A REPLY AGAINST M. GILBERT BROWN Priest.

WHEREIN IS HANDLED MANY OF THE GREATEST and weightiest points of controversy
between us and the Papists, and the truth of our doctrine clearly proved, and
the falset of their religion and doctrine laid open, and most evidently
convicted and confuted, by the testimonies of the Scripture and ancient
Fathers; and also by some of their own Popes, Doctors, Cardinals, and of their
own writters.

WHEREUNTO IS ANEXED A Several treatise, concerning the Mass and Antichrist.

By M. JOHN WELSCHE, Preacher of Christ's Gospel at AIR.

EDINBVRGH Printed by ROBERT WALDE-GRAVE Printer to the Kings Majesty 1602.
Cum Priuilegio Regio.

royal blazon or coat of arms IN MY DEFENC GOD ME DEFEND


PROVE. 29.14. A King that judges the poor in truth, his Throne shall be
established for ever.

TO THE RIGHT EXCELLENT AND MIGHTY PRINCE, JAMES the 6. King of Scotland, etc.
Grace and peace be multiplied.
I Hope it shall not be accounted presumption, (most noble Prince) to offer to
your Majesty, the first fruits of these my simple and rude labors, seeing the
cause is Jesus Christ's, that King of Kings, and Lord of glory, whilk is heir
defended, even the everlasting truth of God, against the venomous stings of
one of the Reu. 9.3.
Locusts of that Antichristian Kingdom. The right whereof does most justly
belong to your Majesty, both in respect of these rare and singular gifts of
knowledge and understanding, whilk the Lord hes vouchsaued upon your Majesty,
in sik a plentiful measure, that your subjects does acknowledge it at home,
and strangers does admire it and commend it abroad: whereby you are not only
able to 1. Pet. 3.15
rander a reason of that Faith whilk is in you; but also able to Tit. 1.9.
stop the mouth of the adversary, and convict the gainsaier whatsumeuer, by
that 2. Tim. 13.15.
word of truth wherewith your Majesty hes been brought up from your very
infancy: so that all the wise men of Babel, I mean the Clergy of that Roman
harlote, is not able to resist the mouth and wisdom whilk the Lord hes given
to your Majesty. And also in respect of that supereminent power, ( as Romans 13.1
the Apostle calls it) whereby as you are most able, so are you most oblished
to maintain his truth, propagate his kingdom, and nurishe his own spouse,
whilk he hes Act. 20.20
purchased to himself by his own blood, by the breasts of your Majesty's
government, as it was promised of old that his Esa. 60.16
spouse should suck the breasts of Kings. So, who is more oblished, then ye,
Sir? Who so sufficient and able every way to mantaine it, as ye Sir? Your
knowledge binds you: your profession binds you: your sovereign authority,
as year a King in Israel binds you. For, as the wisest king that ever was hes
said, and left it in write: or rather that King of Kings in him and by him,
Pro. 8.15
Princes reign by me. Ye hold your kingdom of him, Sir, and must lay down
your crown at his feet, and must stand up and give a reckoning of the
government of his Kingdom, of the maintenance of his truth, and of the
nourishing his spouse in that day. Your knowledge, Sir, is able to justify it
(...): your sovereign authority able to defend it (...) Ye have received that
Heb. 4.12 Ephesians. 6 17, 2.
two edged sword of Gods Spirit in your mouth, able to wound, yea to consume
that man of sin and son of perdition: ye have received that Romans 13.4
sword of justice and judgment in your hands, able to Psalm 101.8.
destroy betimes all the wicked of your kingdom and to root out from the city
of the Lord, all the workers of iniquity. Ye know, Sir, Reu. 17.4.5.
the abomination of Babel, that as it is said of the verteous woman Pro. 31 26
Many women have done virtuously, but thou surmounts them al: so the contrary
may be said of her: many heretics hes taught erroneously, and worshipped and
wrought abhominably: but the Reu. 17.1.
whore of Babel, the Kirk of Rome, in heresy, in abomination, in idolatry,
hes surmounted the^ all, that ever went before her, or ever shall come after
her: Reu. 13.1.3 6.
Many beasts have spoken blasphemously, but that Reu. 13. and 16.13.14. and
17.3.4.5.6. and 18.24.
second beast that hes two horns like the Lamb, surmounteth them all in
blasphemy, tyranny, cruelty, and abominable idolatry, destroying and making
merchandise of the souls of men and women. Other heresies did but subvert some
fundamental points of Religion, but the Kirk of Rome hes subverted them all
almost. Of other heresies, some was but against the Godhead of Christ, other
some against his ma^hood, other some against his offices and benefits, or some
one head or other: but the doctrine of the Kirk of Rome, is against them all.
Injurious to his Godhead, in making him, not only inferior to the Father, in
teaching that he is not (...) but also inferior to the very creatures, in
praying to Mary to command her Son, Iure Matris impera Redemptori, as I heard
your Majesty most solidely prove, and so worse then the Artians. Injurious to
his manhood, to all his offices, his benefits, and all the means, inward and
outward, of the knowing and applying of him. And last of all, injurious to his
sovereign glory, in communicating it to stocks and stones, a piece of bread
bones and ashes, and the skurf skarf of all things, as I hope, I have made
manifest in this my answer. So that most justly it is called Reu. 13.11. 1.
Tim. 4.
the speech of the Dragon, and the doctrine of Devils by the Spirit of God.
And if the profession of sik a Devilish doctrine be too great an evil, what
would the practice thereof be? I mean the idolatrous Mass that abomination
of desolation. The misery, allace, were too great, Matthew. 9.36.
to see the people of this country scattered as sheep without sheepheards,
dying that second and everlasting death, for want of the bread of life and
gospel of salvation. But this would be the misery of miseries, if the Reu. 17.4
golden cupe of Babel, full of all abominations, should be set to their head
again, to drink the deadly poison of their own damnation. And certainly, if
Amos. 8.11.12.
this famine of the word of God, whereby not only Amos. 48.
two or three cities, as the Prophet says, but twenty or thirty Parochins in
some places, should be compelled to go to one, if they were desirous to drink
the waters of life; this I say, is a judgment heavy enough. But what a
judgment would this be, if they were compelled to bide at home, and it were
but in their own families, by that abominable Mass, the round bread, the
Gods of Babell. Surely a great many of the people of this country, does not 1.
Reg. 18.21.
halte now between these two thoughts, whether God be the Lord, or Baal: but
hes forsaken the Lord and his Gospel, and in their heart desires the
opportunity to say to their round bread, these are our Gods who hes redeemed
us from hell, and these will we worship, at least secreitly, til our strength
grow, and our number increase. The rest of the iniquities of this land, were
too great to provoke the Lord of hoastes, suppose this impiety, (whilk the
Lord forbid for his Christ's sake) be not added unto all the rest, and above
all the rest. For what sin is comparable to idolatry? or what iniquity hes
been ever so seuearly punished, as idolatry? a sin that is immediately
against God, against Christ, against his glory: a sin that made Ex. 32.28.
Number. 25.9.
2700 of the Lords own chosen inheritance to fall in the wilderness, for the
golden Calfe, and Baal-Peor. A sin that provoked the Lord in sik a high
measure, that it made him deliver his own people (whom he had planted in that
land of promise, and to whom he had sworn to be their God) Iudg^. 11.12.13
14.25.
over in the hands of their enemies round about them, so that whithersoeuer
they went, the hand of the Lord was sore against them. A sin that 1. Reg.
11 5.11.
rent the kingdom of David asunder, and made ten parts of it to be given to
Jeroboam the Son of Nebat, suppose the person was called 2. Sam. 12 24.25.
Iedidiah, the beloved of the Lord, and the promise was made unto him, that 2.
Sam. 7.12.13.
his house and throne should stand for ever. And finally, a sin that first
moved the Lord 2. Reg. 17 18.
to put away Israel from before his face, and caused their land to vomit them
out, without al hope ever to return again, and then made 2. Chro. 36.16.17.18
19.20.2. Reg. 25.10.
his wrath so hot against Judah, till there was no remedy but the Temple, the
Kings house, and the houses of all the nobles, were brunt with fire, the Kings
sons first slain before his eyes, then his own eyes put out, himself
bound with chains of steill, and he and his people carried captives to Babel,
where there they remained for the space of 70. years. Are not these things
fallen forth 2. Cor. 10 11.
as examples to us, and ar they not written for our instruction, as the Apostle
says, upon whom the ends of the world is fallen: and is not Reu. 17.4
the abomination of Babel, their idolatrous Mass, as great abomination in
the eyes of the Lord, as 1. Reg. 11.5
Milcom the abomination of the Ammonites. Is it a less idolatry to worship
a Ex. 32.4. 1. Reg. 11.5^ Iud. 2.13.
golden Calfe, the gods of Egypt, or a graven sheep Aschtaroth, the gods of
the Sidonians, then to worship a bit of bread, made of wheat, ground in the
mil, baken in the oven, coniured and erected up by a Idolatrous Priest, whilk
is the God of Babel, the Kirk of Rome. Is there any more Godhead in the one,
then in the other? Hes their idol of the Mass any more life, feeling, or
moving, then the idols of Egypt and Sidon had? and does not the Kirk of Rome
give as great, yea rather greater worship and Religion to their round bread,
then Judah or Israel gave to their golden calfe, or to Asttaroth the graven
sheep. For they worship it as their Creator and redeemer. And as the worship
of the golden Calfe, is called Deuteronomy. 32.17.
the worship of Devils in Moses song: so the Idolatry of the Kirk of Rome,
whereof their round bread in their Mass, is one of the principal, is called
Reu. 9.20.
the worship of Devils, by the voice that came from the four horns of the
golden altar. For what Kirk or Kingdom under heaven is there to be found, who
in the time of the blast of the sext Trumpet, when that fearful army of the
Turks was loosed to ouerrun Christendom, does worship Idols of gold and
silver, of brass, of wood, and of stone, but the Kirk of Rome? And if the
worship of God by Images, as Israel did in the golden Galfe, whilk is but the
break of the second command, be called the worship of Devils, shall not the
worship of a false Creator and Redeemer, as they do in their Mass, whilk is
not only the break of the first command, but also the stramping under foot of
the son of God in the gospel, be most justly called the worship of Devils?
And is not the Lord as jealous of his glory now, as he was then? and hes he
not sworn Esai. 42.8
that he will not give it to another? and hes he not Reu. 13.14 15.16. and 14
8.9.10.11.12. and 16.1.2.10.19. and 17.1.2. and 18.2.3.3.5.6.21. and
19.19.20.21. and 21.21.
threatened as severe judgments against the whore of Babel, and the
worshippers of the beast and his image, and them that receaues his mark,
openly or privately, as ever he did against Judah or Israel? Did he not cause it
to be proclaimed, by an Angel with an loud voice, that the foundations of the
earth might hear it, and tremble, that they shall drink of the wine of the
wrath of God, yea of that pure wine, powered out in the Cupe of his wrath, and
they shall be tormented day and night before the holy Angels and before the
Lamb: and the smoke of their torment shall ascend for evermore, and they
shall have no rest day nor night, that worships the beast and his Image. And
heard not John him that sat upon the Throne, the judge of the whole earth,
say, that Idolaters shall have their portion in the lake that burns with fire
and brimstone, whilk is the second death. And seeing the knowledge of our
redemption surmounteth the knowledge of our creation: and the benefit of our
redemption exceides (by many degrees) the benefit of our creation: shall not
the worship of an idol redeemer, and of a false Jesus, as they do in their
Mass, surmount by many degrees, the worship of an idol creator, as Judah and
Israel did? For the greater the light be, and the greater the mercy be that is
bestowed upon any, their sin must be the greater. And as the light of the
gospel is more 2. Cor. 3.6.7.8.9.10.11.12.13.
glorious then the light of the law, so the idolatry of these that are under
the Gospel, must be more abominable then the Idolatry of these that were
under the Law. Theirs was but Heb. 10.28.
the dispysing of Moses Law: but this Idolatry of their Mass, is Heb. 10.29.
the stramping under foot of the blood of Christ, and so worthy of sorer
punishment (as the Apost. says.) And supose that the judgment were to fall
but upon the committers of this sin only, it were too great, but it would
reach further to a whole kingdom wherein it were committed, if by repentance
and execution of justice, it were not prevented. For shall Genesis 20.9
Abimelech King of Gerar, fear the judgment of God upon his whole Kingdom
for one adultery only intended, and that in ignorance? And what may a whole
land then fear for sik abominable Idolatry in so clear a light of the
Gospel? And shall the ten tribes fear Josh. 2^ 21.
the wrath of God to be kindled against the whole congregation of Israel,
For the rebellion of the other two tribes, in setting up an altar to sacrifice
upon as they thought? And what should we fear then against this whole land,
if there were altars reired up not to worship God on, but the Idol of Babell.
And if Joshua. 7.
Achans theft, suppose both the person and the sin was unknown: yea suppose
there was no suspicion, neither of the one nor of the other, spoiled all Israel
of Gods presence, made them fall before their enemies, and made the Lord
refuse to be in the midst of them, unless the sin and person was tried and
searched, and the Anathema taken away? And would not Babels Idolatry be much
more effectual to spoil all the land, if it were defiled therewith of Gods
presence, to make us fall before our enemies, and to make the Lord to depart
from us: suppose it were but in one person, seeing the sin is more odious in the
Lords eyes, our light greater, and we more obleist nor they were. And suppose
that this abomination should be but in private families, yet it is 2. Tin. 2.17.
a fretting canker, as the Apostle says, that frait has infected a member of
the body, it will insect the rest; if it be not prevented by cutting of the
festered member. And the Apostle says, 1. Cor. 5.6.
a little leaven leaueneth the whole lump, and experience hes taught that by
process of time a little leck, has sunk a great ship, and one person infected
with the pestilence hes infected a whole kingdom. The first Idolatry of the
land of Canaan began with Iug. 17.5.3.
Teraphim Iehouae, silver sanctified to the Lord to be an Image, but
afterward it grew up to the worship Iug 2.13.
of Baall and Aschtaroth. It was in the beginning, but in one only family,
the family of Iug. 17.1.
Micah. but in process of time, it passed from that family to the tribe of Iug.
18.
Dan. and from that tribe to all the rest of the ^ug. 2.13.14.
Tribes: till at the last all Israel sinned and did that whilk was evil in the
sight of the Lord. So there is no question, Sir, and your Majesty put not to
your hand, as your have begun to do it will get foot in this land, and it
would pass from families to tribes, from private houses, to temples: from the
worship of the round bread to the worship of stocks and stones, and so by one
degree to another, till it have made all guilty, what by infecting, what by
Communicating with their sins, and then bring the fearful vengeance of God
upon all. And suppose, Sir, that you have not need to be taught of any for
that light and understanding wherewith the Lord hes anointed you, in so
great a measure beyond many, does teach you all things, and your Majesty hes
laid so sure foundation of maintenance, both of justice and religion within
your land, and hes begun so substantially to prosecute the same, (for the whilk
from our hearts we render glory and praise to God.) So that all further
exhortation of your Majesty would seem to be superfluous, yet I must borrow
leave at your Majesty, to be bold with all humbleness of mind and reverence
of heart, to God and to your Majesty, to beseeke you by the price of Jesus
Christ your Lord, to stir up the bowels of your compassion over this desolate
country, for 1. Reg. 1.20.
upon whom are the eyes of all Israel but upon you Sir? And what King is
there under heaven under whose government the gospel, hes had so free a
passage, and the kirk of god hes had sik purity and liberty, in sik peace for
so long a time in a whole kingdom, without heresy or schism as under your
Majesty's government. So that we were both ungrate to God and to you Sir, if
with all thanksgiving we did not acknowledge it. Take therefore for examples
these worthy Kings, who hes received a good report in the word of the Lord
and now resting from their labors, hes received that incorruptible crown of
glory. Put on their affections Sir, and follow their actions, that your report
heir, and crown heirafter, may be equal, 2
or rather above theirs. Let your heart q melt, Sir, with good Josias, not for
our fathers transgressions, as he did, but for Eze. 9.4.
our own sins, and the sins of this land: For God Act. 17.30 31. Romans 2.16
regarded not the time of their ignorance, when the Gospel shyned not, but now
since that light is broken forth, he admonishes all men to repent, because he
lies set a day (whilk cannot be far of) wherein he will judge every one by the
man Christ Jesus according to his Gospel. And if that great Reu 10.1 2.
Angel had not descended unto us, with that little book open in his right
hand, and the land had not been once purged of idolatry, we should not Ioh.
15.21.24.
have had sinned, but now we have no cloak for our sin. Stir up your
anger with Moses, Sir, who suppose he was Number. 12.13.
the meekest man upon the face of the whole earth, yet when he saw the golden
calfe his Ez. 32.19
anger was kindled, that he brake the Tables of stone, the Lords own work and
write, brunt the Calfe in the fire, braied it in powder, scattered it on the
waters, and made the people to drink thereof. Follow the example of good
Iehosaphat, Sir, who 2. Chron. 27.4.20.
sought the Lord his God, walked in his precepts, lifted up his heart to the
ways of the Lord, purged his land of Idolatry: and first sent Levites with
his own Princes to teach all the cities of his kingdom the law of the Lord:
and after being admonished by the Prophet, for helping of the wicked, and
loving them who hated the Lord, (suppose he was his neighbor king, joined in
affinity with him) he so repented, that he went from the one end of his
kingdom to the other, even from Beersheba to mount Ephraim, and brought his
people to the Lord their God, and established religion, and justice in all the
cities of his kingdom, and therefore the Lord was with him, he prospered, and
had riches and honor in abundance. What joy of heart, Sir, brought Ezechias
to the hearts of all the godly, as well indwellers, as strangers, when he 2.
Chro. 29 and 30.31.
purged his land of Idolatry, brake the brazen serpent whilk the people had
abused, opened the doors of the Temple whilk were shut up, restored the worship
of God, sent messingers with letters throughout al Israel, to convert them to
the Lord their God, restored the Priests and Levites to their ministry, as the
Lord had commanded by his Prophets, spoke to their hearts, stre^gthened them
in their offices, provided for their maintenance, that they might be encouraged
in the Law of the Lord. Follow these examples Sir: send Pastors throughout all
the borders of your kingdom, to teach your subjects the Law of their Lord,
and the Gospel of their salvation, establishe Religion and Justice in all the
cities of your Kingdom. Cause the Zach. 14 8 9.
waters of life to run from the heart of your country, unto the borders
thereof, that publicly and privately, the Lord may be but one, and his name
one, and he may be a sovereign King in all your land, as it was prophesied and
promised. Establishe Pastors in all your Kingdom, strengthen them in their
offices, and speak to their hearts. Provide for their maintenance, that they
be not distracted, but may be encouraged in the Law of their God, and in the
execution of their ministry. And when it is reported to your Majesty, or ye
hear of any, be they many, or be they few, be they man, or be they wife, be
it publictly, or be it secretly, in any of the cities or parts in your
Majesty's Kingdom, that they have gone out to entise others to Idolatry, or
hes committed Idolatry themselves, ye try it, search it, and seek it out most
diligently, for so the Lord hes most straightly commanded. And if it be true and
certain, that sik abomination is done in your kingdom; take evil out of
Israel, that he may have mercy on us, and multiply his blissings to us. And
then may ye Sir, (having done all these things) take God to record, that you
are clean from the blood of all your people, because you have kept no mean
back from the^, whilk your calling craved, but hes caused the whole counsel of
God to be showed to them: so that if they perish their own blood may be upon
their own heads. And then shall foreign nations and strangers say of you
Sir, as Reg. 5 7.
Hiram, and the Queen of Sheba said of Solomon, Blissed Reg 10.8.9.
be the Lord God who hes set sik a wise and understanding Prince over Scotland,
to build his Kirk, and to exercise justice and judgment there, it was for the
love the Lord had to his Kirk there, that he set sik a wise and understanding
Prince over them. Yea, Psalm. 78, 4.
the generations to come, shall tell to their children, and their childrens
children, the great work of the Lord, whilk he hes done by you, Sir, in this
land. I have heard your Majesty gravely protest, before God, in two general
assemblies, that it was one of your Majesty's greatest desires, and ye were
even, as it were, ambitious of that work, to plant every Parochin within your
kingdom, with a Pastor: that the posterities to come, might say, King JAMES
the sext, hes done sik a notable work in his days. Confirm your self, Sir,
in that purpose: for ye know, Sir, who hes said, 1. Sam. 2.30.
I will honor them that honors me. There is no question, Sir, and I speak
with confidence, if ye honor him in this kingdom, and be faithful to him in
the government of it, he shall honor you: not only by making you to reign in
that everlasting kingdom, but also by lifting you up to be rewler over more
Kingdoms heir. The Lord anointed David King over all Israel: yet he gave not
the possession of it al at once, after the death of Saul, but first proved him
with the government of one Tribe seven years and a half, and then finding
him faithful over that, he placed him rewler over all the rest, and
established all Israel in his hand. So there is no question, and I am sure of
it, if ye honor the Lord to the vttermoste of your power, in the government
of this kingdom, and give him a proof of your fidelity therein: that as he
hes given you the undoubted right by birth, to be a King over more Kingdoms
then this, so shall he make you rewler of them, and establish them in your
hands: only Sir, Joshua 1.6.7.8.9.
be ye strong and courageous to do with all diligence as the Lord hes commanded
you in his word, and as ye see these faithful Kings hes done before you.
Decline neither to the right hand, nor to the left, and then assuredly I dare
promise you in the name of the Lord, he shall not leave you or forsake you al
your days, and none shall be able to stand before your face And as he was with
Joshua and David, so shall he be with you. For the Lord is true who hes
promised, and then shall thou prosper in all thy ways. And consider upon the
other part who ever prospered unto the end, but these that walked as the Lord
had commanded. For true is that whilk the Lord spoke by his Prophet to Asa, 2.
Chro. 1.4 2.
He is with you while ye be with him, and if ye seek him, he will be found but
if ye will forsake him, he will forsake you. Was the Lord any longer with
Saul, Ioash, Amazia, Vzzia, al Kings of Judah, then they were with him? No, no:
but from time they forsook him, he forsook them. Because Saul 1. Sam. 15 23.
and 16.15.
despised the word of the Lord, in sparing whom he should not have spared,
the Lord despised him from being King over Israel, and the Spirit of the
Lord forsook him. Because Ioashe forsook the Lord, 2. Chro. 24 20.
in permitting Idolatry at the request of his princes, the Lord forsook him
and his kingdom, and delivered them into the hands of their enemies. Because
Amatzia did evil, and obeyed 2 Cro. ^5.16.
not the council of the Prophet, when he admonished him, the Lord determined
to destroy him. Vzzia all the 2. Cro. 26.5.16.18.
days that he sought the Lord, the Lord prospered him, but from time he
lifted up himself to corrupt himself, and to trespass against the Lord his
God, in passing the limits of his calling, and inuading the Priests office, he
had no honor of the Lord but was smitten with leaprosie. But let all these
things be far from your Majesty, since you see what every one of these hes
done to Kings and Kingdoms before you, let your heart be constant before the
Lord your God all the days of your life, that priores 2. Cro. 25.26.
and posteriores, be never registrate of your Majesty as it was of them,
neither in the books of the Lords co^mentary before him, neither in the
Chronicles of the kings of Scotland, but that both your former and latter may
be that whilk is good and right in the eyes of the Lord. That both the Lord
may give this testimonye to your own conscience, and to the conscience of all
his children, that he gave of David, I have found you a man according to my
own heart that will do all my will: and also, that it may be written of your
Maeistie in the Chronicles of the Kings of Scotland as it was written of David,
Ezechias, Josias, in the Chronicles of the Kings of Judah, that King JAMES the
sext, his heart was persite toward the Lord his God all his days, and his
government was in sik peace and Justice, that after him there was none like
him of all the Kings of Scotland: neither was there any sik before him, who did
cleave unto the Lord his God, with all his heart, and followed all his
commandments, and neither declined to the right hand, nor to the left. Now
the Lord grant to your Majesty, that ye may find this favor in his eyes for
his Christ's sake. I have now taken this boldness, to offer these my labors
unto your Majesty: as a testimony of my most humble, and loyal heart unto
your Majesty, as God the searcher of the heart knows. Your Majesty did
exceedingly encourage me, to let it go forth unto the light, what by your
Majesty's most gracious acceptance of my endeavor, and most favorable
censure, and approbation of my labors: what by your Majesty's humane counsel
and advise, confirmed by your Majesty's Privilege and authority to me to
publishe the same. Sik was your Majesty's humanity to me, not only in these,
but in all your actions, both public and private, with all your subjects, of
whatsomeuer rank or degree. Ye kyith sik humanity and affability, that that
saying of Trajanus the Emperor, that a Prince should be have himself so to his
subjects, as he would have the^ to do to him, if he were a private man, is
verefied in you, Sir, wherein certainly ye need not to give place to any of
whatsomeuer rank: you expres it so lively in all your actions, and I have
found it for my own part by experience. So that your Majesty hes often
caused me to remember, that notable saying of Titus that Roman Emperor, A
subject should never go sad hearted from the speech of his Prince: The whilk
experience makes me to conceive hope, that your Majesty will pardon this my
boldness, will accept in good part this my small myte. I therefore most
humbly desire your Majesty to accept it, as from your Majesty's most humble
obedient servant and subject. For whose peace and prosperity, I am always
earnest with the Lord. Now the God of all peace, even that King of Kings,
power all light and grace in all abundance, more and more, upon your Majesty,
and so root and ground your heart in Jesus Christ, that ye may honor him more
and more in your life and calling heir, that ye may be honored of him again,
both in this life, and in that day with immortal and everlasting glory. Amen.
From Air the 18. of November. 1602.

Your Majesty's most humble subject M. JOHN WELSCHE.

Unto the godly and Christian Reader in this land, Grace, mercy and peace,
from God the Father, and Jesus Christ his Son our Lord and only Savior.
Amen.
WHen I think, Christian Reader, of the unsearchable mercies, (for so I may
call them) whilk the Lord, according to his rich grace, whereby he hes been
abundant toward us, (if ever toward any) hes vouchsaued upon us: and of our
great ingratitude and manifold iniquities wherewith we have recompensed him
again: I cannot but tremble to think of these most fearful judgments of God,
whilk we have most justly deserved, and whilk cannot but most assuredly fall
upon us, unless with most speedy and earnest repentance of al sorts, they
be prevented and auerted. Ephesians. ^.8.
For unto what kingdom or nation under heaven, hes God been more liberal in
communicating, the Insearchable riches of his dear son in his Gospel, as unto
us in this nation. Nay, unto what one kingdom under heaven hes God been so
rich and superaboundant in mercy, as unto this? There are but few kingdoms
upon whom the Lord hes caused the glorious light of his Gospel to shine upon,
a gross darkness covering the most part of the kingdoms of the earth: and
yet Scotland hes found this favor in the eyes of the most high God. So that,
that may be most truly said of us, whilk is written of the land of Zebulon and
Naphtali, Math. 4.1^.
A people that sat in darkness saw great light, and unto them whilk sat in
the region of death, light is risen up. Many kingdoms upon whom this light is
risen, are but in part delivered from the bondage of that Reu. 13.11. and 17.4.
second beast, and from that abomination of Babel, a part worshipping the
Lord, and a part worshipping Baal, I mean the Idol of the Mass, and their
idols of stock and stone. But our deliverance was full, from that bondage: for
that was fulfilled in us whilk was promised and prophesied of old, Zach. 14.9.
That the Lord should be but one, and his name one And in these kingdoms where
the Lord is but one, and his name one, that is, where he only is worshipped,
some of them hes embraced him but as a Prophet, to teach them, and as a Priest
to satisfy for their sins, and to interceede for them: but not as a
sovereign king to rule them, and govern them by that form of government,
whilk he hes prescriued in his word, with his own Laws, offices, and
officers, retayning yet a part of that hierarchy of Babel, with some of her
Laws, offices, and officers. But the Lord was rich in mercy toward us, in
bestowing himself upon us, not only as a Prophet to teach us, and as a Priest
to satisfy for our sins, and to interceede for us, but also as a sovereign
King, to govern us with that self same form of government, whilk he hes
commanded in his word, and unto the whilk only he hes annexed the promises of
his blissin^ and presence, with his own Laws, offices, and officers. So that
as the Prophet says, Zach. 14^
he was not only one in us, and his name one: but also a sovereign King in our
land.

O Scotland, what nation was like unto thee, that had the Gospel so freely
preached, his Sacraments so purely ministered, his censures and all the
privileges of his kingdom, in sik liberty executed, as thou had? for what one
nation under heaven, hes God done so great things, as for thee? What one
kingdom is to be found in the whole earth, where Idolatry was so fully rooted
out, wherein all the means of his glory, and all the privileges of his
kingdom, was so fully restored to their own integrity and perfection, as they
were first instituted, wherein all these means of the word, sacraments, and
discipline, hes continued for so long a space in sik peace, in sik purity, in
sik liberty, without heresy or schism, as in thee, O Scotland. So that thy
day hes been like the day of Joshua, Joshua 10.12.
When the Sun stood in Gibeon, and the Moon in Aialon. For I know not if
ever nation or kingdom hes had so long a day of the Gospel, in sik peace,
purity, and liberty, as thou hes had? or if ever nation after us, shall have so
long a day, after sik a manner again. And it seems to me, that as the Lord
confirmed EZechiah of his promise, by causing 2. Reg. 20.
the Sun to return back again miraculously, by the degrees whereby it went
down: So the Lord hes confirmed his superaboundant love toward us, in causing
the light of the Gospel to return again, (as it were) often times and that
most wonderfully and miraculously by the degrees whereby our iniquities in the
righteous judgment of God did hasten it to go down upon us. Yea the blessing
of Abraham hes commed upon us. For he hes blessed them that blissed us, and
hes cursed them who hes cursed us, he hes striuen against them who hes striuen
against us, and hes made our oppressors to eat their own flesh and to drink
their own blood: no instrument formed against thee, (O Kirk of Scotland) hes
ever prospered: and the tongue that hes risen against thee, the Lord hes
condemned, that all flesh might know that God was thy Savior, and the strong
God of Jacob thy auenger. And certainly, if ever people might have been called
Esai 62.6
Iephzibas, that is, the lords delight, or their land, and Beula, that is
married unto him, the Kirk and kingdom of Scotland might have been so called.
For the Lord had delight in us, and our land had a husband, even the Lord our
redeemer, he was Esa 60.1^
a ornament unto us, he set Ezech. 16.14.
his beauty on us, he Esai. 62
crowned us with glory, and a Diadem by the hand of our God, was set upon our
heads. And true is that of us, whilk our Savior spoke to his disciples, Luc.
10.24.
Many Kings and Prophets hes desired to see the things that we have seen, and
hear the things that we have heard, and hes not seen them, nor heard them. So
who are so ladened with mercy and kindness as we have been? for we have been
made Deuteronomy. 28.13
the head and not the tail, as the Lord promised. And surely if ever people
should have been Deuteronomy. 32.15
to shurim, that is, upright and straight in the eyes of the Lord, we should
have been so. No, who should have been so holy as we, who so Colos. 2.7
strong in Christ, and rooted and grounded in him, as we? who so rich in all
grace, and fruitful in all good works, as we? For who had so many and so
glorious means, to have made us to have abounded in all grace, as we had? What
could the Lord Esai 5.4
have done more to us, then he hes done? For we wanted no mean, that ever the
lord commanded in his word, either to have bred grace in us, or to have
preserved it and increased it? But they to whom meikle is given, meikle shall
be required at their hands again. For as the Lord made us a spectacle of his
mercy, wherein he did demonstrate the riches of his free grace in Christ Jesus,
unto all the kingdoms of the earth, and above them al. So it had been our part
proportionably, to have met him with thankfulness again: and to have been
examples of all grace, godliness, righteousness, and of all good works, unto
all others, and above all others. Esai 1.4
But allace sinful nation laden with iniquit^es, who is so sinful as thou
art? What nation so polluted with all abomination and wickedness, as thou
art? thy iniquities are more then the sand of the sea, they are grown up so
high, Hosea 9.7.
that the top of them teaches up to the very heavens: and the cry of them is
like, yea beyond the cry of Sodom: there is sik a burden of iniquity upon
this land, that (considering all circumstances both of the means, and of the
time and space the Lord hes given us to repent) I know not if ever nation, was
so great in the eyes of the Lord, as this land is. Ezechiel 22
For may not that whilk the Prophet spak of Judah, be most justly said of thee,
O Scotland: For art thou not replenished with blood, from corner to corner, so
that blood touches blood. Are not thy Nobles in thee, every one ready to shed
blood? In thee the father and the mother are despised: in the mids of thee,
the widow and the fatherless are oppressed: In thee, the very abominations
of the Gentiles ar committed. The discovering of the Fathers shame, and
adultery with thy neighbors wife: thou art so laden with adulteries, incests,
and whoredoms that the land groans under thee: thou have profaned his
Sabboths, despised his Law, contemned his Gospel, withholden from him the
fruits of his kingdom, and hes stramped under foot the blood of Christ, and
hes grieved that spirit of grace. Matthew. 21.41.
So that when I think of the number and greatness of our sins, I cannot but
wonder that the Lord should not have with drawn his Kingdom long since from
us, and have given it unto others, that would have brought forth the fruits
thereof. Yea, I wonder, that he hes not caused the Land to vomit us out, for
the abominations and sins wherewith we have defiled it, in so great a light.
And surely, when I think of the severity of the justice of God, in punishing
other nations and kingdoms, for the contempt of his Gospel, and the
withholding of the fruits of his kingdom from him, my soul trembles. For,
wherefore did the Lord reject the natural branches, that chosen generation, of
whom the Fathers was, and of whom Christ was according to the flesh, and
gave them and their posterity over to the hardness of their hearts this 1500.
Romans 11.21. and 9.5
year and more, to be damned for ever and ever in that everlasting darkness?
and yet his wrath is not turned back: but because they would not be gathered,
and know not in that their day, the things that belonged to their peace, and
would not rander to him the fruits of his kingdom in due season. Mat. 23.37.
Luc. 19.42 43. Mat 21 41. Reu. 2 5 2. These. 2.10.12. Reu 13.11. and 9 1. 2.
These. ^.12.
And wherefore did the Lord remove his Candlestick from a great many of the
Kirks, both of the East and the West, who was planted by the Apostles, and was
once lanterns of light, and hes given them over to strong delusions to believe
lies: the one to the impiety of Mahomet, and the sauadge tyrrant of the Kirk:
the other to the bondage of that second beast, and fearful darkness of that
bottomless pit. But because they received not the love of the truth, but had
pleasure in unrighteousness as the Apostle says. Now if God spared not them,
but gave them over to a most fearful bondage both of soul and body, both
spiritual and corporal, temporal and eternal: how should we not fear, as
great, or rather greater judgments? seeing we had al these as examples before
us, to have sore warned us, and to have made us to fear. For we are not to
think, as our Savior says to the Ga^ileans, that they were greater sinners
then we, but unless we all repent, Luc. 13
we shall likewise perish. And as though all our former sins were too light to
pull down and to hasten the Lords fearful departing from us, Reu. 9.1.
this darkness of the bottomless pit, whilk is spreading the self again in
this nu^k of the country, and this abomination of desolation, the Idol of
the Mass, whilk is set up in the private families of this country, is added
unto all the rest, and above all the rest. So that it is to be feared, unless
it be prevented by a most speedy and earnest repentance of all sorts in this
land, Math, 11.23
that as we have been lifted up to heaven through his Gospel, so shall we be
thrown down in the bottomless gulf of the Lords fearful wrath and
vengeance: and as we have been made a spectacle of his mercy unto all nations
and above all other: so we shall be made a most fearful spectacle of his
wrath unto all other nations, and above all other. O therefore that the Lord
would power upon us that Spirit of grace and deprecation, that even from the
house of David to the house of Leui: that is, from the Kings house to the
Ministry, (...) 12.10.11.12
and from them to the people, from man to wise, that we might al look up to
him, whom we have pierced through with our iniquities: and murne upon him, as
or our first for only begotten son; and that we might murne publikly and
privately, together, and a part, every congregation by them self, and every
family by themselves, and every person by him self. Oh that we had hearts to
repent, at the least, in the evening of this our day, before the Sun went
down altogether upon us: and then there is no question the Lord would not
remove his Candlestick from us, nor make his glory to depart, Reu. 2.5 ^.
Sam. 4.22
but would continue his covenant with us and our posterity, and would cover
all our enemies faces with shame, as with a garment: yea, he would scatter that
darkness that is beginning to ouerspread this land again, 1. Sam. 5.3.4.
and Dagon should fall before the ark of the Lord: and his last fall should be
worse then his first. Let me therefore be bold with you, to beseech you: yea
to charge you in the bowels of Jesus Christ, by the price of his blood, and by
his glorious appearing to judgment, as ye would have it comfortable to you,
and as ye would have his glory to remain wi^h us and our posterity: yea as ye
would not be arraigned guilty, in that great day, of the Lords bannishment, and
remoouing of his glorious presence out of this land. (For, if we repent not,
the Lord as he hes begun to depart from a great part of this country, so shall
he most assuredly depart from the rest of this land) I say, let me beseech you
that every one of you would try and search your sins, by the light of his
spirit in his word, both the sins of our persons and callings, that we would
humble our hearts for them, Ezec. 9.4,
and power them out as water in his bosom, murning for them, and for the
sins of the land: and that we would turn our feet to walk in all his
precepts and commandments. And let us who are the Watch men over the house of
Israel, begin first. For the judgment of God will begin at his own house,
Ezec. 3.2. and 33.
and at the Sanctuary. For if we that are the lights of our people be
darkness, how great must their darkness be? and if we that is the salt of
the earth to season them with grace, become unsavory: Mat 5.14. and 6.23
wherewith shall either they or we be seasoned. And if that we that is the
stomach and the heart, as it were, be come senseless, and dead? is it any
wonder in suppose all the rest of the members be dead and senseless? Let us
therefore first convert our selves, and then let us with tears and murning,
Cry aloude to our Congregations, Luc. 22.32.
and spare not. Let us lift up our voices as a Trumpet, that the deafest and
deadest may hear. Let us show them their sins and defections, that at the
least, Ezec, 3.3.4.5.
they perish not for want of warning, and so their blood be craved at our
hands. Let us be instant in season, and out of season, to preach the word,
improve, rebuke, exhort, with all doctrine and long suffering, as we are most
gravely charged by the spirit of God. Let us admonish every man, and instruct
every man publictly, and privately: Col. 1 28.2.1.2.
that we may do our endeavor at the least to present every man perfect, as a
pure Virgin to Jesus Christ. And if they will not hear, let us say to the
earth, Earth, earth hear the word of the Lord, let us rise up and contend with
the mountains, and let us make the hills to hear our voice, and take them as
witnesses against them. And then shall we have this comfort in the days of our
afflictions, Job 6.10
that we have not kept back the word of the holy one. And then shall we be a
sweet smelling favor in Christ, as well in them that perishes, as in them
that are saved. Let you that are the people walk worthy of that great
salvation that is brought unto you, and be fruitful in all good works, denying
al ungodliness, 1. These 2 12. Heb. 2.3 Tit. 2.11.12.
and worldly lusts, living godly, soberly, and righteously, wayt^ng for that
blessed hope, and glorious appearing of that great God, our Savior, the Lord
Jesus. And you that are the Princes of the land, and magistrat^s of the
country Remove iniquity from your tents, and let not your fami^i^s be h^uses
of iniquitye. Shine before your tennants, serrand^, and housholdes, as lanterns
of light, for sik master, sik seruand. Be exemplers to them of godliness,
sobriety, Job. 11.14 Mica. 6.10. Matt. 5.16. Phil. 2.15.
and righteousness, Clenge youth h^a^tes and hands from blood, oppressions,
whoredoms, Job, 29.15.16 Esai. 58.7. Romans 13.3.4.
adulteries. Be an eye to the blind, and a foot to the lame, and a staff of
comfort to the oppressed. Deal your bread to the hungry, and hide not your
eyes from your own flesh, maintain the godly, and be a terror to the
wicked. That your faces may chase away iniquity, and sin may hide the self
from your presence. Take vengeance on all evil doers, and spare not where the
Lord bids strike. And because a great many of you, through your most cruel
and barbarous covetousness and sacrilege, Matthew. 3.8.9.
(the like whereof, I think, hes not been heard of, no not amongst the Turks
and barbarous Americanes, that they spoil their God, and lets their worship
decay for want of maintenance as ye do in Scotland:) are the causes of the
everlasting damnation of a great part of the poor people, for want of the
preaching of the word of salvation unto them. Ierem. 2.34.
For their blood are sound under your wings: and their blood cries more
strongly from the low helles, to the high heavens against you, for wrath and
vengeance, then ever Abels blood did against his brother Cain.

Genes. 4.10
Now therefore at the last, repent you of it. Purge your hands of it: and at
the least vouchsafe so meikle upon every Kirk, as may sustain a Pastor to
break the bread of life unto them and think the damnation of so many
millions of souls of your pure brethren, who might have been saved for ought
that ye know, if they had had the Gospel of salvation preached unto them: too
great guiltiness, suppose ye had not blood upon blood. Otherwise, Deuter.
30.19.
if ye will not, I call heaven and earth to witness against you, that the
indignation of the Lord, shall root you and your posterities out of the land
of the living: and their blood that perish for want of teaching, shall be laid
to your charge, and ye shall be arraigned as murderers of their souls, in that
great day. Deuteronomy. 27.23.18
And not only that curse shall fall upon you, whilk was commanded to be
pronounced upon Mount Hebal, for causing the blind to go out of the way,
whereunto all the people should say, Amen: But also, that most fearful and
irrevocable sentence shall be pronounced, and executed upon you in that great
day, (by the judge of the whole earth,) Depart from me ye cursed, Matthew. 25.^1
in that everlasting fire of hell, to be damned with the Devil and his Angels
for evermore. Lay it therefore to your hearts, and flatter not your selves in a
carnal and vain presumption. Be not cruel to your own souls, and to the
souls of the poor people any more: otherwise ye shall most assuredly drink
of the wine of the wrath of God, and be casten in the great winefate of his
wrath, where there ye shall be tormented day and night Let every one of us
therefore in the conscience of so great and singular mercies, whilk the Lord
hes vouchsaued upon us, in sik a plentiful measure, harden not our hearts
while it is called to day: ^eb. 4.5. Joel. 2.13
but let us rent them, and turn them unto the Lord our God. and let us not
delay it, while he calls upon us by his word, and spreades out his arms unto
us. Otherwise, if we will not, but despyses the day of our salvation, then I
protest unto you in the name of the great God, that he will hear the cry of our
sins, and will abhor us greatly as he did Israel that he shall forsake his
glorious Tents and Tabernacles in this land: Psalm. 78.49.60.61 etc.
and first give over his strength to captivity, and his glory to the hands of
our enemies: and then accounting no more of us, then of the mire in the
street, he shall deliver us over, both old and young, Pastor and people, to
the sword of the enemy. For this I dare say, Matthew. 11.43.
if he take his kingdom from us, he shall not let Scotland be a free kingdom,
as it hes been before. For true is he who hes said it, The nation and
kingdom that will not serve thee, shall perish, and these nations shall be
utterly destroyed. Esai. 60 12. And if he spare not his own strength and
glory, I mean his glorious Gospel, but deliver it over into captivity, into
the hand; of his enemies, he shall have no compassion of us, but shall surrender
us over to the edge of the sword to be consumed thereby: and as the Lord hes
been more abundant in his mercy toward us, then toward any others: Math.
11.21 22.
so shall his wrath be accordingly. For if other kingdoms or nations, yea if
Tyrus or Sidon, Sodom or Gomorrha: yea, if the Turks or barbarous Americanes
had heard the things that we have heard, they would have repented long since in
sackeloth and ashes and therefore our condemnation shall be heavier, then any
condemnation under heaven. Philip. 2.1
Now therefore if there be any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love,
if any fellowship of the Spirit, if any love to his glory, to his blood, to
his Gospel, and if there be any compassion and mercy in your hearts, to this
poor and sinful land, and his poor Kirk and kingdom therein: repent you of
your sins, Reve 17.14
reconcile you to God, take hold of his blood, wash you and cleanse you in
it, until ye be white and bright in his eyes. Bring him into the chalmers of
your hearts, Ephesians, 3, 17 Galat, 6, 14 Colos, 2, 12, 13 Ephesians. 2.5.6
and make him to dwell in you, that he may crucify your sins, and bury them
in the grave with him, and may quicken and raise you up together with him: and
may set you in those heavenly places with himself. And then having rooted and
grounded your hearts in him, Colos, 2, 7
and having filled your souls with the abundance of his presence, bring him
out first to your families, and then to your tennants, seruands, neighbors and
people. According to your callings instruct them, rebuke them, admonish them,
correct them, and reform them, and rest not till ye have set him up as a Lord,
and a King in their hearts, or at the least, till you have obtained this
assurance in your conscience, that ye have been so faithful and sincere in
your callings, that if Christ be hid from any, to whom your callings or
occasions hes reached: he is hid from sik only as perishes.

Now, oh that the Lord would give us these hearts, and so purge us, that we
might be thus fruitful to the praise of his glory: then assuredly would he
repent him of all the evil, that he hes thought against us: then should he
have delight in us and in our posterity: and then these Cananites (I mean the
relickes of that cursed generation of Babel, the Kirk of Rome) whilk is yet
left vn-rooted out of this land, to try us, and tempt us, if we will serve the
Lord our God: and to be pricks and thorns in our side, should not bring us in
bondage again, but should be made tributaries to Jesus Christ: yea our latter
estate, should be more glorious then the former. Now let us find this favor
in thy eyes, O Lord our redeemer: and glorify thy great name amongst us, by
converting our hearts at the least the hearts of all thy children, in mercy
rather, then by confounding and consuming of us in thy wra^h and indignation.
For wherefore should thy enemies say, Take up their God and their Gospel.
Wherefore should they, O Lord our God, blaspheme thy holy Name, when they shall
see thee angry with thy own inheritance and redeemed ones. Oh turn us unto
thee, and put us not away from thy face: and let not those that are thy
enemies, triumph over us. Purchase thy self an everlasting name, through our
conversion and repentance, that the enemy and the avenger may be still: and
our hearts may be enlarged, and our mouths may be opened, to proclaim thy
everlasting mercies, and to shout forth thy praises. Turn you unto him you
that are his children, and delites in his Tents. You that love the beauty of
Sion, and the glorious presence of his Redeemer, fill your privy chambers with
strong cries and many tears. Cause heaven and earth to be filled with groans
and sighs of his own spirit in you: and take a claught of that Prince of
life, ere he remove altogether: and before he have stolen himself so far away,
that he cannot be found again. And wrestle with him as Jacob did, and let him
not depart out of your hearts: entreat him, yea enforce him, as it were, by
your tears, and sorrowful cries, not to leave his own Tents, and Tabernacle
in this land: not to give over his glorious Gospel, whilk is his strength and
glory, into captivity, in the hands of their enemies. Remember that he cannot
abide the intercession of his own Spirit in his own. He cannot hide his eyes
from his own flesh and blood, he can deny nothing to his own beloved Son,
that makes intercession for his Saints. Let us therefore step up to that Throne
of grace with all confidence: and assuredly, as he is true who hes promised, we
shall find grace and mercy in the time of this our need: both comfort to our
own hearts, and it may be peace in our days, that our eyes shall not see the
evils that are to come: and at that bright appearing of our Lord of life, all
tears shall be wypt away from our eyes. We shall be clothed with those long white
robes, and shall be sed with the fatness of his house, and shall drink of the
rivers of his pleasures, whilk is at his right hand for evermore. For Sions
sake in this land Christian reader, have I thus written unto thee, and for
Ierusalems cause, have I not kept silence at this time: that her glory and
wonted brightness may be renewed, and that the Kirk of Scotland whilk was the
beauty of Europe, and the praise of the whole earth for her liberty purity, and
discipline: might be established in the same, and her salvation and
righteousness, might break forth as a burning lamp, to all the nations of
the earth: and that other Kirks in other kingdoms, whilk desired to see our
bewty and spiritual glory, and accounted them blissed whilk might have had the
occasion to have dwelt in our Tents, to have seen and enjoyed the same: yea
who would have been contented to have bought it with the price of their blood
to their posterities: that they, I say, may see the continuance thereof, and
may rejoice. Turn thou O Lord our God, our hearts unto thee, that thy glorious
presence may be continued with us for ever, for Jesus Christ's sake our Lord and
redeemer, to whom be al praise and glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

Now I come to this matter in hand: the occasion of it was this. There was
one who was sometimes an hearer of the word with me, who show me that he had
been in conference with a Papist, and he had brought him thus far, that if I
would show him of any that professed our religion before Martine Luther, he
would renounce his Papistry: and therefore desired me to set them down in
writ. The whilk I did: and set it down in this form, as thou sees it heir. So
this being carried to Master Gilbert Brown, he writes an answer to it, and
sends it to me. Unto the whilk I have made this reply. Thou hes them all three
their: first, that whilk I did write, then his answer to it, and then my reply
to his answer.

Indeed it is true, christian reader, that there was many things that did
hinder me, and withdraw me from this resolution, either to make any answer to
it at all, or yet to let it go forth to the light. As first, that so many
things hes been written alredie by the lights and lanterns of this age
against that ruinous Babell, that all further conuictions seems to be
superfluous. Next, the conscience of my own tenuitie and weakness, together
with a continual burden of a fourfolde teaching every week in my ordinary
charge, beside others both private and public duties, whilk not only my own
people, but also this desolate country craved, whereby I was let to afforde
that time and study unto it, as the gravity of sik a matter required. And
last of all, the consideration both of the person and work of of the
adversary, that neither the one nor the other would be accounted worthy of
any answer at all, himself being both rejected and excommunicated according to
the express commandment of the holy Ghost, as an heretic being perverted
and damned in his own conscience, and delivered over unto satan, that he
might learn if it were possible not to blaspheme the everlasting truth of God
any more. And also denounced his rebel, Tit. 3.10.11.1^ 1. Cor. 5.5. 1. Timot.
1.2^.
for his tresonable attempts, both against this Kirk and Kingdom his work
also being so foolish in the self, as both I hard his Majesty affirm, that
he was a foolish reasoner in it: and also I hope, the indifferent reader shall
see the same: his reasons and arguments being also so of answered unto by the
learned of our side, so that it seemed but actum agere, to make any further
answer thereunto: yet notwithstanding of al these impediments, these motions and
reasons prevailed with me at the last, both to answer it, and also to let it go
forth to the open view and sight of all men: to wit, the conscience of that
duty whilk low unto the truth of God, being so highly blasphemed and evil
spoken of: the unfeigned love of the salvation of my country men, who for the
most part, are blinded with the smoke of the darkness of that bottomless
pit: the railling and thrasonicall bragging of the aduersarye, both by word and
writ, that it would never be answered: and that the ministry would never
suffer an answer to come to light, because they knew the answer to be
unworthy, and none other was able to answer to it: the most earnest preissing
of a great many of my brethren, who knew the lamentable estate of this
blinded country: the constant desire of all men in this country to see the
same: together, with his Majesty's most gracious acceptance of my endeavor,
and most favorable judgment of this my labor and most human council to
publishe the same, whilk did not a little encourage me: and last of all the
express commandment of the holy Ghost Answer a fool according to his folly,
least he seem wise in his own eyes, the whilk if it have place in any thing,
it must have place here, where not only this seming wise in his own eyes,
would undoubtedly follow upon my silence, but also a seming wise in the eyes
of all, this nuik of the country almost: both to the prejudice of the
everlasting truth of God, and also to the stumbling of the weak, Lib. de
Trinitate cap. 3. and lib. cont. Mend. cap. 6
the further obduring of the obstinate, and the wounding of the hearts of all the godly therein. Augustine hes a notable sentence to this purpose. It is to
be wished says he, where heresy flourishes that all these who hes any gift of
writting, that they all write suppose they should write not only of the
selfsame matters or questions, but also the self same things or arguments,
suppose perchance in other words. For, says he, it is ^up^dien^ that
heretics understand that there are not only one or two, but many in the
camps of the Catholics, who dare with open face meet them. And he says
there is another commodity that commes by the writing of many: to wit, that by
this means, the Catholic books themselves are more shortly and easily
brought unto the hands of al men, so that while as some falls upon one, and
some falls upon others: yet notwithstanding they are all instructed to use the
same weapons in their common dangers. The whilk how sitly it aggrees unto this
purpose of mine, I leave it to the judgment of all men, who knows the estate
of this blinded country, wherein that darkness of the Antichristian kingdom,
is so far spread, the confident brags of the adversary are so universally
credited, the people scattered as sheep without shepherds, lying wide open to
all the assaults of the Devil: ^atth. 9, 36
and the deceates of these rauenons wolfes, and their hands so full of
Papistical books, the deadly weapons of their own destruction, without any one
book, almost, for ought that I know, whereby either these that are perverted,
may be revoked from their errors, or these that are assaulted, may be sustained
from yielding to the adversary, or those that are weak may be confirmed. Not
unlike the miserable estate wherein the Hebrews were brought unto, through the
tyranny of the Philistims, wanting both sword and spear in the time of their
warfare, having no smithes in their whole land, 1 Samuel 13 19.20.22.
whereby they were compelled to go to their enemies to sharpen their Cowter,
and sok, and other instruments Now as for the work it self, I say nothing of
it, but only recommends it to the blissing of God in all your hearts and
consciences. The whilk also hes been my earnest desire to God, from the first
time that I put my hand to the pen continually, that his effectual presence
might be joined therewith, both to convict the contrary minded, and to confirm
the godly Read ye it therefore with that affection of heart, wherewith it was
written, and desire ye that blissing in the reading of it, as I did in the
writing of it: and then I hope through Gods blissing, ye shall reap some
profit by it. Now the God of all mercy, and the Father of all light,
illuminate all our eyes more and more: and cause the light of his glorious
Gospel to shine in our hearts, and bless all the means thereof, that we may
be the children of light heir, and may be partakers of that everlasting weight
of glory heira^ter in Christ Jesus. Amen. From Air the 18. December. 1602.

Yours in the Lord, M. John We sche Preacher of Christ's Gospel.

TO MAJSTER GJLBERT Brown Priest, defender of the Romish faith.
I Received a book of yours sent to me wherein is contained, partlye an
answer to a little scrolle sent be me to a Catholic as ye name him: partlye
your exhortation to me, after the answer, together with some demands, whereof
ye crave to be resolved by me and my brethren. Your answer to my writing you
have subscriued, so I see you will stand by it: The other part is not
subscriued. It is a lamentable and pitiful thing, to see the glorious gospel
of his dear Son our Savior so obscured and darkened in this country with the
Revel. 9.2
smoke of that kingdom of darkness of yours, that hes ascended and come out
of the bottomless pit, to their eternal damnation, who is blinded and deceived
thereby. I have sorrow in my heart for it, and it is my earnest desire to God
the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, that once in his mercy, the smoke of that
furnace may be scattered by the light of his glorious Gospel, and the beams
thereof may shine in their own strength and clearness in this blinded
country, that is drunken with the Revel, 17.2 2. These. 2.5
abominations of that harlote of Babell, and deceived with her strong
delusions whereof ye are used as the instrument in the Lords Justice: that as
the rest of the land hes risen that first Revel. 20.5
resurrection from the death of her darkness and her abominations: so this
country may also be partaker of the same, that in that great day they may rise
that second resurrection to life and glory. I believe and therefore I speak,
and that with confidence and assurance knowing by his word, that Revel. 14.8.
Babel must fall as the Revel. 11, 13.
tenth part of it is fallen already. The Revel. 17.10
whore must be made naked and desolate, and her flesh must be eaten up. For
true is the Lord who hes foretold it, and that God who condemns her is a
strong God, therefore Reu. 18, 8.5.
her plagues shall sal upon her at once, death, famine and sorrow: for her
sins are come up unto heaven, Reu. 17.4. Col. 2.23, 2. Tim. 3.5. Reu. 17.4.2.
and 18.3.4.24.
and God has remembered her iniquities. And suppose the cupe wherein she reached
her fornications and abominations to be drunken out of, be of gold, having a
show of holiness and voluntary religion, yet the drink that is in it, is
abomination and Idolatry, wherewith she hes corrupted the earth, and made the
nations drunken therewith. Let all the children of God therefore, that loves to
be saved, forsake her, and go out of her, least they be partaker of her
iniquities and of her judgments also: for her judgment is pierced through to
the heavens, and is lifted up to the vppermoste clouds. In vain therefore
does any man go about to cure her with balm, for she cannot be healed. It
is al but in vain to you Master Gilbert, or any man else, to display her
banner upon her walls, to strengthen her keepers, to appoint her watchme^, to
prouid for her spies, for the Lord hes both thought it, and will perform that
whilk he hes spoken against her. The Lord is to recompense her, all the evil
that she has done to Sion; and his holy Temple, and the Saints therein: for
their blood is found in her. The Lord hes sworn by him self, even he that made
the earth by his virtue, that established the world by his wisdom, and
stretched out the heavens by his prudencie: and yet man is so brutishe that he
will not understand, and so bewitched with her pleasures, that he will not
believe it. I beseech God who is able to quicken the dead, and to open the eyes
of the blind, and to call the things that are not, to be: to open your eyes
that you may understand and believe these things, and to glorify his own name
in your conversion unto the truth, and if it be possible, for ye have caused
many to err: and as Jeroboam caused the people to sin, because he stayed
them from coming up to Jerusalem, to have worshipped God aright, and made them
to worship Idols in their own land: So have you done great iniquity, and
hes stayed sundry of the Lords people to come to mount Sion, the Kirk of God:
where there they might have learned his ways, Revel. 17 ^^ ^8.
and walked in the same yea, whilk is worse, ye are the cause that many do
worship the abomination of Babell, your round bread in your abominable
Mass: and your wooden and stony Idols: and by the deceit of that golden
cupe, ye make them drink of the deadly poison of the spiritual fornications,
and abominations of that harlote. And as the Lord put an impure spirit of
error in the mouth of Achabs false Prophets, to entise him to go up to Ramoch
Giliad, that he might perish thereby, because the Lord had spoken evil against
him, who entised and prevailed also. So hes the Lord put an impure spirit, and
a spirit of error in your mouth, 2. These. 2.
and in the mouths of the rest of her false Prophets, to entise so many, as
loves not the truth in this sinful country to believe your lies, and to be
deceived with your strong delusions: that all these might be damned whilk had
pleasure in unrighteousness, as the Lord foretold in the 2 These. 2. O that ye
had an heart to turn to God, that as ye have been a stumbling block to many,
to cause many to fall with you to the damnation of their souls; So ye may be by
your conversion to the truth of God, the instrument of the rising of many
again. O that treasure of wrath that ye have hoorded up against your self
in that great day: for Satan hes wrought effectually by you, if ever by any
in this land, with all power, and in all deceaueablenes of unrighteousness
amongst them that perish. For cursed is he, and the Lord commanded to proclaim
it in mount Heball, that causes the blind to turn out of the way, and let all
the people say, Amen. Deuteronomy. 27. What curse of the Lord is then abiding you,
who thinks it good service to God to cause the blind to wander, and turn
away from the light of the Gospel; whilk is the words of eternal life to all
them that believes. Oh remember, and lay it to your heart, the eternity of
damnation. It is hard for you to kick against the prick: the stone of the
truth that ye stumble at, will crushe you all in pieces at the last. Shut not
your eyes at the clear light of life and grace, and harden not your heart
while it is called the day. And while ye are in the way with your adversary
be reconciled to him: for the Lord and his truth against whom you fight is
adversaries unto you, or and ever ye enter in at the ports and gates of hell,
and be casten in that prison and given over to that iayler, you will never come
out again whill you have paid the uttermost farthing, and that will be never,
for it is eternitye of pains. Allace you deceive others being deceived your
self, as the holy ghost foretold it. 2. T m. 3.13. That evil men should wax
worse and worse, deceauing and being deceived. The Lord take away the veil
that is hung over your heart, that ye may be turned to the eternal weill of
your own soul, and the salvation of many that is blindlings led by you to the
bottomless pit of condemnation. Because I have compassion on you, and on this
miserable country, therefore this writ I unto you. Fot allace who can bide it to
be banished for evermore from such a wonderful and everlasting weight of
glory, from the fellowshipe of the Lamb, and of all his glorified creaturs,
man and Angel? who can compass the eternity of damnation in that utter
darkness, where there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth for evermore? who
can tell their terrors? who can number their sorrows, who can reckon and count
the eternal woes of the damned. Be not cruel to your own soul and the souls
of your own country men, love not yours and their eternal damnation. Believe
the Scripture and be not incredulous. Without that city of God, that new
Jerusalem, shall be dogs, inchanters, murderers, and idolaters: and whosoever
loves and makes lies. Revel. 22. Yea, their portion shall be in that lake
that burns with fire and brimstone, whilk is the second death. Either
wondrous blinded and endured must you be, or else in your own conscience you
know your Kirk and your selves to be murderers of souls, Idolaters, luiffers
and makers of lies. For the uphold of the credit of your religion, and that
not be the writtings of your enemies, but of your friends men of your own
profession: yea, by your own latin service set out in your own books, for
ye worship not the one true God in Jesus Christ through his spirit, but as
Jeremy says of the Idolaters in his time, according to the number of your
cities ye have increased the number of your God^, and hes turned the glory of
the incorruptible God, in the similitude and Image of corruptible creatures,
and passing by the creator, whilk is blissed for ever, worships the creatures,
Saints and Angels, stocks and stones and a piece of bread, oil, and water,
bones, and relickes, the skurfe skarfe of all things: yea and your head the man
of sin and son of perdition, (who is called God in your canon law, Did.
96. Satis euidenter and whom your canonists calls, the Lord God) the Pope,
and to whom is given these things, that is peculiar and proper only to Jesus
Christ: whilk by the grace of God shall appear clearly, in our disputation
following. For there is as direct opposition betwixt your head and Jesus
Christ, betwixt your religion and his, as is betwixt light and darkness, Christ
and Beliall, the doctrine of devils and the doctrine of salvation. But the
Lords judgments are unsearchable and his ways past finding out: he hardens
whom he will and hes mercy on whom he will. I thought it surely the Lords
good providence, that he hes brought you out into the camp now, and that now
by write ye have set your foot into the battle, who hes been sik a sore
enemy to the gospel of Jesus Christ in this country, and hes resisted the
preaching of it vehemently, that it may be seen that darkness was but your
strength, and lies the foundation of your religion. But I leave you to the
Lord. Now as for that scrowe of mine, as ye call it, if it was so as you set it
down heir, there hes been some little escapes in scribendo, in the writting.
In the last section (as I have marked in yours heir and there, as may be seen
in sundry places) whilk I have corrected in this my answer as 1258. for 1158.
next 129. for 1290. and James Gyles a threatening Friar, for to John Geillis:
and the Kirk of Grecia whilk with the rest of the Greek and Eastern Kirks
was more nor the Kirks of Europe. And hereby are your marginall notes whilk was
above these places answered. Now as for the first part of your book wherein
ye answer to that whilk I write, I have answered it heir, and as for your
exhortation, and demands of me and my brethren, suppose it be so foolish and
frivolous (as every one that hes but a spark of judgment may see) that it is
worthy no answer at al, for a more bairnely, foolish, and frivolous writting,
red I never, yet you shall have it by gods grace: but I wait first to see if
you will answer ought to this my reply. I have set down your answer fully,
and hes answered to every point and argument severally: the like now Master
Gilbert I desire of you that if ever you can be able to put to your hand to
make an answer, that you set down mine word for word, and answer every head
and point thereof severally, as I have set them down heir, and show what you
grant, and what you deny in every head, and argument as I have done in
yours: otherways, I will take it for no answer, but for a manifest
demonstration that ye are convicted in your conscience of the truth of our
doctrine and of the falset of your own religion. The two heads concerning the
Mass and Antichrist, I have put them in a several treatise, whilk I have
annexed to this: and that both because they are the corner stones and
fundamental points of your religion, and also because when I offered to
disprove them in word, whilk you shifted of under this pretense only, because
there was a brother of the ministry with me, whom ye would not suffer to
be present; to be a witness and penner of our disputation only: but would
have him removed from the hearing of it altogether: notvvithstanding that it
was promised faithfully, both by him and me, and all the gentlemen that was
present, offered as caution, that he should not speak a sillabe, neither
secreitlie nor openly, during all the time of our disputation; but only be a
witness and penner of our conference upon my part, ye having also both Master
George Ker, and another to have written for your part, and nothing to be
written, but that whilk should be subscriued by both parties. You not daring
face your own cause, upon so equal conditions, you desired to set them down
in write, the vvhilk I have done heir. Now the Lord open your eyes to see
the truth for Christ's sake. Amen. From Kirkcudbright the 6. of August. 1599.

M. John Welsche preacher of Christ's gospel at AIR.

The principal points handled in this first part, are these
1. THat the Kirk of Rome is not the Catholic Kirk, in no respect, as they
vaunt of themselves, but a particular Kirk: and that impure, rotten, dead, and
Antichristian.

2. That the Kirk of Christ both may err, and hes erred in all ages, before the
law under the law, in the time of Christ, after his ascension, in all ages,
as well severallie, as jointly, in councels both Provincial, and general: and
that the Kirk of Rome, and their heads the Popes of Rome, hes most foullie
erred.

3. That the falset of the Religion of the Kirk of Rome may be sufficiently
made manifest by comparing the doctrine of the Kirk of Rome, with the doctrine
of Christ and his Apostles, set down in the Scripture, suppose all the rest of
the circumstances of changes and mutations, as the first person, time place and
so forth be not distinctly set down in histories.

4. The author, time, place, and so forth of the rest of the circumstances of
the change of the doctrine of the Kirk of Rome, is set down distinctlie*
first, as the Scripture foretold it, and also some of the ancients and
historiographers, in some particular heads, hes noted out these circumstances.

5. That our Religion was neither first invented by Martine Luther, nor yet
first preached by him, but was inst tuted by Christ in his Scripture, and was
professed by his Apostles, and the Primitive Kirk, and the true Kirk of Christ
in all ages. And that he departed not from the true Kirk, but from the
society of Babel, and the pest of that Antichristian kingdom: and that he had
the Lord Jesus, his Apostles, and all the primitive Kirk, and all these that
professed the true Religion, to be his predecessors.

6. Who should be supreeme judge in all controversies of religion: to wit, the
Lord Jesus in his word, and not the Pope and his council, as they say: and the
true cause wherefore they decline the Lord, both to be Judge in his word, and
witness in his authentic scripture the Hebrew and Greek fountains, and will
have none to be judges, but themselves, their own Popes, the fathers and
forgers of their own religion, because they both know in their conscience
that the principal points of their doctrine is not written, or warranted in
the Scriptures of God. And also some of themselves through the forcible
conviction of the truth, hes been compelled to grant, and to set it down in
write, that the principal points and foundaments of their Religion, hes not
their author, origin, nor beginning in the scripture, nor cannot be warranted
and defended by the same: and therefore they know assuredly, that if the
Popes be not admitted to be judge in their own cause, their Religion will be
gone.

7. That the whole certainty of all their doctrine and religion, and of the
doctrine of the Scriptures, by their own confession, depends upon the
testimony of the present Kirk: that is, the present Popes, and his Clergy:
and that the certainty both of our doctrine, that it is of God, and also of
the divinity of the Scriptures, depends not upon the testimony of the Kirk of
Rome, for that were a weak thread, nor of the testimony of any Kirk only or
principally, but upon other most infallible grounds.

8. Sundry points of doctrine controuerted amongst us, whilk were casten in as
examples by M. Gilbert, to prove that his religion was warranted in the
Scripture, and ours not warranted by the same As 1. the absolute necessity of
Baptism. 2. Freewill, and the possibility to keep the commandments of God
absolutely and perfitely. 3. Transubstantiation. 4. The authority of Priests
to forgive sins. 5. The Sacraments of extreme unction, imposition of hands,
and of marriage. 6. That the band of marriage is d ssoluble for the cause of
adultery. 7. Merits of works. 8, Works of supererogation. 9 Christ's local
descension to Hell. 10. Justification by works. All whilks are most evidently
convicted and confuted by the testimonies of the Scripture: and many of them
also by the testimonies of the ancient Fathers, and some of their own
testimonies of Popes, Cardinals, Doctors, and others.

9. That Fathers cannot be judges of the controversies of Religion, not yet the
exposition of the Scriptures should be tried by them: but only the Scripture
to be exponed by Scripture: and their expositions in so far forth to be
embraced, as they aggree with them. And that both because they may err, hes
erred, and also their expositions dissents one from another: and this is proved
both by the testimonies of some of the Fathers and some of the most learned
Papists

10. That the Apocrypha is not Canonical Scripture, whilk is also proved by
the testimonies of some of their own Popes, Cardinals, and Doctors.

11. That the defection foretold in the Scripture in the ^ime of the
Antichrist, should be a universal defection of all sorts, except the elect.

12. That the Kirk of Christ in the time of the Antichrists defection and
tyranny, should be redacted to a small handful, and should be latent, and
lurk, for to escape his cruelty and tyranny.

13. That the space of 1260. days wherein the Antichrist should reign, and
the number of the true Witnesses of God that should preach the truth all that
time, the space of their preaching, their clothing, the place of the
ignominious handling of their carcases, and their reviving and ascending up to
heaven, as they are set down in the Revelation, is to be understood not
literallie, as Master Gilbert does, but figuratiuelie after the custom of
these prophecies in this Revelation.

14. That the Popes are not the head of the Kirk, nor acknowledged by the Kirks
in all ages to be the head thereof: but his Monarchy is condemned by Christ
Jesus, and his Apostles in his word, by the Fathers of the Primitive Kirk, by
five sundry Provincial councels, and by nine general Councels, and by five
Universities, and by the Kirks of Grecia, Asia, Moscouia, Aethiopia, Boeme,
Piemont, and all the reformed Kirks throughout Europe, so that if it were but
put to an assise of these, his Monarchy would be condemned.

15. That the Catholic Kirk is invisible, and in what respects we affirm she
is invisible, and that the particular visible Kirks heir, may be obscured,
rare, and brought to sik a few handful, that they are not openly known and
seen to all: but only some of them amongst themselves, and some of them to
their persecuters, as it was foretold in the Scriptures of God in the time of
the Antichrist, and as it hes been accomplished in the time of Popery.

16. That our Religion was preached and professed in all ages, by Christ, his
Apostles, the primitive Kirk, the ancient Fathers, and by sundry in the
mids of Popery, who were condemned and persecuted, and put to death many of
them, for speaking against their doctrine, and that many hundredth years
before Ma^tine Luther, and some immediately before him.

17. That we have renewed no old condemned heresies, but these that he ascriues
to us, either are not heresies in deid, but warranted by the Scripture, or else
we do condemn them as heresies, and detests them more then they: whereof some
of them does also better aggree to themselves.

18. That they are they in very truth, who hes renewed the old heresies, of
old heretics whilk are condemned in the word of God, and that to the number of
40 and more.

A reply against Master Gilbert Brown priest.
M. Gilbert Brown.

Ane answer to ane certain Libell or Writing, sent by M. JOHN WELSCHE to ane
Catholic, Title.
as ane answer to ane objection of the Roman Kirk. etc.

I received ane little skroll, whilk was sent to you by M. John Welsche
Minister at Kirkeudbricht, in the whilk, there is meikle promised, and little
done. And because it may appear to some to be something, I will (God willing)
answer the same in particular.

M. John Welsche Reply.

AS to your judgment and censure of this my answer to your objection, wherein
ye think there is meikle promised and little done: I do not regard it, for so
long as your heart is bewitched with the pleasures of Babell, your light is but
darkness: so while the Lord annoint your eyes, with that eye-salue promised in
the Revelation. 3. and purge your heart by faith, ye cannot discern of things
different, and give upright judgment. What I promised, I am now by the grace
of God ready to perform. And whether it was something or nothing, meikle or
little, that I did, let work bear witness, and let them that loves the truth
judge.

M. Gilbert Brown.

First he titles his libell, Ane answer to ane objection of the Roman Kirk,
whereby they go about to deface the verity of that only true Religion whilk
we profess.

God forbid that we Ye teach not the doctrine of Jesus Christ, therefore ye are
not true Cath^lick^.
Catholics, whom he calls the Roman Kirk, seeing that we are the only
defenders The overthrowers of it and Impugners of it.
of the truth, as our predecessors the pastors of the true Kirk was before us,
should go about to deface the truth. But we go about to impugn all false
doctrine repugnant to the truth, as False for ye do not as they did.
the halie fathers of the primitive Kirk did before us, against the heretics
in their days, as Irenaus, Cypriane, Ambrose, Augustine, Hierome, Basile,
Gregory, Chrysostom, with the rest of the true pastors of the Kirk. And seeing
that the Ministers We preach that same Euangell that is written in the
Scriptures.
of this new Evangell hes not only invented sum heresies themselves, but
also hes renewed many auld condemned heresies confuted by them before (as they
You speak here against your conscience.
can not deny) as I fall give sum examples afterward, as the heresy of Simon
Magus, of Manichaeus, Pelagius, Aerius, Iouinianus, Vigilantius, with many
vthers, what le^ can we do nor impugn the same, as our predecessors did
before.

M. John Welsche his Replye.

As to your answer: first ye deny it and detestes it as a blasphemy: Nixt
ye go about to clear your selves from the suspicion of it: Thirdly ye
challenge us and our doctrine with the crimes of noveltie and heresy: And so
ye conclude ye could do no less nor impugn it.

As to your denying of your defacing of the truth of God, so does the hoorish
woman after she hes eaten, Pro. 30.20
she wypes her mouth and says, she hes not sinned, whilk is true as well in
spiritual as in bodily fornication: So not-withstanding your Kirk hes buried
the truth of God in the graves of darkness, and did ouercure it with their
traditions and glosses their many years bygane, yet you wype your mouths, and
says you have not sinned. But look to it in time, for ignorance, and zeil
without knawledge will not excuse you in the day of the Lord. Matthew. 26.65.
That you detest it as a blasphemy, so did the hie priest rent his clothes
and said Christ blasphemed, when he spoke but the truth. As for your golden
styles whilk you take to your selves of Catholics, defenders of the truth,
successors to the pastors of the true Kirk and impugners of all false doctrine.
Your doctrine indeed could not deceive so many, if it were not covered with
their styles; your poysone and abomination would not be drunken so
universally, Apoc. 17.4.
if it were not in sick a golden cup as this. So these are the byssope
wherewith ye would wash you from this iniquity, and clenge you from this sin.
Matthew. 7.15.
But may not false prophets come in sheeps clothing? And the ministers of Satan
can they not transform themselves as though they were the Ministers of Christ?
2. Cor. 11.13 14 Apoc. 24 and 8 Ioh. 8.37. Mat. 23.7
The Scriptures hes foretold it: and did not the false Apostles in Ephesus,
call themselves the Apostles of Christ, and yet they were found liars? And did
not the synagogue of Satan call her self the synagogue of the Jews, (that is,
the Kirk of God) and yet they were not so, but the synagogue of the devil? yea
and did not Abraham's seed, and they that sat in Moses chair, Mat. 7.16. Ioh.
10.11
and was the successors of Aaron, condemned the Savior of the world?
Therefore not by your styles, but by your fruits ye must be tried. For if ye
be catholics etc, ye will teach the doctrine of that good pastor, and chief
shepherd the Lord Jesus. So it is your doctrine and not your styles that must
defend you.

And because (Christian Reader) by this style of Catholic, whilk they ascriue
only to their Kirk, they cause the simple to err, and leads many blindlings
to damnation, therefore I will take this visard from them. Ye are not the
Catholic Kirk, as ye style your self, and thus I prove it. Pope Pius the fifth,
who write a Catechism according to the decree of the council of Trent. He
there says that the Kirk whilk is called the body of Christ, Catechism. conc.
Trident in expositione symbol.
whereof he is the head, is called Catholic, because it is spread in the light
of ane faith from the east to the west, receiving men of al sorts, containing
all the faithful whilk have been from Adam, even until this day, The Kirk of
Rome is not the Catholic Kirk
or shall be hereafter to the end of the world professing the true faith, etc.

Now I reason thus. The Catholic Kirk comprehends all the faithful from Adam
till now, and that shall be hereafter to the end of the world, or else Pope
Pius, and the fathers of Trent erres. But the Roman Kirk comprehends not all
the faithful from Adam till now, and that shall be hereafter: Therefore the
Roman Kirk is not the Catholic Kirk. Choose you now whilk of these ye will
deny. The proposition I trow ye will not: for then ye should bring two
inco^ueniences, the ane upon Pope Pius and the fathers of Trent, that they have
erred in defyning the Catholic Kirk, and so the Kirk and the Pope may err.
The other is upon your self, who said that your Kirk hes not erred. And so
ye lose your style of a defender of the Catholic faith: for this is a chief
point of their faith, that the Kirk cannot err. I hope therefore that these
are Labyrinths whilk ye will not wittinglie cast your self unto, and so you
must hold fast the proposition. All the question is then of the assumption.
Whether the Roman Kirk comprehends all the faithful from Adam till now, and
whilk shall be to the end of the world, or not. First I say, a particular Kirk
comprehendes not all the faithful from Adam etc. But the Roman Kirk is a
particular Kirk, or else the fathers of the counsel of Basile, ^a^^ien council.
epist. synod 3. Verratus, disputationum contra Lutheranos tom ^ de authoritate
a^potest. universe. ^ccles. cap. 1.
and Verratus a papist erres, for they call the Roman Kirk a particular Kirk.
We grant (say they) that the Roman Kirk is a principal Kirk among vthers, but
while you commend a part forget not the haill. And they say, the universal
Kirk co^prehe^ds the Roman Kirk. Choose you then whether will you contradict
the fathers of the counsel of Basile and a Papist Verratus, and be so absurd
as to call the arm of the body the haill body, ane arm of the Oceane sey
the haill Oceane sey, or to go from your title that the Roman Kirk is not the
Catholic kirk. Secundlie, the Catholic Kirk comprehendes them that were
before Christ: But the Kirk of Rome comprehendes not them, for there was a
Kirk, or ever there was a Kirk at Rome, and the Roman Kirk comprehends nane
but them that acknowledges the Pope to be the head of the Kirk. But those that
were before Christ never did that: Therefore the Roman Kirk is not the
Catholic Kirk. Thirdly, the Catholic Kirk is invisible: for at the least,
neither are they that are glorified, neither are they that are to be borne,
visible. But ye will not have the Roman Kirk, but always visible, therefore
the Roman Kirk is not the Catholic Kirk. Fourthlie, if the Roman Kirk be
the Catholic Kirk, then either it shall follow, that the Pope is the head of
the Catholic Kirk, or else that the Roman Kirk wants a visible head. Choose
you whether of these ye will, for the ane ye must, if ye will have the Roman
Kirk to be the Catholic Kirk. But to say that the Pope is the head of the
Catholic Kirk, I trow ye dare not be so blasphemous: for the gloryfied
Saints, and Peter himself are of the Catholic Kirk, or else (as I said
before) Pope Pius and the fathers of Trent erres. And so then if ye will make
him head of the Catholic Kirk, ye must make him head of the gloryfied
Saints and of Peter also. So then choose you whether will ye leave the style of
Catholic, whilk ye claim as proper to your Kirk, or will ye have the Pope
the head of the triumphant Kirk in heaven: or last of all, will ye have your
Roman Kirk to want a visible head: ane of these ye must choose. So to end
this point, this style of Catholic it is like the numbering of the people by
David: for as it brought him in a wonderful strait, 2. Sam. 14.
when he saw it behooved him to choose, either seven years famine, or four
months flying before his enemies, or three days pestilence. So this title of
yours if you will bide by it, brings you in a wonderful strait: for ye have
not the choice of ane of three evils, but these three things must ye either
choose, or else let this style of Catholic go; ane of you fighting against
ane other, the Kirk invisible, and the Pope not to be the head of the Kirk.
Of the whilk, the least of these is more able to overthrow your Kingdom, then
they all were able to have overthrown the Kingdom of David, for they are the
maine pillars of your Kingdom, your unity, your visibilitie, your Popes
supremacy, all whilk you must either lose, or else let your style of
Catholic go from your Kirk. But how will ye wrestle your self out of this?
For if ye will believe the fathers of Trent, and Pope Pius, in defyning the
Catholic Kirk, ye cannot eschew their inconveniences. And if you will not
believe the^, that they spoke truly in that point, ye must accuse them of
error. And so the Kirk hes erred, the Pope hes erred, and your self hes erred
that said your Kirk hes the truth in all things. John. 11.50
And surely as Caiaphas being hie priest that year, spoke the truth when he
said that ane must die for the people, and not the the haill nation perish,
suppose in (...) evil sense. So hes the fathers of Trent and Pope Pius here
spoken truly, Heb. 12, 23. Gal. 4, 26,
both acording to the Scriptures, for the Kirk is called the assembly of the
first borne, whose names is written in heaven. And that new Jerusalem whilk is
from above, whilk is the mother of us al. And also according to the fathers,
Clem Ale^. strom. li. 7. and Bernard. cantic. 78. and August d^ catechis. and.
cap 20. and Gregory and moral. in Ioh. li. 28. c. 9.
who affirms that the Kirk is the company of the predestinate, and all the
elect are within the compass of it, and are citizens of it. So as Mat. 1^.17.
Christ said to the Jews. If I cast out devils by the prince of devils, by
whom then castes your children them out? So if we speak now by ane erroneous
spirit, that says the Catholic Kirk comprehendes all the elect, that was,
is, and shall be, and the Kirk of Rome can not be the Catholic Kirk. By
what Spirit hes your council and Pope and their fathers spoken the same? So not
your children but your fathers shall be your judges.

Ye did mark some contradiction as ye thought between me and some vthers, unto
the whilk I will answer in the own time. Let me therefore mark this ane now,
and mark it (Reader). Ye have heard now how that all these with ane voice hes
said, that the Catholic Kirk comprehends all the elect, that was, is, and
shall be: Is it any heresy then to hold this point? I think you will not,
nor dare not say it. What will you say then to your general council of
Constance Sess. 15, art. 1. 6.
who condemned John Hus for the same Doctrine, the first, and sixth article, for
saying that there is ane universal Kirk, whilk is the company of the
predestinate, and as it is taken in this sense, it is ane article of our faith.
For these amongst the rest, was this pure innocent condemned and burnt as ane
heretic, and his doctrine as heresy: whilk of their will ye say now hes erred?
whether the general council of Constance? or the fathers of Trent, Pope Pius,
Gregory, Austine, Clement, and Bernard? For surely if the latter erred not,
then not only did the council of Constance err, but also hes brought upon
them selves innocent blood, in condemning the innocent and ye truth in him.
And if the council of Constance erred not, in condemning their articles of John
Hus, then have they condemned the doctrine of the fathers of Trent, Pope Pius,
Gregory, Austine, etc. and their persons, in the person of John Hus. Choose
whilk of them ye will. I speak the truth to thee in Christ (Reader) be not
deceived. But open thy eyes and behold the verity it self condemned by a
general council, and the professor of it burnt for ane heretic: But his
Revel. 17.^ and 18.24
blood and the blood of the rest of the martyrs of God is found in this whore
of Babell, and therefore ane day she shall be recompensed for all her
iniquity. Go out of her therefore and save thy soul, Revel. 18.45
that thou be not tormented in the lake that burns with fire and brimstone,
with her for evermore. Vtherwise I call heaven and earth to witness against
thee, that thou sall die in her sin, and the Revel. 14.^^
smoke of thy torment shall ascend for evermore. What now will you say to these
things, that your Kirk is not the Catholic Kirk, but a part of it only. And
is only Catholic, because of the Catholic doctrine that she professes? But
if this be true, wherefore then did your general council condemn it in John
Hus, and burn him for that doctrine, whilk both your self must confess to
be true, and is aggreable to Scripture, fathers, and your own Popes. Next I
say, suppose when ye are brought to this strait, ye must say so: yet for all
this, not only call ye your Kirk Catholic, because of the soundnes of
doctrine whilk ye suppose she professes, but As appears by the epist. of
Cardinal Cusanus writing to the Bohemians. Cochlaeus histor Hussitar. lib. 12
also and specially to make the simple believe, that there is no salvation out
of her. Therefore ye call it the only true Kirk, and ye Catholic Kirk: for
out of the particular Kirk there is Salvation, but out of the Catholic Kirk
there is no salvation. Thirdly I say, as the epistles of Peter, John, James,
and Judas are entitled Catholic, not because of the soundness of their
doctrine, whilk is common to the epistles of Paul also, and all the rest of the
Scripture, whilk in that respect may also be called Catholic, but because
they are written generally to all: So the Kirk is called Catholic properly,
not because of the soundnes of doctrine, for that is common to all the
particular Kirks, that hes the purity of Religion, but because it comprehends
all the particular Kirks and all the elect. And also to put a difference
between the Kirk of the Jews, whilk did comprehend but ane certain people,
and the Christian Kirk since the coming of Christ, whilk is not bound to any
certain place or nation, or people, but indifferently receaues al, both Jew
and gentile that believes. and therefore is it called Catholic: and therefore in
our belief we say not, I believe the Catholic doctrine, but the Catholic
Kirk. So by this she is properly distinguished from particular kirks, as the
Mother from ye daughters, and the hail body from ye particular members. So the^
if you would speak properly of your Kirk, and not make your styles snares, to
catch ye souls of the simple, call her but a particular Kirk, and a member of
the Catholic Kirk, but yet dead and rotten, as shall be shown afterward by
the grace of God. Vtherwise, if you will but call her the Catholic Kirk, you
first rob the mother, for she is properly Catholic, and also iniures the
rest of the daughters: For in respect of the soundnes of faith, they may also
challenge the same to them. And thirdly, ye deceive the souls of the simple
thereby, by making them believe there is not ane other Kirk but yours. And last
of all, you are sacrilegious in decking ane adulteress with the styles of the
spouse of Christ.

As to the third point, wherein ye calumniate the truth of God whilk we
profess, in calling it ane new Euangell, and old renewed, and new invented
heresies of our own. These are indeed heavy words wherewith ye Act. 18.6.
and 19.9.
blaspheame the word of the Lord, and speaks evil of it to the people of this
country. And therefore as the Apost. says of them that blasphemed his
doctrine. Romans 3.8
Your damnation is just. For a woe by Gods own mouth is pronounced against
them that calls good evil, Isay. 5.20. Jude. 1.^.
and evil good, truth falset, and falset truth, and darkness light, and
light darkness: But as the Archangell when he straue with Satan about the
body of Moses, did not blame him with cursed speaking, but said, The Lord
rebuke thee, so we will not blame you with cursed speaking, but the Lord rebuke
you. For ye speak here the vision of your own heart, and not from the mouth
of the Lord: And ye are not the first that hes blasphemed the truth of God,
for so did the Jews before you, call the doctrine of the Euangel a sect, a
heresy, and the gentiles called it strange gods and a new doctrine, Act. 28.
Act. 24. Act. 17.
and the preachers thereof, a setter forth of strange gods, and of new
doctrine, and a babbler. The Jews said that Christ had a devil, and yet as our
Lord testifies, Ioh. 8.44.
It was they that was the children of the devil. Ye say that we preach ane new
Euangel, and old and new heresies; but this is the sin and the doctrine of
your Kirk: O^liel. de san^^o a more, in his book de pericul. ^^^iss. ^empo. a
l^arned man anno. 1192, ^ (...). 5.
For to let that pass of that new and everlasting gospel, whilk your fryats
invented and devised, wherein was contained sic blasphemies as the heaven and
earth abhorres to hear them: That God the father reigned under the law: God
the Son under grace. And the holy ghost was then that year to begin his
kingdom and to continue to the end of the world. And that Jesus Christ was
not God, his Sacrament nothing, and his Euangell not a true Euangell. (O
horrible blasphemy) The whilk if God had not raised up some men in those days
to have resisted it, as the Waldenses and vthers whilk ye call heretics and
infamous men, the gospel of Christ had been loosed, and in steed of it, we
would have gotten ane new Euangel: The dreggs whereof yet remains in your
Kirk. But I will let this pass, because the wise men of Babell (I mean your
clergy of Rome) saw that that was too plain ane iniquity, therefore they
caused it quietly to be removed and buried, and yet they not condemned as
heretics that preached it. But by the contrary, the Waldenses and vthers
that withstoode it, was condemned as heretics and their books burned. To let
this pass (I say) whilk testifies what the world might have looked for at
your hands, if the Lord had not provided better for his poor Kirk. Your haill
doctrine is Antichristian as shall be proven hereafter, your Kirk Babell, Reu
17
your Kingdom that second beast Revel. 13.11
that hes two horns like the Lamb and yet speaks like the dragon, and your
head the man of sin 2. Thessal. 2
, and Son of perdition. And ye are they that hes renewed old condemned
heresies, and hes invented new of your own, as shall be proved afterward, by
gods grace.

M. John Welsche.

Say they, our religion is so ancient that it hes continued ever by a lineall
succession of Pastoures and Bishopes, from the days of Christ and his Apost.
till now, never interrupted, never spoken against, but of late since Martine
Luthers days: But yours, say they, is newly forged, and invented, never hard
tell of but since Luther and Caluines days. Therefore yours can not be the
true Religion, and ours must be the only true Religion.

M. Gilbert Brown.

This objection consistes partly of ane truth, and partly of an untruth. It
appears be this that either M. John knows not our preeues, or if he dois he
alteres the same that he may the better oppugn his own invention.

Our objection, or rather ane of our proves, whereby we prove that we
Catholics is the only true Kirk of Christ, and hes the only truth in all
things, is this.

We have abundantly set down to us by the Prophets and Apostles in the holy
write, that the kingdom and Kirk of Christ shall never faill in this earth and
that the gates of hell shall not prevail against it. But shall be permanent
for ever, and shall have always the presence and assistance of the father,
son, and holy ghost, who shall teach it all truth, and remain with it for
ever, as may be perceived be their places noted here, whilks wereouer longsome
to be set down at length. To the whilks I adioyne some of the ancient fathers
exponing the same.

Out of the old testament.

Psalm. 60. 5. read. August. upon this. Psalm. 88. v. 1.2.3.4. 5,
29.30.31.32.33.34.35.36.37.38. read August. on their places, Psalm 104. ver. 8.
read Aug. Ps. 110.9. Esa. 9.7. read. S. Hierom. on Esa. 51.7.8. read S. Hier.
on Esa. 54.8.9. read Hier on Esa. 55.3.13. Esa. 59.21. read Hier. on Ier.
3^.3.36 read Hier. on Ezec. 17.25.26. Dan. 2, 44, Dan, 7.14.27. Miche. 4.7.

Out of the new Testament.

Luc. 1.33. read S. August. upon the 109. Psalm. Math 10.18. read heir
Saint Hierome upon this place Luke. 22.32. John. 14.16.17. John. 17.18.19.20.
Math, 28.20. 1 Timothy 3.15. Act. 5.39.

Some of the ancient fathers.

^f ye take failing for an utter overthrow of the Kirk of the elect, it is
truth: but if you take it for ^rring, and applies it to the visible particular
Kirks then it is false.
Hilari. de Trinitat. lib. 7. August. de vtili. credent. ca, 87. Ambros, lib.
9. cap. 20. Chrysostom. in sermo. de pente. Clem. Alex. lib. 6. strom. in the end.

And because the Scriptures and the ancient fathers of the primitive Kirk
concurres and agrees in ane unity. I would wish M. John to consider the same,
that the Kirk of Christ be all men's judgments shall never faill, nor be
interrupted nor broken.

M. John Welsche his Replye.

I will follow your foot-steppes and first answer to that part whilk ye say
is true, and then unto that whilk ye say is false: And as to the first, the
ground whilk ye laid down whereupon ye go about to build the truth of
your religion, is the Kirk of Christ shall never faill nor be interrupted etc.
Athenaeus dipn^so phist lib. 1^.
It is recorded in histories of one Thrasilaus a frantic man among the
Greeks. Whenever he saw any ships arrive at the haven of Athens, he
thought them all his own, and took ane inuentarie of their wares, and met
them with great joy. Even so it is with you, where soever you see the name of
the Kirk in the holy Scripture, and the promises of God made unto the same, ye
take all to be yours, and books the treasures of it: And boastes thereof as
though they were your own. Crying, the gates of hell shall never prevail
against it. It shall never fail. It hes always the holy Ghost to lead it
in all truth. To remove you therefore out of the haven and to give every
merchant his own ware, and his own ship, and to set the Kirk it self in
possession of the Kirk we must distinguish the name of the Kirk. The Kirk
therefore is taken sometimes for the company of the elect and chosen, whereof
a part is in heaven triumphing with Christ their Lord; a part here in the
earth fighting her battles, lying in her camp and awaiting for the victory.
And these are termed the invisible Kirk, because gods election cannot be
discerned by the judgment of man's sensis or eyes, and we can not know wha are
his chosen. And unto this Kirk, that is, to the chosen appertains all the
promises set down in the scripture, and in them only are they fulfilled:
Mat. 3.12. and 13 24.25
And sometimes it is taken for the company of them wha professes the true
religion, wherein both the chafe and the wheat; the popple and the good seed;
the dregs and the wine, the good and the evil are mixed together, the whilk
suppose they be in the Kirk, yet they are not of the Kirk, no more nor the
superfluous humors of the body are true and lively members thereof. So then
if ye mean by the Kirk, The Kirk of the elect, and if ye mean by this, That
it shall never fail nor be interrupted, etc. only this, That it shall never
be utterly abolished, but shall have always the presence of the halie Ghaist
to lead her in all truth, yea and in all halinesse also, in safarre, as shall
serve for her salvation: We grant that with you, Lib. 3. de Eccles. mili^. cap.
13
as Bellarmine confesses of us. And therefore he says, That many of their
number spend but time, while as they go about to prove that the Kirk heir
beneath absolutely cannot perish, or make absolute defection: for Calvin
(says he) and the rest of the heretics grant that, but they speak and
mean (says he) of the invisible Kirk. So if ye mean no farther but this,
then Bellarmine tells you that all the testimonies of scripture and fathers,
that ye have heaped up here to prove the same, is but to spend the time, and
so are fetched as needless witnesses in a matter that is not doubtsome or
called in question. And if ye had understood his language, ye needed not to
have combered your self in fetching of this mortar and stane, to build up
your Babel: for this was not required at your hands. Genes. 11.7. with Apoc.
14.8. and 17 5. and 18.2.
But because it is Babel whilk ye are bigging, a tower of confusion, therefore
the lord has sent sic a confusion of language amongst you that few of you
understands what another says, when some cries for mortar, others brings
stone. Bellarmine, the great maister-builder, cries for proofs to prove that
the visible Kirk heir beneth can not err, neither in the matters whilk are
neidfull to salvation, neither in the matters whilk are not neidfull, whilk she
propones to be believed, or to be done, whether they be doctrine contained in
the Scripture or extra scripturam, that is, not contained in the scripture. He
cries to prove that, and ye cumber your self in bringing in a number of
scriptures to prove that the Kirk shall always remain till the end of the
world, whereas in the examination of your proofs it will be found, that they
will go no further with you. But if ye mean of the visible Kirk, that it shall
never fail, etc. that is, it shall never fail in doctrine, nor be interrupted
in the same, not only in matters neidfull to salvation, but in all truth, as
ye affirm of your Kirk, and as Bellarmine says, as has been said before, If
ye go this far, as ye do indeed, and as Bellarmine does, and your self must
do, if ye be a right defender of your Catholic faith here, or else there is
no ground whereupon ye can build the purity and truth of your Kirk and
religion. Then I say, that your ground is als false and erroneous, as the
stuff that ye build upon it, for both they have failed, and hes been
interrupted, as shall be proved afterward. And mark this, Christian reader,
as the Philistims Kirk wherein they praised their God, Judge. 16
and mocked Samson the Lords seruand, had two cheef pillars whereon the haill
house leaned and was borne up, so hes the Kirk of Rome two chief pillars,
whereon the haill wecht of their Kirk and religion hings: ye one whereof is
this, that the Kirk can not err: the other that the Pope is the head of the
kirk. Take these two from them, their house must fall, and their religion can
stand no longer. For when they are brought to this strait that they see they
cannot defend their religion, neither by the testimonies of the Scripture, nor
yet by the examples of the Kirk of God, when she was in her greater purity and
sincerity, they are compelled to lay this as a ground to hold all their
errors on, that the Kirk of Christ cannot err: So take this ground from them,
their Kirk and religion cannot stand.

Now, as to the testimonies whilk ye quote out of the old Testament, and out
of the first of Luke, verse. 33. in the new testament, they only prove that
the Kirk and kingdom of Christ shall endure for evermore, and that his
covenant made with her, is everlasting. The whilk cannot exeeme the milita^t
Kirk from erring in points of doctrine, for both the chafe and evil seed in
the Kirk, that is, these that are called, but not chosen, may err, and that to
death and damnation, and yet his Kirk and kingdom, and his covenant,
remains sure, stable, and inviolate: for the Lord only offers his covenant
unto them, and they through incredulity reject it, and so he is not bund to
sanctify or save them, meikle-lesse to keip them from error. And as for these
who are called and chosen, all these promises are made and performed in every
one of them, and the covenant of God is so sure in every one of them, that
our Savior says, None of them can perish. Ioh, 10.28
And yet for all this, every one of them may err in doctrine, suppose not to
death and damnation, whilk ye will not deny. And gif ye would, infinite
examples not only of the Saints of God, of the laickes (as ye call them) but
also of the Priests, Prophets, Apostles; yea, and of Popes also, and of your
own Doctors and Bishops, as a cloud of witnesses, would stand up and avowe
the same in your face. Now I gather, seeing that the militant Kirk heir on
earth has but two sorts of persons in her, these that are called and chosen,
and these that are only called but not chosen, and both may err in points of
doctrine, the one finally to death and damnation: the other may err, suppose
not finally to death and damnation, and yet the covenant of God remain sure,
everlasting, and inuiolate with his Kirk. Therefore, I say, the promises of the
stabilitie of Christ's kingdom, and the perpetuity of his covenant made with
her, cannot exeeme the militant Kirk from erring in points of doctrine: sa ye
have lost your vantguarde. Let us cum to the rest, and see if they will favor
your cause any better nor the former hes done.

The next place ye quote is the 16. of Matthew, ver. 18. Thou art Peter, and
upon this rock I will build my Kirk, and the yets of hell shall not prevail
against it. And because ye trust that there is not a testimony of scripture
whilk shall feight mair for you nor this: let us therefore try it to the
vttermoste, and see how far it can be streatched out. What argument will ye
frame out of this place? for, if you gather no more but this, Christ has
promised that the gates of hell shall never prevail against the Kirk that is
builded on the rock, that is, on Christ: Therefore the Kirk that is builded on
him, shall never be alluterlie exstinguished and abolished by Satan. Then
Bellarmine tells you that ye spend but time in proouing of this, for we grant
it, That the Kirk of the chosen shall never perish. But if you go farther, and
say: That the Kirk of Christ shall never err, because Christ has promised
that the yettes of hell shall not prevail against it: then, I say, either that
exposition is false, or else ye gates of hell should have prevailed long since
against your kirk: for when it prevailed against ye rock whereon the kirk was
builded, it prevailed against the Kirk. For, raze and ouerturne the foundation
of a house, the house cannot stand, seeing the standing of the house consists
on the firmness and surenesse of the foundation thereof. Now the rock
whereon ye say the Kirk is builded unto whom this promise is made, is Peter
and his successors the Popes of Rome, for so ye all with one consent expones
the same. (...) mists annotation upon this place.
Seeing then that they are the foundation of the Kirk, as ye say, and the yets
of hell hes prevailed against them, as I shall prove by the grace of God: it
must follow, if your exposition be true, that the gates of hell hes prevailed,
not once only, but at many times against the Kirk. For, first Peter himself
erred in a matter of doctrine, when he thought with the rest of the Apostles
after the resurrection of Christ, the kingdom of Christ not to be heavenly
but earthly, Act. 1.6.
not spiritual, but like the kingdoms of this world, proper to Israel, not
common to all by virtue of the promise: and also he is commanded to preach the
Gospel to the Gentiles, Act. 10.20
doubting nothing. Whilk testifies, that he doubted before whether the Gospel
should be preached to them or not, and therefore erred in a matter of faith, and
that after he had received ye promise of ye haly Gaist. Ac. 10.14
And also he erred in the abrogation of the Ceremonial Law: for he believed
that some meats were unclean after the death and resurrection of Christ, and
therefore he refused to eat thereof. And this was a matter of faith also. And
last of all, the halie Ghaist testifies, Galat. 2.11
that he went not a right foot to the truth of the Gospel, and therefore was
rebuked by the Apostle Paul to his face. And as for them whom ye call his
successors the Popes of Rome, not only may they be heretics, but also some
of them have been heretics. And therefore if your argument be good, the gates
of hell both may, and have prevailed against them. That they may be heretics,
I will fetch no other witnesses, but your own councils, Canons, Cardinals, and
your own Popes: for they shall be your judges in this matter. Lib. 7. de Rom
Pontif. cap. 30
Bellarmine says, that the Pope being a manifest heretic, cease to be
Pope, and to be head of the Kirk. De authoritate Papae, and Consilii cap. 20.
and 21
Caietan a Cardinal says, That the Pope being a manifest heretic, should
be deposed by the Kirk. Lib. 4. part. 2. cap. 20
Johannes de Turre cremata a Cardinal says, That when the Pope falls in
heresy, he is deposed of God. Lib, 1. cap. 2
Alphonsus de Castro, says that the Pope as he is a Pope may be an heretic,
and teach heresy, whilk also has sometimes (says he) fallen out in them. Sermon.
2. de consecr. Pontificis.
Innocentius the 3. and Hadrian the 2. Popes, as also the 6. and 8. Synod, and
their own Canon Did. 40. cap. Si Papa
law, do testify, that they may be heretics. And also Pope Hadrian 6.
Bellarm. lib. 4. de Romano Pontif. cap. 2.

And some of them have been heretics also. Tertul. ad prax.
Zepherinus a Montanist. Damasus and Consil. Sinuessanum.
Marcellinus, ane that sacrificed to devils the idols of the Gentiles.
Athanas. in epist. ad solit. vita. Hieron. in catal. scrip. fascic temp aetate
sexta. Hermannus contractus. Marianus Scotus compilatio chronologies
Supplementum chronie. Platina
Liberius ane Arrian, that denied the godhead of the son. Platina in (...)
Anastas. and supplement chronic and distinct. 19. c^put Anastas^^s falcic.
tempor.
Anastasius a fauorer of the Nestorian heresy. Liberatus in Bre^^atio, (...)
Vigilius ane Eutychian, whose heresy was, that after the incarnation of
Christ, there was but one nature in Christ, made of his divinity and
humanity, whilk overthrows the foundation of our salvation. Honorius a
Monothe lite, and therefore damned and accursed in the 6. counsel of
Constantinople. Act. 13. Ocea^. in opere 93. dicrum. Adrian de confirmatione
circa finem. Gerson in sermon de pascha.
John the 22. held that the souls of the blessed being separate from their
body, did not see the Lord before the resurrection. Sessione 11. Concilii
Constan.
John the 23. denied eternal life, whereof he was accused, and deposed in the
council of Constance. Sessione 34.
Eugenius the 4. deposed in the counsel of Basile for heresy. I omit the
rest. Seeing then these whom ye call the rock and foundation of your kirk have
erred, and that in matters of doctrine and religion, and in the principal
points thereof, and that by the testimonies both of the scripture, and of your
own councils, doctors, Cardinals, and Popes. Therefore, if your argument hald
forth, then, I say, the gates of hell has prevailed against your kirk, because
they have prevailed against the rocks and foundations thereof, for they have
erred as has been proved, the whilk, I trow, ye will not grant. And
therefore, the farthest that ye can gather heir, is but this: That the gates of
hell, that is, the power of condemnation shall not katischyousin, that is,
totallie and finally overcome: so that suppose they may ischyousin, that is,
be strong, and make them to fail in many things, yet they cannot prevail
totally and finally against the kirk of God, that is, the elect and chosen,
who are builded, not on the Pope, but on the immovable rock the Lord Jesus. I
say further, this promise is made and performed in every one of the elect:
For, the yettes of hell shall not prevail, that is, get the final and full
victory over any of them. And therefore our Savior says, None of my sheep
shall perish, ^ob. ^0.^^
and yet ye will not deny, but every one of the elect may err. Therefore this
promise does not privilege the kirk of God from erring, but the chafe and
evil seed, that is, these that are called and not chosen, may err, and err
finally, (...) 7
because this promise is not made unto them, for they are not builded upon this
Rock: but upon the sand: for none is builded upon this Rock, but these who are
blessed, and hears the word, and does it, as our Savior testifies. And the
good seed whilk are these that are called and chosen, may err, suppose not
finally and totallie.

The next place whilk ye quote, Matthew. 26.
is that prayer of Christ for Peter, Luc. 22.32. But I have prayed for thee
that thy says sail not. It is true he prayed: It is true also that Peter
faith failed not: but yet it swouned, as it were, when he denied his Lord and
that by mainswering and cursing of himself: and yet he erred, both in the
quality of Christ's kingdom, Act. 1. and 10 Gal. 2
in the calling of the Gentiles, and in the abrogation of the Ceremonial law:
as also, he went not rightly to the truth of the Gospel, as hes been proved.
So this prayer was not that he should be kept absolutely from all erring, for
then it shall follow, that Christ obtained not that whilk he prayed for: seeing
he erred (whilk is impious to think) but that his faith should not decay
finally and totallie. Secondly, the Lord Jesus prayed also for all the
believers, Ioh. 17.18.19.20. whilk place ye also quote, and yet there is not
one of the believers but they may err, as your selves cannot deny, and we have
proved by examples of your own Popes: for if any were exeemed from erring, in
your judgment it should be these that are the foundation of your kirk, whilk
ye call your Popes, but they may err, and have erred, as hes been proved.
Thirdly, I say, it will not follow, Christ prayed for Peter's faith that it
should not fail: Therefore he prayed for the Popes, whom ye will have to be
successors to Peter, that their faith should not fail (for that is the thing
ye would be at) for their faith hes failed. 1. Timoth 4
For if by faith ye understand the doctrine of the faith of Christ, as it is
taken sometimes in the Scripture, then I say your own Doctors, canons,
councils, cardinals, and Popes themselves as they have been cited before,
testifies that not only they may err, but also that some of them have erred,
and have been heretics. And if by that faith whilk our Lord prayed for, ye
understand that lyuelie faith, that embraces the promises of Gods mercy in
Christ, whilk works by love, and shawes forth the self by good works: Romans 3.25
Galat, 5.6. 1. John 2.4
as by keeping of Christ's commandments, and by loving ane another: Then I say,
your own writers, friends, favorers, and cardinals testifies of them, Platin,
Genebrard, Cran^^ in
that they have gone from Peter's steps, that they got the Popedom by bryberie
and barganing with the Devil, That they were monstrous and prodigious men yea,
rather beasts and monsters. So that of all men that ever professed the faith of
Jesus, they have failed most foullie in that lyuelie faith, as I have proved
in another place concerning the Antichrist.

As to that place whilk ye quote in the 14. of John, ver. 16. and 17. Where the
Spirit of Christ is promised to the Apostles, to dwell with them, and to
remain with them for ever: and in the 16. chap. ver. 13. that he shall lead
them in all truth. I answer. First, that was the Apostles prerogative, the
maister-builders of the kirk of Christ, that in writing and teaching the
doctrine of salvation, they should be led in all truth, and in none ever
since promised nor performed in that high measure. Secondly, this promise of
the spirit of truth to dwell and remain in them for ever, and to lead them in
all truth, is made and performed in all the believers, in so far as may
sanctify them and save them: and yet ye will not deny, but that every one of
the believers may err. Therefore this promise will not reach so far as to
keip the kirk from impossibility of erring.

As to that place in the 17. of John, I answered to it before.

As to the 28. of Matthew, I will be with you to the end of the world, I
answer the same thing to it, whilk I answered to the former: that this promise
is made, not to any visible and ordinar succession, (for that is to tie the
promises of God to persons and places) but to the Pastors of the kirk whom he
sends forth, and to all the faithful: and is performed in them in so far
forth as may save them, and enable them for his work. But yet this will not
exeeme them from all possibility of erring.

As to that in the 1. Tim. 3. ver. 15. the kirk is called the pillar and ground
of truth, therefore ye gather, It cannot err. First, I will ask you to whom
the Apost. speaks so, and upon what occasion he speaks it? Ye must say, To
Timothy, that he might know how to behave himself in the house of God, 1.
Timoth 3.14
whilk is the Kirk: for so the Apost. wrytes. Then I ask, Is not that kirk
wherein Timothy should have behaved himself, called the ground and pillar of
truth? So the Scripture calls it, and ye cannot deny it. Now this kirk was
the kirk of Ephesus, then the kirk of Ephesus is called the ground and pillar
of truth. But first, the kirk of Ephesus fell from her first love, and the
Candle-sticke is threatened to be removed from her, Revel. 2.5
unless she repent: She did not repent, but in time became worse and worse,
and so heaped fault upon fault, till Christ has now removed his candle-sticke
from her, and delivered her over to darkness and death, by taking his own elect
to himself, and giving over the reprobate that hated the truth to the
blindness of their own mind: so that cietie is left desolace to the impiety
of Mahomete, and she that was once called by Gods Spirit the pillar and ground
of truth, has now lost the truth. Now, I say, that whilk may befall one kirk,
may befall any other kirk. Then that whilk is befallen to the kirk of Ephesus,
may befall any other: But the kirk of Ephesus was first craised, and then by
little and little quyte overthrown: and being bereft of the light of Christ,
is now a kirk no longer. Therefore, I say, that there is no kirk on the face
of the earth, howsoever they flatter themselves with glorious styles of
Catholic, pillars and ground of the truth: whose body, that is, the elect and
chosen in it, may not be ouershadowed with darkness, and overtaken with
faintness: whose chafe, that is, the hypocrites in it, may not be haillilie
consumed with rottenness and destruction, and whose whole frame and outward
government, may not loose both their strength and beauty. Thirdly, I say, If
the kirk cannot err, as ye say, because it is the ground and pillar of truth:
and if the kirk of Ephesus be called the pillar and ground of truth, as the
scripture says; and seeing the kirk of Ephesus with all the kirkes of the
East, (as ye cannot deny) has condemned the Popes supremacy as heresy:
Therefore one of these two must follow, either that the kirk, that is, the
pillar and ground of the truth, not only may err but hes erred, or else it is
an heresy condemned many hundred years ago, that the Pope is the head of
the kirk, and so Papistrie is heresy. Judge ye whilk of these ye will choose.
Last of all, I say, Philip. 2.16
the kirk is called the pillar and ground of truth, because it is her office
and duty to hold out the word of truth, as lanternes and lights, by
preaching it and practicing it; as the Priest is called the Messinger of the
Lord of Hosts, Malac. 2.7.
because his lips should preserve knowledge, and declare the message of God.
But as there was Priests whilk show not forth the message of God, but caused
many to err in the law, and corrupted the covenant of Leui: so there may be
kirks, and have been, whilk have not vpheld, and maintained the truth, but have
fallen therefrom.

Now I come to your last testimony of Scripture, Act. 5.39. In that counsel
of Gamaliel to the council of the Scribes and Pharisees, that if the doctrine
of the Apostles be of God, that it cannot be destroyed. What do ye gather
here? That the truth does remain for ever? Bellarmine tells you, that ye
spend but time in proving that, for we grant it unto you. It cannot (I grant)
be destroyed, but yet it can be persecuted and removed out of places where it
was before, and obscured and corrupted by men's glosses and traditions, as it
has been this thousand and five hundredth years by the Jews, to whom this
was spoken. That if the doctrine of the Apostles was of God, they could not
destroy it: and yet (as was said) they banished it, and made the Lord to
deprive them thereof, and to give them over to the blindness and hardness of
their hearts, because they would not embrace the truth when it was offered.

Seeing then there is not a sillab in Gods word, that will uphold this maine
foundation of your kirk, (that the Kirk cannot err) take heed to your self,
(M. Gilbert) in time: and build not the damnation of your own soul and the
damnation of the souls of many others, upon a point of doctrine that has not
God to bear witness to it in the whole scripture. I might end here, but
because this point, (as I said before) is the main pillar that vpholdes the
whole weight of their kirk and religion: therefore I will utterly overthrow
the same, and I will prove out of the word of God that the kirk in all ages,
both may err, Marc. 10.18. Rom 3.4.9 10.11 12. and 19. ver.
and hes erred. And first the Scripture testifies, that it is only proper to
God alone by nature to be perfitelie holy, and true and free from all errors.
And contrariwise man by nature is unholy, a liar, prone to deceive, and to be
deceived: so that by nature he is nothing else but a mass of blindness and
corruption: so that the light he has, he has it by free grace, by Gods
Spirit, to make him see so meikle of his light in the face of Christ, as may
save him. But yet so long as they are in this house of clay, they see but in
part: 1. Cor. 13.12.
and that part whilk they see, is but obscurelie and dimly, as the Apostle
speaks. So that as long as they are in this world, they are subject to sin,
ignorance, and errors. But as there are two sorts of men in the visible Kirk:
some called and chosen, some called, and not chosen: and as in the diseases of
the body some are curable, whereof men recouers, some are deadly whereof men
dies: So is it in the errors of the militant Kirk, some are deadly, and some
are curable. The chosen that are called may err but their errors are nor
deadly, as the errors of the Act. 1.6. Act. 10 Act. 11. Galat. 2 Revel. 19.
and 22
Apoles were, they recovered by grace from them. The called that are not
chosen, may err and err deadly, and never recover: as these of whom 1. John
2.1^
John speaks: They went out from us (says he) because they were not of us,
etc. Now seeing the visible Kirk heir beneath stands but of these two sorts, to
wit, of these that are called and chosen, and these that are called but not
chosen, and both may err. Therefore it is manifest, that the Kirk militant
heir beneath, may err. And to prove this more amply, that she hes erred
before the Law, under the law in Christ's time, and after Christ. First, Adam
being made in perfect holiness and integrity, how foullie did he err when
contrary Gods commandment, giving more credit to the Devil nor to his
maker, he brake that first covenant. For, Contra Marcionem lib. 1
Tertullian says Who will doubt to call Adams fall ane heresy? Now if Adam in
his full light did not stand but so foullie erred, whilk is he that is come
forth of his loins, borne in ignorance and blindness, that dare challenge
this prerogative to himself, Genes. 4
that he cannot err, except the man of sin and son of perdition: that is the
Popes of Rome. Now, he being thrust out of Paradise has two sons: the elder
Cain, for the murder of his brother is accursed of God, and the author of the
Synagogue of Babel, that is the wicked. The Kirk of God remained in the
posterity of Seth, Genes. 5
and at the last Religion began to be so profaned, that at length it grew to
sik a height, that Religion being contracted only in the family of Noah, it
could be punished with no less nor with ane universal Genes. 6
destruction of all living creatures by the floode, except only these yt were
preserved in the Arc with him. Of Noah's 3, children two of them fell, both
themselves and their posterity. The true Kirk and Religion remained in the
family of Sem. And neither were they free from Idolatry, God calling Genes. 12
Abraham out of his own country, serving Iosu 24.2. and 3
strange gods. His eldest son Ismael being Genes. 21.12 Genes. 25.23 Genes.
31.34. and 35.2.
circumcised, is commanded to be casten out of the Kirk of God. Isaac hes two
sons, the elder is refused, the youngest is chosen, and so the elder with his
posterity fell away. Jacobs family was not clean neither from Idolatry,
being polluted with strange gods by his wife Rabel, till he cleansed his house.
And as for his posterity, what stifneckednes, what rebellion, what idolatry
was amongst the^, so that no threatening, no blessing, no correction nor
teaching, could keep them in the purity of Gods worship and religion. Exodus
32.
In the Kirk under the Law, the people are Idolaters, the hie-priest Aaron the
maker of the Idol to the people. In the time of the Judges after the death of
Joshua, Judges 1.12.13
they worshipped Baal and strange gods, and every man did that vvhilk seemed
good in his own eyes, when there was not a king in Israel vvhilk was very
often in these days, and therefore they are given over to the cruelty and
tyranny of their enemies round about them. 1. Samuel, 3.1 Proverb. 29.18 1.
Chro. 13.3.
In the time of Heli, there was no open vision. And Solomon says, where there
is no vision the people perish. In Saul's time the Ark of the Lord was not
sought, and so there wanted a chief part of the public worship of God: for
God was consulted at the Arc. And in the time of Solomon in his old age,
when his heart was turned from the Lord, the Scripture testifies, 1. Kings 12
that they forsook the Lord, and worshipped strange gods of the Ammonites.
Such like in the time of Rehoboam Salomons son, Judah committed Idolatry, and
builded hic places, wherein they worshipped contrary to Gods commandment.
Iehoram King of Judah, 2. Kings 14.22.23. 2. Chro. 21.11 and ^^.10^
made Judah and Jerusalem to commit spiritual fornication and Idolatry, as the
house of Ahab made Israel to commit idolatry. Seeing then the worship of God
was corrupted both in Judah and in Israel, and there was na other visible Kirk
is upon the earth, except in Judah and Israel, will it not follow then, that
all the particular Kirk is on the earth may err, and fall also to idolatry?
Siclike in the time of Ahaz, 2 King. 16.10 11. etc
a strange altar is placed in the temple of the Lord, at the commandment of
the king, by Vriah the Priest: and the king with the whole people at the kings
commandment, offers upon that altar, and the altar of the Lord is removed
out of his place. In the time of Ioash, 2. Chro. 24.8
both the king and the nobility forsakes the house of the Lord and worships
Idols, so that the hot wrath, of the Lord was kind led against Judah and
Jerusalem for their idolatry. Siclyke in the time of Achaz, he made hie places
in all the corners of Jerusalem, and in all the cities of Judah, 2. Chro. 28
and there burned incense to strange gods. In the time of Menashe, the whole
public worship of God was so defaced, and idolatry so universally set up,
that the scripture testifies, Judah sinned more hainouslie nor the very nations
did, whom the Lord cast out before their face. 2. Chr. 33.9
The whole host of heaven was worshipped in stead of the true God. I beseek
thee (Reader) to read this chapter, and there thou shall find that there was
not sa meikle as ane outward face of a Kirk at that time. Yea, 2. King. 12.3.4
2. King. 14, 4
in the very time of good kings, as Ioash, and Amatzia, who both in the
beginning embraced the worship of God, but yet made defection in the end. The
hic places were not removed, whilk was ane error in the worship of God. The
scripture testifies that the feast of the Passover was not kept so preciselie,
2, Chro, 35, 18
according to the word of God since the days of Samuel, no not in the reign
of the best kings, as it was in the 18. year of Josias, and there was 400.
years and more between. Nehem. 8, 18
Also the scripture testifies, that ye feast of the Tabernacles was not so
kept, as it was the^, since the days of Joshua, whilk was more nor 1000. years.
And all the time of the captivity, where was there any public face of the
Kirk of God, with his publik worship uncorrupted in all things as the Lord
commanded it? As concerning the kingdom of Israel from the time of their
renting asunder by Jeroboam from the Kingdom of Judah, they never had the
worship of God in integrity: but first worshipped God in the places where they
should not have worshipped him, and after ane other manner, and by other
Priests, nor they were commanded. Next, they fell to the worshipping of
Idols, till they were transported out of their land, and scattered upon the
face of the earth. What, shall I pursue the sayings of the Prophets, how the
only visible Kirk in the world is called an harlote? Esai. 1. Ier. 7 Esai.
57.10.11 Ho^^a 2
the Temple a den of thieves: the Prophets all blind guides, and dumb dogs
that cannot bark.

Now, when God of his infinite mercy sent his only begotten son in the
world, the light, the life, the salvation of the world, what did the Kirk and
the Clergy, the Scribes and the Pharisees that sat in the Mat 23
chair of Moses? Surely Christ had none so great enemies, as they were, who
were the Doctors, the lights, the successors of Aaron, to whom the law was
concredited. When Christ testified of himself that he was the light of ye
world, they said, his Ioh. 8.13
testimony was not true. When others believed in him, they said Ioh. 7.47
they were deceived. They ordain Ioh. 9.22
that if any man should confess Christ, he should be excommunicate. So that
Ioh. 12.42
many that did believe in him durst not for them confess him. They Luke 6.7
watched him of purpose that they might have matter of accusation against him.
And when he cast out devils, the Marc. 3 22.
Scribes and the Mat^. ^^.24.
Pharisees said that he did cast out devils by Beelzebub the prince of devils.
Luke 23.2.
They said they found him a man perverting the nation, and forbidding to pay
tribute to Caesar. They Marc. 14.64.
condemn him in a solemn council as worthy of death. Yea, as Christ testifies
of them, Math. 23.13.
they neither entered in the Kingdom of heaven themselves, nor suffered others
to enter in. And yet they are these that if ye look to their antiquity, they
have their beginning from Abraham: if to their succession, they succeeded to
Aaron: if to their callings, they were Scribes and Pharisees, Math. 23
and sat in the chair of Moses: If to the place, it was the house of God. If
to the people whom they taught, they were the only people of God. If to
their prerogatives, to them appertained the adoption, and the glory, and the
covenant, Rom 9.4 and 5.
and the giving of the law, and the service of God, and the promises, of whom
are the Fathers, and of whom is Christ according to the flesh, who is God
over all blissed for ever, Amen. And if ye will look to their Council, they
were solemnlie called together, where they condemned the Lord of life, and
crucified the Prince of glory. What can you say to these? That they erred in
the person of Christ, but not in the exponing of the Law, (as some of you
says) But first, Moses did write of Christ, John. 5.^6. Rom 10.4.
and Christ is the end of the Law: So that if they had not erred in exponing of
the Law, they had not erred in the person of Christ, because the Law
testified of Christ, and he was the end of it. Next, Math. 5.
the Scripture testifies that they erred in exponing of the Law, that they
both brake the Law, and teached others so to do. And therefore Christ says,
Math. 5.20.
Except your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees, ye cannot enter in the Kingdom of heaven. For, whereas the Law of
God counts hatred murder, and lust adultery, and rash swearing unlawful
swearing, and our enemies our neighbors, whom we ought to love and to do good
unto: They by the contrary taught that our friends was only our neighbors whom
we should love, Verse 43.
and therefore they said that we should hate our enemies: that hatred was not
the breaking of the sixth command, and lust no breaking of the 7. command: and
rash swearing, no breaking of the third command. And therefore the Lord Jesus
in that fifth chapter of Matthew, does vindicat the true meaning of the
commandments from their falls expositions. And he testifies of them that they
did abrogate the Law of God through their traditions, Math. 15.6.
and so in vain they worshipped God, teaching for Gods Law (whilk he calls
doctrine) men's precepts, whilk he proves there by an example of abrogating and
annulling of that duty whilk we owe to Father and Mother, commanded us in the
fifth commandment, by their tradition. And therefore he gives charge to his
Disciples to bewar of the leaven (that is the doctrine) of the Pharisees. Seeing
the^ they who had their ordinary succession from Aaron, erred: Math. 16 6, 10.
how can the Doctors of your Kirk, yea, your Popes be privileged from erring?
But it may be ye grant all this; for how can ye deny it? That the Kirk before
the Law, under the Law, in the time of Moses, in the time of the Judges, in
the time of the Kings, in the time of the captivity, and in the time of Christ
erred: but yet the Christian Kirk hes greater privileges and promises that it
cannot err. Let us examine this also, whether the Christian Kirk be
privileged from erring, or not. And certainly, if any Christian Kirk, at any
time had this praerogatiue, appearandlie the primitive Kirk whilk was in the
days of Christ and of his Apostles should have had it. But they had it not.
Therefore what Kirk since under heaven can challenge it? For, in the time of
Christ's suffering the Apostles and Disciples, who only then were the Christian
Kirk yea, after that they had been Apostles, and after that they had been sent
to preach the Gospel, and work miracles, yet at that time, did they not err
in the article of Christ's resurrection? Matthew. 10 Act 1.6 Act 11 Act 10 Gal. 2
Alex. Habensis in 3. part quest. v^t. art 2. and Johan. de Turre Crem. in lib.
1. de Eccl. cap. 30. 1. Cor. 3 and in lib. 3. cap. 61
and erred they not concerning the estate of Christ's kingdom after the
resurrection? And concerning the teaching of the Gentiles, after that they had
received the holy Ghost And Peter himself, as has been shown. And sundry
Papists says that true says remained only in the heart of Marie in the time
of Christ's suffering, was not heir then an universal erring? Now to go
forward did not the Kirk of the 1. Cor. 3 and 11 and 15
Corinthians err in building hay and stubble on the foundation and in the use
of the Lords Supper, and some of them also concerning the resurrection of the
dead? And the Kirk of Galat. 1. and 3
Galatia erred in being carried away to another Gospel, and in joining the
Ceremonies of the Law with grace in justification? And what will ye say when
the heresy of Arrius (who denied Christ to be the son of God aequall to his
father) spread the self so far that it is testified that the Bishops of the
haill world became Arrians, Theodo. hist. Eccles. lib. 2 and Hie^d al contra
Lucis. cap 7. and in c^^on. ^thanas. ep^st de Synod. A^^^. and Scleue.
that the haill warlde did grieve and wonder at it self that it was becum ane
Arrian. What will ye say unto all the Christian Kirks of the East, Grecia, Asia
and Africa, Kirks planted by the Apostles: I mean not now of them that hes
professed Mahometisme but of the^ that admits the scripture, acknowledges
Christ their Savior who hes their ordinar succession of Patriarckes and
Bishops as well as your Kirk of Rome hes, who in number far exceeds these Kirks
whilk acknowledges your Pope to be the head of the Kirk. For first yours is but
in Europe, except ye will claim to the new found land, and not all Europe,
for all the Kirks in Greece, whilk is a great part of Europe, acknowledges not
your supremacy. Now take the Greek Kirks from you, next the reformed Kirks
in Scotland England, Germany, Denmark, France, Zealand, Holland, and other
places, whilk hes gone out of Babel, whilks are all in Europe, your number will
not be many that acknowledges your supremacy. And next take all Asia and
Africa from you, whilk is the two part of the world, your number will be small
in comparison of these that are against your supremacy. Now all these detests
your supremacy as tyranny, and the worship of Images, your transubstantiation
in the Sacrament, the Communion under one kind, the single life of Priests.
Either therefore ye must grant that the greatest number of Christian Kirks
hes erred and does err, or else that your Roman Kirk does err and your
supremacy, yea your religion whilk depends upon your supremacy is the head of
heresy. But it may be ye will say, that all other Christian Kirks may err,
but that it is only proper to your Kirk not to err. First therefore, let me
ask at you what can be the cause of that singular privilege whilk the Kirk of
Rome hes beside all other Kirks whilk ever hes been, is, or shall be? Yea, above
Adam when he was in his integrity (for he erred:) yea, above the Angels, for
they remained not in the truth. Above the Patriarckes, Abraham, Johan. 8
Isaac and Jacob, yea, above Aaron, and the Kirk in the wilderness above the
Kirk under the Law, yea, above the Apostles, and Peter himself before Christ's
suffering, in the time of his suffering, after the resurrection, after the
receiving of the holy Ghost: for they erred in all these times, yea, above the
Christian Kirks that hes been founded by the Apostles as well as yours: that
had the promise, the covenant, the service of god once in as great purity as
ever yours had, that hes their ordinar succession, their antiquity, their
vocation ordinar as well as yours hes unto this day. Great surely must be that
privilege given unto the Kirk of Rome that hes exeemed her from error, all by
having erred. What is then your prerogative above all other Kirks. I know that
ye will say because of Peter's chair that was there wherein the Popes sits
after him. First, then if Peter's chair hes such an prerogative that the
Pastors who sits in it and the Kirk that cleaues to it. can not err. I think
surely the Lords chair whilk was at Jerusalem, whilk was called the Temple and
seat of God, and Moses chair wherein the Scribes and Pharisees sat should
rather have that prerogative to freeth the Kirkes and Pastors sitting in these
chaires from erring, yea the kirk whilk the truth it self Jesus Christ
founded whom he taught with his own mouth, and among whom he was crucified
should with far greater right clame to that prerogative. But since al their
seats hes erred, for the Temple became a den of thieves: The Scribes and
Pharisees that sat in Moses chair condemned the Lord of glory: and Jerusalem
it self cried out Crucify crucify him. And the christian Kirk gathered there
are long since far from the way of salvation. So that if neither the chair of
God, nor Moses freed the Kirk of the Jews from erring, nor the chair of
Christ freed the christian Kirk there gathered from erring. How then can Peter's
chair have this prerogative above them al as to exeeme that Kirk and Pastors
that sits therein from possibility of erring? What is this but to prefer him
before them all, whose seat hes a privilege that neither God nor his sons,
nor Moses seat had? O high blasphemy to be detested and abhorred of all
christian hearts. But let us see if it hes this prerogative whilk they ascriue
unto it, or not. And first if it could have exemid any from erring, should it
not have exemed himself especially from erring? But as it hes been showen he
erred. Therefore it can not exeeme neither his successors, Act. 1.6. Gal. 2
nor yet the Kirk that acknowledges them, from erring. Secondly if it had
exeemed any Kirk from erring, should it not have exeemed the Kirk of Antiochia
especially, for surely Antiochia hes better right to clame to this prerogative,
Galat. 2 11.
nor your Kirk hes. For first it was Peter's first seat. Next the Scripture
bears witness to it, that he was there. But neither was Rome Peter's first seat,
nor is there so much as a sillabe in all the scriptures, to prove that ever
Peter was in Rome. But suppose Peter was there (for we will not examine this
now) whether is this prerogative (not to err) given to your head, that is, to
the Popes, or to the body, that is, the people, or to both? If ye say to the
head, (as ye do indeed,) then what will ye answer to your own writers and
Fathers, to your own councels and Popes. To your own cannon law, affirming
that Popes may err and be heretics and should be deposed, and are deposed
when they are manifest heretics (as hes been proved before.) And what will
ye say to your Popes that hes been heretics indeed, one of them an Arrian,
another an Eutychian, the third an Nestorian, the fourth a Montanist, the fifth
deposed as an heretic. The sext denying that the souls of the children of God
saw Gods face whill after the resurrection. The seventh denying life
everlasting, and others giving themselves over in the hands of the Devil for
the Popedom, others repelling and abrogating the decrees of their
predecessors. Others sik monsters and beasts, so cruel to the dead and to the
living, that your own friends calls them monsters and affirms of one John
the 12. o^ after some the 13 car. Tu^^ecre summa de eccles. li. 2. c. 103.
of them that the devil shot him through whill he was abusing another man's
wife, and so dyed without repentance. Dare you say, and would ye have the
salvation of men's souls, to lean to this point of doctrine that they cannot
err which is the rock and foundation of your Kirk, whilk above all others hes
erred most foullie. O malicious and cruel man that would deceive the poor
flock of Jesus Christ, for whom he shed his blood, with such heresy and
abomination. Then this prerogative is not granted to your Popes the head and
foundation of your Kirk. And surely if the foundation may be turned up side
down, and the head may become sensles and dead, I see not how the house can
stand, and the body can be whole, and one of your greatest Papists
Bellarmine plainly confesses, that if the Pope err, of necessity, tota
ecclesia errabit. That is, Lib. 4. de Romans pontifice cap. 3.
the whole Kirk shall err. Upon the whilk I reason, If the Pope may err, and
hes erred, then the whole Kirk may err, and hes erred: (so Bellarmine one of
the learndst papists that ever was, writ:) But the first hes been proved by
your own Doctors, Cardinals, Popes, councels, cannon law: Ergo, by your own
doctrine the whole Kirk may err. Here we might stay now and go no further:
for this sufficiently overthrows this point of your doctrine, that the Kirk
cannot err, and that be the confession of the learned of your side. But yet
I will persew the rest. If you say it is granted to the body, then it is either
granted to the people or to the Clergy. To the people, I trow ye will not;
for if your Popes may err, much more may your people err: And if he Apostles
and other famous Kirks may err, much more may your people err: yea, if not,
it should follow that your people were above their head the Pope, whilk I
trow ye will not say. If ye say the Clergy, then either it must be your
Doctors severally by themselves, or as they are gathered together in a
council. But as they are several ye will not say. For your Bellarmines
controversies would convince you to the face: for almost there are few
controversies whilk he handles (and he handles more nor 300) but he brings in
some of your own writers dissenting from him, and whom in many places he
confutes. And I think if Popes hes not this privilege, surely the Doctors of
your Kirk severally hes not this privilege. But because (as Bellarmine
confesses if a general council err, then the whole Kirk may err, ^ib. 2,
de author council. cap. 11
for it represents the whole Kirk. And therefore he brings this in as a reason
to prove ( that general councels can not err, because the whole Kirk can not
err, for (says he) the general council represents the whole Kirk, therefore
it can not ere. Let us examine this: for if it be found that general councels
may err surely your cause is gone. First then what will ye say to thirteen
general councels whereof seven is utterly rejected, and the other six are in
part allowed, and in part rejected, whilk al hes erred as Bellarmine
confesses. De conci^^s lib. 1 cap. 6 and 7
But it may be you answer that these was not approved by the Popes of Rome, and
therefore they might err, Bellarm. lib. ^ cap. 2 and 5
and hes erred, but these councels that are altogether allowed of him can not
err, nor hes not erred. Indeed it it true that this is your doctrine that
neither general nor provincial council can err that is allowed by the Pope,
and that general councels lawfully conuened may err, unless they follow the
instructions of the Pope. Cap. 11
And therefore Bellarmine says that they may err three manner of ways, 1. in
defyning of anything the fathers of the council dissent from the Popes legates.
2. If it be against the Popes instruction suppose both the Fathers and the
legates of the council agree together. 3. They may err before they have
received the Popes confirmation and judgment, suppose all both fathers and
legates consent together, because (says he) the Popes judgment is the last
from the whilk no man may appeall, and he may approve and disprove the general
council notwithstanding of their consent with his own legates. And therefore
he says in another place that the whole strength or certainty of lawful
councels depends only of the Pope. Lib, 4. de Romans Pout side cap, 3
So then this is your last refuge. All depends on his instruction and
confirmation, he hes a privilege that he can not err and the general
councels receives the same through his approbation and confirmation. But I
answer: The Pope can give no greater prerogative to others, nor he hes
himself: But (as has been proved before) the Popes may err, and have been
heretics: Therefore they cannot give this prerogative to others. And if ye
will say (as some of you does) that the Pope suppose he may err privately as he
is a private man, and as a private teacher, yet he cannot err as he is Pope in
his office iudiciallie. Whereunto I answer first, That some of your own
Kirk, as De potestate Ecclesiae
Gerson and Almane, Lib, 1, cap, 2 contra here.
Alphonsus de Castro, Loci Theolog lib, 6. cap, 1
Canus, and Pope Adrian the sext: all these teaches That the Popes may err and
teach heresy as they are Popes: Either therefore the Popes may err as they
are Popes iudiciallie, and teach heresy, or else not only these Doctors of
your own Kirk, but also the Pope himself hes erred, and that in a point of
doctrine: and so how ever it be, the Popes as they are Popes, iudicially may
err in points of doctrine. Secondly, I say, besides nine Popes whilk have been
heretics, and that when they were Popes, sundry of them hes made decrees not
only contrary to Gods word, but also contrary one to another, and that in
matters of doctrine. As for example. Pope c, laudabilem de conversione
insidelium and Alphonsius a Papist confesse^ that this Pope erred in desining a
matter of faith, and Lies he saw this decree extant in the old Decretals
aduer. here^. lib, 1. cap. 4.
Celestine the third made a decree that when of married persons the one falls
in heresy, the marriage is dissolved, and the Catholic party is free to
marry again, Math 6. Math 9 9.
contrary to the truth of God. And also contrary to the lib. 4 decretal. cap
Quanto
decree of Pope Innocentius the third. Thirdly, either your Cannon Law erres,
or else Causa 12. quest 1. Dilectissimis
Clements decreit that all things should be common, and that wives also should
be common. Gelasius De conscerat. cap. Competimus
Pope affirms that the mystery of the body and blood in the Sacrament cannot
be divided and that the Sacrament cannot be taken in one kind only without
great sacrilege: and yet the Council of Trent hes decreed the contrary, and
the whole Roman Kirk practices the contrary. Pope Did. 50. cap. Qu semel
Martine decreed that the Priests who are deposed for any fault may never be
admitted to any degree of the Priest-hoode again. Pope Distinct. 82. cap. Qui^
Syricius, and Pope Distinct. 82. cap Presbyter
Calixtus hes decreed the contrary. Pope Gregory the third he permits one to
have two wives if the first be siklie, Decret causa 32. quest. 7. c Quod
prop^su sti
contrary both to the gospel ^atth. 19
and to ane other Dec^^tal ^b 4. tit. 9. cap. Quoniam
decree of the cannon law. Pope Did. 40. cap. A quodam Iudaeo
Nicholas says, that that Baptism which is ministered without express mention
of the three persons of the Trinity, is firm and sure enough. But Pope Did
eadem de consecrat. cap. in Synodo
Zachary hes decreed the contrary. All these decreites are set down in their
cannon law, and hes the strength of a law in the Roman Kirk, not as private
men's, but as Popes decreits. And yet some of them are directly repugnant to the
word of God, that themselves cannot deny but they are heresies, and some of
them so directly repugnant to the decreits of other Popes, that either the one
or the other must be heresy. But it may be ye will answer that suppose the
Pope may err as he is Pope, and that in matters of doctrine, yet he cannot
err with his council, either provincial or general (as Bellarmine says).
Whereunto I answer, first if general councels lawfully conueened together,
may err in matters of doctrine, unless they be confirmed by the Pope, as
Bellarmine grants: And if the popes may err themselves alone, and that
iudiciallie in matters of doctrine, as hes been proved. Why may they not err
also being joined together, seeing councels hes this privilege only by his
confirmation and allowance? As Bellarmine says lib. 4. de Romans pontisi. cap.
3. Secondly, I say, either Pope Steven the 6. with his council erred in
condemning of Formosus and his acts whilk he made as pope, Sigebert in (...)
nico. Platina in vita harum
and in decreing his ordinatio^s to be void and null, because the man was
wicked by whom he was ordained: whilk is ane error of the Donatists, or else
Pope John the 9. with his council of 72. Bishops, erred, in justifying Formosus
and his decreetes, and condemning the acts of Pope Steven with his council.
Last of al, since general councels that hes been confirmed by their Popes hes
erred, In epist. ad Th^a clum quae estin 2. action 7. Syn. Canon 2
the sixth general council confirmed by Pope Hadriane hes sundry errors whilk
they themselves will not defend, as the rebaptising of heretics. For the
counsel of Cypriane is confirmed there, wherein this is decreted. Canon. 13
And also it is ordained that Elderis, Deacons, Canon. 67
subdeacons should not separate from their wives contrary to the canon of the
Roman Kirk, as is said there. And the marriage of catholics and heretics
is judged null and void, 1. Cor 7.13 Canon. 12
whilk your self can not deny to be an error contrary to the express truth
of God. And the forbidding of ministers to remain with their wives contrary
to the sixth canon of the Apostles. Either therefore a general council
confirmed by a Pope hes erred, or else the Apostles hes erred in this canon, for
they judge them to be the canons of the Apostles. Bellarm lib. 1. de conciliis
cap. 5
The first general council of Constantinople and the general council of
Chal^edon whilk are both by their own confession approved by the Popes. And
yet both these hes decreed that the Bishop of Constantinople should have equal
privileges of authority honor and dignity in ecclesiastical affairs with
the Bishop of Rome, save only the first place or seat the whilk by their own
confession is an error. Therefore either lawful general councels confirmed by
the Pope, hes erred; or else the Pope is not the head of the Kirk, and hes not a
pre-eminence of authority over the rest, for they have made the Bishop of
Constantinople equal with him, or else there are two heads of their Kirk, the
Bishop of Rome, and the Bishop of Constantinople, I omit the rest. Augustine
says that provincial councels may be corrected by general councels, and of
general councels the former may be amended by the later, De baptism contra
Donatistas lib. 2. cap 3
if they may be mended then they may err. And here he speaks not of a matter
of fact but of a matter of faith, for he speaks of the baptism of heretics.
Now to conclude seeing the Kirks in all ages, before the law, in the time of the
law, and in the time of grace, yea and the Apostles and Peter himself hes
erred; and seeing the Kirk of Rome that claims this privilege of not erring
above all other Kirks, hes erred also, and that not only her people whilk they
call Laics, but also her clergy severally and together in councels, as well
provincial as general. And seeing the head whilk as they say is the rock and
foundation of the Kirk hes erred in life, in office, in matters of faith and
religion, not as private men only, but as Popes, both by themselves alone, as
also with their councels, as well prouincial as general. Seeing, I hope I have
proved all these things sufficiently, then may I not with the judgment of al
men safely conclude, that that maine pillar whereupon the whole weight and
pillar of your religion depends (that the Kirk cannot err) that it is an
error, and such a dangerous and damnable error, whereupon all the errors of
your religion is builded, that whosoever will believe it, they hasard the
endless salvation of their souls. Ground then (christian reader) thy
salvation not upon this, that the Kirk cannot err: for that is false: but upon
this, that as long as she sticks to the word of God written in the old and
new Testament she erres not, and when she swerues and it were but an inche
braid from the Scripture, then she erres. And therefore two learned Papists De
examinat. part. 1. consid. 5.
Gerson and Panormitan affirms the one says simplici non authorizato sed
excellenter in sacris literis erudito etc. Extra de elect. cap. Significasti
that is, that more credit is to be given to one unlearned and simple, but yet
excellently besene in the holy write, in a point of doctrine: nor to the Pope.
And such a learned man says he ought to oppone himself to a general council,
if he perceive the greater part to decline to the contrary of the Gospel
either of malice or of ignorance. The other says that more credit is to be
given to an unlearned and simple man that bringes for him the Scripture, nor to
a whole general council. And this for answer to the testimonies of Scripture
whilk ye cited.

Now, as concerning the fathers testimonies whilk ye bring in, they will serve
you no further nor the Scripture hes done, for they will go no further with
you nor this that the Kirk of Christ and his covenant with her shall endure for
ever, the whilk we grant, and they that will read them will find them so. And
if ye prove any further out of them it shall be answered by Gods grace, for
it were too fashions to the reader to set down here the particular sayings of
every one of them. And if ye had formed your arguments out of them, I should
have formed my answer by the grace of God to every one of them. And this much
concerning your ground, and the proofs of it. Now I come to that whilk ye
gather of it.

Master Gilbert Brown.

Of this we collect that our Kirk must be the only true Kirk, and not theirs,
Prove this by the Scripture M. Gilbert, and take it to you. But this you are
not able to do, for your Kirk hes failed in the substantial points of religion
therefore it is not the only true Kirk. It only suffices to prove this by the
Scripture False, M. Gilbert
because ours hes never been interrupted, nor hes failed in any substantial
point of faith and religion since Christ and his Apostles days, and theirs hes
done. To confirm this, I say, that Master John, nor no minister in Scotland
can be able to assign to us the circumstances of all mutations and changes in
Religion: That is to say,

1. The author who first began out Religion.

2. The time when it was begun.

3. The place where it began.

4. The true Kirk who said against the same.

5. The matter it self whilk was changed or begun.

6. Nor the faithful number from whom they departed.

All these things we shall assign to their Religion, and that since Christ and
his Apostle,.

1. The first author of their Religion, albeit not in all things, False, he
neither invented it, nor first preached it.
was Martine Luther an Augustine Friar.

2. He began his Religion in the year of God 1517.

3. He began the same in Saxony in the country of Almanie.

4. The Kirk of Rome, Italy, France, Spain, Scotland, England, not the true
kir^ but those who was drunken with your abominations. And justly.
Denmark, Swaden, Pole, an great part of Almanie, with the east and west Indies
whilks were the true Kirk, said against him.

5. The heads of Religion whilk he first said against were Pardons. He
affirmed that man was only justified by Faith. He denied the Supper of our
Lord to be an sacrifice, etc.

6. He departed himself from all the Christian Kirks in Europe, Fal^^
in the Indies and other places, and therefore he had no predecessors of his
own Religion, as we There is a darkness fallen upon your eyes, for there is no sik
thing there.
read in the Apology of the English Protestants, that he and Zuinglius were
the first that came to the knowledge of the Euangell, and therefore none
immediately before them.

False, for he had all these who professed the true religion to be his
predecessors. Matthew. 28.20.
Then seeing that there was none of his profession in the earth before him
immediately, neither visible nor invisible, he and his could not be the Kirk of
Christ: for it hes ever stood, and never failed, no not the space of one day
universally, because our Savior says, I shall be with you every day to the
consummation of the world.

M. John Welsche his Reply.

As to your collection, the form of it must be this. That Kirk only must be
the true Kirk that hes never been interrupted, nor failed in any substantial
head of faith and religion since Christ and his Apostles. But say ye, yours is
such, and ours not: Therefore your Kirk is the true Kirk, and ours not. The
proposition I grant. But all the controversy lies in the probation of your
assumptio^. Yea, in stead of proving ye say it is not possible to me, nor to
na Minister in Scotland to assign to you the circumstances of all mutations
and changes in your religion, as the person, time, place, etc. And then ye
attempt to assign al these circumstances of our religion, upon the whilk ye
conclude the falset of it. So we will first see how ye prove your own, and then
see how ye disprove ours. Indeed this argument of yours is of sik account with
you, that there are not many of your writers, but they have set it, as it
were, in the vaunt-guarde of their host, and amongst the greatest of their
strengthes and bulwarks, for to vp-holde their ruinous Babel. So Hammilton and
Hay, in their demands to the Ministers of Scotland, so Campion, so Duraus
Scotus against Whitaker in his defense: Upon the 28. of the Acts. and on 1. Ioh
1. Bellarm lib. 4 de Eccles cap 5
so your Rhemists: and so Bellarmine. Whereby it may be seen of what account
this argument of yours is in the judgment of your Kirk. But to answer to your
argument: first, I say, If there be no mutations or changes in your Religion
since Christ and his Apostles, then your religion and doctrine will be one with
that quhilk is set down in the Scripture of God. For you will not deny, I
hope, but the Scripture does sufficiently testify, what doctrine and religion
was in Christ's and his Apostles days. And so let it once be put in the
balance of the Scripture, and tried thereby, and then I hope it will sone be
made manifest how far it is changed. So, and you dare, M. Gilbert let once your
Religion be set upon the Panel, and let it once have an assyse of the
Scripture, and then the plea will end, I hope. Next I say, it will not follow,
We cannot assign all the circumstances of changes in your Religion: Therefore
your Religion is uncorrupted. For it suffices if we can prove the first only,
that is, the matter or doctrine it self whilk is changed, and that by
comparing it with the Scriptures of God, suppose we could not assign all the
rest of the circumstances of the mutation: as the time, place, author, and so
forth: for the changes of many things are most notorious, and yet all the
circumstances of the change thereof not known. We say then it is not needful
to seek the beginnings and circumstances of the decays and corruptions in
your Kirk, when the corruption and change it self is so manifest, by comparing
your doctrine with the written word of God, that it cannot be denied. For will
you say, that he who is deadly diseased, is whole and sound, because I cannot
tell you the first article of time, the place, and first occasion of the
disease? When it is manifest that a city is full of misorder and confusion,
will ye say that ye will not believe it to be so, unless you know the first
beginnings and progress of these misorders. If you saw a ruinous house, would
ye say, Prove me and tell me all the circumstances of the change of it,
otherwise I will not believe it? Will ye deny that a ship could be drowned,
unless it were told you all the circumstances of the change of the lecke
where-throw it drowned. If any found a man fallen in a pit, shall he not believe
that he is fallen, whom nevertheless he sees to be there, unless it were told
him, when and by whom he was cast into the same: Even so, will ye not
believe, or will ye hinder al others to believe that your Kirk and Religion is
ruinous, consumed, rotten, dead, drowned, and full of misorder, heresy, and
confusion, unless the first beginnings of these changes can be told you? We
say therefore it is sufficient to prove the ruin and consumption of your Kirk
and Religion, if by comparing your doctrine with the truth of God in the
scripture, we make evident the direct opposition betwixt them, suppose we
could not assign all the circumstances of the change of it out of the
histories, leaving it free to Historiographers to write what they please, and
omit what they please. Thirdly, it is manifest, that the Kirk of the Jews
in the time of Christ was changed both in doctrine and manners from that estate
that it was in the time of Aaron, Eleazar, and sundry others: and also the
Kirks of Galatia and Corinthe that they were changed from the estate wherein
they were. And yet I trow that neither ye, nor any Papist in the earth is able
to assign to me all the circumstances of the mutations and changes in the
same, as the first authors, time, place, etc. and yet there was a great change
in Doctrine and Religion in all these Kirks, as has been proved before. And we
read that our Savior and the Apostles, convicted them of a change, and yet
they designed not the first authors, time, and place and so forth. The like I
say of the Kirk of Greece, Asia and Africa, which in number exceedes yours.
That there is a wonderful change in their Kirk and Religion ye will not deny,
or else your Religion is heresy: for (as said is) they acknowledge not your
Popes supremacy, Transubstantiation, etc. And yet I trow ye, nor na Papist in
the earth is able to assign all the circumstances of changes in their Kirk, and
Religion which they have presently: yea, more unable to do this, nor we are
able to do the same in yours. I mean not the heresies of Arrius, Samosatenus,
Nestorius, Eutyches, Sergius, and the rest, whilk long ago were damned by the
Councels of the Greek Kirks. (For I trow ye shall not be able to prove that they
now maintain these heresies, whilk they condemned and refuted long ago.) But I
mean of the present errors and corruptions in their worship and Religion,
whilk now they maintain and profess. If then ye judge the kirks of the east
heretical, because they are not aggreable to your doctrine and Religion of
Rome, and yet not be able to assign the circumstances of the changes and
mutations of the same? Will ye not grant the same liberty to us to account and
judge your kirk and Religion failed, because it is not agreeable to the
doctrine of Jesus Christ, set down in the Scripture, suppose we could not
assign to you the circumstances of the changes of the same.

Fourthlie I say, if you have read Epiphanius, there ye shall find many
heresies, whilk I omit for shortness, whilks he accounts heresies, whose
beginnings and authors are unknown.

Fifthlie, there is sik ane universal complaint of the monstrous abominations
and decaies in your Religion, discipline, and manners, and that by your own
Council. Constant. les 4 5. Trident. ses 6 Basil ses. 2. 3
councels, Bernard. in Cant. 3^
Fathers, Popes, Cardinals, and Friars, that I would have thought it incredible
unless I had read them, that either your own mouths should have so condemned
your selves, or else that the posterity afterward should have been so
shameless as to have boasted of the purity of their Kirk and Religion.
Therefore the Council of Trent hes proclaimed it to the world in write, that
the Kirk hes need to be reformed in the head and members. Now, I ask that of
you concerning these abuses in discipline and manners, whilk ye ask of us
concerning your doctrine. Show me all the circumstances of mutation and change
distinctlie, if ye can, what time, what place, by what author etc. sik
monstrous abominations first brake in in your Kirk and religion. Now seeing
there is no man who hes a spark of judgment, that will doubt of that
incredible change of manners and discipline in your Kirk, and yet the
circumstances of the changes unknown: think ye then that ye shall assure men
that no changes culd fall in your doctrine, unless we knew the circumstances
of the changes of the same?

Sixthly, Matthew. 13.27.2^.
the Scripture testifies that eue^ the tares whilk is the evil seed does not
appear so soon as they are sown, and that neither the times, nor the first
author of them was known, no not to the most diligent laborers of the Lords
ground at the first: and yet it was enough to know them to be evil seed, by
the difference that was seen betwixt them and the good seed, suppose the
time, place, and author was unknown at the first. So it is proof enough
against your doctrine, that it is but tares, if the difference be made manifest
between it and the Lords truth in the Scripture, suppose the circumstances of
the changes of it, can not be assigned.

Seventhly, theirs is likened to leaven and a canker, whilk does not all at
once infect the whole mass, and feister the whole body; but piece and piece:
so your corruption came not in all at once, but piece and piece infected your
Kirk and feistered your religion. And therefore it is no wonder suppose the
beginnings of infection and circumstances of it, hes not been marked: for if
they had broken in all at once, and in a suddentie overthrown the whole Kirk,
it had been no difficulty to have assigned the circumstances of the overthrow
of it. For if any having a whole constitution with an stroke were slain, if an
ship with an wave were drowned: it were no difficulty to assign the
circumstances of the sudden changes. But in a consumption, and in a leck that
hes come in piece and piece in the body and in the ship, the beginnings thereof
cannot be so easily perceived: for a little leck in process of time will sink a
great ship. And if it be so hard to discern the beginnings of these things
whilk our senses may grope, how much more hard is it to perceive the beginnings
of these spiritual corruptions whilk cannot be perceived by the natural man,
but only by the light of Gods spirit by the spiritual man.

Eighthly, if now it be so in other heresies as the Scripture testifies of them
that their beginning are oft-times unknown, even unto the most diligent
laborers of the Lords husbandry and that they come in by little and little
and does not infect all at once, how much more is this true in your
Antichristian religion, whilk (as it was fore-tolde) should deceive all nations
and make them drunken with the wine of her fornication. 2. These.
And therefore your doctrine is termed in the Scripture an iniquity, but an
secret iniquity: an unrighteousness, but yet an deceiuable unrighteousness: a
delusion, but yet a strong delusion; Revel. 17.
an abomination and spiritual fornication, but yet put in a golden cup, that
is, having the show of godliness and religion, and your Kirk is called a
harlot: but yet finely decked in purple, etc. not like a harlot, but a Queen.
Your kingdom is called a beast that speaks like the dragon, but yet like the
lamb in his horns, resembling the power and authority of the Lord Jesus.
Seeing then your Kirk, kingdom and doctrine is such a mystery of iniquity,
hes such a show of godliness, hes such a resemblance with the lamb, hes such
cloakes of styles is so deceiuable, and is such a strong delusion, as the
Scripture testifies of it: is it any wonder, suppose the beginnings of this
mystery, and of the whoredoms of this queen be not distinctly marked and set
down?

Ninthly, it is likely enough that the great credit wherein the first Bishopes
of Rome was for their piety and godliness, and the lofty estate of their
successors after them, together with their cruelty and tyranny did so dazell
on the one side the eyes of the godly, that they were not inquisitiue in
marking the changes and beginnings of their corruptions, and so brideled the
mouths of other some that they durst not write the thing they saw, and if they
write any thing, they write it but barely and corruptly, for the tyranny of
your kirk was such, that none durst mutter against your Kirk and religion, but
he was taken without further as an heretic and condemned and executed where
ever your tyranny reached.

Last of al, suppose they had been written by the histories of every age, and
that distinctly; yet considering the universal power, craft and policy of
your Kirk and kingdom, is it any wonder suppose they be not now extant at all,
but either burnt, or else so falsified and corrupted that the beginnings thereof
should not have been perceived. For seeing in the purer times when the power and
dominion of your Kirk was not yet come to the height, Concilii Carthag 6 The
^o^es one after another Zozimus, Bonifacius, Cael^sti^us, anno. 430.
such was the ambition and falsehood of your Popes that in the presence of a
council of 217. Bishops in Carthage, where Augustine was present, they did
allege a false canon of the council of Nice, for to have established their
supremacy, and under one of their hands sent it to the council by their
legates: the whilk was espied (...) and found out by the whole council, that
not only it was decreed and ordained in that council he should have no
prerogative over the Kirkes of Asrik, and that none should appeal to him under
the pain of deposition and excommunication: but also he was rebuked by the
fathers of that council in their letters to him. If he was so bold then, what
marvel suppose since he hes falsified and corrupted every history and
writing, that he saw might bear any ways witness of the corruptions,
tyrannies and abominations of that Kirk and religion of his. And hence it is,
I am sure, that we find so little written of the beginnings of their
corruptions, and of them that resisted it. And your Index expurgatorius devised
in the council of Trent for blotting out every thing in the writing is of men
that might testify of your corruptions, does also sufficiently witness unto the
world what ye did in the former times. So, to conclude this, suppose we could
not assign to you the circumstances of the changes of your religion, yet it
follows not but your religion and Kirk may be corrupted and decayed.

But to satisfy your demand, (suppose I hope the things already said, will
satisfy the consciences of the godly) what crave you? That all the
circumstances of changes in your religion may be assigned to you? First then, I
say, there is nothing that may serve either to make the man of God wise unto
salvation, or yet that may make him perfyte in every good work, but the
Scripture testifies: for it is able to do both these. If these circumstances
then serve either for salvation or perfection, I say they are set down in the
Scripture, so that we need not to go to hystories to search the same.

The first then ye crave, is the time when the change began. The Scripture
tells you that the mystery of iniquity began to work even then in the Apostles
days, and that it does already work, and so grew on from degree to degree
till he that withheld it was removed, that is till the Empire of Rome began to
decay, and the seat of it removed from thence, as the fathers expounded it,
Augustine, Chrysostom. Hiero. and so the city left to the Pope the man of sin
for him to set his the ^ne there: for Rome that seven hilled city behooved to
be the seat of the Antichrist, as it was foretold by the Scripture. So, Revel
17.
if you will believe the Scripture, you have the time. What crave you next? The
place? Lib. 2. de Romano Pontisi cap. 2 Reuelat. 17.
I say the Scripture testifies of the same that that mystical Babylon, whilk
Bellarmine your chief campion grants to be Rome, that sittes upon seven
hills, that had the dominion over the Kings of the earth, that is the place
where first your Kirk and religion began to decay. So there the place if ye
will believe the Scripture. What crave you next? Revel 11. and 17 Revel. 13.
and 1^
The author? The Scripture also hes foretold that the beast that came out of
the bottomless pit, and slew the witnesses of God and made war with the
Saints, and overcame them, and made all to worship the image of the beast, and
the harlot Babell, (the city of Rome) the mother of whordomes, who made all
nations to drink of the wine of the wrath of her fornication, that is your head
and Kirk, they are the authors and mothers of this decay and corruption. What
is the fourth thing ye require? The Kirk that said against the same? The
Scripture will tell you that too: Revel. 11. and 10 and 13. and 14
the two witnesses of God whom she killed, the woman that fled in the
wilderness, the Saints with whom she made war, and who would not worship the
beast nor receive his image, the hundredth forty and four thousand that John
saw standing with the Lamb in mount Sion, who was not defiled with your
idolatry, but followed the Lamb whithersoeuer he went. These then are the
true kirk whilk spak against your corruptions, who are like unto Eliahs seven
thousand that had not bowed their knees to Baall. What crave you more? The
matter it self they said against? The Scripture and ye will believe will
satisfy you in this point also. The doctrine then that was said against was
that mystery of iniquity, 2. Thessal. ^^ Revel. 13. Revel. 17.18 1. Timoth. ^
that deceiuablenes of unrighteousness, that strong delusion, that doctrine of
the Dragon, that spiritual idolatry and abomination, that doctrine of Devils
in forbidding marriage and commanding abstinence of meat, and so forth of the
rest. What crave you last? The number from whom they departed? The Scripture
will also bear witness of this, seeing your religion is a departure from the
faith, 2. Thessal. ^
then all these that ever professed the faith of Jesus set down in his
written word, even the Lord Jesus the head, the Apostles, the layers of the
foundation, the primitive Kirk, the woman that fled in the wilderness, the
Saints with whom ye made war, and all the elect and chosen of God that
abhorred your idolatry: These are the true Kirks from whom you departed. What
now crave you more? Will not the abundance of the rivers of the Scriptures of
God quench and satisfy this your desire, but that you must go unto the vnpure
fountains of men's writings, as though the Scripture were not sufficient not
only to make a man wise unto salvation, but to make him perfect in every
thing? These things I am sure will satisfy the souls of them that loves the
truth. But because you give no credit to the Scriptures, but counts them as a
nose of wax, Leo. 10.
and as one of your Popes speaking to Bembus a Cardinal called them a fable of
Christ, and yet such a fable as hes enriched your treasures. And Syluester
Prierias writing against Luther, says that the Roman Kirk and Pope is of
greater authority then the Scriptures. O horrible blasphemies of the holy
truth of God. Therefore we will go to the histories, and se what they have
testified of these circumstances. And although all things here be not
expressed to the full, yet there is so much left uncorrupted and vnscraped out
(by the gracious providence of God, that would not want his witness in all ages)
out of the fathers and your own writers, that I hope will satisfy the
consciences of all the modest and godly. Lib. 1. ^^^om.
Cleme^s Alexandrinus says that the Apostles successors received the doctrine
from them, as the sons from their fathers. But he subioynes that there was
very few children that was like their fathers. Lib. 3. cap. 16.
Aegesippus as Nicephorus reports, says that the Kirk remained a pure virgin
as long as the Apostles lived unto Traians time, but they being dead, he writes
that it was spedily corrupted. So if ye credit the testimonies of these men,
ye se the Kirk remains not long in her integrity. And if you would hear
ought of your Romans Kirk, Lib. 7. cap. 11.
Socrates says that Celestinus your Pope past the bounds of his preisthood.
Read cap. vlt.
Basilius de spiritu sancto, and there ye may se what change of religion was in
his time. epist. 1.9 c. 19
Augustine testifies that the multitude of ceremonies grew so in his time, that
the condition of the Jews seemed to be more tolerable, nor the condition of
the Kirk. Now did not this sickness trow ye, grow be time? And to come to your
own writers. in Canti 33.
Bernard says, that ye Ministers of Christ (meaning of the Roman Kirk) serves
Antichrist. And to the Pope himself, Eugenius 3. he says Lib. 4.
And thou the shepherd goes forth being clothed with a glorious attire, if I
durst say it: these are the feeding places of Devils rather then of sheep: thy
court is accustomed rather to receive good men, nor to make them good: not the
evil profits, but the good decays there. And in another place he says, From
the sole of the foot (speaking of the Kirk of Rome) to the crown of the head
there is no health, nor soundness. And in another place he says, De c^n
Pauli. Psalm. 91 ser. 6.
What remaynes now (speaking of the corruptions of that Kirk of Rome) but that
the man of sin be revealed, the man of perdition, Daemonium non modo diurnum,
sed and meridianum, that is, a deuilrie not only in the day tide, but in the
very noone-tyde. And to Fugenius the Pope he says, Lib. 4.
In these secular attyres and powers thou hes not succeeded to Peter, but to
Constantine. The day would sooner fail me, nor the writing of his complaints
against the Kirk of Rome.

Pope Hadrianus the 6. in his instructions to his Legates whilk were sent to
the council of Noremberg, he graunts and bids them say to the council, that We
know that in this chair, (meaning Peter's Sea in Rome,) for certain years many
abominable things hes been in it: the abuse in spiritual things, the excess
in commandments, and in a word, all things are changed in a worse. And the
council of the Cardinals to Paul the third: they say, Out of this fountain
(holy father) as from the Trojan horse, Dele^ card.
hes broken so many abuses in the Kirk of God, sik heavy diseases, whereby we
see now that she is dispaired almost of health. Aeneas Syluius a Cardinal, who
also was Pope afterward, says of your Kirk, That al faith hes perished in her,
and love is grown yee-colde. Ex epistola. 54. ad Caspar. Schlicke. Oration.
Cornelii epi. Bitoti 3 dom aduent, whilk was spoken in the council of trent.
And Cornelius Bitontinus Bishop, who was present at the council of Trent
says, Would to God (speaking of your Kirk) that vnanimes velut prorsus etc.
all with one heart alluterlie they had not declyned from Religion to
superstition, from Faith to infidelity, from Christ to Antichrist. (What would
ye have more? will ye yet be so shamlesse as to boast of the purity of your
Kirk?) and from God to Epicurisme. I leave the rest, as Platin, Genebrand,
Friar Mantua^, Nicolaus Clemangis, Franciscus Petrarcha, Auentinus, and a
number of others who are full of complaints of the abominations of your Kirk
of Rome, that certainly I cannot but wonder at your shamelessness in opening
of your mouth, and saying, that your Kirk had the truth in all things, and
never failed nor was interrupted, against sik a cloud of witnesses, whose
testimonies ye dare not refuse. But I leave you to the Lord. The lips of a
liar is abomination to the Lord. Proverb. 20.
So your own mouths shall rise up in the day of the Lord, and condemn you
that says, Your kirk hes not failed in any substantial point of Religion. But
you crave more distinctly the time, place, and persons, and so forth, that hes
brought in this mutation and change. If these are to be accounted authors of
your erroneous doctrines who were the chief defenders thereof: then I say the
Popes of Rome (for the most part) are the authors of the same, for they were
the chief defenders thereof, suppose they had not been the first teachers
thereof. For, otherwise Luther cannot be said to be the author of our
Religion, as ye say, because he was not the first that taught the same, and
that by your own confession. For ye say, that sundry other heretics before
Luther taught the same heads of doctrine whilk he taught, and whilk we
profess now. As, that Fasting should be free, that only Faith justifies,
that man hes not free will, etc. Next, because it were too longsom to go throw
the whole heads of your Religion, therefore I will only bring a few examples,
and that in some of the substantial points thereof. As for the sacrifice of
the Mass, and the ceremonies thereof, I have shown the authors thereof in
another place therefore I omit that now. The first that ever took upon him to
exercise jurisdiction over the Kirks of the East, was Pope Victor anno 200. or
198. who took upon him to excommunicate the Bishops of the East, because they
would not follow his fashion in the celebration of Easter. There the person,
Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. ^5.26
time, and place, resisted by Irenaeus bishop of Lions in France, and the
Bishops of the East, and the brethren there, Polycarpus and sundry others. The
first that took upon him the style to be called universal Bishop, was the
Bishop of Constantinople, anno 581. Resisted by Pelagius, and after him Lib. 4.
epistola 3^.38.39
Gregorius Bishops of Rome. And yet for all this, Boniface Platina, Sabellicus,
Manarus Scotus. Platina in vita Bonif.
the 3. anno 607. obtained this style of Phocas the Emperor, the murderer of
his predecessor, complained of by the Kirk of Rauenna in Italy, and resisted
by sundry as shall be proved afterward. The first that Eusebius. lib. 5. cap 17
appointed laws of Fasting, was Montanus the heretic, anno 145. accounted
heresy by Apolonius and Augustine, against the fasting of the Manicheans The
Manicheans were the first we read of that ministered the Communion under one
kind, as the Papists does now: and so forth of many other old condemned
heresies whilk your Kirk hes renewed, as shall be proved afterward. The first
that gave inckling of Transubstantiation, was Mark a notable Magician anno 115.
who by his enchantment having first caused a cup of white wine to bear the
coullour of blood, made his followers believe that by his invocation over it,
that grace whilk is above all things, had powered his blood into the cup,
refuted by Here Is. 34
Epiphanius and Irenaeus. The first that decreed Transubstantiation in effect,
Lib. 1. cap. 8.
was Pope De consecrat. Distinct. 2. cap. Ego Berengarius
Nicolaus the 2. anno 1090. in causing Berengarius to recant, but yet it was
not decreed as an universal doctrine, before Pope Innocent the 3. his time in
a council of Lateran anno 1215. as de Sacrament.
Tonstall witnesses. The Greek Kirk never consented to it, Bertramus,
Berengarius, Waldensis withstoode it. The first that decreed the worshipping
of Images was Hadrian in the 2. council of Nice, against the express
Scripture, after the example of Marcellina an heretic, who worshipped the
Image of Jesus, resisted by sundry Fathers and Council. Elibez. Council.
Constant Conc. Francof.
councels, The first Distinct 82. cap Proposnisti
that imposed single life and condemned marriage in their Clergy was Pope
Syricius anno 390. as the Manichees did before him, resisted by Sigebert and ^.
Mutius
sundry. Let these examples serve as a taist to the reader.

How strongly now ye have manned and fortified your own Kirk and Religion by
your proofs, let the reader judge. Now let us see, how ye disprove ours. The
question now comes in of the truth of our Kirk and Religion, whether it be
from Jesus Christ, or not. You say, it is not from him, but from others since
his time. If ye had gone the straight way to have proved this and to have
satisfied the consciences of men, you would at the nearest have run to the
Scripture, and by the same have disproued it. But you insteede of this go a
far by-way, and would father our religion on flesh and blood, dust and
ashes: in poynting us out Martine Luther to be the father and author of the
same, as though it had not an ancienter pedegre to reckon unto, nor had not the
beginning and foundation of it, from the root of Iesse, the bud of the Lord
from whom it hes sprung. And for to get your self the better credit you busy
your self in marking the circumstances of his preaching, as time, place,
matter, opposition, etc. Now that ye are so skilled and acquainted with that
history of Martine Luther, that you can assign al these circumstances, it is
no wonder, for that was the most notable and markable period of the decaying of
your Babell, and of the erecting up again of the kingdom of Jesus Christ,
whilk your head and clergy had stamped it under foot for so many years, whilk
suppose the beginning of it was but like a little leaven, and as a grain of
mustard seed whilk of all seeds is the least. Yet now since it hes so sowred
almost the whole mass, even the most part of the kingdoms of Europe, whilk
once was under your spiritual bondage, and hes grown up into sik a high tree
having fair and great branches, under the whilk the Lords sheep may get rest
and warmness, and in the whilk his souls that mounts vp-wardes to that
kingdom, does build their nests, so that neither can all your purgations, nor
yet all your axes of fire and sword, of bulls and pardons of preachings and
writtings, stay the spreading of the one* nor cut down the branches and root
of the other. That M. Luther began at that time, and in that place, and
preached against these doctrines, we do not deny, and that is not controuerted:
But here lies all the question, whether if that doctrine that he preached
against, was antichristian or not, and whether that religion whilk he neither
invented, nor yet first preached (for sundry before him did preach that same
doctrine, whose names I set down in my answer to your objection) but only
raised it out of the grave of darkness wherein ye had buried the truth of God.
Here then (I say) is the question whether that religion whilk he preached hes
the warrant from Jesus Christ in his Testament or not? the whilk if ye ever
disprove by the written word of God, then shall we grant you all that ye say,
the whilk is as impossible to you to do, no not suppose your King would call
all your wisemen and clergy together, Daniel 2
as it was to all the wisemen of Babell to tell and interpret Nebuchadnezar
his dream: yea, suppose your King would reward you gloriously with honor and
riches if ye could do it, yet are ye not able to win your wages. Yea, suppose
he would riue you in pieces and make your house a iakes unless ye did it, as the
wisemen of Babell was, because they could not tell and interpret the Kings
dream. This is therefore the point whilk lies in question betwixt us, whilk ye
should have proved if ye could. But know ye for a truth, that suppose he raised
out of the grave the truth of God whilk ye had buried, yet was he neither the
inuenter nor the first preacher of it, but it hes for ye beginning and author
of it, Jesus Christ the Son of God, and the foundation of it in the new
Testament of his holy Scripture. This for the author, time, and place whilks ye
assign.

Now, to the Kirks that spoke against him. I answer: they were but sik as was
made drunken with the wine of your fornication, and deluded by your strong
delusions, being deceived by the golden cup, Revel. 17.4
wherein you propyned them to be drunken out, as it was prophesied of you. But
the measure of your iniquity being full, and the time of the lurking of the
truth of God being runn out, God of his infinite mercy by his ministry, and
the rest that followed since, hes opened the eyes of a great part of these
kingdoms who first said against him, to se your Kirk to be the whore: Revel.
17.1. and 13 11.2. These. 2.3.4 11. Revel. 18.4
your kingdom to be the beast: and your head to be the Antichrist: your
doctrine to be delusions, and your Rome to be that mystical Babylon. And so
the Lord hes made them believe and give obedience to that commandment of his,
go out of her my people etc. That ye call these the true Kirk that spoke
against him, that lies in the weights and balance yet betwixt us, for or ye
prove them to be the true Kirk, ye must first prove your doctrine whilk they
then professed, to have the warrant out of the word of God. So, let them have
the name of a Kirk, but of an impure and corrupted Kirk: of a Kirk infected by
the pest of your doctrine, oppressed by the tyranny of your Pope and clergy,
and consumed by the rotten humors of your Idolatry. So then it was not the
true Kirk, that is, the called ones by the light of the Gospel (for they are
the true Kirk) that spoke against him, but only these that were infected and
poisoned with your abominations, the whilk I grant did ouer-spread these
nations as it was foretold of her. Revel. 17.2. and. ^^. 3. and. 13.14.
And as for these first heads of religion whilk he oppugned: Of your pardons,
justification by works, and the sacrifice of the mass, there condemnation is
set down in the great register and Testament of Jesus Christ the Lord of life
as shall be proved hereafter. So that he was not the first that oppugned them.
Now as to the last the Kirks from whom he departed, he departed not from their
body, but from the consumption of your heresy, that consumed the body: not
from the Kirk, but from the corruptions of your Idolatry and abominations in
the Kirk. Not from the commonweal of Israel, but from your tyra^nie and
oppression of the co^mon-weale. Not from the city of God, but from the pest of
your doctrine, that infected the city. And last of al not from the spiritual
communion and society of the Saints of God in these parts, but from the
communion with Babel with Antichrist, with the beast, and with ye Dragon, and
that at the 1. Tim. 6.3 4.5. Matthew 7.15. Act. 19. and 8 v. 1. Cor. 10.14. 2.
Cor. 5.14.15 16.17.18. Hosea 4, 15. Revel, 18 4,
commandment of the Lord fly from Idolatry; go out of Babell my people.
Now after you have assigned the mutations of our religion since Christ and his
Apostles (as you think) you gather the whole force of it together and makes the
stream of your argument to runn as strongly as it can upon our Kirk and
religion, that the face and form of it might be so washen away that it be not
known to be a true Kirk. Your reason then is this. The true Kirk of Christ hes
neuerfailed universally for the space of one day, because our Savior hes
promised to be with it to the end of the world. But our Kirk was never before
Martine Luthers days, therefore it is not the true Kirk of Christ. As to your
proposition, if ye sake failing for erring in matters of doctrine, then I deny
your proposition for I hope I have proved sufficiently before that the Kirk
both may err and hes erred in all ages. But if you take failling to be utterly
abolished and rooted out of the face of the earth, then I grant your
proposition, that God hes ever a Kirk, the Kirk of his elect, with whom he will
be to the end of the world. And as to your assumption, that our Kirk was never
before Martine Luthers days, I deny it. Let us see how ye prove it. There was
none (say ye) before his days neither visible nor invisible that professed
his religion. But how do ye prove that, for that is still denied to you? For
if our religion hes the old and new Testament to bear witness to it, and Jesus
Christ to be the author of it in every point, as shall be made manifest by the
grace of God, then I say whosoever they were from the beginning of the world to
this day visible or invisible that professed the true Jesus, the true Savior,
his true doctrine and Sacraments wherein religion stands, they are our
predecessors, and are of our profession and religion: so then ye should first
(if ye had gone squarely to work) have disproued the heads of our religion not
to have their warrant from the tables of Christ's Testament, or ye had concluded
that we had none of our profession and Religion before Martine Luther. And this
is the point you should have begun at, for it is not the Kirk that makes the
religion, but the religion that makes the Kirk. Have we a warrant out of the
word of God for our religion, then are we the true Kirk, and the successors of
all them who ever from the beginning of the world hes professed the same. Have
we not this vvarrant then I grant you we have no true Kirk. So there is the
point of our controversy, whether our doctrine be from God, out of his word
or not. But how prove ye that Martine Luther had none of his profession
before him? First you gathered upon the former things that all the true Kirks
said against him, and that he departed from them, unto the vvhilk I ansvvered
before that these was not the true Kirk, but only so many of every nation who
was deceived by your doctrine, and whereof the Lord did cure a great many by
his ministry, and by the ministry of others whom the Lord did stir up
since, so that neither did the true Kirk who saw the truth, speak against nor
yet did he depart from their society. ^. Reg 19.10.18
Next as the lord had a true kirk in Israel in the time of Elias, even these
7000. whilk did not bow their knee to Baal, who was neither known to Elias the
Prophet nor yet to the persecuters: so did the Lord in the midst of your
darkness and Idolatry reserve to himself a true Kirk, even these hundredth
forty and four thousand whilk Ihon saw standing with the Lamb on mount Sion,
Reuelat. 14.1
who did not defile themselves with your Idolatry and did not worship the
beast and receive his mark: whilk suppose neither ye nor we had known, yet the
Lord did reserve them as he promised.

Thirdly, I say Martine Luther had sundry who professed his religion
immediately before him, who was even known to the world, as I shall prove
afterward.

Your next proof is taken from an testimony of one of our own writers where
ye allege that it is written of Martine Luther and Zuinglius, that they were
the first that came to the knowledge of the Gospel. I say ye are not faithful
in citing of this testimony, for it says not that they were the first that
came to the knowledge of the Gospel, but these are the words that it was an
easy thing to them (meaning of your Kirk) to devise against us (meaning the
English Protestants as ye call them) these cursed speeches, when Martine
Luther and Zuinglius first came to the Gospel. The Latin words are, cum
Martinus Luther et Zuinglius primum accessissent ad Euangelium. So it says not
that they were the first that came to the Gospel, but that it was easy to you
to spew out cursed speeches when they came first to the Gospel. So that this
word primum that is, first, is not in comparison with them that knew the
Gospel before, but in comparison with that time in the whilk they themselves
knew not the Gospel. It is an aduerb of time, and you take it for an adjective
noune. But there is a veil over your eyes Master Gilbert that ye can neither
see what we or your selves writes: So then to conclude, seeing the religion
whilk Martine Luther taught, hes the warrant from Christ's Testament; and seeing
all that ever professed the true religion, that hes Christ to be the author of
it in his Scripture, visible or invisible, are his predecessors: Therefore the
religion whilk Martine Luther taught was the true religion. And seeing your
religion hes not Christ to be the author of it in his latter Testament, but is
that apostasy and defection, that Antichristian kingdom that was forespoken
of in the Scripture: Therefore I conclude that your Kirk and religion whilk he
oppugned is not the true Kirk and religion, but that Antichristian kingdom.
And this for the first part of your objection. Now we come to the second.

Master Gilbert Brown.

As for the other part of the objection whilk he alleges to be ours: that is,
that our religion was never said against, we say not so: Matthew. 13.4
for why all heretics and others infected with false doctrine hes ever said
against the same, almost at all times. A d therefore wonder not M. Gilbert
suppose your mystery of iniquity so sone began.
For how soon that Christ our Savior planted the truth: the Devil
immediately sewe Popple in the same, according to the parable set down in S.
Matthew.

Master John Welsche, his Reply.

I come now to that part whilk ye say is untruly alleged of you, whilk moved
you to say that either I knew not your proofs, or if I knew them that I
altered the same, that I might the better oppugn my own invention. Of my
knowledge of your proofs I will speak nothing. But let us see whether this be
my invention or not, or rather your own proof. You, for the confirmation of
the truth of your Kirk and religion brought in this as a proof, that I, nor
no Minister in Scotland was able to assign the true Kirk that spoke against
it. Either then ye prove nothing, or else this must be one of your proofs,
because it was never spoken against by a true Kirk. Now compare these words
with mine, and see whether I speak ignorantly or untruly of your proofs. I
said, that ye affirmed your religion to be true, because it was never spoken
against. Here our words are one, except this that ye ad (be a true Kirk) I
understand the same, and therefore I gave the instances, first of Christ and
his Apostles next of the primitive Kirk, thirdly of these that lived in Popery
whilk spoke against your religion; all whilk I appeal your conscience whether
think ye that I judge them a true Kirk or not. Now in that ye expound it
otherwise of heretics, this is neither my words nor meaning, but your own
invention. So that by this it may appear that either ye have not understood my
words alleging your objection, or else ye have altered the meaning of the same,
that ye might the more easily answer to your own inventions, and gain say my
words.

Master John Welsche his answer to the objection.

Your religion of the Roman Kirk was never instituted nor preached neither by
Christ nor by his Apostles, as I offer me to prove by their writings: whilk is
the only touchstone whereby all religion should be and must be tried.

Master Gilbert Brown.

I think in this Master John takes upon him an impossibility, for it is said
that it is impossible to prove a M. Robert say you is contrary to this, that
the word except it be preached is but a slaying letter, therefore say you t
cannot be judge to the christian religion. Sermon upon Esai 1 and 6. Answe c.
You belie M. Robert Bruce, for there is not sik a word of his in these sermons:
this is twice that you have falselie forged our testimonies. Ergo, it is
impossible to prove your Popes not to be the Antichrist by your reason
negative proposition, except it be set down in the word of God, whilk is of
authority: and that I am sure he cannot find, because Papistrie by him is not
so old as the word of God is. But in the mean time Master John proves nothing
He off rs very fair, and when ever he proves any thing contrary to us, w th
Gods grace he shall get an answer. And note here that Master John can say
nothing to our argument, for to it he gives no answer.

Master John Welsche his Reply.

In your answer to this section, first ye think it impossible because of the
form of it. Next, ye say it is but an offer and I prove nothing. Thirdly that
I answer nothing to your argument, nor can answer nothing. Now, of al these
in order. And first to the form: ye think it impossible to prove because it
is a negative proposition. Is not this a negative proposition that the Popes of
Rome are not the Antichrist; you can not deny it. Again, I ask is this
sentence to be found in the whole Scripture; I trow ye vvil never be able to
find it. Then I say if it be true that ye say, Bellarm lib. 3 de Romans Pontif.
Sanders 40 demonstrations.
then ye your self in your book and this your answer, and Bellarmine and
Sanderus and all the rest of you that takes in hand to prove the Pope not to be
the Antichrist, takes in hand in your judgment an impossibility (and so do
ye indeed, not because it is a negative proposition, but because he is the
Antichrist in very truth.) What would the Pope your head think of you, if
he heard you say so? Certainly I think he would not inroll your name among the
defenders of his catholic faith whereof this is the foundation. Secondly, is
there not many formal syllogismes that hes the proposition or assumption
negatiues, and will you say they cannot be proved if the matter be true, because
they are negatiues? What is this but to raise the foundation of Logic and
Reason? Logic is not Rhethorick, and Physic is not Logic: both these are
negative propositions, and I trow neither of the^ are so found in the
Scripture, and will you say that it is impossible to prove them, because they
are negatiues? What you mean by this I understand not, Tim. 2.14.
unless you do (...) strive about words, prove and improve, forbidden by the
Apostle. Thirdly, ye except these negative propositio^s, whilk are set down in
the word of God, whilk hes authority as ye say, I assume. But your religion in
substance is condemned in the word of God: Therefore by your own confession it
may be proved, suppose it be negative: For Nazianzene says, that these
sentences that are collected out of the Scripture by a necessary consequence
are of the same truth and authority with these sentences that are expressly
set down in the Scripture. Lib. 5. de Theologia.
And whereas ye say Papistrie by me is not so old as the Scripture, I grant
that. What then? Therefore it is not condemned in the Scripture; I deny that:
for Antichrist and his kingdom are not so old as the Scripture, and yet the
Scripture condemned it. For not only condemns it present heresies, but also the
heresies that was to come. And seeing Papistrie is that Antichristian religion,
as shall be made manifest by Gods grace: therefore it hes the express
condemnation of it in the word of God. The form therefore of it, no ways will
make it impossible to be proved. As for the next thing, that I prove nothing,
but offers very fair. I answer it was not my purpose then, but I hope ye
shall have a proof now of that whilk I offered then. As to the third then,
that I can say nothing to your argument whilk ye would have the reader to
mark: when I red this, I marked this, that ye would earnestly have the reader
persuaded of the inuinciblenes of your argument and my inabilitie to answer.
But what bring ye with you to persuade him of the same? Your reason is, because
I have not answered it. Will this follow, I have not (suppose it were so as ye
say) therefore I cannot? It will not follow (M. Gilbert) I have not answered, I
cannot answer to it. But as ye have a new Theology, so have ye a new Logic.
But said I nothing to your argument? What is not ansvvered sufficiently in the
same? Your argument was the antiquity of your religion and continuance of it
from Christ by a lineall succession never interrupted, etc. And the novelty of
ours. My answer was: yours was not institute by Christ nor his Apostles in
his Scripture as ours was, and yours was gainesaide in the chief points by
the testimonies of the fathers the first 600. years, and the principal points
of our religion confirmed by sundry of their testimonies. Thirdly yours was
that Antichristian apostacy that the Scripture fore-tolde should come, and in
the height of your tyranny and Idolatry was gainsayed by many before Martine
Luther, and ours was professed by sundry before him whose names I set down,
all vvhilk I offered to prove, and now shall do by Gods grace. Now you say
this is no answer. But is that no answer that cuts the very throat of your
religion if it be verefied, and hoghs your argument, that it do never stand up
to vnder-propp your religion again? For that religion vvhilk is not instituted
by Christ in the Scripture, whose maine foundations is gainsaide by the
testimonies of sundry of the fathers of the first 600. year whilk is
Antichristian, and whilk was gainesaid by the Saints that they persecuted and
slew, hes not the continuance from Christ by a lineal succession never
interrupted nor spoken against by a true Kirk till Martine Luthers days. This
I am sure ye will not deny. But your religion is sik as I offered then to
prove, and now hes in some points, and shall in other some points by Gods
grace. The whilk if it be verifyed, then I hope ye will not deny, but that your
religion hes neither antiquity, continuance nor succession from Christ til
Martine Luthers days. And that religion cannot be newly forged and invented
since Martine Luthers days, whilk hes the warrant and institution of it in the
Scripture etc. This you cannot deny. But our religion is sik, as then I offered
to prove and now hes done in some points and shall do in other some points by
Gods grace. Therefore our religion cannot be newly forged and invented etc. but
is the only true religion. So that this answer if it be proved, does
sufficiently vindicat our religion from novelty. Now if this be no answer to
your argument, the^ I say no more, but ye will answer it the sooner. And
because ye formed your own argument your self in your answer to me, and I
have answered to it else; therefore I will now insist no further upon it. And as
for your lineall succession of Bishops it will come in question afterward,
therefore I omit it now.

Master Gilbert Brown.

As for the written word, it is true that it is a most faithful witness (and it
be not corrupted) to Christ and his Kirk, as our Savior testifies him self:
John. 5, ^^,
of the whilk opinion there is sundry Protestants, chiefly young Merchiston in
his discourse upon the Revelation in the 21 Proposition, and other places. 2,
Cor, 3, 6. John. 6, 63, John, 14.15, 16.
But that it ought to be judge to decide all controversies in religion,
Master John hes no Scripture for the same. It is the holy Ghost that must be
judge, and the holy writ must bear witness thereto. For this cause the holy
Ghost was given to the Kirk by the Father and the Son, that he might teach it
all truth This holy Ghost gives judgment by the Pastors of the true Kirk, as
he did by the Apostles and Priests at the council of Jerusalem. Act, 15, 1^,
2^,
It hes pleased the holy Ghost and us (says the Apostles) and so he hes ever
done since the beginning of the Kirk, when it was trobled with heresies and
false doctrine As the council of Nice, Constantinople, Ephesus and Chalcedon.

Master John Welsche his Reply.

You first here decline the Scripture as judge, to decide all controversies in
religion. And you are not the first that hes done this, but all your Roman
clergy with you. And suppose there were not another thing to make the
consciences of men suspect your religion that it is not found in the book of
God: yet this is a great presumption that ye give out of it your selves. For
what may all men think of the same, but that if ye were persuaded in your
conscience to justify your religion to be from Jesus Christ in his written
word, ye would never decline the iudicatorie of it, and the declining of the
same is an evident demonstration that ye are privy with your selves in your
own consciences that it is not from God in his written word. But wherefore say I
that ye are privy with your selves of this? Ye have made it known to the
world by your confession in your own books, that many of the chief points of
your religion controuerted between you and us, whilk ye maintain, hes not
their original beginning, nor author in the Scriptures, but in your unwritten
traditions. So Petrus a Soto a papist of great name confessed. He calls all
these observations Apostolic traditions whose beginning principium, In his
book against Brentius
origo, and auhor cannot be found in the whole scripturs and then he reckons
out a number of the chief and principal heads of their religion, saying, of the
whilk sort are the oblation of the sacrifice of the altar, the invocation or
prayers to Saints, the prayer for the dead, the supremacy of the Pope of Rome,
the consecration of the water in baptism, the whole sacraments of orders,
matrimony, penance, confirmation and extreme unction, the merits of works,
the necessity of satisfaction, In his Catechism cap. 5. de preceptis Ecclesiae.
the nombering over of the sins to the Priest. Canisius a great Papist says,
that the worshipping of images, the set fastes and the sortie days of lent, and
all that are done in the sacrifice of the mass, prayers and oblations for the
dead, and alia and others, he says all these are traditions because they are
sik that they cannot be defended by the scripture. Lib 4. Panopliae cap. 100.
and in sine illi^s libri tab. 6.
And Lindanus another great defender of your Romish faith and religion, he
reckons out for Traditions, that there are seven Sacraments, the consecration
of the water and oil in Baptism, the real presence of Christ's flesh and
blood in the Sacrament, Communion under one kind, that the Lords Supper is a
Sacrifice, that it should be kept and adored, private Masses, Confession of
sins to the Priest, Satisfactions, Pardons, Purgatory, Part 3.
and that Peter was in Rome. Martinus Peresius another Papist nombers the
single life of Priests amongst the vn-written Traditions. The truth is
strong, that hes so far glanced in the consciences of some of you, and hes
opened your mouths to confess and to set it down in write to the world,
that the principal heads of your Religion, yea the very foundation and ground
of it, (as the supremacy of your Popes, and the Sacrifice of your Mass and
the rest) are vn-written Traditions whilk hes not the beginning, nor original,
nor authority in the Lords written word: and whilk cannot be defended by the
same, as some of your selves have confessed. So it is no wonder, Master
Gilbert, suppose ye refuse to have the controversies of Religion decyded by the
same. Let the reader now judge what he may think of your Religion, that hes
not God in his Scripture in the principal and maine foundations thereof, as
some of your selves have confessed, to be the author and beginner thereof. So
what needs any further proof against their Religion? out of their own
mouths the falset of their Religion is convicted. This therefore was the true
cause (Master Gilbert) wherefore ye refused to have the controversies of
religion decyded by the Scripture. And for this cause also hes your Kirk heaped
up so many falls calumnies, accusations, and blasphemies against the same,
calling it obscure, Hosius lib. 3 de authorit. Ec. contra. script. Andradius
lib. 2 orthod, explic. Lindanus in Panoplia sua lib. 3. cap. 6
darksome, doubtsome, Bellarm de verbo Dei lib. 4. cap. 4.
not necessary but only profitable, imperfect, Iuel page 521. Defens. Apolog.
and Lodouicus a canon
a dead ink, a dumb and dead thing, Pigius contro. 3 de Ecclesia.
dum Judges, Eckius.
a black Gospel, an inkine divinity, Pigius hierarch lib. 3 cap. 3.
a nose of wax that may be drawn every way, Fox page 804.
containing in them diverse erroneous and damnable opinions, Hermannus a Papist.
whilk were of no greater authority nor the fables of Aesope without the
approbation of the Kirk, and by the Pope Leo the 10. ex Iucl. defen Apolog.
page 273
Pope himself a fable of Christ. And for this cause also, did they hyde it up
in an vn-knowne language, forbidding the translating of it in the vulgar
language, and the reading of it by the people in their mother tongue, least
they should have perceived the falset of their religion, and so it should have
lost the credit at their hands. So ye have been wise in your generation, Sed
Veritas tandem vincet: but the truth shall overcome at the last. You grant it
to be a witness, but yet you deal subtillie, while as ye put in an exception,
if it be not corrupted. Canus lib. 2. cap. 13, de locis Theologicis Lindanus
lib. 1. c. 11, de optimo genere interpret Andradius def. fid. Trid, l. 4 Pagnin
in epist, ad Clement, sep Arias Montanus tom, 8. Biblii Regi^^ in praesati^^e.
For if you be of that mind with your Kirk, and especially with Canus,
Lindanus, and the College of Rhemes, you think the Hebrew and Greek
fountains of the Scripture to be corrupted. And therefore it is decreed in the
Council of Trent, the old Latin vulgar translation to be authenticke, whilk
notwithstanding by the confession of some Papists, as Andradius, Pagnine, and
Arias Montanus, it hes missed the sense and meaning of the holy Ghost
sometimes. So you not only put the Lord in his Scripture out of the benche,
that he should not judge and give out the sentence of doom against your
doctrine, but by this exception also ye remove him from the bar, that his
testimony in the Hebrewe and Greek fountains against you, should have no
credit. Let all men judge now what prejudice ye give out against your own
religion, when as ye will not admit the Lord in his word in the Hebrew and
Greek fountains neither judge nor witness. But you say, I have no Scripture
for me, that the Scripture ought to be judge. What will ye say then to Jesus
Christ in the 12 chap. 48. verse of the Gospel of Saint John, speaking to sik
as ye are, He that refuses me and receives not my words, has one that
judges him, the word that I have spoken it shall judge him in the last day.
Unless now ye be a man of perdition, ye must confess that the word of Jesus
Christ, (whereof so much is written as may make a man believe, and by believing
to get eternal life) is judge and judges presently, and shall judge also in
the latter day.) Therefore the Apostle says, that God shall judge the secrets
of men's hearts by Jesus Christ, according to his Gospel. So the Gospel shall
be the rule of that great judgment in that great day and so is it the rule of
his worship while we are in the way to that judgment. Suppose you now decline
the iudicatorie of the same here, because in your conscience ye know, and
your own mouths have confessed it, that ye are not able to justify your
religion thereby, yet nil ye will ye, ye shall be judged by the same word in the
last day. But whom will ye have to be your judge? Ye say, the holy Ghost.
Bellarmine says, that we and your Kirk aggrees in that, L b. 3. de verbi
interpret, cap, 3.
that the holy Ghost should be supreme judge of all controversies. But is not
the Scripture the holy Ghosts own infallible voice and breath? So then when
the Scripture is judge, the holy Ghost is judge, because the Scripture is the
immediate voice of the holy Ghost, and the holy Ghost hes given out, and gives
out his judgment in all controversies of religion in and by the Scripture: 2,
Timot^, 3 16 Roman, 1^.^^
and the holy Ghost illuminates the eyes of these that are foreordained to
life, to se the truth in the Scripture: and works in their heart faith to
apprehend it and believe it: and forms a spiritual judgment in their hearts to
try and judge, 1. Corinthians. ^.1^
for the spiritual man judges all things. And all this he works by the
means of the Scripture: for it is the only mean and instrument whereby the
holy Ghost works faith in our hearts. Thus I reason therefore: He only can be
judge in controversies of religion whose authority is sik that none may appeal
from the same whose judgment is infallible true, who will not be partial nor
favor parties: and who is able to convict and persuade the conscience of the
truth, and make the party to rest in the same: But only the holy Ghost in and
by the Scripture hes these properties, and no other: Therefore the holy Ghost
in and by the Scripture is only judge.

And whereas you say, that the holy write must bear witness to it, Petrus a
Soto in his book against Brentius, Canisius, Lindanus, and Ma^t, Peresius
quoted before
what will you say then to all the chief points of your religion almost,
whilk the learned and great defenders of your faith hes confessed, are
unwritten traditions whilk hes not their beginning nor authority from the
Scripture, nor cannot be defended by the same? Upon the whilk I reason thus:
That doctrine is not the holy Ghosts, whilk the Scripture bears not witness
to: this ye say your self, for ye say, the Scripture must bear witness to
it: But all the chief points almost of your religion, as the supremacy of the
Pope, the sacrifice of the Mass, invocation of Saints, the five bastard
Sacraments, the worshipping of Images, Transubstantiation, Communion under one
kind, Satisfactions, Pardons, Purgatory, merits of works etc. hes not their
authority from the Scripture, nor cannot be defended by the same, as your own
Catholics (as ye call them) testifies: Therefore your doctrine and religion
is not the holy Ghosts, and that by your own testimony. Now truly
(Master Gilbert) I fear ye tyne your style, if you defend your religion no
better nor this.

And whereas you say, that the holy Ghost gives out his judgment by the
Pastors of the true Kirk: I grant indeed that the Pastors gives out public
sentence in controversies of Religion, because they are the Lords witnesses,
messingers, and mouths to testify, proclaim, interpret and discern his
truth from falset. But first, the rule of this their judgment should be the
word of God, unto the whilk they are bound in all their testimonies and
judgments, from the whilk if their judgments swerue but an inche-broad, they
are not the judgments of the holy Ghost: so that all their decreetes and
determinations in the worship of God, and man his salvation, should only be
received accordingly as they aggree or dissent from the same. For the Apostle
Galat. 1.8.
pronounces him accursed suppose he were an Angel that would preach another
Gospel then that quhilk he preached, and he preached Act. 26, 22.
nothing but out of the Scripture. But your Roman Kirk by the contrary
says, That their decreets and sentences should be taken without all trial and
examination because whatsoever they decree (say they) in manners or doctrine,
Bellarm. de Ecclesia lib. 1. de council. cap. 18. and lib. 3. cap. 14
whether they be comprehended in the Scripture, or not, they cannot err.

Next if it be asked of you whom ye judge to be the Pastors of the true Kirk,
you will answer (as ye do) that your Kirk is the only true Kirk, and your
Bishops and Popes the only true Pastors, so that they only must be the judge to
end all controversies. Bellarm. lib. 3. de verbi interpret. cap. 5. and 9 and
lib. 4. de Romano Pontif. cap. 2.
And Bellarmine is plain in this: for he says the Pope is chief judge in all
controversies in religion, either he him self alone or with his council, and
that in his judgment and sentence all men should rest, and he should be
obediently heard of all the faithful in all matters of controversy, whether
he can err or not: and their canon law hes decreted that no man should rebuke
him, suppose he should carry with him innumerable souls to hell. Did. 40.
cap. Si Papa Bellarm. lib. 1 de council. cap, 18. and Rhemist annotat. in 1.
These. 2. ver, 12. and Ioannes Maria vert^^tus editus anno 1561. and Hosias lib,
de expres. ver. Dei page 97
And they teach that their decreets should not be examined of any whether they
be aggreable to the Scripture or not: but that they should be received, as the
express word of God and the Gospel. But first judge thou (reader) in what
suspicion they have their religion in their own hearts, they have declined the
holy Ghost speaking in the Scripture, and that not only as judge, but in the
authentic Greek and Hebrew as witness. So their religion cannot stand, if the
Lord be either as judge in his Scripture to give out sentence of it, or as
witness in the authentic copies to hold his hand at the bar and depone against
it. Now whom would they have as Judges? Their own Pastors and the Pope, and
all their determinations to be received without a trial, as the Gospel and
express word of God as though their religion could not be justified, unless
the Fathers and forgers thereof, the Popes and Bishops of Rome were set on the
bench to be Judges thereof. Now what a unrighteous thing is this, both to be
party and Judge? For the chief controversy is of themselves, whether he be
the Antichrist or not? and his Ministers and Kirk Antichristian or not? But
what show of reason can you have for this? The prince of life, the son of
God, who is the righteous Judge of the whole world, in that great controversy
wherein it is called in question whether he was the Messiah or not, desired not
to be the Judge, Ioh, 5, 3^
for he said if I testify of my self (much more if I judge of my self) my
testimony is not sufficient but referred this controversy to the Scripture
saying search the Scriptures etc. And yet you that are but flesh and blood,
Ioh. 5.39
dust and ashes, yea monsters and incarnate devils, as your own writers and
Councels hes testified of some of your Popes (Concilium Constantiense) who may
err and hes been heretics, as some of your Popes hes been, and that by your
own testimony, you will not only bear witness of your selves, but also be
Judges in the controversies of your selves, rejecting the judgment of the holy
Ghost in the Scripture. Al men, says the Apostle, are liars, how then shall I
certainly know but they may lie: how shall my conscience rest in their
judgment: shall I have no better warrant for my salvation nor the testimonies
of your Bishops and Popes who are but men and so may lie, who are party and so
never will condemn them selves, and who of all men hes most foullie erred?
What is this but to make the voice of your Bishops and Popes of greater
authority nor the voice of God in his Scripture? for seeing it is the sense of
the Scripture that is called in controversy, and the sense of the Scripture,
is the Scripture it self: and your doctrine is that I must embrace sik and sik
interpretations of the Scripture that are called in controversy, and my
conscience must rest in the same, without further trial, because he hes so
decreed it: What is this, but not only to make him equal to the lord? (For
God only hes that privilege to be believed, because he so speaks; man's
testimony so far only is to be credited as it may be warra^ted by the
scripture:) but also to prefer his authority to the voice of God in his
scripture, seeing he is judge of the same, and not that only, but to hang my
salvation upon his voice and testimony? And seeing ye will have them judges,
what is the cause that their Canons, laws, and determinations, are not as
authentic as the Scripture, and insert in the Canon of the scripture? But let
us see your reasons. First you say, That the holy Ghost was given to the Kirk
by the Father and the Son, that he might teach it all truth. I grant this, that
the holy Ghost is given to every one of the elect, as well Pastor as people, to
lead the^ in all truth in so far as may bring them to salvation. And yet ye
will not make every one of the^ judges: next eueryone of the elect may err
notwithstanding of this promise, suppose not totally and finally and therefore
cannot be Judges of religion. Secondly, you allege the example of the council
of the Apostles and Elders. It is true in that controversy that arose among
the Christians concerning the observing of the ceremonies of the law of Moses
that the Apostles and Elders with the whole Kirk after reasoning defined the
same, and writes the same to be observed by the Disciples euerie-where: but
first they were Apostles and was infallibly governed by Gods Spirit that they
could not err in teaching and writing: but your Pastors are not Apostles and
may err. Next they assemble with the Elders and the whole Kirk, and all with
one accord defines. Act. 15, 12, 22 23 Bellarm. lib. 1 de council. cap, 1^.
You in your council excludes all except your Bishops to be ordinary Judges
to give out judgment and your Popes, neither Elder nor brethren having power
of voting with you. Thirdly, Act. 15. ver. 15.
they define according to the Scripture (saying (a) as it is written etc.) This
controversy to make us to understand and we will not be more nor blind,
that this rule should be followed in all councels to determine in controversies
according to the Scripture. Upon the whilk I reason if the Apostles who had
that high measure of Gods spirit whilk never man had since, so that in writting
and teaching they could not err, if they, I say, did determine the
controversies of religion according to the Scripture, how much more then are
all Pastors since who may err both severally and jointly together in a
council, bound to follow the same rule? And whereas ye call their Elders
Priests you style them, not as the holy Ghost hes styled them there, so their
they are called (...) that is, Elders, and not (...), that is, sacrificing
Priests as ye suppone. Your third reason is, the practice and custom of the
kirk in deciding the controversies of religion in councels: we grant that this
is a very commodious mean to search and find out the truth by the Scripture:
for first the more they are that seeks the truth, it is the more easily
found. Next the consent of many in determining a truth will be of greater
authority to repres heretics nor if it were aggreed upon only by a few. But
yet they should determine nothing but that whilk is warranted by the Scripture,
and their determinations only in so far forth to be received as is aggreable to
the same. And this we grant hes been done in the council of the primitive Kirk.
And therefore the Emperor Constantine speaking to the fathers of the council of
Nice says sunt libri Prophetici et Apostolici qui aperte quid credendum sit,
docent etc. That is, there are the books of the Prophets and Apostles, who
teaches plainly what we should believe. (...)
All contention therefore laid aside, let us take the sovereign decision of
these things whilk are called in controversy, out of the scriptures whilk are
inspired by God. And this we grant, and this we crave. But that councels ought
to determine any thing of their own authority in matters of religion whilk
binds the conscience, without the warrant of the word, that we deny.

Master Gilbert Brown.

The judgment of God in causing sik a dimnes and darkness to fall upon your
eyes, it is to be wondered at.
It is an wonder that Master John will refer any thing to the written word,
seeing that he and his hes no warrant that the same is the word of God but by
the authority of the Roman or Papists Kirk. For understand there was no Kirk
worthy of credit, immediately before Luther, but that Kirk.

Master John Welsche his Reply.

You wonder that I refer any thing to the Scripture. But what a wonder is this
that ye are so far blinded of God that you think that a wonder in me whilk
Abraham hes done, Luc. 16 29. Ioh, 5 39. Act. 26.22. Romans 12. and 6.26 2. Tim.
3 16 2 Pet, 1, 19 Apoc 1.3. cap. vlt
whilk the Prophets hes done, whilk our Savior and his Apostles hes done, and
whilk the fathers hes done (for all these have referred the infallible
testimony and decision of the will of God concerning his worship unto the
Scriptures,) yea whilk your self also hes done, for ye make it a witness. But
what hes moved you to think this a wonder in me, whilk so many and your self
also hes done before me? Because (say ye) that he and his (that is, our Kirk)
hes no warrant that it is the word of God, but by the authority of the Roman
or Papist Rirk. I grant in deed (Master Gilbert) that you and your Kirk are
plunged in this blindness and misery that all the warrant that you have not
only of the Scriptures them selves, that they are inspired of God, but also of
al your doctrine and religion is the testimony of your Roman Kirk, that is,
Bellarm de sacr. lib 2. cap. 25 Lib. 1. contra Whitak. de authoritate scrip.
cap 10
of your Pope and Clergy (for so ye interpret the Kirk) so Bellarmine grants
that all the certainty of all doctrine depends upon the authority of the
present Kirk (meaning the Pope and his Clergy) and Stapleton says that it is
no absurd thing not to believe God but for the testimony of the Kirk. Pigius
says, that it is not needful to believe all that Matthew and John write in
their Gospels to be true, because that they might fail in memory and lie as al
men may do. Ecclesiast. hierarch. lib. 1. cap. 2. And Hermanus says that the
Scripture would be of no more authority then the fables of Aesope were not the
testimony of the Kirk. And so blind and miserable must you be that hangs the
certainty of all religion, and of man his salvation upon so small a thread as
the testimony of your Popes and Clergy. What peace in conscience can any man
have that professes your religion, whilk teaches that the certainty and
warrant of all the doctrine in the Scripture, and the Scripture it self, that
they are of God, but the testimony of your Popes and Clergy? What is it to
expone the certainty of the Lords scripture and of al religion comprehended in
the same, to the mocking and derision of the wicked, if this be not? Yea, is
not this to prefer the voice and authority of your Popes and Clergy to the
voice of God him self? For what is the testimony of your Kirk, but the
testimony of men? And is not the scripture the testimony and voice of God him
self? Do ye not therefore lift up the authority of your Kirk, that is, your
Popes and Clergy above the authority of God in his word whilk as you say,
that there is no other warrant of the Divinity of the scripture, but only the
testimony of your Kirk? But God be thanked in Christ Jesus who hes delivered us
from this blindness: for we have other warrants (Master Gilbert) whereupon the
certainty of our salvation and the Divinity of the scripture depends, nor by
the testimony of the true Kirk much les the testimonye of your Kirk whilk is
Antichristian, and given over of God to believe lies, and so worthy of no
credit. But how prove ye it? Ye say there was no other Kirk immediately before
Luther, but that of yours; vvhilk was worthy of credit. Whereunto I answer:
first that is false: for there was a true Kirk immediately before him whilk ye
persecuted, as I have proved else where. Next I say, your argumnt will not
follow: there was no other Kirk immediately before him etc. Ergo, we have no
other warrant that the scripture is the written word of God. For we have also
the testimony of the Kirk of the Jews concerning the old Testament, and of
the primitive Kirk in all ages, concerning both the old and new Testament,
whilk are not only other warrants nor the testimonies of your Roman Kirk, but
also worthy of more credit. Next, I say we have many more principal and more
effectual warrants that the scripture is of God, nor the testimony of the
Kirk, either past or present: as first the testimony of the holy Ghost, crying,
testifying, and sealing up in all consciences of the godly, not only the truth
of the doctrine contained in them, but also the divinity of the scripture,
Lib. 1. de authorit scrip, cap. 1.6.7 1, Ioh, 5, 6
whilk Stapleton denies not, and therefore the scripture says that the spirit
(that is the holy Ghost) bears witness that the spirit (that it is the doctrine)
is truth.

Secondly, the testimony of the Scripture it self warranding and testifying of
it self, the whole Scripture is inspired of God. The old Testament warranted
both by the testimony of the self, 2. Timoth. 3
the histories and prophesies testifying of the books of Moses, and also by the
testimonye of the new Testament both in 1 Pet. 1, 19. Luc, 24, 44. Luc, 16, 19.
Ioh 5.39
general, and also in Matthew, 5, Math 19.7. and cap, 22 Ioh, 3, 14
particular as the books of Moses and the historical books, as the history of
the Queen of Matthew. 12
Saba, and of the widow Luc, 4
of Sarepta, and of the Act, 2 Act, 13
Psalms, in sundry places, and of sundry of the books of the old Heb^. 11
Testament, and Matthew. 1
Ruth also. And out of Esaias, Ezechiell, and Jeremy, many testimonies are
cited, and out of the books of the small Act, 7, 42
prophets. And sik like the new Testament hes the confirmation of it out of the
old Testament: for whatsumeuer thing were prophesied in the old Testament
concerning the Messiah are fulfilled in the new Testament, so if the old
Testament hes authority, the new Testament also hes authority. And sik like
2. Pet, 3, 16
Peter by his testimony confirms the Epistles of Paull to be the written
word of God. Thirdly, the majesty of the doctrine whilk shines in it, the
simplicity, purity, and heauenlynes of the speech therein, whilk is not to
be found in any other writings whatsoever, the ancientnes and antiquity of
them, as the books of Moses far ancienter then any other writing. 1. Kings 13
Psalm 44
The acco^plishment of the prophecies and oracles in them as they were
foretold, their miracles and wonders whereof they testify. The testimonies of
the holy Martyrs that shed their blood in the defense of the truth of them,
their wonderful preservation notwithstanding of the rage and cruelty of
sundry tyrants who sought them out most diligently to have destroyed them, all
testifying of the divinity of the holy Scripture. So then to conclude this,
seeing we have the testimony of Gods Spirit, sealing up the truth of them in
our hearts, aad the testimony of the scripture it self, testifying of the self
so many manner of ways: and sundry other arguments out of the scripture it
self: and the testimony of the Kirk in all ages, all warranting to us the
divinity of the holy scripture, I cannot but wonder at the unsearchable
judgment of God, in blinding you so far, that ye have set it down in writ, that
we have no other warrant of the holy scripture but the authority of your Kirk.

Master Gilbert Brown.

And albeit heir it were not necessary to me to prove any heads of our
Religion by the word of God, because Master John hes promised to improve the
same by the word, whilk he is no way able to perform: yet to satisfy the
Christian Reader, and that he may know that the word of God is only on our
side and with us, so that their exposition and notes be taken from the same: I
will set down (godwilling) some heads for examples cause, that that same
doctrine whilk we teach and practice, is the same that our Savior and his
Apostles preached before, and is written in the same that he calls the
touchstone.

Master John Welsche his Reply.

Howsoever ye say this (Master Gilbert) that that doctrine whilk ye teach and
practice in your Kirk, is that same whilk our Savior and his Apostles teached
before, and is written in the Scripture, yet in very truth there is nothing
less in your conscience. For if you and your Roman Kirk were so persuaded,
wherefore then should ye have declined to have it tried by the same? and
wherefore hes some of your own chief pillars and defenders of your Roman
religion who knows the certainty of the same, wherefore (I say) would they
have proclaimed it by write unto the world, that the most part and the
principal heads of their religion, are unwritten traditions, whilk hes neither
their original, beginning, nor authority in the Scripture, nor cannot be
defended by the same? And wherefore would your Roman kirk have heapt up so
many falls accusations and blasphemies against the same? and wherefore last of
all would ye have set up your Pope and his bishops to be supreme and
sovereign judge over the same, as you do? But this you do, because you know
that if ye rejected the Scripture as far in word, as ye do in deed, the
consciences of the poor people would at the last withdraw themselves from
under your tyranny, and would go out of your fellowship for the safety of
their souls: so under the cloak and pretense of the Scripture, ye keep them
in your communion. And surely, were not for this cause only, you would
regard no more of the testimony of the Scripture, nor of the testimony of the
fables of Aesope. For, Bellarm. de sacr. lib. 2 cap. 25 Stapl. lib 1. cont.
Whitaker. ca, 10
the chief authority and all the surety and certainty of all Religion with
you, as Bellarmine and Stapleton confesses, is (not the testimony of the
Scripture) but the authority of your own Kirk. So I assure thee, reader, it
is but for a show that they bring forth the Scripture to prove the heads of
their religion. Let the matter therefore be tried betwixt us by these examples
whilk ye set down here.

Master Gilbert Brown.

Epist. 28. ad Hier.
1. We say with Saint Augustine that the Sacrament of Baptism is so necessary
to infants, that they cannot come to heaven without the same, whilk is contrary
to their negative faith, where they call it the Popes cruel judgment against
infants departing without the Sacrament. First, I say, that Christ taught the
same doctrine in these words, Except a man be borne again of water and of the
Spirit, Ioh. 3.5
he cannot enter in the kingdom of God. We say this is spoken properly of the
Sacrament of Baptism, because there is no regeneration of water and the
Spirit of God, but in Baptism. The same is the doctrine of the Apostles also.
When they exspected the patience of God (says S. Peter) in the days of Noe
when the Arc was building, 1, Pet, 3, 20, 21
in the whilk, few that is eight souls, were saved by water, whereunto
Baptism being of the like form now saues you also. Galath. 3 27 Act. 22.17.
Act. 2 38
And Saint Paul says. For as many of you as are baptized in Christ, have put
on Christ. And Ananias said to Saint Paul And now what tariest thou, rise up
and be baptized, and wash away thy sins, inuocating his name. T^t. 3.5. Romans 6
3 4, 1, Cor 6, 11 Mat, 16, 16
And Saint Paul himself in another place, Christ hes saved us by the lawer of
regeneration and renouation of the holy Ghost. I think there is no Christian
reader that sees these places, but he must say that Baptism is most necessary
to infants, except he will believe rather the exposition of the Ministers, nor
of the word of God.

Master John Welsche his Reply.

First, ye begin at the necessity of the Sacrament of Baptism, whereof ye
affirm that it is so necessary, that infants cannot come to heaven without
the same. As for Baptism we grant that it is a most effectual seal and
pledge of our ingrafting in Christ Jesus, and of the remission of our sins
through his blood, and regeneration through his Spirit, so that either the
neglect or the contempt of it, (because it is the neglect and contempt of the
covenant it self, and of Christ Jesus the foundation of the covenant) is
damnable. But that it is so absolutely necessary to infants, that without it
they cannot come to heaven: to wit, these whom he hes predestinate, it being
neither neglected nor contemned, but death preue^ting the receiving of it: that
we allutterly deny as impious, ungodly, and cruel. For first I say there is
none that is in the covenant of grace, and who hes God to be their god, and are
holy, that can perish. This you cannot deny. But the children of the faithful
who are of his secret election are sik before they be baptized. And this I
prove. The Lord promised to Abraham I will be thy God and the God of thy seed.
Gen, 17, 17 Act, 2, 39. 2, Cor, 7, 14
And this Peter also testifies, The promise (says he) is made to you and to
your children. And the Apostle says, that the children of the faithful are
holy: Therefore the children of the faithful who are of Gods secret election,
suppose they die without Baptism, does not perish. Secondly, if Baptism
were absolutely necessary to salvation, then the grace of God were bound to
the Sacrament. This cannot be denied. But your Master of sentences says, that
the grace of God is not bound to the Sacraments, and it is impious so to
think, that Gods free grace and salvation is bound to the instrument.
Thirdly, if Circumcision was not absolutely necessary to salvation in the old
Testament, then Baptism is not absolute necessary now, because Circumcision
was as straightly enjoined to them, as Baptism is enjoined to us, and Baptism
is succeeded in the room of the same, but Circumcision is not absolute
necessary. For Lombardus is rebuked by the Doctors of Paris because he so
thought. And David doubts not to say of his child who died the seventh day,
and so before he was circumcised, I shall go to him, etc. and so he pronounced
that he was saved: and all the time that they were in the wilderness, almost
40. years, Circumcision was neglected, whilk plainly shows, that it was not
so absolute necessary, that salvation could not be obtained without it.
Therefore Baptism is not so absolute necessary to salvation, as ye suppose:
for the grace of God is of no less force in the new Testament, nor it was in
the old. Fourtlie, we read of sundry that received the holy Ghost before they
were baptized, and seeing the holy Ghost where he is, regenerates to eternal
life: Therefore life eternal is not bound absolutely to Baptism Fiftlie,
what a cross and disturbance is this, that your doctrine brings to the
consciences of all these parents, whose children hes been prevented by death,
before they could be offered to be baptized? if they believe your doctrine, how
often will this come in their mind, that their children are damned. And seeing
the infants themselves are not in the cause that they are not baptized, but
their death preventing by Gods providence, or the Parents neglecting or
contemning the same, or persecution, or one impediment or other hindering,
wherefore are ye so cruel to judge them to be damned for that, whereof
themselves are causlesse? And last of all, if ye be acquainted in the histories
of the Kirk of God in the first age, ye will find many that delayed to be
baptized, until their latter age, whilk they would never have done and they
had thought it simpliciter necessary to salvation as ye do. And Ambrosius
doubts not to say that Valentinian wanted not the grace of Baptism, suppose he
wanted Baptism it self: the whilk he would never have said, if he had thought
it absolutely necessary to salvation. And Bernard says, I can not altogether
despair of the salvation of them who wants Baptism not through contempt, but
only through impossibility to get it. And in that same place he says. So
also if our Savior Christ for this cause. When he had said, he that
believes and is Baptized shall be saved: did of purpose in repeating the
sentence, omit to say: He that is not Baptized, but he that believes not
shall be damned, for he saw that faith only might suffice to salvation, and
without faith nothing can suffice. Justly then might your Popes sentence and
your own be said to be cruel, in our confession. But how prove ye this
doctrine of yours to be Christ's? Ye cite the three chapters of John where our
Savior says, Except a man be borne again etc. vvhilk say ye is properly
meaned of the sacrament of baptism. Upon the whilk ye infer the necessity of
the same. Whereunto I answer that interpretation of yours is false: for our
Savior speaks not here of the sacrament of Baptism: and that for these
reasons: first, our Savior speaks here generally of al men, and not of
infants only, and therefore he says, Except a man be borne etc. speaking to
Nicodemus who was a man and not an infant, so that if your exposition were true
all men that died without baptism and not infants only, are excluded from
heaven. But that is false: for first the good thief was not baptized with
water, and yet our Savior said to him, this might thou shall be with me in
paradise. And therefore our Savior speaks not here of the sacrament of
baptism: for he speaks of that new birth by water and the spirit without the
whilk none can be saved: but this thief and others were saved without the
baptism of water: therefore he speaks not here of it. Next our Savior in
that place speaks of that new birth by the spirit and water whilk is so
absolutely necessary to the salvation of al men that it admits no exception.
This cannot be denied. But Bellarmine makes two exceptions against the absolute
necessity of baptism: one of martyrdom, the other of true conversion and
penance, Lib, 1, de Baptis, cap. 6
whereof (says he) either of them supplies the want of baptism. Therefore our
Savior speaks not here of the sacrament of baptism. Thirdly if we will
believe Christ Jesus expounding himself, and Scripture expounding Scripture,
I say, by water is not always meaned the sacrament of baptism: but the
purifying grace of Christ whilk is called the water of life, so our Savior
speaks in the 4. chapter of John verse 11. and 7. chapter verse 38, And in
that same sense water is here added to the spirit to expound the more sensibly
the efficacy of the spirit in washing and clensing us, as fire is added to the
spirit in the 3. of Matthew. 11. verse. He will baptize you with the spirit and
with fire, whilk is not properly understood of any natural fire, but taken
figuratively to expound more sensibly the force and eficacie of the spirit in
burning up our corruption.

Fourthlye, what an absurd thing were this whilk should follow if your
exposition were true, that for the want of the sprinkling of a little water,
the infants should perish that are in the covenant, seeing they were not the
cause of the want of it. Further, I say, that suppose baptism were here
meaned: yet there is no sik necessity as ye suppose, for if martyrdom and
penance may supply the want of this water (as Bellarmine confesses) how much
more may the holy Ghost supply the want of the same in infants: and if any
thing may supply the want of it, then it is not so absolutely necessary that al
these infants are damned that wants it.

Ioh 22.6.53
2. Our Savior speaks as generally and absolutely, Unless you eat the flesh
of the son of man and drink his blood, ye have no life in you, whilk ye
interpret of the other sacrament, so that if your interpretation were true,
the Eucharist should be as absolutely necessary to the salvation of infants, as
you say baptism is. But the first you will not grant. Therefore the other must
also be false. 3. If here ye would infer a necessity of baptism, then I say
at that same time it began to be necessary: for he says not, he that shall not
be borne again etc. But he that is not borne etc. Lib. de Baptism cap 5
But Bellarmine says it was not necessary while Christ's death, yet not while
the Pentecost fifty days after his death, therefore it is not like that any
necessity of baptism is here understood: for it had been good reason that
Christ's baptism whilk was ministered while he lived in the flesh should have
been as necessary as the Apostles baptism whilk was ministered afterward. But
the first was not absolutely necessary, as Bellarmine testifies, therefore
neither is the second. And last of all, least ye should say all this is our
exposition, Se^^. lib 4. distin. 4. cap. His autem
the Master of the sentences expounding this place, who suppose he be of this
judgment with you concerning infants departed, yet he says that this place is
to be understood of them who might have been baptized, but contemned the
same: therefore this place imputes no absolute necessity of it. As for the
rest of the places of Scripture whilk ye quote, they serve nothing to prove
sik an absolut necessity of baptism, as ye suppose, but only sets down the
effects of the same whilk are sealed up in the hearts of the believers by the
holy Ghost, as the inward worker, and baptism as the outward instrument, 1.
Pet. 3.20.21. Tit. 3 5. Mar. 16 16
as our salvation through the death of Christ, our Gal. 3.27
union with Christ, and Rom 6 3.4
with his death, and Act. 22.17. and 2.38 1, Cor. 6.11.
remission of sins, regeneration, mortification of the old man. And therefore
circumcision in whose room baptism is succeeded it is Romans 4
called the seal of righteousness whilk is by faith. Take away therefore your
exposition from these places, and there will no sik absolute necessity of
baptism follow here as ye suppose. And therefore Lib. 1. de sacr. Bapt. cap. 4
Bellarmine the learned of your writers, because he knew that these places
whilk ye quote here could not prove sik an absolute necessity of baptism, nor
have no appearance to prove the same, does not cite one of them for the proof
of the necessity, except only the third of John leaving all the rest. And as
for that of Augustine, we grant he was of that mind that baptism was
necessary to infants, but he was also of that judgment that the Eucharist was
necessary unto them, and yet your Roman Kirk, nor you neither, I hope, will
subscriue to this error of his. Seeing therefore you dissent from him in the
necessity of the one, and that upon good ground of the Scripture; why may not
we also dissent from him in the other having so many grounds and reasons out
of the word of God to the contrary, as hes been said? And this for the first
point. Now let the christian reader judge upon whose side the word of God is.

Master Gilbert Brown.

2 Our doctrine is, that ane man by the grace of God may keep the commands of
God, and obey him, whilk is contrary to their confession of faith Our doctrine
in this is the doctrine of Christ and his Apostles. Christ says, Matthew. 19.17
If you will enter into life, keep the commands. And again, If ye love me
keep my commands: Ioh, 14 15, 24 Mat. 21, 29, 30
And in another place, He that loves me not, keeps not my words, etc. Also,
Take up my yoke upon you, etc. For my yoke is sweet, and my burden ^ight.
Now I believe that no man can deny, but this yoke and burden of Christ is his
commands and Laws. This same doctrine the Apostles teached. Saint Paul says,
I can do all things in him that comfortes me: Phil, 4, 13, and 2, 13 1, Ioh,
5, 3
and before, For it is God that works in you both to will and to accomplish
according to his good will: and Saint John says, This is the charity of God
that we keep his commandes, and his commands are not heavy Now farther nor
these, we read that Gen, 6 9
Noe, Ge. 26.5
Abraham, Job. 1, 22
Job, were just men, and obeyed God: and Saint Luke says, that Zacharias and
Elizabeth his wife, were both just before God, Luc, 1, 6 3. Kings 14 8, 4, Reg,
8, 3, 4. Reg, 20, 3, 4, Reg, 23, 25, 2, Par. 15, 15,
and walked in all the commands, and justification of our Lord without blame. I
here are many other places in the old Testament of the same matter, of the
whilks I have noted some on the margent. Now hold away from these places the
Ministers commentaries, and I believe that all men will confess, that our
doctrine in this, and the doctrine of Christ and his Apostles is all one.

Master John Welsche his Reply.

It appears that Master Gilbert is loath that the secret of the doctrine of
his Kirk should be known to the people, because he knows in his heart they
would abhor the same: their own hearts and consciences witnessing to the
contrary. Therefore he hes hid up the poison of it, and covered it as
secretly as he could. But that wherein you are dark, the rest of your Roman
clergy are plain. For first, whereas ye say, that a man by the grace of God,
may keep the commands, Lib. 4. de Justify, ca. 10. Gratia Dei adiunante
Bellarmine expones more clearlie and says, By the help of the grace of God.
And the Monks in that form of abiuration set out anno 1585. says, that man
by the new strength of grace infused in goodwill, may keep the command. So
that whereas your words would seem to import that the grace of God is the only
cause of this obedience to Gods commandments in the faithful, and so I think
every one almost who is not acquainted with the doctrine of your Roman Kirk
will take it, and so it may be ye teach them. The rest of your brethren are more
plain, in halfing it betwixt Free Will, and the grace of God helping
Free Will, as though the strenth of nature were the more principal cause, and
the grace of God but a helper to it. And secondly, whereas ye say, that a man
by the grace of God may keep the commandments of God, and obey them, Bellarm.
cap. 19 page 364 Ex integro boro. and lib. 2. de Iustif cap. 3
Bellarmine says more plainly that the Law of God is absolutely possible
unto them, and they may absolutely fulfill the Law, and keep the whole Law,
and that the works of the righteous are absolutely and simpliciter righteous,
and proceeding of a perfect holiness, without all blemish of sin, and that
they please God, not for the imputation of Christ's righteousness, covering
their imperfections, and forgiving them, but for the excellency of the work
it self. So this is their doctrine (Christian reader.) Now, as he hid his
own, so hes he hid ours also. For our confession of Faith says, that our
sanctification and obedience to Gods Law is imperfect, whilk word he omitted:
as though it had been our doctrine that the children of God in no measure nor
degree keeps the commandments of God. Our doctrine therefore is this: That of
our own nature we are Ephesians. 2.1
dead in sin, and of our selves we are neither able to 1. Cor. ^.14
understand, nor 2. Cor. 3 5
think, nor philip. 2, 1 3
will, nor do those things that are pleasant to God, and therefore we must be
Ioh. 3 5.
borne anewe again, or we can do any Ioh. 15.5
thing that is acceptable in Gods sight: and this Romans 7.14.15
sanctification of ours is not perfect, while we are in this life, but
imperfect, ever some darkness, some rebellion, some dregs of the old man yet
remaining in us, so that we 1. Cor. 13.12
know but in a part, and our will is but renewed in part, and our heart
sanctified in part, from the whilk it comes, that first we do not all the
good that we are bound to do, and would do, as the Romans 7.15, 16, 17.18.19.20,
21 22.23.24
Apostle says: next that all our righteousness, as the Esai. 64, 6
Prophet says, is but as a menstrous cloute, ever smelling somewhat of the
corruption of the old man within us: and so, that they have need to be covered
with the righteousness of Jesus Christ, and their imperfection to be pardoned.
By the only strength therefore of Gods Spirit who works both to will, and to
do in us, we begin heir obedience to the whole Law of God, but yet are not
able perfitelie so to keep it, as our works may bide to be tried before the
Lord in the balance of his Law: and therefore we place the whole hope of our
salvation in the only mercy of God through Jesus Christ, who is made to us
of God, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption: by whose mercy we
obtain the perfect remission of our sins: and so we conclude with David, Psalm.
32. Blessed is he whose sins are forgiven him, and whose iniquities are
covered. This now is the very simple truth both of our doctrine and theirs in
this head.

Now to answer you. Whereas ye say, that a man by grace may keep the
commandments of God: if you mean that the only cause of the obedience of the
children of God to his Law, is the renewing grace of God, and that this
obedience is sincere and hearty, not to one, but to all the commandments: not
only outward, but inward: suppose not in that high measure of perfection that
the Law of God requyres: then, I say, you contradict the doctrine of your
Roman Kirk, and forsakes their error of Free Will concurring with grace, and
of the perfection of man his obedience here to the Law, and so shakes hands
with the truth of God whilk we profess in this point. And so becomes a bad
defender of their Catholic faith, as ye style your self. And would to God
your eyes were opened so to see and believe, suppose ye lost that style for
ever. But if ye make Free Will the principal cause of this obedience (as
Bellarmine calls it:) and if ye understand a perfect obedience (as your Kirk
teaches) then first tell me why did ye not speak as plainly as you thought?
Were you afraied that the hearts of men should have skunnered with this your
doctrine, if ye had been as plain in your write, as ye are in your own
judgment? Next I say, you have the Lord in his written word as contrary to
this your doctrine, as light is to darkness. For, as to the first the
Scripture testifies plainly that we are Ioh 5.25. Col. 2 13. Ephesians. 2.1
dead in sin, and that the Romans 8.17
wisdom of the flesh is enimity against God: and therefore we have need to be
Ioh. 3.5
borne again: that is, to receive a new life or ever we can be able to enter
into the kingdom of God: and that it is God that Philip. 2.13
works in us both to will and to do, and that of 2. Corinthians, 3 5.
our selves we are not sufficient to think any thing as of our selves, and
that Genesis 6 5
all the imaginations of man's heart is only evil continually: Where then is
there any place left to Free Will? And as to the second, the Scripture says,
Eccles 7.10.
There is not a righteous man in the earth, who does good and sins not,
therefore no perfect keeping of the Law. And who Pro, 20.^
may say, my heart is clean, and I am pure from sin: if no man may say so,
then no man can keep perfitelie the whole Law. And Rom, 3, 20, 2^
by the works of the Law no flesh is justified in his sight, therefore no
flesh is able perfitelie to keep the Law, for if he could keep the Law,
he would be justified by the Law. But the Apostle says, that no flesh can
be justified by the Law: Therefore none can keep the Law. And therefore the
Scripture says, Rom, 8 3 (...) Act. 15, 10
that the Law is impossible because of the waiknesse of the flesh. For the
whilk cause the son of God took on him our nature to fulfill this
impossibility of the Law. And James calls the Law a yoke whilk (says he)
neither we nor our Fathers were able to bear. If they said that they could
not bear it, that is, perfitelie obey it, who obtained a higher measure of
grace, nor ever any since did, what shall we then say of all other men after
them? and what arrogancy and presumption is this in these of the Roman Kirk,
to say, and to bear others in hand, that they are able to bear that yoke
whilk the Apostles was not able to bear? And Jesus Christ hes taught us to
pray daily, Forgive us our sins, Matthew. 6
whilk needed not, if we were able to keep the whole Law. And beside the
plain testimonies of the Scripture, every man's own doleful experience tells
them of their manifold and continual sinning. What a damnable doctrine is this
then, whilk blindes their eyes so far, that neither they see nor feel the
inward corruptions of their own heart within them, rebelling against the Law
of God, nor yet the perfection whilk the Law of God requyres.

Now to the testimonies of Scripture whilk ye quote: and first, that in the 19.
of Matthew, If you would enter into life, keep the commandments: I answer:
the same is to be said to you, who seeks for life and righteousness by the
works of the Law, Keep the Commands. But that are ye unable to do, or any
man else, except the man the Lord Jesus, (as hes been proved:) and as vn-able
as this young man was, to whom it was said at the last, It is as impossible
to him to go into heaven as to a Camel or Cable rope to go through the eye of
a needle. But ye will say, Wherefore then would our Savior Christ have
commanded him to keep the commandments, if he would have life? I answer: not
because he was able to do it, but to bring him to a conscience of the breach
of it, for by the Law as the Apostle says, Romans 7.7
comes the knowledge of sin. And to cast down that presumption that he had
of himself, that he had observed and kept the Law, that in conscience of
sin, he might be brought to seek for life eternal in Christ Jesus only.

And least Master Gilbert, ye say that this is my exposition: therefore hear
what the Apost. says. As many as are of the works of the law are under the
curse: Galat 3.10.14
for it is written, Cursed is every man that continues not in all things
whilk are written in the book of the law to do them: and that no man is
justified by the law in the sight of God it is evident. Now this is spoken not
only of the Jews but of the Gentiles that believed in Christ Jesus, and were
under grace: upon the whilk I reason thus. If as many as are of the works of
the law are under the curse, and no man is justified by the law in the sight of
God, then no man is able to get life eternal by keeping of the law, and so
this young man to whom Christ gave his answer, neither had kept nor could
keep the law: but the first is said by the Apostle, therefore the second is
true. Next, the law requires a perfect obedience with all the heart, with all
the understanding, and thought, and strength unto all the commandments, Mat.
22.37. Luc 10.17. Mar, 12.31 Deuteronomy. 27.16 Iac. 2.10
and that continually: so that James says, he that breaks one is guilty of
all: and the law does pronounce them accursed that continues not in the doing
of all things etc. in this perfection. Now who is he that is come out of the
loins of Adam (except only the Lord Jesus) who hes continued in the perfect
obedience of all things without the breach of any in thought, word, or deed?
Are you able (M. Gilbert) or hes every one of your Roman Kirks performed, or
is able to perform this obedience that the law requires? Seeing therefore yt
none is able, and this young man neither had performed, nor yet was able to
perform this perfect obedience to the law: therefore of necessity it must
follow that our Savior gave him this command Keep the commandments, etc. not
because he was not able to keep them, but to bring him by the law to a
conscience of the brek of them. As for the rest of the Scriptures whilk ye
bring in, they are easily answered, John. 14.15, 24. 1. John. 5.3. If ye love
me keep my commandments etc. and he that loves me not keeps not my word etc.
I grant the Lord hes commanded obedience to his commandments. And I grant
they that loves him keeps them, and all the children of God loves him, and
begins also obedience to al his commandments. But yet as their love is not
in that perfection whilk the law requires, with all their heart, with all their
understanding, and with all their strength: so their obedience is not in that
perfection. And neuer-theles the perfection of their obedience is forgiven,
being covered with the perfect obedience of Jesus Christ, and through him is
acceptable in his presence, and of him also shall be crowned with a crown of
glory, suppose freely. And to prove this: if any had obeyed the
commandments perfectly, the^ surely the Apostles Paul, James, John, Peter,
should have done it: for they loved him in as great and greater measure of love,
nor ever any since did. And our Savior testifies of them to his father that
they had kept his word. Ioh. 17.6. Romans 7 1. Ioh. 1.8.9
But the Apostle Paul testifies of himself that he did not the thing he
would, but the thing that he hated that he did, and to will was present with
him, but to perform he found it not, and he saw a law in his members rebelling
against the law of his mind, and leading him captive unto sin. And John
says of him self and of all men, if we say we have not sin we make him a lier
and the truth is not in us. And him self twice would have worshipped an Angel
contrary to the law. And James says that in many things we offend all. Revel.
29.10. and 22.8 9. Deuteronomy. 6 13. James 3.2 Gal, 2.11.12
And Peter to whom our Savior said thrice: if thou love me, keep my laws:
went not with a right foot to the truth of the Gospel. Therefore none is
able perfectly to keep them.

We se then there is a keeping of the commandments, and a keeping of them in
perfection. The first common to all the faithful, suppose not in an equal
measure. The second only possible to Adam or he fell, and to the Saints in
that kingdom.

As for the 11. of Matthew, Take up my yoke etc. for my yoke is sweet and my
burden light. And the 1. John 5.3. his commandments are not heavy. I answer.
Our Savior and his Apostles calls his commandments light, sweet and not
heavy, not because the perfection of the law is possible to any to perform
in this life, but first because the Lord Jesus hes taken away the curse of it,
and also requires not of us that perfection whilk the law requires under the
pain of the ours of the law if it be not satisfied. And last of al because he
by his spirit renewes the hearts of his own, and makes them able with joy to
begin that obedience: so that what they do they do it not upon constraint, as
being under the law: but willingly for the love of Christ, Roman. 7
and they delight in the same according to the law of their mind, as the
Apostle speaks of him self. But yet with in they find a law in their members
rebelling against the law of their mind, leading them captive unto sin. So
in these respects are his comma^dements called light and sweet. But in the 15.
of the Acts, the Apostles calls it a unsupportable yoke, whilk neither they nor
their fathers were able to bear. (...) Rom, 3 20 and 7.14 etc. Gal. 3.10
And in the 8. to the Romans it is called impossible. As for the 4. of the
Philippians 13. where the Apostle says. He is able to do all things by him
that comforts him. The Apostle speaks not here of his ability to perform the
law in that perfection whilk the law requires: for he hes testified the
contrary both of him self and of all others, as hes been said. But only
this, that through him he is able to sustain all sorts of condition, both to
abound and to be in scarcity, to be full and to be hungry. This is not my
exposition, but the Apostle so expounds him self in the former verse: so that
I wonder upon what show ye could quote this testimony.

As for the 2. of the Philippians, it is true the Lord works in his own both
to will and to accomplish: but yet it follows not that they are able perfitly
to obey the law. For, if that measure of grace had been wrought in any, it
had been wrought in the Apostles, but not in them as hes been shown, and that
by their own testimony: therefore in none else.

Next what can be more clear for the overthrow of your Free Will, nor is this
place of Scripture. If the Lord works in us both to will and to perform, then
we are not able to will of our selves that whilk is acceptable to God. As for
the examples whilk ye cite of Noah, Abraham, Job, Zacharias, and Elizabeth,
David, Ezechia, Iosia, Judah, and Asa, and these whom the Lord reserved to
himself pure from the Idolatry of your Antichristian kingdom forspoken there.
They walked indeed in integrity and sincerity in the commandments and ways
of the Lord, and therefore hes received a good testimony and report of Gods
spirit in the Scripture, all whilk we grant unto you. But that they answered
the law in that perfection, that it requires; the Scripture whilk hes
registered their walkings, and their own testimonies will gainesay it. Roman. 4
Noah fell in drunkenness, Abraham was not justified by the works of the law,
but by faith, whilk is a most sure argument that he fulfilled not the law. Job
says, Job. 9.2.3.20 Luc. 1.20
if I would affirm my self to be righteous, my own mouth would condemn me.
Zacharias believed not the word of the Lord spoken to him by the Angel,
therefore was stricken dumb. David fell in adultery, 2. Samu. 12, and 24
murder, and provoked the Lords anger by numbering the people and he says of
himself, Psalm. 40, 13. Psalm 130, 3. Psalm. 143.2.
my iniquities are more in number then the hairs of my head. And in another
place If thou mark iniquity, O Lord who can stand? And enter not in judgment
with thy servant, for no man living should be righteous before thee. 2. Chron.
32, 25 2. Chron. 17.7 Ioh. 21.22.
Ezechias heart was lifted up. Josias harkned not unto the words of Necho
according to the word of the Lord. Asa put his trust not in the Lord his God,
but in the King of Syria. The like is to be said of these whom the Lord did
reserve to himself in the midst of the kingdom of darkness, that they did
keep the commandments of God, but not in that perfection whilk the law
required. For they were not more righteous then the Prophet Esaias and the
Apostles were. But the Prophet says, Esai 64. James 3
that we are all unclean, and all our righteousness is as a menstruous clout.
And the Apostle says, in many things we sin all. And Augustine says, Ad
Bonif, lib. 3 cap. 7
all the commandments of God are accounted to be done when that whilk is not
done is forgiven. And in another place: Epist. 6^
for the want of love it is that there is not a righteous man in the earth,
that does good and sins not. And In Galath. 3
Ambrose says, the commandments of God are so great that they are impossible
to be kept. And In Galath. 3
Jerome says, because no man can fulfill the law, and do all things that is
commanded. And Cantic. sermon. 5.
Bernard says, the commandments of God cannot nor could not be fulfilled of
any man. And In Galat. 2
Chrysostom says, No man hes fulfilled the Law. And In Gal. 3, lect. 4
Thomas, one of the chief pillars of your own Kirk writes, That it is
impossible to fulfill the whole Law: and Lib. 11. in con^^l. cap. 20,
Vega a Papist says, That venial sins are properly against the Law. Upon
the whilk I reason, he that daily transgresses the law, fulfilles not, nor is
not able to fulfill the law, (for to fulfill the law and trasngresse the law
are contrary:) but your own doctrine is, that no man can keep himself at
least from venial sins, and Vega (as hes been said) says that venial
sins are against the law: Therefore if your selves speak true, no man is
able to fulfill the law. I conclude therefore that this doctrine of yours is
contrary to the doctrine of Jesus Christ and his Apostles, set down in the
Scripture, and also contrary to the doctrine of the fathers, and contrary to
the doctrine of the most learned, and chief doctors of your Roman Kirk. And
this for the second point of your doctrine.

Master Gilbert Brown.

This is the third time that you have belied and spoken falsely of our writings
and doctrine Matthew 23 37 Act 7.51 2 Pet. 39. 1. Tim. 2.4
3 Our doctrine is, that man of his Free Will may resist the will of God, whilk
is contrary to their doctrine, ratified by act of Parliament in the year
1560. And also against their Psalm book of Geneua. Yet our doctrine is the
doctrine of Christ. For Christ said to them of Jerusalem, How often would I have
gathered together thy children, but you would not? and Saint Steven Ye
stiff-necked and of uncircumcised hearts and ears, ye always resist the holy
Ghost, as your fathers, your selves also. The same was the faith and belief of
the Apost S. Peter says, Our Lord is not willing that any perish, but that al
return to penance and S. Paul hes, Our Savior God wills all men to be
saved, and to come to the knowledge of the truth. This was the doctrine of the
Psalm. 5.5. Ezec. 18.23 Ezech. 33.^^,
Prophets before. Now then if God wills that all men should return, and yet
all men does not the same, whereof proceeds it but of their Free will, whilk
will not work with the will of God. Therefore our Savior says in sundry
places, If thou will enter into life keep my commands: If thou will be perfect
go and sell all that thou hes: Matthew. 19.17 Luc. 9.23
He that will follow me, let him deny himself.

Master John Welsche his Reply.

As for this third point of doctrine, I cannot wonder enough what ye mean by
it. For have you sold your self so far to vn-trueth and lying, that for to
bring the truth of God whilk we profess, in hatred: you will father on us
that doctrine whilk never so meikle as once entered into our thoughts, let be
to teach it or write it. Did you think when ye write this, that the truth of it
would never come to light? or thought you that ye regarded not to be controlled
of lying at the last, so being that for a season ye might make our Religion to
be more abhorred through your calumny? But frost and falset (as they say) will
never have a fair hinderend. If you mean then by resisting the will of God, a
voluntary disobedience and repyning against the Spirit of God, and his
revealed will in his word, as the testimonies whilk ye quote here, imports:
Then, I say, there was never man of our religion that professed, taught, or
write the contrary: and ye will not find a syllable neither in the confession
of our faith confirmed by the act of Parliament, neither in our Psalm book to
the contrary. For our doctrine is flat contrary to this: to wit, that man of
his free will resists that that is good, and chooses the contrary. So ye fight
heir with your own shadow. And if ye mean any other thing, set it down in
plain terms, and I hope, by his grace, it shall be answered. So I cannot
wonder enough what ye meant to write, and subscriue so manifest an vn-truth.
Now surely, (Master Gilbert) I think it had been greater wisdom to you to
have saved your own credit, and not for a little hatred to our religion, to
have blotted your self with lying and vn-trueth for ever. I would pray thee,
Christian reader, if thou will not credit me, read our confession thy self:
and, I hope, thou shall wonder with me what the man meant in subscriuing so
manifest a calumny. This for the 3. point.

Master Gilbert Brown.

4 Our doctrine is, that our Savior gave his true flesh and very body and
blood under the forms of bread and wine, to be eaten of his disciples at his
last Supper, and that to be received by their very mouth: and this I say by the
written word, is the doctrine of Christ and his Apostles. Christ says, And the
bread whilk I will give you, Ioh. 6.51 Matthew. 26, 7, 28
is my flesh for the life of the world: and at the latter Supper, Take ye and
eat ye, This is my body And Drink ye all of this For this is my blood of the
new Testament, whilk shall be shed for many unto remission of sins: Marc. 14,
22, 24
And in Saint Mark, This is my body, and this is my blood of the new
Testament, Luk, 22, 19.20
whilk shall be shed for many And Saint Luke says, This is my body whilk is
given for you: and this is the chalice of the new Testament in my blood whilk
shall be shed for you. This same is the doctrine of the Apostles. For Saint Paul
says, This is my body whilk shall be delivered for you: 1, Cor. 11.24, 25 27, 2^
and this Chalice is the new Testament in my blood: and whosoever shall eat
this bread and drink the Chalice of our Lord unworthily, he shall be guilty of
the body and blood of our Lord: and after, For he that eats and drinks
unworthily eats and drinks judgment to himself, not decerning the body of
our Lord: and in the chapter before, The Chalice of benediction whilk we do
bliss is it not the communication of the blood of Christ? 1. Corinthians. 10, 10
and the bread whilk we break is it not the participation of the body of our
Lord

Master John Welsche his Reply.

I come now to the fourth point of your doctrine, your Transubstantiation and
real presence. The first ye quote, is the 6. of John, And the bread whilk I
will give, is my flesh, etc. This makes nothing for your real presence. For
first, our Savior speaks not here of that Sacramental eating and drinking,
of his flesh and blood, in this sermon, whilk was not instituted a year after
that: for he speaks here of that eating and drinking of his flesh and blood,
without the whilk there is no life. So our Savior testifies in the 53. verse,
Except ye eat (says he) the flesh of the son of man, and drink his blood,
ye have no life in you. But your selves graunts that men may be saved without
that sacramental eating: therefore it is not of that whilk he speaks heir.
Secondly, he speaks of that eating and drinking of his flesh and blood, whilk
whosoever so does, has eternal life to themselves: so our Savior Christ
promises in the 54. verse. But your own doctrine is, that the reprobate eats
and drinks Christ's body and blood in the sacrament, and yet hes no life in
them: therefore he speaks not here of that sacramental eating. Thirdly, if he
speak here of the sacramental eating as you say, then your Kirk not only
hes erred foullie, but also hes been and is the cause of the condemnation of
your people these many years, because you give them not his blood to drink
And our Savior says not only, Except ye eat the flesh of the son of man,
but also, except ye drink his blood, ye have no life in you. And this reason
was so effectual, that it hes moved sundry of your own Doctors to expone this
place, not of the sacramental eating and drinking of the body and blood of
Christ, As Iansenius and Tapperus with sundry others.
but of the spiritual eating and drinking of him by faith. For they did se
that it behooved them either to forsake this place, as not making for them, and
grant that it speaks not of the sacrament: or else to confess that their
Kirk hes erred, and through this error, hes been the cause of the damnation of
many, in ministering the sacrament but under one kind. And because you say, if
our expositions were removed from the Scripture, they would serve for you:
whom therefore will you credit in exponing of this place? If our Savior,
hear then how he expones this eating and drinking of his flesh and blood in
the 35. verse. I am the bread of life, he that comes unto me shall not
hunger, and he that believes in me shall never thirst. So when we believe in
Christ, we eat him: and when we come unto him, (whilk is only by faith) we
drink him. So Tractat, 25 in Johan. cap. 6 Tract. 26. and de doct. christians
lib. 3. cap. 16
Augustine also expones this place. Believe, says he, and thou hes eaten. Lib.
1, Paedago. cap, 6.
Clemens Alexandrinus and In Psalm. 147
Hieronimus and Supra psalm. 90 verse, 3
Bernard al expones the flesh and blood of Christ figuratiuelie. And if ye will
credit none of these, then I hope, ye will not discredit your own chief
Doctors, who affirms, that this place is not meaned of the Sacrament, but of
the spiritual eating and drinking of Christ by faith. As Bellarm. lib, 1, de
Eucharist, cap 5.
Biel, Cusanus, Caietanus, Hesselius, and Iansemus. And if ye will reply that
many others of the Fathers hes exponed this place of the sacrament, then
Iansenius and Tapperus two Papists will answer you: That they did it only by
way of application unto the readers and hearers, to stir them up to the often
receiving of the Sacrament. So this place can serve nothing for your
Transubstantiation, for it speaks not of the sacrament, but of his suffering
upon the Crose for the away taking of our sins, and the purchasing to us of
eternal life.

The next place ye quote, is the words of the institution, as Matthew, Mark,
Luke, and the Apost. rehearses them. Your argument is this: Christ calls the
bread his flesh, (and so Paul) and the wine his blood: therefore the bread is
changed in his body, and the wine in his blood, the outward forms of bread
and wine only remaining. This is the chief and principal ground of your
real presence and Transubstantiation. Whereunto I answer: First, there is not
a syllable here that tells us that the substance of the bread and wine is
trans-changed in the body and blood of Christ, unless ye will expone this
word, is my body, for, it is changed in my body, Est and Fieri, sunt contraria
whilk is a monstrous exposition: for both it is contrary to the native
signification of the word est; that signifies to be already: (for to be
already, and to be in a change are contrary) as also it hes not the like
form of speech in the whole Scripture to vvarrand it: from the first of
Genesis, to the last of the Revelation. (Bring one instance if ye can.) And
Augustine says, August. in Genes quaest 117. in Psalm 105. supr. Number. quaest 95.
the solution of a question should be warranted by some example of the like
speech in the Scripture, the whilk you are not able to do: therefore your
exposition is without warrant. Next I say: By what art of reasoning can you
gather this doctrine out of these places of Scripture? Christ says of the
bread, This is my body, and of the wine, This is my blood. Therefore the
outward forms of the bread and wine only remains, but the substance of
them is gone. Never sik a inkling in all these texts of this doctrine of yours.
Thirdly, this interpretation and doctrine whilk results upon it, is false, and
that for these reasons. First, because it is plainly gaine-saide by the
Scripture. Secondly, because it destroys sundry articles of our faith, and
many blasphemous absurdities does follow upon it. 3. It destroys the nature of
the Sacrament. And last of all, is utterly repugnant to the words of ye
institution. My argument then is this. That interpretation and doctrine whilk
is gaine-saide, by the plain testimony of the Scripture, whilk destroys the
articles of our faith, and the fundamental points of our salvation, whilk hes
many absurdities following upon it, whilk ouerthrovves the nature of the
Sacrament, and last of all, vvhilk is contrary to the whole institution, must
be false, blasphemous and erroneous. This cannot be denied but your
interpretation of these words this is my body etc. and your
transubstantiation whilk ye gather upon it, is sik. Therefore it must be
erroneous etc. My assumption I prove thus. First your interpretation is
gainsaide by the plain testimony of the Scripture. Your interpretation is that
there remains no true bread nor wine in the sacrament, but the substance of it
is changed. But Matthew, Mark, Luke. and the Apostles all four testifies that
Christ took bread, brake it, and gave it to his Disciples, and least ye should
say yt it was true bread and wine before the consecration, 1. Cor. 10.16,
but not after, ye scripture says planely that it is bread whilk we brake, and
bread whilk is eaten, and the fruit of the Vine whilk is drunken in the
sacrament. The Apostles says, the bread whilk we brake etc. And as often as ye
eat this bread etc. Whosoever shall eat this bread etc. And let a man examine
him self, and so let him eat of this bread etc. And our Savior says, that
after he had given the cup and they had drunken of it, from hence forth shall I
not drink of the fruits of the wine with you etc. Therefore true bread and wine
remains in the sacrament, contrary expressly to your interpretation. 2. That
your interpretation destroys the articles of our faith, I prove it thus. If
this be true that the bread and wine be really changed in the body and blood
of Christ in the sacrament, as ye expound the words: first it will follow that
either Christ ascended not into heaven, because he remains in the earth in
the sacrament: and so one of the articles of our belief is falsified. Or else,
if ye say he ascended once, but yet discends continually to be present in the
sacrament, then another article of our belief is falsified whilk says, that
he sits at the right hand of God his father. Act. 3.2^ (...) that is, whom
the heavens must receive till the restoring of all things
And as Peter says, abides in heaven whom the heavens must contain while the
time of the restoring of all things come. Secondly it will follow that Christ's
body is made of the bread: for if the substance of the bread be changed in the
body of Christ, then it must follow that the bread is becomme the body of
Christ, and Christ his body is made of that bread, as the wine was made of the
water at the marriage of Cana in Galilie. And so Bellarmine and Pope John, Ioh.
^ Bellarm lib. 3 de Eucharistia fol. 399. John 22. Libro orat. inscript.
antidotar. animae
and the master of Lombard. lib. 4 distinct 11. cap. B
sentences grants that Christ is made of bread, and the substance of bread and
wine is made Christ's flesh and body, and so here another article of our faith
falsified, whilk says, that Christ his body was made of the seed of the
woman, and not of any other matter, and like to us in all things except sin.
Thirdly, it will follow that Christ had two bodies together, one under the
form of a man, and an other under the form of bread: one speaking and
another dumb: one giving to his Disciples to eat, and another the self same
thing whilk was given to be eaten: yea, it shall follow, if your exposition be
true, in saying that Christ's body and blood is under the forms of bread and
wine in the sacrament, not only that there are two Christ's, one in heaven at
the right hand of his father visible, glorious and in one place: and another
Christ in the earth invisible, circumscriued by no place: but also that there
are as many Christ's as there are sacraments in the earth, yea, as many
Christ's as there are bitts of bread in every sacrament, and so the foundation
of our salvation is ouerturned. Fourthly it will follow that the body and blood
of Christ are separate, as the bread and wine in the sacrament whilk is turned
in them is separated. Fifthly it will follow that his body is separate from his
soul, and so a dead body, because the bread and wine are not changed in his
soul, but only in his body. Sextly it will follow that the bread in the
first supper being changed in the body of Christ, that the substance of the
bread hes suffered for us, died for us, and risen again for us: and hes a part
of our redemption, whilk is blasphemous to think. Seventhly, it will follow
that Christ eated his own body and drank his own blood whilk is absurd:
Hom. 83. in Mat. De consecr did 2 canon. Nec Moses.
for Chrysostom and your canon Law testifies that he eat the same thing
whilk he gave to his Disciples. And also he says him self, from hence forth
will I not drink with you any more of the fruit of this vine etc. So he drank
of that whilk they drank of. And last of al it will follow that the Mass
Priest is the creator of his creator: and so their Breuiaries and Lombardus,
and Bellarmine grants. In their Breuiaries the Priest says. Qui creauit me
sine me, creatur media^te me: that is, He that created me without me is created
by my moyen. Distinct. 11, lib, 4. cap. 5
Lombardus says, the Priests are said to make the body and blood of Christ,
because by their ministry the substance of the bread is made his flesh. And
^^b. 3. de Eucharist. cap. 24. Sacerdotes confi^ unt corpus Christi ex pane
Bellarmine says, that the Priests makes Christ his body of bread. Now if
their be no blasphemous absurdities, I know not what is blasphemy. Now choose
ye whether ye will subscriue to all these absurdities, whilk you with all the
wit of the Roman Clergy is not able to eschew if ye grant this
interpretation of yours to be true: or will you forsake this interpretation of
yours, as false, erroneous, and contrary both to the plain Scriptures of God,
and the articles of our faith, and the grounds of our salvation. As to the
third. Your interpretation destroies the nature of al sacraments, and makes the
supper of the Lord no sacrament, for every sacrament consistes of an outward
and visible sign, and of a spiritual thing signified by that sign: the whilk
sign hes a resemblance with the thing signified. The sign is ever earthly,
and the thing signified is heavenly, as shall appear by all the rest of the
sacraments, both of the old and sign Testament. In Genesis 2.9. Apoc 2.7
Paradise there was a very tree for the sign and Christ the thing signified by
it. In Genes, 17 9, 10, Romans 4, 11. Deuteronomy, 30.6, Col. 2.11
circumcision there was a cutting of the skin, and the cutting off of sin. In
the Exodus 12.1, Cor 5.7.8. Ioh. 19.36.
Passover there was a Lamb and Christ. And in the Heb. 4, 1.3, 4, 5. etc.
Sabbath there was a day of rest, and eternal rest. In the Heb. 9 24
Sa^ctuarie there was an holy place, and heaven. In the 1, Cor 10, 4
wilderness there was an Rock yielding water, and Christ yielding his blood. In
the John ^.32,
apparition there was a dove, and the holy Ghost. In the 1 Cor, 10.3
manna there was bread, and Christ. In Tit. 3.5. 1. Pet. 3.21
Baptism there was very water whilk washes us, and Christ's blood washing our
sins. Therefore in the sacrament of the supper must be bread and wine feding
this natural life, and resembling our communion one with another, 1. Cor. 10,
16, 17.
and Christ's flesh and blood feeding our spiritual life: otherwise this
sacrament is against the nature of all other sacraments, whilk is absurd to
think and should be no sacrament at all as Augustine says, Epist. 2^
if the sacraments had not a resemblance with the things whereof they are
sacraments: they should not be sacraments at all. But your interpretation and
doctrine destroies both the signs, and the resemblance whilk they should have
with the things signified in the supper, for there is no outward sign there
whilk is an earthly substance, but only accedents of collor, and quantity, if
your doctrine be true, and there is nothing there to resemble either our
spiritual nuriture by the flesh and blood of Christ, or yet our spiritual
fellowship one with another: unless you will say that accedents feeds, and
nourishes, the whilk if you will say: then to say no more to it, but this: if
you and your common clergy who is so bold and strong in maintaining this
monstrous Transubstantiation of yours against the truth of God, were fed with
no better substance, nor accidents: then, I say, you would have fainted long
since in the defense of it. Seeing therefore your interpretation makes the
Supper to be no Sacrament, and makes it vn-lyke all other Sacraments, therefore
it must be falls and erroneous. As to the fourth, that it is against the whole
institution, and use thereof, I prove it thus. First, I will ask you what was
it whilk Christ took in his hand? if you say his flesh, then the text will say
the contrary, And Jesus took bread, in all the three Evangelists, and the
Apostle Paul. So it was bread whilk he took, after he did take it, he blissed
it: what did he bliss? but the bread whilk he had taken: so it is yet bread:
after he blissed it, he brake it: what did he break? If you say it was his
flesh or body, then the Scripture will say the contrary: there was not a bone
of him broken. And the Apostle says, Exodus 1^ John 19. 1. Cor. 10
It is bread whilk we break. So it is bread whilk is broken. Then yet it is
bread. After he brake it, he gave it: What gave he but the thing whilk he
brake? 1, Cor. 10.17 and 11, 26, 27, 28
and what brake he but bread? so it is bread whilk he gave. After he had given
it they received it, and did eat it. But what did they eat? But that whilk he
gave: and therefore the Apostle says four times, It is bread whilk is eaten,
and whereof we are partakers, and that after the consecration: for it is
broken, given and received, and eaten, after the consecration. And when they
did eat it, he said, This is my body, what did he call his body but that
whilk they did eat, and that was bread. So when then, Master Gilbert, should
this change be? seeing it is bread all the time while he took it, blessed it,
and gave it, and they did eat. For, I trow, ye will not say it is changed
after it is broken, and given, and in eating. Secondly, I will ask you, what
are the words whereby this monstrous change is made, as ye suppose, of the
substance of the bread, in Christ's body? If this change be made by any word
spoken in the institution of this Sacrament: then, I say it must either be by
this word: And he blissed it: or by these words, This is my body, etc. But not
by the first: for after he blissed it, he called it bread. And the Apostle
says it is bread whilk we brake, therefore it remains bread after the
blissing. Not by the other words: for if they be not spoken to the bread and
wine, they cannot change their nature: But Mark says plainly they were spoken
to the Disciples, And he said unto them, This is my blood: Marc. 14 24 In h^s
rational^
therefore they changed not their nature. And Durand a Papist says, that this
change is made by the blessing, therefore not by these words whilk were
pronounced after the blessing. And these words cannot work a change: Genes.
Ioh. 12
for they are not words importing an operation as these are, Let light be: let
the earth bring forth fruit, come out Lazarus, and sik-like: but only
signifying the things themselves, as these are, Thou art my well-beloved Son.
So if these words should have wrought any change, they would not have been
This is my body etc. but Let this be my body: therefore there is no sik change
at all heir as ye imagine. Thirdly, it should follow that the Cup should also
be changed in his blood, and in the new Testament, because Christ calls the
Cup his blood and new Testament, as he calls the bread his body. But this
you will not say: wherefore then are you so absurd as to say the other.
Fourthlie, I will ask you whether do ye receive in the Sacrament that body
whilk is mortal, or that body whilk is glorified: for one of them you must
receive: either Christ's body as it was mortal, or his body as it is now
glorified. If ye say a mortal body, then I say Christ hes not a mortal body
to give you now in the Sacrament, for it is glorified: therefore ye cannot
receive it: if ye say an immortal and glorified body, then I say, ye must
seek another warrant nor this text of Matthew, Mark, and Luke. For at that
time his body was not glorified. For the Sacrament was instituted before his
death, and he was not glorified until after his resurrection: and if ye
receive that same body whilk the Apostles then received: then, ye receive not a
glorified body. What a body is this then whilk ye receive, neither mortal nor
glorified? Fifthlie, the text says, they who receives unworthily, receives
their own damnation: But if Christ's flesh and blood were there present, as ye
say: then al who received it should receive their salvation, because our
Savior says, Ioh. 6.54
He that eats my flesh and drink, my blood has life everlasting. Now I
conclude, seeing your interpretation of these places of Scripture, and your
doctrine of Transubstantiation whilk ye gather thereupon, first is plainly
gain-saide by the express testimonies of the Scripture, next overthrows all
the maine foundations of our salvation, and articles of our faith: thirdly
destroys the nature of a Sacrament and makes it no Sacrament at all, and like
no other Sacrament either of the old or new Testament, and last of all is
contrary to the whole institution thereof, as, I hope, I have sufficiently
proved: therefore of necessity it must be false and erroneous.

As for the 10. of the Corinth. 16. The Cup of blissing whilk we bliss, is it
not the communication, and the bread whilk we break, is it not etc. I answer:
this Sacrament of bread and wine, because it not only represents and seals up
to us our communion both with Christ: but also by it, as by a most effectual
instrument the holy Ghost increases and nourishes this communion, both with
him, and amongst our selves: therefore it is called the communication of his
body and blood. But this most clearlie proves, that there is no sik change
heir as ye suppose: for the Apost. says plainly, the bread whilk we break,
and this breaking you say is after the consecration: therefore after the
consecration true bread remains in the Sacrament and so there is no
Transubstantiation in the same. But because you say the substance of the bread
and wine is not there I pray you tell me whither are they gone? whether are
they turned to nothing, or are they changed in Christ's body. If you say they
are turned to nothing: first, I say this were a strange kind of reasoning:
This is my body, therefore the substance of the bread is turned to nothing:
next the Apostle should not speak truly, to call it bread whilk is broken,
and bread whilk is eaten, etc. if it were turned to nothing. Thirdly then this
should not be called Transubstantiation, or changing of one substance into
another: but an annihilation of one substance, that is, a turning of it to
nothing, and a bringing in of another substance in the room of it. And
fourthly Thomas of Aquine, Lib. 4. did. ^
your great defender of this doctrine is against this. But if you say, they are
turned in Christ's body, whilk the word Transubstantiation imports: then, I
say, as often as the Sacrament hes been ministrated, as often hes there been some
quantity of substance ciked to his body: and it shall still grow in greatness
and quantity, as long as it shall be ministered: but this is monstrous to
think. And to end this, if you say there is no substance of bread and wine
left in the Sacrament, then let me ask you whose are the whiteness, and
readnesse, and roundnesse that we see: What means this taist in our mouths of
bread and wine, if there be no substance of them there. May we not say to you
as Christ said to Thomas, who doubted of his resurrection, Put thy finger
heir, behold my hands, put thy hand in my side, and be not incredulous but
believe. So, may not we say to you, who doubts whether the substance of bread
and wine be heir remaining yet, touch them, taist them, look on them, and
feel them, and be not incredulous, but believe. For behold, there would not
be sik a coullour, sik a taist and smell, and there were not substance of bread
and wine heir. And I pray you tell me what is this that rottes then and grows
in Mauks in the bread, and sowers in the wine, if they be long kept? If their
substance remains not, will you say Christ's flesh and blood rots and consumes
and sowers, what is this but to make him mortal, yea to crucify him again.
And if you will not say that, then either must you confess that their
substance remains and is not changed, or else Christ's flesh and blood is
transubstantiated in these substances whilk rots and sowres, or else that the
accidents is changed again in their substances: and so ye shall not have one,
but maa changes in your Sacrament. Yea, if their substance be gone, and nothing
but their accidents remaining, then how could Pope Victor the 3. and the
Emperor Henry the 7. have been poisoned with them, Fasciculus temp. Platina,
Blond.
accidents and Christ's body could neither poison them nor be capable of
poisoun: therefore they felt by experience that there was no Transubstantiation
in the Sacrament. So we see the textes ye brought with you, is against you as
ye sword that Goliath brought to slay David, cutted off his own head. But yet
you will say, If the bread be not his body, why then did he call it his body:
this is the chief thing you have for your doctrine, and answer this, and the
plea is won. Unto this then I answer, 1, Cor, 11, 24 Luc. 21 (...) whilk is
given in the present time,
that in that same sense he said This is my body, in the whilk he said
afterward whilk is broken for you But there can be no sense of these words, but
this; the bread was broken, and signified that his body should be broken with
the sorrows of death: for his body was not broken before he suffered: and the
Apostle says, it is bread whilk is broken: so then as the breaking of the
bread signified the breaking of his body: so the bread signified his body: and
as his body was not broken indeed when the bread was broken: so the bread
could not be his body in very deed when he so called it. For the resemblance
and likeness therefore between the bread and his body the bread it is called
his body: etc. and this phrase is very frequent in the scripture to give the
name of the things signified to the sign, as shall be seen afterward.

Master Gilbert Brown.

Now let not the Ministers come in here with their natural reasones against
the omnipotency of Christ that he cannot be in two places at once and with
their figures, signs, similitudes, symboles and spiritual eating of an
natural body, with many the like: whilks are the inuenti^ns of their own
brains, Read the notes of the Scottish Bible in these places.
not contained in the written word. And who can say but that our doctrine in
this is the doctrine of Christ and his Apostles, and not theirs.

Master John Welsche his Reply.

Ye prevent our answers here, and first ye bid us hold away our natural
reasons against the omnipotency of Christ, that he cannot be in two places at
once. Whereunto I answer: that we shall bring no reason, neither natural nor
supernatural, against the omnipotency of Christ for we acknowledge it, and
adores it. But we say to you pretend not his omnipotency for your monstrous
imaginations, whilk hes no warrant of his will in his Scripture. For first we
say, this argument of yours will not follow: Christ is able to make his body
to be in two places, both at once, in heaven, and in the Sacrament: therefore
he makes it to be so. For you must first prove he will do so: for your self,
Master Gilbert, can do many things quhilk you do not, because you will not,
so from can to will, it follows not. And if you say that Christ hes willed so,
because he said, This is my body: I have answered to it before, refute you
it, and all your Roman Clergy if you can. For you might as well say, Christ
willed the Cup wherein the wine was, to be changed in his blood and new
Testament, and himself to be changed in a wine Tree, Ioh 10. and 15 1. Cor, 10.
Luc ^^ 1. Cor. 11
and a Door and a Rock to be changed in him: because so hes he and his Apostles
spoken, and these speeches are as true, as that; and yet there is no change
heir. Next, I say, your own schoolmen and great defenders of
Transubstantiation, Lib. 1. cap. 84. and lib. 2. cap. 25. con^agent
Thomas of Aquine and others, says that it is against the omnipotency of God,
to affirm that he may do anything whilk implies a contradiction in the
self, for that is rather to be called a weakness nor a power. And the
Scripture affirms, that God cannot lie, nor deny himself, nor be tempted, and
that yea and nay is not in Christ: Heb. 6.2 Tim. 2. James 1.2, Cor. ^
but to Christ's body both to be a true body like to us in all things (to wit
essential) except sin, as the Scripture says, and to be in more places at
once, whilk makes him to have not a true body like ours. For Augustine says,
(speaking of Christ's glorified body,) If it be a true body, it is then in a
certain place: August. ad Da^danum
and take away from bodies their quantities, they are no more true bodies)
implies a contradiction, and is yea and nay in him: and Christ's body both to be
visible and invisible at one time: to be in a certain place in heaven with
his own length and breadth, and not to have his own length and breadth at once
in the Sacrament, is a manifest contradiction, is yea and nay in Christ:
therefore both by the Scripture and your own doctrine, the omnipotency of
Christ: cannot be alleged or pretended for this your doctrine, whilk is yea
and nay, and implies a manifest contradiction. So this in very truth, M.
Gilbert is the invention of your own brain, whilk is alleged for your
Transubstantiation, and wants the warrant, yea is gainsaide both by the written
word, and your own schoolmen. Next, ye would have us to hold away our
figures symboles, and similitudes: I answer: our own figures we shall hold
away: but these figures, symboles, and signs, wherein our Savior hes
delivered his truth to us, we must and will acknowledge So then, obeying rather
God who hes set them down in his Scripture, nor you who forbids us to
acknowledge them: and what a monstrous exposition would you make of infinite
places of Scripture, if you would admit no figures in them, but all to be
understood plainly and literallie as they were spoken. The Scripture ascriues
to God eyes, ears, seit, hands, and a face: and the Scripture calls Christ a
door, a vine. Now if you will admit no figures heir, but will have all these
places exponed literallie, as you will have us to do in the Sacrament: then
you would be reckoned in the number of the old heretics called
Anthropomorphitae, who because they saw the Scripture speak so of God, they
taking it literally and exponing it without figures, as you would have us to
expone the Sacrament, they thought that God was bodily: yea, you must make
another monstrous Transubstantiation of Christ in a door, and vine tree, for so
he calls himself. And to come to the Sacraments themselves, how many
Transubstantiations will you make in all the Sacraments both of the old and new
Testament, if you will remove figures and signs from them, and expone them
literally, as you would have us to do in this Sacrament, Circumcision is called
the covenant, and yet it was but the sign of the covenant: Genesis 27. Exodus 12
2. Cor. 1^ Psa. 24 Heb 4. Tit 3
the Lamb in the Passover, is called the Passover of the Lord, and yet it was
but the sign of the Passover: the rock in the wilderness is called Christ,
and yet it was but a sign of Christ: the Arc is called the Lord, and yet it
was but a sign of the Lord: the land of Canaan is called the rest of the Lord,
and yet it was but a sign of that rest: and Baptism is called the lawer of
regeneration, and yet it is but the sign of our regeneration. Do you think
that the forms of speeches in all other Sacraments are figuratively taken and
the form of speech in this Sacrament only to be literallie understood? what
reason can there be of this diversity? But it may be you think that the form
of speeches in all other Sacraments should be taken figuratively: but the
phrase of speech in this Sacrament is to be taken literallie. But first, what
then will you say to this speech This is my body whilk is broken for you, and
this, 1. Cor, 11. Luc. 22 Mar. 14.1. Cor, 13
the Cup is the new Testament in my blood, and the Cup is my blood, and the
bread whilke we break, is it not the communion of the body of Christ, and the
Cup whilk we bliss, is it not the communion of the blood of Christ? al
figurative speeches, and to be understood figuratiuelie: otherwise Christ should
have been broken in the Sacrament, whilk is both contrary to the Scripture, and
also absurd. For then he should have suffered twice, once in the sacrament,
and once upon the Croce: and not only should there be one Transubstantiation in
the Sacrament, but many: as of the cup in the blood of Christ: and of the
bread and cup in the participatio^ of the body and blood of Christ: and so you
should not only have one Transubstantiation, but many. And how I pray you can
Sacraments whilk are but figures, signs and symboles, be understood but
figuratiulie? And how can duo diuersa indiuidua alterum de altero praedicari in
praedicatione, and be spoken of another, without a figure, as it is here.
This bread is my body, etc. Can you or any at all of your Roman Clergy,
understand sik propositions othervvaies then figuratiuelie? What an
unreasonable thing is it then to you to forbid us to acknowledge figures in
this sacrament, whilk is but a figure and sign, seeing they are so frequently
used in the scriptures of God, and especially in sacraments, as also in this
sacrament? So nil ye, will ye signs and symboles, tropes, and figures ye must
admit in the exposition of this sacrament. Last of all ye think, a natural
body cannot be spirituallie eaten. Would you be so absurd and blasphemous as
to have Christ's body naturally eaten? For then his body must be naturally
chawed, A page have blasphemiam
digested, turned over in our substance, and casten out in the draught, and so
be mortal and suffer again. Let me ask you whether is Christ's body the food
of the soul, or the food of the body? If you say it is the food of the
body to fill the belly, then I say it must be naturally eaten, but you are
blasphemous in so thinking. But if you say it is the food of the soul, as it
is indeed, and as our Savior says, then it cannot be eaten naturally: for
as the food of the body cannot be eaten spiritually, Ioh. 6.35.
so the food of the soul cannot be eaten naturally, but spiritually by faith.
And if you understood this true eating of Christ by faith, all your contention
would take an end. But this is the stone whilk ye stumble at, and therefore
ye forbid us to come in with a spiritual eating of Christ's natural body, as
though it could be eaten otherwise nor spiritually by faith. Will you neither
understand the Scriptures nor the ancient fathers, Ioh 6.35. August tract. 26.
in Ioh 6 and lib 3 de doctr. Christ cap 16. and Clemens Alex. Hieronim s.
Basilus B^rnardus supra citat. lit Be^larm. de Eucharist lib, 1. ca, 7 and your
can^n law de consecr. di^t. 1, cap. V, Quid pa as dentes, B^leue and ^^ou hes
eaten Eph^ s. ^ John. 16
nor your own Kirk, who all acknowledge a spiritual eating of Christ by
faith? What gross darkness is this, wherewith the Lord hes blinded you above
all, that ye cannot understand it? As Christ dwells in us and we in him, so do
we eat him and drink him. But the Apostle says, he dwells in us by faith
therefore we eat him and drink him by faith. And seeing your Kirk grants that
the eating of Christ corporally does no good, and the eating of him by faith
only will bring eternal life, as our Savior says: what needs then this
corporal and real eating of Christ? And why are ye like the gross and
carnal Caperna^ts who can understand no eating but a corporal eating of him?
And what is the cause that ye cannot understand the doctrine of your own Kirk
whilk acknowledges a spiritual eating of Chirst by faith both by the word and
by the sacrament also. De consecra. list a cap. Vt quid
I had never have thought that ye had been so far blinded of the Lord. But I
have you to the Lord. Let the (Christian reader) now judge whether our doctrine
or yours be the invention of man's brain, and whilk of them hes their warrant
out of the written word of God.

Master Gilbert Brown.

And further, I say, of these words, 1. Cor, 11, 24
This is my body whilk shall be delivered for you, whilk is an true
proposition, and therefore this must follow. But there was no body delivered
for us, but the natural body of Christ: therefore it was his natural body
that he gave to his Disciples to be eaten. Then if it were his natural body,
it was not natural bread. As Saint Ambrose expounds the same, let us prove
says he this not to be that that nature formed, but that thing whilk the
blessing hes consecrate and greater strength to be in blessing not in nature:
for nature it self is changed by blessing. He hes the same more amply in the
fourth book the fourth chapter de Sacramentis

Master John Welsche his reply.

First I answer, the words of the Apostle is not as ye cite them here whilk
shall be delivered, but (...) whilk is broken and in the present time, and so
in Luke (...) whilk is given, so you are not faithful in translating this
place of Scripture, both contrary to the Greek and Syriak copies. Upon the
whilk I reason thus, this proposition is true, this is my body whilk is broken
for you. So the Apostle says, but Christ's body was not broken then reallie,
for not a bone of him was broken at all, as the Scripture testifies: Exodus 12.
Ioh, 19,
and the Scripture says and all men confesses that he suffered but once, so
only his sufferings ar signified then by the breaking of the bread in the
sacrament here: so as Christ's body was not broken then reallie, that is,
suffered: but his suffering only signified by the breaking of the bread, so his
body was not given reallie and corporally to be eaten, but only signified.
Secondly, I say, it is true, that Christ's natural body was delivered to the
death for us: but yet it will not follow upon this, that it was his natural
body whilk he gave to them to be eaten corporally: for his natural body
was reallie delivered to death for us: and it was but given to them
spirituallie to be eaten. You must coin a new Logic M. Gilbert or you can
make these two stick together: and the one necessarily to follow upon the
other. For by that same reason you may as well conclude, that Christ gave his
natural body to be eaten corporally in the word, for he gives himself to
Ioh. 6.35 Bellarm grants this also lib. 1. de Eucharist. cap. 7.
be eaten in his word as well as in his Sacrament, and also he gives that same
body to them in the word, whilk was delivered to death: for the self same
Christ is offered and received as well in the word as in the Sacrament. So
from his bodily death, to a corporal eating of him, it will not follow. And
further by that same reason you may as well say that the fathers before Christ
under the law, did eat Christ's body corporally, for they eat that same
spiritual food, and drank that same spiritual drink, in their Sacraments,
whilk we do now in ours. So the Apostle testifies, even that self same Christ
his body and blood whiilk was delivered to the death, and yet it will not
follow, that they did eat his natural body etc. As for Ambrose, it is true
he so speaks: but he expoundes himself in that same chapter, while as he
says, Before the blessing another form or thing is named, but after the
consecration the body of Christ is signified: If the bread then signify the
body of Christ, it is not changed in his body. And because of this holy use to
signify the body of Christ, Ambrose says that the nature is changed by
blessing: and that this is his meaning his words following will declare it,
where he says. Shall not the words of Christ be of force to change the form
of the Elements. ^^^^nter species clementorum
In that same sense Ambrose says, the nature of the elements is changed, in
the whilk he says, the form of them is changed, for he affirms both there.
But you will not say I trow, unless you will ouer-throwe your
transubstantiation that Ambrose means, that the form of the Elements is
changed in substance, but only in use and signification, for you say the forms
remains, therefore you must also grant that Ambrose means not by the change
of nature, the change of the substance of them, but only the change in the use
of them, from a common use to a holy use. And because it may be you will delay
to subscriue to the truth of our doctrine, until you hear the sentence and
judgment of the fathers. Therefore, I will set them down here. Co^^a Marc l, 4
Tertullian says, This is my body, that is, a figure of my body. Chrysostom
says, What is that whilk the bread signifies, the body of Christ. Theodoret
says, Chrysostom. in 1, Cor cap, 10 Theodoret. dial. 1, and 2
The bread and wine is signs and figures of the body and blood of Christ.
And he says, Our Savior in the institution of the Sacrament enterchanged the
names and gave to the sign or simbole the name of his body: and these
mystical signs of these holy things whereof are the signs. Unto the whilk he
answers, are they not signs of the body and blood of Christ. Hieronymus says
That Christ by taking of the bread, Hier in Mat. ^6 Cyrillus ad ^^^p Matthew. 11
Bas. Liturgi^ Nauian. in orat. 2 de Pas. and funere Gorg. Cyprian lib 1. ep 6.
eius contra Adima. cap, 12. and Psalm. 3
whilk comforts the heart of man, represents the truth of hi^ body.
Cyrillus says, Our Sacraments auoweth not the eating of a man. Basilius and
Nazianzen calls the bread and wine in the Supper (...) figures or signs of
the body of Christ. Cyprian says, The Lord called bread made of many
grains his body and wine made of many grapes, his blood. Augustine says, Our
Lord doubted not to say: this is my body while as be gave but the sign of his
body. And he calls it the figure of his body and blood. And their canon law
says, De consecr did. 2 cap Hoc est.
The heavenly bread whilk is the flesh of Christ, is called after a manner the
body of Christ, while as it is but the Sacrament of his body. And the gloss
there says, The heavenly bread, that is the heavenly Sacrament whilk
represents truly the flesh of Christ, is called the body of Christ but
improperlie. I omit the rest whilk is exceeding many, and because if you be a
right defender of the catholic faith, you will say with the rest of your
Clergy, that the Pope cannot err. Therefore a Pope, Gelasius by name says,
Gelasius de ^^bus naturis in Christo
Neither the substance of the bread, nor nature of the wine, ceasses to be
any more nor they were before: but remains in their own substance. And he
calls them there, an image and resemblance of the body and blood of Christ.
Now tell me Master Gilbert do not these speak as plain as we, will you
avowe your Transubstantiation whilk they so flatly deny. And as our Savior
says, a kingdom divided against it self cannot stand. So the manifold
divisions amongst your selves, concerning this transubstantiation, is a very
sure argument of the falling both of you and your doctrine. Some of you
expounds this word hoc. this Bonauenture Ge^son contra Florentium, ^ib, 4
of the bread as Thomas lib, 4. seu did 8. Occam, in 4. se^^ d. 13, q. 16, 17
Some of Christ's body Innocent, 3. de offic. mis. page 3 object, 14. and
Se^tus in l. 40. d. 8. q. 3
and some calls it an Indiuiduum vagum Durandus rational. 4
some says it signifies nothing, Holcot in ^ sent, quest. ^
and some says it signifies a thing whilk is common both to terminus a quo
and terminus ad quem.

Secondly in the exposition of the word est, is. Some for it is: some for it
is changed: 3. some Thomas.
says the substance of ye bread and wine returns to nothing: some says The
gloss of Grati^n and the extra^ ga^ts de conseci. did. 2 c. Species. etc.
si^mit. ex^t. de sum^a s^nitate
it passes in the body of Christ. 4. some says C^^on oporte: and ^b^glos. de
c^nsecrat d st. 1 etc Cu^ Ma^tha pa^a vtrum de c^le mis.
the water in the Sacrament returns to nothing: some says it is changed in
the blood with the wine: some says it is Thomas 3974 art 8
turned in Christ's vital humors: some says it is turned in the wine, and
after in the blood: some says ^^ran. lib, 4 cap. 42
they dare not define it. 5. some says, Thomas epist. 59 and 3. quest 7^.
the worms that are bred of the Sacrament commes of the quantity: other some
says Durand. lib. 3. cap. 41
they are bred of the substance. 6. some says Christ Durand l^b 4. cap 41
consecrated by the word, he blissed: some by the May. G^lbert.
words, This is my body, and the blissing together: some Glos. in c. Vtrum in
verbis perferri de cons. did. 2
will have the consecration to be made in heaven: and some frankly Scotus in
repor did. 8. quest. 2
confesses that they neither know the words nor the number of them wh^reby
this consecration is made: and to omit six hundredth the like, I will only
touch these few glosan t^t ibus
some says the body of Christ is taken bodily with the mouth, Ca^^an. tom. 2.
cap. 2, and 3, and 5,
some says that it feeds, G^os ibidem
some says as soon as it is pressed with the teeth the body of Christ is
caught up to heaven. Durand. ration. lib 4.
But other some says, it passes from the teeth to the heart, and then the
bodily presence ceases, Bonauenture 4 d^st 13. ar. 2. q. 2
and other some will have him to go to the stomach etc. but not to the mind.
And yet he says he doubts whether he goes to the belly or not, for the
variety of opinions: and in so great variety he says, what to hold is hard
to judge. And suppose he holds it that that the body of Christ goes not into
the belly of a mouse or is casten out into the draught, because, says he, the
ears of well disposed persons would abhor it, and infidels and heretics
would jest at it, and laugh us to scorn. Alexander de hales part. q 45. and
Thomas of Aquine part. 3. q 80 art 3 and Antoninus Archbishop part. 3. tit, 13
cap, 6
Yet sundry others holds that not only it goes into the belly, but also
Christ's body may be vomited up or purged out in the draught, and that brute
beasts may eat Christ's body and it may go into the belly of dogs and
swyne. O filthy mouths and unclean spirits, what heretic, what Capernait
was ever so gross and carnal: yea, so barbarous and brutish, as ye are. So not
only are ye more gross nor the Capernaits who thought that saying hard: but
also like the barbarous Canibales who eat the flesh of man. O blind leaders
of the blind, shall myse, dogs, and swyne, eat and drink the precious body
and blood of Christ? shall they then have eternal life? I think the ears of
all Christians will abhor this your doctrine, and their hearts will tremble at
it. Ex citatione Smithes sermon^
These absurdities, together with Scriptures and Fathers against the same, hes
made some of your great pillars to say as Aga nst the captiu tie o^ Babylon
made by Luther
Fischer, that no man can prove by the words of the Gospel, that any Priest
in these days, does consecrate the very body and blood of Christ: and
Lindanus ^^b. 6 lib. 4 panop, and Caninus, and Petius a Soto sa^es, t^aditions
hes not their author in the Scripture, supra citati
others, that Transubstantiation is but a tradition whilk hes not the author
of it in the Scripture, nor cannot be defended by the same: and others, as
Tonstal in the book of the Sacraments.
Tonstall, that it had been better to have left every man to his own
conjecture, as they were before the council of Lateran then to bring in sik a
question. I have been longsome in this, but yet it so behooved me: because it
is the ground-stone of their sacrifice of the Mass, and their other Idolatries
and abominations. So then to conclude this, seeing your doctrine of
Transubstantiation is aggree-able neither to the doctrine of Christ, nor his
Apostles, nor the ancient Fathers, nor your own canon Law and Pope, as they
have been cited: and seeing ye are at sik variances amongst yourselues
concerning the same: therefore it is to be rejected as heretical, damnable,
and blasphemous by all Christians. And this for the 4. point of your doctrine.

Master Gilbert Brown.

5. Our doctrine is, that the lawful Ministers and Priests of the Kirk of
Christ, hes power given them by Christ to forgive and to retain sins, John.
20.23. Matthew. 9. ^. Matthew. 16.19. Matthew. 18.18.
because Christ says to his Apostles, Receive ye the holy Ghost, whose sins ye
shall forgive, they are forgiven them, and whose sins ye shall retain, they
are retained. And in another place, That ye may know (says Christ) that the
son of man hes power in earth to forgive sins, etc with sundry other
places, conform to the same. And this is denied by the Protestants.

Master John Welsche his Reply.

As for the fifth point of your doctrine, that the lawful Ministers of Christ,
hes power given them by Christ to forgive sins, and to retain them. If you
mean that they have this power as Gods witnesses, Ministers, and Ambassadors,
yea and Judges too: (for the Apostle says, We judge them that are within) to
testify and to declare, to judge and give out judgment according to Gods
word, not only by the preaching of the Gospel, and administration of the
Sacraments joined therewith: but also by the censures, and discipline, in
excommunicating the obstinate impenitent, and absoluing the penitent. If, I
say, your doctrine be this, then you injury us in saying, we deny it: and you
needed not to have quoted these places to confirm the thing whilk we both
teach, and also practice. But what is the cause ye would not quote the place
where we deny this doctrine? But if you mean that the lawful Ministers of
Christ hes an absolute power, and full authority, not as Ministers and
Witnesses only, but as judges and Lords over our faith, to forgive or retain
by their own authority, 4. Controv. tom. ^. page
and that the very pronouncing of the words of absolution, is the cause of
remission of sins, and that it so scatters the sins, and makes them to
euanishe, as the blaste of wind extinguishes the fire, and scatters the
cloud, as Bellarmine says. If you mean so, this we utterly deny unto you,
and all men: because it is only proper unto God. The whilk the Jews suppose
they were blinded did acknowledge: Mat^h. 9.
and so not so blind as ye are. For it is only God that forgiues in Jesus
Christ. It is only his death that hes merited it, and only faith that
apprehends it, and only his spirit that seals it up, and the word and
Ministry that declares it, testifies, and confirms it. For the Apostle
says, He hes committed to us the word and ministry of reconciliation, and we
are in his stead to beseech men to be reconciled to God: so we are but
Ministers of this. 2 Cor. 5 18.19 20. Homil. 23
Augustine is plain in this: It is the Spirit (says he) that forgiues, and
not you, meaning of the ministers, and the Spirit is God: it is God therefore
who forgiues, and not we. There is one argument: God only forgiues sins,
therefore not man. And again, What is man but a sick man to be healed
himself? Would thou be a physician to me, with me seike the physician thy
self. Heir an other argument, He cannot be a Physician to others, who needs a
Physician himself. Further, he says, He that can forgive by man, can also
forgive without man: for he may as well forgive by him, as by another. But to
what purpose do ye quote the 9. of Matthew, That the son of man hes power to
forgive sins, for will you say, that the Ministers of the Kirk hes that
absolute authority that he had? the whilk if ye do, then are ye blasphemous.
As for the word Priest, wherewith ye style the Ministers of the Kirk, I know
that you and your Kirk takes more pleasure in this soil, nor in all the styles
whilk the holy Ghost hes given to the Ministers of the Kirk in the new
Testament: for amongst the manifold styles whilk are given to his Ministers,
yet hes he never given this style of a sacrificing Priest, as proper to them,
throughout the whole new Testament. But as your office of Priest-hoode is not
written in Christ his latter Testament, so neither is your style of sacrificing
Priests contained in the same. But new offices must have new styles.

Master Gilbert Brown.

6. Our doctrine is, to make the Priests of the Kirk to anoint the seike with
oil, in the name of our Lord, and to pray over him, because it is the doctrine
of the Apostles, as we have in Saint James in these words, Jacob. 4.15 August.
tom. 4. super Leui. quest 84.
Is any seik amongst you, let him bring in the Priests of the Kirk, and let
them pray ever him, anointing him with oil in the name of our Lord, and the
prayer of faith shall save the seik, and our Lord shall lift him up, and if he
be in sins, they shall be remitted him. And because we find heir an external
form, whilk is the anointing with oil, of an internal grace, whilk is
remission of sins: therefore we say it is a Sacrament. Now take from these
places the vain subterfugies of our new men, that will have him a Mediciner
for the body in this, and not for the soul, the matter will be plain of it
self.

Master John Welsche his Reply.

As to your doctrine of anointing of the seik with oil, and that not by every
man, but by a Priest: not in all seiknesses, but in the extremity of death:
not with every oil, but with oil consecrated by the Bishop: Cap. 7. de ex^^.
unction
(whilk Bellarmine makes essential to this Sacrament) and that not all the
parts and members of the body, but the five organes of the senses, and the
reins, and feet: and that by this form of words, Let God forgive thee
whatsoever thou hes sinned, by the sight, hearing, smelling, etc. by this holy
unction, and his most godly mercy. The whilk you will have to have two
effects. The one, the health of the body, if it be expedient for the soul:
the other remission of the relicts of sins that remains: and this ye make to
be one of your Sacraments, And for this purpose ye only bring one testimony
of Scripture. So that all the show of warrant you can pick out of the
Scripture, is this only place of James For I trow with Bellarmine, and
sundry others, you have seen that that place of Marc. 6.13. whilk is also
alleged by the council of Trent for the confirmation of this doctrine, would
carry no show to make any thing for you, and therefore it may be you have
omitted it. But this place serves nothing for your purpose. For, first I say,
this was a ceremony annexed to the miraculous gift of healing, Marc. 6.13
as is plain both by the text using the word (...) and the Lord will lift him
up whilk is properly spoken of the health of the body: and also by that place
of Mark, where it is written, that the Apostles anointed many s^ik with oil,
and they healed them. The whilk gift was not only given to the Apostles, but
also to the very Churches, as is plain of the 1. Corinthians. 12. Unto another is
given the gift of healing, etc. Now seeing this extraordinary gift is ceased in
the Kirk of God, wherefore will you superstitiouslie use the ceremony? So
either avowe (Master Gilbert) that your Priests hes this miraculous gift of
healing, whilk I trow ye will not, or else leave off the ceremony?

Secondly, by this argument ye may as well make all the rest of the ceremonies,
(whilk our Savior and his Apostles, Peter and Paul, and the believers in the
primitive Kirk, used toward the seik, blind, lame, and dead) sacraments. As
the Marc. 16.18
laying on of hands, whilk had both a command and a promise joined with it, Ioh
9.6
anointing of the eyes of the blind with clay, Ioh 5 Mat. 9 29. Act. 3.6.
Act. ^^.^
washing in the poole of Shiloam, etc. For why should not their examples be
as well followed, as the example of the Elders of the primitive Kirk? and seeing
you use not these ceremonies, because ye want the miraculous gift, whilk was
joined with them, why do ye use this ceremony superstitiouslie, seeing ye
want this gift also?

Thirdly, I say, this place can make nothing for your doctrine: for this place
says, Call the Elders of the Kirk, and let the^, etc. but you call for a
sacrificing Priest. This text says in the plural number, Call for the Elders:
your doctrine says, one Priest is sufficient. This place speaks of oil, not
mentioning a sillabe of consecration, blissing of it by the Bishop, and that
nyne-folde salutation that ye give unto it, Hail, o holy oil, with the bowing
of the knee, and other ceremonies. There is not a sillabe in this, nor in any
other Scripture that speaks of these things, and yet your doctrine will have
all these ceremonies. This place says, And the prayer of says shall save the
seik: and you attribute it to the ointment. This place puts no differences of
seiknesse: but your doctrine is, that none be anointed, but he who is lying in
the bed, and at the point of death. This place only specifieth the anointing
of the seik, some of you reckons, as the council of Florentine seven parts:
some, the five senses, as necessary. Lib. 4 sent 4 did. 23. quest.
And therefore this moved Thomas of Aquine to say, That the form of this
Sacrament is not exstant in the Scripture. Now if it be not exstant in the
Scripture, what to do have we with it? seeing the Scripture is able to make a
man wise unto salvation, and to make the man of God perfect in every good work?

Fourthlie, Beda, Oecumenius, and Theophylactus in their commentaries upon
these places and 2. de sacram.
Thomas Waldensis and de heresibus.
Alphonsus de castro, two arch-papists affirms, that in the 6. of Mark, and
5. of James, the self same unction and anointing is meaned. But de extern.
vnct.
Bellarmine and In Marc. 6
lansenius two other papists affirms and proves by firm reasons, that that
anointing in Mark is no Sacrament: therefore neither is this anointing in
James a Sacrament, seeing (as said is) in both the places the selfsame unction
is meaned.

Fifthlie, I say, all the Sacraments the Lord hes instituted, are public, and
not private: but this Sacrament of yours is priuatlie ministered: therefore not
a true Sacrament.

Sextlie, all the Sacraments of the new Testament should be ministered by them
who have the preaching of the Gospel concredited unto them, and not by private
Christians. In his epistle 1. cap. 8
But Innocentius the first, a Pope says, Private men may minister this, in
their own and others necessities: as also Thomas Waldensis a Papist. And yet
the council of Trent accurses them that so says: Therefore it is not a
Sacrament.

Seuenthlie, Pope Innocent in that same epistle cited before calls it but
genus Sacramenti, a kind of Sacrament: therefore it is not properly a
Sacrament. But you are more bold to call it a Sacrament.

Eightlie, all the Sacraments of Christ hes their warrant from the written
word: But Petrus a Soto calls this a tradition whilk hes not the warrant in
the written word: In his book against ^^^^^ll.
therefore it is not a lawful Sacrament of Christ.

And as to your argument: That it hes an external form of anointing with
oil, of an internal grace whilk is remission of sins: I answer: this form
or ceremony was extraordinary, as I proved before, annexed to a miraculous
gift of healing. The whilk seeing it is now ceased, the ceremony also should
cease. And this promise is not made to the anointing (if ye will believe the
Apostle) but to the prayer of faith. The prayer of the faith, says the
Apostle, shall save the scik. And whereas ye say that we make him a Mediciner
only for the body in this, and not for the soul: we answer: That this
ceremony as sundry others, was only annexed to the extraordinary gift of
healing of the body, and was not seals of grace. And yet with the health of
the body, the healing of the soul was oftentimes joined, as our Savior says
to the Paralytick man: Matthew. 9.2.6
Thy sins are forgiven thee, take up thy bed and walk. Now whether these be
our vain subterfuges, or cleir grounds out of the Scripture, let the reader
judge. And where as ye call us new men: let them be new and most recent,
whose doctrine is most new. But, as hes and shall be proved by Gods grace, our
doctrine is not new, but Jesus Christ's in his old and new Testament, and yours
devised since. Therefore this title of novelty most justly belongs unto you.
This for the 6. point of your doctrine.

Master Gilbert Brown.

7 Our doctrine is, that when our Priests (whilk are the only lawful Ministers
now adays) are called to that function, receives the imposition of hands, with
the grace of gift of the holy Ghost, because it is the doctrine of Saint Paul
in these words: ^. Tim. 4.14
Neglect not the gift or grace that is within thee whilk is given the by
prophecy, with the imposition of priest-hoode. And therefore must b^e a
Sacrament, because it hes an external form, whilk is the imposition of
hands, of an external grace, whilk is the gift given by the same. And for
this cause Institut. lib 4 cap. 14. sect. 20 item lib. 4. cap 19 sect. 28
John Calvin his self admits it to be an Sacrament: albeit in their
confession they call it an bastard Sacrament of the Popes, and detests the
same, although In l^cis com. edit. 1543. de numer. sacrament.
Melancthon hes the contrary.

Master John Welsche his Reply.

As for the 7 point of your doctrine concerning the imposition of hands in the
ordination of the lawful ministers of the Kirk of Christ, because it is a
ceremony whilk hes the foundation of it in the word of God, and was practiced
in the primitive Kirk, as in the ordination of Timothy here, and others: and
is profitable both to put the Pastors in mind of his calling, that he is
separated of God for the discharge of the same, and also the people that they
embrace him as one sent of God to them, therefore we both acknowledge it and
practice it. But that either the gift of the holy Ghost is inseparably joined
with it, or that it is a sacrament of the new Testament properly (as you
affirm) that we deny. As to the first, the gift of the holy Ghost is not
inseparably joined with it, first, because that is injurious to the Lords free
grace, whilk is not bound to any instrument, let be to a ceremony. And also he
speaks against experience: for how many, I pray you, do receive imposition of
hands, who receives not a new grace and gift of the holy Ghost amongst you?
Miserable experience these many ages both does testify it, Ex veteri Testa.
quest 109. inter opera Augustini.
and also one hes testified the same, saying, our Priests does lay the word of
blessing upon many, but in few follows the effect of that blessing. And
certainly if any gift of the holy Ghost is joined with this ceremony, it
should be an ability to preach the word: for that is the principal part of
the office of the Minister of the Gospel. But how many thousands are they among
you in your Kirk wholes received this imposition of hands, and yet as unable to
preach the Gospel as Asses are? and last of all, what needed that trial and
examination, so straightly commanded in the Scripture, whilk ought to be had
of them that are to be ordained, if the holy Ghost were ever inseparably given
with the ceremony. For wherefore is this trial and examination? And wherefore
is Timothy so straightly charged to lay his hands suddenly on no man, but
because it is only the holy Ghost who enables. The whilk also should be well
known unto his Kirk ere they presume to testify the calling of God to them.
For if it were true that ye say that the gift of the holy Ghost were joined
with the imposition of hands inseparably, 1. Timoth. 5.22
then the Apostle should rather have commanded Timothy to lay his hands upon
many in respect of the need that the Kirk stood in of all men, rather then
to have discharged him. And as for the place of Paul whilk ye cite here,
Despise not the gift etc. This serves nothing for your doctrine: for if first
the gift given to Timothy whilk the Apostles speak of, was extraordinary,
and so ordinarily does not ever follow the ceremony. 2. It is not ascriued
here to the ceremony of imposition of hands, but unto Prophecy, whilk is
given thee by Prophecy, whereby it was revealed to the Kirk of the ability of
this man. And so if there be any prophecies that goes of you in your Clergy
that the holy Ghost is given to you, then ye may claim unto the same: but I
think ye will not say that sik like prophecies goes of you: therefore ye
cannot claim to this testimony. 3. 2. Tim. 1.14
Timothy is exhorted to keep that worthy thing concredited unto him through
the holy Ghost. It was the holy Ghost therefore who was the giver and
preserver of it. And as for the ceremony it was a sign of the presence of
gods spirit in them who was lawfully ordained. Now as to the second that ye
will have it a sacrament, because it hes a external form, and also a promise
of grace. That will not follow: for then you should have innumerable
Sacraments: for prayer, almous-deeds, and the ordination of Magistrates, and
many other hes external forms, and hes promises of grace joined with them:
and yet you will not say, that they are properly Sacraments. For in all the
Sacraments of the new Testament whilk properly are Sacraments, there must be
first not only an external action but an earthly and visible Element, as
water in Baptism, and bread and wine in the Supper. And therefore, Augustine
says let the word be joined with the element, In Ioh. tract 90
and then it is a sacrament. Secondly, they must have their expres warrant and
institution from Jesus Christ in the Scripture, as baptism hes Math. 28. and
the Lords supper hes Math. 26. Thirdly, they must not only have a promise of
grace, but a promise of remission of sins and sanctification: for they must
be seals of that covenant whilke is common to all Christians, as baptism and
the Lords supper is. But this ceremony of imposition of hands wants all these
three: for neither is there any earthly element, neither seals it up the
covenant whilk is common to al, but proper to the ministry only: neither hes
it the expres institution of Christ in all the four Evangelists. and whereas in
the 20. of John he there ordaines his Apostles, we read, he breathed on them,
and said, receive the holy Ghost. but not a word that he laid his hands on
them, or commanded them to use it to others. The whilk without all question he
would have done, if he had ordained it to be a sacrament: and Petrus a Soto a
Papist says, that the making of the imposition of hands to be a sacrament, is
a tradition. Therefore it is not a sacrament properly of the new Testament.
Secondly, if the ordination of any by imposition of hands were a sacrament, the
ordination of a bishop by the same especially, should be a sacrament: for the
place whilk ye quote here is of Timothy who was a Bishop as your Kirk
affirms. De sacramento ordinis lib. 1. c 5.
And Bellarmine says, if this be not a sacrament, then it cannot be proved by
the Scripture that ordination by imposition of hands is a sacrament: and he
says, if this be not granted they will lose all the testimonies of the ancients
to prove impositio^ of hands to be a sacrament, for they speak of the
ordination of Bishops. But the In 4. did. 24
ancient Scholars and Doctors of your own Kirk, and Dominicus a Soto lib. 10.
de iustitia, and iure q i artic. 2
Dominicus a Soto a learned Papist affirms, that this is not a sacrament
properly, and so neither the ordination of the rest of the ministry can be a
sacrament, seeing a Bishop is above the rest in your order. Last of al, Ses. 23.
cap. 2, and 3 Bellarm. lib. 1. de sacr. o^d. cap 9.
the counsel of Trent, is not against it and sundry of the rest of your
Clergy makes all the seven orders of your Kirk, as Priests whilk ^ou
distinguish in two sorts: to wit, in Bishops and inferior Priests, Deacons,
subdeacons, Exorcists, Lectores, dore-kepers, Bellarmine says sing^^^lip Jesus
t sac^^menta. ca. 9 Lib. 4 did. 24. cap (...) autem
and your Acoluthytes every one of them by themselves sacraments. And your
Master of sentences calls all the orders in the plural number sacraments. So
if ye durst let the people know the secret of this your doctrine, ye make not
only seven sacraments, but fourteen in very deed. But this were dangerous to
you to sow abroad: for you fear it would cast your doctrine in some
suspicion with them, and be an occasion to them, to examine it by the
Scripture, the whilk if they would once begin to do, ye know your hope were
lost. As for Calvin and Melanchton, they call it a sacrament taking the word
in an ample sense, for these ceremonies that hes the foundation in the word:
whilk hes a promise of a blessing joined with them: and not in that sense that
baptism and the Lords supper are called sacraments, as Calvin in that first
place whilk ye quote plainly acknowledges: for these are his words, Let the
Christian Kirk (says he) be content of these, (meaning of baptism and the
supper) and let them not admit nor acknowledge, desire, or look for, any other
third sacrament til the end of the world. And as for imposition of hands whilk
the Kirk uses in their ordinatio^s, he says, I will not be against it that it
be called a sacrament, so being I reckon it not among the ordinary sacraments.
And Melanchton in that same place reckons up prayer, alms, marriage, the
Magistrate in the number of these unto the whilks he gives this name of a
sacrament, whereby he makes it plain that he takes this word sacrament, amply
and larglie as hes been said before, and not in that sense that baptism and
the supper is called sacraments. So you play your self (Master Gilbert) in
the ambiguitie of this word sacrament, and deceiues the reader with the same.
And whereas ye call your Priests the only lawful Ministers now a days: I will
answer to this more fully afterward, only this now: First, seeing the
fountain and ground upon the whilk all the lawful callinges in your Kirk
depends and is derived, as your selves confesses, is the supremacy of your
Pope, whom I have proved to be the Antichrist in my other treatise, and seeing
the office of your priesthood in sacrificing the son of God, as ye suppose,
is most abominable, idolatrous and Antichristian, as I have proved also there:
therefore you are not only not lawful Ministers of Christ, but the Ministers
of Antichrist. And as for the style of Priest, I answered it before; it is not
so much as once ascriued to the Minsters of the Gospel to signifye their
proper calling in the whole new Testament.

Master Gilbert Brown.

8. Our doctrine is, that matrimony is an bond vndissoluble, because our
Savior says, that which God has joined together, let no man separate. Matthew
19 6 Marc. 10.11 12. Luc. 16.18. Matthew. 5 33 Matthew. 19.9
And sik like he says: that whosoever dimits his wife and marries another,
commits adultrie upon her. And in Saint Luke we have the same And Saint Matthew
is of the same opinion (albeit one may put away his wife by him for
fornication) this is the doctrine also of the Apostles of Jesus Christ. For it
is written in Saint Paul, that an woman that is under a husband, her husband
living is bound to the law, Romans 7.2.3. 1. Corinthians. 7.^9 1. Cor. 7.10.11
but if her husband be dead she is loosed from the law of her husband Therefore
her husband living she shall be called an adulteres if she be with another man,
and so forth. And in another place he says, to them that be joined in
matrimony, I give not command but our Lord: that the wife depart not from her
husband and if she departs to remain unmarried, or to be reconciled to her
husband. And let not the husband put away his wife. Now this is our religion of
matrimony, and plain repugnant to the doctrine of the Ministers of Scotland
that will license a man to put away his wife and marie another. And they call
the doctrine of Christ and his Apostles the Popes cruelty against the innocent
divorced in their negative faith.

Master John Welsche his Reply.

As for your 8. and 9. points of doctrine concerning marriage, the first that
it is vndissoluble for no cause: the other that it is a sacrament. As to the
first, I would scarcely have understood this point of your doctrine, and
your council of Trent and others of your Clergy who writes of it, had not been
more plain then ye. And I think, that there are few that knows not this
point of your doctrine otherwise, who can take it up by this your writing. I
wonder why ye are so dark in setting down your own doctrine. But wherefore
should I wonder, for darkness may not bide to se the light. Your doctrine then
is this. Council. Trid. ses. 24 canon 8 Bellarm. lib. 1. de matrim. cap. 14
First you make many causes of separation and diuorcement, beside adultrie
(expres against the doctrine of Jesus Christ, he that shall dimit his wife
except for fornication etc.) he makes her to commit adultery. As 1. for the
vow of continency to enter in a Monastery or Nunnerie: 2. for heresy: 3.
and for perrill of offending of God. Next, your doctrine is, That suppose there
be many causes of separation betwixt the man and the wife, from bed and board
(as we speak) yet the bond of Marriage contracted and perfited, betwixt the
faithful, can no ways be broken, as long as they both live together, no not
for adultery. So that the party innocent divorced, Bellarm. lib. 1. cap. 12.
may not lawfully marry another, during the life of the guilty party: And
if they marry, they call it adultery, and they will have the ground of this to
be, because it is a Sacrament. So one error follows and leanes upon another.
For if Marriage be not a Sacrament, then the bond may be lowsed by their own
doctrine. But marriage is not a Sacrament, as shall be proved hereafter:
Therefore the bond is soluble. Our doctrine is, that the bond of marriage
contracted and perfited between two Christians, is broken by the adultery of
either of the parties: so that the innocent divorced, may lawfully marry
another. As for our doctrine. It is plain in the Scripture, in the 19. and 5.
of Matthew: where there the Lord in plain terms excepts the cause of
fornication, saying: Whosoever dimits his wife except it be for fornication,
and marries another, commits adultery. So then by the contrary: he that
dimits his wife for fornication (whilk is adultery there) and marries another,
commits not adultery. And seeing the Apostle commands, 1. Cor. 7.2.
That every man have his own wife, and every wife her own husband, and that
for the avoiding of fornication: and it is better to marry nor to burn.
Therefore, the first marriage being dissolved by diuorcement justly, according
to gods word; It is leasome to the party innocent at least, to use the
remedy of marriage for the avoiding of fornication. Other-wise, if he might
not use it, diuorcement were not a benefit, but rather a punishment, and the
innocent should be punished without a fault.

Now, as to the Scriptures whilk ye quote, Matthew. 19.6. and 5.31. they have
that exception of fornication expreslie mentioned. And as for the places of
Mark. 10.11.12. and Luke 16.18. and Romans 7.2.3. and 1. Corinthians, 7.39. they
are all to be understood with that exception of fornication, that our Savior
expreslie sets down in the former two places, otherways Scripture should be
contrary to Scripture, whilk is blasphemy to think, and our Savior is the
best exponer of himself. And as for the 1. Corinthians. 7.10.11. the Apostle
speaks not of that separation for adultery, but of a separation for a season,
for other causes or variances, in the whilk ease the parties separated, are to
remain unmarried, or to be reconciled together. And because ye will not credit
us nor the son of God so expreslie speaking in his Scripture, yet I think ye
will give some credit to your own Doctors, councels, canons and Popes, whom
if ye be a right Catholic, ye think that they cannot err. In comment Matthew.
19
Caietanus a Cardinal, lib. 5. annot in comment. ^ C^^ctaui.
Ambrosius Catharinus Papists, holds this doctrine with us against the religion
of your Kirk, that Adultery breaks the bond of marriage, and that the innocent
divorced may marry another. Pope Decret. causa 32. quest 7 cap. Concubu^sti
Zachary, and the council Decret. causa 32. quest 7 cap. Concubu^sti
Triburiense, and another Ibid cap. Qu^dam
canon says, Ibidem cep. Si quis
That incestuous adultery breaks the bond of marriage, so that the party
innocent, may marry another. And Pope Gregory the 3. suppose in a Ibid. cap.
Hive^o
canon he will not have adultery to break the bond of marriage, so that the
pairty innocent may marry another, contrary to the doctrine of Christ our
Savior, yet he Ibid. cap. Quid propusu^sti.
permits a man to marry another, if his former wife being taken with some
disease, be not able to rander dew benevolence unto her husband. So suppose
this Pope will not admit that true cause whilk our Savior sets down, of
adultery: yet he sets down causes himself, whilk wants the warrant of the
word. And Pope Celestine the 3. set forth a decree, that when of married
persons one falls into heresy, the party Catholic is free to marry
again: cap. Laudabilem de convers. infidelium, confessed by Alphonsus a
Papist, lib. 1. cap. 4. aduersus haereses. So then either your Doctors, Canons,
Councels, and three Popes erres, or else the bond of marriage may be broken,
and the innocent party divorced may marry another. Your religion of
Matrimony therefore is not only repugnant to ours and Jesus Christ's, but also
to your own canons Councels, Doctors, and Popes. Let them therefore condemn
your cruel judgment against the innocent divorced. And therefore Bellarmine
confesses, Bellarm. de mat. lib. 1. cap. 15
that in this point they have many against them, not only us whom he calls
heretics: but also Latins, Greeks, and Catholics.

Master Gilbert Brown.

Ephesians. 5.23
9 With Saint Paul, we make it a Sacrament, as sundry of the learned
Protestants do, as Lib. de vera and falsa r^^ cap. de matrimonio
Zuinglius, In l^cis ^^ditis, 1558. and 1558
Melancthon, and chiefly young Marchinstoun, in his 22 Proposition of his
discourse upon the Revelation, whose words are these. Thirdly, bodily marriage
is by Saint Paul, called a symbol and a Sacrament of the union of Christ and
his Kirk. And yet our new confession detests the same, and will have it but a
bastard. Sik concord is betwixt Christ, his Apostles, and our new preachers of
the Gospel: and also amongst themselves.

Master John Welsche his Reply.

Lib, 1. de matri^ cap. ^
The 9. point of your doctrine is: you will have Marriage a Sacrament of the
new Testament, and that properly, and that according to the institution of
God, unto the whilk the promise of the grace of justification is annexed: so
Bellarmine and the council of Trent says. But mark (Christian reader) their
ground of this their doctrine. They say, the bond of marriage amongst infidels
may be broken: but say they the bond of marriage amongst the faithful cannot
be broken. And they make the cause of this difference to be this, because the
marriage of Christians is a Sacrament. So they reason. Marriage amongst
Christians is a Sacrament: therefore say they, it cannot be broken. But what is
their principal ground now, whereby they prove marriage to be a Sacrament?
because (say they) the marriage of Christians is a bond indissoluble; therefore
it is a Sacrament whilk hes the grace of Justification joined with it. So
mutuallie, one error vpholds another. Upon the whilk I reason: If the bond of
marriage may be broken for adultery then it cannot be a Sacrament: (this your
Kirk graunts, because they make that the ground of this) but the bond of
marriage may be broken for adultery, as has been proved before, both by the
Scriptures, and also by your own canons, councels, Doctors, and Popes:
therefore marriage is not a Sacrament.

Secondly, in the sacraments of the new Testament, there are earthly
elements: as the water in Baptism: the bread and wine in the supper: and an
express form of words prescriued in the new Testament: as in Baptism, I
bapitze thee, etc. and in the Supper, This is my body etc. Matthew. 26. They
have their express institution by Christ in the same, and hes the promises of
remission of sins and justification annexed to them. But none of these things
are to be had in marriage. First, no earthly element: next, no form
prescriued in the word of God: thirdly, no express institution of it as of a
sacrament: fourthlie, no promise of the remission of sins and salvation
annexed unto it. Therefore it cannot be a sacrament of the new Testament
properly.

Thirdly, if marriage were a sacrament, and sik a sacrament that signified and
gave the grace of justification with it, Bellarm. lib. 1, de matrim, cap. 5
page 67
that is, remission of sins: then wherefore should your Kirk forbid all your
Clergy from the same? and wherefore should ye abstain from that sacrament,
whilk is instituted of God, to give remission of sins to you, and to make you
acceptable to God, as your doctrine says. Why should ye deprive your self of
that thing whilk may place you in Gods favor, and purchase to you remission of
sins, (as ye say marriage may do) it is a token that either ye believe not
your own doctrine, or else preferres whoredom and adultery, whilk is
condemned of God, to marriage whilk is Gods ordinance and honorable amongst all
men.

Fourthlie, I say, if the marriage of Adam and Eua in Paradise, and the
marriage of all the Patriarckes, and Prophets, and Priests, and people in the
old Testament, was not a sacrament, neither is the marriage of Christians in
the new testament a sacrament. For they were symboles that represented our
spiritual conjunction with Christ, as well as the marriage of Christians in the
new testament does: the whilk you will not deny. And Pope Leo says, Epist. 92.
ad (...).
That marriage was instituted from the beginning, that they might have in
themselves a Sacrament of Christ, and his Kirk: but the first you grant your
selves was not a Sacrament? therefore neither is the second a sacrament.

Fifthlie, that whilk is filthiness and pollution cannot be a sacrament to
give forgiveness of sins: Did. 82. cap, Proposu^sti, and c, Plur^mos
but Pope Syricius calls marriage pollution and uncleanness: therefore it can
not be a sacrament if he speak true.

Sextly, if marriage be sik a sacrament as ye say, to give remission of sins,
then it should be more excellent then virginity, because virginity hes not
this promise: but this ye will not grant, therefore it is not a sacrament.

Vt Capreolus res^^^ (...) 4. did. 26 ^^uest. Vnica ^^uc. 3.
Last of all, Durandus a great Doctor of your Kirk says, that marriage is not
properly a sacrament.

As for that place in the 5. of the Ephesians whilk ye quote, where the Apostle
says, This is a great mystery, speaking of the mutual duties of man and wife.
I answer: first, he calls not Marriage this great mystery, but that band of
our conjunction with Christ, as he expones himself: This is (says he) a great
mystery, and then he subioynes, I speak of Christ and his Kirk. Secondly,
suppose the old interpreter does translate this word mystery a sacrament,
yet you know (if you know the Greek language) that (...) is called a secreat.
Thirdly, will you have all these to be sacraments properly, whilk are called
mysteries in the new Testament, and whilk the old interpreter and your
Rhemists translates sacraments? then fall you not only make marriage a
Sacrament, 1. Tim. 3.16 Col. 1. Ephesians 3 and 1. 2. These 27 Reave. 1.20 and 17 5
but also the chief articles of our says, and the Gospel, and the 7. stars
in the Revelation, and the whore of Babel, and the iniquity of the Antichrist,
all sacraments. For they are all called (...) in the Greek, and some of them
are translated sacraments by the old interpreter, and your Rhemists, as
marriage is. I wonder that ye quote Melanchton, as though he were of your
opinion, seeing Bellarmine acknowledges plainly ( that he denies it to be a
Sacrament properly as Baptism and the Lords Supperis: Lib. 1 de matrim cap 1,
and cap. 5.
) but only graunts that it is a Sacrament in some respects. But you regard
not what ye write, so being it may carry any show against us. The same we
answer to you of Zuinglius and Marchistoun. They call it a Sacrament but not in
that sense that Baptism and the Lords Supper are called sacraments, taking the
word improperlie and more amply, ac Bellarmine confesses of Melancthon. So
here is no discord, Master Gilbert, neither betwixt us and Christ, neither
amongst our selves. But in very deed, you are they who are at discord both
with Christ, and amongst your selus. For besid this that Bellarmine and
Innocentius calls the marriage of the Gentiles Sacraments, because you may
answer that they call them Sacraments improperlie as Melancthon, Zuinglius,
and Marchistoun calls marriage a sacrament improperlie. So if they be at
variance with us for calling marriage a sacrament, so is Bellar. lib. 1 de
sacram. matrim. c. 3
Bellarmine and Pope Inno. c. gaude. de diuortis.
Innocent at variance with your Kirk, for calling the marriage of infidels a
sacrament. For as we deny marriage to be a sacrament at all properly, so does
your Kirk deny the marriage of infidels to be a sacrament properly. But to
let this pass I say because I will not deceive the reader as ye do with
apperances of contradictions through the ambiguitie of the words Lib. con.
here. verbo. nupti^ here is. 3.
Alphonsus de Castro Lectio. 2. de matrimonio.
Petrus a Soto two of your doctors and sundry others says that marriage is not
a proper sacrament of the new Testament: and yet the council of Florence and
Trent and sundry others of your Kirk says the contrary. 2. In 4. did. 26.
quest. 3.
Durandus a great doctor of your Kirk says that mareage is not a sacrament
properlye. 3. Some of our Kirk holds that carnal copulation in marriage is a
part of the sacrament, lib. 1 de sacra. matrim. c. 5. page 88.
some the contrary that it is neither a sacrament nor a part of the sacrament,
so Bellarmine testifies. 4. Durandus and your canonistes houldes that the
sacrament of marriage does not confer grace unto them that receives it, and yet
our common doctrine is contrary this as ibidem.
Bellarmine grauntes. Last of all Canus a learned Papist affirms that every
marriage lawfully contracted among christians is not a sacrament: but only
that whilk is made by the Minister in a certain form of words, the whilk
Bellarmine and sundry others denies. And you are of great diversity
concerning the matter of that sacrament amongst your selves. These are not now
shows of disorders and contradictions, de sacra. matrim lib. 1.
but they are so true and manifest that Bellarmine your chief campion hes
confessed them. Judge thou now (christian reader) whither is it we or they
that is at variance amongst our selves. And this for the 9. point of your
doctrine.

As for the tenth point: I have answered to it, in the other part of my
treatise concerning the Mass. Therefore, I omit it now, and I come to the 11.
point of your doctrine.

Master Gilbert Brown.

Our doctrine is that a man in the estate of grace doing good works merits of
deserve a reward: whilk is the doctrine of the Prophets, Christ and his
Apostles: as may be perceived in these places, and many the like Genesis 17.^.
2. Paral. 15.7 Eccles 16.15 Eccles 16.31 Psalm. 118.112. Prove. 11.18. Sap. 5 16.
Sap. 10.17 (...) 3.^0 Ier 31 16
Fear not Abraham (says God) I am thy protector and thy reward great turnly.
In another place. Therefore be ye of comfort, and let not your hands be
dissolved, there shall be a reward for your work. And in the book
Ecclesiasticus. All mercy shall make place to every one, according to the
merit of his works. with many more in the old Testament, nor I am able to
set down here But some of them I have noted on the margent. And our Savior
says, Matthew. 5.12 Ioh. 5.29 Mat. 10 42. Mat. 16.1 Matthew. 16 27 Matthew. 25.34.
Ma th. 10. Mar. 9.41. Luc. 6.35
Rejoice and be glade for your reward is great in heaven. And again, They
that have done good things shall come forth to the resurrection of life: but
they that hes done evil, to the resurrection of judgment. And whosoever shall
give drink to one of these little ones, one cup of cold water only, in the
name of ane Disciple, truly I say unto you, he shall not lose his reward And
1, Cor, 3, 8.14 1. Cor. 9.17.18 Ephesians. 6.8
Saint Paul says, Every one shall receive his own reward, according to his
labor: and 2. John, ver. 8 Apoc. 22.12
S. John says, Look to your selves, that ye lose not the things whilk ye have
wrought, but that ye may receive ane full reward And in his Revelation,
Behold I come quickly, and my reward is with me, to rander to every man
according to his works, with many more the like in the word of God What can our
new men say against this doctrine of Christ, his Apostles and Prophets, seeing
that there is no reward without merit, because merces and meritum hes relation
together: for there is no reward promised in the word of God, but for doing and
working And albeit God hes promised to reward all our good deeds, yet this
promise is not without a cause: that is, to them that will labor and work,
and to do according to his will. For he hes promised no reward to them that
will not work, but to sik as deserves the same by their doings, as I have noted
before in the book called Ecclesiasticus, the 16. chapter.

Master John Welsche his Reply.

As for your doctrine of merits of works wherein you say that a man in the
estate of grace does merit eternal life and glory, and that as well in
respect of the work it self, as of the covenant and promise made unto it. Lib
5 de justify. cap. 17.
So Bellarmine. Yea that the works are in virtue equal and of as great valor,
as the reward of eternal life is, so that there is an equal proportion between
the works and eternal life. And there are some of your Kirk and those of the
learned amongst you who hes gone further, and affirms that the good works of
the righteous merits life eternal in respect of the worthiness and excellency
of the work it self, Bellarm. lib. 5. de ^ustis. cap. 17
suppose the Lord had never made a promise or covenant, as Caietanus a
cardinal and Dominicus a Soto, as Bellarmine reports of them. And Master Pa^
1^5
Reinold says that good works and evil are laid in different balance, that
good works are the cause of heaven, as evil works are the cause of hell. And
In 5. quest^^^ de Iust^.
Andreas Vega says that the reward of glory shall not be greater nor our good
works hes deserved. What blasphemy is this your doctrine? And surely if in
any one point of your doctrine, you show your selves to be men, who not only
knows not the holiness of God, the vnspeakablenes of that other life, the
perfection and infinite virtue of Christ's merits, the perfection of his law,
and man's infirmity and weakness; especially you manifest it in this point, for
if ye knew any of these things, ye would never profess such damnable
doctrine: for that our works may merit eternal life (as ye say) and that not
only in respect of the covenant, but in respect of the work it self there
are five things required. 1. That the work be perfect according to that measure
of perfection whilk the law of God requires, and the whole law must be
fulfilled, and that perfitlie and continually. 2. The works must not be debt,
that is, sik works as we are bound before to do; for the paying of that duty
whilk we owe already cannot merit properly a reward: for will you say that
for the paying of that whilk you owe already you deserve a reward? 3. There
must be a proportion and equality between the work wrought and the reward it
self, for if the work be less and the reward greater, then that whilk is
more then the work is not of merit but of liberality. 4. The persons to whom
the work is done must be oblished and bound by right to rander and recompense
the worker for the worthiness of the work, so that he is not just and he do it
not. And last of all the work must be our own and not an others, and the
power our own whereby it is done and not an others, or we can be said
properly to merit by the same. But all these conditions will fail in our
works: therefore they cannot be meritorious of eternal life. For as to the
first the prophets says that all our righteousness is as a menstrous clout.
cap. 64 epist. in c. 3.
And James says we all offend in many things: and none there is that hes
contained in doing all things written in the law in that perfection, whilk it
craves of us, as hes been proved before: therefore our works cannot be
meritorious of eternal life. And as to the second all that we can do, or is
able to do, we are bound to do it all readdie, by the virtue of our creation
and redemption and his other blessings all ready bestowed, yea they oblish us
to more nor we are ever able to pay, according to that saying of our Savior:
even so ye when ye have done all that is commanded you say that we are
unprofitable servants, (...). 17.10.
because we have done that whilk was our duty to do. Since therefore it is
duty it cannot be meritorious of eternal life. And as to the third there is
no proportion between eternal life and our works, the reward by infinite
degrees surpassing the work, and therefore the Apostle says the afflictions of
this life are not worthy of the glory whilk shall be reueiled: everlasting
life being only the just reward of the sufferings of the son of God. Tim.
8.18.
ser. 1. de annnn
Bernard says what are all our merits to so great a glory: and in vita
Antonii.
Athanasius says not suppose we would renounce the whole world yet are we not
able to do any thing worthy of these heavenly habitations. As to the fourth
the Lord is dettor to no creature: Romans 11.35.
for as the Apostle says who hes given him first, and he shall be recompensed:
the Lord is all sufficient in himself and so needs non of your labors, and
so our works cannot oblish him. ser. 16 de verbis Apostoli.
And therefore Augustine says God is made a detter unto us, not by receiving
any thing from our hands, but because it pleased him to promise. And to the
last the Apostle says, What hes thou that thou hes not received? 1. Cor. 47.
and if thou have received it, why reioycest thou, as though thou had not
received it? Seeing therefore all our works are imperfite, and seeing we are
not able to fulfill the Law: and seeing all that we can do, is but our
duty: and there is no proportion betwixt eternal life and our works, and
that the Lord is debtour to no man, and all our ability of doing is from the
Lord only: therefore our works cannot be meritorious of eternal life. In
ma^uali. c. 10.
Hear further what the Fathers says in this point. Augustine says, All my
hope is in the death of my Lord: his death is my merit, my refuge, salvation,
life, and resurrection: my merit is the compassion of the Lord. I shall not
be void of a merit so long as the Lord of mercies shall not want. Origin who
lived 200. years before him says, In epist. ad Rom c. 4. lib. 4.
I scarsly believe that there can be any work whilk may of due demand the
reward of God for so much as even the same that we can do, think, or speak,
we do it by his gift or bounty. Then how can he owe us any thing, whose
grace did preueene us. And he says afterward, de bono mor. cap. 2.
that the Apostle assigns eternal life to grace only. Ambrose says,
Everlasting life is forgiveness of sins, so then it is not merit. Jerome
says, That before God no man is just, therefore no man can merit. And again
he says, The only perfection of man is, Aduersus Pelag.
if they know themselves to be imperfite: and our justice consists not of our
own merit, but of Gods mercy. I omit the rest for shortness.

Now to your testimonies, and reason to prove your merit of works, whilks
you shamefullie abuse, bringing forth Scripture to cloak your damnable
doctrine: unto the whilks I answer shortly. That there is a reward laid up
with God for the works of every one, be they good be they evil, and
according to their works shall they be tried, and every man shall be judged and
recompensed accordingly, as the Scripture plainly testifies. But that this
reward of eternal life promised, is of debt, and not of grace, and that our
works are the meritorious cause of the same, that the Scripture never affirms.
For the Lord freely and of his mere grace crowns his own works in us: and
that, not for the excellency of the work it self, but of mercy freely for
his Christ's sake, as both I have proved, and the Fathers hes testified. So
these Scriptures serves you to no purpose. For the controversy betwixt us is
not whether there is a reward promised, and whether it shall be randered
accordingly to the same, for that we grant: but whether this reward is of
merit or of grace. The Apostle says plainly in the 6. of the Romans, The
wages of sin is death: but everlasting life is the free gift of God. Romans
6.23. and ^ 17.
And in the 8. of the Romans, it is called an inheritance. Now if it be
heritage to them that are in Christ, and they aires of it through him, then it
is not their merit. As for the 16. of Ecclesiasticus it is Apocrypha, and the
text hes not that word merit, as the old interpreter whom ye follow,
translates it, but according to his work. As for the 118. Psalm, and the 16.
of Matthew, ye are ouer-seene in the quoting of them, for they have no sik
thing. As for your reason, that a reward hes ever a relation to a merit, that
is false. For the Apostle in the 4. of the Romans speaks of a reward that is
vnputed freely, not to him who works, but to him that believes in him, who
justifies the ungodly, verse 5. and Luc. ^.5^
And in this sense the reward of eternal life promised and fulfilled in his
Saints, is taken in the Scriptures And whereas you say, that there is no reward
promised but to doing and working: that is false also, for there is a reward of
eternal life promised to the believer, ver. 5. And as for the promises of
reward made to good works: it is true, it is made to them, but not as though
our works were meritorious causes of that reward, but only that they are
effects to testify of our faith in the merit of Jesus Christ, in whom only
the promises are made to us and our works, and for whose sake only they are
fulfilled in his Saints. For these causes therefore is the promise of reward
made unto works, first because all men by nature are hypocrites, and boastes of
a vain pretense of faith, unto whom James says, James ^.^8
Show me thy Faith by thy works? to take away therefore this veil of
hypocrisy from hypocrites, the promises are made to works. 2. The promise is
made to works to stir us up to the doing of them: for we would be faint in
doing good, and we knew not that the Lord would reward them. It is true he hes
promised no reward to them who works not, because they in whom Christ dwelles
they are not only justified, but also sanctified, and brings forth the fruit
of their sanctification. And this for the 9. point of your doctrine, whilk is
so damnable, that both it derogates from the merit of Christ, and makes men to
take away their confidence from Gods only mercy and free grace: and swelles
them up with a vain confidence of themselves, and binds as it were their
hearts and mouths, that they cannot with all their heart rander the whole praise
of their salvation to Gods only free grace.

Master Gilbert Brown.

12 We have other works that are called works of Supererogation, whilk are
works of greater perfection, and are not set down to us as the commands of
God (without the whilk we cannot be saved) but as divine counsels adjoined
thereto, they augment our glory and reward in heaven: whilk is also the
doctrine of Christ and his Apostles. Matthew 1^ 21. Mar. 10 21
Christ said to the young man, If thou will be perfect, go self the things
thou have, and give unto the poor and thou shall have treasure in heaven, and
come fo^low me so we find that wilful poverty, is a w^^k of
supererogation. 1 Cor. 7 34 38
Sik like Saint Paul says, and the woman unmarried and the Virgin thinks on
the things that pertaines to our Lord that she maybe holy both in body and
spirit: and afterward Therefore both he that ioynes his Virgin in matrimony
does well, and he that ioynes not, does better. Therefore Virginity is a work
of supererogation: for albeit Matrimony be good yet the other is better, and
this was a counsel that Saint Paul gave and no command. 1. Cor. 7 40 1. Cor. 9
14.15.23 1. Cor. 9.17.18.1^ Luc. 10.35
Sik like Paul wrought an work of supererogation when he preached the Euangell
gratis, where he might have taken justly for his labors. Christ our savior
speaks of the same works in the parable of the Samaritane, where he promised
to the oistlar to recompense him what ever he did supererogat upon the wounded
man, more nor the two pennies. And David the Prophet did supererogate, Psalm.
118.62.164
when he did rise in the night to give God loving, and seven times in the day,
and so forth.

Master John Welsche his Reply.

As though your former doctrine had not iniuried the merits of the son of
God, and his free grace enough, with the whilk (if the Apostle be true) your
merits of works cannot stand. For the Apostle says, Romans 11.6
(speiking of our salvation) If it be of grace, then is it no more by works,
otherwise grace were no more grace: and if it were of works, then were it no
more of grace, otherwise works were no more works; you yet eik this damnable
and blasphemous doctrine to all the rest. And certainly suppose ye will not
let it fall to the ground, that your doctrine is the doctrine of the Dragon,
and that your Kirk is that mystical Babylon, that mother of whoredoms, full
of names of blasphemy: yet this your blasphemous doctrine sufficiently
declares what you are. For I appeal your conscience, Master Gilbert, if ye
have any vn-blotted out yet with the smoke of the bottomless pit, and the
conscience of al men who ever felt the power of sin in them, and the free
grace of God renewing them: whether this doctrine of yours be blasphemous or
not: That not only you may fulfill the Law, and do all the duty whilk God
hes commanded you, and thereby merit eternal life: but also you may do more
nor God hes commanded, whilk ye call works of greater perfection, nor the Law
of God requyres of us, by the doing of the whilk, you say, you merit a greater
degree of glory in the kingdom of heaven, and as In his preface before de
mona chis. lib. 2.
Bellarmine says, That your religious Monks lives a straiter, and more high
kind of life, then either the Law of God or man hes prescryued. And that a
man lib. 2. c. 13 etc. 6. Ergo si addam alterum gradum amoris amphus quam
teneor. according to the ordor of sarum.
may love God with a greater and more perfect love, nor is commanded him in the
Law: yea, that a man may love God with a greater love, nor he is bound to love
him: and that these works are not only meritorious of eternal life, and of a
singular glory in heaven, but also are profitable to satisfy for our sins:
and that men may communicate of the abundance of these their merits unto
others. And therefore, they have in their service books this form of prayer
often, That by the merits of the Saints they may obtain grace and by the blood
of Thomas (Archbishop of Canterbury) they may ascend to heaven. Revel. c. 13.
All whilk whether they be not words of blasphemy, and the doctrine of the
Dragon, I appeal your conscience before God in the great day, and the
consciences of all men, as though it were not blasphemy enough to say, that
men may merit eternal life, and a greater degree of glory in that life to
themselves by their works: but also to communicate unto others of the
abundance of their works and so not only to be saviors of themselves, but
of others also. And here (reader) I am compelled to speak this to thee suppose
thou believe not that they have written and will maintain so horrible
blasphemies I wonder not: for I speak the truth to thee in my conscience I lie
not, I could not have been induced my self to have believed that ever they
durst have professed sik damnable and deuilish doctrine and I had not red it my
self in their own books, yea I durst not have been so confident as to have
set it down here upon the report of any, except I had red it my self. But if
the blind lead the blind both will fall into the pit together. The Lord
deliver his own from sik damnable doctrine whilk of necessity must bring
damnation upon the believers and professors of it. To answer you then, first
if we be not able to perform all the duties whilk God requires of us in his
law, then we are not able to do works of supererogation whilk is more then
our duty, commanded in the law, as ye say. But the first I have proved before:
therefore the second is true. Secondly, if the Law of God be perfect, and
prescriues more then we are able to do, Psalm. 1^.
then there is no works of supererogation: this you will not deny. But David
says, The Law of God is perfect, and our inabilitie to perform it, I have
proved before: therefore there is no works of supererogation. Thirdly, what
an absurd and blasphemous thing is this to say, that God hes not commanded to
us the works of greatest perfection, (for Master Gilbert calls these, works
of greater perfection) and so sik works wherein he is most glorified: but hes
left them in our own choice to do, or not to do, as though the Lord had not
commanded us to glorify him in the greatest perfection, nor yet we were bound
to do the same? Fourthlie, if there be any sik works of supererogation whilk
are of greater perfection nor the Law commands: then it should follow, that
the vow of continency, wilful poverty, and monastical obedience to their
superiors, should be works of greater perfection, and so please God more, then
the love of God with all the heart, with all the soul, with all the strength,
with all the mind, Matthew. 22.^^ Marc. 12.29.30
with all the thought: (for the former are your works of supererogation, and
the last is commanded in the Law) but this is absurd: therefore there is no
sik works. Fifthlie, this was only proper to the son of God to fulfill the
Law of God perfitelie, and to do more then the Law required: to wit, to die
for us who were his enemies: this doctrine therefore of yours spoils him of
this his glory. Last of all, if none can merit eternal life through their
works at all: then none can augment their glory and reward in heaven by
their works of supererogation. But the first I have proved before: therefore
the other must follow. And mark this (reader) how far God hes blinded their
minds: for they deride, and they mock at that imputation of the righteousness
and merits of Christ, Bellarm. lib. 2. de justice. cap. 2. and Consil. Trid.
can. 10 and Bellarm. lib 2. page 12^
and they pronounce them accursed that so thinks: but yet they teach that the
works of supererogation whilk men does may be communicate to others. As for the
first place whilk ye quote Matthew. 19. If thou will be perfect, etc. I answered
to it before, in my answer to the second point of your doctrine: to the whilk
I refer the reader. And so your wilful poverty hes no ground heir. For if
this man did not perfitely fulfill the Law, then was he not able to do more
then the law required of him: but the first is true as I proved before in the
second point of your doctrine, and as the circumstances of the text testifies
it, for he went away sad, and he put his trust in his riches: and so it was not
only difficile, but impossible for him to enter in the kingdom of God, as our
Savior says, whilk had not been true of him, if he had fulfilled the Law.
And this was a special command to this man, to discover his hypocrisy. And
all Christians is bound also out of the love of their heart to Christ, to be
content to forsake all that they have before we renounce him, or his word,
when he so requires of us. And if wilful poverty be sik a work of
perfection as ye think, Pro. 30.8
wherefore then would the Prophet have prayed, Give me neither poverty nor
riches, but feed me with food convenient. And if this be the work of
greatest perfection, what is the cause that your Abbots, Popes, Bishops, and
Cardinals (for who should be perfect if not these?) will not sell al their
revenues whilk they have, wherein they surmou^t the princes of the world, and
so augment their glory in heaven, and be perfect? But shall others believe and
obey this doctrine of yours, when the greatest Patrons of it, believes and
obeyes it not? O hypocrites who will believe you!

As for the next work of supererogation, Virginity: it is true that the
Virgin and vn-married, who hes the gift of continency, thinks upon the things
that appertains to God: and it is true, that if any have the gift of
continency, it is better to be vn-married, then to marry, especially in the
times of persecution. But yet it follows not that it is a work of
supererogation: for to them who lies the gift, it is a commandment: for he
that hes the gift is commanded to use it, and in losing it, he sins. And
every man is bound to glorify God to the uttermost of his power, and God is
most glorified by the single life of these, especially in the time of
persecution, who hes the gift: and so it is not a counsel simply but also a
command, but to them only who hes the gift, and that so long only as they
have the gift. And the Apostle says in that same place whilk ye quote heir,
that he thinks he hes the spirit of God also, and so this judgment of his was
the judgment of the spirit of God, whilk binds and oblishes al them who hes
the gift. But unto these who hes not the gift, 1. Cor. 7. (...). 3. and 9
the Scripture hes a plain command: For the avoiding of fornication let every
man have his own wife, etc. And if they cannot abstain, let them marry, etc.
And whereas ye say that Virginity is better then Matrimony: that is not true
simply, but only to them who hes the gift. And since you say it is better,
wherefore make ye Matrimony a Sacrament to give remission of sins? For shall
not a Sacrament whilk gives remission of sins be better then an indifferent
action, whilk men may do, or leave undone, sik as ye say Virginity is? As for
the Apostles example 1. Corinthians. 9. in preaching the Gospel freely without
wages to them: I answer: suppose it was leesome to him, and all the Ministers
of the Gospel, to have taken wages, as him self testifies and proves in that
same chapter, from the 4. ver. to the 15. yet it was not expedient to him for
the course of the Gospel amongst them. And men are not only commanded to
abstain from that whilk is vnleesome, but also from the things whilk are
leesome, if they be not expedient: and so he did no more heir then he should
have done. 1. Cor. 9.15
And therefore he says, It were better for me to die, then that any should
take my glory from me, whilk cannot be said of these works whilk we are not
bound to do. And he says, Ver. 18
That I abuse not my authority in the Gospel: but this would have been an
abuse of his liberty with his people: therefore he was bound to do it. And yet
we read that he spoiled other Churches as he says him self, and took wages
from them. 2. Cor. 11.^ Phil. 4
And also the Kirk of Philippi did communicate unto him twice.

As for the 10. of Luke, it appears ye are scarce of proofs in quoting this
place for your works of supererogation: for, will you say that the Samaritane
was not bound by Gods Law to ware more upon his neighbor in his extremity,
then two penye worth? Hes not the law said, Thou shall love thy neighbor as
thy self? And are we not bound to lay down our life one for another, much more
to ware out for him sik things as may serve for the comfort of this life in
sik an extremity. 1. Ioh 3.16
And the Greek word (...) is not to supererogate (as ye take it) but to ware
our further expenses. So your blindness is gross in this. And as for that of
David in praising God night and day, so often, he was so far from (...) king
of himself that he had done more then the Law required of him, that he never
thought of himself that he had fully obeyed the Law. And therefore how often
prays he in that Psalm, that the Lord would open his eyes to understand the
Law, and give him grace to perform the same. And in other Psalms he says,
Psalm. 119.12 ^7. 1^ 27 3^ psalm. 40.
My sins are m^e then the hairs of my head. And if thou mark iniquity who
can stand? and therefore this was no work of supererogation. And if you knew
Master Gilbert, (but the Lord hes blinded you) either the perfection of the
Law of God, or our inabilitie to perform it, or the unsearchable love and
kindness of God whilk hes oblished us to more duties then ever we are able to
do: (for when we have done all whilk is commanded us, yet we are but
unprofitable servants:) you would be so far from defending these your works of
supererogation, that ye would abhor and detest this doctrine.

Master Gilbert Brown.

13. Our doctrine is, that Christ our Savior (according to the soul)
descended to the Hels, as we have in our belief. And this was the doctrine of
the ^postles. Act. 2 24
For Saint Peter says, That God hes raised him up, lousing the sorrows of
Hell, according as it was impossible that he should be held of it. And this he
proves by the Psalms of David, Behold thou will not leave my soul (...) hell
(says David) nor give thy holy one to see corruption. (...) 15.8 (...) 29.3
(...) 49 10
This same is the doctrine of Saint Paul also: And that he ascended, what is
it but because he descended also first into the inferior parts of the earth. He
that descended, the same is he also whilk is ascended above all the heavens,
that he might furthfill all things. Ye see in these and all the rest of our
doctrine, wherein they diff^r from us, that the touchstone bears witness to us,
and proves ours only to be the doctrine of Christ, and his Apostles, and not
their denying thereof.

Master John Welsche his Reply.

Bellarmine graunts that we all aggree that Christ after a certain manner
descended into hell: but the whole controversy is of the sense and meaning of
it. We say, that he suffered the pains of hell in his soul upon the Croce,
and lay under the bondage of death, and was held captive in the grave, whilk
in the Hebrewe is called SCH^OL (whilk signifies sometime Hell in the
Scripture, and sometime the grave) for the space of three days: and in this
sense we grant he descended unto hell, and in this sense it is taken in our
belief. But your doctrine is, That he descended locallie unto Hell according
to his soul, Bell^^m (...) 4 de Christo cap. 16
first to give to the souls of the Fathers essential blessedness: and to
deliver them out of that prison, and bring them to heaven. And this we say is
neither the meaning of that article of your belief, neither yet hes it so
mekle as a sillabe in the whole Scripture to warrant it. And as for the article
it self, Lib. 4 de Christo cap 6
Bellarmine confesses that this article was not in the Creed with all Kirkes,
as he proves there by the testimonies of Irenaeus, Origin, Tertullian, and
Augustine, who all exponed the Creed. And Augustine exponed it five times, and
yet never mentions this article. And Ruffinus an ancient writer testifies,
that this article was neither in the Creed of the Roman Kirk, nor of the East
Kirks. And also it is not in the Nicene Creed, whilk was more nor 300. In his
exposition of the Creed
year after Christ. And Perkins a learned man affirms, that threescore
Creedes of the most ancient councels, and Fathers wants this clause. Whereby
it is most clear that this article was not put in at that time, when the rest
of the articles were gathered together, but hes crept in since, and that more
nor 300. year after the days of the Apostles. For Augustine lived in the 400.
year, and the Nicene Creed was more then 300. year after Christ. And yet
because it hes continued of a long time, and hes been received by the consent
of the Kirks of God, and does also carry with it a fit understanding and sense
as has been spoken. Therefore it is to be retained, but not in that sense as
ye expone it. For first if this local discension of Christ according to his
soul into hell were true, and that it were an article of our faith, as ye say,
then the four Evangelists, whilk are the sworn penmen of the history of his
death and resurrection, ^^c. 1.3
and especially Luke, who (as he says himself) intended to make an exact
narration of the same, who also did amply set down the same, with all the
circumstances thereof, they would not have omitted it being a special article
of our faith, if your doctrine be true: Ioh 20.31
seeing the end of their writing, as John says was that we might believe, and
by believing have eternal life. But they never mention it, as your selves
cannot deny. Therefore it can not be that he locallie descended into hell.
Secondly, the Scripture makes it plain that Christ's soul was in Paradise at
that time with the thief: (...). ^3.43
for he says unto him, This night shall thou be with me in Paradise: for this
cannot be meaned of his godhead, for it is euery-where: neither of his body,
for it was in the grave. Seeing therefore his soul was at that time in
Paradise, it could not be in hell, except you will say that Paradise and hell
are both one, whilk I trow ye will not say. Thirdly, if the souls of the
Fathers was not in hell, then Christ descended not thither: for ye say, Bellar.
lib 4 de Christo cap. 16
That he descended thither for that effect to deliver them: but they were not
in hell, but in heaven, whilk our Savior calls Abraham's bosom, where Lazarus
was betwixt the whilk and hell the Scripture testifies there is a great gulf:
Luc. 16.2^
therefore he descended not locallie into hell. Fourthlie, some of your own
learned Doctors hes seen this error of yours, and hes gone from it, as
Durandus by name, In 3. distinct. 22 ^^.
who affirms that Christ's soul descended not to hell in substance, but in
virtue, and proves it by reasons. And last of all, you are at sik variance
amongst your selves concerning this point, that some of you affirms that
Christ's soul suffered pain in hell when it was there, as In (...) ^.
Caietano, and 3. part qu^st 52 artic. 1 and 3
Thomas of Aquine two great Papists: and yet (...) 3. ^t ^ct. 22 (...)
Bonauenture and Bellarmine ^^b 4 de Christo cap 6
Bellarmine affirms the contrary, that his soul was in the place of pain,
and yet suffered no pain. Next Thomas of Aquine (...) quest ^.
affirms, that Christ descended only into that place of hell called Limbus
Patrum, but Bellarmine says, It is more probable that he went to all the
parts of Hell: and this is the consent whilk you Papists hes amongst your
selves, not only in this point, but almost in all the points of your doctrine.
Now as to the places of Scripture whilk ye quote, they serve nothing to this
purpose. For the 2. of the Acts, it speaks of that bondage of the grave whilk
kept him under until he rose again: and therefore the Greek word is (...);
whilk signifies death, and not hell, as ye translate it heir: and Peter says,
whom God raised up. The Apostle speaks then of that part of Christ whilk had
fallen and was raised up: but it was the body only and not the soul whilk fell
down and was raised up: therefore he speaks of the sorrows of death whereby
his body was kept in bondage, and not of any local descension of Christ's
soul. As for the places of the Psalms whilk ye quote heir, Peter brings them
not in to prove this local descension (as ye say) whereof he makes no mention:
but to prove his resurrection as he says in the 31. verse most plainly: He
knowing this before, speaking of David, spoke of the resurrection of Christ,
that his soul should not remain in grave, neither his flesh should see
corruption. So, if ye will believe the spirit of God in the Apostle
interpreting these places, they speak of the resurrection of Christ, and not
of the delivering of the soul out of hell, for he was in Paradise, as he says
himself: and it is the body that was raised, and not the soul. And the
Hebrewe word is NEPHESCH, whilk not only signifies the soul, but also the
life, as Gen 37.21. Let us smite his soul, that is, take away his life. And it
signifies also the body of the dead wherein there was life, as Leuit. 21. ver.
1. and 11. And this word hell is SCHEOL in Hebrew, whilk most usually is taken
in the Scripture for the grave. So then the meaning is this, The Lord will not
leave his Nephesch, that is, the body wherein his life was in Scheol, that is,
in the grave: whilk speech is usual in the Scripture. Now as to the other
Psalm 29.3. it is spoken properly of David, where he thanks God who had
saved his life from the hands of his enemies, whilk by a borrowed speech
frequented in the Scripture, is called the delivery of his soul from the
grave. As for the 4. of the Ephesians, These lower parts of the earth is not
hell, as ye expone it, but the earth it self, whilk in respect of the world is
the lowest part: and so it is taken in the 139. Psalm, ver. 15. where David
says, Thou hes fashioned me beneath in the lower parts of the earth, where
heir it is not taken for hell, as you take it in that place of the Ephesians,
otherwise you must say that David was borne in hell vvhilk I trow ye will
not say. So heirby is meant then the lowest and basest degree of his
humiliation. So now to conclude this: neither in these points, Master
Gilbert, nor in any point of doctrine wherein ye differ from us, is your
doctrine aggreable to Christ's doctrine and his Apostles, as hes been (I hope)
proved sufficiently. You must therefore provide you for better weapons and
armor, and stronger defenses for the ouer-throvv of our doctrine, and vp-holde
of yours, then ye have done: otherwise your shotts will be but as shotts of
paper, and your Bulvvarks but of intempered mortar, vvhilk suddenly will rushe
down at the li^ht of the truth of God. The Lord open your eyes to see the
truth, and suffer you not to continue any longer, to cause the blind go out of
the way, as you have done. Amen.

Master Gilbert Brown.

14 I thought to have put in heir also of Justification, whilk is the greatest
head of controversy betwixt them and us: for they will have only Faith to
justify: into the whilk (only) they seclude all good works. But because I
think to set this down afterward, I have not put it heir.

Master John Welsche his Reply.

This comes in afterward: therefore I refer the answer of it to that place.

Master John Welsche.

And our Religion whilk we profess, and all the particular heads of it, was
instituted by Jesus Christ and his Apostles, whilk I offer me also to prove
either by word or write, against whatsomeuer that will plead the contrary.
The whilk if I fail in, I will be content to lose my life therefore, by his
grace.

Master Gilbert Brown.

There is much promised heir, but nothing done, and it is ane thing impossible
to him to do. For why the difference chiefly that the Protestants d ffers from
us is in denying, abhorring, or detesting, as may be seen in their confession
of faith, whilk they compel all men to swear and subscriue. As we detest and
refuse the usurped authority of that Roman Antichrist, upon the Scriptures of
God, upon the Kirk, the civil Magistrate, etc. except sik things were expressly
contained in the word of God.

Master John Welsche his Reply.

As for my promise and performance, I ansvvered to that be fore, and whether
that be a thing impossible to me or not, let this my answer be a trial
thereof. You are bold enough indeed in affirming it to be impossible: but what
have ye for you? You say, because the difference chiefly that we differ from
you, is in denying and abhorring. What a reason is this? Can we not prove our
religion out of the Scripture, because we deny yours whilk is contrary to the
same? Is it impossible to prove the truth, because falset is denied and
abhorred. What new Logic or Divinity is this, Master Gilbert? I would never
have believed that ye had been sik an unskillful reasoner, if your self had not
bewraied the same. And certainly your Kirk is not beholding to you: for if
your reason hold forth, it will follow that it is impossible to you, or any
man else to prove the heads of your Religion by the Scripture: for in your
confession of faith, and form of abiuration set down by the Monks of
Bordeaux, anno 1585. there they deny and abhors the Protestants and their
doctrine, and compels all men who desires the fellowship of the Roman Kirk,
and their absolution, to main-svveare, renounce, and subscriue the same. But I
trow your Kirk will not allow this manner of reasoning of yours. And vvheras
you say that the chief difference wherein we differ from you is in denying
and abhoring etc. of your Religion. I ask you, does not our Religion differ as
far from yours, as yours does from us? This you cannot deny. For are not two
contraries equally different one from another? Does not light differ as far
from darkness, white from black, Bellarm. in his preface before the
controversies and in his preface de summo Pontific e
Christ from Antichrist, as darkness from light, black from white, and
Antichrist from Christ? And are not yours and our religions contrary one to
another? But your self will not deny, and Bellarmine confesses that you differ
from us in the maine and substantial points of religion: therefore of
necessity we must also differ from you in the maine and substantial points
of our religion. And so the chief difference wherein we differ from you, is
not in denying and abhorring, but in the maine and fundamental grounds of our
Religion. Otherwise it shall follow that the chief difference that ye differ
from us, is in denying and abhorring of our Religion, vvhilk I think your Kirk
will not digest. Whereas you say that this may be seen by our confession of
faith: Our confession hes not only the detesting and denying of your
abominable errors in general and particular: but also the confession of our
faith in general: referring the particular heads thereof to that confession
whilk is ratified and established by act of Parliament. And so heir Master
Gilberts untruth and calumny of our confession may be seen. As for this form
of exacting of an oath and subscription to Religion, The example of Moses. Deuteronomy.
29.10. and of Joshua 24.25 Iehoiada the hie priest. 2. Reg. 11.17. Iosia. 2. of
the Kings. 23 3. Asa. 2. Chro. 15.12. And of the people returning from the
captiu^tie of Babell with Nehemias. Nehem 10.
if you find fault with it, you not only gainesay the Scriptures of God,
impaires Princes lavvfull authority, and the Kirk of their jurisdiction and
lawful power: but also blots your own Kirk, who, as may be seen in that
confession of faith and form of abiuration set out by the Monks of Bourdeaux,
whereof we spoke before, does the same. As for this exception whilk ye put in
heir, I answered to it before.

Master Gilbert Brown.

For if this be a true ground of theirs, that nothing ought to be done or
believed, but sik things as are expressly contained in the word of God: but
their general confession, or their negative faith is not expressly contained in
the word of God: therefore it ought not to be done, nor believed.

Master John Welsche his Reply.

As for this ground whilk ye allege to be ours: it appears certainly,
Master Gilbert, that as ye said of me, either ye know not our grounds, or
else ye wilfully invert them for your own advantage. For our ground is, that
nothing ought to be done or believed in Religion, but that whilk may be
warranted by the testimony of the scripture, either in words and sense
together, or else by a necessary collection out of the same. The whilk with
Nazianzene we say, are of the same truth and authority with the first. And
according to this sense we say that all the heads of our Religion, asvvell
negative as affirmative, are expressly contained in the scripture, and so ought
both to be believed and practiced. These are but silly shifts, Master Gilbert,
whilk ye bring to discredit the truth of our religion. You knew full well the
blindness and simpleness of the people in this country: and therefore you
regarded not how silly and simple your reasons were.

Master Gilbert Brown.

That their Faith is contained in the word of God, so far as it differs from
ours, he will never be able to prove, neither by word nor write. And if he
will cause our kings Majesty to suspend his acts against us, that we may be
as free to speak our mind as he: he (a) shall have a proof hereof. But why
refused you to give a proof of this when I did offer it unto you, before your
own familiars, where you might have spoken as freely as I, so these ar but
words M. Gilbert and braggs only.
If not, let him prove the same by write, and he shall have an answer by Gods
grace. As for his life we desire not the same, but rather his conversion to the
truth.

Master John Welsche his Reply.

As for our ability to prove the truth of our doctrine, I answered it before:
judge thou Christian reader of the same, by this my answer. As for the
suspending of his Majesty's acts against you, that is not in our hands: and for
all the good ye could do, you have but too much liberty. And if you speak no
better for your religion, nor ye have done else in this your answer, your Kirk
will be but little beholden to you for it. And certainly if you will bind and
oblishe your self to face your own cause, and defend your religion by word, I
hope that license of a safe passage and conduct would be granted to you by his
Majesty, to let you speak for your self, what ye have for you for the defense
of it, for that space without any danger to your person, and that surer, and
with greater safety nor John Hus had, who notwithstanding of his safe conduct,
yet was brunt. And whereas you promise an answer, do what you can, Master
Gilbert, for now it is time to plead for your Baal. And let your answer be
more firm nor this, or else ye will lose more then ye will win by it. That
you desire not my life, I am beholde^ to you (if ye speak truth) considering
the bloody generation of your Roman Kirk, who these many years by past, hes
spilt the blood of the Saints of God in sik abundance, that it any can tell
the stars of heaven, he may number them whom your Kirk hes slain for the
testimony of the word of God. And as for that whilk ye call conversion, it is
auersion from the truth, and the losing of salvation: the whilk I hope shall be
dearer to me then a thousand lives, suppose they were all included in one.

Master John Welsche.

Secondly, I offer me to prove that there be verry few points of controversy
betwixt the Roman Kirk and us, wherein we dissent, but I shall get testimonies
of sundry Fathers of the first six hundredth years against them, and proving
the heads of Religion whilk we profess. Let any man therefore let me down
any weighty point of controversy, one, or more, and he shall have the proof
of this.

Master Gilbert Brown.

Whom Master John calls Fathers heir, I know not, except Simon Magus,
Nouatus, Aerius, Iouinianus, Pelagius, Vigilantius, and sik. For indeed there
is none of these, and many the like, but they were against us, and with them
in some heads. But I am sure, S. Irenaeus, S Cyprian, S. Ambrose, S.
Augustine, S. Hierome, S. Basile, S. Chrysostom with the rest of the holy
Fathers is no way with them, (...) 2.24. Math. 7.21. Math. 19.7. Matthew 34.35.
Joan. 14.15.21 1. Joan. 2.3.4 Romans 2.13. 1. Cor 13.2. 1 Cor 1.19 Galat. 5.6.
Tit. 1 16 De fi^e and operibus cap. 14.
and against us, as Master John will not be able to prove for all his offer.
As for example: It is a chief ground in their Religion, that only Faith
justifies: This, I say, can neither be proved by the Scriptures, nor ancient
Fathers of the first 600. years. For why the contrary is expressly contained in
the word of God. Do ye see, says Saint James, that by works a man is
justified, and not by faith only, with many other places that aggrees with
the same, as I have noted heir on the margent. And S. Augustine says himself,
that this Justification by Faith only was an old heresy in the very time of
the Apostles.

Master John Welsche his Reply.

As for this calumny of yours, the trial of it will come in afterward:
therefore I refer the answer of it to that place And whereas you say, that
you know not whom I call Fathers, either your malice makes you to dissemble
your know ledge in this, or else palpable must your ignorance be. And where ye
say, that Irenaeus, Cyprian, etc. and the rest of the holy Fathers are no wise
with us, against you; and that I will not be able to prove it: I have not only
proved that already in sundry heads of our religion: but also that sundry of
your own Popes, Cardinals, Doctors, Bishops, Councels, and Canon law hes
been with us in sundry points of our religion whilk we profess, against that
whilk ye profess. And as for that example of Justification by Faith only
whilk ye cast in, whilk is one of the chief grounds of our religion: this I
will prove both by the Scripture, and by the testimonies of the Fathers of the
first 600. years. 2. Cor. 5.11
Our doctrine then concerning Justification is this: That as our sins was not
inherent in Christ, but imputed to him, whilk was the cause of his death: so
his righteousness whereby we are accounted righteous before God is not
inherent in us, but imputed to us: 1. Cor. 1.3^
and therefore the Scripture says, that he is made of God unto us
righteousness. Next, the only instrument that apprehends, and as it were,
takes hold of this righteousness of Christ, is a lively Faith, whilk works by
love, and brings forth good fruits so that neither is Faith a efficient or
meritorious cause of our salvation (for only Christ's death and righteousness
is that) but only an instrument to apprehend the same. Neither is every Faith
this instrument: but only that living Faith whilk I have spoken of: so that
true Faith is never without the fruits of good works, no more then fire is
without heat: and yet neither are our works, nor the work of Faith it self,
the meritorious cause of our salvation: but only Christ's death and
righteousness: neither are the fruits of this lively Faith, the instrument to
apprehend and take hold of Christ's righteousness, but only Faith it self.
This then is our doctrine, whilk is so plainly confirmed by the Scripture,
that he must be exceeding blind that sees it not. The places to confirm the
same, are these. Romans 3.28. and Romans 4.2
We conclude that a man is justified by Faith without the works of the Law.
If Abraham were justified by works then hes he wherein to rejoice, but not with
God. Ephesians. 2.9
By grace are ye saved through Faith, and that not of your selves: for it is
the gift of God: Phil. 3.9.
not by works, that none should rejoice. And I have counted all things loss,
that I might win Christ, and might be found in him, not having my own
righteousness whilk is of the Law, but that whilk is through the faith of
Christ, the righteousness whilk is of God through Faith. Tit. 3.3
And again, Not by the works of righteousness, whilk we had done, but
according to his mercy he saved us. Seeing the Scripture so expressly remoues
all works both of nature and of grace, both going before Faith, and following
after it, (and therefore the Apostle says, We are not saved by the works of
righteousness whilk we had done) and of all men, even of those who were
justified already and sanctified, as Abrabam, Paul, and the Ephesians were,
from our justification and salvation, as the causes thereof: therefore we are
only justified and saved by a lively faith apprehending the righteousness of
Christ.

Secondly, the Scripture not only remoues works (as we have said) from the
cause of our Justification and salvation, but also ascriues it to Faith, as in
these places, Whosoever believes in him shall have eternal life. And Thy Faith
has saved thee, etc. Ioh. 3.16. Luc. 8.48. Ephesians. 2.9. Romans 4.3.4.5. and Romans
3.26.28.30
And again, We are saved through Faith. And man is justified by Faith. And God
shall justify Circumcision of Faith, and incircumcision through Faith. And
Abraham believed God, and it was counted to him for righteousness. And least
ye should say, the Scripture hes not by Faith only, read the 8. of Luke, and
50. verse where our Savior says to Iairus, (...) Only believe and she shall be
saved. Therefore Faith is the only instrument to lay hold on the promise of
God. And least ye should say this was not a justifying Faith? I answer, this
Faith whilk Iairus had, was that same Faith whilk the woman with the bloody
issue had: Luc. 8.48. Lib. 1. de iustif. cap. 17. page 84.
but her Faith not only healed her body, but her soul also, whilk Bellarmine
grants, and our Savior testifies saying, Thy Faith has saved thee, etc.
therefore this is a justifying Faith also. Secondly, seeing the Faith of
miracles and justifying Faith is both one in substance with your Kirk, as
Bellarmine and the Rhemists says: cap. 5. lib. de iusti. annotat. in 2. Cor.
12.
and if it be a greater work to work miracles, as they say, then to be
justified: therefore if only Faith suffice to obtain miracles, as Bellarmine
graunts, lib. 1. cap. 20. page 97. why should not Faith only be also sufficient
to justify? for if it suffice for the greater work, much more for the less.

Thirdly, the Scripture ascriues our Justification to grace and not to works:
and so oppones them, that the one cannot stand with the other in the matter of
our Justification. Romans 3.24.
We are justified (says he) freely by grace, and not by works. And to him
that works the reward is imputed, not according to grace, but to debt: but to
him who works not, Romans 4.4. Romans 11^.
but believes an him who justifies the ungodly, his faith is imputed to him
for righteousness. And in another place, If it be of grace, it is no more of
works, or else were grace no more grace: but if it be of works, it is no more
grace, or else work were no more work. Seeing therefore our Justification is
only of free grace, and grace (if the Apostle be true) cannot stand with
works: therefore our Justification is not by works, or else it were not of
grace: and so not at al: and so the foundation of our salvation were
ouerturned. I hope therefore this our doctrine of justification is plainly
warra^ted by the scripture. Now to the Fathers, Origin in epi^^ ad Romans cap.
3. who lived in the 200. year after Christ. Hilar. canon. 8. in Matthew. in 300.
seculo. Basil. in homil. de humilitate in seculo 300. Ambrose in c. 3. ad Romans
etc 4 and 9. in seculo. 300. Chrysostom. in homil de fide and lege naturae and in
homil. 3. ad Tit. in seculo 400. August. lib. 1. contra Duas Epistolas Pelag.
c. 21. in seculo 400. Cyrillus lib. 10. in Joan c. 18. in seculo. 400.
because ye say it cannot be proved by them, they spoke as plainly as we do.
Origin has these words: And the Apostle says, that the justification of
Faith only suffices: (solius fidei) so that he that believes allanerlie is
justified, suppose no work be fulfilled of him. Hilarious says, For only
Faith justifies: fides enim sola iustificat. Basilius says, This is a perfect
rejoicing in God, when a man vaunts not himself of his own righteousness,
but knows himself to be misterfull of true righteousness, sola autem fide in
Christum iustificatum, and to be justified only by faith in Christ. Ambrose
says, They are justified by faith only through the gift of God. And in the 4.
chapter he hes thrice, by faith only, sola fides. And in the 9. chapter also,
Sola fides posita est ad salutem: that is, only faith is appointed for
salvation. Chrysostom says, The thief believed only and was justified. And in
another place, If thou gives credit to thy faith, wherefore brings thou in
other things, as though faith only were not sufficient to justify. Augustine,
it is a known saying of his, Works goes not before Justification, but
follows him who is already justified. And in another place, August. de fide
and operib. c. 14. Theophil. in comment ad Galat c. 3, in the 800, age. Bernard
sermo, 22, in c^^^ic. in the 1200. age.
How virtuous so ever ye report the ancient righteous to have been, yet their
virtue saved the^ not, but the faith of the Mediator. Cyrillus Alexandrinus
says, Man by faith only sticks in Christ, inhaeret Christo. Theophylactus
says, only faith hes in the self the virtue of justifying. Bernard says, Man
being justified by faith only, shall have peace toward thee. What more plain
now could the fathers speak of Justification by faith only, whilk you will not
deny Master Gilbert? The reader may learn how much credit (...) to be given
to you who so boldly affirmed that neither Scripture nor Fathers said with us
against you. I hope they will try you before they trust you in time to come.
For dare you say (Master Gilbert) that I have fained heir ought of these
Fathers, and hes not brought in their own words speaking? Deny it if ye dare.
Be not so impudent and shamlesse Master Gilbert, in your untruths and lies
again: for by this ye will both discredit your self and your religion.

As for the 2. of James whilk ye quote here, that by works a man is justified
and not by says only. I answer. This word to be justified, is taken in the
Scripture two manner of ways. First, to be accounted righteous before the
tribunal of God: and in this sense, only a lively faith apprehending the death
and righteousness of Christ iustifies us: and of this is the controversy.
Next, it is taken for a declaration of ones righteousness, as in the 3. of the
Romans, ver. 4. That thou may be justified in thy words (that is, declared to
be just) when thou judges. And in this sense it is taken in this place. So that
this is the meaning of it. Ye see then, by works man is justified, that is,
declared by his works to be just, and not by faith only, that is, by the
profession of his faith in Christ. So then James speaks not of our
Justification before God whilk is by faith only, but of the declaration of our
righteousness before men, whilk he calls Justification: and that for these
reasons. 1. Otherwise James should be contrary to Paul who says, That a man
is justified by faith without works, whilk is blasphemous to think therefore
James speaks of our Justification before men, whereby our Justification before
God is declared and made manifest. 2. The scope of the whole chapter, and whole
Epistle testifies the same. For his purpose is to cast down the arrogancy and
presumption of sik, who bragged of their Faith, as though the bare profession,
that they believed in Christ, were sufficient to save them, suppose they did
not bring forth the fruits thereof. Therefore the Apostle takes this in hand
to prove that they are not justified by a dead faith, but only by that faith
whilk brings forth the effects thereof. And therefore he says in the
fourteenth verse, What avails it my brethren when a man says he hes faith,
when he hes no works? can that faith save him? And in the eighteenth verse,
Show me thy faith out of thy works, and I will show thee my faith by my
works. And because it may be ye say, this is my commentary, therefore hear
how one of your own great and chief pillars Thomas of Aquine expones the
same, from whose judgment, I hope, ye will not appeal. In Jacob. 2
Heir he speaks (says he) of works that follows faith, not according to
that sense wherein Justification is said to be the infusion of righteousness,
but according to that sense that Justification is called exercitatio iustitiae,
the practice or declaration, and confirmation of righteousness. So if ye will
believe him, Justification heir is taken not for our justification before God,
but for the declaration of our righteousness. And so the ordinar Gloss
exponing that place writes, In Jacob. 2
Abraham was justified without works by faith only: but nevertheless the
offering up of his son, was a testification of his faith and righteousness.
What can be more clearlie spoken by any? Would you have more then this? So the^
this place of James speaks not of our Justification before God, and therefore
serves not to prove this your doctrine. As to the 2. of the Romans, 13, It is
true, it is not the hearers of the Law, but the doers of it whilk are
justified, if there were any who had fulfilled it. But the Apostle concludes in
the third chapter, all under sin, both Jew and Gentile: and therefore gathers
that by the works of the Law no flesh is justified. And so we will leave this
to you to do, and that also in the 19. of Matthew, spoken to the young man, Do
the commands, etc. And as for the rest of the testimonies, I wonder to what
purpose ye have quoted them, except for to make a show of Scriptures and
testimonies. For they speak only of the necessity of good works, whilk as
they cannot be separate from true faith, so no man can attain to salvation
without them: because where ever Christ dwelles by true Faith, not only he
iustifies them, but also sanctify them, and makes them fruitful in good
works. The whilk we grant, and therefore does urge the same continually,
knowing for a truth, Heb. 12 14 Matthew. 3.10
that without holiness no man shall see God, and that the axe is laid to the
root of the tree, and that every tree that brings not forth good fruit
shall be hewn down, and cast in an unquenchable fire. They speak not
therefore of the efficient or formal, or isntrumental cause of our
Justification, but of our sanctification with the fruits thereof, and
therefore serves not to prove the controversy that is in hand. As for
Augustine his testimony, as you corrupt the Scriptures, so do ye his
testimony also: for this was the opinion whilk was risen up in the Apost.
days, as he testifies there: That is a dead faith whilk brought not forth
good works.
for these are his words: that some thought that faith only was sufficient to
obtain salvation without works, neglecting to live well, and to hold the way
of God by good works, and being secure of salvation, whilk is in faith, had not
a care to live well, as he says. And in the end of that chapter he concludes
the whole matter saying, How far therefore are they deceived, who promises to
themselves everlasting life through a dead faith. The whilk error we condemn
also with you: for we acknowledge the necessity of good works, as the fruits
of a living faith: but not as the efficient, formal, or isntrumental cause of
our justification.

Master Gilbert Brown.

Further, I say, since the difference chiefly in religion betwixt us and them
is about the understanding of the word of God, Not we M. Gilbert, but one of
the chief pillars of your own Kirk, Caietan a Cardinal (whilk was sent in
Germany against Luther) the Popes legate, who says in plain words that the
author of the Epistle to the Hebrews does gather insufficient arguments, to
prove Christ to be the Son of God, that the 2. and 3. Epistle of John, is not
canonical Scripture, that the Epistle of Jude is Apocripha, that the last
chap. of Mark is not of sound aut^oritie, that the history of the adul^erous
woman is S John is not authentical, and of S. James E^ stle that the
salutation of it is profane.
albeit they deny a great part of the same to us: What is the cause that they
will not abide the trial of the ancient Fathers of the first sex hundredth
years, seeing that they were of his Religion, as he affirms, If he be as good
as his word, the matter will be sone ended. And if our Religion be not found
consonant to theirs in all things (wherein they differ from us) we shall
reform the same.

Master John Welsche his Reply.

You said a little before, Master Gilbert, that the chief difference wherein
we differ from you is in denying, abhorring or detesting, etc. Now you say,
that the difference chiefly of Religion betwixt us, is about the understanding
of the word of God. How well these two aggrees, let the reader judge. It is no
wonder suppose you dissent from your brethren (as I have proved in sundry
points before) seeing ye dissent from your self. It is true indeed, that many
of our controversies are about the right sense and understanding of the
scripture, but yet if Petrus a Soto, Lindanus, Peresius, Canisius, all great
and learned Papists speak truth, the most part of the waightiest and chiefest
points of your religion, whilk are in controversy between us, are but
unwritten Traditions, whilk hes not their beginning nor author in the
Scripture, and cannot be defended by the same. And whereas ye would have us to
refer the controversies about the sense and right meaning of the Scriptures, to
be decyded by the writings of the Fathers of the first 600. years: we receive
their monuments and writings gladly: but yet so, that we put a difference
between them, and the writings of the holy Ghost in the scripture. For as I
have proved sufficiently before, as I hope, that only the Scriptures of God
hes this prerogative, to be ye supreme judge of all controversies in religion,
and no other and the best way to learn the sense of the Scripture, is by the
Scripture it self: for seeing all the Scripture is inspired of God, therefore it
ought to be exponed by God in the same. For he who made the Law can best
interpret the Law. And the Leuits practiced this in the old Testament, Nehem.
8 8. Act, 26.2^.
who exponed the Scripture by the Scripture: and the Apostles in the new
Testament, who taught nothing but that whilk the Prophets said should come to
pass. And if a Father, yea a Saint, yea if an Angel would preach beside that
whilk the Apostles preached, let him be accursed. So then, nothing can be a
warrant to us of the truth of the sense of the Scripture, but the Scripture it
self. And as for the Fathers expositions, as they may not be judge (as hes been
said) because they may err, and hes erred, as hes been proved, and your
selves will not deny: and they dissent oftentimes one from another in the
exposition of the same. So let their expositions be taken in so far as they
aggree with the Scripture. For would ye have us ascriue that unto them, whilk
they themselves hes refused, and hes ascriued unto the Scriptures only?

Hear therefore what Optatus the Bishop of the Kirk of Mileuitan a learned man
who lived about the year of God 369. says, writting against the Donatistes
who claimed to themselves only the title of the Kirk of Christ as ye do. They
called for a Judge, be bringes the Testament of Christ for a Judge: and
speaking to them of a point of religion that was controuerted, whether one
should be twice baptized or not? he says, You, says he, affirms it is
lawful, we affirm it is not lawful, between your say it is lawful, and our
say it is not lawful, the peoples souls do doubt and waver. Let none believe
you nor us, we are all contentious men, Judges must be sought for, if
Christians, they cannot be given on both sides; for truth is hindered by
affection. A Judge without must be sought for. If a Pagane, he cannot know the
Christian mystery; if a Jew, Optatus lib. 5. contra Parmenianum
he is an enemy to Christianity. No Judge therefore of this matter can be
found in earth. A Judge from heaven must be sought for. But why knock we at
heaven when here we have his Testament in the Gospel. And he randers a reason
of this in that same book. Christ says he, hes dealt with us as an earthly
father is wont to do with his children, who fearing least his children should
fall out after his decease, does set down his will in writting under witness:
and if there arise debate among the Brethren, they go to the Testament. He
whose word must end our controversy is Christ. Let his will be sought in his
Testament, August. in Psalm. 21 exposa
(says he.) Augustine urges the same reason of Optatus against the
Donatistes. We are brethren, says he, to them why do we strive? Our father
died not vntestate, he made a testament and so died. Men do strive about the
goods of the dead whill their testament be brought forth. When that is
brought forth they yield to have it opened and red. The Judge does harken: the
Counselors be silent: the Crier bids peace. All the people is attentive
that the words of the dead man may be red and hard. He lies void of life and
feling, and his words prevail. Christ sits in heaven, and is his Testament
gainsaid? Open it let us read. We are Brethren why do we strive? Let our
minds be pacified, our father hes not left us without a testament. He that
made the testament is living for ever, he does hear our words. He does know
his own word, Pre^. lib 4. contra here is. cap. 65
let us read, why do we strive. Irenaeus says that the lawful exposition of
the Scripture whilk hes no peril with it, is according to the Scriptures
themselves. What can be more plain (Master Gilbert?) And I ask you further?
Would you have us to ascriue more to the interpretation of the fathers, nor the
learned of your Kirk does? Caietan. in praes. in commentatia in lib. Mosi^
As Caietan a Cardinal and Doctor. Andradius the first says that God hes not
tied the exposition of the Scripture unto the exposition or sense of the
fathers, (if God hes not bound it as he says, why then should we bind it:)
wherefore their he desires the reader, not to mislike it, if sometimes in the
expounding of them, he fall into a sense agreeable to the text, though it go
against the stream of the fathers. If he speak truth, then that sense that
is agreeable to the text suppose it be against the stream of their
expositions, is to be received and preferred before them. And Andradius that
learned man says, Andra. defen. sid. Trident lib. 2. At whose gifts the
Italians wondered at, Oso ep. praefixa Andrad. fid. Trident. def.
that the fathers spoke not Oracles when they exponed the Scriptures, but might
therein be deceived. And he says more that the ouer-sights of the translation
whilk they followed, must needs cause them sometimes to miss the meaning of the
holy Ghost: and yet you would have the sense of the Scriptures to be decided
by them, who sometimes hes missed the meaning of the holy Ghost. And he
concludes in the end, That the holy Ghost is the only and faithful interpreter
of the Scriptures. Thus the fairest flowers of your garden, and chiefest
pillars of your faith hes written: so that if they speak true (whom I know
not if ye will presume to contradict) the exposition of the Scripture is not
tied unto the exposition of the Fathers: and it is leasome to go with the
text, against the stream of their expositions.

And whereas you say, if I will be as good as my word, the matter will soon be
ended: I am glade of it, if you think as you speak. My word was, Master
Gilbert, as your self hes written it, that there be very few points of
controversy between us, wherein I will not get some testimonies of sundry
Fathers of the first 600. years, proving with us against them (meaning your
kirk.) And I desired any man to set me down any weighty point of
controversy, one or more, and he should have the proof of it. These were my
words. Now ye say, if I will be as good as my word, the matter will soon be
ended. Whether I have been as good as my word in this or not, let the reader
judge. And I appeal your conscience Master Gilbert, before the Lord in the
great day, whether it be true or not. For not only in that example of
Justification, whilk ye cast in, but almost in all the heads whilk are
debated amongst us, I have brought in sundry testimonies of sundry Fathers
with us against you. Yea, I have been better then my word in that: for I have
brought in testimonies of sundry that lived after the 600. year: and not of
these only, but also testimonies of sundry of your own Doctors, Jesuits,
Cardinals, Bishops, Canons, Councels, and Popes: proving with us in some points
against your selves. I look therefore (Master Gilbert) that ye shall be as good
as your word, and that the matter shall end heir between you and me. For both
you have said that the matter would soon end, if I were as good as my word:
and also ye have promised and subscriued with your hand, to reform your
religion in all things wherein it is not conform to their testimonies. The
whilk if you do, then must you renounce the supremacy of your Pope, the
sacrifice of your Mass, your Transubstantiation, your Justification by works,
your merits of works, your perfect fulfilling of the Law of God, your
erroneous opinions that the kirk cannot err, that the Scripture should not be
judge, with sundry others. For in all these I have brought the testimonies of
sundry Fathers: and in some of them the testimonies of your own Doctors,
Councels, Canons, and Popes with us against you. Either therefore take shame and
falset for euer-more upon you, or else keep your word and your write, whilk ye
have subscriued heir, and reform these points of your religion. As for that
calumny wherewith ye charge us to have taken away a great part from the
scripture, I know you mean the Apocrypha, whilk bears not the mark and stamp
of Gods spirit, as being neither written by Prophets, nor yet the most part
of them in the prophetical language the hebrewe tongue, wherein all the old
Testament was written, except some things of Daniel, and Ezra, whilk were
written in the Chaldaick language, quhilk was known then to the Jews: nor yet
received as Canonical by the Kirk of the Jews, whilk Belar lib. 1: cap. 10.
your Kirk will not deny. Nor yet acknowledged Cannonicall by the testimonies
of sundry Melito lib. 4. c 26. Eusebius. Origin lib. 6. c. 25. Eusebius. Athan. in
sinop. Hilar. in prolog. explan. Psalm. Cyrill. in 4. cateches. Ruff^nus. in
expos. simboli. Hieron. in prologo galeato.
Fathers, Synod. Laodicen. canon. 59. confirmed by the council Trullan.
Councels, and of your Greg. Mag. in comment. in Iobum lib. 19. c. 16 Hugo.
cardinalis in prologo. Iosuae. Caietan a cardinal in fine coment. Hester.
Arias Montanus who was present at the council of Trent, in aeditione quad am
hebraicorum Bibliorum interlinearum interpretationem.
selves, also Papists of great name: some rejecting al, some more, some fewer:
containing also many things repugnant to the truth of God set down in the
Canonical Scripture. Last of all, wanting that majesty of Gods spirit whilk so
evidently shynes in the Canonical Scripture. And therefore most justly say
we, that ye underly the curse of God, pronounced in his Scripture, Apoc. 22.
for the adding unto the holy truth of God. And look to it (Master Gilbert,
what you will say to your Cardinal Caietane, who has denied sundry books
and parts of the Canonical Scripture in the new Testament.

Master John Welsche.

Now, if the first thing I offer me to prove, be found of verity: that is,
that our Religion is that self same, and no other, then that that Jesus Christ
preached, and his Apostles, and theirs is not so: but devised by the man of
sin, and that Antichrist, that whore of Babylon, then the plea is won But
if I prove the second also, then I hope they will never open their mouth to
speak evil of the truth of God, as though it were but a new Religion.

Master Gilbert Brown.

When Master John proves the thing that he is not able to prove, we shall do
the thing that we are not able to perform. but it is an wonder of him to put
in so many (ifs) and does nothing to the matter. For it is and true saying in
Philosophy, that a conditional Proposition proves nothing. It appears he hes
been in haste, that he might not have leisure to I proved all that was required
at my hands then.
prove any head for example of his promise. For we understand that M. John is a
man who may err, as many man hes done before by his judgment. And therefore
he must have no I desire no credit without warrant, as your popes and your
Kirk does of her disciples.
credence of us, except he bring his warrant, and ye shall be M. Gilbert is once
beguiled for this is performed.
sure that he is never able to perform his sayings.

Master John Welsche his Reply.

This my reply, I hope, satisfies for answer to this sectio^.

Master John Welsche.

Thirdly, I answer The Spirit of God foretells that when the Antichrist shall
come, the defection shall be universal, and all nations shall be drunken with the
wine of her fornication.

Master Gilbert Brown.

Where this is written, Master John tells not. For I am sure, as it is set
down heir, there is no sik things in our Bibles, no not in their own
corrupted Bibles, except they have augmented them of new. That there shall be an
universal defection, it is altogether repugnant to the word of God, as I have
showed before; in proving the Kirk always to continue. For the same place
where I believe he alleges too, hes these words, Apoc. 1^ 17.^
And it was given unto him to make war with the Saints, and to overcome them:
and power was given him upon every Tribe, and people, and tongue, and nation,
ann all that inhabit the earth adored it, whose names be not written in the
book of life of the Lamb Heir any man may see that the Saints of God that
shall be persecute by the Antichrist, and sik that is written in the book of
life, shall not make defection: then it shall not be an universal defection.
And also Master John afterward in finding some of his Religion that said
against the Antichrist the Pope, the time bygane, is contrary to himself heir,
that the defection shall not be universal. And where he says that all nations
shall be drunken with the wine of her fornication, the text is otherwise: Because
all nations have drunken of the wine of the wrath of her fornication: that is,
that the people of all nations that hes obeyed her, shall be punished with the
wrath of God and not that all the world should make defection.

Master John Welsche his Reply.

You fight heir against your own shaddowe, Master Gilbert) and whereas ye can
find nothing justly to quarrel in my words being rightly taken, and taken
as the Scripture takes them: you devise a meaning of your own brain, and
would father it upon me, that ye may the more easily have somewhat to speak
against. For I neither spoke it, nor meaned it that the elect should make
defection in the time of the Antichrist: I am so far from it, that suppose I
believe assuredly that this prophecy is fulfilled in your own Kirk; yet I
know assuredly that the Lord reserved his own elect to himself, Revel. 14
who was kept free from your Idolatry, as he promised, and histories
records of some, whereof I did set down some of their names. Domin. a Soto in
lib. 4. sent. did. 46 quest. 1. artic. 1 Bellarm. lib 3, de Romans Pont. ca 17
But this is the doctrine of one of your own Kirk, Dominicus a Soto, who
believed it assuredly, that the faith of Jesus Christ and Religion should be
utterly exstinguished through the persecution of the Antichrist, if Bellarmine
speak true of him. And so turn the point of your sword, Master Gilbert,
upon your own brother, who so taught, and not upon me, who is far from
it. And if ye vvil say, wherefore then called I it universal? I answer:
because the scripture calls it a defection, without any addition or
restraint, and your Rhemists graunts, that this defection shall be a reuolting of
Kings, people, and provinces, and the public intercourse of the faithful with
the Kirk of Rome shall cease: and that the daily sacrifice shall be abolished
most universally throughout all nations and Kirks of the world by Antichrist
himself. Annot. upon 2. Thessal. 2. And Bellarmine says, that he shall be
Monarch of the whole world. Lib. 3. cap. 16
Therefore this kingdom by your own confession shall be universal: and seeing
his kingdom is an apostasy or defection, for as many as shall obey him, shall
make defection from the faith: therefore by the doctrine of your own Kirk, it
must be an universal defection. And the Scripture says expressly, that he
shall make all both small and great, etc. Reuelat. 13 Revel. 14 8. and 18 3
to receive a mark on their right hand, and on their foreheads: and that no
man may buy or sell, etc. and that all nations hes drunken of the wine of the
wrath of her fornication. Now, whether I might call that universal whilk the
Scripture calls all, and your Rhemistes and Bellarmine makes so general and
universal, that it shall possess all the kingdoms of the earth, let the
Christian reader judge. And let me ask you (Master Gilbert) Do you not
believe that the Kirk is Catholic, or universal? Costerus a Jesuit in
Euchirid.
and do you not think with one of your own number, that the Kirk is called
universal, because the faith of the Kirk is scattered in all nations: and yet
for all this, all particular nations, and all particular men receaues not this
faith? and yet notwithstanding it is universal, and is called universal
still. And does not the Scripture prophecy that in Abraham all the Nations
shall be blissed, Galat. 3.8
and yet for all this, there were, and is millions of the Gentiles that are not
blissed in him? Why then, in like manner, may not the defection in the time of
the Antichrist be called universal, although the elect be exemed from it? But
wherefore insist I to refute this vain quarrelling of words whilk serves to
no purpose? So then, this that I said is both in your translation and ours in
substance, and is not contrary to that whilk I said afterward.

As for that place of Scripture whilk ye cite heir, Apoc. 3.7.8. it is not
spoken heir of the Antichrist, but of the persecution of the Roman Emperors.
As for that calumny of yours in calling our Bibles corrupted, and augmented:
this is your sin (Master Gilbert) whereof one day ye shall make an account to
the Majesty of God, for the slandering and bearing false witness of the truth
of God. And to speak the truth, this is true of you: for both you have added
to the Scriptures of God, first the Apocrypha, next your Traditions, whilk your
Kirk hes decreed to be received with equal reverence and godliness with the
Scripture: Council. T^ident. Se^. 4 Grat^^^us did. 19. Et Alph^nsu^ de g^ner^^
in thesau o Christ relig^^ 3. n^^. 5.
thirdly, the Decretal Epistles of your Popes, whilk some of you hes reckoned
in the number of the Canonical scripture. And also you have corrupted the
scriptures of God by your corrupt translation, especially that of the College
of Rhemes. The whilk to be true, if time would serve, I might sone be able to
prove, whilk hes been sufficiently proved by that learned and worthy man of
God Doctor FVLK: unto the whilk you, not al your clergy hes not answered as
yet, for ought that I know: nor never is able to do.

And as for the last point wherein ye say, that the text is otherwise then I
set down: let the Christian reader judge whether my words be one in substance
with this text or not for suppose this be set down in the preter-time, and I
spoke it in the future-time: yet it is a prophecy of a thing to come: and your
Kirk graunts it is not fulfilled yet, therefore they are both one in substance.
And as for your exposition, where you expone this of the punishment of the
people that hes obeyed her, and not of their sin in communicating with her
Idolatry, that is manifestly against the text. For this is set down heir as
the cause of her punishment, whilk is pronounced before in these words,
Babylon hes salne, etc. Now the reason, because al nations hes drunken of the
wine of the wrath of her fornication, whereby in the Scripture is signified
Idolatry: and it is called the wine of the wrath, etc. because her fornication
provoked God to wrath. Osea 1. Ierem 3.
And Aretas exponeth this fornication, a defection from every good. And in the
18. chapter it is more evident, where after the denunciation of her fall, this
reason is subioyned, Because all nations hes drunken of the wine of the wrath
etc. and the Kings of the earth hes committed fornication with her: and the
marchands of the earth are waxed rich through the abundance of her pleasures.
The whilk as they cannot be understood of the punishment, but of the defection:
so this drinking cannot be understood of their punishment, but of their
communication with her Idolatry: and yet how ever it be, this proves that
universal defection, of the whilk I spoke.

Master John Welsche.

And the K rk of God shall be latent, and flee to the wilderness, and there
lurk, and be fed of God all that time secretly.

Master Gilbert Brown.

It is an wonder to hear the word of God abused, not only with false
expositions repugnant to the words self, but also alleging the word falslye.
For the text of Saint John hes but this, (for he notes no place, because This
is your imagination, and you are deceived in it therefore correct your thoughts
M. Gil.
he knows it may not abide ane trial) And the woman fled unto the
wilderness, where she had ane place prepared of God, that there they might
feed her, ane thousand, two hundredth, and threescore days. Heir there is no
word that she shall be latent, nor lurk, nor be secreat. And if Master John will
mean that the fleeing to the wilderness, is nothing but to be invisible, and
to lie secreat: then it must follow that the whore of Babylons self must be
invisible and secret. For the same Saint John says. And the Angel took me
away in spirit into the desert, and I saw ane woman sitting upon ane skarlet
colored beast, full of names of blasphemy, having seven heads and ten
horns. This word (desert) signifies more properly to be secret or invisible,
nor the word (wilderness) It is true appearandlie, that if this Woman si
nifies the Kirk of Christ that in the time of the Antichrist, she shall be
redacted to ane small number, as it were in ane wilderness, and shall not
possess every nation, as she had wont to do: but that she may be made
invisible, and not to be seen, there is no true Catholic that expones it so.
And siklike, this time shall be but short, that is, for 1260 days, as the text
says, whilk is but three years and ane half. And if Master John's Kirk had
been but so long invisible, we should have dispensed with the same. But it hes
been invisible their thousand years, as it is now professed in Scotland, and
much more as young Marchistoun hes in his book upon the Revel. cap. 12. ver. 14

Master John Welsche his Reply.

All that you can find fault with here, is this, that I said the Kirk in the
time of the Antichrist, should be latent and lurk and be fed secretly: the
whilk hes stirred you up in sik a choler that you have cried out with
admiration that I have abused the Scripture: etc. Now tell me (Master Gilbert)
whether is it because these same words are not found in the Scripture, or
because the doctrine it self cannot be warranted by the same? If the former,
then I say you are but a quarreller about words, And all the doctrine whilk ye
have set down in this your answer is not set down in so many terms in the
Scripture, and yet ye will have it to be the doctrine of Gods spirit, (suppose
it be not so.) So it suffices that this whilk I said be warra^ted by the
Scripture, suppose the same terms be not found. If the other: then I say
beside other places of Scripture, this same place whilk ye quote here
confirms the same. For know ye not that the wilderness is a place of refuge
and secrecy from the tyranny of their pursuers? And they that flies to the
same, they fly to lurk there, and to be kept close and secret from the rage
of their persecuters for the safety of their lives. So while it is prophesied
that this woman (whereby is signified the Kirk,) whilk suppose ye condtionally
expone so, 40. demonstrat.
yet Sanderus one of your own number expones it to be the Kirk without all
doubt shall fly in the wilderness from the face of the Dragon, and that for
her safety, and there be fed etc. Is it not then manifest that she shall be
secret and lurk then, and not be so open and visible as she was before? And if
this be an abuse of the Scripture, then not only your self hes abused it,
but also sundry of your own Kirk, as the Rhemistes, Bellarmine, and Sanderus.
For your self says that in the time of the Antichrist, she shall be redacted in
a small number, as it were in a wilderness, and shall not posses every nation
as she had wont to do. For what is this else but to lurk and be latent, and to
be fed secretly, in comparison of that estate wherein she was before? And
therefore the only thing that I inferred on this in the end, was that no man
should think that the Kirk of God was ever open and visible, in sik a
flourishing estate as it is now. And the Rhemists says that in the time of the
Antichrist, Annotat. in 2. Thessal.
this great defection or revolt shall be of kingdoms, people, and Provinces,
from the open external obedience and communion with the Kirk of Rome. So that
their communion with her shall be in heart, and the practice thereof in secret,
and he shall abolish the public exercise of al religions true or false,
Bellarm. lib. 3. de Rom Pont. cap. 17. and 18 Sander. demonst 35. and 37
save that whilk is done to himself: So that the Mess they say, shall be had
but in secret then. And Bellarmine and Sanderus is of the same mind, that his
cruel persecution shall stay all public exercise of religion, and he shall
make open warfaire with the whole Kirk, and shall endeavor to destroy the
universal estate of the whole Christian common weal, and shall shut up the
door of sacraments, and shall suffer no man any more to enter in the Kirk of
Christ, and shall be Monarch of the whole world. Now if this be true, whether
shall the Kirk of Christ by your own doctrine be fed secretly, or not be
latent and lurk, in the time of the Antichrist, let al men judge. But what a
contradictorious spirit is this of yours, who to gainesay the thing that I
write, cares not to inuolue your self in a contradiction, not only to the
truth, but also to your own Catholics. Either therefore wonder at your own
Catholics, who hes spoken as much and more in this point nor I did, and at
your self also, who grants as much in substance as I meaned, that ye and they
have abused the Scripture, or else leave of to wonder at me, and wonder at the
veil whilk is hung over your own eyes, whilk hinders you not only to
understand the truth, but also to understand what your self and your own
brethren teaches. Now as for your reason, it is not said that Babylon was in
the desert, but that John was taken in the spirit, that is, ravished in the
spirit (as in the 1. and 4. chapter) into the desert that is, into a solitare
and heavenly contemplation of that vision whilk was afterward shown him. For
as this carrying of him in the spirit signifies his spiritual rauishing, so
this desert signifies the solitarenes of his contemplation. And as that lifting
up of Ezechiell by the locks of the hair of his head between the heaven and
the earth, and that carrying of him to the door of the innermost port toward
the North, to see the abominations of Jerusalem, was only in vision, and not
bodily. So I take this carrying of John in spirit to the wilderness to see the
whore of Babylon to have been in vision only, and not bodily. And whereas ye
say that this word desert signifies more properly to be hid and invisible nor
the word wilderness, I pray you tell me (Master Gilbert) what is between
desert and wilderness? save that the first is driven from the Latin, and the
second is English? Must you be set to the grammar school again? What fancy
is this wherewith ye are possessed, that you put a difference between
wilderness and desert? Is there any difference, if you understood the greek
language, between (...) and (...), that is, between desert and desert,
wilderness and wilderness? And if ye have ever red the new Testament in
Greek, there is but the self same word (...) in both these places, whilk
signifies desert or wilderness. But where have you been when ye did imagine
this difference? Appearandly ye have been dreaming in some wilderness, or else
wandering in the wilderness of your own blind imaginations. As for the
exposition of your true Catholics, we count not much of them. Always these
whom ye call your true Catholics, Bellarmine the Rhemists, and Sanderus hes
been plain in this matter, and hes spoken more in this point then we do. And
as for the time of this her secrecy and lurking 1260. days whilk you expound
literallie to be but three years and a half. I answer, this exposition of
yours is against first the custom of prophesies, whilk are expounded
figuratiuelie and not literally, as these 70. weeks in Daniel concerning
Christ, where there a day is put for a year. Next, it is against the whole
circumstances of ihe text: for will you expound this woman figuratively for the
Kirk, as Sanderus does: and the wilderness unto the whilk she fled, figuratively
for the small number whereunto she shall be redacted, as you do: and the sun
wherewith she was cled, and the moon whilk was under her feet, and the twelve
stars that was upon her head, and the red Dragon whilk persewed her with ten
heads etc. all figuratiuelie, and yet will ye expound the time of her being in
the wilderness literallie? What violence is this whilk ye will offer unto the
holy truth of God, to expound all the rest figuratively, and only the time
literallie? So then a day here is set for a year, as also it is taken in the
same sense in the 2. chapter of the Revelation in the Epistle to Smyrna, where
it is said they shall have tribulation for the space of ten days: that is, for
the space of ten years. As for the invisibility of our Kirk, because that
question cums afterward, therefore I omit it now. Only this, as your Hierarchy
and abomination of your Kirk grew, so did the purity of the doctrine of Jesus
Christ in his Kirk decay. And as your Popes came not to their height at an
instant, and brought not in their abominations at an instant but piece and
piece, and by longproces of time: So the purity of the truth of God decayed
not at an instant, but piece and piece and by a long process of time. For the
degrees of your exalting, was the degrees of the depressing of the truth of
God in his Kirk. As for our dispensation suppose your Kirk uses not to give
them without money laid down, yet we will neither buie them, nor have them
for naught. So keep your dispensations at home (Master Gilbert) whill we send
for them.

Master John Welsche.

And the Ministers thereof shall preach in sackcloth, that is, under
persecution, all the (...), and at the last they shall be put to death for the
testimony of Jesus, and for speaking against their false worship and Religion.

Master Gilbert Brown.

It appears to me that Master John hes found some new revelation, other
then that of Saint John: for he notes no place to us: Apoc. 11.8
and these words of his are no way in S. John. and therefore as an invention of
his own head, we will reject the same. Indeed we have in Saint John, That God
shall give to his two witnesses, and they shall prophecy 1260 days clad with
sackcloth But this can no ways aggree with this purpose of his For why there
shall be but two of their: and there is more then two hundredth Ministers in
Scotland. And these two shall prophecy, but our Ministers are no Prophets
(albeit they foretell things often times that is not true) and all the
prophecies, if they prophecy at any time, is of evil and not of good. These
two shall prophecy but three years and ane half: but our Ministers hes
prophesied these 38 years, if preaching be prophesying. And these two shall be
cled in sackcloth, but our Ministers, chiefly of Burrow towns, is clad in fine
blak cloth, or silk. And so forth of many more differences, as is contained in
the 11 chapter of the Revelation.

Master John Welsche his Reply.

It appears to you that I have found some new revelation, other then that of
Saint John. So did it appear to the Jews, that the Apostle Paul taught all
men every where against the Law of Moses, and yet it was the truth, Act.
21.28 Act. 26.2^.
as he himself testifies, he spoke nothing beside that whilk Moses and the
Prophets fore told was to come. So every appearance is not truth. It is but
the scailes that are upon your eyes, that makes this so to appear to you: For
the Scripture of God, and this revelation of John is sufficient to us to make
it manifest, that your head is the Antichrist, and your doctrine is that
Apostasy that was prophesied to come: so that we need no new revelations, as
ye do: for because the revelations already made by God to his Kirk, and
written in his holy Scripture does not warrant your abominable and false
doctrine, and your Popes supremacy, whilk is the foundation of all: therefore
you and your Kirk flees to vn-written Traditions, and fained revelations to
prove the same. As for example, because your Kirk hes not so much as a sillabe
in the whole book of God, to prove that Peter's seat was translated from
Antiochia to Rome, whilk is the whole fundation of all Popery, Causa 24.
quest. 1. cap. Rogamus.
therefore your Pope Marcellinus in his canon law, grounds the certainty of
this upon a fained revelation, that Peter by the commandment of God did
translate it. But to leave you with your new revelations, what have ye for you,
for this your appearance? You say first, because I note no place: and next,
because these words of mine, are no ways in Saint John. Therefore ye conclude
it to be an invention of my own. As to the first. Is this a good reason, I
note not the place, therefore I have found out some new revelation: You must be
sent to the Logic schools again, to learn the right manner of reasoning. I
noted no place, Ergo I could not, that will not follow. As to the second my
words are no ways found in Saint John, Ergo I have found a new revelation? But
what if the sense be found? What if the self same doctrine be found in Saint
John, suppose not in the same words? Then it will not follow that I have found
out a new revelation, or that this is the invention of my own brain. This
place whilk ye quote heir, Revel. 11.3. sufficie^tlie confirms all that I
said. For your self will not deny, and Bellarmine, Bellarm lib 3. c. 6 Rhem.
in annot. upon Apo. cap. 11 Sand. in his demonstrations.
the Rhemists, and Sanderus graunts, that these two witnesses are they who
shall preach in the time of the Antichrist, suppose they expound them of Elias
and Enoch, and that they shall be persecuted, and put to death by him. What a
blindness is this, Master Gilbert, that hes ouersyled your eyes, that for the
writing of that same doctrine whilk the scripture warrands, your Divines
graunts, and your self will not deny, you have said that it appeared to you,
that I have found out some new revelation. But judge thou (Christian reader)
what thou may presume upon Master Gilberts appearances. But you say, this
aggrees not with my purpose: and that because of the differences between these
two witnesses, and the Ministers of Scotland. First I do not mean by these two
Witnesses the Ministers of Scotland only, but the Ministers of all the
reformed Kirks in Europe, who hes departed out of your Babel, and hes shaken
off the yoke of the tyrannous bondage of your head, the man of sin: and not
only these who now lives, but these also who now rests from their labors, and
sleeps in the Lord: of whom a great many was persecuted, and put to death by
your tyranny, for speaking against your abominations. Now as to these
differences whilk ye mark: the fountain from the whilk this springs, is your
mistaking of the prophecies of God, and exponing them literally, whilk
according to the use of prophecies and especially these whilk are set down in
this Revelation, and all the circumstances of this text, ought to be exponed
figuratiuelie. These same two Witnesses are called two Olives, two
Candlestickes, and it is said of them, Revel. 11, 4.5.6. etc.
that fire commes out of their mouths and destroys their enemies. etc. If you
will not be so absurd and ridiculous, as to expone these things literallie,
but figuratiuelie: otherwise ye will make them Monsters, Trees, and
Candlesticks: why then do ye expone this place concerning their number, work,
time, apparel, etc. literallie, and not figuratiuelie as the rest of their
works, and properties must be exponed: the whilk if you had done, then would
ye have seen no difference between the Ministers of the Gospel that resisted
your Pope, and these two Witnesses heir: but the one to be the prophecy of the
other, and the other to be the accomplishing of the prophecy. As for their
number then, they are said to be but two, that is, few: and yet sik a
sufficient number, as may prove and qualify any thing by the law. For by the
law: Out of the mouth of two or three witnesses, shall every word be
established. So the Ministers of the gospel in the time of your Antichrist and
darkness, was but few at the beginning: and yet so many, as served for to
establish the truth of God by their testimony, in the consciences of so many
whom God had appointed to save. As for their work of prophesying, the
Scripture calls preaching, prophesying, ^. Cor. 12. and 13. and 19. Annotat.
in 11. Revel.
and the Rhemistes graunts that these Witnesses shall preach against the
Antichrist. And whereas you say, that we foretell often times things that is not
true: this is your calumny and lie, Master Gilbert, and so ought to have no
credit. And the prophecies of the Ministers of this land against your
Antichristian kingdom, ye have found by experience that they have been too
true. And their prophecies are trewer then the prophecies of one of your Popes,
Hildebrand, who openly in the pulpit on the second holy day in Easter week, in
the presence of diverse Bishops, ^o^ in page 229.
and Cardinals, and of the people and Senate of Rome, prophesied that the King
whose name was Henry should die before the feast of Peter next ensuing: or at
the least, that he should be so dejected from his Kingdom that he should not
be able any more to gather above the number of sex knights. And this he
preached with this confirmation, never accept me for Pope any more, if this
prophecy be not fulfilled, but pluck me from the altar. But he was a false
Prophet in the same, for neither was fulfilled. And whereas ye say, if they
prophecy at any time, it is of evil and not of good: so said Achab of the
Prophet of the Lord, 1. Reg. 22.^.
and therefore he hated him: so you speak with the same spirit against us,
that Achab spak with against the Lords Prophet. And what good can be spoken of
your Babel, since the Lord hes fore-tolde the ruin of it, and in part hes been
accomplished? and some of your own number, as Hildegardis, Briget, Catherine
de Senis hes for-tolde of the destruction of your Kirk, and the reformation of
the Kirk of Christ. As for the time, Fox. page 260.
it was spoken of before, and I trow ye have thought it too long, and yet be in
pa^ience, Master Gilbert, for it must continue, and your Babel must down. As
for the clothing of sackcloth, it was the apparel of sik as was in dolor and
in mourning, whereby is signified the sorrow and dolor that should arise to
the true ministers of Christ, throw the persecution of the Antichrist and his
members, and their idolatry and abominations. The whilk hes been so clearly
fulfilled in the preachers of the Gospel since John Hus his days, and before
also, even to this day, that he must be blinded of the Lord who sees it not.
And whereas ye cast up the clothing of the Ministry in this land, ye have
forgotten your self, and your Clergy, and your head the Pope, with his triple
crown, with all the rabble of his Prelates, Abbots, Bishops, Cardinals, etc. as
full of riotous pride and pomp, as ever were the Persians Kings, His clothes
be made of precious stones, his gorgeous Miter dight, Bernard de con. sid ad
Eugen. lib. 4. Platin de v^ta pontific. in Paulo 2.

With jewels rare, with glistering gold, and with A precious stone called a
carbuncle of the whilk kind, one that fell out of the Popes mytre by a
mischance at his Coronation was worth 6000. crowns Platin in vita Clementis. 5
Piropus bright.
O very Troian-trulles, not Trojans.
The pomp and glory of whose court does surmount all the pomp and glory of
all the Princes in Europe, as some that hes seen it reports. How then can ye
justly quarrel our attire? Can you say that we pass the bounds of that
modestye and comeliness whilk the Apostle requires in the overseers of the
Kirk of Christ, seeing you will have all the outward pomp and glory of your
Popes and Prelates, according as it was prophesied of you, Revel. 17. to be
comprehended within the definition of comeliness and modesty? But you are
like the Lamians, of whom it is reported that they had but one eye: and when
they went forth they took it with them to look upon others: and when they
came in their own houses, they laid it beside them: you look to your
neighbors, but ye ouer-see your self. So for all the differences whilk ye
have yet assigned, it remains sure that by these two Witnesses heir are
signified the Ministers of the Gospel.

Master Gilbert Brown.

But note heir, I pray you, how well these new Evangelists aggrees in the
exposition of this Revelation of Saint John: (for all their grounds and proofs
is upon prophecies and dark speakings) Young Marchistoun in his book upon the
Revelation, the 11. chap. 3. verse, expones these Witnesses to be the old and
new Testaments, as he proves in the 21. Proposition: and Master John will
have them the Ministers. Marchistoun says, that to be cled in sackcloth, is to
preach the word of God with the obscurity of men's traditions and colored
glosses. Master John says heir, that the sackcloth signifies persecution for
the preaching of the word. The notes on their Geneua Bibles printed at London,
expones the sackcloth to signify poor and simple apparel. And Bale upon the
same place writes, that this sackcloth signifies sober conversation. God knows
if this and the like be wholesome doctrine to preach to the poor people, some
one way, and some another, according to the invention of their own brains,
without any proofs.

Master John Welshe his Reply.

As for these diverse expositions whilk ye mark in us, that hes so stirred up
your affections, that ye cry out, God knows whether this be wholesome doctrine
to teach the poor people, or not: I answer: that these diverse expositions of
ours, are all aggreeable to the Analogy of faith, as your self will not deny:
and therefore cannot be called vn-wholsome doctrine. Otherwise, not only the
Fathers, but also your own Doctors and Bishops, and Popes hes delivered
vn-wholsom doctrine by your reason, for they have exponed innumerable places of
Scripture diversely, vvhilk is so manifest that I need not prove it, and your
self also hes delivered unwholesome doctrine heir, In the 10 point of your
doctrine.
for ye expone blessing and thanksgiving for two contrary things, and yet
Bellarmine says, that some Catholics takes them both for one. And what shall
I say of your diverse expositions, whilk were tolerable, so being they were
according to the proportion of faith? Your contradictions one to another: and
that not only in exponing the Scripture, but in the maine points of your
religion: some holding one thing and some another, as partly hes, and partly
shall be marked, are manifold. And if diverse expositions of a place of
scripture be vn-vvholsome doctrine, as ye say, then surely this point of your
Catholic doctrine, whilk teaches, that the Scripture hes a fiuefolde sense,
and that it may be sieve diverse ways exponed, must be vn-wholsome doctrine,
and then ye lose more then you can win by this. Bewarre, Master Gilbert, that
by this dealing ye bring not your self in suspicion that ye are forsaiking
your Catholic faith: for this is a point of it, as Bellarmine reports. Lib. 3.
de interpr. Ver. cap. 3
As for your calumnies first in calling us new Evangelists, I answered to that
before: next in saying that all our proofs and grounds are upon prophecies and
dark sayings: first, you injury the holy Ghost in calling his prophecies
dark: for the cause of this is not in them, but in our blindness. Secondly, ye
speak too plain an untruth: for it is more then manifest that not only
prophecies, but also the plain and simple doctrine of the whole Scripture is
the grounds and proofs of our Religion, as is manifest by the points of
doctrine whilk we have handled heir.

Master Gilbert Brown.

And it follows in Master John. And at the last (says he) they shall be put to
death, etc. Heir is two things to be noted: First, that the Kirk shall not be
invisible in the time of Antichrist: for if the Pastors of the Kirk be
invisible, how shall they be taken, and put to death? If the Antichrist and his
members shall slay them, how can they do the same, except they know and may
see them? To be invisible, is not to be known or seen: but they will see and
know them, or else they cannot discern them from their own, whereby they may
put them to death, and save their own. The second thing to be noted, that our
Ministers in Scotland except they be put to death by the Pope, they bear not
the testimony of Christ. For these are Master John's own words. And S. John
says, Apoc. 11.7.8
That the beast shall slay the two Witnesses. Now by Master John, the beast
is the Pope, and the Witnesses is the Ministers: therefore the Pope must slay
the Ministers: and after that, their bodies mustly three days and an half,
not in Scotland, but in Jerusalem, Apoc. 11.9.11.1^
for there was the Lord of these two Witnesses slain. And after, they must
revive and ascend up to heaven in a cloud in the sight of their enemies, and
so forth. In his 14 Pro p^.
Whilk things I trust shall come to pass to none of them in our days, nor
long after the Lord of Marchistons doomesday.

Master John Welsche his Reply.

As for the first thing whilk you infer heir, concerning the invisibility of
the Kirk, because you have the same argument afterward, I refer the answer of
it to that place. As for the second thing vvhilk ye infer, that except the
Ministers of Scotland be put to death by the Pope, they bear not the
testimony of Christ. I answer: As it is true that it is prophesied of the
Antichrist, that he shall Apoc. 11.^.
slay the two Witnesses of God, and that he shall make war with the saints
and overcome them: so is it Apoc. 11.12 13 15 17. and 13.6.8 9. and 18.2
likewise prophesied that his cruelty shall not alvvayes continue, but at the
last, the Lord shall take his Kingdom in his own hand, and the Gospel
shall be preached to them that dwell upon the earth, and Babel that great cietie
shall fall, so that the blood vvhilk your Kirk hes spilt of the saints of God
already in all the parts of Europe, these 300. years bypast, and that in sik
abundance, that suppose the Lord may number them, yet no man is able to
number them. And the patience and suffering of our brethren, is an sufficient
evidence that both your Popes are the Antichrist, and they are the Ministers of
Christ, suppose they slay no more of them And although the Lord hes shortened
your power, yet ye want no goodwill to spill the blood of the rest. That
ransacking of Germany, that cruel persecution of Queen Mary, and bloody
inquisition of Spain in the Iowe countries, and that most sauadge and cruel
massacre of Paris, and that Spanish navy, whilk the Lord discomfited, with his
own mighty and outstreatched arm in the 1588. year of God, does
sufficiently testify what hearts ye bear to the Ministers of Scotland, if
your power were according to your malice: But fulfill ye the measure of your
Fathers, that the blood of all the righteous may come upon you. As for the
prophecy of the ignominious handling of the bodies of these Witnesses after
their slaughter: it is also fulfilled by your Popes, and their authority upon
the carcases of the Saints of God, whilk in all parts almost, where ever their
blood was shed, was most ignominiously handled, as though they had been not
the bodies of men, but the dead carions of dogs and swyne. Let both histories,
and some who yet lives bear witness of this. As for the time and place, and
their reviving and ascending up to heaven, it is to be understood after the
manner of prophecies, mystically and figuratiuelie, as I have proved before.
The time of three days and an half, signifying all the time of your tyrannous
cruelty. The place of their ignominy is the streets of that great Cietie,
Revel. 17.9 18. Bellarm. lib de Roma. pontif. cap. 2. Revel. 12, 8. and 17.5
whilk heir is called Sodom and Egypt, and the place where our Lord was
crucified, not literallie, but (...); spirituallie, as the Text says. And also
called Babylon, in the 14. and 17. and 18. of the Revelation, whilk is
literallie that seven hilled cietie, whilk hes dominion over the Kings of the
earth, whilk as Bellarmine confesses, is Rome properly. So as this great
cietie is neither Sodom nor Egypt, nor Babylon (suppose it be called so)
literallie, but only mystically and spirituallie, as the Scripture says, and
your self will not deny, for the likeness between them: Sodom, for her
filthiness and uncleanness: Egypt and Babylon for her tyranny and cruelty
ever the Saints of God, wherein she resembls them. So is she not literallie the
place where Christ was crucified, but only mystically and spirituallie for the
likeness between them: that as by the authority of the Emperor of Rome, his
deputy Pilate our Lord was crucified, for the false challenge of treason
against the Emperor, whilk was falsely and wickedlie laid to his charge: and
therefore is said heir by the holy ghost, to be crucified at Rome: that is, by
the authority of the rulers at Rome: So by the authority of the Popes who now
reigns and hes reigned these many years at Rome, Christ is crucified again
in his members, because they will not receive his mark, and worship him. And
as Jerusalem boasted her self to be a holy cietie, and the spouse of Christ,
and yet was a harlote, a murderer, Exodus 20.
and a persecuter of the Saints: so Rome does boast her self to be a holy
ciety, and the spouse of Christ, and the head of all: and yet is now, and is
long since become an harlot and a murderer, and a pesecuter of the Saints. And
if ye will ask, When did the bodies of the Saints lie in the streets of Rome?
I answer: As by the gates in the cietie in the fourt command, is not meant the
gates of the cietie properly, but the authority and jurisdiction of the
cietie: so by the streets of Rome is not only meant the gates within the
walls of Rome, but all the places and parts whither his power and dominion hes
spread the self. So that all the places where the Popes of Rome hes exercised
their tyranny over the Saints, are called heir the streets of that great
Cietie. All these therefore who hes been cruelly murdered by the Popes
authority in England, Scotland, France the low countries, etc and whole bodies
hes been cast out, and whose bodies hes been ignominiously handled, they have
lain in the streets of that great cietie And as all the rest of this prophecy
is to be understood spiritually, so is this, reviving and ascending of these
Witnesses to heaven in the sight of their enemies, to be understood not
literallie, but spirituallie. So this is not the meaning of the holy Ghost that
these Witnesses whom the Antichrist shall slaye shall be raised up again in
their own persons (whilk yet shall be at the last day in the general
resurrection:) but that the Lord shall raise up other Witnesses, endued with
that same spirit, whilk they were endued with: preaching the same truth, and
maintaining the same cause against Antichrist, as that prophecy in the 3. of
Malachie of the sending of Elias before the coming of Christ, was fulfilled,
Mat. 11.10.14.
as our Savior testifies, not in the raising up of Elias in his own person
again: but in the sending of John Baptist, in the virtue and spirit of Elias.
So this prophecy concerning the reviving of these two Witnesses, whereby was
figured the faithful Ministers of Christ, who was murdered in the time of
Popery, as John Wiclef, John Hus, Jerome of Prage, M. Geor^e Wishart, and many
others, is fulfilled not by raising up of their persons again, but of others
his faithful seruands, who in their virtue and spirit hes defended and
maintained ye same doctrine and cause against the Antichrist, as M. Luther,
Calvin, Bucer, Peter Martyr, Master Knoxe, and sundry others whom the Lord
hes, and daily raises up in all countries, for the overthrow of your Babel. As
for your trust what will come to pass, we pass not, for so much hes been
fulfilled of these prophecies, whilk testifies your head to be the Antichrist,
and the Ministers of the reformed Kirk to be the faithful seruands of Christ,
and the rest concerning your daily consumption and final abolition, 2.
Thessal. 2.8 Revel. 18.2.21. and 19.20.
we know assuredly shall come to pass, because the Lord hes so thought it
and said it. And as for any further proof of the clemency and meekness of
your Popes, if so the Lord will, we desire it not. For as it is said of the
wicked man, Your compassions are cruel, and your by past cruelty testifies of
what spirit ye are. And suppose you say you trust that this, amongst the rest,
shall not come to pass, yet I fear you long to see that day upon the
Ministers of Scotland, whilk your brethren rejoiced to see fulfilled in that
cruel persecution of Queen Marie in England, and in that bloody massacre of
Paris, of the saints of God there: for we cannot think but that ye are of the
same spirit and mind, whilk your brethren were of, otherwise ye are not a
right catholic. As for the Lord of Marchistouns conjecture concerning the day
of judgment, he hes his own probable reasons, and if you be as good as your
word, as your favorers hes reported of you, Mat. 24.36.
we will see the refutation of his book by you. And suppose I know the time to
be uncertain to man, or Angel, as our Savior says: yet his conjecture
thereof is in greater modesty and sobriety, nor your determination thereof.
Whereby if the doctrine of your Kirk be true concerning the Antichrist, whom
ye imagine is yet to come, and the time of his reign, whilk ye say is to be
but three years and an half: then not only the year, but the very day thereof
may be known of them that lives in these days. For the Scripture says, He
shall be abolished by the brightness of his coming: 2 These. 2.8. Bellarm. lib.
3. de Romano pontificat cap. 17. page 418.
yea that whilk is greater arrogancy and presumption the learnedest of your
Kirk, Bellarmine, hes taken upon him to determine the very day of the coming
of Christ to judgment: to wit, 45. days after the perishing of the
Antichrist. It is manifest (says he) that after the death of the Antichrist,
there shall be but 45. days to the end of the world.

Master John Welsche.

Now if all this be true, both concerning the Antichrist, the largenes of his
dominion, the estate of the Kirk of God and his true Pastors all that time whilk
I offer me to prove by the Scripture, And also that the Pope of Rome is that
only Antichrist that was to come, and is now disclosed, then I say, no man
should think that the Kirk of God was ever open, and visible in that
flourishing estate as it is now.

Master Gilbert Brown.

But what if all these sayings of his be false, what shall follow then? but
that Master John and the rest of the Ministers are deceived, and deceaues
others, with sik vain and untrue expositions upon the word of God. For take
away from it Master John's own invention, and the word shall never have sik
ane meaning. And although Master John offer never so often to prove the same, I
say, he is never able to do it, nor all the Ministers in Scotland.

Master John Welsche his Reply.

If all these sayings of mine concerning the largeness of the dominion of
Antichrist, the estate of the Kirk of God, and his true Pastors all that time,
be false: then not only have I been deceived, but also Bellarmine, the
Rhemists, and Sanderus the chief defenders of your Kirk, hes been deceived, and
deceaues others: for they have spoken and written as much, and further in these
points, then ever I did, as I have proved before by their own testimonies.
And yet I trow your head and Clergy will judge them to be as far from error,
as you are. So either you or they, must be deceived in this. And as for the
fulfilling of these prophecies in your Popes of Rome, I hope it hes been
proved sufficiently, whilk ye nor all the Clergy of Rome, is never able to
improoue. As for the rest of your answer, wherein ye prove that the Pope is
not the Antichrist: I have answered to it in the other part of my tretise,
concerning the Antichrist, therefore I omit it now.

Master Gilbert Brown.

What he means that the Pope is now disclosed, I know not: for I understand
that he hes not been like their Kirk, that sometimes is visible, and sometimes
not: for he hes always been known by the visible Kirk to be the visible
head thereof in place of Christ.

Master John Welsche his Reply.

My meaning is this, that suppose in ye darkness of Papistry he was taken to
have been the Vicare of Christ, yet now the Lord hes smitten him and consumed
him by the sword of his mouth, that is, ^. These. 2.8.
the word of God: and hes discovered him to the full to all these, whose eyes
the Lord hes opened, that he is that Antichrist, whilk the Scripture hes
foretold was to come. And where you say that he hes been always known by the
visible Kirk to be the visible head thereof in place of Christ, I see you
regard not what you say, for the maintenance of that head and kingdom of
yours. For certainly either hes the Lord wonderfully blinded you, or else ye
speak against the light of your own conscience. For are you eue^ able to
produce one sillabe in the whole Scripture to proou^ this? Yea, hes not his
Monarchy and supremacy been condemned: first Math. 18 1. and 26. v. 25.26.
Marc 10.42. Luc. 22.25.
by the son of God: next, by the 2. Cor. ^. 1 Pet. 5.
Ap^stles themselves: thirdly, by the Fathers of the primitiu^ Cyprian. epist.
55 ad Cornel.
Kirk, in their synods and councels, both provincial and general, as by the
Bishops of Cyprian. epist. 55. ad Cornel.
Afric, about the year 255. By the general councels of 1. Canon 5.6.17.
Nice, wherein was 318. Bishops, anno 327. Of Canon. 2 3.5.
Constantinople, wherein was 150. Bishops, anno 381. Of Canon. 8.
Ephesine, where was 200. Bishops, anno 436. Of Actio. 16. Canon. 28.
Chalcedonense, anno 454. where there was 630. Bishops. Of Canon. 36.
Constantinople 6. anno 681. where there was 289. Bishops. Of Canon. 1.
Nicene 2. anno 781. where was present 350. Bishops. Of Canon. 17.
Constantinople 8. where was present 383 Bishops, anno 870. Of the council of
Sessio. 4.5.
Constance, where was 1000. Fathers almost, anno 1418. And of Sessio. 2.18.
Basile, anno 1431, all general councels, condemning your Popes supremacy, as
your Kirk now affirms of him, some more, some less. And also it is condemned
by provincial councels, as of Canon. 6.12.23.14.15.19.20.
Antioche, and of Canon. 11. anno. 404.
Carthage, 2. and 3. confirmed in the general council of Canon. 26.
Trullan, and 6. and by the council of Canon. 22.
Mileuis: condemned also by the Universities of Appellation. vniuersi. paris.
olione 10. ad futur, cons^. infastic rerum expe. et fugi.
Paris, and Aeneas Sylviu^ de gestis Basil. consil. lib. 1.
Louane, and Colein, and Histor. de Europa cap. 22.
Vienna, and Comer. de rebus Poionorum lib. 21.
Cracouia. So then by the authority of Councels, general and provincial, and
of Universities, the Monarchy and superiority of the Pope over all general
councels is disallowed. And suppose the Kirks of France and Germany did honor
them, and gave them some pre-eminence, both of honor and power, being blinded
at that time with the smoke that came out of the bottomless pit: yet it may
appear by their Ad Ludouicum 11. pro. liberate ecclessi^ gallican^ aduersus
Romans aulum defensio parisiensis cutiae. Grauamina nation^^ Germaniae exhibita
Maxim. 1
supplications that they did not allow that full Monarchy of his, but
misliked it, and hated the same: yea In conuentu Bituricensi.
France made laws against it. Now these are sik whom your selves do hold
for Catholics, and yet they acknowledged not the Monarchy of your Pope. The
Kirks of Chalcho. con^ dereb. Tur^. lib. 1. and 6
Graecia, and of Asia in the East, and of Iouius in Moscouia
Moscouia, in the North, and of Aluarez in descriptione aethiopiae c. 77. and
83.
Aethiopia in the South, and of Aeneas Syluius hist. Bohem. c 33
Boheme, Sleidan courment lib. 16.
Province, M. Fox in the acts and mo^^ments lib. 7.
Piemont, and the reformed Kirks that are this day in France, Flanders,
England, Scotland, and so forth throughout Europe, all hes condemned your Popes
supremacy. So that if his supremacy were to be put to trial by the judgment
and will of men, so many thousands of Pastors, Doctors, Synods, Councels,
Universities and Kirks through all ages, in all countries, of all sorts and
estates, may suffice to put the Pope from his supremacy: so that I think you
may blushe, Master Gilbert, that hes so boldly written that he hes been
always acknowledged by the visible Kirk to be the visible head of the Kirk,
seeing his Monarchy was never fully acknowledged until the Sessio. 11.
Lateran council, under Leo the 10. 1516. years after Christ. But seeing the
word of God is the only just trial of it, and seeing it is not written in the
book of life: therefore I conclude that his supremacy is not a citizen of
that new Jerusalem, but a child of Babel: and therefore they are blissed that
shall dashe it against the stones.

Master Gilbert Brown.

That the Kirk at any time may be invisible, it is repugnant to the word of
God in many places, and to Master John also. For he gives examples afterward
of sundry, as he says, that was of his religion, and opponed them selves to
the Pope and his Clergy: and that, says he, when he was come to the hight.
If the true Kirk opponed the self to the Antichristian Kirk, then it was
visible and known, and if it was known when the Popes kingdom was at the
highest, much more when it was low. and so it was always known by Master
John's self.

Master John Welsche his Reply.

Whether oppugn ye your own imagination (Master Gilbert) heir, or that whilk
I write. If the first, then you are foolish who fights against your self, as ye
do indeed: if the second, then I say, that whilk I said was this: that no
man should think that the Kirk of God was ever open and visible in that
flourishing estate as it is now. For this is our doctrine, Master Gilbert,
concerning the invisibility of the kirk the whilk because you know not,
therefore you stumble at it and oppugnes only your own invention, and not our
doctrine: and therefore your reasons and Scriptures whilk ye bring heir, serves
to no purpose, for they make nothing against us. We say that the Catholic Kirk
whilk comprehends all the elect is always invisible, Ephesians. 5.25 26.27.32.
Psalm. 45.13. Ioh. 10 27. 2. Tim. 2 19. Luc 11.28. Math. 7.
both because the principal part thereof is in heaven: and also because the
senses of men cannot discern who are true members of the Catholic Kirk heir,
their effectual calling, their faith, love, hope, and inward graces: their
union with Christ their head, their spiritual armor, weapons, and
warfare, Ephesians 6, 12. 2. Cor. 12.34.
and their head Christ Jesus, and their whole glory is inward and invisible,
and they shall never be seen all gathered together until that great day: So
that suppose they may be seen outvvardlie, as they are men, and sometimes in
respect of their outvvarde ministry: yet in so far as they are a part of the
Catholic Kirk: that is, in so far as they are chosen, and sanctified, etc. as
hes been said, they cannot be discerned by the senses of men and so are
invisible. Next we say that the particular visible Kirks are not alvvaies in
one outward estate: sometimes outwardly glorious, sometimes more obscure:
sometimes openly known and seen by all: sometimes known and seen but by
a fevv: sometimes frequent, and consisting in many, sometimes rare and
consisting in fevve: sometimes adorned with outvvarde ornaments of peace,
largeness, outvvard glory and multitude: sometimes again wanting this
outvvard glory vnderpersecution. But yet having that inward glory of these
inward graces. So that when we say these particular Kirks are sometimes
invisible, we do not mean as though they were known to none (for that is not
our doctrine, Master Gilbert, as ye imagine:) but that they are not so openly
known that they are patent to all to be the true Kirk: but known unto them
with whom they have to do, and who professes the truth with them. Yea
sometimes, some of them are known unto the very persecuters and enemies by
their constancy and perseverance in their sufferings, suppose they allow not
their profession. And in this state was the Kirk of Israel in the time of
Elias, 1. Reg. 19.10.
when he complained that he knew none left but himself of the true worshippers
of God. 2. Chron. 2^.24. 2. King. 16.10.
And the Kirk of Judah in the days of Achaz and Manasse Kings of Judah. And
siklike in the time of Christ, both in the time of his living amongst them, as
also in the time of his death and resurrection, the Kirk was brought to a small
handful: the Princes, Priests, and Scribes, who only was in dignity and
authority, being persecuters of Christ, condemned him, and crucified him. And
siklike in the time of the persecution of Diocletian the Emperor, and in the
time of the Arrian heresy whilk ouer-spred, as it were, the whole world. The
whilk also our Savior foretold should come to pass: Matthew. 18.8. Matthew 24,
11.12. 2. These, 2, 1 Timothy 4. Revel. 9.1.2.3.4. and 12.6. and 13. verse. 14
15.16.17 and 14. v. 8 and 17. v. 2. and 18. v. 3.
When the son of man (says he) shall come, shall he find faith in the
world? And by the Apostle also. And John in the Revelation, in the time of the
Antichrist, confessed also by the learned of your own Kirk, as Bellarmine and
the Rhemists, as they have been quoted before: and by your self also who
confessed that the Kirk of Christ should be redacted to a small number, as it
were in a wilderness in the time of the Antichrist. This now is our doctrine
concerning the inuisibilitie of the Kirk, whilk is neither repugnant to the
word of God, nor yet to the examples whilk I brought in afterward against your
Religion. For both these, Master Gilbert, are true, and neither of them
repugning one another: that the particular Kirks in the time of the Antichrist,
are not so openly known, and so outwardly glorious and flourishing, as they
were before: but redacted to a small number, more obscure and more latent:
partly through that universal defection, and partly through that extreme
persecution of your Kirk and head: and that there was some that opponed
themselves to the Pope and his Clergy, and that even when he was come to the
height. If you will make these repugnant which are not aduersa, but only
diuersa secundum magis and minus, then I say ye are repugnant to all rules of
reasoning, and to the light of nature it self.

Master Gilbert Brown.

Of this I may justly make ane argument against Master John, that the Pope is
not the Antichrist. The Woman that fled to the wilderness is the true Kirk,
and to flee to the wilderness is to be invisible, as Master John says. Now
young Marchistoun hes that this inuisibilitie endured from the year of God
316. til our days, the space of 1260. years, whilk was by him all the time of
the Antichrist. But by Master John Welsche, there was many in that time that
opponed themselves to the Pope, and said against him and his Religion and
Clergy: and therefore was known. Of the whilkes the Popes gart slay many,
And as the ^^eth i^
as he says: Therefore it must follow, that either the Pope is not the
Antichrist, because he did persecute but visible things, or else the Kirk was
not invisible all the time foresaid.

Master John Welsche his Reply.

Let us see the force of this argument that ye make for your Pope, that he is
not the Antichrist. The woman, ye say, that fled to the wilderness, is the
true Kirk: that I grant: and to fly into the wilderness is to be invisible by
me. I answer: By me it is to be latent, and to lurk, to eschew the rage of
her persecuters, and not to be openly conversant, as that all the world may
know her: and yet not to be so latent, but that some of them are known both
amongst themselves, as also to their enemies. And this is our meaning (as I
have said before) when we affirm that the particular Kirks sometimes becomes
invisible. But you take it as though our meaning were that ye kirk is so
invisible, that it is known to none whilk is your invention, Master Gilbert,
and not our doctrine: and therefore you fight without an adversary in this
point. But to go forward to the rest of your argument: you say, that by me
there was sundry that oppugned the Pope, and his Clergy, and was put to
death by them, This is true: and therefore the blood of the Saints is found in
your Kirk. Now what will you gather of all this? Therefore say you the Pope is
not the Antichrist, because he persecuts but visible things, or else, the Kirk
is not invisible. I deny that either the one or the other will follow. And
because you made an argument against your Pope (I should have said with him)
that he is not the Antichrist, whilk is grounded upon your own invention,
mistaking our doctrine, and therefore hes no feet: I will make another for him
that he is the Antichrist, the whilk you nor all your Clergy will not be able
to disprove. He is that undoubted Antichrist, whilk hes redacted the kirk of
Christ, as it were in a wilderness, to a small handful: partly through the
pest of his damnable doctrine, partly through his extreme persecution, so that
they were compelled to lurk and hyde themselves from the cruelty of his
power. This you cannot deny, because the Scripture affirms this of the
Antichrist. But I assume, that the Popes of Rome hes done this these many
hundredth years, as I have proved before, and in the other part of my answer:
therefore of necessity it must follow, that the Popes of Rome are the
Antichrist that the Scripture foretold should come. Answer this if you can.

And as for the time of this inuisibilitie, it hes relation to the beginning,
and grouth, and hight of your Antichristian kingdom: for as it grew the Kirk
was more and more obscured: and when it was at the hight, the Kirk was in her
Eclipse: and as it hes decayed now since, she hes accordingly spread her self
abroad. If the Apostle be true that mystery of iniquity began to work in
his days: 2. These. 2.7 1. Ioh 4.3.
for first the manifold heresies whilk were sown in the primitive Kirk,
whereof the Popes of Rome hes renewed a great many: as shall be proved
heirafter, was the first step to that Antichristian kingdom. ^. of Ioh. ver. 9
Next, the loving of pre-eminence in the Ministry, over their brethren, as the
scripture testifies of Diotrephes, who loved pre-eminence, 3. of John, verse. 9.
and specially the aspiring of the Bishops of Rome to a domination and lordship
over their brethren forbidden by Christ, whilk was manifestly kythed in Pope
Victor, who did take upon him to excommunicate the Bishops of Asia, for a
light dissension of the celebration of Easter, Anno 198. And in others, as
Cornelius, Zosimus, Bonifacius, and Celestine Popes, who did receive to their
Communion those who were excommunicate in Africa, was the second step. Thirdly,
if it be true that these impious and superstitious decreits whilk your Kirk
ascriues to the Popes of Rome before Constantine, be theirs: as is not lykelie
that sik superstitions did creip into the Kirk of Christ it being under
persecution: then, I say, the Popes of Rome even before Syluester by their
superstitious decreits, made a further entry to that Antichristian kingdom.
And because the Roman 2. These. 2.7. (...)
Empire, was the let that hindered Antichrist to step up to his throne: and the
Reuelat. 18
cietie of Rome behooved to be his seat: therefore Constantine the great leaving
the cietie of Rome to Syluester the Bishop of Rome, made yet the way more
easy: till at the last, they first got the primacy of honor, next of
authority and jurisdiction over their brethren: and then last of all did subdue
the necks of Kings and Emperors unto them. The whilk they did not attain unto
at the first, but piece and piece: and that not without long and great
resistance, both of the Kirk, (as I have proved before) condemning his
Monarchy in all ages; and of the Emperors, as we shall see heirafter. And as
they ever grew in their superiority, so did the purity of the Kirk of Christ
decay: and as a pest infects not a kingdom all at once, but piece and piece:
so did your Antichristian heresy: it infected not all at once, but piece and
piece, till at the last it went over all. While as then Marchistoun makes the
beginning of his reign to be in the 316. year of God, and the Kirk from
thence to become invisible: his meaning is, that then that let whilk the
Apostle speaks of, was begun to be removed, that his seat and throne might be
in Rome: and from thence as they grew in height, so was the Kirk ay more and
more continually obscured, till at the last the Lord did scatter that
darkness by the light of his Gospel whilk came to pass in our days.

Master Gilbert Brown.

The Kirk that is set down to us in the word of God, Number. 20.4. ^. Reg. 8.14.
Matthew 16.18. Matthew. 18.17. Act. 15.3.4. Act. 18.22. Act. 22, 28, 1, Tim. 3, 15
can no way be invisible: for when the holy write speaks of the Kirk of
Christ, it speaks of an visible number of men and women: and no ways of
Angels or spirits, as may be seen in these examples on the margent.

Master John Welsche his Reply.

I come now to your arguments. First you say that the kirk that is set down to
us in the word of God can no ways be invisible, because say ye, when it speaks
of the Kirk, it speaks of a visible number of men and women, and no ways of
Angels or spirits: I answer, this is most false: for the Scripture sets down
to us that Kirk whilk is the Ephesians. 1.22.23 and
body of Christ, and whereof he is the 5.23
head and Savior, and whilk is Col. 1.18
builded on the rock, whilk is called the Heb. 12.23
congregation of the first borne, whose names are written in heaven, and that
Gal, 4, 26 Matthew, 16, 18
Jerusalem whilk is the mother of us al. And this is the Catholic Kirk whilk
comprehends all the elect, as well triumphant as militant, whilk is invisible for
the respects before said, as I have proved. And suppose the elect that are
heir militant may be seen as they are men, and often times also in respect of
their outward profession: yet it follows not but yt they are invisible in so
far as they are a part of the Catholic Kirk. And also that sometimes through
the extremity of persecution, they may be latent and lurk, so that they are
not openly visible and known to all, as I have said before. As for these
places of Scripture, to wit, Number. 20.4. 3. Reg. 8.14. Act. 15.3.4. and 20.28.
and 18.22. and 1. Tim. 3.15. they speak all of particular Kirks, whilk we
grant unto you are visible, suppose not ay alike, as hes been proved. As for
the 16. of Matthew, it speaks of the kirk of the chosen, for they only are
builded upon this rock, and against whom the gates of Hell preuailes not: and
they are invisible in respect before said, as hes been proved. As for the 18.
of Matthew, it is quoted afterward: therefore I refer the answer of it unto
that place.

Master Gilbert Brown.

Psalm. 18 6. Read S, Aug on th^s Math 5.15 Esa. 61.9. Dan. 2.35. Miche. 4 1.2.
Read S. Hieron on these places. Aug. 1. Tract. in Ep^st. Io, Item de Bapt. lib.
4. c. 1 Matthew. 18.17, Cyprian de simpli. prelat. Ier. 1. Epist. ad Damas. Aug
lib. 19. contra Faust cap. 11. Origin. homil. 30. in Matthew Cyp. lib. de vnitat.
Eccles. Chrysostom hom. 4. in cap 6 Es^. Aug lib. 3. contra Ep^st Parment. c. 3.
Item. tract 1. in Epist. ^o^^ tract 2. Item. Epist. 166. ad ^o^at^as.
The Scripture also in many places compares the Kirk to visible things that
cannot be un seen. As, He hes placed his Tabernacle in the Sun, A cietie
cannot be hid set on a mountain. It is also compared to a light set on a
Candle-stick to lighten the whole house, and not to be put under a bed, or a
bushel; with many the like whilk I have omitted for breuities cause, saving
some noted on the margent. Moreover our Savior commands us to complain to the
Kirk if our brother offend us: and also, we ought to join our selves to the
true Kirk, or else we cannot have remission of our sins. But how can a man
complain to it, if it cannot be seen? or join himself to it, if it be
invisible? The Kirk of Christ may never want the true preaching of the word and
right administration of the Sacraments: but these things are always visible,
because by the Ministers they are the signs and marks of the Kirk: therefore
the true Kirk may be always known by them. To be short, not only the word of
God affirms the Kirk to be always visible, as I have noted before: but also
the ancient Fathers in all their works, as partly I have marked also.

Master John Welsche his Reply.

As for the 18. Psalm, it speaks not of the visibilitie of the Kirk there:
but of the Lords wonderful and glorious works and especially, in disponing sik
a glorious place or Tabernacle, or throne, to the Sun to shine in, the whilk
demonstrates the glory of the Lord. As for Augustines exposition, it results of
the corrupted old translation, whilk was not taken from the Hebrew fountain,
but from the version of the septuagints: therefore Pagninus, Vatablus, and
Arias Montanus a Papist, and Tremellius expones it not so, but after the
Hebrew. Secondly, he means not heir of the Catholic Kirk, but of particular
Kirks, whilk were exceeding far enlarged in his days: but yet this hinders not
but that they should be obscured in the time of the Antichrist, as it was
foretold, and your Kirk acknowledges. As for the 5. of Matthew, 15.16. there,
not the Catholic Kirk, but the Pastors of particular Kirks are compared to
this light, whilk is set up in the Candle-sticke, and to the cietie set up upon
the hill top, whilk cannot be hid, that is the eyes of all is on them: and
therefore they should be so much the more walk-rife and careful, because their
doings cannot be hid. As for Esa. 2.3. and Esa. 60 20. and Esa. 61.9. and Dan.
2.35. and Mich. 4.12. they prophecy of the greatness and clearness of the
Kirk of Christ in the time of the M^ssias, and of the propagation of the Gospel
throughout the world, and of the stabilitie and perpetuity of Christ's
kingdom. But yet it follows not but both the Catholic Kirk is invisible, as
I said before, and that the visible Kirks may be obscured and darkened, as it
was foretold in the time of the Antichrist. As for the the 18. of Matthew, Go
tell the Kirk, etc. The Kirk is heir taken for the Pastors and governors of
particular Kirks, whilk we grant are visible: but yet it follows not, but that
both they and the professors may be obscured and darkened, either through
heresy, or through extreme persecution, or through both together, as it was
foretold in the time of the Antichrist, and hes been fulfilled by your Kirk.
As for the true Kirk unto whom we should join our selves. I answer. We can
have no salvation unless we join our selves first to the Catholic Kirk, that
is, unto Jesus and his members by a spiritual communion, out with the whilk
there is no salvation. Next, unto some particular visible Kirk, by the outward
communion of the word and Sacraments, etc. if we know it, and possibly can
join our selves unto it: for if either we know it not, or may not, as these
7000. that bowed not their knee to Baal, then I say, salvation is not perilled.
As for your last reason, the true Kirk may never want the true preaching of the
word, and right administration of the sacraments, I answer, first, there is
not the like necessity of the Sacraments as there is of the word: next,
suppose they have it, and thereby are known amongst themselves, and some of
them also to their adversaries: yet it follows not that they are so openly
visible, that they are patent and known to al. As for example: there is no
question but these 7000. 1. Reg. 19 18
that did not bow their knee to Baal, and these 1. Reg. 18.13
100. Prophets who was hid in the caves, and Act. 8.1
the Apostles when all were scattered through that persecution, as Luke
testifies, had the exercise of the word amongst them. And it is not likely
that the Apostles wanted some to teach, suppose they were not known to all: no
not to their persecuters: otherwise they would have been persecuted. And
siklike we doubt not, but in the time of Queen Mary's persecution in England,
and in other parts under that Antichristian tyranny but the Lord had his own
both Pastor and people, amongst whom the truth was preached, suppose neither
we, nor their adversaries knew them all: for it is often times for the safety
of the Kirk to lurk, and to be hid, that she may escape the fury and rage of
her enemies. As for Augustine, Cyprian, Origin, Ch^ysostome, and Jerome whilk
ye quote heir, they speak either of the perpetuitye and eternity of the
Catholic Kirk, or else of the largeness and clearenesse of the particular
Kirks whilk were in those days whilk is neither against the inuisibility of
the Catholic kirk nor yet against the obscure estate and small handful of the
Kirk of Christ, whereunto she should be brought in the days of the
Antichrist, as was fore-tolde by the Scripture, and fulfilled in your
Papisticall kingdom. For we grant that in their days the Kirks of Christ was
frequent and glorious, but yet they did not ay remain in that estate. For the
Kirks of the East are almost overthrown by the Mahomet, and the Kirks of the
West by the Antichrist. So that partly by the one, and partly by the other, the
Kirk of Christ hes been redacted to a small handful, as hes been said.

Master John Welsche.

Last of all I will set you down the names of these worthy men, that in the
midst of Popery spoke against their errors, and preached the same Religion
that we preach. M. John hes not the right diet of these his holy fathers.
Answe^e. If it was so as you write it, it was error in scribendo: and that
whilk I write afterward might, have taught you this, when I said this was 400.
years past.
I will but only name a few of them that was in the midst of Popery, when it
was come to the hight, anno 1158. Gerardus and Dalcimus Nauarrensis did preach
earnestly against the kirk of Rome, and called the Pope the Antichrist: and
taught also that the Clergy of Rome was become the whore of Babylon, fore
spoken in the Revelation: this was 400. years past. In the year of our Lord
1160 one This Waldus and his sect had wives and all other things common and so
must M. John and he follow him. Answer This is falsely alleged of him and his
followers: but either your canon law erres Causa 12. q. 1. Dilect ssimis, or
else Pope Cl^mens was of this mind and so if you be of his Religion, you must be
so; for albeit ye have no wives; yet other men's wives hes been made common to
your Popes and your Clea^^ie in horrible adulteries.
Waldus a Citizen in Lions in France, with a great number taught that same
doctrine whilk we teach now, condemned the Mass to be wicked the Pope to be
the Antichrist, and Rome to be Babylon. They were persecuted by the Pope, and
remained long in Bohemia. In he year 1112, the Pope caused an hundred persons
in the country of Alsatia, whereof many were noble men, to be burnt in one
day, for the maintayning of that same doctrine that we now maintain against
the Kirk of Rome. About the year of our Lord 1230. almost all the Kirks of
the Grecians whilk with the rest of the Kirks of Asia and Africa, who does not
acknowledge the supremacy of your Pope, are more then the Kirks of Europe, who
submits themselves to him, did all renounce the Pope, and the Romish Kirk,
because of their execrable simonie and Idolatry, in the year 1240. In the
country of Sueuia there were many preachers that taught freely against the
Pope, and affirmed he and his Clergy were heretics and Simoniacks, in the
year 1250. or thereabout Arnoldus de noua villa a learned Spaniard taught
freely against the Kirk of Rome, and amongst the rest that the Pope led the
people to Hell, for the whilk cause the Pope condemned him as an heretic,
about the same time. Gulielmus de Sancto Amore, Master and chief ruler of that
University, taught that all the testimonies of the Scripture, spoken of the
Antichrist, should be applied to the Pope and his Clergy, and so taught them
to be the Antichrist, and the whore of Babel, anno 1290. Laurence an Englishman
and Master of the Vniuersi^ie in Paris, proved mightily that the Pope was the
Antichrist, and his Clergy the synagogue of Babylon. About the same time
Robertus Gallus a man of noble parentage, taught the Pope was an Idol, and
said the judgment of God would fall upon him, and his Clergy. Because I have
no time to write the doctrine of the rest that spoke against the Pope. I will
but note their persons, Robert Grosshed John Geyll^s, ane preaching Friar, anno
1253. Gregory Ariminensis, Franciscus de Rupe Scissa, Taulerus in Germany,
Gerhardus Rhidit, Michael de Cesena, Petras de Carbona, and Johannes do
Poliaco. Johannes Rithetalanda, anno 1360. Armachanus the archbishop in Ireland
1360 Nicholas Orem, Matthias Parisiensis, Nilus archbishop of Thessalonica,
John Wiclef, and the Lord Cobham, and sundry others.

Master Gilbert Brown.

Master John hes set down heir a number of It is false
obscure and infamous persons, for the most part And this also
iustlye condemned for heresies, without their works or books whereby they
affirm this that he alledge^: and all This is also false for Gerard and
Dulcimus Nauarensis whilk I first cited was almost 400. year before M. Luther
and Calvin, and the Waldens^s was more nor 30^ year before them.
two hundredth year before Calvin began their Religion, or therabout. Of the
whilk I contend not, whether they spoke against the Pope, or not. For all
heretics from the beginning hes barked against the Pope: but our contention
is, whether sik heads of Religion, as they denied, were heresies, or not?
whilk as yet Master John hes not But these heads is prouen that the Pope is
the Antichrist and Rome Babell they are not heretics, and therefore our
religion was before Marrine Luther.
proved, nor is not able to defend these, whom he calls, his worthy men:
for appearandly by this all heretics are worthy men by him, albeit they be
not of his Religion in all things.

Master John Welsche his Reply.

You calumniat our Religion of novelty, and says Martine Luther began it anno
1517. Unto the whilk I answered, that our Religion hes Christ Jesus in the old
and new Testament to be the author thereof, and hes the primitive Kirk many
hundredth years there-after, to be the teachers and professors thereof, the
whilk I have proved already by some examples, and that even till the smoke of
that Antichristian darkness of yours did ouerspread al, as it was foretold
by the holy Ghost. At the whilk time also the Lord did reserve his own elect
to himself, even these hundredth forty and four thousand, whilk did not bow
their knees to your Baal, as it was fore-prophecied: whereof also a great many
is recorded in histories, and of whom I set down some examples heir. Upon the
whilk I reason: That Religion whilk is warranted by the Scriptures, and
professed in the primitive Kirk, etc. and hes sundry that taught and professed
it, and that even in the midst of Popery, when it was at the hight thereof;
is not a new Religion, nor invented by Martine Luther: but ours is sik, as hes
been proved: therefore unrighteous and blasphemous must ye be, who slanders
the Lords truth and Religion of novelty, and fathers it upon flesh and blood,
whereof he is the author. Your answer to the first two, we have examined: now
let us see your answer to this: first you say they are obscure men, I answer:
If you call them obscure because they wanted the outward glory, wealth, and
renown of this world: then, suppose it were so, yet have they Jesus Mat.
13.54.55.56.
Christ the Prince of life, who was called a Carpenters son: and his
Prophets, of whom some were Amos. 1 1.
heard me^ and his M^t 4.18.21.
Apostles who were fishermen: and his Kirk who consists not of Cor. 1.^^ ^^ 28.
many wise, mighty, or noble, but of the foolish, weak and vile of the world.
For them God hes chosen to confound the wise and noble, to be companions with
them, and so they are the liker both the head and the members. It is true
indeed your Popes and Clergy are not obscure: for they have the wealth and
glory of the world. But as Bernard said to the Pope, In this they succeed
not to Christ or Peter, but to Constantine. But they receive their good things
in this life with the rich glutton, and therefore they must receive their pain
with him in the life to come. But why do you call these obscure whom I named
heir? are not some of them Friars, some of them Prouincials of gray ^riers,
some of them Masters and rulers of Universities: some of them excellently
learned, whilk your own Kirk cannot deny: some of them Bishops, and
Archbishops: some of them noble men: And some of them, as namely the Greek
and Eastern Kirks, in number, learning purity of doctrine, and godliness,
far exceeding your Papisticall Kirk. Who is worthy or famous, if these be
obscure? are all men obscure and infamous to you but your Popes, and those who
submits their necks to him? And if you think these too obscure men, to be
called worthy men, then behold yet Master Gilbert, more noble personages who
hes resisted your Popes Monarchy. As K. Philip le bell of France, the Prelates
of France joining with him in his dominions, about the year of God 1300. And
Edward the third, King of England despised the Popes curse, and appealed from
him to God, about the year of God 1346. And also sundry Emperors, as
Constantine the fifth, Leo his son, and Constantine the sext in the East, and
Henry the 4. and Henry the 5. and Frederick the second in the West. Will you
call these Kings and Princes of the whole world, obscure men? So all sorts of
men, Master Gilbert, both rich and poor, Princes and subjects, and these also
within your own bowels being overcome with the strength of the truth of
God, hes spoken against your Religion. Why you call them infamous and
heretics, justly condemned I know not, except it be because they taught and
professed the truth of God, and condemned your Antichristian idolatry and
abominations. But all are not infamous and heretics whom ye call so: and
surely if murderers, heretics, adulterers, Sodomites, open bargainers with
the Devil, and the vile monsters of the earth, is to be called obscure,
infamous, and heretics: then your Popes are to be called so, who of all men
that ever the earth hes born, hes been the vilest monsters and heretics, as I
have proved in my other treatise, concerning the Mass and the Antichrist.

You say next that you contend not whether ye have spoken against the Pope or
not, for all heretics hes ever barked against him, and that sore against your
heart, (Master Gilbert) because you cannot deny but ye have taught this
doctrine with us: and if it be so (Master Gilbert) that these men and Kirks
and many thousand more of all sorts hes taught this doctrine with us many
hundredth years before Martine Luther, for the first two whilk I named was
almost 400. year before him: then why were you so shameless both to write it
and also speak it, to blind your poor countriemen to their and yours
damnation that our religion was begun by Martine Luther, and never professed
before him. So leave off (Master Gilbert) to beguile the simple and ignorant
people with this sottish and blasphemous reason of yours, ( Martine Luther is
the author of our religion) for now you are enforced to grant the contrary
that infinite nombers hes taught the same doctrine before him. The truth is too
strong for you (Master Gilbert) that compels you to grant the thing that ye
would wish with all your heart the people never knew it: but comfort your self
(Master Gilbert) for the truth will be victorious at the last, and your
darkness daily more and more will be discovered. Indeed the least stroke that
ye can give for the defense of your Pope is to call them all heretics who hes
spoken against him, for I grant the Pope and his Clergy is not sik fools, as
being their own Judges to condemn them selves, and to justify them, who not
only hes taught it, but also sufficiently did prove it, and many thousands
sealed with their blood that he was the Antichrist, and his Kirk Babell. But
with them, they have the son of God, and the Apostles, Paul and John
heretics: for they also did condemn his Idolatry, and tyranny, and errors.
But where about now will ye contend (Master Gilbert?) ye say whether their
doctrine be heresy or not? I would you and your Kirk would stand upon this,
and give over all your other contentions whill this were first proved, whether
their doctrine in so far as they aggree with ours: and ours, in so far as it
dissents from yours, be heresy or not, that is, be against the scripture or
not, the whilk if you would do, then I hope our contentions would soon be
ended. But for as fast as you run to this now, you will flee from it as fast
again, when we desire to have yours and our doctrine, tried by the Scriptures
whilk of them is heresy: and consequently, whether ye or we be heretics? And
therefore you ever refuse to let your doctrine be tried by the scripture, but
runs to your pretended antiquity, and successions, Councels, and lying
miracles, and many other vain starting holes, like a vvilde Fox, when he is
hunted out of one hole he flies to another, and dare never abide the fair
fields. And mark their craft, reader, when we affirm that our religion hes
Jesus Christ to be the author of it in the Scriptures, as we offer to prove
the same, ye refuse this trial by the Scriptures, and says that Martine
Luther invented our religion, and we had none that professed it, and taught it
before him. When we again reply that we had sundry of all sorts many
hundred years before him, even when your Kingdom was at the hight, and
produces their names, they not being able to deny it, they slyp from that
again, and says they contend not whether there was sik that taught sik
doctrine or not: but they contend whether that was truth or heresy: so they
run from one starting hole to another. But I will ask you (Master Gilbert) if
it be proved that this their doctrine was not heresy, will you contend any more
then, shall the pley cease then? will you ever slander our religion of novelty
in saying Martine Luther was the first that began it, and we had none who
professed before him: but you will say, this you have not proved? It is true I
had not proved it then; but now I hope I have proved it sufficiently that your
Popes are the Antichrist, and your Rome Babell, whilk was one of the principal
heads of the doctrine whilk ye taught, and sundry others also. Disprove you
it if you can (Master Gilbert.)

Master Gilbert Brown.

But, he says, they preached the same Religion that he preaches, etc. Let
Master John name any of these his Doctors, that he will abide at in Religion,
and I shall let him see, that he was not of his Religion in all things. For
that is the thing that we say, that albeit Master John and his brethren have
renewed many old condemned heresies of heretics: yet they were not of their
religion in all things. And therefore this that Master John calls the only
truth, was never professed in all heads, as it is now in Scotland, before in
no country, no not by any one man, let be by a number, whilke thing Master
Robert Bruise graunts himself in his sermons, in these words: And God hes chosen
a few hearts in this country, where he hes begun his dwelling place, for God
dwelles now in the hearts and consciences of his own by his holy Spirit. And
surely so hes he dwelt with us these thirty years, in sik purity, that he hes
not done the like with no nation in the earth, he hes not remained with any
nation without error and heresy so long, as he hes done with us, etc. So God
dwelt in no place without error and heresy the space of 10, year whill now in
Scotland.

Master John Welsche his Reply.

But you say, they dissent from us in some things, and is not of our Religion
in all things. Whereunto I answer: that suppose this were true, yet it will not
follow but that they are of our religion, seeing they and we do aggree in the
maine foundations thereof. For we have learned to call them brethren, whilk do
hold the foundation, as the Apostle says, suppose they have builded hay, 2.
Cor. 3.
straw, or timber upon the same. Otherwise, if ye will be content to be
measured with that same measure wherewith ye measure us, if you will have none
to be accounted of your religion, but these only that professes with you in
all things, as your Kirk does now: then not only (by your reason) shall ye want
the Lord Jesus, his Apostles, the primitive Kirk, as ye do indeed: and that
not only in the first 600. year, but long after, till the thousand year: and
long after that also, to be of your profession: because not only the waightiest
points of your doctrine hes not their original in the Scripture, and are
unwritten Traditions, by the testimony of some of your selves: but also sundry
points of your religion hes been brought in after these days, being unknown
in the former ages, as your selves will not deny, and I have proved in some
heads, in the other part concerning the Mass. Yea, you shall want all the
Fathers by this reason of yours. For there is not one of them but they have
their own errors, whilk ye your selves will not defend: and the most part of
the^ are with us against you, in many things, whilk you cannot deny: and that
whilk is more, ye shall want almost, all the general Councels, except three or
four, and many of your own Popes, Doctors Bishops, Cardinals, and Jesuits:
for not only hes some of them had errors, and some of them been heretics by
your whole confessions: but also some of them have been with us in some points
against you, as I have proved before, so that I need not repeat the^ now. As
for example, lib. 19. c. 16. (...) morali.
Pope Gregory affirms that the books of the Machabees are Apocrypha: and so
hes sundry others of your Clergy, as in lib operis biblioth.
Sixtus Senensis, in fine coment veter. test.
Caietanus, in editione, quadam hebr. bibli. Cum interlineari in terr. Gelasius
de duabus naturis in Christo.
Arias Montanus, Nugo Cardinalis, against you and with us in the books of
Apocrypha. Gelasius is against your Transubstantiation, also against your
Communion under one kind: and Pope Adrian the 6. against this, that the Pope
cannot err and teach heresies. Panormitane against this, that it is not
lawful to Ministers to marry after their ordination. Bellarm. lib. 1. de
Clericis, c. 19. Bellarm. lib. 2. de purg. cap 4.
Michael Bai, Gerson, and Roffensis all Papists, against your venial sins.
Bellarm. lib. de imaginibus. c. 8.
Abulensis and Durandus and Peresius Papists, against your making of the Images
of the Trinity. A great many of you, as Alexander, Thomas, Caietan,
Bonauenture, Marsilius, Almayn, Carthusianus, and Capreolus teaches, that that
same worship should be given to the image, whilk is given to that whilk the
image represents: and yet Durandus, and Alphonsus a Castro, and others is
against this: therefore either the one or the other is not of your religion.
And ye your self if ye be measured by this measure, is not a right Papist,
because you dissent from many of them in many things as hes been proved
before. And certainly, Master Gilbert, if this reason of yours hold forth,
you shall cut off from your profession sik a number of Popes, Councels,
Jesuits, Cardinals, and Doctors from your religion, that it is to be feared,
that they cut you off from being a right defender of their Catholic faith, yea
from being a member of their synagogue, that for the defense thereof is
compelled to cut off so many from the same. And secondly, I say, your reports
concerning their doctrine, is not to be credited, but their own apologies and
writings, whereby it appears that it hes been always your fashion, the more
to discredit them, to charge them with a number of absurd opinions, whilk
they never held. As for example, you charge heir Waldus and his followers to
have had their wives, and al other things common, whilk is your calumny of
them, and not their practice, or doctrine. For Gulielmus Parvus wrytes that
their life was commendable, and Reinerus in his book of inquisitions, one of
your own religion, a writer of 300. years ago, who was often at the
examination of them, as he himself says, confesses that they had great show of
holy life, and that they believed all things well of God, and all the articles
contained in the Creed, and lived justly before men: and charges them that they
hated and blasphemed solam Romanam Ecclesiam, the Romish Kirk only. So then, if
his report be true, as I hope ye will not gainsay, they were both far from that
error, for that were neither to believe all things well of God, nor yet to have
a show of holy life, and to live justly before men: and also they were of our
religion in all things.

And where you say that we renew many old condemned heresies: I answer, that
neither the doctrine whilk I affirmed they taught heir was heresies, nor yet
themselves heretics. But you and your Kirk who hes condemned them for the
truth of God, and hes renewd old condemned heresies, as shall be proved
afterward. And we have renewd no heresy at all, but only the truth of God
whilk your Kirk hes obscured and buried. Therefore your conclusion is false,
that our religion was never professed in all points as it is now in Scotland
before in no country, no not, say you, by any one man. For it was taught and
professed by Christ and his Apostles, and also by all the primitive Kirks in
their days, in all points, throughout all the parts of the world, where they
preached the Gospel, as it is now in Scotland, as we offer to prove by their
writtings, and I have proved the same in sundry heads heir. Next, the
substance thereof was continued many hundredth years in the Kirks of Christ,
whill partly by the heresies that sprang up (for the popple was soon sown
among the good seed, and the mystery of iniquity began to work in the
Apostles days) and partly by the Mahomet, and partly by the darkness of
Popery, it was corrupted piece and piece. And what difference can you find
between the religion that the Waldenses professed, and us; if ye will give
credit to their Apologies, and Reinerus testimonies of them? As for Master
Robert Bruses testimonye whilk ye produce, it serves no ways to confirm your
purpose: but seeing ye abuse the testimonies of Scripture, it is no wonder
suppose ye abuse the testimonies of men. For it is most true whilk he affirms
that the truth of God hes continued for that space in this kingdom without
heresy or schism, as we never read it did in any nation in the earth, in sik
purity without heresy and schism for sik a long space. And yet it follows
not but he hes dwelt in sundry Kirks in sik purity before, suppose not so
long together, whilk you omit in your conclusion. Does it follow by his
testimony, but that our religion hes been preached and professed in all true
Kirks, in all points, suppose not so long in sik purity, as it is in Scotland?
neither does it follow but that the substantial and maine points of our
religion hes been professed in all Christian Kirks, longer nor that space,
suppose mixed either with some heresies or schisms. So you must coin a new
logic (Master Gilbert) before ye can confirm your proposition by his
testimony.

Master Gilbert Brown.

But That is contrary to that whilk you said before that they were all two
hundredth year before them.
heir it is to be noted also, that Master John can find none before the year
of Christ 1158. that said against the Pope and his religion, and none
immediately before Luther, the space of an 100. year and more. So the Kirk was
without his Doctors, elleuen hundredth year and fifty, or thereabout. And
siklike Martine Luther had no predecessors to whom he succeeded in his
Religion.

Master John Welsche his Reply.

You note two things here whilk are both false: the one that I can find none
that said against the Pope and his religion before the year of Christ 1158.
for our Savior and his Apostles and sundry learned Fathers in all ages, and
councels, both general and prouincial: and sum of your own doctors and Popes,
hes spoken against the Monarchy of your Pope, and your doctrine and religion,
as I have proved before. And Reinerus a man of your own religion testifies
that some said the Waldenses who had the same religion whilk we proses, was
continued from Siluesters days, who lived about the 320. year of God. And
some said that it continued even from the Apostles days: therefore the first
is false. The second thing is, that I can find none before Luther immediatlye
the space of 100. years and more. I see you are not ashamed to speak any
thing for the defense of your Kingdom, were it never so manifestly false:
for it appears that either ye are not acquainted with the histories of that
age, or else ye dissemble it of purpose: for John Wickles he left so many
behind him in England who professed our religion, that though your Prelates
did molest them what they could, yet they and their favorers in short time
grew to sik strength and multitude, that by the year 1422. (whilk was 100.
years immediately before Luther) Henry Chichesley the Archbishop of
Canterbury writ to the Pope, that they all could not be suppressed they were
so many, but by force of war. The professors of our religion began to gather
so great force in Bohemia after the burning of John Hus, and Jerome of Prage at
the council of Constance, whilk was about the year 1417. (whilk was just ane
hundredth year immediately before Luther) that they were able not only to defend
themselves by force of arms against the tyranny of your Popes, but also
obtained many notable victories, against the strongest power that the Pope did
raise against them. In England William Tailor, was burned, anno 1422, and two
years after that William White was burnt. And betwixt that time, and 1430.
Father Abraham of Colchester, John Wadden, and Richard Houington were burnt.
And after that, Richard Wiche, and John Goose, one Braban, and one Jerome, and
others with him were burnt. Hieronymus Sauonarola, a Monk in Italy, with two
others, named Dominick and Sylvester, were condemned to death at Florence, in
the year 1500, with sundry others whom for shortness I omit heir. Now
surely, I cannot but wonder, Master Gilbert, that ye should have been so
impudent as to have set it down in write, that I could get none that professed
our Religion, an hundredth year immediately before Martine Luther. But the
reader may gather what credit he may give to your notes: and yet with sik
impudent lies ye blind the poor people. Upon the vvhilk I gather, that both
these conclusions of yours, is false. For the Kirk of Christ in all ages, even
from the Apostles days to this day, hes ever had her own teachers and
professors, (unto whom Martine Luther hes succeeded in his religion) suppose
not in the like frequencie and purity, Apoc 9.
and that by reason partly of the smoke of that bottomless pit, that is of
your doctrine, Reu. 15.
whilk darkened both the Sun and the air, that is, both teachers and people:
and partly by your extreme persecution, whereby ye made war with the Saints
of God and overcame them. But your smoke will euanishe away at the last, and
the clear light of the Lord shall shine more and more, maugre all your hearts.

Master Gilbert Brown.

But that Master John shall not think that we slander him and his with old
condemned heresies, let him read S. Augustine, Epiphanius, and others noted on
the margent as of these, and many the like.

1 Nouatus forsook the Pope of Rome Cornelius, and caused others do the like,
as Histo. l. 6. c. 33.
Eusebius and lib. 6 c. 30.
Nicephorus reports.

2 Aerius the heretic denied that offering or prayers should be done for the
dead, and that fasting should be free, as Here Is. 55. wrong cited is should be 75.
S. Augustine and Epiph declares.

3 Eunoninus and Aerius held that only Faith justifies, as Here Is. 55 and lib
de side and operibus.
Augustine and Here Is. 76.
Epiphanius writes.

Master John Welsche his Reply.

Now are we, by Gods grace, come unto your last calumny, in affirming that we
renew old condemned heresies. This is indeed (Master Gilbert) a heavy
challenge, if it were true: but it is but like the rest of your calumnies: yea,
it hes less appearance of truth, nor any thing whilk ye have spoken against
us. Alyar, Master Gilbert, shall not enter in that heavenly cietie, Psalm 15
Revel. 19 and 2^.
but his portion shall be in that lake that burns with fire and brimstone, and
he that slandereth his neighbor (much more then be who slandereth the truth
of God) shall not rest in the Lords holy mountain. But to come to the first,
Nouatus intruded himself in another man's charge, and caused set up himself
against Cornelius the lawful Pastor in the Kirk in Rome then, and that
craftily: and withdrew many of his flock from him, whilk is as contrary to
our doctrine, as black to white. For we teach that every pastor should have his
own particular flock, as Cornelius had then in Rome, and no man should intrude
himself in another man's charge, as he did. So this is a calumny, Master
Gilbert. But your Popes are like Nouatus, who not only hes disturbed all the
Christian congregations in Europe almost, by setting up and thrusting down
sik Pastors as he would, but also all the kingdoms in Europe. As for this
doctrine of Aerius, I answer you, as ye did me: I contend not whether he
taught this doctrine or not, for the scriptures hes taught the same. But our
contention is, whether they be heresy or not, whilk you have not proved, nor
ever will be able to prove by the Scripture. It is true Epiphamus, and
Augustine following him, reckons him amongst heretics, but Theodoretus in his
book de fabulis Iudaerum, and the Ecclesiastical history reckons him not
amongst heretics: and he was not condemned for an heretic in any Council:
that therefore whilk he taught according to the Scripture we embrace. But as
for the errors of the Acrians, whilk are errors in deed, and whilk are
ascriued unto them, as the damning of marriage, urging of continency,
requyring them whom they receive to their fellowship to forsake their own
proper things: these heresies, I say, your Kirk hes renewed, who damnes
marriage, and vrges continency in your Clergy, and receaues none to your
religious orders, but sik as refuses their own proper things. As to the third,
the Aetian and Eunomian heresies, they secluded holiness of life from that
faith of theirs, and taught sik a faith that might stand with whatsoever
sins, and with perseverance in them. Will you stand to this (Master Gilbert)
before the Lord, that we teach sik doctrine? Is not this our doctrine, that
only living faith whilk works by love, and brings forth good fruits does
justify? But you are like to them that knows no other justifying faith, but
sik a faith, as both the reprobates and the Devils may have. So this is your
third calumny.

Master Gilbert Brown.

4 Simon Magus, Marcion and Manichaeus denied that man had Fre-will as Here Is. 46
S. Augustine, S. Hierome, and Here Is. 42
Epiphanius makes mention.

5 Iouinianus affirmed, that Priests marriage was lawful, after the lawful
vow of chastity. He moved sundry Nuns to marry in the cietie of Rome He
made fasting and abstinence from meat superfluous, as Here Is 82. Item lib. 1.
cap. 7 de peccat. merit. and remis.
S. Augustine wrytes of him.

6 Vigilantius denied the prayer to Saints, as Contra Vigilant.
S. Hierome writes: he despised the burning of lights and candles in the Kirks,
in the day time, and the Relics of Martyrs.

Julian the Apostata, was of the same opinion, as cont Julian.
Cyrillus declares. The same Julian despised the image of Christ and his
Saints, as the forsaid lib. 9. contra Io lianum.
Cyrillus makes mention.

Master John Welsche his Reply.

As to this fourth heresy, they took away all the liberty and freedom of the
Will in man, but this is not our doctrine. For we affirm that man hes a
liberty and freedom in his Will in natural, moral and sinful actions: but
not in these things whilk pleases God, before he be renewed. This is your
fourth calumny.

As for the fifth, Iouinian taught, as Here Is. 82
Augustine and In his 8. epist. in his defense of his books against Iouinian.
Jerome sets it down, and De Ecclesia militant. lib. 4. cap. 9
Bellarmine reports, that the married estate was equal with Virginity. Unto
the whilk we answer, that true and undefiled Virginity we prefer always, as
the more noble and excellent gift in them to whom it is given: but we doubt
not to say, but that marriage is better in them, that cannot contain. And
generally we dar prefer the honest marriage of Christians, before the proud and
fained virginity of many Monastical votaries, as In Psalm. 99.
Augustine says, Lowly and humble marriage is better then proud and hauty
virginity. As to the second point, he affirmed indeed that the choice of
meats and fasting was no merit, and this is no heresy: But if this be
heresy, Romans 6.23.
then the doctrine of the Scripture is heresies: for it teaches us that life
everlasting is the free gift of God: as hes been proved before. This is your
fifth calumny.

As for the sixth of Vigilantius heresies, if the denying of prayer to be made
to Saints be an heresy, then it is an old heresy: Psalm. 50.15. Isa. 42 8.
Aug. de ciuitate de^ l. 22. c. 20.
for it is the Lords who is the ancient of days, for this is his doctrine:
call upon me in the day of thy trouble, and I will deliver thee. And let
Augustine also go for an heretic who says that the Saints are not called
upon. As for the dispysing of the burning of lights and candles in the Kirks
in the day time, I know not to what use it serves, except to be a sign that
ye are blinded of the Lord, who in the midst of the day, lights your
candles: did Jesus Christ or his Apostles so? And this was the custom of
Pagans, whilk you have taken from them. Irenaeus lib. 6. cap. 2. As for the
despising of the relics of Martyrs: if he despised these, then he erred: for
we both teach and practice that the bodies of the Saints should be honorably
buried, and we do not despise them. But if he taught that they should not be
worshipped, then I say he is not an heretic in this, Matthew. 4.10 Deuteronomy. 6.23.
but you are heretics and idolaters who expres contrary the commandment of
God, does worship the creature. And Vigilantius was no heretic, nor his
opinions condemned as heresies, only there was a hoate contention between him
and Jerome. And as for Iuliane, he calumniated the Christians that they adored
dead men for Gods, and the tree of the croce. Unto whom Cyrillus answered that
they adored not the sign of the croce, but God only. So this was but Iulians
calumny against them. But if he had lived in your days he might justly have
objected it unto you.

Master Gilbert Brown.

7 Valentinus the heretic denied the very body of Christ to be in the
sacrament, as lib. 4. cap. 34.
Irenaus says.

8 Simon Magus, Marcion, and the Manichees held, that God compelled man both to
do evil and good, as Ha^es. 46.
S. Augustine, Vincentius Lar^nensi^, In recognit.
S Clement of Rome, and Haeres 42.
^piphanius hes in then works whilk is the doctrine of the most learned of the
Protestants, as Melanchton, Calvin, In lib. de praedest cont. Ca^uisycophant.
BeZa and others.

9 The Nouatians denied Penance, as Haeres. 38.
S. Augustine affirms.

10 The Manichees denied the necessity of Baptism, as the same Haeres. 46.
S. Augustine reports.

11 Aerius, Eustachius, and the Manichees condemned fasting days ordained by
the Kirk, as Epist. ^3. cap. 4.
Leo, Haeres. 75.
Epiphanius, the council of In prefat.
Gangra, and as lib. ^0. cap. 3. cont. Faust Manich.
S Augustine records.

12 The Manichees used to fast on the Sunday only, as Haeres.
S. Augustine, and scr. 4. de qua.
S Leo witnesses Read for this also Council. Gang cap. 13. and de consecrat.
did. 3. Ne quis. Ignatius ad Philip. de consecrat. distinct. 3. Ieiunium.

13 The Pepusians and Collyridians denied holy orders, and made it no
Sacrament, as Haeres 4.24.
S. Augustine and Haeres. 44.7^.
Epiphanius writes.

14 The Pelagians denied that confession should be made to a Priest, as our
Hect. Boc^. lib 9. cap. 19.
Chronicle writer testifies. They deny also that Baptism was neidfull to
bairnes or infants, as Haeres. 88.
S Augustine reports.

15 The Donatists denied the order of Monks, and other religious persons, as
In psalm. 132,
S. Augustine, and Tom. 5, against the dispraiser of the monastical life.
S. Chrysostom writes.

Master John Welsche his Reply.

Whether Valentinus taught so or not, I contend not: but the question is of
this doctrine, of the real presence, whether it be contrare to Gods word, or
not; the whilk I have proved sufficiently before in the fourth point of
doctrine: and so the denying of it is no heresy. But yet it appears not by
this testimony of Irenaeus, whilk ye cite heir, that he taught sik doctrine.

As for the 8. heresy, it is a calumny to ascriue it to us, for Melanchton,
Calvin, and Beza hes no sik doctrine. You are not ashamed, Master Gilbert, of
impudent lying.

As for the 9. of Nouatus heresy, that is a calumny to ascriue it to us. I or
Nouatus denied that there was any place of repentance to these, who after they
were baptized, fell from the faith, by any infirmity, or violence of
persecution, as Epiphanius testifies of him that he said, No man who hes
fallen after Baptism can any more obtain mercy. But our doctrine is contrare
to this: for we teach that there is place to repentance for any sin, except
the sin against the holy Ghost, whilk is ever punished with final
impenitencie.

As for the 10. of the Manichees heresy, their doctrine was as Augustine says
there, that Baptism served nothing for salvation to any: and that none, who
followed their sect, should be baptized. and therefore they brought in a
contempt of Baptism, whilk is contrary our doctrine. For we teach that
Christians and their children is to be baptized: and that the contempt of it is
damnable, suppose not the want of it.

As for the 11. and 12. heresies, we contemn not fastings that are appointed
by the Kirk, for lawful causes: but we deny that they should be tied to
certain and prefixed days, as your Kirk does: and we think it no heresy to
fast on the Lords day, more then other days: both to stir up our repentance,
and to make us more meet to holy and spiritual exercises, because it is not
contrary to the word of God. As for Leo his Epistle, it is wrong quoted, for it
should be Epist. 91. and there fasting on the Lords day is not like ours: for
they fasted on the Lords day, because they believed not that Christ was a true
man, as Leo in that same place testifies whilk you will not say your self that
we do, for we acknowledge him to be a true man.

As for the 13. heresy of the Pepusians and Collyridians, their doctrine was
that women might be Bishops, and Elders, and might use these public functions,
as these places whilk ye have quoted, testifies: whilk is not our doctrine, but
rather yours, who permits women to baptize, in case of necessity. That they
denied orders to be a Sacrament, there is no sik thing to be found in these
places whilk ye quote heir.

As for the 14. heresy of the Pelagians, if they denied that these who were
accused of any scandalous offense, and guilty thereof; should make their
confession of it to God, his Ministers, and the Congregation, for to take away
the offense of it, then they erred, and our doctrine and practice condemns
this: but if they denied the absolute necessity of your auricular confessions,
then is it no error, because there is na sik thing commanded in the whole
Scriptures of God. Now as for the testimony of Boethius, I have not seen it.
As for their second heresy concerning Baptism, they taught, as Augustine
reports in that place, that Baptism was not needful to children, because
they were borne without original sin, as they taught whilk is an heresy
indeed: but this is a calumny to ascriue it to us, for we teach that children
are borne in original sin, and so should be baptized. And surely this
heresy rather aggrees to you, who teaches that Marie was not borne in
original sin, and therefore she needed not to be baptized.

As for the last of the Donatists, denying the order of Monks. I answer:
first, your Papisticall and Idolatrous Monks, Bellari 2. de indulgentus
are far different from these whilk Augustine and Chrysostom defended, and
these of the Primitive Kirk. For first they were bound to no prescript form of
diet, apparel, or any thing else, by solemn vows of wilful poverty, and
perpetual co^tinencie, as yours are, next, the former Monks remained in the
order of private men, and laics, and had no thing to do with Ecclesiastical
charges, whilk was afterward broken by Pope Boniface the 4. anno 606. But yours
are not so: they have Ecclesiastical charges, and are more then private men.
And last of all, suppose their kind of life was mixed with some superstition,
for the envious man sone sowed the popple amongst the good seed, and the
mystery of iniquity began sone to work: yet their religion was not defiled
with Idolatry, worshipping of Images, prayers to Saints, opinion of merit,
the sacrifice of the Mass, and other abominations wherewith your Papisticall
Monks are defiled. Next I say, these Monks and religious orders of yours, hes
not their foundation within the four corners of the Scripture of God.

Master Gilbert Brown.

These and many the like new renewed heresies by the Ministers, was old
condemned heresies in the primitive Kirk of the former heretics, as testifies
the ancient Fathers: and therefore this is a true argument. What ever was
heresy in old times is heresy yet, and the defenders thereof heretics, as
they were of old: but these former heads that I have set down, with many the
like was heresies in old times, and the defenders thereof heretics, as
testifies the ancient Fathers: Therefore they are heresies yet, and the
defenders thereof heretics.

Master John Welsche his Reply.

Now here was all the cause (Christian reader) that made (Master Gilbert) so
often to cry out of us, that we renewed old condemned heresies, whereof some are
sik as we our selves condemn, and some are sik whilk do better aggree unto
themselves, nor unto us: and some heresies he forces upon us whilk we never
taught nor maintained: and some are sik whilk are not heresies indeed, but
aggreable to the Scriptures of God. So that if we err in these, suffer us to
err with Jesus Christ and his Apostles. Now to answer to your argument whilk
ye bring. What ever was heresy in old times, is heresy yet, and the
defenders thereof heretics. I answer, if ye define heresy to be an error
obstinately maintained against the Scriptures of God: I grant your
proposition. But if ye define heresies in general, to be whatsomeuer any one
Father or Doctor, or some more hes rebuked as an heresy; then I deny it, for
sundry of the fathers hes maintained errors themselves against the Scripture,
and hes accused some doctrine to be heresies, whilk hes been aggreeable to the
truth of God, whilk you will not deny, I hope. For if you would, I could prove
it both of the Fathers, Councels, and your own Popes. Now to your assumption.
But these former heads, say ye, whilk ye have set down with many the like was
heresies in old times, and the defenders thereof heretics, as testifies the
ancient Fathers. I answer that some of these are heresies indeed, and we
abhor and condemn them more nor ye, and some of these as falsely laid to
our charge, and some of these are not heresies indeed, but aggreable to the
Scripture. And therefore, your conclusion falls not upon us, who hes renewed no
old condemned heresy, and therefore is not heretics. And where you say
many other like. I answer: It is true they are like, for they are both
calumnies and horrible untruths, and lies as these hes been, whereof one day ye
shall make answer to the great God that Judges the quick and the dead. But the
pit whilk you ^^gged for others you have fallen in it your self: for certainly
in this you do as thieves does, who the better to eschew the crime of theft
whilk is justly laid to their charge, and that they may the more easily escape
in a fraye, does cry out and shout out upon others, common thieves, common
thieves. Even so do you: for these crimes whereof ye are guilty your selves
you falsely charge us with. Therefore that all men may se that you are the men
who hes renewed the old condemned heresies, I will not do, as ye have done to
us, that is either to lay to your charge sik heresies as ye maintain not, or
sik things to be heresies whilk are not heresies indeed, whilk ye did to us.
But in this I will deal sincearelye with you, faining nothing neither of them
nor of you.

1. Simoniani, worshipped the image of Simon and Selenes, Ederus in Baby, page,
5,
whose heresy they followed: so does your religious orders worship the image
of these, who were first authors of their orders.

2. The Basilidians worshipped Images, Irenaeus lib, c. 23.
and used inuocations, so do you.

3. Ireneus lib, 1, ^.3.24.
Carpocrates had some painted Images in great estimation, both of others, as
also of Christ: So do the Papists paint Christ, and says that his form was
painted by Luke the Evangelist.

4. The old Idolaters did excuse their idolatry, August, in Psalm, 113, in, con,
2, and Lactan, l, 2. c, 2
that they did not worship the Images, but the thing represented by the image:
so do you excuse your idolatry.

5. Iren, lib, 1, c, 21,
It was the custom of the old idolaters to afflict and whip their own bodies,
that they might please their own Gods, so do some of you now.

6. Iren, lib, 6, c, ^,
It was their custom also to light candles at noone days, in the time of
their service, so do you.

7. Basilidiani, and Carpocratiani kept secret their doctrines, Iren, lib, 1,
c, 23 Epiph, haeres, 24.
counting all other men dogs and swine: so do you keep secret your mysteries
from the common people, and will not suffer the Scriptures to be read of all:
least, say ye, precious pearls be cast before swine.

Iren. lib. 1. cap. 18
8. Marcosij they spoke some Hebrew words in Baptism, to astonishe and afray
the hearers: but you are worse, who in all your service speaks nothing but a
unknown language: and that, say you, to make there mysteries to be had in
greater reverence.

August. de here is. cap. 16. Epiph. here is. 36.
9. The Heracleonites anointed their dead with oil, balm, and water
superstitiouslie, and so do you.

Epip. ^er. 42 Auad quod vult c. 27
10. Marcion and the Pepuzians heretics, permitted weme^ to baptize, so do
you.

Ep^ph. her. 19 an te Ch^istum.
11. The Ossenes taught, that it was not needful that prayers should be made
in a known language: so do you: and therefore your prayers are in Latin.

Theodoret. divine dec et. cap. de Bapt.
12. The Messalians affirmed Baptism only to serve for the washing away of the
sins going before it, so do you.

Epiph. here is. 46
13. The Tatians and sundry other heretics affirmed marriage impure: so does
your Pope Siricius in their Priests. Gratianus epist. 82. cap. Proposuisti.

14. The Manichees damned marriage in their elect and perfect, but suffered it
in the rest: so do the Papists, in their Priests and religious men they damn
it, August. epist. 74.
but they do tolerate it in the laics: 1. Timot. 4.1.2.3.
and yet the spirit of God calls it, a doctrine of Devils to forbid marriage.

15. The Manichees they had the Communion under one kind: Leo sermon. 8. de
^uadragesi^^.
so does the Papisticall Kirk. The Council of Constance so decreed it, against
the Scriptures, with these heretics. Siklike their Fasting and your Fasting
is alike: for they made choice of meats, and abstained from flesh: but yet
used their delicates, and so do you.

16. The Manichees affirmed there was two beginnings: so does Augustinus
Steuchus a Papist, in sua cosmopoea, in principio Genes. where he says, that
the Chrystalline heaven is coeternal with God. The whilk if it be true, then
certainly it is God: for that whilk is without beginning is God, and so there
are two gods. If Caluint or any of us had written sik, how would heaven and
earth have been filled with cries against us?

Epiph. here is. 48.
17. Montanus an heretic received the whole Scripture, but yet he denied that
it contained all doctrine needful to salvation: so does the Papists: and from
this error springs their Traditions, their Ceremonies infinite in number,
partlye Iewishe, partly Ethnicke.

18. Apollo. apud Eusebius. lib. 5. c. 17.
This Montanus was the first who prescriued certain Laws of Fasting, the
Scripture appointing no sik thing: so does the Papists, their fastings are upon
their prefixed and set days.

19. Tertul. de a^im^ in fir^.
Montanus taught that small faults was to be suffered for after this life
neither was the souls to be delivered from the prison, till they had paid the
vtmoste farthing. So does the Papists also.

20. Siklike the doctrine of the Montanists was, In ib. de anima and Tert. de
co^^. milius.
that Abrabams bosom was beside Hell, or in the uppermost part of hell.

21. That the Patriarckes before the coming of Christ, was in Hell.

22. That only the Martyrs souls goes immediately to Paradise.

23. That prayers and oblations should be made for the dead.

24. That extreme unction should be given after Baptism.

25 That the sign of the Croce should be used, all whilk your Kirk hes renewed.

26. Helcesaitae made two Christ's: one above, Theodore^
another beneath: so does your Kirk make two Christ's: one in heaven having a
true natural body with his own essential properties, in a certain place,
visible: another in earth, made of the bread and wine, with all the essential
properties of a true body, invisible, in the Sacrament.

27. Sampsaei, kept the dust of the feet, Epip. haeres. 53. and haeres. 19.
ant^ Christum.
and the spittle of two weme^ whilk they worshipped as Goddesses, whilk they
affirmed did serve to cure diseases, and whilks they used as amulets: so does
your Papisticall Kirk, keep the relickes of Saints, worships them, and carries
them about, as serving either to preserve, or to recover health. The like also
was the superstition of the Ossens.

28. Cathars gloried in the merits of their works, Isid. Etymol. lib. etc. de
h^^efib. Christi
and affirmed that they were made righteous, with an inherent righteousness.
The Papisticall Kirk in this heresy goes beyond them: for both they glory of
their works, and affirms that we are justified with an inherent
righteousness.

Aug ad Quodvult, cap. 39 Epiph. haeres, 38
29. The heretics called Angelici, and also the Caim, they worshipped Angels,
so do the Papists.

30. The heretics called Apostolici, admitted none in their number, August. de
haeres. cap. 40 Epiph. haeres. 61
but these who vowed wilful poverty, and chastity. So the Papists admits none
to their religious orders, but sik, who vows both.

Augqst ex Philastrio quo. undam cap. 68.
31. There were some heretics who went barefooted, so do the Franciscan
Friars, and these who are called Cordigeri.

32. The Donatists denied that the true preaching of the word was a note of the
pure Kirk: and therefore Augustine in sundry places calls them back to the
Scriptures: so does your Kirk.

Epiph. haeres. 74
33. The Collirydians worshipped Marie, and therefore they are called Idolaters
by Epiphanius, so do the Papists.

Epiph. in Panoplia.
34. Armenij worshipped the croce of our Lord, and therefore they were called
(...) that is, worshippers of the croce, so does the Papists.

35. The Pelagians affirmed Adam would have died, suppose he had not sinned: so
does Augustinus Steuchus, a Papist of great name in his annotations upon the 2.
of Genesis. He says, Death is natural, and sin is not the cause of it, and
the infants and Adam would have died, suppose they had not sinned.

36. Also, they affirmed that after the fall there was left in mana fredome to
will good, and so does the Papists, suppose they differ in this, that the
Papists ioynes grace to be a preveener and worker with free will.

37. The Pelagians affirmed that the Gentiles might by Philosophy have known
God, and been saved. So Andradius a Papist, lib. 3. orthod. explic. so
Catharinus a Papist, who was present at the council of Trent affirms in his
commentary upon 1. Timoth. 4. That some unfaithful men may be saved, whilk is
as mekle to say, as some may be saved who knows not God, nor Christ, whilk is
horrible, and more then Pelagian.

38. Also, they affirmed that a man may fulfill the Law, and be perfitelie
righteous, so do all the Papists.

39. They affirm that infants wants original sin: so does Pighius a Papist
in his book of controversies, In 3 part sum. mae quest. 27. art. 7.
in the controversy of original sin, that in them that are baptized,
original sin is taken away: and he writes also that Marie was borne with out
original sin: and Thomas of Aquine writes that Marie had the fullness of ^ll
graces, whilk is to equal her with God. For only in him the fullness of all
dwells: and many other heresies of the Pelagians hes the Papists renewed.

40. A kind of heretics called Anomi, taught that the obedience to the Law
was not needful, so does the Papists. First, in affirming, that concupiscence
without consent is not sin, and is not forbidden in the Law. Secondly, some
of them says, as Syluester Prierias, It is honesty (says he) but not of
necessity that God should be loved above all things. And so De theolog.
practit. tractat 3. cap. 16 concl. 1. numer. 11.
Molanus another Papist affirms. The same cap. 8 conclu. 3 numer. 19.
Molanus also says, that it is not commanded of God that we should pray for
our enemies in special: and yet the Scripture says most plainly, Pray for
them whilk persecute you. And in cap. 16. conc. 3.
another place he affirms that it is not commanded that we should salute our
enemies with a friendly and loving heart. And also he Tract. 2. cap. 20.
conclus. 2
says, That he who does not tell to him who is ignorant, his manifest defect
is not unrighteous. And again cap. 23. conc. 5
he says He who gives counsel to do a less evil to eschew a greater,
sins not. Siklike contrar the second command they universally teach, that the
worship of Images is no break of it. And they call the Croce their only hope.
What horrible blasphemy is this? And In his book de residentia cont. Cathar.
Torrensis a Papist, objected to Catharinus another Papist, that he denied the
Law of Moses to be Gods law, and the precepts of Paul to be Christ's precepts.
More also I might bring, but these will suffice. Now of these things I may most
justly conclude, that your religion hes renewed many of the old condemned
heresies. And as you made one argument, so I will make another. What ever was
heresy in old times, is heresy yet, and the defenders thereof heretics:
this you cannot deny, because it is your own proposition: but these former
heads whilk I have set down (wherein I have used no calumny as ye have done)
was heresies in old times, and the defenders thereof heretics, as witnesses
the ancient Fathers: Therefore they are heresies yet, and the defenders thereof
heretics. And so by your own argument many points of your religion, are old
condemned heresies, and your selves heretics, who does defend them.

Master John's conclusion.

One thing whilk I hope will cut off all controversy, I offer to prove, the
Pope to be the Antichrist. And if this be true, then all men that professes
him, secretly or openly, as it is said in the Revel. 14. shall drink of the
wine of the wrath of God.

Master John Welsche, preacher of Christ's Gospel, at Kirkcudbright.

Master Gilbert Brown.

If this controversy of ours shall not be cut away whil Master John prove the
Pope to be the Antichrist, certainly it will endure ten hundredth thousand year
after the Lord of Marchistouns doomesday. Then it must follow (seeing that is a
thing impossible to be done) that all they that will not ope^lie and priuatlie
obey the Pope, and reverence him as the Vicare of Christ, because he is chosen
by God to rule his Kirk heir on earth, that they must drink of the wine of
the wrath of God.

Our merciful Lord illuminate Master John with his haly spirit and grace,
that he may understand the truth, and receive the same, and so become one
member of his true Kirk, whereby he may be partaker of the merits of Christ,
that his soul may be safe, Amen. Master Gilbert Brown Priest, and defender
of the Catholic Faith.

Master John Welsche his Reply.

It is not impossible to prove your Popes to be the Antichrist. It hes been
proved already by the learned on our side: to the whilk you, and all your
Clergy of Rome is not able to answer. It hes been taught and sealed with the
blood of infinite nombers of Christians: and I have not taken so long a term
as you have set down heir, and yet, I hope, I have proved it sufficiently. Put
all your might to disprove it if you can. And as to that threatening of yours,
Master Gilbert, wherein ye say that all these, who will not openly and
privately obey the Pope, etc, must drink of the wine of the wrath of God. If
it may be believed, then how does this stand first with your Popes pardons,
whereby he gives men pardon or license to profess, subscriue, and swear to
our religion: as it is reported that some of your own religion hes confessed
it? Next, how stands it with the dissimulation of your Jesuits, and seminary
Priests when they come to any place where our religion is openly professed?
Thirdly, what comfort is this whilk ye have pronounced to your own poor
countriemen, who do not openly avow Papistrie, but hes subscriued and
communicate with us? Is this an open profession, or not? And if it be not, if
ye be a true Prophet, then must they drink of the wine of the wrath of God,
then must they be condemned in Hell by your judgment, because they profess him
not openly. And last of all, if this threatening of yours be true, then beside
the many infinite thousands who professes him to be the Antichrist, you
condemn to Hell all the Greek and Eastern Kirks, who in number far exceedes
them who obeyes you, and all the Kirks that hes been 600. year and more after
Christ: for they obeyed not the Pope openly nor priuatlie as Christ's Vicare
over them, as I have proved before. And also you condemn a number of your
Anti-Popes to Hell, with their Cardinals, Bishops, and Kirks who followed them:
for they gave out themselves to be Popes, and did not obey the other. As also
a number of the Fathers of your own religion, who in two general councels the
one of Constance, where there was almost 1000. Fathers: the other of Basile,
did not obey the pope, in defining general councels to be above the Pope. So,
if ye speak truth, infinite millions of Christians in all ages, and
innumerable Kirks, and thousands of your own religion are condemned to hell.
But this is false, Master Gilbert, and who will believe you? And to the end
now my conclusion yet holds sure, that seeing his kingdom is that second
beast that hes two horns like the Lamb and speaks like the Dragon: and
himself is that man of sin, Revel. 23. ^. These. 2.
and son of perdition, that adversary and Antichrist that was to come: Revel.
^^.
and his doctrine is that Apostasy and abomination foretold in the
Scripture: and his seat that Harlote and mystical Babylon, that mother of
hoordomes, who is drunken with the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus, whosoever
receaues his mark on his forehead or hand, that is, openly or priuatlye
professes obedience unto him, shall, as the Angel proclaimed, drink of the
wine of the wrath of God, yea of that pure wine in the cup of his wrath, and he
shall be tormented with fire and brimstone before the holy Angels, and before
the Lamb. And the smoke of his torment shall ascend for ever more: and they
shall have no rest day nor night whilk worship the beast or his image. And as
for your prayer, I beseech God (Master Gilbert) that he may open my eyes, and
enlarge my heart to understand and embrace his truth more and more, and to
make me to grow up in that spiritual communion with Christ and his members
more and more. But that whilk ye call truth is heresy, and that whilk ye
call the true Kirk is Babell: and therefore that doctrine and Kirk of yours is
that strong delusion and whore of Babell, with the whilk whosoever shall
communicate is excluded from the merits of Christ, and shall be pertakers of
her plagues, and finally shall be damned.

FINIS.
THE SECOND PART OF THE REPLY AGAINST MASTER GILBERT BROWN PRIEST, CONCERNING
THE MASS AND ANTICHRIST.

Wherein the abominations of the one is most largely and fully set down: and
the Popes of Rome are proved in the other to be the most undoubted Antichrist,
whilk the Scripture foretold should come.

By MASTER JOHN WELSCHE Preacher of Christ's Gospel.

PRINTED BY ROBERT WALDE-GRAVE Printer to the Kings Majesty 1602.

Cum Priuilegio Regio.

The several things that are handled in the first part concerning the Mass
are these.
1. COncerning the name it self, the variety of their opinions concerning the
deriuation of it, and the cause wherefore they give it this style of Mass is
showed: and that neither in proper terms, nor in substance it is to be found
in the Scriptures of God, and therefore to be rejected

2. That the sacrifice of the Mass is neither figured nor foretold in the
old Testament, nor yet instituted by Christ in the new Testament, in the
latter Supper.

3. Is showed the difference betwixt the Mass, and the latter Supper, whilk
Christ instituted: and it is proved that the Priests in the Mass does not the
same whilk our Savior either did, or commanded to be done in the latter
Supper.

4. It is proved by the testimonies of sundry learned Papists, and great
defenders of their Religion, that the Mass is not set down in the Scripture,
and instituted by Christ in the same.

5. That we have all these things whilk our Savior comprised in the
institution of the Supper, and they have them not.

6. Solid, most clear, and evident proofs out of the Scripture, against the
abominable sacrifice of the Mass, whereby it is sufficiently confuted,
amplified also by their doctrine and testimonies.

7. By the testimonies of the ancient Fathers even until the 1000 year after
Christ, it is confuted.

8. That it may be known how this abominable sacrifice of the Mass crap
in. First, the estate of the publik worship of God in the celebratio^ of the
sacrament of the Supper the first 300. or 400. year after Christ is set down:
next the manifold means and degrees, whereby it crap in piece and piece: how
it was first conceived, formed, brought forth into the world, and then
nourished, strengthened, and rooted in the hearts of all men, and universally
embraced. And thirdly, the authors of the ceremonies of the Mass, who put to
every point of it, and in what year of God is set down. So that betwixt the
first that put to the first piece, to the last that clamped to the last
cloute, is a thousand year and more.

9. Is set down the manifold absurdities, abominations, idolatries
blasphemies, vain, idle, superstitions, Jewish and Ethnic ceremonies of their
abominable Mass, as in a table, a great number: whereby it is made evident
and plain to all those who are not blinded, that of all worships and services
that ever was devised by man, it is the most absurd, blasphemous, and
idolatrous.

10. The manifold oppositions and contradictions amongst themselves,
concerning this their Mass, both in the matter, form, effect, substance, and
circumstances of the same: whereby it is evident, that it is Babel a town of
confusion: and that they and their kingdom cannot stand, seeing they are so
divided amongst themselves in this point.

IN THE SECOND PART CONCERNING the Antichrist, these heads are handled
1. The reasons that M. Gilbert brings for to defend his Popes from being
Antichrist are answered. Wherein it is showed: first, that Antichrist should not
be a Jew, and repair to the temple of Jerusalem, and the Jews should not
receive the Antichrist, as their Messiah: next, that the Pope. suppose he
pretends that he come in the name of Christ, and that he is the Vicare of
Christ, and the seruand of seruands: yet he is nothing less. He hes neither
his calling of God in his word, nor is left in the room of Christ: but hes
entered in, not by the door into the sheepefolde, but another way, as a thief
and briggane, to steal and devour, and does no true service to Christ, but
tyrannizes over his pure flock, and over the princes of the earth. Thirdly,
that the Antichrist should not be one singular person, but a succession of
many, in the self same, Apostate kingdom and tyranny. Fourthly, that for all
his pretenses of humility and piety, yet he is an adversary to God, and lifted
up above all that is called God.

Secondlye, it is proved by all the marks whereby the Antichrist is discriued
in the Scriptures of God. in the 2. These. 2. Apoc. 13. and 17. that the Popes
of Rome are the undoubted Antichrist, because to him only aggrees all these
marks, and to none other. And first they are proved to be the men of sin,
and sons of perdition, by their most monstrous and abominable lives, as
their own friends and flatteters, and Historiographers of the time, hes
descriued them: a few are brought forth as examples to prove this. Secondly, it
is proved that he is an adversary to God, by comparing of his doctrine with the
doctrine of Christ how it overthrows his person, offices, Prophetical,
Priestly and Kingly, and all his benefits, and all the means, outward and
inward, of the knowing and applying of them: and that it depriues the Lord of
his sovereign glory, in communicating to stocks and stones, oil and water a
piece of bread, Angel and man, bones and ashes, and the most vile things that
can be. And also how it overthrows the Sacraments of Christ, and puts to
others whilk he never instituted: and the whole frame of his Discipline and
government, whilk he hes commanded in his word His officers, his offices, his
Laws. And hes put himself in Christ's room and hes made new offices,
officers, and laws, whilk the Scripture knows not of. Thirdly, that he hes
lifted up himself above all that is called God, or that is worshipped. First,
above the whole Kirk, and all general councils: next, above al Kings,
Magistrates, and powers: And thirdly, above the Angels in heaven, and above
them in Purgatory and Hell: and hes equalled himself with God himself, in his
styles, and properties, and works, and equalled himself to Christ Jesus. And
hes also lifted up himself above the God of heaven and his son Christ Jesus.
Fourthly, that he sittes in the Temple of God as God, and so forth of the rest
in the 2. Thessal. 2. chap. and in the Revelation. Whereby it is shown, that
every thing that is foretold of the Antichrist, is fully filled and
accomplished in them: and that Babylon that harlote, that is set down in the
Revelation, is by their own confession, Rome. Further, it is also proved by
the testimonies of sundry of themselves, and others, that the Popes of Rome is
the undoubted Antichrist, and Rome is that Babel.

The second part of the Reply against Master Gilbert Brown
Master Gilbert Brown.

WE have only in our Kirk that heavenly action and Sacrifice, (whilk we call
the blissed Mass) that our Savior did at his latter Supper, and was Leuit. 2.
per totum. Leuit. 6.20.
prefigured by the Law of Moses, and forespoken by the Mala. 1.10. 1^ Esa. 19
19.21, Esa. 56.7
Prophets. For Christ being the chief Priest of all Priests (according to
the order of Genes. 14.18. Psalm 109.4 Heb. 73.17
Melchisedech in this action, and according to the order of Heb 9.12.13 14
Aaron upon the Croce) took Mat. 26 26.27
bread and wine, and having given Luc. 22.19
thanks to his Father of heuin, Mar. 14.22
blissed the same, by the whilk 1. Cor. 10.16
blissing, and heavenly words he made them his body and blood, [as I said
before] and Luc. 22 29.
gave, or offered himself then for them, (that is) for his. And last of all
gave the same body and blood to his Apostles to be eaten, whilk we call to 1.
Cor. 0 16.
communicate. And when he had done the same, he commanded his Apostles, (and by
them the lawful Pastors of the Kirk till the worlds end) to do the same, for
the Luke 22.19.
remembrance of him. And seeing that our Priests does the same, as our Savior
did, how can Master John say that our religion (in this) was not instituted by
Christ?

Master John Welsche his Reply.

I Come to the 10. point of your doctrine concerning the sacrifice of the
Mass: whilk suppose ye call blissed, yet is it most abominable idolatry, as
(by the grace of God) shall be made manifest. And first concerning the word it
self MASS, you are of sik variety of opinions amongst your selves concerning
it, that As doctor Bellarmine in his answer to Plessis de Mornay. de
Eucharist. lib. 11. cap. 1. and Genebrard. in Liturg. S, Denis from the word
MESSAH Deuteronomy. 16.10. that properly signifies sufficiency, but Bellarm.
refutes this, lib. 1. de Missa, cap. 1
some of you says it is taken from the Hebrew: some Bull^nger ibidem from
(...) that signifies a secret sanctification, from the whi^k comes mystery.
from the Greek, some As Bellarmine ibidem, and sundry others from mitto,
missio, or dimissio.
from the Latin: and Some because the sacrifice and prayers is sent to God in
the same, as Hugo de S Vict de sacram. lib. 2. part. ^ cap. vlt.
some says it is called the Mass for one cause, and Some because an Angel as
they say is sent unto the same, as Lombardus in 4. sent. did. 13 and Thomas
part 3. quest. 83. And some because the people is dismissed, and send forth, as
Bellar. lib. 1. de Missa, cap, 1.
some for another. I will only speak this of it, that it is usually taken by
the ancient writers, for the dimission, or skailling (as we call it) of the
Kirk, after the publict service was done to God, as Bellarmine graunts, in the
first acception of this word Mass. And therefore in the end of your Mass, the
Deacon cries, Ite missa est, that is, Go your way, the Congregation is
dismissed. But now the Papists takes not the word in this sense, for the
skailling of the Kirk, or dimission of the people, after the service of
preaching, prayer, and so forth: but for that abominable sacrifice of theirs,
wherein, as they suppone, they offer up Christ his very body and blood, in a
sacrifice for the quick and the dead as Master Gilbert does heir. And for this
cause they as Durandus li. 4. rational. divine.
call this sacrifice, the Mass, that is, first sent from the Father to us,
that Christ his body and blood might be with us: next, sent from us to the
Father, that he may interceede, and may be for us with the Father. But how can
he be sent from them to heaven? seeing he descends in the mouth, stomach, and
belly of the Priest? for to be sent down to the belly of the Priest, and to
be sent up to heaven, are things contrary. So by this style of the Mass, as
they take it, it is plain, that either Christ descends from heaven in the
earth daily in the Mass, whilk Turrian. 1. tract cap, 11. fol 59
some of the^ graunts also) whilk is contrary to an article of our faith, that
he sits at the right hand of his Father, whom the Act. 3.21
heavens must contain until the time that al things be restored: or else their
Mass Priests, dust and ashes, are the creators of their creator, whilk is a
blasphemy.

This mekle now for the name of the Mass, whilk al christians should abhor,
according to that of Psalm. 16.4
David, that he would not take the name of false Gods in his mouth. For that
word, whilk is proponed by men for an article of our faith, whilk is not found
in the Scripture, neither in proper terms, nor yet in substance, and by
necessary consequence out of the same, should be rejected by the kirk of God,
as a profane, and a bastard word. But the Mass is sik: for it is proponed by
the Kirk of Rome, as an article of our faith: and yet it is neither found in
proper terms, nor in substance, nor by any necessary consequence out of the
Scripture: Therefore it should be rejected; as profane and idolatrous, by the
Kirk of God.

This for the name: now to the matter. This is one of the greatest
controversies betwixt you and us, concerning your sacrifice of the Mass:
whilk, as ye account it most heavenly, so we account it most abominable, as
that whilk iniures the son of God, whilk derogates from his death and
passion, whilk is injurious to his everlasting Priest-hoode, whilk is
idolatrous, vain, neidlesse, and frutelesse, whilk hinders and overthrows the
true service of God: all whilk shall be made plain of it, by Gods grace. The
matter of our controversy therefore is: Whether Jesus Christ, God and man, his
body and blood be personally and corporally offered up, in your sacrifice of
the Mass, (as ye call it) and whether this your sacrifice be a propitiatory
sacrifice, for the sins of the quick and the dead: this your Kirk affirms
and holds, and this we deny. Now let us see your reasons first, and then we
will set down what reasons we have for us out of the word of God, to the
contrary. As to yours. First, ye say it was prefigured by the Law of Moses:
next, forspoken by the Prophets and thirdly, done and instituted by Christ our
Savior, and commanded by him to be done to the end of the world. As to the
first, This sacrifice was prefigured by the sacrifices of the old Testament,
for the whilk purpose ye quote Leuit. 2. and 6.20. Unto the whilk I answer:
that the sacrifices of the old Testament were figures and shadows, of that
great and bloody sacrifice of Christ Jesus, once offered up, upon the croce,
never to be offered up again, as Heb. 9.25.26.27.28.
the Apostle says: and of our spiritual sacrifices, and service to God,
whereof the Romans 12.1. Heb. 13.15.16.
Apostle speaks in these places cited on the margent. The whilk also were
fulfilled in that one, and only sacrifice of him self upon the croce, for the
sins of the world: and are fulfilled in our spiritual sacrifices of our
selves, and of the calves of our lips continually. But that these were figures
of your abominable sacrifice in the Mass, there is not a sillabe in the whole
Scripture, to prove the same: for that whilk was prefigured in the old
Testament, was, and is fulfilled in the new Testament. But the new Testament
hes not so mekle as one sillabe of your sacrifice of the Mass: therefore it
could not be prefigured in the old Testament. For if it were prefigured by the
sacrifices of the old Testament, it behooued either to be one with the
spiritual sacrifice of all Christians, or else one with the bloody sacrifice
of Christ upon the Croce: for only these two sorts of sacrifices are prefigured
in the old Testament, and recorded to be fulfilled in the new Testament: but
your sacrifice of the Mass, is one with neither of them: for it is not one
with the first sort, for they are spiritual, and you will have it external:
neither is it one with the other of Christ's sacrifice upon the Croce, for there
he died, and there he shed his blood, and there he suffered the torments of
Gods wrath, and indignation for our sins: and there he satisfied the justice
of God, and merited an everlasting redemption to us. But in your sacrifice of
the Mass, your Ballarm. lib. 2. de missa. cap. 4.
selves graunts, that neither is he crucified, nor is his blood shed, nor
suffers he the wrath of God for our sins, nor satisfies properly the justice
of God for the same, nor properly merits remission of our sins in the Mass:
therefore it is not one with that sacrifice of Christ upon the Croce. For two
several actions whilk hes two different forms, and are done in diverse times,
and places, for diverse ends, cannot be one only, and the self same sacrifice:
for it is the form that gives a thing to be, and distinguishes it from all
other things. But Christ his offering up of himself upon the croce, and your
sacrifice of the Mass hes different forms, are done in diverse places and
times and for diverse ends, therefore they cannot be both one. Further, if they
were both one, then it should follow, that as the sacrifice of Christ upon the
Croce is of an infinite valor, so the sacrifice of the Mass should be of the
same valor. But Bellarm. says, lib. 2. de missa. cap. 4. fol. 740.
That the sacrifice of the Mass, is but of a finite valor, and the sacrifice
of the Croce of an infinite valor. Therefore they cannot be both one and the
self same sacrifice: Therefore this sacrifice of your Mass, seeing it is not
one with neither of these two sorts of sacrifices, is not prefigured in the
old Testament.

As for the second: that it was foretold by the Prophets: It is as true as the
former: for all the sacrifices whilk were fore-tolde by the Prophets in the
old testaments, are fulfilled in the new Testament. But the new Testament,
(as hes been said) makes only mention of these two sorts of sacrifices,
Christ's on the Croce, and our spiritual sacrifices: and not a sillabe of the
sacrifice of the Mass: Therefore it is not fore-tolde by the Prophets in the
old Testament. As for these Malac. 1.10.11 1^ Esa. 19.19.21 ^sa. 56.7
Scriptures whilk ye quote, they speak of the spiritual worship of God, and
of the spiritual sacrifices, whilk the Gentiles being called, should offer up
unto God, under the Gospel, whereof mention is made in these Heb 13.15 16 1.
Pet. 2.5. Romans 12.1. Romans 15.16.
places. For either they speak properly and literally, or else figuratiuelie.
But if you say they speak properly of external sacrifices then they speak
heir of that legal, and ceremonial worship of the Jews, and so these places
does not appertain to the new Testament. Or, if you will say they speak
figuratively, then, I say, they make nothing for your external sacrifice in
the Mass, whilk you will have to be a sacrifice, not figuratively, but
properly. So howsoever ye expone them, they ca^ no ways make for your
external sacrifice in the Mass. Either therefore must ye prove this sacrifice
of your Mass, in the new Testament first, (whilk ye will never be able to do)
or else the figures and prophecies in the old Testament, will never prove it,
seeing there is nothing either prefigured, or foretold in the old Testament,
but that whilk in the new Testament is fulfilled. Let us see therefore what you
can allege for this your sacrifice in the new Testament. You say, that Christ
the chief Priest (according to the order of Melchisedech in this action, and
according to the order of Aaron upon the Croce) instituted it. Matthew 26.26 Luc.
22.19. Mar. 14.22
(m) Matthew, Mark, and Luke: and commanded to be observed to the end of the
world. Before I come to the institution, there are two things to be examined,
whilk you have written heir. The first, that you say, that Christ, according to
the order of Aaron did offer up himself upon the Croce. Unto the whilk I
answer: first, that you gainsay heir, two great Papists, Alanus and
Bellarmine, whereof the Alanus de Euchar. lib. 2. cap 9.
one says that Christ never sacrificed Aaronice, that is, according to the
order of Aaron. The Bellarm. de Missa. lb 1. cap 6 fol. 626. M. Gilbert contrad
cts the learned Fathers of his Kirk.
other says, that Christ his sacrifice upon the Croce was neither according to
the order of Melchisedech, nor yet according to the order of Aaron. And not
only he affirms it, that it is not according to the order of Aaron, but also
he affirms, that this should be certain to all the faithful. So, if you be of
the faithful, and his doctrine be true whilk the Pope your head hes
privileged to be printed, this should also have been certain to you, and so
you should not have gaine-saide it. You had need to be ware of this (Master
Gilbert) to contradict so openly the learned fathers and masters of your
Catholic faith, for by this doing, ye will both bewray your selves, that you
have no unity, and concord one with another, and also ye will bring your
self in suspicion with your head: that ye are not a defender of the
Catholic faith, seeing you so openly contradict the masters and defenders
thereof. Mark this (Reader) what concord these men hes amongst themselves,
some saying one thing, some another. Next, I say: if you refer this also to
his person, that as this action was according to Aaron, so himself was a
priest according to his order, in his sacrifice. Then I say, you both gainsay
the plain. Heb. 5.6.10 Heb. 7.11
Scriptures of God, and also the Bellar. lib. 1. de Missa. cap. 6
learned of your Kirk. For, suppose it be true, that this sacrifice of his
upon the croce, did accomplish all the sacrifices of Aaron, and put an end unto
them, according as he said, It is finished: Yet he offered up this sacrifice,
not as he was a Priest according to Aaron, (for he was not a Priest according
to his order at all) but as he was a Priest, according to the order of
Melchisedech: and therefore the Heb. 5.6.7.10.
Scripture ioynes both together: to assure us that he offered up himself upon
the croce, as he was Priest, not according to Aaron, but according to
Melchisedech.

The second thing is: that you say, For this is the proper signification of the
Hebrew word HOTZSI as in sundry places of Scripture, Ezech. 21. Psalm. 135.
Exodus 8. Number. 30. and so the chaldaick paraphraste Amena which is to bring
forth, and the greek Exenegge and so Cyprian Epist. ad Caecil. and Chrysostom.
hom 35 in cap. 14. Gen and Joseph. lib. 1. cap 19. and Ambrose upon the 7, cap.
Epist. ad Heb. he brought forth for to refresh Abraham etc And Cardinal
Caietan says the same upon the 14 of Genesis There is nothing written there of a
Sacrifice or oblation: but a bringing forth of bread and wine to refresh the
victours, says he,
Christ according to the order of Melchisedech in this action, whilk you mean
the Mass, did offer up his body and blood under the forms of bread and wine.
It is true indeed, that Christ, according to the order of Melchisedech is an
hie-Priest, and not according to the order of Aaron: but yet neither is it
certain out of the Scripture, that Melchisedech did offer up bread and wine,
in an external sacrifice. For the Scripture says only, he brought it forth,
whilk is not to sacrifice. And it is certain As these confessis.
that he gave it to Abraham, and his company to refresh them with, after the
slaughter of these Kings. And the Heb. 7.
Apost. whereas he sets down these things wherein Melchisedech was a type of
Christ, he does not so much as give any inkling of this: for there he compares
Melchisedech with Christ: first, that as Melchisedech was both King and Priest,
so was Christ. Next, as Melchisedech was with out father and mother, beginning,
and ending, the Scripture not mentioning of it, so was Christ. Thirdly, as
Melchisedech was greater then Aaron, and had a more excellent Priesthood then
the Leuiticall Priest-hoode, so was Christ's. But never a word heir, of a
sacrifice of bread and wine, wherein Melchisedech should have resembled the
sacrifice of your Mass, as ye suppose. So you find out heir that whilk the
spirit of God found not out: and so ye make your self wiser then the holy
Ghost in his Epistle. But we will learn not to be wise above that whilk is
written, and to search no further, then the spirit of God hes found out
already. And suppose it were granted to you (whilk ye are never able to
prove,) that Melchisedech did offer up bread and wine yet what to do hes this
with your devilish abomination of your Mass, wherein ye say the substance of
bread and wine is gone away, only the forms remaining. For if your sacrifice
in the Mass, be like the sacrifice of Melchisedech, then the substance of
bread and wine should remain as it did in the sacrifice of Melchisedech, and
the bread and wine should be offered up, and not Christ's body and blood, as
bread and wine only were offered up in Melchisedech his sacrifice, So then,
either Melchisedech his sacrifice is not a tipe of your sacrifice in the Mass,
or else true bread and wine remains in the sacrament, and not Christ his body
and blood whilk is offered up. Choose you then, whether you will deny your
sacrifice to be according to the order of Melchisedech, or else will you let
go your real presence, your Transubstantiation, and your personal offering up
of Christ Jesus in your abominable Mass, for one you must do. Thirdly, if
Christ offered up sik a sacrifice at his Supper, as was prefigured by
Melchisedech, whilk you affirm heir, Ioh. 19.28.
then must it follow that Christ fulfilled that figure perfitely: and so the
same sacrifice needs no more to be offered up again, and so heir will follow
the desolation of your Mass Priests, whose work is chiefly in repeating of
this sacrifice again. Fourthlie, I would ask you, Whether is this sacrifice,
whilk ye say he offered up according to the order of Melchisedech in his last
supper, one with that sacrifice whilk he offered up upon the C^oce, or not? If
it be one, then, I say as he died and shed his blood on the croce, and
purchased an everlasting redemption by the same: so this sacrifice of your
Mass must be joined with his death, and shedding of his blood, and must have
the like virtue and effect to redeem us, and so two absurdities will follow.
The one, that Christ not only should twice have died, once in the Supper, and
afterward upon the croce: but also dies, and is crucified continually: in your
Mass, and yet the Scripture says he dyed but once. The other, that that
sacrifice of his upon the croce is superfluous: for what needed him to die
again to redeem mankind, since the first offering of himself in the Supper
was a sufficient redemption. For if his sacrifice upon the croce was a
sufficient redemption, whilk you cannot deny: and if the sacrifice of him in
the Supper be one with that: of necessity it must follow, that as his
sacrifice upon the croce was a sufficient redemption: even so his sacrifice in
the Supper must be a sufficient redemption for mankind. And therefore De euchat
lib. 2. cap. 18.
Alanus a great defender of your Catholic faith, says, according to the
judgment of the council of Trent, that the new covenant is founded on the
blood of Christ offered up in the Supper, before he was crucified: and that
Christ was truly our Passover the day before he suffered: and he says, This
is the foundation of all Christian doctrine, according to the judgment of the
council. Now if this be true, that he was our Passover, before he died, and
the covenant was founded in his blood whilk he offered up in the Supper: then,
certainly, Christ died in vain, whilk is more then blasphemous: and so
blasphemous must that doctrine of your Mass be, whilk carries with it sik a
blasphemy. And if you will say, it is not the same with that sacrifice upon
the croce: then, I say, first you are contrary to your own Kirk in this, who
says, it is one with that sacrifice of the croce. Next, Christ his body and
blood is not offered the^ in the Supper: for his body and blood was offered up
upon the croce, and so your Mass is gone, or else make two Christ's: one in the
Supper under the forms of bread and wine, whilk the Disciples saw not: and
another who was offered up upon the croce, whilk was seen of all. So whether
will ye go, and unto what side will ye turn you, Master Gilbert, for the
uphold of your Mass? for there are rocks and sand beds on every side. So
neither did Christ offer up himself in a sacrifice at all in his last Supper,
neither did he it according to the order of Melchisedech. But now let us see
how ye prove this sacrifice out of the institution. And seeing this point of
doctrine is sik a weighty point, as whereupon the salvation and damnation of
souls does hing: The institution of the Supper makes nothing for the sacrifice
of the Mass.
therefore I pray thee (Christian Reader) deceive not thine own soul to thy
everlasting perdition, but take good head what ground is in the institution for
this their sacrifice, for if they prove it not heir, it will never be proved
by the Scripture. You say therefore that Christ took bread and wine, we grant
that, yet heir is no sacrifice. What then? He gave thanks: yet heir is no
sacrifice. What next? He blissed it. Yet heir is no sacrifice. And whereas ye
say that by this blissing, and his heavenly words the bread and wine is
changed in the body and blood of Christ: that I have sufficiently (as I hope)
overthrown in my answer unto the fourth point of your doctrine in the first
part. But to return to the words of the institution: after the blissing of
the bread, whilk Luke expones by giving of thanks: the text says, He gave.
What gave he but that whilk he took, and had blissed? And what took he, and
blissed he, but the bread? And therefore the 1. Corinthians 10.
Apostle says, The bread whilk we bliss, etc. So the^ it was bread whilk he
gave, and not his own body and blood corporally. And unto whom gave he it?
the text says, Unto his disciples, both in Matthew, Mark, and Luke, all with
one consent. Now, that whilk was given to his Disciples was not properly
offered up in a sacrifice: for a sacrifice is an offering to God. And the text
says heir, He gave it to his Disciples. So there is not a sillabe in the
institution, that can make for your pretended sacrifice. M. Gilbert adds to
the institution a new giving, whereof the scripture makes no mention.
You heir corrupt the word of Jesus Christ wonderfully: for first you expone by
Giving, Offering up in a sacrifice. Next, whereas the Scripture in Matthew,
Mark and Luke hes but giving once, and referres this giving not to God, but to
the Disciples: And he gave it to the Disciples: you allege heir two giuings:
the one to God, whilk is your own invention, whereof the Scripture makes no
mention: the other to the Disciples, whilk is the form of a Sacrament and not
of a sacrifice: All the ground of the sacrament of the Mass.
for a sacrament is given to us, a sacrifice to God. So all the grounds of your
sacrifice of the Mass is two: the one is, your devised Transubstantiation: so
one error leanes upon another: the other is, not the words of Christ, And he
gave it to his Disciples, but your own words, and your own exposition only,
And he gave, or offered up himself then for them. These are your own words,
and not the words of the holy Ghost. So this sacrifice of your Mass, hes not
the words of Jesus Christ as Matthew, Mark, and Luke hes set them down, to be
the ground of it: but only your own words, and your own interpretation. For
how dare ye be so impudent as to affirm that Christ gave it twice: once in an
offering for his Disciples and another time in an sacrament to his Disciples,
seeing we will believe Matthew, Mark, and Luke, the sworn penmen of the holy
Ghost, who says only he gave it to his Disciples as a sacrament, and makes no
mention at all, that he gave it to God as a sacrifice. Do you think the Lord
will never take an account of you for sik a manifest lie of the son of God,
of his Scripture, of his Apostles and holy writers who write it, they all
saying, he gave it to his Disciples, and you affirming beside that giving to
them, that he gave it, that is, offered it up for them. O sinful man! Who will
venture the salvation of his soul upon so small a thread: yea, upon so impudent
a lie, as ye make of the son of God. O repent, or else you shall one day
feill the fierceness of the Lords hot wrath and indignation upon your soul
and carcass for evermore. Leave off therefore to be the cause of the damnation
of souls, for you deceive them, and makes them believe that this monstrous
abomination of your Mass, hes Jesus Christ to be the author of it, while it
hes not so mekle as a sillabe in the whole institution, that gives sa mekle as
an inkling of it. Are you wiser then the wisest of your generation, Bellarmine,
who for all the arguments that he brings, never so mekle as once gives an
inkling of this your argument. For he thought it was too plain a lie to
affirm a double giving heir, out of the words of the institution: and too
absurd a exposition to expone, He gave, that is, he offered it up. And
therefore he hes no sik reasoning for his sacrifice of the Mass. Yea, that
whilk ye think is plain out of the institution that Christ offered up his
body and his blood in the supper: he says, Bellar. lib. 1. de missa. cap. 12.
fol 669.
that the action of offering cannot be easily distinguished and separated from
the other actions whilk was done jointly there together, by the words of the
institution. And more plainly he says, lib. 1. de missa c. 24. fol 706. The
sacrifice of the mass hes no express warrant in the institution of the Supper
by their own confession.
that the Evangelists hes not expressly said that Christ offered up himself
unto the Father in the Supper. This is a plain speaking: now your sacrifice
of the Mass, hes no expres warrant out of the institution of Christ if you
will believe him, whose controversies are allowed by the Pope to be printed.
But it may be ye thought that this your doctrine would have been swallowed up
without further trial, and therefore you regarded not what you write. You have
stolen your self in sik credit with the simple amongst you, who are deceived
and blinded by your lies, that ye are not ashamed to be plain enough in
speaking untruths and lies of the word of God. But the Lord will recompense
this one day. But now to return to the rest of the words of the institution,
as ye rehearse them. And last of all ye say, He gave his body and blood to his
Disciples to be eaten: He gave it spirituallie, and they did eat it
spirituallie: and he gave the sacraments of his body and blood, the bread and
wine corporally to them, and they did eat them corporally, suppose for a
spiritual use and end. For that whilk he gave they did eat: he gave the bread
and wine, therefore it was bread and wine whilk they did eat, and drink. And
therefore the 1. Cor. 11.
Apost. says plainly, for whosoever shall eat of this bread, etc. He calls
it bread that is eaten. And our Savior says Matthew. 26.29.
Verily, verily from hence forth shall I not drink of the fruit of this vine
with you. That whilk he gave his Apostles to drink corporally in the latter
Supper was the fruit of the vine, (so the Evangelists says.) But Christ's
blood was not the frutie of the vine: therefore it was not his blood whilk they
corporally drank, but wine, whilk was the fruit of the Vine-tree. I go
forward. And when he had done this, ye say, He commanded his Disciples, that
is, the lawful Pastors of the Kirk to do the same for the remembrance of him
to the end of the world. That is true, that whilk he did heir, he commanded to
be done by his Disciples to the end of the world: but never a sillabe heir that
he offered up his body and blood under the forms of bread and wine in the
Supper, in a propitiatory sacrifice for the quick and the dead: Therefore he
commanded not this sacrifice of your Mass to be done to the end of the world.
And whereas ye restrict this commandment, Do this, only to the Pastors, ye
have to understand that as there is some thing heir whilk Christ did, whilk is
proper to them, as to be the dispensers of these heavenly mysteries: so there
is some actions heir, whilk is common also with them to the people: as to
receive, to eat, to drink these Sacraments of his body and blood in his
remembrance. Seeing therefore this commandment, Do this, is to be referred to
the whole actions of the Supper: and seeing there is some actions in the same,
whilk the other Christians should do also: Therefore this commandment, Do
this, is not to be restricted to the office of the Pastors only, (whilk ye do)
but common with them to the actions of the people. Now to your conclusion:
Seeing (say ye) your Priests does the same in this sacrifice, whilk our Savior
did: how can I say that your religion in this, was not instituted by Christ.
The priests in the mass does not the same thing that Christ either commanded
or did himself in the latter Supper.
If ye do the same that he did, indeed I will grant you it. But you do not
the same whilk our Savior did: Therefore your religion in this is not
instituted by Jesus Christ. The whilk I prove. First, Christ took bread and
wine in this Sacrament and gave it to be eaten and drunken: and bread was
eaten, and wine was drunken by his Disciples. The difference between the
Sacrament of the Supper, and the abominable sacrifice of the Mass.
But your Priest takes bread and wine, and coniures the substance of it away by
your Transubstantiation, and only remains the forms of the bread and wine
behind: therefore you do not the thing whilk Christ did. Secondly, Christ
took bread and brake it you take bread and hangs it up, and keeps it in a
box, to carry to the seik, and in processions. Thirdly, Christ took bread
and gave it to his Apostles: your Priests like gluttons in the sacrifice of
your Mass eats it up every whit himself alone. Fourthly, Christ gives a
Sacrament to stre^gthen men's faith: but your Priests gives a sacrifice to
redeem men's souls. Fifthly, Christ gave it to be eaten, your Priests gives it
to be worshipped. Sextly, Christ gave bread, your Priests say they give God.
Seventhly, Christ gave the Cupe to his Disciples, saying, Drink ye all of
this, your Priest drinks all himself, and takes away the Cupe from the
people, both in your sacrifice and sacrament. Eighthly, Christ instituted the
Supper, and commanded the Kirk to celebrate the same, as he had instituted it:
but the Mass hes been clamped up by many sundry Popes: one made the Confiteor,
another the Introit: another the Kyriceleison, another the Gloria in excelsis:
and so forth of the rest, as shall be proved afterward. Ninthly, Christ
intending to celebrate his Supper, changes not his garment: but the Priest
going to say his Mass, does naught but cloth and vn-cloath, and every garment
carrying a great mystery. The Priest saying Mass must have his head and
beard shaven, and upon his head a circle of hair, whilk they call a crown:
imitating the Priests of the Gentiles in this, Baruh chap. 6. ver. 30. and not
Christ and his Apostles. Tenthly, Christ in the Supper used common bread, but
the Popish Priest must expressly use other manner of bread, baked betwixt two
irons, whilk is properly, Wafers. Elleuenthlye, Christ made his Supper upon a
Table, the Popish Priest must have a consecrate Altar, with some pieces of
relickes put in the hole of it, or else a marble stone, in the borders whereof
are little pieces of cloth, whilk they call corporales, to say his Mass on.
Twelfthly, Christ in the celebrating of the Supper, preached and taught his
Apostles: the Popish Priest mumbleth betwixt his teeth certain prayers: he
turns to and from the altar, one while his back, another while his face to
the people: now goes he from one side of the altar unto another: now he
sings with an high voice, now with a low voice: now he lifts up his arms,
now he casts them down. Briefly, he seems to be a man wholly mad, not
knowing what countenance for to use. Thirtenthly, Christ in the Supper spoke in
a vulgar tongue, that al might understand: the Popish Priest in their Masses,
speaks in a strange tongue, whilk the most part of themselves understands not.
Fourtenthly, Christ first brake the bread, and then gave it to his Apostles:
the profane Priest first speaks certain words over the bread in his
Mass, and then breaks it, (or the accidents of it, as they say) at their
pleasure. Fiftenthly, Christ after he had broken the bread says, This is my
body the Popish Priest speaks the words, without breaking of the bread, and
not content with the words of Christ, he adds this word enim unto them.
Therefore you cannot M. Gilbert, but speak against the light of your own
conscience, when you say that your Priests does the same in their Mass that
Christ did in the Supper, and heir I appeal your conscience before the
terrible and everliving God, and before Jesus Christ that shall judge the quick
and the dead, whether ye do not speak in this against the light of your own
conscience or not, and whether your Priests in your Mass, does the same whilk
Christ did in the Supper or not? Think you not that you must stand before the
living God, and give a reckoning of these things. Repent in time, and cease to
deceive the souls of your countriemen any more. But to conclude this: What
ado hes your Mass with the Supper of Christ? what likeness is there between
the one and the other? In the Supper whilk Christ instituted in the Scripture,
we are remembered of his death and passion upon the Croce, whereby he appeased
the wrath of God for our sins, and of our duty toward him: whereby we
acknowledge in our consciences, that we are oblished to die to sin, seeing it
behooued the eternal son of God by his death upon the croce, to redeem us
from the same: upon the whilk arises an earnest thanksgiving in the hearts and
mouths of every true Christian, for so great a salvation, purchased so
wonderfully, as by the death of the eternal son of God. In your sacrifice of
the Mass is there any sik thing? Is there any remembrance of his death and
suffering there? Is his death shown to the people in a known language that
they may understand it? Is there any acknowledging of any duty there, for his
death? Is there any true thanksgiving there? No, none. But in stead of these,
a heap of words in an unknown language, and a diversity of Apish gestures,
and Morishe and Iuglers tricks, to feed the eyes of the poor people, whilk
neither the people, nor yet many of your selves do understand. In the Supper we
are also admonished of our spiritual conjunction with our neighbor, and of
our duty toward him, in that we are all partakers of one bread, made of many
grains, and of one wine made of many grapes: to signify unto us that we are
all renewed and redeemed by one blood, members of one body, living by one
spirit, drawing life, motion, and feeling all from one head, being one with
him, and so one with others, whereby follows our mutual duties one toward
another. In your Mass there is no communion of the bread made of many grains,
and of the wine made of many grapes, to signify this conjunction and communion,
either with Christ our head or amongst our selves, the Priest eating and
drinking all himself. In the Supper, according to Christ his institution by
giving, taking, eating, and drinking of the bread and wine by all the
Disciples, whereby our bodily life is nourished and strengthened, is not only
signified and represented our spiritual grouth in that spiritual communion
with him, whereon our spiritual life depends: but also in the same, all the
faithful does truly by faith eat and drink spiritually his flesh and
blood, whereby they are made one with himself, flesh of his flesh, and bone of
his bones, whereby they are strengthened in that spiritual life, and confirmed
in the hope of that glory. But is there any sik thing in your Papisticall
sacrifice? Is there any giving, and taking, eating, and drinking of bread and
wine by the faithful, either to represent our communion with Christ and amongst
our selves, or to strengthen us in that spiritual life through his
conjunction. Do the poor people eat or drink, either bodily, or spiritually
in your Mass? Is there any action there to stir up their conscience? or any
instruction to incres their knowledge? Are they ought but idle be holders of a
pretended mystery, whilk is both dumb and deaf, and of a Priest that eats and
drinks all himself alone? So that in stead of these heavenly dishes, whilk our
loving Father does propine unto us, upon his Table in the Supper, what is
there in your abominable sacrifices, but a feeding with husks, an apishe
game, and Iuglers tricks to feed the fantasies of poor people, that sees but
understands not, that hears, but they know not what. So that in truth there
is as great likeness betwixt Christ's Supper, and your Mass, as is between
the Table of the Lord, Some of themselves hes confessed and written that al
men may know it, that the Mass is but an unwritten Tradition, and is not
instituted by christ in the Scripture
and the Table of Devils, and light with darkness. Seeing therefore there is
sik a difference betwixt your sacrifice in the Mass, and Christ his Supper, as
hes been seen: therefore your Priests does not the same in the Mass, whilk
our Savior did in the last Supper. And therefore how can you say, that your
religion in this is instituted by Christ? And this is so evident, that some of
your own Doctors and learned writers hes been forced to confess the same. As
In his book against Brentius
Petrus a Soto and Lib. 4. Panopl.
Lindanus co^fesses that the sacrifice of the Mass, with many other points of
their religion, is an unwritten Tradition, whilk hes neither the beginning nor
author of it in the Scriptures of God. And In Floretum.
Gerson, a Papist, and exponer of the Mass says, that the office of the Mass
was ordained by Saint James and Basile the Bishop of Caesarea, but the
Sacrament of the Supper was instituted by Jesus Christ. And he alleges the
Canon De cons. did. 1 Canon Iacobus. graece, (...) that is, they have
delivered that mystical sacrifice in write to us.
Law for him. So first there is three hundredth years betwixt Basile and James,
whilk are the composers of the Mass. Secondly, he distinguishes betwixt the
supper and the Mass, and he says the Supper is instituted by Christ, and the
office of the Mass by S. James, and S. Basile. So if he speak true, the Mass
and the Supper is not both one, and the Mass is not instituted by Christ, as
the Supper is. And so out of your own mouths, your Mass is confessed not to
be instituted by Christ in the Scripture. Shameless therefore and impudent
(Master Gilbert) are ye in affirming that your religion in this is instituted
by Christ.

Master Gilbert Brown.

There are five chief things wherein the institution of Jesus Christ consists
(as I have showed before.) Of these five, the Ministers wants three of the
chiefest in their communion. First, a lawful Priest or Minister. Secondly
Thanksgiving. Thirdly, blissing. Fourthly, giving or offering. Fifthly,
communicating. First, ane lawful Minister; as after I shall show. Secondly,
the blissing of the bread and wine, whilk they have blotted out of their Scots
Bibles, and put in thanksgiving for the same, as if both were one: not the
les, that both the Greek, Mar. 14.22.23
and Latin is against them, and signifies two diverse actions, both done or
said in S. Mark at his Supper (...) benedicens, blissand, and (...) gratias
agens, giving thanks. And thirdly, giving or offering of his blissed body and
blood to his Father for his faithful, whilk properly is to sacrifice, as the
holy Fathers writes upon the same. And as for their thanksgiving, it is but an
invention of their own head, as may be seen in their Psalm books: and
their communicating is but of bread and wine, but ours is of the body and
blood of Christ. So we only huae the true institution of Jesus Christ, and not
they, and that by the trial of the touchstone.

Master John Welsche his Reply.

We have all things that are comprised in the institution of the Supper by
Christ You have them not.
As for the five chief things wherein ye say the institution of Christ
consists: to wit, a lawful Minister, 2. Thanksgiving. 3. Blissing. 4. Giving
or offering. 5. Communicating. We grant that a lawful Minister is required,
but not a sacrificing Priest heir, because there is no external and outward
sacrifice heir, as ye suppone, and as hes been proved. And seeing your Priest
are sacrificing Priests of a sacrifice that hes not a sillabe in the word of
God to bear witness unto it, and seeing their authority depends of the
authority of the Pope, whilk is Antichristian, as shall be proved heirafter: and
seeing the most part of your Priests are admitted without the due trial and
examination of gifts and manners: and the most part cannot preach the Gospel,
as experience teaches, therefore in your communion, or rather abominable
sacrifice of your Mass, (for how can it be called a Communion, where the
Priest only eats and drinks up all?) there is no lawful Minister: and seeing
our offices is lawful: to wit, the preaching of the Gospel, the
administracion of Sacraments, and Discipline: and seeing our entry to the
offices is lawful also: by dew examination of life and doctrine: and seeing the
authority of our calling is from God, who enables whom he calls with gifts
meet to discharge the calling, and from his Kirk examining, trying,
testifying, approving, or dayning, and consenting unto the same: Therefore in
the administration of our Communion there are lawful Ministers. As to the
second, Thanksgiving, we grant also it is comprised in the institution of
Christ his sacrament, and is required in the celebration of the same: But you
say, our thanksgiving whilk we use is but an invention of our own heads, as
may be seen in our Psalm books. Whereunto I answer: If ye respect the matter
contained in our Thanksgiving, it hes the warrant of the Scripture, and so in
that respect it is not our own invention. If ye respect the authority, we are
taught and commanded by our Savior, both by his example, for he gave thanks:
and also by his commandment, Do this, to do the same. And so in that respect
it is not our own invention. If you respect the end, it is Gods glory, whilk
is the proper end of all thanksgiving. If ye will respect the form of this
thanksgiving: to wit, the words and order wherein it is conceived: I say, it
is left indifferent to the Kirk of God to form their prayers and
thanks-giuings: so being the matter, end, and authority of the using of them
publikly, have there warrant out of the word of God. So seeing the authority
to give thanks, and the matter also of our thanksgiving, and end thereof is
set down in the word, and seeing the Lord hes left it free to the Kirk of
God concerning the outward form of the same, the Scriptures not determining it,
whilk your self, I hope, will not deny. For your canon hes many forms of
prayers, and thanksgiving in your Mass, whilk after that form and order is
not set down in the word of God. Therefore, you injury the Lords spirit and his
Kirk, who calls our thanksgiving our own invention.

As to the third concerning Blissing, whilk you distinguish from thanksgiving:
and says, we have blotted it out of our Scots Bibles, and put thanksgiving in
the room thereof: and so you say, we want that part. First then, I will ask
you, Did not Luke and the Apostle Paul set down the whole form and the chief
points of the institution of that sacrament? Luke 22 1. Cor. 11
I trow you will not deny it, for it were too plain an impiety for you to say,
that either Luke the sworn penman of Gods spirit, or Paul, who said, I have
received of the Lord, that whilk also I have delivered unto you, that either of
these had omitted the history of the institution of this Sacrament, 1. Cor
11.23
a principal point thereof: but either this Blissing is one with
Thanksgiving, or else they have omitted a principal point thereof, for
neither of them makes mention in these places of Blissing, but only of
Thanksgiving: therefore it is one with Thanksgiving. Secondly, I say,
either the whole three Evangelists, and the Apostle Paul, in setting down the
institution of the sacrament of the Supper, omits a chief thing: to wit, the
blissing of the Cup (whilk I trow ye will not say) or else the Blissing of the
Cupe is one with Thanksgiving: for the Apostle Paul and Luke makes no
mention at all of blissing, but only of thanksgiving: and the two Evangelists
Matthew and Mark, makes no mention of the blissing of the Cupe: but says,
that after, or Also he took the Cupe, and when he had given thanks, etc.
therefore they are one. Thirdly, if ye will credit one Evangelist exponing
another whereas Matthew and Mark hes this word, and he blissed: Luke and Paul
hes these words, And he gave thanks. And whereas Matthew and Mark hes this
word Blissing after he took the bread, they use the word thanksgiving after
he took the Cupe, to signify that they are both one. And therefore if ye will
believe Scripture exponing Scripture, they are both one. Yea, what will you say
to Bellarm. lib. 1 de sacr. Eucha. cap. 10.
Bellarmine, who says that some Catholics contends, that both the words to
bliss, and to give thanks in the Scripture signifies one thing: and therefore
they interpret Thanksgiving, Blissing. So if you will credit your own
Catholics, they are both one heir.

And whereas you say, that both in the Greek and Latin they signify diverse
things: I answer: Indeed it is true that sometimes they signify diverse
actions: as Number 6.
Blissing, for the petition of a blissing. But yet sometimes also blissing is
taken in the Scripture, for thanksgiving, as both I have proved in these
places, as also, if ye will deny, there is places Luc. 1.65 Ephesians. 1.3 1. Pet 1.3
ynow in the Scripture for the contrary. And whereas you say that in Mark they
signify two distinct actions, I have proved before they are both one.

And last of all I say, if by blessing you mean the words of the consecration
this is my body whilk is broken for you etc. as (d) Bellarmine affirms that the
Roman catechist so expones it, Lib. 4. de sacram. Euch. cap. 13
and the Theologes commonly teaches the same: then I say we want not that
chief point, for we rehearse the words of the institution. So howsoever the
word (blissing) be taken, either for thanksgiving, or for the sanctification of
these elements to an holy use, by prayer: whilk is co^prehe^ded in the
thanksgiving, or for the words (as ye call them) of the consecration, we have
always this blissing in our communion. And as for your houering and blowing of
the words of Christ over the bread and challice, with your crossing and
charming them, after the manner of Sorcerers, with a set number and order of
words and signs: your hyding it: your rubbing of your fingers for fear of
crummes: your first thortering, and then lifting up of your arms: your joining
and dis-ioyning of thumb and forefinger: and sundry other vain and
superfluous ceremonies and curiosities, whilk you use in blissing of the
elements: they have neither command, nor example of Christ's institution and
action, and the Apostles doctrine and doing, in the Scriptures of God.

Now as for the fourth, giving, or offering up of the body and blood of Christ
to his Father, by the faithful: We confess a giving to his Disciples, vvhilk
you call afterward a communicating. But for another giving, that is, (as you
expone it) an offering up of his body and blood to his Father, we alluterly
deny it, as a thing not so mekle as once mentioned in the whole institution,
but contrary to the same, and Antichristian: and therefore we utterly abhor
it, and detests it, as an invention of your own, as Antichristian, as
idolatry, as abomination, as that whilk derogates from that blissed and only
one sacrifice, whereby he offered up himself once upon the Croce, never to be
offered up again, as the Heb 9.25 Bellar. lib. 1. de Missa, cap. 12 and cap 24.
scripture testifies. And Bellarmine says plainly, that this offering up is
not expressly set down in the words of the institution, and that it cannot be
easily discerned.

And as for the fifth a communicating we have it, and that not only of the
bread and wine, as ye here imagine, but of Jesus Christ God and man, his very
flesh and blood, and al his blissings by faith spiritually: seeing therefore we
have all these points whilk are requisite in the institution, a lawful
Minister, thanksgiving, blissing, giving, and communicating: therefore we have
the true institution of Christ in the sacrament. And because in this your
abominable sacrifice of the Mass, (as hes been said) there is no communion,
for the Priest takes all; and because you affirm the personal and corporal
presence of Christ's flesh and blood in your sacrifice, and the corporal eating
and drinking of it, whilk is Capernaiticall and more nor carnal, contrary to
the Scripture, contrary the nature of a sacrament, contrary the truth of
Christ his humanity, and contrary the articles of our faith of his ascension,
sitting at his right hand and there remaining, till his returning in the last
day, all whilk your sacrifice of the Mass, and Transubstantiation in your
communion overthrows: Therefore you have not the true institution of Jesus
Christ according to the Scripture. I might end here, but because ye account the
sacrifice of your Mass most heavenly and the principal part of the worship
of God, and we account it a most abominable idolatry: Arguments against the
abominable Sacrifice of the Mass.
, herefore I will set down some arguments against the same, whereby if you
will you may perceive the abomination of it. First I say, all lawful
sacrifices hes the expres testimonies of the Scripture to warrant the
institution of them to be of God. But your sacrifice of the Mass hes no
expres testimony of the Scripture, whereby it can be made manifest that it is
instituted of God: therefore it is not lawful. What now will you say to this,
the proposition you cannot deny, for our Savior says, Math. 15 9. I^r. 7.24.
in vain worship ye me, teaching for doctrine men's commandments. And Jeremy
reprooues the Jews that they would not walk according as the Lord commanded
them, but according to their own wills. Col. 2.23.
And the Apostle condemns all voluntary Religion. Therefore this is most
certain, that that Religion or sacrifice, whilk hes not express Scripture
whereby it may be made plain that it is instituted of God, is not lawful: Rom
14.1^. Romans 10.17.
for all that is done without faith is sin: and faith hes only the word of
God to lean to: And dare the creature be so bold as to appoint a mean to
worship God, without the warrant of his will in his word? Now to the
assumption, what can you say to it? Bring me an expres testimony out of the
Scripture, that God hes instituted your Mass, and take it to you? Yea, if it
be instituted in any place of the Scripture, it is instituted in the last
Supper (for this you grant your selves:) But there is not a sillabe in the
whole institution, that Christ offered up himself in a sacrifice in the same,
as hes been proved: Bellarm. lib. 1. de missa cap. 24.
and Bellarmine the learnedest of your Kirk confesses plainly, that the
Evangelists hes not said expressly that Christ offered up himself in the
Supper in a sacrifice. And therefore others of your own Religion, Petrus a
Soto in his book against Brentius. Lindanus lib. ^ Panopli^
Papists of great name, hes reckoned the sacrifice of the Mass amongst the
traditions, whilk hes not their beginning nor author in the Scriptures. So then
by your own confession, the sacrifice of the Mass hes not express Scripture
to warrant it: yea, it is a tradition, whilk hes neither the beginning nor
author of it in the Scriptures of God. And I would ask this question of you:
What can be the cause, wherefore the typical sacrifices, and all the rites and
ceremonies thereof, is so expreslye set down in the Scripture of the old
Testament, (whilk you will not deny) and this sacrifice of yours, whilk ye
account more excellent then all these, not to have been expressly see down in
the new Testament, neither the sacrifice, nor the rites and ceremonies
thereof, yea, not so meikle as the very name of it? Is the new Testament
(think ye) more obscure then the old Testament? (whilk is absurd to say.)
Shall the old Testament be clear in setting down the sacrifices and all the
rites thereof, whilk is but the shaddowe: and should not the new Testament,
have been at the least, as clear in setting down the sacrifice of the new
Testament, whilk ye affirm to be the Mass, if it were sik, what an absurd
thing is this? Christian reader assure thy self, the Lord Jesus would have
dealt as lovingly, and plainly with thee, in setting down the sacrifice of
the Mass in the new Testament, (if ever he had instituted sik a sacrifice) as
he was in setting down the sacrifices of the old Testament. But thou may
assure thy self, and thy conscience may lean unto it, since he has not so
much as once expressed it in all the new Testament, therefore he hes never
appointed it. Secondly, I say, in all the places of Scripture wheresoever the
Apostles speaks of the sacrifices, whilk Christians should offer up, they ever
speak of spiritual sacrifices, and never speaks of this their external
sacrifice of the Mass. They never remember of this their sacrifice, of the
offering up of Christ in the Mass Look throughout the whole new Romans 12. Heb
13 Phil. 4. Romans 15. 1. Pet. 2. Apo. 2
Testament, and thou shall not find this, as namely, in these places noted in
the margent. Are you and your Mass Priests more wise then the Apostles are?
Whether shoule we then think and speak as they spak and thought, or as ye
would have us? They never spak of your sacrifice of the Mass, and bring one
instance, if ye can: therefore neither should we. We will believe them rather
then you. Thirdly, that doctrine whilk is expressly gainsaide by the Scripture,
must be false:) this you cannot deny:) but this your doctrine concerning the
often and daily offering up of Jesus Christ, his body and blood in sacrifice in
your Mass, is expressly gainsaid by the scripture: for the Scripture says in
sundry places, that he hes once offered up himself, never to offer up himself
again, Heb 10.10. By the whilk will we are sanctified, even by the offering up
of Jesus Christ once made. 11. And every Priest stands daily ministering, and
ofttimes offers one manner of offering, whilk cannot take away sin 11. But
this man after he had offered one sacrifice for sins, sits for ever at the
right hand of God. 14. For with one offering has he consecrated for ever them
that are sanctified. Heb. 9.24. Christ hes entered into the very heaven to
appear now in the sight of God for us, not that he should offer himself often,
etc. 28. So Christ was once offered to take away the sins of many. Heb. 7.27.
Christ died once, when he offered up himself, Seeing the Scripture therefore
affirms so plainly, that Christ once offered up himself, and you affirm that
in your abominable sacrifice, he offers up himself often: since the Scripture
says, the offering up of Christ is once only and ye say it is often in your
Mass: Therefore this doctrine of yours is plain against the express sayings
of the Scriptures. For suppose ye will have an unbloody offering up of Christ,
yet the Scripture only acknowledges this bloody offering up of himself upon the
croce.

Fourthly, I will ask you to what purpose serves the personal sacrifice of
Christ in your Mass? It must be for one of two: to wit, either to satisfy for
our sins, (and therefore ye call it a propitiatory sacrifice) or else to
apply that satisfaction once made by his death upon the croce unto us, (the
whilk ye affirm also of it:) But for neither of these is Jesus Christ to be
offered up again: therefore for no cause is he to be sacrificed in your
Mass. Not for the first, to satisfy for our sins, because the Scripture
says plainly, that he hes satisfied for our sins, by his once oblation upon
thh Croce, never to die again, and therefore our Savior says upon the *
Croce, It is finished. And our redemption and satisfaction is ascriued only to
his death once made, Heb. 1. and 9. and 10 Ioh. 19.28. Bellar. lib. 1. do
Missa. cap. 25
and his blood once shed. And your selves will not deny this, but the death of
Christ is a sufficient ransom and satisfaction for all the sins of the world,
and therefore Bellarmine graunts this, that the virtue of his once offering up
upon the croce, is infinite and everlasting, to sanctify us: so that there
needs not another sacrifice of the croce, or the repetition of the same. And
the treuth of this is manifest: for if Christ must be offered up in the Mass
to satisfy for our sins, he must die again, and suffer again. For what is
it to satisfy God, but to pay to God that whilk we owe? And what owe we unto
him for our sins, but death: for death is the stipend of sin? So that to
satisfy God for our sins, is to die for our sins: and therefore we say,
Christ hes once satisfied for our sins, because he hes once paid our debt,
whilk is death: that is, he hes once died for our sins. So the^ either Christ
hes not fully satisfied for our sins, by his once death upon the Croce,
(whilk is impiety to think) or else the Lord craves a debt already paid, over
again: (whilk is blasphemy) or else Christ needs not to be offered up in your
Mass, to satisfy for our sins. And so your sacrifice of the Mass availles
not for to satisfy for our sins.

Let us come to the next: If ye will say, he is offered up in the Mass for to
apply the virtue of the death of Christ unto us, (whilk your Kirk also says.)
First, I say, Christ is applied to us, when he is offered, not to God in a
sacrifice, but to us in the word and Sacraments: therefore he should not be
offered up to God in a sacrifice, but offered to us in his word and Sacraments,
that he may be applied to us: for it is the word and Sacraments whilk
outwardlye applies Christ and his death to us, and not a sacrifice: for in a
sacrifice the thing whilk is sacrificed, is offered to God, and not applied to
us. Next, I say, if your sacrifice serves but to apply the virtue of Christ his
satisfaction unto us: then it is manifest, the satisfaction is already made:
for first the salve must be made, before it can be applied. So your Kirk heir
erres, whilk says your sacrifice of the Mass is propitiatory to appease the
wrath of God, and also applicatorie to apply the same to us. I say thirdly, if
Christ should be sacrificed again, that the virtue of his death may be made
effectual in us: then also should he be conceived again in the womb of the
Virgin borne again, die again, and rise again: that the virtue of his
incarnation, birth, death, and resurrection, should be applied unto us: for
will you say, that he must be sacrificed again to apply the virtue of his
sacrifice upon the croce unto us: and what reason then can ye pretend for you
wherefore he should not be incarnate again, die again, and rise again that
the virtue of these may be applied to us? Do you think this absurd? What is
the cause then that ye will not blushe at the other. Fourthly, I say, if your
sacrifice of the Mass be an application of Christ his sacrifice: then it is
not the sacrifice it self: for the applying of the salve, is not the salve it
self: and therefore since you say that it is the applying of Christ his
sacrifice, wherefore should ye say that Christ is sacrificed in it: for these
two cannot stand together. Fifthly, in Baptism, the sacrifice of Christ, and
the virtue of his death is truly applied unto us: and yet ye will confess
that Christ is not sacrificed in Baptism. Wherefore then may not the virtue of
this death and sacrifice, be applied to us in the sacrament of the Supper, and
yet he not sacrificed again in it. And last of all, neither you, neither any
creature should appoint or make more means of the applying of Christ and his
death to us, then is set down in his word: but his word only sets down the
inward operation of Gods spirit applying it to us, and faith upon our part
apprehending it: and the word the sacraments, and discipline proponing and
confirming the same unto us. But never a sillabe in the whole scripture, that
the Lord hes appointed your sacrifice of the Mass to apply the death of Christ
unto us. Seeing therefore your sacrifice of the Mass, neither satisfies for our
sins (for Christ by his death hes done that sufficiently) nor yet applies the
satisfaction once made by the death of Christ unto us, (for that is done by the
spirit and faith inwardly, and by the word sacraments, and discipline
outwardly, and that sufficiently:) Therefore your sacrifice of the Mass is
needless, and serves to no use in the earth.

Fifthly, the Scripture ever conioynes with the sacrifice of Christ, his death:
so that he cannot be sacrificed but by dying, as the Scripture plainly
testifies, Heb. 9.25. and 26. Not that he should offer up himself often, for
then must he have often suffered from the foundation of the world. Heb. 7.^^.
Heb ^.1^
The same may be seen also in sundry other places, whereof I have quoted a few
on the margent. So the Scripture says, if he must be often offered up, he must
often suffer. And Bellarmine lib. 1. de Missa, fol. 725. says, That if there
be not a true and a real slaughter of Christ in the Mass, then the Mass is
not a true and real sacrifice. But the Scripture says plainly that he hes but
once died, and I trow you will not say that he is to die again: Therefore
seeing he cannot die again, he cannot be offered up again: for the Scripture
acknowledges no sacrifice of Christ, but that whilk is joined with his death.

Lib. 1. de Missa cap. 2. fol. 693 and 604. Cap 27. lib. de Missa, fol. 726.
and cap. 2. fol. 604.
Sextly, Bellarmine graunts that in all external sacrifices, the sacrifice
must be changed. It is also required (says he) in a true sacrifice, that that
whilk is to be sacrificed be alluterly destroyed. And in another place, That
whilk is offered is ordained to a true, real, and voluntare destruction. But
Christ now being glorified cannot be changed and alluterly destroyed: therefore
he cannot be sacrificed, if your selves speak true: or else as often as he is
sacrificed in your Mass, he is alluterly destroyed, whilk is blasphemy.

Seuinthly, the scripture says, Where there is remission of sins there is no
more offering: Heb. 10.18
that is, all external propitiatory sacrifices ceases: but remission of sins
is already obtained by the death of Christ, as the Heb. 1.3
Scripture testifies, and your selves will not deny. Therefore there needs no
more oblation of Christ in your Mass for the same.

Eighthly, the Heb. 9.22
Scripture says, That without shedding of blood there is no remission: but in
your sacrifice of the Mass there is no shedding of blood, as your selves
graunts, for ye call it an unbloody sacrifice: therefore by your sacrifice of
the Mass there is no remission of sin.

Further, the Heb. 5. Heb. 7
Scripture acknowledges no other Priest of the new Testament, but Christ only,
These Priests says the Apostle to the Hebrews, speaking of the Priests of the
old Testament, were many, because death hindered them to endure: but he,
speaking of Christ, because he abydes for ever, hes an everlasting
Priest-hoode, whilk cannot pass from one to another. So Christ is the only
Priest of the new Testament. Now if it be true whilk you say, that Christ is
offered up in your Mass, and that by your Masse-Priestes, then are there more
Priests of the new Testament then Christ, whilk is plain against the
Scripturs. What will you say to this? That Christ is the principal priest of
the new Testament, and yours are secondary Priests and under him, by whose
ministry he offers up himself to God But first, was not the Priests of the
old Testament only secondarie Priests? this you will not deny, seeing their
sacrifices were figures of his, and their Priesthood figures of his Priest
hoode. But the Apostle oppones the Priesthood of Christ, not to another
principal Priesthood, but to the Priesthood of men, whilk was but secondary,
and says it cannot stand with that secondary Priesthood in the old
Testament: therefore it cannot stand with your Priesthood of the new Testament.
And the reason whilk the Apostle alleges will not only serve, to exclude the
Priests of the old Testament, that was but secundary Priests also: but also all
other sacrificing Priests whatsoever, of the propitiatory sacrifice of the new
Testament. For the reason is, because he bydes for ever, and hes a Priesthood
whilk cannot pass from one to another, whilk will serve as well against your
Mass Priests, as against them: for they are mortal as the Priests of the old
Testament were: and his Priesthood cannot pass from one to another, as it
might have done amongst the Priests of the old Testament, and also does
amongst your Priests. For to what purpose should your Priesthood and sacrifice
serve, seeing Christ his sacrifice hes fulfilled all the types of all the
sacrifices of the old Testament? If you say, to signify Christ his sacrifice
to come, as theirs did: then that is false, for he is sacrificed already. But
if you say, to signify and represent his sacrifice already done: then I say,
what needs him to be sacrificed again for that purpose? for the word and
sacraments does represent him sufficiently: and so your Mass needs not to
represent his sacrifice. And if you say it represents his sacrifice: then I
say, it is not one with that sacrifice of his upon the croce, whilk you will be
loath to grant, for your Kirk says, that it is one with that in substance. And
I say farther, Bellar. lib. 1. de Missa, cap. 25
if you will say with Bellarmine, That this place of the Apost. only excludes
absolutely the multiplication of Priests in the same dignity and power with
Christ: that then they exclude yours also. For if you offer up the same
sacrifice whilk he offered up, then you have the same power and dignity whilk
he had. But this you say you do: for it is no matter of the difference of the
manner, since the sacrifice is one. Seeing therefore Christ God and man, whilk
ye say ye offer up in your Mass is of that same dignity, whilk he was of,
when he was offered up upon the croce: and seeing the equal dignity of the
sacrifice makes the equal dignity of the Priest that offers it up: therefore
sacrilegious are your Mas-Priests, and excluded heir by the Apostle. And
thirdly, I say, This is a vain distinction of yours, of principal and chief
Priest, and secondary Priests: for this is the nature of this sacrifice of
Christ that it cannot be offered up by none, but by himself. And fourthly, if
your Mass Priests be but Ministers in this sacrifice, and Christ the
principal, (as you say) who offers up himself by you: then I say as ye offer
up Christ as instruments, for your sins and the sins of the people: it
should follow that Christ offers up himself in your Mass by you, for his own
sins, and the sins of the people: But this is blasphemy, Heb. 7.^7.
and expressly gainsaide by the Scripture. And last of all, I say, seeing (as
your Kirk says) Christ his sacrifice in the Mass is one with that sacrifice
upon the croce: therefore as Christ offered himself upon the croce, without the
ministry of secondary Priests, so should he be offered up in your Mass,
without the ministry of the same, or else it is not one with that. So your
Mass Priests are no ways to be called secondary Priests to Christ, except in
that respect that Judas, with the band of men of war and hie-priests, were
the instruments and ministers of Christ his taking, death, and crucifying: even
so you are the instruments and ministers of the crucifying of Christ daily in
your Mass, so far as in you lies: and in this respect brook ye your style of
Mass Priests. And because they have a common distinction in their mouths of a
bloody and an vn-bloody sacrifice: for they affirm that sacrifice of Christ
upon the croce to be bloody, and that sacrifice of him in the Mass to be
vn-bloody: Therefore I will take away this refuge and vain starting hole from
them. And first I say, this distinction of theirs of a bloody, and vn-bloody
sacrifice of the self same thing that is sacrificed, wants al war^^nd in the
word of God. For there is not so meikle in the whole new Testament as a
sillabe, that tells us that there is a proper sacrifice of Christ whilk is
vn-bloody: and you ar never able to bring one instance to the contrary.
Secondly, I say, it is repugnant to the Scripture: Heb. 10.10.11 12.14. Heb
9.24.25.
for the * Scripture only acknowledges sik a sacrifice of Christ as is joined
with his death, as hes been proved before. See Heb. 9.24.25. Not that he should
offer himself often, for then should he have suffered often since the beginning
of the world. Now if the Apostle his argument be true, that Christ cannot be
offered up often, because then he must die often: then this doctrine of yours
is against the scripture, ye says, Christ may be offered up often, and yet not
die often. But if you will say, this is spoken of that bloody sacrifice: I
grant that: and I say the Apostle knew not, nor never spak of another
sacrifice: and therefore your doctrine is vain, that would have another
sacrifice, then ever the Apostles in the whole Scripture hes made mention of.
And I say thirdly, this distinction of yours cannot stand with your own
doctrine: for if there be a true sacrifice of Christ properly in your Mass, as
ye say, then his blood must be truly shed, and he must truly die, (for this
is the nature of all sik sacrifices for sin, as Bellarmine graunts it) lib.
1. de Missa, fol. 725. saying, If there be not a true and real slaughter of
Christ in the Mass, then is not the Mass a true and real sacrifice: And
also, In all true, real, and external sacrifices, the sacrifice must be a
thing sensible and must be made holy of a profane thing, as Bellarmine
confesses: and these conditions he requires in the definition of the same: but
this, I hope, ye will not say of Christ: for he is holy always, and is
insensible in your sacrifice, and cannot be slain again: therefore properly
there can be no true sacrifice of Christ in your Mass, by your own doctrine.
To conclude this then: For these causes we reject this abomination of your
Mass. First, because Christ cannot be offered up in a sacrifice, but he must
die also, as hes been proved, and the Scripture testifies that he hes once
died, and all christians confesses it. Secondly, because the death of Christ is
a sufficient satisfaction for our sins, and so we need not that he should be
offered up again to satisfy for the same. Thirdly, because the spirit of
Christ and faith, by the outward means of the word and sacraments and censures,
is a sufficient mean to apply him to us, and so we need not the sacrifice of
the Mass for that end. Fourthlye, because Christ only is the Priest of the
new Testament, who hes no successors, and whose Priesthood cannot pass from
one to another, because he lives for evermore, and he only can be sacrificed by
himself, and therefore he only can offer up himself, whilk he hes once done upon
the croce. Fifthly, because the sacrifice of Christ upon the croce is perfect,
and the virtue of it indures for ever, and it cannot, nor should not be
reiterate. Sextly, because the Scripture propones Christ now sitting in glory
at the right hand of his Majesty, and not under the forms of bread and wine in
your sacrifice. And seauenthly, because it is but the devise of man, wanting
God to bear witness to it in the Scripture, repugnant to that only one
sacrifice of his upon the croce, abolishing the fruits of his death and
passion, turning the sacrament of the Supper, in abominable idolatry, causing
men to worship a bit of bread, as the son of God: and last, because it
spoils men of the fruit of the sacrament Therefore in all these respects it
is abominable, to be detested, and in no sort to be communicated with.

Unto this I will adioyne some testimonies of some of the ancient Fathers, The
testimonies of the ancient Fathers against the same, even until the thousand
year after Christ
whereby it is manifest what their doctrine and judgment was concerning this
point. Li. 2. Paedagog. cap. 2. and in strom
Clemens Alexandrinus, who was neir the Apostles days, says, We sacrifice
not at all unto God, meaning with a real and external sacrifice but we
glorify him who was sacrificed for us. And then he subioynes what kind of
sacrifices they offered up to God: to wit, a sacrifice spiritual, of
themselves, of prayer, and of righteousness: and upon what altar, to wit,
upon the altar of their souls, with the perfo^me of their prayers. In
T^yphon, and in expos. fidei.
Justinius Martyr says, I dare says he, affirm that there is no other
sacrifice perfect and acceptable to God but supplications, and thanksgiving.
And he says, that Christians hes learned to offer up these sacrifices only.
aduer. Iudaeos.
Tertullian says, That it behooues us to sacrifice unto God, not earthly, but
spiritual things, so we read as it is written, a contrite heart is a sacrifice
to God. In epist. ad Rom and in homil 2. in Cant. and lib. 8. contra Celsum
Origin says, The blood of Christ is only sufficient for the redemption of al
me^, what need then hes the Kirk of any other propitiatory sacrifice? And as
for the sacrifice of Christians, he says, they are their prayers and
supplications. It was a common reproach wherewith the Christians was charged by
the Pagans three hundredth year after Christ, that they had no altars; unto the
whilk their common answer was, that their altars was a holy soul, not
corruptible altars, but immortal altars. If then the Christians had no
material altars the first three hundredth year after Christ as Lib. 7. Stro.
Clemens Alexandrinus, Ibid. cont. Celsum
Origene, Minutius Foelix, and Lib. 2. and 4
Arnobius do testify: therefore it must follow they had no external
sacrifices nor Masses all that time: so there was no Masses the first three
hundredth year after Christ, seeing there was no altars. Contra Matt. haeres 42.
and 55
Epiphanius says, That God by the coming of Christ hes taken away all the use
of sacrifice, by that one sacrifice of Christ. In orat. 3. cont. Arrianum
Athanasius says, that the sacrifice of Christ once offered up, hes
accomplished all things, and remains for ever, and that he is a Priest without
succession. The same says In Esaiae cap. 1. Irenaeus lib. 4, cap 34. Cyprianus
de Baptismo Christi Athenag. in Apolog. pro Christianis. Lactant. lib. 6. ca.
26. Eusebius. de demonst. lib. 1. cap 6. and lib. 3. cap. 4. Greg. Nazianz. in
Pasch. orat. 2 Eusebius. Nissen. de coena Domini. Chrysostom. aduers. Iudaeos orat
4. and in Ioh. hom, 17. and ad Heb. hom. 13. and homil. de cruce and spirit. 3.
and in Matthew hom 83. and ad Heb. hom. 26. and hom 17. and hom. 7. Cyrillus lib.
1. cont. Iul^anum and ad Hebraeos homil. 11. Ambrosius ad Heb. cap. 10. and ad
Theod. epist. 28. and in epist. ad Romans cap 12. Hieronymus in Esaiam, cap. 1.
and in Psalm. 26. and 49. and 50. Augustinus de fide ad Petrum Diacon. cap. 2.
and de Trinitat^ lib. 4. cap. 1. and 14. and in Psalm. 49. and de ciuitate Dei,
lib. 10. cap. 4. and 6. Idem de tempore.
Basile. And he says further, There is no more question of a continual
sacrifice: for there is but one sacrifice whilk is Christ, and the
mortification of his Saints. Because it were over longsome to set down the
sentences of the rest, therefore I will only quote them on the margent: and I
would desire Master Gilbert to read the same. And if he will believe them, I
am sure he will leave off to be a Mass Priest any longer: for they all aggree
in this, that the sacrifice of Christ upon the croce, hes accomplished all the
sacrifices of the old Law: and that the virtue of it is everlasting and
therefore should not be reiterate: and that the sacrifice of Christians are not
propitiatory, but only spiritual.

Seeing therefore the sacrifice of the Mass was so long unknown to the Kirk of
Christ, it remains now that we show by what degrees it crap in: for as after
the going down of the Sun, darkness commes not in immediately, but there is a
twilight before the darkness come: even so after the bright stars of the
primitive Kirk had ended their course, in process of time, and piece and
piece: first, the third part of the Sun, Moon, and stars were darkened:
till at the last the bottomless pit was opened, and that great darkness came up,
as the smoke of a great furnace, that darkened both the Sun and the air.
Out of the whilk this great abomination of the sacrifice of the Mass did
proceed. For Bertram. de corpore and sang. Domi. in Heb. 7.
Bertrame who lived between the 800. and 900. year after Christ, says, Our
Savior hes done it once in offering up himself: for he hes once offered up
himself for the sins of the people: and this oblation is always celebrate
eueryday, but in a mystery: and he says, that once oblation of Christ is
handled every day by the celebration of these mysteries or sacraments, in the
remembrance of his passion. There he oppones a real sacrifice to a mystery, and
Christ's sacrifice once made, to a daily commemoration or remembrance of his
suffering. Haymo in cap. 5. Ose. and in cap. 2 Abac. and Malac. 1.
Haymo siklike, reckoning out the sacrifices of Christians, he calls there,
the praises of the believers, the penitence of sinners, the tears of
supplications, their prayers, and alms. Theophilact in Joan. cap. 8. and ad
Heb. cap, 10
Theophilact, who lived in the 900. year after Christ, he says, That there is
but one sacrifice, and not many: because Christ hes offered up himself once.
And he says in an other place: Christ hes offered up himself once, a
sufficient sacrifice for ever, and we have need of no other sacrifice: to wit,
propitiatory. And Anselm, in ep. ad Heb. cap. 10.
Anselm who lived in the 1000. year of God and after, he says, That whilk we
offer every day is the remembrance of the death of Christ, and that there is
but one sacrifice, not many: for it hes been once only offered up. And again,
Our Lord, says he, bade take eat, not sacrifice and offer up to God. So this
was the doctrine of the most learned, who lived 1000. years after Christ,
that Christ offers up himself but once, and that sacrifice, was sufficient and
everlasting, and the sacrifices of Christians are spiritual: and the sacrament
(whilk they called sometimes a sacrifice) was a commemoration of Christ's one
sacrifice, once offered up upon the Croce. But from thence unto this time, this
abuse and sacrifice of their Mass crap in, but by diverse degrees, and by the
concurrence of many causes.

The degrees and means whereby the sacrifice of the Mass crap in. First, I
will set down the estate of the public worship of God in the Primitive Kirk,
the first 300. or 400. years after Christ, and then the means and degrees
whereby this abominable sacrifice crap in.

FIrst, it is manifest, that in the primitive Kirk, the communion or sacrament
of the Lords Supper, Justin. Martyr in apolog, 2. and Tertul, apolog. Aug, de
consecrat did 2 cap, Quotidie Ambros, lib, 5, ca, 4, de sacramen
was ministered every week once, upon the Lords day: and in some place it was
ministered every day, as appears by these places. And therefore Ambrose who
lived in the three hundredth age, exhorts to a daily receiving of it. Next,
from the Communion was excluded, first these who were not sufficiently
instructed in the grounds of christianity, who were called Catechumeni, that
is, catechized and instructed by questions and answers. Next, these who had
not ended out their repentance, and satisfaction to the Kirk who were called
Poenitentes, that is, penitents. And thirdly, these who were possessed with an
evil spirit, who were called (...) All these, after that the first prayer,
the reading of the Scripture, the sermon, and the rehearsing of the Creed (at
the whilk they were present) were ended, they were commanded by the Deacon to
retire themselves, and to depart out of the assembly or congregation, that
place might be given to the faithful, who was to communicate, in these words:
Ite, missa est: The origin of the word Mass Lib, 1, de Missa, cap. 1
that is, Go your way, depart. And from this first came the word Mass in the
Kirk of God: and this Bellarmine confesses, whilk in Latin is called missio,
or dimissio, or missa: and in the Greek (...) For the Pagans used that same
word after their sacrifice was ended. In Apule, lib, 11 de metamorph.
And the abuse easily growing in the frequent using of this word, it came to
pass by time, that all the worship of God, as the first prayers, the singing
of the Psalms, the reading of the Scripture, the preaching of the word, the
rehearsing of the simbolo, whilk was performed in the assembly before the
dimission of these who were catechized, As Bellarm. confesses lib. 1. de missa
cap. 1. Conc. Valent. ca. 1

Bellarm. ibidem. Alcuinus a Papist de officiis Eccles cap de celebratione
Missae


was called Missa Catechumenorum. And the rest of the worship of God whilk was
done after their departure, to the dimission of the faithful, as the
celebration of the Supper, etc. was called Missa Fidelium. So then this word
Mass, whilk the Kirk of Rome ascriues now unto their pretended sacrifice,
came first from the dimission, or skailling of the people (as they call it)
from the Lords service, and was never heard of in the Kirk of Christ, nor read
of in any author, Hebrewe, Greek, or Latin, for the space of 400. year
almost after Christ. And Jerome who lived in the year 422. and was an Elder
in Rome, who write so many volumes, made no mention of this word Mass, at all.
For that commentary of the Proverbs whilk is ascriued unto him, where mention
is made of the Mass, See Marianus Victorius Reat. in praefat. in 8. tom.
operum Hier.
* is not his: for beside other things there, mention is made of Gregory, who
lived almost 200, year after him. And Ambrose makes mention of it only once,
and Saint Augustine twice or thrice, for all the volumes whilk they write if
these books be theirs. For Erasmus in his censures upon the sermons de Tempore,
says that many of them are found under the names of other authors, and
savors little either of Augustines learning, or phrase. See James Gillotius in
praefat. ad Ambros. And that neither of them in the exponing of the matter of
the Sacrament, whilk they handled most largely: the one in sex books, and the
other most largely and frequently, and in the foresaid places: they used it in
a far other sense, then it is taken now in the Kirk of Rome: for by this word
they neither understood a sacrament, nor a sacrifice, as the Kirk of Rome does.
For Lib, 5. epist. 33.
Ambrose takes it for the whole service whilk was proper to the faithful. And
Augustine in In sermon. 237. de tempor.
one place, for the dimission of these who were catechized: and in the In
sermon de tempo. 251 and 91
other two places, for the whole service, as well of the Catechumeni, as of the
faithful. So rarely was it used by the lights of that age, and in a far other
sense, then the Kirk of Rome takes it now. But what a strange change hes fallen
in this word Mass, the abuse growing by time more and more? First, from a
commandment to the people to depart, Ite, missa est, and that in evil latin,
for Ite, missio or dimissio est, it passed to signify the service of God, and
from thence to signify a sacrifice, and from thence to signify that opus
operatum, that work wroght of that abominable sacrifice of the Mass for the
quick and the dead: so that now in end it holds that place in the Roman Kirk,
that Mineruas image, whilk (as was supposed fell out of heaven in a temple, in
the cietye of Troy) did hold amongst them: so that, as they thought it was
their only protection and fortress, and as long as they kept it, they were in
no danger to have been overcome by the Grecians their enemies. So does the
Papistical kirk think of this their Mass: and this for the 2. point, of the
form of the public worship of God in the primitive Kirk. Thirdly, after the
dimission of the Catechumeni, the faithful who was commanded to remain and
communicate, they did offer up of their goods, and first fruits unto God,
before they did communicate: whilk (for the most prrt) was of bread and wine:
or of their first fruits of corns and rasings, whereof so much was taken, as
did serve for bread and wine to the communicants. And the rest that remained,
was either eaten in common amongst the faithful, whereof also some was sent
unto them who were sick, or absent, in a testimony of their communion with
them: (from whence sprung that abuse and idolatry in the Kirk of Rome, The
origin of the sending of the Sacrament to the sick.
in carrying of the sacrament, whilk they call the Lord God, to the sick) or
else was distributed unto the poor. And when the Kirk waxed rich, as it did
after the time of Constantine, the oblations abounded: and apart thereof was
also employed unto the maintenance of the ministry, as Jerome witnesses
saying, Clerici de altari viuunt: altari servientes, altaris oblatione
sustentantur. The Clergy lives of the altar, and are sustained by the
oblations thereof: The whilk begat avarice in them: and their avarice brought in
the sacrifice of the Mass, as we shall see afterward. Now these oblations
whilk were given by the faithful, for the sustentation of the ministry, for
the relief of the poor, and furnishing materials to the communion, was called
after the custom of the old law Phil. 4. Heb. 1^ Iren. lib. 4. cap. 32 Cypr.
de Bleemo sina.
sacrifices. So the Apost. Paul, Irenaeus, and Cyprian calls them. And
Paulinus epist. de gazophyla. page 349. calls the place where these offerings
was presented, a Table. And these was presented unto the Justin. Matt, apolog. 2
Minister, who by prayer did consecrate them unto God, as is manifest by the
prayers set down in the Liturgies. Tua ex tuis tibi offerimus: that is, Of thy
own, we offer thy own things unto thee. And, Has oblationes famulorum,
famularumque tuarum benignus assume, quas singuli obtulerunt: that is,
Mercifully receive these oblations of thy seruands whilk every one of them hes
offered up to thee: and sundry other prayers of the Mass, whilk can no ways
be spoken of the sacrifice of the son of God, The means and degrees whereby
this ^bhominable sacrifice of the Mass crap in and was conceived, fo^med
brought forth, strengthened, and embraced of all.
without blasphemy, as shall be seen afterward. And this was the estate of
the Kirk three or four hundredth year after Christ. But the love of God
decaying, and the hearts of men and women waxing cold in the worship of God,
the people did not communicate so often. And therefore we read of the complaints
of the Ambros, lib, 5, c 4, de sacram: Chrysostom, in epist a^ Ephesians, August
epist, 119
Fathers, of the rarity of the communicants, and of their vehement exhortations
to the people to communicate every day: or at the least, every Saboth. But
these exhortations did not profit, and therefore there was De consecratione
distinct, 1, cap Episcopus, and did ^, cap, Peracta, and cap. Hi qui intrant
Canons and laws made, to bind the people to communicate, at the least, every
Saboth: otherwise, to be thrust out at the Kirk doors. And also Carol, magnus
lib, 1, cap, 138, 182, 167
Civil laws for that same effect. But these laws did gain but little: for
whether it was the obstinacy of the people, or that they were not preased unto
it by their Pastors, they did wax more and more negligent in communicating.
And therefore Distinct, 2, cap Saeculares, and cap Si non. and cap, Scis homo
Civil laws, lib. 2 cap, 45, ad 3, 38
Laws were made, that if not oftener, at the least thrice in the year the
people should communicate: to wit, at Pasche, at Christistime, and at
Pentecost, otherwise not to be reputed as Christians. But for all this the
people did not communicate, for the most part: so that in end a Extra, de penit
and remis, cap, Omnis
law was made, that at the least once in the year, they should communicate: to
wit, at Pasche. The whilk custom is yet kept in the Kirk of Rome. So by these
degrees the Communion was lost in the celebration of the Supper amongst the
people: first, from a daily communion in some places, to once in the week, and
from thence to thrice in the year, and from thence to once in the year: so
that ordinarily there did none communicate but the Ministry and Clergy. But
in process of time this corruption ouertooke them also: and therefore De
consec. did 1. cap. Hoc quoque. and cap. Omnes fideles.
Laws, both Civil and Ecclesiastical was made, to constrain them to
communicate: and that at the least two or three should communicate with the
Priest: the footsteps whereof yet remaynes in the abbacy of Clugme, where the
Deacon and subdeacon co^municats yet with the Priest. And of this came the
distribution of the bread of the sacrament in three pieces, according to the
number of the communicants, whilk is yet used in the Kirk of Rome, suppose they
have drawn it now to signify a mystery: and these three at the last was
brought to one, and this one to the Clarke that rang the Bell. And at the last,
some of the Priests themselves did abstain from communicating: and therefore
laws was made, as well De consec did. 2 cap. Velatum est.
Ecclesiastical, as Carol. magn. lib 5. cap, 93. and lib, 6 cap. 118. and
addi. 2 cap. 7
Civil, to constrain them to communicate at all times, after the
consecration. So that by these degrees the communion in the sacrament, was lost
also amongst the ministry: first, from an ordinary communion whilk they used it
passed to three or four, and from the three to one, and from this one to the
Clark that rang the bell: The first step was the losing of the communion in the
celebration of the Supper, first amongst the people, and then amongst the
Clergy,
and ofttimes to the Priest himself alone. And this losing of the communion in
the celebratio^ of the Supper, first amongst the people, next amongst the
Clergy, was the first step to their pretended sacrifice. Now when the people
did communicate, there was so much bread and wine, in a great quantity brought
to the Table, to be consecrate by prayer, as might serve them. Then as the
number of the communicants decayed, The second degree or step was the
diminishing of the materials of the communion.
so was the bread and wine proportionably diminished. And as it came to this at
the last, that none did communicate but the Priest and his Clark, and
oftentimes none but the Priest only: so no more bread and wine was brought to
the table, to be consecrate, but that that served him. And so from many breades
it came to one: and from a great bread to so small a bread, that it might be
parted in three: and in end it is come to the quantity of a denier, as Durandus
a Papist says. And sik like of the wine, from many great veshels, to small
pottels, from many Cupes, to one: and from a great Cupe to a small. And this
was the second step to their pretended sacrifice. The third step, the avarice
of the Priests.
Thirdly, from the peoples negligence in communicating, proceeded their
negligence in bringing their oblations: for these two were joined together,
their communicating and their offerings, a part whereof was taken for the
maintenance of the Clergy But the Priests they would not want their offerings,
and therefore they procured civil laws to be made, to constrain the people to
bring their offerings. Therefore Charles the great made a law, Civil laws.
Carolus magnus lib, 7. cap. 94. and lib. 6.
That the people might be admonished to communicate, and to bring their
offering every Sabbath: for the one ceasing, the other ceased also: and the
Priest did demand the one, under the pretext of the other. And heir was the
third step, the avarice of the Priests. But while as neither civil nor
Ecclesiastical laws could prevail with the people to make them to
communicate, and to bring their offerings: they devised this damnable doctrine,
and taught it to the people, That not only the Lords Supper was a sacrament,
The fourt step of their damnable doctrine, that the sacrament was a meritorious
sacrifice as well for the present as absent, for the communicants as beholders,
for the dead as for the living
and so was profitable only to them that did communicate, but also it was a
sacrifice to God, and therefore was profitable for all them that were beholders
of it, and by the merit thereof they might obtain mercy and grace: yea, that
it was not only meritorious to the beholders, but also to all these for whom
the Priest said it, as well dead as living, absent, as present, not only for
the soul, but also for all other necessities, as well of beasts as of men, so
being they brought their offerings also to the Priest, the whilk they taught to
be meritorious both for them and theirs. For to keep the people therefore in
some devotion, The causes wherefore the Priests taught sik damnable doctrine so
diligently to their people, was their own gain, for they were nourished by
sik doctrine
as we say, and for to move them to bring their offerings unto the Priests,
this doctrine of Christ's sacrament, that it was a most meritorious sacrifice,
and of the peoples oblations, that they were profitable for them and theirs,
was first invented by the auaritious clergy, and taught to the people. And
therefore Charles the great in his Laws, enjoined to the Priests to make the
people to understand distinctly the force of the Mass, how far it was
profitable both for them and theirs, both for the living and the dead: and to
the people that they should bring their offerings continually unto the Priest
and that because their offerings to the Priest, was profitable both to the^
selves, and also to these that appertained to them. Now as for the Priests
part, they needed not laws to urge them to teach this doctrine: for they were
carried, as it were, with the charriots of their avarice to the performance of
the same, for otherwise their Masses would have been left desolate. And from
thence came this their doctrine, that the Mass served Gabriel Biel lect. 85.
in expos. canon. and in 4. sent. did. 12. q. 3.
to appease Gods wrath, to obtain remission of sins, Missale in canone, and
Pap^ Innocent. 3. tract. de Missa. and Thomas de Aquine and Eckius de Missa.
lib. 1. cap. 10. Council. Trident. ses 6 can 2
redemption of souls, and al spiritual grace and salvation: and that it served
for all other necessities, as well of man, as of beast, as well for the dead, as
for the living, as well for the absent, as for the present. And from hence come
this three-folde force Gabriel Biel lect. 26.
whilk they ascriue unto their Mass: the one most general for all, another
more special for him that says it: and the third after a mid way, whilk was
in the hands of the Priest to apply it to what person, or persons, dead or
living, it pleases him, equally or unequally: and that God the Father dispenses
the fruits thereof according to the determination of the Priest. And from this
did spring their treasures and riches, through the abundance of the peoples
oblations: and from this came also the rich donations, prebends, Colleges,
and lands, as may be seen by the common form of their donations in their
Charters: I offer to God all the things whilk are contained in this Charter,
for the remisson of my own sins, and of my Parents, to maintain the service
of God in sacrifices and Masses. Matthew. 15.5.6.
As the Scribes and Pharisees therefore taught the people, that by offering a
gift, albeit they honored not their father and mother, yet they should be free,
and have profit, abrogating the commandments of God through their traditions:
so did the Priests teach the people, that suppose they neglected the
commandment of God in communicating in the sacrament: yet by their presence at
the sacrifice, and by their gifts that they offered unto them, they should be
free from that sin, and should have profit not only to themselves, but
also to all that appertained unto them. And to content the people that they
should not be offended that they were deprived of the communion, and received
nothing for their offerings, but a bare sight and hearing of the Priest, eating
and drinking all himself allone: they invented their holy bread, whilk they
distributed unto the people every Sabbath: and the kissing of the Pax, that is
the covering of the Challice, to supply the want of the communion, whereby they
might think that they were not altogether frustrate of the same.

And as for the people, because they received not the love of the truth, The
causes wherefore the people so greedily embraced it the just judgments of God,
because they received not the love of the truth, therefore the Lord gave them
over to strong delusions to believe lies.

Next, the plausiblenesse of sik doctrine, so well aggreing to their corrupt
nature, and the great profit that was pretended it would carry with it.


(for no exhortation or admonition, no Laws Ecclesiastical nor Civil, could
make them to reverence the Lords institution, in receiving the sweet pledges of
their salvation as the Lord had commanded) therefore the Lord gave them over,
as it was foretold, to strong delusions, that they might believe lies. And
beside this just judgment of God, as this doctrine was most profitable to the
Priests, so was it most aggreeable to their corruption, and therefore was easily
embraced and believed. For what was more easy to practice, then to hear and
see a Mass, and to bring their offering unto the Priest? This required no
examination of themselves before? No mortification of their sin: no sad and
heavy hearts, with fear and trembling to come to the same, as the Communion
did, but only their eyes to see, and ears to hear suppose they neither knew
nor understood what was said or done in the same. And yet what was so
profitable as it was? whilk was able to obtain remission of sins, and
redemption of souls, to appease Gods wrath, and to obtain all grace, and to
help for all necessities, both for the living and dead, present and absent,
man and beast as they affirmed. So this was not the strait way to salvation,
for who was not able to practice this doctrine? that is, to see and hear a
Mass. And yet our Savior says, The way is strait that leads to eternal
life, and many shall seek to enter in, and shall not be able. Matthew 7.13
From this sprang the abundance of their oblations, that they spared neither
silver nor gold, houses, lands, nor heritages: for what would not a man give
to get salvation so easily, both to himself and to others? So it was no wonder
suppose the Priests were earnest in beating in the ears of the people sik a
profitable doctrine for themselves: for it was a golden mine unto them. And
suppose the people (having forsaken the love of the truth, and being given over
of God to believe sik strong delusions for the contempt of his ordinance,)
embraced sik a plausible doctrine, whilk brought heaven to them and theirs, so
easily, as they supponed: and by these degrees the pretended sacrifice of the
Mass was not a little promoued. And yet these abuses crap not in, while after
Gregory the great, who lived in the 600. year after Christ suppose a great
part of these abuses is ascriued to him.

Hitherto now hes this sacrifice been confusedly conceived, and all things
almost prepared for her birth: Other corruptous wh^lk crap in that ripened this
monstrous birth 1. The consecration of als much bread and wine as might serve
the Priest only De consecra. did a c. Non oportet and cap. In sacramento
Gregor. in dialog
from these now follows other corruptions, whilk did ripen this monstrous
birth: as first where the Priest was wont to bliss and consecrate by prayer,
so much bread and wine as might serve the whole people who did communicate in
the primitive Kirk: the communion of the people in this sacrament being lost,
as we hard before, and the Priest himself alone, or at the least, two or three
with him only communicating: the oblations of the people whilk was not only
of bread, and wine, and water, according to the express Canons of the Kirk,
but (corruption growing with the riches of the Kirk) also of gold, silver, of
sheep and nowlt, as we read in the time of Gregory. These oblations, I say,
was not brought unto the altar to be consecrated by prayers to God, but only
so much bread and wine as might serve the Priest only, and whilk at last (the
abuse growing) he began to make himself, and to bring unto the sacrament. Upon
the whilk followed other two abuses. 2. As of before the peoples gifts and
presents whilk they brought to the sacrament, were called sacrifices and
oblations: now this style was taken from their gifts and offerings, and was
ascriued only to the Priests action in consecrating the elements
The first that the style of (offering) and (sacrifice) in the sacrament was
taken from the peoples action of offering and their oblations, for the whilk
cause especially the sacrament was called a sacrifice: and therefore the prayer
in the Canon, was not in Gregory's time pro quibus tibi offerimus for the whilk
we offer unto thee: but, qui tibi offerunt, who do offer to thee. And their
oblation was called sacrifices, as is manifest by the ordinance of Pope
Gelasius, where it is ordained that the sacrifices whilk the people should
offer up in the Mass, should be distribute in four parts. This style (I say)
of offering and sacrifice was taken from them, and ascriued only to the Priests
action: and his action was called the sacrifice. And this was no little step to
their pretended sacrifice. The next whilk did put even some life and breath in
it, 3. The applying of all the prayers whilk was made and said in th
sanctification of the oblations of the people before unto the sanctification of
that small round bread, and little Cupe whilk was reserved for the Priest only.
was the applying of all the prayers whilk was used to be said and made in the
sanctification of the oblatio^s of the people, to the sancificatio^ of that
small round bread, and portion of wine whilk was reserved for the sacrament, and
appointed for the Priest and the few that was to communicate with him. So that
here was a manifest change, wherein they passed from the oblations of the
gifts, whilk was presented to God by the people and offered to him in the
sacrament of the Supper, whilk were called sacrifices, as we have proved
before: to a sacrifice of a round bread, and a little cupe of wine, whilk the
Priest only, or at the least, with other two or three, eat and drink in the
same, and consequently from a sacrifice of the fruits of the earth offered to
God by the people, to a sacrifice of the eternal Son of God whilk the Priest
supponed he offered up to God in the same. So by this means it received, as it
were, some life and breath.

This alteration manifest by the prayers in their Canon and liturgies.
This alteration is so manifest, that the prayers in their own Canon of the
Mass and Liturgies will prove the same, Precamur te, (says the Canon) vt
accepta habeas and benedicas haec dona, hac munera, haec sancta sacrificia
illibata, that is, We pray thee thou would accept and bliss these gifts,
these presents, these holy and unspotted sacrifices. And again, Remember of
them, pro quibus tibi offerimus, vel qui tibi offerunt hoc sacrificium laudis,
pro se suisque omnibus: that is, These for whom we offer unto thee, or who
does offer unto thee, this sacrifice of praise for themselves and all theirs.
And again, Supra a qua sereno and propitio vultu respicere digneris, and
accepta habere sicut accepta habere dignatus es munera Abelis, Abrahae,
Melchisedech, etc. that is, That thou would vouchsafe to look upon them with
a favorable and merciful countenance, as thou have vouchsaued to accept of the
gifts of Abel, Abraham and Melchisedech, etc. And again, Iube haec perferri
per manus Angeli tui in sublime altar tuum: These prayers was not made of the
sacrifice of the eternal son of God, but of the gifts and presents of the
people.
that is, Command them to be carried by the hands of thy Angel unto thy hie
altar in the sight of thy majesty. And again, Tua de tuis, that is, We offer
of thy own, thy own to thee. I would ask you, (Master Gilbert) Dare ye in
your conscience say, that these prayers were made of the eternal son of God,
whom ye pretend to offer up in your Masses? For can either the words
themselves be understood of him, They cannot be applied to him without great
absurdity.
without great absurdity? or can they be applied to him without horrible
blasphemy? And may not every one see, that they were conceived and made of the
gifts and sacrifices of praises, whilk the people did offer up to God in the
sacrament? And they speak heir in the plural number of many, and the
sacrifice of the son of God is but one. Next, they are called gifts,
presents, thy own, gifts of thy own, and sacrifices of praises, whilk cannot
be spoken of the real sacrifice of the son of God, whilk is a propitiatory
sacrifice: and are not called gifts, presents, and sacrifices of praises of the
people. Thirdly they say remember them who offers unto thee their gifts for
them selves and theirs, whilk cannot be understood of any, but of the people
that offered their offerings of their fruits unto the Lord. For you will not
say that the people offers up the Son of God, but only the Priest. And what
Christian heart can think that these prayers can be applied to him without
horrible blasphemy: as to dust and ashes to interceed by prayer to God the
Father for his beloved Son, Neither without horrible blasphemy.
to pray him to accept in his favor, to bles and sanctify his own beloved
Son who is the fountain of all blessing and holiness, and in whom the fulness
of the godhead dwelles: and to look upon him with a merciful and favorable
countenance and to denyie to vouchsaue to accept of him in whom and with whom
he is well pleased, Matthew. 3.17. and 17 5. Pro 6.8.30. Coloss. 1.19.
who is his fathers daily delight and joy, and to accept of him as he did of
the sacrifices of Abell, Abraham, and Melchisedech, comparing that blessed
sacrifice of himself, with the sacrifices of the fruits of the earth, and
beasts of the field, as theirs was: without the whilk neither their
sacrifices nor persons would ever have pleased God: and to pray to God the
Father to command the Angels (in whom as Job says he sound no purity) to
carry his own eternal son up to heaven in his presence, as though he were
not as able now to ascend from thence to heaven, if he were there: being
glorified without the help of Angels, as he did after his resurrection.

Now let any Christian heart judge whether these prayers can be conceived
without blasphemy of the eternal son of God or not. And after the
consecration they have this prayer in their Canon, By whom thou creates,
sanctifies, quicknes blisses, and gives to us all these good things, whilk can
no ways be applied unto the sacrifice of Christ, unless they will have him a
creature daily made, blissed and quickened in their Mass: but unto the gifts
and presents of the people, whilk they offered up to God in the sacrament. And
in the Liturgy whilk they ascriue to Clement, the prayer is pro dono oblato,
Clemeus lib. 3 cap. 17
that is, for the gift whilk is offered up, That it would please God to receive
it in his altar, through the intercession of his Christ, in a sweet smelling
savor, whilk no ways can be applied unto the sacrifice of the son of God.
For heir they are manifestly distinguished, the gift offered, and the
intercession of Christ for the whilk they desire God to accept of the gift
offered. So heir is a most notorious corruption, wherein they apply all the
prayers, whilk were first conceived and made of the gifts and presents of the
people, whilk they offered up to God in the Sacrament; to the pretended
sacrifice of the son of God. The degrees of this change and corruption
And from the offerings of the people whilk was many, they pass to an oblation
whilk was offered: for a sacrament of praise, to a sacrament whilk the Priest
consumes all himself: from a sacrament to confirm us of our salvation in
Christ, to a propitiatory sacrifice of the son of God, for the redemption of
souls: and from a commemoration of the death of Christ in the sacrament, to a
real immolation and offering of him up again, and that not for the living
only, but for the dead also.

By these degrees then hes this monstrous sacrifice been conceived formed,
received life, and brought forth into the world. Now many other things did
concur to the strenthening of her, and the rooting of her in the hearts and
consciences of men: as first the word sacrifice, whilk was freque^tlie used by
the Fathers of the Primitive Kirk, What things concurred to the strengthening
of her, and rooting her in the hearts of men after she was borne.
taken from the old Testament, and the typical sacrifices there, whilk they
ascriued unto the sacrament of the Supper, calling it a sacrifice. And that
first, because it was celebrated with thanksgiving, whilk are called the
sacrifice of praise. Next, because they sacrificed themselves in a holy,
lively, Romans 12.1.2.3 Heb. 13.15.16.
and acceptable sacrifice to God in the same. Thirdly, because of their
offering and alms whilk they offered in the sacrament, whilk are called
sacrifices wherewith God is pleased. And last of all, because it was a
commemoration of that once offered up sacrifice of the son of God, the virtue
whereof is eternal and sufficient. The next was the universal ignorance, both
of Pastors and people, The universal ignorance both of Pastor and people
through the inundation of barbarous nations
through the barbarous nations of the Gotthes, Hunnes, and Wandales, whilk
spoiled and wasted the empire of the West, more then 100. yearefull, whereby
all learning (almost) was buried: and the lights and toarches of the Kirk being
exstinguished, their successors being borne and brought up under that
barbaritie, in that common and public ignorance, they were so far from
chaissing away that darkness, that they rather increased the same, being given
altogether to seculare and worldly affairs, as the laws of Charles the great
do testify: commanding them that they should abstain from seculare affairs
from the Court, from wars, from Falconry from lechery, from games. Thirdly,
the corruption of languages whilk entered in with these barbarous nations at
that same time, 3. The coruption of languages
through the mixture of people of sundry languages: whereby first the language
became barbarous: next, not universally understood. And certainlye were not
this, Satan could not have prevailed so meikle, in causing this poison of this
monstrous sacrifice to be so universally drunken out by the people. For if they
had understood the language, these words whilk they daily heard in their
service, Sursum corda, List up your hearts: And show forth the death of the
son of man, and confess his Resurrection till his coming. These words
might easily have kept them in this knowledge, that Christ was above, and they
should not seek him bodily in the sacrament, because he was not there really
present, but was to come: and that the sacrament was not a real offering of
the son of God again, but a showing forth of his death, until his second
coming.

But two doctrines especially, whilk by process of time also entered in the
Kirk of God, 4. The doctrine of Transubstantiation and Purgatory brought her
to her full perfection and strength.
brought this pretended sacrifice of their Mass, to her full perfection and
strength: the one was the doctrine of Transubstantiation, that the bread and
wine in the sacrament, by the words spoken, or rather muttered by the Priest,
was changed in the body and blood of Christ. From time this was taught the
people, then what followed but all adoration and worship to be given to the
sacrament, where Christ is really present. Then how could it be but a
propitiatory sacrifice for the sins of the living, seeing it was that self
same body and blood, under the forms of bread and wine, whilk was offered up
upon the Croce for the sins of the world. The next was that of Purgatory,
for seeing (say they) that there is a fire of Purgatory after this life, where
through men must pass to heaven: and seeing in these flames their sins must
be purged: therefore a remedy must be foreseen: and where is there a remedy
to be found, but in the sacrifice of the Mass, where the son of God is
offered up, that will relieve our souls after we are departed? These will
help the souls of our Parents and friends that are there already. Upon the
whilk was founded the Masses and sacrifices for the dead: and from thence came
the most part of the donation of lands to the Kirks, to have Masses said for
their souls.

So then, to conclude, the loss of the communion in the sacrament of the
Supper, The conclusion
next the sanctification of the oblations of the people, whilk at last was
turned to that whilk the Priest consumed himself alone: thirdly, the avarice
of the Priests whilk bred their damnable doctrine, that the Supper was not
only a sacrament, but a sacrifice, etc fourthly, the applying of the prayers
conceived of the gifts of the people, unto the round host and Challice, whilk
the Priest consumed: fifthly, the abusing of the word sacrifice, whilk the
fathers and Kirk used: sextly, the public and universal negligence and
ignorance of Pastor and people: seauenthly, the confusion of languages: and
last of all, their damnable doctrine of Transubstantiation and Purgatory:
These were the degrees by the whilk their abominable sacrifice hes been
created, nourished, entertained and perfited, in that measure and strength:
that at the last it took sik deep root in the hearts of all men almost,
that nothing could root it out, except only the power of the Lords spirit by
the voice of his word. And yet this abuse was perceived by (a) sundry, whom
the Lord stirred up, who taught, Arnold. de noua Villa, anno 1200. and
Albigenses and Waldenses in France.
That the sacrifice of the Mass was a manifest abuse; and that the Masses both
for the living and the dead, was directly contrary the institution of our Lord.
And some of their own Doctors in their writings does co^tradict this
propitiatory sacrifice of the Mass, as Distinct. 12. lib. 4 de consecrat.
the Master of sentences, and in summa part. 3. quest. 83. and 73.
Thomas of Aquine, In epist. ad heb cap. 10
Lyranus, affirming, That Christ once died for our sins, and that once
oblation is sufficient for all our sins, and that it cannot be reiterate: and
that the sacrament is an ordinary memorial and representation of that only one
sacrifice whilk was offered up upon the Croce: the whilk doctrine of theirs
cannot stand with their daily immolation, and real oblation of the son of
God in their Mass.

And that nothing may be lacking to the manifesting of it, The authors of the
Mass, and year of God wherein every one clamped and clouted to their own
piece is set down.
we will show also the authors and times of the entering in of the Ceremonies
of the same. The mixing of water with the wine in the Challice, is ascriued to
De consc^r. did 2. can. In Sacrament. oblat, anno 111.
Pope Alexander the first; he also put to this clause to the Mass, Qui pridie
qua^ pateretur. 2. Sanct. sanct. Sanct. Dom. Deus Sabbath, is put to by Pope
Syricius the first, anno 121. 3. Gloria in excelsis is put to by Pope
Telesphore the first, anno 139. 4. The singing of the Creid after the Gospel,
put to by Pope Mark the first, (and according to some by Pope Julius the
first,) anno 335. 5. The Mass like a beggars cloak patched and clam ^ed
together of old rotten rags of their own corruption, evil placed, and far
worse ^owed together.
Pope Zepherine ordained that the wine should be put in glasses, and Vrbane the
first ordained that the veshels should be of gold or silver, or at the least
of Tin, anno 213. 6. Pope Felix the first ordained to celebrate Masses in the
names of the Martyrs, above their graves and relickes, anno 267. 7. The
offerture of the Mass is ascriued to Eutychian the first, anno 270. 8. The
Kyrieeleison to Silvester the first, anno 314. 9. The celebration of Masses in
linen clothes to Eusebius and him also. 10. The standing up at the reading of
the Gospel to Anastasius the first, anno 402. 11. The blissing of the Pax to
did. 2. e. Pace^
Innocentius the first, anno 405. 12. The Antiphones, the Introits, and the
Graduals, to Celestine the first, anno 427. 13. Orate pro me fratres and Deo
gratias, and sanctum sacrificium to Leo the first, anno 444. 14. The ninefolde
repetition of Kyrieeleyson, and the singing of Haleluiah to Gregory the first,
anno 593. 15. The singing of Agnus Dei thrice to Sergius the 1. anno 688. 16.
The incense and offerture restored by Leo the third, anno 800. 17. Their
Transubstantiation invented by Lanfrancus, an Italian, anno 1036. Decreed in
the council of Lateran in substance, anno 1059. And made the 13. article of
faith, by Decret. tit. 1. de summa trinit. and fide cap. Firmiter credimus.
Innocent the 3. anno 1215. I omit the rest, as their Canon compiled by one
named Scholasticus, as Lib. 2. and 7. and 9
Gregory witnesses, and sundry other ceremonies. So that between the first
and last inuenters and authors of their Mass, it is more then 1000. year. And
this meikle touching that abominable sacrifice of the Mass, whilk is not the
Lords ordinance, but the invention of the Popes, and Clergy of Rome.

Master Gilbert Brown.

I thought siklike to have proved the ceremonies of this blissed sacrifice, by
the same holy word: but because it were something longsome, I have continued
the same till another place.

Master John Welsche his Reply.

As for your Ceremonies, you did most wisely in rejecting the probation of them
till another place: and so to hold the reader in ye half (as we speak:)
because ye are never able to do it: and it is good to delay to enterprise a
thing that is impossible. But how can you be so impudent, as to write, that you
will prove the ceremonies of your Mass by the scripture seeing the Mass it
self hes not the warrant out of the same, out contrary and repugnant to the
same, as hes been proved. And I can scarcely think, (Master Gilbert) that
you have spoken this in earnest, when you said, you would prove the Ceremonies
of your Mass by the same holy word, whilk is the Scripture. Conc. (...).
Sessi. 22, cap 5.
For what then will you say to the Council of Trent, who referres not the
institution of them to the Lord Jesus in his written word, but to the Kirk by
the unwritten Traditions. Bellarm. lib. 2. de Missa, cap. 13
And to Bellarmine who says the Kirk instituted them, and so referres the
institution of them, not to Christ in his written word, but to the institution
of the Kirk and to your own Doctors, and Canon law, and writers, who ascriues
the institution of them, to your Popes, and others of your Kirk, as I have
proved before. O Master Gilbert! What a preposterous love is this that ye
bear to your abominable sacrifice, that ye are not ashamed to write, that the
very Ceremonies of it hes their warrant in the same holy word, and that
contrary your own general Council of Trent, and all your learned Doctors and
writers. I think ye thought that we had never read your ceremonies, or never
known them, that ye write so boldly of them: Shall the Council of Trent say
they are instituted by the Kirk, by Apostolical Traditions, whilk your Kirk
confesses are not written in the Scripture: and yet are not you ashamed to say,
they have their warrant by the Scripture, and so openly to contradict the
doctrine of your own council of Trent I will say no further, but surely either
they err in this, point, or else ye: and if they err, then the general Kirk
may err, and hes erred: and so one of your maine foundations is gone. Choose
you whether you will take this blot to your self, or let it fall on them.

But because ye accounte this Mass of yours most heavenly: and ye vaunt, The
horrible abuses of the Mas.
that ye only have in your Kirk that heavenly action: and because it is the
chiefest point of your service and worship, whilk ye give to God in your Kirk:
and also because ye so impudently affirm, that the ceremonies thereof hes
their warrant out of the Scripture: Therefore I will discover heir, as shortly
as I can, the abominations, absurdities, blasphemies, idolatries: vain, idle
superstitions, Jewish and Ethnic ceremonies of the same, that poor folks be
not deceived any longer therewith. For certainly, for as heavenly as ye think
it is, I dare affirm that it is nothing else, but a very sink and filthy
closet of all abominations, idolatries, and horrible blasphemies. So that as
it is said in the Proverbs of the virtuous woman, Pro. 31.23
that many weemen hes done virtuously, but thou surmounts them all: so it may
be said of the Mass: Many services and worships devised by man, hes been
idolatrous, blasphemous and abominable: but this sacrifice of the Mass
brought in the Kirk of God by Antichrist, in idolatry, abominations, and
blasphemies surmounteth them all: so that the like of it hes never been before
it, nor never shall be after it. For beside the foresaid abuses, that it is a
will worship instituted by man, that it hes corrupted the Sacrament of the
Supper, whilk was given us to assure us of the grace of Christ, and hes turned
it in a sacrifice, and that a propitiatory sacrifice, and meritorious not to
the Priest only, but to the beholders also: and not to the present only, but
to the absent, and not only for the living, but for the dead: that it hes
abolished the death of Christ, and the virtue of that one sacrifice: and that
it hes spoiled Christ Jesus of his Priest-hoode, and communicated it unto
others: beside these intolerable abuses, it abounds and ouerflowes with other
intolerable abominations.

1. Abuse of the Mass, their entry to the Mass either Iudaisme or Paganism,
or both, the ordinance of Pope Celestin the first, anno 426 Et introibo ad
altate Del.
As first, their altars in their Mass, whereon they think they sacrifice the
son of God, and therefore in the beginning of their Mass, the Priest says,
And I will go in into the altar of God: whereby they renew either Judaism or
Paganism: for their material altars was a part of the Ceremonial law of
the Jews, whilk was abolished by the death of Christ: and Nuna Pompilius 700.
year before Christ, ordained that the Ethnicke Priest when he went about to
offer sacrifice, that he should draw neir to the altar. This entry of the
Mass is said to be the ordinance of Pope Celestine the first, about the year
of God 426. Na^ele^
And because the Priests takes the altars for the Table whereon the Supper is
celebrate, whilk he co^founds with the abomination of the Mass: and also
because Master Gilbert said he was minded to prove the ceremonies of the Mass
by the Scripture: therefore I will ask him and his fellow Priests these few
things concerning their altars? First, where read they that Christ did ever
institute in the new Testament, The abuses of their Papisticall altars, first,
that they must be of stone
that the Table of our Lord should only be of stone, and not of timber, or any
other metal, as Did 1. cons. c. Altaria si non 2. That they must be
consecrate by the Bishop.
their altars whereon they chant their Mass, must be according to their law?
Secondly, canon Non alii.
where read they in the new Testament, that the Table of the Lord should be
consecrated with oil and chrysme, with a sprinkling of water, mixed of wine
and salt, of ciphers of holy water, at the four corners of the same, at the
middle part: and that none may do this but a Bishop: if a Clark do it, that
he be degraded, and if one of the Laics do it, that he be excommunicate.
(What folly is this, that a Priest hes authority (as they think) to sacrifice
the son of God, and yet he may not power a little oil upon a stone?) that
the Bishop compass the altar seven times, singing the 51. Psalm, Thou shall
wash me with hysope, etc. profaning the truth of God. And there to bury the
relickes of some Saints put in a little shrine, with 3. grains of incense,
that God for their cause may hear the prayers and accept of the sacrifice
offered up upon that altar: and then anointing the Table of the altar with
oil, and singing, Jacob erected up a stone, etc. Where, I say, read you these
in the new Testament, that Christ commanded these things to be done to the
Table of his Supper, whilk ye do to the altars whereon ye say your Masses.
And siklike, where read ye that none should chant their Masses, but on sik
altars as are consecrated, and Canon Placuit vt Altaria 3. that the relickes of
some ^^ints must be there ^. That they are dedicate to others then God 5. The
kissing of the altar by the Priest
siklike that your altars are not lawful, where there is not found the bodies
or relics of some Martyrs? Siklike, that ye dedicate your altars whereon ye
chant your Mass to others then to Christ, as unto the Virgin Mary, Peter, and
other Saints departed? And siklike, that the Priest should kiss the altar
often? and namely, when he approches unto it, carrying the Challice? Hes Christ
commanded this? Hes the Apostles used them? Hes the Scripture made mention of
them? What think you will you answer to God, when it shall be said to you, Who
required all these things at your hands? And wherefore also transgress ye your
own law in having more altars then is necessary, seeing by it ye are Canon
Eccles. vel Altaria.
commanded by express terms, that superfluous altars be destroyed? To
conclude this then with In epist. ad heb cap. 8. and 10
Ambrose, As our sacrifice, says he, whilk is no other thing but our prayers
and thanksgiving, is not visible, but invisible: so our altar also is not
visible but invisible.

The second abuse is in the confession of the Priest, that he says in the
entering of the Mass, I confess to God almightye, and to the blissed Virgin,
and to all the Saints that I have sinned: in the whilk are sundry absurdities.
First, that this confession is made not only to God, but also to the dead who
neither sees the secrets of the hearts, nor yet are able to give remission. The
second is, in the prayer that is set down in the latter end of it, saying, I
pray thee blissed Marie, and all the he Saints, and she Saints of God, to
pray to God, that I may have mercy, wherein are two horrible abuses: 1. Tim.
2.5. 6. Confession to Saints, 7. Prayer to saints departed. Rom: 10.14.1. Tim.
2.5.1. Joan. 2.1. Ierem. 17.5 Psalm. 50 15. Ier. 29 12. Matthew, 6.9 Iac 1.17.
Genesis 20, 1.2 2. Reg. 6.6.7. chr. 6.30 Esai 63.17. Eccles. 9.6.
one, that he makes no mention of Jesus Christ our only Mediator, and desires
him not, to make intercession for him: next, that he prays unto the Saints
departed, and makes them intercessors and Mediators, who neither knows our
necessities, and the secrets of our hearts, neither is able to hear or help
us, whilk wantes all warrant out of the word of God. And seeing prayer is a
honor only due to God, and Jesus Christ is our only Mediator and intercessor:
therefore this prayer to Saints departed is both idolatrous, and injurious to
Christ his intercession and mediation. This confession was instituted by
Pontian and Damasus Popes, anno 335. and 368.

The third abuse, is the absolution pronounced to the beholders of the Mass:
Amen, Brethren and sisters by the mercy of our Lord Jesus, by the help and
sign of the Croce, by the intercession of the Virgin Marie, by the merits of
the Apostles, and of all the he Saints, and she Saints, God give you mercy.
First, this aggrees not with their private Masses, where the Priest and the
Clark only are present: for how can the Priest speak truly, Amen brethren and
sisters, since none is present but the Clark only. Next, that whilk is only
proper to Jesus Christ, to his death, merits, and intercession, to make the
Father merciful unto us, and to make him to forgive us our sins, is taken
from him heir, and communicate unto the virgin Marie, and the merits of all the he Saints and she Saints: and whilk is most horrible, unto the sign of
the Croce: that by her intercession, their merits, and the help of the sign
of the Croce, God might have mercy. What horrible idolatry is this, to join
sik helpers to the son of God, who is a perfect Savior. To join the merits
of flesh and blood, to his merits, as though his were not sufficient to obtain
salvation. And as though men were not only able to merit eternal life to
themselves but also had sik abundance of merits that they served to obtain
mercy for others: and so not only to make them saviors of themselves, but of
others also. And that whilk is yet more horrible idolatry and blasphemy, (if
worse can be) to join with him the help of the sign of the Croce. Therefore
in their Breuiarie they say, Keep us Lord with thy peace, etc. whom thou
have redeemed by the tree of thy holy Croce. And in a hymn, O Croce, hail O
Croce, only hope, increase, righteousness to the godly, and forgive the
guilty. And in their breuiarie they say, We adore thy Croce o Lord. Now what
is it to mock God, if this be not: to substitute creatures, yea a very stock
and a tree in the room of the son of God, and to ascriue redemption unto it:
and to pray for righteousness and remission at the same, to adore it, and to
call it their only esperance? What place is left then to the blood and death
of Christ?

The fourth abuse is in this prayer of the Mass, We pray thee Lord, for the
merits of thy Saints, whose relics are heir, to forgive me all my sins.
Where first, he makes no mention of Christ or his merits: next, he prays to
God that for the merits of the Saints he may be forgiven, so he puts them in
the room of Christ. Thirdlye, they have the relicts of the Saints in sik
account, that they have made a law that it shall not be lawful to celebrate any
Mass, but upon sik altars, ^e consecrat. did cap. Placuit, v^
where the relicts of some Saints are. But to what purpose is this? To make
their altars commendable, and their sacrifices acceptable? But hes not the
Priest, (as he thinks) in his hands, Christ Jesus the holy of the holiest?
And is there relicts of Saints more precious and worthy, then his blood is?
yea, and what relicts, I pray you, for the most part? not of Saints, but of
harlots and brigands: yea they have so multiplied their relicts, that they have
made some of them to have more heads then one, to have more legs and arms then
they were born with. As for example, Peter his whole body is buried in Rome in
Annal. Eccles. tom. 1. and 3.
Vatican, and yet the half of him is in another Via Ostiensi, Onu. d. y. vr b.
Eccles. cap. de Basilica
part of Rome, another part in Bellarm. lib. 2. de Eccles. trium. cap. 3 and 4.
Constantinople, and his head kept in the Romae Onu ibidem.
fourth place, and another part of his head in the Romae Onu ibidem.
fifth place, another part of his head in the Pictauii Calv. admon. de reliq.
sext place, and yet sundry of his teeth in Onu ibidem.
other parts. So that if he had as many bodies, and bones, and teeth, and
heads, and arms, and legs, as are said to be his, and are kept as his
relicts, his body were monstrous. And the head of Saint Luther Postil. in
Euang fest. exalt. cruce.
Barbara was shown in so many parts, that it behooved her to have seven
bodies, or at the least seven heads. And that whilk is yet worse, they honor
them, adores them, and prays unto them: the whilk is so manifest by the
ordinary practice of their Kirk, that it needs no probation.

Unto this we may join the fifth abuse, their images upon the hosts of their
Mass, and the rest of their Idols and Images, whilk they call the books of
the Laics, wherewith they fill their Temples and Chapels: whilk they honor,
adore and prays unto, saying unto a stock, Thou art my father: and to a stone,
thou art my mother: not only without commandment or example in the Scripture,
but contrary the express commandment of God given out of Mount Sinay in
horror and fear, so that the mountain shook, and Moses himself feared,
Thou shall make thee no graven Image to worship it. And contrary the whole
Exodus 20. Deuteronomy. 4 15. Isa. 40.15 16 Ierem. 10.3. Act. 17.29. Romans 1.23. 1. Cor.
10.14. 1. Ioh. 5.21. Apoc. 20. and 21, 8.
Scripture, and also the doctrine of the Tertul. lib. de corona militis. Orig.
contra Cesum lib 7. and 8 Lactant. de d^uin instit lib. 2 ca. 2^ Cyprian. le
van idol. Clemens l^b. 5. ad Iac. frat. Chrysostom. hom. 57 in Genes. 31. Council.
Eliber. canon. 36. with sundry others.
Fathers.

The sext abuse is in the prayer that the Priest says when he offers his host
upon the altar, Receive holy Father this immaculate sacrifice whilk I offer
unto thee, for my own sins, and for the sins of all the faithful, both
living and dead, that it may profit to me and them to salvation and
everlasting life. And he prays the like when he offers the challice upon the
altar, That it may ascend in the presence of his majesty, for the salvation of
him and of all the world. Wherein the Priest commits horrible blasphemy in
ascriuing remission of sins and redemption, to the sacrifice of bread and
wine, for as yet the words of consecration are not pronounced: and so by their
own confession they are yet but bread and wine: and yet the Priest says, he
offers it to God for the sins of the quick and dead, and for the salvation of
the world. Now what blasphemy is this to ascriue that to the sacrifice of
bread and wine, whilk by their own confession is not changed yet in Christ's
body and blood, whilk is only Ioh 1.29. Heb 9, 26. and 10 12. 2, Ioh, 1.7, and
2.2. Act. 4 12.
proper to the blood of Jesus Christ. Next, that he offers this sacrifice for
the salvation of the dead seeing the elect departed are in heaven, and so they
need no sacrifice for them: and the reprobate departed are in hell, so no
sacrifice will auaill them. And as for Purgatory whilke they dream of, the
Scriptures knows not sik a thing. I pass by the mixing of the wine with
water, contrary the express institution of Christ, and the necessity of the
silver and golden veshels, or at the least tin veshels in your sacrifice.

The seventh abuse is their magical blessing of their incense, after the
manner of sorcerers, without the warrant of the word, and the virtue whilk the
Priest prays for, that it may chaise away the devil, make whole every disease:
whilk hes no more virtue then their Exorcismes and adiurations, whilk the
Priest makes in Baptism, and in their other services, by their holy water, by
their lighted candles, their oiles, annointings, and other like ceremonies. And
in this ceremony they either Iudaize: for the Jews used this ceremony of
incense under the law, to figure the sweet savor of the sacrifice of the son
of God to his Father: and so makes the death of Christ of no effect to them: or
else they follow the custom of the old Alex. ab Alex. lib. 4. cap. 17
Roman idolaters. For we read more then 700. year before Christ, that they
used incense in their sacrifices and other services, whilk they did to their
Idols. Some says, that Leo the third joined to the Mass this part,
concerning the incense, about the year of God 800.

The eight abuse is, in that they make their Mass a memorial of Christ his
incarnation, circumcision, resurrection, and ascension: and that they celebrate
the same to the honor of others then to God: to wit, to the honor of the
Virgin Mary and of all the Saints, whilk is horrible blasphemy, to give that
whilk is Gods glory to his creatures. And therefore they have a Mass of our
Lady, a Mass of S. Antone, a Mass of Saint Michael, etc. Now if the Mass be
one with the Lord his Supper (as they say it is) then it is properly a memorial
of his death, and it is instituted only to the glory of God, and not to the
honor of any creature: therefore our Savior says, Do this in remembrance of
me, and not of his Saints.

The nynth abuse (passing by their monstrous Transubstantiation, whereof I have
spoken in another place) is their round host, taken from the use of the old
Pollux in Onom. lib 6. and Alex. ab Alex. lib. 4 cap. 17.
Roman idolaters 700. years before Christ, who had little round bread whilk
was consecrated to the honor of their gods, whilk they did eat after the
sacrifice. So it was not the spirit of Christ whilk taught you this form, but
the spirit of Numa Pompilius, the Magitian, who breathed this doctrine in you:
for there is no word of this round bread in Christ's Testament.

The tenth abuse is the lifting up of the sacrifice above their head, and the
adoring and worshipping of the same, whilk is abominable idolatry, to worship
a bit of bread, as the great God and creator of all the world, contrary the
express commandment of God, Deuteronomy 6.16.
Thou shall only worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. And
how can they excuse themselves from idolatry, according to their own
doctrine: for they hold this, that if the Priest have not an intention, (some
says actual, Summa angel^ ^uch. cap. 26
other some habitual) that is, a purpose to consecrate, that the bread and the
wine are not changed in the body and blood of Christ: and if he had a purpose
to consecrate but the one half of the bread, the other half is not changed,
but remains common bread. They therefore that adores it, if the Priest had not
that purpose, what do they worship but the creature, and that according to
their own doctrine. And who can be certain of the Priests intention? So who
can worship in faith that god of theirs, seeing they cannot be certain of the
intention of the Priest, upon the whilk this change depends: and that whilk is
done without faith, is sin. Secondly, their own doctrine is, Bonauentura in
compend. sacr. Theolog. lib. 6.
that the intention of the Priest suffices not, unless it be according to the
institution of Christ: now sundry of their own learned Hugo de S. Victor.
Gerardus Lorichius,
doctors says, that their private Masses, where there is no public
communion, is not according to the institution of Christ: therefore by their
own doctrine, they are vile idolaters, both Priest and people, in worshipping
a bit of bread that is made of wheat, as the great God: seeing by their own
doctrine there is no change there in their private Masses of the bread and wine
in the body and blood of Christ. Last of all, Thom. p. 3. q. 83 Joan de Burgo
Pupilla cap. 3. Gerson contra Florent. extra de celebrat. Miss.
seeing there are sundry cases, and that very ordinary, wherein the Priest (by
their own doctrine) does not consecrate at all: as if the Priest have
forgotten to put wine in the challice: if the bread be made of other thing then
flower if the water surmount the wine: if the wine be sour: if he left out
one of the words of consecration: now what certainty can the standers by have,
that the Priest hes fallen in none of these cases. So with what assurance of
faith can they worship their breaden God.

To prove this by some examples, that by their own doctrine they make the
people to commit idolatry in worshipping of their breaden God. About the year
1536. there was four Augustine Friars, hanged in Civil in Spain, who had
secretly by night murdered their Provincial. The day following to avoid all
suspicion of the murder, they all four said Mass, but they had no intention
to consecrate, as they themselves afterward confessed: and so there was no
Transubstantiation there, by their own doctrine. And therefore, all these that
heard their Mass that day, by their own doctrine committed Idolatry, because
there was no consecration there. I will set down another example. There was a
certain Priest who being deposed for his filthy life, wherein he had continued
for the space of 30. years with a harlote: being demanded by one, if he had
truly repented him of this his abominable life, and if he had put away this
his co^cubine from him, with intent never to receive her again? he never had
(said he) any sik purpose. Being asked again, how then said he Mass every
day, and made he no scruple to eat the bread of the Lord, and drink of his
holy Cupe, his conscience accusing him of sik an erroneous sin? At the last,
he confessed, that to avoid the unworthy receiving of the body and blood of
the Lord, he did not pronounce the sacrame^tal words wherewith it is consecrate.
And being urged again, how he durst commit so horrible a wickedness, as to
give so great an occasion of so horrible idolatry to the people: who kneeling
on their knees, casting themself on the earth, lifting up their hands toward
the altar, striking their breasts, did worship the vn-consecrated bread and
cupe. Unto whom he answered, that it was not so great a fault as he said of
it: and that he was not allone, but many more did the same, whilk thought it
not so abominable an offense, as he made of it. These two histories I find
written by a Spanishe author, one Cyprian Valera, the title whereof is, Of the
Pope and his authority, and of the Mass and the holiness thereof. All these
than that heard the Masses of these men, and adored the sacrament whilk they
lifted up, committed idolatry by their own Canons and decrees: for the last
did not pronounce the words of consecration, and the other four had not the
intent to consecrate: and therefore there was no Transubstantiation there, by
their own doctrine, and so they worshipped bread and wine as their great
redeemer and creator. But what a miserable religion is this, that depends upon
the intention of another: and therefore who can be certain, by their own
doctrine, whether it be God they worship or not in their sacrament. And this
made a certain inquisitor, an enemy to the truth, fearing when he heard
Mass, whether the Priest had intention to consecrate or not to say, O Lord, if
thou be there I adore thee: and so by this subtelty he thought to escape
committing of idolatry. In the time of the Council of Constance, there was
three Popes that the Council for their abominations did depose, and elected
another: these three not being Popes could not ordain Priests, nor give them
authority to consecrate: so that by their own Canons, all they that heard
Masses of sik Priests as had their authority from them, committed idolatry.
This same may be said of them that heard the Masses of all these Priests that
were ordained by Pope Constantine the first, and the whore Pope John the 8.
For neither of these had power to ordain Priests by their own Canons. And as
for Pope John, there is no controversy of it, because she was a woman, not
capable of that authority by their own Canons. And as for Constantine the
first, he was a laick man, who without receiving any orders was by force named
Pope. He not being a Priest himself, could not give this authority to others.
And so by their own doctrine, all these that heard the Masses of sik Priests
did commit horrible idolatry. And howsoever the Pope and his Clergy affirms
it to be God, and not bread and wine, whilk they adore; yet ye shall see what
estimation they have themselves of that breaden God of theirs, by some
examples. Pope Gregory the seventh, used it for coniuratio^, and sought a
response of it, and because it would give him none, he cast it in the fire,
and burned it, and so burned his Creator. They use it to revenge their wrongs,
hatred and malice by it: and therefore Pope Victor the third in the year. 1088.
was poisoned in the Challice by his subdeacon. Siklike the archbishop of
York, poisoned in the Challice. Siklike Henry the seventh, poisoned by a
Dominican Friar in the Sacrament. They use it for an Haruenger, sending it one
or more days journey before, with the basest sort of the people. The Dominican
Friars of the town Auferra in France in the year 1536. did burn it, being
vomit out by a Fria^ that said Mass. And the Franciscans de alia Villa burnt
the Cow whilk had eaten up the sacrament out of the Priests hand, and so in
burning her, did burn their Creator with her. Molon, one of the Spanish
inquisition, 35. years since, being to go into procession upon the day of
Corpus Christi, and the host that was to be put in the box, being so great
that it could not be placed in the same, he being impatient to awaite whill
another host had been consecrate, demanded ane pair of sheares, and clipped
his God and Creator: and so went on forewarde to their procession. Of the whilk
we gather two things. First, that their Popes and Ecclesiastical rabble is
without all God and religion, that makes so light of their God as to clip it
and burn it, and use it as the instruments of their malice and revenge.
Secondly, that this consecrate bread of theirs whilk they sell to the people to
be worshipped and adored is most abominable Idolatry, whereof one day they
shall give a reckoning to God: and thus much for the tenth abuse of their
idolatrous Mass.

The eleventh abuse is, that in your communions, first contrary the institution
of Christ, ye give not the bread to the hands of the people to take, but puts
it in their mouths, as though their mouths were holier then their hands.
Next ye spoil the poor people of a sweet pledge of their salvation, the
sacrament of the wine; giving them only bread: contrary first the express
Matthew. 26.27 Marc 14.23
command of Jesus Christ drink ye all of this: next, contrary the doctrine of
the August. in lib. sen prosp.
Fathers, your own De consecrat. did 2. can. Dum frangitur hossia Cyprian.
sermon. 5. de lapsis
canon law, and Pope De consecrat. did. 2. can. Comperimus
Gelasius. The second is that in your Mass, suppose ye speak of a communion
and communicants, yet there is none at all; for your Priest eats and drinks
out all. And therefore have ye eiked to the words of Christ eat all, drink
all, contrary the express institution of the Supper, take ye, eat ye, and
drink ye all of this. And contrary also to the doctrine of the ancient
Hieron. in 1. Cor. cap. 11 Chrysostom. in 1. cor hom. 18,
Doctors of the primitive Kirk, and of some Council, 2, Antio cap, 2. Conc. 4.
de Tolet. cap, 17.
Councels, and some of your own Alex. 5. epist. 1. de myst^r. cerp. and sang.
Calixcus de consecrat^ did. 2, can, Per^^^.
Popes also.

The twelfth abuse is in the prayer contained in the canon ^f the Mass in
these words. Look mercifully upon these things to wit, Jesus Christ his
body and his blood, whilk the Priest ^hinks he offers up to God, and so Biell a
exponer of the Mass ^nterprets the same;) and accept of them, as thou accepted
of the sacrifice of Abell, of Abraham and of Melchisedeck. And in another
place, the Priest prays unto God to receive that sacrifice (to wit of Christ)
and to sanctify it with the blissing wherewith he san^tified the oblation of
Abell. ^^ri benedictio^. ^san^^^d.
Now if any thing can be said to be blasphemy, certainly this must be
blasphemy, to a Masse-Preist a sinful creature to interceede betvveene God
the Father, and Christ his Son to pray the Father that he may sanctify his
Son and accept of him; as though he were not fully sanctified in him self,
and were not the fountain of all holiness to others, and as though the Father
were not well pleased in him already. And because the Masse-Preist vantes that
in his sacrifice of the Mass he offers up the eternal son of God in a
sacrifice to his Father for the sins of the quick and dead, I will ask him
this: does not he blaspheme horribly, who vants that in some thing that he
does hs is more acceptable to God, nor Jesus Christ is? This cannot be denied.
But I assume that the Priest vantes that in his Mass he is more acceptable to
God, nor Jesus christ is: therefore the Priest is a horrible blasphemer. And I
prove the Assumption thus: The Priest vaunts that in his Mass he offers up
Jesus Christ to God his Father: the Priest also in the Mass prays the
Father, that he would sanctify and accept of his son whilk he offers up:
Therefore the Priest vaunts yt he is more acceptable to god in the Mass, nor
Jesus Christ is: for God regardes more the person that offers up, then the
thing that is offered up. This is Irenaeus language: Irenaeus lib. 4. contra
haeres. Valent. cap. 34
and for this purpose he brings forth the examples of Abel and Cain, and their
sacrifices. For he says, They two offered up to the Lord, but they were not
both accepted of him: for Abell his sacrifice pleased God, because his person
pleased him, and that because of his faith: but the sacrifice of Cain pleased
not God, because his person pleased him not, and that because of his
incredulity. Seeing therefore that the Mass Priest vaunts that he offers up
Jesus Christ in his Mass to the Father: and seeing the Priest must be more
acceptable the^ your sacrifice: Therefore it must follow that the Priest in the
Mass vaunts, that he is more acceptable to God then Jesus Christ is, and so is
a horrible blasphemer in his Mass.

The thirteenth abuse is, that he compares the sacrifice of the son of God,
with the sacrifice of Abel, Abraham, and Melchisedech, whilk by infinite
degrees surpasses them all.

The fourtenth. What horrible blasphemy commits the Priest, when he prays that
that oblation whilk he thinks to be Jesus Christ, may be carried to heaven by
the hands of an Angel, as though Christ were not as powerful now to ascend to
heaven, as he was after his resurrection, and therefore hes now need of the
help of an Angel, to carry him to heaven What blasphemy is this? But let me
ask you, Master Gilbert, Wherefore pray ye that he may be carried to heaven
seeing ye eat him, and makes him to descend in your belly, as ye think, and to
ascend and descend are things contrary? And if ye will say, that first it
mounts to heaven, and then descends again: then I say, first the accidents of
the bread and wine are left there allone: for they are not carried to heaven,
but remains in your hand: and Christ's body and blood are not under them, seeing
he is carried to heaven by the hands of an Angel: and so your real presence
is gone. Secondly, seeing ye eat his body and drink his blood, it must follow
that ye must make a new Tra^substantiation, to cause Christ come down again
from heaven, and to make the bread and wine to be trans-changed again in his
body and blood, that ye may eat him and drink him. And so these are many
voiages whilk ye cause Christ to make: First, to descend from heaven by the
means of your Transubstantiation, then to make him to ascend to heaven by the
means of your prayer and then last of all, to make him again descend from
heaven, that ye may eat him and drink him. These are the blasphemies whilk
follows on your blasphemous Mass.

The fifttenth abuse, is in their prayer for the dead, wherein they pray for a
place of refreshment, light and peace for them, who hes died in faith, sleeps
in peace, andrests in the Lord, and yet in the Masses that are said for them,
they will not give the Pax to be kissed, whilk is a sign of peace: let them
advise how they will reconcile this. But first I say, their prayer for the
dead, is without all warrant of the word: next, I would know who these are for
whom the Priest prays: not for them that are in Hell, for they have not died
in faith, nor sleeps in peace, nor rests in the Lord: and prayers for them are
needless, for out of hell is no redemption: not for them that are in heaven,
for what greater light or peace, or joy can they have nor that whilk they have
already? not for them that are in Purgatory, for beside that it is but the
devise of man, according to their own doctrine, they that are in Purgatory
sleeps not in peace, but are tormented in fire, (if their doctrine of the fire
of Purgatory be true:) and so this prayer cannot be for them neither.

The sixtenth, is your horrible cruelty against the son of God, in breaking
the body of Christ in three cupons in your Mass, (as ye think) whilk is
greater cruelty then the men of war did to him upon the croce: for they brake
not a bone of him, and yet ye Masse-Priestes makes no scruple to part his body
in three cupons.

The seuententh, is your dipping a part of the host into the Cupe, whilk is
without all warrant or example of the Scripture, and is against the doctrine of
one of your Pope Julius de consecrat did. 2. can. Cum Omne crimen.
Popes.

The eighttenth, is in the prayer wherein the Priest prays, that the receiving
of Christ his body be not to his condemnation, seeing he means not heir by the
body of Christ, the bread whilk is a seal of his body, but properly the body
of Christ: whilk whosoever receaues, receaues not to death but to life; seeing
he is life and salvation it self.

The ninetenth, is the blowing and mumbling of the Priests on the bread and
wine, there turning of their back to the people when they prouounce the words
of consecration: their so often signing with the sign of the Croce in their
Mass, 25. times: their The ordinance of Honorius the 3. confirmed by Pope
Innocent the 4. de celebrat dis. canon Sanc. and de custod. Eucha. cap. 1.
keeping and enclosing of Christ's body (as they suppone) in a box: their
burning of candles before it: their Ordinance of Pope Vrbane, anno 1564. who
^iued then.
carrying of it in processions upon their solemn days whilk they call the
feast of God, in their Temples, Villages, streets: their carrying of it to the
sick and diseased, with these blasphemous words spoken by the Priest to the
patient, Behold my friend God your Creator, whilk I have brought unto you.
What blasphemy is this? and what a God is this that cannot come by himself,
but must be brought by another? and what comfort can this God bring to the
patient, that ca^ not bring himself to the patient, but as he must be borne by
the Priest? What a mockery of God, of his word, of themselves, and of the poor
people, is this? Does their Priests the thing that Christ did in the
Sacrament? Did he any of these things, or commanded he them to be done? Crossed
he the bread and wine? Did he blow and mumble the words upon it? Commanded he
the bread to be kept in a box, to be carried in Processions, to be carried to
the sick, to burn candles before it? What spirit hes revealed to you these
things? seeing the spirit of Christ hes not revealed them in the Scriptures?
You must seek therefore for a new Gospel, to prove these ceremonies: for the
Gospel of Christ makes no mention of them: yea, this keeping of the sacrifice,
it is forbidden by your own De consecrat. did. 2. cap. 3. Gradibu^.
Canon law. So ye both fight against the Scripture, and your own Canon law.

The twentieth abuse, is their manifold styles and titles that they give to
their Mass, whilk cannot be all aggreeable to the same: some taken from the
persons in whose name and honor they are celebrate: as the Masses of the
Trinity, of the name of Jesus, of his croce, crown, and five wounds, of our
Lady, of the Angels, of the Saints: some taken from the persons and matters
wherefore they are said. For there are sundry sorts of Masses, for sundry
sorts of persons and matters; as one for the Pope, another for the Emperor,
the third for the King, the fourth for a man, 5. for a woman. 6. for the
bridegroom. 7. for the bride. 8. for Prisoners. 9. for them that sailles. 10.
for them that goes a voyage. 11 for the dead. 12. for him of whose soul there
is doubt. 13. for the pest. 14. for the rage. 15. for the tempest. 16. for the
fire. 17. for all sorts of diseases both of man and beast. And last of all,
some of their styles are taken from the diversity of times and seasons where in
they are said: one sort of Mass for Summer, another for Winter: one for the
time of lent, another for the time of flesh: one for Christ-mas, another for
Pasche, another for Whitsonday, and other some for other feast days. Now
these Masses are so diverse, that the Mass that is said at one of these
solemn times, cannot serve for another: the Mass for lent, cannot serve for
the time of flesh: the Mass for Pasch cannot serve for Christmasse, and so
forth of the rest. In the whilk there are many horrible abuses. First, if the
Mass be one with the Supper (as they say) then as there is but one Supper of
the Lord, whilk is instituted only for the remembrance of Christ, whilk is but
one in general for all: and whereof all the faithful are partakers, of
whatsomeuer rank they be: be they great, be they small, be they rich, be they
poor; and whilk serves for all times. For, as our Savior did institute but
one Baptism to serve for all persons, and for all times so he did institute but
one Supper to serve for all persons and all times. If therefore the Mass were
one with the Supper, it should be but one for all persons, and for all seasons.
But this diversity of Masses does testify that it is not the institution of
Jesus Christ, but the institution of Antichrist, and that it is not one with
the Lord his Supper, as they falsely allege: Yea, it does testify that they
have forsaken the truth of God and are given over of God to believe lies, and
to be deceived by strong delusions, that they might be damned.

Secondly, what needs several Masses of the Trinity, of the holy spirit, of
the name of Jesus? for seeing the three persons of the Trinity are one, and
they all concur in the work of our faith, the Father giving his son by his
holy spirit in the word and sacraments: therefore this diversity as though the
persons of the Trinity were separate, is needless.

Thirdly, this would be marked: that suppose they have styled their Masses
from sundry persons, yet they have not ascriued a singular Mass to Jesus
Christ, that it might be named simply the Mass of Jesus Christ: and this, no
question is not without the providence of God, that seeing the Mass is not the
institution of Christ, but of Antichrist; not the ordinance of God, but of
Satan: he would not that sik a blasphemous and idolatrous invention should
have the same style to be called the Mass of Christ simply, without any
further addition, as the Supper is called the Lords Supper. Fourthly, they have
a several Mass to the name of Jesus, unto the whilk Missale Romanum.
Boniface the sixth, hes given pardon of 3000. years to them, that says this
Mass deuotly: as though his name were a thing separate from himself: and as
though there were some special virtue in the sillabes and letters of that
name, after the manner of Magicians and Sorcerers.

Fifthly, their Masses to his Croce and crown, is manifest idolatry, in
ascriuing that whilk was proper to Jesus Christ, to the tree whereon he hang,
and to the crown of thorns whilk he bure: as though either they had redeemed
us, and not himself who was crucified on the tree: or else that they were one
with himself, whilk are both blasphemy. Sixtlye, their Masses to the honor of
the Virgin Marie, to Angels, and Saints is manifest idolatrye: for the Supper
was not instituted in the honor of any creature, but only to the honor of him
who did redeem us. Seventhly, wherefore serves any Mass for the Pope? for if
he be sik a one, as himself and his Kirk hes written of him: to wit, that his
will is heavenly, that he may make something of nothing, Extra. de translat
ep^st. canon Quanto. in textu and glossa. Clement. 6. in Bulla.
that he may of right dispense against right: that he may make righteousness
of unrighteousness, and that he may deliver as many souls out of Hell and
Purgatory, and place the^ in heaven, as pleases him, he needs no Masses to be
said for him. Either therefore these sentences that are spoken of him are
false, or else all Masses said for him are superfluous. 8. if the Mass be one
with the Supper, then as the Supper was only instituted for the living, and not
for the dead: and therefore our Savior in the Supper commands, To take eat,
drink, and to do it in remembrance of him, whilk the dead cannot do: so
these Masses should not be for the dead. And for what dead are these, that
these Masses are said? If they say, for them that are in heaven or hell: I
answer, the one needs them not, and they are unprofitable for the other. If
they say, for them that are in Purgatory: I answer, this Purgatory is but
their own invention, to draw water to their own mil, and to enriche the Popes
treasures, for the Scripture makes no mention of it. Ninthly, their Masses that
are said for them that are absent, as for the Prisoners, for them that sailles,
and are in their voyage, etc. makes it manifest also, that the Mass is not one
with the Lords Supper: for it was instituted not to them that were absent, but
to them that were present. For in the Supper they are commanded to take, eat,
and to drink in remembrance of him, whilk the absent cannot do. Indeed it is
true, that these that are present at the Mass does eat and drink as little,
as they that are absent: the only vantage they have is to be beholders of the
Priest eating and drinking all himself allone, and of these vain and iuglers
tricks of the Priest in saying of his Mass, whilk the absent cannon see.
Tenthly, how can their Priests please God in saying Mass for him, of whose
soul it is doubted, seeing it cannot be said with faith, and whatsoever is
done without faith the Apostle says is sin: and this doubting, as James
says, Romans 4 23 Iac. 1.6
cannot stand with faith: therefore this Mass of theirs for his soul of whom
there is doubt, cannot please God? But what is all their religion, but
conjectures, and opinions, and doubtings. Elleuenthly, is their Masses for the
pest, tempest fury, fire, and all afflictions, and maladies, as well of man,
Masses for the pest, tempest, etc
as of beast, whilk contains intolerable and vile idolatry: for every Mass
hes his own Saint to be a patron, according to the subject thereof, and every
Saint hes his own office. Against the pest, the Priest says the Mass of S.
Sebastiane, and S. Roch, for they are the patrons and defenders against it:
after the custom of the Pagans, who honored Apollo and Aesculapius by feasts
and sacrifices for to be saved from the contagion of the same. Against the
tempest, they say the Mass of S. Bernard, S. Graith, S. Barbe, and others, in
stead of Jupiter whilk the Pagans worshipped. Against the rage or fury, they
say the Mass of S. Hubert, who is the patron of hunters and dogs, as the
gods Diana was the patron amongst the Pagans. Against the fire they say the
Mass of S. Anton, for they make him the patron of it: and they say it is a
greater oath to swear upon the arm of S. Anton, then when one swears by the
name of God. For a woman with child, they say the Mass of S. Margaret, in
stead of Diana and Juno whilk the Pagans worshipped for women with child. For a
horse they say the Mass of S. Eloy, or S. Anton, yea, Alanus de sacri^ic.
euch. cap. 32
for a poor wifes hen, if it be sick or lost. And for their pigs, they have
the Mass of S. Antone. But first what blasphemy is this, to have their
recourse to Saints, he or she, to obtain of them, or by their merit, or
intercession, health in sickness, etc. and sik like things, whilk are only in
Gods hands to bestow: for it is he only that sends health, and sickness,
fair wether, and foul wether, and so forth. Next, the Lords Supper was not
instituted to be a charm for sik diseases of man or beast, or for the fire,
pest, tempest, etc. but for the remembrance of Christ's death. So that if there
were no more abuse in the Mass, but these two things, it is sufficient to make
all men to abhor sik abominable idolatry.

The twenty and one abuse, is their mixing of parcels of the Scripture, with
their abomination and idolatries in their Mass, after the manner of those who
goes about to impoyson any: who mixes their poison with some good food, that
it may be the less suspected: or rather as the Magicians and Charmers does,
who mixes with their devilish practices, parcels of the Scriptures of God, and
makes those to serve for their devilish purposes, whilk was appointed to Gods
honor So are all the places of Scripture, whilk are read and sung in their
Mass, they are brought forth, not for the truth, but against the truth for
their idolatry and abomination: and this they have done, that their idolatry
may be less suspected by the simple. Next, what warrant have they to prefer
the Gospel, (as they call it) to the Epistles, in standing up at the reading
of the Gospel, and sitting at the reading of the Epistles, Romans 1.1. Romans 2
16. 1. Cor, 4.15.
seeing they are both inspired of God, and they both contain the Gospel of
Jesus Christ, as the Apostle testifies. Thirdly, the Gospel and Epistles, were
appointed not to be sung and chanted in the Kirk, (as they do) but to be red
and interpret: for the Psalms and other hymns in the Scripture are ordained
for that use. Fourthly, seeing the Scripture whilk is read and sung in your
Mass, is read and sung in an unknown language, as all the rest of your Mass
is done: to what purpose does it serve? and what is it but a mocking of God,
and abusing of the poor people.

The twenty and two abuse, is their wax candles whilk they have burning in
the time of their Masses, in the fair day light, mocking as it were thereby,
both God the author of all light, and the light of the sun. And to what
purpose ca^ they serve to burn in the day light, when the sun is shyning,
but to bear witness against them in the great day, that in the midst of the
noone day, they groped in darkness, and that they have put out the light of
the Gospel, that should have shyned in their hearts? What shall I speak of the
rest of your ceremonies whilk are superstitious, idle, carnal, and Jewish? In
attire like them: for as their Priests were cled in an Ephod, a Myter, a
broidered coat, a girdle, Exodus 28.4.
a breastplate, and a robe. So with you your Priests must have an Amice, an
Albe, a girdle, a fannell: whereof some of them are taken from the fashion of
the Pagans. For Numa Pompilius when he used to worship, Ovid. in Fastis.
he covered himself with a kerchiffe or veil: and he ordained that these
idolatrous Alex. ab Alex.
Priests should have their Albe, and a painted colored coat above it: as the
Exodus 30.20
Jewish Priest had a lawer, whereat they must wash, before they sacrificed, so
have yours: as they Exodus 29.27
lifted up a part of the host, so you lift up the whole host: as they sounded
the Number. 10.10,
trumpets at their sacrifices, so you ring your belles. And what shall I speak
of the rest of your vain and superstitious ceremonies? in washing often, in
crossing and blessing often, in censing often, in soft speech and whispering,
in kissing of the Amice, kissing of the fannell, kissing of the stole, kissing
of the altar, kissing of the book, kissing of the Priests hand, and kissing of
the Pax: in smiting and knocking of the breast, in gesturing by rule and
measure, in bowing and becking, in spacing foreward and backward, and turning
round about, and traversing of the ground: his gesture so ridiculous, so
changeable, so affectate in saying of his Mass, that a man would think a
plaier were coming forth upon the stage to play, when the Priest addresseth
himself to the Mass: beside the music of your Organs where it may be had,
and your threefold salutation of the Priest, Dominus vobiscum, whilk can have
no use in the private Masses, where the Priest is himself allone together with
the Clark. So that in truth it is more then Iewishe: for in ceremonies they are
above their ceremonies, in orders more exquisite, in cautels more diligent: so
that it seems rather to be a stage play nor the worship of God. But I see it
is fulfilled in them whilk was foretold, that God would send them strong
delusions, that they might believe lies, that all these might be damned whilk
loved not the truth. Let the Christian reader judge now, whether the Mass be
an heavenly action, or whether it be not a sink and closet of all abomination
or idolatry, or not.

As truth confirms the self, so falset destroies the self: A Kingdom
divided against it self (as our Savior says) cannot stand: The manifold
contradictions one against another, both in the matter, form, and effect,
su^stance, and circumstance of their Mass.
Therefore their divisions and contradictions amongst themselves concerning this
their sacrifice of the Mass, is an evident token that yt kingdom cannot
stand. Turrian. 1. tract cap. 11 fol. 59
Some of you says, Christ descends daily from the bosom of the father to the
altar, and ascends from thence to heaven again: other some Scarga artic. 11
fol. 335
says the contrary, that he neither descends from heaven in the Mass, nor
ascends from thence to heaven. 2. Bellarmine says in a Lib. 2. de Missa cap. 4
part, that the sacrifice of the Mass does not satisfy for our sins, or
merit properly the forgiveness of them. and yet in another Lib. 2. de Missa
fol. 731
place he says, that Christ offered in the last Supper a sacrifice for the
sins of the Apostles, and the sacrifice of the Mass (says he) is one with
that. And In canone miss.
their Priests says in the Mass that he offers it up for the redemption of
souls: and the counsel Ses. 6. canon 2 and 3
of Trent calls it a true propitiatory sacrifice for the sins of the quick
and the dead. And Lect. 85. in exp. canon. and in 4. sent. did, 12. qu. 2.
Gabriell Biell a exponer of the Mass, says that the Mass is one in
substance with the sacrifice of the Croce, and that it proceeds the self same
effects; to wit, the appeasing of God his wrath: If it then appease God his
wrath, and be offered for the redemption of souls, then it must both merit
properly, and satisfy properly. 3. Bellar. lib. 1. de Missa, fol. 6.6.
Some of you affirms that the sacrifice of the Croce, is more excellent then
the sacrifice of the Mass, and the V^ga de Missa these. 141.
virtue of the Mass depends upon it: and yet some of you Vega these. 137.
says, It is but one sacrifice with that of the Croce, the same sacrifice and
the same Priest in both, how then can the one be more excellent then the other?
4. L b. 2. de Missa cap. 4.
Bellarmine says, that the valor of the sacrifice of the Mass is finite, and
therefore it is often repeated: but Tract 7 de celebrat Missae, cap 2. quest 1
Caietan a Cardinal says, that the virtue, quantity, and effect of it, is
infinite, as the suffering of Christ. 5. Possen^^us lib. contra Chy^aeum and
Volanum.
Some of them says, that Christ is offered up in the Mass by the words of the
Kirk, when it is said, Tua de tuis offerimus tibi, some when the words of the
consecration are pronounced: but Lib. 2. de Missa cap. 11
Bellarmine aggrees with neither: he says, the sacrifice is offered up, not so
much by the words as by the putting of the sacrifice upon the altar. 6. Lib.
1. de Missa cap. 27.
Bellarmine says in a part, That if there be not a real and true slaughter of
Christ in the Mass, then the Mass is not a true and real sacrifice: for
says he, to a true and real sacrifice, is required a true and real slaughter
of the thing that is sacrificed: for the essence, says he, of the sacrifice
stands in the slaughter. Upon the whilk follows, that either Christ is daily
truly crucified in the Mass, by their Priests, or else their Mass is not a
true and real sacrifice. And yet in another Ibidem cap. 25
part, he says, that the sacrifice of the Mass requyres not a true slaughter
of the sacrifice. 7. Lib. 1. de sacr. cap. 20
Gaspa Casilius says, that there are two diverse sacrifices in the Eucharist
or Mass, the one of the bread and wine, the other of the body and blood of
Christ: and yet Lib. 1. de Missa, cap. 27
Bellarmine and sundry others denies it, and says there is but one. 8. Pope
Tract. de missa
Innocent says, that the sacrifice of the Mass is offered up for original,
venial, and mortal sins, and yet the Master Lib. 4. sent. did 12. cap.
Posth^c
of sentences, and In Floret, lib, 4
Gerson says, that the Mass purges but venial sins, and Thomas de Aquina.
Thomas of Aquine aggrees with neither of them, for he says, the sacrifice of
the Croce was for our original sin, but the sacrifice of the altar, is for
our ordinary sins. 9. M. Gilbert Brown says, that their Priests does the
same in the Mass, whilk Christ did in the Supper: but Lib, 1, de Missa cap, 27.
. Bellarmine frankly graunts that Christ did not offer up the bread by the same
words, that their Priests do now in the Mass, therefore they do not the same
thing that Christ did. 10. Master Gilbert Brown says that Christ did offer
his body and blood to the Father after the consecration, but Ibidem
Bellarmine says that neither Christ nor his Apostles in the beginning did
offer up any oblation after the consecration. I leave the rest of their
contradictions, so that seeing they have no concord amongst themselves,
neither in the matter, nor in the form, nor in the effect, nor in the
substance, nor in the circumstances of their pretended sacrifice: but that the
Lord (as is said in Hosea) hes divided their hearts: therefore their Mass
must perish. And seeing the Lord hes sent sik a confusion amongst them, that
they understand not the language one of another: some saying one thing, some
another: therefore it is Babel the tower of confusion whilk they are building,
and not the house of the Lord.

By their own doctrine they are convicted to be worshippers of a false God and
a ^als Jesus in their Mass.
To conclude this, they will have their sacrifice not a creature, Turian. 1.
tract. cap. 17. and Antonius de Padua, ex Bellar. de Eucha. lib. 3. cap. 8.
but a Creator of all creatures: and therefore they worship it with the worship
of Latriae, whilk by their own doctrine is only proper to God: therefore they
sing after the consecration, It is not bread but God and man my Savior: and
yet they say that this Scarga artic. 5 fol. 335.
Creator both begins to be where he was not before, after the consecration: and
ceases to be where he was before: and that he is not Turrian. tract. 1 cap. 21
every where as God is. And they say that the Priest makes Christ his Bellarm
lib, 3. de Euch. fol. 399.
body of the bread in the Sacrament, and Christ this king Pope John 22. lib.
orat, inscrip. Antidotarius animae. and in Breuiario and missalibus, Qui
creauit me sine me, creatur mediante me that is, he that created me with out
me, (that is the Priest) is created by my moien that is, he makes that God,
that made him.
is made of bread. Now how can he be the true God, and a true creator, whilk
hes a beginning, and ceases to be, whilk is not every where, as God is, whilk
is made of bread and wine by a Mass Priest, and that by their own doctrine?
How therefore shall their Kirk be cleared from abominable idolatry, that
worships that whilk they call God, creator and Savior: and yet sik a God, as
by their own doctrine hes a beginning and ending, and is not every where, and
is made of bread and wine by duste and ashes. O, woe be to their souls that
worships God, whilk made not heaven and earth, and causes others to do the
same! And how shall their Masse-Priestes be cleared from sacrilegious
blasphemy, whilk vaunts that in their Mass they daily creat their Creator,
and that of bread and wine: and so makes themselves Gods, and more then Gods,
for God created but creatures, but they (as they suppone) creates the creator.
And as they worship a false creator in their Mass, so do they worship a false
Christ and Savior in the same. For the scripture says, That the true Christ
is made of the Romans 1.3. Galat. 4 4
seed of David, and of the seed of the woman, and not of any other substance.
But the Christ whilk they offer up in their Mass, by their own doctrine, is
made of bread and wine, and that by the Priest. So Ibidem
Bellarmine confesses, and Ibidem
Pope John 22. For the one says, that it is no absurd thing to the Priest to
make Christ his body of bread, and the other says, that Christ the King is
made of bread: Therefore they worship not Jesus the son of Mary who was made
of the woman, and of the seed of David: but a false Jesus made of bread, and
baken in the Oven, and formed by the Priest: therefore of all idolaters they
must be the most blasphemous and abominable. And this meikle for the first
head, concerning that idolatrous abominable Mass. Now follows the second
point concerning the Antichrist: that the Popes of Rome are that undoubted
Antichrist, that the Scripture foretold should come.

The other part concerning the Antichrist. Master Gilbert Brown.
IF the It was not my purpose then, Ioh. 5.43. Tract. 29, upon John.
Pope be the Antichrist, what is the cause that Master John would not set
down some place out of the word of God that proves the same. But good reader,
I will let you see how far Master John is against the word of God in this, and
that by some examples only. First, our Savior show unto the Jews, that
albeit he came in the name of his Father, yet they would not receive him: This
title of seruand of seruands will not excuse him, being indeid the title of
cursed Cham, for he is called the seruand of seruands and so fit in the Lords
just providence for your Popes who is that man of sin.
if another (says he) shall come in his own name, him ye will receive. This
no doubt, as Augustine expones the same, is meant of the Antichrist, that the
Jews shall receive. Now it is out of all controversy that the Jews never
received the Pope: Therefore the Pope is not the Antichrist. Again, the Pope
came never in his own name but in the name of Christ, for he is called the
Vicare of Christ, and the seruand of the seruands of God: therefore he cannot
be the Antichrist.

Master John Welsche his Reply.

I Come now to the second head, whilk I offered then to prove: to wit, that
your Popes whilk ye will have to be the head of the Kirk of Christ, are the
self same Antichrist, that the Scripture fore-tolde should come. Thou
would know (Christian reader) of what weight this controversy, is, Whether
the Pope be the Antichrist or not? For this supremacy of his unto them, is the
foundation whereupon their religion, and the safety of their whole Kirk
depends: so that they call it, the Rock whereupon the Kirk is builded, Rhemist.
anno^ upon Mat. 16 and Bella^^ ^is praeface before that controversy of the
Popes supremacy
against whilk the yets of Hell shall not prevail. And Bellarm. calls him the
foundation whilk vpholdes the house of God, the Pastor whilk feeds his flock,
the Emperor whilk gouernes his host, the Sun whilk gives light to the
stars, that is, to the Ministers of the Kirk: the head whilk gives life to
his body. So that remove his Supremacy the house of God must fall, the flock
of Christ must be scattered, the host of the Lord must be discomfited, the
stars, that is the Ministry, must be darkened: and the body must ly still
without motion. Isa 28, 16, and 8, 14.15
And he applies these (a) prophecies, spoken and fulfilled only in the son of
God, unto him: calling him that fundamental stone in Sion, upon the whilk the
whole Kirk is builded: and that proved stone, against the whilk the yets of
Hell hes never, nor never shall prevail: and that corner or cunzie stone,
whilk ioynes both Jew and Gentile, as two walls together in a Christian Kirk:
and that precious stone wherefrom the infinite treasure of grace is most
plenteously derived, unto the whole Kirk: as unity in doctrine, the bond of
peace, the unity of faith, whilk is salvation it self, and the very life of
Religion: and he says there is no way to Christ, but by Peter, in whose room
their Popes succeedes: so that in their judgment there is no way to Christ,
but by the Pope. And he calls him that rock of offense, and stumbling stone
spoken of in Esaias chap. 8. Upon the whilk whosoever shall fall, shall be
broken: and on whom it shall fall, it shall dashe him in pieces. O blasphemous
mouth! Let the heavens be confounded at this. And therefore this is of sik a
weight, that Boniface the 8. hes made it an article of our faith: whose words
are these. We declare, Extra, de minoritate and obedientia, cap. Vnam sanctam
we affirm, we define and pronounce that it is altogether needful to
salvation to all creatures to be under the Pope of Rome. So that Bellarmine
says, when the Popes supremacy is called in controversy, the sum of all
Christianity is called in question: and when that is controuerted, then it is
controuerted whether the kirk should stand any longer or not, or fall and
dissolve. Unto them therefore it is an article of faith, whilk must be believed
and practiced under the pain of the loss of salvation. And unto us he is that
self same Antichrist whilk the Scripture hes foretold, time hes made
manifest, and the Kirk hes suffered. Unto them he is the head of the body of
Christ, the Pastor of his flock, the sun that gives light to the stars, the
foundation of the house of God, and a mortal God amongst men: Unto us he is
Gods enemy, the son of perdition, the second beast, and false prophet, the
adversary of true Religion, 2, These, 2. apo, 13
a pest in the body, a tyrant in the commonwealth, and Antichrist in the Kirk.
So thou sees (Christian reader) of what wayght this controversy is.

Let us see then how he defends him from being the Antichrist, and then you
shall hear our reasons to the contrary. You ask wherefore I set not down some
places of Scripture to prove the Pope to be the Antichrist: I answer: not
because I could not, but because it was not my purpose at that time. But now I
mind to do it (God willing) after that I have answered to your arguments.
Your first reason is, The Jews shall receive the Antichrist: but they never
received the Pope: therefore the Pope is not the Antichrist. I answer: Your
Proposition I deny, that the Jews shall receive the Antichrist. For first I
will ask you, Are you of that opinion with Bellarmine, the Rhemists, and the
rest of your Clergy, Bella 1. lib. 3. de Romans Pont. cap. 12.. Rhemist. annot.
upon 2 These. 2 The Jews should not receive the antichrist as their Messiah.
that they shall receive him as their Messiah, whilk they look for? If you be
not of their mind, then beside that you dissent from the doctrine of your own
Kirk, it is not probable that the Jews would receive him, if they thought not
he were their Messiah. And if ye be of their mind, then I say, the Jews will
receive none as their Messiah, but these who are borne of the tribe of Judah,
and the family of David in Bethlehem, and who shall reign in Jerusalem. But
the tribes are confounded, so that they cannot know it, and the family of
David destroyed by sundry Emperors: or at the least, so confounded that they
cannot be distinguished: and Bethlehem is destroyed, and the Temple in
Jerusalem alluterly casten down: therefore the Messiah whilk they look for,
will never come. And so (if this be true) the Antichrist whilk ye imagine heir
will never come, since your Antichrist and their Messiah that they look for,
are both one, as your Kirk suppones. And I say further, Sanderus and the
Rhemists says, In 8. demonst. Rhemist. annot. upon the 2, Thessa
the Antichrist shall come of the tribe of Dan: if then he shall come of the
tribe of Dan, (as they say) the Jews will never receive him as their Messiah,
because they know their Messiah whilk they look for, shall come of the tribe
of Judah. Therefore if Sanderus and the Rhemists speak true, the Jews shall
never receive the Antichrist at all. Thirdlye, I lay this ground whilk you
cannot deny, that the Jews are to be planted in again in the natural Olive:
that is, they are to be converted to Christ, because their fall was but for a
time, as the Apostle plainly foretelles, Romans 11. Rhemist annot. upon that
chapter
and the Rhemistes graunts it. Upon the whilk I ask you, Master Gilbert,
whether shall they receive the Antichrist, before, or after their conversion?
If you say, after: the^ I say, after they have embraced the true Messiah and
the Gospel, how can it be that they will look for another Messiah, and
receive the Antichrist as their Savior. Next, we read of their conversion in
the Scripture, but nothing of their reiection of Christ after their conversion.
And thirdly, seeing (as your Kirk says) the Antichrist shall be sent to them,
and they shall receive him, because they received not Christ Jesus: of force
then it cannot be after their conversion. For the cause, to wit, their
hardness of heart, and refusal of the true Messiah, being taken away: this
punishment should not be sent unto them after their embracing of Christ: so
not after their conversion. And if you say before their conversion; the^ I say,
either must you make the reign of your Antichrist longer then three year and
a half, (whilk your Kirk does) and put a greater space betwixt the perdition
of him, and the end of the world, then your Bellarmine puts but 45. days
between his perdition and the end of the world. lib. 3. de Romans Pont. c. 17.
Kirk does, and so overthrow your own doctrine concerning the Antichrist, that
ye may establishe your imaginary Antichrist. Or else what likelihoode is there
that ever they shall be converted to Christ, whilk is against both the
Scripture, and your own doctrine? for seeing the Jews are to receive him as
their Messiah, and seeing he is to build their Temple, restore their
ceremonies, and obtain ye Monarchy of the whole world, especially by their
help (as your doctrine affirms) shall not this drive them further from Christ,
Bella 1. lib. 3. de Romans Pont. cap. 12.16. etc.
and harden their hearts more then ever it was before? And seeing he shall reign
but three years and a half, and they cannot embrace the true Savior, as long
as he reigns (for they cannot embrace both the Antichrist, and the true Christ
together) and seeing after his death the day of judgment shall come
immediately, or at the least 45. days after, (as Bellarmine says:) how can it
be possible that they shall ever be turned to Christ before the end of the
world, if this your doctrine be true? Therefore they cannot receive the
Antichrist before their conversion, and so they shall never receive the
Antichrist. So then to conclude this point, as the Messiah whilk the poor
blinded Jews looks for, will never come, the true Messiah being come already,
whom they crucified: So the Antichrist whilk ye imagine will never come, for
the true Antichrist (whilk either ye will not see, or else if ye see, ye will
not confess him) lurkes within your own bosom, these many years, whom ye
labor to cover, that he should not be seen.

But how prove ye that the Jews will receive the Antichrist? Because our
Savior says to the Jews, If another shall come in his own name, him ye will
receive. I grant indeed our Savior so speaks. But first I say, this other
is not to be restricted to the Antichrist only, Joseph. de bello Iudaico, lib.
2. ca. 12. Pet. Gala. lib. 40. cap. 21. Bellarm lib. 3. de Romans Pont. c. 12.
but to be referred to all false Prophets, who shall come, not being sent of
God, so Nonus, so Lyra expones it: and this was fulfilled long since in
receiving of Theudas and Cozban, and other deceauers whom they received. As for
Augustine, it is true, he expones it of the Antichrist. But if Bellarmine
reiects Augustins opinion concerning the generation of the Antichrist, that he
shall come of the tribe of Dan, because it cannot (says he) be proved by the
Scripture: shall it not also be lawful for us, not to be bound to the
exposition of Augustine, unless it be certain by the scripture: so give us
that liberty whilk ye take to your selves. Your first reason then hes no
feet: for this place speaks of all false Prophets whatsomeuer, whilk the
Jews should receive: and it hes been accomplished sundry times amongst them:
therefore this yet remains unproven that the Jews shall receive the
Antichrist. This for the first part of the argument. The second part of your
argument is, The Pope came never in his own name, but in the name of Christ:
therefore he is not the Antichrist. Your antecedent I deny. For if ye will
credit Franciscus Toledo if ye know him, writing upon the same place, he
says, He shall come in his own name, who truly shall have no divine virtue,
The Pope come not in the name of Christ in truth but in his own name, because
Christ left him never in his stead or left na sik calling in his word.
but shall feign himself to be sent of God, as the false Prophets came in their
own name, because they were not truly sent of God. And this is that, says he,
whilk is said now (meaning in this place) if only shall come in his own name:
that he, is not truly sent of God, neither hes Gods power. So then a false
Prophet is said both to come in the name of God, and in his own name: in the
name of God falslye vanting so: in his own name, because God sends him not,
but he intrudes himself without a lawful calling. Now to answer you then, I
say the Pope comes in the name of Christ, as his Vicare, I grant he and his
Clergy so vaunts: but falsely. For the truth is, he hes come, and he commes in
his own name, and that truly, because the Lord never sent him, but he hes
intruded himself without God his calling: therefore this can not free him but
he may be the Antichrist. But how prove ye that he commes in Christ his name,
and not in his own name? Because (say ye) he calls himself the Vicare of
Christ, and the seruand of the seruands of God. A pretty argument: he so
calls himself, Ergo he is so. Who will cr^dite either you or him in your own
cause? Is this all ye can do for your Pope? He is called so, Ergo he is so.
Augustine says, Non attendamus ad linguam, Tract 3. in epist. Joan.
sed ad facta. Let us not take tent to the tongue, but to the deeds. For if al
be asked, and all with one mouth confess Christ, let the tongue cease a
little, and ask the life Interroga vitam? and again, whosoever denies Christ
(factis) by his deeds, is Antichrist. The idolaters of Ephesus might have
reasoned so for their great goddess Diana: Act. 19.
she is called a great goddess, ergo she is so indeed. And what false
Prophet yet ever came, but they said they came in the name of God, and they
called themselves, and were called by these whom they deceived, the seruandes
and Prophets of the Lord: and yet will you frame this argument for them, as
you do for your Pope. Ierem. 23.25 Ezech. 13 6.7.
All the false Prophets said they came in the name of God, and were called by
these whom they deceived, the seruands of God, therefore they came not in their
own name, but in the name of God. Did not the false Apostles Revel. 2, 2
in Ephesus say they were the Apostles of Christ, and yet they were found
liars: and did not the verse 9.
Synagogue of Satan call themselves Jews, and yet they blasphemed in so
speaking. Does not the harlot with whom the nations of the earth hes committed
fornication, Revel. 18.7
say in her heart, she is a Queen, and yet she is that great harlote. And is
not her Revel. 17 4
Cupe of gold, and yet the drink therein is abomination. And should not the
Antichrist 2. These. 2.4
sit in the temple of God, and yet he is the son of perdition, and an
adversary to God, and to Jesus Christ. And Matthew 4.8.9.
said not the Devil of himself, that all the Kingdoms of the world were
given to him, and he would give them to whom he would, and yet he was a liar?
So if this argument of yours will follow, The Pope is called the Vicare of
Christ, and the seruand of the seruands of God, therefore he came never in his
own name, and so he is not the Antichrist: you may with as good reason
conclude, that the false Prophets and false Apostles, came not in their own
name, but in the name of God, because they are called the seruands of God, both
by themselves, and also by these who were deceived by them. Yea, you may with
as good reason conclude, that the Antichrist is not the son of perdition, and
adversary to God, and that all the kingdoms of the world are given to the
Devil, and that he hes the power in his hand of giving them to whom he will:
because the Scripture foretold of the one, that he should have horns like the
Lamb, 2. Thessal, 2. and Revel. 17 Matthew 4.
and the other ascriues this right and power to himself. It is good therefore
that you cannot defend your Pope from being the Antichrist, unless with him
also you defend all the false Prophets, false Apostles, false Kirks, the
Antichrist, and the Devil himself, from being the thing whilk they are
indeed. But who will venture the salvation of their soul, upon this so silly,
and foolish a reason? But I pray you (Master Gilbert) let me ask you this.
Is your Pope the seruand of the seruandes of God, and the Vicare of Christ, as
he calls himself? Dare you avowe this in the presence of him, who shall judge
the quick and the dead, that he is so, as he calls himself? Did ever Christ
Jesus either tread upon the necks of Kings, and Emperors with his feet? or
was he ever lifted up and carried upon the shoulders of noble men? or did he
ever give his feet to Emperors to kiss, as your Popes hes done, as your own
histories does witness? And have ye ever read what one of his own Archbishops
of Coleine, one of his own religion, writes to Pope Nicolaus the first, five
hundredth years ago, Auentinus lib. 4. annalium.
speaking to him, he says, Thou pretends the person of the Pope, but thou
plays the tyrant: we feel under the habit of a Pastor, a Wolf, the style
belyes the Parent: thou vau^tes thy self to be Iouem.
God by thy deeds, while as thou art the seruand of seruands, thou contends to
be Lord of Lords, according to the discipline of Christ our Savior, thou art
the least of all ministers of the Temple of God; but thou by the ambition of
ruling goes to ruin: whatsumeuer lykes thee, Fucus factures Christianis.
is leesome. This was evil in those days, but there are worse since. And what
now (reader) shall we say of the Pope, since his own Archbishop hes so written
of him? You say he is the Vicare of Christ, but Christ Jesus in his latter
Testament, did never leave him to be in his stead. For in the 4. Ephesians. 11. He
gave Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, and Doctors for the work of
the ministerye, and the building of the body of Christ. But that he ever left
a Pope to be head of the Kirk in his stead, to be a Monarch in this earth, to
reign in Rome, and to be Lord over the seruands of God, there is not a
sillabe in the whole book of God to prove it. And because you say he is the
seruand or seruands: what service, I pray you, does he whereby he makes it
manifest that he is a seruand in deed? For the principal service of the
ministry of the Kirk stands in preaching the word, whilk he neither does,
neither thinks that it appertains to him to do. Yea, what is it that
appertains to any Lord, King, or Monarch in the earth, that he ascriues not to
himself, and does not also practice? Yea, as though that were too little, what
either style or properties or works, whilk are peculiar only to God his
Majesty, that he ascriues not to himself, as (God willing) shall be proved
afterward in the third mark of the Antichrist. So that Auentinus says of the
Pope, Lib. 7.
He who is the seruand of seruands is the lord of Lords, and he desires to be
as though he were God: he speaks great things as if he were God: he changes
the laws, establishes his own: he reaues, he spoils, he deceaues, he
slayes: that man of perdition, whom men uses to call Antichrist, (speaking of
the Pope) in whose forebead the name of blasphemy is written: I am God I cannot
err. So what is this else, but a horrible mocking both of God and man to style
him the seruand of seruands, seeing he hes lifted up himself, so far above
both God and man? So then to conclude this, as Goliath his own sword slew
himself, so the reason whilk ye bring to defend your Pope from being the
Antichrist, does most evidently convict him to be the Antichrist. He may justly
be called the Antichrist, who under pretense of the Vicare of Christ, and the
seruand of seruands, is Monarch and lord over all: this you cannot deny.
Because the Scripture descriues the Antichrist to have two horns like the
Lamb, to sit in the Temple of God, Apoc. 13. and 17. 2. Thessal. 2.
to have a golden Cupe: and yet to speak like the Dragon, to be adversary to
God, and to lift himself above all that is called God. But so hes the Popes of
Rome done, as it hes, and shall be proved by their own doctrine and practice,
and whilk you cannot deny: Therefore he is in very deed that Antichrist whilk
was to come. And this for your first reason.

Master Gilbert Brown.

Secondly, Saint Paul in descriuing of the Antichrist, 2. Thessal. 2, 3.
tells that he shall be but one, the son of perdition. Now then, if there
shall be but one chief Antichrist, whether is this present Pope he, or some
other before him. For every man knows that there hes been more then 230. Popes,
as all the writers of their lives testifies. They cannot all be Antichrists,
for that repugnes to Saint Paul, who hes put him in the singular number. And
if Master John will follow the word, as he says he does, where will he
find that there shall be many chief Antichrists, and not one only? For that
place of Saint John where he says, That now there is becommed many
Antichrists, can no ways be understood, but of the forerunners of the great
Antichrist. 1. John 2.18.
For at that time Master John will grant himself, that the great Antichrist,
the son of perdition was not begun.

Master John Welsche his Reply. The Antichrist should not be ^o singular
person, but a succession of many in one kingdom defection and tyranny.


Your second reason is, the Antichrist is but one singular person. The Popes
hes been many: therefore they are not the Antichrist. I deny your proposition,
for there lies all the controversy. We say the Antichrist is not this Pope, or
that Pope an certain person. But we ascriue this name, to the whole seat and
the succession of your Popes: we say the body and the kingdom of your Roman
Kirk, whereof your Popes are the heads, is that Antichrist whilk was to come.
So if you prove that the Antichrist should be but a particular person, and not
a body, a kingdom, a seat and succession of men that are adversaries to God
and to Jesus Christ, I will grant you have sufficiently cleared your Pope
from being Antichrist. But content your self (Master Gilbert:) this ye will
never prove by the Scripture: and therefore ye must let your Popes be accounted
the Antichrist still. And if this reason of yours be good, the Antichrist is
one certain person. Therefore the Popes, because they are many, are not the
Antichrist; wherefore (I pray you) shall not this also be good: the Vicare of
Christ is one certain man, but the Popes are many: therefore they are not
Christ his Vicare? What difference (I pray you) is there beetwene the one and
the other? And if ye will say, the Vicare of Christ is not one singular man,
but a succession of many in one office: why will ye not also grant, that the
Antichrist is not a singular man, but the succession of many in the self same
impiety. So either choose you, whether will ye grant that the Antichrist is
not one singular man, but a succession of many; or else that the Popes are not
Christ his Vicare: for the one ye must do, if this reason of yours hold
forth. But how do ye prove that the Antichrist is but one singular person? You
say, that Saint Paul tells that he shall be but one. How would ye have cried
out, if I had fathered sik a falset upon the spirit of God as you do heir? but
let sik be far from me. You say, Saint Paul calls him the son of
perdition, and puts him in the singular number: therefore say ye, the
Antichrist shall be but one singular person. I fear ye take pleasure to deceive
the simple with sik silly reasons. Our Savior Matthew 12.35.
says, that a good man o anthropos, out of the treasure of his heart bringes
forth good things. And he says, Marc. 2.27
The Sabbath was made dia ton anthropon, for man, and not o anthropos dia ton
sabbaton, man for the Sabbath. And also he says, Luke 4 4
o anthropos man shall not live of bread only. Also 2. Tim. 3.17
that o anthropos the man of God may be made perfect. And, 1. Timoth. 3.2.
For it behooues ton episkopon a Bishop or ouerseer, etc. Heir are the same
phrases of speech: they speak all of a man in the singular number, with that
same greek article o, as the Apostle speaks heir in descriuing the
Antichrist, and yet I trow ye will not be so ignorant or impudent, as to say,
that our Savior and the Apostle speaks of one singular person in these
places. So what warrant have ye to gather that heir, whilk you dare not gather
out of the like phrases of the Scripture? If then in these places there is not
a singular man understood, suppose they speak of a man in the singular number;
it will not follow that the Antichrist must be one singular person, because the
Apostle speaks of him as of one man, in the singular number, for the phrases
are all one: but the first ye must grant: therefore the next will follow.
Secondly, in the 16. of Matthew, our Savior says, Epi taute te paetra, Upon
this rock I will build my Kirk, he speaks heir in the singular number with
the same article te, that the Apostle speaks of, in descriuing the Antichrist.
Now let me use this same argument against your Popes, that they are not this
rock upon the whilk the Kirk is builded, as you say, as you have used heir to
prove that he is not the Antichrist. This rock upon the whilk Christ promised
to build his Kirk, is but one singular person, because our Savior puts him in
the singular number (Epi taute te petra) Upon this rock: but your Popes of
Rome are not one singular person, but many: Therefore your Popes of Rome are
not this Rock upon the whilk Christ promised to build his Kirk What difference
is there between your argument for the Pope, and this argument against the
Pope, seeing both are grounded upon the like phrase? Choose you then, Master
Gilbert, whether will you have the Antichrist, not to be one singular person,
but a succession of many: or will you have the Popes not to be the rocks where
upon the Kirk is builded? for the one ye must. Thirdly, I say, the Apostle
Paul says speaking of the Antichrist, that the mystery of iniquity is begun
even now to work. ^. Thessal. 2.7. 1. John 4.3.
And John says, this is the spirit of that Antichrist whilk ye hard was to
come, and is even now present in the world: and the Apostle says, the Lord 2.
These. 2.8.
shall destroy him with his presence: and your doctrine is, that he shall not
come while the end of the world. Now what a monstrous man will ye make him,
whose spirit was in the days of the Apostles, and who must continue till the
end of the world, if the Scripture be true, a man of fifteen hundredth year of
age already. Is this credible? or are you able to persuade men that hes but the
least drop of reason left in them, and believes the Scripture, that the
Antichrist should be but one singular man, since the Scripture says, that his
spirit was present in the world and his iniquity even then began to work in
the Apostles days, that is, 1500. year since, and he shall continue to the
end of the world. Fourthly, is it possible that one singular person can
perform all these things, whilk either the scripture or your own doctrine
tells he shall do? Revel. 13. and 14. and 17. and 18
For the scripture says, he shall resemble the Lamb with horns, he shall
speak like the Dragon, he shall do all the power of the former beast, he shall
make al men to worship the beasts image, he shall make all, both rich and
small, etc. to receive his mark, etc. so that no man shall buy or sell but he
that hes his mark, etc. so that all nations shall be drunken with the wine of
her fornication. Bellarm. lib. 3. de Romano Pont. and Rhemists annot. upon 2.
These. 2. and Sanderus in his demonstra.
And your doctrine is, that he shall build the Temple of Jerusalem, whilk the
Turks hes now in possession, that he shall destroy Rome, that he shall
abolish al religion, and all the outward ceremonies thereof, that he shall
conquer and overcome the strongest impires in the earth, and be Monarch of the
whole world. Now, is it likely, or can it be, that any one mortal man is
able to perform so great and so wonderful things? Was there ever yet any
King, Emperor, or any other creature under heaven, that ever performed so
great and wonderful things, and especially in so short a time, as ye assign
to your imaginary Antichrist, as of three years and a half? That one ciety of
Troy kept all the Grecians for the space of 10. years almost besieging it,
before they could overcome it. The temple of Jerusalem was seven years in
building by Solomon, who had riches and wealth above all the Kings in the
earth, who had an hundredth fifty three thousand, 2. Chron. 2.
and sex hundredth workmen for the same. That great Conqueror Alexander, with
whom no Monarch is comparable, neither in power, nor happy success, was not
able to conquer all Asia the space of ten year, whilk was the fourth part of
the world And shall we think that a miserable Jew, by the help of their
scattered people, being an enemy to God and all good men shall be able to
overcome that great Monarchy of the Turks, against whom all the power of
Christendom hes not prevailed: and not only to overcome them, but also to
overcome all the empires and kingdoms in the earth, and to restore the ciety
of Jerusalem, and build the Temple again from the foundation, and abolish all
religion, both true and false, except his own: (for this is the doctrine of
your Kirk concerning the Antichrist) and that in so short a time as three
year and a half, as you ascriue unto him. Who will believe you, Master
Gilbert? Will any Turk, Christian, or Jew him self believe, that any one man,
suppose his age were never so long, and his person never so strong, can be
able to accomplish and perform so many, and so wonderful things, as your
own doctrine affirms shall be done by the Antichrist. So this doctrine of
yours, that the Antichrist shall be but one singular person, can neither stand
with the scripture, nor yet with your own doctrine concerning the Antichrist.
Fifthly, as partly hes been proved, this is the common phrase of the Scripture,
in the person of one to understand a multitude: and therefore Daniel in the
descriuing of the Monarchies, he compares them to sundry beasts in the
singular number, to a lion, a Bear, a Leoparde. etc. and yet by them was not
signified one certain person, but a succession of kings in the selfsame
kingdom: and therefore the Antichrist is likened to a beast, to signify a
kingdom, Apoc. 13.
and succession of persons in that kingdom. De resurrectione ca^nis.
Tertullian calls the Antichrist a ciety, whilk prostitutes the self to
fornication, to wit, spiritual In Apoc. 17.
Ambrose calls the woman cled with purple (who is the Antichrist) the ciety of
the devil. Homil. 10. in Apoc, and homil. 13. and de ciuitate Dei, lib. 18
cap. 2. and lib. 20. cap. 19.
Augustine calls that beast whilk is the Antichrist, the ungodly, and body of
the wicked, who fights against the Lamb, a people contrary the people of God,
whilk jointly with their head is called the Antichrist, a heretical Kirk,
whilk is called Babylon: nonnulli non ipsum Principem, sed vniuersum quodammodo
corpus eius, id est, ad eum pertinentem, hominum multitudinem, simul cum suo
principe, hoc loco Antichristu^ intelligi volunt. in Moralibus lib. 33. cap. 26.
Gregory a Pope says, the beast is a multitude of them who preaches the
Antichrist. And In Apoc. 13.
Thomas a Papist says, the beast (whilk is the Antichrist) is a body, and so
not a singular person. And the ordinary gloss says, The head and the body
together makes the Antichrist. And Hugo a Cardinal calls him an University,
or communalty. So not only the scripture and reason, but also the testimonies
of these Fathers, and of some of your selves concurres all in this, that the
Antichrist is not a singular person, but a body, an estate, a succession. So I
hope the reader hes seen nothing, neither by scripture, neither by reason
alleged by Master Gilbert, wherefore the Pope may not be the Antichrist.

Master Gilbert Brown.

Thirdly, Saint Paul says, He shall be an adversary, and is extolled above all
that is called God, or that is worshipped, etc. whi k no manner of way can
aggree with the Pope. For he calls him self the seruand of God, and prays
most humbly to Christ, and desires support at his haly mother and Saints. If he
will deny this, I cannot tell what any man can say to him, but whether God will
or not, he will have the Pope to be the Antichrist, albeit it be repugnant to
the word of God. These are no dark prophecies, but manifest sayings of Christ
and his Apostles. I would wish Master John to read Saint Augustine de
Antichristo, tom. 9.

Master John Welsche his Reply.

The pretenses of the styles of humility and piety, hinders not but he may
be, and is in very deed an adversary to God and lifted up above all that is
called God.
I come to your third reason. The Antichrist shall be an adversary, and is
extolled above all that is called God. I grant that: but your Pope is not an
adversary etc. This I deny: the whilk if you prove, then shall I grant he is
not the Antichrist. Let us see your proves then, for they had need to be
sure, seeing all your religion and safety of your Kirk depends upon it: and if
ye cannot clear him from being an adversary to God, and from lifting up him
self above all that is called God, or that is worshipped: then your head and
your religion is gone. You say he is not an adversary to God because he
calls him self the servant of God, and prays most humbly to Christ. We
answered to this before. It is not his styles whilk he sacrilegiously claims to
him self, Mat. 7.15. Tit 1.19.
nor yet his form of godliness that can free him from this: for Wolves will be
clad in sheeps skins, and false Apostles and Prophets hes pretended the
authority and calling of God: and the Apostle testifies that there are many
whilk profess God in words, 2. Cor. 12.13.14.
but denies him in deeds: and Satan can transform himself in an Angel of
light. 2. These. 2. Reu. 1^
And it was fore-tolde that the Antichrist should sit in the Temple of God,
that is, in an eniment and high room in the Kirk of God, and that he should
have two horns like the Lamb, that is, as Augustine interpretes it, two
Testaments as the Kirk hes: In Apoc. homil. 11.
but yet speaks like the Dragon, that is, as he interpretes it, who under the
name of a Christian pretends the Lamb, that he may spout in more secretly the
poison of the Dragon: and that harlot who makes all nations drunken with the
wine of her fornication should have a golden cup, that is, a show of godliness,
Apoc. 17.4 Upon Matthew treatise 28. and treatise 24.
that he might the more easily deceive. And Origene says the Antichrist
holds nothing but the name of Christ, neither does he his works nor teaches
his truth. Christ is the truth, and the Antichrist is a disaguised truth, a
disaguised justice and mercy. He takes the testimonies of his false doctrine
out of the Scripture, for these that will not be pleased otherwise, and he
sits upon the chair of the Scriptures, showing him self as though he were
God. Epistol. 7.
And Cyprian says that they teach despair under the pretense of hope, and
perfidy under the pretense of faith, and the night for the day, and perdition
in stead of salvation, and the Antichrist under the name of Christ. So then if
ye will believe either the Scripture, or these testimonies of the Fathers,
neither the styles, nor yet the show of godliness whilk your Popes hes will
clear them from being the Antichrist.

And as to his humility toward men, we have heard somewhat of it before: and as
to his humility to God, we shall hear of it heirafter, whether he be so humble
as he pretends or not And certainly, it had not been possible that his
spiritual idolatry and abominations had been so greedily drunken out by all
nations, if they had not been put in Revel. 17.4
a golden Cupe, and his 2. Th^^. 2.11
delusions had not been so strong to deceive, and they had not been a and 10.
deceaue-able unrighteousness: that is, sik a unrighteousness as had the show
of righteousness, that it might the more easily deceive: and the Revel. 13.11
doctrine of the Dragon had not been so easily and universally embraced, if
he had not had two horns like the Lamb, that is, the pretense of the royal
and Priestly authority of the son of God. So he hes taken on these maskes
that he may the more easily deceive. It is not then these visards and maskes
that will be able to hide him from these, whose eyes the Lord hes opened. And
as for the third thing, the invocation of Saints departed, I say, this argument
is so far from clearing him from being an adversary to God, that if there were
no more, it is enough to convict your Popes and your Kirk, that they are
adversaries to God. For he is an adversary to God, who robbes God of any
portion of his glory, Isa 42.8. Psalm. 50 14.15.
and gives it to his creatures: My glory, says the Lord, I will not give to
another. But the Pope and his Kirk does so, in giving invocation or prayers
(whilk is a part of Gods glory and worship) unto the Saints departed. For the
Lord says, Call upon me in the day of thy trouble, and I will deliver thee,
and thou shall glorify me: therefore your Popes and your Kirk are adversaries
to God in this point. For we Romans 10.14.
ought to call upon them only, in whom only we ought to believe. But we ought
only to Ierem. 17.5
believe in God: therefore we should only pray to him through Jesus Christ. And
he only should be incalled upon, who knows our necessities, and is able to
hear our prayers, and to grant them. But only God in Christ, the searcher of
the heart does these things: Therefore he only ought to be incalled upon. Heir
therefore ye give out a sufficient evidence against your Popes and your Kirk,
that you are Antichristian, and adversaries unto God: For that whilk ye bring
heir to cleanse him, does fyle him.

The Pope may be an idolater, and yet a hypocrite, he may speak like the
Dragon, and yet be like the Lamb, he may confess him in word, and deny him in
deeds, he may be a ravenous wolf, and yet clothed in a sheep clothing
Indeed, I will neither deny the hypocrisy nor idolatry of your Popes, for
they both aggree unto them: and that whilk Origin says of the Antichrist, is
true of them: for they hold nothing of Christ, but his name: they neither do
his works, nor teaches his truth. And yet for all their hypocrisy and
pretense of godliness and humility, these notes and marks of the Antichrist,
as the word of God hes descriued him, does every way aggree to them. So that
if the word of God be true in setting down the marks of the Antichrist, your
Popes who bears these marks, of necessity must be the same. You wish me in
the end to read Saint Augustine de Antichristo, tom. 9. It would appear that
you think, that the reading of that work would have altered my mind
somewhat concerning your Popes, that they are not the Antichrist: and it
appears to me, by that your earnest desire, that the doctrine set down in
that treatise is worthy of all credit and authority, and that your self is of
that self same judgment concerning the Antichrist with the author of that
treatise: for I think you would not have wished me to read that thing, whilk
ye your self believes not to be true. I therefore read it, and read it over
again. And beside many other things, I find this in it: that the Antichrist
should be borne of a Virgin, by the help of the Devil, as Christ was borne
of the Virgin by the work of the holy Ghost. I wondered that you should have
wished me to read that book, in the whilk there was so manifest an error, and
that contrary the doctrine of your own Kirk. You should beware of this (M.
Gilbert:) for if your head and Kirk get wit of it, they will not only count you
a bad defender of the Catholic Faith, as you say you are: but also it may be
they suspect you of heresy, who does wish your adversaries to read that
book, wherein so manifest an error is, and that against the doctrine of your
own Kirk. For who will think of you, but that ye are of that same opinion
your self, seeing ye are so earnest with others to read the same. Lib. 3. de
Romans Pont cap. 12.
Bellarmine that great defender of your Catholic faith, was more wise then you
in this point. For first he says, there is a manifest error in that treatise:
next he says, It is certain that that treatise cannot be Augugustines, but it
is probable, says he, that it is Rabanus his work. So to conclude this, I
assure you M. Gilbert, I am of the same mind that I was concerning your Popes,
for all the reading of that work: But I am not of the same mind toward you
that I was before the reading of the same: for either I think ye have been
very foolish in vishing me to read that whilk ye believed not your self to be
true: or else, that ye defend a manifest error, not only against the truth, but
also against the doctrine of your own Kirk. And let your Pope who is the bond
of unity amongst you, see to this: how to reconcile you and Bellarmine, two
defenders of his Catholic faith; you saying that that work is Augustines, and
Bellarmine flatly denying it, and affirming that it cannot be his: you wishing
your adversaries to read it, and Bellarmine confuting a manifest error in it.
But betwixt you be it. Now this is all that you have said for the defense of
your Pope, whilk are but as fig leaves, whilk cannot hide his nakedness.

Arguments proouing that the Pope is that undoubted Antichrist
Now I will let thee see (Christian reader) what we have for us wherefore we
affirm and teach, and is ready also (as thousands hes done before us) to
seal it with our blood that the Popes of Rome are the Antichrist, whilk the
Scripture hes fore-tolde should come, time hes made manifest, and the Lord his
mouth hes in a part consumed. And first, I will lay this ground whilk (Master
Gilbert) cannot gainesay, and the conscience of all men will subscriue to. That
as the true Christ is sufficientlye descriued in the old and new Testament, so
the Antichrist is sufficiently descriued there also: and as he is to be
believed, under the pain of the endless damnation of their souls to be the
true Christ, to whom the prophecies of the old Testament concerning the
Savior to come, does aggre; and of whom the new Testament testifies that
they are accomplished: So he must be that Antichrist whilk the Scripture
fore-tolde was to come, to whom every one of the marks and properties of the
Antichrist set down in the same, does aggree, and in whom they are found to
be accomplished. Let us therefore out of the Scripture search the marks of
the Antichrist, and then let us see whether their Popes of Rome be stamped
with these marks or not. I speak not now of the many Antichrists whereof John
speaks, 1. Ioh. 2.18.
whilk were forerunners of that great defection, whilk was fore-tolde should
come in the Kirk of God: but of that chief and great Antichrist, who not in
one or two things only, but almost in all the points of his Religion, should be
contrary to Jesus Christ, 1. Ioh. 4.3.2. These. 2, Apoc 11 13.17.18.
whom the places of Scripture noted on the margent, does descriue. And while
as I affirm, that the Popes of Rome are this great Antichrist, I understand it
thus: that they are the Prince and head of that defection and apostasy, whilk
the Scripture fore-shewe and foretold was to come in the Kirk. For I do not
think, that all the strength and force of the Antichrist, is included in the
Pope: but the Pope and his kingdom whilk is contrary to the kingdom of
Christ, is most truly called the Antichrist: whereof, because the Pope is the
Prince and head: therefore by that figure, taking the part for the whole, I
call him the Antichrist. And in this we follow the scripture: for the
Scripture speaking of the Antichrist, sometime calls it a defection, and a
mystery of iniquity, and the second beast that hes the horns like the Lamb,
and the harlote: and sometimes points out the principal and chief in this
kingdom, on whom the whole body of iniquity does hang: as when he writes
heir, the man of sin, and son of perdition, whilk is an adversary, who
extolles himself above all etc. whilk is most properly spoken, not of the
body, but of the head. Having shown now in what sense we take the Antichrist,
we will go to the matter. And first to that 2. Thessa^^. where he is
descriued, and that by no dark prophecies, as you say, but by plain sayings.
First therefore the Scripture calls him there, A man of sin, and son of
perdition. The whilk to be accomplished in your Popes, your own histories,
Cardinals, Councels, favorers, Friars, friends, and themselves, does
sufficiently testify. So that if they speak true of themselves (whilk you
cannot deny) then of all the monsters that ever the earth hes borne, some of
your Popes hes been the greatest monsters. For in this point (Master Gilbert)
we deal not with you, as ye deal with us: for ye cite our enemies as
witnesses of us, whilk should have no credit and we cite your own friends,
and these of your own religion. So that they shall be fetched out as witnesses
against you in this point, whether your Popes be the men of sin, and sons
of perdition, or not. What commandment is there of the first or second Table,
whilk they have not violated in the highest degree. 1. Whoremongers. 2.
Adulterers. 3. Sodomites. 4. Incestuous. 5. Fosterers and maintainers of
harlots. 6. Tyrants. 7. Devilish, and Sorcerers. 8. In pride passing all
creatures under heaven. 9. Atheists without God. 10. Perjured. 11. Burreaus 12.
Baudes, and marchantes of whores. 13. Sacrilegious. 14. Traitors. 15.
Seditious. 16. Blasphemous. 17. Parricides. 18. Poisoners of Emperors,
Senators, Cardinals, yea of their own Parents and Sisters. 19. Helpers of the
Turks. 20. Drunkards. 21. Simoniaks. 22. Monsters. 23. Bastards. 24. Arrians.
25. Idolaters. 26. and so contentious, that sometimes there was two, sometimes
three, and sometimes four, all Popes striving for the Popedom together. It
were longsome and tedious to bring in their monstrous lives, as their own
flatterers, Friars, Cardinals, and others of their own religion, hes written
the same I will therefore only set down a few for example, for the probation
of this first point.

A confirmer and allower of horrible blasphemy and idolatry. he died, anno 816
Leo the third, he by his authority allowed, and by his Bulls confirmed a false
and adulterous blood, whilk some lying deceauers affirmed to spring out of a
certain wodden Crucifixe, to be the true blood of the son of God, and caused
a solemn festival day to be made to the honor of (...) What horrible both
blasphemy and idolatry was this? The Devil himself could not have done that
whilk the Devilish Pope did. Radolphus monachus Benedict lib. 5. cap. 32. and
Marianus Scotus who died, anno 1086 and Sigebertus a Monk, who lived anno 1110
and Martinus Polonus the Popes penitentiar, and Laonicus Atheniensis li. 6.
apodeixeos, and flores tempor. and Franciscus Petrarcha. and Ioannes Bocatius
in libro de claris mulierib. cap. 99. and Antoninus arch. of Florence, and
sundry others whilk for shortness I omit, as Platine, Mantuanus Baptista, and
sundry others.
The Serpent whilk deceived Eua, could not have persuaded men that Christ
Jesus, who (as the Apostle says) but once shed his blood, and is now in glory
at the right hand of his Father) did shed his blood again, whilk this Pope
confirmed and allowed.

John the 8. a Woman, or rather Ioane alone of that name, before called
Gilberta, a harlote: who in the time of her Procession, brought forth a child,
and died thereof: sat in the Papal seat of Rome, two year, and six months,
that all might understand, that that prophecy of the great whore that sat
upon many waters, whilk is spoken in the Reuelat. 17. was fulfilled in the
Idolatrous Kirk of Rome. And because some of you denies this, therefore I have
cited these authors, testifying the same.

Steven the 6. he caused take out of the grave, the carcass of Formosus, who
had mansworne himself: and spoils it of the Pontifical habit, and commands
it to be buried again in the burial of the Laics, cuts off two of his
fingers, and casts them into Tyber, and abrogates his decreets: and decreed
that the ordinances of Formosus should be void, whilk is a point of Donatisme,
as Sigebert a Monk notes. Cruel Nero ^^rogater of their predecessors decreets.
But Romanus the first, and Theodorus the second, Popes, his successors, they
allow Formosus, and abrogates the acts of Stephanus, and so did John the 10. by
a council of 74. Bishops, restored the acts of Formosus to the full, and
abrogated the acts of Stephanus, and condemned them. Yet for all this, Sergius
the 3. having casten down Christopher the first out of his Papal seat: and
afterward did cast him in prison, where he died: and so obtained this
Satanicall seat by the help of Marozia his harlote; he causes take out the
body of Formosus, whilk had lain eight years in the grave, degrades it from
the Pontifical honor, cuts off the three fingers whilk Stephanus the 6. had
left, and with them casts his carcass in the river Tiber, and abrogates his
acts, and ordained anewe them whilk was ordained by Formosus, whilk is a point
of Donatisme. And this most filthy adulterer, begets John the 12. an
adulterous bastard, who was Pope afterward, with Marozia his harlote.

Pope Lando he begets in adultery John the 11. Petrus Pre monstratensis testi^
before he was Pope: who afterward was Pope.

John the 11. or 10. Lando his adulterous son, he by the means of Theodora
his impudent harlote, being then ruler of Rome, was first made Bishop of
Bononia, Luitprand^^ lib. 2. ca. 13. de impe Platine says that this John the
11^ was the son of Pope Sergi^^, the 3.
and then archbishop of Rauenna, and then last of all, Bishop of Rome, with
whom he wallowed himself in whoredom. But he by the means of Marosia his
harlots daughter, is cast in prison, and there smoared. And her bastard son,
whom some calls John the 12. whom Pope Sergius the third begat with her in
adultery, is set up in the Popedom: and he gouernes the same in that
accustomed filthiness. So the Kirk of Rome was governed by harlots, as notes
Luitprandus lib. 3. cap. 12. and was made a harlote, as it was prophesied of
her, Ap. 17.

John, whom some calls the 13. of that name, he is sik a monster, that I
know not if ever the earth did bear a greter, who had sold himself to all
sorts of licenciousnesse, adulteries, incests, and most horrible cruelties. Of
his Cardinals, Luithprandus in lib. 6.
of some he cuts out their tongues, of some he cuts off their hands, of some
their noses, of some their privy members. He is accused in a Synod of his own
Bishops, before the Emperor Otho, that he did not communicate, that he
ordained Deacons in stables, that for money he made bairnes Bishops: that he
defiled Virgins and strangers: that he made the palace of Lateran a
bordel-house, that be dra^k wine to the Devil: that in his gaming at the dice,
he sought the Devils help, that he committed a threefold incest: one with two
sisters, another with his father his concubine, the third with his Niece:
therefore he was deposed from his Popedom. But afterward by the help of his
harlots was restored to it again, having dejected Leo the 8. who was placed in
his room by the Emperor. And last of all in the very act of adultery, he is
stricken through, (as some says) by the Devil, God giving out that sentence
against him, and so dies without repentance. A monster of monsters. Cardinal
Turre cremat^, summa de Eccl. li. 3. c. 13
These are evil, but yet worse (if worse can be) did follow. For from Joan
the 8. who was a woman Pope and a harlote, for the space of 156. years, as
some reckons to Siluester the second, who got the Popedom in the 1000. year
of our Lord. For that space, I say, the Popes suppose they vowed holy
chastity, yet they were sold to all lusts, and lived in all licenciousnesse,
harlotry, adulteries, incests, and in great contentions, cruelty, tyranny, and
briberie: so that they might rather be called the Princes of Sodom and
Gomorrha, then the Vicars of Christ. Genebrard a Papist says, that for the
space almost of 150. years, from Joan the 8. who died 884. anno, after
Genebrards account: unto Leo the 9. anno 1048. about a fifty Popes did revolte
wholly from the virtue of their antecessors, and were Apostaticall rather then
Apostolical, and obtained the Popedom, some by money, some by force and
bryberie: and so no marvel, says he, suppose they were monstrous, and
entered not in by the door, but by the Postern gate. Chronol. lib. 4. seculo
10. But from Sylvester it appears that the Devil was then loosed in his full
strength and liberty: and the Antichrist reigned then as a Dragon in the Kirk
of Rome. For from him till Gregory the seventh, including them both, being
18. or 19. Popes, their own Cardinal Benno vvrytes, that they were all
inchanters or Sorcerers.

Syluester the second, a teacher of these diuelishe arts: he by a solemn
bargane with the Devil, that if he vvoulde promote him to the Popedom, he
vvoulde give him both soul and body afterward, obtaines the same. He had a
copper-head in secreat, vvhilk alvvaies gave him answer of that vvhilk he
demanded of the Devil. He asked of the devil how long he should live? who
doubtfully answering him, that he should not die vvhill he said Note what a
thing is the mass seeing with it the Devil mocketh and deceaueth, even the Pope
himself. Concerning these things whether they be true or not, see these
Papists that writes the same, platin, Sabellicus Volater, Petrus Premostrat.
Benno a Cardinal, and in particular Friar John de Pineda part. 3. li. 19.
Mass in Jerusalem: he rejoicing at that, and never being purposed to go to
Jerusalem, yet not being vvare of the Devil his subteltye, on a certain day
went to a certain place in Rome, vvhilke was called Jerusalem, and there
saying his Mass in that Temple, is suddenly taken with a fever, and knovving
by the noise of the Devils, his death to be at hand, in the anguishe of his
soul confessed his Diuelry, and as Benno a Cardinal vvrytes, he desires his
hands and tongue, and (as some other vvrytes) his priuye members also, to be
cut off, with the vvhilk he sacrificed to the Devil, and blasphemed God.
Now judge thou (Christian reader) whether this seat and throne, and office of
the Popedom, be of God, or not: whilk the Devil can give, and hes given to
men, and vvhilk men can obtain by Diuelrie. And judge whether these men
whom they call the head, light, and foundation of their Kirk, be Christ's
Vicars, or the Devils Vicars, or not. Yea, judge whether they are the very men
of sin, and sons of perdition, and the Antichrists vvhilk the Scripture
foretold should come in the Kirk, or not.) But yet this did not fear his
successors: for they follovved his foote-steppes in these Devilish arts.

Benedict the 9. a Magician, and obtaines the Popedom by that diuelishe art:
a worshipper of devils, a filthy harlote his councellers devilish sorcerers, a
seller of the Popedom, suffocate by the Devil.
Benedictus the 9. he was so skilled in these Devilish arts of Magic, that
before he was made Pope, in the vvoods he called upon these evil spirits,
and by his Diuelry caused women to follow him, for to satisfy his
filthiness. He by these his devilish arts obtaines the Popedom, and makes
his former companions Magicians, his most familiar counselors. But he fearing
himself, sold the Popedom unto his fellow Magician, called Johannes
Gratianus, who was afterward called Gregory the 6. for 1500. pound. Platine
says, that by the judgment of God he is damned for the selling of his
Popedom. So after he is deposed, he is suffocate by a Devil in the vvoodes,
and so he perishes. Of whom it is reported, that after his death, he was
seen monstrously to appear to a certain Eremite, in his body like a Bear, in
his head and tail like an Ass: and being asked how he was so monstrously
transformed: he ansvvered, I wander in this shape, because I lived in the
Popedom without reason, without a Law, and without God, (out of thy own
mouth thou art condemned.) There was sik tumults, contentions, and great
slaughters for that throne, betwixt Sylvester the 3. and Benedict his faction,
that Benno a Cardinal says, the Kirk was rent in pieces; and by heresies,
under the culour of svveete honey, was suffocate. And Platine a Papist says,
that the good was oppressed and rejected: and they that might do most by pride
and ambition clam up to that throne. But Gregory the 6. buys the Popedom (as
hes been said) and so at one time there are three Popes, whilk hes three sundry
seats in Rome, whom Platin calls, Teterrima monstra most ougly monsters.

Gregory the 7. called otherwise Hildebrand that most ougly monster, Gregory
the 7. a ugly monster, a magician, he poisoned sex Popes before him, a in^uder
of himself in that throne, a worker of false miracles, his Bible a devilish
book, a traitor to the Emperor.
he having by the means of Brazutus poisoned six Popes his predecessors, to
make a way to himself unto the Popedom: he climes up to that devilish throne
that same night, without consent either of people or Clergy. Of whom Benno a
Cardinal writes, that he was a notable Magician: that when it pleased him he
would shake his sleeue, and sparks of fire would come out, whereby he
deceived the minds of the simple. Of whom the said Cardinal reports also,
that coming to Rome at a time, he left his book of his Magical and diuelishe
arts behind him through forgetfulness: and remembering himself, he sends two
of his most faithful seruands about it, charging them straightly that they
opened not the book: but they the more they were forbidden, they were the more
curious: and so opening the book, and reading it, behold the Angels of Satan
appeared to them in sik a multitude, that skarcely did the two young men
remain in their wits: and the Devils said unto them, Wherefore have ye called
us? why do ye weary us? Tell us what we shall do, otherwise we will fall
upon you? Unto whom one of them ansvvered, Pull down these high Walls
vvhilk are neir Rome, who went and did it quickly, and so the young men came
to Rome exceedingly terrified. This same Cardinal reports of him that he
seeking by many deceatfull means to put down the Emperor, he hearing that
the Emperor resorted often to a certain Kirk to his prayers, and having
searched the place where he used to bow himself: he hired a Villain to lay
great stones over the beams of the Temple where the Emperor prayed: that they
falling on the Emperor, might crushe him in pieces: and so it might be
reckoned for a miracle of Gods judgments. But it fell not out so: for the stone
being so heavy, fell backwards upon him: and breaking a table that was
amongst the beams, the stone and the miserable man fell down upon the floor
of the Kirk: and so the miserable Villain is crushed in pieces, with the same
stone vvhilk he had prepared for the destruction of the Emperor. The same
Cardinal also reports, Judge Christian reader whether this man be not the
devils Vicar, and not Christ's Vicare.
that he sought a response of the sacrament of the lords body against the
Emperor (as the Pagans wont to do at their Idols:) but when he got none, he
cast it in the fire. For the vvhilk cause the Bishop of Porteous in open
Pulpite says, that Hildebrand and we should be burnt quick. He excommunicates
Henry the 4. deposed him from his empire, and set up Rodolphus Duke of Sueuia
in the Empire, and sent him a crown with this verse, Petra dedit Petro,
Petrus Diadema Rodolpho.

He loused all his subjects from their oath of obedience to him, and forbade
his Bishops and Clergy under the pain of Excommunication, to acknovvledge
him. This Emperor with his wife, and son, came in the Winter, and stood
before his Palace barefooted, three days, in linning clothes: and all that
time could not get access to this proud Antichrist: who answered that his
holiness was not at leisure. Antoninus and Vincentius says, that he granted
to a Cardinal in the time of his death, that by the instigation of the Devil
he stirred up hatred, enimity, and vvarres amongst many. Of whom also
Cardinal Benno writes, that seeing the Devil could not get Christ subverted
by the Pagans: he labored to subvert his name under the shape of a Monk, and
pretense of Religion.

The most cruel, arrogant, and treasonable tyrant Pope Alexander the 3.
Alexander the 3. a cruel, arrogant and a treasonable tirant.

He betrayed the Emperor to the Turk.


He continevves a debate for that Satanicall seat 20. year: first with
Victor, then with Paschalis, Calixtus and Innocentius, who were elected
Popes, and succeeded one after another. He excommunicates the Emperor
Frederick, and Pope Victor. He betraies the Emperor to the Souldane, sends his
picture to him, and wrytes to him to cut him off, if he would live in peace. He
caused him to fall down on the ground, and to seek mercy, and then stramped
upon his neck, (the Monarch of the world) repeating that sentence of the
Psalm, Super aspidem and basiliscu^, etc. Thou shall walk upon the serpent,
and the cokatrice and thou shall tramp down the lion and ye Dragon. (O
blasphemous mouth, for this is spoken only of Christ.) And when the Emperor
ansvvered, Not to thee, but to Peter: he replied, Both to me, and to Peter.

Boniface the 8. that threeformed beast, of whom the common Proverb is,
Boniface the 8. a threeformed beast, a deceauer (...) ^^^ell tirant
that he entered in like a Fox, rang like a Lion, and died like a Dog: he
most craftily deceived his Predecessor Celestine, by causing one to speak to
him for many nights through an vvhistle, as though it had been the voice of
an Angel: Celestine, Celestine renounce, for the burden is greater then thou
art able to bear. The vvhilk the simple man believing, renounced the Popedom,
and so he entered in his room, and having inprisoned the simple man his
Predecessor, he was sik a cruel tyrant that he persecuted some of his
Cardinals every where, spoiling them both of their livings, offices, and their
heritages. He wasted and spoiled the places where they were reset, so that they
were compelled some of them to dwell in the woods, flying his cruelty. Some did
venture upon the cruel hearted Pirates, thinking to find greater humanity with
them, nor with their holy Father the Pope. He was also without all Religion:
for when the archbishop in Genua upon Ashwednesday, upon his knees, bare
headed, doing his service in the Temple before the people: An atheist and
mocker of Religion.
this holy Father looking on him, took a great many of ashes and cast in his
eyes, saying these words, Remember man because thou art a Gibelline, and with
the Gibellins thou shall return to ash. He nourished Harlots, he begat
bastards, he affirmed that no man should judge him, though he carried a number
of souls with him to Hell.

John the 23. taught, that the souls separated from the bodies, did not see
Gods face while after the resurrection, Who after some is the 22. An heretic,
a tirant, a perturbes of the public peace.
and sent Friars to preach it. He was declared by the people of Rome (as Marius
says) to be an heretic, a tyrant in the Kirk, and a perturber of the public
peace of Christians.

Benedict the 12. he bought from her other brother Gerardus with great gifts,
a sister of Franciscus Petrarcha, Benedict the 12. a buyar of a harlots, a
nurisher of harlots, death to the people, a Viper to the clergy, a wanderer
from the truth.
to commit villainy with. He nourished many harlots, of whom it is written,
Iste fuit vero laicis mors, vipera clero, deuins a vero, he was a death to the
people, a viper to the Clergy, a wanderer from the truth.

One part of Christendom, to wit, the Romans, makes Vrbanus the sext Pope:
another sort makes Clement the seventh Pope, whereby was sik a schism, that
it went to their successors, and continued forty years. These Popes did
mutually by their bulls excommunicate one another: Popes schismatics,
thieves, tirants, wickedsowers of tares, traitors, heretics, antichtists, and
sons of Beliall, by their own do doctrine. Vrbane the 6 put 5. Cardinals in
sackes, and cast them in the sea, and drowned them, he condemned to death 3.
other Cardinals, commanded their heads to be cut off their bodies, to be
roasted in a fomace, and being roasted to put them into sackes and whenever he
went from one people to another, he carried them upon horses as spectacles: and
that they might be known to be Cardinals, he placed their read hats upon the
sacks. Collenutius writes this in his Neapolitane history, was ever Nero or
Heliogabulus so cruel?
they sent infamous libels one to another: wherein they called other mutually
heretics, schismatickes, Antichrists, tyrants, thieves, traitors, sowers of
evil seed, and the sons of Belial, and that worthily. Now because the Kirk
of Rome says that the Popes cannot err, and that their judgment is
infallible, and their decreetes most sure: therefore, if this be true, by
their own testimonies they are heretics, schismatickes, and Antichrists.
etc. Illyricus testifies, that Theodoricus Niem the Pope his most inward
Scribe, faithfully set down the history of the schism of these Popes in three
books: wherein he says, that he fand the devilish craft of the Popes and
their wickedness whereby they horribly mocked God and Religion, vexed and
tyrannized over the Kirk of Christ, to be sik, that suppose he had red, heard,
and seen meikle of their wickedness before: yet having red that book, he
saw their wickedness was ten-folde more then ever he would have suspected.
And therefore he says, Truly now I assent unto the Canonists, who affirms
that the Pope is neither God nor man: for, says he, they are incarnate Devils,
and in malice and wickedness is worse then Satan himself.

John the 24. after his Predecessor was poisoned, threatened the Cardinals to
choose whom he would: for this cause named they many, but with none of them
was he pleased: then they prayed to name whom he would Pope: he answered, Give
me S. Peter's mantle, and I will put it upon him, who shall be Pope: and when
they had given it him, he put it on himself, and said, I am Pope. He is
accused before the Council of Constance, of forty weighty and grave crimes,
whilk were sufficiently proved against him. And Bellarmine says, there was
35. Bellarm. lib. 4. de Romans Pont. c. 14.
articles proved against him: that he poisoned his predecessor Alexander, that
he was an heretic, a Symonaick, a liar, an hypocrite, a murderer, a dicer, an
adulterer a Sodomite, and what not? This also was laid to his charge, that he
denied life everlasting, and therefore is deposed, and another set in his
room. In his Epitaph it is written of him Pestis auaritiae me caecum reddidit,
^p^^phi^^
auru^ Plus iusto sitiens munera sacra cradedi: that is, the pest of avarice
made me blind, and thirsting over meikle for gold, I fold holy things too
dear.

Sixtus the fourth that vile and beastly monster. Sixtus the 4. an al lower of
Sodomitrie, an inuenter and seller of new offices a builder of a solemn stews
in Rome, whereby he augmented his r^^^t.
Wesselus Groningensis in his treatise of the Popes pardons, writes of him that
he permitted to the whole family of Cardinal Luciae, at the request of Petrus
Ruerius Cardinal, and his brother to use Sodomitrie, (O horrible
abomination!) the three months of the year, June, July, and August. Agrippa
says, that among ye Bawds, or maintainer of bordels of these latter times,
Sixtus the fourth was famous: for he builded a meikle bordel-hous in Rome, both
for whoredom and Sodomitry: he fed troops of harlots, gayning thereby great
sommes of money: for every harlote of Rome, every week paid to the Pope, an
Julian penny, whilk would amount in the year to twenty thousand Ducats. But
they say it is now augmented, that it commes to forty thousand. In his
Epitaph it is written, Riserat vt viuens coelestia numina Sixtus, etc. that is,
Epitaphium.
While he was living, he mocked God, and dying, he believed there was no God.
Ane adulterer, the destruction of the town, Pemiciesque dei
who past Nero in wickedness, who was all wickedness and vice together.

Alexander the 6. he made a covenant with the Devil, E^ Eusebio cap^uo
Hieronymi Marii. Alexander the 6 a bargainer with the Devil for the Popedom.
His counselor was the Devil, as Simoniack, an Atheist a Traitor, a incestuous
adulterer, with his own daughter, a permitter of Sodomie, a poisoner of his
Cardinals.
and gave himself over to the Devil, that by his help he might obtain the
Popedom: the whilk when he had obtained, he so holily led his life, that he
preased to do nothing without first he had asked the advice of the Devil. A
Simoniack an Atheist also: of whom it is written, Vendit Alexander cruces,
altaria, Christum: Emerat ille prius, vendere iure potest. That is, He selled
the croce, altars, and Christ himself: he bought the^ first, and therefore he
might sell them again. A traitor also for two hundredth thousand Ducats, whilk
he received from the Turk: he poisons the Turks brother, Gemen Baiazetes,
being then captive in Rome. Who also called for the Turks to assist him against
the french King. He committed vile incest with his own daughter Lucretia, of
whom it is written her Epitaph, Alexandri filia; sponsa, nurus. He made one of
his sons Prince of S^cile, and another a Cardinal. He gave liberty to
Petrus Mendoza a Spaniard, a Cardinal, whose lust could not be satisfied,
neither with a troop of harlots, neither with the Queen her self, to commit
Sodomitry with his own bastard son Zanathensis. (O horrible impiety!) He
commanded to poison some of the Senators of Rome, and of his own Cardinals,
who were at a banquet together with him self. But in the righteous judgment of
God, the Flagon being changed at unawares by him that filled the Cups, he
himself was poisoned, and so perishes. His Epitaph says, Famae contemptor
honestae, etc. contemner of honesty, and all wickedness it self. And in
another of his Epitaphes it is written, that he destroyed cieties and
kingdoms, and wasted the world with sword, fire, and robbery, to enrich his
bastard children: and that he took away the laws both of God and men, and
the Gods themselves, that he might more licenciouslie sin. In quodam
commenta^io magist. Parisiens.

Julius the 2. a Sodomite, a cruel tirant, by whose tirannie 200 thousand were
slain a mocker of Peter's keys a seller of heaven, and yet gets not heaven
himself.




Julius the 2. committed Sodomitry with two youths of an honorable lineage,
whilk the Queen of France sent to a Cardinal to be informed. He was sik a
cruel tyrant that by his tyranny in the space of 7. year, there was two
hundredth thousand Christian men slain. Of whom it is written that when he
went to the wars, he cast Peter his keys in Tybris with this voice, Saint
Peter's keys helps not, let Paul's sword defend us. Of whose pardons it is
written, Vendit emm coelos, non habet ipse tamen, he selles heaven, but hes not
heaven himself.

Leo the 10. a beastly monster, an atheist, he accounted the gospel of Christ
a fable and yet a profitable fable for that devilish seat
Leo the 10. a beastly man, borne to all licenciousnesse, a drunkard and
Atheist without God, when one of his Cardinals Petrus Bembus was repeating a
sentence out of the Gospel he answered blasphemously, What profit that fable
of Christ hes brought to us and our Kirk, it is sufficiently known to all
ages. Whereby, though all the world should deny it, this horrible monster
sufficiently declares, that he is that man of sin, and son of perdition.

Clemens the 8. and after some the 7. it is written of him that he was a
bastard, In comment. supera^^^e magist. Patisiens. Clemens the 8. an anatomy
of al abomination
a Venefician, a Sodomite, a murderer, a bawd, a Simoniack a harlote,
perjured, a sacrilegious man, a Diuiner, and a craftesman of all wickedness.
Of whom Pasquillus writes in his Epitaph, Hic est perquem tot prostant in vrbe
puellae, etc. that is, a defiler of maidens, a banisher of honesty and
chastity, a honorer of all unclean persons, the infamy of the world, the decay
of the Empire, a contemner of God, a man of wickedness, a public enemy, a
false and ungrate man, a tyrant, and sik a man as there was never a worsein the
world.

Paul the 3. a vile beastly monster as ever the earth bure: Paul the third a
seller of his sisters chastity, the poisoner of his mother and two sisters,
incestuous with his own sister, niece, and daughter.
he sold his sister to be a harlote to Pope Alexander the 6. that he might be
made a Cardinal. He deceived a certain maid of honorable parentage, and
defloured her under the hope of marriage, of whom he begat Petrus Aloysius
that vile Sodomite. He poisoned his mother and sister that he might enjoy all
the heritage himself. He committed incest with another of his sisters, and
afterward poisoned her, because she loved others more then him. He committed
vile incest and adultery both, with his Niece Nicolaus Quercaus his wife, who
being deprehended in the very act by her husband, was so wounded by him, that
he kept the mark thereof to his very end. He committed also incest and
adultery with his own daughter Constantia. And that he might the more
licenciously enjoy his beastly lust with her, he poisoned her husband, Eusebius
c^^tivus.
named, Bosius Sforsia. He exceeded Heliogabalus and Commodus in filthiness,
defiling his own sister, niece, and daughter He had 45. thousand harlots in a
row, of whom he received tribute and toll every month, who was familiar with
him day and night.

Julius the third, what better was he, who against the wills of all his
Cardinals made one Innocent with whom he had done villainy, Cardinal: and
admitted him to his domestic familiarity. Vergerius writes, he abstained not
from his own Cardinals and that he used sik horrible blasphemies, as the most
vilest bands, and the most filthy villanes uses in the contempt of God. When
he missed his dish of Bacon whilk was not set at the table, at the command of
his Physician, he brast forth in this blasphemy: bring me my dish al dispetto
de Dio, that is, in despite of God. Again, when he missed a dishe of a could
peacock, whilk he had commanded to keep to him, having other new roasted
peakocks, he vomit out most horrible blasphemy against God. And when one of
his Cardinals answered, let not your holiness be offended at so light a matter:
he replied, if God was so angry for the eating of one apple, that he cast
out our first parents out of Paradise, wherefore shall it not be Iesum to me
who is his vicare, to be angry for a peacock, seeing it is far greater nor an
apple. Now let men judge, whether the Popes of Rome bears this mark of the
Antichrist or not, that is, whether they be men of sin and sons of
perdition or not. Much more might I have brought for the manifesting of this
point, as the threttie schisms amongst their Kirk, vvhilk never Kirk had so
many, their mutual contentions, strifes, cruelties, exercised one toward
another. But I hope this will suffice to satisfy the conscience of all men,
that the Popes are that man of sin, and son of perdition. And certainlye if
others had written their abominations, then men of their own Religion, their
own flatterers and friends; it would have seemed incredible. But their own
writers hes by Gods providence, so discovered their abominations, that I think
the consciences of all men may be at a point in this. This for the first mark.

2. Thessal. 2.4.
The second property of the Antichrist, as he is descriued in that same place,
is to be an adversary to God. For as the Devil is called Satan, that is, an
adversary to God: so his chief Lieutennant Antichrist, is called an adversary,
that is, opposed and contrary to God, and that not in life only, but in
doctrine, religion, and government: and that not in one point only, but almost
in all the substantial points thereof. The whilk mark the Popes of Rome
bears, and that not only in their lives, but also in the whole substantial
points of Religion. And to make this clear, beside that whilk hes been
spoken, we shall compare the doctrine of Jesus Christ, and the government of
his Kingdom set down in the scripture, with the doctrine of the Popes, and the
manner of their government, that the contrariety of them may be known: so that
it shall be seen, that cold is no more contrary to heat, and black to
white, nor Papisme to Christianity and the religion of the Kirk of Kome, to the
Religion of Christ Jesus. The doctrine of Christ stands especially in these two
things: in the knowledge of his person, 1. Cor. 3.
and in the knowledge of his offices. And therefore the Apostle says, I desire
to know nothing but Jesus Christ and him crucified. Ioh. 17
And Christ himself says, It is life eternal to know thee to be the true
God, and whom thou have sent Jesus Christ. The doctrine of the Popes of Rome
overthrows both. And first to prove this concerning his person, Romans 1.3. Gal
4 4. Heb. 2.17.
the Scripture testifies that Jesus Christ is conceived of the substance of the
Virgin Mary, and that he hes but one true body made of the seed of David,
and of the seed of the woman, and not many: and that he is like unto us in all
things except sin. The doctrine of the Kirk of Rome is, Bellar. lib. 3. de
Eucharistia, fol. 399. Pope John 22. lib. orat. infer. Antidotarius animae. the
Priests make Christ's body of bread
that Christ Jesus his body is made of the bread and wine in the sacrament: and
their doctrine makes him to have as many bodies as there is bits of bread in
the sacrament: and not to be like his brethren in all things except sin: for
his brethren can be but in one place at once, with their own due proportion
visiblie: But their doctrine of Transubstantiation makes him to be both in
heaven and earth, at once: in heaven visibly, in earth inuisibly: in heaven
with his own quantity and proportion, in earth without his natural
proportion: and not in one place of the earth only, but in innumerable places
thereof at once: so that this maine foundation of man's salvation, (without the
whilk there is no eternal life) concerning the truth of Christ's manhood made
of the woman, is alluterlie defaced and overthrown by the doctrine of the
Popes of Rome, in making him to have infinite bodies, not made of the seed of
the woman, but of bread and wine: or at the least, made of two diverse
substances. And as they ourthrow the doctrine of his person, so they overthrow
the doctrine of his offices. His offices are three: a Prophet, a Priest and a
King, whilk are all overthrown by them. As he is a Prophet, he hes revealed
his Fathers whole Ioh. 15.19.
will unto his seruands, and hes left it in register in his latter Testament,
and hes forbidden Deuteronomy. 4.2. Revel. 22.18.19. Gal 1.8.
to eike, empaire, or to alter the same: and hes pronounced a woe and a curse
unto them that eikes, empaires, or alters the same: 2. Tim. 3.15.16.
and that because it is sufficient to make a man wise unto salvation, and to
make the man of God perfect unto every good work: Prou. 8, 9. Psalm. 19.8.9.10.
Psalm. 119.
and because it is pure and perfect and easy to al them that will understand
it. But they have many ways corrupted this Testament of Christ, by mingling
and adulterating the same: first in that they Cone. Trident. Ses 4 Bud. aannot.
prior is pandect. Andrad. lib. 4. Arias Montanus, tom. 8. bibl. reg. in prefat.
give divine authority to the books called Apocrypha, whilk are humain. Next,
in receiving, and commanding others to receive Traditions with equal reverence
and affection with the Scripture. Thirdly, in their corrupt latin translation,
whilk they have made authentical, whilk some of themselves confesses hes
missed sometimes the meaning of the holy Ghost. Conc. Trident. Ses. 6. cap. 10
Fourthly, in joining with the commandments of God their own commandments,
and that not as things indifferent, but as necessary to salvation. Sessi. 4.
Fifthly, in condemning al sense and meaning of the holy Scripture, but that
whilk they hold themselves. Last of al, in quarrelling the Scripture of
imperfection, obscurity and ambiguitie, calling it dead and dumb like a nose
of wax. They therefore who hes altered, eiked, and corrupted the Testament of
Jesus Christ, confirmed by his death, whilk he hes left in write, for to
instruct his Kirk in all things, and to make her wise to salvation, and perfect
to every good work, does spoil the Lord Jesus of his prophetical office: But
the doctrine of the Kirk of Rome hes done so, Ergo they spoil Jesus Christ of
his prophetical office.

Heb. 9.11.12.15.2^.25.26.27.28
Thirdly, they are no less sacrilegious and injurious to his Priest-hoode. His
Priest-hoode stands in two things. First, in purchasing unto us, by the virtue
of that one sacrifice once offered up upon the Croce, an everlasting redemption
Next, in making continual intercession for us with his Father: the whilks both
are overthrown by the doctrine of the Kirk of Rome. As to the first, it is
overthrown many ways: as first, our savior says, that his soul was
sorrowful unto the death: Mat. 26.37.38. etc. Heb. 57. Luc ^0.44. Mat. 27.46.
and the Scripture testifies that for the fear of that Cupe be swate drops of
blood: and he send up strong cries and supplications with tears, in the days
of his flesh: and therefore he thrice upon his knees prays that if it had
been possible that Cupe might be removed from him: and upon the Croce through
the sense and feeling of that wrath, he breaks forth in that complaint, My
God, my God why have thou forsaken me? Al whilk does testify that he suffered
more then a common death: to wit, the terrors of the wrath of God, whilk was
due to the sins of all the elect. But the doctrine of the Kirk of Rome
ranuerses this doctrine of our salvation, and teaches that Christ suffered not
the wrath of God upon his soul: whilk if it be true, then Christ hes not paid
our debt sufficiently: for our debt was not only the natural death of the
body, but the wrath of God upon the soul: Ezech. 18.20.
and therefore the Scripture says, the soul that sins shall die the death.
Secondly, the Scripture testifies, Heb. 10.10.14 Ioh, 19, 18, 1, Timoth, 7, 6
1, Pet, 2, 24, 1, Ioh 1, 7,
that Christ his death and blood is a sufficient ransom for our sins, and a
sufficient satisfaction unto the justice of God: they by the contrary ioynes to
his satisfaction, the satisfactions of men, both in this life, and in the life
to come: in Purgatory, and that not only for their own sins, but for the
sins of others. What is this else, but to make themselves in a part Saviors
of themselves, and saviors of others also. Yea, what is this else, but to make
themselves God? for who can satisfy the justice of God, but God himself?
Thirdly, as it hes been proved before, Christ offered up himself once, by
shedding of his blood upon the Croce, never to be offered up again, whilk hes
purchased a everlasting redemption: the whilk is the only ground of man's
salvation. How they have ouerturned this by their abominable sacrifice of
the Mass, and their sacrilegious Mass priests, I hope hes been proved
sufficiently before: So that they have both euacuat the virtue of the sacrifice
of Christ upon the Croce, in setting up an other sacrifice for the dignity of
his royal priest-hoode, in joining unto him Colleagues and fellow-priests to
offer up himself daily in their pretended sacrifice. Fourthly, as they spoil
him of his priesthood, so do they spoil men of that redemption,
righteousness, and salvation, 2. Timoth. 1.9. Tit. 2.11. Ephesians. 1.5. and cap. 2.
Ioh. 3.16.
whilk his death hes purchased, both in the fountain, matter, and form
thereof. The Scripture testifies, that the only fountain and efficient cause
of our salvation is gods free love and grace. They Masuenda in disput. Ratish.
cum Bucero and Scholast.
teach that a infidel by the works of preparation (as they call them) even
done without Faith, may procure and merit Gods favor. And also they join
with the grace of God, man his free will, as a party worker with it, as though
God did not renew it being corrupted, or repair it being perished, Romans 11.6.
and 4.5.
but only relieve it, being waike and raise it up being faint: by the whilk
they abolish (if the Apostle speak true) the grace of Christ: for if our
salvation be of grace, Romans 5.19.
it is not of works, and if it be not of works the^ it is not of grace, and so
not at all. As to the^ matter of our justification, the Scriptures ascriues it
only to Christ his obedience and his death. They by the contrary, suppose
they grant that Christ hes fulfilled the Law, and perfitely satisfy God, yet
they teach that this righteousness of Christ is not our righteousness by the
whilk we must be justified, Romans 4.22.23.24 3.5.6.7.
but they place it in our own works and in our own merits. And of this
comes the third, that whereas the Scripture testifies, that this righteousness
of Christ is imputed unto us by faith, they acknowledge Bellarm. says lib. 2.
de Pontifie. 2. that the imputation of the righteousness of Christ is not
required to our justification. And the council of Trent can. 10. accurses them
who says that we are justified iustos formaliter per Christi iustitiam) by the
righteousness of Christ.
not this imputation, but places the form of our justification in the merit
of our works. And so they spoil man of righteousness and salvation.

And as they have spoiled Christ, of the first part of his office of his
priest-hoode, so do they spoil him of the second part thereof, vvhilk
consists in his intercession: in joining with him innumerable intercessors and
mediators, asvvell of Angels as of Saints departed, at whose hands they
seek all manner of grace, vvhilk is only proper to Jesus Christ to give: and
that not only for the virtue of ye merits of Christ, but for their own merits
and intercession. Every Parish almost among them had their own patron: and
every malady disease or calamity their own Saint or Angel to run to.

And as their doctrine hes robbed the Lord Jesus of his priestly dignity, and
man of the benefit of eternal life purchased to him by the same: So have they
robbed him of that glory and worship that is due unto him, in plucking away
his glory from him, and giving it unto creatures 1. as unto Angels, and 2.
unto Saints departed, and especially unto the virgin Marie, 3. unto their
relicts, 4. unto images of the Trinity, of the Saints, of the Croce, 5. unto
things consecrated, as water, oil, etc. 6. and unto the Sacrament of the
Eucharist, unto whom they give that vvorshipe vvhilk is only due unto God,
as prayer, worship, vows, sacrifices, etc. So that if they may be justly
called the Antichrist, whose doctrine spoils Christ of the office of his
mediation, and man of his salvation purchased thereby; and God of his due
glory: vvhilk man is bound to give him, for his creation, and redemption: and
sets up other Saviors and mediators, other priests and intercessors beside
him, and teaches another way of man's salvation nor he hes taught, and worshipes
other Gods, nor the God that made heaven and earth, and after another manner
nor he hes commanded: Then I say the Popes of Rome, may justly be called and is
in truth the Antichrist and adversary to God: For they are guilty of all
this abomination. And because I know that the poor and ignorant people, and
these that are blinded with the strong delusions of that man of sin, will not
believe these things of him, and of his Kirk, but as Thomas said of Christ,
unless I see the print of the nails, and put my finger in the print of the
nails, and put my hand into his side, I will not believe. Even so, unless
they see their idolatry and grope it as it were with their hands, they will
not believe it: therefore I am compelled for their conviction and information
(that none of them that is ordained to salvation perish) to let them se their
idolatries, and to make them to grope their abominations, and that by their
own books. For I shall not speak heir begesse, for that were great foolishnes
to allege heir any other thing, nor that whilk is written in their own
books, seeing he hes promised to give an answer least he should challenge me of
lying of them. I protest therefore (Christian Reader) that I shall forge nor
feign nothing of them but shall only set down those things whilk ar to be
found in their own vvrittings. And first, they pray to the Archangels and
Angels to defend them in battle, to defend them that none condemn them to
keep both their body and soul from godless desires and from unclean
cogitations, In their service and Mass book secundum vsum Anglic anum. Horae
beatae Mariae, and suffragia etc. Printed anno 1520,
to keep their mind from pollution, to confirm them in the fear and love of
Christ. Secondly, they pray to the Saints departed, that by their merits and
intercession, they may be defended from all evils, obtain all gifts, and get
eternal life. Yea, they seek of them, defense in this world from all evils,
and everlasting life. And they pray to God the Father that by their merits and
intercession, they may be delivered both soul and body from hell fire, and
may obtain through their merits, faith, patience, and everlasting life. So
not only they make them intercessours, but mediators: at whom, and for whose
merits, they seek salvation. And upon this ground came that Paganism whilk
they have brought in the Kirk of God, whereby every nation, village, family,
every estate, and every malady or affliction hes their own Saint to be a
patron for them. Upon the whilk also hes proceeded this canonizing of Saints,
that is, to make men Gods. For they say that this canonizing of them is
Antoninus part (...) summa tit. 12
to let men understand that they should be adored and called upon, as one of
their own Archbishopes Antoninus says. For he says that 7. things
appertain to the canonizing of Saints. 1. To be reputed publicly to be a
Saint. 2. To be prayed to by the kirk. 3. To have temples and altars. 4. To
have offerings and sacrifices offered to their honor. 5. To have a feastiuall
day. 6. To have an Image with a candle in sign of their glory. 7. To have
their relicts. And they say that they may be directly prayed unto with the
Lords prayer, vvhilk our Savior formed only to be said to God the Father.
Now how shall they be excused from vile idolatry in this? Lib. 5 cap. 4
Durand. ep. Nimi^.
Pope Innocent says, that to the worship whilk is only proper to god
appertains, temples, altars, sacrifices, feasts. And Durandus a Papist says
the same. If this then be true, vvhilk this Pope and this Papist says, how
then can they be cleared from idolatry, that gives unto Saints that service,
vvhilk by their own confession is only proper to God, as Temples, Altars,
Feastiuall days, etc? And what shall we say to Franciscus and Dominicus,
Anno 1200.
two of their canonized Saints, in whose persons they have done that lay in
them to have abolished the merit and the name of Christ? Of this Franciscus
they say in their book Bartol. de Ps. lib. conformitat.
of conformities, that he is greater nor John the Baptist. And preferring him
in many things to him, they say that John received the word of repentance of
Christ, But Franciscus say they received it of Christ, and of the Pope, quod
plus est, whilk is more. Of John it was revealed by an Angel to his Father,
what he should be: but of Franciscus it was revealed to his Mother, and his
Seruands by Jesus Christ. John was like the friend of the bridegroom: but
Franciscus was like the bridegroom himself. They say, he is better nor all
the Apostles: For they left but their boats, but he left al to his very hose.
They call him Typicus Jesus, a typical Savior, a singular crucified one, who
received in vision the same wounds whilk Christ hes, and suffered the same
dollors: who is the way of life, who is the image of Christ, as Christ is the
image of the Father. Yea whilk is more they prefer him to Christ Jesus. They
say, Christ did but pray, Christus ora^^^ Franciscus exorauit.
but Franciscus by prayer obtained. They say, the Baptism of Christ forgiues
original sin, but Franciscus hoode much more. It is written also upon the
port of the Cordiliers of Bloyes, of this Franciscus, that his sin shall be
sought for, but it shall not be found, whilk is only proper to Christ. Now
these are not particular opinions but approved by the Kirk of Rome: For Pope
Gregory the 9. Alexander the 4. and Nicolas the 3. ordained all the faithful
under the pain of heresy to believe all Franciscus marks. And their books
are set forth by their privileges.

As for Dominicus, Antoninus who was of that ordour compares him with Christ,
and in a manner preferres him to him, Antoninus arch^ epis. hist. 3. pars tit.
23, Cap. 1. par. 1. and 3
Christ, says he, did raise in all but three from the dead. Dominicus raised
three in Rome, and by his prayer restored forty to life. Christ after the
resurrection being immortal, went twice to his disciples, the door being
shoot: But Dominicus (says he) having as yet but a mortal body, whilk (says
he) is more marvelous, Quod mirabisi^^ est.
went in to the Kirk in the night the doors being shut, that he should not
walken his brethren. And so forth of the rest of the miracles wherein he not
only compares, but in a manner preferres him to Christ. Christ (says he) said
after his death, all power is given to me in heaven and earth, This power
(says he) is not in a little communicate to Dominicus, above all heavenly,
earthly, and infernal things, (and that in this same life) for he had the
Angels to serve him, the elements obeyed him. And in the end he applies that
whilk is only spoken of Christ in the 45. Psalm, He is more beautiful nor the
sons of men: Also he says, that there was two images, the one of Paul, the
other of Dominicus. At the foot of Paul's Image, it was written, per istum
itur ad Christum: By this man is the way to Christ. At the foot of the Image
of Franciscus it was written, by this man the way is made easy to Christ. And
marvel not (says he) at this: for the doctrine of Paul and the rest of the
Apostles, induces men to believe and to obey the precepts of Christ: but the
doctrine of Dominicus induces men to keep the councels of Christ, and
therefore the way to Christ by him is easier. So he preferres him to Christ in
miracles, and to the Apostles. But what shall we say to that that follows?
Christus est Dominus absolute, and authoritatiue: Dominicus autem
participaliter and possessiue.
He is called (says he) Dominicus because he is like our Lord, and he hes
possessiue and in possession that whilk Christ hes absolutely and by
authority. Christ says, I am the light of the world: The Kirk (says he)
sings of Dominicus, ye are the light of the world. The Prophets testified of
Christ, and so did they also (says he) of Dominicus and of his ordour, as in
the 11. chapter of Zachary, Where it is spoken of Christ. I have taken unto me
two rods, and I called one the staff of beauty, and the other the staff of
bands. The staff of beauty (says he) is the ordour of Dominicus: The staff
of bands is the ordour of Franciscus. So they abuse the Scripture. He compares
him also with Christ, and in a manner, prefers him to him. Christ (says he)
was borne upon the bare earth, but least he had been over much hurt by
cold, he was put in to the cribe by his Mother: But Dominicus (says he)
being in the custody of his nurse, even then abhorring the pleasures of the
flesh, was found often times lying upon the bare earth. When Christ was borne a
star appeared, signifying, that he should illuminate the whole world: But
(says he) when Dominicus was borne his godmother saw a star in his
foreheade, a prognostication of a new light of the world. The prayer of the
Lord was ever hard when it pleased ^im, but yet did not ever obtain that whilk
he prayed for, as when in the garden he prayed that the cup might be
tra^sferred from him: But (says he) Dominicus desired nothing of God, but that
whilk he obtained perfitely according to his desire. Christ loved us and
washed us from our sins in his blood: But Dominicus (says he) not being
void of that perfection of love, he took a threefold correction out of his
own hand every day, not with a cord, but with an iron rod, even to the
effusion of his blood, and for his own faults whilk were very few, Qu^
minimae erant.
another for them that were in purgatory: the third for them that were in the
world. And so deduces this comparison through all the parts of Christ his
life. And in the end he says, that being to depart from this world, he
comforts his disciples, saying: let not this trouble you, for in the place
where I go to, I shall be more comfortable to you, nor if I were with you: For
after death ye shall have me a better advocate nor ye could have in this
life. What blasphemies these are judge thou (christian Reader) and yet they are
authorized by the Kirk of Rome, because they serve to establish the Popes
supremacy: For Gregory the 9. canonized him as a Saint, and appointed a
festival day to be kept to his honor: Anno 1223.
And he that writes these things is an Arch-bishope of Florence, a man famous
among them. To him that will join him self to this ordor of Fra^ciscus and
Dominicus, for to merit the kingdom of heaven, and to redeem their own
souls, or the souls of their friends (as their bull of Fraternity says) the
Prouincial gives him the bulls of Fraternity, by the whilk he is made capable
of all the merits of the Convent, and of the merits of all the Friars of that
Province, of their Masses, prayers, fastings, abstinence, devotions, watchings,
disciplines, etc. Whereby (as though it were to little for them to be Saviors
of them selves) they teach that they have sik abundance of merits, as also
may serve for others. They have a prayer to Thomas Becket, In their porteous
book.
who was made a Saint by Alexander the third in these words, Tu per Thomae
sanguinem quem pro te impendit, fac nos (Christ) ascendere quo ille ascendit.
That is, make us (O Christ) to ascend to heaven by the blood of Thomas, whilk
he shed for thee. (Mocking as it were the blood of Jesus.)

Now as for the Virgin Marie, what tittle is proper to Jesus Christ, whilk
they have not ascriued unto her? What honor or worship is given to Jesus
Christ, whilk is not given to her? Damascene says, praying to the Virgin
Marie, I shall be saved by hoping in thee. Thou is the salvation of mankind.
Antoninus says, Part 3. summa tit 12 and part. 4. tit. 15. cap. 14. para. 7.
Quia Christus non solum Aduo catus, sed etiam Iude^ est constitutus, cuncta
itaque discussu^us, and quia nibilinultum remanebit etc. ideo Deus prouidit de
Aduocata nobis nempe Maria, quae tota suauis est and mitis, and in qua nihil
asperum inuenitur: ad thronum igitur eius accedamus cum fiducia, vt ^it Apost.
Heb. 4. vt gratiam and misericordiam assequamur, in tempore opportuno. Amen.
Blasphemouslie applying that place of Scripture to her, whilk the holy Ghost
hes spoken of Christ.
That all they upon whom the Virgin Marie turns her eyes are necessarily
justified and saved: and that Christ because he is both advocate and judge
together, is too rigorous: for this cause, says he, God hes provided an
Advocate, meaning of the Virgin Marie, in whom nothing is to be found but
sweitnesse. And he says, The Seraphims willing to have retained Marie as she
mounted to heaven: Not (says she) for it is not meet that man should live
his alone, (speaking of the everlasting son of God, who sits at the right
hand of his Father) I am given to him for to be a help to that work of
redemption by my compassion, and to that work of glorificatio^ by my
intercession: to the intent, that if he threaten to destroy the earth as in the
time of the Deluge, I may appear before him as the Rainebowe, to the intent
that he may remember his covenant. And whilk is yet worse, (if worse can be)
another Papist says, applying that whilk is only spoken of Christ to her, God
(says he) said to her in her birth, I have given thee to be a light to the
Gentiles, to the intent that thou may be our salvation, (applying it
blasphemously to Marie) to the end of the world, and a light to be revealed
to the Gentiles. And again he says, that all graces whilk runs down from
the Father and the Son, commes by her, who (says he) is a mediatrix between
God and men: and no grace commes from heaven, but through her hands, and all
grace enters in her, and commes out of her. And he says, She is a mediatrix of
salvation, of conjunction, of justification, of reconciliation, of
intercession, of communication. And to be short, he says, the Father hes given
to her the half of his kingdom, the whilk was signified in the persons of
Assuerus and Hesther: and that he hes retained to himself justice, and hes
left to her to exercise mercy. So that we may appeal from the Court of the
justice of God, to the Court of the mercy of the virgin Marie. Whereby they
most blasphemously prefer and lift her up above the Lord: for that Judge unto
whom appellation is made, must be superior unto to these Judges from whom the
appellation is made: therefore they blasphemously prefer the tribunal of
Marie, to the tribunal of the God of heaven.

In their porteous and service, and Mass books.
And what shall I speak of her Letanies, Psalteries, and hours? Of her hours
where she is called the Queen of mercy, who hes bruised the Serpents head,
Genesis 3.
whilk thing is spoken only to the first Parents of the son of God, and the
restorer and savior of mankind: the most godly, and most holy, the yet of
heaven, the shyning port of life, the mother of grace and mercy: our life, our
hope, who makes the world to shine by the light of the brightness of her
peace, who only hes deserved to be next in honor to the Trinity, by whom the
whole world lives next God. She is called the comfort of the desolate the
salvation and hope of all them that puts their trust in her, the fountain of
salvation, grace, godliness, joy, confort: the Queen of heaven, and star of
the sea, whom the Sun honors: the promise of the Prophets, the Queen of
the Evangelists, the teacher of the Apostles, the comforter of the Martyrs,
the salvation and consolation of the quick and the dead, the bottomless
fountain of all grace, the port of Paradise, the Lady of glory, the queen
of joy, the Lady of Angels, What is Christ then, and what place is left to him?
the joy of the Saints, the only hope of the miserable, the Empress of the
Angels, the comforter of sinners, the keeper of the heart, the praise of all
the Saints. And of her is sought in her hours and Letanies all these graces
generally whilk are only proper to God through Jesus Christ to give: as
protection, receiving in the time of death, refuge in the time of misery,
remission of sins, the keeping of soul and body, holiness of life, staying
of the pest, calming of the seas, perseverance in grace, the eschewing of sin
salvation and eternal life: and that by her merits and prayers their sins
may be forgiven, and that being redeemed by her they may climb up to heaven.
And they pray to Marie and John Baptist, by the Redeemer, making Christ a
mediator between them and them. And they pray to Christ to defend them from
his anger, and from the anger of his mother: and they pray her to give her self
and her son unto them. What horrible blasphemy is this? O horrible blasphemy
Who can give Christ but only God the Father. They say, God will give them
that worships her a reward heir, and heaven after. How shall I praise the
redeemed by thee? (speaking of Marie.) And in the Prose of the Mass they have
this Prayer, lure matris impera a Redemptori: that is, By thy motherly
authority command the Redeemer. And as concerning her Psalteries, how horrible
is it to see all that David spoke of the Father, Son, and holy Spirit, to be
transferred and applied to her, without exception, from the beginning to the
end? changing only the style of the eternal Lord, in the style of our Lady,
Horrible blasphemy
blaspheming, Blessed is he who loves Mary, fears her, and praises her name,
who hopes in her. The heavens declares thy glory, and the earth, and the
fullness thereof. Blessed are all they who loves thee, because thou have washen
their sins in thy mercies. Have mercy on me, o mother of mercy, and according
to the bowels of thy compassions wash me from all mine iniquities: Save me for
thy names sake: Let Mary be lifted up, and all her enemies will be seattered.
Lord give thy judgment to thy Son, and thy mercy to the Queen his mother.
Lady, salvation and life is in thy hand. O how good is God to them that
worships his mother. God What greater blasphemy culd the Devil himself vomit
out.
is the God of vengeance, but thou art the Queen of mercy. Come let us
worship the Lady, let us praise the Virgin who hes saved us: let us confess
our sins unto her: The Lord said unto our Lady, Sit heir my mother on my
right hand: O mankind rejoice, because God hes given to thee sik a mediatrix
and at the name of Marie let all knees bow in heaven, in earth, and in Hell.
Anno 1470
This Lady Psalter was compiled by a Cardinal of Rome Bonauenture, who was
canonized for a Saint, by Pope Sixtus the fourth. After the same manner have
they corrupted the songs of the Prophets, of Simeon, and of the Virgin,
blaspheming after this manner, My soul reioyces in my Lady, My soul
magnifies my Lady, etc. Now lets thou, o Lord, the seruand of Marie depart in
peace, because my eyes hes seen the salvation of Mary. And to put an end to
these abominations, they ascriue unto the Virgin that whilk the holy Ghost
hes spoken only of Jesus Christ, Proverb. 8, 22,
the everlasting wisdom of his Father, The lord hes possessed me in the
beginning of his way: before he made any thing, I was ordained from
everlasting. And Pope Leo the 10. calls her Deam, a goddess. In the general
council of Lateran, in stead of praying to God through Christ for the
assistance of his spirit, Epist, 17. Council. Lateran, sub Iulio 2, and Leone
10, ses, 9, 10, etc Mattyrologium romans act, 7, Antoninus hist, part. ^ tit, 23.
cap, 3,
they crave the help and assistance of Marie. And Pope Pius the fifth
acknowledges her for the victory of the Christians against the Turk, in their
combat whilk was stricken in the sea: and for that victory hes ordained a
yearly remembrance of her to be kept. And Antoninus one of their Archbishops
says, that Christ sitting at the right hand of God the Father rose up angry
to have slain all the sinners in the earth: and when none was able to resist,
his mother came to him and pacified him, till two of her seruands Franciscus
and Dominicus might be sent to them: and that Christ answered, Behold I am
pacified and have accepted thy face I appeal your conscience, Master Gilbert,
before the Lord Jesus Christ, as ye must appear before him in that great day
whether these speeches, be not the speeches and blasphemies of the Dragon, or
not: and whether this doctrine and religion of yours, be not idolatrous,
blasphemous, and antichristian, or not.

Not only have they spoiled the Lord Jesus of his mediation, intercession, and
of his glory due to him, and mankind of their salvation purchased by his
blood, in ascriuing it to Saints, Angels, and to the Virgin Marie: but also in
ascriuing them unto their consecrate things, as their holy water, the tree of
the Croce, the sign of the Croce, their golden, silver, and stony Croces. For
Thomas (...) part. 3. summae quest. 25. artic. 4. and Caicta. in comment in
illum Iocum Thomas. Et Andradius in lib. 9. orthod. explic.
unto the Croce they give the worship of Latria, as themselves testifies, whilk
by their own confession is only proper to God. And their prayer to the Croce,
and the sign of the Croce, is to help them, defend them, and save them: and
they adore it and worship it. They pray siklike that the holy water may be
salvation unto them, and that by the sparging of the same: the health of their
soul, the strengthening of their Faith, the security of their hope may be
given them.

Unto the Images and relics of the Saints, they offer sacrifice, in burning
incense unto them, whilk the Scripture calls an oblation only proper to the
living God. Therefore Ezechias brake the brazen serpent, because they burnt
ince^se unto it. Marc. 9.49. 2. Reg. 18, 4. 2. Reg. 23. Pontif. Romans part 2.
Tit. de benedict. nouae crucis. Careat omni peccato perpetrato.
And the burning of incense to Baall is counted idolatry. They pray for their
golden, silver, and stony croces, that as the world was purged from the
gyltinesse of sin by the Croce of Christ, so by the merit of this Croce,
these who offers it up, may be forgiven of all their actual sins. Is not
this to set up their stony etc. Croces, in the room of the blood of Jesus
Christ? They ascriue to the tree of the Croce, that whilk is only proper to
God, saying, Salua caeteruam: that is, Breuia. Romans in fest. invent. and exalt.
sanctae crucis.
Give salvation to the assembly gathered together in thy praises. They worship
their images after the same manner, as the Ethnicks did their idols. And as
the Baruc. 6.3
Ethnicks bure their golden, silver, and timber Idols upon (...) shoulders, so
do the Baron. nota in Marti Romans Sleidan. com. lib. 9. Iodoc. meg. pe regr.
Hieros. ca. 3 Pellic. in Barue cap. 6
Papists. The Ethnickes worshipped their idols, the Conc. T^id. ses. 25.
Papists does the same, in falling down before the images of Saints. The
Ethnicks decked their idols with vestiments, as though they had been men: so
does the Papists with their images, whilk Molin, epist. Valen. Salig. Espen.
hist. Eccles. Ecclesia reform. in Gallia, lib. 4.
some of themselves thinks to be an abuse, and would have it abolished. They
lighted candles before their idols, whilk their idols saw not, so does the
Erasm. colloq, peregrin. relig ergo, Polyd. Virg, de invent. rer. li. 2, cap,
23. and lib. 6, cap, 13.
Papists. There the faces of their Gods were made black through the smoke of
their incense whilk was brunt in their worship, as it is exponed by some: so
does the Miss Romans de rit. servand. in celebrat Missae
Papists burn incense to their golden, silver, and copper idols. And to be
short in this, as their Priests had their heads and their beardes shaven:
how like are the Pontif. 20. part 1. Pier, Valor. pro sacerd. barbis
Papists Priests in this? They worship Thom. Aquin. part. 3. quest, 25 art, 2,
and 4. Ant. Possev. bibl. select. lib. 1. cap, 10
also the image of Christ, with the worship of Latria, whilk themselves
confesses to be proper only to God, confessed by one of their own number, a
learned Grego. de Valen. lib. 2. cap. 7.
Jesuit. And therefore he defends that some kind of idolatry is leesome. And
Bellarm. lib. 2. de Eccles. trium. cap. 23.
Bellarmine says, that the worship of Latria is given truly to the image of
the Croce, and the Crucifixe suppose he says, he thinks it not saif to preach
this to the people. They Conrad. Brun de imagine. cap. 7.
style the image of the Crucifixe, with the styles only proper to God, The King
of glory, the Lord that is strong and mighty in battle the Lord of strength.
Siklike, Ibidem
when the image of the Dove at the Pentecoste, is let down in the Temple with
fire and water, then the Priest says, Receive the holy Ghost. So Sacra. cerem.
cecl, 20, lib, 1, tit. 7
do the Popes give the style of the immaculate Lamb, to the images of wax.
The second Act. 4
council of Nice, says of the image of Christ, This is Christ: and the Sessi.
25
council of Trent. And in their Ibid. Sacra,
consecration of their Images of wax, they pray to God the Father, Let these
immaculate Lambs, (speaking of the images) receive that self same virtue
against all the crafts and deceats of the Devil, wherewith that innocent Lamb
his own Son Jesus Christ, delivered from the power of the Devil our first
Parents. And they sing of every one of these wax images, whilk they call their
Agnus Dei, Omne malignum, that is, these wax images breaks and annulles
every sin, as Christ's blood does. And to fill up the heap of their
iniquities, not only do they worship the thing signified by the images, but the
images themselves, as themselves Polydor, Virg. de inven. lib. 6. cap. 13
testifies. And Comment, li, ^
Pius secundus says, that in the Kirk of Saint Mary etc. there is an image of
the Virgin, whilk the people worships mira religione, with a marvelous
Religion, as the giver of rain and fair weather. And Lib, 2, de imag cap, 21
Bellarmine says, that the images of Christ and the Saints, ought to be
worshipped properly and by themselves, as they are considered in themselves,
and not only as they represent another thing. And he Ibide ^ cap. ^8
says that the image it self should be worshipped with that same kind of
worship properly, with the whilk the thing it self represented thereby should
be worshipped. The second general council of Nice is of the same mind. de
reb^^ his^ lib. 5.
Marinaeus Siculus testifies that in Spain in a certain Temple, the Crucifixe
of Christ is adored: and he says, Cuius imaginis inuocato numine: at the
invocation of the Godhead of the whilk image, sundry received their health.
Pope John the 22. formed a prayer to be said to the image of Christ his face,
kept in a sarke whilk they call Veronica, and hes granted ten thousand days
pardon to them, that says this prayer devoutly, Salve sancta facies
redemptoris nostri. etc. In the whilk prayer first these styles are given to
this image, as the face of our redemer, wherein shynes the brightness of the
Godhead, the beauty of the world, the glass of the Saints, wherein the
heavenly spirits desires to look in, the strength of our Christian faith, the
destroyer of heretics, our joy in this life. Secondly, they pray to this
image, to purge us from all the spots of our sins, to join us to the company
of the blessed, to power in light in our hearts by that virtue whilk is given
to it, to increase our merit, and to lead us to heaven. When shall we tumble
our selves out of the gulf of these abominations and idolatries? Blind now
must they be that sees not their doctrine to be the doctrine of the Dragon.
Therefore do I strive with you (says the Lord) and with your posterity. For
go through all the regions of the earth, and see if there be the like
abominations, as is amongst them. For they have changed the glory of God into
unprofitable idols: O ye heavens be astonished at this, and be confounded and
be ye desolat. For two evils have they done: they have forsaken the Lord, and
Christ his son the fountain of living waters, and have made unto themselves
broken pits, whilk can hold no water: that is, they have made unto themselves
false Gods and false Christ's, whilk cannot bring salvation unto them. They have
given his glory unto others, so that of all Idolaters that ever hes been, they
are the greatest. It is no wonder therefore suppose the Lord hes caused it to
be proclaimed by an Angel, Reuelat, 14
That he that worships the beast and his image, shall be tormented in fire and
brimstone, day and night, and the smoke of their torment shall ascend for
evermore, and they shall have no rest. I hope now the second point is
sufficiently cleared, that they have spoiled Christ of his Priest-hoode, and of
that glory and honor that is due unto him.

Now as they have spoiled him of his Priestly office, so have they robbed him
of his Kingly office. His Kingly office stands in two things: The one is, in
the inward operation of his spirit: The other is, in the exercise and
ministry of the word, sacraments, and discipline, vvhilk he hes ordained for
that end. As for the first. He by his Spirit prepares the heart by bringing us
to a sight and sense of our misery, that we may run to him to seek for
mercy: And then he by his Spirit works that living faith, whilk makes us
fully assured of salvation, whilk works by love, and brings forth the
fruits of holiness and righteousness, whereof prayer is one special. All
whilk is taken away by their doctrine. As to the first: No sufficient knowledge
of their misery among them. For first their doctrine is, that we are not dead
in sin, but man hes free will: and then that concupisence after Baptism is
not sin, and that the adoring and worshipping of Images, is not the breaking
of the second command: And that the reward of every sin is not everlasting
death. And that men even without Maluenda in disputat. Ratisb. cum Bucero, and
omnes fere scholastici.
faith may merit the favor of God, and that after they have obtained faith,
they may not only fulfill the law perfitely, but also do more: yea, love God
with a greater love nor he hes commanded, and lead a more strait and heavenly
life nor either the law of God or man prescriues, as Bellarmine says: and that
men may not only satisfy God for their own sins, and merit everlasting
life to themselves, but also may communicate of the superabundance of their
merits unto others.

Now, is it possible that these men who so liftes up themselves, in the
conceate of their own righteousness, can have the knowledge and sense of their
misery? And as for this full assurance of faith, without doubting they call it
Presumption: And as for the fruits of holiness, without the whilk no man can
se God, let their fruits of their vow of single life among their Clergy, and
forbidding of marriage, whilk the Scripture says, is the doctrine of devils,
bear witness: whereby innumerable abominations, murders, adulteries,
whooredomes, hes been committed in their Cloisters, and Nunneries, as their
visitation does testify. And in a fish ponde their was found 6000. bairnes
heads, whilk moved Gregory to revoke that determination of his upon this
reason, that it was better to let them marry, then to give sik occasion of
murder, as appears by an epistle of Hulderick Bishop of Ausburgh written to
Pope Nicolas the first. And Pope Pius the 2. says, that marriage was taken
away for some reasons, but it should be restored again for greater. This is
ascriued unto him. And as for true prayers whilk should be in the Spirit, Rom
8.26. 1. Cor. 14.
with sighs and sobbes that can not be expressed, in a known language, with
words of understanding, that men may say Amen, to them; in steed of this
they teach vain repetition and babbling in prayers, as though God were served
by reckoning up their muttrings, so many Auees, so many Pater nosters upon a
pair of beedes. They teach to pray in a strange language, whilk is a sign
not to them that believe, but to them that believe not, whilk can not edify
nor build up, no not the tower of Babel it self, suppose it be a tower of
confusion. So by their doctrine they have spoiled Christ of hi^ spiritual
government in the hearts of his own by the work of his Spirit.

And as for the outward government by the word, sacraments, and discipline:
they have both spoiled him of it, and also hes deprived the people of God of
these means whereby their faith may be wrought, nourished, and confirmed in
their hearts: For as for the word, beside their corrupting of it what by
Apocrypha, what by Traditions, what by the commandments of the Kirk, what by
their corrupted translation and their false interpretations, they have starued
the people of God for the want of them, in keeping them up in a strange
language, and reading them out so in their assemblies in a strange language: so
that the people may have eyes and not read them; ears and not hear them,
minds and not understand them, because they are kept up in a strange
language. And therefore sundry of our predecessors have been accused and
burnt by them, for reading parcels of them being translated in the vulgar
language. And as for ye sacraments, they have increased the number of the^, by
adding other five unto them: they have impaired them of their virtue, corrupted
them with errors, polluted the^ with ceremonies, and have spoiled the people of
the fruit of them by reason they are ministered in a strange tongue, and they
have turned the Sacrament of the Supper, in a propitiatory sacrifice for the
living and the dead. They have taken away the sign of the Sacrament. They have
abolished the humanity of Christ by their monstrous transubstantiation. They
have taken away the Communion vvhilk should be in the Sacrament, by their
private Masses: and they have spoiled the people of a sweet pledge of their
salvation, in taking away the cupe from them by their lamed communion under one
kind.

And as for the discipline of Christ, they have renuersed it also, the ordour
whereof according to the scripture, is that the Kirk of Christ be governed by
his own Number, 3, 10. Heb 5, 4. Ephesians, 4, 11
ministers, and his own Exodus, 25.30. Matthew, 28, 20
laws, set down in the word, for the 1. Cor, 12, 7, Ephesians, 4, 12
salvation of his people, all whilk they have taken away. And first concerning
the Ministers of Christ, Pastors, Doctors, Elders, Deacons, vvhilk is given
of God for the work of the Ministry and building up of the body of Christ,
they have removed them from the government of the same, and hes set up other
office bearers, as Legates, Cardinals, Primats, Patriarcks, Archbishops, Lord
Bishops, Canones, Persons, Vicares, Archdeacons, Priests, Abbots,
Prouincials, Popes inquisitors, Commissioners, Officers, Procutors, Promoters,
and the innumerable route of their Monks, Friars, Jesuits, whose sects and
ordours as they have been reckoned by some, extends to an hundredth and one,
all different in ceremonies and ordours one from another, all unknown in the
Scriptures of God: Foxe-Monume^t^
And transformed the government of the Kirk of Christ, into an visible
Monarchy and kingdom of the Romans, as it is named by Turrian Sand of the
Popes suprem. Turrian de Eccles. and ordinar. Minist, li, 1, cap, 2
a Jesuit: And the popes having set themselves in the room of Jesus Christ
the King of his Kirk, hes not only tumbled out Christ his officers and set in
their own, of whom they exact an oath of obedience to them: but hes lifted up
themselves above the hyer powers kings and magistrates, as shall be spoken
hereafter. Clayming to themselves both the swords, and authority, to give and
to take kingdoms at their pleasure, exacting an oath of obedience of them,
making them their vassals and tyranizing over the Kirk of God. And as they have
shot out the ministers who should rule the Kirk of God, so have they shot out
his laws whereby it should be ruled. For this new prince the Pope, hes shot
out the canon of the scripture, from being a rule to govern his kingdom; and
in steed thereof hes set down his Canon law, Decrees, Decreetals, and so
forth: whilks decretall epistles Gratian the gatherer of the canon law,
Distinct, 19, i^ Canonicis.
would have reckoned in the number of the canonical Scriptures. And to what
end does he use these laws? Not to further the salvation of Gods people, but
to satisfy his own, (if yet a horse-leiche might be satisfied) and his
courteours insatiable covetousness, ambition, and lust. For this cause he hes
taken in his own hand, the election of Bishops from them to whom it
belonged. For this cause he hes not permitted the causes of the Kirk to be
debaited where they rose, as equity, reason, and peace would he should have
done: But he hes removed them thence to be hard at Rome, what by reserving of
causes to himself, what by appellations, what by exemptions: And for the same
cause hes he committed the feeding and guiding of the flock of Christ to
brute and beastly creatures, in giving the charge and commodities of the Kirk
to whom he would: by presentations, preuentions, reseruations, translations,
provisions, permutations, and commendations. How hes he waste and seized
upon the Kirkes goods, with his pensions and first fruits and
appropriations, Ammian. Marcel lib. 27. Baptist, Man. Fast lib. 5. B^rn. ep. 42
Cone. Basil. ses. 21
so that he hes been cried out upon of riot, pride, extortion, and symonie.

And as for excommunication he has used it not against ye Bernard. ad Eugen.
lib. 1. and 3. Mantuan. syluar. lib. 2
wicked, of whom a sink has flowed at al times in Rome, not against thieves,
of Aeneas Siluius hist. de Asia m^n. cap. 77.
whom Rome is made a den, not against murderers, for whom there is a
Ibidem.
sanctuary in the houses of Cardinals at Rome: not against adulterers, not
against vvhoores, whereof the Pope received sik tribute, as hes been spoken:
but against Emperors, estates, nations, who would not serve him at a beck,
against any man that denied his parish priest a little teinds: against whole
assemblies of the faithful, whom he by most villainous cruelty and
treachery, (as if they had been sheep appointed for the slaughter) hes red
away by fire, by torment, by svvord.

And to end this, what shall I speak of his tyrannical Laws? whereby he hes
oppressed the Kirk of God, as of single life, auricular confession, choice of
meats, apparel and days, of new and strange canonizing of Saints, of
Pilgrimage to the holy land, of the vows of Monks and Nuns, of the estates
and rites of marriage, and of innumerable ceremonies, partly unfruitful,
partly foolish, partly impious. And what shall I speak of his dispensations
against the old Testament, against the Epistles of Paul, against all right and
equity? That a King Henry the 8
brother may marry his own brothers wife, and an Philip King of Spain.
uncle his sisters daughter. And Pope Martine the fifth approved the marriage
of one with his sister german. That Kirk offices, and livings, may be given
to Bernard. epist. 4^. and de consid. ad Eugen. lib. 1. and 3.
boys, to Simonicall merchants, and unlearned persons: that Did. 70. cap.
Sacerdotum. cap. de mult. de Praeb.
one may have plurality of benefices: that he Cap. Relatum de cler. cap licet
canon de elect. in Sexto.
who hes the benefice needs not to attend the office: that Cone. Constanse^^i.
19
promise may be broken with God and man: that subjects may be discharged of
their oath to their Princes. And last of all, what shall I speak of his
Indulgences and Pardons? in granting so many hundredth and thousand years
pardon of their sins to them that will devoutly say their idolatrous prayers.
Some giving three hundredth days pardon, as Pope Celestine: some seven
hundredth years pardon, as Pope Boniface: some ten thousand years pardon, as
Boniface the 6. some thirty two thousand, seven hundredth, and fifty five
years pardon: Portuus book of Sarum Prented anno. 1520.
and Sixtus the fourth hes doubled the time of this foresaid pardon: and some
ten hundredth thousand years pardon for deadly sins, as Pope John 22. Heir is
pardon for all sins, so that there be money. And as the Revelation says,
Revel 18. Baptist. mantua. calam. temp. l, 3.
The very souls of men are made merchandise of. And one of their own friends
says, Venalia Romae Templa, sacerdotes, altaria sacra, coronae, ignes, thura,
preces, coelum est venale, Deusque. That is, Kirks, Priests, altars, crowns,
fire, incense, prayers, heaven and God ar to be sold in the Kirk of Rome. To
conclude this then: he is the Antichrist, whose doctrine and religion,
ministry and discipline, is directly contrary to the doctrine, religion,
ministry and discipline of Jesus Christ. Again, he is the undoubted
Antichrist, whose doctrine spoils Jesus Christ of the truth of his humanity,
of his Prophetical, Kingly, and Priestly offices, and sets himself and others
up in the same offices: and whose doctrine spoils him of the glory whilk is
due to him only, for our creation and redemption, and gives it to creatures:
and last of all, he whose doctrine spoils men of their salvation, must be that
undoubted Antichrist. But the doctrine and religion of the Popes of Rome and
his Clergy (as hes been proved sufficiently) are sik: Therefore they are that
undoubted Antichrist, whilk the Scripture foretold was to come. And this for
the second mark.

The third mark of the Antichrist, is that he exalts himself above all that is
called God, and is worshipped: that is, above all powers and majesty's, both
heavenly and earthly. He says not, Above God himself, but above all that is
called God: that is, above all powers heavenly and earthly, as hes been said.
He then is the undoubted Antichrist whom the Scripture foretold should come,
who lifts up himself above al powers as well heavenly, as earthly: (this you
cannot deny because the Scripture so affirms) But the Popes of Rome hes lifted
up themselves above al powers, both heavenly and earthly: the whilk if it shall
be proved, then of necessity it must follow, that the Popes of Rome are that
undoubted Antichrist Now for proof heirof, we shall set none other upon their
assise, to file or cleanse them in this point, but their own canon Law, their
own writers, their own Bishops, and them selves. Anto. sum. part. 3 tit. 22.
c. 5.
Antoninus archbishop of Florence says, That his power is greater, then any
created power: and that it extends the self to heavenly, earthly, and infernal
things. Of whom, says he, that is true whilk is spoken of Christ in the 8.
Psalm, Thou hes subjected all things under his feet, that are in heaven, in
earth, or in hell, applying it to the Pope. What needs more? this is
conviction enough. But yet we will proceed and see how far he hes lifted up
himself above all these. As for them in the earth, there are two special
powers, the temporal power and the spiritual power. He claims superiority
over both, as is manifest by their own doctrine. The Anron. in sum part. 3.
tit 22 c. 5.
Pope is over the world in stead of Christ. I am Boniface 8
Caesar, all the power in the heaven and in the earth is mine. We Extra de
maiorit Vnam sanct,
affirm and defines that it stands all creatures upon the necessity of their
salvation to be subject to the Pope. The Did. 40, cap Si Papa, Glos, extra,
vacant, ad Apost
Pope should judge all, and be judged of none, unless he be found an heretic.
And suppose he should draw after him innumerable souls by heaps unto Hell,
yet no mortal man should be so bold as to say to him, Lord why do thou
this? How far he hes lifted up himself above the temporal power, Kings,
Princes, and Emperors, let both their doctrine, and practice bear witness.
The E monument. ^oxii
Pope is as the Sun to rule over the day: that is, the spiritualty: and the
Emperor as the Moon, to rule over the night: that is, the temporalty. And as
the earth is seven times greater then the Moon, and the Son eight times
greater then the earth; so is the Pope forty seven times greater then the
Emperor. (p) And as the Emperor or Roman Princes takes of me their approbation
unction, and imperial crown: so they must not disdain to submit their heads
to me, Pope Clement 5. de iureiurando.
and to swear to me their oath of allegiance and fidelity. The Sext, de
cretal. de sentent. and reiudicata, cap, ad Apost. I^em Glossa
Pope may depose Kings from their kingdoms, and absolve their subjects from
their oath of allegiance, and interdyte their kingdoms, and set up others in
their room. Achilderik King of France, was deposed; and Pipine set in his
room. Pope Zachary. Causa 15. quest. 6. cap. Alius. Henry the fourth, Henry
the fifth, Frederick the first, Otho the fourth, Frederick the second, and
Conradus his son all Emperors, were excommunicate and deposed by the Popes.
Iustinianus, Otho the first, Frederick the first, Henry the fifth, Sigismundus,
Carolus the fifth, all Emperors and Monarchs, admitted by the Popes of Rome
to kiss their feet. And if this had been their practice only, and not their
doctrine: this Pride and arrogance might have been imputed to the persons, and
not to the seat. But his Author ceremoniarum, lib. ^. and 3.
doctrine is so: The Pope of Rome does reverence to no mortal man. All men of
whatsomeuer dignity or pre-eminence they are of, so soon as they come in the
presence of the Pope, ought to kneill thrice down, and to kiss his feet. The
Emperor as soon as he sees the Pope with his bare head, kneiling to the
ground, he worships him, and kisses his feet The Emperor holds the
stirroppe, whill the Pope leap on. So did Constantine the great, says their
Did, 96, cap Constant.
canon law. The Emperor at the banquet holds the water to the Pope to wash his
hands, and brings the first dishe to the Popes Table. And if the Pope be to be
carried in a chair, he, or the King, if they be present, ought to carry the
Pope in the chair on their shoulders. So this is clear both by their
doctrine, and practice, how far they have lifted up themselves above the
Kings and Monarchs of the world: so that Pope did, 96, ca, duo
Gelasius says, that Emperors are more inferior to Popes then lead is to
gold.

Their superiority over the spiritual power of the Kirk of Christ, hes been
shown in part before. But for the further proof of it, they say Pope Marcel,
did, 17, cap, Synodum
That the Pope is above all general Councels, and that they take their force
and confirmation only by him. And Bellarm, de Primat, Pap.
that he is supreme Judge in all controversy of Religion, whose judgment is
also infallible. And Symmachus Pope 99, 3, Aliorum. Pope Innocentius 9. q, 3,
cap Nemo
where God hes ordained all causes amongst men to be judged by men, he hes only
reserved the Pope to be judged by himself, and that he cannot be judged by any,
neither of Kings, nor of the Emperor, nor of the whole Clergy, nor of the
people. And that Anastas, q, 3. c^ Antiquis, Item ^1, q. 3, ca, Quam vis, and
cap Quatuor, did, 19, cap, Sic omnes, 9, q, 3, cap, Patet Pope Innocem 2, art,
17, q, 4, cap Si quis. did, 19 ca, In memoriam. Sext, decret, tit 7, de
renunciatione cap Quoniam
he is Judge over all the Kirks: and that without a Council, both to absolve
and condemn: and none to iugde of his judgment: and all to appeal to him, and
none from him, whose judgment must stand, as given out of heaven by the mouth
of Peter himself, whilk no man must break or retraite, no man must dispute or
doubt of. And that Bellarmin, de Pont, lib, 4, cap, ^ and cap, 1^
in omni re dubia, that is, in all controversies of Religion, be must
obediently of all the faithful be heard, whether he can err or not And that
be may make laws to bind the consciences of men, and that he Anto. fum. 3.
part. tit. 22. c. 5.
may creat new Religions.

His power over them that are in Purgatory and Hell. Ibidem.
According to his absolute jurisdiction, he hes power to spoil al Purgatory,
by the communication of his Indulgences and Pardons, except only them who hes
only the Baptism of the Spirit, and infants who ar in Limbo Patrum, and these
Anton. tit. 22. c. 5.
who hes not friends to do for them The Pope may absolve from an infinite
pain: to wit, from the pain of Hell, as Gregory did who by his prayer
absolved the soul of Traian from the infinite pain of Hell. The Clem. 6. in
bulla and Anton. ibidem cap. 6
Pope hes as great power in Purgatory and Hell, as that he may deliver as many
souls as are tormented there, by his Pardons, and with all speed place them
in heaven, and seats of the blissed, as he pleases.

4. His power over heaven and all the powers therein.

All Boniface the 8
power in heaven and earth is given to me says Boniface the 8. The Clemen. 6.
Bulla Troilus in tract de canonizatione sanct.
Pope hes so great power in heaven, that he may canonize any dead man, and
place him among the Gods: and that against the judgment of his Bishops and
all his Cardinals. He Clem, 6. in Bulla
commands the Angels to take souls out of Purgatory, and to carry them to
heaven. His Baldus
power is greater nor the power of all the Saints. God Anton. ibidem. tit 22.
cap. 5
hes subjected the Angels in heaven to the Pope, and he is greater nor they in
four respects: and no less honor is due unto the Pope, nor to the Angels:
and then greater (says he) for the Pope receaues from the faithful
adoration, and kissing of his feet, whilk the Angel would not permit to be
done to him by John. What needs more now for the proof of this mark? Does
not he lift up him self above all that is called God, who claims power over
heaven and earth and hell? This they can not deny: But I assume, their own
Clarks, Doctors, Popes, and Bullets testify this, whilk they can not choose
but confess also: Therefore of necessity the Popes of Rome hes exalted
themselves above all that is called God, and therefore they are that undoubted
Antichrist whilk was to come, and now is come.

And as they have exalted themselves above all heavenly powers, so have they
matched them selves with Jesus Christ: for these things are only proper to
Jesus Christ, To have all power given him, to have all things subject to him
under heaven, to be greater nor all the Angels, to receive that worship whilk
the Angels refuses, to command the Angels, to make laws to bind the
consciences of men, to create and institute new religions. And yet the Pope hes
arrogated all these things to himself, as hes been proved: Therefore he is
that undoubted Antichrist: for he that makes himself equal to the Son of God,
lifts up himself above all that is called God: (this can not be denied,) But
the Popes of Rome have done so, in challenging to them selves these things
whilk are only proper to the Son of God: therefore they must be the
Antichrist. Further, these things are proper to Jesus Christ only, to the
head, the spouse, Epa. 5.23. Col. 1.8. Ephesians. 1, 21.22.23 Isa 28.16. Isa. 8 14.
Matthew. 21.42 Malach. 3.20. Matthew. 28.18 2. Pet. 5.4. Col. 2.3
and foundation of his Kirk, to be that corner stone, that precious stone, and
that proved stone, to be that rock of offense, to be the son that gives
light to 2his Kirk, to be the Prince of Pastors, and to have all treasures of
wisdom and understanding hid in him, and to have all power in heaven and
earth given him, and to have the fullness of power. But all these things the
Popes of Rome hes arrogated to themselves, as is manifest by these places
quoted in the margent. Bellarmine in prefat. de sum. pontif. lib. 1. ceremo.
tit 7. de maiorita. cap. Vnam sanctam de constitut. cap. licet. In sexto. de
translat. cap. Quanto. In glossa. Yea, he hes not left so much unto Christ as
his style, but it is ascriued to him: For de consider. ad Eugenium
Bernard writting to him says, Tu es unction Christus, that is. Thou art
Christ, etc. yea he hes claimed a greater power to himself, nor ever we read
that Jesus Christ the Prince of glory and the Lord of life used, as to Clemen.
6. Papae Bulla
deliver damned souls out of hell, and make the^ Saints in heaven, and that
as many as pleases him. So not only hes he made himself equal in authority,
in office, in styles with the Prince of glory the Lord Jesus: but also hes
lifted up him self above him: And that there may be nothing wanting to make it
manifest that he is this Antichrist, as though it had been too little to him,
to have lifted up him self above all powers in heaven, in earth, and in hell:
and to have matched him self with the eternal Son of God, both in works,
styles, and offices and to arrogate a greater power nor ever he did exercise.
He hes matched him self with the majesty of the Godhead, claiming to himself
these things whilk are only proper to the Godhead, De translat. cap. Quanto
as the Papists will is for reasone: He hes a heavenly at bitriment, he changes
the nature of things: Of nothing he makes something: He may depose and set up
in kingdoms whom he will: Panormitan de elect, cap, licet ab,
He hes an absolute jurisdiction that no man may say to him, wherefore does
thou this: He may liberare ex toto sicut ipse deus, that is, absolve a man from
the whole as GOD may do: Yea that he may do all that God may do except sin,
the key not erring. All whilk things are only proper to the Majesty of God.
And as he hes matched himself with the majesty of God himself in his
judgment, will, and power: so does he claim to him the self same worship
and adoration whilk is only proper to God: This worship is only proper to God
To fall down before his feet and to adore him, and therefore Satan craved it
of Christ, and he refused to give him it: And John would have given it to the
Angel, but the Angel refused it. Wherefore did Christ refuse to give it, and
the Angel refuse to receive it, Revel, 22, 8, 9 Math 4, 9, 10
but because it was written? The Lord thy God thau shall worship, and him only
shall thou serve? But that worship whilk the devil craved to be given to him,
and whilk the Angel refused as proper only to God, that does the Pope claim
to him and receive from others, as his own Archbishops and canon law, and men
of his own religion do testify. Antoninus says, he receaues adorations,
prostrations that is worship and falling down before his feet, 3, part, sum,
ti, 22, cap, 5. Printed Lugduni 1516 De donat, Constant, p4g. 1 ij 1 Lib, 3,
inst. Romae
whilk (says he) the Angel refused to receive of John. Steuchus says,
Constantine the Empetour worshipped the Pope as God, and gave unto him divine
honors, and worshipped him as the lively image of Christ. And Blondus says,
that all the princes of the world worships the pope, vt summum Deum, as the
most high God. Praefat, in institut
And Johannes Faeber says, the pope calls himself by words, the seruand of
seruands, but yet he permits himself to be worshipped whilk the Angel in the
Revelation refused. And Friar Mantua says, Cuius vestigia adorat Caesar; et
aurato vestiti murice regis. Whose feet (meaning the Popes) or footestepes
Caesar and the Kings of the earth adores or worshipes. And yet least any
should doubt whether he be the Antichrist or not, he is not only made equal
with the Majesty of God, in power, arbitriment, and adoration, but also the
very godhead it self, and the very style of the Majesty of God is ascriued
to him. Au^ntinus says, Lib 7.
the Popes of Rom: earnestly desires domination et Diuinitatem, divinity or
Godhead. And de electione: It is said: Cap, Fundamento in Sexto
That he is tak n up in the fellowship of the invisible trinity. And Baldus
says: The Pope is a God in the earth: And the common voice of the Canonists is
Dominus Deus noster papa, that is, the Lord our god the Pope. And he is called
by his Doctors Optimus Maximus, Canonist, extra, Johan, 22, cap Cum inter in
glossa Stapleton in praefat, in prine, fid, doct, Vict, in tom. 4, Hieron,
praefat, did, 96, cap, Satis euidenter
most good in grace, most great in power. And Auentinus says that it is
written in his forehead, Deus sum, I am God. And Gomesius, says the Pope est
quoddam numen; a certain God-heade showing himself to be a visible God in the
earth. And in the council of Lateran, one says to the Pope, Tu es alter Deus
in terris: Thou art ane other God upon the earth. And the Tridentine chapter
calls him, Terrenu^ Deum an earthly God: And his canon Law says, It is
manifest that the Pope was called God by Constantine.

What needs more? He must be blinded by God that sees not the Popes to have
lifted up themselves above all that is called God and is worshipped. But yet I
say further. He hes lifted up himself above the majesty of God: First in
making yt to be Gods word, yt is not Gods word, in decreeing the Apocrypha to
be canonical Scripture. distinct, 19, in Canonicis
And his canon Law reckons in the decretall Epistles among the canonical
Scriptures of God. Now what is this but to prefer his authority to the
authority of God? He denies forgiveness to them that breaks his law, but he
selles the break of Gods law for money. It is certain that there is no
redemption out of Hell: and yet the Popes of Rome claims that authority to
deliver souls out of Hell, and to make them Saints in heaven. It is
impossible to God ex iniustitia facere iustitiam, 2, Timoth, 2, ^3 Heb, 6, 18
to make wrong to be right, because the Scripture says, He cannot deny
himself, and he cannot lie. But the Popes de translat, cap Quanto in glossa de
conces, Praebend, cap, Proposuit, 16, q, Quicunque in glossa 15, q, 6,
authorit, in glossa, did. 32, Lecto
Canonists says, that he may ex iniustitia facere iustitiam, of wrong make
right. His Canonistes also says, That the Pope may dispense supra ius de iure,
above right. And that he may dispense against the law of nature, against the
law of God, against the old Testament, against the Apostles, and that he may
Vt citatura Iuello page 59, defens, apolog. Fox page, 785 and
dispense against all the precepts of the old and new Testament. They say, he
may dispense against the degrees forbidden in the Law of God. And that he may
according to his absolute power dissolve the bond of marriage, upon the consent
of both the parties, without any lawful cause. And that he may dispense with
oaths and promises made either to God or men. And some says, that he may
dispense that one may have more wives then one at once, in some cases. Now what
is this else, but to exalt himself above the Lord? And in a Conell. Later. sub
Leone ses. 10
sermon in the council of Lateran, it is there spoken of him by one of his
own Bishops, That all power in heaven and earth is given to the Pope. And that
whilk is more, That in him is omnis potestas supra omnes potestates caeli and
terrae: all power above all powers, both of heaven and earth. And Auentinus
says, that they desire to be feared more then God. To conclude this then, He
that hes exalted himself above al powers in heaven, earth, and hell: he that
hes equalled himself with the son of God, the Prince of glory, and with the
majesty of God in styles, authority, office, and power: and he who hes lifted
up himself above the Lord Jesus, and above the majesty of God; he must be
that undoubted Antichrist, whilk the Apostle Paul hes descriued: But the Popes
of Rome hes done so, both by their practice, and by their doctrine, as hes been
proved by their own testimonies: Therefore they are that undoubted Antichrist
who was to come. This for the third mark.

So Jerome ad Gelasium, and Chrysostom. upon that place, and The odoret, and
Thom. of Aquine a Papist, expones this place, and Aug. de ciui. Dei, li. 20
cap. 19. expones this temple to be the Kirk of God, wherein the Antichrist shall
sit.
The fourth mark of the Antichrist, set down by the Apostle is, That he sits
in the Temple of God, as God. That is, in an eminent and high place in the Kirk
of God. For least men should think that the Antichrist should be an open enemy
to God, the Apostle says, he shall sit in the Temple of God, that is, in the
Kirk of God: as it is taken, 1. Corinthians. 6. where the Saints in Corinth are
called the temple of God. So the Antichrist is foretold to be a household
enemy, and not a foreign foe: and he shall withstand Christ not openly, but
covertly. And though he be a deadly enemy to Christ, yet shall he pretend that
he is in the Temple of God: that is, a member of the Kirk: and that he hes a
throne, that is, a high dominion within Gods Kirk. Reave. 13.11
And therefore in the Revelation he is called a beast whilk hes two horns like
the Lamb: that is, who in outward show is like the Lamb, pretending his
power and authority. And as Primasius says exponing that same place, Those
whom he seduces, he seduces them by hypocrisy of a dissimulate truth: for he
says, he were not like the Lamb, if he spak openly as the Dragon. And
Augustine says, Tract. 3 in epist Ioannis
Let us not take tent to the tongue, but to the deeds: let the tongue rest,
and ask the life. Whereby it appears, that they also are Antichrists, who
denies Jesus Christ in their life. And therefore (alluding to Judas) he is
called the son of perdition, who not by open warfare should oppugn Christ,
but by a kiss, as it were, should betray him. And therefore he is descriued
also under the form of a woman, a harlote: Revelation. 17 2. These. 2.
whereby is signified that he shall not be an open enemy in profession, but
secreit and dissimulate. And therefore the Cupe wherein she reaches out her
abomination, is discriued to be of gold: that is, having a show of
godliness. And his unrighteousness, that is, his doctrine, is called
deceaueable, because of the show of truth that it hes. And his iniquity is
called a mystery: that is, not a plain and open impiety, but secreit: so
colored with shows of truth and godliness, that every one cannot perceive
it. And yet for all this hypocrisy of his, for all this dissimulation and show
of godliness, he shall speak like the Dragon: that is, his doctrine shall be
the doctrine of Devils. Apoc. 13.
His drink shall be abomination and fornication: that is, abominable
idolatry. Now to whom can this aggree? and in whom hes this been fulfilled,
except only in the Popes and Bishops of Rome. For does he not call himself,
the Vicare of Christ, the head of the Kirk and these that obeyes him only the
true Kirk, and true Catholics? Who hes horns like the Lamb, and yet speaks
like the Dragon, but he? That is, Oraculo vocis mundi moderaris habenas, and
merito in terris crederis esse Deus: that is, by the oracle of thy voice, thou
reul^ the world, and worthily is thou believed in the earth to be God. This
inscription was written in Rome to Pope Sixtus the 4.
who styles themselves the seruande of seruands, the Vicare of Christ, the head
of the Kirk, etc. but they? and yet for all this, who hes ever lived, taught,
or spoken so blasphemously as they? In show of holiness most vaunting and yet
for all this, of all the creatures under heaven, the most monstrous. Of all
idolaters, under the show and pretense of Religion, the vilest and most
abominable: and of all creatures in the earth, they have lifted up themselves
farthest above God, and that under the pretense of humility. And therefore the
Scripture says, that the Antichrist shall sit in the Temple of God, not as a
minister teaching and preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom, in season, and out
of season: but as God; that is, claiming to himself these things that are
proper and peculiar to God. The whilk the Popes of Rome hes done, as hes been
proved before. So to conclude this: He must be the undoubted Antichrist, who
suppose he hes lifted up himself, above all that is called God; yet he sits in
the Temple of God, as God: who hes two horns like the Lamb, and yet speaks
like the Dragon: whose abominations are drunken out of a golden Cupe; whose
doctrine is deceivable: and a mystery that is, who under the pretense of
Christ, overthrows Christ: But so it is, the Popes of Rome are sik, (as hes
been proved:) Therefore the Popes of Rome are the undoubted Antichrist. This
for the 4. mark.

The fifth mark of the Antichrist, as he is descriued by the Apostle is in
these words: Tertul. de resurrect. cap. 24 Jerome ad Gelasium. Chrisostom upon
this same place, and so also Ambrose upon this place, and Aug. de ciuit Dei
lib. 20 cap. 29. expones it of the Roman impire.
Ye know (says the Apostle) what withholdeth: namely, that he might be
revealed in his own time. This Tertullian, Jerome and Chrysostom understands
of of the Roman impire: the whilk as long as it flourished, and was in the
full strength, the Antichrist could not climb up to this his full hight and
pre-eminence. So that it behooved that empire first to be translated, and piece
and piece diminished before the Antichriste could come up to his hight, for
that stayed him. Now it is manifest out of the 17. chapter of the Reuel^t.
that Rome should be the seat of the Antichrist: And Bellarmine and the Rhemists
does not deny it: and Rome was the seat of the Roman empire before. So then it
behooued the empire to translate his seat from Rome, that Rome whilk was first
the seat of the empire, might be the seat of the Antichrist. Now the issue and
event, is a sure and clear interpretation of this Prophecy: For Constantine
the Emperor of Rome, translated his seat from Rome, to Byzantium called
Constantinople in Greece. And piece and piece that empire of the Greek
Emperor began to decay. And was translated from the Greeks to the Frenchmen
by the Popes: and then from them to the Germans, by the Popes also. So that
both Rome and a great part of Italy, and at the last a great part of the
Empire is fallen in the Popes hand. So that now he vaunts himself to be
Monarch of the whole world, and all Kings and Princes gave him their oath of
allengeance: and the Emperors and Kings held their empires and kingdoms of
him, and are but his vassals. (as their Canon Law says) So that by the taking
away of the Roman empire, the Popes did then climb up to their supremacy, and
make themselves manifest, that they were the Antichrist. And so this does also
aggree to the Pope of Rome, and to none other. He is the Antichrist, whose
climbing up was let by the Roman empire, and who is builded up upon the
ruins of the same: But the Papacy is sik: therefore the Papacy is that
Antichristian kingdom.

It is said sextly, That Kingdom is that apostasy and antichristian
monarchy, whose foundation was beginning to be laid in the Apostles days,
whilk should be first consumed by the word of God and alluterlie abolished by
the brightness of his coming, but the Papacy is sik, therefore it is that
antichristian kingdom Mat. 18.1.2.3.4. and ^0.25, 26.27 Mar, 10.41. Luc 22.25.
2, Cor. 1. 24.1. Pet. 3.2.3
that this mystery began to work in the days of the Apostles: that is, the
foundation of that apostasy was begun to be laid in these days and that he
shall continue til the Lords coming: for he shall not be abolished but by the
brightness of his coming, suppose he shall be first consumed with the sword
of his mouth: that is, discovered, and sore beaten by the Lords word. All whilk
aggrees unto Papistrie, for the foundations of it was soon laid, both of that
Hierachie and supremacy of the Pope, and also of his damnable and erroneus
doctrine. For that superiority of the ministry one over another, of Bishops
over Pastors forbidden by Jesus Christ, soon crape in, whilk was the
foundation or rather stairs, by the whilk the Pope clambe up to his Popedom
and supremacy: and the old condemned heresies whilk sprang up in the
primitive Kirk, many of them were the foundation of these damnable doctrines,
whilk the Popes brought in afterward, as is proved in the end of the first
part.

And as to his consuming by the Lord his mouth, the Lord hes accomplished that
alredie in some measure, and shall assuredly fulfill it daily more and more:
For since the time of the burning of John Hus and Jerome of Prage, About the
^eare of God 1415
and since the time the Lord stirred up Martine Luther, and sundry others his
faithful seruands to preach the gospel of Christ, whilk was as it were buried
in the darkness of Papistrie, the supremacy of the Pope hes taken sik a
daily consumption, that many of the Kingdoms of Europe now hes forsaken her,
and the Lord hes put in their hearts to hate her: But yet we know the dregs of
it shall not be abolished alluterlie, whill the bright coming of the Son of
God.

It follows seauenthly, the manner how his kingdom and tyranny shall be
promoued, vpholden, and established: To wit, By the effectual working of
Satan with all power and signs and lying wonders, and with all
deceaueablenesse of unrighteousness amongst them that perishes: Whilk the
Apostle calls strong delusions. And with this, that of the Revel. cap. 13. (in
the description of the second beast, whereby it is meaned the Antichristian
kingdom) does aggree that he did great wonders, and deceived them that dwelt
upon the earth, by the signs whilk was permitted him to do. Now certainly
nothing can be spoken more aptly of the Popes kingdom nor this: Fot unless
the Pope had had an effectual power, strong and devilish also, by signs and
lying wonders: and unless his unrighteousness, that is, his false doctrine
had been exceeding deceaueable: that is, covered with a fair color of
godliness: and unless his delusions had been strong, his kingdom had never
been so far enlarged, and so firmly established, as we see it hes been:
and his damnable doctrine and errors would never have deceived so many nations
as they have done. For what is more common and usual in their mouths nor
miracles? What is it they vaunte so much of, as of their miracles? So that they
make it an infallible mark of the Kirk. And how I pray you hes a great part
of their errors and superstitions, as the praying to Saints, and worshipping
of Images, and pilgrimages, and other of their superstitions and idolatries, as
purgatory, the real presence, their monstrous transubstantiation etc. how, I
say, have they been so confirmed and so rooted in the hearts of ignorant
people, but by their lying wonders and miracles, whilk they feign was done?
Whereof their golden legend are full, and sundry yet lives who hes been eye
witnesses of the falset of their miracles. I will only set down for example,
some of the false miracles of two Nuns heir: the one of Magdalena de la cruz,
Abbess of the monastery of the Franciscan Nuns, who was condemned by the
Inquisitours of Cordoua for her enormous offenses and Covenant whilk she made
with the devil, as they say in their sentence against her: she by the aid of
the Devil with whom she made a covenant when she was nine year old, became a
singular hypocrite, and by his help wrought many miracles, as that she
appeared unto Mariners in a storm being inuocated, and so the storm calmed:
that she burned in flames like Seraphims, and was ravished in the spirit, and
hard wonders whilk mortal man could not utter: (In this she was made another
Saint Paul) that she was lifted up in the air, and the Sacrament went visibly
out of the hand of the Priest that said Mass, through the air, and entered
into her mouth: And when the Sacrament went by she being in a garden, the wall
of the garden opened the self, and then she worshipped it: Sik was the opinion
of her holiness that many Ladies of Spain and the Empress, seeing themselves at
point of childbirth, sent their mantels wherein the creature should be
wrapped, that she should bless them. She gave to her beloved friends drops
of her monstrous blood, and made them believe it was the blood of Christ, she
was condemned as a witch by the inquisitors of Spain about the year of God
1540. The other of a Dominican Nun Priores de la Anunciada of Lisbon in
Portugale, about the 1586. year of God, that she had deserved to have Christ
visible for her husband, that he appeared to her often times, and talked with
her, as one friend would talk with another: that she had the impression of
Christ's 5. wounds upon her. And as the history records other infinite
miracles did she. So that many became Nuns through the opinion whilk was
conceived of her holiness and miracles. This story is written in french by one
Steven de Lusignan a Dominican Friar, and dedicated to the Queen of France,
with this title, the great miracles and most holy wonders whilk this present
year 1586. has happened to the right reverend mother Priores of the
monastery etc. in Lisbon, approved by Friar Jews of Granada and by other
persons worthy of credit in Paris, printed by John Bessant 1586. He alleges
three letters sent from persons of great credit for his warrant: But she was
discovered, and confessed her hypocrisy: and that she painted the wounds on
her hands, and drew blood on her side, and fained all the rest, that she might
be esteemed holy, and therefore was condemned by the Archbishops of Lisbon and
Brage, the Bishop of Guardia, the Inquisitors, and sundry others in the end of
the 1588. year, as it is to be seen in a book printed at Civil in Spain
1589. Let these examples suffice to prove this mark that by lying wonders they
have established their damnable doctrine. So that certainly their is no one
thing that does more confirm this, that their Popes is the Antichrist, and
their kingdom antichristian: nor the effectual working of Satan by lying
wonders, whereby their devilish doctrine hes been promoued and established.
And what seek we further? Is it not manifest by their own histories that
their own Popes to the number of 20. or more hes wrought by the effectual
working of Satan? So then to conclude this point: If the Apostle Paul be a
true Prophet, whilk I trust no man will call in question, and if he be the
true Antichrist to whom al these marks does aggree: that is, who is the man
of sin, and son of perdition; who hes lifted up himself above all that is
called God, or that is worshipped etc. whilk can not be denied: then of
necessity it must follow that the Popes of Rome are the self same Antichrist
whilk was foretold to come, because they bear all these marks of that
Antichrist whom the Apostle descriues, and no other.

And if we will come to the Revelation, where the Antichrist is most clearly
foretold: The marks of the Antichrist, as they are set down in the Revel.
chap. 13. aggrees to the Popes of Rome.
What is there in that Reuela. spoken of the Antichrist whilk is not fulfilled
in the Popes of Rome. In the 13. of the Revelation mention is made of two
beasts, by the first is signified the Roman Empire by the whilk the Saints
of god were persecuted the first 300. years: by the other is signified the
Kingdom of the Antichrist, whilk rose up immediately after the diminishing and
destruction of the Roman Empire: the whilk John calls another beast,
distinguishing it from the former: whilk he discriues first from his outward
form and shape, that he hes two horns like the lamb, but speaks like the
dragon, whilk hes been accomplished in the Popes of Rome, as I have showed
before. The second from his works that he does. First, that he did all that
the first beast could do before him. Secondly, that he shall cause all to
worshipe the first beast, whose deadlye vvound was healed: Thirdly, that he
should deceive them vvhilk dwell upon the earth by the wonders and signs
vvhilk was permitted to him to do. Fourthlye, that he should restore the
image of the first beast. Fifthly, that he should suffer none to buy or
sell but sik as received his marks on their forehead and hands. And the last
thing from the whilk that Antichristian kingdom (whilk is represented by the
2. beast) is descriued, is the number of his name All the vvhilk are so clearly
accomplished in that papisticall Kingdom, these many hundredth years, that he
must be blinded of God, that sees not that the Popes are the Antichrist, and
their Kingdom Antichristian.

As to the first. Who hes exercised all the power of the former Emperors of
Rome but they? Have not they claimed to themselves the Monarchy of the whole
world? Ths authority of both the swords? Hes not Emperors and Kings sworn
their oath of allegiance and fidelity unto them? taking their unction,
consecration and crowns of the^? And paid tribute unto them? Have they not
kissed their feet? holden the stirrops? Led their bridles? Set the^ on their
horse? Have not the Popes of Rome excommunicated Emperors and Kings? Deposed
them from their Kingdoms? Stirred up their subjects against them? Set up
others in their places? and finally what outward power or tyranny did ever
the Roman Emperors exercise over Kingdoms and nations? Yea what cruelty,
tyranny, avarice, blasphemy against God and his Saints, did they ever
exercise, vvhilk the Popes of Rome hes not done? Yea, and hes overcome them in
all these things The vvhilk are so clear and manifest, and that by their own
practices, that they can not be denied. Does he not affirm in his canon law
that Constantine gave the Pope all the kingdoms in the earth? Did. 9.6. cap.
Constantius. c Venerabilem de electio-Steuchus de donatione Constantini. Lib.
3. instan. Romae.
And that all Kings reigns by the Pope? And that he transferres the Empire
from nation to nation, and gives them to whom he will? And that all Kings are
but the Popes vassals? And therefore says Blondus, Now the Princes of the
world adores and worshipes the Pope as perpetual Dictator, not Caesar's
successor, but Peter his successor, and the foresaid Emperors vicar. Yea,
says he, all Europe sends greater, or at the least as great tribute to Rome,
as they did in the former times: (to wit, to the Roman Empire. Ser. 1. de
conuersione.
) And Bernard says, they are the first in the persecution (speaking to the
Kirk) whilk appears to love the primacie in the Kirk, and to be the princes
thereof. As to the second, who is he that hes caused all to worship the first
beast: that is, hes brought again that tyrannous cruelty and dominion over
the poor Kirk of God, in setting up idolatry and abolishing the true worship
of God, whilk the Ethnic Emperors did, but the Popes of Rome? For was not the
Emperor of the East excommunicate, because he would not suffer images in the
temples? Have not they filled the world with their Idolatry as hes been
proved? Who hes made war with the Saints and oppressed them in all the parts
where there dominion might reach, but they? France, Germany, England, Scotland,
the Low countries, and al Europe bears witness unto this. As to the third,
who by lying wonders hes deceived the world, but they? And as to the fourth,
who hes healed the deadly wound of the first beast, in setting up an impire
heir in the West in the person of Charles the great, whilk was more nor 300.
years so deadlye wounded through the incursion of other nations, that there
was no impire in the West: Who (I say) did all this, but the Popes of Rome?
giving unto them the style or bare name, but taking by little and little ye
substance of the whole impire to themselves, so that Theodorik a Niem says the
Roman empire is so little now in ^lmany, Lib. 3. cap. 43.
that their is some Bishops or Archbishops that will spend twice as much, as
they will do of all the lands that is under their subjection: And some princes
hes more land nor the Emperor hes. And if ye will look to Rome (says he)
and Italy, it was once the seat of the Empire, but now the Emperor hes
nothing of it but the style. As to the fifth. Who is he who hes caused make
the image of the beast, and given a spirit unto it that it should speak: That
is, who hes set up a very image of the Roman monarchy and hierarchy, in the
whole frame of their government in the Kirk of God, but the Popes of Rome? So
that the whole frame of their government and hierarchy, is a lively pattern
and image of the Roman impire. For as in the Roman impire, there was an
Empeperour whom all did worship as God: unto whom there was joined a Senate,
who was next in authority to him: so is the frame of the government of the
Papistical kingdom There is a Monarch the Pope; whom all are compelled, when
they come in his sight, to worship as an earthly God, to whose sentence al must
stand to, who judges all, but can be judged of none, who hes joined with him a
Senate of cardinals, who are next him in authority. Secondly, as in the Roman
monarchy, the Emperor took upon him not only the highest Kingly authority
in all matters civil, but also the Priestly authority, and power over
religion: and not that only, but also to be Tribunes over the people, who had
the power of forbidding and annulling of all decrees made by other Magistrates.
Even so the Popes of Rome hes usurped all these three. First, the highest
royal authority over all Kings and princes: next, to be lords over religion:
so that as Antoninus one of his archbishops says, Summa par. 3 tit 22. cap. 5
He may create new Religions: thirdly, to be tribunes; that is to disanull what
someuer decree or judgment, of any Bishop or inferior judges: yea of
synodall and general councels, if they be not ratified by him. Thirdly, as in
Rome was the head of the empire, the Emperor and his Senate with him, and as
the Emperors had their Magistrates under them, in all their provinces, and
places of their dominions, from whom all their authority was, and who was at
their beck and commandment: So in the Popes Kingdom, the Pope who is the
head, and the Senate of Cardinals whilk is next him in authority, hes their
seat in Rome: and they according to the old pattern of the roman impyre,
hes their Bishops, archbishops, Abbots, Priors, Monks, Friars, etc. in all the
places of their dominion under them: who hes their whole authority from him,
and who all are his sworn men. So heir is then the lively image of the former
beast.

And as to the sext, Who did kill all them that would not worship the image.
And this frame of government of Popes, cardinals, Bishops, Archbishops, etc.
and their Religion, but the Popes of Rome? The blood of infinite thousands does
testify this. And wha hes brought all under their bondage, both one and other,
that none might buy or sell: that is, neither brook Civil nor Ecclesiastical
offices, but those who were marked with his mark: that is, took on them his
profession, and was Catholics (as he terms them,) Is not this sufficiently
known, that none might have offices nor benefices in the Kirk, but they that
received his mark, and ordours from him? And none might brook their kingdoms
and civil dignities, in so far as lay in his power, but these that were of
his profession. Clement. lib. 2. ^it. 9.
Rex venit ante fores, iurans prius vrbis honores: Post homo fit Papae, recipit
quo dante coronam. And Erasmus says in his Adagies, That neither Baptism nor
marriage nor sacrifice, nor psalms, nor prayer, nor Sacrament, nor grave in
the papisticall Kingdom are given without money.

Now last of all: to what kingdom or Kirk under heaven, since this
Revelation was written, does the number of the name of the beast, heir set
down, aggree; but to the Latin Kingdom of the Popes, and their Latin Kirk:
for heir is set down the name of the kingdom of Antichrist. The number of the
name of the beast heir set down, is 666. and the letters of the name of this
Antichristian kingdom (...) amounts to the same number of 666. (...) 30 1 300
5 10 (...) 50 70 200 all wh lk being joined together, makes 666
For what is the name of the Popish kingdom and hierarchy? Is not the Kirk
called the Latin Kirk? Is not all the exercises of their Religion, almost in
Latin? And suppose the old Testament be written in Hebrew, and the new in
Greek: yet, have they not condemned the originals as corrupted, and have they
not authorized the Latin interpretation as only authentical? So that Papacy,
is the very kingdom of Latins. Now the letters of this Greek word (...)
whilk signifies Latin (for the Reuelat. was written in greek) does amount to
the same number 666. And what other kingdom or monarchy under heaven can they
show whose name is sik, Iren lib. 5. cap. 25 Sed and Latinis no men 666.
numerum habet, and val de verisimile est, quia verissimum regnum hoc habet
vocabu^um. Latini enim sunt qui nunc regnant 5 20 20 30 8 (...). 200 10 1 10
300 1 (...) 30 10 20 1 (...) ROM (...) 200.6.40.10 ITH 10.400.
that the letters thereof amounts to this number? Ireneus an ancient writer,
yea so ancient, that he saw and heard Polycarpus who was one of John's
Disciples, who received this Revelation, mentions, that the name of this
beast in this prophecy, is (...) And as the letters of this greek word (...)
amounts to this number 666: so does the letters of these Latin words,
Ecclesia Italica, written in greek letters, and of the Hebrew word ROMIITH,
that signifies Romam. Is not this meikle now that this number of 666. aggrees
to the name of the Papisticall kingdom, both in hebrew, greek, and latin. In
greek (...) that is Latin: in He^rew, ROMIITH, that is Rome: in latin
Ecclesia Italica, that is, the Italian Kirk. For Italy is called Latium, that
is Latin. What more would any man require? Will not this suffice to make it
manifest, that the Popes are the Antichrist, to whom every thing prophesied of
the Antichrist by the Apostle Paul, and this Revelation of the second beast,
does so fitly aggree? So that there can be none under heaven unto whom they
can be applied, but only to the Popes of Rome. But yet for the full
manifestation of this point, we will go to the 17. of the Revelation. For, as
his Kingdom was figured under a beast that had two horns like the Lamb, in
the 13. chapter: so there is the principal throne and seat of his Kingdom,
figured under a great harlote, with whom the Kings and nations of the earth
hes committed fornication. The whilk harlote is most gloriously decked and
richly apparelled, Who hes a Cupe of gold in her hand, full of
abominations: in whose fore-heade a name is written: A mystery, that Babylon,
that mother of whooredomes, who is drunken with the blood of the Saints and
Martyrs of Jesus, whilk is that great city, whilk reigns over the kings of
the earth, whilk sits upon seven mountains. For the maintenance of whose
kingdom, ten Kings yealded up their power and authority, to fight against the
Lamb, and to overcome him. That this great ciety is the ciety of Rome: it is
so plain, that he is more then blind that sees it not. For what ciety did
reign over the nations when this Revelation was received, but Rome? and what
ciety, Capitolinus, Palatinus, Auentinus, Caelius, Exquilinus, Quirinalis, Vi
minalis.
since the Pope clambe up to his Kingdom, hes done the same, but Rome And what
ciety sits upon 7. hills, but Rome, whose names are yet known? And what
ciety hes been the mother of all spiritual and bodily fornication, of all
idolatry and abomination, but Rome. Yea, what ciety hes been so enriched with
gold, purple, and precious stones, but Rome? And what ciety hes been drunken
with the blood of the Martyrs and Saints, but Rome? All these things are so
manifest, that not only some of the Fathers, as in praefat. ad Dydimum, and in
epi. ad Algasium.
Jerome, contra Marci. lib. 13. aduers. Iudaeos, cap. 9.
and Tertullian saw it: but also some of themselves confesses it, that this
Babylon is Rome. Both Bellar. grants it plainly, and also the Rhemists do not
deny it. I or Lib. 2. cap. 2,
that great Jesuit Bellarmine says, that John in the Revelation every where
calls Rome Babylon: and confirms this, first by the testimony of Tertullian,
and then by the circumstances of the text For (says he) there was no other
ciety at that time that did reign over the nations, but Rome. And it is most
notorious (says he) that Rome sittes on seven bills. What now would ye have
more? And in another L b. 4 cap. 4.
place, It appears, says he, that in the time of the Antichrist, Rome shall
be made desolate, and shall be brunt, as it is gathered out of the 17. of the
Revel. and this shall not be until the end of the world. These are plain
speeches. And I say this great ciety of Rome, whilk is called heir mystical
Babylon, is not descriued heir, as she was the seat of the heathen Emperors,
when they reigned in her, as the Roman Kirk says, but as she is, and hes been
the seat of the Antichrist. For in the time of the Emperors, she made not
the Kings of the earth commit fornication with her: that is, she did not
pollute them with her idolatry and religion, as it is foretold of this Rome:
for she left every kingdom free to use their own Idolatry and superstition:
But Rome since she began to be the throne and seat of the Antichrist, the
Popes of Rome hes propagated her idolatry and worship to all nations, and hes
made all nations drunken with the wine of her fornication: and hes obtruded her
religion to all nations, against their will, with fire and sword. And from
thence hes proceeded all the wars and blood-sheds, in many nations of Europe,
because they did go out of her, and departed from her idolatry.

Further, all the parts of her description heir, aggrees to Rome, having the
show of Christianity, and not as she was Ethnic under the Ethnic Emperors,
as that purple and skarlet wherewith she was clade, that gilding with gold and
precious stones, and pearls: whilk the Archbishop of Ratisbon, Albertus
Magnus, and the gloss interprets of the simulation of piety and meekness,
and the spiritual graces of God: as faith, hope, charity: all whilks (say
they) she shall in hypocrisy pretend: but yet in truth have nothing sik: but
cruelty and ungodliness, the whilk can no ways aggree with Rome, as she was
in her Gentilisme: therefore of necessity Papisticall Rome is heir descriued,
and not Ethnic Rome. Thirdly, that Rome is heir descriued, whilk was vpholden
by the beast, unto whom the ten Kings yielded up their power, to fight against
the Lamb, as is manifest by the 12. and 13. verses of that 17. chapter. But
this beast is not the empire of Rome, but the Antichristian kingdom: for these
ten Kings had not received their Kingdoms all that time that the Roman
Emperors were Ethnic, and long after: Therefore Rome as it is the seat of
the Antichrist, and not as it was the seat of the roman Empire, is heir
descryued. And the Rhemists says, that some expones these ten Kings, of ten
kingdoms, In their annotations upon this place.
into whilk the Roman empire shall be divided, whilk shall all serve
Antichrist: therefore Rome as it is heir descriued, must be the seat of the
Antichrist.

Last of all, the Revelation speaks heir of that Rome that shall be brunt with
fire, and be made desolate by the ten kingdoms, whilk God should stir up to
hate her; and he speaks heir of that Rome whilk shall be casten in the mids of
the sea: after the whilk shall follow the day of judgment: But this cannot be
Rome as it was the seat of the Roman Empire, The testimonies of themselves
proving the Popes to be the Antichrist, and Rome to be that mistical Babylon.
but as it is the seat of the Antichristian kingdom: for it is more then a
thousand years, since Rome left off her Gentilisme, and yet this prophecy is
not accomplished in her. Unto these I join the testimonies of some of their
own Monks, Bishops, Poets, Friars, historiographers, Emperors and Popes also,
whereby it will be verefied, that this harlote is Rome, and the Popes thereof
the Antichrist. Bernarde a Monk of Cluniak, who lived about 400. year ago,
writing unto Peter the Abbote of that Monastery, speaking of the tyrannous
behavior of the Clergy and Bishop of Rome, he accuses them of sacrilegious
bryberie, of bying and selling of the Bishops Pall, the Ring, and of all Laws
and equity. And he says in another place, Roma nocens nocet, atque viam docet
ipsa nocendi, Iura relinquere, lucra requirere, pallida vendi: Non Deus est
tibi Jesus Roma peristi.

That is This hurtful Rome, does hurt, and teach to be wicked,
To leave all law, and gaip for gain, and sell a Popish Tippet.
A greedy gulf, a griping grave, a filthy iakes,
Both bottomless, unsatiate: and all alike she makes.
By drinking thou art dry, and louder thou does cry, come bring me more:
I pray thee cry hoe: but thou says no: I hunger sore.
I think thou makes gold thy God, not Jesus Christ.
Rome what shall I say? what shall I do, or tell thee what is done?
Wealth weakeneth thee, wealth threatens thee not to be Rome.
Then let me speak it, and let me write it, Rome once thou wast.
Then let me speak it, and let me write it, Rome thou art gone.


And John a Monk says, Curia vult marcas, bursas exhaurit, and arcas: etc.

That is, The Court of Rome does aim at marks, it souks the purse, and soaks
the arks:
If that you mind to spare your arkes, come not at Popes nor Patriarchs:
But if you frankly give them marks, and with good gold stuf up their arkest
I warrant then you shall be free, from any kind of penalty
Who is within? who is there? I. Why, what would ye? Come in.
Bring you ought? No. Stand still. But I do. Go ye then in.


The same Monk also says, Roma manus rodit: quod rodere non valet, odit.
Dantes exaudit, non dantibus ostia claudit.
Curid curarum genitrix, nutrixque malorum.
Ignotos notis, inho nestos aequat honestis.


That is, Rome is a raker, and spiteful hater of the empty hand:
She hears the giver, but others never, but lets them stand.
Her Court a cage of cares: of mischiefs eke the mother:
She uses knaves like honest men, and strangers like a brother.


The Archbishop of Colon and Traverse says to Pope Nicolaus the first, Thou
pretends the person of he Pope, but thou plays the tyrant. We feill a Wolf
under the weed of a Pastor: the style belies the parent. Thou by thy deeds
makes show as if thou were God: while as thou art the seruand of seruands, thou
contendes to be Lord of Lords. According to the discipline of our Savior, thou
art the least of all the ministers of the Temple of God. Thou through the
desire of ruling, goes to perdition. Whatsomeuer thing pleases thee, is
leesome to thee. Fucus factus e^ Christianis
And Gregory a Pope says, I affirm this boldly upon good assurance, that
whosoever he be that calls himself, or is desirous to be called universal
Priest, in that hautines of his, is a forerunner of Antichrist, in that by
swelling pride he prefers himself before others. Arnulphus Aurelaensis unto
the council of Rhemes, testifies this of the Pope, Whom (says he) reverend
Fathers think ye this man so be? who sitting in a high throne, shynes in his
purple and golden attire? to wit, if he want love, and be puffed up by knowl
dge, he is the Antichrist sitting in the Temple of God, showing himself as
though he were God. Bernard 400. year ago, writing to Eugenius Pope of Rome,
2, Book to Eugen
in conclusion he breaks forth in these words. Thou hes more need (says he)
to have a rake in thy hand, 4. book to Eugen
nor a scepter to perform the office of a Prophet. And in another place,
after he hes descriued and detested the pride of the Bishops of Rome, at last
he concludes the matter in these words, saying to the Pope, Heirein (says
he) thou shows thy self to have succeeded not to Peter, but to Constantine.
Peter is he who never knew what belonged to sik solemn showing himself
abroad, in braueries of precious stones, or silks, or ^old, or ryding upon a
white Palfray, or being guarded with a troop of tall fellows, or environed
which a c^mpany of ruffling seruing-men. Also in another place, In his epistle
230
speaking of the tyranny of the Bishop of Rome, he makes an exclamation in
this sort. At the first indeed (says he) ye began to play the Lords but over
the Clergy, contrary to the counsel of Peter: 1. Pet, 5.3. 2. Cor. 1.24.
and within a while contrary to the advice of Paul (Peter's ftllowe Apostle)
you will have dominion over the faith of all men. But ye stay not there: ye
have taken upon you more: namely, to have a peremptory power in Religion it
self. Now what remains whereon ye might further incroache, except ye will
go about to bring the very Angels under your subjection. And in another place,
Upon the Cantic sermon. 33
speaking of the behauiours of the romish Prelates, Hence comes (says he)
that whoorish tricking, that stage-like attire, that prince-like pomp, whilk
daily we see in them: Hence proceids the gold that they use in their brydles,
sadles, and spurs: in so much that their spurs are more glittering then
their altars. Hence came their stately Tables, their variety of dishes, and
quaffing cups: hence issued their ionketting, banketting, their drunkenness
and surfets: hence followed their Viols, harpes, and shalmes: hence flowed
their sellers and pantries so stuffed with wines and viands of all sorts: hence
got they their lee-pots, and painting boxes: and hence had they their purses
so well lyned with coin. Fie upon it. Sik men they will needs be, and yet they
are our great masters in Israel, as Deanes, arch-deanes, Bishops, and
archbishops. These works of theirs are little inferior unto that filthiness
whilk they committed in darkness. And lastly he adds these words, For he is
the very Antichrist. Frederick the second, foretold the ruin of Rome, more
then 300. years since in these wyrds, writing to Innocentius 4. Pope: Roma diu
titubans, long is erroribus acta
Corruet, and mundi desinet esse caput.


That is, Rome rolling long about in errors, bound, and thrall,
Shall fall at last, and cease to be the lofty head of all.


And in his verse written against the Pope, he affirms plainly that he was
that son of perdition and that head of the wicked forespoken by Paul. And in
his letters to the prelates of the world, he calls the Pope that great
dragon, that hes deceived the whole world, that Antichrist, and that
counterfite Vicare of Christ. Eberharbus Bishop of Salsburgh, Above 380. years
ago. Auentinus lib. 7
speaking of the Bishops of Rome he says: they only desire to reign, they
can not abide peace: They will not cease till they have stamped all under their
feet, that they may sit in the Temple of God, and be lifted up above all that
is called God, or that is worshipped. He who is the serua^d of serua^ds, is the
Lord of Lords, and desires to be thought of, as if he were God: And he says,
that man whom they use to call Antichrist, be speaks great things as
though he were God, in whose fore-heade that name of blasphemy is written: I
am God I can not err. Franciscus Petrarcha a light of that age for his
manifold learning, calls the court of Rome Babylon, and that harlote of
Babell that sits upon many waters, the mother of Idolatry and whoordo^e,
the refuge of heresies and errors. And Petrus Johannes pronounced the Pope to
be the Antichrist and the sinagogue of Rome to be that great Babylon. And
Matthias Parisiensis says, that Antichrist hes seduced all the universities and
colleges of the learned, so that they teach nothing soundly now: and the edict
of the empire, under Lodouick the fourth, speaking of Pope John the 22. says,
Christians can not keep the peace whilk is given them of God, for this
Antichrist (meaning the Pope) And in another edict it is written, as he is a
disaguised Pastor, so is he a mystical Antichrist: and we declare him being
the author of that Antichristian Empire, to be damned of heresy, and deposed
by our right by the council, sentence, and common consent of the princes and
prelates of Germany, the Priests of Italy, and people of Rome so desiring. And
Auentinus in the history of Hildebrand writes, that almost all the plain,
just, simple, and upright hes written, that then (to wit when he was Pope) the
Empire of the Antichrist began, because they saw that come to pass at that
time, whilk our Savior fore-tolde so many years before. And to conclude
this: Hadrian the 6. Pope, in his instructions of his legates to the conuention
at Noremberge, he says: Thou shall say, that we grant freely that God hes
suffered this persecution to come upon the Kirk for the sins of men, and
especially of the priests and prelates of the Kirk. And again he says, we
know that in this seat (speaking of that Pontifical seat in Rome) many
abominable things hes been for some years, as abuse in spiritual things,
excess in commandments, and last of all, all things changed in worse. And the
Popes Cardinals (speaking to Paul the third) says. From this fountain (holy
Father) as from the Troyan horse, so many abuses hes rushed into the Kirk, and
so heavy diseases wherewith (as we may se) she is brought into a desperate
estate, I omit the rest: Ye may se the truth is strong that hes made their
own mouths to fyle themselves. To conclude this then: He must be the
undoubted Antichrist, and his kingdom Antichristian, unto whom the whole
marks of the Antichrist, as he is descriued in the scripture by the Apostle
Paul, and John in the Revelation does aggree: But they all aggree unto the
Popes of Rome and his kingdom, as hes been proved. Therefore they must be
that undoubted Antichriste who was to come. Secondly, he must be that
undoubted Antichrist, whom his own Friars, Bishops, Cardinals, and some of
themselves does call Antichrist, and ascriue these things unto him that belongs
properly to the Antithrist: But his own Friars, Bishops, Cardinals, and some
of themselves hes so testified, as hes been proved also: Therefore out of
their own mouths they are condemned to be that Antichrist, and their kingdom
Antichristian.

Now to put an end to this my reply, that religion is false whilk hes neither
unity, succession, nor antiquity: this you can not deny, because you make
them the marks of your Kirk: But your religion hes neither unity, for that is
broken by your manifold contradictions and dissensions amongst your selves,
whereof I have marked some, and the diligent reader of your works may gather
many more: Chrachtouius in his book called Bellum Iesuiticum, hes gathered of
two heads to wit the Mass and Antichrist 205. contradictions, let the
Christian Reader judge then what may be gathered of the rest, no succession,
neither personal, broken by their Popes who was Atheists, Schismatickes,
heretics, and by a woman Pope: neither in doctrine, being direct contrary
to the doctrine of Christ: no antiquity, for the authors and origin of sundry
maine points of your religion is set down here, and al your Roman Clergy,
hes not satisfied Master Jewels challenge this 30. year ago, concerning the
novelty of 27. of your opinions. Therefore since it hes neither unity,
succession, nor antiquity, it is a false religion by your own doctrine.
Secondly, that religion whilk is contrary the Scripture, contrary the practice
of the primitive Kirk whilk opens a door to all licenciousnes, whilk can bring
no true peace and consolation unto the consciences of men, whilk blusheth to be
known and made manifest, whilk maintains many great absurdities, horrible
blasphemies, abominable idolatry that is the doctrine of Antichriste, and the
doctrine of devils, whilk by their own mouths is condemned, must be erroneous
and false: But the religion of the Kirk of Rome is such as hes been evidently
proved before, therefore it must be false. Woe therefore belonges to their
souls that professes it openly or secrectly.

REVEL. 14. And another Angel followed saying, Babylon that great city, she
hes fallen, she hes fallen: for she hes made all nations to drink of the wine
of the wrath of her fornication. Ver. 9. And the third Angel followed them,
saying with a loud voice, If any shall worship the beast and his image, and
receive the mark upon his foreheade, or upon his hand, he also shall drink of
the wine of the wrath of God yea of the pure wine, whilk is powered in the Cupe
of his wrath, and he shall be tormented in fire and brimstone before the holy
Angels, and before the Lamb, and the smoke of their torment shall ascend for
evermore: and they shall have no rest, day nor night, whilk worship the beast
and his image: and whosoever receaueth the printe of his name.

FINIS.
Faults escaped.
PAge 20. line 15. read Apostles, page 28. l. 1. for and by, r. others. page 31.
l. 3. r. if in. page 32. l. 4. r decicets. page 33. l. 2. for he was, r. they
were. page 40. l. 5 for theirs, r. heresy. page 48 l. 36 r. the souls. page
56. l. 16. r. therefore. and l. 34 for do, r. dow. page 67. l. 7. r is, and l.
16, for whilk, r. whill. page 68. l. 4 r the. page 73. l. 4. for three, 1.
third. page, 74, l, 28. for yet, r. yea. page, 75, l, 3 for imputes, r imports.
and l, 20 for the, r. this page 80. l 32. for every, r. ever any. page, 89, l,
20 r. express contrar. page 121, l, 26. for our, r. your. page, 184, l, 13. for
ye, r, they. and l, 16. for ye, r. they page 185, l, 30. for your, r. their.
page, 211, l, 22. r. fulfilled page, 229, l, 33. for priest, r. Prouests. page
230, l, 12. r in the. page, 244, l, 29. for offers, r. offered. page, 252. l. 21,
for for, r. from page 263. l, 7, for ciphers, r. ciners. page, 297, l, 7, r. not
the. page 324, l, 8, for Franciscus, r, Dominicus, and l. 9. for made, r.
maine: page 325, l, 4. for and r. one page, 327, l, 10. for same, r. some. page
341. l, 37, for Papists, r, Popes. And in the epist, to the Reader, and to M,
Gilb. Brown. for this country read that country of Niddisdaill and Galloway,
every where.

Good Reader, if thou shall find any more faults, then these above corrected,
eitherr in the matter, or marginall quotations, excuse the author by reason of
his far absence, in the time of the imprinting of this work


