AN ABRIDGEMENT of all SEA-LAVVES.

Gathered forth of all Writings and Monuments, which are to be found among any
people or Nation, upon the coasts of the great Ocean and Mediterranean Sea.

And specially ordered and disposed for the use and benefit of all benevolent
Sea-farers, within his Majesty's Dominions of Great Britain, Ireland, and the
adjacent Isles thereof.

By WILLIAM WELVVOD, professor of the Civil Law.

LONDON, Printed by the Assigns of Ioane Man and Benjamin Fisher, 1636.

TO THE HIGH AND mighty Prince, James, King of Great Britain, France and
Ireland, etc.
IT pleased your M. some years past, most graciously to accept of this birth,
in the great weakness and in fancy thereof. Therefore is it, that now being
strong, and by all warrants inarmed, it most thankefully returns, offering
service to your M. even for all the coasts of your Highness dominions, upon
hope to merit your former grace.

Your M. most humble subject, and daily orator, W. Welwod.

To the right Honorable, LUDOVICK, Duke of Lenox his Grace, etc. Henry, Earl
of North-hampton, etc. and Charles, Earl of Notingham, etc. Lords Admiralls of
England and Ireland, of Scotland and the Isles, and of the Cinque Ports.
HAving intended a painful and new labor, upon a rare and necessary
argument, as for all Sea-farers, so also properly pertaining to your Honors, my
most noble Lords; I could not but of due salute your Honors, as the keepers of
Sea-lawes, for a refreshing remembrance, and needful consideration of that
most honorable estate and high office, presently, and (I hope) happily
allotted unto you: I mean, the Admiraltie of his M. dominions; a charge both
ancient from many hundredth years in this I Will, and most honorable by the
personages your predecessors, bearing the same: as being all, either sons,
brothers, uncles, or cousins to Princes, or (at least) for action most famous.
With all the which, that your Honors may the better rank and match, surely,
as the condition of these days craves, so the best disposed wish, that as you
be every other way Noble, your nobility may be crowned with a careful attention
to the special parts of the Admiraltie requiring the same, to a memorial
surpassing all ancesters: I mean the conservacy, jurisdiction and privileges
thereof. The jurisdiction, albeit it be most faithfully and diligently
exercised, and namely in England by Sir Daniel Dunn, and Doctor Trevor, most
learned, sincere, and worthy colleagues, Judges in the high court there: yet the
daily thwarting and curbing of the process of the Judicature, urges a clearing
or designing of the limits and marches, to a better distinguishing thereof from
all other jurisdictions ordinary; without which, due justice can neither be
administered, concerning the sea customs (of which no court else can take
knowledge) for strangers traffiquing here (importing no small stain to the
King his justice) nor yet for his M. lieges traffiquers on sea, whose contracts
and charter-parties ordinarily bear the clause of ruling by law of Olero^; a
foreign law, as all the other laws of the Admiral court commonly are,
whereof no other Judicature here can take cognissance.

To end this point; Beside that which God in the heavens requires of the
ministers of justice, please you to remember, that here below amongst men,
Nihil justitia popularius. Consequently therefore, the privileges due for the
maintenance of the Admiraltie and jurisdiction thereof, would be vindicat from
all sort of encroching and usurping. But above all, the conservacie (as the
chief point of that office) requires security and safety in common for all
loyal subjects, traders on Sea: specially, for Fishers and others, happily
disposed to adventure and exercise the trade of fishing, to the end, that not
only a peaceable, but also a full and plentiful fishing may be enjoyed by
the inhabitants of his M. kingdoms, even according to that which God so freely
and bountifully offers into their very doors. For which cause, the barbarity of
the Ilanders would be repressed, and strangers stayed from scarring, scattring,
and breaking the shoals of our fishes; namely, upon our coasts of Scotland.
There could be no better employment for some (at least) of his M. ships and
companies, Ne vel illi usqu^ turbent, aut isti intercipiant, quod nos capere
oportet.

But, I break from this purpose, remitting the same to the 27 Title of this
book; hoping for a comfortable out-bearing and maintaining of that necessary
and great dignity of the Admiralty by your LL. according to all the occasions
of these quarrelsome times. And so I rest, by this present token, devote to
serve your Honors in my calling.

William Welwod.

The Contents.
THe Prohem, containing the origin of the Sea-law. page 1 1 The order of this
Treatise. 22 2 Of the Judge ordinary in Seafaring causes, with his
Jurisdiction and priviledge^. 26 3 Of the Admiral Clerk. 45 4 Of the
Advocates, and other officers, assistants for the speedier proceeding. 49 5 Of
the manner of proceeding in Seafaring causes. 52 6 Of persons ordinary in
ships. 64 7 Of fraughting of ships. 71 8 Of the Master of the ship his power
and duty over the ship. 83 9 Of the Master his duty to the Merchant and
passenger, and of his privileges. 90 10 Of the Masters duty to the Mariners.
99 11 Of the duties and privileges of Mariners. 103 12 Of the Clerk of a
ship. 113 13 Of a Pilot or Steirsman. 116 14 Of money bent to Sea, or upon the
Sea. 119 15 Of the outreaders or furnishers, the hyrers, and owners of ships;
and of actions for them, and against them. 124 16 Of sundry partners of ships,
and their discords. 130 17 Of casting of goods, and contribution therefore. 136
18 Of contribution for Pirates. 142 19 Of contribution for spoiled goods 144 20
Of contribution for disburdening of ships for their easier entry to the port,
and other chances. ^45 21 Of the common manner of contribution, and execution
thereof. 152 22 Of privileged ships. 156 23 Of shipwreck. 161 24 Of things
found on the Sea, or within the floud-marke. 168 25 Of things taken upon Sea.
175 26 Of Fishers, fishing, and traffiquers therewith. 187 27 Of the community
and propriety of Seas. 200 28 Of war-ships, and of the Captains and company
thereof. 237 29 Of Ferryers and Watermen. 243 30 Of Shipwrights. 248
The Proheme containing the Origin of the Sea-law: with the occasion of this
Treatise.
COncerning the Argument of Seafaring government, so far as by any
momuments can be observed, our beginning must be at the inhabitants of the
Island called Rhode, situate within the Mediterranean Sea, in the part thereof
called the Carpath sea, upon the coast of Asia minor, over against Caria. The
indwellers whereof, amongst all other people we can read of, were most famous
for shipping and Sailing; and that not only to the great increase of their
power and wealth every way, as by which they did command and daunt all other
people about their coasts and seas; in such manner, that neither Pirat, nor any
sort of enemy, or disturber of their peace and traffic, durst then appear
Gellius, lib. 7. Cap. 3.
: but also by the communicating of their trade, and discipline on sea, they did
make neighbor Princes, and Cities, willingly Tributars unto them Strab. geogr.
lib. 12. cap. 14.
. And further, as Strabo writes Ibid.
to the crowning of their renown, they surpassed all other Nations in
knowledge of equity in marine business; which they manifested by making of
Sea-lawes.

For, the very Emperors of Rome, Tiberius Caesar, Hadrian, Vespasian, Traian,
successively, did refer all seafaring debates and controversies, to the
judgment of the Rhodian law. Vide Il. Rhodior. in prin.
And so likewise exemplarilie, did their successor Antoninus, by his rescript
yet extant L. deprecatio ad L. Rhod. e^ c. rhodiae leges. distinct. 2.
: wherein, answering to one Eudemon his plaint, I am (says he) the Lord of the
world, but the law is the master of the sea; let that thy plaint and
controversy Eudemon be decided by the law of the Rhodians.

So far did the Romans (who always excelled all other Nations, in devising
of humane laws) yield and give place to the Rhodians in the sea laws.

And by their example, finding seafaring and trafique on sea, redound to a
great common wealth, as plainly pronounced L. 1. sect. licet. de exerc. act.
Vlpian, one of the fathers of their laws; the Roman Emperors, and namely
Claudius, Suet^. ca. 218.
brought in new forms of actions, and devised a kind of new and sure
commodities and gain for trafiquers; by taking upon them the hazard of ship
and goods: to which end also is erected by English laws, the office of
Assurance.

It is true, that the first making of Sea laws, is otherwise by some
attributed to others, as by Dionysius to the Phenicians, because of Merchant
trade De situ orbis.
. And Plinius, for that same cause ascribes the Art of sailing to the
Carthaginians. Lib. 7. nature. histor. vide ^zechiam. c. 27.
. and consequently, would seem to attribute to these two Nations also for
their necessity, the skill of sailing. To be brief, by the space of a
thousand years, the sea, at least the Mediterranean, was only ruled by the
Rhodian law, but helped with some few additions by the Romans, and that by way
of interpretation: the rather, to occur to the deceits and Sophistry of
calumniators and wilful vexers of their neighbors, as also for other needful
doubts Dotimus in lib. suo legoli.
.

At last, when all sorts of laws by the eversion and renting of the Roman
Empire, was as it were for a long time buried, necessity forced the Rulers of
Rome, Anno Dom. 1075. to make new sea laws and statutes: and so successively,
every chief seafaring town upon the Mediterranean coast, to add other
ordinances; as they of Marseilles did, Anno Dom. 1162. and they of Genua, Anno
Dom. 1186. And they of Peloponnesus, called Morea, Anno Dom. 1200. and the
Commonwealth of Venice, Anno Dom. 1215. And the Emperors of Constantinople,
Paleolog. Anno Dom. 1262. and Constantine, 1270. and James King of Aragon that
same year; and Peter King of Aragon, Anno Dom. 1340. and they of Barcelona,
Anno Dom. 1434. which laws being all collected and amassed, serve the
Mediterraneans unto this day.

But on the great Ocean, which is our sea, the first laws we knew to be made,
were devised by them of the Island of Oleron, situate on the sea coast of
France, beside S. Martin against the mouth of Charante and the Marraes, near
to the entry of Garumna: which are therefore called La roold' Oleron; as by
which the controversies on the sea coast of France toward the Ocean were
ordinarily decided, in the town of the said I Will, called thereupon, Lavile de
droict, or Oleron. As where the skilled Skippers in that law did dwell, and had
cognition of all such occurrent debates and questions.

Now these laws of Oleron, were afterward translated into Dutch by them of
Wisby, for the sea use of the Dutch coast.

And of late, our Kings of Scotland made diverse Acts in Parliament, concerning
seafaring Vide act. par. lia. Scot.
.

As also the Kings of England have done before Vide statut. Ang.
: for Edward the third, by a solemn inquisition of eighteen most famous
persons for skill in seafaring, assembled at Quinborow from diverse parts, Anno
1375. set down certain articles concerning the Admiralty and seafaring, into
old French: as may be seen in an old parchment authenticke book yet extant;
which articles one Thomas Roucghton of that same, turned afterward in Latin,
and entitled de officio admiralitatis Angliae.

Likewise Frederick the second of Denmark, in his general convention, at
Coppenhaven, Anno 1561: sets down a compend of Statutes, for ruling of his
Seafaring subjects; but for most part all one with La rooled' Oleron.

Also the French King Henry the third, added his new constitutions to these of
Francois, and others his predecessors, which are chiefly for the authorizing of
his Admiralty, Jurisdiction, honor and profits thereof; preferring the Admiral
and his officers to all other Judges and Justices, except these called Royals.

Notwithstanding all these many, diverse, and late Statutes and Ordinances made
and set forth these sixeteene hundredth years, by the nations, people, and
Princes above written, in the decision of causes, and judging of seafaring
controversies; that fragment of the Rhodian law, extant and Latinized by Simon
Shardius, entitled by him, Leges navales Rhodiorum and selectae Leges
Rhodiorum, with the interpretations and commentations, devised thereupon by the
old Roman Iurisconsults insert in the Pandects; together with the
constitutions made by the Roman Emperors, contained in the Cod. and Novells
at large: as it were by common consent of Nations, obtaines the prerogative
throughout all Europe, as in Great Britain, Germany, France, Italy, and
Spain. Such is the force and authority of the Civil Roman Law amongst all
Nations Christian.

In which Countries, albeit there has bin, and yet remains a great number of
professors and doctors of the Roman civil law, who have written largely
thereupon; yet few or none has taken in hand to write pertinently or expressly,
upon the laws concerning seafaring, the traffic on sea, and by sea, with
the duties requisite of every seafaring person, of all sorts and degrees.

It is true that Julius Ferrettus in his observant devoir to the Emperor
Charles the fifth, prepared a discourse for the addressing of Navies with
convenient and expert Governors, and all sort of necessaries for hostility on
the sea, entitled de iure and re nautica, but far off from our present
Argument, as may be seen by the same of late published, Anno 1579. and
dedicated to Philip, Charles his son, by Exuperantius Ferrettus, son also
to the said Julius.

Petrus Pekkius also a Fleming Zelander, has learnedly commented upon the
titles of the civil law, touching the sea-lawes; but more busied about the
exposition of words then of the matter. Likewise Benvenutus Straccha, in his
large book de mercatura, interlaceth a learned title, de nautis, navibus and
navigationibus, but comes not close to this our argument; for he holds
straightly within the compass of the civil law, protesting also his
pretermissions and remissions of many chief matters to certain Doctors, who
also writes but obiter of the sea matters, and none speaks of the sea
customs, which is our principal argument: To the end of which book is
annexed an half sheet of paper, bearing consilia Roderici Suarij de usu maris
and Navibus vehendis; a turn of small contentment.

It Is true that Simon Shardius, Anno 1561. promised this same compend and
collect of sea laws forth of all laws (which presently by Gods grace I
intend) but by death prevented, could not perform it.

To conclude then, since no man, as I can understand, has set his pen to this
my argument and purpose, for the due information of every sort of seafaring
persons in every order, whether Commanders, Judges, Skippers, Mariners,
Merchants, Passengers, Fishers, Ferryers, Watermen, etc. concerning their
several duties, privileges and powers, and all manner of things pertaining or
incident to sea and sea-farers; I thought good, after the insight and deep
consideration of all the laws and ordinances aforesaid, to mend a weak piece
of labor, which I intended many years since, entitled the Sea law of
Scotland; and to frame the same in a very harmonicall collection of all
sea-lawes, And upon the conscience of my profession of the civil law, having
no employment or part in any Admiralty, to publish the same for the use of the
Admiralties, and benefit of all benevolent sea-farers; and that presently,
because of the present use thereof so requiring the same, as I now clearly
perceive: that is to say; Because that whereas the most civil, wise, and
politic nations, have even most carefully distinguished the jurisdiction of
the sea from the jurisdiction of the land in all respects: yet nevertheless
some men prease always, upon what intent I wot not, to confound the same. And
the multitude of these who do acknowledge the foresaid distinction, as
specially the Mariners, through ignorance contemn all other law but the rule
of Oleron.

In these respects (I say) I have with great pain and travel, concluded the
publication of this work; which if it please (as I pray) God to bless with the
own effect, I have reward enough.

TIT. I.
The order of this Treatise.
AS the affairs of the sea concerns only seafaring and medlers therewith:
even so all doubts, differences, and controversies, rising upon the same, and
their cases must also concern the same persons, which are either chiefly
Owners, Out-traders or hyrers, Masters, Pilots, Mariners, Clerks, Merchants,
Passengers. Of whom the owner is he, to whom the ship or any part pertaines in
property. The out-trader or hirer, he to whom as hirer or partner for a voyage
or more, or a longer time, during the hyring and lease of the ship, the
profits and commodities thereof redounds L. 1. de, exercit. act.
.

And the Master is he to whom the whole care and charge of the ship is
committed L. 1. ad l. Rhod.
. The rest are all known. Now their persons whiles happens all to fall forth
in one man; as one to be Master, owner, and outtrader; and again to be all
diverse and distinct: and therefore the actions to bear out accordingly.
Likewise the cognition of their debates pertaines not to every Judge
indifferently, but only to the Admiral of the sea: which thing this
Abridgement shall orderly and summarily declare; beginning at the Judge
ordinary to sea-fare causes, the members of the Court, and manner of proceeding
there: next, the persons ordinary in ships, with the fraughting thereof, as
belonging to the chief uses of shipping: thirdly, the power, duty, and
privilege of every one of the foresaid in ships: fourthly, the manifold causes
of losses and damage in seafaring, with the redress thereof: fifthly, the
privileged ships, shipwreck, ships and things taken and found on the sea,
or within the floud-marke thereof: and lastly, of Fishing, Fishers, Ferryers
and Watermen, and Shippewrights.

TIT. II.
Of the Judge ordinary, in seafaring causes, with his jurisdiction, and
privileges.
AS for the Judge of the Sea, we have first to consider, how at the beginning
of the Roman Empire, there was a special difference betwixt the persons to
whom the charge of shipping was given, and them to whom the commandment of
Fleets and Navies was committed; and betwixt the persons who exercised the
jurisdiction in seafaring debates, as follows.

For amongst the Romans in the beginning, first the builders, forth^eakers, or
furnishers, and preparers of Ships and Navies with all necessaries (by a
special ordinance called Lex Decia) were styled Duum viri navales; Livius lib.
^.
as the Governors of these Fleets were called Archigubernij, L. Seius
Saturninus ad S. C. trebell.
and the Iusticiaries of seafaring debates, Magisteriani: even so amongst the
Grecians, the Commanders of their fleets were styled (...). And after the
Empire seated at Constantinople, Magnus dux classis, and Drungarius magnus,
Vide fragmenta ascripta Polybio.
as the chief carrier of the Pinsell or flagge. His style afterward was
Admiratus, from Amiras, a word of the Sarazens, signifying an Overseer, or a
Captain on sea or on land; for Mirar is to see, as the Spaniard uses it. From
this word Amiras, comes the word Amirante to the Italians for the Leader of
their fleets, as well as L'amiraglio: albeit they term their seafaring
Judges, Li consoli del mare, and such like from the same word Admiral, which
most part of the Nations of Europe use in the same meaning; as first and
chiefly France, where Childebert the first, one thousand years sithence,
instituted an Admiral as Captain and Commander of his Army upon sea, like as
he did then ordain a Marshall for the government of his Gen d'armerie on
land. Only the Spaniard called this Leader and Commander of his fleets and
navies, Adelantado: as who should go before the rest.

Briefly, the word Admiral, how ever this day it be used or abused, for to
signify the chief ship, which was Navis praetoria to the Romans, as the
chief Commander of the fleet; yet that word Great Admiral, notes properly the
man whom the Romans called Praefectum maris, and the Grecians, Thalassiarcham:
to wit, the Governor of the sea. And thus far concerning names and styles
for the Commanders and Gubernators of ships, fleets, and seas.

But concerning the jurisdiction of the sea, and the exercises of justice
amongst seafaring men; at first amongst the Romans, it was allowed to every
President on the coasts, and afterward other Judges were specially constitute
at the sea sides, called Magisteriani: Vide Alberic. ad novell. 17. and 24.
but their Judges were all countable to their higher Judge, styled Praefectus
praetorio sublimissimus, from whom was no appellatio^ or advocatio^ L. a
proconsulibus. C. de appell.


Sithence, in these latter days, for the readier obedience to the great
Admiral of the Sea, it is by common consent of Nations, successively agreed,
that in consideration of the Admirals their sovereign commandment, their
special preferment, and power upon the lives of men within the sea flood; that
therefore they should also have a sovereign jurisdiction only proper to
themselves, over all seafaring men within their bounds, and in all seafaring
causes and debates, civil and criminal. So that no other Judge of any degree,
at least in Scotland, may meddle therewith, but only by way of assistance; and
that by commission and in difficile causes, as was found in the action intended
by Antoin de la tour, against one Christian Marteis, 6 Novem. Anno 1542. Tom.
1. c. ^35 regist. Scot.


In which jurisdiction, the first power necessary, is to constitute a
Vice Admiral and Captains to supply his absence on sea; as also Deputies, for
particular parts on the coasts, with the Crowners to view the dead bodies found
on sea, or found on the coasts thereof, and Commissioners or Judges general,
for exercising justice in his high Court on land, with Clerks, Procurers,
Doome-sayers, Marshals, and other Officers, for the exercising of their said
jurisdiction both in peace and war: and therefore to sit and hold Courts
where they please; to execute justice, to imprison and relaxe; and to command
the Kings prisons and borroughs their prisons, to receive and keep their
warders and prisoners. L' Admiral de France.


Finally, their authority should be distinctly acknowledged in all things
pertaining to seafaring.

It is true, that in Scotland before the erection of our Admiral after the
example of other Nations, the Deanes of Gild were ordinarily Judges in civil
debates, betwixt Mariner and Merchant, as the Water-baily betwixt Mariner and
Mariner, like as the high Justice was Judge in their criminals. Which actions
all now falling forth betwixt the persons aforesaid, of due appertains to the
jurisdiction of the Admiral; and therefore his Judge depute or Commissar,
called Judge Admiral, and none other, should sit, cognost, determine and
minister justice in the foresaid causes: as likewise upon all complaints,
contracts, offenses, pleas, exchanges, assecurations, debts, counts,
charter-parteis, covenants, and all other writings concerning lading and
unlading of ships, fraughts, hyres, money lent upon casualties and hazard at
sea, and all other businesses whatsoever amongst sea-farers, done on sea, this
side sea, or beyond sea; not forgetting the cognition of writs and appeals
from other Judges, and the causes and actions of Represals or Letters of
Marque: yea, to take stipulations, cognossians, and insinuations, in the books
of the Admiraltie: and to do all other things without which the jurisdiction
of the Admiraltie cannot stand nor bear out; and therefore to arrest and put
in execution, to inquire within and without liberties, by the oaths of xij.
men upon all offenses. Vide diplomata admiralior. in utroque regno. Vide late
de off. Admir. Ang


As first, touching the revealers of the King and Country their secrets over
sea, in time of war.

Item, against Pirates, their Assisters or Abbetters, Outtreaders and Receptors.

Item, against fortifiers of the Kings enemies, and ha^^ers of his friends.

Item, against the breakers of the Admirals arrestments and attachments.

Item, against goods forbidden, and merchandise not customed, and yet shipped
and transported.

Item, against the resisters of the Admiral his officers, in executing his
precepts.

Item, against the forestallers, regraters, and dearthers of corn, fish,
drink, firewood, victuals carried over sea.

Item, against pleaders before other Judges than before the Judge Admiral, in
causes pertaining to his jurisdiction; as also against the Judges cognoscing
thereupon

Item, against them which give Sea-brieves, Testimonials, or such like, over
sea, without power or license from the Admiral.

Item, against transporters and carriers of traitors, rebels, manifest
transgressors, and fugitives from justice, over sea.

Item, against hirers and fraughters of ships of other nations, when they may
be served by their own nation:

Item, against such as cast in ballasting, sand, or what else, in harbors, or
channels, that may defile or spoil the same.

Item, against ship and boat-wrights, extortioning the Lieges or subjects.

Item, against taking away the boigh from the anchor, or cutters of cables, or
other tewes.

Item, against false weights and measures by sea.

Item, against shedders of other men's blood on sea, or any Port or river below
the first bridge next the sea: or them who are lamed or hurt through faulty and
ill gear in ship.

Item, against Customers or Water-bailies, taking more custom or anchorage
than wont.

Item, against such as absent themselves from wappinshewing or mustering; which
the Admiral may ordain twice a year in time of war, and once in two years
in time of peace, upon all dwellers at Ports and Harbors, or within one mile
near thereunto. L' Admiral de France.


Item, all sorts of transgressions committed by seamen, ferry-men, watermen,
as well in flood rivers and creekes from the first bridge, as on the seas;
Fishers, Pilots; Shipwrights, pressed men contemning the authority of the
Admiral: and after due cognition, to levy and apply to his own use the
penalties and amerciaments of all transgressors aforesaid, as due unto the
Admiral; together with the goods of Pirates, Felons, capital faulters, their
receivers, assisters, attainted, convict, condemned, outlawed or horned.

Item, wayffe or stray goods, wreck of sea, cast goods.

Item, deo dando, that is to say, the thing, whether Boat or Ship, etc. that
caused the death of a man, or whereout-of a man did perish.

Item, shares, lawful prizes or goods of the enemy. siclike Lagon, that which
was found lyand at the sea ground, and Flotson that is found swimming upon sea;
and Ietson, which is cast forth of the sea to the shore and coast, with
anchorages, beaconages, meare swine, Sturgeons and Whales, etc. and all fish of
extraordinary greatness, called regal fishes; which all are allowed in great
Britain, France, and other noble kingdoms, to the Admirals, by their
Sovereign; for the better maintenance of their estate, jurisdiction, and
conservancie on seas, rivers, floods, roads, ports, harbors, channels,
sailing, fishing, and all trading there, as altogether and chiefly committed to
the care, maintenance, and protection of the Great Admiral.

TIT. III.
Of the Admiral Clerk.
THe Clerk of the Admiral Court, beside that he should be very skillful,
faithful, and give his solemn oath thereupon at his admission; and beside the
points of his office requisite and common to all Clerks of other Courts, he
should have diverse Registers, as for congees, saueconducts, pasports,
sea-briefes; as without which no ship should pass to the sea in time of
war, not yet to far voyages in time of peace: L' Admiral de France.
which no other Judges nor Governors should give forth, but the Admiral
only. Eodem.


Item, one other Register for the reports of the Skippers and Captains, at
their return to the Admiral also. Eodem.


Item, one other Register for the names of Merchants, and Passengers, and
Owners; for the Skipper is holden to give-up the said persons by name. Secundum
act. parliam. Iac. ^. cap. 27.


And because no man ought to take upon him to be a Master or Pilot without due
trial of his skill: even so ought his trial to be registered in the Admiral
his books. L' Admiral de France.
But within the water of Thames, this trial and registration of Pilots,
pertaines to the Trinitie-house. Look the Charter of the Trinity house on
Thames.


Lastly, all money lent to hazard upon the sea, called of old Pecunia
trajectitia, for certain profit, called Foenus nauticum, for the which the
Lender was wont to bear the peril, against the manners of these avaricious
days; their lendings (I say) and bills of assurance, should be done before
the Admiral Clerk. L' Admiral de France.


To conclude, no other Clerk or Writer, may meddle or pen things concerning
the seafaring, without license of the Admiral. Kintor. art. 45


TIT. IV.
Of the Advocates and other Officers assistants for the better and speedier
proceeding in the Admiral Court.
FOr the more upright proceeding, and easier dispatch of causes and plaints in
the Admiral Court, it is found needful that all Procurers, before they be
heard, swear solemnly first, that they should do nothing maliciously; but as
soon as they find* their action to be unrighteous in any part of the
process, they shall tell it to their client: and if the client will insist,
then to show it to the Judge.

Secondly, that they shall not reveal their clients secret to the adversary,
nor yet collude with him to betray their client. And lastly, that they shall
propone neither dilator nor peremptor against their conscience. Il consolato
del mare.


To conclude, the oath of fidelity is likewise to be solemnly taken of the
rest of the officers of Court: for the due execution of their offices, namely,
at their admissions. Eodem.


TIT. V.
The manner of proceeding in Seafaring causes.
THe debates of sea-farers, and seafaring actions, should be decided according
to the received Laws and Statutes of the sea: which failing, then the customs
and consuetudes of these are to be followed. Perladeprecatio ad l. Rhod. Bald.
in l observan. in sect. antiquam de off. proc^ns.
because all dispositions and ordinances commonly take their interpretation
from consuetudes and uses. Innoc^nt. in e. vlim de ^erb. Sig.


And if neither law written, or unwritten custom, nor consuetude occurres or
appears, the last refuge is to the opinions and sentences of skilled and
upright men in the profession and exercise of seafaring; because it is old and
common, that the judgment of skilled and well practiced men, should be
followed in their own trade and calling. Per l. 1. de vent inspic.


But in the manner of proceeding, it is a perpetual privilege, Quod velo le
vato. L. de submersis C. de nauf. lib. 11.
That is to say briefly and summarily, causes should be cognosced, and without
the solemnity of other ordinary Courts and judgments, only looking to God
and the truth; so that the Judge should do, if it were possible, as God
himself. Vide rotam genuae, and DD.


Plaints then of sea-farers should be most summarily cognosced, but specially
of shipwreck; for it were a cruelty to vex so miserable persons with the
tedious ordinary proceedings of Courts, in so much as they need not to put
their petition in writing. ^artol. Lu^ius and Johannes ad d. l: de submersis.


And because that sailing tends to a great Commonwealth, therefore least
sea-farers should be wearied with pleas, and so either lose their right, or
their trade, Secundum l. illum de Pet. hered.
summary process should be common to them all.

Which sort of process is so urged by the Doctors of Law, that they counsel
Judges, who fear appellations or advocations, to prevent the same by a present
execution; DD. i^ c. proposu (...). de sor. comp ^.
namely, in causes of spoil or wrack: so that upon every interloquutor, they
may proceed to execution, making restitution presently. Providing always, that
caution be first found by the spoiled, to satisfy the sentence of the Judge
of the appellation, in case it shall happen to be made. L' Admiral de France.


This is also a privilege of the seafaring Judicature, that albeit by the
common rules of the law, where no Litiscontestation is past, no witness should
be received, nisi ad aeternam rei memoriam, ac adversario ad id citato; yet in
shipwreck, as a case very pitiful, any of the shippe-broken men may come to
the Judge of that part where the wrack happens, and by witness brought with him,
prove the wrack and spoil; Si quis. 10. C. de naufrag.
to the end that if any owner should pursue his goods, for to recover them, he
might be justly repelled by an exception of an innocent loss: L. Fin. ad l.
Rhod.
which should be done within a year and a day; namely, by such as were in
service to the Prince and country. L. quoties. de naufrag.


The like is to be observed also in causes of spoil; where by the laws of
England, it is sufficient for the spoyler to prove his goods by his mark, etc.
Vide statut. Ang.


In which doing, no citation is required; and that against the common law: L.
de unoqu^que. dear iudica. and L. quoties. C de naufrag. lib. 11.
yea, the death of the ship-broken may not only be proved by the rest living,
but also by the persons, who were present at the preparation of their voyage,
even their own parents and children, if none of the ship-broken be on live. De
l. quoties.


And as this is a privilege extraordinary for such chances; even so ordinarily
may Merchants and Mariners sailing together, bear witness each one to other
of their society within ship, if they have neither to lose nor gain thereby;
and namely Mariners, for or against the Skipper when the voyage is ended, and
when they are free from his commandment. Il conselato artic. 221. and 222.
For by the consent of the Doctors, when the truth cannot be otherwise tried,
then unable persons may be heard.

Item, to the end that this trade be not hindered by calumniators, and wilful
vexers of their neighbors under color of Law: it is provided, that not only
the common caution, Iudicio sisti, and Iudicatum solvi, be kept on the part of
the defender; but also that the pursuer shall find caution, de expensis
solvendis, if he fail in proof. Consent of ^ll sea laws.


Likewise, in case the party pursued be contumax, and will not compeire to
defend himself, or his ship, or things challenged; namely, after three or
four citations directed from the high Court of the Admiraltie, called quatuor
defaltae (for that citation called Vnum pro omnibu^, is not sufficient to
convince one of contumacy) specially in the claim or vindication of a ship,
any part thereof, or any other such like thing or goods; then may the Judge
ordain his Marshall or officer, by his sentence called primum decretum, to put
the plaintiff in possession thereof, at least to the worth of the suit:
Providing notwithstanding, that if the party compeir within a year and a day
after, offering the expense made to the pursuer, and caution to obey the
definitive, he shall yet be heard upon the propriety. Otherwise, that time
being fully expired, the Judge may proceed and adjudge the propriety of the
ship to the plaintiff. De offic. Admi. Ang. in fin. cum ibi citatis.


Neither is it needful to execute summons or citations in such cases,
elsewhere but where the ship or quarrelled goods in question lies, or at the
part usual of their haunting. Ibid.


Further, as this way it is provided for the snibbing and staying of
calumniators in judgment: even so it is ordained against maliciousness out of
judgment of such persons who only to hinder and stay their neighbors, vexes
them with needless arrestments; that upon caution such a^restments be speedily
losed, except it be either for fraught already deserved, or mariners wages, or
such cases wherein by law the ship is obliged; or else for service to the
Prince: Il conselato 4^
as also if arrestment be used, either upon goods, or mariner ready to sail,
the same may be loosed, upon caution to make forth-comming so much goods as
the mariner has within ship-boord. Denmark.


TIT. VI.
Of persons ordinary in ships.
TOuching persons ordinary for sailing in ships, they are of diverse orders, and
therefore diversely styled: as first, he who bears charge over all the ship
and kippage, is commonly called by us, and most part of nations, both now and
of old, and specially by the Roman laws, Navicularius, or Magister Navis: L.
1. and passim. ad l. rhod. and l. 1. parag* ^^naur, caup.
that is, as we speak, Master of the ship; by the Duchess, Skipper; and by
the Grecians, Nauarchus or Nauclerus; Vide l. semper de iur. immun ita. and l.
3. C. de navicular. Vide Vegetium de re militar.
by the Italians, Patrono. But if the ship be a warfaring ship, the principal
person is commonly called Captain by us and other near nations. The next to
the Master, is he who directs the ship in the course of her voyage, called by
the Frenchmen, Pilot; by Us and the Dutche, Steirsman; by the Romans,
Gubernator; Vide lege^ navales Rhodior.
by the Italians, Nochiero, Il consolato*
Pilotto, and Nauarchus, as Gerretus writes.

The third person is commonly called the Masters mate or companion, chiefly if
the Master be Steirsman himself: this man is called by the Grecians and Romans
Proreta: Vide dd. Il. navales, and Plautum in ruden^^.
his charge is to command all before the mast.

The fourth person is he who attends upon the mending of the faulty parts in
the ship, called by us and the Duchess, Timberman or Shipwright; by the old
Grecians and Romans, Naupegus or Naupagus: Vide dd. Il selec. Rhod.
but by the late Grecians, Calaphates: for which cause the Emperor Michael was
called Calaphates, because his father had been a Shipwright in Paphlagonia; as
witnesses Egnatius and Volateranus, Lib. 23*
and therefore the Venetians and Italians name their Timberman Calafatte. Vide
il consola.


The next person in order, is he who bears the charge of the ships boat,
called by us Boatsman; by the Italians, Barchierie; by the Grecians and
Romans, Carabita: for Carabus notes the boat of the ship. Vide dd Il. Selec.


The sixth person requisi^e in any ship of great burden, is a Clerk; by the
Italians, Scrivano, Vide il consol.
whose office is to write up and make account of all things received or
delivered in the ship, together with all the ordinary and needful expenses
made upon ship and kippage: who for his more faithful discharge, should at his
entry be sworn before the ordinary Sea-Iudge; as is ordinarily practiced in
Ancona, and other parts of Italy. Ferretus de re and iure navali.


The seventh is the Cook, a most necessary member as long as there will be
bellies.

The eighth is the ships boy, who keeps her continually in harbors; called
therefore by the Grecians, Nauphylakes; by the Romans, Dietarius; L. 1. parag
2, naut. caup.
and by the Italians, Guardiano. Il consolato.
All the foresaids are distinct in offices and names, and therefore accordingly
should also be distinguished in hyres and fees, after the custom of the
Country. The rest of the persons of the kippage, are under the common style of
mariners, which the Romans call Nautas: but they name those of the lowest and
base degree, as may be the boys and prentises in ship, Mesonautae, Vide
Budaeum ad l. 1. naut. caup.
and Nautebatae, as who should be ready at command, to climb upon the tewes,
or to such common service in the ship. Vide l. debet. parag. haec actio. naut.
caup.


TIT. VII.
The fraughting of Ships.
NO Ship should be fraughted without a charter-partie written and subscribed,
Il naval. rhod. select. art. 20.
containing both the Master and Merchant, and the name of the Ship, that no
doubt may arise; Vide Bartol. in l que^ rerum. parag. Si navem. de leg 1.
argumento l. Labeo de. Supel. ligat. etc.
and likewise, that the Master shall find a sufficient Steirsman, Timberman,
Shipman, and Mariners convenient, Shippe-tycht, masts, sails, tewes, strong
anchors, and boat fit for the ship, with fire, water, and salt, on his own
expenses. Cap 17. and 130. art. Iaco^. 3. Vide de Il. Rhod.
And this charter party, among all the western Merchants, and those of the
great Ocean, usually is made to per^orme all things requisite by the laws of
Oleron. d. art. 20.


And if there be no Writing, but an Earnest, then the Merchant, if he repent
or rue, loses his Earnest: but the Skipper, if he repent, loses the double of
the earnest or arles Art. 19. Il. naval. Rhod.


If the ship be not ready at the day appointed in the charter-party to go to
sea, the Merchant may not only free himself of her, Per legem item parag. Si
in lege l. ca.
except he hold his peace and discharge her not (for then by his silence he
appears to consent of new) but also shall or may obtain all charges, scathes
and interest: Oleron.
Except the Master show some excuse of a notorious necessity, or of a chance
that could not be eschewed: and then he loses only his fraught, because he
has not deserved it. Per l. si, ex conducto, and l. si item fundus, and l.
haec distinctio and d. l. si in. lege. loca.
But if the fault be in the Merchant, d, l. ex conducto.
he shall pay the Skipper and ships damage, or according to the Rhodian law,
shall entertain the kippage and company ten days; and if then he stay
longer, shall pay the fraught of all accordingly: (...) navalium.
and further, shall upset all hurt and damage happening by fire, water, or
otherwise, after the time appointed. Art. 29. cod.


It is true, that the Rhodians charge the Merchant in this case only with
half fraught, and the Skipper with the whole fraught if he fail: albeit that
the Romans inflict the pain of the whole fraught upon the Merchant: d l. si in
lege, and l. ult. ad l. rhod. and d. l. ex conducto.
specially, if he take forth his goods again; for then is the fraught thought
to be deserved. l. ult. loca^.


But if the ship in her voyage become unable without the Masters fault, or that
the Master or Ship be arrested by some Magistra^e in her way, the Master may
either mend his ship, or fraught another: but in case the Merchant agree not
thereunto, then the Master shall at least obtain his fraught, so far as he
has deserved it. Oleron, and l. ult. adc. Rhod.


For otherwise, except the Merchant consent, or necessity constrain the
Skipper, to put the goods in another ship worse than his own, the Master is
holden for all losses and damage, except that both the ships perish that
voyage, and that no fault nor fraud be found with the Master. d. l ult.
Also it is recounted for a fault, if the Master put forth the ship to sea,
either without a skilful Pilot, or without sufficient furniture and
necessaries, according to the clause ordinary ^f charter parties, or that the
other ship in which the goods were last put in, be not sufficient, or that the
Master hazard forth to sea in an unlikely time. d. l. item.
Yea, in former times it was forbidden expressly, as by the Emperors Gratian,
Theodosius, and Valentinian, to hazard upon sea from November till April l. 3.
de nauf C. Theodos. and l 3. de nauf C. Iallin. lib. 11.
As also by the Kings of Scotland, from S. Iudes day till Candlemas V^de act.
par.
And always it is accounted by the laws for a fault, to make forth of a Port
in time of a manifest storm. l. u^ique parag. fin. and l qui petitorio. parag.
fin. de vend. l. item queritor. sect. si navicularius. C. ^oca^ and l. u^t. de
naufrag.


Item, if a Skipper set forth his ship for a certain charge, and then takes in
any more, he ought to lose his fraught justly. la ro^l^ Oleron.


And in such a case, when goods be cast through storm, it shall not be made
good by any contribution, but by the Skipper his own purse. art. 2^ l^g.
naval. rhod.
And if he overburden the ship above the birth mark, he shall pay a fine.
Denmark.


Item, if a Ship Port at any other Port then she was fraughted to, against the
Masters will, as by storm, or some force; then the goods shall be transpor^ed
to the port conditioned, on the Skippers charges: but this thing also must be
tried by (...) oath of the Skipper and two of his Mariners: Oleron.
or else the Skipper may be in further danger.

Where also it is to be observed, that for the in-going to sundry diverse ports
by the way, imports not a diversity or a multiplication of voyages DD. in l.
qu^ romae parag. Callimachus. de verb oblig.


But if any man compel the Skipper to overburden ship or boat, he may be
therefore accused criminally, and pay the damage happening thereby. l. unica C.
ne quid on^r pub. lib. 1^.


Item, if any Skipper set his ship to an unfree man, and not of substance, and
other qualities prescribed by king James the third, c. 17 etc. (...) act. r.
Iac. ^.
he and his Mariners shall under-lie the pains contained therein.

Item, if a Merchant put in more goods in ship than was conditioned, then may
the Skipper take what fraught he please. Il consolato del ma^e.


It is imputed for a fault to the Master, if he direct his course by ways
either dangerous through Pirates, enemies, or other evil aventures, and holds
not forth his due rout, l. pe^. parag. si navis. loc. and l. si pecuniam. de
cond. indeb. and l. qui fiscalis C. de navicul. lib. 11. and l. quum proponas
de naut. ^oen.
and damage happen thereby.

It is likewise counted a fault, if the Master carry the pensell or flagge of
other Nations than his own, and thereby incurres scath and loss of any thing.
Per. l. quum proponas. ad l. rhod.
For, as packquets, pipes, hogsheads, and such like, should be marked by the
proper marks of the Merchants to whom they appertain: Per l. ^. C. d^ nav. b.
non excus and l. minim^. de espisc. aud^en*
even so should ships be discerned one from another, by their own pensell or
flagge

Item, if coffers, pipes, pakquets, etc. be delivered close and sealed, and
afterward shall be received open and loose, the Master is to be charged
therefore, until a due trial and consideration of that matter. Bat^. in l. in
actionib. in fin. de in lit. iurand, and in l. unic. furt. advers. naut.


The Master also must be answerable, for that harm which the rats for want of
a cat do in the ship to any merchandise. Per l. item quae parag si ^ull^. loc.


TIT. VIII.
Of the Master of the Ship, his power, and duty thereunto belonging.
THe Master of the ship is he to whom the whole power and charge of the ship
is committed: l. 1. de exercit. act.
which power is prescribed, partly by the owner or outreader, and partly by the
common law of the sea: as, to set her forth for fraught; to take in passengers;
to mend and furnish the ship. d. l. 1
And to that effect, if need be, in a strange country to borrow money with
advise of the kippage or, company, Oleron.
upon some of the tackle, or to sell some of the Merchants goods; provided,
that the highest price that the rest of the goods is sold for at the market, be
repayed to the Merchant: which being done, the fraught of that goods so sold
and repayed, shall be repayed by the Master to the owner of the ship, as well
as the fraught of the rest of the Merchants goods, except the ship perish in
the voyage; in which case only the price that the sold goods were bought for,
shall be rendered: Eod.
And for no other cause, no not in the chance of shipwreck, may the Master
take on or conquest money, specially, by-selling of Merchants goods. Eod.
And thus far concerning his power

As for the Masters duty, he ought first before he loose or make sail, to
seek and obtain the consent of the most part of the kippage or company; yea,
if he be not very skillful, he should do no other thing of importance without
their advise: otherwise, he shall undergo whatever damage happens by his
doings; Eod.
and specially if he loose forth of any harbor without an expert Pilot, l.
item Magister locat.
yea, or in the harbor the ship happen to fallover. Oleron.


And as the Skipper his rashness and unskilfulnesse is thus-wise corrected:
even so his negligence and sloth is to be punished. As first, by suffering the
overlap and cowbridge to be unticht, Denmark.
or the pumpe to be faulty, or a sufficient decking to be lacking; Leges
naval. Rhod. art. 11.
and specially, from corn, victual, and such like goods, which should be most
carefully kept, and fenced from water and spoiling. Eod. art. 38.
Otherwise, the negligent Skipper is holden to make good all scath or damage
coming thereby, beside that the fraught of such spoiled goods is lost; except
that Art. 44. eod.
the ship or crear was open from the beginning, and fraughted without any
overlap: Vide. l. 1. parag. quadam de exercit.
which two kinds of ships, are termed by the Iurisconsult, Emphractae and
Rephractae, d. l. 1 parag. quaedam.


Further, this duty is required of the Master, that according to the Act made
by King James the third of Scotland, he give up the names of all persons
transported in his ship, before he make sail: c 27 actor. per lac 3 and l'
Admiral de France.
As likewise at his return, the just Inventarie of the goods of any persons
which shall happen to depart this life in that voyage; L' Admiral.
to the end, that not only the lieges at home, nearest to the dead, may
succeed to their right: but also concerning strangers so deceased, and their
goods, that the same may be put in sure keeping, forthcomming for three years
space; but by the custom of England, one year, until the nearest of the
dead-mans kin come and claim the same. Il consolat del mar. at. delmar.
Of which goods in the mean time, the bedding with the pertinents thereof, may
be of due taken by the Master and his mate, to their uses; as also such
clothing, and other thing then presently upon that persons body, may be
delivered to the boatsman and servants of the ship, as who ought therefore to
bury, or cure at least, the over-putting of the dead in the Sea. Eod.


TIT. IX.
Of the Masters duty to the Merchant and Passenger; and of his privileges.
THe Master ought to render again whatever he receives within his ship, to him
who delivered the same, as well victual as clothing and merchandise, goods, or
other thing: T. T. nau^, caup.
where we take goods to be delivered, if either it be put in the ship, or in
presence of the Master or Clerk as his deputy, laid to the ships side, l. 1.
in fin. eodem.
and both ways, the peril to appertain to the Master. l. 3. eod.


Which thing also is extended to boatsmen, and to the Ferryers: d. l. 1. parag.
^
and yet is it surest to deliver goods before witness, and that either to the
Master, Clerk, or Skipper his deputies thereto: Art. 12 ll. navalium.
for the master is not holden for such things as are put in ship without his,
and his companies knowledge; l. 1. depositi.
because where men are found ignorant, they are also esteemed not to consent.
But if the Merchant or Passenger keep his goods by himself, as money or such
thing in his coffers, and then allege the lack thereof, then is the Skipper
and his kippage only to purge themselves by their oath: Eod. art. 13.
but if afterward notwithstanding they be found guilty, the denyer shall pay
the double, and also be punished for perjurie. Art. 14. eod.


Even so, the Master is liable for all damage sustained through evil hooks,
cordels, blocks or lines; namely, if the mariner foreshew the said things to be
faulty: and always the mariners shall help the Skipper in common to pay the
said damage. Oleron.


Item, if any scath or damage happen to the Merchant or Passengers goods,
through unreasonable stowing or breaking up, the master shall not only refound
or make good the same, but also lose his fraught, and twenty pound in Scotland
to the King, Eod. etc. 17. etc. 130. act. Jacob. 3.
or his Admiral as his successor now; and for lack of proof in this case,
the Skipper and his kippage shall be put to their oath. Oleron.
Further, what ever shall hape^ through fault, negligence or chance eschewable,
or by the deed of passengers and others than himself or his kippage, the
Skipper is holden to answer and pay for all, to the uttermost penny: d. l. 1.
in fin. and l si vendita de perie. rei. vend. and l. 5. and 6. naut. caup.
for if such damage happen by a mariner, the Skipper shall refound the double,
d. l 6. and l. 7. eod.
but he may repett it from the mariner. d. l. 7.
But it is not so if the damage be done by a mariner to another, except he be
a Merchant also, or by a Merchant or Passenger to one another, then shall not
the double be sought of the master. Vide d. l. 7 and l. unic. furt. ad naut.
caup.
Neither yet is the master holden for anything without the ship, or yet within
the same, if he duly forewarn each man to keep his own goods, and they agree
thereunto. l. fin. naut. caup. and per l. itaque de ed. edict.


Such is the force of due protestation, according to the opinions of the most
famous Doctors; Bartol. and Jason in l. non solum parag. mortem. de nou oper.
nunc.
which conditions aforesaid, are most justly laid upon the master, because he
ought to hire good men, and no evil person in his company: Instit. de ob. qu^
ex delict. parag fin.
for it is in his own free will to choose his company, and he should not be
ignorant of the men he has to do with; l. quicu^ alio. de rog. iur.
otherwise, if the master were not so obliged to all such duties and diligence
for the Merchant and Passenger, there should be great occasion of stealth and
spoil. l. 1. in fin. naut. caup.


Lastly, if through the Masters fault, confiscation, or other damage happe^s,
as for non-payment of the custom, or false bills of the goods customable, or for
transporting of unlawful goods, the Master shall refound the same with the
interest. Seund. fin. l. ult. ad l. Rhod. and l. quum proponas C. de naut.
s^^nor.


But concerning the pursuits of these aforesaids, as the Merchant may well
pursue for the spoiled goods only: Accursius in l. 5. naut. caup. per l. mela
ad l. aq.
even so may the Master pursue the stolen goods; as he who must only, at
least, chiefly, answer therefore. Per. l itaque de furtis.
And yet for all this, in case for want of these things, which the Merchant at
the fraughting promised to be done at the entry to the voyage, any of the
aforesaid losses happens, and therewith the Master and four mariners swear no
fault to have been in them, the Master shall go free. La reol d' Oleron.


And yet must we not overpasse this observation, that if the Master offer the
just custom, anchorage, or whatever other duty pertaines to any Customers, and
he, because of their unrighteous refusal, makes sail, the weather and his
necessity so requiring, then may he be justly defended afterward against that
Customer. Per l. quantae: de pu^.
Neither yet should a ship that has once paid her anchorages, pay again, if
she be forced through tempest back to the same Port. Per l. fin. parag. si
propter necessi^atem eod.


TIT. X.
The Masters duty to the Mariner.
SEeing the Master is the ordinary ruler over his own kippage or company, he
ought to keep them in peace so long as they eat his bread. Oleron.
And if any mariner hap to be hurt in doing service, or by his companion, the
Master shall cause him to be healed, as he who is only answerable for the fact
of all within ship-boord; Per. l. 1. de exerc. act. and l. fin. naut. caup.
and then by his authority, repeit or recover from the other mariner, the
charges, with all that is lost to the hurt man thereby: Art. 5. ll. naual.
except that he who is hurt or lamed, have provoked the other by evident
invasion, assault, or strokes. Art. 6. eod.


And if a mariner become sick, the Skipper shall cause him to be laid in a
house, with all sustentation necessary and usual in the ship, but shall not
stay the ship until he be healed; and when he recovers health, shall give him
his hire: or if he dye, shall give it to the wife or nearest friends. Per. l.
ulr. ad l. Rhod.
But if a mariner be not hurt in the ships service, the Skipper shall hire
another in his place; who if he draw more hyre, then that mariner shall refound
the superplus. Oleron.
And always the Master ought to le^d his mariners if they lack Eod.


Item, if through the Masters fault, the ships boat perish with any mariners in
it, as through spoyld tews, etc. then shall the Master pay one whole years hyre
to the heirs of the drowned: Art 46. il. naval.


Item, he ought to give his mariners, flesh upon Sunday, Tuesday, and Thursday;
and upon other days, fish, or such like, with sufficient drink: but no meat
to them that sleep not in the ship. ll consolato.
And yet the quality and quantity of mariners food and hyres, goes diversely,
according to the diverse customs of Countries, and the conditions made at the
entry to their voyage.

TIT. XI.
Of the duties and privileges of Mariners.
MAriners owe all due obedience to the Master, not only in flying from him in
his wrath so far as they can, but also in suffering; yet may they after one
stroke defend themselves. In case of rebellion of mariners against their
master, which is thought then to be done, when the Master has thrice lifted
the Towell from before any mariner, and yet he submits not himself, then may
he not only be commanded forth of the ship at the first land, but also if he
make open strife and debate against the master, he shall lose his half hire,
with all the goods he has within ship-boord. Oleron, and il consolato.


But if in this strife a mariner uses any armor or weapons, then should the
rest of the mariners bind him, prison him, and present him to justice; so that
if any of them refuse to lay to his hand, and to assist, he shall lose his
hire, with all that he has within shippe-boord. Il consolato. cap. 160.
Yea in case any number of the mariners would conspire to force the Skipper to
pass to any other Port, than to the which he was fraughted, then may they be
accused criminally, and punished, as for a capital crime. Denmark.


And yet, if a rebellious mariner repent in time, and offer amends for a simple
rebellion, and the Skipper notwithstanding refuse; he may follow the ship, and
obtain his hire. Oleron.


Mariners ought each one to help and assist others on the sea: or else he that
refuses, loses his hire; and the oath of his fellows shall be a proof
against him. Eodem.


Mariners in a strange Port, should not leave the ship without the masters
license, or fastening her with four ^ewes; or else the loss lights upon them.
They should also await upon the ship until she be discharged, and ballasted
new, Denmark. Oleron.
and the tackle taken down.

And if a mariner, in time of loosing and lading, labor not with the rest of
the company, but goes idle and absents himself, he shall pay a fine to the
rest, prorata, at the Masters discretion. Denmark.


At least, the half of the kippage or company, ought in strange country port
or road to stay aboard: and the rest who go a-land, albeit with license,
should keep sobriety, and abstain from suspected places, or else should be
punished in body and purse, like as be who absents himself when the ship is
ready to sail. Denmark.
Yea, if he give out himself for worthier than he is in his calling, he shall
lose his hire, half to the Admiral, and the other half to the master: Eodem.
but this especially ought to be executed against an unworthy Pilot. Eodem.
The mariner also forfets his hire if the ship break in any part, and he help
not with all his diligence to save the goods. Oleron.


If it chance any otherwise than well to the Master, the mariners are then
holden to bring back the ship to the port from whence she was fraughted,
without delay, Eodem.
except it be otherwise provided.

A mariner may carry as much meat forth of the ship as he may eat at a meal,
but no drink. Eodem.


A mariner may either keep his portage in his own hand, or put forth the same
for fraught: and yet should not the ship stay upon the preparation for his
portage. Eodem.
So that in case the ship be fully laden before the goods for his portage be
brought in, he shall have the just fraught of so much goods. Il consolato.


If a ship pass further than the mariner was hired, his hire should be
accordingly augmented; except he be hired, as the French man speaks, a
mareages, mais non a deniers. Oleron.
If a Mariner run away with his hire undeserved, he deserves the gallows.
Denmark, and Oleron.


If a mariner be hired for a simple mariner, and afterward in the voyage finds
hiring tobe a Pilot or a Master, he may pass with provision to render his
former hire: eve^ so is it if he mary. Eodem.


Mariners are not only holden to loose and deliver goods over-boord; but also
if no Porters nor Caryers be in those parts, to carry the same themselves, for
such hire as other workmen should have had therefore. Il consolato del ma^e.


If it happen a ship to be prized for debt or otherwise to be forfeited, yet
should the mariners hire be paid; and if she prosper, to receive their pay in
the same money that the fraught is paid with. Eodem.


Lastly, a mariner should neither be arrested nor taken forth of a ship making
to sail, for any debt (but only his hire, and as much other goods as he has
in the ship arrested therefore, according to the quantity of the debt, and the
master to be answerable for all: Oleron. Denmark. Kinror.
because the ship is compared to a man's dwelling house; Bald. in l. certi
iuris. loc.
and by the Civil law, a man's dwelling house is his most sure refuge) l. nemo.
de reg. iur. and l. plerunque. de in ius voc.
except for a sworn debt, or a penalty to the King through some crime.

TIT. XII.
Of the Clerk of the ship.
IN ships of great bulk and burden, a Clerk is most needful: who being put in
by men of chief power, and sworn solemnly before some Judge, as the use is in
Italy (or at least before owners and mariners) that he shall write nothing but
the truth, nor leave ought unwritten; being, I say, so constitute, neither
Merchant nor mariner may put in or take out any thing of the ship without his
knowledge. So that whatsoever goods or other thing shall happen through storm
or otherwise, to be cast, stolen, or spoiled, that has not been presented or
shown to the Clerk, it shall no way be up^set by contribution, or any search
made therefore. And if it come safe to land, the Skipper may take what fraught
he likes therefore. Also the Clerk may take of that which is delivered to him,
and sell thereof for the ships need, but must satisfy the owner thereof: for
he must be always countable of his receipts: Il consolato.
But howsoever he do, he may neither take in, nor give forth goods by night,
but in day light. L' Admiral de France.
Vide statuta Ang.

TIT. XIII.
Of a Pilot or Steirsman.
IF a Master hire a Steirsman not only for to guide his ship in through shalds
or other dangers at a time only, but also for a whole voyage, and to be ready
therefore against a certain day, and he fail to keep that day, he shall not
only pay Master and Merchants damage or stay, but also the fraught that is
lost thereby: except sickness, or some very lawful excuse qualify it. Oleron,
and arg bult. ad l. rhod.


A Steirsman, after the time he has brought the ship in sure harbor, is no
further bound or liable; for then should the Master see to her bed and her
lying, and bear all the rest of the burden, charge, and danger: so that if
before she come into the Port or some safety, either she or goods perish or be
spo led, the Pilot makes good the same: yea, if his faul^ or ignorance be so
gross, that the company sees any manifest and present wrack to all thereby,
then may they lead him to the hatches and strike off his head. Oleron and il
consolat.
Yea, if without any seeing danger, certain of the skilfull'st mariners deem
that he is not so skillful as he set himself forth to be, then shall he both
lose his hire, and double the same to the Admiral and Master, or else pass
thrice under the ships keil. Denmark.


TIT. XIV.
Of money lent to Sea, called Nauticum foenus.
GReat is the difference, or at least should be betwixt money lent amongst men,
to use on land, and that money which is lent to Sea; for this money is called
pecunia Traiectitia, because that upon the hazard of the lender it is carried
over Sea. So that if the ship perish, or that all b^ spoiled, the money loses
to the lender. L. r. de foen. naut.
But on the contrary, money on land is delivered on the peril of the borrower:
so that the profit of this, is the price of the only simple loan; therefore
generally called usura: but the profit of the other loan is called usura
maritima, or soenus nauticum, which is not the price of the loan, but of the
hazard and danger which the lender takes upon him during the loan: L.
periculi. eod.
which is understood to be to a certain day or voyage, or whatever of time
agreed upon. And therefore if the money miscarry, either before the voyage
begun, or after the term appointed for the f^ll loan; then the peril
pertaines to the borrower thereof, and not to the lender: Vide passim ad. ll.
de foen. naut. and ad. ll. naval. Rhod.
I mean of perils proceeding from storms, violence, spoil or such like
occasions, which cannot be eschued by any diligence of the borrower; and
therefore in case the borrower employ the lent money upon lawful goods, or
that by his defrauding of the due customs, the same be confilcat, the lender
is freed of such hazards. Vide l. 3. C. de foen. naut.
It is also to be noted, that money lent upon the Sea, without hazard, and yet
with security, should pay no profit, suppose it were unbooked in the Clerks
book with the profit; contrary to that which is lent on land: Art. 15. and 16
Leg. naval.
so that albeit money be lent within the ship during the voyage, to the need of
the company; and if before the day appointed for the rendering, shipwreck or
spoil happen, then should the loss come in contribution between them; Art.
17. eod.
because if that money had been lying by the lender, still unlent, it had bin
in common danger of shipwreck of spoil with the rest. But if the time appointed
were past with the hazards aforesaid, then shall the borrower repay the
borrowed money, free from all contribution. d. art. 17.


Further, in case the borrower deteines any such lent money as is aforesaid,
beyond the term appointed for the repaying, he shall at his return not only
pay the profit agreed upon before the voyage, but also augment the same
according to the greater time, and yet shall not pay the profit of that first
condition, but only after the common rate. Art. 18. eod.


TIT. XV.
Of the Outreaders, or Outriggers, Furnishers, Hyrers, and of the Owners of
Ships, and of actions for and against them.
IT is not only permitted to him who contracts with the Master of a ship, or
that has any other action or claim against him as Master of the ship, to
pursue him; but also the outreader, setter, or exercitor thereof, as him who
placed the Master; and therefore ought to make good the Masters deed and fact.
Parag. exercitor. just. de ob. ex quasi delic. T. T. naut. coup.
This outreader we take to be him to whom the commodity of the ship eod. ibid.
redounds; so that he may lay his action upon any of them; Ne in plures
adversarios distrahatur qui cum uno tantum contraxit. d. l. 1. 2. and 3. eod.


But the rest of the owners or outreaders shall relieve this man prorata* of
their portio^s; except the handling of the ship be so severally divided amongst
them: or that the Master have not his power and commission of them all: l. 4 in
prin. eod.
or that the master have obliged himself beyond his commission; as if he have
taken on money to mend the ship, when as she needs it not: or that he have no
commission at all; in which case the lender has to blame his own folly: for
by the common rule of Law, men should know well the persons and their
conditions, with whom they have to bargain. d. l. 1. and l. qui cum ali^ de
reg. iur.
And yet in case evident need be of mending, and money be lent thereto; suppose
the Master should spend it otherwise, yet ought the outreader to satisfy the
creditor. l. ult* de exer. act.
But above all, that money which is lent for victuals to the ships company,
should be repayed, as preferred before all other sort of debts. Per l. interdum.
cum seq. Qui p^tior in pig.
But a Merchant contracting with a Mariner that is not a Master, shall have no
action against the outreader, except for a fault done by the Mariner,
specially, if he has been hired and put in by the outreader.

Again, albeit by the common law of the Sea the outreaders may not pursue
persons obliged to the Skipper, yet are they permitted to pursue upon the
Masters contract, as they had bin contracters principal; Passim. d. l. 1.
because in such dealings he sustaines the out^^aders person: and because of
the great commonwealth that is Procured by this kind of traffic, d. l. 1.
parag. 10.
worthily such privileges to the outreaders and exercers of shipping are
granted. And yet is not the Master always bound to satisfy all counts to the
outreaders: specially, in case it happen some passengers to be Non solvendo,
the Master is nor holden to pay for them, because it becomes not the Master, in
the acceptance of Passengers, to search out so narrowly their means and
ability. l. 2. sect. 6. (...) l. Rhod.


And again, the outreader is not holden always to answer for the Masters
sloth, but for his own self. Oleron.


TIT. XVI.
Of sundry Partners of Ships, and their discords.
MOreover, concerning the owners of the ship, in case they cannot agree amongst
themselves to remain in Partnership; seeing by the law they cannot be
constrained thereunto: l. fin. C. prosocio. and pass. inst. and D. eod.
yea, not albeit a Paction had bin made never to sunder; L. in hoc parag. si
conveniat. pro soc.
then is there many considerations required in their sundring. And first, if
their common Ship or Cray be put in building; or that she be but presently
bought: in these cases it is thought convenient, that she shall be employed one
voyage first, upon the common outread and hazard, before any of these Partners
be heard to sunder and discharge their part. And after that, if they cannot
agree, he who desires to be free, should offer to the rest, and set his part on
such a price, as he will either hold or sell, which if he will not do, and
yet refuses to outread with the rest, then may the rest rigge forth the ship at
their own charges, and also upon the hazard of the wilful refuser, so far
as his part extends, without any count to him of any deal or part of profit at
her return: Denmark. cum ll. hic seq.
but they must be bound to him to bring her home safe, or the value of his
part.

And justly; because that, as ships were inven^ed in common, for the use of
all men; even of them that dwell in the mountains, as on the coasts of the
sea: l. arboribus parag. naves de usufr.
so were they ordained and builded for sailing, and not to lie idle and
unoccupied. Glossa in l. si navis. and iuris. in l. utique para. culp^ de
r^iundic. and l. arborib. parag navi^. de usufruct.
But if the persons, who have most part of the ship, refuse to abide in
partnership with him who has a small part, that neither he can sell his part
at that price, without great loss, nor yet is able for poverty to attain to
their parts, then are they all bound to put the ship to an appraisement.
consolato.
Otherwise, the scoff which Casselius, a Roman lawyer, used against two
wilful partners of a ship, may also be used against such: that is to say, while
they asked him by what way they might divide and part their ship, Casselius
answered; If ye divide her, then neither of you shall have her. Maerobius lib.
2. c. 6.


And if for lack and want of buyers in that place, the poor partner can
neither eschew the oppression of the richer, nor yet the rich satisfy the poor
man, perchance also wilful; then may the Judge ordinary deal and decree in
this case, as he may In omnibus alijs bonae fidei actionibus: that is to say,
consider all the circumstances of the persons, their motions, the matter of
their debate, with all the merits thereof, and make up a full consideration of
all together, that every man may obtain and receive his own due right. Secundum
citata, and Secundum. l. bona fides. Deposit.


TIT. XVII.
Of Casting of goods in a voyage, and the like; and of Contribution to be made
therefore.
COncerning contribution or scott and lot, as we speak, it is ordinary: and
first, it is practiced upon ships so stormestead that for relief of lives
and goods, casting of goods must be made: In that case the master shall consult
with the mariners: who if they consent not, and yet the storm and danger
continue, then may the master cast some goods notwithstanding: Oleron.
But if the mercha^t be present, let him begin to cast, Il consolato.
next the mariners: but if the mariner keep back any part that should be cast,
to his own use, he shall render the double. Art 3^. Il maval. select.


But when afterward the master shall come to land, he must with the most part
of his company swear that he did cast goods for no other cause but for the
safety of ship, goods, and lives Oleron.
Secondly, when goods are cast, they shall be upset and compensed by a
contribution of Ship and such goods as are safe thereby: l. 1. and 2. ad l.
rhod.
and not only of goods paying fraught and burdensome, but of clothing, money,
jewels, and such like, d. l. 2. and oleron
which are not weighty.

For, it is most righteous, that the loss be common to all things which are
safe thereby. eod.
Except things borne upon a man's body, victuals and such like, put in ship to
be spended, and therefore should not scott and lot, with other goods: in so
much, that when they become scant and wanting, each man is bound to communicate
the same one to other. d. l. 2.


But here it may be asked, whether yet should all kind of cast goods, be
up-set and made good by contribution, as for example, the goods transported
above the overlap, and goods forbidden to be transported l. 17. etc. 130 actor.
Jacob. 3.
Sure, if such goods happen to be the cause of any scathe and danger, the
master who received the same within his ship, shall bear the loss and also be
criminally pursued therefore. Arg. l Vnie. C. ne quid oner. public.


But if goods unadvisedly, without consent of the owner thereof, be cast out,
on the sudden; then may he himself upon his conscience esteem his own goods
to the just worth, because the company has that way by their rash dealing,
lost the privilege they had to estimate that goods. Per. l. si fide. iussor.
D. qui satisd. cog.


In like manner the ship gear and apparel wracked by storm, imports no more
contribution, then if a workman break or spoil his work-tooles, or
instruments in his ordinary work, d. l. 2 and l. navis eod.
except in the avoiding of a danger, as the helving the maste over-boord, l.
amissae. eod. and Oleron.
or the slipping of a Tow-anchor or boat upon just fea^^, or at the desire of
the Mercha^ts. d. l. 1. and il consol. del. mar.
But that should be always proved by the oaths of the ship-men: for concerning
all facts within house or ship, credit must be given to the domestics and
company familiar. Per. l. conse^su. C. de repud: and l. qu^ties. C. de naufrag.
etc. veniens. extr. de testib. etc. 2. de pr^bat.
Also if goods be put in without the master and clerks knowledge; if they be
cast, they shall have no contribution. Il consolato del mar.


TIT. 18.
Of contribution for Pirates.
IF ship or goods be redeemed from a Pirate, contribution shall be made
therefore, by all; because the redemption is made for the safety of all. But if
the Pirate be once Master of all, and yet take but some special goods, whether
from ship or Merchant, and not as a contentation for the sparing of the rest,
it should appear in this case, that seeing the remnant is not safe hereby, but
freely spared, that no contribution should be made for the taken goods. For
oftentimes Pirates take but things at their pleasure, and not of mind to
spoil. Vide lat^. l. 2. ad l. rhod.
Yet now adays because this chance of taking at pleasure, concerns (in common
judgment) the rest of the goods as subject to that same pleasure of the Pirat;
therefore should it be also in common upset by all to whom that chance is
common.

TIT. XIX.
Of contribution for spoiled and spilt goods.
IF through the losing of any cast goods, or upon any needful occasion, the
remaining goods be spoiled either with wet, or otherwise; a contribution shall
be made, proportionable for so much as they are made worse. Vide l. navis 4.
ad. l. rhod.


TIT. XX.
Of contribution for lightning and disburdening of ships for their easier entry
to the Port, and for other chances.
IF it be needful to lighten a ship of her burden, for her easier entry to
Port or channel, the two parts of the loss fall upon the goods, and the third
part on the ship; except that the ship surpass in worth the loading, or that
the charge of goods be not the cause of her inability to enter, but some bad
quality proceeding of the ship it self: Oleron.
Or that otherwise it be provided in the charter-partie, that the goods shall
be fully delivered at the Port covenanted and appointed; for then condition
makes law: L. 1. verse quod convenit. depos.
In which case it is to be also observed, that if by occasion of lightning, the
goods which are put in the boat or Lighter, perish, the ship and remaining
goods in ship shall upset the same. But on the contrary, if the ship and
remaining goods perish after the Lighter is once safe, no contribution shall be
set upon the goods in the Lighter: because the rule is constant, that only
then should goods be liable to contributions, when ship and goods come safe to
Port. d. l. navis. and l. amissae ad l. rhod.


Item, contribution should be for the Pilots fee, that is taken in to guide her
into an unknown Port; Oleron.
as also to raise the Ship off ground when the fault is not in the Master. Eod.


Even so if two ships rush and cross one over another, and the company swear
their innocence, as that it lay not in their power to stay the same,
contribution must be made for one equal upset of both their losses. eod. and
l. quemadmodum. parag. si navis ad. l. Aquil.
But not so if one of them perish; because of that mishap, there can be no due
proportion of the loss: for if it were otherwise, a malicious Skipper, might
of purpose set an old weak ship against a strong ship, in hope of some upset
and recompense. And yet for redress of the lost ship, an action may be to
the owner, against the negligent Master, or the Mariner who losed her, or cut
her cable: d. l. quemadmodum. parag. si navis ad. l. Aquil
which action is called Legis Aquiliae, for damage and scathe done. And
therefore if such a chance befall in the day light, by a ship under sail
against a ship riding at anchor, then the Master of that sailing ship, shall
make good the damage or scathe of the other, to the extremity: and the like
shall be done, if in the night the riding ship hold fire and light forth, or
make any crying to forewarn the other.

It also pertaines to this argument, Art. 3. 6. 11* naval. rhod.
if some sort of goods, as salt, or corn, be laid on heap by diverse partners,
into a ship without distinction, and that the Master deliver to any of them
their due measure, and before the rest receive their measures, the remaining
salt or corn, washes or looses, he that had the good luck to be first served,
enjoyes it fully without any contribution to the rest of the partners:(i)
because when this goods was put into the ship, it was delivered to the master,
tanquam in creditum; and so he is become owner, as of lent money: which men are
not holden to render in the self same pieces, but in value or such like coin;
Just. in pr. qu^b. mod. re contrab. ob. ^e. l. 2. si cert. peti.
except quod convenit de verb. ob.
there be some other condition past before: which in all affairs makes law.
Neither can this be imputed for any fault to the master, because of necessity
he behooveth to make delivery to one, first, before another. Vidd. l. in menave.


TIT. XXI.
Of the common manner of contribution, and execution thereof.
IN setting of contribution or rates, things must be estimate in manner
following.

First, the goods cast, spoiled, or reft; to the price they cost, if their
chances did happen before midde voyage: but if after the midde voyage, then to
the price, the rest of the same goods attain to at the market; because there
is here a consideration, rather of loss and scathe than of any gain. l. 2. in
fin. ad l. rhod. and il consolato.
And because damage and loss should be drawn as it were in streite, and gain
and vantage spredde forth and extend, according to Harmenopolus sentence;
spoiled and lost goods should be set to the common worth, and not after men's
affections: d. l. navis and l. pretia. ubi bartol. ut ad. l. 7. C. de prog.
milit^r. lib. 12.
except only in goods unadvisedly cast: wherein for the correction of the
rashness of the casters (as who thereby appear to have amitted their own
privilege) the estimation of the goods is permitted to the conscience of the
Merchant or owner thereof. ( Per. l. si ^ideiussor. Qu^. satisd. cog.
Vide supratit. 17.

Secondly, concerning the Persons, whose losses are under contribution, he
should first deal with the master, to retain all the same goods on the
bottom of the ship, in his keeping, until the rate be set and executed: l. 2
ad l. rhod.
or else may omit all other persons, and pursue the Skipper ex conducto: which
also ceases, if the cast goods be found again. d. l. 2. in fin.


Lastly, concerning the Master of the Ship his privilege, it is not only upon
the detinew, and keeping of the goods and geere brought within his ship, which
are thought as by a privy band to be obliged and given him in pledge for the
fraught, by common consent of lawyers, but also for the due and timely
satisfaction of such contributions; because the imposed taxation, as likewise
the fraught, is thought to stick firmly to the said goods: and therefore the
Master may hold his hand thereon, until satisfaction be made, l. 1. de dol.
mal. excep. and l. si non sortem. de cond. in de.
albeit that commonly the withholding of other men's good be not allowed. l. 1.
parag, rediguntur. D. quod vi ^ut clam.


TIT. XXII.
Of privileged ships.
SHips or boats serving the Country, or the Prince, have great prerogatives.
For first they go free from all Imposts, Customs, and Arrestments, l. 1. de
navicul. c. lib. 11.
not only in forth-going, but also in their return, according to Frederick
the Emperor his constitution. Auth. (...) filiu^ pre patre.
Yet if a Skipper serving the Prince or Country, wilfully falls on coasts
and by-courses where he should not, to their hurt and hinderance, he merits
death: l. 5. de navicular. C. lib. 11.
and the commanders or officers in chief parts, who wittingly suffer such
Skippers to lie and slugger, incur a forfeiture of all their goods. l. ult.
eod.


And if any man shall force the Skipper of these or any other ships to take in
more than his just charge, not only should he upset all hurt and loss, but
also be publicly punished. Art. 49. Il. selectar. naval.


And as these are the conditions of ships serving the Prince; so is it to be
known that all sorts of ships are subject to this service, upon command: Vide
Tit. de navib. non excusand. C.
otherwise in case they refuse, their ships shall be confiscat, except they
report a testimony from the Admiral of very lawful excuse de offic. admir.
Ang.


Yea, further is to be noted, that Masters of ships and Ferriers once so
professed, are bound to serve as well subjects in common, as the Prince;
Albericus ad tit. naut. caup. and in l. unic. furt. adver* naut. caup.
except they have left the trade, or be under a safe conduct, or have taken in
more, then they can well carry a shipboard. Bart. and Bald. in d. l. unic.


And this is a common privilege to all sort of loaded and burdened ships, to
have the nearest place to the shore, for their discharge and unloading; and
therefore the ships lightened, to give them place. Wis^i^ c. 10.


Lastly, even the persons who build, purchase, or dress ships expressly for a
commonwealth to their. Country, are accounted amongst the privileged: Qui
navium de privileg. creditorum.
yea the frequenters of sailing are also privileged in all Courts. C.
Innocentius. de for. comp.


TIT. XXIII.
Concerning Shipwreck.
STrangers incurring shipwreck in Scotland, should have the same favor of us
that we use to receive of them in the like case; 138. actor. Jacob. 1.
so that no confiscation should be used against them, except they use to do so
to us, or that they be very Pirates, or enemies to Christianity: L. 1. C. de
naufrag. and auth. naufragia, C. de furt.
otherwise, who steals any such miserable goods, shall pay fourfold to the
owner, if he be pursued within a year and a day; l. 1. in pr. de incend. ruin.
l. in eum cum auth. seq. de furt.
and as much to the Prince or his Admiral: yea, the only stealing of a nail,
or the worth thereof, makes the thief guilty of all, to the rendering of all
the remaining goods. l. 3. in fin. de incend ru. nauf.


Yea, by the Emperor Antonius his ordinance, this thief or robber of such
goods should be battoned, and banished for three years, if he be of any honest
rank; but if he be base of condition, should be sent scourged to the Galleys
or metal mines. l. Pedius 4. eod.


And if any man should be so cruelly wicked, as to hinder the ship-broken men
from help in danger, he shall be recounted for a murderer. Arg. l.
Sacc^larij de extraord. crim.


And therefore may no man hinder ships from forthlaying of Tews and Anchors
upon land: Gaius l. 5. de rer. divis.
as was decided betwixt Couper and Seagy, Anno 1498. mense Iulij, Tom. 1.
regis^. Scot.


In like manner, if any man should be so accursed as to hold forth a Lantern
in the night, of intention to draw on ships to a danger, in place of a good
port or harbor or safe road, that wicked person should be punished to the
death. Per d. arg. l Saccula. ^i.


Yea, though no harm happen, yet may the Admiral punish him at his pleasure:
Per l. 10. de incend. ruin. nauf.
And therefore even Fishers are forbidden to fish with light in the night, lest
that Sailers thereby be deceined with the false show of an harbor. l. ne
piscatores eod.


But for the better eschuing of these cruel evils, Hadrian the Emperor
ordained, that all men having possessions on the coasts, should attend
carefully upon such chances; otherwise, to be answerable for all things missing
by stealth or robbery. l. ne quid eod. and auth. naufragia. C. de furt.


Item, if no man in due time claim such a wrack, it fell of old to the Prince
his customers, according to that of Hermogenes and Fortunatianus, m. Cod.
Theodo.
Naufragia ad publicanos pertinento; but now-adayes to the Admiral, by the
Princes grant.

But concerning the action for shipwreck, it should be intended within a year
and a day, l. si quis. C. de naufrag. lib 11.
and sped by the Judge within two year. Vide l. de Submersis. eod.


Where it is to be marked, that if the ship only perish and the goods are
safe, in that case the goods shall pay the fifth or the tenth penny; according
to the easy or difficult winning and saving of the said goods; Art. 37. leg.
naval. Rhod.
for gold, silk, silver, and such like things of easy transportation, should
pay less than goods of greater weight and difficult transporting, as being in
greater hazard: Art. 40. eod.
except the Skipper carry-in his ship to a port or part where he should not,
nor the Merchant would not; for then is the Merchant free of all the Skippers
loss, Art. 39. eod.
and no way should upset the spoiled or broken ship. Art 37. eod.


But in cases of wrack, the laws of England are also to be seen: as, Westminster.
1. 3. E. 1. vid. praerog. regis 12.

TIT. XXIV.
Of things found upon the Sea, or within the floud-marke.
SHips, goods, or gear, or whatsoever other things found within the Sea or
flood thereof, are of three sorts: as, either found on the stream floting, and
then are called Floatson: or found on the Sea bottom, and drawn up from the
same by Doukers and other means; and then are called Lagon: or found on land,
but within the Sea-floud, as cast forth there by storm and the water; and then
are called Ierson.

Concerning Floatson and Ie^son, whether things be cast up by shipwreck, or
else left as lost through casting in storms, the finders thereof, as some
Lawyers think, Faber and alij inst. de rer. divis. sect. pen.
should do therewith, as with other goods found upon land: that is, to
proclaim the same to be forth-comming to the just owner; because the loser or
^ynner of such goods remains still owner and proprietar thereof: per l.
Pomponius. parag. fin. de acquir. rer. dom.
and if no man claim, the finder to keep it to himself if he be poor.
Faber. d. parag. pen.
But according to the old Rhodian law, whether the finder be rich or poor, he
may claim or rather retain the fifth part, for the safe keeping Art. 45. and
46 Il. nava^. Rhod.
If a Douker find drowned goods upon eight cubits deep, he gains the third
part; and if on fifteen cubits, then he obtaines the half; but upon one
cubite, only the tenth part. dd. art.


Yet if the finder be rich, and has found goods by chance, he should rather
give it to the Church or poor, as some say. Auth. omnes peregrini communio de
successionib.


But now-adayes this goes far otherwise; first, because persons endued with
the superiority or signiory of any part of the Seacoast, do claim all or a
part of these things, whether cast forth of ships, or otherwise coming upon
their land, Oleron.
which otherwise before was allowed to the finder: Eod,


Even so, when ships or boats were found on the sea, or at the coast thereof,
without any living creature therein, and no man claiming the same for the space
of a year and a day, then was the half allowed to the finder, and the
remanent to the Prince, as a derelict: Vide statu. regis Alex. Scot
but since the erection and constitution of Admiralls, this kind of found
goods are diversely par^ed; for in France, the King, draws a third, the
Admiral a third, and the finder a third. L' Admiral de France.
And of old, in England, although such things were divided twixt the Admiral
and the finder, Vide de off. Adm. Ang^.
yet now they are left to the arbitrament of both Admirals in England and
Scotland, to consider the finder or taker with a condign portion, for his
travels, charges, and hazard in all circumstances; Per diplomata.
even with the half at least, according to that which Tryphonius sets down,
concerning things found on land. l. Si is qui. 63. in fin. de acq. rer. dom.
Yet, if the finder conceal such goods, whether anchors, timber, jewels,
deadmen with money or jewels about them, etc. he not only loses his just
part, but may be also fined at the will of the Admiral. L' Admiral de France.
and d. depl.
And thus far concerning things found by the labor and travels of men.

If Whales, great gross fishes, ships, or boats, without any living in them,
by force of wind and waves only, be driven to any coast or land, then all and
whole appertains to the Admiral: and so generally, all casualties whatsoever.
Per dd. diplo. and de off. Adm.


TIT. XXV.
Of things taken upon Sea.
NOw follows to treat of goods taken upon Sea; which are of three sorts: for
either they are taken from Pirates, and sea-thiefes; or from professed enemies
in lawful warfare; or from such as not professing open war, allows taking
reft to be exercised against us. Which kind of taking, is covered with the
title of letters of Marque, called Ius represaliarum.

And first, touching that which is taken from Pirates, since the goods which they
have wrongfully taken from others, whether they be found in their own, or in
their successors possession, are esteemed to be a just prey to any taker, so
that account be made thereof to the Admiral: in case the taker find the goods
of his country man or friend with the Pirat, he should make the same
forth-comming to the just owner claiming the same; his cost, charges and
hazard, being always considered and allowed; Per l. Pomponius de acq. rei dom.
so that if any man buy or redeem his neighbors ship from a Pirat or enemy,
he must receive the price thereof from the owner. Per l. mulier. de cap. and
post.
But if no man claim the goods taken from a Pirat, then should the same be
delivered to the Admiral, who ought to consider the taker with his due part
thereof.

If a ship or goods be taken by a professed enemy, who has not brought it in
praesidia vel locum tutum, for the making of a prescription; or a right, and
afterward the same is taken back, and recovered by any friend, and the just
owner claim the same, it ought to be restored to the owner; for that by the
law, Huiusmodi res non tam capta quam recepta intelligitur. Per d. l.
Pomponius, and per l. in bello. parag. si quis seruum in pr^ae capt. and post.
But when such goods become a just and lawful prize to the taker, then should
the Admiral have a tenth part: for so of old, the tenth part of lawful
spoil, was offered to God, in a manner; as we may learn by that which Abraham
returning from victory over five Kings, offered to Melchisedeck: Genesis 14.
and the remnant of the spoil should be proportionally divided amongst the
takers, according to the law of God, set down by Moses, Deu. 20.
and practiced by King David; 1 Reg. 30,
and yet not only amongst several persons, according to every man his proved
travel and hazard. c. dicat aliquis parag. 23. q. 5. etc. ius milita. re did.
1.
So that the ship that sets no sail, fights not, nor hazards not with the
rest, should have no part with the rest, thereof. L' Admiral de France.
Provided always, that first and foremost, the prisoners, captives, and taken
goods of preyes, be in due time presented to the Captain, to be disposed by
the Admiral: so that if any man break bulk, meddle, or dispose of any of
those goods before, he may be punished, and the receiver or buyer prisoned,
until caution be found, that these goods shall be forth-comming to the
Admiral, and just owner, according to a decision past betwixt the King of
Scotland and Maubray, Anno 1487. 17. Iunij. Tom. 1. c. 24. ^^gist. Scot.


If two foreign Nations be at war, and the one take a ship from the other,
and bring her into a Port or road within the bounds of a neutrall Nation, alike
friend to both, then may the Admiral of that neutrall Nation ordain that ship
so taken and brought within the said bounds, to be restored to her owner; and
the persons captives, to their former liberty, even as if she had been brought
back to her own Port and Country again. Per. l. postliminium. parag.
postliminio. de. cap. and postlim.


Besides that, generally in all cases, the action and cause of liberty, as
privileged, should be favorably considered: Per l. libertas. de reg. iur.
and it is the honorable practice of Princes, to make their Countries an
Asylum, or sanctuary, to all distressed strangers that be not Pirates.

Lastly, concerning letters of Merque, as we speak, or droict de Merque, as
Frenchmen term it, sive ius represaliarum, and goods and things taken under
that title upon sea; surely, as far as we may, we should prease to keep Gods
law set down by Moses, Deuteronomy. 14. 16.
practiced by King Amasia, 2 Reg 14. 6. and 2 Chr. 25. 4.
and confirmed by the Prophets: Ier. 29. 3. Ezech. 18. 20.
that the father should not be punished for the son, nor the son for the
father, but a difference to be always put betwixt the guilty and the innocent.
Which thing moved Emperors to make constitutions for the repressing of
represalies in certain respects. Vide an^hent. imo. C. ne filiu^ pro patre.


Notwithstanding, if our patience be so oppressed with the increase of
robberies, spoils, and violence upon sea, by men falsely professing friends,
in such sort that upon no supplication, intercession, nor other travels, the
Princes of these wrongful Nations (who only can and should repress and
redress) will do justice, or neglect to do their office; then because such a
dealing imports a just cause of lawful hostility and warfare, I see not but
that such a calamity may and ought to be repressed, at least by these
represalies and letters of Merque; Vide Bartol. late de represal.
specially, since that cause, in effect, resembles a war denounced without
solemnities of clarigation.

And therefore, both according to the laws of England, letters of Merque are
allowable; and according to the old custom of Scotland; and the tenor of the
Act of Parliament made by James the first of Scotland, ^. 131. actor.
concerning shipwreck, to be followed for a rule to such cursed cases, that is
to say, that other Nations should have the like favor of us, that they show to
us.

Now being agreed that letters of Merque are lawful, as they are by statutes,
customs and reason, specially upon a matter of great importance, and after a
due warning, intimation, and one requisition; so that it be done by the Prince,
and solemnly: Per gloss. in c episcopus. 18. did. and DD. in c. si contra.
etc. 1. de milite vasallo qui contumax.
then what goods happen to be taken by that means, should be brought and
presented as aforesaid before the Admiral; Per l. si quis in servitute. de
furt. and l. ait praetor. parag. si debitorem. Quae infraud. cred.
that a just Inventary may be taken thereof, for diverse good respects.

TIT. XXVI.
Of Fishers, fishing, and traffiquers therewith.
ALbeit hunting, hawking, and fishing, be of one kind, as subject to a like
law and liberty, l. 1. in fin. de acq. rer. ^om. and parag ferae insti. de rer.
divis.
because what wild beast, foul, or fish be once taken by any man, commonly it
becomes his own proper by the laws of Nations; yet is there a difference
twixt these three: for, albeit hunting and hawking be almost every where
lawful, yet fishing is forbidden in other men's ponds, stanks and lakes, l.
iniuriorum 13. parag. fin. in fin. de iniur. Jacob. 3. act 60. and Jacob. 5. p.
4. cap. 12.
as comparable with the^t.

Yea, now a-daies, in rivers, and in parts of the Seas nearest to the
possessions of men having grant and infeftment from the King, may fishing be
forbidden, but no private man, without the grant of the Prince, upon any
pretense, or allegation of long consuetude and prescription, may acquire the
propriety of any such part of the sea, as to prohibit others to fish there
also; l. prascrip de usucap.
for such prescriptions only pertain to Princes.

To return to the quality of fishing; since it is not only allowable to all
sorts of persons, c. 1. and 2. de cler. venat. etc. 1. in cleric. and mon.
but also commendable, and always to be preferred to all other trades and
traffiques upon sea, not only for necessaries, but also for the great good and
profit redounding thereby; all civil and virtuous Princes have diversely
forthshowne their care, for the entertaining and advancing thereof: as, by
ordinances to build ships and boats to that purpose; Vide late. act. parl.
Scot.
and by their wise appointing of certain only times for the fishing, as
namely, of Salmon, under pains not only of Fynes, but also of forfeitures,
and of death, according to the manner of the offense, and contempt of their
decrees and statutes. Vide statuta, and constit. and act. regu^ Franc. Angl.
and Scotiae.
Which Princes also (for the increase of fishes) have, as it were with common
consent, forbidden the making, setting, and using of crows, yarrs, dammes,
fosses, tramelets, parkings, dyking and herrywaters, in any waters Vide statut.
Angl. and Scot. and l' Admir. de France.
where the sea ebbes and flows, under pain of confiscation of all the goods
of the transgressors in Scotland. Iac. 6. parl. 6. cap. 89.


Yea, albeit that any man were of old infefted with keeping of crwiffes,
wears, and kiddles, etc. yet must he keep the Saturdaies slop: that is, to
lift the same from Saturday at afternoon till Monday; and also to make each
heck or mesh of his crwiffe three inches wide, Iac. 1. p. 1. c 11. Iac. 6. p.
7. c. 11.
except for taking of smelts, loches, and such like that will never be bigger:
as also, for to set the same upon the waters, that the mid-streame may have the
just space of six foot wide, under the pain of five pound. Iac 3. p. 10. cap.
73
And thus far concerning the maintenance and increase of fishes, by our
Scottish laws and custom.

It follows, to set down concerning the Fishers their safety and
privileges. Wherein it is provided, first, that all Ships sailing into the
parts where Herring are taken, at least during the taking thereof, shall let
down ^aile after day light past, let their Anchor fall, and keep watch with
Lantern and light, until day light appear again, lest otherwise the poor
Fishers should be overrun, or their nets broken: their pain in Denmark, is
death to the transgressors: Denmark.
and the Fishers are likewise forbidden to use light in their fishing by night,
lest they deceive sailors with the false show of a port. Vlpian in l. ne
pifcatores de incend. ^ui. naufr.


Likewise, lest any of the Fishers harm or hurt one another, it is diversely
provided, as also concerning the right measure of their nets in length and in
breadth; Vide l' Admiral de Franc.
as may be seen by the Statutes of sundry nations Vid statuta Angliae.

And specially therefore it is agreed of long time sithence, by the Sea-farers
on the Forth of Scotland; Vide Forman his Register.
first, that no ground-draffe or drag-net, be set before March, nor upon deeper
water then fourteen fathom.

Item, that none shall lie to their neighbors when he shall be asked
concerning the length and depth of his tewe, when he is in driving: neither yet
wittingly and wilfully to suffer his tewes and nets to flit, and run over one
another, under the pain of ten pound for every transgression of the premised
articles.

Item, above all, that from the Sunset on Sunday, no man lay nor hale nets or
great lines, or exercise any labor, under the foresaid pain.

Item, for the further encouraging of Fishers in the West and North Isles of
Scotland, there is a Statute that no other customs be sought of the Fishers in
the said I^es, but only the Kings customs; under the pains due to manifest
oppressors against them who exact the same. Mar. p. 6. c. 5^


Lastly, concerning Fishers and traffiquers with fishes, it is ordained that
not only all fish slain and taken near to the coast of Scotland, be brought
and presented to the market places, where the takers or slayers thereof dwell:
Jacob. 5. p. 9. c. 98.
but also all fishes taken in the North and West Isles or Firths, to be brought
directly to the towns where the Fishers dwell (that the need of the country
may be first served) Iac. 6 p. 4. c. ^0.
and presented to the market places: from which none may carry them away to
pack and peil, but only betwixt the hours of eleven and two in the
afternoon, under the pain of confiscation. In which markets, it is lawful to
the Provost and Bail^ffes to set down prices, and to compel the packer and
peiler to sell again for the need of the Lieges. Iac. 5. p. 7. c. 98
Which being done, they may transport the remainder where they please. Iac. 6.
p 4. c. 60
And in case they contemn, then their fishes to be eschete, two parts to the
King, and the third to the Magistrate* Iac. 6. p. 6. c. 86


Likewise, concerning the barrelling of fishes, it is ordained that the
measures prescribed of old shall be kept: videlicet, each barrel of Herring,
or of white fish, to be of twelve galons; Iac. 5. p. 4. c. 57 Iac. 6 p. 4. c.
147.
and the barrel of Salmon of fourteen galons, according to the measure of
Hamburg, Iac. 3. p. 10. c. ^76.
under the pains of escheting there of from the pa^ker, and of five pound to
be lifted from the Couper. Iac. 3 p. 10 c. 76.
And therefore hoop irons to be made in each town, for the trial and gaging
thereof Iac. 3. p. 14. c. 100.
Vid. statuta Angliae. Tit. of fishing; in the Abridgements.

TIT. XXVII.
Of the Community and Propriety of the Seas.
HAving of late seen and perused a very learned, but a subtle Treatise (
incerto authore) entitled Mare liberum, containing in effect a plain
Proclamation of a liberty common for all of all Nations, to fish indifferently
on all kind of Seas, and consequently, a turning of undoubted proprieties to a
community; as the fifth chapter thereof at large discovers (wherein the unknown
Author protests, that he may for his warrant use the authority and words of
such old Writers as have been esteemed most mighty in the understanding and
judging upon the natural condition of things here below) and the Discourse,
being covered with the maintenance of a liberty to sail to the Indians; I
thought always expedient by occasion of this argument of fishing contained in
my former Title, by Gods grace, to occur thereunto; as manifestly direct, at
least (in my weak sight) tending to the prejudice of my most worthy Prince and
his subjects; and that not only by arguments derived from the first verity of
the nature of things, but also from his own proofs, warrants, and their
Authors.

And yet before I go any further, I cannot pass the Author his ridiculous
pretense, in both Epistle and beginning of his Discourse; as for a liberty
only to sail on Seas: a thing far off from all controversy, at least upon
the Ocean; specially, since passage upon land through all Regions Christian, is
this day so indifferently permitted to all of all Nations, even to Turks,
Jews, Pagans, not being professed enemies; and therefore much less to be
restrained on Sea in all respects. So that I cannot but persuade both my self,
and other loyal subjects, that the said pretense is but a very pretense; and
so much the more to be suspected as a drift against our undoubted right and
propriety of fishing on this side the Seas.

Now remembering the first ground, whereby the Author would make Mare I^herum,
to be a position fortified by the opinions and sayings of some old Poets,
Orators, Philosophers, and (wrested) Iurisconsults, that Land and Sea, by the
first condition of nature, has been and should be common to all, and proper
to none: against this I mind to use no other reason, but a simple and orderly
reciting of the words of the holy Spirit, concerning that first condition
natural of Land and Sea from the very beginning; at which time, God having
made and so carefully toward man disposed the four Elements, two to swim
above his head, and two to lie under his feet: that is to say, the Earth and
Water, both wonderfully for that effect ordered to the up-making of one and a
perfect Globe, for their more mutual service to man's use: according to this,
immediately after the creation, God says to man, Genes. 1. 28.
Subdue the earth, and rule over the fish: which could not be, but by a
subduing of the waters also.

And again, after the Flood, God says, Replenish the earth: eod. c. 9. v. 1.
and for the better performance hereof, God in his justice against the building
of Babylon, scattred mankind over all the face of the earth; eod c. 11. v 8.
therefore is it that Moses says, eod. c. 10 v. 5.
These are the Isles of the Nations divided in their lands. So that hereby is
evident that things here done, are not so naturally too common; since God the
author of nature, is also as well author of the division, as of the
composition: and yet howsoever, in his justice as is said, yet in his mercy
also and indulgent care, for the welfare and peace of mankind. For those are
sentences both vulgar and sure, set down by the Roman Iurisconsults, Vlp. l
qui neque. de reb eor. quisub ^utel.
Communio parit discordiam. Quod communiter possidetur, vitio naturali
negligitur. Habet communio rerum gerendarum difficultatem. l. pa^er. parag.
duluss^^ie de leg. 2.


Afterward, the earth, by the infinite multiplication of mankind, being
largely replenished, and therefore of necessity thus divided* and things upon
the earth not sufficient for the necessaries and desires of man in every
region, followed of force the use of trading upon the seas; not only for the
ruling of the fish therein, according to the commandment given by the Creator
at the beginning, but also for transporting of things necessary for the use of
man. For the which, and other causes above mentioned, the waters became
divisible, and requiring a partition in like manner with the earth; according
to that of Baldus: Videmus, de iure gentium, in mare esse regna distincta,
sicut in terra arida. Ad legem 1* de rer. divis.


And thus far have we learned, concerning the community and propriety of land
and sea, by him who is the great Creator and author of all; and therefore of
greater authority and understanding then all the Grecian and Roman Writers,
Poets, Orators, Philosophers, and Iurisconsults, who-so-ever famous: whom the
author of Mare liberum protests he may use and lean ^o without offense.

Now, since the weakness of this his first and principal ground does this way
appear; let any man judge upon the truth of that which Cicero (his man) sets
down, 1. officior.
Sunt privata nature a nulla; and likewise of all other his authors their
opinions, for the fortification of an original community of things.

It follows to examine the chief warrants of Mare liberum; and to consider
how far they may bear forth to a common liberty for fishing, on all seas
indifferently.

The author cites Vlpian, a renowned Iurisconsult indeed, and Martian their
sentences; alleging pagina 25.
that Vlpian should say, l. iniuriarum. parag. ult. and parag. si quis de in
iur.
Ante aedes meas aut praetorium ut piscari aliquem prohibeam, usurpatum quidem
est, sed nullo iure, adeo ut contempta ea usurpatione, iniuriarum agere potest.
sz. prohibitus. That is to say, if I should forbid any man to fish before my
house, he may mis-know such an usurpation, and intend action of injury against
me, for a wrongful staying him from fishing there.

But as I read, d. p^rag. si quis.
Vlpian his words are thus; Sunt qui putant iniuriarum me agere posse: that is,
there are men who think, I may intend action, etc. It is true also, that
Martian says, Nemo ad littus piscandi causa accedere prohibetur. l. 4. de.
rer. divis.
And yet neither of these two Iurisconsults, pronounces absolutely in these
cases, but upon another higher warrant: and therefore Vlpian adds, Saepissime
rescriptum est n^c piscari, etc. prohibere posse. d. parag. si quis in fin.
That is, it is by writ most often answered, etc. Which Martian expounds most
clearly, when he says, Nemo igitur ad littus maris piscandi causa accedere
prohibetur; and subjoynes his warrant, Idque Divus Pius piscatoribus Formianis
rescripsit: d. l ^. de rer* divis.
that is, No man is forbidden to come to the sea side and fish; as the Emperor
Divus Pius did write to the Fishers of Formian. So that you see the Emperors
to have been warrants to these Lawyers, and their written opinions, concerning
the voyage of the sea.

Now, to pass the propriety which hereby we see these Emperors did claim on
the seas, I ask first, to whom did the Emperors write such resolutions? was
it not to the professed subjects of their own Empire? and what? even the usage
of the seas, and coasts of their Empire, to be indifferently common to every
one of their own subjects: and how? Iure gentium; that is, according to the law
kept by all other nations, to every one of their own nation in like cases.

Moreover, albeit these and other Roman Lawyers pronounce so, concerning the
community of the sea-shoare, and coast, that private men may build houses
within the floud-marke, and appropriate them to themselves, according to that
which Neratius writes, Quod in littore quis aedificat, eius fit: l. quod in
littore. de aeq. rer. dom.
that is, what a man builds on shore, it becomes his own; yet upon this
condition, Tamen decretum praetoris adhibendum est ut id facere liceat, says
Pomponius: l. quamvis. de acq. rer dom.
that is, providing the Praetor his decree be interponed thereunto; or that the
Prince give grant, as Vlpian writes; l. prohibere. parag quod et si. Quod vi
aut elam.
Vel ut princeps concedat. As for the remnant of these sorts of warrants
alleged for Mare liberum, since they sing all one song for the common use to
the people, and propriety to the Prince, if men will but only mark them; I
need not stay further upon them. So that every man may see both the use of the
word commune, and the meaning of Iure gentium among these Lawiers, whereupon
this Mare liberum appears so to be founded, that it cannot be shaken. For,
commune, there is nothing else but publieum, q^asi populicum; signifying a
thing common for the usage of any of one sort of people, and not for all of all
nations: according to that of Modestinus, Roma communis patria est. l. Roma. ad
municipal.


Neither yet does that word, Iure gentium, mean any law set down by common
consent of all nations; but only notes the example of the law, or custom of
other nations: as if they would say, the liberty of fishing on our seas, and of
other doing there and at shore, should be common to every one of the Roman
Empire, like as the same is common to all of all other nations, on their seas,
and their shoares.

Likewise, that of Placentinus; Quod mare sit in nullius bonis, nisi solius
dei: that is, GOD is only Lord of the sea; and so say we with King David, that
the land also is the Lords. Psalm.
But that of Faber, Ad parag. littorum inst. de rer. divis.
Mare esse in primaevo iure quo omnia erant communia, I need no otherwise to
refute now, than I have done above already.

And these are the Authors and warrants whereupon Mare liberum inferres his
conclusion; Demonstratum igit ur nec populo, nec privato ius aliquod in mare
competere posse, quum occupationem, nec natura, nec publici usus ratio
permittat. Page 28.
Which, how it follows upon the premises, let men judge; since neither these
his Authors make for him, neither yet the reason inserted in the conclusion
bears out; which is, quum occupationem nec natura, nec publici usus ratio
permittat: that is, neither nature, nor the common need, suffers the sea to be
acquired in property to any occupation.

For answer, first concerning the nature of the sea, as supposed impossibly
occupable or acquirable; Is this so thought because the sea is not so solid, as
is the land, that men may trade thereon, as upon land? or that it is
continually flowing to and fro? Surely, that lack of solidity for man his
trading thereon by foot, shall not hinder the solid possession of it, far
less the occupation and acquiring, if we will give to the sea, that which the
Iurisconsults indulgently grant to the land, which also cannot be denied.
Paulus the Iurisconsult says, In l. possideri. de acquir. poss.
Qui fundum possidere velit, non utique omnes glebas eius circumambulet, sed
sufficit quamlibet partem eius introire, dum mente and cogitatione hac sit ut
totum possidere velit usque ad terminum: that is, it is not needful for him
who would possess himself in any part of the land, to go about and tread
over the same; but it is sufficient to enter-in upon any thereof, with a mind
to possess all the rest thereof, even to the due marches. And what can stay
this to be done on sea, as well as on land? And thus far concerning the
solidity.

As for the flowing condition of the sea, howsoever it be liquid, fluid, and
unstable, in the particles thereof, yet in the whole body, it is not so:
because it keeps the prescribed bounds strictly enough, Psalm. 104. 9.
concerning the chief place and limits thereof.

Which discourse, gives us occasion of force to answer to a scoff cast in by
the Author of Mare liberum, concerning the possibility also of marches and
limits, for the division of the seas: Page 38.
Mundum dividunt (says the fore^aid Author of Mare liberum) non ullis
limitibus, aut natura, aut manupositis, ^ed imaginaria quadam linea: quod si
recipitur, and Geometrae terras, and Astronomi coelum nobis eripient: that is,
they divide the world, not by any marches, put either by nature, or by the hand
of man, but by an imaginary or fantastic line: which kind of doing being
embraced, the Geometers may steal away the earth, and the Astronomers the
heavens from us.

It is true, that there are not in every part of the sea Isles sensible (as
Gernsey is to England in the narrow seas) or sands (as the Washes at the West
seas of England) nor rocks, or other eminent and visible marks above water,
for the designation of the bounds (or laying-out the limits) of the divisible
parts thereof: but GOD, who is both the distributer and first Author of the
division and distinction of both land and sea, has given an understanding
heart to man for the same effect, as well as for all other necessary actions
wherein he has to employ himself: so that to a very wonder, God has diversely
informed men by the helps of the Compass, counting of courses, sounding, and
other ways, to find forth, and to design finitum in infinito; so far as is
expedient for the certain reach and bounds of seas, properly pertaining to any
Prince or people.

Which bounds Bartolus insect. nullius in tractat. de insula.
hardily extends and allows for Princes and people at the sea side, an
hundredth miles of sea forth from their coasts, Per l notionem de verb. Sig.
at least; and justly, if they exercise a protection and conservacy so far: and
this reach is called by the Doctors, Districtus maris, and territorium. Gloss
in c. ubi periculum. parag. porro. de electionib. lib. 6.
It is true, Baldus m l. si testamentum. de inst. and subst.
esteems potestatem, iurisdictionem and districtum, to be all one.

To conclude then, since Papinian writes in finalibus quaestionibus vetera
monumenta sequenda esse; l. in* finalibus. com. divid.
what more evident monuments for our King his right in the narrow seas, then
these Isles of Gernsie? etc. And for the Eastern seas, direct from Scotland,
what is more anciently notorious than that covenant twixt Scottish men and
Hollanders, concerning the length of their approaching toward Scotland by way
of fishing?

And thus far through occasion of answering to that alleged impossibility,
of acquiring the Sea by occupation, because (as would appear) of the
unsolidity thereof, for any foot treading. It rests to touch the other cause
natural, for that other impossibility, which may be the continual flux and
instability of the Sea; in such sort, that it would appear not aye to be one
and the self same body, but daily changeable. For answer, I must remember that
which the Iurisconsult sets down so prettily: In l propon^ba^ur. de iud.
, Suppose (says he) a certain College of Judges, or a Legion of Soldiers,
or the particular parts of a Ship, or of a man's body, should so continually and
often be changed and altered, that none of that first College or Legion could
be found alive, nor yet any part of the Ship or body could be so certainly
demonstrate, that it might be affirmed for the very same that it was at the
first; yet if that College or ^egion be in number full, and the ship or man
whole and able in all the frame, they shall be accounted and esteemed not to be
new, but to be the very same which they were at the beginning: even so, however
the sea many ways and hourly changes, in the small parts thereof, by the
ordinary rush on land, mixture with other waters, swelling in it self,
exhalation and back receipts thereof by rain; yet since the great body of the
Sea most constantly keeps the set place prescribed by the Creator, I see not
in this respect neither, wherefore the nature of the Sea should not yield to
occupation and conquest. And thus far concerning Mare liberum his last and
great conclusion, against all appropriation thereof by people or Princes. I
call it his last great conclusion, because of other two passing before, whereof
the first is this; Mare igitur proprium alicuius fieri non potest, quia nature a
iubet esse commune: Page 21.
and for what reason? Even because Cicero, Virgil, and Plautus have said so. To
whom I could also assent concerning the great, huge, and maine body of the sea.
His next conclusion is this; Est igitur mare in numero eorum quae in commercio
non ^unt, hoc est, quae proprij iuris fieri non possunt: Page 25.
that is, The Sea to be of that order of things, which cannot be appropriate
to any man. His warrants for his conclusion also are the Roman Lawyers, whom I
said to be wrested by Mare liberum; and therefore must show the same, contrary
to his purpose indeed. Martianus, l. si quisquam diverse and temp. praescrip.
as the Author of Mare liberum largely grants, Page 24.
says, that if any private man have himself alone, by any lawful space of
time sufficient for a prescription, kept and exercised fishing in any ^reeke or
nooke of Sea, which they call Diverticulum; he may forbid all others to fish
therein: which Papinianus l. praescriptio de usu cap.
also confirms. The which, as I accept, so I would further demand of him. By
what reason should a private man, who has no other care nor respect but to
himself alone, be thus privileged and preferred to a Prince? who not for
himself; but for his people also in common, yea and for the safety of all
traders passing his coasts, with great charges and care protects and conserveth
the Seas nearest unto him: shall not this Prince be acknowledged, at least with
the good which that Sea, conserved by him, offers so directly to him? And I
pray you say, What less authority had Leo than the rest of the Roman
Emperors, to grant to every one in particular, having possessions at the Sea
side, as much of the ^ea as was nearest against their lands, Novell. constable.
102. 103. and 104.
with the fishings thereof? What then, shall not Princes be equalled, in these
cases, with subjects? Or rather, have not all Princes a like right and power
within their own precinct and bounds, as these Roman Princes had?

But now to draw nearer to the chief point of our purpose, and so to the end
thereof: as I accepted Mare liberum his former large grant, so now also do I
more heartily embrace the next, which is this; When after these his
conclusions, he had said in tanto Mari siquis piscatu arceret, insanae
cupiditatis notam non effugeret: page 30.
he subjoynes according to that of Cicero, Off. 1.
Quando sine detrimento suo quis potest alteri communicare in ijs quae sunt
occupanti utilia and danti non molesta, quid ni faceret: and subjoynes
afterward, page 35.
Et si quicquam eorum prohibere posset, puta piscaturam, qua dici quodammodo
potest pisces exhauriri: that is to say, If the uses of the Seas may be in any
respect forbidden and stayed, it should be chiefly for the fishing, as by which
the fishes may be said to be exhaust and wasted; which, daily experience these
twenty ye^res past and more, has declared to be over true: for whereas
aforetime the white fishes daily abounded even into all the shoares on the
Eastern coast of Scotland; now forsooth by the near and daily approaching of
the busse Fishers the sholes of fishes are broken, and so far scattered away
from our shores and coasts, that no fish now can be found worthy of any pains
and travels; to the impover^shing of all the sort of our home-fishers, and to
the great damage of all the Nation. Whereby, I see at last, the Author of Mare
liberum not so addict to serve any man's particular desires, as to answer
(forsooth) to his profession of the laws, that is, to allow the proper right
for every man and nation, and to hurt none; according to the three general
precepts of all laws, set down by Caius, in l. iustitia. de rer. divis.
and after him by ^ribonianus: Parag iuris praecepta. de just. and iur.
Honest vivere; alterum non laedere; and ius suum cuique tribuere: whereof the
second tryes and rules the rest; according to the vulgar saying out of
Pomponius, l. nem^ de reg. iur. and l. 14. de cond. indeb. and l. iu^e. de iure
dot.
Neminem debere cum alterius damno locupletari: and that of Tryphonius, l.
rescriptum de distract. pig.
Ex aliena iactura lucrum haurire non oportet. And therefore I would meet him
with his deserved courtesy; even to proclaim Mare liberum also: I mean that
part of the maine Sea or great Ocean, which is far removed from the just and
due bounds above mentioned, properly pertaining to the nearest Lands of every
Nation. Atque ita esto mare vastum liberrimum.

TIT. XXVIII.
Of War-fare ships, and of the Captains and Companies thereof.
ANd since we have written above of privileged ships Tit. 22.
amongst which the warfare-ships of Princes are first and chief) and somewhat
of the conservacy of the Seas, in the last title; I cannot here pass the
warfare-shippes unmentioned, albeit not in such large manner and measure as
their employment now-a-dayes requires. As for the matter fit for their
building, and things necessary for their forth-setting and preparation to Sea,
I must refer the same to Julius Ferretus, and to Vegetius, who have written
largely thereupon. Some touch I have here subjoyned, in the last Title of this
Book, concerning the materials: as likewise somewhat is premitted concerning
their privileges, in that Title of privileged ships. Therefore would I here
set down (but very briefly) some thing concerning the Captains, Commanders,
and Companies of the Prince his warfare-ships, the graces and virtues required
in them, with their duties, power and preferment.

Captains of Princes warfare-shippes should be men, first, fearing God,
because they must continually walk in the midst of the wondrous works of God.
Next, they should be stout, hardy, and courageous. Thirdly, vigilant, diligent,
and careful; and therefore very temperate on Sea: Ferretus.
specially, because their employment, as it is full of hazard and danger, even
so are their occasions and opportunities sudden and momentanie. Therefore their
commandment and power over their company, not only surpasses the power of
Masters and Commanders of private ships, but also that of the Captains on
land; and therefore their honor and estimation every way higher also, because
of their greater charge, care, and hazard. Their duty toward their company, is
first, that they choose such as be free from heinous and scandalous offenses.
per. l. 4. de re militar.
Next, that they suffer none of their company to be idle, but to punish as
well the sluggard as the rebellious: per l. 6. eod.
yea, even those who are irreverent toward them; per. l. 13. eod.
and again, should with all loving care see to the due food of their company,
hear their mutual plaints, hold them in peace by all obedience, visit,
refresh, and with all helps comfort the hurt and diseased. per l. 12. eod:
As for the Captains their other duties to the Prince and Admiral, with their
own privileges, they are all gathered out of old customs, and at large set
down in that Book called L' Admiral de France.

TIT. XXIX.
Of Watermen and Ferriers.
FErryers and Watermen are bound to serve all true Lieges for their due fare;
per l. 1. parag. si furt. advers. naut.
so that they may be compelled thereunto: l. 1. and l. cum navarchorum. C. de
navicul. lib 10 and l. litica de public.
and most, justly, because it was in their own hand and power from the
beginning to give and apply themselves to that calling and trade, or not. And
if therefore they fail, it shall be, according to the law of Scotland, a point
of dittay or indictment against them in the first Iustice-court; and if they
transgress unto the third time, they may be suspended from their trade, Iac.
3. parl. 13. c. 95.
except they can allege a just cause; as, of feud or hostility.

Item, it is ordained, for the easier boating and landing of men and beasts,
that Ferriers make, and have ready, fit and convenient bridges, or else to lose
their Boats. Iac. parl. 31. c. 20.


Lastly, Ferriers and Watermen are no less bound, than Skippers and Masters of
ships, to render again whatever they receive to be carried within their
Boats. l. 1. parag. naut. caupou.


But concerning their ordinary fares and hires, it is neither needful nor
expedient in this place to recite the diverse statutes made thereupon; because
that first they are at great length set down in the Statutes of England and
Scotland: next, because their fraughts have been, according to the rate of
times, changed and altered even to the triple, as specially in Scotland Vide
act. Iac. 3 arl 3. c. 20. and arl. 7. c. 61. and ^ariae. parl. 5. ^. 21.
So that now also, according to the condition of this time, their portage,
fraughts or fare, may be of new considered by his Majesty, or Admiralls,
according to the quality of the boats, and the space of passage and time,
either shorter, longer, or hazardfuller, during their service; but with a due
Proviso, for the repressing of their rude and uncivil manners. For truly, if
the Roman Iurisconsults might of old by any reason call Mariners, in general,
Pessimum genus hominum, Vide tit. naut. ^. up. and. tit. furt. ^^vers.
(which in these latter days for the most part is amended, partly through
Christianity and civil conversation, and partly; by good laws, praise be to
God) then may we now use that same still, at least against the most part of
Watermen and Ferriers; as requiring to be reformed, or at least by correction
repressed. Secund. l. 3. naut. caup.


TIT. XXX.
Of Shipwrights.
TO conclude this Treatise, there remains a special sort of persons to be
considered and respected, as the forgers and framers of the isntrumental
causes of all Seafaring; to wit, Shippe-wrights, and builders of Ships or
Boats, called by the Romans, imitating the Grecians, Naupegi: and by the
Italians, following the latter Grecians, Calafatti, as is above described; Tit.
6.
and therefore subject to the jurisdiction of the Admiralty Per diplom.
admiralior. utriusque regni.
as accountable to the Admiral and his Judges) as accessories of sea causes,
for their skill, diligence, and dutiful discharge in every respect, by a frame
not only likely and comely, but a work also strong, ticht, and durable: or
else they must undergo the pains of the law, called Lex Aquilia; that is to
say, all costs and scath happening by their unskilfulnesse, negligence, or
whatever other fault or amiss. Per T. T. ad l. Aquil.


And therefore, first touching the materials, they should not only furnish the
same good and sufficient, but also, if the furniture pertain not to them, they
must refuse to take from the furnishers bad and unmeet gear and stuff for the
work. Per l. 2. de naut (...). and per Vegetium de re militar
As for example, Aller, Beech trees, and such like brickle and naughty timber
for salt water, or for the seas. Neither should they put green timber in
work; but ought to foresee if they can, that their wood be cut down either
at the wane of the Moon, and in the deep of Winter, or at such time as
experience declares wood to be most solid and durable. For timber cut at the
contrary times, is commonly full of moisture; and therefore being afterward
dried, becomes clung, and open to receive water.

The like care and skill is required in the iron, and all other necessaries, to
the end that the works may prove strong, durable, right, and comely. This
being done, it rests to consider their hires and fees: which because they
ordinarily depend on the conditions agreed upon with the party, which also
commonly is cavelled withal before a full performance of their work, upon
surmises and quarrels; therefore to occur to all such doubts and discords,
the contracts of such bargains should be (after the example of other seafaring
dealings) made before the Admiralls deputy* or Judge, and registered in their
books. Vide sup. of the Admiral Clerk.


Last of all, as Shippewrights were of old, l. fin: C. de poen.
so are they also of late, forbidden, Vide de off. Adm. Ang.
under pain of treason, to communicate their skill and Art to enemies and
barbarous people. Vide C. de m^n^p. and ibi. DD.


Likewise, they are forbidden (as are also all other societies of
handy-crafts-men and tradesmen) to conspire among themselves to enhance their
wages, or hire, or to receive excessive wages. Vide de off. Adm.


FINIS.

