TWO MEMORABLE RELATIONS.

THE ONE A LETTER WRITTEN from Colonel General VVEERDENBVRK, out of the
VVest-India from Farnabuck, to the Lords the States General of the United
Provinces, touching the surprisall of the Town of Olinda in Farnabuck, with
the Forts thereunto belonging.

Translated out of Dutch into English.

The other, The Copy of the true relation of all that has passed and been
done at the taking and reducing of the City and Cittadell of (...) after a
very hot and f(...)

Together with all the pa(...) occurrences that happened at the (...) Rivolle.

By the Lord ^ De Crequy.

Faithfully translate^ out of the French Copy.

W(...) Privilege, Printed at Roane (...) Tho. Mallard dwelling at the (...)
^^ace. 1630.

LONDON, Printed for Nicolas (...) the South Entrance of the Roya^ (...) ^620.

A Letter written from Colonel General Weerdenburk, out of the West India
from Farnabuck to the Lords the States general of the United Provinces,
touching the surprisall of the town of Olinda in Farnabuck with the forts
thereunto belonging.
Translated out of Dutch into English.
ILLUSTRIOUS, high and mighty Lords, Seeing by Gods help I have victoriously
conquered this place of Farnabuck; according to my duty I could not omit to
give an account unto Your Lordships of the manner and passages that happened in
the mastering of this place, as much as this present time will give me leave.

Having found General Lonck with his ships in the Bay of St. Vincent, after
we had layen there some weeks till the rest of our fleet came unto us, being
in all fifty three sail, manned with many sick men amongst the sound ones; on
the 26 of December 1629 last, we set forward for the Coast of Brasill; and upon
the 12 of February following, we sailed on to the height of eight degrees,
where some other of our ships and pinnaces came unto us that had been lost; so
that then we were fifty six sails in all: And having met all together in
counsel, after mature deliberation we sent out some ships before to discover,
and resolved to assault the enemy in two places, to wit, I my self with 2400
soldiers, and 300 sailors. And besides those, other 300 Mariners should go
along with the train divided into 16 ships, which should be la^ded some six
English miles to the Northward of Fernabuck; and the General to have along
with him two other strong squadrons, which should put into the road by the sea
bank or shelfe.

Which resolution was accordingly put in execution upon the 15 day of February
last. But in regard those of the Castle were warned, or suspecting of our
coming, and had therefore sunk some ships in the very mouth of the shelfe,
the General his design could take no effect, though he did his best endeavor
to open the passage into the shelfe with his Canon.

In the mean while a great number of the enemies both foot and horse showed
themselves in the afternoon upon the sands, which made me make for the shore
with sloopes and boats, where we landed in the sight and spite of them all;
the rest of our men following me with two pieces of Ordnance, which carried a
bullet of some three pound weight. And because it began to be late, I was
constrained there to abide and lie on the sands all that night. The next day
very early in the morning having sent the boats and sloopes back aagaine to
the shipping, I ordered my troops into three divisions. First, the Avantgard,
wherein I was present my self in person both in landing the day before, and
then upon our march; and this Avantgard was commanded by Collonell Eltz: The
Battle was commanded by Lieutenant Colonel Steincallenfels; and the rereward
by the Sergeant Major Huncks.

I led my self the Avantgard along the sea shore toward the town, and
coming to the River called Riodolce, the depth whereof is up to a man's middle,
and which of necessity we must pass: There the enemy gave us the first
encounter, being in my judgment strong about 1800 foot and horse; But after a
hot onset, and diverse being flame and hurt on both sides, (but thanks be to
God the least number on our side) we put them to flight; notwithstanding they
had this advantage of us of a swift running water. Thus being past and a little
further advanced on the sands, we met with a second troop, who likewise made a
trial of our resolution, assaulting us with a brave skirmish, and we
encountering them with a great desire; but after a little resistance they made
their retreat into the woods. A third time the enemies showed themselves
again, but would or durst no more stand against us. I then perceiving this
fear and irresolution amongst them, marched in all diligence directly toward
the town, and being come near to it, we climed up to the height of the hill
whereupon stands the Cloister of the Jesuits, and there finding the gates
thereof barrocadoed, we fell on and broke them open, while part of our enemies
defended themselves with their weapons, and part run away: so the others also
seeing the courage of our men, after some small opposition, they also fled,
leaving behind them many dead and hurt men, as also on our side there were
slain some.

In the mean while our enemies beneath on the sands, and in the trenches and
forts perceiving this our proceeding, and being now also set upon and pressed by
our Reere, which entertained a fight with them, after many Canon shots made by
ours against them, betook themselves at last to their heels, abandoning their
Forts, which we presently took and possessed our selves thereof.

Thus by the assistance of God we became masters of the town, after we had
lost by reason of the great heat in the fight about 50 or 60 soldiers in all.
The Jesuits cloister wherein I my self lie, and some other avenues and
passages, we presently fortified against any assaults that the enemy could
make upon us. The 20 of February last I commanded Colonel Steincallenfels,
with the advice of the council, to see if he could surprise the great fort
that lies upon the shelfe on the land side And truly he carried himself
bravely, and gave an assault upon it that lasted two hours together; but
because our ladders were too short, it was thought good to prevent the spoiling
of more men, to retreat after the loss of some 20 slain and 40 hurt; the
enemy having on his side also lost some 12 that were slain by ours. And seeing
we could not carry so easily that fort by an assault, we resolved on the 23
of February, to take it by approaches, and forthwith to cause Canon baskets and
other necessaries to be prepared and set up. All which was done accordingly,
and with such an expedition, that on the 27 of the same month with 500 men we
began to break ground and to run a trench and a line toward the Castle,
which stood between the village situated upon the shelfe and the town: And
the next day Lieutenant Colonel Eltz, who commanded the battery, being almost
in a readiness, he was relieved that night by Sergeant Major Huncks: I also
going thither in person, on the next morning very early the battery was
finished of 3 half Canon; we played all that morning, discharging 708 shot
till about nine of the clock in the forenoon. Then the besieged called for a
parley, holding out a white sheet, and sending forth a Captain, with whom we
presently came to a composition, to wit:

That they leaving the Fort to us should march out without colors, or lighted
matches; leaving behind them all their ordnance, ammunition and victuals that
were in the Castle, which we suppose they cast the most part of them into the
Sea, because we could find but little in it; Besides, that they should bind
themselves by promise to show no hostility against our state in six months
after.

This being done, we summoned up also the other Castle, which stands upon the
entrance into the shelfe.

The General Admiral and Vice Admiral being advertised thereof, and coming
unto us, approved of the Council, and so sending a drum unto the said
Castle, they within it presently sent out a Lieutenant (upon condition of
leaving one of ours as hostage in his place) who from the Commander thereof had
order to treat with us, and to frame certain articles or conditions, which
were signed on both sides: And so this great fort being given over also unto us
this day, we became not only masters of both these forts, but also withal of
the haven and the whole shelfe.

The next day being the third of March, I commanded Lieutenant Colonel
Steincallenfels to make an enterprise upon the I Will of Antonia Vaaz, lying right
over against the village that stood upon the shelfe, which he did in launching
over some boats: But thanks be to God, the enemies having already knowledge
that we were masters of the two forts, they fled away without any making of
resistance. In the Cloister that stands upon that I Will he lodged a company of
his men.

And thus at last the Town, Castles and Forts (none remaining) fell under our
command. I doubt not but my Lords the Administratours of this Company will
second us in this our victory, to the end they may enjoy the fruits thereof;
this being indeed a place invincible, if it be well seconded and provided for:
It is of good temperature, having fresh and good waters, and good store of
meat: A place I say of driving the greatest trade in all Brasill; and which
trade (by Gods grace) will increase mightily if it be reduced to peace; and
such a place as will curb all Brasill, seeing there is such a fear and
terror amongst the enemies throughout the whole land already: And I hope to
make such a progress into it, that your Lordships name shall live perpetually
in it; And that by the taking of this town, with the forts thereunto belonging,
all Brasill will be bridled and brought into subjection, and the enemies
navigations along the coast utterly destroyed; which will be the way to take
this trading from them, and to reduce the Inhabitants thereof to a mutual
love, amity, and strict alliance. Thus God preserve your Lordships as
preservers of his people, in all prosperity, to the glory of his Name, and to
the confusion of all our enemies, Amen.

Given in the Jesuits Cloister in the town of Olinda Fernabuco, the 7 of
March 1630. stilo novo.

Your Lordships most humble servant, D. V. WEERDENBVRC K.

The true portraicture and description of Fernambuco, the principal and chief
City of the Kingdom of Brasilia in America, with all the conveniences and
situation of the Country thereabouts, as also the Rivers, Havens, and roads
of ships, very lively deciphered according to a Map lately drawn.
1. THE hole of the Resiffe (so named) through which the ships do come into
the haven called the Posso, so to come forwards into the City.

2. Posso where the ships lay, and many ships may lie continually.

3. Here is a sand-banck, where it is five foot deep at low water, and twelve
foot deep at a spring tide, here the ships must sail round about the
Resiffe, where is the greatest depth.

4. The point of the shelve or bank which must be shunned in the coming in of
the ships.

5. The River of the City, which has recourse to diverse places.

6. This place is called Varrador, where the ships and barks do unlade their
goods and merchandises, etc.

The (...) of Ferna^buco.

8. The Castle right over against the entrance of the ships, and at a high tide
it is compassed round about with water.

9. The River toward the Vargie, running above two miles in height at the top,
with many shallow places, here we may sail with barks and boats.

10. Here the ships may ride at anchor as it were in a tide-haven, but they must
ride far forth from ebb and flow, and then the slight ropes or cables will
serve the turn.

11. This place is called the housing of the Resiffe.

12. A dry place.

13. The Cloister of St. Bento, being the Order of the Benedictines.

14. A Parish Church named St. Peter's Church.

15. This is the head Church called the Che.

16. The Church of Misericorde.

17. Nossa Sinora da Concession, being a Church, near unto which do adjoyne
certain houses where young maidens are.

18. The Cloister of St. Anthonio, where women and friars are in white
apparel.

19. The Cloister of St. Franciscus, in which are Cordeliers, or Love-fryers:
here is a great commodity of water.

20. The Cloister of the Jesuits, which is a very fair building, with
beautiful gardens, and pleasant clear water, besides Rocks, out of which
they dig stone continually, as also stone to make chalk or lime.

21. Nossa Sinora du Monte, and the little Church standing on the hill is also
called by that name.

22. The hole of the Barette, right against the River of the Vargie, or
otherwise called Capibariba.

23. The house of the Barette with a little Chapel.

24. On the road before the shore ships may anchor at ten and twelve fathom
water, being but half a mile or a small mile from the shore.

25. The Island of Tamarca, where men may come out from the road with shallops
between the clifts and rocks, and then from Tamarca again upon the firm land.

26. A Bridge hard by the City, here men may pass at a low water with horses
and carts, being but two foot and a half deep, or three at the most: here is
a great passage of men, and wagons, and carts, etc. to all quarters and parts
of the South.

27. The Island and habitation of Marcus Andre.

28. The firm land of the Vargie de Capibariba, being three miles in length,
and a mile and a half broad, with many sugar mills or engines in it: This is a
very fair and costly Country, where is great riches of persons, and a mighty
deal of sugar.

29. The firm land of the Barette, this is barren, full of Manques, and it is
low sandy ground, some two miles continent, but coming up toward the
mountains, it is very costly ground, yielding much sugar, and all kind of
commodities.

30. The Resiffes which reach along by the shore and seacoast, being 6 or 8
foot high at a low water, after the wane or spring of the full and new Moon.

31. A new fort for the securing of the haven, well provided with Ordnance.

32. Retrenchments newly made, well fortified and provided with shot and
Ordnance against the coming of the ships, as also for the defense of the
haven: insomuch that power nor force will not prevail here, by reason the
Forts are so well planted with Ordnance, and the ships must sail very near
them to avoid the shelves and sands.

33. This was the old haven, where they were wont to unlade their ships and
barks, and is called the old haven, here men may sail between the cliffes
with boats and barks.

Thus loving Reader and Spectatour, you have the declaration of this Map,
which will give you a farther demonstration of the City and all appendices.

Relation of what lately happened at the taking of the City and Castle of
Pignerolle, and the pillaging of Rivolle, by Monsieur de Crequy.
THE arms of the King having appeased and settled the great troubles of his
Kingdom, and his lillies flourishing with a sweet tranquillity beyond desire
and expectation; his Majesty would now cause the enemies of his Crown to be
sensible of the power and endeavors of the same; and to that end and purpose
conducted his forces into Italy under the command of my Lord the Cardinal of
Richelieu: Where his Highness of Savoy (whose spirit can never be at rest) had
for a certain space of time given threatening speeches that he would employ
his forces thither for the service of his Majesty; and to this effect did offer
and present unto the King all manner of submission in true and certain
fidelity, assuring my Lord the Cardinal of Richelieu (who was Commander and
leader of the Kings army) of free passage into Italy.

The Lord Cardinal, whose judgment and understanding virtue has adorned and
endued with all manner of qualities required in a General of an army, well
knowing by experience that the foresaid his Highness of Savoy had oftentimes
made the like and great protestations to the King, and that notwithstanding
there was never any trust or credence to be given to his promises, not at this
time degenerating from his excellent disposition, would not accept of this his
offer, unless first of all he would deliver into his hands diverse Towns
which are upon the passage into Italy, to the end that he might retain them
within the limits of reason, if perchance he would do that which should
prove contrary to the thing he had promised unto the King.

The Duke of Savoy not knowing how he might closely hide, and afterward bring
to pass his treacherous intention, well knowing that the Cardinal did use a
great deal of prudence and policy, and that his Romish Cardinals hat did not
any way diminish or hinder his valor, resolved to grant him his demand, that
thereby he might the better color over his pernicious design.

But the said Lord Cardinal using a great deal of requisite providence and
precaution, according to his accustomed manner, placed strong garrisons into
those towns, which the Duke of Savoy had given into his possession, and in the
mean space advanced his Army into Italy; ever being vigilant, and having an
especial care of all the actions and passages of his Highness of Savoy,
expecting no other issue nor performance of his promise, but only a mark and
token of his infidelity.

In the mean time, whilst the Army of the King (conducted under the command
of the Cardinal Richelieu) marched and advanced into Italy, and that they must
needs come unto hands with some troops of Spanish, his Highness of Savoy
being inspired with an evil wind, as that is ordinary to him, betakes
himself to his accustomed inconstancy and infidelity, trusting, that by such
an action he should hinder and overthrow the design and intention of his
Majesty: But God who commands the very secrets of the King, would not suffer
his will and intention to prevail and take effect.

Whereupon having performed this stratagem, the Lord Cardinal possessed
himself of all the towns which he retained for hostage, and gave the town of
Rivolle to to his soldiers for pillage.

Which being done, he caused certain Regiments co^ducted under the hand of
the Lord Marshal de Crequi, to march toward the Town and Castle of Pignerolle;
which the said Lord Marshall invested with a diligence and vigilancie agreeable
to such a valorous courage.

And at the very first vollie of Canon shot he reduced the same town under the
command and obedience of the King without loss of any of his men.

The Lord Marshall besides this, well knowing that it was necessary and
requisite furiously to assault the Cittadell or Castle, before the same could
be constrained to yield, he caused all his batteries to shoot, thereby to
make trial whether or no those within the Castle were resolved to keep the
same.

Those within having made certain shot at the Kings forces, the Lord de Crequi
caused a general assault to be made, in which assault the Count de Saulx did
behave himself most valiantly, obtaining to himself the Crown of the walls,
by scanding the first and chief Bull warke, which he gained with an invincible
courage.

The enemy having retired themselves into the strong hold or Fort within the
Castle, the Lord de Crequy caused a retreat to be founded, and the next day
following those within the Castle finding themselves sorely pressed and hardly
put to it and having also lost their principal Bulwark, seeing also that the
Lord de Crequi had mastered the town, then they made sign for a parley.

The Lord Marshall de Crequy sent unto them to know what they demanded; their
answer was to yield, but on this condition, that faithful promise might be
made unto them, that ever after they might remain under the government and
obedience of the King, which the said Lord Marshall de Crequi assured them of.
And the one and thirtieth day of March being Easterday, at seven a clock in
the morning, these Lords, the Lord Marshall de Crequi, Count de Saulx, and de
Villeroy, entered into the Castle with two Companies of foot.

The Duke of Savoy at the present is much perplexed, and knows not which way
to turn himself; for whithersoever he looks he sees his own calamity, the
ruin and destruction of his Country, having now lost Rivolle, Pignerolle, and
other places for his safety, and which indeed were bulwarks unto Italy.

This is all that passed in Piedmont at the taking of the Town and Castle of
Pignerolle; unto which Castle the Lord Marshall de Crequy adds all
necessaries, and carries all possible care for the keeping and maintaining of
the same under the Crown and obedience of France.

O you French Nation, for this must you make prayers and supplications unto the
Almighty, that he will be pleased to bless and preserve his Anointed Lewis
the Just, beseeching his Majesty to afford us this grace and favor, that we
may see this King flourish, and to heap upon our King blessings and
happiness, giving him a successful offspring, to favor our Prince Dauphin,
giving him victory over all his enemies. Heaven grant that our prayers may be
received at his hands to whom we direct them, and that his great goodness be
pleased to grant us whatsoever we demand, blessing our King, directing his
enterprises, giving him the accomplishment of all his good intentions, with the
augmentation and increase of his Crown and Kingdom.

FJNJS.

