OBSERVATIONS, NATURAL AND MORAL. With a short Treatise of the Numbers,
Weights, and Measures, used by the Hebrews; with the valuation of them
according to the Measures of the Greeks and Romans. For the clearing of sundry
places of Scripture in which these weights and measures are set down by way of
Allusion. By John Weemse of Lathocker in Scotland, Preacher of Christ's Gospel.

Printed at London by T. Cotes, for John Bellamie, and are to be sold by
Benjamine Allen in Popes head Alley, 1633.

Recensui hunc Tractatvm, cui titulus est, Observations Moral, and Natural;
qui quidem liber continet 76. folia, in quibus nihil reperio bonis moribus, aut
sanae doctrinae contrarium, quo minus cum utilitate imprimatur, modo intra
septem menses proxime sequentes typis mandetur.

Ex adibus Londinensibus Iun. 13. 1632. Guilielmus Bray Episcopo Londinensi a
Sacris.

The Contents of the Chapters and chief heads contained in this Book.
CHAPTER I. OF the four Elements. Page 1. CHAP. II. How the earth hangs upon
nothing. Page 6. CHAP. III. That the earth is the basest of the Elements. Page
13 CHAP. IIII. Of the situation of the Elements. Page 16 CHAP. V. That the
waters come from the Sea, and return to the Sea again. Page 24 CHAP. VI.
Whether the Winds have any weight or not? Page 28 CHAP. VII. Whether the water
or the fire be the more excellent Element. Page 32 CHAP. VIII. Of the Meteors,
the dew, and the Spiritual applications of it. Page 37 CHAP. IX. Of bodies
perfectly com^^^ and first of the mettalls. Page 40 CHAP. IX Of the diverse
names that go (...) in the Scriptures. Page 43 CHAP. X. The blesssing of God,
and the influence of the heavens, make thigs fertile below here. Page 45 CHAP.
XI. Why the Children are said to come out of their Fathers thigh. Page 52 CHAP.
XII. That a woman gives seed in generation as well as the man. Page 54 CHAP.
XIII. How old some of Christ's predecessors were when they begot children. Page
56 CHAP. XIIII. What time the soul aenimateth the body, and what care the Lord
has of the Child after that he is animated. Page 62 CHAP. XV. In what part of
the body the soul lodges. Page 65 CHAP. XVI. What things the Midwife does to
the child when it is newborn. Page 69 CHAP. XVII. That the mother should
nourish her own children. Page 72 CHAP. XVIII. Of the weaning of Children.
Page 75 CHAP. XIX. Whether the sight or the hearing be the better sense. Page
78 CHAP. XX. Whether the fantasy brings forth real effects. Page 84 CHAP.
XXI. How the Hebewes distinguished the ages of man. Page 54 CHAP. XXII. Whether
death be natural to man or not? Page 56
Moral Observations.
CHAP. I. Of two evils, the least is to chosen. 97 CHAP. II. Of Friendship. 103
CHAP. III. Sinful love degenerateth into hatred. 110 CHAP. IIII. Whether we
may exceed the rule of righteousness in well doing or not? 116 CHAP. V. Of
Liberality. 118 CHAP. VI. Of Contentment. 122 CHAP. VII. De connexione
virtutum. 126 EXERCITAT. Of Numbers, Weights, and measures. 129
FINIS.
NATVRALL OBSERVATIONS.
CHAP. 1. Of the four Elements.
Proverb. 30.4. Who has ascended up into the heaven, or descended? Who has
gathered the Winds in his fist? Who has bound all the Waters in a garment? Who
has established all the ends of the earth?
THe Hebrews gather out of this place the four Elements, How the Hebrews
gather the four Elements.
three of them set down here clearly, the wind, the water, and the earth;
and the fourth the fire, because it is not clearly seen by us as the rest of
the elements, therefore it is comprehended under the word heaven; and by a
contraction the Hebrews contract the four elements in this word armang. (...)
ignis (...) pro (...) aer (...) pro (...)
The first letter aleph stands for esh the fire; the second letter Resh, for
Ruah the wind; the third letter men for maijn, aqua (...) pro (...) terra (...)
pro (...)
the water; the fourth letter G^aijn for gnapher the dust or earth.

Ames 9.6. It is he that has founded his troops [or bundles] in the earth,
the Hebrews mean by these troops or bundles, the elements, the air, the
water and the fire which the Lord has bound together.

Reasons proving that there are four elements; Reasons proving that there are
four elements.
first there is a heaven that moves and turns about still, si consequens
sequitur antecedens, Regula Philosopherum.
consequens cum modo sequitur antecedens cum modo: but the earth is necessarily
cold and dry, therefore the fire must be necessarily hot and dry; and there
must be two middle elements betwixt these two which are contrary, the air and
the water, the midst betwixt the two cannot be one: and as there are two
extremes, bote in the highest degree and cold in the highest degree, so there
must be one midst which is temperately hot, and another midst which is
temperatly cold.

Whatsoever is found in composed and perfectly mixed bodies, extra mixtum,
without the thing mixed or composed; example, There are in man a body and a
spirit, therefore there are some which are spirits only as Angels, and some
bodies which are no spirits; The spirits, breath, moisture, and substance of
man, resemble the four elements.
in man there are first the spirits, and when he dies they go away, and they
resemble the fire: Secondly, there is the air which fails when the body
begins to consume, and rot: thirdly, the moisture flies out of it which is
the water; and last of all it is resolved into ^ust, natura in^initum renuit,
and terminum quaerit, and always aymeth at an end, The body resolved into
four elements.
and seeks by the most compendious way to attain unto the same, and
therefore she has established but four principal elements in composition of
things, and also resolving the body into four elements. And as there are four
Lations, one simply highest, another respectively highest, a third simply
lowest, and a fourth respectively lowest, so there are four places; the earth
is simply lowest, and the water is respectively lowest, the fire is simply
highest, and the air respectively highest. Four elements resembled by the
complexion of man's body, and the four seasons of the year.
Choler in the body of man resembles the fire, his blood the air, melancholy
the earth, and petuite the water: and the four seasons of the year resemble
the four elements, the Winter resembles the earth, the Autumn the water, the
Spring the air, and the Summer the fire.

God has situated and placed these elements that they may have a musical
proportion one to another, The elements keep a musical proportion one to
another.
the earth lowest as the basse, the fire highest as the triple carrying a
diapason or eight to the earth: he has set the water next the earth that it
might carry a diapente to the fire, and a diatesseron or tenor to the earth;
And the air next the fire that it may have a diapente or counter tenor to the
earth, and a diatesseron to the fire; this perfect harmony arises from the
proportionable temperature of the four first qualities in the elements, dry,
hot, cold, moist, The four qualities of the elements.
for the chief quality of the earth is dryness, and by participation of cold
from the water; the chief quality of the fire is heat and partaketh of the
earths dryness: the water is exterame cold and partaketh of the moisture of
the air; the air is extreme moist and partaketh of the heat of the fire, so
that there are eight qualities here to make up a diapason, four extreme and
chief, and four remiss and by participation, and their harmony may be taken
up thus:

Bassus, Terra Siccum 1 Frigidum 2
Tenor, aqua Frigiaum. 3. Diatessaron. humidum. 4.
Contra, aer Humidum 5 diapente calidum 6
Triplex, ignis calidum 7 Siccum 8 diapason.


As natures perfection is to imitate God in his first creation, The perfection
of nature, is to imitate God, and of Art to imitate nature.
so the greatest perfection of art is to imitate nature. Phythagoras did find
out the concent of music by hearing a smith beating upon his Anvell with
four hammers being of unequal weight, How Phythagoras found out the
proportion in Music.
and that he might find out the difference of the sound, he weighed the
hammers, and he found the heaviest to be twelve pound weight, the lightest
six and the third eight and the fourth nine according to arithmeticall
proportion, the first being twice as heavy as the second, the fourth carrying
a triple proportion to the first, and the third a double proportion and a half
to the first; and according to musical proportion the fourth to the first was
diapason, resembling the water and the fire; the third to the first, and the
second to the fourth, are diapente; the first to the second, and the third to
the fourth are diatassaron, respecting the weight of the ha^mers. Pythagoras
that he might make Art to imitate nature stretched out four Lutestrings
between two roots of trees, and making a bridge betwixt the two just in the
midst, struck upon the fourth string it makes a diapason, so to the first;
then he made a bridge in the second room, the third string made a diapente to
the first: then he set a bridge betwixt these two bridges, struck upon the
second string, it makes a diatessaron to the first in respect of the
stretching out of the strings, as may be seen here.

depiction of the bridge of a lute Terra. 1.

aqua, diatessaron

aer diapente

ignis diapason.



The contrariety betwixt the fire and the earth, What elements symbolize and
what not.
the fire is hot and dry, the earth is cold and dry, yet they symbolize in
dryness; the water is cold and moist, the earth is cold and dry, they
symbolize here in coldness: the fire is hot and dry, the water is cold and
moist, therefore they symbolize in nothing.

There were three great miracles which the Lord wrought, Three great miracles
in respect of the elements which symbolize not.
first when he made the water to come out of the rock in the wilderness, Number.
20.8. Secondly, when the Angel touched the rock, and the fire came out of it
to burn the sacrifice, Judge. 6.24. The third when Elias poured water upon the
sacrifice, and then made it burn, 1 King 18.33. this was a greater miracle
than any of the other two, for there is no concord betwixt the water and the
fire, as in the other two miracles; for the water and the rock symbolize in
coldness although not in dryness, and the fire and the rock symbolize in
dryness, although not in coldness.

The Lord has tempered the body of man, The wonderful temperature of the
body of man.
of moist and heat, cold and dry; and that the heat prevail not and breed
fevers, he tempered it with cold to make up the harmony, and that the cold
prevail not and breed lethargies, he tempered it with heat; and that the
moisture prevail not and breed hydropsies, The wonderful temperature of the
body of the world.
he tempered it with dryness. So the Lord tempered the great body of the world
at the first, and set this contrary to that: when the Lord destroyed the first
world with water, this great body dyed of the hydropsie; and when he shall
consume it at the latter day with fire, then he shall burn it as it were with
a fever.

The conclusion of this is, Conclusion.
we must admire the wisdom of God who has made all things in weight, number
and measure, God made all things in weight number and measure.
Wisd. 11.17. Who has made all things in weight that the earth and the water
should be heaviest, and the air and the fire lightest; in number that he has
made two extreme elements and two middle elements; in measure that he has
tempered the hot fire by the air and not by the water, for that would have
extinguished it, and he has made the dry earth moist by the water, and not by
the air for that would not have moystned it.

CHAP. II. How the earth hangs upon nothing.
Job. 26.7. He hangs the earth upon nothing; and Psalm. 104.5. He settled it
upon the foundations thereof.
SSalomon says that dead fles cause the syntment of the apothecarie to send
forth a stinking savor, The best wits have their blemishes.
Eccles. 10.1. that is, great gifts may be corrupted and stained with some
notable blemish, as may be seen in that notable and excellent mathematician
Archimedes, cui magnum ingenium, sed non sine mixtura dementia.

The King of Syracuse gave so much gold to make a crown of it, Vitru^tius.
the goldsmiths made a very curious piece of work of it, but the king
suspected that he had mixed some silver with the gold, but was loath to break
the crown because of the workmanship of it, yet he was very desirous to know
how much silver was in it. The quick invention of Archimedes in finding out
the false metal in the crown.
Archimedes busied himself about it a long while, and one daygoing into a bath
even into the middle, he observed how much water his body made to run over
out of the bath, then upon a sudden he leapt out of the bath with joy crying
(...), I have found it, I have found it; What does he then? he took a mass of
gold and another of silver of equal weight with the crown, which he putting
into a vessel of water, first he observed how much water the gold made the
vessel to run over, and how much water the silver made it to run over, and
thirdly he marked how much water the crown made it to run over: and by the
weight of these waters he gathered how much gold was in the crown, and how
much silver was in it; as for example, put the case that the mass of gold
caused twenty pintes to run over, the crown twenty four pintes, and the
mass of silver thirty six pintes; divide twelve three times, and the
quotient shall be three, so that he found out three parts of the crown to
be gold, and one silver, as you may see in this proof following.

Inaequalis effusio massae aurea coronae massa argenteae
Sext 20 14 26
differentia 12 4
mistio 3 1


Pondus coronae 16 100
mistio auri argenti
12. 25. 3 1 14. 27.


Was not this an excellent wit in Archimedes, but mark how the dead flees
putrified the box of ointment. Archimedes his fond opinion.
He said, give him a place to stand upon, and he could raise the frame of the
whole earth; and if he could raise the earth out of the Center, then he could
hang the earth upon nothing, and if he might hang the earth upon nothing, then
he might stand upon nothing.

By this conclusion of Archimedes we may learn how many Epha's the brazen sea
would contain which Solomon made, How to know how many Epha's the brazen sea
did contain.
1 King. 7.26. first we must reduce the baths to the brazen sea, it contained
two thousand baths 1 King 3.4. but 2 Chro. 4. it contained three thousand
baths: and next we must reduce the dry measure the Epha to the bath. Now that
we may know what every bath contained, we must consider the form of the
brazen sea, it is said to be thirty cubits in compass, ten in the diameter
or breadth, The quadrant of the Epha will be the circonference of the bath.
and five in the semidiameter or depth. It was not ovalis out Cylindrici
figura, but like the half of a hemisphere or a ball cut in two equal parts;
then take the cubite and make the Epha of a cubicall form, that is, alike in
height, length, and breadth; then the cubit and the Epha will be alike.
Thirdly, take the bath being round, and make him contain alike with the Epha,
then the cubit, bath and Epha will be all one. The brazen sea is said to
contain two thousand baths, 1 King. 3.4. that is, baths made according to the
cubicall Epha which is a cubite; and 2 Chro. 4. it is said to contain three
thousand baths made according to the cubicall half Epha which is (...), or the
great Palm, so that by the bath here we may know the greatness of the brazen
sea. So the ten brazen Lavers which Solomon made, every one contained forty
baths, that is, half baths, as we may perceive by their measures, because the
text says, What baths the Lavers did contain.
they were four cubits. He hangs the earth upon nothing, he measures the
waters with the hollow of his hand, and meateth out the heaven with his span,
God who made the earth of nothing can hang it upon nothing.
and comprehends the dust of the earth in a measure, and weighs the
mountains in scales and the hills in a balance, Esaias. 40.12. He hangs the
earth upon nothing, he who made the earth of nothing can hang it upon nothing,
Prima principia non possunt demonstrari sed illustrari, we cannot give a reason
why the earth hangs upon nothing, because we can go no higher, but rest
here: we may illustrate this, We must rest in the first principles, for we
cannot give a cause of them.
that it hangs upon nothing; we may define what the earth is, and what the
Philosophers call nihil, we may assign the cause of a cause until we come
to the first cause, and there we must rest. Example; These things which were
dedicated to the temple of the Lord were hung up upon pinnes fastened in the
wall, the wall stood upon the foundation, the foundation stood upon the earth,
the earth hangs upon nothing; here we go not higher but rest in the power of
God that hung it, the Lord sustained it with his three fingers Esaias 40.12.
(...) Tribus digitis appendit, ut vertit Hieronymus.
and as we weigh and try the least things in the balance, so the Lord weighs
the earth, and if the mathematician say that the earth is but a point in
respect of the heavens, what must the heaven and earth be in respect of God?

He hangs the earth upon nothing, Job. 26.7. gnal belima, which some derive
from beli non, and ma quid, because it hangs upon nothing: (...) non quid.
and the Greeks translate it (...) nihil, and others derive it from the Chalde
word balam constringere, (...) fibula chaldace.
because the earth is bound together as it were with a button, hence comes
belimah a button; he that hangs the earth upon nothing, (...) super bases
suas.
settled it upon the foundations thereof, Psalm. 104.5. [gnal mecunnatha] super
bases suas, Aquila (...) vertit; and he that settled the earth upon the
foundations of it, is able only to raise it out of the Center; Archimedes was
not able to do this, all the devils in hell cannot destroy the Universe, they
are but a part of the whole, and a part has no power over the whole; The
devils cannot destroy the universe nor invert the order of it.
and the Apostle says, Heb. 1. That he has not put under the feet of the
Angels the world, neither can they invert the order of the universe, for as the
Philosopher says, bonum universi est ordo, they cannot remove the principal
parts of the world, neither can they transfer the elements from one place to
another, they cannot stay the course of the Sun and the Moon, therefore it
is but a fable that is written of the witches of Thessalie that they could stay
the course of the moon.

When God hangs the earth upon nothing, The hanging of the earth upon nothing
is not a miracle now.
it is not a miracle; the Philosopher says, that elementa non ponderant in
locis suis, but if the earth were heavy in it own Center, and then should
hang upon nothing, that were a miracle, as when Elisha caused the Axe to swim
in the water, 2 King. 6.6. because the Axe was heavy of it self, therefore
this was a miracle in causing it to swim above in the water.

There are two things required in a miracle, Two conditions required in a thing
to make it a miracle.
first that the cause be an hidden cause altogether, I say, altogether; for if
it be hid to some and known to others, then it is not a miracle: example, when
a country man sees the eclipse of the Sun, the cause of it is hid to him,
yet because it is not hid from a Mathematician, therefore it is not a miracle.
Again, these things that are miracles were not appointed by God in the
creation to receive these effects which he works immediately in them: the
settling of the earth upon nothing is not a miracle in the second respect,
because here he works according to nature, placing it in the Center. When
Christ restored sight to the blind, this was a miracle because it was not
according to Gods ordinary course in nature; but when they saw once, their
sight could not be called a miraculous sight but natural, for they saw as we
see; so we may say, the settling of the earth in prima constitutione is
miraculous, sed constituta, being once settled according to nature, it is not
miraculous. God is said to set a Law to his creatures and to command them, he
does this by natural causes: Before the creation God did things by his
immediate power, but nature being settled he works by it.
when nature was not in the first creation he did things by his immediate
power, but nature being once settled he does things mediately, neither does this
diminish any thing from the power of God, when he works by his handmaid
nature, for if he should bind the sea only by his power, then we should see
nothing but only, his power to praise him for it; but when he does these
things by natural means, here we are led both to praise his wisdom and his
power.

God when he created the earth, Why the Lord made hills and valleys.
he made in some places hills and in some places empty parts to contain the
water; but to reduce this inequality to an equality, he weighs (as the
Prophet Esaias says cap. 40.12.) the hills in balances, and makes this hill to
conterpoyse that, and from this equal distribution of the parts settling one
against another, The Lord weighed the parts of the earth.
he settled the earth in the midst that it is not moved, and lest it should fall
no way but to the Center, he made it firm in the lowest parts, and lest one
part should fall upon another, he provided that the hills should be poised one
against another.

The earth that is the Center is so settled that it cannot be moved; there
falls out some particular earthquakes here and there, The whole earth is not
shaken with earthquake.
but the whole earth is never shaken with an earthquake: for if the whole were
shaken at once, with an earthquake, then it should follow that the earth were
settled contrary to the nature of it; for the nature of the Center, is to be
Immovable: and if it could be so, then the heavens were turned about that
which is moveable. The earthquake which fell out at our Lords passion, if it
was universal it was a miracle indeed.

God settled the earth upon nothing, Co^pernicus error refuted.
then Copernicus error is disproved, who held that the earth moved about, and
that the Sun stood still; which conceit of his Solomon refuteth Eccles. 1.
The earth stands for ever, but the Sun rises, and goes down, and hastes
to the place whence it arose. And if the Sun stood still and moved not, what
miracle was it then, in Ioshuas days to make the Sun to stand? The Scripture
speaker's oftentimes of things as they appear to our sense.
Therefore to say, that the Sun mooveth because it seems to move, that were
to deny the very knowledge of sense: as if a man should deny the fire to burn.
It is true, the Scripture speaks sometimes of things as they appear to our
sense, as Mark says, the Sun did set, but in the Greek it is (...)
dipping, Mark. 1.32. because it seemeeth to the people to dippe in the sea when
it sets. So it calls the Sun and the Moon, great lights, Genesis 1.
bearing as it were with the infirmity of the weak people; but when men see
things sensibly and feel them, then the Scripture speaks of them according
as our senses take them up; and it uses the senses as an argument to prove
things by, as 1 Ioh. 1.1. That which we have seen with eyes; that which we
have heard, and that which we have handled, etc. that we declare unto you; the
senses are not always mistaken then.

The conclusion of this is; Conclusion.
if the earth that hangs upon nothing, be so settled that it cannot be moved,
In the settling of the earth Gods power is seen, but in the settling of the
Church, his power, wisdom and mercy are seen.
how much more is the Church settled, which is settled upon the rock Christ? In
the settling of the earth, Gods power and his wisdom are seen; but in settling
of his Church, both his power and his mercy appear.

Secondly, David alludeth to this, When he shall be established in his
kingdom, the earth and all the inhabitants thereof were dissolved, but he
would establish the pillars of it, Psalm. 75.3. and settle the government of it
when he came to the kingdom.

CHAP. III. That the earth is the basest of all the Elements.
Job. 30.8. Thou art viler than the earth.
I It may seem that the earth is the most excellent of all the Elements.
First, because in the creation, Some prove that the earth is the most excellent.
it is said, God created the heaven and the earth, walks in the midst of the
seven golden candlestickes, Revel. 2.1. Fourthly,

But these reasons being well considered will not prove the earth to be the
most excellent element; Reasons prooving the earth to be the basest of all
elements.
for the heaven is the throne of God and the measure of order,

Secondly,

Thirdly, The answer to the former reasons.
attenuating, and elevating: but the earth is opposite to it in all these
respects.

In the beginning, 1.1. Here the earth is put next the heaven.

This shows an imperfection, Moses makes mention of the two first things
which were made, heaven and earth, the heaven as the most excellent, and the
earth as the basest.

There was a paradise upon the earth,

The reason of this, Why a Paradise in earth and not in the rest of the
elements.
was because man had an earthly body: and could not dwell in any of the rest
of the elements: and the Paradise upon the earth, was an excellent and glorious
place, but as it was adorned with temperate heat, pleasant air, and sweet
waters.

The earth is the resting place of man.

Not as it is the earth simply but as it is the earth adorned with the rest of
the elements, The earth not the resting place of the body simply.
but it is not the resting place of the soul; for it seeks the things above,
Colos. 3.2.

The earth rests, but the rest of the elements moove;

We may gather, a contrary argument from this; motu rectu, by straight motion,
bodies are moved to rest, that they may attain to their own rest, which place
when they have once attained unto, the more excellent they are, the more they
follow the motion of the heavens, which are turned about continually.

The earth is a common mother, and nourishes all things, therefore most
excellent.

It becomes a rich, and fertile mother, The earth of it self is dry and
barren.
for the earth of it self is both dry and barren: and it is not fertile
unless it be tempered with the rest of the elements, and the heat of the
fire is to be preferred to the humiditie of the air.

The earth is the midst of all the elements.

The Philosopher says, that there is a double midst, Medium Perfectionis molis.
vnum perfectionis, alterum molis, the heavens are the midst of perfection:
from the which as from the heart, the whole is preserved; the earth again is
but medium molis, The earth is not the midst of perfection, but the middle
place.
it is but like the middle place, it is like the Navell in the body of man: but
not like the heart: and if we shall consider the right order of the elements
and the right order, how all the rest hang upon the first; by this
consideration the heavens shall be the highest, and the earth shall be the
lowest and not the midst.

The conclusion of this is, Conclusion.
seeing the earth is the basest of all the elements, we should not seek our
contentment in it neither should we say it is good to be here, but we should
set our affections on things above, Collos. 3.2.

CHAP. IIII. Of the situation of the Elements.
Exodus 20.4. Or in the Water under the earth. De situ Elementorum.
ALthough the water be said to be under the earth, yet the water as the
lightest element is above the earth.

The water is above the earth, therefore Jerusalem is called umbilicus terrae,
Ezekiel. 38.12. The midst of the Land; and Tyrus is said to be placed in the heart
of the Sea, Ezch. 28.8. The water is said to have a heart, and the earth a
Navell; as the heart is above the Navell, so the water naturally is above the
earth.

When God created the Waters and the earth, at the first they were mixed
together as the Wine and the dregs, but the Lord separated them, and he caused
the earth to fall down like the dregs of the wine, and the water to rise out
of the earth to the circumference, then he gathered the waters into one place,
Genesis 1. called the deep; whereby the earth and the water, made but one globe,
and the earth, being settled as the Center, the water goes round about it, as
the circumference; therefore that position of the Philosophers holds not, that
there is ten times more water than earth, for as Bodinus says in his Theatrum
natural, that the highest hill being measured perpendicularly to the superfice
of the water, is not a mile of height about the water, and the deepest place in
the ocean is not a mile of deepth; There is not so much water as earth.
therefore there is not so much water as there is earth, and if the earth were
made in a plain circumference it would fill up all the wastnesse of the
deepes, and in Noah's deludge it was but fifteen cubits above the highest
mountain, therefore there would not be so much water as earth.

The earth being the Center and the water the circumference, The earth and the
water make but one globe.
they make but one Globe which is proved by the eclipse of the Moon, for when
she is eclipsed, there is but one shadow cast up both of the water and the
earth upon the body of the Sun.

By the Eclipse we learn four great secrets in nature, first the distance of
the earth from the Sun; Four great secrets to be learned from the eclipse.
secondly the distance of the earth from the Moon; thirdly, the distance of
the Sun from the Moon; and fourthly, that the water and the earth make but
one Globe.

First, the discance of the earth from the Sun, for the Sun is farther
removed from us than the Moon, as we may perceive by the Eclipse; when the
shadow is cast upward from the Sun, it reaches to the body of the Moon, and
by measuring the shadow, we know the bigness of the Sun, the circumference
of the earth, and the bigness of the Moon, and that the Sun is bigger than
the earth, and the earth bigger than the Moon.

That the Sun is bigger than the earth, The Sun is bigger than the earth.
the form of the shadow shows this, for it casts up the shadow to the
Moon Pyramidaliter instar coni, and if the Sun were not bigger than the
earth, then the shadow would rise up like a pillar in infinitum, and then all
the planets should be Eclipsed as well as the Moon.

Secondly, How to know the distance of the Moon from the earth.
by the shadow in the Eclipse we gather the distance of the Moon from the
earth, for the earth Eclipseth no other planet than the Moon, and measure the
length of the shadow, and then it will show what distance the Moon is from us.

Thirdly, How to know the distance of the Moon from the Sun.
by the Eclipse of the Sun we may know the distance of the Sun from the
Moon, for the Sun can never be totally eclipsed, because it is both higher
and bigger than the Moon; and knowing the bigness of the body of the Moon;
we may understand what distance there is betwixt the Sun and the Moon by
the parts of the earth that are obscured in the Eclipse, for the eclipse of the
Sun is never universal as that of the Moon, for there may be an Eclipse in
Persia or Judea which is not here, and here when it is not there. So measuring
the parts of the earth eclipsed, and the bigness of the shadow of it, we may
gather the height of the Sun above the Moon.

The fourth thing is, The water and the earth make but one globe
that the water and the earth make but one Globe, because the shadow is but one
shadow, as the shadow of the Moon cast down in the Eclipse of the Sun is
but one shadow; but if the water and the earth were two distinct Globes, then
they would cast two shadows.

By measuring the length of these two shadows, we may know the bigness of the
Sun, This shadow shadoweth the distance of the Sun from the Moon.
the Moon and the Earth.

The Eclipse of the Sun

The Eclipse of the Moon.



This shadow shows the distance of the earth from the moon.
This shadow shows the distance of the earth from the sun.
This shadow shows that the earth and the water make but one globe.
Although the water be higher than the earth, The water although higher than
the earth, is not miraculously kept in.
yet it is not miraculously kept within the bounds, but only by the Law of
nature it runs to the Center.

There is another cause why the earth is dry and the water overfloweth it not,
Why the water overfloweth not the earth.
which is the Sun, who by his light and motion does heat the moist parts of
the earth and engendereth vapors, which lift up the hills and make many hollow
places in the earth; and then the water finding passages, runs into the
deepes of the earth.

Secondly, Another cause of the dryness of the earth.
the distance of the heaven from the earth is the cause of the dryness of the
earth, for the elements of themselves being without form, and receiving their
forms from the heavens because the earth is farthest from the heavens, it most
imperfectly takes the round form, because it is very dry, and is hardly
drawn to the round form, and the inequality of the parts of the earth,
makes that the water overfloweth not the whole earth.

Whether is the dryness of the earth,

It is according to the nature of the universe, because it serves for a good
end, Whether the dryness of the earth be natural to it or not.
the preservation of many living creatures: for although it seem that it is
natural for the lighter element to be above, yet in respect of the universe it
is natural for the earth in many parts to be above the water, it is natural
for the water to run down, yet lest vacuum be granted it runs up, and
this course is natural to it in respect of the Universe; and if the dryness
of the Universe were altogether violent and not natural, then it could not
continue long, for no violent thing can continue: and moreover if we shall
respect the particular parts of the earth, it is natural, for the parts of the
earth that are high to be dry, and these which are lowest and nearest the
Center, to be covered with water.

He made the water as the lighter element to go above; and the earth as the
heavier element to be lowest. The opinion of some who held that the earth did
swim in the water. Arist. lib. 3. de calo cap. 13. Augustine de ciVit. dei.
lib. 16. cap. 19. Lactantius lib; 3. instit. cap. 24.
It was an old opinion of some that the earth did swim in the water, as a ship
does in the Sea, which opinion Thales Milesius held, as Aristot. shows: hence
they gathered that there were no antipodes, and that men lived not in another
hemisphere, and when one held that there were Antipodes, Bonifacius who was the
Popes Legate in Germany, Johannes Aventinus, lib. 3.

Psalm. 136.6. Who stretched out the earth above the waters.

But Job says, cap. 26.7. He hangs the earth upon nothing, and David Psalm
104.5. Who has founded the earth upon her pillars, Symmachus, (...) super
seeds suas. The earth is said to be founded in the water, not that the water is
under the earth, but in respect of some parts of it, he has founded it upon
the waters, gnal is put pro (...) here, as Mat. 27.19. (...) in tribunali, gnal
pro in; so Esaias 38.20. [gnal beth Iehova,] in domo domini: so gnal pro (...)
juxta, as Pharao stood [gnal bajeor] juxta flumen. So Psalm. 1. as a tree
planted [gnal] juxta rivos: thirdly gnal notat supereminentiam, (...) pro (...)
(...) super juxta cum.

and so the earth is higher than the water for the commodity of man, and
beast, but naturally the water should be above the earth. Lastly gnal is put
for cum as both the men and the women came, gnal, Exodus, 35.22. so 2 Pet. 3.5.
the earth is said to be of the water, How the earth is said to be of the water.
and by the water, but Peter means not that the earth is sustained by the
water: so Noah is said to be saved (...), not by the water, but in the water.

But David seems to make the sea lower than the earth, Psalm. 107. They that
go down into the Sea.

If we will compare the coasts and the nearest sea, How the sea is said to be
lower than the earth.
then the Land is higher than the sea; but if we will compare the Land and the
maine sea, then the sea is higher than the Land, and therefore the sea is
called altum.

The Lord has set bounds to the sea, and with a compass has drawn a line
how far the sea should come. Circinavit. God has set bounds to the sea.
Job. 38.11. Ier. 5.22. Will ye not tremble at my presence, who has placed the
sand for the bounds of the sea? We are to fear him as well in his work of
nature here [for we see both his power and his wisedome] as we are to fear
him when he represseth it only by miracles.

Xerxes was most impudent who took upon him to make a bridge over Hellespont,
The foolishness of some who have thought to command the sea.
and charged the sea under pain of disobedience not to cast it down; and
threatened that he would scourge and whippe the sea if it did so. These princes
who assayed only to cut the passages of Peloponesus where Corinth stood, as
Claudius, Casar, Demetrius and Nero, could never effectuate this business. So
Sesostratus and Darius went to cut the Land betwixt the Mediterran sea, and the
red Sea, but they were glad to leave off this work, lest the Sea should have
overflowed the Land; so Trajan thought to have cut a passage betwixt Nilus and
the red Sea, but could never effectuate it: all which teach us, that it is the
Lord only who sets bounds to the sea, and it is he that stops it by his
mighty power. The example of Canutus King of England is memorable for this
purpose, for when his flatterers flattered him too much (as Polydore Virgil
testifieth] he caused to bring his chair of estate to the Sea shore; when it
was ebbing, and he sitting in it caused his heralds to proclaim and to charge
the Sea under pain of disobedience that it should not approach to his chair
of estate, but the Sea keeping it ordinary course, made the King and all his
Courtiers to remove; then the King took occasion to speak unto these
flatterers, after this manner, Ye see that I am but a mortal man, whom neither
sea nor wind will obey, therefore learn to fear him who has power to set
bounds to the sea, and to whom both the wind and the sea does obey, Mark. 4.39.

The Conclusion of this is, Conclusion.
although the water be above the earth, and should overflow it naturally, yet
the Lord says, this far thou shall come and no farther, Job. 38.11. so the
Lord has set bounds to the pride of the enemies of the Church. David when he
speaks of the waters, Psalm. 124. he called them aqua superbiae, (...)
superbire.
[maijm hazedonim] and this word Jeremy uses to express the proud heart of
man, Iere. 49.6. and the Law uses it when it speaks of a man, who kills
one in the pride of his heart: the Lord can repress this proud sea, Mark.
4.39. The wind ceased, (...) fraenum vel capistrum.
and there was a great calm, in the Greek it is more emphaticall (...), he
put a bridle in the mouth of the sea, that it could rage no more: as the Lord
can put a bridle in the mouth of the sea, so he has a hook in the nose of
the tyrants on the earth, and as he limitateth the waters, so he limitateth the
pride of tyrants. God that bridled the sea, can assuage the fury of the
enemies of his Church.
In the winter when there are greatest storms the Lord makes some Halcyon or
calm days, that this bird may hatch her young ones: so the Lord in the
greatest rage and fury of his enemies can calm the storm; that the Church of
God may bring forth children to him, and reserveth some dry place for them.

CHAP. V. That the waters come from the sea, and return to the sea again.
Eccles. 1.7. All the rivers run to the Sea, yet the Sea is not full; unto the
place from whence the rivers came, thence they return again.
THe sea is like the Liver in the body, which by the veins sends blood to
the whole paits of the body, so does the sea to all the parts of the earth.

That the waters come from the sea, Reasons showing that the waters come from
the sea.
first it is clear, for although much water comes into the Sea, yet it
increases nothing, and the reason of this is, because as much goes from the
Sea as comes to it; and that of Ecclesiastes may be applied here, As riches
increase so do they that eat them; if the Sea receive much, it gives out as
much again.

Secondly, Gods testimony is the greatest proof to prove that they come from
the sea, (...) fletus maris.
Job. 38.16. An venisti usque ad fletus maris [nibhki jam] which may be
translated the tears of the sea: why are they called the tears of the sea?
because the fountains come from the depth of the sea, Gods own testimony
shows that the waters come from the sea.
through the earth as tears trickle from the eyes. Psalm. 104.13. He waters
the hills from his chambers, that is, from the clouds above, and verse. 10. He
sendeht the springs into the valleys which run among the hills, not only the
waters which fall from the hills, but also these which he sends from the
veins of the earth. And here most plainly it appears, Edcles. 1.7. That all
the waters come from the sea, and he who knows full well the secrets of the
heart, and the many turnings and windings which are in it, knows full well
the many ways how these waters turn and wind from the Sea; and he that
knows the way of a serpent upon a stone, and the ways of a man with a maid,
and the way of an Eagle in the air, and the way of a ship in the Sea, Prove.
30.19. Knows full well these turnings of the waters from the Sea, The waters
come and ^oe to the sea by secret passages.
and how the waters come through the secret passages of the earth, to the
Caspian sea, although there be no passages seen betwixt them; and as Jordan
when it runs into the dead sea runs by secret passages under the earth to
the sea, so does the waters come by secret passages from the Mediterran sea to
the Caspian sea, and back again.

In the deepth of the earth there are hollow places which breed winds, these
winds carry up the waters, How the waters are carried to the fountains.
the waters again press down the winds, and the winds being borne down by
the waters seek a passage through the earth, and make a way for the sea to run
through the veins of the earth, and seek to highest places, and of these came
the fountains; and because of the continual strife betwixt the sea and the
winds, the water never fails in the fountains; and coming once to the
fountains, then they run back again to the sea. The waters of the floodes
come also from the Sea, Iere. 10.13. When he utters his voice there is a
noise of waters in the heavens, The waters of the floods come from the sea.
and he causes the vapors to ascend from the ends of the earth, that is, out
of the sea, and these waters return again to the sea. These then who hold
that the waters are bred of congealed air in the cavernes of the earth, are
deceived.

If all thewaters come from the sea,

Salt water by Art may be made sweet, Why the waters lose the saltness.
by running through the veins of the earth it loses the saltness of it. And
as children when they are carried to a strange country forget their mother
tongue, Why the waters are of different colors and diverse effects.
Nilus makes the Land fat, when it overfloweth, and Euphrates makes it lean
that the corns should not be too rank, but this is only accidental by
reason of the ground, out of which they spring. For as, All men were created of
one blood, Act. 17. but accidentally they differ in their color, for these who
dwell nearest the fiery zone are black, and these who dwell farthest from it,
some of them are tawnie, and some of them are of the Olive color,

The Sea is salt for many necessary uses, Why these a is salt and not the
floods.
which are no ways necessary in the floods, first he has made the sea salt to
keep it from putrefaction, which is not necessary in the floods because of
their swift motion and running still. Secondly, he has made the sea salt, for
the breeding and nourishing of great fishes being both hotter and thicker;
which use is not necessary to the rivers, because they breed but small fishes.

The sea is salt, the dead sea is called the salt sea, Genesis 14.3. But the whole
sea is salt also, as experience teaches and the Scripture testifies, Jonas
1.5. (...)
the mariners feared, in the original it is [hammelachim] the salt men
feared: why are they called the salt men? because they rowed in the salt sea,
and the sea wherein they were now, was not the dead sea but the Mediterran sea.

There are diverse motions found in the sea which are not found in the rivers,
Diverse motions of the sea.
the sea has fluxum adaequationis; secondly, it has motum agitationis;
thirdly, it has motum fluxus and refluxus; Fourthly, it has motum fluxus
only: the rivers have but only motum fluxus common with the sea, but none of
the other three sorts of motions.

The sea is that element which follows the motion of the heavens, The sea
follovveth the motion of the heavens.
and this motion is made by the Sun and ruled by the Moon, and herein it
follows the Sun and flows from the East to the West: the rives Tanais
runs into Meotis, Meotis into Hellespont, Hellespont into the Mediterran
sea, the Mediterran sea into the Ocean sea, the Ocean sea into the Tartarian
sea, and the Tartarian sea into Meotis again.

The second motion of the sea is motus agitationis, when the waves of the sea
swell up and beat one against another; of this motion David speaks Psalm.
107. The waves ascended up unto the heavens.

The third motion of the sea is motus fluxus and refluxus, whereby it sends
forth waters from the deepes and they return back thither again: The motion
of the Riveis.
the rivers have none of these three motions, these three are all proper to
their mother the sea, but they have motum fluxus common with their mother.

The conclusion of this is, nam si gratiarum recursus cessat, gratiarum
decursus cessat.

CHAP. VI. Whether the Winds have any weight or not?
Job. 28.25. He makes the weight for the winds.
GOd by his power restrains the waters that they over flow not the whole
earth, therefore Job says that he weighs them by measure, lest they
abounding too much should break up the fountains of the deepes as they did in
Noah's time, therefore he fitteth the water to the Center of the earth; so Job
adds, who makes the weight for the winds: The winds are kept down by a
certain weight.
and as he admired before, why the water overflowed not the whole earth, so he
admireth now why the winds ascend not up through the whole earth, but are
carried about the earth, and are kept down by a certain weight.

Weight and levitie are not the first qualities of things, Non prime sed ort^e.
Weight and levitie are (...) not the first qualities.
but they arise from the first qualities: these which are the first qualities
are made of no other, and the qualities of all creatures are made of them, and
one of them striveth against another and agunt invicem, and two of them are
active and two of them passive; active are hot and cold, and passive are
humiditie and dryness

Weight and levitie ought not to be reckoned amongst the first qualities,
because non agunt invicem, one of them does not fight against another, Reasons
proving that weight and Levitie are not first qualities.
as heat and cold do, they depend upon heat and cold; we may give a reason
why the earth is heavy, because it is cold; but we cannot give a reason why it
is cold, but here we must rest as in the first simple quality.

If levity and weight were qualities in things according to certain degrees as
things are hot or cold, then one thing should weigh an ounce, and another a
pound; but this is not found in heavy things simply, but in heavy things
compared with other things, and then they are said to be light or heavy, and
they are not a^ solute qualities but have still a relation to some other thing.
Things become not sweeter or sowrer changing them from one place to another,
but weight and levitie do alter according to the midst, and have still
relation to some other thing.

That which is heavy or light is considered two manner of ways, first in
respect of the place, secondly, in respect of the midst; in respect of the
place, that which is most simple goes nearest the Center, as water if it be
mixed with wine it descends farthest down seeking toward the Center. If ye
put water first in the glasse^, and then power wine into it, he that drinks
first shall drink pure wine, and he who drinks last, shall drink only
water; but if wine be powered first in the glass and water upon it, then it
makes a small mixture, because the water seeks to the own place descending
downward, and the wine to the own place ascending upward; and by this we may
try another conclusion, to find out the pure wine from the mixed, if ye pierce
an hogs head at the uppermost part, if there be both water and wine in it, ye
shall draw out the pure wine; but if ye pierce it below, then the water shall
come forth first, and next the wine.

Secondly, weight and levitie are considered in respect of the midst, Weight
and levitie do change according to the midst.
for they vary much changing the midst; example: take a mass of pure gold, and
a mass of that which is mixed gold, and weigh them both first in the air with
a pair of balances, and then they are of equal weight, but sink them both
in the balance half a foot deep in the water, then the mixed gold shall be
found much more heavier in the water than it was in the air: the reason of
this is the porositie, the balance is only the judge of the weight of things
and reduces them to one quality, but they being suncke in the water, the
water judges of their quality, which is the lighter, and which is the
weightier, the water tries that but by accident only, by the porositie of the
metal, but the balance tries it per se, for the water entering into the
impure metal, because of the porositie of it makes it descend downward, and
the pure metal having no pores in it retains still the same weight which it
had in the air; and thus the mixture or mixed metal varieth according to the
midst here, the water. The air is seen sometimes going up, and sometimes
going down, and we know not which is the proper Center of it, until it enter
into the hollow places of the earth, and then it bursteth upward, and then we
know that the Center of it is above here, and the earth is the midst or judge
to try this, as the water was to try the pure metal from the impure. When
the pure metal and the mixed metal are in the water, to know how much the
one is better than the other, add to the mixed gold in the water a piece of
pure gold, and so make the balance of equal weight in the water, and that
addition put to the mixed gold in the water will show you the difference
betwixt the pure gold and the mixed gold, here we see, mutato medio mutatur
pondus, the midst being changed, the weight is changed.

If ye weigh 21 pounds of Lead in the air, and so much gold of equal weight,
and sincke the balance in the water, the gold shall be but seventeene pound
weight and the lead shall be one and twenty; the reason of this is the
porositie of the lead which sinketh in the water: so weigh thirty one ounces
of silver in the air, and thirty one ounces of gold, and put them in the
water, the gold shall be thirty one still, but the silver will be thirty six.
How the winds are weighed.


The wind is an exhalation which is more gross than the pure and subtle
air, but more subtle than the gross exhalations which come out of the earth;
therefore the wind for the subtilitie of it, ascends to the lowest religion
of the air the clouds, but it is carried down by the weight of it from the
more pure and clear region of the air, yet it cannot descend to the earth,
because of the thick and gross vapors which arise out of the earth still, for
they must be lowest, and it cannot ascend through the more subtle air, for
the lightest must always be highest, and having no place to rest in, it is
carried about, and carries about the clouds with it; therefore the weight
which God made to the wind was this, to vary according to the midst, for
compare the wind with the grosser exhalations of the earth, then it is light,
but compare it again with the pure and subtle air, then it is heavy: so
weight and levitie in the wind are only in comparison.

The conclusion of this is, As things change their weight being compared with
this or that, so do things vary before God, and that which is in high request
amongst men is abomination before God. Balthasser for all the honor that he
had before men, yet when he was weighed before the Lord he was found light,
Dan. 5.27.

CHAP. VII. Whether the water or the fire be the more excellent Element.
2 Peter 3.7. But the heavens and the earth which are now, by the same word are
kept in store, reserved unto fire against the day of judgment, and perdition
of ungodly men.
THere was a controversy upon a time, between the fire and the water, Reasons
proving the water to be the more excellent elements.
which of them were the more excellent element, and he who stood for the water
alleged these reasons.

First,

Secondly, Prometheus was of the fire; and the life of man was long without
fire, but never without water.

Thirdly, Diogenes never used fire, and many other creatures live without fire,
and are nourished only in the water: do not the fish live in the sea? beasts
upon raw flesh and upon roots? and no creature lives without water.

Fourthly, Salamander is but a fable that it lives in the fire, it deliteth to
be near the fire, for the coldness of it) but the greatest creatures and a
multitude of diverse kind live in the water.

Fifthly, and nihilexira se desiderat.

Sixthly, That element is judged, ignis nuit quam humidus, aqua sape calida.

Seventhly, there are four elements, Heraclitus said, if we wanted the Sun,
we should live in perpetual darkness, so we may say if, we wanted the sea,
we should live like barbarous people and wild creatures.

Eighthly, The manner how the heathen subdued other Nations.
they desired to them terram and aquam, and they in token of subjection sent
them water and earth because all commandment is either by sea or by land, and
all possessions and riches are gotten out either of the sea or land: and in the
body of man, the water and the earth are the elements which prevail most, when
Darius sent to the King of Scythia, Herodetus libre Scytha^ rum.
he desired the King to send him water and earth, and when the King of Scythia
had sent him a Foul, a Mouse, and a Frog, and five arrows; Darius interpreted
the matter this ways, that the Mouse signified the earth, because the Mouse is
bred in the earth, and lives upon the same things which man does; the frog to
be the water, because it lives in the water, and the foul to be his horses,
because it is likest unto a horse for swiftness, and the five arrows which
he sent to him (for they were excellent archers) lignified that he would yeeid
unto him, and deliver all his strength and armor unto him, when they required
the earth and water in token of subjection, this shows the excellency of the
water above the fire.

We are baptized by water and not by fire.

In the creation when God created the four elements, Reasons proving the fire
to be the more excellent element.
the water and the earth, were but like the matter; the air and the fire like
the form, forming and fashioning these dead and dull elements, for what were
the water and the earth without the fire to cherish them? take heat from the
water, it does puttifie, as we see in standing waters, which wanting motion
(which breeds heat) putrify and corrupt; but the running waters we call them
living waters, because the motion keeps heat in them.

Take away heat from living creatures,

These things which have least heat in them,

How necessary has the use of fire been for the finding out of all Arts and
preserving of them, Valcan the chief inventer of all arts, but the water has
no use in the invention of Arts, therefore not so excellent as the fire.

The Philosopher said that sleep took up the half of a man's life which is
but a short time, but if a man cannot sleep in the night, then the fire
serves with the light of it to make as it were a second day to him, and takes
away the difference betwixt the day and the night.

That is the most excellent element which serves for the temperature of the
most excellent sense, and this is seen most in the sense of seeing, which is
as it were a fiery substance. This sense is most profitable for us, to behold
the works of God. Answers to the objections.


And where it is objected that the water admits the fire to be joined with
it,

When the water is hot and cures us,

Where it is objected that some men live without fire,

Although they want the outward element,

Nothing lives in the element of the fire,

The element of the fire in it self is so pure that composed bodies cannot
live in it; the element, but only the grosnesse of composed bodies; and
nothing lives without the fire, for every thing that likes has the natural
heat to preserve it.

But we are baptized with water, and not with fire.

This proves only the water to be the better element for this use, but it
does not prove simply that the water is the better element: the earth which is
the basest of all the elements, furnishes bread and wine, for the sacrament,
yet this will not prove the earth to be the best element.

The Egyptians who held themselves to be the most ancient people of the world
and the most noble people, Diorodus Siculus verum antiq. lib. 2. cap. 1.
Plutarchus in convivie septem saptentum.
contended with three diverse nations; first, they contended with the Scythians
for their antiquity: secondly, with the Ethiopians for their wisdom;
thirdly, they contended with the Chaldeans for their God: the Egyptians had
the water for their god; and the Chaldaeans had the fire for their god, and the
Chaldaeans said that their God the fire was the more excellent god because it
was a part of the Sun. Lib. 2. eccles. hist.
And Rufinus says that the Chaldeans went in the days of Constantine through
many parts of the earth, to prove the excellency of their god the fire, and
their god burnt the rest of the images, but when they came to Egypt, and there
appointed a day of trial for their gods, Vide Suidam in voce Canopus.
the Egyptians brought forth the huge image of Nilus which was hollow within,
and filling it with water hored some holes in it, and closed them with wax
artificially, that they could not be discerned. The Chaldeans set their god the
fire round about the image, but the fire melting the wax, the water gushed out
in abundance, and so quenched the Chaldeans God the fire: the Egyptians
concluded, by this that the water their element was a more excellent goddess
than the fire; see how the blind heathen here had neither grace nor reason;
they wanted grace forgetting the Creator to worship the creature; and then they
wanted reason, for when the water is cast upon the fire, the fire is not
extinguished but ascends up to the own element of it.

The conclusion of this:

CHAP. VIII. Of the Meteors, the dew, and the Spiritual applications of it.
AS there are sundry sorts of Meteors engendered in the superior region of the
air, Some Meteors bred in the superior and some in the inferior region of the
Air.
so there are Meteors bred in the inferior region of the air, the dew and the
hoare-frost; and the cause of these are the exhalations drawn up by the Sun
in the day time, the Sun going away, and the night coming in place of it:
these vapors are condensate by the coldness of the night, and if the cold be
not vehement as it falls out in the Spring time and the Summer, it breeds
the dew, which is a small sort of rain, refreshing the grass and the herbs,
(...) vos (...).
and the Hebrews call it tal and the Greeks (...): but if the cold be more
vehement, then the vapors are more consolidated, and that breeds the
hoarefrost, which falling upon the grass, and herbs, are like a little snows
this dew and hoare frost when they be engendered, are bred in the clouds; but
this cloud is so small and thin that it obnubilateth not the air: when the
South wind blows softly, then the dew is bred; and the hoare-frost, when the
North wind blows, and they are engendered in the morning and evening: In the
evening, for then the Sun beams go away, and in the morning when the Sun
rises, the clouds melt and the watrie humors fall down, Why coldes at the
Sunrising than before.
therefore about the Sun rising we find the cold to be vehement.

The Prophet Esaias says, A comparison taken from the falling of the dew.
Chap. 45.8. Dreppe down ye heavens from above, and let the skies pour down
righteousness: let the earth open, and let them bring forth salvation. Here
the Prophet takes a comparison from the falling down of the dew upon the
earth, to show the conception of Christ in the womb of the Virgin.

And first he beggeth for that celestial grace from the heavens, Things
proper to the dew applied to Christ.
for these things which come from the heavens are the most excellent; even in
the conceit of the heathes, and that which they made much of, they called it
delapsum de calo. Now this is most fitly applied to Christ, Ioh, 3.13. No man
ascended up to heaven but he that came down from heaven, even the Son of man
which is in heaven: so Ioh. 8.23. Ye are from beneath, I am from above. and 1
Cor. 15.47. The first man is of the earth earthly, the second man it the Lord
from heaven. And he desires that lust one to come down and quench our
thirst, for without this dew the fleece will be dry, Judge. 6.36. and so the
ground shall be dry. So without this spiritual dew men shall be barren, like
the mountains of Gilboa, 2 Samuel 1.21.

As the dew falls upon the ground, without any noise, and we feel it not,
and as the hail and the rain fall, and we see it not when it falls; so
when our Lord Jesus Christ, was conceived, in the Womb of the Virgin, who
perceived it, or took notice of it, except the Angels, and his Mother Marie?

Secondly when Manna fell, there fell first a dew in the camp; and so before
Christ was conceived in the womb of the Virgin, the dew of the Holy Ghost came
and over-shadowed her.

Thirdly, when the dew falls, it imitigateth the scorching heat; so when the
world was scorched with the heat of Gods wrath for burning in sin, then he
sent the Sun of righteousness to refresh them.

And lastly, the clouds are bidden drop down righteousness, the clouds a
sign of abundance, the clouds, who willingly drop down and liberally, the
clouds, who dropp not down partially: So this righteousness of Jesus Christ
comes freely from the heavens in great abundance, and not partially
distributed to men.

The Conclusion of this is, as Cannan was a land blessed of God, and his eyes
were upon it from the beginning of the year to the end, it was a Land that
drinks in the water of the rain of heaven, Deuteronomy. 11.12. So the Church is a
land blessed for ever, and watered with that celestial dew that came from
heaven.

CHAP. IX. Of bodies perfectly composed, and first of the mettalls.
Iere. 6.29. The bellows are burnt, the Lead is consumed of the fire, the
founder melts in vain; for the micked are not plucked away, reprobate Silver
shall men call them.
THe jews divide their Physickes into three sorts, first [Domes] silens.
Secondly [tzemah] germen; thirdly, [chaja] vivum; they call all the minerals,
silens, they call vegetative things, germen, and the living things they call
vivum. (...) silence (...) germen (...) vivum


The Lord to show the nature of the wicked and hypocritical Jews, borrows a
comparison from the metals, silver and lead: for as the silver-smith before he
melts the silver, Why the Lord borrows this comparison from the silversmith.
he puts lead to it, to make it melt the better; so the Lord threatened
first the notorious wicked Jews, to see if by them he might draw hypocirtes
(who held themselves to be good silver) to repentance and to melt.

The metals are bred by the heat of the Sun, and then by cold they grow
together, and are consolidated: although they be consolidated by cold, yet they
are not bred by cold, How the metals are bred.
but by the heat of the Sun. If the consolidating or gathering of them
together were the cause of their being, then the melting of them should cause
them to perish: the heat of the Sun, drawing up the vapors and exhalations,
is the first cause of engendering the mettalls, and then comes the cold and
consolidateth them; for as the Meteors are bred in the air, of vapors and
exhalations drawn up into the air out of the earth, so are metals bred in
the earth of these exhalations drawn up by the Sun, but hindered and kept
within the earth, that they cannot ascend any higher; then they congeale and
consolidate about the stones or some other parts of the earth, therefore they
are called metalla, id est, (...), that is, which is en gendered or bred about
or with some other thing, as gold about silver, and silver about brass, and
sometime about iron or brass. The metals are of a wat^ie substance.


The metals generally are of a watrie substance, and all of them have less or
more water in them; all the metals can melt in the fire, and the fire being
removed they consolidate again, which shows us that they are of a watrie
substance and participateth both of water and earth. The metals when they are
melted by the fire, they are not like Iee, for when the Ice is frozen it is
still but water, and is capable of no other form; but the metals besides that
they can be melted, they receive other forms, which the Ice cannot receive,
being still water and not metal. Stones may be broken, and bruised and
sometimes they may be hewed, but they cannot be melted as the mettalls. Iron,
brass, and Lead, have more earth in them, than the gold or silver, as we may
perceive by the rust which they contract: gold and silver have more free of
earth than other metals are, and they are more decocted water than the rest. A
comparison betwixt gold and silver^


Now let us make a comparison betwixt gold and lead, Gold has less earth, and
more water in it than lead, yet it is heavier than lead, because it has no
pores in it, to let in the air as lead has; yet it melts not so soon as
the Lead does, Why the gold melts not so soon as the Lead does.
because the water is more perfectly mixed in the gold, than in the Lead, and
the gold being more solid keeps the watrie element better than the lead does.

Then let us compare lead and silver together, lead has more earth in it than
silver has, and the water flows sooner out of it than out of the silver,
because it is not so solid; it has more earth in it then silver has, and
therefore it is hotter when it is melted than silver, and it melts sooner
than silver, because the water is not so perfectly mixed in it as in silver;
Why Lead is put to silver in melting.
therefore the silver Smith when he would melt silver puts lead to it, to
cause it to melt the sooner, and this the Latins call replumbare argentum to
leaden the silver.

The application of the comparison is this, The applieation of the comparison.
that the hypocritical Jews are like iron and steel, and not like silver as
they would appear; for they are so far from separating themselves from the
wicked, that they are altogether like Iron and steel that can hardly melt: the
bellows are burnt, that is, the Prophet has spent his travel in vain
amongst them, and the most notorious wicked men a among them are like the lead
which is burnt up; yet hypocrites by their example will not melt, but remain
indurate and as hard hearted as before, therefore they are but reprobate
silver, and the Lord shall reject them.

When the Lord comes to his Church to separate dross from the silver, God
finds few that are good silver.
he scarcely gets the third part as good silver. Zach. 13.8.9. And I will
bring the third part through the fire, and will refine them as silver is
refined: happy are these who are of this little handful and of this third
part, but as for the wicked he will put them away out of the earth like dross,
Psalm. 119.119.

The conclusion of this is, when the Lord threatens his judgments against
notorious wicked sinners, then it is time for hypocrites to repent, lest the
same judgment overtake them.

CHAP. IX. Of the diverse names that gold has in the Scripture.
1 Kings 9.28. And they came to Ophir, and fetched from thence gold.
FIrst gold is called Zahabb, which is common to all sorts of gold, 2 King.
5.5. (...)


The second name which it has, it is called, (...)
aurum ophir, Job. 22.24. torrentes ophir: not that ophir signified gold, but
the floods out of which the gold was gathered were called ophir, not this ophir
from whence Solomon brought his gold afterward, but a river near the Land of
Vz.

The third name, that it has, (...) mollescere.
it is called Aurum Paz from the root Pazaz which signifies to make soft, but
afterward it was called aurum ophaz and muphaz, Iere. 10. from the places from
whence it was taken. Job speaks of topheth as an appellative, (...)
and yet it was turned afterward into a proper name of a place of torment; so
anrum paz, at the first might be an appellative, but afterward became a proper
name: so Carmel at the first, was a proper name, but afterward it was changed
into an appellative name, for any fertile place. So Paradise was first a proper
name, but afterward became appellative, Ecces. 2.5. I made me Paradises: so
Tarshish pro oceano: so Ezekiel. 17.4. He cropped off the top of his young twigges
and carried it to Canaan, that is, to Babylon the land of merchandise: see
Prove. 31.24. (...)


The fourth epither is [charutz] fossile, which is rather a name of the art,
than a name signifying the essence of the gold, as obrysum fignifieth rather
the Art about the fining of the gold, than the substance of the gold, Job.
41.22. Psalm. 67.14. and Solomon alludeth to this sort of gold, Pron. 8. choose
my doctrine as pure gold, (...)
separate from all base and vile things.

The fifth epithete is chethem, it is that sort of gold which is engraven
curiously, and when it has Ophir or Ophaz joined with it, then they signify
the matter, and it signifies the form: 1 King. 10.25. And they brought every
man his present, vessels of silver and vessels of gold, which were vessels of
great price, not only for the substance, but also for curious workmanship.

The sixth epithete is segor, (...)
as ye would say, includens, the gold which is elaboratly wrought and cunningly
set within silver, Prou. 15.11. Apples of gold put in silver, cut like
networke, and requires great skill in this art to set it right, (...)
the Hebrews call it [musgor] inclusor, and therefore 2 King. 24.24. The King
of Babylon cariea away with him all the tradsemenand Inclusores, noting them as
special cunning men.

The last epithete is Parva^^^, (...)
and it is called 2 Chronicles. 3.7. the gold of Parvana, from the place from whence
it was brought.

All these names the Scriptures give to gold, The Scriptures give diverse names
to gold, to note the excellency of it.
to note the excellency and diversity of it, but in that vision of Daniel,
where he saw an image whose head was of gold, the gold is not set down there
to signify the most excellent monarchy, but the metals are set down there,
to fignifie their hardness; the gold the softest, the silver harder, In
Nabuchad^ezzars vision, the metals are set down to signify the hardness of
the monarchies, and not their excellency.
the brass more hard, and the iron hardest of all; we must not then make the
comparison, from the glistering of the gold to express the flourishing estate
of the Babilonian Empire, or that the silver signified the glorious estate of
the Medes, but only the hardness of the metal is marked here, the gold
being ductile and plicable, signified that they should not have so hard
entertainment under the Babilonians as under the Persians.

Secondly, Why the Babylonian Empire called glod:
the head of gold signified the Babylonian Empire, as Daniel expounds it to
Nebuchadnezzer, Dan 2.38. Thou art this head of gold; Why the Persian Empire
called silver.
the Babylonian Empire is called gold, because the Babylonians spoiled all the
treasures of the Temple; the Persians are called silver because they spoiled
the Babylonians, yet they got not so great a treasure as the Babylonians got:
Why the Grecians called brass.
the Grecians are called brass, they spoiled the Persians, yet got not so
great a treasure as the Persians got: the Romans are called iron and clay, Why
the Romans called Iron.
for before they overthrew the Grecians they wore rings of iron upon their
singers, and their treasure was but iron: but when the Vandals, Goths and
Hunues spoiled Rome, they got but only clay.

The conclusion of this is, Habakuk calls it [gnabhtit] densum lutum, Hab.
2.6. (...) densum lutum.
To teach us not to set our affections upon it or desire it, for when men have
loaded themselves with it, it is but thick clay.

CHAP. X. The blessing of God, and the influence of the heavens, make things
fertile below here.
Hosea 2.21. I will hear the heavens, and they shall hear the earth, and the
earth shall hear the Corn and the Wines, and they shall hear Izreel.
WE have spoken before of metals which the Jews call [domes] silens, (...)
silen^.
now it rests to speak of that which they call [Zemeh] germinans, and
[chaja] vivum. God who created the trees, fruits and man, he hears them,
Deus audit eminenter, cael^^^ audit metaphe; hom^e audit proprie.

and makes them to hear one another, God hears eminenter, he that planted
the care shall he not hear? Psalm. 94.9. the heavens and the earth hear
metaphorice, How God is said to hear the heave^s.
and man hears properly.

God hears the heavens when he gives his influence and blessing unto them
to make them nourish the things below here.

When God works upon the creatures below here, Deus operatur ratione.
Sappositi ^^rt ut^.

he works either mediatly or immediately; he works immediately vel ratione
virtutis vel suppositi; he works immediately ratione virtutis, because all
virtue proceeds only from him, as the Sun works immediately ratione
virtutis because it has the virtue from it self, and not from another: the
Moon again works mediate ratione virtutis because she has the virtue and
hear from the Sun, and hears not first, of it self: Man lives not by
bread only but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God, Mat.
4.4. The power to nourish and feed comes immediately from God. The blessing
of God called the staff of bread.
is called the staff of bread, Deuteronomy. 28. for as the staff upholdeth the old
weak man, so does the blessing of God uphold and nourish us.

God again works Immediate rations suppositi, for he is indistanter (as the
Schoolmen speak) in every thing.

Ye will say, how does God work mediately,

If ye will respect the second causes with the effects, How God is said to
work mediatly.
then God is said to work mediatly, but not if ye will respect the media
themselves.

When God uses the second causes to produce an effect, How God uses second
causes to produce effects.
he uses them not as helps or as co-working causes with himself, but to show
his goodness and his bounty, that he will communicate with his creatures some
part of his power, and for the weakness of these whom he helps. Curse ye
Meros, because be came not out to the help of the Lord Iud. 5.23. the Lord
needed no help of Meros, but when Gods people saw the tribes coming out to
help, then it helped their infirmity; but the hand of the Lord is not
shortened, 1 Samuel 14.6. who can help with few or by many.

The heavens are said to hear the earth when they send down their heat and
rain to moysten the earth; When the heavens are said to hear the earth.
the former rain in the scripture is called [more] plavia and the latter rain
[Malcosh] pluvia serotina, (...) jacer^ (...)
which fell out in the month Nisan when the Corn began to be ripe, it was
called pluvia maturati^nis. And when the heavens are like brass, then they
hear not the earth. Now when the heavens hear the earth, then the husband man
waits for the precious fruit of the earth, and has long patience for it
until he receive the early and the latter rain: Iam. 5.7. How the earth is
said to hea^e the Corn, and Wine.
And the earth shall hear the corn and the wine, the earth hears the corn
and the wine when it is mannured and labored by the husband man, and when the
heavens send down their influence upon it, when the earth is mannured and
dressed, (...) Terratuaeris maritata, Terra moritur comnin colitur and producit
fructus.
then it is said to be married, Esaias 62.4. [Veartzecha tibbagnel] and when the
ground is not mannured nor sown, it is said to die. Genesis 47.19. Wherefore
shall we die before thine eyes both we and our Hand?

God is the only cause of fertility. God is the only cause of fertility.
Paul may plant, and Apolles may water, but it is God that gives the increase,
1 Cor. 3.6. and it is the Lord that crowns the year with goodness, Psalm.
65.12. The Lord made them to understand this, that it was he only who caused
things to grow, therefore they called the great trees which grow without labor
arbores Dei, as the cedars and such: and this people found this by experience
in the blessing of the seventh year, when the increase of one year served for
three: and that he might teach them that fertisitie only depended upon his
blessing, he caused the earth to make a great show of fertility which
afterward turned to nothing. Hab. ^.^^. (...) est Oliva, the labor of the
Olive made a lie, that is, the Olive blossomed very fair, When the earthis
said to abhort.
but deceived the expectation of the labourer. So 2 King. 19 this country is
barren; but in the original, it is more emphaticall [haaretz meshakkeleth]
haec regio facit abortum, for as a woman when she is with child, when she
parts with it, (...) haec regio facit a^orlum.
she is deceived of her expectation, so the ground about Jericho made a fair
show to the laborers, and deceived them.

I will bear the heavens. Our faith should not look to the means which God
uses, but to God himself; neither should we depend upon the means, when God
uses reasonable creatures as his instruments: we may be thankful to them,
but we must give the whole praise to God; but we have no obligation; to the
unreasonable creatures as to the heaven and to the earth; this was the ground,
We have no obligation to unreasonable creatures to thank them as Gods
instruments.
amongst the heathen that made them worship the Sun, the moon, and the
stars. Alexander the great was mindful of his horse that saved him in the
battle, that when he died he builded a City upon him, and called it after
his name, Bucephalus: he was not so mindful to give thanks to God after his
deliverie, as he was to his horse.

I will hear the heavens, Men should not rest until they come to the first
cause.
this should teach us never to rest until we come to the first cause, but men
who have their portion in this life, their bellies are fed with his bid
treasures, Psalm. 17.14. Why are they called his hid treasures? because they
know not who is the giver of them, they see the creature but they see not the
giver; so when the Lord smites them, they see three fingers as it were upon
the wall with Balthazar Daniel 5.5. But they see not the hand, nor the arm,
nor him that strikes; but Job ascended from the Chaldeans to God himself, and
says, the Lord has given, and the Lord has taken, Job. 1.21. And so did
David when Shimei railed against him 2 Samuel 16.11. When the universal and
particular cause concur together, things take their denomination from the
particular cause.


I will hear the heavens, when the Universal and particular cause concur
together, things take their denomination from the particular and not from the
universal cause, as sol and homo generant hominem, yet the man is said to
beget his child, and not the Sun. So when the cause of causes works with
subordinate causes, we must not ascribe every particular effect to God, but to
the proper cause, as the fire burns, but not God, and so the bread feeds
us; yet none of these could effectuate any thing without the first cause,
therefore we are called the of pring of God Act. 17.29. although our fathers
beget us: so Iere. 1.5. Before I formed thee in the belly. Psalm. 22.9. Thou
art he that took me out of the womb, and thou did make me hope when I was
upon my mothers breast: our father begets us, yet unless he bless the
begetter he cannot beget; so our mother conceives us, yet she shall not bear
us except he bring us forth; The creation took the denomination from the
universal cause.
although these take the denomination from the second causes, yet unless the
Lord bless them who is the first cause, it is nothing. But in the first
creation which was only by the power of God and no helping cause concurring,
then the work took the denomination from the universal and first cause.

Whether does the effect owe more to the universal or particular cause?

It owes more to the particular cause than to the universal cause, Whether
things owe more to the universal or particular cause.
because it gets it is kind from it, and is named by it, and is likest to it;
but for preservation and continuation of the kind, it is more beholden to the
universal cause, as the child is more beholden to the heavens for his
conservation, than to the parents; but if we look to the cause of causes God
himself, creatures are most beholden to him both quoad ad esse and conservari.

And the heavens shall hear the earth when it is manured by the husbandman.

Observe how the husbandman is directly subordinate to the providence of God,
The husbandman is directly subordinate to the providence of God.
all honest callings are subordinate to God, but yet the subordination is not
so clearly seen, nor the blessing of God appears not so well in any other
trade as in husbandry; for after that he has cast the seed in the ground, he
lies down and sleeps, and night and day it springs up and he knows not
how, for the earth brings forth of it self, first the blade, then the care,
then the full corn in the ear, How riches and a prudent wife are from the
Lord.
Mark 4.24. House and riches are the inheritance of the fathers, but a prudent
wife is from the Lord, Prove. 19 14. House and riches are from the Lord as well
as the wife, but the directing hand of God and his special providence is not
so clearly seen in these, as in this.

All the blessing of husbandry depends upon God, The custom of the heathen
in their husbandry.
therefore the heathen when they went to plough in the morning they laid on one
of their hand upon the stilts of the plough, and they lifted up the other hand
to Ceres the Goddess of corn: but it is a pity to see the most part of
these who mannure the ground as though they were fungi or (...), sprung out of
the ground like toad-stooles, affixi glebae, filij terrae, having their minds
fixed upon the earth, and never to elevate their minds higher to God, than the
Oxen which labor the ground, but if they had hearts to look up to God, O
beatos agricolas! O how happy were those husbandmen!

There are five things which commend husbandry in the Scriptures; first, the
antiquity of it, Five things which commend husbandry.
There was not a man to till the ground, Genesis 2. He is the first man that is
missed, it is neither the Lawyer nor the Physician, nor the Tailor but only
the husbandman.

Secondly, the innocence of it, it was commanded to Adam in Paradise, and
Christ calls his Father a husband man, Ioh. 15.1. I am the true Vine and my
Father is the husbandman.

Thirdly for the delight of it, Vzzia the King is called vir agri, because he
delighted so much in husbandry, 2 Chronicles. 26.10.

Fourthly, for profit, Eccles. 5.9. The profit of the earth is for all, the
King himself is served by the field.

And lastly, this calling is most clearly seen to be subordinate to Gods
providence, and therefore Esaias 28.26. The Lord is called the husbandmans God,
who teaches him and instructs him.

The conclusion of this is, torpedo or the crampfish when it touches the
hook, it transmitteth a benummednesse from the hook to the line, and from the
line to the goad, and from the goade to the fishers arm; here the crampfish
works but mediately, but God works immediately in all the causes and in all
the effects, and therefore let us crave the blessing of God both to the causes
and to the effects.

CHAP. XI. Why the Children are said to come out of their fathers thigh.
Genesis 46.26. All the souls that came with Jacob out of Egypt, which came out
of Jacobs thigh.
THese who have described the Anatomy of man, Of the generation of man.
say that the seed bringers called vasa seminaria, be two veins and two
arteries which come down to the thigh.

These veins take their beginning from vena cava the Master vein, which has
the original from the liver, and the artery has its beginning from the
heart, and so they descend to the parts of generation. (...) virga (...)
testiculi, (...) fila testiculorum.


These membraseminis or vasa seminaria the Hebrews call them first [gid]
virga: secondly, [habezim] testiculi, thirdly, [hashebhelim chute bozim] fila
testiculorum.

They came out of Jacobs thigh, for modesty the Hebrews put other parts of
the body for the part of generation, as first they call it the feet, Esaias.
7.20. I shall shave the hair of the feet, The Hebrews for modesty put other
parts of the body for the members of generation.
so she shall eat that which comes out betwixt her feet, so they call it
the Navell Job. 40.16. and the thigh Number. 5.2. and the heathen Poets say that
Bacchus was borne of Jupiters thigh.

Secondly, they came out of Iacabs thigh, because pater est principium activum
generationis, and not the mother; Why the children are said to come out of the
fathers things.
and therefore some Divines conceit that if Adam had not sinned, although Eve
had sinned, then original sin had not been transmitted to the posterity;
because he was principium generationis, Romans 5.12. By one man sin entered into
the world.

Thirdly, they came out of Jacobs thigh, these seventie souls came out of many
bellies, but from one thigh, they came out of the bellies of Lea and Rachel,
Zilpah and Billah etc.

Fourthly, Children come out of their fathers thigh, Why the husband is to love
his wife better than his children.
but the wife was taken out of the husbands side, therefore the husband should
love his wife better than his children.

Fifthly, they came out of Jacobs thigh, Many came out of (...) thigh that was a
poor man.
that was a silly poor man, Deut^ 26.5. And thou shall speak and say before
the Lord thy God: Syrus perditionis erat pater meus, a Syrian ready to perish
was my Father, yet he went down into Egypt and sojourned there with a few, and
became there a nation great and mighty and populous, who multiplied
exceedingly even as the fish of the sea [ijshretzu] Exodus 1.7. (...)
multiplicarunt mere piscium.
Look to the number of the fighting men in Judea in Iehosaphats time, how they
increased that came out of of his thigh, there were eleven hundredth and
threescore thousand fighting men, 2 Chronicles 17. What number of women and
children were beside? and then if we shall add all the number that was in
Israel, Gods promise verified to Abraham.
we shall see how Gods promise was verified to Abraham, I will multiply thy
seed as the sands of the Sea. Although the Lord gave him seventie children out
of his thigh, yet he touched the hollow of Jacobs thigh, and the pain made him
to weep, Hos. 12.4. and he halted upon it all the days of his life. (...) The
Hebrews say that a thing forgets, when it leaves off to do that which it
was wont to do.
This sinew which shrunk in, in his thigh, in the original it is called [gid
haneshe] nervus oblivionis, the sinnew of oblivion, and it never stirred any
more there. So Job. 28.4. The waters are forgotten of the foot; that is, the
foot treads no more there. God promises no good thing in this life, but
with condition of the cross.
What ever the Lord gives his children in this life, it is always cum
exceptione crucis, Mark. 10.30. He shall have an hundredth fold, but it is
added, with persecution. Seventie souls shall come out of Jacobs thigh, but he
shall halt upon fourteen all his life time; So Paul was taken up to the third
heaven, yet the Lord gave him a prick in the flesh to humble him, 2 Cor. 12.7.
God this ways tempereth our wine with water, he upholdeth us with the one
hand, and takes us down with the other.

The conclusion of this is, Ezekiel. 47.3. The waters that flowed out of the
Sanctuary were but first to the ancles, God of small beginnings can make a
Church to himself.
as the graces of God grow in the Church, so does the number of the Saints,
from hundreths to thousands, and from thousands to Millions.

CHAP. XII. That a woman gives seed in generation as well as the man.
Levit, 12.2. If a woman give seed, and have borne a male child.
THe devil who envieth the salvation of man kind, The devil set himself
against the nature and the offices of Christ.
has still set himself against Christ our redeemer.

First he set himself against the divinity of Christ by his instrument
Areius, whodenied the divinity of Christ, The Arriaus denied his Godhead.
and he poisoned the third part of the waters with his wormwood, Revel. 8.11.

Secondly, he set himself against the person of Christ by Nestorius, who
taught that there were two persons in Christ, as there were two natures.

Thirdly, he raised up Eutiches, who confounded the natures, and made but one
nature as there is but one person.

Fourthly, he raised up Martion, The error of the Anabaptists refuted who deny
that Christ took no flesh of the woman.
who denied that Christ was truly a man: and last, he raised up the,
Anabaptists who deny that Jesus Christ took flesh of the virgin Mary, but
that he passed through her as water does through a golden pype; and their
principal reason was this, because women give no feed in generation; but this
text shows clearly that the women give seed in generation as well as the
men: it should not be translated then si Semen conceperit aut susceperit, for
that is contrary to the nature of the active conjugation hiphil, and it should
be translated si seminaverit semen, and so Number. 5.28. seminabit semen, she
shall give seed, and not conceive feed, (...) (...)
and it is oftentimes spoken of trees in the Scripture sementare semen, which
cannot be translated, si susceperint semen: so Heb. 11.11. Sara received
strength ad jaciendum vel emittendum semen, (...) is not receptio sed jactus
seminis, as when the husbandman sows his seed and casts it into the
ground, ut conciperet vel susciperet semen. 2 Cor. 15.47. The first man is of
the earth earthly, the second man is the Lord from the heaven, then it may
seem that Jesus Christ took not his flesh of the Virgin Marie.

The second Adam is said to be the Lord (...), not that it was in regard of his
manhood, by the heavenly overshadowing of the holy Ghost, and was made partaker
of heavenly qualities, as immor tality, glory and power. And became the
instrument of an hevenly conversation upon earth.

The conclusion of this, (...) vindex redemptor propinquus.
if Christ had not taken our flesh upon him he had not been our goel, and so
jure propinquitatis he could not have redeemed us: he is called our dud our
beloved, Esaias. 5.1, Iere. 32. Hananeel because he was in necessity, his dud
became goel for him, Jeremy.
and redeemed his land for him. So Jesus Christ being our dud or near kinsman,
becomes goel to us: if he had not taken our nature he should not have been
vindex sanguinis nostri, neither redeemed heaven when we lost it, neither
redeemed us out of Prison, for all these things did the goel to his kinsman.

CHAP. XIII. How old some of Christ's predecessors were when they begot children.
Genesis 18.11. Now Abraham and Sarah were old, and it ceased to be with Sara
after the manner of women.
AS the Lord has measured the Periods of the life of man, how long he shall
live, and when he shall die; so he has measured the Periods when a man
begins to beget children, and when he leaves off to beget, When (...)
begin to beget ordinarily.
and so of the woman.

The Period when a man begins to beget, or may beget, is thirteen years of
age ordinarily, quando exit ab eo concubitus seminis, when the seed of
copulation goes out from him, Leuit. 15.16. (because then he is able to lie
with a woman) and the Jews call him Parvus so long as non exit ab eo
concubitus seminis, and they extend it to the thirteenth year and the woman's
to the eleventh. The Period when he cease to beget differs now in men, from
the time when the Patriarchs lived.

The time when the woman leaves off to conceive ordinarily is fifty.

And we may observe in the Scriptures that these Kings of whom Christ came not
according to the flesh, some of them begat their children very young, Confer
2 King 16.2. and 2 King 17.1. with the 2 King. 16.6. and 2 King. 18.1. and ye
shall find no interregnum betwixt Achaz and Ezeki^^: and conferring the
kingdom of Israel and Judea together, it will appear how old Achaz was when
he begat his Son.
so Solomon begot his Son Rehoboam when he was little more than twelve
years of age, and Achaz was but eleven years when he begat Ezekias. But these
again who were the predecessors of Christ were very old before they begot
their children, to exercise their faith; this ways Abraham begat not his son
until he was an hundredth year old, and Boaz begat his son when he was
sevenscore years old. So Sara the great grandmother of our Lord, Many of
Christ's prodecessors were old before they b^got children.
bare a child when she was nintie year old. And Rachab another of our Lords
predecessors bare her son, when she was fifty five year old or thereabout.

There was great difficulty both upon Abraham's part and Sarahs part here.
Genesis 17.17. Greas difficulty of begetting children both on Abraham's and
Sarahs part.
Shall a child be borne to him who is an hundredth year old? and so upon
Sarahs part, The Lord has restrained me from bearing, Genesis 16.2. Yet the
Lord who who has power over the womb and grave, made Sara to conceive: the
Chaldie Paraphrase of Iernsalem upon Genesis 30.4. sets down these four
keys, God has reserved four Itayes to himself.
the first is facunditatis ad aperiendum, and sterilitatis ad occludendam, the
key of fruitfulnes to open the womb, and the key of barrenness to shut the
womb, Genesis 30.22. God remembered Rachel and opened her womb. Secondly clavis
pluviae the key of the rain, Clavis faecunditatis Pluviae cabatiouis sepulchri.

Deuteronomy. 28.12. The Lord shall open unto thee his good treasures, the heavens to
give rain unto the Land in due season. The third is clavis cibationis the key
of feeding every thing, Psalm. 145. Thou openest thy hand and fillest with thy
blessing every living thing: the fourth is, clavis sepulchri the key of the
grave, Seven mothers barren and yet bare children.
Ezekiel. 37. When I shall open your graves.

There were seven mothers who were barren, and yet the Lord opened their womb,
Sara, Rebecca and Rachel, the mother of Sampson, Anna the mother of Samuel, and
Elizabeth the mother of John.

It may be asked whether Abraham thought himself absolutely unfit to beget
children, Sarah.

Some hold that he thought himself absolutely unfit to beget children upon any
woman, Whether Abraham thought himself absolutely unable to beget children.
because the Apostle Romans 4.19. called his body a dead body, and because the
Apostle says Galat. 4.23. That Jacob who was borne of a free woman was by
promise, and Heb. 11.11. By faith Sara conceived, and Esaias 51. Look to
therocke whence ye were hewed, Abraham compared to a rock and Sarah to a pit.
Abraham is compared to a rock here, and Sara to a pit; and as a rock cannot
bring forth children of it self, so neither could old Abraham, and it may
seem that there was as great an impossibility to Abraham to beget, as it was
to Sarah to bear children; therefore they hold that this was a miracle when
this power was given to him to beget children anew again.

But if we will consider the matter better, we shall find that Abraham doubted
not absolutely of his power to beget children, Abraham doubted only to beget
Children upon Sarah.
but only to beget children upon Sara who was now nintie year old, yet he
might beget children upon a younger woman, for after the death of Sara when he
was an hundredth thirty seven years, old, he begat six children upon Keturah,
although he doubted to beget children upon Sarah. Abraham after he begat Isaac
lived seventie and five years, therefore his body was not a dead body
simply; and he wanted not power altogether to beget. Abraham might beget when
he was an hundredth year old according to the course of nature.
Again in these times men lived two hundredth years as Terah the father of
Abraham lived two hundredth years, therefore they were not unfit and impotent
for generation when they were an hundredth years old, for then they should have
been unfit for generation, the half of their life time. Thirdly Jacob who was
the great grandchild of Abraham begat Benjamin when he was an hundredth and
seven year old, therefore Abraham might beget children by his natural
strength when he was an hundredth year old although his strength was not
restored to him miraculously.

The Apostle says that Abraham's body was now a dead body Romans 4.19.

This is spoken only in respect of Abraham's own opinion who was out of hope
to have children therefore the Apostle says, Why the body Abraham was called a
dead body.
he considered not his own body, and comparatively his body was much more
unable at that time than it was before, and if in his younger years he begat
no children upon Sarah much less was there hope now in his old days. Galat.
4.23. He that was borne of the bondwoman was borne after the flesh, but he that
was borne of the free woman, was borne by the promise, hence it may seem that
he begat not his Son Isaac by his nturall strength but by faith taking hold
upon the promise. The strange conception was upon Sarahs part and not upon
Abraham's.


This strange conception was upon Sarahs part and not upon Abraham's part, for
when the Lord opened the womb of Sarah, Abraham begat children by his natural
strength which he had then.

But it may be said that the Lord makes the difficulty as great upon Abraham's
part as upon Sarahs: 51. Look to the rock whence ye were hewed, and to the
pit whence ye were dug.

Abraham was a rock when he was considered with Sarah. Secondly when the
Prophet calls him a rock here from whence the people of God were hewed out,
he means especially in this place of their calling out of VZ of Chaldea, Why
Abraham was called a rock.
that Abraham was an Idolater when he was called thence.

When the Lord gave Sara strength to conceive, it ceased to be with her after
the manner of women, Genesis 18.11.

When God who is the author of nature contracteth nature or enlarges it, Deus
operatur (...) sed non (...).
for the God of nature never works against nature: when Peter looked upon
Ananias and beheld him, here his sight was (...), according to nature; when
Steven stood before the council Act. 7. and saw unto the third heaven, this
was (...) besides nature, for the Lord extended and enlarged nature, but this
was not a miracle; but when Christ restored sight to the blind, and made them
to see, this was (...) above nature, and this was a miracle. Example 2. When
the hungry Lions devoured the accusers of Daniel, and when the Lion killed the
young Prophet, this was according to nature, and when ^e brake not his bones,
this was besides nature: but in the lowest degree, (for Lions use commonly to
break the bones that they may get the marrow,) so when the hungry Lion spared
Daniel, this was besides nature in a higher degree, but it was not a miracle
but only the restraining of nature; but when the Ravens fed Elias, this was
above nature. So in our Lords predecessors some of them conceived and bare
their children when they were young, and this was according to nature, When
Christ's predecessors conceived being old it was not a miracle, but the Lord
enlarged nature only.
but when Rachab bare a Son when she was fifty year old, and Sarah when she
was nintie, this was besides nature, but not above nature, God did only
enlarge nature here; but when the Virgin Marie conceived and bare Christ, this
was above nature and a miracle indeed.

As the Lord made barren Sarah to conceive, so the Lord is able to make his
barren Church fruitful: Creare and formare quid.
Esaias 43.5. Thus says the Lord creating Jacob and forming Israel: to create a
thing is to create it of nothing, and to form a thing is to fashion it after
it is created, so he created when he made barren Sara to conceive, when he
multiplied the posterity of Abraham then he formed them: The posterity of
Abraham why called Iacoh and Israel.
so he calls them Iacoh and Israel, poor Jacob when he went over Jordan,
with his staff, but rich Israel when he returned home again over Jordan: the
Church is first dead and created of nothing, and then the Lord adds a new
form to her and multiplieth her. Look to the rock whence ye were hewed, and
to the pit, whence ye were dug. As a stone cannot beget children, so no
more could Abraham beget children upon Sara, but the Lord who is able to raise
up children to Abraham out of the stones, so he raised a seed to himself; and
as that stone which was cut out without the hands of man, became a great
mountain and filled the earth, Dan. 2. so did his Church, etc.

CHAP. XIIII. What time the soul animateth the body and what care the Lord
has of the child after that he is animated.
Exodus 21.21. If two strive together and hurt a woman with child, so that her
fruit depart from her, and no mischief do follow, etc.
AS the world in the first Creation was a confused mass, and then by degrees
the Lord distinguished the several days works: so does he in the little
world man: In the first seven days it is no other thing but seed; secondly, it
is curdled as Iobsaith cap. 10.10. and becomes flesh, How man is fashioned in
his mothers womb.
and it is no more called seed but fatus: thirdly the principal parts of the
body are fashioned, the Heart, the Brain, and the Liver, and the rest of the
members, are hardly discerned; fourthly, when the rest of the members are
distinctly fashioned, then it is no more called faetus but infans, then it
lives and stirs.

It is an error too commonly holden, that we first live the life of the plant
by the vegetative faculty only, and secondly the sensitive life, and thirdly
the reasonable; but if it were so, then the child might be justly called a
plant, secondly a beast, and lastly a man.

The Philosopher says that we live first the life of the plant.

This is not so to be understood as though that imperfect conception called
Embrio lives first the vegetative life, The Embrio receives the three
faculties at once.
and then the sensitive, for it receives all these three faculties at once,
but it exercises this vegetative faculty first; for the first forty days,
or forty five days, the seed is in the matris, and by that power only which
is in the seed called virtus formatrix, it is piece and piece prepared, and
then simul and semel at one and the self same time it receives all these
faculties together, The featus is sometimes sooner and sometimes longer ere it
be perfected.
then it is nourished and grows til it be quickened by the soul, neither is
it a living soul till it be perfectus fatus, and sometimes it is longer ere it
be perfected, and sometimes in shorter time it is perfected. If the fatus be
perfected in the thirty five days and the soul animates it, then the child
begins to stir the seventieth day, (...) puer. (...) movere.
and then he is called nagnar from nagnar movere, because then he begins to
stir in his mothers womb, and then the child is septimestris borne in the
seventh month; We know when the child lives by doubling the perfection of the
faetus.
but if the faetus be perfect in the forty five day, then the child begins
to stir the nintieth day, and he is borne in the ninth month; so that by
doubling the perfection of the Embri^ when it has all the parts of it formed,
we shall know when the child begins to stir in the mothers belly, We know
when the childis borne by trebling the motion of the child.
and tripling the motion of the child in the mothers belly, we shall know the
time, when the child is borne.

This place Exodus 21.22. If two strive together and hurt a woman with child;
the vulgar translation reads it badly thus. If the striker strike a woman
with child, and she abhort and live, he shall surely be punished, How this
place is interpreted by the vulgar translation.
their meaning is, that the man shall be punished by a fine or a mulct for
stricking of the woman, but if she live although the child die, yet the
stricker shall not die for it; whereas the meaning of the law is, if there
follow [ashon] damnum any hurt either to the mother, or to the child, then the
striker shall die, so that there are two causes set down here; first, if the
striker strike, Two causes in this Iaw.
and death follow not, then he shall not die for it, although she abhort,
because the child was not [gebher] a living child, but [naphal] fructus
abortivus vel deciduus Job. 3.3. which falls from the tree before it be ripe,
which Solomon Eccles. 6.3. calls an untimely birth; but if it be a child
which is animated, and the striker strike her, and there follow death either of
the mother or of the child, then the man shall die for it: this place then must
be understood of a child formed and animated, for if it be only that which
David calls [golem] massa rudis an unperfect substance, (...) non signatum,
and the Rabbis call it asiman.
Psalm. 139.16. then if she abhort and bring forth such a birth; he shall not
die for it. The Seventie translate it (...), non signatum, and the Rabbis call
it asiman, which words they have borrowed from the greeks, as ye would say,
money not stamped or sealed. So is the Embrio before the soul be created in it,
and therefore the striker if he strike the mother, and she abhort and live, so
that there follow no danger to her, then he is not to die it, because he has
not killed a living soul, no more than if a man should die for cutting a
member from a dead man.

The conclusion of this is, the Lord has great care of the life of man, God
has great ear of the life of man.
even when he is in his mothers belly, if he be once a living child whosoever
kills him shall die for it. When Benah and Rechab killed Ishboseth, David
said ye are wicked men who have killed a righteous person in his own house
upon his own bed, shall I not require this at your hands, 2 Samuel 4.11. So the
Lord required this at the hands of the murderer who killed an infant in his
first mansion and sleeping in his bed. The Lord forbids in his Law, Exodus
23.19. to kill the kid when it is sucking the dam, has the Lord regard of
kids. 1 Cor. 9.9.? no: his chief intention is to have young infants safe in
their mothers womb and when they are sucking.

CHAP. XV. Jn what part of the body the soul lodges.
1 King. 3.12. The Lord gave to Solomon a wise and an understanding heart.
THis question has much troubled the greatest Philosophers, the Peripatetickes
the Platenickes and the Physicians, and the Jews differed from them all. How
the puripatetickes divided the faculties of the soul. How the Jews place the
faculties of the soul.
The Peripatetickes divided the faculties of the soul into the vegetative,
sensitive, and reasonable, and they place them all in the heart. The Platonicks
divided the faculties of the soul into the jrascible, (...) cerebrum
concupiscible and reasonable faculty, which they placed in the brain: (...)
spiritat (...) anima
and the Physicians differed from both, for they say principium motus est
hepar, dignitatis cerebrum, (...) jecur
and necessitatis est cor: and the Jews differing from all, say, that
rationale habet sedem in Cerebro, Reasons to prove that the soul lodges in
the brain.
which they call Moahh from [moahh] medulla. Secondly spiritus has the seat in
the heart, which is the beginning of life. And [nephes] anima seu concupiscible
they placed it in the Liver called cabhod.

It may seem that it has the chief residence in the brain, and dwells
there:

Again that seems to be the seat of the soul which is the original of
sense and motion; and consequently reason it self which is informed by them.

Thirdly, the brain is arbor inversa, and as the life of the tree proceeds
from the root of it, so does the life of man proceed from the brain.

Fourthly,

Fifthly, Achis said to David, 1 Samuel 27. Thou shall be keeper of mine head,
that is, of me: so 2 King. 2.3. Thy master shall be taken from thine head this
day, that is, from thee.

Lastly, because the soul lodges in the head, we uncover the head first as
the most excellent part, we bow the head when we applaud to any thing; and
because the soul lodges in the head, therefore when a man sins, the head
is especially punished.

It is alleged that the heart was created before the head.

Quod est primum natura est ultimum dignitate; membrum organicum as the rest of
the members of the body, but that it is erganum animae, Reasons proving that
the soul lodges in the heart.
that is still denied.

It may be said for the heart that the soul lodges in it, primum (...), it is
the member of the body that lives first and dies last, it is not like the
eye which sees last, and fails first.

The instruments of life the spirits proceed from the heart; spirat, when he is
borne then respirat; thirdly, inspirat, he draws in the breath again: and
last expirat, he lets out the breath again, therefore the pulse is framed
before either the sinews or Arteries be framed.

Life and heat proceed from the heart,

Fourthly, the heart is a part void of all excrements,

Fifthly, medium magnitudinis vel molis, as the navell is just in the midst of
the body: Medium arithmetieum, moles, perfectionis.

it is medium perfectionis as the Sun is which is the most excellent sort of
midst; so all motion, heat and life of the body proceeds from the heart.

Sixthly,

Seventhly, Esaias. 1.5. The whole head is sick and the whole heart is faint,
and from the sole of the foot to the head there is no soundness: the head is
the Prince, the foot are^ the common people, and the heart the Priests; and as
the natural life proceeds from the heart, so does the spiritual life from
the Churchmen, who are the instruments to beget the spiritual life.

God him self cares for no part of the body when he wants the heart: This
people draw near to me with their lips, but their heart is far from me. The
understanding is called the heart, The Lord gave Solomon a wise heart, 1 King.
3.12. The memory is called the heart, Write my Laws in thine heart, The heart
put for the understand, the memory, the affections, and for the conscience.
Prove. 3.3. The affections are called the heart, 2 Cor. 6.8. Our heart is
enlarged toward you: the conscience is called the heart, 2 Samuel 24.10. David's
heart smote him; so the will is called the heart, 1 King. 3.

The soul is not in one part of the body more than in another, The soul is
not only in one part of the body.
and we must hold that opinion, est in toto corpore, it is in all the body and
in every part of the body, which must be understood negative but not positive,
that is, it is not in this or that part of the body, more than in another, but
it is in the whole body repletive; and the diverse faculties of the soul which
follow the temperature of the body, cannot be placed in one part, but it
exercises the functions of it in one place more than in another, The soul
exercises the faculties more in one part than in another.
as it understands most in the head, and loves most in the heart and the
reins.

The conclusion of this is, the soul is in every part of the body to animate
it for natural uses, members the weapons of righteousness and holiness, Romans
6.19. To make David's foot dance before the Lord 2 Samuel 6.14. to make the knees
bow before the Lord, Romans 14.11. and to make the tongue to praise the Lord.

CHAP. XVI. What things the Midwife does to the child when it is newborn.
Ezekiel 16.4. And as for thy nativitie in the day that thou wast borne, thy
navell was not cut, neither wast thou washed in water to sowple thee, thou was
not swadled at all nor salted.
THe holy Ghost to express the miserable estate of the Church of the Jews
when he called her, The holy Ghost to express the calling of his Church,
borrows a comparison from a midwife.
borrows a comparison from an infant newborn, whose navell the midwife
first cutteth, then she washes the infant and cleanses him from the blood,
then salteth him and lastly swadleth him.

When the infant is newborn, the midwife is ready to meet the child that he
fall not to the ground, To prevent with the knee, what.
and to receive him upon her knees, Job. 3.12. Why did the knees prevent me,
meaning the midwifes knees. And the heathen framed a goddess which they called
Levana, who prevented the child before it fell to the ground, but Augustine
refers it omni nutrici gratiae dei, which he makes but the midwife and
nurse to the Church: and as the Lord did draw David wonderfully out of his
mothers womb, Psalm 22.9. so he did draw the Church out of, Egypt that
bloody womb, God drevv the Church out of Egypt, a blodie womb.
who were all to be killed by the midwives as soon as they were borne. Exo. 2.
when no eye pitied them, when they were cast out into the open field to the
loathing of their person, in the day that they were borne, when they were
wallowing in their blood, he took a care of them and adopted them, he said
Thou shall live, Ezekiel. 16.4.5.

The second thing, What meant by cutting of the navell.
which the midwife did to the child newborn, she cutteth the navell of the
infant; the navell of the infant is in place of a mouth to it when it is in the
mothers belly: when the child is borne the midwife cutteth the navell, and
opens the mouth of the infant, that it may receive nourishment by the mouth,
Plut archus de (...) proli^.
the navell serving him no more for that use. And Plutarch marketh that the
navell is first bred in the mothers belly, as the anchor which stays the
infant in the mothers womb, and upholdeth him in his first mansion; and the
cutting of the navell is as it were the cutting of the cable at woe or pulling
up of the anchor, to let the poor infant go from this haven, his mothers
womb, to the storms and dangers of this world, The navell is as it were a
cable or rope to keep the infant in the haven the mothers belly.
in which he is tossed too and fro until he return unto his death, which is
his haven, and the grave which is his shore, as Abraham's bosom was a haven to
Lazarus, Luc. 16.

The third thing that the midwife does to the child, she washes him, therefore
the Prophet says, Thou was not washed in water to sowple thee: but the word
[lashang] should be rather translated in salutem, (...)
for thy safety; for the Physicians hold that it is most profitable for the
child to be washed when he is newborn, Why are chidren washed when they are
borne.
and it should not be translated, to sowple thee, for the flesh of the newborn child is both soft and tender, and sowple already: a child newborn, and
wallowing in his blood, is rather like one killed than newborn; and to take
him up and kiss him, and hug him in their arms, if nature had not placed in
the mothers some natural love, they would never do it. Skillful Physicians
have afterward commanded that the child-should rather be washed in wine than
water, because it makes the body of the infant more firm. Ioh. 3. alludeth to
this, when he says, unless a man be borne of water and the spirit: he washed
not his Church with wine, Christ washed his Church with his own blood.
but with his own blood. And as they washed the infants when they were newborn, so they used to wash the bodies when they were dead, Act. 9.37. and they
washed the body of Dorcas, and laid it in an upper chamber.

The fourth thing which the midwife does to the child, Why they salted children
newborn.
she salted him that his flesh might be more solid and more able to withstand
the cold: but in this effeminate and daitie age, they use not to do this to
their children. So the Lord when he called his Church, he seasoned her with the
salt of grace.

The fifth thing which the midwife does to the child, (...) infantes palmarum.
she sets the bones of the child aright and swadleth him, that he be not
vacius: they are called [gnolele tippuchim] infantes palmarum; Lament. 2.20.
not because they are but a span in length, but because the midwife when they
are newborn, settled their bones and joints with her hand, Infantes palmarum
quid apud Hebraeos.
that they may be the more straight afterward: she swadleth them to strengthen
their weak members, therefore it is observed that the bodies of the Barbarians
were much more straight then the bodies of the Romans, because they were
swadled still until they were two or three years old. Why the Lord is said to
swaddle the sea.
God himself takes a comparison from this, Job. 38.9. He swadleth the sea, as
easily as the midwife does the young infant.

There is a great resemblance betwixt our birth and our death, A great
resemblance betwixt our birth and our death.
as we came forth naked out of our mothers womb, so shall we return naked
thither again, Eccles. 5.15. And as the infant is bound and swadled when he is
borne, so is the dead body bound hand and foot, as we see Lazarus Ioh. 11. And
the infant is salted when he is borne, to teach us that we shall quickly
corrupt, and go to corruption again.

The conclusion of this is, wrath, and be thankful to God who has taken us
out of the state of corruption, washed us, and made us heirs of grace and
salvation.

CHAP. XVII. That the mother should nourish her own children.
Genesis 21.7. Who would have said unto Abraham, that Sarah should have given
children suck?
GOd and his handmaid nature, God and nature makes nothing in vain.
do nothing in vain. Why has God put wine in the grape but that men should
drink it? and why does he put milk in the mothers breasts? but only that the
children should suck it; Two reasons why God placed the dugges of a woman in
her breast.
God has placed the dugges of a woman in her breast, and the pappes of a beast
in her belly, and they give a double reason of this, first a physical reason
and then a moral reason; the physical reason is this, he has placed the
dugges of a woman so near the heart and Liver, that the milk might be the
better concocted for the nourishing of the child: mulieri superius adpect us
nascuntur ubera ut in promptu fit osculari, amplecti, and fovere infantem, that
is, The dugges of a woman are placed in her breast, A forcible argument to move
children to obey their mothers when they have given them suck.
that she may more readily kiss, embrace and cherish her infant. In old times
it was holden to be one of the most forcible obligations to bind the child to
obey the mother, because she had given him suck, and therefore the mothers
would attest their children this ways, By these dugges which thou have sucked
do this.

The milk of the mother is the fittest mike to nourish the child, for as
contraria contrarijs curantur, The mothers milk is the fittest milk for the
child's complexion.
so similia similibus aluntur, the blood which was first the Fabaicator should
now be the Altor when it is turned into mike, this milk must be fitter for the
Childs complexion than any other milk. The milk a forcible means to make
the child resemble the mother.


The milk is a forcible mean to make the child resemble her whom he sucketh:
Gellius gives this example, take a kid and let it suck an ewe; the hair of
it will become like unto wool: take a lamb again, and let it suck a goat,
the wool of it will become like the goats hair: so let a whelpe suck a cat,
and he will kill Rats and mice as a cat; ye see then what force is in the
milk. The history gives this reason why Tiberius Caesar was such a drunkard,
because he sucked a drunken nurse; Caligula sucked a cruel nurse who rubbed
her dugges with blood every day, and therefore he became a cruel and bloody
monster. It is true that good education and instruction, but above all, grace
can overrule these inclinations. Cyrus before God changed his name, was called
Spacon, as ye would say, a dog, Many have been eroull by reason of the milk
they have sucked.
because he sucked a bitch when he was a child; but the Lord gave him
excellent and heroical virtues, and made him the deliverer of his people:
these virtues overruled his natural inclinations which would have been both
wild and currish, if these virtues had not restrained him. Menahem, Act. 13.1.
(...)
was a Prophet and a teacher, yet he was Herod's foster brother and sucked the
same milk with Herod: here grace overruled his natural inclination, for by
nature he would have been as bad as Herod.

As the nourishing of the child is a great cause why the child resembles the
mother, so it is a great obligation to move the mother to love the child the
better: therefore the Church ravished with the love of Christ says, O that
thou were as my brother that sucked the breast of my mother! Cant. 8.1. and the
Jews hold, that this was one of the reasons why Bathshebe called Solomon her
only Son, Prove. 4. because he was nourished by her, she loved him better than
the rest of her sons, as he was the son of her womb, and the son of her
vow. Prove. 31. so he was the son of her breasts.

The Hebrews observe that the nurse in their language is called Omen coming
from the root Aman, (...) untrix ab (...) fidelem esse,
which signifies to be faithful: the natural mother when she nourished her
child, will have a greater care of her child, and be more faithful in bringing
it up than the hired nurse will be: Mepiboseths nurse let him fall that he
became lame, The examples of holy women will teach mothers to nourish their
own children.
all the days of his life, 2 Samuel 4.4.

The examples of holy women in the Scriptures and else where, will teach
mothers this duty, Sara nourished Isaac, Rebecca Jacob, Anna Samuel, Bathsebe
Solomon, and the virgin Marie Christ himself, and Moses was brought by Gods
special providence to be nourished by his own mother, and the mother of the
seven sons in the Macchabees, 2 Macch. 7. nourished her own sons, and
Augustine says in his book of confessions that with his mothers milk he drank
in to learn to honor and worship God.

The conclusion of this is, Hosea c. 9.14. What will thou give them? a
miscarying womb and dry breasts: there is none of them, but would think it a
punishment to have a barren womb, why then should they not think it a
judgment to have dry breasts when their children suck them? but yet withal
on the other hand, it being not a disdain and contempt, but a bare neglect of
this duty in diverse mothers, it is but an omission, and so may be wthout
sin, if it be propter majus bonum. The School well observes though no sin
may be committed for any goods sake, yet a lesser good may be omitted for the
attaining of a greater good: as in the case in hand, for the establishing of a
Kings throne by a speedy increase of his royal issue in the case of Queens:
for the preserving of the mothers life in case of weak mothers, or for the
preserving of the childs health in the case of diseased mothers; these are
greater goods, than the mothers giving suck to her own child, and therefore
in these cases it may be omitted without sin by the mothers.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the weaning of Children.
1 Samuel 1.22. I will not go up until the child be weaned.
THe next duty of a woman after that she has nursed her child is to weane it,
as Anna did Samuel. (...) ^lactatio.
The time when the Jewish women weaned their children was when they were three
years old; 2 Macch. 7.27. The mother said to her son, have pity upon me
who carried thee nine months in my belly, and gave thee suck for three
years.

Some Physicians hold that to suffer a child to suck three years makes him
dull and unfit for learning, Valefius cap. 28.
and therefore it is fit that he be weaned sooner; and Valesius holds that
the three years spoke of in 2 Mac. 27. are meant only of two complete
years, and that in the beginning of the third year she weaned her child, and
that it was annus currens and non completus: but this seems to be a strained
sense, for as nine months are taken for full 9 months, not for the eight
complete and the ninth begun, so years here are taken for three complete
years, and not for two complete years, and the third begun. The Lawyers take
Biduum sometimes for a complete day and the next begun, and the Civilians use
this reckning sometimes; but the Physicians in reckoning of natural days, they
reckon to the full and complete time, and it is more probable that in the first
ages they were longer before they weaned their children than now.

Petrus Comestor observes upon 1 Samuel 1.3. that they had a threefold weaning
of their children in old times, The Jews had a threefeld weaning their
children.
first when they weaned them from their mothers milk, when they were three
years old: the second weaning he makes to be, when the child was weaned from
his tender age, and the ear of his dry nurse; and this was when he was seven
years old. The third sort of weaning he makes to be this, when he is weaned
from his childish manners, and his Pedagogie, and this is done when he is
twelve years of age; and he adds further that there is a proper weaning and
a metaphorical weaning, ablactatio propria metaphorica

the proper weaning was when the child was three years old, and the
metaphorical when he was twelve; and Comestor says, when it is said of Anna
that she weaned her son Samuel, it is to be understood of this metaphorical
weaning when he was twelve year old, and fit to serve in the Temple; when he
needed no more the ear of his mother after that she had offered him to the
Lord.

But the text makes this clear, that this weaning of Samuel is not taken
metaphorically here but in the proper sense, 1 Samuel 1.23. she brought him into
the house of the Lord after she weaned him, she had need to carry him, because
he was not as yet able to go of himself; and the text says, 1 Samuel 1.24.
puer erat puer, (...)
the repetition of the word shows that he was a very little child: and 1 Samuel 2. verse 19. his mother made him a little coat, and brought it to him from
year to year. And to this sort of weaning David alludeth Psalm. 131.2. Surely
I have behaved and quieted my self as a child that is weaned of his mother. 1 Samuel 1.28. (...) tum pluralis numeri, ut hic, vel singularis numeri cum affixe,
Genesis 47.31.
Vaijshtachu should be translated incurvarunt se, to wit Elkana and Anna, and
not incurvavii se, to wit Samuel being as yet but a little child.

The heathen kept a feast, when they were borne, Pharao kept a feast on his
birth day Genesis 40.20. Mark. 6.21.
and Herod made a supper to his Lords one his birth day.

The Jews made a feast when they weaned their children and not one their birth
day, Eccles. 7.1. The Jews made a fest at the day of their death and not at
their birth.
Better is the day of death than the day of ones birth, and cap. 4.3. Therefore
I praise the dead which are already dead more than the living which are yet
alive: Yea better is he than both they, which has not yet been, who has not
seen the evil which is done under the sun. The council of Toled observed
that Christ wept not at Lazarus death but at his rising again: and Christ
says, Ioh. 14.28. If ye loved me ye would rejoice because I said I go to my
Father. The fathers called the day of the martyrs death (...) because then
they got to the land of the living, Origin. lib. 3. in Job.
there was no cause then why to keep a feast on their birth day. They kept
the feast when they weaned their children Genesis 21.8. because their children
then were past the greatest danger: the greeks called this (...), and the
feast they called the teeth feast, Macrobius lib. 1. (...) productio dentium ab
(...) and (...).
de somuo Scipionis, and they were glad that the children had no need of milk
but of strong meat then, as the Apostle speaks in another sense, Heb. 5.12.

The conclusion of this is, some unnatural mothers will not take pains to
nurish their children, and they fail in the one extremity. So there are some
sottish mothers who suffer their children to suck too long, and they fall in
the other extremity. For although in the first ages when they lived so long,
they suffered them to suck for three years, yet our days being shortened,
they should not take up so much of their childrens age in giving them suck.

CHAP. XIX. Whether the Sight or the Hearing be the better sense.
Mat. 6.22. The light of the body is the eye.
THe eyes resemble the heavens most, and as the Philosopher proves by that
Maxim, Perfectissimo corpori perfectissima debetur figura, the most perfect
form is due to the most perfect body:

The eye most resemble the heavens having the tunicles as the spheres, The
eyes resemble the heavens.
and clear like the crystal heaven, and it most resembles the sun: Job.
3.9. neither let it see the eye lids of the morning, where the holy Ghost
compares the eye lids to the clouds and the sun to the eye, therefore it was
called oculus mundi, the eye of the world.

The eye most resembles the mind, The eyes resembles the mind most.
therefore in the scriptures it is called the eye of the mind; Ephesians. 1.18. and
there is such intelligence betwixt the eye and the mind, that the eye takes
the denomination from the mind; if it be an unchaste mind, then it is called
oculus adulter an adulterous eye, if it be a corrupt mind then it is oculus
nequam an evil eye; if it be a simple mind, then it is called oculus simplex;
if the mind be liberal, then it is called oculus bonus a good eye.

The eye discerns and takes up things farther than any other sense does, The
eyes takes up the object better than any other sense albeit far distant.
although the objects be far distant from it, as the mind does, and then it
has a surer knowledge of things than the care has; it believes only that
which it sees, the ear believes the report of others, therefore we say plus
valet unus oculatus testis quam auriti december, better is one eye witness than ten
ear witnesses. The Queen of Sheba admired the glory of Solomon more when she
saw it than when she heard of it. 1 King 10.7.


The eye moves the beholder most, 2 Samuel 16. perchance the Lord will look
[begnoni] upon my affliction, but the Masoreth read it [begneni] in oculum
meum, that is, (...) in afflictionem meam. (...) in oculum meum
to the tears of mine eye, because tears moove much; and when men would
express any thing that is dear unto them they say, ye would have pulled out
your eyes for me, Gal. 4.15.

The Hebrews put the sense of seeing for all the senses, Ioh. 20.29. because
thou saw thou believed, that is, Alexander the coppersmith has caused me to
try much evil that is, to feel much evil, 2 Timothy 4.14. so, Psalm. 16. he saw
no corruption, that is, he felt no corruption. So for smelling, The sense of
seeing put for all the senses by the Hebrews.
Thou caused our Savor to be abhorred in the eyes of Pharao, that is, in the
nostrils of Pharaoh; thirdly it is put for the taste, Psalm. 33.9. Taste how sweet
the Lord is, that is, see; fourthly for hearing, Exodus 20.8. and the people saw
the voices, that is, heard the voices.

It is thought that this sense is not a fit sense for sciences and learning,
but they are deceived who think so, for the senses are profitable for sciences
two manner of ways, The sense of sight both profitable for finding out
sciences and for the learning of sciences being found out.
either for finding out some principles of the sciences, or for the learning of
them which are already found out; the sight helps us most to find out
sciences, but the ear helps us most to learn them when they are found out.

It is objected against this sense, that it is often deceiceived, species from
the object, as in the water a staff seems broken to us when it is whole: so
when a man looks through a pair of spectacles which are full of corners, his
hand cannot touch these things, which he looks upon with his eyes.

The defect here is not in the eye, medium; for the eye may be deceived by the
medium two manner of ways, either by the refraction of the perpendicular beam
that proceeds from the eye, or by reflection; by refraction, The eye
sometimes deceived by the medium two ways.
as the staff in the water seems to be broken, because the beam of the eye
is hindered by the medium the water: so by reflection when the eye is hindered
that it cannot see the object through the spectacles because of the many
superficies and diverse corners of them, the beam is reflexed back again so
that it can never fix it self upon the right object: but if the organ be
sound and the medium be fit for the organ, and a proportionable object for
them both, neither too bright nor too obscure, then the eye can never be
deceived.

It is objected against this sense, Gal. 3.1. O foolish Galatians, who has
bewitched you?

The heathen that had conceit that the witches could hurt with their eyes, The
superstitious conceit of the heathen concerning bevvithing with the eye.
and therefore they did hang fascininam vel turpiculas about the childrens
necks to be (...) against their bewitching with the eye. When one saw Esope in
his masters house (who was a very deformed creature) he said that his master
had bought him ut esset fascinum domus, but they were much mistaken in this,
for it is not the eye that hurts, more than the words of the enchanter; for
when the enchanter uses his charm or spell, the words hurt not, but it is the
Devil that does the hurt: The evil eye does not hurt, but it is the Devil
that concurreth with it.
So when an envious eye and bewitching eye is thought to hurt, it is the Devil
that concurreth with the evil eye, and it is he that harmeth; the heart of an
envious man may hurt himself, and the strong imagination may bring death to a
man's self, and a sore eye may affect the eye of another who looks upon it,
with the humor coming from it, but it can neither infect the air nor bring
death to any man.

It is commonly objected against this sense, Many things objected against the
eye.
as Eve looking upon the forbidden fruit, longed after it; David looking upon
Bathshebe committed adultery with her; and the sons of God, saw the
daughters of men to be fair, which brought on the first great judgment upon
the world: therefore the Lord Number. 15.39. says, Seek not after your own
heart, and your own eyes, after which ye use to go a whering; and the
Hebrews say that oculus est proxineta peccati, Many have pulled out their eyes
because of the evils that come by the eye.
it is the broker which goes betwixt the object and the heart, to make up the
sinful bargain. Democritus knowing well what evil came by the eye, pulled
out his eyes; and Oediput because his adulterous eyes drew him to incest to lie
with his mother, therefore he pulled out his eyes. And for this cause the eyes
were called subsessores which lie in the high way to wait for men, and to kill
them at unawares; Petrus Abbas Claravallensis, when he had lost one of his eyes
by sickness said, I have lost one of mine eyes, and now I am more afraid of
that which is left than I am sorry for that which is lost, therefore when we
would diligently meditate upon any thing, we shut our eyes.

But we must know that the most excellent things being abused become worse, The
most excellent things being abused become worst.
this argues only that if the eye be abused, then it becomes the worse
sense, but being rightly used, it is the most excellent sense, for it beholds
the world which the Philosopher calls Altar of God, in which we may see his
power and his wisdom to praise him and magnify him for it. Then the blind
man concluded how pitiful his cause was, who wanted this noble sense and
lived like a prisoner continually in darkness.

I perceive this day that to be true, The speech of the dease.
that every man judges other men's greefes lesser than his own; but if my
greefes were weighed in a balance with this man's, they would soon weigh them
down.

I want the daughters of music, Eccles. 12. I am no more delighted with
music nor old Barzillai was, Reasons for the pre-eminence of the hearing.
2 Samuel That could not hear the voice of singing men, and singing women; and
let one sing as sweetly unto me as the sweeter singer of Israel could do, yet
I am like the deaf adder that is nothing moved with it.

The care is janua disciplina the gate of knowledge: Greater knowledge by
hearing than seeing.
a man may see the principles of knowledge with his eye, but when a science is
found out, how can he learn it? it is only this sense of hearing which
begets understanding. A man may be blind and yet have great knowledge, but
if he want his hearing, what knowledge can he have? Rabbi Joseph Coecus was
blind; yet he paraphrased the third part of the Bible in the Chaldie tongue,
(...)
and for this the Hebrews call him [Saggi maor] abundans lumine: Dydimus was
blind seventie years, yet he was must skillful in the Scriptures, therefore
Jerome calls him videntem suum Didymum, his seeing Didymus: it is this sense
which breeds understanding more then the eye, therefore Socrates said to a
young man who was beautiful, loquere ut te videam, speak that I may see thee;
a man wanting this sense of hearing, can have little knowledge of any thing.

That we have knowledge by hearing rather than by seeing or any other sense, we
may prove it by the example of old Isaac, Oculi caligant, palatum seducitur,
fallitur manus, sed non fallitur auris: and Bernard speaking to this purpose
said, Non est in gustu veritas, etsi suavitas, non in oculo sed in aure.

Faith comes by hearing, Romans 10. Sam. 3.10. and the Hebrews put audire for
intelligere, they put hearing for understanding.

The ear is the most excellent sense, corpus aptasti mihi, but David says
aures perforasti mihi Psalm. 40. because the body is most fitted to obedience by
the care.

The Lord takes greater pains about the ear then about any other sense, Sam.
20.12. that is called revelare aurem to uncover the ear; secondly, perforat
aurem he boreth the ear, Psalm. 40. as the servants ear was bored of old that
they might dwell with their masters for ever, Exodus 22. God takes great pains
about the ear.
the first was ad intelligentiam for understanding, the second was ad
obedientiam, for obedience, thirdly he circumeided the ear, which includes
both the other two.

Satan envieth most the ear, Satan envieth the ear most.
therefore in the Gospeil it is said, that he possessed a man with a deaf
Devil, but he never studied to make a man blind.

Leaving these theological and moral reasons, Why one that is borne deaf is
also dambe.
for a man that is borne deaf, he can never speak. Then the deaf man
concluded that his case was a thousand times worse than the blind man's, and
that he ought to be thankful to God who enjoyed the sense of hearing,
although he was defective of the sense of seeing.

The conclusion of this is, Martha and Marie, Martha was troubled about many
things, The fight and hearing like Martha and Mary.
but Marie sat at his feet and heard him diligently, therefore she made choice
of the better part, Luke 10.41.42. But in the life to come the sight shall be
no more busied about earthly things, but shall sit down at the feet of Christ
and choose the better part with Mary, and only then it shall contemplate
heavenly things, for then we shall walk by fight and not by faith.

CHAP. XX. Whether the fantasy brings forth real effects or not.
THe fantasy is an imagination and an impression made in the soul of such
forms and shapes as are let in by the senses, The Phastasie what.
or by such as are imagined without any sight. How Imaginations are wrought in
the Fantasy.


The way how these imaginations are wrought in the brain is this: The natural
spirits which are in the heart are sent up by the arteries to the brain, and
there they waken these fantasies which are sleeping as it were in the brain,
and then they begin to compose devide or abstract.

The resemblance of these imaginations wakened by the spirits, How the
resemblance of the imaginations are carried from the brain to the seed.
are speedily carried from the brain to the heart, and from the heart to the
liver, from the liver to the blood, and from the blood to the seed. And as the
influences of the heavens when they meet with a fit object, make diverse
impressions in the earth, so do the spirits in the seed; pigmei or a dwarse,
and sometimes by translation, as when we imagine the eye to be in the breast;
and as the painter by art borrows the nose from one, the lip from another,
and the eye from the third, so does the fantasy, and as nature composeth
sometimes, as struthiecamelus, pardo-camelus, so does the fantasy compose
things, and make up diverse forms.

The spirits when they ascend unto the brain, The spirits being free from
exhalations, do compose and divide in the brain.
and are clear without fogge or mist of gross exhalations, then they compose
and divide, and play the part as it were of a Poet or painter in the brain;
and this we see by experience, for when a man lies down first, and the gross
exhalations arise out of his stomach, then he cannot dream, or if he dream,
Why dreams in the forcpart of the night are not so distinct as in the latter
part of the night.
his dreams are wonderfully confused and undistinct: but when the humors are
settled, and the spirits begin to be more clear, then they compose or divide
more distinctly; arising out of the stomach, then they work not so clearly
and distinctly as they do when the humors are settled.

That the fantasy of it self works no alteration within a man, Reasons
proying that the fantasy works no alteration of it self in man.
it is proved thus.

First, nihil agit extra genus suum, as thorns bring not forth figs, 7.16.
The imagination conceives not the things themselves but the images of things,
for as we are not fed by the nature of bread apprehended in the fantasy, but
by the bread it self: So neither can the notions of things apprehended in the
fantasy affect or change the body; idem numero one and the self same thing,
Sensus and sensile idem numere.
as the each and the sound are one. So the fight, and the thing taken up by the
sight are one, even so the thing imagined, and the imagination are one; and
there is no other act without the imagination, it is not actio transiens here
sed immanens, it is not a transient action, but permanent, and therefore
works nothing upon the body.

The imagination cannot work upon the body. The imagination neither works
formallie nor vietually upon the body.
produces an effect like the thing it self, as the fire produces heat.
Secondly, it works not virtually, for one body virtually only affects
another, as Physic works upon our bodies. Thirdly, it works not eminenter
by way of excellency upon the bodies, for then it should produce such an
effect which should be more excellent than the cause.

The spirits then ascending from the heart, How the spirits waken the
phantafies and carry them to the seed.
wakeneth these fantasies in the brain, and carries these idea's or shapes
down again by the Nerves, to the heart, and to the Liver, and then to the
blood, and last ^o the seed where they take their impressions, and there is a
great correspondencie betwixt the two begettings, the imaginary begetting and
the bodily begetting, and the one takes the examplary from the other; and
although these imaginations be not actually seen in the seed, The
imaginations are not actuallie but virtually in the seed.
yet they are virtually in it, as the rest of the members are comprehended in
it before they be fashioned; so are the colors, marks and shapes.

The spirits draw out these shapes and colors, taking the parterne of them
from the fantasy, and they imprint them in the seed; The spirits imprint the
shapes and colors in the seed.
neither must this seem strange unto us, for if the devil can mix himself
with the humors of the body, and out of these humors, frame diverse shapes
and colors, much more may the natural spirits do this in the humors.
Augustirus de civitate dei lib. 8. cap. 8.
Augustine shows this, how the Devil did delude the Egyptians and continued
Idolatry amongst them, presenting to the Cow when she was engendring, an Ox
marked with the same marks wherewith the ox was marked which they worshipped
in Egypt, so that when he dyed they had still an Ox marked after the same
manner.

Whether was this a miracle or not, Jacobs ewes brought forth speckled lambs?

It was mirum but it was not miraculum. God in working a miracle sometimes he
uses an ordinary means, as when he cured Ezekias sore, he bade lay figs to
it, figs naturally mature and ripen the sore, Jacobs Ewes bringing forth
speekled Lambs whether a miracle or not.
but because he healed Ezekias in an instant the natural cause wrought no
more here than Paul's girdle, when he healed the sick by it: but when Jacobs
ewes conceived speckled lambs, this cannot be called a miracle, for they
conceived by natural means here, and they brought not forth their lambs upon
an instant, but kept their course as other ewes did.

What is the reason that other men who have tried, this conclusion could never
do the like?

God who is the God of nature, natura naturans, whereas she is but natura
naturata) can do many things by her, Natura naturans naturata.

which neither the Devil nor men can do, who are but natures instruments; the
Nazarets by the law might drink no wine, yet their cheeks were most comely
and ruddie, Lament. 4.7. But ordinarily drinking of water makes the face more
pale: ye see here how the God of nature did work beside the ordinary course of
nature; Satan can dive far in nature.
but Satan albeit he be not the God of nature, yet he could dive far and
invegle himself into the fantasy of the Cow, when she was in gendering, and
so made the brain of the Cow more pregnant, and the spirits made the colors
more vively in the feed, and brought forth such a calfe marked with such
spots: but God being the God of nature, gave such a blessing to the ewes that
they brought forth all their young ones speckled. Man can only present to a
Cow when she is gendering an ox or a bull marked with such marks, but he
cannot give that blessing which the Lord gave to the ewes, neither can he
invegle himself in the fantasy of the Cow, as the Devil did who is a
spirit; and therefore a Cow brings not forth a calfe so vively marked, when a
man, the instrument of nature has a hand in the work, as when the Devell has
an hand in it.

Man is an instrument of nature two manner of ways, either he is propinquum
instrumentu^ naturae, or remetum instrumentum naturae; Instrumentum propinquum
remotum.

he is propinquum instrumentum naturae the near instrument of nature quando
sol and homo generant hominem, and here he works more forciblie in nature;
than Satan can do. Again he is the remote instrument of nature: example;
when a Physician composeth his drugges of so many herbs and simples, here he
cannot work so effectually as Satan can do, because he is but remotum
instrumentum naturae: so if a man should have presented a marked ox bfore the
Cow, she would not have brought forth a calfe marked after that manner, because
he was but instrumentum remotum naturae here, and could not work so as the
devil could do.

Last observe, The parents give matter and form to the birth.
that the parents give matter and form to the birth, and if there be not a
like efficacy in them both, then the imagination appears not so vively in
the birth; now the Lord by his directing hand matched the like with the like,
the strong imagination with the stronger, and the weak with the weaker, and
so, they brought forth lambs some with broader spots, and some with lesser.

The fantasy then by it self works not this alteration, The fantasy does
not alter the body, but moves the spirits and they alter the body.
but yet the fantasy when it apprehends the object either as profitable or
hurtful, then it moves the spirits, and the spirits alters the body.

The conclusion of this is, as in natural things, the Images breed
Imaginations in the fantasy; when they behold monstrous objects the birth is
oftentimes marked with the like. The Concubine of Pope Nicolas brought forth a
child marked like a Bear, because in her conception she beheld the arms of
the Vrsins, and therefore his successor Pope Martine caused the arms of the
Vrsins to be rased out. So we must beware of obsceene spectacles and filthy
objects, for they breed monstrous sins in the heart.

Secondly,

CHAP. XXI. How the Hebrews distinguished the ages of man.
1 Samuel 2.33. And all the increase of thy house shall die young ones.
THe Hebrews do not divide the ages of man as the Greeks do, The Greeks
divide the life of man into seven periods.
or as the Latins. The life of man is called by the greeks Hebdomas because
it is divided in seven periods; the first is his infancy until he be seven
year old; the second is pueritia childhood until he be fourteen years old;
the third is adolescentia, youth-head until he be twenty five years of age;
the fourth is virilis aetas until he be fifty: the fifth is aevi maturitas
until he be sixty; the fixed is senectus until he be eighty; the seventh is
decrepitasenectus from eighty to the day of his death.

But the Hebrews distinguish the life of man after this manner; How the
Hebrews distinguish the life of man.
first they are [ hajonekim lactantes, sucking children until they be three
years old; (...) lactantes. (...) aliquando est nomen aetatis, aliquando non.
Secondly, [nagnarim] pueri ratione aetatis until they be thirteen; they
say, ratione atatis, for oftentimes nagnar non est nomen atatis in the
Scripture. Joseph when he is thirty year old is called nagnar, Joshua when
he is fifty five years old is called nagnar: see Psalm. 127.4. and Prove.
(...) aliquando nomen proprium, and aliquando nomen speciei.
5.18. so Joel 1.8. So Adam is sometimes nomen speciei, and then it
comprehends infants and men. Infants who know not the right from the left
hand, Jonas 4.11. and sometimes it signifies a man come to age, and then it is
opposite to the child. But when Nagnar is a name of age, then it comprehends
from three years old to thirteen, Thirdly, he is ish, when he has past
thirteen and a day, (...) aliquando late sumitur, aliquando est nomen officij.
then he begins to observe the Law and is filius pracepti, and wears his
phylacterie. Sometimes, this word [ish] is taken more largely. 1 Samuel 17.12.
venerat in viros, id est, senex erat; and sometimes it is nomen officij, the
name of a husband, Hos. 2.

Fourthly, they are bechurim from twenty year old to sixty, Exodus 30.41.
(...) electi.
because then they were chosen for the wars.

Fifthly, senectus, and it was three fold, (...)
first zickna when he was sixty years old.

The second is [shebha] canities from seventie to eighty. (...)


The third is, (...)
[Iashish] silicernium or decrepita senectus, 2 Chro. 36.16. The sword of the
Chaldaans spared not the old man nor him that stooped for age. By this we may
see that they translate not these words rightly, they shall die in the flower
of their age, 1 Samuel 2.33. for they dyed long before that time: The meaning
then is this, thy sons shall not die when they are children, but when they
are ishim past thirteen years of age, and when they shall have so much
understanding to see themselves put from the holy service of the Lord, the Lord
shall cut them off before they come to be men, which the Hebrews call more
excidij, before they come to the flower of their age. Not unlike unto this
place, is that phrase Hos. 9.12. orbabo cos ab homine, that is, Orbabo eos ab
hemine quid.
I will cut them off that they shall not become men, or before they shall
become men.

As the age of man is divided, The ages of the Church.
so Augustine divides the age of the Church, first infantia when he called her
out of Egypt; Secondly pueritia when she lived under the pedagogue of the Law
till Christ came; thirdly in adolescentia under Christ; fourthly, in senectuie,
under the Apostles and last decrepita senectus now.

So the Church of the Gentiles was in infantia from Adam to the flood; The ages
of the Church of the Gentiles.
secondly in adolescentia from the flood to Abraham; thirdly she was in her
widdowhead from Abraham to Christ: in this time the Gentiles were rejected, and
Abraham's posterity only chosen. This time of her rejection is called but
momentu^ vel modicum temporis, Esaias. 54. for as the earth although it be
twenty thousand miles about in circuit, yet it is but a point in respect of
the heavens; so is this time from Abraham to Christ, but a point in respect of
eternity. Christ says, a little while, and ye shall not see me, and a little
while, and ye shall see me, Ioh. 16.16. It was but a little while from Christ's
ascension to his coming again in respect of eternity

The conclusion of this is, Number. 17. he signified that Aarons children the
Priesthood should flourish; therefore the Hebrews called the Priests sons
flores sacerdotales: but here when Eli and his sons were to be cut off, the
rod withered and decayed in him, and the children did bear the iniquity of
their fathers.

CHAP. XXII. Whether death be natural to a man or not?
Genesis 3.19. Dust thou art, and to dust shall thou return.
Job. How man was made of the dust, and is resolved into dust.
10.9. Remember I beseech thee, that thou have made me as the clay, and will thou bring me to the dust again? When man was created first, his body was
dust; Secondly slime, that is, dust tempered with water; Thirdly, clay, that
is, coagulate slime: and lastly earth, that is, condensate clay; then when man
returns back again, first he is earth, then clay, then slime, and lastly
dust; therefore God says, dust thou art, and to dust thou shall return, Genesis
3.19.

Whether is this death natural to a man or against his nature?

If ye will respect the intention of nature, Whether death be natural to a
man or not.
because generation is according to nature; therefore Dionysius said well malum
carere fine, naturaet efficiente, cum a nullo optetur and sit recessus ab ente.

Secondly, Death considered two ways.
death may be considered two manner of ways, either if it be compared with
generation, or if ye compare one sort of death with another; if ye compare
death with generation, then death is always contrary to nature: but if ye
will compare one sort of death with another, How death may be said to be
contrary to nature.
then one sort of death may be said to be natural, and another sort of death
contrary to nature: example; when a man dies in a consumption, this death is a
natural death, because he has that within himself which makes him to die:
but when a man is killed and dies a violent death, this death is contrary to
nature, for he has not the immediate and next cause within himself.

Again consider natures first intention, All death is contrary to the first
intention of nature.
and then the way how nature works; in natures first intention all sort of
death is contrary to it: but if ye will observe how nature works, if she
work by her own principles then this is according to nature; but if death be
violent, this is contrary to nature: consider then the first and principal
intention of nature, death is contrary to it: but according to the second
intention of nature it is not contrary to it, Death is not contrary to the
second intention of nature.
because it is necessary for the introduction of a new form, that the matter
be changed, the matter always craving the form; and likewise because this is
done by the law of nature which ordained that things which have a beginning
must die.

The young Vipers when they come out of their mothers belly, One death may be
both said to be according to nature and against nature.
they gnaw the belly of their mother and so kill their mother; this unnatural
birth is first prater naturam, it is besides nature; for nature teaches
creatures to love those who bred them; Secondly, it is contra naturam against
nature, because they come not out the ordinary way as other creatures do;
Thirdly, it is Secundum naturam in the second intention of nature, for every
creatures seeks the life and preservation of it self and the continuing of
the own kind of it.

Whether is it natural for the soul to be separate from the body or not?

In the first creation it was natural for the body and soul still to be
together and never to be separated, Whether it is natural for the soul to be
separated from the body.
but sin intervening makes the soul long oftentimes to be out of the body;
the soul longs to be out of the sinful body that it may be the more able
to discharge her spiritual duties, which are hindered by the heavy and dull
body. The water according to the own proper inclination goes downward,
vacuum or an emptiness in nature it ascends upward; so the soul first
desired to continue in the body that there may be pulchritudo vniversi, and the
soul to be freed from sin it defyreth for a while to be out of the body. So
the soul says to the body, neque possum vivere tecum, neque sine te, I can
neither live with thee nor without thee.

Death is a thing violent to man,

It is not violent to the soul, Death although violent to the body, yet not to
the soul.
it does not perish, but is more perfected.

A part being taken from the whole, is violen, and the part imperfect; but the
soul is a part of man, and there it is imperfect when it is separate from the
body.

That is to be understood of such parts as receive their perfection from the
whole, but the soul rather gives perfection than receives.

When the soul is separate from the body it desires to be joined with it
again.

It desires to be joined with the body again not as it is a natural body,
Why the soul desires to be joined to the body again.
but as it is a pure and glorified body.

Then the resurrection is according to nature,

It is natural for the soul to desire a glorified body again, yet the soul
cannot be joined to God naturally,

When the soul is out of the body,

It is not kept violently out of the body, Whether the soul be kept violently
out of the body or not.
is not only detained and kept from the place which it desires, but it is
also detained in a place which it desires not, which is altogether contrary to
it; when a man is taken out of his own house and put in a close prison, he
wants not only his own house which he longs to be at, but he is shut up
also in a close prison which he abhors to be in, there he is violently
detained;

The conclusion of this is, her first intention follows Gods direction,
Nature follows Gods intention in the dissolution of man.
and as God intended first that man should be immortal, so did nature: but
then comes in Gods second ordinance, because man sinned God said, Dust thou
art and to dust thou shall return, so nature in her second intention seconded
Gods decree, and works to the dissolution of man.

MORAL OBSERVATIONS.
CHAP. I. Of two evils, the least is to be chosen.
2 Samuel 24.14. And David said, let me fall into the hands of the Lord rather
than in the hands of men.
DAvid made choice here rather to fall into the hands of God then man. Malum
Culp^ pana.

In evils of sin there is no choice to be made, as Lot who chose rather to
prostitue his daughters than to hazard his guests, In evils of sin there is
no choice.
and so did Pilat. When Dionysius the tyrant presented three whores before
Aristippus bidding him make choice of one of them, he said, that Paris had such
bad success for choosing one of that kind that he would never make choice of
one of the three.

Revel. 3.15. I would ye were either hot or cold, here it may seem that the
holy Ghost would have made choice rather that they were cold, than to be
lukewarm, which are both sin.

He wills them not here to make choice of the lesser sin, What is meant by
being lukewarm.
but shows them only which is the lesser sin, and that it is more
tolerable to be cold than lukewarm.

But in evils of sin, Moses chose rather that the husbands should give their
wives a bill of divorce, than that they should kill them.

Moses tolerated this for the hardness of their hearts, Why Moses gave the
bill of divorce.
but suffered it because he could not help it.

An Idolater is charged by the Law to go to the Church,

He is to make choice of neither of the two,

Whether did the man of Gibea, 19. sin or not, in offering his daughter and
the wife of the Levite to the men of Benjamin to be abused, rather than the
Levite who was his guest?

We must not do evil that good may come of it, Romans 3.8.

But might not this man rather have made choice of death than offered his
daughter,

It is one thing to be a patient,

There is one sort of evil which is evil in it self, Malum perse per
accidens.

and another which is but evil by accident only: a man may choose that which
is but accidentally evil, but never that which is evil in it self. Example,
1 Cor. 7. it is not good for a man to touch a woman, When a man may choose that
which is accidentally evil.
and it is not good for a man to commit whoredom; It is not good for a man to
touch a woman, that is, to marry her: accidentally it was not good at that time
for the present trouble that was upon the Church, yet he might choose this
remedy to marry rather than to commit whoredom, because it was but
accidentally evil to marry, evil at all that time when the Church was
underpersecution, but that which is evil in it self he may no ways choose.

When two evils are set before the will, a greater evil and a lesser evil,
the will cannot but choose the lesser evil, which is either lesser indeed or
apparent-lesse, Non habet libertatem qu^ad specification^m s^d qu^ad enitium.
it is so determinate by the understanding, but yet it has this freedom to
choose the media for this end. So when two good things are set before it, it
cannot but choose the better good, either in appearance or simply best.

The greatest evil of punishment is to be chosen rather than the least evil
of sin: Therefore the martyrs would choose rather to suffer the greatest
punishment than to commit the sin.

But here an innocent man is to take heed when these two are put in his choice,
The greatest punishment rather to be chosen then the least sin
whether to sin or to suffer punishment; he is not to make choice of the
punishment, although he refuse to make choice of the sin, but he is to suffer
the punishment inflicted upon him, An in no ceat person it not to make choice
of the punishment.
but not to make choice of it. Charles the ninth the French King, offered to
the Prince of Condie his choice, whether he would go to the Maffe or choose
perpetual banishment or imptisonment, what replied he? to go to the Mass is
simply sin, therefore I will never choose that: but to choose either
perpetual imprisonment or perpetual banishment, that I cannot do, for then I
should imply a certain guiltiness in my self; but it is in your power o King
to inflict which you please, and I am ready to suffer. A man is condemned to
die, the magistrate puts it in his choice what sort of death he would die,
he may lawfully now choose the easiest sort of death, he implies now no
guiltiness upon himself, for the Judge has now already found him guilty.

It may be asked why David made choice rather of the plague than of the sword
of famine.

The reason was because he would expose himself to that danger of the plague
as well as the subjects, Reasons why David those the plague rather than the
svvord or famine.


Another reason why he made choice of the plague rather than of the sword or
famine, because these two would have made the Lords people to have been evil
spoken of amongst the heathen; for the enemy would have insulted against God
and his people if they should have overcome them: and so would they have done,
if they had been enforced to seek releife of them in time of famine; but in
the plague they had no such occasion, and David had rather fall into the hands
of God immediately than into the hands of men.

War and famine are from God,

When they afflict us, What the wicked do in afflicting the children of God.
but when they sin they can do that likewise which God permits them to
do; the wicked when they are Gods scourges they add their own malice and
mischief, Zach. 1.15. I was angry but a little, and they helped forward the
afflictions, I minded but to whip my children, but they flayed them, see Esa.
10.7. When God uses the good Angels to punish, they do nothing but that which
the Lord commanded them, but the evil Angels add their own malice and
wickedness, the one is Angelus malt, (...) Angelus malt Psalm 78.49. est (...)
non con^enientiae.
and the other is Angelus malus; the Lord sent Ashur against his people to
correct them; he did not only permit them to go but commanded them, Iere.
50.21. go up against the land, do according to all that I have commanded
thee: yet the Lord is angry with them for going against his people, why?
because their thoughts were not answerable to his thoughts, they had another
intention and affection, and they added their own malice.

David made choice here rather to fall into the hands of God than man. Moses
rod when it was laid upon the ground was a Serpent, but when Moses took it in
his hand, it became a rod; So these chastisements and punishments which are
fatherly corrections to us in the hand of God, in the hand of the wicked they
are Serpents to sting us. When Elias fled from Iezabel he desired that the Lord
would take his life, but o Elia if thou be weary of thy life, go but back to
Iezabel, and she will quickly dispatch thee: but Elias would none of that, for
death out of her hand should have been stinging Serpent, but out of the hand
of God it should have been a gentle rod. When the Lord reasoned with Jonas, he
says, if thou who art an angry and orabbed creature had pity upon the
gound, how much more should I have pity upon Niuive who am a God of mercy?
There is more mercy with God than with man, therefore it is better to fall in
his hands then in the hands of man.

It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God, Heb. 10.

It is a fearful thing for contumacious sinners so remaining, to fall into
his hands, when he is an angry God; then it is better to be corrected by the
rod of men; but for penitent persons that take the ready course to pacify his
anger for their sins, for such it is a hopeful thing and far better, to
fall into Gods hands than into the hands of men.

The conclusion of this is:

It is better to fall into the hands of God than men:

When God punishes us by his instruments, Job looks not to the Chaldeans who
robbed him, but says, The Lord has given and the Lord has taken, Job. 1.21.
So when Shimei cursed David, he says, the Lord has bidden him, a Sam. 16.11.
So Joseph looked not to the malice of his brethren but to the Lord, Genesis 45.8.

CHAP. II. Of friendship.
1 Samuel 18.1. The soul of Jonathan was knit to the soul of David, and he
loved him as his own soul.
THere are sundry sorts of love, first, natural love; Amor naturali^ sensualit
ration^lit spiritualis.

secondly, sensual love; thirdly, rational love; all these three binds one
to another, but spiritual love excels all these.

Natural love is that sympathy which God has placed in things without life,
Natural love what.
as in heavy things to descend, and light things to ascend: and that sympathy
which is betwixt the iron and the loadstone, these things although they have no
knowledge in themselves, yet they are directed by the hand of the first mover,
as the arrow by the hand of the Archer is directed to the mark.

The second sort of love is that sensual! love, Sensual love what.
directed by appetite which is found amongst beasts, for beasts of the same
kind love one another, and these ravenous beasts which live by rapine, yet they
love one another: but this sort of love differs far from the love of man;
the beasts love only their young ones for a time, Difference betwixt sensual
and rational love.
but afterward they love all the rest of the same kind alike. Man loves not
his own children only, but also these who are in affinity or consanguinitie
with him, and these of his acquaintance, and his love is a permanent love: it
is true through the corruption of the nature of man, there is a greater hatred
betwixt man and man than amongst the beasts, but this arises of some perverse
affection, but it was not so from the beginning.

This friendship is either perfect friendship, Amicitia perfecta imperfecta.

or imperfect friendship.

Perfect friendship is the mutual love of two, Perfect friendship what.
arising of an effectual good will of the one toward the other, and grounded
in moral goodness: this kind of friendship is not found but amongst good men,
he that loves a man for pleasure and profit, this is not true friendship. The
measure of true friendship.


The measure of this friendship is this, we must love our friend as our self,
the reason of this is, because amicus est alter idem.

How (...) a man love him self,

If ye will consider reason and sense together, Howa man loves himself.
and if reason give place to sense, then sense is amatum and reason is but
amans; and that breeds self-love: but if sense give place to reason, then
reason is amatum and sense is but amans, and thus we should love our neighbors
as our selves: when a man loves the sensual part in his neighbor rather than
the reasonable part, this is not right love.

This friendship resembles marriage in five things, A comparison betwixt
friendship and marriage.
first there must be some equality betwixt these who are to be married, so
there must be some equality betwixt these who are friends: the love which the
Prince carries to his subjects is not properly friendship, but friendship is
amongst these who are equals, and yet the Lord submitted himself so far as
to call Abraham his friend, Iam. 2.23.

Where there are two equals,

Friendship is kept two manner of ways, How friendship is kept with those who
are in a higher degree.
and (...) the inferior faculty is pres^^ved in the superior (as the (...) is
pref^^^ved in the sensitive) so is friendship kept still but (...) a more
eminent manner, and the^ it is ^u^ed into reverence and more greater respect.

The second thing wherein friendship (...) marriage is in unity; as in marriage
two are made one (...), friendship like unto marriage in unity.
so in true friendship they are made one spirit, and amans est alter idem
cum^mato. The Prince of the Sa^^cens and the Emperor of Cons^antinople entering
in a league of friendship, (...) to open a vein in each one of their arme^
that they might make up this friendship the betton, this friendship makes two
friends to be one; or to be sour, but never to be two, for he that loves is
loved and he that is loved ^^eth, and true friendship makes (...) one, it
makes one soul in two ^^dies: and at a ma^^ must not have many wives so he
must not have many friends, this i^ called (...) the love of many friends;



Good the more it is extended in the one kind, thou shall love thy neighbor as
thy self, Particular friendship the more it is contracted the better it is.
the Apostle, Romans 13.9. extends it to (...) any man, to teach us that this
love must be extended to all; but particular friendship which suffers no
extention, the more it is contracted the better it is; and in this sense it is
said, qui multis cupitesse amicus ^^^ini^micu^ est, he that desires to be a
friend to many is a friend to none. If the hand were not parted into fingers,
it could not do things commodiously, as to write or to throw; but yet it
gripeth faster when it is folded.

Thirdly, Friendship like unto marriage in commnion.
friendship is like unto marriage in communion, love seeks not her own but
delights as much in the good of others. Plato willed that in his Commonwealth
meum and tuum should not be heard, but amongst true friends the right of
possession ought to be heard, but not the right of use. Let thy fountains be
dispersed abroad and rivers of waters in the street, but let them be only
thine own, and not strangers with thee, Pro. 5.16.17.

The fourth thing wherein friendship resembles marriage is in the endurance of
it, Friendship like unto marriage in the perpetuity of it.
for as nothing parts married persons but death, so nothing parts true
friends but death. Artemisia Queen of Caria knowing the death parted husband
and wife, showed a wonderful act of passion toward her husband Mausolus; for
death having taken him away, she not knowing how to pull the thorns of sorrow
our of her soul, caused his body to be reduced to ashes and mingled them in
her drink, meaning to make her body a living tomb, wherein the relics of
her husband might rest, from whom she could not endure to live separated; So
friendship which is true friendship can hardly be dissolved, and nothing
separateth them but death.

But charity endures after this life,

Charity in general indureth in the life to come amongst all the Saints of
God, Charity in general remains i^^^^life to come (...) lar friendship.
but not this particular love betwixt man and wife, betwixt friend and friend:
a friend may be a friend to his friends children and do good to them after his
friend is dead, Ruth. 2.20. Blessed be he of the Lord, who has not lest off
his kindness to the living and to the dead, that is, to the posterity or the
wife of the dead: And it seems that David was unmindfull of this rule of
friendship to Ionathans son, when he bade devide the land betwixt Shiba and
M^phiboseth, 2 Samuel 19.29.

The last thing wherein friendship resembles marriage is, Friendship like unto
marriage in bearing others infirmities.
as the man ought to bear with his wives infirmities and to cover them, so
should a friend cover the infirmities of his neighbor, but not his gross
enormities, for then he hates him, Levit. 19.17. Thou shall not hate thy
brother in thine heart but reprove him. This comfortable kind of friendship is
known best in adversity, Friendship best known in adversity.
for as a true friend rejoices with his friend in prosperity, so he lamenteth
with him in his adversity and bears a part of his burden with him. Jobs
friends came in adversity to visit him and they sat seven days by him and
spoke nothing, How a man is to behave himself (...), friend in the time of
griese.
for in the beginning of grief it is most fitting for a friend to hold his
peace and to express his compassion rather by tears than by speech; And it is
most probable that the Angel when he came to comfort Christ and to strengthen
him, Luke 22.43. did rather comfort him by gesture than by speech, by standing
by and assisting him in a visible shape, How the Angel did comfort Christ in
his agony.
weighing and considering with himself the great grief and agony that was in
Christ's soul. And when Christ fell grovelling upon the ground, it is not
unlikely that ^e in companion fell down upon the ground also. What is that
which he acquired of his Disciples in his ago^e? he desires not words of
consolation from them, but only that they would weigh and consider with
themselves his great agony and grief, What (...) Christ required of his
Disciples.
and it grieved him that they could not watch with him in his great heaviness,
yea (...) comfort unto him when he went a stones cast farther from them, if
they would watch and express their love to him by shaking off their
drowfinesse.

Whether (...) friends more necessary for us in our prosperity or in our
adversity.

Simply they are more necessary for us in our adversity, At what time friends
are (...) necessary.
but for more excellent uses in prosperity: the basest pa^^s of the body are
simply more necessary for our life, than our seeing or our hearing, for a man
cannot live without them, but we may live without seeing or hearing, (...)
^^^^imes, and a brother (...) for adversity, Pro. 17.17.

Imperfect friendship is that which is either grounded upon pleasure or profit.
Imperfect friendship what:
And as these extractions of spiring which are drawn out by the Chemists, are
more (...) and (...) the grosser bodies out of which they are extracted; (...)
amitis, for as we love not (...) for our bodies sake to (...) them, so wh^^ we
use our friends only for our profit, we use them but we enjoy them not. Paul
said, I seek not yours but you. Pro. 19.6. every man is a friend to him who
gives gifes; but this is no true friendship. Prove. 19.27. All the brethren of
the poor do hate him, how much more does his friends go far from him? But
if the friendship be grounded upon sin, this is the worst ground of all: such
was the friendship of Simcon and Leve, brethren in evil, and such was the
friendship of Herod and Pilat, Though hand join in hand yet the wicked shall
not escape, Proverb.

This friendship which arises of profit it is easily dissolved, and to help
this, Friendship grounded on profit is easily dissolved.
we are not to receive benefits of every man, but we are to consider first for
what end the gift is offered to us: for if a man offer a benefit to the intent
that he may receive as much or more, then it is not a benefit, but rather a
selling; as the Pharisees would bid their neighbors to dinner because they knew
they would invite them again.

Again, In amicitia honesta mensura est dantis propositum.
the benefitis not to be reckoned by the profit of him who receives it, but
according to the mind of the giver; as the widows mite was more accepted than
the large offerings of others. Hiram was to blame in this, when Solomon gave
him twenty cities in the land of Galilee, he called them dirtie cities, 1 King.
9.13. he measured not the gift here according to the mind of the giver.

The gifts which are given by friends are not like things sold and bought,
Gifts given by friends not like things bought and sold.
for the thing sold depends chiefly upon the seller, but here the value and
estimation depends upon the receiver; he should not measure the gift by the
profit that may redound to him by it, but by the affection of the giver.

That friendship which is only grounded upon pleasure is not well grounded,
Friendship grounded on pleasure is not permanent.
for our pleasures for the most part are excessive as the Epicures friendship;
Let us eat, let us drink, for to morrow we shall die, 1 Cor. 15.32. here
their friendship and joy continued not, it is but like the trackling of thorns
under the pot, Eccles. 7.6. which is soon gone. But true friendship is
grounded in the Lord, as David's companions were these who feared God, Psalm.
119.63. such a friend was Hushai to David, 2 Samuel 15.37.

The way to keep this friendship is, How to keep true friendship.
Pro. 25.16. Withdraw thy foot from thy neighbors house, lest he be weary of
thee and hate thee: Have thou found honey? eat so much as is sufficient for
thee, lest thou be filled therewith and vomit it. Again, let thy foot be rare
in thy neighbors house; in the original it is, precious, for these things
which are rare we hold them precious, 1 Samuel 3.1. The Word of the Lord was
precious in those days, that is, it was rare. So Esa. 13. a man shall be more
precious than gold, that is, more rare. And he uses a comparison here, for as
he that eats sparingly of honey it is comfortable to him and refreshes him
as it did Jonathan, but if he eat much of it,

CHAP. III. Sinful love degenerateth into hatred.
2 Samuel 13.15. Then the hatred wherewith he hated her, was greater than the
love wherewith he loved her.
THere are two affections which carry great sway in the soul, desire and love:
sometimes we both desire and love them; somethings we desire but love them not,
till enjoyed; and somethings we desire, but love them not when we have gotten
them.

These things which we desire and love are things honest; these things which
we desire and love not, Things honest we both love and desire.
are things profitable, we love them not before we enjoy them; we may carry
some Imaginary love to them before we enjoy them, but this is not true love:
for other men's profits so long as they enjoy them affect us not, but when we
enjoy them indeed then we begin to love them; but finfull delights we desire
them, but being once gotten we loathe them, but things honest we both desire
them and love them.

Honest things we both love them and desire them although we want them, but
things profitable before we have them, we desire them but love them not
properly: when a man wants riches or children he has a desire to them, but
when he has gotten them then he loves them. Things pleasant before we have
them we both desire them and carry an imaginary love to them, but when we
have them once, The desire and love of things pleasant once gotten perish
together.
both the desire and the love perish together, and they leave behind them a
certain loathsomenesse, as he that cateth too much of the honey comb
loatheth it: Prove. 25.15. here the desire and the love go away together, and
the love in sinful pleasure is turned to hatred. Things profitable are
profitable to us when we possess them, and the longer that we possess them
the greater fruit reap we of them. But the delight which we have in pleasant
things is neither an habit nor a perfect possession of them, but a motion which
has always some privation joined with it, which failing the love fails
likewise: These pleasant things before we enjoy them they have a greater force
to stir up a desire in our fantasy when we want them; but when we have
profitable things they have a greater force to give me contentment than
pleasant things; pleasant things when we want them they breed an imagination
in our appetite, and when we have them they breed pleasure in our sense: but
the love and desire of honest things consisting in virtue and wisdom, is
preferred both to things pleasant and profitable; The love and desire of things
honest remains both when we want them and when we enjoy them.
for we love them both when we have them, and when we want them, and the love
of them is the first degree of enjoying them, not in our sense and fantasy,
but in our understanding.

Honestum Vtile Iucundum
convenient in defiderio rerum non possessarum. Honestum Vtile
convenient in amore postquam possidentur. Honestum Vt i will
differunt honestum ante possessionem and in possessione defideratur and
amatur, utile ante possessionem non amatur sed defideratur, and in possessione
amatur non desideratur. Honestum Iucundum
convenient in desiderio ante possessionem, Honestum Iucundum
differunt in juncundo post possessionem perit desiderium cum amore; in honesto
vero utrumque post possessionem manet. Vtile Iucundum
convenient in desiderio ante possessionem. Vtile Iucundum
differunt utile non amatur ante possessionem sed solum desideratur, at
jucundum ante possessionem amatur and desideratur, Secundo utile amatur post
possessionem, sed amor jucundi cum desiderio perit post possessione^.

Health, children,

Health chiefly is to be referred to profit, Health reserved to profit.
as we do these things which bring only delight with them; and health when we
want it we wish it not only with our sensitive appetite, but with our will and
understanding: Children belong to honesty and pleasure,
children again belong both to honesty and pleasure, for we desire our
children to possess our goods, and we enjoy them; this desire is mixed with
delight, and therefore the conversing of parents with their children breeds
not satietie or loathsomeness as sinful pleasures do. And they long for
children to continue their kind by a certain immortality, Difference betwixt
the love of parents to their Children and the love of beasts to their young
ones.
and herein man differs from the beasts who love their young ones only ut
nunc for the time present, but respect not the continuance of their kind in
them: and this is the cause why parents are never weary of their children more
than they are of their health.

The love of marriage especially consists in pleasure, but has honesty and
profit joined with it. The love and desire of dominion has both profit and
pleasure joined with it, but there is a twofold honor, Honor legittimut
illegittimus.

a bastard honor and a lawful honor, the bastard honor only belongs to
pleasure, but the lawful honor belongs not only to pleasure but also to
honesty.

These things which we both desire and love, they proceed sometimes ab amore
sensibili, and sometimes ab amore rationali, when we desire them first, and
next we love; but when they proceed ab amore rationali then we first love
them, and then desire them. When delights give contentmentment both to sense
and reason


The delights which are sensual when they ascend to reason they give no
contentment to it, but when the delights descend from reason to fantasy and
sense, they give contentment to both. And as the mist which arises out of the
valleys and ascends to the mountains betokens rain, beneplacitum animi
the good pleasure of the will being approved by the reasonable faculty in the
understanding, (...).
which does try things first and sets the will on work and the will sets
the rest on work.

Again if we shall consider the senses, The baser senses are soonest cloyed
with pleasures.
if we shall consider the senses, we shall perceive that the baser senses, the
touch, taste and the smell which serve most for sensual pleasures, they are
soon cloyed, as he that eats the honey comb surfetteth quickly, Pro.
25.15. Pro. 7.18. when the whore inviteth the young man she says, come and let
us take our fill of love until the morning, one might well give them a furfet
of this beastly pleasure; but consider again the more noble senses, the sight
and hearing, which serve for reason, they are never satisfied, The eye (says
Solomon) is not satisfied with seeing nor the ear with hearing, Why the eye
and ear are not satisfied.
Eccles. 1.8. Why are they not satisfied? because they give information to the
nobler faculty of the soul the understanding wherein honesty and virtue are
seated, and they are never weary to serve her. And if we shall compare things
honest, profitable and pleasant, we shall find that things pleasant are
farthest out of the square, and consequently must breed the greatest distaste to
the soul for things honest the more we desire them the more we are commended
for that; but when we desire things profitable, we must desire them with a
greater moderation, because they are more base, and we must reduce them to some
mediocritie, but most of all have we need to take heed to our delights of sense
as basest of all; therefore Solomon wills us, Pro. 23.1. We must take heed to
our basest senses.
when we sit at a governors table to put a knife to our throat, that is, when
we sit at a table where there is variety of dishes and dainties, we must eat
sparingly then, as if there were a knife set to our throat to cut it, lest our
table become our snare, Psalm. 69.22.

Some things may breed delight to the fantasy but not to the sense, Things
may breed delight to the fantasy but not to the sense.
as when a Poet describes a gnat or flea, this is delightful to the
fantasy; but if a man should feel the gnat or the flea biting him, it would
be most unpleasant to his sense and feeling. Somethings delightful to the
sense but not to the fantasy.
Sometimes a thing may be delightful to the sense, but brings little or no
delight to the fantasy, as when a man eats sweet things. But things which
are honest breed delight both to the understanding, fantasy and sense. The
sensual pleasures are like the book which John did cate, Reve. 10.9. they are
sweet in the mouth, but bitter in the belly,

Amnon loved Thamar with an incestuous love, Amnon sinned in hating Thamar.
then he falls into the other extremity to hate her, but if he had reduced
this to a right mediocritie he should have loved the person but hated the vice.
Levit. 19.17. Thou shall not hate thy neighbor in thine heart, but thou shall
rebuke him.

The conclusion of this is, James 4.3. Ye ask amiss that ye may consume it
upon your lusts.

CHAP. IIII. Whether we may exceed the rule of righteousness in well doing or
not?
Eccles. 7.16. Be not righteous overmuch.
A Man cannot exceed in justice which is the compend of all virtues, and it
signifies to give every one his own; if we take right for that which is
partly right or rectum mathematicum, Virtues in themselves cannot be said to be
more or less.
there can be nothing more right. Virtues in themselves are not more or less,
but if ye will consider them as they are in this or that subject, and not in
their absolute or greatest perfections, Virtues in this or that subject may
besayd to be more or less.
then they may be said to be more or less. Example: if we will respect
religion in it self, here we cannot be too religious, for religion in it self
is opposite to all defectes in religion. Hope in respect of the inward form of
it, looks directly toward God, we cannot exceed here, although we may come
short: but respecting the matter which is hoped for, and weighing all
circumstances, a man may presume or despair, as he who hops, (...).
what he hops, and when he hops. So in religion, there is (...), and (...),
atheism and superstition are both defects in religion, but in the true worship
of God we cannot exceed.

So in justice, as it is justice we cannot exceed; but yet when we respect the
circumstances, as the persons to whom we do justice, How a man may exceed
injustice.
when we do justice, or where, we may exceed or come short. Prove. 17.17. these
two are equally abominable before the Lord, to let the wicked go free, and
condemn the just; to condemn the just is the excess, and to spare the wicked
is the defect in justice. So Levit. 19.15. Ye shall not respect the person of
the poor for his poverty, this is the excess, nor honor the person of the
mighty for his riches, this is the defect. 1 King. 20.42. Because thou have let
go out of thine. hand virum destructionis, that is, a man whom I appainted to
destruction, or virum retis mei, the man of my net, (...) Destr^^^ (...) rete.

that is, the may whom I catched in my net and delivered unto thee that he
should not escape; now when Achab let Benhadad go free, this was a defect in
justice.

David had many worthy captains, nimium justus.

But the Lord of the vineyard gave a penny alike to all these who wrought in
his vineyard, Matthew. 20. this might seem not to be equal justice.

This was not distributive justice but commutative, Did not I agree with you
for a penny? So in commutative justice if a man should not give fifty for that
which is worth an hundred pounds, he fails in the defect, and if he should
have give two hundredth pounds for it, Liberality has no place in commutative
justice.
then he should fail in the excess, for liberality has no place in
commutative justice in buying and selling, he who gives more then the thing
is worth to the seller, he is not nimium (...) for he wrongeth the commonwealth
and does hurt to himself.

But when he takes hurt to himself he does no man wrong, quia iniuria non fit
velenti.

Yet notwithstanding this is not good commutative justice in respect of
liberality this may be a good action, but consider it as it is commutative
justice, it is the sin in excess; because it keeps not medium rei.

When the Preacher says then, What is means by being righteous overmuch.
Be not righteous overmuch, it is to be understood also in respect of men's
conceit who think themselves too just; for verse. 20. the Preacher says, there
is none just in the earth, who does good and sins not.

The way to reduce too much righteousness to the medium is to reduce it to the
Law of God, which is the only rule of perfection to all virtues. The
philosophers hold that the way to reduce extremes is to bring them to the
midst, as they make mediceritie the midst to the two extremes, Mediocritas est
privatio excessus and defectus.
but mediocritie being but a privation it cannot be the rule of any virtue.

The conclusion of this is, Josh. 1.

CHAP. V. Of Liberality.
Act. 20.36. It is a more blessed thing to give than to receive.
LIberality is a virtue which makes a man resemble God himself, Liberality
makes (...) a men resemble God.
who gives freely and upbraideth not, Iam. 1.5. We do not read in the Gospel
that Christ used these words, but by consequent it may be gathered out of
sundry of Christ's speeches, as Luke 16.9. and out of the parable of the
Talents, and by that sentence which Christ shall give out at the last day,
Reasons proving that is a more blessed thing to give than to take.
Comme ye blessed, when I was bungry ye fed me etc Matthew. 25.

It is a more blessed thing to give than to receive.

First,

There is bonum hope^^m and (...) vtila, and as far as honest things are
preferred to profitable things, so far must giving always be preferred to
receiving.

Honest things endure longer than profitable things do, for the memory of
receiving perishes with the gift, but that liberal honesty which consists
in giving perishes not with the gift, because it depends upon him who gives
it. By accident indeed the memory of the gift may be lost through the
forgetfulness or unthankefulnesse of the receiver, but yet it deserves still
to be had in remembrance, and that which is most durable is always most to be
loved.

Dare est docere apud Hebraes, and lakab, accipere, est discere. Pro. 2. Donum
tribuam vobis, id est, doctrinem, and as far as the master exceeds the
senellor, so far does giving exceed receiving.

The Divines mark,

If we shall compare prodigality and avarice together, The prodigal is not so
bad as the avaritious man,
we may understand that to give is better tha^ to receive, for the prodigal
man is not so bad as the avaritious man, as the Palosopher proves by many
reasons.

First, the prodigal man helps many, but the avaritious man helps none.

Secondly, prodigality comes nearer to liberality than avarice, because the
prodigal man has a desire still to do good to others, as the liberal man
does, and it is a grief to him to receive as it is to the liberal man.

Thirdly, prodigality cures it self by bestowing, but avarice heaping up
riches grows worse more and more daily.

Fourthly, prodigality is cured by age, but avarice grows with age, therefore
prodigality it a lesser evil then avarice, Three degrees of prodigality.
and shows us that it is better to give than to receive. He is a prodigal
man who gives all to others (although they be not altogether unworthy) which
is necessary for himself, but he is worse, who gives both his own and other
men's goods which he takes by robbery to any sort of men, whether good or bad:
but he is worst of all who takes from other men and gives only to the bad;
so he is a wretch who gives not according to his power, but he is a greater
wretch who keeps both his own and other men's, and bestows nothing upon the
poor or upon any other; but he is worst of all who denies himself the
liberal (...) of the creatures and yet takes from others by hook and by
crook. Three degrees of avarice.
By this we may consider, that some prodigal men are worse than some
wretches, but if we shall make an equal comparison and compare the prodigal
with the wretch, he shall always be (...).

The Phil^^pher says, Arist. lib. 9. Eth^^^. 7.
but to give a (...) more and tha^ to receive, and he shows (...) in
borrowing and lending, he who borrows would wish the lender not to be at all,
but the lender wishes well always to the borrower, therefore it is a more
blessed thing to give than to receive; and although he says that the giver
should forget the things which he gave, and the receiver should always
remember them, Lib. 7. cap. 7.
yet he shows, that it is much more delightful to the mind to remember his
liberality in giving, than for him who has received to remember that he has
received.

But how can it be a more blessed thing to give than to receive, gives
depriveth himself of that which he gives, and he that receives has it? the
end of receiving is to have, and the end of giving is to want, and seeing all
things are measured by their end, it may seem that receiving is more blessed
than giving.

God who is most blessed gives, and yet loses nothing. Again, when men give,
give to deprive themselves of all things; neither is every sort of giving
better than receiving, for it is a better thing for a man to receive something
from his friends to maintain his family, How a man may receive things lawfully.
than for a another prodigal to wast all his own: but it is meant of this
honest liberality which is given with discretion, whereof the Apostle speaks,
2 Cor. 8.13.14. I mean not that other man be eased, and ye be burdened.
Thirdly, the thing which they give, they lose it not, for their honest
liberality is a thing permanent and increases their honor and liberality.

But if it be more blessed to give than to receive,

The rich man's riches make him not to be in a better case than the poor man,
Giving measured according to the will and intention of the giver.
for it is the heart that the Lord looks upon the giving and not the gift.
Christ preferred the widows mite to the great offerings of the Pharisees, and a
cup of cold water given to a Prophet in the name of a Prophet makes a blessed
giver. Christ at the latter day will say, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit
the kingdom prepared for you before the foundations of the world, for when I
was naked ye clothed me: this will be pronounced to more poor ones than to
rich ones, who had never scarce meat and cloth to themselves; the liberality
is accepted here according to the will and not according to the deed.

The conclusion of this is, Prove. 11.25.

CHAP. VI. Of Contentment.
Phil. 4.12. I know both how to abound, and how to suffer need.
THere is no condition or estate of man that can keep a mediocritie. A hard
thing to keep a mediocritie.
If we be full then we wax wanton, and if we be hungry then we grudge; Agur
knowing how dangerous both these estates were, prays the Lord to give him
neither poverty nor riches, but to feed him with food convenient, Riches more
dangerous than poverty.
Pro. 30.8. not to give him poverty, lest he steal and take the name of God in
vain; and not to give him riches, lest he deny him, and say, Who is the Lord.

The Israelites when they wanted flesh they murmured, and when they had quails
in abundance they surfetted; but Paul can be content in any of the conditions
alike. For a man first to be rich, and then to be poor, and then to be rich
again, he may the better learn to be content in any of the estates, Job his
contentment in his three est^^^s.
as Job who saw three changes, first he was rich, then he was poor, then he
was rich again: So if a man has been first poor, then rich, then poor
again, he will be more content in any estate. Zeno the Philosopher when he
had left a ship loaded with goods, and nothing being left to him, said, been
sane agis o fortuna, quod ad pallium illud obsoletum me revocas, and ad stoam
me redegisti, that is, that thou have brought me back again to a poor
estate, and made me to profess philosophy. But for a man that has been only
rich to fall to poverty, is a very hard case for it is to be deprived of the
comfortable means whereupon he should live, Riches are a man's civil life.
which in the Scriptures are called a man's life: and she spent all her living
upon the Physician, Luke 8.43. in the Greek it is, (...) her whole life,
because riches are the means to entertain a comfortable life. It is as hard a
thing for a poor man to lose his little stock, as for the rich man to lose
his great wealth, and Seneca said, Non minus molest^um est celvo quam comatis
evellere pilos, et aque pauperi as divi^^ tormentum; but it is a harder case
when a man becomes rich that has been very poor, how to carry himself
well.

Abundance brings forth more dangerous ^ruits than want does, Abundance more
dangerous than want.
for abundance makes a man to deny God, and poverty but makes him to steal.
Solomon for all his wisdom in his abundance forgot himself. In our natural
estate and complexion of body,

When the Devil tempted our Savior Christ, The order of the devils tentations.
Mat. 4. his first temptation was but the hungry temptation, to turn stones
into bread; but his last temptation was the full temptation, he would give him
all the world if he would fall down and worship him. By the order of the
Devils temptations we may know which is the greatest temptation, for the Devil
keeps his greatest temptations last. It is observed that these who live in
the north parts of the world if they go toward the south under the hot
climate, Paul could be content in any estate.
then he may live; but let Paul have abundance or scarcity he can use both: he
says of himself, a Cor. 6.10. as having nothing, and yet possessing all
things, that is, he was as well contented in poor estate, as in his great
plenty and riches; so if he had had abundance, he could have used it so
moderatly as if he had had nothing.

How could Paul know this,

There is a threefold knowledge of a thing, Cognitio (...) (...) (...)

the first (...) experimental, the second is, (...) gotten by discourse, and
the third is (...) gotten by revelation. Paul had gotten this not by discourse
or by revelation, but by experience of poverty and want, for he learned in his
poverty how he should use abundance.

To abound here is not meant of excess, What is meant by abundance here.
but he speaks here after the manner of the Hebrews who take to be filled
and to be drunk, for that which suffiseth without excess, So Genesis 43. and
Phil. 2.10. and the Hebrews observe that this word [Sacar] is one of these
words quae vergunt in extren^um, that is, (...) inebriari: non semperin vitio
ponitur ut Genesis 9.21. sed interdum declarat liberalem vmi usum qui modum non
excedit.
this moderate drinking is set down under the name of drunkenness, and if men
take not heed to themselves in this liberal use of drinking, they may be
soon overtaken and become drunk; but Paul by the grace of God would have kept
himself within the lists if he had been in this estate to have abundance. To
be content in any estate is a lossen hard to be learned.


He says I have learned, Phil. 4.12. in the Greek it is (...) sacris
initiatus sum, and he that was initiate this ways to the Lord, was called
(...) initiatus. we must be long time trained up and separated to Gods service,
if we would learn this lesson, and he was a perfect man that could live
patiently, in afflictions, in necessities, in distress, in stripes, in
tumults, in labors, in watchings and fastings, 2 Cor. 6.4. but it was more
that he could use abundance well. Benjamin was called ittar jad, because he
could use both hands, and they were a notable tribe; but this is a greater
skill, to use poverty well at the left hand, and riches at the right hand.

The heathen said, infoelicitatis genus esse, fuisse a liquando falicem and
tunc miserum, that it was a kind of unhappines to have been happy, and then to
become miserable: but Job said, the Lord has given and the Lord has taken,
and he sinned not with his mouth, Job 1 and 2.

Secondly, the heathen said, Lati^res videbis quos nunquam aspexit fortuna,
quam quos deferuit, that is, They look more cheerfully whom fortune has
never favored, than those whom fortune has left, but Paul is as glad in his
poverty as in abundance.

Solomon says that the prosperity of fools shall destroy them, Prove. 1.32.
But prosperity would never kill the wise Christian Paul.

CHAP. VII. De connexione virtutum.
2 Pet. 1.5. Add to your faith vortue, and to your virtue knowledge.
VIces are not coupled together, as fear and boldness, prodigality and
avarice; this far vice may be said to be coupled together, How vices may be
said to be coupled together.
first in the fountain, for as prudence is the beginning of all virtues, so is
imprudency of all vices; Secondly, every vice departs from virtue and
striveth against it. Every good gift comes down from the Father of lights,
Iam. 1.17. So every virtue fights against vice. Mortal and theological
virtues are not essentially coupled together.


Moral and theological virtues are not essentially coupled together, for
faith is not of the essence of moral virtues, neither are they defined by it:
for moral virtues are habitus electivi consistentes secundum rationem, but
faith is not ^uch, therefore faith and moral virtues are not essentially
joined together. Theological virtues are not essentially coupled together.


Secondly, theological virtues are nor essentially coupled together, far
less are moral and theological virtues; faith shall cease in the life to
come, but charity shall be perfited, 1 Cor. 12.13. Faith and works are not
essentially joined together, for they are in diverse categories.

Faith works by charity Gal. 5.6.

Faith works by charity, Forma assistent conslitueus.
How faith works by charity.
there is duplex forma asssistens vel constituens; Assistens, as the mariner to
the ship vel constituens as the soul to the body, faith is forma assistens
bonorum operum, non dans esse absolutum.

Although theological virtues be not essentially coupled with moral virtues
yet they are required for the perfection of a Christian man: Theological and
moral virtues are requisite for the perfection of a Christian.
one vertie (...) not from another virtue that it is a virtue, but to (...) up
one absolute perfection, it is necessary that they be all joined and agree in
one tertio. Plearing and seeing are not essentially joined together, yet to
make up a perfect man it is necessary that he both hear and see: So it is
requisite that a Christian man have both moral and theological virtues; and
although these theefogicall virtues immediately beget not moral virtues, yet
they comfort and streng then them, and so does the moral virtues the
theological. These who have their passions unsettled, it hinders them to call
upon God, 1 Pet. 3.7. Matthew. 7.24. So moral virtues require theological
virtues to strengthen them, for when a man's temperance fails his faith
corrects it, for faith purtfieth the heart.

What are we to judge of the heathens virtues which have no theological
virtues joined with them?

If we consider their works materially and not consider how they did them, The
works of the heathen are good materially.
they may be called good works and approved by God, and so it is said that
Amaziah did that which was good in the eyes of the Lord but not with a perfect
heart, 2 Chro. 25.2. Licet subjecto, objecto, and (...) malum.

But the Fathers called the works of the heathen but false and counterfit
virtues: Truth is opposite both to imperfection and falsehood.


The Fathers when they speak so are thus to be understood, they are not (...)
virtues, that is, they are not perfect virtues, but they are true virtues, that
is, they are not false; truth is opposite to imperfection and so likewise to
falsehood. Example, Arichalcum or Latten is a true metal and not counterfit,
but it is false gold, if ye will respect the perfection of it, for it
dis^^^eth much from gold; So the virtues of the heathen are true virtues, and
opposite to counterfeite virtues, but they are false, opposite to Christian
virtues.

Again, The manner and end of the he^thens works were not good.
if we will respect the manner how they did these things, and the end why they
did them, then they were not good. Alexander when he overcame Darius, he sent
back both his wives and his concubines untouched, this he did not for the
fear of God as Joseph did, but only to get praise of men. An infidel gives
alms to the poor to help the poor; although he does this for a particular
good end to help him in his need, yet he does it not for the glory of God
which should be the supreme and last end.

Whether were all virtues coupled together in Adam before his fall?

Thomas says that virtues were coupled in Adam after a diverse manner, Thom.
1.1. quest. 96.
for some virtues he had both the habit and the act of them, such as were
these which imported no imperfection; such as were justice, charity, holiness;
others again he had actually as they did import some imperfection, What
virtues were coupled together in Adam before his fall.
as faith and hope, for he had faith of the things which he had not yet seen,
and hope of these things which he had not as yet obtained; for he was not
created in such an estate to see the things which he was to believe, neither to
enjoy those things which he hoped for. Other virtues again he had the habit
of them but not the act, such as imported a greater imperfection and repugnant
to his first estate; such as were patience, mercy anger, these he had not
actually, but he was so created at the first: if injuries had been offered to
him he should have suffered them patiently and to have had pity on other men's
miseries.

A SHORT TREATISE OF THE NVMBERS Weights and Measures, used by the Hebrews,
With the valuation of them acording to the measures of the Greeks and Romans;
for the clearing of sundry places of Scripture in which these weights and
measures are set down by way of allusion.
EXERCITAT. Of Numbers Weights and Measures.
Levit. 19.35. Ye shall do no unrighteousness in judgment, in mete-yard, in
weight, or in measure.
THe Lord commanded his people to deal justly and uprightly every one with
another, The Lord would have his people deal ^^^ly one with another.
that they might be like himself who made all things, in number; weight and
measure, Wisd. 11. By these three the equity of all things is tried out, and
therefore the Lord sets down precepts to his people, and rules in the
Scripture, how they should number, weigh and measure all things, and every one
of these depend upon another; for he that numbereth rightly does
measur^^^ightly, weighs (...)

(...) by order of nature, for (...) things must go in the first place, by the
which measure is found out; and ^^umber and measure find out weight; therefore
we must explain the rules of numbers in the Scriptures, then the measure
arising from thence, and thirdly the weight, arising from them both.

The rules whore by every thing was numbered in the Scripture, The rules whereby
every thing is measured.
beginning from the greatest to the least, according to the Hebrews and Romans
were these.

Regula:
Hebraeor. Roman. Cubit. 1000. Milliare passus 1000 Stadium passus 125 (...)
Iugerum ped. 220 (...) Calamus faniculus cubit. 6 (...) Passus ped. 5 (...)
Spithama pes. 1. (...) Pes (...) 3 (...) Pal^^5. digit. 4 (...) Digitus gra^. 4
Gr^n^m

The highest rule of distance is a thousand cubits, and the least a finger
breadth amongst the Hebrews; and amongst the Romans the highest a mile, and
the least a grain, whereby not only the distance of ^^^ing is numbered; but
also their numbers. What the Hebrews mile was.


The Hebrew mile was a thousand (...), Number. 35.5. the bounds of the cities of
the Levites (...) mealured in the fourth verse, to be a thousand cubits, but in
the fifth verse to he two thousand cubits: the first is to be understood from
the City to the wall, but the second, How the either of the Levites are said
both to be a thousand and to be two thousand cubits from the wall.
from the wall southward to the wall opposite northward, and so the like
measure from the east to the west.

The same was the measure of the outmost part of the camp to the Tabernacle,
from the south part of the camp to the north part; and this was called a
Sabbath days journey, Act. 1.12. A Sabbath ^ayes ourney what.
so farr^ distant was mount Olivet from Jerusalem; but a Sabbath days journey
is as much space as they had to go from their houses to the Synagogues.

Again there was (...), the Latins called it Stadium a furlong, and eight of
these made a mile, as Luke 24.13. Emmaus was distant from Jerusalem si^^^
(...), that is, (...).
3 of a mile. So Ioh. 6.19. A fuelong is the eight part of a mile.
the Disciples rowed five and twenty or thirty furlongs, that is, 3 or 3 of a
mile. So Ioh. 11.18. Bethania was nigh toward Jerusalem fifteen, furlongs,
that is, 1 1/^ of a mile. The Apostle, 1 Corinthians 9.24. speaking of the
Christian race alludeth to this, when he says, They which run (...) (...)
race, run all; but one receives the victory. Thus was the new Jerusalem
measured, Reve. ^1.16. and he preasured the City with the re^d^twelve thousand
furlongs. And John speaking of the judgments of God which were to come upon
the earth, says, that the blood came out of the winepresse even unto the horse
bridles by the space of a thousand and six hundredth furlongs, (...) 14.20. So
that fur long is the eight part of a mile. (...) (...).


Thirdly, there was [Izamid] Ingerum, (...) Acre which was two hundred and
twenty foot always in breadth and length, Esa. 5.10. ten acres of vineyard
shall yield one bath; an acre is about the third part of a furlong.

Fourthly, (...) calamus.
was [kanna] calamus, a reed and funiculus a line, A twofold useof the reed.
and they had a twofold use, first they served for measuring of their ground,
and building; and secondly for demolishing of their building. For measuring of
the ground, Joshua divided the land of Canaan by a line: to this David alludeth
Psalm. 16.6. my line is fallen in pleasant places: Paul alludeth to this
measuring by the line, 2 Cor. 10.13. We will not beast of things without our
measure, but according to the measure of the line which God has distributed to
us, a measure to reach even unto you. They measured their buildings with the
^ine and re^^e.
So they measured their buildings with the reed and line, both the length and
breadth and height of them: The Angel measured the Temple to be reedified with
a reed, Ezekiel. 40. and with a reed the Angel measured the spiritual Temple,
Revel. 21.15. He that talked with me had a golden reed to measure the city and
the gates thereof and the wall thereof. The second use of the line.


The second use of the line was for demolishing and cutting away the
superfluous parts of the building, and it had a plummet or stone hanging down
from it: to this the Lord alludeth, King. 21.13. I will stretch over Jerusalem
the line of Samaria, and the plummet of the house of Achab. Esa. 34.11. he
shall stretch out upon it the line of confusion and the stones of emptiness.

The fourth was [amma] a cubit, (...) cubitus. A Cubit what.
which was a foot and an half; it was from the knop of the elbow to the point
of the middle finger. By this measure Noah measured the Arc, Moses the
Tabernacle, and Solomon the Temple: this cubi^ was the rule of their other
measures, and was laid up in the sanctuary to be kept as the shekell was, (...)
(...). A pal^^ or (...).
therefore it was called the holy cubit.

The first was [^ereth] spithama or great palm, which was half a c^bite or
twelve fingers broad. This measure is made mention of in these places, Exodus
28.17. the breastplate was a palm long and a palm broad. So 1 Samuel 17.4. his
stature was six cubits and a palm or a span. So Esa 40.12. who has mete out
the heaven with the span or palm? and Ezekiel 43.14. the ditch was a palm
without the borders of the Altar.

The sixth was a foot, (...) pes.
a measure amongst the Romans whereby they measured their paces, and it
contained three palms.

The seventh was [tephah] the lesser palm being four finger broad, Exodus
25.25. (...) palmus minor.
thou shall make unto the table a border of an handbreadth round about: David
alludeth to this measure, Psalm. 39.6. ecce palmorum deposuisti dies meos, thou
have measured out my days or thou have made my days an hand breadth, or four
fingers breadth in length. (...) digitus.


The eighth was [etzbang] a finger broad, this was proper to the Physicians
whereby they measured their herbs and roots: of this measure mention is made,
Iere. 52.21. and the thickness thereof was [arbang etzbagnoth] four fingers;
and the High priests under the Law measured the incense [kamiza] with his ring
finger, this was the least measure amongst the Hebrews and it contained four
grains.

Last was granum, a grain of barley,

Of Measures.
THe rules of numbers being found out, How to find out the measure.
it is easy to find out the measures, for take a cubit and make a measure
cubick or four square, always in length, breadth and depth; the measure of an
Epha for dry things, and bath for wetthings is found out; this by the Latins
was called quadrantal, and amphera, and by the Greeks (...), and by the Atticks
medimna. The greatest measure for dry and wet is called Corus or Chomer, and
the least is Cabus according to the Hebrews, Greeks and Romans.

Mensura Aridorum.
Heb. Graec. Romans (...) vel (...) Culleus. (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...)
amphopa. satum. modius.
(...) (...) (...) (...) Dimensum.

As the Talent was the greatest weight amongst the Hebrews, Corus or Chomer
the greatest measure amongst the Hebrews.
so was Corus or Chomer their greatest measure, and did contain as much of wet
or dry, as a Camel is able to bear at once, or an Ass at twice. Therefore
Chomer is called an heap, and an Ass is called Chamor from bearing of
burdens, and by the Greeks (...) or subingale, Mat. 21. To this Sampson
alludeth Iud. 15.16, (...)
With this Iawbone [habhamor chamor hbamorathaijne] of an Ass heaps upon
heaps: see how the heaps allude to the Ass. And Number. 11.32. (...)
They gathered ten homers of quails, but the Chaldie has it, ten heaps of
quails. So Exodus 18.14. (...) aterves acervos.
They gathered them together [coros etcoros] heaps upon heaps. By this we may
understand what great debt that was, which the Steward sought of his Lords
debtor, Luke 16.7. when he said he was oweing him 100 Coros of wheat; and what
a great gift that was, which Solomon gave Hiram 1 King. 5.11. Twentiethousand
coros of wheat, and twenty coros of Oil; and what a great house Solomon kept,
when he spent daily thirty Coros of fine flower, and three score coros of
meal 1 King. 4.22. Culleus, or equuleus.


The greatest measure amongst the Romans was Culleus or equuleus, made of
Lether, which behoved to be a very large measure, for they sowed in it a
murderer, with a Dog, a Cock, an Ape and a Viper, because they were most
like in nature to this monster, it was less then Coros or Chomer and bigger
then Letech. (...)


Letech is half a chomer, Hos. 3.2. I bought her to me for fifteen pecces of
Silver, and for one Chomer of Barley, and for a letech of Barley, that is, for
a chomer and a half of Barley. (...)


An Epha is the tenth part of a Chomer, The Epha, what.
equal with the bath of liquid measures, and the Egyptian Mede and Persian
Artaba, and equal with the Greek (...) or (...), as much as an English
Bushel; it contained three Sata, amphoras or Modios, English Pecks, and ten
gomers. Thus may be understood these places that have relation to the fine
flower offered in the Sacrifices Levit. 5.11. Thou shall offer a gomer the
tenth part of an Epha: Ezekiel. 45.13. The sixth part of an Epha, and Ezekiel. 45.24.
He shall prepare an Epha for a bullock and an Epha for a Ram. Cadus what.
1 Samuel 17.17. Take to thy Brothers an Epha of parched Corn. Cadus or hydria
is the same measure with the Epha, (...)
an hundredth Cadi of oil, Luke 16.6. So 1 King. 17.14. the [Cadus or] barrel
of meal shall not wast; so Iud. 7.16. he put in every man's hand [Cados] empty
pitchers. (...)


Seah or Satum was the third part of the Epha, Seah or Sutem. what.
it was all one with the Roman amphora or modius, and it contains six Cabs;
hence is that in the Parable understood, The King dome of heaven is like unto
leaven which a woman took and hid in three [Sata or] Peckes of meal, 13.33.
Alluding to Abraham who commanded Sara to prepare three peckes of meal for his
Ghuests, Genesis 18. So Ruth 2.17. (...)
and it was about three Sata of Barley.

Gomer is the tenth part of an Epha, A gomet what.
all one with the Greek (...): this was the measure which every one had for
his portion in the desert, Exodus 16.15. the Apostle 2 Cor. 8.14. alludeth to
this while as he exhorts the Corinthians to releeve the Church of Jerusalem
which was in great trouble in the persecution. (...)


Cab is all one with the Greek (...) or (...), Cab what.
or with the Roman dimensum or denarius, the sixth part of satum and thr
eighteenth part of an Epha: then it was but a small measure of doves guts which
the Samaritans got; for the feurth part of the kab of doves guts, was sold for
a shekle, that is, a Log, 2 King 6.15. this kab (...) or dimensum, was the
measure of a man's daily food: hence we may see it was but a little bread,
which the Lord commanded the Prophet Ezekiel to eat, for the space of three
hundredth and nintie days, The spar^ diet of Ezekiel.
Ezekiel. 4.10. And thy meat which thou shall eat, shall be by weight twenty
shekels a day, that is, but ten ounces of bread, and the sixth part of an Hin of
water by measure, this was less than the fourth part of a man's daily food; for
he got but as much bread every day, as six eggs would contain, and as much
water as twelve would contain. The measure of a man's daily food.


The fourth part of a Kab, (...) or dimensum, was the measure of a man's daily
food: to this measure Christ alludeth in the parable Luke 12. that the Steward
is set over the whole house, that he may give to every one (...), that is, the
measure for every day. And in the Lords prayer he teaches us to seek from our
heavenly father panem (...), supersubstantiall or daily bread. The Syrians call
this panem necessitatis: Mat. 6.11. calls it (...) this day, but Luke 11.3.
(...) indiem, every day, so much as may sustain this frail life. So Solomon
Prove. 30.8. desired to be fed with food convenient, that is, sufficient and
necessary: those who got all food alike were called (...) as getting all one
measure.

Of Liquid Measures.
THe greatest measure for wet among the Hebrews is called Corus, and the least
a Log: but among the Romans Amphor^ was the greatest, and the least cochlear.

Mensura Liquidorum.
Heb. Grac. Romans (...) (...) hydria. (...) (...) amphora. urna. (...) (...)
(...) congius. (...) sextariue as pondo libra hin solidus centum an^^s
haereditas, etc.
every one of these is divided in twelve parts.
deunx dextans dodrans bes septunx semis quincunx quadrans triens sextans
uncia.
(...) quartarius (...) (...) (...)
hemina. acetabalum. scutella. catinus. cochlear.


Bath was the tenth part of a chomer, Bath what.
all one with the Greek Hydria, and equal with the Epha, 2 King 12.11. They
gave the money according to number and measure: as they weighed the money to
see if it were weight; so they weighed the bath by weighing the corn and wine
to see if it was a true measure.

There were two sort of baths, Two sorts of baths.
as there was two sorts of Epha's and sheckles, the one was the double of the
other, 1 Kings 7.26. The brazen sea contained two thousand baths, this is the
great bath; but 2 Chronicles. 4. it contained three thousand baths; that is, of
lesser or half baths.

Vrna was the half of the Amphora, Vrna what.
which served for many uses, as the keeping of their oil, The use of the Vrna.
(...)
the Ashes of the dead, and the casting in of Lots, Hest. 3.7. for there a Lot
is deduced from the word pur which signifies to fall, so called because the
lot was cast in, and fell down in it: but Esaias. 63.3. it is called a barrel
or a Vessel, in which they did cast the wine to be troaden. The Hebrews put
bosom or lap in place of Vrna. Prove. 16. (...) in sinum.
the lot is cast [bachek] in the bosom or lap, but the whole disposing
thereof is from the Lord, that is, The manner how they cast their lots.
They cast in the names of men that are to be chosen, in urnam; but that the
lot falls upon this or that particular man, it comes from Gods immediate
providence, as in the election of Matthias, Act. 1.26. It is a comparison
borrowed from the bosom of a man which is the fore part of his body, and it is
transferred to signify the inward part, or hollownesse of any thing: wherefore
in this place, Prove. 16.33. it is not to be taken for the bosom of a man
properly, but for the inward part of the Vessel, (...) The Hin what.
and especially for urna wherein they did cast their lots.

Hin was half an Vrna, it contained twelve, L^gs or sextaries; half a hin was
six Loge, and the fourth part of a hin was three logs; for a hin was divided
into twelve parts, as Exodus 30.24. a hin of oil Olive was mixed with the
ingredients of the holy oil: Number. 15.9. the meat offering of a bullock
sacrificed should have half an hin of oil; and verse 6. a Ram the third
part of an hin, and verse 4. a Lamb the fourth part of an hin of oil: and
Ezekiel. 4.11. Thou shall drink the sixth part of an hin of water, that is, two
logs, or as much as twelve eggs will contain.

(...) amongst the Greeks and Congius amongst the Latins, (...).
were the half of the hin.

Log was the twelfth part of a hin, (...) Log what.
and contained so much as six eggs do contain, it was equal with the Roman
Sextarie, The Log divided into twelve parts.
Levit. 14.12. And the Priest shall take a he lamb and the Log of oil: this
Log was also divided in twelve parts, the half whereof was called by the
Greeks (...) and (...), and by the Latins Scutella and hemina. This half Log
contained six cyathus, so that every cyathus was half an egg or an ounce;
and the Latins gave every one of them a several name beginning at the lowest,
and going upward thus: Cyathus or vncia, sextans, quadrans, triens, hence Psalm.
75.9. a triental cup, quincunx, semis septunx, bes, dodrans, dextans, deunx
Lob or sextarius. So that amongst the Romans who borrowed it from the Grecians,
Amongst the ^omans every whole thing was divided into twelve parts.
and they from the Hebrews, every whole thing was divided in twelve parts, as
centesima usura was the twelfth part of a hundredth. As was divided in twelve
ounces, as here is ex ass is to be heir of all, and here is, (...) uncia is to
be heir of the twelfth pare. K. Da. Kimchi.


Again the Hebrews divided a Log in four rebbiguith or quartarius, every one
of which contained in measure an egg and a half 2 King. 6.25. the half of
quartarius was acetabulum, so called from acerra the hollow where the thigh
bone turns, How the Hebrews divided the Log. (...)
and the Hebrews call it caph, hence it is transferred to signify a salser.
Number. 7.14. it is called a spoone, the Princes dedicate twelve spoones of gold,
every one weighed ten shekels of gold, that is five ounces the Greeks called
it (...) or (...), and the Latins acetabulum scu^^ssa, catin^^, Mat, 2^.23. he
that dippeth with me [in catino or (...) ] in the dish or salser.

The Romans divided their ounce thus, How the Roman^^ d^^ded their ounce.
the half of it they call duella, the half of duella is Sin^^^^, the half of
this sextula; the half of sextula, drac^^^^, the half of this scrupul^^, the
half of scrupul^^ abolus, the half of this siligna or ceration, and the half
of Ceration lens, spelta or lupina; and this is the smallest measure that can
be.

Of Weights.
From number and measure arises weight, Weight arises from number and measure.
for the two first being found out, to wit number and measure, the third is
easily sound out. The greatest weight is a talent, and the least is minuta or
lepta. The (...) weight (...) ^^brewes.
The weights according to the Hebrews, Greeks and Romans, are these,
descending from the greatest to the least.

Pondus.
Heb. Grac. Romans (...) (...) Libra. (...) (...) (...)
Semuncia. (...) (...) Denarius. Numisina.
(...) (...) (...)
(...) Nauta. (...) (...) (...) Areola. Quadram.
(...) Minuta.

The Talent by the Hebrews is called Cicar. The talent what.
It was the greatest weight amongst them, consisting of three thousand sh^kels,
as may be gathered out of Exodus 38.24.25.26.27. (...) it is said that 6035
(...) men did pay every one of them half a sh^kell, The talent confested of
3000 sliekels
the sum came to 100 talents and 1775 shekels. The 600000 thousand men came
to 100 talents, and the 3550 men came to 1775 shekels, two men paying one
shekell, therefore there is a double proportion betwixt the number of men and
the shekels. Now if 600000 men pay 100 talents, then six thousand men pay one
talent, every one paying half a sh^kell; What they weighted with the talent.
therefore a talent contains 3000 shekels. By the talent gold, silver, brass
and iron were weighed, Exodus 38.29. 1 Chronicles. 29.7. In the Scriptures there were
not two sorts of talents, for the Lord discharged diverse weights, Lev. 19. So
may it be said of the Mina, shekell, Epha, (...); the talent was of a great
weight because one man could not carry two of them, 2 King. 5.23.

But it may seem that there were two sorts of talents, The weight of the
crown of Milcom.
for it is said 2 King. 12.30. and David took their kings crown from off his
head (the weight thereof was a talent of gold, with the precious stones) and it
was set on David's head. Who can bear upon his head a crown of 125 pound
weight, which a man will scarcely lift off the ground, much less carry it upon
his head, how could the King of Ammon carry it on his head, and David after him?

1 Chro. 20.2. How David could bear the crown of Milcom.
David took the crown of Milchom from off his head, for this was an idol
amongst them, 1 King. 11.7. which was a great brazen statue, having upon the
head of it a crown which weighed a talent of gold; but how could this be put
upon David's head? That place of the Chronicles answers to this, when it
faith, that David set it is upon his head, first he brake this crown, purged
it by the fire, and changed it into another form, neither did he put all the
weight of the talent into it, but that which was competent.

Mina was the hundredth part of the talent, (...)
and contained sixty shekels.

But it may seem that Mina was a talent, Luke 19.13. Matthew. 25.15. he gave so
many talents to his servants, and both the Evangelists speak of one matter.

By talent there is not meant properly a talent, Mina and the talent were not
one.
but a great sum; and by the scope of the parable only this much is
intended, that these who had received greatest gifts made greatest gain, and
more who had received lesser gifts made lesser gain, and they when had received
least gifts made no gain. If the parable were understood according to the
letter, What the min^ is which is made (...) Ezek^el.
a man could not bind his talent in his napkin, being such a great sum.

The Mind made mention of Ezekiel. 45.12. is sixty shekels; the mina amongst the
nations, some were sixty drachmas, others eighty, others an hundredth, that is,
fifteen shekels: but the Lord says, twenty shekels, five and twenty she^els,
fifteen shekels shall be your Manch. All these diverse sorts of shekels the
Lord forbids, and for them all he will have them to keep a min^ of sixty
shekels, Shekel in the original signifies to weigh, Job. 6.2. (...) The money
was not numbered but weighed at first.
for at the first the money was not numbered but weighed: this the Greeks
called (...), and it weighed four Atticke drachmas: the Persians and
Macedonians used the same sort of money, therefore they are called Philippici
Alexandrini or Dariet. 1 Samuel 9.8. Behold now in my hand is the fourth part of
a shekle of silver; the Sevenly translate it the fourth part of a (...). So 2
King. 7.1. The ^orrow a measure of meal shall be for a shekell, or a (...) So
Matthew. 17.24. take out of the (...), and give it for, ^ee and thee, that is, a
shek^ll. Two sorts of shekels.


There were two sorts of shekels, ponderal^^ and numeralis. The shekell was
weighed at the first, Josh. 7.20. the wedge of gold was fifty shekels, that is,
it was of weight fifty shekels.

The shekell was also stamped and numbered, The shekell stamped and numbered.
it was stamped first with the print of a lamb, and this was called keshita,
and after when the tabernacle was erected it had Aarons rod upon the one side,
and the pot with Manna upon the other side.

When silver is alone we must understand shekels, When silver is set down
alone then shekell is to be understood.
as Mat. 26 15. He was sold for thirty pieces of silver, that is, for thirty
shekels. So Hos. 3.2. I bought for her fifteen pieces of silver, that is, for
fifteen shekels of silver. And sometimes the number and the matter are set
down, but not the shekell, as Genesis 20.16. Behold I have given thy brother a
thousand pieces of silver, that is, shekels of silver.

The half shekell was called bekaugh shekel from [bakaugh] findere, (...)
because it cut the half shekel in two. Every one in Israel paid this half
shekell to the Lord both rich and poor equally when they went up to Jerusalem,
Why every one in Israel paid the half shekell.
because all equally did hold their life of God. Secondly, because all were
redeemed a like by Christ. Thirdly, because the Lord accepts of us, half
payment for the whole; and although our service be very defective, yet he
gives us the whole shekell. Matthew. 20. he gave to them who came at the sixth
hour and at the ninth hour both a penny alike. This half shekell was the
tribute which the Pharisees sought of Christ Matthew. 17.23. although Christ was
free from tribute because he was the Kings son, yet to avoid scandal he
commanded Peter, go to the sea and cast in his angle and he should pull out a
fish with astater in his mouth, that is, a shekell, which was to be paid for
them every one half a shekell; this half shekell was called (...) or
denarius, and it had the superscription of Caesar upon it, Matthew. 17.

There is mention made of the third part of the shekell, Nehe. 10.38. which is
three drachmas: The third part of the shekell was three drachmas.
we charged our selves with the third part of a shekell. (...)


The fourth part of a shekell was called zuzim, and by the Greeks (...); and
Nehe. 7.71. darkemonim, (...)
a Chalde name from which the Greeks borrow their (...): Luke 15.9. I have
found my dram.

A shekell had twenty Gerahs in it, (...)
as (...) was twenty oboli, and every (...) was five oboli: (...) was that
naula which they put in the mouth of the dead, that they might have hasty
passage over Lethe by Acheron.

Obol^^ was divided in six areola or (...): How Obolus was divided.
this fourth was called quadrans, and it was divided in seven minuta or (...),
which was the least of all their stamped money. This was the widows offering,
Mark. 12.4. Luke 21.1. she cast in two mites, which is a quadrant or the fourth
part of areola or the English farthing.

FINIS.

