THE Late Commotion of certain Papists in Herefordshire.

Occasioned by the death of one Alice Wellington, a Recusant, who was buried
after the Popish manner, in the Town of Allens-Moore, near Hereford, upon
Tuesday in Whitsun week last past.

1605.

With other excellent matter thereby occasioned.

Truly set forth.

AVT NVNC AVT NVNQVAM
printer's or publisher's device

Imprinted at London by S. S. for I. Chorlton, and F. Burton.

1605.

To the Reader.
GEntle Reader, to satisfy thy mind, and to stop the mouths of the multitude,
who listening after every idle report, are easily induced to believe,
whatsoever be by uncertain fame bruted abroad, I have caused these several
Letters, with a true discourse therein contained, of the beginning and
proceedings in these late Popish actions, to be diuulged: and I have the rather
been thereunto induced, because I know certainly, that not a few, for their
better satisfaction, are very desirous to understand the truth thereof.

Furthermore, in perusal hereof, the vulgar people, and such as are wavering
in Religion, by reading his Majesty's protestation, for the mayntenance of
Religion, herein contained, and publicly uttered in the Star Chamber, by the
mouth of the L. Chauncellor of England, upon Thursday the xx. of June last
past, shall hereby be encouraged to go on in the Christian profession of the
Gospel, so long time by Gods mercies, and the constancy of religious Princes
mayntayned amongst us, and not be discouraged by any idle persuasions, which
seditious and treacherous Papists, who have vowed themselves unto the service of
the Pope, shall closely and vndermyningly (thereby seeking to alienate the
hearts of his faithful subjects, from their dutiful allegiance)* buzze into
their ears. So that if any Papist hereafter should seek to persuade any of
his Majesty's subjects, that the times are like to alter, and that a Toleration
should be granted, (thereby wronging his Majesty exceedingly, who is so fully
settled in the Truth) they may answer them, Avoid, false and lying Varlets,
your words are vain, and your hopes are more vain; see here his Majesty's
protestation to the contrary.

Neither can I here omit to give notice unto the world, of that excellent
speech, which mine own ears heard uttered upon Monday the fifth of August
last past, at Paul's Cross, by the right Reverend Father in God, the Lord
Bishop of London, in his Sermon there; because it serves for a strengthening
and confirmation of that, which in the ensuing Letter you shall read. His words
tended briefly to this effect:

That his Majesty had made a protestation before God and his Angels, that he
was so constant for the maintenance of the Religion publicly in England
professed, as that he would spend his own dearest blood in the defense
thereof, rather then the Truth should be ouerthrown: and that if he had ten
times as many more kingdoms as he has, he would dispend them all for the
safety and protection thereof: and likewise, that if he had any children that
should out-liue him, if they should maintain or vp-hold any other Religion, he
desired of God, that he might see them brought to their graves before him,
that their shame might be buried in his life time, never to be spoken of in
future ages.

Oh worthy speeches, and worthy so noble and religious a King! Shall we
therefore that are his subjects, be discouraged, having so courageous a King?
No, God forbid.

Thus wishing thee to judge none otherwise hereof, then as proceeding from one,
that tendreth the good of his Prince and country, and is willing to satisfy all
such, as desire to be informed in the truth hereof, I rest a wel-willer to all
that mean well.

Tho. Hamond.

A Letter from a Gentleman in London, to his friend in Hereford.
To his most affected and kind friend, Mr. E. R. in Hereford.
KInd Mr. E. R. the former proofs that I have already had of your love to
meward, causes me again to presume upon your further courtesies. The matter is
thus: There has been lately noysed abroad very commonly in London, a strange
report, concerning the proceedings of some Papists in your parts, and as fame
goes, not far from you: much have I heard thereof, and that diversely:
whereupon being desirous to be satisfied with a certain truth of that matter,
(because my mind cannot rest contented with an uncertain Relation thereof) I
repaired upon Thursday last, being Star Chamber day, unto Westminster, there
expecting to hear something concerning those causes: neither was I altogether
deceived in my expectation, although not fully satisfied in any particulars of
this matter, how the manner thereof was: for being there, upon the same day,
after that the Lords were set, and that one or two matters, concerning some
former misorders in those parts formerly committed, had been heard, the right
Honorable, the Lord high Chancellor of England, as from his Majesty's own
mouth, began a most excellent speech, and delivered the matter after such an
inexpressible manner, as it is impossible for me to come near unto, either the
words, or perfect substance thereof, it was so pithy, so excellent, and so
admirably couched together: and yet acknowledgeing that he himself was unable
to declare it unto them in such manner, as his Majesty had delivered it unto him.

But I will only herein relate unto you, as near as I can remember, such
things as were uttered by his Lordship, concerning these present matters: for
his Lordship, after that he had spoken somewhat largely, concerning some other
points, said, That there had now happened a present occasion (meaning this late
Commotion in your parts) which did administer much matter worthy of
consideration.

Then he began to show how certainly his Majesty was informed, That the number
of Papists in England was mightily increased, since his Majesty's coming, and
that Popish Priests and Jesuits (factors for the Pope) lay lurking in many
corners of this land, to seduce his Majesty's subjects from their due and
lawful allegiance unto their rightful Prince, to the acknowledgement of a
foreign power and authority, namely, the Pope of Rome.

Then also, that his Majesty maruayled, how it happened, that Papists could so
increase daily, or Priests and Jesuits be intertayned within his Kingdoms,
considering, that his Laws are in force against them.

And thereupon entering into a consideration of the estate of this Land, and
seeking by all means possible to find where the fault might be; after the
examination of diverse supposed causes, he alleged, that none was greater then
this, viz. That Justices are too slack and negligent in their places; it being
a thing impossible, that Priests and Jesuits should swarm so thick as they
do in any parts of England, or Wales, unless Justices of Peace in those
parts where they frequented, were careless of their place and office.

Hereupon also he said, that his Majesty was informed, That many, who were in
place of Justice, to punish others, either were themselves so affected, or
atleast wise, for special respects, favored them that were.

Then spoke he unto the Judges, and such as were to go their Circuits,
remembering unto them, how careful his Majesty had been for the good and happy
government of these his Kingdoms; how studious for the mayntenance of the true
Religion, professed and maintained by the Church of England; how often his
Majesty had held consultation with his Council and Clergy, for the sure
establishment of matters in Religion; and how loath to alter, change, or
disanull any of the Laws of England: because he found, that there was no more
perfect form of government in the world, nor any Church that came so near unto
the very substance of the truth in every point, as the Church of England does:
and because that Religion is the surest bond to knit men's hearts in unity, he
recited how great pains, and what often cares his Majesty had taken for a
perfect unity in Religion, and divine worship, that not every one should be at
liberty to serve God after his own fashion, but all should join in one true
worship of God; which, if ever any Nation in the world had, we now have.

Further also, giving unto the Judges a straight charge, that in their Circuits
they should have an especial care to inquire for all such as were Priests,
Jesuits, or Recusants, and to take such order, that they might be punished;
and more especially, for inquiry of all such Justices of peace, as were either,
themselves, their wives, children, or servants, Papists; or known themselves
to be favorers of Papists.

Hereupon further alleging, that there were some Justices, who although they
themselves would not be seen to give any entertaynement or countenance unto
Priests, Jesuits, or Recusants, yet such should find welcome at their Wives
hands.

And therefore his Maiestyes pleasure was, That all such Justices, as can be
known to be as aforesaid, should have their names sent up, that they may be
removed out of the Commission for the Peace, as being unfit members to hold
such places.

And as this his Maiestyes charge extended unto the punishment of such, as were
obstinate Papists: so, more especially, for the punishment of such, as were
become Papists since his Majesty's coming: and yet a more strict charge for
those parts about you, because they were always most infestious and
troublesome.

Then he put the Judges in mind, how long a time they now had for search into
these matters, and what directions they had received for their proceedings,
assuring them, that as his Majesty had signified unto them before their going,
what course they should observe: so at their returns, he would call them unto
an account, what they had performed therein.

And amongst many other matters of special moment, he entered into a deep
consideration of this Land, the estate thereof how blessed it was, how much
bounden unto GODS Almighty goodness, for that he has sent us so gracious a
King: A King, that did so constantly profess CHRIST'S true Religion
established in the Church of England: a King, by whose happy command we were
free from many cares, many dangers, many perils.

Moreover also, he showed, that Papists in diverse places, (as his Majesty was
certaynely informed) did brag in words, That they were in a good hope of a
Toleration: hereunto adding a speech of his Maiestyes, concerning the folly of
Papists, how they were besotted, yea; and more then bewitched, to suppose any
such matter, wondering, whereupon they should build their false hopes; adding
thereunto also, that his Majesty was so surely persuaded of the truth of his
Religion, so firmly grounded upon the cercertainty thereof, and so constantly
bent for the mayntenance thereof, as that he yowed unto his Privy Council,
that if he did know that any of his children after him (which I hope never will
be) would go back from the Religion which he now professed, and maintain
any other, that upon that child he would lay his curse.

These and many other matters (which not a little ioyed me to understand, how
constant his Majesty is for the mayntenance of the Gospel) I heard with mine
own ears, whereof I thought it not amiss to certify you: but because I
cannot here know of the particular matters, and manner how those things fell out
in your parts, I make bold to request your pains, in learning, as near as you
can, the truth thereof, and to let me understand thereof by your Letters.
London, the 22. of June. 1605.

Your friend assured, T. H.

An Answer unto the former Letter.
To his most approved good friend, Mr. T. H. in London.
BEcause Reports are many and variable, and the world is given to inquire after
novelties, according as the saying is, Est natura hominum nouitatis auida; and
also, because the further a tale goes, the more it is made: for, Fama crescit
eundo: and lastly, because by your Letters, you seem to be so importunate, to
know the truth in these late stirs and Commotions in our parts. I have
(though unwillingly, but only for your sake, unto whom I acknowledge my self
many ways beholding, and whose request in any matter lawful, is unto me a
strong command) taken some pains in collecting the truth thereof, as near
as I could, without putting in of any thing, unless it were credibly reported
to be true, or were matters of coherence with these actions.

Accept therefore these few lines ensuing, as a further pledge of my unfeigned
love unto your Worship; and as occasion shallserue, if any other matters
worthy the writing do happen, I will not fail to perform whatsoever
belongs unto a trusty friend, and one that wishes all happiness and
prosperity unto your fortunes.

Neither may I here omit to render you most kind thanks, for your pains
taking, in writing so largely unto me in your letter as you have done.

And besides that, the substance of your Letter is so welcome unto me (because
I know, that had it not been true, you would not have written it) as that it
causes my heart to leap for joy within me, as often as I remember, how
constantly his Majesty has auowed to maintain and uphold the truth of the
Gospel, which is now in England publicly preached.

Neither does the remembrance thereof seldom times with joy affect me: for so
many causes do daily administer matter, to bring me into the remembrance
thereof, as that I am always replenished therewith; especially, when I
bethink me of Papists, how vain their hopes are, and how like unto smoke
they vanish away.

God omnipotent, of his infinite mercy and goodness bless us all, and make us
here faithful servants unto himself, and the King, that after our service
here on earth, we may all rest with Christ Jesus in the kingdom of heaven.
Hereford, the nine and twentyeth of June. 1605.

Yours to command, E. R.

A true Relation of the late Commotion in Herefordshire.
THere is a little Uillage in Herefordshire, called by the name of Allens
Moore, distant from the City of Hereford, two little miles. In this Parish (as
also in many other thereabouts) the Priests of Rome have so bestirred
themselves, that with their doctrine, they have so poisoned and made many
drunk, with the dregs of the fornication of the Whore of Rome, as that they
are become obstinate Recusants, to repair to the Church, and to participate of
our Churches Sacraments, the true and undoubted Pledges of our salvation.

And amongst the rest, without any further digression (to come to our present
purpose) one Alice Wellington, wife of Thomas Wellington, of Allens-Moore, in
the aforesaid County, Peoman, being but a simple woman, and void of any true
grounds of Learning or Divinity; but only being seduced by the witcheries of
Baals Priests, continued so obstinate in her erroneous perverseness, that she,
contrary unto his Majesty's Laws, would by no means nor persuasions, be
induced to repair unto the Church, according to his Majesty's Laws in that
case provided. Whereupon, by the censure of the Church, she rested
excommunicate.

It pleased GOD, to visit this Alice Wellington with sickness, and to lay his
hand so heavy upon her, that she dyed excommunicate, not having submitted her
self unto our Church.

Whereupon, the Uicar of the Parish being asked whether he would bury her? He
the said Uicar (knowing that the Law would not admit those to be buried,
according to the order of our Church, being dead, who living, refuse to submit
themselves thereunto) refused the performance thereof, alleging; that he
should incur the penalty and danger of the Law, if he should yield
thereunto.

Hereupon, many Papists being advertised of her death; and drawing themselves
together, they so determined, that among themselves, come what come would
thereof, it should be performed after their manner.

Whereupon it was agreed, that upon the Tuesday following, being Tuesday in
Whitsun week in the morning, it should be done.

Understand by the way, that the Uicars house being close to the Churchyard,
as he lay in his bed, about six of the clock in the morning, some hour and
half after Sun rising, he heard the sound of a little Bell; and being
unacquainted with such a sound, and wondering what it might be, he started up,
and looked out at the wyndow, from whence he espied (as he gessed) some forty
or fifty persons accompanying a Coarse round about the Church, one of which
company had a Saints-bell, another bare a Cross, fastened (as it seemed unto
him) upon the end of a staff; before the coarse some carried Tapers burning,
and other such trumperies: The rest of them being weaponed, some with Bills,
some Staves, some Swords, and other weapons; some of which men the Uicar
himself knew, and some he knew not.

Hereupon, the Uicar (as soon as he could) arrayed himself: but before he
was dressed and come unto them, the body was laid into the ground, and their
Ceremonies welneere ended. Whereupon, the Uicar drawing near, spoke unto them,
blaming them for their boldness. But they little regarding his words, gave him
many reuiling terms, and bade him get him gone, if he tendered his own life,
and not to disturb them, nor approach near them.

The Uicar being but himself alone, and seeing so many weaponed in offensive
manner, thought it bootles to say any more, or to make resistance against so
rude a company, and thereupon returned into his house.

After that the company was dissolved, the Uicar gave the right Reverend Father
in God, the Lord Bishop of Hereford, then lying at the Palace in Hereford, to
understand thereof, both the manner how, the time when, and the names of some
persons, whom he had seen and known in the said Action.

Whereupon, his Lordship having an especial care, for the suppressing of such
tumults and disorders, and also knowing how much hurt the wincking thereat
might easily procure; and withal, being zealously bent against their profane
customs, directed a Warrant unto the high Constable of that Hundred, George
Wenlond, for the speedy search for, and apprehension of such as were known to
be Actors therein.

The high Constable having received the Warrant, with other petty Constables,
speedily repaired unto the shop of one James Cowle, a Weauer of Hungerstone,
near thereunto adjoining, where the said James Cowle was, and also one
Chadnor, a Weauer like wise, who wrought in another room adjoining, both of
them being in the Warrant, the said high Constable, George Wenlond, caused them
both to be apprehended, by virtue of the said Warrant.

But they began to strive and struggle, and would not go with them,
according to the purport of the Warrant: In which contention, the said Chadnor
escaping, some pursued him, the rest remained with James Cowle: but Cowle,
contrary to the Kings Peace, desperately struck at a Gentleman, named Master
William Gough, with a short knife, which Weauers commonly use to cut off their
threeds, and there with grievously wounded the said Master William Gough upon
the chynne. At which time also, one William Rogers, one of the Constables, was
hurt in several places upon the hand.

It happened, that as they were thus contending, one Leonard Marsh, of Kynson,
who had likewise been in the former Action, and was also one of the men named
in the Warrant, came into the said Shop, where the same James Cowle was.

Whereupon the said Leonard Marsh was likewise apprehended; and in their
striving, the Constable being hurt, and Master Gough likewise, the said James
Cowle escaped also; in so much that none, save only the aforesaid Leonard
Marsh, remained in their power.

The rest having escaped, and wilfully endangered themselves, by committing
such vile misdemeanors against his Majesty's sworn Officers, the high
Constable took the said Leonard Marsh with him toward Hereford; and by the way
as he passed, he charged diverse such as he met with, in his Majesty's name, to
be assistant unto him, in conducting the Prisoner unto Hereford: in so much,
that he had to his aid some fifteen or sixteen men, every one taking with
him such weapons as they could come presently by, and as the haste required;
whereby they were but very meanly and slenderly weaponed.

In this manner marching toward Hereford City, suite was made unto the high
Constable, by a brother of the said Leonard Marsh, that he would stay his
course with the Prisoner, until such time, as Master William Morgan of Treble
Park had spoken with him.

But the high Constable following the words of his Warrant, advisedly replied,
That he might not stay his course; for his Warrant was to the contrary.

Whereupon, William Marsh, brother unto the said Leonard Marsh, called unto his
brother, and bade him not to go with them.

Thereupon, the said Leonard began to draw backwards; but being himself alone,
he was by strength forced forward softly.

Thus, having gone on softly some two miles, when as they came within a quarter
of a mile of Hereford City, suddenly they espied themselves beset on every side
the way with men (in number as they gessed, some forty or fifty) weaponed, some
having Bows and Arrows, some Bills, some Long-staues and Pikes, some Swords;
And so enclosing the high Constable, and his company, they demanded, whither
he conuayed the Prisoner? He answered, That his Warrant was to carry him to
Hereford. The^ they demanded, For what purpose? He answered, That when he came
there, they should know. At which words, one of them set a Iauelin to his
breast, and charged him, unless he meant to see his own guts, to let go the
Prisoner.

The high Constable perceyning in what danger he was; and also knowing how far
too weak his company was to make resistance, being (as before is said) but
some fifteen or sixteen persons, and those also, (as not mistrusting so bold
a rescue) but very meanly weaponed; yea, welneere as good as altogether
without weapons, after he had reasoned with those unreasonable persons, and
showed them the danger that they had thrust themselves into, by making so
rebellious a rescue (seeing no means of resistance, let go the Prisoner, who
as soon as he was loose, had a Byll presently by some of the company delivered
unto him: and then in most bold and presumptuous manner began to threaten
diverse of those, that were with the high Constable to aid him.

Presently, as soon as the said Leonard Marsh was rescued, came the aforesaid
Master William Morgan of Treble Park (who is now with some others sent up to
London) unto the high Constable: unto whom the high Constable spoke some
words, as blaming him for the rescue, and that he should be the cause thereof,
and that his coming in afterward, was but only to color the matter. All
which, the said Master Morgan denied, excusing himself, that he came only to
speak a word or two with him, not knowing any thing at all of the rescue.

The Prisoner being thus rescued, the high Constable gave present notice
thereof unto the Bishop of Hereford: whereupon, the Privy Council was
presently with all speed informed thereof: and suddenly were sent for up to
London, some such as were known, to be chief Actors therein.

Upon which business, Sir Herbert Croft was dispatched into the country. And
after inquiry made, certain Gentlemen were sent up to London, to answer the
matter.

Upon which occasion, diverse Justices in this County have been since that time
put out of the Commission of the Peace, as known to be too much leaving unto
the Popish faction.

Thus have I briefly related unto you, the true manner of the Papists
proceedings in these late Actions: if any other matter of moment ensue
hereupon, I will not fail (God willing) but certify you thereof by my Letters.
Hereford, the nine and twentieth of June. 1605.

Yours (as before) to command, E. R.

The Copy of a second Letter from Hereford, concerning some further
proceedings in the former Actions.
ALL promises, that with honesty may be kept amongst men, ought to be
observed, and especially amongst those that by love and inward affection are so
nearly obliged each to other, as we both are.

I remember well, that by my last Letter, I bound my self unto your service,
if any material accident worthy the observation, concerning the late broils
in our parts, should happen; and although I must needs confess, that my style
in penning, be very blunt and harsh, yet know I this also, that the matter and
substance of my lines are true. which may in some sort counteruaile the glosing
eloquence of some Rhetoricians, who study more for sine and fyled phrases, then
for the truth of matter: for unless I be much deceived, the thing that you
most desired, was the truth, and that also was the end, whereunto my thoughts
tended, and principally aimed at: and therefore, I hope, that you will rather
accept of nudam veritatem, without eloquence, then of eloquence without the
truth.

Within few days after that I had written my last Letter (dated as I
remember, the nine and twentyeth day of June) unto your worship, the Right
Honorable, the Earl of Worcester, came down unto his Place of Ragland in
Munmouthshire, with full authority from his Majesty, of present Justice to be
executed upon such as had been Actors in these causes.

Now, albeit that the matters were far gone, and diverse misorders committed,
yet seeing it booted not to withstand any further, having waded too far
already, most of the principal of them came in, and yielded themselves unto
his Lordship.

Whereupon, such as his Lordship in his wisdom thought fit to be proceeded
with somewhat sharply, after examination, he caused to be committed to prison,
until his Majesty's further pleasure be known, where diverse of them yet
remain: with others, who were less obstinate, and only carried away by false
persuasions of Popish Factors, being of themselves inclinable to accord unto
the truth, if their consciences might be thereunto persuaded. His Lordship
took a more mild course, seeking to win them unto the truth, by reasons
grounded upon Gods Word, which is the only Rock, whereupon the conscience
must build. And so effectually has his Honor dealt in this case with many of
them, as that from stiff Recusants, they are converted, and become new
Scholars in Christes*Schoole, and I trust will proceed rightly, and in a
rightful course hereafter.

I could name diverse of good account, who have reconciled themselves unto our
Church, by his Lordships honorable proceedings with them, and do now dutifully
repair unto the Church.

What will become of those that are yet Prisoners, I know not, as yet they
only remain in durance, until his Maiestyes pleasure be known.

The Country is now quieted (God be thanked) and all things, by his Lordships
honorable carriage, well settled. God grant the continuance thereof.

Thus, having performed my promise in what I know, I rest, as ever before, your
friend in all obsequiousnes,

E. R.
Hereford, the third of August. 1605.
FINIS.
A necessary and godly Prayer.
O Most merciful Lord God, and loving Father, we thy children and sheep of thy
pasture, humbly prostrating our selves at the foot of thy divine Majesty, do
here confess, that we are not worthy of the least of those innumerable
benefits, which thou in mercy, for thy Son Christ Jesus sake have bestowed
upon us; neither are we worthy to be called thy children, but only in and
through him, in whom thou art well pleased: for we have disobeyed thy will,
broken thy Laws, contemned thy Precepts, and cast thy Commandments behind
us: if thou should call us to account for our lives misspent, for our deeds
misdone, and for our maniford tra^sgressions which we have committed, we are not
able to answer thee one for a thousand, it is impossible that we should stand
in thy sight: Nay, Lord, if thou should but mark what is done amiss, why
then, who were able to abide it?

We were not, and thou of thy goodness made us to be; and when we were, we
fell away from thee, and forsook thee: But thou (who before we were, causedst
our being) when we were, would not* suffer us to be lost for ever; but
did send thy Son Christ Jesus to redeem our souls out of the hands of
Satan, who otherwise would have seyzed upon us, and greedily have devoured us.

Not long since, O Lord, we sat in darkness, and in the shadow of death; we
slept in ignorance, not knowing the precious sweetness of thy holy Word; we
lived in blindness, not knowing whither we went, but as we were led; and
withal, our leaders were blind, in so much, that the blind leading the blind,
(had not thou sent us a guide to conduct us) we had both fallen into the
ditch.

Thy holy word, O Lord, is a Lanthorn unto our feet, and a light unto our
paths: thy holy Spirit is the guide to lead us unto the light; and the light,
which is thy holy word, is that which leads us unto salvation. O Lord, take
not this light from us, but let it ever shine as bright unto us, as the Sun at
noone day. And for this cause, O Lord, we render unto thee most humble and
hearty thanks, for the long, happy, glorious, and prosperous reign of our late
dread Sovereign, Queen Elizabeth, under whose blessed and happy government so
many years together, we inioyed the light of thy holy word, and by whose
constancy the truth thereof was ever since the beginning of her Reign,
mightily maintained. We thank thee, O Lord, for all those blessings, that by
and through her thou did confer upon us thy unworthy children: as namely,
the practice and profession of thy holy word: The quiet possessing of that we
had, (every man under his own Vine, peaceably eating the labor of his own
hands:) The great number of many paynefull, learned, and faithful Preachers,
which under her government thou did send into thy Vineyard: The grave,
wise, and honorable Counselors, that by thy gracious goodness, thou did
appoint unto her: Their true, faithful, and dutiful service, that (guided by
thy grace) they performed unto her: The prevention of many evils and dangers
(intended to have bin wrought by the hands of villaynes) which, had they taken
effect, might have bin the utter overthrow and ruin of our whole Country: The
quiet and peaceable end, that (protected with thy Shield, maugre the malice of
all her enemies) after the common course of Nature, peaceably dying in her bed,
she made, leaving (as in right they did belong) her imperial Crowns unto our
now gracious and renowned Sovereign Lord King JAMES, by thy grace, of great
Brittayne, France and Ireland, King, Defender of the same true, Catholic and
Apostolic faith, which she formerly did.

Lord, we humbly again, and again, upon our bended knees, from the very
bottom of our hearts pray and beseech thee, that, as of thine especial love
and favor unto us, thou have given us so gracious and religious a King: so
thou will of the same thy loving mercy, protect and defend him, in all dangers
and perilles whatsoever.

Guide, O Lord, his going fotth, and his coming in: bless him in all the
actions that he shall take in hand. Put (O Lord) into his heart good desires,
strengthen him with thy continual grace, and in the end, bring him to thy
everlasting kingdom.

As he is; so, O Lord, continue him, a faithful professor of thy Gospel; a
zealous and religious confessor thereof; a true and mighty defender thereof; a
bar and obstacle, to hinder all the courses and proceedings that either
Papists (or other enemies of thy Gospel whatsoever) shall go about to invent
for the suppressing of the truth. Discover them, O Lord, and let their devices,
if they persevere in wickedness, redound unto their own shame and confusion.
Protect and defend him, O Lord, in all his ways; counsel him in all his
consultations; let all his thoughts, words and works, tend unto the honor
and glory of thy holy name, and his own endless joy and comfort.

Continue him a true maintayner of the truth: Establish and confirm thy truth
in his heart: Root out Antichrist, and pull down his pride: Let Religion (as
now it does) always flourish in this kingdom: Suppress the power and might
of Satan: Cause an unity in the Church: Graffe us all into one stock, and let
us be all composed into one body, whereof thy Son Christ Jesus is the head.

And because, O Lord God Almighty, that Kings and Princes, as they are here on
earth, in highest Offices and authority under thee, so are they chief marks
for Satan's Instruments to shoot at, we meekely pray and beseech thee, that
thou will bless and defend his Royal Majesty from all the desperate and
wicked attempts, whatsoever Satan, or wicked Traitors, his ministers, shall
undertake. O Lord, let them all (who wish him any harm) suddenly be consumed,
perish, and come to a fearful end. Bless, O Lord, our gracious Queen Anne,
our noble Prince Henry, and all the rest of the King and Queens royal Issue:
Let their Posterity never fail; but let them continue Kings and Queens of
this Land, to maintain the Truth unto the worlds end.

Disperse, O Lord, all the mists of error and superstition; Let those that are
blind, and feign would see the Light participate with us in the Truth: Settle
all misorders whatsoever, that are any where in these his Majesty's kingdoms,
either in Church or Commonwealth. Let peace dwell in our quarters, and let not
the name of War be heard amongst us. Convert those unto thy truth, that are
yet unconverted; and establish those in the Truth, who are already converted.

Finally, O good God, bless and preserve all and every particular member, and
members of this thy Church of great Britain: make us all ready to serve thee,
and faithful subjects unto his Majesty.

These, and all other blessings, whatsoever thou in thy wisdom shall think
necessary for us, we beg at thy merciful hands, for his sake, in and
through whom thou first louedst us, even Christ Jesus our Lord and alone
Savior.

Amen.
God save the King.
FINIS.

