A DISCOVRSE OF THE ABUSES NOW IN QVESTION IN THE CHVRCHES OF CHRIST, OF THEIR
CREEPING IN, GROwing up, and flowrishing in the Babilonish Church of Rome, how
they are spoken against not only by the scriptures, but also by the ancient
Fathers as long as there remained any face of a true Church maintained by
public authority, And likewise by the lights of the Gospel, and blessed
Martyrs of late in the midst of the Antichristian darkness.

By Thomas Whetenhall Esquier.

Pro. 24.24.25. He that says to the wicked thou art righteous, him shall the
the people curse, and the multitude shall abhor him: But to the^ that rebuke
him shall be pleasure and upon them shall come the blessing of goodness.

Imprinted. 1606.

THE PRINTER TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
CHristian Reader, it is well known to all men, how odiously the adversaries
of the Churches reformation in England do accuse and defame the seekers of the
said reformation with Novelty, Singularity, Schism, Error, and with many
other such like most foull crimes. The iniquity and untruth whereof, will
through Gods blessing well appear to every one that shall read and pervse this
present most profitable Discourse following. Wherein two maine and principal
matters, to wit, The Inventions and Traditions of men in Church affairs, and
the overreaching Clergy beyond the condition of ordinay Pastors, (whereunto all
the particulars now in controversy are easily reduced) are observed in all
ages and times since the Apostles to have been held by some godly persons and
faithful Witnesses of the truth to have been heinous transgressio^s against the
ordinances of Christ in his New Testament. So that heerby men may see, that it
is noe new thing, that the servants of Christ and the lovers of his ordinances
should strive now against these Corruptions. For if this be Schismatic now
(I say, to strive against these Corruptions) then surely all the holy Martyrs
and pillars of the Gospel in all ages past but chifly since the discovery of
Antichrist) were Schismatiks. For they then travayled and labored (as by this
Discourse we may see) in one and the same cause, wherein now the true servants
of Christ do also labor. But if in former times those were faithful men, and
the true lovers of the Gospel of Christ, who hated all men's Additions in
matters of the Church, then doubtless so are these now; and it will be manifest
to all good men that they are wrongefully traduced and accused in such wise as
is before mentioned.

To which end and purpose this ancient Christian Gentlman has worthily
observed, gathered, and given out to the world (as his last service to God and
to his people) these testimonies of sundry old and new writers. The which
coming unto my hands, I could not in love to thee (good Reader) but
communicate the same unto thee The rather considering how many things daily
are spoken and written to the contrary by the adversaryes, to dazell the eyes
of Gods people in these causes. The Lord Jesus inlighten the minds of all his
true Children in all his ways, who only is the way, the truth, and the life;
and grant us his peace. Amen.

A TABLE OF THE PRINCIPAL MATters contained in this Discourse.
False Accusations against the seekers of Reformation. 166: The Apparel of
Ministers did not differ from the apparel of other men. page 70, 129, 130, 164,
Neither ought it to differ 163, 164, 170, 171, 175, 176, Audianus was no
Herjtike, though his successors were, page, 6
B
The ordinary name of Bishop is common to all Ministers in the New Testament,
page, 13. 14. 15, 16, Bishops chosen in and proceeding from the Court are the
cause of al corruption, page, 123. Ordinatio^ made by a Lord Bishop is void,
page, 127, 128, 131 132 The like Excommunication is no better page 77. 78:
C
The Ceremonies in question are unlawful for us, page, 85. 86. 87. 98, 113.
114. 149. 150. 172. 173, When, and how Ceremonies of man's invention were first
brought into Gods worship, page 33, Civil rule in pastors is unlawful and
contrary to Gods word in the New Testament, page 58 90 91 92. 95. 96. 97. 98:
107. 108. 110. 122. 125. 126. 136. 137 143: 151 152. 159. 161. 174. 175. 180.
Corruption in the Churches took place immediately after the Apostles page 4 The
time of the highest Ecclesiastical corruption and tyranny, p. 56. 57 What a
visible Church is, page 76. 77. 140. 141. 142. Churches are all equal in power,
and jurisdiction, and spiritual rights, page 2. 3. One Pastor cannot be but to
one Church. See Pluralities. Church government belongs wholly and only to
each Church: By no mea^es to any one man either within or without the same: page
70, 89, 124 The Churches government ought to depend only on Gods word. page 69,
99, 108, 109. The sign of the Cross. page 130. Custom without Gods word is
pernicious, page 106.
D
Discipline in our Churches is necessary to be restored. p. 108. 109 The folly
of them who now think orherwise, page 80. 81, 87: 88. 90. It is necessary to
salvation. ibide^
E
False Ecclesiastikes page 92. An Eldership page 94, 95, 97. 118. 124, 130: 131.
Election of Ministers ought to be by that Churches free consent to which they
belong, page 71. 72: 73. 74. 75. 98. 107, 108, 109, 118. 123. 127, 128, 131,
132, 138, 173. Election of Ministers by the free liking of every Church is a
thing easy and no way inconvenient in a civil Monarchy p. 74. 94. 100.
Excommunication is in each Churches power (and in none other) touching any
member therein. pa. 77, 78, 89, 90: 94, 128, 130. 150, 151 Church Government,
see before in Church, and Discipline.
I
Questions to the Infants in their Baptizing, are vain: pa, 101: 102 130.
K
Kneeling in receaving the Communion ought to be reformed, page 149: 150.
M
Maintenance ought to be reasonable and liberal for a Minister. Yet not
superfluous. 21 etc. 42, 54, 59 117, 121, 122, 133: 135: 143 178. What a
reasonable Maintenance may be: page 21: 132: 135: Ministers of man's Institution
are unlawful: page 61, 62, 94, 98, 99. Mingling of men's inventions in Gods
worship is very pernicious, page 103. 104, 105, 106, 111: 113: 114, 120, 124,
125, 129, 147, 148: 150, 167, 168, 175, 184, 187: 188. 189.
N
Non residents very wicked. page 146. 152: 160. 168. 169. 172. 174.
O
The Oath ex Officio unjust and tyrannous. page 138 139. 140.
P
The name Papa Pope was aunciently common to all Bishops, page 17, 18. 19.
Pastors are all equal page 109, 112. see Superiority in Pastors. and Churches
are all equal. Ignorant Pastors, and bare Substitutes a deadly evil. pa. 92.
93. 118 138, 145, 152, 169. 170. Paulus Samosatenus a stately Prelat, like
those of our times. pa. 7. 8 The first beginning of true reformation ought to
be in reforming the Prelates, page 83, 137, 152. No amendment to be expected from
the Prelates, page 82, Pluralities damnable. pa 123. 129. 138, 152. 156, 157,
160. 168. 169 172. Pomp and riches in the Clergy is cause of corruption and
error in all page 62. 151. 175. 176. A Prayer for the King and State. page 191,
192. Good Christians fasly called Puritanes, 166, 167,
R
No man ought to forbid Reformation in any Church state after the Original
orders in Gods word. page 112. 116, 117. 181. 183. 184 Excuses against
Reformation were the same heretofore, which are now. But still most vain,
page 81. 143. 144. 159, 160, 185, 186, 188, 189, Reformation when it began page
57. which hitherto has still proceeded but by certain degrees, and so shall
till the full co uming of Antichrist. Open Reprehension of our present Church
Corruptions at this time is necessary in every faithful Minister. page 79. A
Representative Church no where found in the New Testament, pa. 76.
S
Superiority unlawull in Pastors: and Lordship is tyranny. Either is simply
unlawful. page 13. 14. 15. 16. 40. 50. 58, 68, 69, 75, 76, 94. 96. 98, 100.
101, 109, 112. 118, 120, 135 137, 138, 142, 145, 146, 151, 159. 161. 162, 172
173. 176, 177, 178, 179, 190. 193. The Surplice, page 158: 154: 155: 162: 163,
164, 171, 184,
T
Ecclesiastical Traditions unwritten are unlawful and contrary to Gods word,
both Ministeries, and Ceremonies, etc. page, 66, 67, 70. 75. 111: 112. 113. 114.
115, 120, 124. 125: 126. 128: 129: 130. 133, 134. 147, 148, 149, 152, 157. 158.
165, 167, 168, 175
V
Improper terms very dangerous, and cause of error in doctrine. page 9, 11, 13,
14. 15. 16.
Refer these 2. points following to the letter. I. before placed.
The fashions of Idolaters (being of themselves things unnecessary) ought to be
abolished in the exercise of true religion. page 162. 163 164. 165. Images of
man's devise in religious use are simply unlawful: and yet no more unlawful
then Ceremonies of like institution in the like use. 186. 187.
A TABLE OF THE AVTHORS ALLEGED in this Discourse.
A
Alley. page 33. Ambrose. page 45. Athanasius. page 73. Augustinus page 16. 19.
20. 40. 45. 101. 163. 164. 165. 167.
B
Bale. page 177. 178. 179. Barnes. page 25. Basilius Magnus. page 34. Beacon.
page 170. 172. Beatus Rhenanus. page 163. Bernard. page 24. 50. 52. 53. Beza.
page 15. 127. 130. Gabriel Biel. page 163. Bradford: page 174. 175. 176. 177.
Bucer: page 79. 80. 85. Bulinger: page 93. 99. 168.
C
Calvinus. page 14. 22. 121. 125. Chaucer. page 54. Chrysostom. page 25. 27.
47. 49. Lord. Cobham. page 133. Coelestinus Papa. page 164. Costerius. page 45.
Cranmer. page 157.
D
Danaeus. page 131
E
Epiphanius. page 5 Eusebius. page 4. 7. 30.
F
Fox. page: 3. 44. 50. 70. 71. 79. 92. 134. 139. 140. 143. 153. 154. 155. 157.
173. 175. 176. 181. Fulke. page 11. 127. 130. 142. 181. 187.
G
Genevenses Theses: page 120. Gualter. page 102. Gregorius magnus: page 13.
Gregorius Nysen: page 35.
H
Harmony of confessio^s. page 16. 112. 113. Homilyes. page 180. 186. Hoper.
page 111. 148. 149. 150. 151. 152. Husse. page 59.
I
King James. page 21. 32. 99. Ieronymus. page 16. 36. 37. 38. 112. 164. 193.
Jewel. page 157. 158. 159. 160. 161. 162. 163. 164. 165. 166. 167. The Queens
Injunctions. page 114. Ireneus. page 20.
L
Francis Lambert. page 75. John Lambert. page 173. 174. Latimer. page 142. 143.
144. 145. 146. 147. Lavaterus. page 23. Leaver. page 168. 169. Lindsey. page
54. Luther. page 63. 65. 67. 68. 71. 79.
M
Marloratus. page 126. Peter Martyr. page 86. 92 Musculus. page 14. 24. 99.
102. 174.
N
Nowell. page 37.
O
Origin. page 164
P
Pantaleo. page 178. Platina. page 71 Posidonius. page 39. 41. 42. Procopius
Magnus. page 61.
R
Ridley: page 153. 154. 155. 156. 147.
S
Sabellicus: page 71. Saravia: page 45. Sigismund Emperor: page 83 Socrates:
page 45. 46. Sozomenus: page 35. Synodus Alexandriae. page 31. 73. Carthag:
page 3: and 4: 40. Constance: page 83.
T
Tilenus. page 132 Tindall page 134. 136. 137. 138. 139 140. 141. Tertullian:
page 33. 163.
V
Valafredus Abbas. page 164. Polyd. Vergilius. page 8. Viretus. page 125.
W
Whitaker. page 113. 114. Wicklife. page 57.
Z
Zanchius. page 115. Zisca. page 61. Zuinglius page 76.
THe Lord Jesus in the Revelation of himself to his servant John commands
him to write to the 7. Churches of Asia, the things which he had seen, Rev.
1.1^, 19
and the things which are, and the things which shall com hereafter. Wherein
3. points are to be considered. John, by him to be delivered unto his Churches;
where he says, I am Alpha and Omega, the first and the last etc. That they
might thereby know with what fear and careful attention, the things so
written should be read, searched out, and observed; namely, in that they were
commanded to be written, and sent unto them by so high a Majesty. Asia,
representing by them the estate of all Churches visible, which then were
gathered in their several places throughout the world. In which point
touching the present estat of all these Churches, three things are specially to
be observed. First, that they were the true churches of Christ, the Golden
Candlesticks upon which the light of the Gospel was set, and their Pastors
Bishops or ministers like stars holden in the right hand of Christ, as Angels
or Messengers of the same Churches or Congregations, and Christ himself
walking in the midst of them. Secondly (notwithstanding this excellent estate
wherein they were, yet) here it appears that many foul corruptions were
even then crept in, both in the Pastors and Churches; and scarsly any one
Church found to be free from foul abuses: As you may plainly see in the
discourse of the seven Churches of Asia, if you read the 2 and 3 chapters of
the Revelation. Whereupon this objection may and does arise; Namely, that
seeing such abuses and corruptions were in the most pure and sinceare
Primitive Churches, why should we not then at this day stay our selves, though
many foul disorders, abuses, and corruptions be found to be retained in our
Churches. Whereunto may iustsly be answered, that contrary-wise the holy Ghost
has set down the example of these most holy, pure, and Apostolic Churches,
with their faults and imperfections, and also their threatenings, that all
Churches following unto the end of the world, should be the more vigilant and
careful that no corruption should crepe in among them; seeing those most pure,
and uncorrupted times (in comparison of the times following) were with so
great difficulty preserved from such dangerous mischeifes, and never the less
were threatened of God with such terrible plagues and vengance for suffering
the same. As, the removing the golden Ca^dlesticke from Ephesus, the fighting
of Christ himself with the Svvord of his mouth against the Church of
Pergamus; The casting of the Thyatirians into the bed of great afflictions, and
that he would come upon the Church of Sardis as a theife in the night, and
that they should not know what hour he would come upon them. And to
conclude, that he would spue the luke warm Laodicians out of his mouth. All
which grievous plagues in a short time fell upon those Churches of Asia. And
shall we escape, if now in this great light of the Gospel, we retain and
maintain any filthiness of corruption in our Churches? No, God is not partial;
neither with him is any variablenes, neither shadowing by turnning. Besides
here also it is vvorthly to be noted, that among these seven Churches of Asia
representing all other thereis not one word spoken of an Archangel, Archbishop,
or Lord Bishop that might over rule or govern all the rest, which in these
our times are some of the greatest and most noisome corruptions which do
overflowe all. To which purpose I here set down the words of M. Fox,
speaking of the first and Primitive Churches; his words are these. Act Mon. p,
36;
It is evident (says he) to all men that have eyes in their head, etc. that
there was not then any one Mother Church above other Churches, One Universal
Church Milita^t Invisible.
but the whole universal Church was the mother Church, under which uniuersall
Church in general, were comprehended all other particular Churches in
special, as sister Churches together, not one greater then another but all in
like equality etc. But this ring of equality being broken, all flewe in
pieces. Howbeit of this more shall be spoken God vvilling hereafter.

There remains now, to speak of the third general thing which Christ here
commands his servant John to write of, namely, Revel. 1.19
the things that should come to pass concerning the Churches of God, after the
Apostles time to the end of the world. And how the Synagogue of Satan and the
whore of Babylon by little and little should creep in, and with her filthiness
endeavor to envenime the Churches; till at the last she should become that
glorious whore described in the 17. chapter, clothed in scarlet and purple,
gilded with gold, precious stones, and pearls, and having a cup of gold in
her hand, full of abominations and filthiness of her fornication, sitting upon
the scarlet coullered Beast, having seave^ heads and ten horns; and by her
glorious power should banish the true Churches of God, and make make them fly
into the wilderness, that is into secret places, hidden, and unknown unto men.
But leaving the high estate of the Babilonish whore which is the great City,
that in John's time reigned over the Kings of the earth, which all men know
was the City of Rome; and now calls her self the Catholic Church.
Leaving her (as I have said) in her magnificence, I will show, how by little
and little she crept in, and so at the last got up unto that her high estate.

Now this beginning of corruption both in doctrine and Discipline made no long
delay, after the Apostles time. Eusebius Hist Eccle,
For as Evsebius in his Ecclesiastical History. lib 3. cap 32. says. Vt vero
et Apostolorum chorus. etc. As soon as the company of the Apostles and all
that age which had received the hearing of the Lords own lively voice, was
departed out of this world: then as it were into an empty house, the wicked
error of false doctrine thrust in and plunged her self. Which thing also is
evident, by all Ecclesiastical Histories: as the heresy of Cerinthus shows
about the year of our Lord 70. Which taught that the world was not made of
God, but of Angels, and that Circumcision was necessary to be observed, and
that the kingdom of Christ after the resurrection should be upon the earth.
And likewise the heresy of the Ebionites about the year 85. Which taught that
Christ was very man both by Father and Mother, and that Moses law was
necessary to be observed. Thus daily many heresies and foul corruptions crept
in, so that by the time that Augustine and Epiphanius lived, they vvrote
special books against heresies (to the number of an hundred several heresies
of note) co^tayning all of them great corruptions, some in doctrine and
manners, some in Discipline and orders of the Church. Which corruption in
Church Discipline was often times the cause of the heretical doctrine. And
heerin I purpose (God assisting me) chiefly at this time to insist: showing
what the ancient Fathers of the Primitive Church did practice and teach in
these points of religion now controversied among us: and likewise what the
lights of the gospel and the blessed Martyrs of God from age to age since,
even unto this day have also practiced and taught touching the same.

And this I do the rather; because many excellent men have already by
manifold reasons grounded and taken out of the word of God, proved that there
ought to be a full reformation both in Doctrine and Discipline, according to
that order in the Church which Christ and his Apostles left; Which must be
acknowledged to be the only sure ground of proof for all points of
controversy in the Church of God. But because the enimyes of full and true
Reformation of religion, do yet (after the old fashion) rest upon custom,
antiquity, and ancient Fathers: I have thought good to follow this course
before named, that it might be plainly seen, both how the chief of the
ancient Fathers, and also of the principal lights, set up by the Lord in the
deapth of the darkness of Antichrist; with one voice and agreement taught,
practiced, and proved the same, both by the scriptures, and manifold reasons
grounded thereon, touching the matters of reformation now desired.

And heerin I think good for example (before I enter into the rest) to set
down out of Epiphanius the heresy of Audianus, which heretics were
afterward called Anthropomorphits, who being thrust out of the Church as simple
men (in time lacking learned teachers) fell into a persuasion and belief, that
God was like unto a man, whereof they took the name of their heresy. Erat
autem vir a Mesopotamia oriundus clarus in patria sua etc. Epiphanius de Here Is.
Audianus (says Epiphanius) was a man by birth of Mesopotamia, a famous man in
his own Country, for the sincerity of his life and of faith and Zeal
toward God, which often beholding the things that were done in the Churches,
he did oppose himself against such evils, even to the face of the Bishops and
Elders, and did reprove them, saying, These things ought not to be so done,
these things ought not to be so handled, as a man studious of the verity,
and of such things as are spoken by men, which lead a most exact life; and
are usually spoken for love of the truth. Wherefore Audianus seeing such
things (as I have said) in the Churches, he was driven to speak and confute
it and kept not silence. For if he saw any of the Clergy to seek after
filthy luker, whether he were Bishop or Elder, or any other: he spoke
altogether according to the rule of Gods law. And if he saw any man livyng in
voluptuous pleasure and delicates, or any man corrupting the Ecclesiastical
preaching and the laws of the Church: this man could not bear it, but by
words did reprehend it, as I have said. And this was very grevous to them that
were of a lewd life: and for this cause he was despited with contumelies and
suffered contradiction, he was hated, and suffered himself to be vexed and
thrust out, and tolerated shameful ignominy, continuing so a long time in
the Church among them, until such time as certain men violently rushing upon
him, drove him out for the same cause. But he would not suffer himself so to
be driven out, but rather endeavored himself to speak the truth, and not to
depart, and break the bond of the union of the Catholic Church. Audianus
was no Heretic, nor his present company. But their Successors were
Anthropomorphits.
But when he had been often beaten, both he and his companions, and had
suffered very grievous things, lamenting exceedingly, he took to himself the
necessities of injuries for his Counselor: for he separated himself from the
Church, and many together with him departed: and so made a division, having
nothing different in the faith, but did believe most rightly both he and all
his company. Thus far Epiphanius touching the sect of these heretics called
Audiani, and of the cause occasion and means whereby it grew, and thus far was
the shamfull corruptions in the order and discipline of the Church grown at
that time, which was about one hundred years before Epiphanius. Neither may we
think that the Bishops and clergy of that age, did without cloak or color
in plain terms, defend their Lordly pride and ambition, but even as they do
now, under the pretenses of unity, conformity, and peace of the Church. For
who can dream or immagine that they would say these men ought to be thrust out
of the Church, because they speak against our pompous, proud, and ambitious
government? but no doubt their pretense was, the breach of unity, conformity,
and refusing to subscribe to such orders and policy of the Church, as they had
devised to maintain themselves withal, and their pompous estate; without the
which they pretended the Church could not be well governed. But this place of
Epiphanius I leave to the reader further to consider of, wishing him to observe
the integrity of life, the sincerity of faith, the necessity that compelled
them to speak, and the exceeding loathnes to make any schism or to depart
from the Church, that was in these men, who were so violently thrust out, and
this was not yet 300. years after Christ. Hereunto I may join the pride and
ambition of Paulus Samosatenus, Bishop of Antioche; who also was long before
the time of Epiphanius, of whom Eusebius says. Cum prius egens fuerit, et
pauperrimus, Eusebius: Eccles. histor. lib, 7 ca^ 26
et neque ex parentum successione, neque vllam questus occasionem habuerit
honestam, nunc ad summas divitias pervenerit, non aliunde nisi ex sacralegiis,
et ex his quae per fraudem diripuit. When before he was a needy fellow (says
Eusebius) and a very poor man, and neither by succession from his parents,
neither had any just means of gain; he got up to very great riches, none
other way but by sacrilege, and of that which he gat by fradulent means: Who
is so blind that sees not, this Bishop Paulus to be a-perfect pattern of the
L. Bishops of our days, who coming for the most part of poor parentage, by
hook, or by crook become Lord-Bishops, abounding in riches and worldly honor.
Which thing Polydorus Virgilius (being other wise himself a great fautor and
maintainer of Lord-Bishops, yet) speaking of the pride of Paulus Samosatenus,
he says. Vnde propter hominis arrogantiam plerique Christi religionem
detestabantur: Polydor Virgill l^b. 8,
ab hoc Paulo opinor nostros pontifices pomparum ordinem, quem nunc ducunt,
accepisse. Whereby (says Polydor) through this mans' arrogancy many men
detested the religion of Christ. Wherefore it is that Polydor concludes with
these words, Ab hoc Paulo opinor nostros pontifices pomparum ordinem, quem
nunc ducunt, accepisse. Of this Paul I suppose our Bishops or Prelates have
taken the order of Pomp which they now carry. Thus far and thus plain
speaks Polydor Virgill. And Eusebius in the place before of this Bishop
Paulus says, Directio quoque praeeuntium, et constipatio insequentium, quam
plurima querebatur: ita vt omnes qui videbant, horrescerent et detestarentur,
per illius arrogantiam, religionem divinam. He sought also to have troops of
men to go before him, and trains of many to follow him, in so much that all
men which saw it, did utterly abhor it, and through his arrogancy, detested
the religion of God. Thus you see how the Dragon, that old subtle Serpent,
even then practiced to corrupt the religion of Christ, and so to bring it into
utter detestation.

But to return nearer to the first original corruptions that began immediately
after the Apstles time: you shall find in all the most ancient Fathers a great
liberty taken to leave the very words of the Holy Ghost, and instead of them
to use such improper speeches, names, and words, as they thought fit and
convenient, to express the same thing: as to call the Ministers of the word of
God and the Pastors of the Church, Sacerdotes, Priests; the Deacons Levites;
the table of the Lord, an Altar; the whole action of the Supper of the Lord, a
Sacrifice; and at the last they called it Missio and then Missa, a Mass;
Improper speeches.
likewise they called a Diocese and a Province, by the name of a Church; and at
last the whole Universal multitude of Christians throughout the world, by the
name of the Catholic Church. As also their Teachers and Governors by the name
of Bishops. All which are very improper speeches. And these improper speeches,
are as frequent and as commonly used among the ancient Fathers, as the words
of the Holy Ghost are used in the scripturs. Wherein we may observe, out of what
small beginnings, and little sparks of error, great flames, and horrible
corruptions do grow; as a line beginning from the very Center to be drawn
never so little a wrie, makes a shamfull error, when it comes to the
circumference: so the Fathers at the begi^ning using these terms thought full
little that such a foul Idol as the God of the Mass; and such a spiritual
tyrant as a Universal Bishop should have grown out of them, but they spoke
alluding unto the Church, Priests, Levites, Aulters, Sacrifices of the law in
the old Testament: which were indeed figures and shadows. In which mistaking
Satan (that old serpent) had his drift to set up his Idol in process of time,
thus reasoning upon these terms, (as our Papists do yet to this day) that
over Levites there must be Priests, unto Priests there belong Aulters, unto
Aulters Sacrifice. All which things (yet) in the old Testament were known to
be but figurative shadows yea head, horns and all: and when he has once
gotten in, though he may be as plainly seen, (according to the proverb) as a
man's nose of his face; yet he so maintains the possession that he has once
gotten both by fair and foul means, by religious pretenses, and rigorous
defenses; that it is almost impossible to get him out again. As for example,
who sees not in these our days (at the least where the light of the Gospel
does shine) the horrible abominations of the unpreaching ministry,
Nonresidencies, Pluralities, Impropriations, excommunication for every trifle,
the pompous and lordly estate of Bishops together with those rotten and
beggarly Ceremonies, which have so long burdened and troubled the Churches Nay
Kings and Princes are made believe that their state could not endure, nor
their Kingedome stand, yea that heaven and earth would be confounded, if these
things should be reformed. But alas it is lamentable to behold what curious
carvers, what trusty tasters are used in bodily meats, how great care is
taken that a moate fall not into our earthly cups: But though the toe, or
foot of A Toad.
a paddocke fall into the food of our souls we are not afraid to swallow it,
though we se it.

But let us proceed in opening farther the things which were done in the
Churches, and the abuses that crept in shortly after Saint John's time, until
Antichrist and his great whore of Babell came up to the top of their glorious
dignity.

Now Satan having sowed his tares among the good corn, which the holy
Apostles had sown, which tares grew so fast in the hearts of many Sardian
sleeping Angels, that pride and ambition pricked them to be lifted up above
their fellows. And as many hundred years after, Gregory the Bishop of Rome
himself said of John Bishop of Constantinople: In this pride of theirs what
other thing is there betokened, but that the time of Antichrist is even at
hand. For he follows him (says Gregory) that despising the joy of
equality among the Angels labored to pearke up to the top of singularity.
For they thought it a base thing not to be lifted up above their fellow Pastors
or Elders, so that they procured by agreement and consent among themselves,
that some one among the rest, in every assembly should be called a Bishop:
where before that time all the preachers, Pastors, and Elders, were generally
called Bishops: so that Bishope, Pastor, or Elder, were Synonima, words of one
and the self same signification; But now they agreed, that one of them only
in every assembly should be called a Bishop: and he only and singularly
should be so termed, whereas all the rest were so called before. which injurious
dealing with the rest of the Ministers went yet more forward: namely, as at the
first agreement one only in every Congregation or assembly, should be called
Bishop; so this devise of Satan with in a while grew so fast, that only one
in every Dioces was so called, and all the rest were called Ministers, Elders,
and Pastors, and not Bishops. What injury this was to all other Pastors and
Elders, yea and to the holy Ghost himself, which gave them all, as well as to
any one that reverent name of Bishop; he that has eyes in his head may easily
see. For as poor christians should have great injury if it should be made
unlawful to call any man a Christian, or a christian man, but only a Prince, a
Lord, or a Noble man: so all the pore Pastors and Ministers have great injury,
that one Lord in a City or Dioces, only, should be called Bishop, seeing Gods
own word calls all Pastors and Ministers of the word Bishops; as well as all
faithful people Christians. And thus within a while these Bishops did not only
take to themselves the name, wealth, and dignities which God forbids them;
but they took from other such names, wealth, and dignities as God had
appointed them. Showing themselves plainly disobedient to God, and injurous
toward men, and namely, toward their brethren and fellow servantes in one
and the self same function appointed by God. And here touching this matter
take the words of M. Calvine that excellent and learned Divine upon the first
chapter to Titus. Porro locus hic abunde docet, Calv, in epist, ad Tit. cap: 1.
7.
nullum esse Presbyteri et Episcopi discrimen, etc. Verum nomen officii quod
Deus in commune omnibus dederat, in vnum solum transferri, reliquis spoliatis,
et iniurium est, et absurdum. Deniquc sic pervertere spiritus sancti linguam,
vt nobis eaedem voces aliud quam voluerit significent, nimis profanae audaciae
est. This place of the Apostle to Titus, (says M. Calvine) does very evidently
teach that there is no difference between a Bishope and an Elder or Minister,
but, the name of an office which God gave to them all in common, to transfer it
only to one among many of them, spoiling or robbing the rest thereof; is both
injurious and absurd. To conclude (says M. Calvine) so to pervert the tongue
or language of the Holy Ghost, that the same words or names should signify an
other thing unto us then he would have it: It is a point of too profane or
heathenish bouldnes. Hereunto I will add the words of M. Musculus in his
Common Places, being translated into English, and dedicated unto Parker
Archbishop of Ca^terburie, Musc, Com. pla, fol, 166
in the days of Queen Elizabeth, his words are these. When that temptation
of greatness and superiority, gat once into the minds of the Priests, Pastors
and Doctors: then men began to chose some one of the Elders, which should be
set above the rest, and advaunced unto higher degree, and be called a Bishop:
and thus he should only and singularly be called, as all the rest were
commonly called before. Whether this device does any good to Christ's Church,
that Bishopps are become (rather of custom (as Jerome says) than upon any
truth of the Lords appointment,) greater then the Priests; it is better
declared in these latter times, then when this custom was first taken up,
which we may thank for all the pride, wealth, and tyranny of the Princly, and
riding Bishops, yea for the corruption of all Churches: which if Jerome saw,
no doubt he would acknowledge it to be not the device of the holy Ghost to take
away schisms* (...) it was pretended to be, but of Satan himself, to decaie
and destroy the old Ministry in feeding the Lords flock. Whence it is come,
that the Church has not true Pastors, Doctors, and Elders or Bishops, but
under the couller of these names we have idle bellies and magnificall Princes.
Beza in Phil, cap. 1. 1
Whereunto I ad also the words of M. Beza upon the first chapter to the
Philippians. Episcopos igitur intelligit, quicunque verbo et gubernatio ni
praeerant, puta pastores, Doctores, et presbyteros etc. Haec igitur olim erat
episcoporum appellatio, donec qui politiae causa reliquis fratribus in caetu
praeerat, etc. Peculiariter dici episcopus caepit. Hinc caepit Diabolus prima
tyrannidis fundamenta iacere in Dei Ecclesia. etc. En quanti sit momenti a Dei
verbo vel latum vnguem deflectere. The Apostle says M. Beza means by Bishops
all those which were appointed to rule in the word and government of the Church,
namely the Pastors, Teachers, and Elders. This was of old time the denomination
of Bishops, until he which for policy sake was preferred in the assembly
before the rest of the brethren, began only, or peculiarly to be called Bishop:
heerof the Devil began to lay the first foundation of tyranny in the Church of
God. Behold (says M. Beza) of how great weight or moment it is to decline from
the word of God, yea though but a hairs breadth. Here is also to be noted how
Jerome many years after often times puts the Bishops in remembrance of
their original estate and titles, even when long custom had established the
same; As in his epistle ad Evagrium and in his Commentary upon the Epistle to
Titus, and diverse other places you may read. Ierom. ad Evag. and in Tit.
Let Bishops know (says he) that rather by custom then by any truth of the
Lords appointment, they are become greater then the Elders, or Ministers: and,
the Church ought to be ruled in common. And this (...) Augustine also
acknowledges in his Epistle to Jerome, whom (...) himself was a Bishop, and a
man in that degree of the highest note in the world: saying to Jerome (who was
then but a poor Minister, nor never would be other.) Quanquam secundum
vocabulum, August. epist. 19
quod vsus obtinuit, Episcopus mayor est presbytero Hieromimus tamen in multis
mayor est Augustino. Although though (says Augustine) according to the term,
which use has brought in, a Bishop is greater than an Elder, yet Jerome in
very many things is greater then Augustine.

And this former saying of Jerome is commonly alleged and allowed by all the
excellent writers in the defense of the gospel to the same effect; as you may
read in the Harmony of Confessions. Con. Helve: 2. sect: 11. Tit. Of the
Ministers of the Church. Where their words be these: So the Bishops must know
that they are above Priests rather by custom than by the prescript rule of
Gods truth, and they should have the government of Gods Church in common with
them. Thus far Jerome. Now therefore no man can forbid by any right but that we
should return to the old apoyntment of God, and rather receive that, then the
custom devised by men.

And this conclusion in the Harmony of Confessions, every man may see is
plainly grounded upon the confession of the holy Apostles, Peter and John
saying, Acts 4 9
whether it be right in the sight of God to obey you rather than God, judge ye.
A man would think it impossible, that any Christian should deny that we ought
rather to receive the appointment of God, then the custom devised by men.
Which custom (as M. Musculus says) we may thank for the pride wealth, and
tyranny of our Princely and riding Bishops, and for all other corruptions of
the Churches, as shall more plainly appear hereafter.

Here the Prophet Isaiah says of them that fought against Sion, stay your
selves and wonder: they are blind, Isai. 15 9, 10,
and make you blind, they are drunken, but not with wine, they stagger, but not
by strong drink. For the Lord has covered you with a spirit of slumber, and
has shut up your eyes, the Prophets, and your chief Seers has he covered.
And before I proceed any further, I will say with Isaiah the Prophet, stay your
selves and wonder at an admirable work of God. For as soon as this first
foundation of tyrranie (as M. Beza calls it) was laid in the Church of God,
and that the name of Bishop which God had given to all the Ministers of his
word in common, was transferred to one alone among many, the rest being robbed
and spoiled thereof: even quickly after was written upon the forhead of this
Bishop, a mystery, a strange and unknown name, even the very name of
Antichrist, that is to say, Papa, a-Pope. For straight way in general, all the
Bishops were called by the name of Papa or Pope, taken (as some learned men
suppose) of the Greek Syracusane word, Pappas, signifiyng a Father.

The Papists themselves seeking for the Etymology of this word, are so
astonished therein, that some of them say it was taken from Pape, the
interjection of wonder. Howsoever, a word it is fecht out of the bottomless pit
of hell, that it might be a mark to make difference between a Minister and a
Bishop, and between a Pastor and a-Pope, as the word Missa was devised by the
Devil to disguise the Communion withal, and to supersubstantiat the blessed
bread of the Lords Supper into the cursed Idol of the Popes mass. And from
hence arose at last that one Pope of Rome overall: of whom they say in their
gloss Papa stupor mundi, the Pope is the wonder and the admiration of the
world: neither God nor man, but a thing between both. Some have thought it
might be taken of Pappa, which some say the latin children used to call their
Fathers by; as our children call Dadd: othersome have imagined it should be
taken from these two words Pater Patriae, which the Romans used to write by
way of abreviation thus: Pa. (with a prick) and Pa. (with another prick:) So
that the pricks in the midst being left out, there remained Papa. Such far
fecht follies, and ridiculous dotages, the Papisticall crew are feign to seek
for to find their holy Father Papa, the Pope. But this is certain and evident,
that as soon as it was agreed upon that one only, among many Ministers of the
word of God should be called a Bishop: and the rest should be robbed of that
name, which the holy scripture has geiven them: this singular and peculiar
Bishop, (set up as it were with a higher degree and name then the rest) was
straightwaye called in a special sort, Papa. As Cyprian one of the most
ancient Fathers was usually termed. Cypt. Epist. 2.7.
The Elders and Deacons of Rome writing to him, do set down the
superscription of their Epistle in these words: Cipriano Papae, presbyteri et
Diaconi Romae consistentes, salutem. To Pope Cyprian, the Elders and Deacons of
Rome, wish health. And in the latter end and conclusion of the Epistle they say
unto him. Optamus te beatissime ac gloriosissime Papa, in Domino se^per been
valere, et nostri meminisse. We wish thee (most blessed and most glorious Pope)
ever good health in the Lord, and that thou always be mindful of us. August
epist ^^
Likewise Jerome writing to Augustine says, Domino vere sancto et beatissimo
Papae, Augustino, Hierenimus in Domino salutem. To the right holy and most
blessed, Pope Augustine, Jerome wishes health in the Lord. The very same words
also are used unto Augustine in his epistle 21. And so likewise in the rest.
Neither do I speak these things to condemn those excellent ancient Fathers,
(who otherwise many years were singular instruments and profited greatly the
Church of God) but to show how great a buses crept in, duringe the most pure
times, (like as has been before said) even in the time of the Apostles
themselves, and after more and more unto the full setting up of Antichrist the
Pope, that great Papa, (the Bishop of Rome) who alone gat this name Papa Pope,
at the last to be peculiar and proper to himself. Thus growing up by little
and little, from the first beginning of the petie Papa, until he and all his
clergy with him, came up unto their full perfection, and papisticall
dignity. Which time when it drew near, errors and most enormous and
shameful abuses crept not in by little and little, but were thrown in by
shouelles full, and cart loads. And further I noted it, to set forth the
wonderful providence of God (without which nothing is done in heaven earth, or
hell.) To set such manifest charecters and marks upon the first beginnings of
mischeife, which although it could hardly be discerned in the beginnings
thereof, yet in the event and full high estate whereunto they grew, a very
child might understand, perceive and see it. So that at the lenght when the new
light of the gospel should shine, even the old and first original errors
might thereby the better be corrected. For in Prophecies and mysteries it must
always be observed, which that most ancient Father Ireneus says in his 4.
book and 43. chapter. Omnis enim prophetia priusquam habet efficacia^, etc.
All prophecies (says he) before they have the effect, be as it were riddles
and ambiguities unto men: but when the time is come, and that is come to pass
which is prophesied, then the prophesies have a clear and undoubted
exposition. So we see in this mystery of Papa or Pope when it first began, it
was such an aenigma, as was almost impossible to understand whereunto the old
Serpent meant to bring it. But now the event thereof being come, and the Angel
between heaven and earth preaching the everlastinge Gospel and setting up the
new light thereof in many Nations and Churches: every man that wincketh not may
see it.

Now therefore to proceed, ( as Augustine says in his 18. book and Second
chapter, of the City of God: That it may the better appear how Babylon the
first Rome keeps her course with the City of God, whom she makes a
pilgrim or stranger in this world.) When the name of Pope had thus possessed
the Bishops whereof many were both godly and learned, yet they never drempt of
the mischief that followed, nor of the great Papa the Pope that man of sin
even the son of perdition, that exalts himself against all that is called
God, and sits in the temple of God sheewing himself that he is God. The
mystery of which iniquity began to work even in the Apostle Paul's time.

How be it the godly Fathers (as I said) little suspecting any such matter,
labored tooth and nail to keep under the Pomp pride and ambition of the
Bishops and Pastors of the Church, which they saw now began to grow both in
riches and regiment; and which after their time grew in few years beyond all
measure. But because I shall have occasion to use the examples and doctrine of
the ancient learned and godly Fathers, against the po^pe, pride, and lordly
estate of Bishops, A sufficient mai^tenance is due to the ministry And what it
may be.
least I should seem to be injurous and prejudicial to the sufficiency of
honor, living and maintenance which both by the word of God, and by the
judgment of the ancient Fathers does of right belong unto all Pastors Bishops
or ministers of the word, and which the authority of all christian Magistrates
and Princes ought to provide for the^, I will adventure to set down a
proportion of such estate and living as I am fully persuaded does of right and
by the law of God appertain unto them, and ought by Princes and Magistrates to
be appointed and provided for them. Wherein I cannot but observe the most
excellent and honorable advice and charge which the Kings Majesty in his own
book gives unto his Son our Noble Prince. As first in his preface (he
says) I exhort my Son to be benificiall unto the ministry, Basilicon do^o^.
praising God that there is presently a sufficient number of good men of them
in this kingdom (of Scotland) and yet are they all known to be against the
form of the English Church. And in his second book his Majesty charge him,
that he should see all the Churches within his Dominions, planted with good
Pastors, the Schools (the Seminary of the Church) maintained, the doctrine and
Discipline preserved in purity according to Gods word, and sufficient
provision for their sustentation. It pertains therefore to the duty of
Princes to see that there be a sufficient provision, for the sustentation and
maintenance of their Pastors, and suerly Gods law does expressly requier it. And
as the law of God does evidently forbid them a Lordly estate, so it does
utterly condemn the beggarly and miserable estate of the Pastors and preachers
of his word. Wherefore the law says, Beware that thou forsake not the Levite
all the time that thou shall be upon the earth. Upon which place M. Calvine
says, Deuteronomy, 12
Moses adds. That the people should beware in any wise that they defrauded
them not of their right: And not without cause. For as I have told you before
(says M. Calvine) God had appointed them of purpose to serve him, Calvin,
and the greater part of them also to teach his people, that his law might be
known. Seeing it was so, it was good reason that they should have wherewith to
find and maintain them. For in very deed aparte of the inheritance belonged
to them, because they were descended of the lineage of Abraham. But God put them
from it, to the end they should not be troubled neither with tilling of the
ground nor with any other businesses: but only give them selves wholly to the
doing of their office. And it is not without cause that Moses plainly
exhorts the people to do their duty in this behalf, for we see the
unthankfulness of the world. They Idolaters can find in their hearts to
maintain their Priests and they spare for no cost: but as for them that serve
God purely, there is commonly no account made of them as has been seen in all
times. And further he says. And if it were in the worlds choice, it had
always lever to maintain a whole Covent of Munks and Canons to houle out with
full gorge, than to find one Preacher that would speak as he ought to do.

And surely it is plainly seen at this day in the Popery and in such places
where such relics of Popery are left, that they had rather maintain their
Lord Bishops all though they be unpreaching Prelates with many thousand pounds
of yearly revenues, then good Pastors and diligent Preachers with a hundred or
twain. Prove. 30.6.
But to this purpose the words of Agur in the 30 of the Proverbes, are worthy
to be noted. Where he says, Every word of God is pure, he is a shield to those
that trust in him. Put nothing unto his words, least he reprove thee and thou
be found a liar. Two things have I required of thee, deny me them not before I
dye. Remove far from me vanity and lies. Give me not poverty nor riches: feed
me with food convenient for me: least I be full and deny thee, and say who is
the Lord? Or least I be poor and steal, and take the name of God in vain.
And mark that he says deny me not them before I dye, that is grant me these
two things, not for a day, or a time, or for a year, or two. But that I may
enjoy them, Lavater in Proverbs,
and observe them all the days of my life. Which thing Lavater in his
Commentary upon those words rightly understands. Saying, Nec tantum
postulavit ad diem etc. Neither do the Prophet to this purpose make this
request, for a day, or for a Month, or for a year or two, but for all the
time of his life. For this it signifies which he says, deny me not until I
dye, that is to say, as long as ever I shall live. In which words it is
manifest that Agur in his Prophecy speaking as he was moved by the holy
Ghost: sets down himself as a pattern, for all the Prophets, Pastors, and
Teachers of the word of God. What manner of state and living they ought to
desire, and of right ought to be given unto them. Namely, a mean estate
between poverty and riches, neither to set them up like Lords, nor to tread
them down like beggars, neither to pamper them with the abundance of many
thowsands, nor to abase them with less then one hundred.

And this the Apostle Paul does plainly confirm in his Epistle to the
Corinthians where he says, Do ye not know, that they which minister about
the holy things, ^ Cor, 9, 13, 14.
eat of the things of the Temple? And they which wait at the Alter, are
partakers with the Alter. So also has the Lord ordained, that they which
preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel. Upon which place says M.
Musculus, (and with him to the same effect all the best Commentaries, both of
the Protestants late writers, Musc. in 1. Cor.
and also of the ancient Fathers) Vivant: inquit, Victus necessitas vivendi
verbo expressa est, vt intelligas tantum victus deberi ex evangelio Christi
ministro, quantum ad necesiariam vitae sustentationem sufficere potest, non
quantum delitiae et luxus exigunt. Should live, says he. the necessity of
food and sustentation is expressed by the word, live, that thou should
understand that such a lyving is due for the preaching of the Gospel unto the
Minister of Christ, as may suffice to the necessary sustentation of life, and
not such a living as delicacie requiers. And old Barnard upon the same place:
Bernard
which though according to the proverb he saw not all, yet saw he so much that
he says, Vivat de altari iuxta Apostulum; alimenta et quibus tegatur habens,
his contentus sit; vivat, non superbiat, non luxurietur, denique non ditetur,
nec ex clericatu ditior fiat: He ought to live of the Alter as the Apostle
says, that is, having food and raiment let him there with be content: he
should live of the Gospel says Barnard and not to be puffed up, and not live
delicatly, not be made rich of the gospel: to conclude, by his Ecclesiastical
office he should be made never the richer.

And here I think good likewise to set down touching the same matter, the
words of our blessed Martyr and reverent Father Doctor Barnes, answeryng them
that said they sold not the word of God, but received the reward of their
labors. Barnes page, 265
Tell me (says D. Barnes) ye that be without shame if you do sell but your
labors. Is it not a soar and unlawful price to sell it so dear? what Bishop
can deserve by his labor a thousand pounds by the year? and yet some of them
have a great deal more and labor nothing at all. How dear would these men
sell their labors if they should be Tanker bearers: they would make water
dearer then wine. Yea, tell me what labor there is within the Realm that is
half so dear sold as their idlnes is? But, O you belly gods, did not
Christ's Apostles take pains and labor about the ministration of the word? And
in fulfilling of their office more in one day, then you do in all your lives.
and yet was it not lawful for them more to receive then a living. For our M.
Christ said, the work man is worthy of his meat: so that our Master would:
that they should receive noe more, but that was necessary. Also S. Paul says,
Our Lord did ordain that they which preach the gospel should live on the
gospel. Now which of you all does preach the gospel? Not one: and yet will
you enjoy those innumerable possessions. S. Jerome says one this same text,
Chrysostom. in ^ Tit. 9
You must live of the Gospel but not be rich. Also Chrysostom says, I say
bouldy that the Bishops and Prelates of the Church, may have nothing but meat
and drink and clothinge, least they should set their affections upon those
things. Here have you plainly (says Doctor Barnes:) that if you did labor
faithfully and truly in the gospel you could have but a living thereon, and
no Lordly possessions. And thus far D. Barnes, one of our own English
Ecclesiastical reverend Fathers, and blessed Martyr of God.

Now the Apostle in the same chapter proves, that the Preachers of the Gospel
ought to have not only a bare living, but also maintenance, when he says, 1
Cor. 9.3 4 5 6,
My defense to them that examine me is this. Have we not power to eat and
drink. Or have we not power to lead about a wife being a sister as well as
the rest of the Apostles, and as the brethren of the Lord and Cephas? Or I
only and Barnabas, have not we power not to work. By these words it is most
manifestly and clearly proved, that the Preachers of the Gospel with their
wives and houshoulds should have such a sufficiency of lyving, as might
maintain them in good sort with out any labor of their own hands. So that
all preachers of the word of God have authority and power not to work, but so
to be maintained, that they may wholly and altogether attend upon their
Ecclesiastical functions.

Further also, that the Preachers of Gods word ought to be so maintained as
they should not need to work and labor with their hands, is most evidently
proved in the sixth of the Acts, where all the twelve Apostles with one consent
say, Acts 6.2.
It is not meet that we should leave the word of God to serve the tables. For
if it were meet, that the preachers of the word of God should be employed or
occupied in any work or business in the world; What employment would be fitter,
then that holy labor of attendance upon the poor? And mark these words of
the holy Ghost pronounced with a full consent of all the Apostles; That we
should leave the word of God, (say they) whereby they plainly declare that
they must needs have left the preaching of the word of God, if they should
have attended upon any other bvsines whatsoever. Now if the Apostles covld not
do it, what Bishops or Pastors are able to perform it? Can Satan so blind
their eyes, that they should think themselves wiser; and endued with greater
graces and gifts of God then all the Apostles of Christ, so that they can
perform more duties, offices, and functions, then the Apostles were able to
do? And mark the conclusion of their words in the same place* And we (say the
Apostles) will give our selves continually to prayer, ver, 4
and to the ministration of the word. Where note well this word continually.
And S. Luke says, this thing pleased the whole multitude, v. 5
whereby we may see, that the whole multitude understood that he which
preaches the Gospel, ought not to be entangled with any other business. And
hereunto I will further add the words of Chrysostom speaking in the defense of
a sufficient maintenance for the Pastor and preacher of the word of God upon
the Epistle to Titus cap. 2. Vide quaeso, quanta rerum absurditas, Chrysostom. in
Tit. ^
number ille debet carere ministro? Vt sibi necesse sit incendere ignem; et aquas
afferre, et ligna perfringere atque in foro sepe necessario ingredi; potest
esse mayor perversitas, maiorque confusio? At sancti quidem illi viri Apostoli
eum qui doctrinae insisteret neque ad viduarum ministerium applicari voluerunt,
verum id opus indignum arbitrati sunt, etc. See (says Chrysostom) I pray you
how great absurdity there is of these things, should the Pastor be with out a
servant to tend upon him, so that he must make his fire himself and fetch
water, break his sticks for his fire, and go often to the market for things
necessary, can there be a greater perversitie, or a greater disorder? Those holy
men the Apostles thought it an unmeet thing that he which should attend upon
the word, should be employed so much as to the service of the poor widows.

Ye see, how this ancient Father Chrysostom applies the same place of the
Acts to this purpose, and vehemently defends that he which attends upon the
word, that is, he which preaches the Gospel that he should be able to keep a
man to attend upon him. And hereunto agreeeth the example of the Prophets, who
being extraordinarily called, had far less need of any ordinary assistance of
service. God himself immediately commanding other to sustain them, and the
very fowls of the air to feed them. Who havinge power to command fire to
fall from heaven, upon their wicked adversaries, and power to raise the dead to
life again for their beloved friends, God so providing for them that one
handful of meal and a little oil in a cruse should grow and increase to such
abundance that it sustained them and other a long time. And not only in matter
of bodily sustenance, but also even to the payment of their debtes to their
poor friends, so to multiply the creatures of God for them that they had
abundance, both to pay their creditors, and to sustai^e themselves.

These Prophets therefore a man would think, should have little need of
ordinary attendance of a servant to wait upon them, yet God would have it that
each of them, should have such ordinary maintenance, that they should be able
to keep one man to attend upon them. That they might be freer from the business
and affairs of this life, and to attend wholly and continually to prayer and
administration of the word. As Eliiah had by the appointment of God Elisha to
wait upon him and to power water upon his hands. As it is written in the 2 of
Kings the 3 chap, 2 Kings 3.11
and the 11. verse. By the which words of powering water upon his hands, the
holy Ghost signifies the free attendance of such a one as we call a serving
man, which waits upon his Master and serves him even in the least matters.
And likewise Elisha had his servant Gehazi attending upon him as he went by the
way, and waiting upon him in his chamber which the Shunamite had prepared for
him: so had Jeremy, Baruch, and no doubt all the rest of the Prophets, though
their names and service be not so expressly set down in the text. But here I
can not but rest a little upon that memorable history of the Shunamite a woman
(as the text says) of great estimation, an honorable person, which had no
need to make suite or crave any thing, either of King or Captain. In what
reverent sort she entertained the Prophet, and with care she provided althings
necessary for him, and with all how Elisha was able to do for her, both with
the King and genenerall captain. 2. Kings ^, 9, 10
I know (says she to her husband) that this is an holy man of God. Let us
make him a little chamber, (I pray thee) with walls, and let us set him there a
bed and a table and stool and a candlestick, that he may turn in thither
when he comes to us. She says not let us make ready the great chamber, and
let us consider that he comes with forty, or fifty, or threescore men,
whereof many be gentlemen of good account, so that all the chambers we have
must be well furnished and trimmed up. But she prepared for him a studentlike
lodging, in which he might be lodged when he came. Here you see the mean
estate wherein the prophet kept himself: and which all godly persons thought
it meetest for him to continue in. Notwithstanding that he was in so great
favor, both with many Noble personages, and with the King himself. And
specially with the King who so loved and honored him, that being sick the King
in his own person came unto him, wept upon his face, and cried out saying, O
my Father my Father, the charet of Israel, and the horsemen of the same. And
yet he allowed him not four or five thousand pounds by the year: nor made him
a Lords grace, nor an Archprophet; but let him live in-such a mean estate as
has been before declared, and as the Prophet thought meetest for himself to
continue in. And not unfitly hereunto may be joined the history of Constantin
the great, and his singular love and favor, toward the Ministers and
Preachers of the word of God in his time; that we may see together what was the
estate both of the Prophets in the old Testament, and of the Preachers of the
word of God in the New. And how Kings and Princes maintained the^, which most
dearly loved them. In the life of Constantine thus it is written. Dei vero
administros ad se accersitos semper honor praecipuo dignos censebat et omni
officio prosequebatur, Vit. Constable: apud Eusebius,
nihil circa devotos addictosque numini benignitatis aut humanitatis omittebat.
Homines quidem de vultu ornatuque tenues, alia tamen apud eum nota convictores
erant, haud asseclae. The Ministers of God being called unto him, he ever
thought them most worthy of special honor, and did reverence them withal
duetifulnes, and he omitted nothing toward them who were devoute, and
dedicated to God which pertained to loving kindness or courtesy, yet they were
men indeed in countenance and garnishment but poor: but in another note they
were familiar companions with him, and not waiting servants. I need not to
amplify this matter: ye see (as I have said) the estate of the Ministers of
Gods word both in the old Testament and in the New, under those Kings and
Princes which so highly favored, honored, and so dearly loved them. And yet
never made the^ Lords nor Archlords, nor maintained them in any pompous or
lordly estate. And here I will ad the example of Athanasius, who must needs
have been extolled and lifted up unto a Lordly dignity by that great and
mighty Emperor Constantine, if he had not thought it utterly unlawful so to
exalt any Bishop in the world. Being the only man above all the rest among all
the three hundred Bishops in the Counsel of Nice, which confuted, and
confounded the horrible heresy of Arius, which then was ready to overrunne
the Church of God; in so much that he was called Oculus mundi, the eye of the
world. And whose Confession is set up and received even to this day in all
christian Churches, and called Athanasius Creed: yet when he was accused to
have turned the corn (which the Emperor sent unto the City) to other uses
then the Emperor had appointed. The Synod of Alexandria in their Apology for
Athanasius, makes this answer, Synod. Alexan. Apol 2.
Quid Athanasio remotius a crimine? qui si vel in ipsa Alexandria fuisset quid
tamen ipsi cum negotiis prefecti. What could be further of from fault then
Athanasius? Which if he had been at that time even in the City of Alexandria,
yet what had he to do with the affairs of the Magiistrate. And further they
say, Nec fieri posse vt homo privatus et pauper tantum virium haberet. Neither
could it be possible, that such a private and poor man should be able to do
it.

Here you see the estate that Athanasius the most famous Bishop in the world
at that time was in, and how the Bishops themselves, and the most godly
Princes, and Emperors thought fit for the^ to live in. All these things being
considered, I conclude that the Pastor or Preacher of the word of God, ought to
be so maintained that being freed from all other business, he might have one man
at all times to wait upon him. Whereunto a convenient proportion of living, as
the state and rate of things stand at this day in England cannot be less then
one hundred pounds by the year, considering that he may not attend upon any
other occupying, affairs, or business, but only and continually upon prayer
and administration of the word. Wherefore I say, at the least one hundred by
the year: for so the sound judgment of reason requires. Howbeit if some one
be above other charged with many children or other ways, A reasonable
proportion for a Pastors maintenance
or in special sort with excellency of gifts be found worthy to be
preferred before other, the living unto such may and ought to be increased, yet
so, that none exceed the revenues of two hundred, or there about. Which thing
agreeeth well with the words of his Majesty: in his second book of his
Basilicon Doron where he says, As some will deserve to be preferred before
other, pa. 44.
so chain them with such bonds as may preserve that estate from creeping to
corruption. And surely a foul and shameful corruption it is, that any
Ecclesiastical person, should be maintained upon and by any Ecclesiastical
lyving, exceeding the reasonable estate and proportion before named. For so he
is both corrupted himself, and also robs other of that which by right
belongs unto them; while the one is lifted up to a Lordship, and the other
kept under in a beggarly estate.

Now to go forward with the proceeding and growing up of Antichrist and his
Babilonish whore. When the Bishops had taken a degree above the rest of the
Pastors, and had the name of Papa, as it were written one their foreheads, and
usually given them in their titles, and their regiment creaping up to whole
Cities and Diocesses. So that some of them began to maintain themselves as
Lords, and to claim a Lordly estate. The godly learned Fathers not seeing the
mischeifes that were already by a general and common consent crept in:
whereby it was imposible to keep out the foul corruptions following, not
only tolerated the foul abuses brought in, but also they themselves in their
simplicity, with a zeal of God, though not according to knowledge, brought in
many bald Ceremonies and corruptions, which for brevityes sake I will pass
over, and only set down the words of our English Father George Alley Bishop
of Exeter of the corruptions in the Sacrament of Baptism brought in by the
ancient Fathers. Alley
Whereby we may see the weakness even of the first times and former ages.
Tertullian writes (says he) that when we come to the water we stay somewhat
before in the Church under the hand of the Priest, and do protest that we will
renounce the Devil, his pomp, and all his Angels. After that we be thrice
dipped in the water, de coron militi^
answering no more then the Lord has determined in his gospel. And then being
taken out we taste of milk and honey. And from that day we abstain from being
washed by the space of a whole week. Here you may see (says our Bishop of
Exeter) by the words of Tertullian what rites were added unto Baptism, as
abrenunctions, three immersions, tasting of milk and honey, abstinence from
washing. lib. 15. in Esa
In his first book against Martion, he makes mention also of oil: S. Jerome
testifies that wine was added to the milk, he writes in his commentaries
after this manner. The Lord did provoke us not only to buy wine, but also
milk, which signifies the innocence of infants, which manner and type is
even at this day observed in the west Churches, that wine and milk be given to
them that be borne again in Christ. S. Augustine in certain places of his
works does show, that diverse prayers and manners, were used about Baptism, he
makes mention of Exorcismes, and Exufflations against the contrary power: he
speaks of Godfathers which promise faith for the infants, he makes mention
also of oil wherewith the christened were anointed. After Augustine, Rabanus
Maurus Bishop of Mentz makes rehearsal of many more Ceremonies in Baptism, as
to sign him that was Baptized with the Cross in the forehead and in the
breast, to bless salt and to put it into his mouth, of a white cloth which we
call the Chrisome. All those things, and many such other were added from time
to time by men. But if antiquity may seem to defend the manner of these
rites, who dare deny the authority of the Apostles far to excel their
authorities, for the Apostles were long before them. Therefore it shall be
best to cleave to, and follow the steps of the Apostles, as well in the
ministry of Baptism, as in other godly ministrations. Thus far our Bishop of
Exeter.

And as these foul corruptions and other such like, were even then brought
into Baptism, so likewise in the Supper of the Lord, and many other orders of
the Church. As namely, the filthy vermin of Monks in the time of Augustine and
Jerome grew to be almost innumerable, which although at that time they had very
coulerable pretenses and great show of virtue and holiness, yet had they noe
ground in the word of God; and so by the event we now manifestly see, that they
were nothing else, but the very Locusts which even then began to come out in
the smoke of the bottomless pit, spoken of in the 9. chap. of the Revelation.
Yet these ancient Fathers tolerating and bringing in these and many other
follies and Humane inventions, labored with might and maine to keep down the
po^pe, pride, and stately regiment which they now saw grew so fast and without
measure in the Bishops, Pastors, and the rest of the clergy; as things in the
Church which they saw to be most intolerable, and most clearly against the
word of God. And therefore they fought against them, both by their examples of
life, by their doctrine, and by general constitutions and decrees made in
their assemblies and Counsels. Basil moral 70, cap. 28,
As Basilius Magnus which says. Quod non oportet eum cui concreditum est
predicare Evangelium, plus possidere quam ea quae ad necessariu^ ipsius vsum
sufficiant. That it is not lawful for him, to whom the preaching of the word
of God is committed, to possess more then that which may suffice for the
necessary use of this life. And to show the practice of his own life thereunto
according, upon occasion being threatened with the confiscation of his goods,
he answers. Siquidem horum nihil me cruciari poterit; equidem opes non habeo,
Zoz lib. 6 ca. 16
praeterquam vestem laceram et paucos libros; sicque terram incolo quasi semper
ex ea migraturus. Certainly (says Basil) none of these things can greatly
vex me, for surely I have no riches, more then a ragged gown and a few books,
and so I dwell upon earth as looking ever to depart out of it. And Gregory
Bishop of Nisse, in his funeral oration in which he did celebrate the praise
and memory of this his brother Basil the great, says. Placuerat ab initio
nihil quicquam possidere et paupere^ esse tanquam petra immota atque inconcussa
stabile firum; Impress, Basil Anno 1562. page 347
id iudicium fuit, concupisebat per puritatem appropinquare Deo. It pleased him
(says Gregory Nissen) to possess nothing at all and to be a poor man: and
this his judgment was stable and firm as a rock that could not be removed,
and he coveted by purity to draw near unto God. Mark well what a Puritan
this Basil the great was, who had his addition of greatness, not for the
greatness of riches, but for the greatness of his learning, virtue, and purity of
life. And mark how the Bishop of Nisse also numbreth these things among his
excellent virtues, namely that he lived in a mean estate, which he calls
poverty in comparison of pompous dignity and Lordship. As he that may dispend
but one hundred pounds by the year, is but a beggar in respect of him that may
dispend three or four thousand. Thus much of Basil the great.

And Jerome complains and cries out against the Lordship of Bishops of his
time in his Commentary upon on the book of the Preacher saying. Hoc autem
propterca evenit quia nemo peccantibus Episcopis audet contradicere: nec statim
Deus scelus ulciscitur, Jerome
sed differt paenam dum expectat penitentiam: This mischeife comes to pass
(says Ierom) because when Bishops do naughtily no man dares speak against
them, and God does not straight way take vengaunce of the abominable wickedness,
but he deferrs the plague expecting their repentance. Here we may see by these
few words of Jerome, how the Lordly state of Bishops was even then crept up
what think ye Jerome: would say, if he saw their magnificent estate in our
age? Alas the poor proud Bishops of Ieromes time, if they should be compared
with these, the comparison would be, as between Mountains, and moule hills.
But straight way after in the same place, Jerome says further. Nemo quip pe
audet accusare maiorem, propterea quasi sancti et beati et in preceptis Domini
ambulantes augent peccata peccatis. For indeed says Jerome, no man dares to
accuse him that is greater then himself; and therefore as though they were
holy and blessed men they go fo^^^rd, and heap sin upon sin. And here it
is worthy to be noted how Jerome again in this place girdeth at the
superiority that Bishops then had got above other Ministers of the word. For
(says he) no man dares accuse him that is greater the^ himself, and therefore
they go boldly from one wickedness to another, and this is indeed all the
advantage that they get by their superiority. But if that mischeife came of
that small superiority, what a world of wickedness comes of the Lordly estate
wherein the Bishops now are. But Ierom in the same place goes forth, saying.
Difficilis est accusatio in Episcopum, si enim peccaverit non creditur, et si
convictus fuerit non punitur. It is a difficult accusation against a Bishop
(says Jerome) for if he offends no man belieues it, yea and if he be
convicted, yet is he not punished. And agreeable speech unto this uses our
reverend English Father M. Nowell in his great Catechism, Nowell Catech.
where commending and speaking of the Discipline of the Primitive Church (he
says.) But this Discipline since long time past by little and little decayed, as
the manners of men be corrupt, and out of right course, specially of the rich
and men of power, which will needs have impunitie, and most free liberty to
sin and do wickedly.

But to return to Jerome, ye see whereunto the superiority of Bishops was come
even then; and what fruit this corn of evil seed, being then but newly
sowed, has brought forth unto this day, a man may easily judge. And this is
the cause why Jerome so often, (as has been before declared) puts the
Bishops in remembrance that they are greater then other Elders or Ministers by
custom, and not by any truth of the Lords appointment, and that they ought to
rule in common. But the Discipline liked them much better whereby they might
have free liberty to sin, and that no man might dare, or be so bold to
reprove them, much less to punish them. Yet Jerome in his Epistle to Nepotian
is bold with the Lordship of Bishops saying. Illud etiam dico quod Episcopi
sacerdotes se esse noverint non dominos. This also I say, that Bishops should
know that they be priests and not Lords. And further he says to Nepotian
Negociatorem clericum et ex inope diuitem et ex ignobili gloriosum quasi
quandam pestem fuge. A man of the Clergy (says Jerome) that is an occupier and
that is become of a poor man a rich man, and of a man of low degree to be a
man of honorable estate, fly from such a one as it were from a certain
pestilence. And touching his own estate he says being then one of the most
famous christian Pastors in the whole world, and in many things greater and
better learned then Augustine. Altaris oblatione sustentor, habens victum et
vestitum his contentus ero, et crucem nudam nudus sequor. I am sustained by the
offering of the Altar, and having food and raiment, Epistlo 11.
and being a naked fellow my self I follow the naked Cross of Christ. And in
his Epistle to Augustine he says. Ego in paruo tuguriolo cum monachis, id est
cum compeccatoribus meis, de magnis statuere non audeo. I in my poor little
cottage (says he) with certain monks that is to say sinners, dare not
determine of high matters. You see how far Ierom was from Lordly estate, he
lived not in a Princly Palace, but in a poor little cottage: Yet for the
excellency of his fame and learning inferior to none which then lived. For
proof whereof, and for the worthynes of the matter, I will set down one
example though I shall make there in a little digression.

Algasia a gentle woman of France, dwelling at the least as far from Ierom as
England from the Isles of Canarie, hearing of his excellent learning and
knowledge in Divinity, sent purposely unto him, from the borders of the Ocean
sea, and the furthest part of all France, and passing by Rome, she sent unto
him dwelling at Bethleem, to be resolved in diverse points of the scripture.
Among which the Eleaventh question was, how she should understand the words of
the Apostle speakeyng of Antichrist. 2 These. 2 ca. In answering which question
Ierom says. Ad Algas, q. 11,
Nec vult aperte dicere Romanum inperium destruendum quod ipsi qui impera^t
aeternam putant; vnde secundum Apocalipsim Iohannis infronte purpuratae
meretricis scriptum est nomen blasphemiae; id est Romae aeternae. Nether would
the Apostle (says Ierom) say in plain terms that the Empire of Rome should
be destroyed, which they that reign there think to be eternal, where upon
according to the Revelation of S. John, in the forehead of the purple coulered
whore, there is written the name of blasphemy, that is of Rome eternal. A
religious and right noble Lady,


In which discourse, diverse things of special note are worthy to be observed.
As first the great zeal and careful diligence of that Noble gentlewoman
seeking so far to know and understand the scriptures. O, that our Ladies and
gentleweomen of England, were so careful to seek after God, that their souls
might live. Secondly, that she passed by Rome (being right in the way to
Bethleem) with the proud Pope, which boasts himself to have all knowledge
within the coffer of his own breast, together withal his college of
Carnalls, and seeks after Ierom the poor Minister of Bethleem. Thirdly, of
how great fame, poor Ierom was for his knowledge and learning in Divinity.
Fourthly, that the name of Rome eternal is the name of blasphemy, which is
written upon the forehead of the purple coulered whore. Now to return again
to the state of the Church in Ieroms time; and leaving him to his poor cottage
with his Monks, Hom. against peril of Idolatry. part 2:
let us see in what lordly estate Augustine lived, and what his judgment is
concerning the same; of whom it is written in the Homily of our English
Church, that he was the best learned of all the Ancient Fathers. And
Possidonius testifies of him, Posid. de vit, Aug cap. 31.
how excellent and dilligent a Preacher he was: Verbum Dei usque ad ipsam suam
extermam aegritudinam impraetermisse, alacriter, et fortiter, sana mente,
sanoque consilio in ecclesia praedicavit. He preached the word of God in the
Church (says Possidonius) without pretermission, with sound mind, and advised
judgment, even unto the time of his extreme sickness. Where mark the word
impraetermisse, without pretermission, and how far the Lord Bishops are from
this diligence in our days. Now touching this matter Augustine says; lib, de
Pastor cap, ^.
Vnde enim vivitur. etc. It is of nessitie (says he) to take so much as the
Pastor may be able to live on, and charity requires so to be given unto him,
not as though the gospel were a thing to be sold, and that should be the
price thereof which they take that preach it; for so they should indeed sell a
great thing for a small price, but they ought to take of the people the
sustentation of their necessity, and of the Lord a reward of their
stewardship. But let us hear, what Augustine and all the Bishops of that part
of the world with him not only say, but also in full assembly decree, in the
third Counsel of Carthage. And first touching their titles Canon 26. Carth,
Coun, 3.
Vt primae sedis Episcopus. etc. We decre (say they) that the Bishop of the
first seat shall not be called the chief priest, or hie priest, or any such
manner of thing; but only he shall be called Bishop of the first seat. And
mark that they say nor any such manner of thing. And also these words, but
only; by which two words they clearly reject the titles of Archbishop,
Primate, etc. And touching their Lordly estate in life and livyng. Carth. Coun.
4,
In the 34 Canon of the fourth Counsel of Carthage, they decreed that a Bishop
should not suffer a Minister or an Elder to stand when he himself did sit:
and in the 14 Canon of the same counsel they decree thus. Vt Episcopus non
long ab ecclesia hospitiolum habeat; That a Bishop should have his little poor
dwelling not far from the Church. Here you see that as Jerome dwelt in his
Tuguriolum, So Augustine binds himself and the rest of the Bishops to their
Hospitiolum; So far Bishops ought to be from their princely Palatium. But
Augustine and the rest of the Bishops with him, seeing the mischeife of
Bishoplike pomp growyng so fast, seemed to think that no words could be
spoken or decreed plain enough, to pull it down. Therefore in the 16 Canon of
the same Counsel, they say and decree thus. Vt Episcopus vilem supellectilem
et mensam ac victu^ pauperem habeat, et dignitatis suae authoritatem fide, et
vitae meritis quaerat. We decree (say they) that a Bishop shall have base
household stuff, his manner of livyng and his table poor, and let him seek
the authority of his dignity by faith and worthynes of life. By what more
effectual words were it possible for Augustine and his fellows to pull of the
Lordly Cappe of maintenance, which the Lord Bishops do wear: and how could
they more violently stamp it under their feet? Yet here perhaps some will
say, we cannot deny but Augustine by way of doctrine and decree condemns the
Lordship of Bishops, yet he himself lived like a Lord: and so does the Pope
also call himself and writes himself Servus servorum Dei. The servant of the
servants of God. Yet lives he like a Lord of Lords both spiritual and
temporal, reigns like a Prince by his spiritual Lordship over the soul,
and by the temporal over the body. Well then let us see how like a Lord
Augustine lived.

Possidonius Bishop of Calamine well acquainted with Augustine, Possid. de vit
Aug.
himself being a Bishop writes the life of Augustine: where he so highly
commendyng his worthy life, nombreth these things also among his excellent
virtues. First he says. Docebat et praedicabat ille privatim et public in
domo et in ecclesia. He taught and preached both publicly and privately, both
in the house and in the Church. And (as has been before declared) without
pretermission, he never failed to preach the word of God in his Church, even
unto the extremity of sickness. And touching his household, estate, and the
rest of his life, Possidonius says, Mensa vsus est frugali et parca, quae
quidem inter olera et legumi na etiam carnes aliquando propter hospites vel
quosque infirmiores continebat. Ibidem cap, 22.
He used his table sparynge and frugall; which among, beans, pease, and such
like poor men's fare, sometime also it had flesh thereon for strangers, or for
some that were sick. Behold this Lordbishops ordinary diet and dainty fare,
perceive ye not by his cheer how like a Lord he lived? But let us go forward;
Cochlearibus tantum argentis vtens cetera vasa quibus mensae inferebantur cibi,
vel testacca, vel lignea, vel marmorea erant, Using (says Possidonius) only
silver spones, the rest of the vessels in which meat was brought in to his
table, were either wodden, or earthen, or marble. Here I might reason thus; he
lived not like a Lord, for he eat his meat in wodden dishes: and one the
other side, he lived not like a beggar, for he used to eat with silver spones.
Neither was he driven to do this by the beggary of necessity, but by a willing
purpose of heart. And also says Possidonius, he ever kept good hospitality;
mark that Possidonius being a Bishop also, commends him for this
hospitality. Further he says to Augustines commendation. ib. cap, 12,
Et in ipsa mensa magis lectionem, vel disputationem, quam epulationem vel
potationem diligebat. And at his very table, he loved more readi^g or
disputation, then either eating or drinkyng. But here perhaps some cunnyng
caviler will say; it may be he lived so sparingly to gather the more, and to in
rich his children or heirs, or those on whom (after his death) he would bestow
that he had. But let such a shifter hear what Possidonius says further.
Testamentum autem nullum fecit, quia unde faceret pauper Christi non habuit. He
made (says Possidonius) no testament, for the poor christian (says he) had
nothing to make a testament of. And to conclude he says, Domum vero vel agrum
seu villam nunqua^ emere voluit. Augustine would nether buy house or felld or
farm. We see here Augustine both in full resolution of iudgne^t, and in the
whole practice of his life, utterly condemns the Lordship of Bishops. Yet
rather then they would follow him, they would plainly reject him, saying, it
is but one Doctors opinion: forgetting that which is said in our English
Homily, and commanded to be read and declared to all our people, that
Augustine was the best learned of all the ancient writers. Nor remembering that
which has been before proved, namely, that not only Augustine alone, but all
the whole assembly of Bishops and ancient Fathers in the Counsel of Carthage
do with him and with one voice and consent, fully condemn and tread under
their feet their Lordly estate. But let us hear what other Doctors also say
to this matter.

Ambrose upon this place of Paul to Timothy. Ambros in 1 Timothy cap. 5
The Elders that rule well are worthy of double honor, especially, they which
labor in the word and doctrine. says, Non vt abundet, sed vt non desit. Dicit
enim scriptura: Non infrenabis bovem triturantem, dignus est operarius mercede
fua; Tanta merces debet esse evangelizantis regnum Dei, qua neque contristetur,
neque extollatur. Not that he should abound (says Ambrose) but that he should
not want. For the scripture says, thou shall not mousell the mouth of the Ox
that treads out the corn, and the laborer is worthy of his reward. So great
a reward ought he to have that preaches the Gospel of the kingdom of God, by
which he should neither be greived with need, nor lifted up with abundance.

What could be more plainly spoken for the mean estate of the preacher, and
for the utter condemning of the beggerie of a Minister and the Lordship of a
Bishop, who are both comprehended under the name of Preacher of the Gospel.
Not that he should have a bundance (says Ambrose) but that he should not be in
need, that he should neither be grieved, nor exalted, but with a mean and a
reasonable sufficiency to content himself.

And again on the first epistle to the Thessalonians cap. 5. he says. Hoc est
quod dicit, et in alia epistola. Presbiteros duplici honor honorandos etc.
This is that the Apostle speaks, in another epistle, that the Elders are
worthy of double honor, which labor in the word and doctrine. For it may
greiue him which suffers through need, to keep the exercise that may
profit the hearers. For what is one the better to have honor without profit?
or how is it a great matter to offer him carnal things, which gives him
spiritual things. For as riches beget negligence of salvation, so needines
while it seeks to be satisfied, declines from justice. And therefore the
Prophet Agur in the Proverbs of Solomon, Prove. 30
desires to be made neither over rich, nor extreme needy. Behold here the
excellent moderation of lyving and estate which Ambrose so precisely sets
down for the preacher of the word of God. And this memorable saying of Ambrose
in the Counsel of Aquilegia is commonly aleaged by the best late writers,
against the popish pride and Lordship of Bishops. Gloriosa in sacerdotibus
Domini paupertas. Poverty is an excellent, or glorious thing in the Priests of
the Lord. And as M. Fox and many of the best Protestant writers affirm. Fox
page, 1263, edition 1583.
In the time of Ambrose this proverb took his original, that sumptuous
palaces did pertain unto Emperors, and Churches unto Priests. And mark that
it was grown then to a proverb, that is to a speech which the common people
used, and was persuaded generally to be true. And these words of Ambrose, also
are commonly aleaged. Et intra Palatium certare non possum qui secreta palatii
nec quero nec novi. And within a palace (says Ambrose) I cannot dispute,
Sarav: de minist, grad cap, 2^.
who neither know nor seek after the secreats of a palace. And for Ambroses
diligence in preaching, wherein he so fare differs from our Lord Bishops, it
is worthy to be noted which Augustine himself says of him. Aug confess. 6 ^8
Et enim quidem in populo verbum veritatis recte tractantem omni dominico
audiebam. And I heard Ambrose (says he) every Lords day publickely and soundly
preaching, the word of truth.

And now to his Lordly estate of life, and how like a Lord he lived: and surely
if ever any Bishop might have lived like a Lord Ambrose might have best done
it; being set up by the Emperor before he was Bishop into a lordly and noble
estate, So. lib, 5,
even to be the Emperors Lieftenant in the great City of Millaine. Where his
authority and countenance was such, that coming into the midst of the
people, where the rage of contention, between the Arians and Catholics was
very great, of all sides the rage ceased. And with one voice they all chose
him to be their Bishop (and says the story) all the Bishops that were present
said, that the uniform voice of the people, was the very voy^e of God, and
therefore he ought not to refuse it. So, tha^ the consent of the Emperor being
had, he was presently made Bishop of Millaine. Costerius
And Costerius writing his life says, that Valentinian the Emperor wrote thus
familiarly unto him after he was made Bishop, Macte igitur virtute esto, etc.
Be of good courage (says the Emperor unto him) do that which belongs to
thy office, take care that the christian affairs continue safe and sound, and
that the discipline of the ancient religion persevere and continue uncorrupted
etc. And afterward fol. the 6. the Emperor has these words of Ambrose; Cuius
ego authoritatem tanti facio, vt is solus sit que^ ego Episcopi nomine dignum
censeam. Whose authority (says Valentinian the Emperor) I so highly esteem,
that I think him the only man worthy the name of a Bishop. Not withstanding
all this, Costerius concludes of his Lordly estat with these words. Non
satellitio aut clientelis stipatus, neque potentiae magnitudine formidabilis,
sed rebus ac censu pauper. He was not (says Costerius) environed or beset with
a great retinue of men, nor with a company retained to guard his person,
neither was he dreadful, or to be feared for his greatness, but in substance
and revenues he was poor. And a non after speaking of ambition and
covetousnes: says Costerius, Verum is ab hac peste adeo liber fuit etc. He was
so free from this pestilence, that after he had spent all that he had in
virtuous and godly uses, having now nothing in his house which he might either
give to helpyng of the poor, or to the redeemyng them that were in captivity,
he brake in pieces the vessels of the Temple for the same purpose. Thus much of
Ambrose both of his dignity before he was Bishop, and of his poor estate
afterward.

Now let us see what Chrysostom writes and teaches concerning the Lordship
of Bishops. Chrysostom Socra. schola lib. 6 ca. 3.
The Emperor Arcadius (says Socrates Ecclesiasticus) with the general
consent both of priests and people, sent for him. And to the end his
consecration might be of more authority, by commandment of the Emperor,
there were present many other Bishops. Where first note that Chrysostom was so
famous a man, that not only the Emperor and the Clergy, but also the common
people, (who kept until that time, yea and many years after, even as long as
remained any face of a true Church, their right and interest in the election of
Bishops and Ministers,) had intelligence of Chrysostom worthiness to be their
Bishop, of who^ he was generally called for his eloquence and excellency of
speaking and teaching, the goulden mouthed Doctor. Let us hear then what this
goulden mouth utters, for the Lordly estate of Bishops upon this place of
Matthew. Math. 10.10,
The work man is worthy of his meat. Cibo suo dixit Christus, ne Apostoli plus
aliquid querant. Mark (says Chrysostom) that Christ said the work man is
worthy of his meat, signifiyng thereby that they ought to take no more but
their food. And upon these words in the first Epistle to the Corin. 9. ca: Who
goes a warfare any time at his own cost etc. Hom: 2 1.
Etini^ militis sortitudinem exhibere oportuit, et agricolae diligentiam, et
pastoris curam, et cum eis omnibus nihil supra necessitatem accipere. For the
preacher of the gospel ought to show forth the valiant courage of a Soldier,
the diligence of a husba^dman, and the carefulnes of a Shepherd, and withal
these to take no more but that necessity requires. And in the same place
immediately he says; Recte quidem non de agnis sed de lacte loquutus est, vt
ostenderet parvo lucro magistru^ contentum esse oportere et solo victu
necessario. The Apostle (says Chrysostom) speaks well of eating the milk,
but not of eating the Lambs, that he might show that a Teacher ought to
content himself with a small gain and only with a needful lyving. And
again he says; Sed que^admodum sacerdotes etc. Like as the Priests live of
the holy service and Alter, so they that preach the gospel ought to live of
the gospel, and as they do eat, so these take their livyng, but they do not
abound nor gather any treasure. And upon the second chapter to the Philippians
sermon the 9. Even speaking in the defense of the Pastors maintenance, he has
these words. Dic quaeso, sericisvestitur, multitudinem sequentium et
concomitantium habens? Circa forum arroganter incedit? Equo vehitur? Domos
edificat, habens vbi maneat? Si ista facit, et ego reprehenda^ et non par came,
imo ipsu^ sacerdotio quoque indignu^ dico. Quomodo enim admonebit ne superfluis
istis vacent, cum se ipsum admonere nequeat. Si vero necessarium victum abunde
habuerit, ideo ne iniustus erit? Sed circum ire oportebat et mendicare. Et tu
vt discipulus nihil inde, dic quaeso, pudifieres? At pater quidem carnalis si
hoc faceret, turpe putares: Si vero spiritualis ad hoc cogatur, non quaeres pre
pudore latebras? Tell me I pray thee (says he) is the Pastor clothed in silk,
having a great number followyng and accompaning him? Goes he proudly about the
Market place? Is he a horseback (or at his foot cloth) does he build houses
having already an habitation to dwell in? If he do these things I my self
will reprove him, neither will I spare him; yea I my self also say that such a
one is unworthy of the Preisthood. For how shall he admonish other men that
they give not over themselves to those superflutious things, seeing he cannot
admonish himself. But if he have a plentiful necessary lyving shall he
therefore be counted unjust? Thou will say, he ought to go up and down and
beg? And I pray thee tell me, would thou not be asha^ed to be the Disciple
of such a one? If thy fleshly Father should do so, thou would be ashamed.
Now if thy spiritual Father should be driven thereunto, do thou not for
very shame hide thy self?

If Appelles with his pensill should have painted out this matter, he could
never half so lively have painted out the Lord Bishop and the Parish priest of
our days; as this goulden mouth in these words has done, condemnyng both
these extremes as shameful and abominable. But I leave it to the reader that
winketh not, but opens his eyes to behold the state of the Church in our time
and to compare it with that time. In his 50 Hom. upon the Epistle to Timothy
the 5 chap: Chrysostom. in 1. Tim.
he discourses in these words. Honorem hoc in loco obsequium etc. In this
place (says Chrysostom) honor is taken for readiness to do the thing that a
man is willed to do, and for needful liberality. For that which follows,
thou shall not mousell the mouth of the Ox that treads out the corn, and
the laborer is worthy of his reward, shows that to be the Apostles meaning;
for when he also commands that widows should be cherished with honor, it
must needs be referred to a necessary livyng etc. Therefore (says he) if any
man be a delicat fellow or negligent in his office, he is surely worthy of no
reward except he be an Ox that treads out the corn: except he draw the yoke
even against the thorns and the frost and shrink not away, he is unworthy.
Therefore unto the Teachers a necessary livyng ought plentifully to be
ministered, least they should faint or be discomforted; neither that being
occupied in the smallest things they should deprive themselves and other of
great things; that they might work spiritual things, having no regard of
secular affairs: For such were the Levits, which had no charg of worldly
business as the lay men had. Yet to the Levits some care of such things was
permitted, and by the law there was appointed unto them revenues, tithes, first
fruits, vows, and many other things; but unto them by the law these things
were worthelie permitted; as unto them that sought things present and earthly.
Now Chrysostom concludes with these words. Yet I (says he) will speak it
bouldly, that the chiefest Prelates of the Church ought to have no more but
only food and raiment, least their affections should be drawn away to these
worldly things. He says not; that they should have the^, yet not set their
affections upon the^: but he says they should not have the^ least their
affections should thereby be drawn to love them. Thus have ye heard both the
judgment and practice, of all the principal and chiefest of all the ancient
Fathers which are called the Docters of the Church, which lived under the most
godly and christian Emperors, in that three hundredth years whch our book of
Martyrs calls the florishyng time of the Church. In which time although many
ceremonial corruptions steps toward the Hierarhie were brought in, yet the
Lordship of Bishops was by them all with one voice and consent, and with one
uniform practice of their life utterly condemned as most wicked and
abominable. Fox page 406: edit 1563
But as M. Fox says, speaking of the time between Augustine and Barnard; And
this while (says he) still the regiment and riches of Bishops increased, and
thereof ensued a monstrous regiment. Yea, blind Barnard himself saw plainly
that the Lordship of Bishops with their riches, great livyngs, and magnificent
estate was a wicked and monstrous regiment. And that all men might know these
things to be so plain that even a blind man could see it, therefore I will
here set down some few of his sayings touching that purpose, as in his 77.
Sermon upon the Canticles in the title, De malis pastoribus of evil Pastors.
Vnde hanc illis ex vberare existimas rerum affluentiam, vestium splendorem,
mensarum luxvriem, congeriem vasorum argenteorum et aureorum, (...).
nisi de bonis sponsae? Inde est quod illa pauper et inops, et nuda
relinquitur, facie miseranda, inculta, hispida, exangui. Non est hoc ornare
sponsam, sed spoliare: non est custodire, sed prodere: non est defendere, sed
exponere: non est iustituere, sed prostituere: non est pascere gregem, sed
macctare et devorare. Whence trow you does this abundance of riches flow unto
them (says Barnard) as that bravery in apparel, the voluptuousnes of their
tables, their cubbards of gold and silver plate, but of the goods of the spouse
of Christ? Here of it comes, that she her self is left poor, needy, and
naked, with a miserable face undressed, rude, and terrible, to see as pale as a
dead corse. This is not to garnish and beautify the spouse, but to rob and
spoil her: this is not to keep her, but to destroy her; not to defend her,
but to thrust her out of doors: not to instruct her, but to make a whore of
her, this is not to feed the flock, but to kill and devour it. It was not
possible that Barnard in those blind days, who was himself so blind in many
other things, could so plainly have seen this if the thing it self had not
been as plain as a pack staff. And it is worthy to be noted that he says.
Inde est quod illa pauper et inops, et nuda relinquitur, facie miseranda etc.
Heerof (says Barnard) even of the great riches, great livynges, and high
estate of the Prelates, the Spouse of Christ, that is, the Church of God,
becomes so poor, needy, and naked, with such a withered and miserable face.

For he could not complain in the midst of popery, that their temples lacked
and were not garnished with Surplices, Vestiments, silk glistering in gold,
and glory, like the firmament pouderd with bright stars, and the full Moon
in the midest of the night. But his complaynt was, that the Lord Bishops, and
other the great Prelates, by the devise and consent of Antichrist the Pope; and
of the Kings and Princes which were become his vassalls and slaves, had gotten
into their hands the livings that belonged to the Pastors and preachers of the
word of God; And thereupon lived like Lords, accounting the parish Ministers
single sole Sir John's and hedge priests, who being robbed and spoiled of their
maintenance, left themselves and the Church without all the divine and
spiritual ornaments, which Christ her Bridegroom at the first had given her,
and appointed by his word and commandment, to have her adorned and garnished
withal to the end of the world. Namely, (...).
with learned preachers, grave and discreat Elders, and faithful distributyng
Deacons: the one sort with all diligence to attend upon the word and
doctrine, and continually to feed the Church with bread of life: the other to
attend with the former upon the Discipline, and to see that no man give over
himself to leaudnes of life. And the third distributyng the alms of the
Church unto the poor, to procure sufficient sustenance for them, and to see
them live in such order as they ought to do: and this is to beautify, adorn,
and garnish the Church of Christ. But contrariwise that a few proud Prelates and
Lord Bishops should take the goods of many Churches unto them selves, and live
thereupon like Lords and magnificent princes, whereby the spouse of Christ is
utterly destitute of the functions and offices, which Christ her bridegroom had
appointed unto her. This is (as Barnard says) not to beautify her, but to rob
and spoil her, and to make a whore of her. For the offices appointed by God
whereby she should be governed being taken from her, and she by nature being
given to spiritual whordo^e, following her natural disposition, embraced the
inventions of men, and the Idolatrous superstitions which Antichrist and his
wife the great whore of Babell used. And this is (as Barnard says) not to feed
the flock, but mactare et devorare to kill and to devour it. (...)
And therefore in another place, he says. Vae generationi huic a fermento
Phariseorum quod est hypocrisis; si tamen hypocrisis dici debet quae iam latere
praeabu^dantia non valet, et praeimpudentia non querit etc. Woe be to this
generation (says Barnard) for the leaven of the Pharisees which is hypocrisy;
yet if it may be called hypocrisy, which can no longer be hidden for the very
a boundance thereof, nor yet seeks to be covered, for the very impudency of
them that use it. Ministri Christi sunt et serviunt Antichristo, etc. They be
the Ministers of Christ, and yet they serve Antichrist. Inde. splendidae mensae
et cibis et ciphis, etc. And by serving this good master, the^e (says Barnard)
comes their tables so sumptuously decked both with meats and cups. And to
set forth their shameless impudency, a non after he says. Pro huiusmodi
volunt esse et sunt Ecclesiaru^ praepositi, Decani Episcopi, Archiepiscopi. For
such manner of fellows they would be counted, and such are indeed the Prelates,
the Deanes, the Bishops, and Arcbishops. And therefore in his epistle to one
that would be made an Archbishop, to teach him to live like a Bishop and not
like a Lord he says. lib. ep D. Bar, ep, 2 Tom. 2,
Conceditur ergo tibi vt si been deservis, de altario viuas; non autem vt de
altario luxvrieris, ut de altario superbias, vt inde compares tibi fraena
aurea, sellas depictas, calcaria de argentaria; varia griseaque pellicia a
collo et manibus ornatu purpureo diversificata. Denique quicquid preter
necessarium victum, ac simplicem vestitum de altario retines tuum non est,
rapina est, sacrilegium est. It is therefore granted unto thee that if thou
serve well, thou should live of the Alter. But not that thou should live
voluptuously of the Alter, that thou should wax proud of the Alter, that
thou should get thy self gilted bridles, wrought saddles, silvered spurs,
diverse sorts of furrs and graie furs, made with variety of purple garnishme^t
at the collar and hands. To conclude whatsoever thing from the Alter thou
do retain besides a needful lyving and simple clothing it is not thine, it
is plain theft and Church robbery. Thus you see though Barnard saw not all,
yet he saw that the Lordship of Bishopes was (...) ough for the Church of God,
and a good Preacher often turned out of his place for not useing a beggarly
ceremony. To conclude, then the holy regiment of the Churches of Christ
standing in the simplicity and playnens of Pastors, Elders. and Deacons, began
utterly to be defaced; and the little spark Papa brake forth which at the
first stuck but as a small spot upon the forhead of the Bishop: no man thinking
it to be any bleamish, not knowing from whence it came nor whereunto the old
serpent called the Devil and Satan meant to bring it. Now this monstrous
regiment taking place and the regiment appointed by Christ and his Apostles
restyng chiefly in spiritual excellency, the glory whereof could not be seen
with outward fleshly eyes, being counted for the simplicity and plains thereof
to base a regiment for the glorious strumpet: she took into her hands her
pair of bellows of pride and ambition, and never left blowyng with all her
might and maine upon the little spark Papa aforesaid, till it grew to a flame
that reached up to heaven; in which infernal flame the great Papa himself
shows forth his face. Taking that name to himself only, as being from the
beginning thereof appointed unto him by the old serpent Satan his father: And
as being now of full age he himself alo^e would wear it, though in his
minority other were permitted to use it.

Now this great Antichrist Papa the Pope reigns and florisheth, exaltyng
himself against all that is called God or that is worshipped, so as he does sit
as God in the Temple of God, The highest Ecclesiastical corruption and tyranny.
showing himself that he is God. And for the maintenance of his high
exaltation he thought it requysite above all other to take care of these two
things: First, how to keep under the temporal Princes and Lords which had
long reigned before him: and to set up his spiritual Lords as his own
creatures, which should be apperteyning and beholding to himself only for all
their Lordly estate: The highest ecclesiastical corruption and tyranny
that at the last both the Lords temporal and spiritual might serve him to
his great glory. Now this great Antichrist reignyng over his temporal Lords
and Princes, who by the ordinance of God were appointed to reign themselves to
the honor of Christ, and not to the glory of Antichrist; and specially
triumphing by his spiritual Lords as his own creatures created unto their
Lordships and Archlordships by himself only, and not ordained thereunto by
God; but by him appointed for his special guard and defense of his own person,
and of his wife the great whore of Babell: It pleased the Almighty God, which
created heaven and earth in the time by him appointed, reformation beginyng.
to raise up again agreeable unto his first institution certain poor
Ministers, Bishops and Pastors, to whom he committed the word of God, which is
the sword of the spirit, therewith to fight against this glorious Antichrist and
all his spiritual Lords.

And therefore as you have heard before, the ancient Fathers utterly
condemning the great livyngs and Lordly estate of Bishops, both by their
doctrine, decrees, and practice of their own lives; Now likewise let us hear
what these men thus newly raised up of God, hold and affirm, and also in the
practice of their own lives approve touching the same Lordship of Bishops, and
other unwritten Traditions of men.

And first of Wickliffe of whom our book of Martyrs says. This is out of all
doubt, John Wicleffe Act. and Mon page 323: edit. 1570:
that at that time all the world was in most desperate and vile estate, and that
the lamentable ignorance and darkness of God his truth had overshadowed the
whole earth: this man stepped forth like a valiant Champion, Unto whom it may
be justly applied, that is spoken in the book called Ecclesiasticus of one
Simon the son of Onias: Even as the morning star being in the midst of a
cloud, and as the Moon being full in her course, and as the bright beams of
the Sun, so does he shine and glister in the temple and Church of God. This
Wickliffe in his answer unto King Richard the second, as touching the right and
title of the King and the Pope, joining old Barnard before named with himself,
says. How could the Apostle give unto you that which he had not himself?
Hark what he says. Not bearing rule (says he) as Lords in the clergy, but
behaving your selves as ensamples to the flock. And because thou shall not
think it to be spoken only in humility and not in verity, mark that the
Lord himself says, in the Gospel, The Kings of the people do rule over
them, but you shall not do so. Here Lordship and Dominion is plainly
forbidden to the Apostles: and dare thou then usurp the same? If thou will
be a Lord thou shall loose thine Apostleship, or if thou will be an Apostle
thou shall lose thy Lordship. For truly thou shall depart from the one of
them. If thou will have both thou shall lose both, or else think thy self to
be of that number, of whom God does so greatly complain saying: They have
reigned but not through me, they are become Princes and I have not known it,
now if it do suffice thee to rule without the Lord, thou have thy glory but
not with God. But if we will keep that which is bidden us, let us hear what
is said: he that is the greatest among you (says Christ) shall be made as the
least, and he that is highest shall be as the Minister, and for example he set
a child in the midst of them. So this then is the true form and institution
of the Apostles trade. Lordship and rule is forbidden, ministration and service
is commanded.

Ye hear what this bright morning star, which is likened to the full Moon
in her strenght, and to the sunshining in the Church and temple of God, says
and concludes, that Lordship and rule is forbidden to Bishops and ministration
and service is commanded. And in another place he says. To enrich the
Clergy is against the rule of Christ. Fox tom. 1: art: 31, page 55: 16 art. 34.
Silvester the Pope and Constantine the Emperor were deceaved, in giving and
taking possessions into the Church. And in another article he says, The Pope
with all his Clergy having those great possessions as they have, be heretics
in so having, and the secular power in so suffering of them do not well. And
touching the practice of his own life: It is written of him that he went in a
simple russet gown, Fox tom. 1 page 526.
and yet he was specially favored and maintained by the great Duke of Lancaster
son to King Edward the third, with the Lord Henry Percie high Marshall of
England, and many other Lords and men of great account, who esteemed him as an
excellent learned man and true Preacher of the gospel, embraced his doctrine
even to the danger of their own lives: and were able enough to maintain him
like a Lord, or at the least to have put him out of his simple russet gown,
into a Mathematical capp with four angles deviding the whole world into four
parts, (as our book of Martirs terms it) with a great and large sarcenet
scarf about his neck, and a wide sleeved gown with a standing collar as an
Archdeacon, if he or they had thought it meet for him to have been so (like a
Lord or petty Lord) mainteyned.

The next that we read of which God raised up after Wickliffe was John Husse,
John Husse
who being of so great reputation among the Bohemians that they came to the
Counsel of Constance to make his defense for the gospel of Christ. He was
accompanied and assisted (besides others of his friends) with diverse Noble men
of the Bohemians who stood by him and spoke boldly in his defense, even to the
day and time of his Martyrdom, yet was he never (nor would be) mainteyned with
the great living and high estate of a Lord Bishop: as plainly appears by his
last farewell to his dear friend and brother Martin, farewell (says he) in
Christ Jesus with all them that keep his law. Acts and Mo. to. 1. p. 747.
My graye coat if you will, keep to your self for my remembrance: but I
think you are ashamed to wear that gray color: therefore you may give it to
whom you shall think good. My white coat you shall give the Minister: N: my
scoller. To George or else to Zuzicon 60 groats or else my gray coat, for he
has faithfully served me.

Surely this was but apoore Lord Bishop that went in such a graye coat, as M.
Martine his friend might be ashamed to wear it: yet was he the principal
preacher of the gospel in all the kingdom of Bohemia and a true and christian
Bishop: but how far unlike he was unto the Lordbishops in our time; every man
may see, even as far as a coat of course russet cloth, is from a coat of fine
black velvet: and yet he lived not so miserably as our Parish Ministers
commonly do, for it is evident by his request that he had an honest servant or
twain. And here it is also worth the noting, that the Minister should have
his whit coat, which was not a surplice but a coat to be ordinarily worn, as
was likewise his gray coat. Whereby we may evidently see that a white colored
garment, was at that time among them a grave color, and meet for a Minister:
as it is a mong us stage like and meet for a player: specially when a white
coat is put upon a black gown. But this Preacher of the gospel and
excellent Bishop John Husse in his poor estate more profited the Church of God
in his time, then a carte load of the Lord Bishops in our time with all their
great livings and sumptuous estate. And God so blessed his labors, that almost
the whole kingdom of Bohemia received the gospel: and God for the mayntenance
thereof, sent unto them the invincible captain Zisca. Who if he now lived it
is very like he should be called a Puritan, for so precise he was (as says
his history) that he would not suffer any image or Idol to be in the Churches,
Zisca. Acts and Mo. to. page 766.
neither thought it to be borne withal, that Priests should Minister with
Copes or vestiments: for the which cause he was much more envied amongst the
States of Bohemia. And a little after upon his Tomb in his Epitaph it is thus
written; Eleaven times in joining battle, I went victor out of the field. I
seemed worthily to have defended the cause of the miserable and hungry,
against the delicate fatt and glottonous Priests: and for that cause to have
received help at the hand of God. This cause is worthy to be noted, for the
which Zisca thought himself to be defended of God.

And after Zisca, God for the maintenance of his gospel, raised up another,
who like a victorious Prince was called for his noble acts Procopius Magnus:
which feared not himself to come to the general Counsel of Basil, Procopius
Magnus:
and there boldly and openly mainteyned the Gospel professed by him and his
Bohemians, so that it being objected against them as a great crime, that they
had taught the invention of the begging Friars to be Diabolical. Acts and Mo.
to. 1. edit: 2; page 779:
Then Procopius rising up said, It is not untrue. For if neither Moses, neither
before him the Patriarks, nether after him the Prophets, neither in the new law
Christ, nor his Apostles, did institute that order, who does doubt but that it
was an invention of the Devil, and a work of darkness?

This rule and maxim of Divinity being true and out of all doubt as the noble
Procopius affirms; then whence comes Pope, Cardinal, Patriarch, Legate,
and likewise Metropolitanes, Primats, Archbishops, Diocesanes, Archdeacons,
Deanes, Commissaries, Officialls and such like, but out of darkness and from the
Devil: for neither Moses, nor the Patriarks before him, nor the Prophets after
him, neither Christ, nor his Apostles after him appointed or instituted any
such orders to be in the Church. And in the fruitful exhortation which the
Bohemians wrote to all Kings and Princes they all likewise say. And if ye knew
them as we know the^, ye would as diligently destroy them as we do: Acts and
Mo. to. 1. edit. 1570: page 775.
For Christ our Lord did not ordain any such order, and therefore it must needs
come to pass that shortly it shall be destroyed, as our Lord says in the
Gospel of S. Matthew the 15 chapter: Every plant which my heavenly Father has
not planted shall be rooted up. And a non after they say: As long as they have
such goods they will never cease to be at strife with Lords and Cities,
neither will they begin to teach you the true foundation of truth. For they do
as a dog which as long as he holds a bone in his mouth and knaweth it, so
long he holds his peace and cannot bark: Even so, as long as they have this
bone of pleasant riches, they will never preach the Gospel truly.

Thus much of these Angels, Messengers of God, and bright stars sent of him
into Bohemia to lighten the world with all: which although through the
iniquity of the time, they tolerated many corruptions, yet they all agreed
that the Lordly estate of the Prelates was the cause of all mischeife in the
Church, and according to the saying of M. Fox before noted, page 5^.
by the geeat increase of regiment and riches of Bishops there ensued again a
monstrous regiment. For within short time after, although there remained in
Bohemia certain sparks raked up in the Ashes of those blessed Martyrs, (
Wicliffe, Husse, and Jerome of Prage) that monstrous regiment of the Church,
grew to be far worse then it was before. And the great Antichrist with his
spouse the great whore of Babell, both in glorious reigning and cruel sheeding
of blood in all the parts of Christendom; made all Kings and Princes his slaves
and buchers, and his spiritual Lords and Archlords (as his own creaturs,
devised and instituted by himself) always to be the Lords of his privy
Counsel to the effectual working of all his abominations. For the time was
not yet come, appointed by the high providence of God, Revel. 16
when the viale of the wrath of God should be powered out upon the throne of
the beast.

But after one hundred years according to the Prophecy of John Husse and
Jerome of Prage, God raised up Luther in the year of our Lord 1516. Luther:
being just one hundred years after the burning of the said John and Jerome in
the Counsel of Constance, which was in the year 1416. Then according to their
prophecy as it is written great Babylon came in remembrance before God to give
unto her the cup of the wine of the fiercenes of his wrath. Revelat: 16
But before this great work of God should be wrought, it pleased him to give
unto her three notable preparatiues whereby her purging following might be so
violent that even her bowels, liver, lungs, heart and life should at the last
by continual purging depart from her: By these preparatiues I mean first, the
battle between three Popes continuing almost forty years fighting for the
glorious throne of the Popedom, whereby the whole world began to see that they
were some of them knaves, all. And the very Counsel of Constance does plainly
affirm the same, de- (...) here S: Peter prescribes, namely, unto whom
soever the office, vocation, and charge of preaching of the word is allotted,
let him speak, as the words of God: which caveat and lesson ought most
carefully to be taken heed unto, that no man presume to Preach and teach any
thing, whereto he has not express word of God for his warrant; and except he
be most certain, that the same be directly to be avouched out of the sacreed
scriptures. Which being so, what may be thought of the Pope, and his dirtie
dreggs and traditions? Here you see M. Luthers judgment that all traditions
which have not the express warrant of the word of God, are but dirtie dreggs
and Popish traditions: And mark it well, that what traditions soever is
brought into the Church which has not the express word of God for it, the
same is to be nombred among the Popes dirtie dreggs: I say, except the same be
most certain, and directly to be a vouched out of the sacred scriptures. And
anon after he says again, A Prelate or Bishop ought to do nothing in the
Church, unless he be certain and sure of the warrantise thereof by Gods word:
For God cannot abide to have his service umbled and mingled at pleasure with
every foolish gewgawe and light trumpery. You see how this beginning of the day
light whereby God showed himself again unto the world, does constantly
affirm, that a Bishop ought to do nothing in the Church, unless he be
certain and sure of the warrantise thereof by Gods word, no not to bring in a
ceremony nor a light guegawe: for God (says M. Luther) cannot abide it nor
suffer it to be used in his service. And yet not so content, he goes farther,
saying. And therefore we are straightly forbidden, not to rely unto, nor to
allow whatsoever decree or constitution the Bishop list to obtrud and enjoin,
unless they stand upon a sure ground, that the things which they do are
allowed of God, yea don of God himself: and unless the be able to say: do
this, for it is the will and Commandment of God, and we have his express word
and commandment for our warrant. If they be not able to say thus, they ought
to be accounted as liars and deceavers: much less ought any Christian to
yield unto them therein any obedience or subscription. No Christian (says M:
Luther) ought to subscribe nor obey to any of the Bishops Canons, Subscriptio^
unless they be able to say do this, for it is the will and commandment of
God, and we have his express word and commandment for our warrant. Thus does
this Angel or messenger of God write, who having a lively faith by this faith,
he being dead with Abell, yet speaks this unto all the world, and even unto
England in plain English; whereby ye may perceive he was no sleeping Sardian
Angel, nor rich luke warm Laodician, but like the Angel of Ephesus could not
forbear them which were evil, and was himself poor with the Angel of the
Smirnians and far from the pomp and pride of the Laodician Angel which lived
like a Lord and rejoiced he was increased in riches, and had need of nothing.
But if this excellent messenger of God were now in England, and would refuse to
subscribe to a number of Canons and many light guegawes: which are neither
commanded of God, nor have the express warrant of the word of God, he should
surely be turned both out of his preaching and out of his living, though many
hundred sleeping Sardian Priests, and blind unpreaching Ministers should keep
their place. But let us go forward with M. Luther upon the fifth chapter of the
same epistle, thus he says. When S. Peter or any other of the Apostles came
into any City wherein Christians were, 1. Peter 5.
they ordained some one or other of them, such as lived honestly and
unblameablie, and had wife and children and also skillful in the Scriptures of
God, to to have the superintendencie and charge over the rest. And them they
called Seniors or Elders, whom afterward both Saint Peter and also S. Paul
called Bishops, whereby we may note that Bishops were none others, then the
very same that were Elders. Touching this purpose we read in the History of S.
Martine, how a certain man came into a place in Aphrica and there in a poor
Cottage found an elderlie man whom they thought to have been some plain
Countriman. Within a while they saw many people come flocking to him, to whom
he preached and expounded the word of God, whereby they perceaved that he was
their Pastor or Bishop. For in those days there was no difference either in
apparel or manners between the Bishops and the residue of Christians.

In which saying of M: Luther these three things are to be observed. First that
there was no difference in the word of God, (and by the doctrine of the
Apostles) between a Bishop and an Elder or Minister: or as he is now called a
Parish Priest, in the latin word (taken out of the Greek) Presbyter; for in
the new Testament, (as you have heard before) he is never called Sacerdos that
is to say a Priest, as in all the old Testament it is ever englished. But here
you see plainly by the judgment of M. Luther, that a Bishop by the word of God
and doctrine of the Apostles is nothing else but the Minister of a Parish. And
you heard before how precisly and violently he rejected whatsoever ordinance in
the Church has not the express word of God and commandment for it. And
therefore (he says) touching all constitutions of Bishops, without this
express warrant we ought to take them for liars and deceavers, and by no
means to subscrib unto them. Seeing this he speaks not only of Ceremonies
and other traditions: but even of the government and orders of the Church, as in
the same place within a few words he plainly and vehemently expresses. For
(says he) there is nothing so pernicious, nothing so monstrous, 1 Pet: 4.11
nothing so beastly as to go about to govern the Church of God without the
warrant of Gods own word and work. And therefore S. Peter saw great reason to
ad this much, thereby to teach, how the Church ought to be governed.

And in the fifth chapter he does in a mannner repeat the same again, for
taking occasion from the care and diligence that every Bishop and Pastor, ought
to have of every particular within his own flock. In chap 5
Hereby (says he) we may well perceive and know, that a Bishop is even the
same that is here meant by an Elder. And therefore it is not true, which some
say, that a Bishopric is a dignity, and a Bishop only he that wears a
forked Miter. Episcopacie is not a name of dignity, but of Office. Which thing
he also affirms in diverse places, as in his book contra Papatum he says.
Bishops wheresoever they be in all the world, are equal to our Bishops or
Parish Ministers and Preachers: Of none can it be said, one is Lord, and other
a Servant. Where Luther uses this word vel parochis which must needs be
englished, either after the Popish phrase, Parish priests, or in better English
parish Ministers. Which you see here M. Luther makes as great a Lordbishop as
a Diocesan Bishop or Bishop of a Diocese, and unto this rule he pulls down
the proud Pope himself and so breaks the neck of his Popedom. For he says
that Bishops in all the world are not other in right and truth, but Parish
Ministers: and that the one ought not to live like a Lord and the other like a
Minister or servant. And upon the 5 chapter of Peter aforesaid (he says)
Furthermore. S. Peter calls it peculiarly the flock of Christ, In chap: 5:2.
as though he should say: Think not, that the flock is any of your own, ye
are but only Servants and Ministers to look unto it, ye ye are no Lords nor
Masters over it. And further afterward he says: For we have but one Lord Jesus
Christ, and he it is which governs over souls. Elders and Pastors have no
further charge then to feed. And here in one word S Peter overthrows all the
kingdom of the Pope: and concludes that no Bishop has any authority, so much
as in one word to clogg and tie the consciences of the faithful to the
observation of their precepts. For they themselves ought to be servants and
Ministers, and to say; thus says the Lord, and these be the words of Christ;
it is not we, the words are none of ours: and therefore ye ought to do that
which is here commanded. According to that which Christ says Luke the 22. The
Kings of the Gentiles reign over them, and they that bear rule overthem are
called gracious Lords, but ye shall not be so. Contrary whereunto the Pope
boasts and brageth, saying: we ought to be Lords, and to us only it
belongs to exercise chief rule and supreme authority.

The second thing that I speak of to be observed in the former saying of M.
Luther is this. That the state of Bishops in those days was such, that a
Bishop could not be known by any Lordly countenance, or attendance, from a
plain man of the country.

The third thing is, that in his apparel he differed nothing from the common
sort of men, he had not on his head (as our book of Martyrs (of a certain
Bishop says) a Geometrical, (that is to say, a square) cap, although his head
be round: nor a white rochet upon his blake coat: nor a priests cloak, nor a
formal gown. For by those Mathematical marks he must needs then have been
known from a plain man of the Country, as that foresaid Bishop in Africa was
not. Yea though he had been an unpreaching Prelat, and so could not have been
known by his preaching.

But let us hear what M. Luther further says. In our book of Martyrs many
things are specified which are most worthy to be noted concerning him: Fox
Edition 1570 to. 2. page 976. Election of Ministers ought to be by the Church to
whom they belong.
but for brevities sake I will only observe this one thing, namely, that he
affirms the voices of the people, ought not to be severed from the choosing
of Ecclesiastical persons, in which point all the ancient Fathers do with
one voice agree with M. Luther: they were also chosen themselves in that
manner, and so caused other to be chosen. And so likewise all the Protestant
writers, and lights of the gospel do generally affirm in their writings that
by the law of God, and by the holy Scriptures it ought to be still observed in
the Churches of God. And yet at this day it is exploded out of many Churches
(as namely here with us) that profess the Gospel, as a thing that cannot
stand with a Christian common wealth: wherein I will only recite the words of
our book of Martyrs, and one worthy sentence, and also one notable example out
of ancient Fathers, and so leave it to the consideration of the Christian
reader, and to the consciences of all christian Magistrates that profess the
Gospel: with mine own prayers to God, that this Apostolic order of chosing
of Ministers, may be again restored to all Christian Churches. Fox pa. 5 ed.
1570. col. 2
After which time of the Apostles (says our book of Martyrs) the election of
Bishops and Ministers stood by the Clergy and the people with the consent, of
the chief Magistrate of the same place, and so continued during all the time
of the Primitive Church, till the time and after the time of Constantine the
fourth Emperor, which Emperor (as writes Platina and Sabellicus Enead: 8:
lib: 6) published a law concerning the election of the Roman Bishop, Platina.
Sab. Ene: 8. lib 6
that he should be taken for true Bishop whom the Clergy and people of Rome
did chose and elect without any tarying for any authority of the Emperor of
Constantinople or the deputy of Italy, so as the custom and fashion had ever
been before that day. anno 685. And a non after in our book of Martyrs it is
thus written, ^owsons and ^^uralities of ^enefices.
likewise vowsons and pluralities of benefices were things then as much unknowen
as now they are pernicious to the Church, taking away all free election of
Ministers from the flocks of Christ. Heerunto I add touching this matter as I
promised first a most worthy sentence out of Cyprian who flourished about 260
years after Christ. He in his 68. Epistle says. ^yprian Epi: ^8 iuxsta
^amelium.
Plebs obsequens preceptis Dominicis et Deum metue^s a peccatore preposito
seperare se debet, nec se ad sacrilegi sacerdo it is sacrificia miscere; quando
ipsa maxim habeat potestatem vel eligendi dignos sacerdotes vel indignos
recusandi. Quod et ipsum videmus de diuina auctoritate descendere vt sacerdos
plebe praesente, sub omnium oculis deligatur et dignus atque idoneus publico
iudicio ac testimonio comprobetur. The people being obedient unto the
commandment of God and fearing God ought to seperat themselves from a wicked
Pastor or Minister, and not to join themselves to the sacrifice of a
sacrilegius Priest, seeing the People it self cheiflie has power either to
choose priests that are worthy, or to refuse those that be unworthy: which
thing we see does come from the authority of God, that the Priest may be chosen
in the presence of the people, that he which is worthy and meet for the place,
may be allowed with a public judgment and testimony. And a little after he
concludes, saying, Et sit ordinatio iusta et legitima que omnium suffragio et
iudicio fuerit examinata. And let the ordination be just and lawful which is
tried by the judgment and voice of all.

Athanasius:
And now as I said take one example, namely of Athanasius the great, The
confession of whose faith is read in our Churches of England at this day, and
holden for undoubtedly true in all the Churches of Christendom: who lived in
the most tumultuous time, and times of greatest contention that ever was in the
Church, even in the time of public broils and strife, between the Arrians and
the Catholics: when the manner of election by the people, must needs, if
ever, be most dangerous, unto the quietness of the common wealth and unto the
estate of Kings and Princes. Yet when Athanasius was chosen Bishop of
Alexandria, and the matter brought in question before the Emperor whether he
was lawfully chosen, which his enimyes denied: the Synod of Alexandria make
rheir Apology, for his defense in these words. Aiunt igitur post obitu^
Episcopi Alexandri cum paucissimi essent qui Athanasii mentionem facerent,
Synod Alexandr: apol 2
sex vel septem Episcopos clanculum et in loco obscuro eum in presulem
elegisse, etc. Nos autem contra cum tota civitate, et universa provincia
testamur omnem multitudinem populu^que Catholicae Ecclesiae in vnum coactum,
quasi in speciem unius corporis et animae, clamoribus vociferationibusque
postulasse Athanasium Ecclesiae Episcopum dari. They say that after the death
of Bishop Alexander, when there were very few, which made any mention of
Athanasius, six or seven Bishops privily and in an obscure place did choose
him to be Bishop. But we contrary wise with the whole City, and generally
with all the Province do testify that the whole multitude and people of the
Catholic Church, being gathered to gether in one, as it were in the form of
one body and soul, with exclamations and out cries required to have Athanasius
to be given unto them the Bishop of their Church.

If six or seven of our Lordbishops with their trains of twenty, thirty, or
forty horse apeece, should meet together about an election with such of their
friends as they could gather together in their assembly; trow you the thing
might be said to be don obscurely and in a corner: or may we think that those
christian and most mighty Emperors had neither wit nor knowledge how to
govern their common wealths? Or that Athansius the great and all the
excellent Fathers of the Primitive Church, and Luther and Zninglius, and all
the lights of the Gospel set up by Gods wonderful work in this our age, (for
the casting down of Antichrist and the great whore of Babell) upon all the
golden Candlestickes in Germany, Helvetia, Savoy, France, Scotland and the
Lowcountryes, and many other places, understa^d not: what by the word of God
ought to be done in the election of Bishops and Pastors, and only the Lord
Bishops of England by their Lordly looks upon their learned books, or by some
secreat inspirations have the contrary reveled unto them? But if all the
christian Emperors, and all the ancient Fathers did think this manner of
election might well stand with the godly government of the Common wealth, and
ought not to be altered: and that both the election of Bishops Pastors and
Ministers, and excommunication also ought never to be don without consent of
the people even when the Bishops were grown up to be little petie Lords, and
the regiment of a Bishop was crept to the limits and bounds of a Dioces and
over whole Cities, where, by the reason of the exceeding greatness of the
multitude, there must needs follow great sturres and troubles; with what
facility and easines might this order be brought in again, if the Bishops were
reduced unto the pristinat estate appointed unto them by the word of God and by
the holy scriptures, namely, to be the Bishop or Pastor of one congregation
only?

Upon which point I will set down briefly, the words of that excellenr light,
Francis Lambard joined by God with Luther in Germany touching the limits of a
Bishops regiment, F. Lambard
together with the right of election of the Pastors and excommunication of the
offenders: and of Zuinglius, the first light set up by God among all the golden
ca^dlesticks of Helvetia. This noble and famous Francis Lambard in the preface
of his book entitled The sum of Christianity translated into English, and
dedicated unto the most Noble Queen Anne mother to our late Sovereign Queen
Elizabeth. In his Epistle, to the Noble Prince of Lausanna; he says: Nor you
shall not marvel that I said, there be many Bishops of one City; for verily
every City has so many Bishops, as it has true Evangelists or Preachers: for
every Preacher of the truth, I say of the truth, that does not preach lies,
decrees, inventions, dreams, laws and counsels of men, but the most pure,
and simple word of God, is a true Bishop, although he be not called so of many:
the Church of God has no other Bishops but these. And a non after he says.
For verily every Parish ought to have his proper Bishop, the which should be
chosen of the people and confirmed by the Comminalty of the Church of every
place; and to do this thing they have no need of letters, rings, seals,
tokens, and such other of this kind, very much used clean contrary to the
word of God. And so long they should be accounted for Bishops, as the preach
most purely the Gospel of the kingdom of God. From the which if they swerve
one jot, and teach strange doctrine, they ought to be deposed, and put out, of
the^ by whom they were elect and chosen, that is to say, of the comminalty of
the Church a forenamed, and other more fit for the purpose to be elect. And in
the fifth chapter in the said book of the Sum of Christianity he has these
words. It is the most greevous crime and by no means to be suffered, that many
children of perdition do deprive the people of God of their right, and just
title, that is to choose them a Pastor. And afterward he says. All Canon of
the world cannot lawfully choose one Bishop of the Church of I^su^ Christ. And
again he says, Deacons of the Church be those that the faithful choose for
to gather and distribute to the poor the alms of the faithful. And a non
after. The Church of God has no Ministers besides these Bishops and Deacons.

Zuinglius Artic: 8: explanat:
Now to the words of Zuinglius, he in a certain place says thus; A multis iam
seculis ad nostra usque tempora, quae sit Ecclesia certamen fuit, ortum nimirum
ex regnandi cupiditate. Nam hoc sibi quidam arrogarunt ut se dicerent esse
Ecclesiam etc. There has been contention, what a Church is, from these many
ages until our times; which verily has risen from the desire of bearing rule.
For some men have arrogated this unto themselves, to say that they are the
Church, that all things might be ordered by their hand. But omitting the
devises of men whero^ some in this cause do rest, we will write of the Church
out of the holy scriptures and the mind of the spirit. A Church therefore I do
find is taken 2 ways in the holy scriptures. First for the company of all
those who in asure and firm faith do believe in Christ their only head. This
is scattered through the universal world. Who knows this church? Only God. But
what shall we say of the Pope, Cardinals, and Bishops, which come together
into a Counsel? Are not they also the Church? the Church militant
I answer, they are only members of this Church if so be it that they believe
in Christ and acknowledge him for their head. If they believe not, they belong
not to the Church at all. So far of it is, that they should be the church.
Synods:
But thou will say they are a Church Representative. Of this I find nothing in
holy scriptures: out of men's devises any man may feign any thing. We rest on
the holy scripture: against which thou will not attempt any thing, if thou be a
christian. Secondly, a Church is taken for the several congregations, A
visible Church
which conveniently meet together in some one place for the hearing of the
word, and receaving of the Sacraments. The Grecians call these, Parikias,
Parishes. Of this manner of a Church Christ speaks Mat. 18. saying, Tell the
Church. And so Paul uses the name of the Church, 1. Cor. 1. To the Church
which is at Corinth etc. And Furthermore afterward. Quid audio? Episcopus ne
solus excommunicare potest? Putabam Ecclesiae esse datu^? What do I hear? May
a Bishop alone excommanicat? I had thought that had been appointed to the
Church. But perhaps they will say a Bishop only is the Church, Christ says
tell the Church: does a Bishop then, or an Abbot signify the Church?
Excommunication belongs not to one man, whatsoever person he be, but to the
Church. For Christ said not, we should refuse the company of a man, when he had
contemned an admonition or twain (therefore one only man cannot excommunicat)
but then at the last, when he has despised the admonition of the Church:
therefore no man but that Church can excommunicat, wherein he dwells which by
his sin has offended. unto the Church and the Pastor of the Church belongs
this right of pronouncing sentence of excommunication against the offender. And
further he says. Tradunt excommunicationem ab Episcopo latam Ecclesiae esse
excommunicationem. Art: 31,
Sed observandum (supra ea quae octavo articulo diximus) Ecclesiam in
scripturis accipi aut pro omnibus christianis qui in istis terris visibiliter
nunquam convenient soli Deo noti, atque in hac ecclesia omnes sunt qui Deo
patri per Christum fidunt et nituntur: et haec est ecclesia quam in articulis
fidei profitemur: aut pro singulis quibusque ecclesiis, quas paraecias vocant.
Conventiculum ergo et conspiratio personatorum istorum Episcoporum sub
ecclesiae nomine comprehendi non potest, nec id possunt ex scriptutris
ostendere quod ipsi sint ecclesia, etiam sirumpantur. Ecclesia ergo nequaquam
sunt. Cui ergo ecclesiae offendens pcccator indicari debet? Ad ecclesiam
universale^ Christus nimirum nos ire non mandat, nam haec nusqua hic coit
corporaliter. They hold that the excommunication by the Bishop is the Churches
excommunication. But (says he) those things are to be observed (which before
we have spoken in the 8 article) that the Church in the scriptures is either
taken for all christians which upon the earth do never visibly meet together,
which are only known unto God, and in this Church are all they which believe
in God the Father and cleave fast unto him through Christ, and this is the
Church which we acknowledge in the articles of our faith, or else it is taken
for every particular Church which they call parishes. Therefore the conventicle
and the cloked conspiration of these disguised Bishops cannot be comprehended
under the name of the Church, Synods:
neither can they prove it by the scriptures that they be the Church though
they would burst. therefore it is clear that they be not the Church unto which
the offending sinner ought to be showed: for it is manifest that Christ does
not command us to go tell the universal Church: for this Church never meets
together bodily. And again he says. Quis enim omnes pios congregare posset:
restat ergo ut ecclesiae iubeat Christus indicandum peccatorem quam paraeciam
vocamus. For who can gather together all the faithful, therefore it can be
taken non otherwise but that Christ commands the offender to be judged by the
Church which we call a parish.

Now let us go forward to hear what the rest of the excellent lights and
Angels or Messengers which God has raised in this our age and set up upon the
golden candlesticks (among which Christ himself walks) in Germany,
Helvetia, Savoy, France etc. concerning the pulling down of the whore of
Babell, and the reformation in the points of religion a foresaid. Wherein if
there be any that think some speeches before, or hereafter to be uttered be
over bitter, let them mark what M: Luther says upon the Epistle of Peter a
foresaid. Now their be many (says he) that can well enough abide to have the
Gospel preached, so that their might be no exclayming and speaking against the
Wolves. I mean, so that the Preachers in their Sermons would forbear
exclayming and taunting against Prelates. But although I Preach sound doctrine,
and that which is true: and though I feed and teach (my charg) the sheep well
and rightly, yet is not that sufficient: for it is further required at my hands
to keep the sheep from danger, and to have a careful regard unto them, that
Wolves come not among them to drive them away out of their fertile and
wholesome pastures. For to what purpose is my building, if when I have couched
and orderly laid my stones, an other straight ways come and hurl them down
as fast again, and I seeing him forbid him not? The Wolf is well enough
contented that the sheep be well fed and fatted in good Pasture, because the
fatter they be, the pleasanter and daintier pray he thinks to make of them.
But that Dogs should incessantly bark and baule at him, that he cannot abide.
Such barking dogs they cannot abide, but dumb dogs, they can bear well
enough with all.

The next light set up among the golden Candlesticks of Germany to show forth
the darkness of Antichrist: and the blindness of the Romish Babylon, was M.
Bucer, Bucer. page 2148: edit, 1570. col.
who for his learned excellency was sent for by K. Edward the Sixth and
appointed to be the Divinity Reader in Cambridg, of whom M: Fox in our book
of Martyrs says. He brought all men into such admiration of him, that neither
his friends could sufficiently praise him, neither his enimyes in any point find
fault with his singular life and sincere doctrine.

How earnestly M: Bucer desired to have a better reformation of religion in
England then was in King Edwards time, appears evidently in his book De
Regno Christi, written to King Edward that most gracious and religious King of
England, whom both Ridly Bishop of London, and Cranmer Archbishop of
Caunterburie confessed to have more divinity in his little finger then they
themselves in their whole bodies, as you may read in our book of Martyrs: such
an excellent impression of true Divinity had God engraven in his breast being
then but a child. Who no doubt if he had lived, as he had in many things well
begun, so would he have made a full reformation of those foul corruptions that
remained and yet remain to this day, and would have reduced all the Churches
in his Dominions, unto the Primitive and Apostolic order and Discipline, which
M. Bucer in his said book of the Kingdom of Christ written unto him for the
same purpose, so earnestly desires. Whose words in his first book and 15.
chapter are these. Vt vero claris Dominus et gravissimis verbis disciplinam
suam cum vitae vniversae, De regni Christi 1, 15
tum agendae penitentiae, tumetiam sacrarum ceremoniarum sancivit, etc. With
what plain and clear words (says M. Bucer) has the Lord established his
Discipline, as well of the whole course of life, as of showing public
repentance, and also of the holy Ceremonies? Yet how few shall you find even
among those which are counted men of special note among Christians, which I
will not say desire with all their heart to have this Discipline restored,
which is the only Discipline of health or salvation, but that think it a thing
worthy once to go about it. They say, the times are now far otherwise, then it
was when this Discipline flourished in the first Churches: men are now of an
other sort: And it is to be feared least by the restoring of this Discipline
the Churches should be more troubled, then edified; and that more men should
thereby be frayed from the Gospel, then should be brought unto it. To conclud
that it is to be feared that by this means it should grow into a new tyranny
of a false Clergy upon the people of Christ. But do not these men even by
their own words manifestly convince themselves of their horrible ignorance
concerning the profit of the kingdom of Christ and the true benefitts thereof?
For know not they that the kingdom of Christ is a kingdom of all ages, and of
all men which are elect to salvation? They are ignorant that King Jesus, that
is to say, the Savior of men, and the best Pastor or shepherd of his own
sheep, has instituted nothing at all and commanded nothing to those that are
his, which is not healthful unto them in all times and places, if it be used
as he instituted and commanded the same. Bucer in Ephesians 4.
And upon the 4 chapter to the Ephesians he says. Satan goes about to make
men believe, that by the restoring of the discipline, the faithful Ministers
should be thought to seek ambitiously, the same tyranny which Antichrist did.

Ye see with what force of words M. Bucer lamenteth the lack of true
Discipline in England, even in King Edwards time, and how vehemently he desired
the King to restore and establish the same; which in his time could never be
performed by reason of his sudden death in the minority of his years. And
afterward in the days of Queen Elizabeth the Gospel was received above 40.
years and no fault by publik authority amended (which King Edward left) in the
Discipline of the Church. wherein by the way, I cannot but note one pretty little
point of the Dragon that subtle serpent Sathanas, for the better safeguard of
his son Antichrist his creedit, and his dear daughter Babylon the great
whore of Rome: for slily and cunningly he so scraped out this piece of public
prayer in all Queen Elizabeth's time which both in King He^ries time and King
Edwards time was used, that it could never be restored unto this day. Namely,
From the tyranny of the Bishop of Rome and all his detestable enormities, good
Lord deliver us. For he knew full well no small number of his own enormious
abominations were yet retained in the Discipline of the Church to the great
comfort of himself and of his son Antichrist the Pope, and his dear
daughter the Church of Rome. And it might justly be taken for a Prophecy that
we should not in her days be delivered from the detestable enormities of the
Bishop of Rome, left unreformed in King Edwards time. But let us hear further
what M. Bucer says to King Edward in his second book of the kingdom of
Christ and the 1 chapter. Primum haud dubito, serenissime Rex, Maiestatem tuam
ipsam videre, hanc quam requirimus, imo quam requirit salus omnium nostrum
regni Christi restitutionem ab Episcopis nullo modo expectandam, etc. First I
doubt not most gracious King (says M. Bucer to King Edward) but your own
Majesty does see that this restoring again of the kingdom of Christ which we
require, yea which the salvation of us all requires, may in no wise be
expected to com of the Bishops; seeing there be so few among them which do
understand the power and proper offices of this kingdom: and very many of them
by all means (which they possible can, and dare) either oppose themselves
against it, or defer it and hinder it. And after in the same book he
concludes saying. De reformando itaque Episcoporum ordine serenissima
Maiestatis tuae cum primis animus intendendus. Therefore the mind of your most
excellent Majesty must principally be set upon reforming of the order of
Bishops.

Of these places before cited, first the reader may plainly see, with what
vehemence this Angel and star holden in the right hand of Christ desires
and requires to have the reformation in England, which yet cannot be obtained,
to be squared, according to the first Churches which were in the Apostles time.
Secondly that the objections which are now commonly made against the
reformation are even the same, which Satan and his children made in King
Edwards time; the wilful and horrible ignorance whereof M. Bucer manifestly
discovers. Thirdly, that no hope of this reformation and the restoring of the
kingdom of Christ, which even the salvation of us all requires, was to be
expected at the hands of the Bishops. Fourthly, that that the King ought
specially to bend his mind, to reform the order or estate of the Bishops. And
to speak the truth, ye might truly affirm that the King began at a wrong
end, when he began at the parish Priests and leapt over the Lord Bishops: for
that was a tithing of mint and annis, and a leaving of the waightier matters of
the law undone. It is a memorable and a true saying, that Sigismund the
Emperor used in the Counsel of Consta^ce. Sigismund.
Non a minoritis sed a maioritis incipiendum est. For where the Counsel
pretended to make a reformation in the Church; one stood up and said, the
reformation must begin at the Friar Minorits, that is at the little ones: no
said the Emperor, not at the little ons, but at the great ones, meaning that
they ought to begin not at the beggarly Friar Minors, but at the pompous and
proud Prelates and Popes. And Jeremiah the Prophet speaking of the beggarly
sort, and great men says: Ierem. 5.45
Therefore I said, surely they are poor, they are foolish, for they know not
the way of the Lord, nor the judgment of their God. I will get me unto the
great men, and will speak unto them: for they have known the way of the Lord,
and the iudgdment of their God: but these have altogether broken the yoke, and
burst the bonds. And in the 23 chapter: he says speaking of the Prophets which
were the chiefest and in highest degree of all Ecclesiastical persons in that
time. Chro. 23 15
Therefore thus says the Lord of hosts concerning the Prophets, behold I will
feed them with wormwood and make them drink the water of gall, for from the
Prophets of Jerusalem is wickedness gone forth into all the land.

Now let us hear what M. Bucer says touching the great livings of the Lord
Bishops, and the poor estat of the parish Ministers. First to the Lord Bishops
he says in his second book of the kingdom of Christ, Agnoscant igitur ta^dem
gravissimam suam culpam Episcopi, quod ecclesias tam diu iam, tamque horrende,
non tam neglexerunt quam vastaverunt. Let the Bishops at the last acknowledge
their most grevous fault, that now so long time they have not only neglected,
but violently robbed the Churches. And in the 13 chapter he touches again the
restoring unto the poor Parishes that which the Bishops by injury and rob
berie had taken from them. Si vero parochiis non sit tam multum reliquum, vt
inde prospici queat fidelibus earum ministris, tum certe, vti et supra diximus,
ab Episcopis et ditioribus sacerdotiis petendum erit, unde et his despoliatis
parochiis consulatur. Hic communio sanctorum exercenda erit, vt egentibus
ecclesiis succurratur ab iis quae abundant. If there be not (says M. Bucer) so
much left unto the Parishes, as thereof there may be made a sufficient provision
for their faithful Ministers, then certainly (as we have said before) there
must be taken from the Bishops and richer benefices where with these parishes
that have been so spoiled, may be sufficiently provided for. For herein the
Communion of Saints ought to be exercised, that the Churches which stand in
need may be helped by them, that do abound. And a non after he says? Valeat
itaque Domini lex: dignus est opera rius cibo suo et mercede. Item duplici
honor digni sunt presbyteri qui been praesunt ecclesiis, maxim qui laborant
in verbo et doctrina. Debent autem hi, et suo docere exemplo reliquos
Christianos ut cum eis datur quibus alantar et tegantur, his sint contenti.
valeat et lex spiritus sancti: vestra abunda^tia sublevet illorum inopiam, et
illorum abundantia sublevet vestram inopiam quo sit inter vos aequalitas.
Therefore let the law of the Lord take his force, which says the work man is
worthy of his meat, and his wages, and also the Elders which rule the Churches
well are worthy double honor, cheiflie those which labor in the word and
doctrine. And these also ought to teach all other Christians by their example,
and when there is given unto them, food and raiment, with that let them be
content. And also let the law of the holy Ghost stand in his full force: let
your abundance up hold their need, that there may be equality. I need not to
put the reader in any remembrance what to observe in these words, they are
plain enough; that the Lordly livings of Bishops should be taken from them,
and they themselves should not live like Lords, but in a mean estate as well
as the rest of the Ministers. Bucer in matthew 18.7.
And touching the rest of the popish relics he says, undoubtedly as there is
no agreement at all between Christ and Beliall; so sinceare and unfeined
christians can by no means suffer themselves to be clogged with any whit of
Antichrists trash and trumperie etc. Wherefore so soon as true godliness and the
right worship of God has been preached and professed of many, Antichrists
Ceremonies and rites ought by and by to be abrogated, and the reformation
thereof may not be prolonged etc. These are indeed (says he) over mild and to
soft and sober Christians which can bear with such Antichristian trash: like
unto them who at Corinth knowing that an Idol was nothing, did eat things
offered unto Idols and boasted (as these our men do) in this wise: In outward
matters we are free. What is that to me, that another uses those things
naughtily, I will use them well etc. Thus do they for sooth provide goodly for
the weak ones, yea they serve their own bellies, seeking to gratify such as
are either Christ's enimyes or else backsliders, for no man besides these will
earnestly contend for Superstitious Ceremonies: this is their modest bearing,
and delaying, whereby they are so far from furthering of the Gospel, that by
little and little they do utterly abolish it.

Thus you hear M. Bucers judgment that noble light set up by God in Germany,
and by King Edward brought into England, and made the divinity Lecturer in
Cambridg both for the establishing of the Discipline set down by Christ and
his Apostles in the first Churches, for the taking away of the Lordly estate of
Bishops, and for the utter abolishing of all our vain and beggarly Ceremonies
which he calls Antichristian trash. Unto him I will join Peter Martyr his
combresbyter or fellow Elder, P. Martyr.
brought into England also by King Edward, and made the Divinity Lecturer in
Oxford. Whose departing from Argentine in Germany, was greatly lamented, he
was (says Sleidan) a man there exceedingly beloved for his sincere judgment,
his great mildnes and modesty, and for his incomporable learning. In his
Epistle to the Lords of Polonia, professors of the Gospel, and Ministers of
the Church there, when they began to make the reformation of religion in the
rite of administering the Sacraments; says M. Martyr, That manner is most to be
embraced which shall be most plain, and most removed from the Papisticall
trifles and Ceremonies, and which shall come nearest to the pureness which
Christ used with his Apostles. Christian minds ought not to be occupied much in
outward rites and Ceremonies, but to be fed by the word, to be instructed by
the Sacraments, to be inflamed unto prayers, to be confirmed in good works, and
excellent examples of life. Moreover I counsel you that in any wise ye bring
in Discipline into your Churches so soon as possible ye can, for if it be not
received at the beginning when men are very desirous of the Gospel, it will
not soon be admitted afterward, when (as it happens) some coldness shall creep
in. And how vainly you shall labor with out it very many Churches may be an
example unto you, who since they would not at their very first reformation take
upon them this healthful yoke, could never afterward, as touching manners and
life, be brought into order by any just rule, whereof it happens (which I
speak with grief) that all things in a manner have small assurance and and
do threaten ruin on every side. Therefore it is a grievous loss and a
certain destruction of Churches, to want the strenght of Discipline. Neither
can it be truly and soundly said that they have and do profess the Gospel,
which either be without Discipline, or do contemn it, or be not delighted
therewith. Certainly since in the Evangelists and in the Apostolic Epistles it
is taught with so great diligence, it must be confessed not to be the least
part of Christian religion. Whereby it comes to pass that the Gospel seems
to be despised of them which have banished from themselves so notable a portion
thereof. But under what devise or couller it is rejected at this day in many
places, is worth the hearing. They say that there is a danger, least under the
color of Discipline, the Ministers of the Church should take upon them
tyranny, should correct, reprove, and excommunicate, for no just causes, but
at their own pleasure etc. Neither do these good men perceive, that there
needs not be any fear of the Ministers, where the rule of the Gospel as
touching brotherly correction is observed. For this charge is not to be
committed to the authority and will of one man: but in the shutting out from
brotherly society them which will not be amended, a consent of the Church must
be had by whose authority if it be don, no man can justly compain of the
tyranny of one, or of a few.

Mark how this Divine lecturer, which has so good testimony, of his sincere
judgment, great modesty and mildnes, and of incomparable learning, would have
the Discipline received wheresoever any reformation of religion is made, and
says plainly it is a great part of christian religion, and a notable portion
of the Gospel, and that they which refuse or reject it may be counted enimyes,
and not lovers of the Gospel. And that the charge of excommunication is not to
be committed to one man or to a few, but to the whole Church. And as for the
rites and Ceremonies and administration of the Sacraments, he sets down
these three caveats to be observed in the using of them. First, that they be
most plain and simple. Secondly that they be most removed from the
superstitious trifles of the Papists. Thirdly, that the manner of using them
come nearest, to the pureness that Christ and his Apostles used. Certainly if M.
Martyr were now in Oxford, and with all his sincerity, and modesty, and
learning, should mayntaine this most playnenes in the Ministratio^ most furdest
removed from Popish Ceremonies and trifles, and cry out for the pureness that
Christ and his Apostles used, he should be turned out for a wrangler, or a
Puritan, if he had no more hurt. But let us here what M. Martyr says further
upon these points. In his Common places speaking of the government of the Church
he says. If thou respect Christ it shall be called a Monarchy; part 4 cha 5
sect. 9 Com. in 1. Cor. 5:13.
For he is our King who with his own blood has purchased the Church unto
himself. He is now gone into heaven, yet does he govern this Kingdom of his;
indeed not with visible presence, but by the spirit and word of the holy
scriptures. And there be in the Church which do execute the office for him,
Bishops, Elders, Doctors and others bearing rule: in respect of whom it may be
justly called a government of many etc. But because in the Church there be
matters of very great weight and importance referred unto the people (as it
appears in the Acts of the Apostles) therefore it has a consideration of
public government. But of the most weight are accounted excommunication,
absolution, choosing of Ministers, and such like: so as it is concluded, that
no man can be excommunicated with out the consent of the Church. And a non
after he says, Cyprian writteth unto Cornelius the Bishop of Rome, that he
labored much with the people that they which are fallen might have pardon.
Which if it might have been given by himself, there had been no need that he
should so greatly have traveled in persuading of the people. And Augustine
against the Donatists shows the same, when he says: we must then cease to
excommunicate, if the whole people shall be infected with one and the self
same vice. For it will not (says he) consent to excommunication, but will
defend and maintain him whom thou shall excommunicate. Wherefore this right
pertains to the Church neither ought to be taken from the same: against which
opinion they cheifely are, which would have the same to be committed to one
Bishop or Pope. And in the 5 section a little before he gives this definition
of excommunication. Excommunicatio est etc: Excommunication is the casting out
of a notorious wicked man from the fellowship of the faithful, by the judgment
of them that be chief, and the whole Church consenting, by the authority of
Christ and rule of the holy scriptures, to the salvation of him that is cast
out, and of the people of God. And after he had confirmed the same by diverse
places of scripture he says. Seeing it is the Gospel of Christ as touching
all the parts, it ought to be received of the Church, and credit every where to
be given unto it. So as they are to be wondered at, which would profess the
Gospel, and yet do exclude this particle. And touching the magnificence of
Bishops and their stately using of Civil affairs. In the same part and 20
chapter Section 16 he says, But why in times past (in the old testament) were
both Principality and Priesthood joined together? This may be declared the
cause; Namely that in those persons Christ was shadowed, ^n 2: Kings 11 initio.
to whom was due both the true Priesthood and Sovereign Kingdom. But after his
coming upon the earth we have no other Priest but himself, our only mediator
and redemer. Undoubtedly those Ministers of the Church which are instituted by
him, are appointed to preach the Gospel of the son of God and to administer
the Sacraments: wherefore it is meet they should abstain from outward
principality and administration of civil affairs. Since they have been so
instructed by Christ. For he said unto his Apostles. The Princes of the
Nations have dominion over them, but it shall not be so among you. And being
required by a certain man to command his brother to devide the inheritance
with him, said, who made me a judge over you? Showing that it agrees not with
his vocation while he remains upon the earth, to have authority to devide
heritages. And after the same manner ought Ministers to judge themselves to be
sent even as he was sent. Moreover, Paul informs his Timothy and instructing
him as touching the holy ministry, says; No man that warreth entangleth
himself with the affairs of this life, where he uses an Argument of
comparison to wit, from the lesser to the greater, even so, as if he should
say; if it be not lawful for them which are bound by the office of warfare, to
take upon them other business or trade of life, much less ought they which are
bound to the holy ministry intermedle themselves with other charges, for
their vocation requires the whole man: because they must not only twice or
thrice in the year execute their office, but it is necessary that (as the
Apostle warns) they preach the Gospel and earnestly apply the^ selves to
reading doctrine both in season and out of season. And yet more expressly in his
Co^mentary upon the 13 chap. to the Romans, he says. They will answer that
Ministers indeed have not the sword in as much as they are ministers, but have
received it from else where, and that by just title and possession. Christ
indeed did serve his vocation: for he came in humility, by his passion and
death to redeem mankind; but his example is not to be followed in all things.
Otherwise no christian ought to bear the office of a Magistrate: for Christ
bear it not. Wherefore they affirm that he left an example only to men
tending to perfection: such as are Monks and begging Friars which (as they say)
have renounced the world. Neither can they a bide that Peter should prescribe
unto his successor when he said, that he had neither gold nor silver, but that
he left only a pattern of perfection unto them, which so order their life as
he did, who forsaking all that he had followed Christ, that he might the
rediler serve him. But these men should remember, that not only examples, but
also commandments make one our side. For Christ says, The Kings of the
Nations bear dominion over them, but so shall not ye. And these words are to
be understanded singularly and particularly of the Apostles and Ministers and
not of all men universally etc. Further who sees not that these two functions
do so hinder the one the other: that he which exercises the one, cannot
execute the other. For it is an hard matter to find one so prompt and ready
that can rightly and orderly administer but even one of these functions. And
again in his Common places the 4 part and 13. chapter section 12: he says.
But our false Ecclesiastics will be Princes and reign, and yet Christ would
be no King. And when he was sought for to the end he should be made a King he
utterly refused it, yea rather he plainly confessed that his kingdom is not of
this world: he said also unto the Apostles, Princes of the Nations do bear
rule over them, but ye shall not so do. Peter also whose successors these men
profess themselves to be, warns Ministers that they should not exercise
dominion over the flock. And upon the second book of Samuel the 6 chapter,
he says. Arca ista per allegoriam non incommodam refert nobis ecclesiam Dei.
This Arc by a fit allegory does represent unto us the Church of God: which
ought to be carried and borne at this day upon the shoulders of the Bishops. But
now many Bishops do even the same thing that these Levites did, of whom we
spoke. For when they would seem to be pillars of the Church, in the mean time
they give themselves altogether to idleness and pleasures and lay the Arc upon
their Uicars, Suffragans and Commissaries, which oftentimes a man can call
nothing else but brute and most blockheaded beasts. And in the 12 chapter of
Samuel, speaking of Archbishops and Bishops, he says, Admoniti officii sui
respondent se habere substitutos et vicarios qui ista curent, Ita labor aliorum
est et proventus ipsorum: vtque est in libro Job, Boves arant et Asini
pascuntur. When they are admonished of their duty or office, they answer that
they have vicars and substituts which take the care and charge of those things:
page 1275: edit. 1570.
so other men take the pains and they take the profit, and as it is in Job,
the Oxon plow the ground and the Asses are fead. I might here not unfitly set
down the words of M. Fox in his book of Martyrs where he says: Every Prelat or
beneficed person ought himself to discharg his Cure without deputy or Vicar.

Now let us proceed to other of the excellent lights that God has set up in
the midst of the deep darkness of Antichrist, upon some of the golden
Candlesticks of Helvetia or Swicerland. Of Zuinglius somewhat has been said
already, whom M. Bullinger that excellent learned man succeeded, whom Pantaleo
in his Ecclesiastical Chronicle calls one of the Fathers and lights of the
Gospel; Bullinger,
whose Decads and Sermons being translated in English and set forth by public
authority in Queen Elizabeth's time to be read either privately, or publikly as
appears in the preface: and for the commendations thereof it is said, that
they are fit to be read out of the pulpit unto the simplest and rudest people
of this land, the doctrine of them very plain without ostentation, curiosity,
perplexity, vanity, or superfluity: very sound also without Popery,
Anabaptisme, Servetianisme, or any other heresy. And afterward in the
conclusion of the preface it is said. These sermons of M. Bullingers are such
as whether they be used privately or read publicly, whether of Ministers of the
word or other Gods children, certainly there will be found in them such light and
instruction for the ignorant, such sweetness and spiritual comfort for
consciences, such heavenly delights for souls; that as perfumes the more they
are chafed the better they smell; and as golden mines, the deeper ye dig
them, the more richer they show: so these the more dilligently ye peruse them,
the more delightful they will please, and the deeper ye dig with daily
study in their mines, the more golden matter they will deliver forth to the
glory of God. Now therefore let us hear what this Angel and light of the
Gospel set up by the Lord upon a golden candlestick of Helvetia, says.

And first of the Eldership or Elders in every Church to be used. Decad 5
sermon 10
Like as the Lord (says M. Bullinger) would have the transgressing Ministers
privately to be admonished and corrected, so does he extend the commodity of
the same admonition and correction to the whole Church. And therefore the
Ancient Church had a holy Senate of Elders which dilligently warned the^ that
transgressed in the Church, corrected them sharply, yea, and excluded them out
of the Ecclesiassticall fellowship namely if they perccaved, that there was no
hope of a mendment to be looked for in them. But in the latter times the Popes
and Bishops tyrannically taking that kind of punishment into their hands, and
excercising it sacrilegiously contrary to the first institution, have turned an
wholesome medicine into an hurtful poison, making it abominable both to the
good and bad. Behold what fruit this alteration of Gods order and ordinance in
the Church has brought, by taking away the Eldership from the Church or
Congregation, and committing it unto the Bishops: who by their Lordly authority
tyrannically (says M. Bullinger) took it from the Church into their own
hands, and that even in some places where the light of the Gospel is set upon
the golden candlesticks thereof, whereby they have turned an wholesome medicine
into an hurtful poison, making it abominable both to the good and bad, as in
all Queen Elizabeth's time we might see here in England, that by their Lordly
power oftentimes for such a trifling matter as an honest Magistrate would have
been a shamed to lay a man by the heels, they were not a shamed to commit a
christian to the Devil. And showing what the Elders were, he says. Wherefore
the Elders in the Church of Christ are either Bishops or otherwise prudent and
learned men added to Bishops that they may the more easily bear the burden
laid upon them, Decad 5 sermon 3
and that the Church of God may the better and more conveniently be governed.
For Paul says, The Elders that rule well let them be counted worthy of double
honor, most specially they which labor in the word and doctrine. 1: Tim* ^:
There were therefore certain other in the Ecclesiastical function, who
albeit they did not teach by and by as did the Bishops, yet were they present
with them that taught in all businesses. Perhaps they are called of the same
Apostle elsewhere, Governors, 1. Cor. 1 ^^
that is to say which are set in authority concerning discipline and other
affairs of the Church. And in this point with Bullinger M. Peter Martyr most
plainly agrees. He that rules well etc. Martyr in Romans 1 2:
This me thinks (says M. Martyr) is most fitly to be understood of Elders:
not in very deed of them which had charge of the word and of doctrine. But of
those which were appointed as assistants unto the Pastors; they as being the
discreter sort and indeed with a greater zeal and godliness, were chosen out
from among the laity. Their office was chiefly to attend unto Discipline etc.

And touching the Lordship of Bishops where it is objected against the^ that
think Bishops should be no Lords, that they would maintain the Anabaptisticall
opinion which deny Magistracy and the authority of Kings and Princes, M.
Bullinger confuteth the Anabaptists with the self same reason and scripture,
whereby he proves that Bishops should be no Lords. Decad 2 sermon 9
And unless that Christians (says Bullinger) when they are once made Kings
should continue in their office and govern kingdoms according to the rule and
laws of Christ, how (I beseech you) should Christ be called King of Kings and
Lord of Lords? Therefore when he said, Kings of nations have dominion over them,
but so shall not ye be. He spoke to his Apostles who strove among themselves
for the chief and highest dignity. As if he should have said. Princes which
have dominion in the world, are, not by my doctrine displaced of their seats,
nor put besides their thrones; for the Magistrates authority is of force still in
the world, and in the Church also. The King or Magistrate shall reign, but so
shall not ye: ye shall not reign, ye shall not be Princes, but teachers of
the world, and Ministers of the Churches. Thus breifely (says he) I have
answered to the Anabaptists objections. And again upon the very same matter in
like sort in the 5 Decade and 2 sermon citing the lik place of Peter. Not as
though ye were Lords over Gods heritage (says he) Peter speaks not of any
Empire and Lordship, yea by express words he forbids Lordly dignity. For even
as he is appointed of the Lord a Minister and an Elder, not a Prince and a
Pope: so also he appointed no Princes in the Church, but Ministers and Elders,
who with the word of Christ should feed Christ's flock. And upon that place of
Luke the 22: The Kings of the Gentiles reign over the^, and they that bear
rule over the^ are called gracious Lords etc. Decad 3: sermon 3
This simple and plain truth (says M. Bullinger) shall continue invincible
against all the disputations of these Harpyes. The most holy Apostles of our
Lord Christ will not be Lords over any man under pretense of religion yea S.
Peter in plain words forbids Lordship over Gods heritage, and commands
Bishops to be examples to the flock. Mark how M. Bullinger applies this
place of scripture, and how bitterly he speaks against the Lordship of
Bishops, calling them Harpyes that is monstrous birds, having maiden visages
and talens of a mischevous and marveilous capacity. But before in the same
sermon he says. In the order of Bishops and Elders from the beginning there
was singular humility, charity, and concord, no contention or strife for
prerogative, or titles, or dignity. For all acknowledge themselves to be the
Ministers of one Master, coequall in all things touching office or charge. He
made them unequal not in office, but in gifts by the excellency of gifts. And
therefore in the first Decad and second sermon, he says, Did not Christ
himself refuse a crown upon earth? And did not he that is Lord of all,
minister? Does not he himself disallow that any Minister should seek any
prerogative, no, not in respect of Eldership? He that is greatest among you
(says he) let him be as the you^ger. He therefore commands an equallitie
amongst them all. And therefore S. Ierom judges rightly, saying, that by the
custom of man and not by the authority of God, some one of the Elders should
be placed over the rest, and called a Bishop; whereas of old time, an Elder or
Minister and Bishop were of equal honor, power, and dignity. And it is to be
observed, that S. Ierom speaks not of the Romish Monarchy, but of every
Bishop placed in every City above the rest of the ministers. And to answer the
objection which is made in defense of the Lordbishops; that they take not upon
them civil offices and Lordly dignities: but by their Princes and Magistrates
it is laid upon them and given them, he says: Shall we believe that Peter
would have received secular power with imperial government if the Emperor Nero
had proffered it him? No in no wise, for this word of the Lord took deep root
in his inward bowels. But it shall not be so with you.

And touching the election of Bishops and Ministers, this bright star fixed
in the right hand of Christ says. Decad 5 sermon 4 Titus 1. 1 Timothy 5.
They which think that all power of ordayning Ministers, is in the Bishops
Diocesans, or Archbishops hands, do use these places of the scripture. For
this cause I left thee in Creta (says Paul to Titus) that thou should
ordain Elders in every City. And again, Lay hands soddainly on no man. But
we say, that the Apostles did not exercise tyranny in the Churches, and that
they themselves a lone did not execute all things about election or ordination,
other men in the Church being excluded. For the Apostles of Christ ordained
Bishops or Elders in the Church, but not without communicating their Counsel
with the Churches, yea, and not without having the consent and approbation of
the people. And a little after he says. So undoubtedly Titus, though it were
said unto him, Ordain Elders in every City, yet he understod that hereby
nothing was permitted to him which he might do privately as he thought good,
not having the advice and consent of the Churches. Wherefore they sin not at
all that shaking of the yoke and tyranny of the Bishops of Rome, for good and
reasonable causes to recover that ancient right granted by Christ to the
Churches. And as for Archdeacons, he coupleth them with the filthy vermin of
Monks, Decad 5 sermon 3
saying. And when wealth increased there were Archdeacons also created, that is
to say overseers of all the goods of the Church: They as yet were not mingled
with the order of Ministers or Bishops and of those that taught, but they
remained as stewards or factors of the goods of the Church. As neither the
Monks at the beginning executed the office of a Priest or Minister in the
church. For they were counted as lay men, not as Clearks, and were under the
charge of the Pastors. But these unfortunat birds never left soaring until in
these last times they have climed into the top of the Temple, Archdeaco^s,
and have set themselves upon Bishops and Pastors heads. And touching the
Leviticall apparel and the Lordly estate of Ministers he precisely concludes
thus. The mystical attire and garments of the Priesthood, he neither did
commend to his Apostles nor leave to his Church, Decad 3 sermon 18
but took them away with all the Ceremonies that are called the middle wall
betwixt the Jews and the Gentiles. The Lord himself and his Apostle Paul will
have the Pastors of his people clad with righteousness and honesty: and do
precisely remove the Ministers of the Church from superiority and secular
affairs. Now if the Lord himself and his Apostle, do precisely remove the
Ministers of the Church from superiority and secular affairs, I wish it might
also be remembered and precisely followed, which the Kings Majesty says in his
first book to his Son our Noble Prince; for says our gracious King,
Basilic. doro^ 1 part
In any thing that is expressly commanded or prohibited in the book of God, you
cannot be over precise. Decad 5 sermon 4
And for a full conclusion in this matter M. Bullinger says. That order or
function instituted by Christ in the Church, suffices even at this day, to
gather, govern, and preserve the Church on earth; yea without these orders
which in these last ages new inventions has instituted. For that does the
thing it self witness; and the absolute perfection of the Primitive Church a
voucheth it. And therefore at the last he uses this exclamation. Oh happy had
we been, Sermon 3.
if this order of Pastors had not been changed, but that ancient simplicity
of Ministers, that faith, humility, and diligence had remained uncorrupted.
But in process of time all things of ancient soundnes, humility, and
simplicity vanished away, whilst some things are turned upside down: some
things either of their own accord were out of use, or else are taken away by
deceit, some things are added to, etc. The authors desire.
Whereunto I will ad the exclamation of mine own soul, saying. Oh, happy
should we be if it might please his gracious Majesty to restore unto his
poor subjects of England the ancient orders of the Ecclesiastical Ministers,
set down by Christ and his Apostles, without any other orders which man's
invention has instituted: for that order and function suffices even at this
day to gather, govern, and preserve the Churches of God upon earth without any
of these orders, and such like, which man's invention has brought in: namly,
Archbishops, Diocesan Lords, Archdeacons, Deanes, Commissaries, Officialls,
which are brought in by man's invention and not once mentioned in the scripture.

And so I will proceed to M. Musculus set up also as an excellent light of God
among the golden Candlesticks Musculus
of Tigurie, and the Swicers; I have already showed out of Musculus, that in
plain words he says. That the device of men, page 14.15
that Bishops should be greater then other Ministers, was such a mischeife to
the Church, that we may thank the custom thereof for all the wealth, pride;
and tirannie of our Princely and riding Bishops, and for the corruptions of all
Churches; which if the ancient Fathers did now see, The Devils invention
they would no doubt acknowledge it, not to be the device of the holy Ghost, as
it was pretended; But of the Devil himself to take away the true Ministry of
the Church of God set down by Christ and his Apostles. Now further in his
book of Common places, Tit. Of the Ministry of the word of God, he says. It
is not meet that a Bishop do convert the power of his Ministry to other
Churches, but to Minister faithfully in the same wherein he is elected and
confirmed, like as it was not convenient for the Apostle to convert his
Apostleship to a Bishopric, and to be restrained to one Church only: As also
it is unto James. The like is to be said of Titus Tim. Mark Eva^gelists. Chry.
Tit. 1.
which is falsely attributed unto the Apostle Peter. Wherefore let the Bishops
look to themselves, which whereas they do not lawfully Minister in one Church,
yet they do extend their power not to a few Churches, but unto whole Provinces
also. Let them read Chrysostom upon the Epistle to Titus the first chapter, By
Cities he says. Indeed he would not have a whole Island committed unto one man,
but every man to have his charge and care alone. And a non after he says, Yea
the impudency and state of Bishops is become so great, that a number of
Bishoppricks be swallowed up in the gurmandise of some one Metropolitan Bishop,
such as there be many now a days. And the Bishop of Rome even like the Devil
(painted with his wide mouth) devoureth up all the Bishoprics and Churches of
the world: And a little before he says. They that boast themselves to be the
successors of the Apostles, ought not to extol themselves above the Apostles,
which would not be taken for Lords, (that had authority to command) but for
Ministers serving the will of the Lord. And a non after he says. Thirdly, that
Elders Bishops and Pastors be all one, it is manifest by that which we do read
in this wise. And sending messengers from Miletus to Ephesus, Acts 20
he sent for Priests or Elders of the Church, and when they came unto him, he
said, you know that from the first day etc. And a little after, Look therefore
to your selves and to all the flock, in which the holy spirit has set you
Bishops to feed the Church of God, etc. The same which Luk calls the Priests
or Elders of the Church of Ephesus, those Paul calls Bishops, and says, that
they be set there to that intent, to feed the Church of God. So we do see
manifestly, that Priests or Elders, Bishops and Pastors be all one. And that
there was in one self same Church jointly together many Bishops, and that
appointed by the holy spirit, as we may see also by that which we do read in
the Apostle, saying, Paul and Timothy the servants of Jesus Christ to all the
Saints in Christ Jesus, which be at Philippos together with the Bishops and
Deacons. Lo there were many Bishops together also at Philippos. And touching
the questions in Baptism thus he entreats thereof. Augustine says, If we
will in words declare that the little children do know in godly matters, which
do not yet understand worldly matters, I fear least we shall seem to do
wrong unto our very senses in so saying, whereas the plain evidence of the
truth does easily surmont all that strength and means of our sayings. I know
what Augustins answer was unto this question to Boniface the Bishop, Aug. epis.
57 ad Dardan.
where he writteth in this wise: It is answered, that the Child does believe
which has not yet any affection of faith. It is answered that it has faith
because of the Sacrament of faith. Thus (says he) he calls baptism the
Sacrament of faith, But in case that the Sacrament of faith, be faith, how is
it said that the infant has faith which has not yet baptism, and is
therefore demanded whether that he does believe, to the intent that he may
receive baptism? Again, the question is not whether he has the sacrament of
faith or not, but whether he does believe? The question is of faith and not of
the Sacrament of faith; yet for all that it cannot be truly reported, that he
has faith therefore. And so it is a very feeble answer, that this great man
makes in this matter; for as much as the infant when he is thus demanded has
neither faith, neither the sacrament of faith. For how should he have that
which he has not received? But yet thus they are compelled to answer the
matter, which will needs maintain and keep this custom used in the Church,
without any ground of it. And this being so fond a custom, that it cannot be
defended, risen first of this, that the Bishops, did disorderly apply that
form of baptising of such as were of perfect years of understanding, unto the
baptising also of infans, and so began to demand of infants of the abrenouncing
of Satan, and of the faith in the holy Trinity, as well as they did of them
that were of years of full age. In my judgment it were more convenient if the
Father of the infant that is to be baptized were present at the font to require
baptism for his child, and that he should be openly examined of his faith, by
the Minister in the presence of them that stand by, of the faith, not which the
infant has, but which he himself has in Christ our Lord and Savior; and
whereunto he will bring up and teach his infant.

Unto M. Musculus succeeded M. Gualter, who upon the Prophet Zephaniah that
prophesied only in the time of King Josiah which was the chiefest reformer of
religion that ever reigned among the Jews, Gualter
yet notwithstanding this Prophet sent of God, was such a vehement taxer of the
defects in the reformation of religion and remnants, of Baall, and relics of
superstition left in Josiah his time, that non of all the Prophets did more
exclame against the relics that were left, or threatened greater plagues for
lack of full reformation. Whereupon M. Gualter in his first sermon upon the
Prophet Zephaniah uses this spech in the name of the Lord. My servant Josiah
removed away many things. But because through your ungodlines many things yet
remain being contrary to my laws, Gualt. upon Zepha, ser. 1
verily I my self will bring forth Broomes much more rough, where with these
abominable relickes with their Patrons or defendors, shall be clean purged etc.
And in his second sermon a little before the end he thus concludes. But let us
consider the degrees of superstition which the Prophet in this place makes
mention of. The first is, when the remnant of superstitions is kept, when God
grants liberty to reform things, crafty dissemblers do attend uprn these
superstitions whereunto they bear good will and by little and little spread them
a broad, by and by after follows open Idolatry: but least they should seem
to forsake God altrgother, first theris invented a certain mixture, but the
same at the length degenerateth to a plain defection or falling from God: and
these things certainly, even at this day are seen every where: Behold England.
and do we as yet marveil at the wrath of God, hanging over our heads. Let us
learn therefore to attend and waigte upon the word of God, to fly all
occasion of evil.

O that our Prelates of England, would attend and wait upon the word of God and
so fly all occasion of evil: considering the degrees of superstition how they
increased even in King Iosiahs time, namly, by retayning the relics of
superstition, and not to invent a certain mixture, whereby must needs follow a
degeneration, to a plain defection and falling from God. For every country man
can tell that if a crab tree be graft with the sweet apple called the apple of
paradise, or with the most excellent apple that is in the world, although the
graft do grow and flourish marvelously well: yet if the sients be suffered to
grow, by little and little within a while, the crabb tree sients will so
prevail, and the graft of the good fruit so decay, that the whole tree will
turn again to be a crabb tree and bear no fruit but crabbes. So in King
Henry 8 time the Popes supreme head was cut of, and the graft of Gods word
was set up in every Church through out England: which graft (as James says) is
able to save our souls if it be received with all meeknes and all filthiness
laid a part. James. 1.
But King Henry 8 suffered almost all the boughs upon the stock beneath the
graft to grow. King Edward pared of many of them: Queen Mary laid such violent
hands upon the graft, that she pulled it clean out of the stock and cast it
into the fire. Our late gracious Queen Elizabeth received from heaven a graft
again, and set it into the stock: which by the blessing of God grew and
flourished, but the boughs and sients which King Edward left she suffered
still to grow. As the pompous estate of Bishops, with the abominations of
pluralities and Nonresidencies; and such like, with diverse bad and beggarly
Ceremonies which all remain to this day. O that our Prelates of England would
lift up their eyes to heaven and behold the wrath of God which (as Gualter
says) hangs over our heads for these relics of Antichrist and other our
sinful wickedness: then would they surely, be so far from mainteinyng the same
or persuading his Majesty to let them continue, that humbly one their knees
they would beseech him (though all their wealth and pomp should perish) yet
with his mighty hand to rent of the crabb tree scients, and with the sharp
sword, to cut of the boughs that grow upon the stock, whereby the blessed
graft of Gods word might lively grow and flourish: which exceept it be done
can never prosper, nor as the Apostle speaks can never have free pastage and
be glorified. And it is worthy to be noted that to his great honor it is
written. Josiah also took away them that had familiar spirits, and the
Soothsayers, and the Images, 2 Kings 2; ^ 24.
and the Idols: and all the abominations that were espied in the land of Judah
and Jerusalem, to perform the words of the law, which were written in the
book that Hilkiah the Priest found in the house of the Lord. But this is to be
observed in his most excellent reformation, that the text says, he took away
all the abominations that were espied in the land of Judah and Jerusalem. For
where very great defection and falling away from true religion is established
by public authority, it is a merveilous difficult matter for a Prince that
would make reformation thereof, to epsy whatsoever ought to be reformed. So
that if there be not daily more and more amended, the sients of the crabb tree
stock being suffered will out grow the graft and spoil the tree: as we see in
this most excellent reformation which Josiah made, which yet is so bitterly
taxed, not only by Zephaniah the Prophet but also by Ieremia as you may read in
the third chapter, where he says, The Lord said also unto me, Ier. 3.6.7.8
in the days of Josiah the King, have thou seen what this rebel Israel has
done? For she has gone up upon every high mountain and under every green
tree and there played the harlot. And I said when she had done all this. Turn
thou unto me, but she returned not, as her rebellious sister Judah saw. When I
saw that by all occasions rebellious Israel had played the harlot, I cast her
away and gave her a bill of divorcement: yet her rebellious sister Judah was
not afraid, but she went also and played the harlot. And afterward in the 10:
and 11: verses he shows how high the abominations of Judah even in the time
of Josiah were grown. Nevertheless (says Jeremiah) for all this her (...)
from them, as well as of Monks. Thirdly, that many that do profess the
Gospel, handle the matter as ill as the Monks and Popish Bishops; In that they
restore not again to the Church and Congregation the liberty of choosing
their Ministers, which by tyranny they took from them, ruling the matter by
their Lordly estate as they list themselves. Fourthly, that this evil also
shortly if it be not amended will bring into the Churches that profess the
Gospel both Symonie and the utter confusion of Discipline. And after in the
same Homily, he says. Whosoever would have in the Church the ancient
authority of Discipline, and the boldness of the Prophets and Apostles in the
Ministry, and to be short the old integrity and soundnes of the whole Church;
let him labor to recover and call again this ancient order of choosing
Ministers showed to us by the Apostles. Note.
Observe christian reader, that whosoever wishes to have the old integrity
and sou^dnes of the whole Church, ought to labor in his degree as much as in him
lies to recover and call again this ancient order of choosing Ministers
showed us by the Apostles, in Acts 15 22. Homily 104.
that is with the Churches free consent. But in another Homily he says,
Through the covetousnes and ambition of Bishops it is come to pass that the
liberty of the Church is trodden under foot, and choosing of Ministers
depends upon them. O wicked wretchedness of those Biships, which do not only
herein through their covetousnes and ambition offend Christ, and rob his
Churches of their right: but also with great cruelty and bold faces maintain
the same to be well done, and purpose to continue therein to their lives end?
And of the choosing of Deacons likewise upon the sixth chapter, Hom. 41.
he says: Therefore the chosing of Deacons to whom the administration of the
Church goods is committed, belongs to all the Church. But afterward upon the
15 chapter, he says. Hom. 104.
Now where the ambition of Prelates has disturbed and broken this order, who
contrary to the commandment of Peter the Apostle have challenged unto them a
Lordship over the inheritance or Church of Christ, the Congregations are every
day molested with new contentions and there appears no end, either of errors,
or most bitter debates. I think verily M. Gualter in these words poynted with
his finger specially to England: for no Nation of christendom, that is called a
reformed Church, or had the Gospel once shinyng in at the window, has had or
is like to have such endless contention, and continual errors, only through
the Lordship, and magnificent estate of Lord Bishops, Hom. 86
which no reformed Church in all Europe has retained but England. And upon the
13 chapter he says, We must judge them called of God that are furnished with
necessary gifts of the holy Ghost; and chosen by the voice of the lawful
Congregation: for that the Church has herein her voice and election,
appears plainly by this place. And likewise in the 1 chapter Homely the 9.
he says, And the holy Ghost would have all this history so dilligently
described, for that a sure rule and president might be left to them that came
after, whereby to rule the election of Ministers. And touching the dignity and
superiority of Ministers one over an other, he says. in Acts 20 Hom. 133
Although the dignity of all Ministers in the Church is a like, and none ought
to challenge power or authority over other, yet an order is necessary in the
Church which can never be kept and mainteyned, except Ministers will observe
modesty, and humility among themselves. And in the 8 Homely about the
chosing of Mathias, he says; First Peter will have a partner or fellow joined
with the Eleaven, In Acts 1
not a servant who^ the rest at their pleasure might command. For he knew that
equality was needful among Christ's Ministers. And in his 4 Homely showing
that Christ had warned his Apostles many ways, and in many plain terms, that
they should not live at ease and in Princly palaces like Lords: but suffer
adversity and possess their souls in patience. At last he concludes, These
I say and many such like things they heard of Christ, yet forgetting them all,
they dreamed of a worldly kingdom in which they hoped likewise they should be
Lords. This dream of theirs a-man would have thought, that Christ had beaten
out of their brains long before, Luc. 22.25.26.
when he said unto them. The Kings of the Gentiles reign over them, and they
that bear rule ovcr them are called gracious Lords, but ye shall not be so:
but let the greatest among you be as the least, and the chiefest as he that
serves. Notwithstanding this dream of being Lords under a worldly King, did
so pleasantly swym and had so sweet a smell within their earthly brains, that
nothing but the miraculous gift of the holy Ghost could pick it out. From
which sweet dream, our sleeping Sardian Angels and Lordbishops even at this
day will not be a waked but with a warm, and gay coulered cloak they cover
the^ selves saying, it was not Superiority and Lordship that Christ forbad his
Apostles, but pride, ambition, and tyra^nicall rule. Or else, that they being
Church Ministers should take no rule over their brethren, unless they had it
by special commission from some Magistrate. But who (except he be a Sardian
Angel, that will not be awaked) sees not, that Christ forbad them that
degree, and superiority, which they desired to have under him, simply? Which
surely was none other, but to have under him an honest rule, and Lordship, yea
I say by Commission from him; of whom they then imagined that he should be (as
a Teacher, so) a just and Supreme civil Magistrate likewise. For none but a
blasphemer of Christ and of his holy Apostles, can dream or imagine, that the
Apostles thought their Master should be such a King, as that they might fit at
his elbow, Mark 10.35 37, Math. 20.20, 21
and proudly and ambitiously reign under him, either without Commission, or by
his Commission, which they expressly desired. For then must it needs follow,
that they supposed that both they and he himself should reign like cruel,
proud, and ambitious tyrants. which God forbid that any christian should
dream, that ever it came within their thoughts. Therefore it is most clear
and evident, that Christ forbad his Apostles and in them all Pastors and
Ecclesiastical persons, all Lordship and Magnificent estate, with whatsoever
modesty and honesty they would carry themselves therein, yea though they might
by any Commission have it. M. Gualter speaking of the things which now a days,
under the name of the Apostles and Canons of the Apostles are obtruded, he
rejected them with this reason. Surely (says he) I will never think the Holy
Ghost either so unwise as to take a negligent writer of so high matters, or
else so forgetful, In Acts 1 Hom. 1
as to let pass any of those things, the knowledge and observation whereof
was so necessary in his Church: And would not the self same reason hold with
as great, or greater force; if a man should say, surly I can never believe the
holy Ghost either so unwise, as to take so negligent writers of so high
matters, or else so forgetful, as to let pass any, or so many of those
things, the knowledge and observation whereof was or should be so necessary in
his Church, as Popes, Cardinals, Primats, Metrapolitans, Archbishops,
Diocesans, Archdeacons, Deanes, Commissaries, Officialls and such like. And M.
Hooper (our most blessed Martyr of England, M. Hooper.
) uses the like vehemency of speech and to the same purpose and effect. For
he accuses God (says M. Hoper) of ignorance and foolishnes that entendeth
(...) tures. Can you show that ever Christ or his Apostles used it? I think you
will not say that Philip used any Oil in the baptism of the Ethiopian. If
this reason be good against Oil, it is good against the Surplice and Cross,
etc. Yea, and all other humane inventions for like use. Likewise is the
Injunction of our Noble Queen Elizabeth, set forth by public authority,
Injunctio^ 3.
in these plain terms. Works devised by man's fantasies (says the Queen)
besides scripture (as wandering of pilgrimages, seting up of Candles, praying
upon beads, or such superstition) have not only no promise of reward in
scripture, for doing of them, but contrariwise great threatenings, and
maledictions of God. But if it were tolerated to have a Candle a light set up
in the Church to signify the light of the Gospel that is preached amongst us,
Psalm. 119.107.
what hurt might seem to be therein? Does not David say? Thy word is a
lantern unto my feet, and a light unto my paths. And although the Cross were
worshipped among the Papists with Divine Honor, as no man can justly deny, yet
was the Candle never worshipped; it was nothing else but an idle and superfluous
Ceremony, invented beside the scripture. And certainly there cannot possible be
any Ceremony more perspicuous in signification, more clear in show, more easy
to be understod, or better cloked to agree with scripture, then a Candle or
Taper set up to signify the light of the gospel. And yet we see her Majesty's
Iniunction says; Because it is devised by man's fantasy beside the scripture,
it has not only no promise of reward but contrariwise, great threatninges and
maledictions of God. It were indeed a small matter if a man would think to
bring into the church some such idle or unprofitable Ceremony, if that were all:
but if unto the least invention brought into the Church by man, there belong
the curse and malediction of God; How ought we then to beware and to look
about us that we attempt no such matter? Yea, how careful and clear eyed
ought our Clergy and Magistrates to be in those cases?

I meant in like sort to have cited many mo of the excellent lights of the
Gospel among the Germans and Helvetians, which write with one consent to the
self same effect and purpose: in all the points before entreated of, but these
may suffice: and prolixitie is to be avoided, wherein I fear that I have all
ready offended. But I cannot omit that famous learned man Hieronymus Zanchius,
both because he is a man of singular learning, Zanchius.
and commonly objected against the^ which desire reformation in the points of
religion aforesaid: First one is no number, and one swallow proves not
springtide. Secondly this one, being well waighed, agrees not fully in any one
point with the enimyes of reformation. And first he affirms flatly, as all
the rest do, that by the word of God and the holy scripture there are no more
degrees or orders of them that are appointed to preach the word of God, but
Pastors and Doctors. Wherein these are his words. Zanchius co^fes. fid. cap.
25. Art. 9.
Plures autem ministrorum verbi ordines, a Christo in Ecclesia institutos non
agnoscimus, quam quos Apostolus in epistola ad Ephesios ex pressit, etc. We do
not acknowledge, more orders of Ministers of the word instituted by Christ in
his Church (says M. Zanchius) then those which the Apostle in his Epistle to
the Ephesians has expressed. That is, Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors
and Doctors, of which the first three Christ would not have to be appointed, to
any certain places: but now hear, now there, either to collect or plant
Churches, which the Apostles did: or to water nourish and confirm those
Churches which the Apostles had so planted and gathered together, which the
Prophets and Evangelists did; and therefore might not be perpetual in the
Church: but the two latter Christ would have to be consecrated unto Churches
that were certain, to govern and preserve them, that is to say Pastors, and
Doctors, and that to be observed unto the end of the world; which therefore we
use to call perpetual and ordinary Ministers. Of which in the next Article he
says, Art. 11
The Doctors did only teach, and the Pastor did not only teach, but also
Minister the Sacraments and govern the Church. By these you may plainly see M.
Zanchius judgment, that Christ has appointed in the Church, no mo orders of
them that preach the word of God, but only Pastors and Doctors, which should
remain as perpetual and ordinarily called in the Church: of which the one did
only teach, and the other which is the Pastor, both preach and Minister the
Sacraments, and govern the Church. And although afterward he would defend or
as he himself terms it, excuse those Fathers and others, which brought in
more orders into the Church; yet in the same chapter he says, that all those
things were turned to tyranny and ambition, and concludes with these words.
Quae causa est, cur quo propius acceditur in iis etiam ordinibus ministrorum ad
simplicitatem Apostolicam, eo magis etiam nobis probetur: atque ut vbique
accedatur, dandum esse opera^ iudicemus. Which is the cause (says he) why we
judge, the nearer men come to that simplicity of the Apostles even in those
orders of Ministers in the Church, the more it is to be allowed and approyed;
and that in every place men ought to endevor themselves to attain unto it.

Is it most evident that Zanchius condemns and not justifies the Lordship of
Bishops in our time? And the titles Metropolitans, Archbishops, Diocesans and
the rest which long since have been brought in by custom and not by any truth
of the Lords appointment, according to old Ieromes saying, Which words and
judgment of Ierom, Zanchius in the 11. Article commends, allows, and
acknowledges himself to be fully of the same opinion. And in the 25 chapter,
and the eleventh Aphorism he ends thus; Interim que^admodum non improbavi
patres in ea re de qua est question; Sic etiam non possum nostrorum Zelum non
amare: qui ideo illa nomina oderunt, quia metuunt ne cum nominibuus vetus eti
am ambitio, et tyrannis cum ruina Ecclesiarum, revocetur. In the mean time
(says Zanchius) like as I have not condemned the Fathers in this matter in
which the question is, of the names and titles of Archbishops, Metropolitans,
and so forth, so also I cannot but love the zeal of our men; which therefore
hate these names, least with them the old tyranny and ambition with the
destruction of the Churches should be brought in again. Can he be called a
favorite of them, which loves them the better that hate those names? Or can he
be acounted to allow of those fu^ctions, which says (as you have heard before)
that the simplicity of the Apostles allowed not of them? Which simplicity (he
says) is best to be allowed, and in every place men should endeavor to attain
unto it. Although the Fathers did it for honest causes (says he) perteyning to
that time, in which age the discipline of the Church kept them under from the
wealth, pomp, and pride wherein they afterward lived and now live: For the
Ecclesiastical persons were bound by their Discipline. Cap. 25. Art. 38
Huius parts hae erant praecipuae etc: Of which Discipline the principal
parts were First that they should abstain from many pleasures and delights,
which otherwise in lay men might in some sort be tolerated: such as are many
fleshly delights, brave pomp, great cheer, costly housholdstuffe, a great
company of temporal servants, and such like. But howsoever he handle the
matter beside, (which

(...) 1 Having set down the true and lawful Ministry of the Gospel,
Theses Genevenses 71
which the Son of God ordained, and by his spirit divided into several
functions: it now remains, that we adioyne the false Ministry of the same,
to the end that contraries being laid one against another, may be better
manifest. 2 In the true Ministry of the Gospel there are three things which
distinguish the same from the false. The one that the authority of their
callings proceed from the Son of God, as being ordained either immediately by
himself, or mediatlie by his Apostles. The other is, that the calling be
lawful, that is, such a calling, as is squared according to the prescript
laws of the doctrine and Discipline of the Apostles. The third is the
prescript administration of the holy callings. Now all these we advouch to
have been by little and little utterly overthrown by the Papisticall tyranny,
which with the Apostles we may justly call the mystery of iniquity. 3 And
first we affirm that the callings of the Popish Clergy, which they express
by that proud title of Hierarchy, are in part altogether false; that is, such
as have at the first been invented by man and afterward became meerelie
devilish; and in part counterfeite, that is such as only retained the names of
true callings which they abolished indeed. 4 These functions following, we hold
to be altogether false and destitute of all true foundation, namely, the
Primacie of the Bishop of Rome over all Churches, the Cardinalship,
Patriarkship, Archiepiscopalship, and briefly that whole Episcopal degree of
Lord Bishops over their fellow Elders.

I wish the reader well to mark the first three points and not to forget the
fourth, set down by special name: that is, that these functions or offices
following are utterly false, and have no manner of true foundation, that is to
say the office of Popes, Cardinals, Patriarchs, Archbishops, and to be short
the whole Bishoplike degree over the rest of the Elders or Ministers. The like
may be said of Lausannae and the Universitie thereof, and so in many other parts
of Savoy. But I will only ad some few sayings of Calvin, Viret, Beza,
Marlorat, Danaeus, and Tilenus, leaving all the rest of the French Churches and
learned men there which are exceeding many in number, but all with one consent
agreeing with those last a fore named lights of the gospel; both in their
doctrine, Discipline, and practice of life.

And first of Calvin, which was as famous a Pastor in the City of Geneva, as
Augustine was in Hippo, Calvin.
or Jerome in the town of Bethlem: yet lived he not like a Lord, but like
Augustine and Jerome, and as has been before showed in a very mean estate,
whereof I my self have been an eye witness, The author Ioh. Call. vita ante eius
epist.
and as in the History of his life and death ye may also read. Where it is
written, Testari certe potest Senatus quu^ perexigua essent eius stipendia,
etc. The Senate of the City can testify, that although his stipend was very
small, yet was he so far from being discontent therewith, that a more ample
allowance being freely offered him, he obstinatly refused it. And a little
before, his riches and wealth that he left behind him are set down in these
words. Cuius bona omnia; etc. All those goods, his library also being dearly
sold, came scarcely to three hundred French Crowns: which a mounteth not to
one hundred pounds of our money, but lacks about some ten pounds thereof, and
yet all that he left came scarcely to so much. And according to this his
practice both publicly and privately he taught and wrote, as you may read in
his Instistutions. lib. 4. cap. 4. Where he says. Hereby also we judge what
use there was, and what manner of distribution of the Church goods. Each where
both in the decrees of the Synods, and among the old writers it is to be found,
that whatsoever the Church possesses (either in lands or money) is the
patrimony of the poor. And a non after he says, But since it is equity, and
established by the law of the Lord, that they which employ their service to the
Church, should be fed with the common charges of the Church, and also many
priests in that age consecrating their patrimonies to God, were willingly made
poor: the distributing was such, that neither the Ministers wanted sustenance,
nor the poor were neglected: But yet in the mean time it was provided, that
the ministers themselves, which ought to give example of honest sparing to
other, should not have so much whereby they might abuse it to riotous excess,
or deliciousnes, but only wherewith to sustain their own need. Har. Evang.
Mat: 20, 25
And upon the 20 of Matthew and 25 verse he says, Ye know that the Lords of the
Gentiles have dominion over them etc.) He declares that there shall be no such
superiority in his kingdom as they did strive for. They therefore are deceaved,
which do stretch this saying to all the godly in general, when as Christ only
teaches of that matter in hand, that the Apostles were very fond to make any
question of degree of power, or of honor in their estate and calling: for the
office of teaching whereto they were appointed, had no likelihood wtth the
Empires of the world. And after he says. The purpose of Christ was to put a
difference, between the spiritual regiment of his Church and earthly Empires,
least the Apostles should apply themselves to courtly graces, and fashions.
For as every one among the Nobles is beloved of Kings, so he climeth up to
wealth and offices. But Christ set Pastors over his Church, not to bear a
Lorlie rule over them, but to Minister. So the error of the Anabaptists which
do banish Kings and Magistrates from the Church of God, because Christ said
they were not like his Disciples, is overthrown: For the comparison is not
made here between Christians and propha^e men, but between offices And anon
after he says, So David, Ezekias, and such like when aswillingly they became
the servants of all me^, yet were they adorned with the Scepter, Diadem, Thro^e
and other such ensigns. But the government of the Church admits no such
thing. For Christ gave no more allowance to the Pastors then that they should
be Ministers, and that they should altogether abstain from Lordly government.
I need not to make any explanation of his words, for they are plain enough;
further for the election of Bishops and Ministers, M. Calvin says. Truly
this is a most foul example, Bishops made at the Court, a soul mattes
that out of the Court are Bishops to possess Churches: And it should be the
work of godly Princes to abstain from such corruption. For it is a wicked
spoiling of the Church, when there is thrust unto any people a Bishop whom they
have not desired, or at the least with free voice allowed. And upon the the 14
of the Acts he says. Paul and Barnabas are said to choose Elders. Do they this
alone by their private office? Nay rather they suffer the matter to be decided
by the consent of them all: therefore in ordayning Pastors the people had their
free election. And upon the 6 of the Acts where the seven Deacons were chosen
by the people, these are his words. As touching this present place, the Church
is permitted to choose. For it is tyrannous if any one man appoint or make
Ministers at his pleasure. Therefore this is the most lawful way, that those
be chosen by common voices, who are to take upon them any public function in
the Church. And concerning Nonresidencie and Pluralities of benefices, he
says. Instit 4. 8
Non obiiciam verbum Dei, etc. I will not object against the^ (says M. Calvin)
that the word of God does in every place cry out against it, which long since
amongst them has ceased to be in any manner of account: Neither will I object
many most severe constitution in many Counsels, that has been ordained
against this wickedness. For these Constitutions also as often as they list,
they stoutly contemn. But I say that both these things are a prodigious, or
monstrous, mischevous wiekednes, utterly against God, against nature, and
against the Ecclesiastical government: that one arrant thief should sit over
diverse Churches together, that he should be named (...) unto Satan's kingdom:
But also unlike to the earthly kingdoms which are governed by good civil
policy. Therefore Jesus Christ said, that he came not to be served but to
serve, and to show unto his Disciples the difference that they should put
between the worldli^ kingdoms and their estate; And his Church and the estate
and government of the same, etc. He says the Kings of the nations etc. And a
non after he says. When Jesus Christ sent his Apostles he said unto them, As
my Father sent me, so send I you. For he meddled not, nor took upon him, to
reign as a worldly Prince. But when the people sought him to make him a King,
he hid himself. And when he was required to devide an inheritance between two
brethren, he would not meddle with it, not because the thing it self was evil,
or that it was evil don to appoint those which were indifferent. But to show
that he was come and sent of God his Father for greater things, he left that
office unto Caesar and to his officers. And was content with that his Father had
committed unto him. And the same Commission he had in that behalf, he gave to
his Apostles.

Now one word of Marlorat: Again (says he) what are these reverend
Cardinals, Marlorat. exp. one the Revel, cap, 17, 3:
Archbishops, Archprelats, Patriarks, Primats, Presidents, Deanes, Cannons,
Archpriests, Archdeacons, Abbots, Priors, or Masters, Co^mendators. For like as
Antichrist has his names of blasphemy, even so they that be in office under
him, and are bound unto him by oath, have also names by themselves which the
scriptures know not of. In deed the Primitive Church had Ministers, Stewards,
Elders, or Overseers, Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Shepherds, and
Teachers, as you may perceive by these places. 1. Cor: 4.1.12.4.5.6.7.8. And
Ephe: 4.11. But all these were names of service and labor, and noe styles of
pride. And upon the 9 chapter, he has these words. For the tails of
Antichrist are Bishops Officials, Commissaries, Deanes, Registers; Chancelours,
Proctors, and Somners, which are like unto venomous serpents.

Now somewhat also touching these matters of Religion, and Hierarchy of the
Church, Beza.
as they call it out of M. Beza, whom M. Peter Martyr and many other learned
men, not without cause, do so greatly admire for his sincerity in judgment,
and excellent gifts, as you may read in many of their epistles and works. But
I will here set down the testimony of that singular divine and most noble
patron of the Gospel among our English writers D. Fulke: who against Gregory
Martin that conning Papist and false accuser, defends Calvin, Beza and Viret,
by these words. The books (says D. Fulke) of Calvin, Beza and Uiret, keep
themselves within the compass of the holy scriptures, Fulk 7. in epist, ad Ro^
and hold no blasphemous, or other erroneous opinions, that derogate any thing
from the glory of God, or be hurtful to the salvation of men, as your
slanderous and malicious pen supposes. Now therefore let us hear what Beza
says, whose books keep themselves within the compass of holy scriptures, and
hold no erroneous opinions as D. Fulk testifies. First touching the election
of Ministers upon this place of the Acts. Acts 1.^.2 3
And when they had ordained them Elders by election in every Church, and
fasted, they commended them to the Lord in whom they believed: where upon in
his Annotation he has these words. Paulum ac Barnaham sciamus nihil privato
arbitrio gessisse andt. Let us know that Paul and Barnabas did execute nothing
upon their own private choice, nor exercised any tyranny in the Church: and
to be short they did not any such manner of thing, as do now a days the Romish
Pope and his serving men which they call Ordinaries. Some had rather refer
this unto the laying on of hands which also is necessary, and catching this
pretense they say that our vocation is void, because the Ordinaries (...) and
defiled with infinite superstitions. But some man will say, these be auncien
things. I grant they be ancient: but much more ancient is the simplicity of
the Apostles, under which simplicity the Church flourished. And for the sign of
the Cross, he says. Whatsoever use was made thereof in the old time, it is
now but an execrable superstition. And touching the questions in baptism, he
answers. Itaque sicut Chrisma et exorcismus quantumvis vetusta, etc.
Therefore like as the Chrisme, and exorcisme, or coniuration, although they be
very ancient, by very good right are abolished; so we would wish this
interogatio^, being not only vain but also flolish, were left out. And
toward the latter end of the same Epistle, he says. Aiunt quoque
excommunicationes et absolutiones in curiis quibusdam Episcopalibus in Anglia
fieri non ex presbyterii, quod nullu^ ibi sit, sente^tia etc. They say also
that in England, excommunications and absolutions are done in certain
Episcopal courts, and not by the judgment of the Presbytery which is not
there to be had. Whereunto we answer, that it seems to us almost uncredible
to see such an abuse of most perverse manner and example yet to be used in that
kingdom, where the purity of doctrine does flourish: for it is out of doubt,
that the right use of excommunication (before the Papisticall tyranny) was
never in the power of one man, but perteyned to the right of the Presbytery,
not utterly excluding the peoples consent. Heereunto I will again anex the
testimony and defense of D. Fulke against the Papists and other, which with
such contempt reject the sincere judgment and excellent learning of M. Beza,
Whatsoever account you make of M. Beza, he shall notwithstanding (says D.
Fulke) with all godly learned men) be accounted as he deserves: Fulke def of
the English tran. cap: 5.
One who has more profited the Church of God with his sincere translation, and
learned Annotations then all the Popish Seminaries and Seminarists, shall be able
to hinder it: Iangle of gross and flase Translations as long as you will. Thus
passing over almost infinite other lights of the Gospel both of the most
ancient and late writers abroad, which speak to the very same effect, in
these points of religion, with us in question. Only I will set down further
the words of Danaeus and Tilenus two famous learned men among the reformed
Churches of France, which are exceeding many in number, and almost excellent in
reformation of Christian religion. Who according to the judgment of them all,
Danaeus in Tim. 5.22.
do speak thus of the Election, and Ordination of Ministers. Ex his omnbus
apparet quam nulla sit. etc. By all this it appears that the calling of those
Ministers of Gods word or Pastors of the Church, is none or not lawful, which
are made and chosen by the authority, letters, seals, commandment, and
judgment of the King only, or Queen, or Patron, or Bishop, or Archbishop.
That which is yet done (agrevous thing) in those Churches even in the midst
of England, which have notwithstanding and do follow the pure word of God. It
is marvaill that the Englishmen otherwise, wise, witty, and very godly, should
yet wittinglie and willingly be blind in the acknowledging and tollerating of
these relics of Popish Idolatry and tyranny. Therefore they judge
excellently, which condemn, or taking away,
and would have taken away out of a Church reformed according to Gods word,
Omnem il laem chartulariam et Episcopatica^ curionum et pastoru^ etc.
all this way of making Curates, and Pastors of the Church by Bishops and their
letters of Orders, and the calling of the Ministers of the heavenly word, their
approbation, and their entrance by the only consent and letters of the Bishop.
Because so the order prescribed by Gods word in the ordination of such persons
is omitted and violated, as it may most plainly appear. Even because all the
right and voice giving both of the Ecclesiastical Senate and of the christian
people, is most wretchedly taken away from them by this means, in this kind of
Ecclesiastical callings; and with great tyranny and abuse translated to one
certain man, the Bishop. The Lord God of his great mercy amend these
corruptions which are yet, and are defended in his Churches: which surely will
at length draw (...) great ruin of Gods Church, and will make the holy
Ministry of Gods words either mercenary or altogether contemned and base.
Which God turn away.

D. (...) Answer to the Count. Laval quest. 3.
After him we will ad D. Tilenus his judgment unto the Earl of Lavall in
France. Who demanding, whether the calling to the Ministry be necessary, and
from whom Calvin had his calling, Tilenus answeren: First, that it is
necessary. And then, that Calvin had his calling from the Church of Geneva and
from Farell his predecessor, who had also his from the people of Geneva; who
had right and authority to institute and depose Ministers. For so declares S.
Cyprian saying, that the people obeying to the commandments of God should
seperat themselves from a wicked guide, C^pr. epist. (...).
and not to meddle with the sacrifices of any Sacrilegious Priest: considering
that the said people have chief authority to make choice of worthy persons
and to reject the unworthy. This was so practiced by the people of Geneva, and
in diverse other parts of Evrope, where in these latter times they did forsake
those sacrilegious Priests and sacrifices of the Pope, for to establish
faithful Ministers and proclamers of the Gospel. To be short, the Reformed
Churches had their calling and sending partly from God, and partly from the
people, and partly from the Church of Rome. From God as the chief cause; from
the people, as by lawful instruments; from the Church of Rome, as by a corrupt
instrument. God gave the essence and the form interior to this sending; the
reformed Church gave testimonies and approbations and the exterior form; the
Church of Rome has added thereto abuses and corruptions; which our suceeeding
Ministers have renounced.

There rests now for further proof of these matters before spoken of, to
rehearse the judgment and words of diverse of our own English writers and
blessed Martirs, which agree with those Fathers and lights of the Gospel in
other Countries before cited. And first having sufficiently spoken already of
Wicklife that first light of the gospel set up with us in the midst of the
Antichristian darkness; L. Cobham Fox pa: 669 edit. 1570
I will begin with the noble Martyr the Lord Cobham, who in defense of the said
Wickliffe says. As for that virtuous man Wickliffe whose iugdments ye so
highly disdain, I shall say here for my part both before God and man, that
before I knew that despised doctrine of his, I never abstained from sin. But
since I learned therein to fear my Lord God, it has otherwise I trust been
with me: so much grace could I never find in all your instructions. And what the
doctrine of Wickliffe was and how like a Lordly Prelat he lived I refer the
reader to that which has been before spoken of him. page 57.
But the Lord Cobham being charged with the decrees of holy Church answered. I
know none holier then Christ and his Apostles. And as for that determination I
wot it is none of theirs; for it stands not with the scriptures, but
manifestly against the^. If it be the Churches, as you say it is; It has been
hers only since she received the great poison of worldly possessions, and not
before. And a non after again he says. For since the venime of Judas was shed
into the Church, ye never followed Christ neither have ye stand in the
perfection of Gods law. Then the Archbishop asked him what he me^t by that
venime; The Lord Cobham said, your possessions and Lordships. For then cried an
Angel in the air (as your own chronicles mention) woe, woe, woe, this day is
venime shed into the Church of God. Here you see plainly by this noble
Martirs judgment, that the Lordship of Bishops and their possessions was the
very curse of God upon the Church and the very poison that turned her from
(...) And in his Practice of Popish Prelates. Prelates appointed to preach
Christ, Pract. of prelates pa: 342:
may not leave Gods word, and Minister temporal offices: but ought to teach
the lay people the right way, and to let them alone with all temporal business.
And aftherward he says. They that have the oversight of Christ's flock, may be
no Emperors, Kings, Duks, Lords, Knights, temporal Judges, or any temporal
officer; or under false names have any such dominion. And a none after he
says. Matthew the 20. Christ called his Disciples unto him and said; Ye know
that the Lords of the heathen people have dominion over them, and they that be
great do exercise power over them: howbeit, it shall not be so among you. But
whosoever will be great among you shall be your Minister; and he that will be
chief shall be your servant: even as the Son of man came not that me^ should
Minister unto him, but for to Minister and give his life for the redemption of
many. Wherefore the officers in Christ's kingdom may have no temporal dominion
or jurisdiction, nor execute any temporal authority, or law of violence, nor
have any like manner among them. And in his book of Obedience he says. Let
Kings take their duty of their subjects: and that necessary unto the defense
of the Realm; Obed. of achr. pa: 124.
let them rule the realms themselves with the heelp of lay men that are sage,
wise, learned and expert. Is it not a shame above all shames and a monstrous
thing, that no man should be found able to govern in a worldly kingdom save
Bishops, and Prelates that have forsaken the world, and are taked out of the
world, and appointed to preach the kingdom of God? Christ says, that his
kingdom is not of this world. Ioh. 18. and Lvke 12. Unto the young man that
desired him to bid his brother to give him part of the inheritance, he
answered, who made me a judge and a devider among you? No man that lays his
hand to the plough and looks back, is apt for the kingdom of heaven. Luke.
9. No man can serve two Masters, but he must despise the one, Mat: 6. To Preach
Gods word is to much for half a man. And to Minister a temporal kingdom is
to much for half a man also. Either other requires an whole man. One
therefore cannot do both well. And after in the same book he says. An other
sort of the Prelates are of the Kings secret Counsel: 16 page 152.
Woe unto the Realms where they are of the Counsel: as profitable are they
verily unto the Realms with their Counsel, as the Wolves unto the sheep, or
the Foxes unto the geese. And therefore in another place of that book he
says, As thou Can heal no disease, except thou begin at the root: 16 page
114
even so can thou Preach against no mischeife except thou begin at the
Bishops. Which saying of M. Tindale agrees well with that the Prophet Jeremy
says. From the Prophets of Jerusalem is wickedness gone forth into all the
land. Iere, 23, 25.
From the false Prophets before Christ, as from the fountain, wickedness went
forth over all the land: and so from the false Bishops of the new Testament as
from the root, wickedness grows over all the Churches. And speaking of these
false Bishops M. Tindall says. They say that Peter was chief of the Apostles:
verily as Appelles was called chief of the Painters, for his exeellent conning
above other, Pract. of prelates pa. 343.
even so Peter may be called chief of the Apostles for his activitie and
boldness above the other: but that Peter had any authority or rule over his
brethren and fellow Apostles, is false and contrary to the scripture. Christ
forbad it, in the last even before his passion, and diverse times before, and
taught always the contrary as I have rehearsed. But (says M. Tindall) the
Popes kingdom is of this world. For there, one sort are your Grace, your
Holiness, your Fatherhood: another my Lordbishop, my Lord Abbot, my Lord Prior,
etc: And in his defense of the English translation, against that famous Papist
More, speaking of the names of Bishops, Elders, and Priest, he says. All that
were called Elders, ( or Priests, if they so will) were called Bishops also,
though they have divided the names now: which thing thou may evidently see by
the first chapter of Titus, and Acts 20. and other places more. And when he
lays Timothy unto my charge, how he was young, then he weneth that he has
won his guilden spurs. But I will pray him to show me where he reads, that
Paul called him Presbyteros Priest, or Elder. I durst not then call him
Episcopus properly (as he does.) For these Overseers which we now call Bishops
after the Greek word, were always byding in one place, to govern the
Congregation there. And touching unpreaching Ministers thus he writes. In what
case stand they then, expo. Mat. 5
that have benefices and preach not? Verily though they stand at the Altar, yet
are they excommunicate and cast out of the living Church of Almighty God. And
again he says. Bishops and Priests, that preach not, are none of Christ's, nor
non of his anointing; Obedi. of achr. page: 135 expo. Mat: 5
but servants of the beast, whose mark they bear. And touching the Election
of Ministers, he says. Every man then may be a common preacher, thou will say,
and preach every where by his own authority. Nay verily: No man may yet be a
common Preacher, save he that is called and chosen thereto by the common
ordinance of the Congregation. And for Pluralities thus he speaks even to the
King and his Lords. Now I appeal to the consciences of the Kings grace, Pract.
of prelates pa. 374.
and his Lords, what answer they will give, when they come before Christ, in
the last judgment, for their robbing of so many parishes of Gods word, with
holding every man so many chaplines in their houses, with Pluralities of
Benefices.

Obed. of achristi. man page 122.
Now furthermore let us hear, what this excellent light of the Gospel says of
the Oath yet in our spiritual Courts: called the Oath Ex officio; his words
are these. Let them judge and condemn the trespasser under lawful witnesses,
and not break up into the consciences of men, after the example of Antichrists
Disciples, and compel them either to forswere themselves by the Almighty
God: and by the holy Gospel of his merciful promise, or to testify against
themselves. Which abomination our Prelates learned of Caiaphas Math. 26. saying
to Christ; I adjure or charge thee in the name of the lyving God, that thou
tell us whether thou be Christ the Son of God. Let that which is secret to
God only, whereof no proof can be made nor lawful witness brought, abide unto
the coming of the Lord, which shall open all secreats. If any malice break
forth, that let them judge only; for further authority God has not given
them. And again in the same book, he says. I warned the Judges that they
take not an ensample how to Minister their offices, page 178
of our spiritualty which are bought and sold to do the will of Satan; but of
the Scripture whence they have their authority. Let that which is secret,
abide secret till God open it, which is the judge of all secreats. For it is
more the^ a cruel thing to break up into a man's heart, and to compel him to
put either soul or body in ierperdie, or to shame himself. If Peter that
great pillar for fear af death (by forswering) forsook his Master, ought we
not to spare weak consciences? And herein I cannot but presently join the
words of our book of Martyrs, where M. Fox with M. Tindall, sou^deth the
trumpet of most vehement words against the abomination of this Oath Ex officio,
where he says. Fox pa 625. edit. 1570:
The like law and statute in the time of Dioclesian and Maximinus was
attempted, as before appears. page: 117: And for the more strength was written
also in Tables of brass, to the intent that the name of Christ should utterly
be extincted forever. And yet the name of Christ remains, where that brazen
law written in brass, although it differ in manner and form, from this
statute Ex officio, yet to the end and cruelty to spill the blood of Saints,
there is no difference between the one and the other. Neither is there any
diversity touching the first original, doer, and worker of them both. For the
same Satan which then wrought his uttermost against Christ, before he was bound
up; the same also now after his loosing out, does what he can, though not after
the same way, yet in the same intent. For then with outward violence as an open
enemy he did what he could; Now by amore covert way under the title of the
Church, he impugneth the Church of Christ, ussing a more subtle way to
deceive, under gay pretended titles, but no less pernicious in the end whereto
he shoots, as well appears by his bloody statute Ex officio. But to
return to M. Tindall one thing more I will set down of his, and so go
forward un to other lights of the Gospel, set up among the golden
Candlestickes of England; where he discourses of the words Church, and
Congregation, used in the translation of the new Testament saying. An answ: to
Sir Thomas More Dial: p: 250 col 2
Wherefore in as much as the Clergy (as the nature of those hard and indurat
Adamantstones is to draw all to them) had appropriat unto themselves the term
that of right is common unto all the whole Congregation of them that believe in
Christ, and with their false and subtle wiles had beguiled and mocked the
people, and brought them into the ignorance of the word, making them understand
by this word Church nothing but the shaven flock of them that shore the whole
world. Therefore in the translation of the new Testament where I found this
word Ecclesia, I translated it by this word Congregation, Even therefore did I
it, and not of any mischevous mind or purpose to stablish herisie, as M. More
untruely reports of me in his Dialogue, where he rayleth on the translation
of the new Testament. And where M. More says that this word Church, is known
well enough, I report me unto the consciences of all the land; whether he says
truth, or otherwise: or whether the lay people understand by Church the whole
multitude that profess Christ, or the iugling spirits only. And when he says
that Congregation is a more general term, if it were, it hurts not. For the
circumstance does ever tell what Congregation is meant. Never the less yet
says he not the truth. For wheresoever I may say a Congregation, there may I
say a Church also; as the Church of the Devil, the Church of Satan, the church
of wicked men, the Church of li^rs, and a Church of Turks thereto: For M: More
must grant (if he will have Ecclesia translated (throughout all the new
Testament by this word Church) that Church is as common as Ecclesia. Now is
Ecclesia a Greek word, and was in use before the time of the Apostles, and
taken for a Congregation among the Heathen where was no Congregation of God or
of Christ. Concio Populi^
And also Lucas himself uses Ecclesia for a Church or Congregation of Heathen
people thrice in one chapter, even in the 19 of the Acts, where Demetrius the
gold smith or Silversmith had gathered a company against Paul, for preaching
against Images. Howbeit M. More has so long used his figures of Poetry, that
I suppose, when he erreth most, he (now by reason of a long custom) beleiveth
himself that he says most true. Or else, as the wise people when they dance
naked in nets believe that no man sees them, even so M. More thinks) that
his errors be so subtly couched, that no man can epsy them. Up on which
matter it is worth the note of remembrance, first that M. Tindall shows the
reason, why the Clergy would have this word Church used in the English,
rather then Congregation. And it is thus, that like hard hearted adamants they
might draw all things to themselves, and appropriate to themselves only the
term that of right is common to the whole Congregation of them that believe in
Christ, desiring to make the people understand by this word Church, not the
whole congregation of God, but themselves only. And surely it is well known,
that the lay people unto this day, do commonly understand, (...) was at his
own private studies, etc. ordinarily winter and Summer at two of the clock in
the morning. Let us therefore hear what this golden mouth says in the foresaid
points of reformation yet desired, and not obtained. As touching the Lordship
of Bishops he says. Right Prelating is busy laboring and not Lording. M.
Latimer Sermon 4. at Paul's.
And a non after, he says. But thus much I dare say, that since Lording and
loytering has come up, preaching has come down, contrary to the Apostles
time; For they Preached and Lorded not: And now they Lord and preach not. For
they that be Lords will ill go to plough, it is no meet office for them. It is
not seeming for their estate. And further he says. And no marvel, for if the
ploughmen that now be were made Lords, they would clean give over ploughing,
they would leave of their labors, and fall to Lording out right, and let the
plough stand. And thus, both ploughes not walking, nothing should be in the
common weal but hunger. For ever since the Prelates were made Lords and Nobles,
the plough stands, there is no work done, the People starve. They hawk,
they hunt, they card, they dice, they pastime in their Pallacies with gallant
gentlemen, with their dancing Minions, and with their fresh companions, so that
ploughing is set aside. And by their Lording, and loytering, preaching and
ploughing is clean gone. And thus if the ploughmen of the Country were as
negligent in their office as Prelates be, we should not long live for want of
sustenance. And again a little after. As dilligently as the husbandman
plougheth for the sustentation of the body, so diligent must the Prelates and
Ministers labor for the feeding of the soul: both the ploughes must still be
going, as most necessary for man. And wherefore are Magistrates ordained, but
that the tranquillity of the common weal may be confirmed, limitting both
ploughes. But now for the fault of unpreaching Prelates, me thinks I could guess
what might be said for excusing of them. They are so troubled with Lordly
living, they be so placed in palaces, couched in Courts, rusting in their
rents, dauncyng in their dominions, burdened with Ambassages, pampering of
their panches, like a Munk that makes his Iubillie, munching in their mangers,
moyling in their gay manors and mansions, and so troubled with loytering in
their Lordships, that they cannot attend it. They are otherwise occupied some
in Kings matters, some are Ambassadors, some of the privy Counsel, some to
furnish the Court, some are Lords of the Parliament, some are Presidents, and
controwlers of mints. Well, well, is this their duty? Is this their office? Is
this their calling? And yet further anon after he says. It is also a slander
to the Noble men, as though they lacked wisdom, and learning to be able for
such offices: or else were no men of conscience, or else were not meet to be
trusted for such offices. And a Prelate has a cure and charge otherwise, and
therefore he cannot discharge his duty and be a Lord President too. For a
Presidentship requires a whole man, and a Bishop cannot be two men: A Bishop
has his office, a flock to teach, to look unto, and therefore he cannot
meddle with another office, which alone requires a whole man. He should
therefore give it over to whom it is meet, and labor in his own buisines, as
Paul writes to the Thessalonians. Let every man do his own buisines, and
follow his calling. Let the Priest preach, and Noblemen handle the temporal
matters. And afterward speaking of those which about a King do hinder the
reformation of religion, calling them Blanchers, he says. Therefore (say they)
all things shall be well but not out of hand, for fear of further business.
Blanchers.
These be the Blanchers that hitherto have stopped the word of God, and
hindered the true setting forth of the same. There be so many put offes, so
many put bies, so many respects, and considerations of worldly wisdom. And I
doubt not but there were Blanchers, in the old time, to whisper in the ear of
good King Ezekias, for the maintenance (...) and to have no living at their
hands? For as good preachers are worthy double honor; so unpreaching Prelates be
worthy double dishonor. But now these two dishonors, what be they? If the salt
be unsaverie, it is good for nothing but to be cast out, and trodden of men. By
this salt is understood preachers, and such as have cure of souls. What be
they worthy then? Wherefore serve they? For nothing but to be cast out etc.
Another dishonor is this. Ut conculcentur ab hominibus. To be trodden under
men's feet, not to be regarded, not to be esteemed. For (says he) take away
preaching, and take away salvation. And yet again after ward. But I say if one
were admitted to veiw hell thus, and to behold it thoroughly, the Devil would
say; On yonder side are punished unpreaching prelates. I think a man should see
as far as a kenning, Sermon at Paul's cross
and see nothing but unpreaching prelates. And touching Nonresidence, he
prefers the Devil before a Nonresident. For (says M. Latimer) he is ever
in his Parish, he keeps residence at all times, ye shall never find him out
of the way. And afterward he says. Therefore ye unpreaching prelates, learn of
the Devil to be diligent in doing of your office. Learn of the Devil. And if
ye will not learn of God nor good men: for shame learn of the devil. Ad
erubescentiam vestra^ dico. I speak it for your shame. If ye will not learn
of God nor good men to be diligent in your office, learn of the devil. And
therefore before in milder terms he speaks thus. They have great labors,
and therefore they ought to have good livings, that they may commodiously feed
their flock; for the preaching of the word of God unto the people is called
meat. Scripture calls it meat, not strawberies, that comes but once a
year, and tarry not long, but are soon gone; but it is meat, it is no
dainties. The people must have meat that must be familiar, and continual, and
daily given unto them to feed upon. And touching the name of Priest in his
answer at Oxford, he says: A Minister is a more fit name for that office, for
the name of Priest imports a sacrifice. Acts and Mo. page 1624. edit 1570
Sermon. 3. bef. the King.
And speaking generally of the remnants and relickes of Popery which yet
remained unreformed in King Edwards time, Germany (says he) was visited 20
years with Gods word, but they did not earnestly embrace it, and in life
follow it, but made a mingle mangle and a hotchpotch of it. I cannot tell what;
partly popery, partly true religion mingled together. They say in my country,
when they call their Hogs to the swyne trought; come to the mingle mangle,
com pir com pir, even so they made mingle mangle of it. They could clatter and
prate of the Gospel, but when it comes to all, they joined Popery so with
it, that they mard altogether: they scratched and scraped all the livings of
the Church, and under a color of religion turned it to their own proper gain
and lucre: God seeing that they would not com unto his word, now he visits
them, in the second time of his visitation with his wrath. For the taking away
of Gods word, is a manifest token of his wrath. We have now a first visitation
in England, let us beware of the second; we have the ministration of his word,
we are yet well, but the house is not clean sweapt yet. Behold with what
odious and opprobrious terms, this blessed Martyr of God pai^teth out the
mixture of religion: which is indeed no less odious in the sight of God, then
he discribeth it unto the ears of men? We may say with M. Latimer, that we
have the first visitation, let us beware of the second, which is the wrath of
God, for the house is not clean sweapt. For how can the house of God be said
to be clean sweapt, where there lies on the one side, the filthy dounghill of
ignorant and scandalous Prelates, on the other side a poisoned heap of
Nonresidencies: on the third side the manifest mischeife of Pluralities: on the
fourth side a sack full of rotten and beggarly Ceremonies: and in the midst
as the maine post upholding all the rest, a pompous estate of Lord Bishops. I
beseech the Lord Jesus Christ, which walks in the midst of the golden
Candlesticks of England: to avert and turn away from us, the second visitation
which M. Latimer speaks of, which also shortly after according to his
threatening did the^ fall upon this land.

Now let us go forwards with some other of the principal lights and blessed
Martyrs of God: touching these matters M. Hooper, of whom our book of Martyrs
says. Of all those virtues and qualities required of S. Paul: M. Hooper. Acts
and Mo. page 1675. edit. 1570
in a good Bishop in his Epistle to Timothy. I know not one (says M. Fox in
this good Bishop lacking. Which bright star fixed in the right hand of
Christ, shines not only over England, but also beyond the seaes. So that
Gesnerus, that famous learned man in Germany among other of his praises says.
Aureus Hooperus etc. Flammae instar lucens, lucebit dum stabit orbis. Golden
Hooper shining like a flame of fire, who shall not cease to shine so long as
the world stands. In his Epistle to King Edward likewise as before is said of
M. Latimer, Epistle to King Edw.
speaking of the mingling of popish relics with the Preaching of the gospel
says. Against these minglers and patchers of religion speaks Elias the
Prophet the 3. of the Kings 18: How long (says he) will ye halt on both sides?
If the Lord be God follow ye him, if Baal go ye after him. Even so we may
justly say, if the Priesthood and Ministry of Christ with his notes and marks
be true, holy and absolutely perfect, receive it: in case it be not, follow the
Pope. Christ cannot abide to have the leaven of the Pharis^s mingled with his
sweet flower, he would have us either hot or cold, the luke warm he vomiteth
up, and not without cause. For he accuses God of ignorance and foolishnes,
that intends to adorn and beautify his doctrine and decrees with humane
cogitations. Behold how fearful a thing it is (though the intent be never so
good) even to adorn and beautify the institutions, decrees, and ordinances of
God, with any device of man, without the appointment of God in his word. Yea it
is no less abominable in the sight of God, then if a man should accuse him of
ignorance and foolishnes. Sermon 6
And therefore in his sixth sermon before the King, speaking of the Communion
and Supper of the Lord, he says. The outward preparation, the more simple it
is, the better it is, and the nearer to the institution of Christ and his
Apostles. If he have bread, wine, a table, and a fair table cloth, let him not
be solicitous, nor careful for the rest, seeing they be not things brought in
by Christ, but by Popes: unto whom if the Kings Majesty and honorable Counsel
have good conscience, they must be restored again. And great shame it is for a
Noble King, Emperor, or Magistrate, contrary to Gods word, to detain and keep
from the Devil or his minster, any of their goods or treasure. As the Candles,
vestiments, crosses, Altars; for if they be kept in the Church as things
indifferent, at length they will be mainteyned as things necessary. If a Preacher
now; I will not say before a King, but before a Lord Bishop, should so plainly
affirm: that vestiments, surplices, and crossing are of the Devil, he should
be sure himself with his wife and children, not only to be turned out of
doors like dogs, but also from preaching of the Gospel of Christ. As many
excellent Preachers have been of late years, though many hundred dumme dogs
have and do keep their place within this Realm of England. And of the
Ceremony of kneeling at the Communion he says. ib. post.
The outward behavior and gesture of the receiver should want all kind of
Superstition, show, or inclination of Idolatry. Wherefore seeing kneeling is a
show and external sign of the honoring and worshipping, and heretofore has
grevous and damnable Idolatry ben committed by the honoring of the Sacraments.
I could wish it were commanded by the Magistrates, that the communicators and
receavers should do it standing or sitting, but sitting in my opinion were
best. And afterward he proves the same: by the example of Christ, who together
with his Apostles received it sitting. And again in his third Sermon before
the King, Sermon 3
he says. Yet do I much marvail that in the same book it is appointed, that
he that will be admitted to the ministry of Gods word or his Sacrments, must
com in white vestime^ts; which seems to repugne plainly with the former
doctrine, that confessed the only word of God to be sufficient. And certainly
I am sure they have not in the word of God, that thus a Minister should be
apparelled, nor yet in the Primitive and best Church. And in his first Sermon
upon Jonas, Sermon 1:
he says. This is the note and mark to know the Bishops and Ministers of God,
from the Ministers of the Devil: by the preaching tongue of the Gospel, and
not by the shining, clipping, vestiments and outward apparel. And in his
Epistle to the Kings Majesty: Epistle to King Edw.
he says. And a thousand times the rather shall your Majesty restore again
the true ministry of the Church, in case ye remove and take away all the
monuments, tokens, and leavings of papistrie. For as long as any of them
remain, there remains also occasion of relapse unto the abolished
superstition of Antichrist. And to the point and matter of Excommunication, in
his Apology against them that accused him to be a mainteiner of such as cursed
Q. (Mary;) which Apology was set forth and allowed according to the order
appointed in Queen Elizabeth's Inju^ctions. 1562.
If they knew Gods laws (says M. Hooper, as they do not indeed) they should
see and find that no ordinary excommunication should be used by the Bishop
alone, but by the Bishop and all the whole parish etc. Also when the incestious
man was excommunicated, S. Paul alone did not excommunicat him, but Saint
Paul's consent and the whole Church with him. A declara of the 8 com.
And to the Lordships of Bishops upon the eight commandment, these be his
words. They know that the Primitive Church had no such Bishops as be now a
days, as examples testify, until the time of Silvester the first. A little
and a little riches crept so into the Church, that men sought more her then the
wealth of the people. And so increased within few years that Bishops were made
Prinees, and Princes were made servants. So that they have set them up with
their alms and liberality in so high honor, that they cannot pluck them down
again with all the force they have: what blindness is there be fall in the
world, that cannot see this palpallie, that our Mother the holy Church had at
the beginning such Bishops, as did preach many godly sermons in less time, then
our Bishops horses be a brideling etc? The Magistrates that suffer the abuse of
these goods, be culpable of the fault. And ano^ after he says. They should be
reasonably provided for, and the rest and over plus taken from them and put to
some other godly use. Look upon the Apostles chiefly, and upon all their
successors for the space of 400. years; And then thou shall see good Bishops,
and such as diligently applied that painful office of a Bishop, to the glory
of God and honor of the Realms they dwelt in. Though they had not so much upon
their heads as our Bishops have, yet had they more within their heads, as the
Scriptures and histories testify: for they applied all the wit they had unto
the vocation and ministry of the Church whereunto they were called. Our Bishops
have so much wit, that they can rule and serve (as they say) in both states,
viz. In the Church, and also in the civil policy: when one of them is more
then one is able to satisfy, let him do always his best diligence. If he be
so necessary for the Court, that in civil causes amd giving of good counsel
he cannot be spared; (...) Pope, and all the Popish apparel before his death.
And first in his letter to M. Grindall he says: We Pastors many of us were to
cold and bare to much (alas) with the wicked world, Ridley. Acts and Mo: page
1902. edit. 1570.
our Magistrates did abuse to their own worldly gain both Gods Gospel, and
the Ministers of the same. And anon after hc shows how earnestly he makes
his prayer for them that were banished for the word of God: and for all those
Churches which have forsaken the kingdom of Antichrist, and professed openly
the purity of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. Where mark that he prays for
them that profess not only the Gospel, but even the purity of the Gospel.
In his Epistle to M. Hooper himself, Epistle Rid. to Hooper
he acknowledges his former fault with these words. Howsoever in times past
in smaler matters and circumstances of religion, your wisdom and my
simplicity I confess have in some things varied etc. (Now I say) etc. I love
you and the truth, for the truth sake which abides in us. But most plainly he
acknowledges his fault, when it pleased God to draw him nearer unto himself by
scourging him with the same whippe wherewith he had whipped his fellow Elder M.
Hooper, Act. and Mon page 1677 edit: 1570
as he himself calls him in his Epistle. For when M. Ridley was commanded to
put on the Surplice and the rest of the Popish apparel as our book of Martyrs
shows, D. Brooks Lord Bishop of Gloucester, comes to him with these words,
saying.

B Put of your cap M. Ridley, and put upon you this surplice.


Ridley ib pa. 1934 page 1935 ed. 1570.
Not I truly.


B: But you must.


Rid: I will not.


B: You must therefore make no more a do, but put this surplice upon you.


Rid: Truly if it come upon me, it shall be against my will.


Br: Will you not do it upon you?


Rid: No that I will not.


Br: It shall be put upon you by one or other.


Rid: Do therein as it shall please you, I am well contented with that, and
more then that, the servant is not above his Master. If they dealt so cruelly,
with our Savior Christ as the scripture makes mention, and he suffered the
same patiently; how much more does it become us his servants?


And in saying of these words, they put upon the said D. Ridley the Surplice,
with all the trinkets appertayning to the Mass; and as they were putting on
the same; D. Ridley did vehemently inveigh against the Romish Bishop, and all
that foolish apparel, calling him Antichrist and that apparel foolish and
abominable, yea to fond for a vice in a play. Wherein these five things are to
be observed in this piece of dialogue. First, that none of all the Popish
attire is named, but the Surples, and that is named three times, that it might
not be forgotten. Secondly, that M. Ridley compares those Popish garments to
the attire that in scorn and dispite Herod and the rest of the crucifiers put
upon Christ. Which thing as you heard before, M. John Husse speaks of saying;
That when they put the white garment upon him, he could not but remember how
Herod put the white garment upon Christ to scorn him with all. Thirdly, that
he compares the very cruelty thereof, with the cruel and shameful dealing
against Christ. As likewise our book of Martyrs says of M. Hooper, when he was
driven by Ridley and the rest, Acts and Mo. page 667. edit. 1570
to wear the popish apparel. Thus says our book of Martyrs. He had upon his
head a geometrical, that is a four squared cap, able it that his head was
round. What cause of shame (says Master Fox) the strangnes thereof was that
day to that good preacher, every man may easily judge. Fourthly, that the same
rod of Gods correction was now laid upon M. Ridley, which he and the rest of
the Bishops had laid upon their fellow Elder M. Hooper. Fifthly, how vehement
the spirit of God stirred him up to detest the surplice and the rest of the
Popish apparel, calling the Pope Antichrist, and the surplice with the rest of
the Popish apparel, foolish and abominable, and to fond for a vice in a play.
Alas that ever the good and learned preachers of the word of God should be
compelled either to loose their Ministry, or else to be attyred like vices and
fools in plays. But let us go forward and hear what this noble witness and
Martyr of God says in other points of reformation now desired. In his
treatise, wherein is contained a lamentation for the change of religion in
England, Acts and Mo. page 1946. edit. 1570
he says. There are in the Papistrie, an innumerable rablement of
abominations. Among which he sets down by name, dispensations, and
immunities from all godly Discipline, laws, and good order, pluralityes, and
totquots, (and as he says) a thousand more. O, that dispensations of
Nonresidencies, pluralities, unions, and totquots, which M. Ridley nombreth
among the rableme^t of Popish abominations, were out of England, and restored
unto the Pope which he so often calls Antichrist, and to his spouse the
Church of Rome which he calls the very whore of Babylon. And for the name of
Priest in his disputation at Oxford, he says. There are but two only orders
of Preisthood allowed in the word of God, namely the order of Aaron and the
order of Melchisedech, but now the order of Aaron is come to an end, by reason
it was unprofitable and weak Hebr. 7. And of the order of Melchisedech, there
is but one Priest alone, even Christ. And generally of all matters of religion,
speaking of the Church of Rome, before she played the harlot, Acts and Mo: page
1939. edit. 1570.
and married her self to Antichrist, he says. If ye will know how long that
was and how many hundred of years: to be curious in poynting the precise
number of years, I will not be to bold. But thus I say so long and so many
hundred years, as that sea did truly teach and Preach that Gospel, that
religion, exercised that power, and ordered every thing by these laws and
rules, which that sea received of the Apostles ( and as Tertullian says) the
Apostles of Christ, and Christ of God: So long I say, that sea might have been
called Peter and Paul's chair and sea, or rather Christ's chair, and the
Bishop thereof Apostolicus, or a true disciple and successor of the Apostles.
How happy were we and all our Bishops, if by this rule of M. Ridley, they
might be called Apostolici, and true Disciples and Successors of the Apostles:
which cannot be till every thing be ordered by these laws and rules, which
they receive from the Apostles, and the Apostles of Christ, and Christ of God.
Cranmer.


Now although I have already spoken of Cranmer, yet here again I cannot but
compare him to Solomon with his many hundred wives, who at the last drew him to
Idolatry and all abominations. So Cranmer being married to many hundred
Churches, was at the last driven to subscribe to all abominations of Popery.
For well may we compare the many hundred wives and concubines of Solomon unto
the multitude of Churches subject unto an Archbishop. page 929. ed. 1570.
And rightly no doubt it is spoken by one of the blessed Martyrs in our book
of Acts and Momuments, that it is as lawful for a lay man to have two wives
at once: as for a preiq to have two benefices. And Cranmer being the elect
child of God, with Solomon at the last detested the foulnes of his own fall.
First he fired his own hand for subscribing to all the abominatio^s of
Antichrist; and so entered through the fire of torments, into everlasting joy
with Christ. Jewel.


The like may be said of Jewel Bishop of Salisburie, who although he did bear
much with the injquitie of the (...) to follow, but children and infants. And
in another place he says. They use them as the merchants use his counters,
sometime they stand for an hundred pounds, sometime for a penie. This is the
objection which unto this day, is commonly made against the reformation which
many good men desire to be made according to the original of the primitive
Churches: which objection you see here with what derision M. Iuell rejects
it, as though thereby they counted Christ and his Apostles as children and
babes: without wit and judgment to know what was fit for the Church of God and
to be used in all ages. And yet says he, when they list they shall be counted
holy Fathers and holy Doctors. And against our double fleeced men thus he
speaks; O that Aggcus the Prophet were now a live and saw the rearing up of
Gods Temple here in England, ib postea.
what think ye he would say? You build your own houses and leave the house of
God forsaken, nay he would say, you build your own Mansions, and pull down the
house of God. The Masters of the work build benefice upon benefice, and
Deanerie upon Deanerie, as though Rome were yet England. And against the
Nonresidents and plurality men thus he cries out. Sermon. in Ios.
These Nonresidents and plurality men teach not, they know not, nor care for
the people of their charg, they have brought confusion and shame into the house
of God. If it be true which this excellent Jewel of England says, that
Nonresidents and plurality men are they that bring shame and confusion in to
the house of God: with what face can any Christian man maintain them and not
rather inveigh against them? But let all the precious Jewels in the world cry
out upon them, yet the belly has no ears; Of these belliefleecers it is
written, Whose God is their belly, and glory to their shame. For with shame
enough, they have brought (as M. Jewel says) shame and confusion into the
house of God. And where the Papist Harding maintayneth that an Ecclesiastical
person may use a civil office without care, and so neither deceive himself
and those that hear him. de apol. page 522.
M: Jewel sets down upon the Margent. Fond and childish. As though a
Bishop moy have the temporal sword, and execut a temporal office without
worldly cares. page 623.
And yet again to the same purpose afterward he says. Christ himself says
to the Pope and to all other Priests and Bishops, The Kings of Nations rule
over them: and they that are great exercise authority over the people. But it
shall not be so among you. S. Cyprian says (as he is aleaged by Gratian)
Christ by several duties and distinct honors, has set a difference between
the offices of both powers. And straightway to the same effect he alleges
Bernard. It is plain that temporal dominion is forbidden the Apostles. Now
therefore dare thou (the Pope) usurp either the Apostleship being a Prince,
or the pri^chood being the successor of the Apostles? Doubtless from the one
of them thou art forbidden. If thou will indifferently have both, thou shall
loose both. Otherwise think not thou can be accepted from the number of
them, of whom the Lord complayneth; They have made themselus Kings but not by
me. I wot not how M. Jewel joining himself with Cyprian and Bernard, could
more plainly condemn civil offices in Ecclesiastical persons. And it is
worthy to be noted, how M. Jewel applies these words of Christ to be spoken
only of Pope, Bishops, and Priests. And where M. Harding calls the Pope the
Prince of Pastors, M. Jewel answers him in this sort. de apol. page 112: 1.
Peter 4
He might have remembered, that the right of this name belongs unto Christ S.
Peter says. That when Christ the Prince of Pastors shall appear ye may
receive the uncorruptible crown. Now to infeaffe the Pope with Christ's
peculier titles, a mun might think it were great blasphemy. Certainly S.
Cyprian says. None (...) put to silence in the Church of God. To be short
Origin says, Querendum est etc: We must examine what is meant by this that
follows. Leave her no manner of remnant: the meaning is this, Abolish not
certain of the superstitions of the Caldees, reserving certain: Therefore he
commands that nothing be left in her, be it never so little. May it therefore
please you to understand that at the beginning there appeared no such
distinction or difference of apparel in the Ministry. Ualafredus Abbas says
Veteres co^muni indume^to vtentes celebraba^t missas. The old Fathers said mass
(that is to say ministered the holy communion) having on their own common
apparel. S Augustine in his rules to his Clearks or Mo^ks writes thus. Ne sit
notabilis habitus vester. Let not your apparel be notable. S. Ierom describing
the order of the Church at Bethle^, says thus: In vest nulla discretio etc.
In apparel there is no difference, there is no wondering. Howsoever a man list
for to go; it is neither standered nor praised. And Pope Coelestinus the first
says. Discernendi sumus a plebe etc: We must be known from the lay people by
our doctrine, not by our coat, by our conversation not by our apparel: by the
puernes of our mind, not by the attire of our body. For if we once begin to
devise novelties, we shall tread our Fathers orders under foot and make room
for superstition. The minds of the ignorant ought to be taught, and not to be
mocked. Neither may we go about to dasell their eyes: but rather power
wholesome doctrine into their hearts. These places cited by M. Jewel I have
here set down that the unlearned reader which yet loves the sincerity of
the Gospel may be the better armed against them which affirm that all things
which are in their own nature indifferent may be used in the Church and
service of God: yea though they have been heretofore and yet are in other
places never so superstitiously and Idolatriously abused. Of which opinion the
heretics were that Augustine in his book Ad quod vult Deum speaks of:
August. ad quod vult deu^ cap 28.
Which joined cheese with bread in the ministration of the Supper, and were
called Artotyritae, which they thought to be a thing indifferent, and therefore
lawful to be done. And to say the troth no man can deny it, but to eat cheese
is a thing indifferent, but in that place and at that time by the Minister to
be delivered unto the communicants with the bread of the Lord, it was a thing
abominable and utterly unlawful to be done, and therefore even in that point
they were worthy to be condemned for heritickes though they had held no other
point of heresy but that. And what less can be said of other Ceremonies and
their defenders. But of M: Jewels words I wish specially to observe these. They
may justly say they would not gladly in any appearance show them selves like
unto them that have so untruely and so long deceaved the world. And herein
they are not without sundry authorities, and examples of the godly Fathers.
And mark this word they may justly say it. For if they may justly say, Reply
they would not wear them, then are they uniustly imposed upon them. Again M:
Jewel says. page 417 ed. 1565.
Neither durst Moses, or his workmen, to add or to minish or to alter any one
thing of their devise, or to do any thing more or less otherwise then God had
appointed etc. Here mark good christian reader (says he) in every of these
examples God has bridled our devotion and has taught us to worship him, not
in such sort as may seem good in our eyes, but only as he has commanded us.

Yet such is the unbridled pride of man's devotion that let God say what he
will, he shall not be served only as God commands, but at the least with
some Ceremonial suprerogations of man's mere invention: being worse then
Horses or Mules, whose stiff necks are pulled in with bitte and bridle, that
weak and wreached man has (...) ten of him. 2 Chro. 17 3: 4, 5,
And the Lord was with Iehosaphat, because he walked in the first ways of his
Father David etc. and not after the trade of Israel. And it follows.
Therefore the Lord stablished his kingdom in his hand, and all Judah brought
presents unto Iehosaphat, so that he had of riches and honor in a boundance.
Where this word therefore, is a word of special note; for many wicked Kings
and Princes have given them of God riches and honor even abundance: but when it
is given them of God (therefore) because they walked in the first ways of
their Father David: that is, because they had returned to the first, and
original foundation, and restored the religion even to that perfection wherein
David and not Solomon, yea Christ the Son of David left it; Then are they
truly blessed of God. Otherwise, as it is written; Their table shalhe made a
snare, and their prosperity their ruin.

We will heerunto ad that excellent man's testimony, M. Thomas Leaver. M.
Leaver.
M. Bullinger speaking of the banished christians in Queen Mary's time which
were come to Tigurie, commends by name M. Leaver in these words. There came
unto us English students both godly and learned: they be received of our
Magistrate, Bull. epist: to Hoper
ten of them dwell together, the rest remain here and there with good men.
Amongst the other M. Thomas Leaver is dear unto me and familiar. Now M Leaver
preaching before King Edward, speaking of Non residents says unto them. T:
Leaver bef. K: Edw:
Now my Lords both of the laity, and of the Clergy, in the name of God I
advertise you, to take heed. For when the Lord of all Lords shall see his
flock scattered spilt and lost, if he follow the tracke of blood, it will
lead him even straightway unto this Court, and unto your houses, whereas those
great thieves which murder spoil and destroy the flocks of Christ be
received, kept, and maintained. For you mainteyne your Chaplines to take
pluralities, and your servants mo offices then they can, or will discharge; fie
for sin and shame. And for further confirmation thereof he says. For if their
duty be undone, then can no man excuse them; if it be done, then it is by
other and not by them: and then why do they live of other men's labors? He
that preaches the Gospel, should live of the Gospel, as God has ordained.
Qui mollibus vestiuntur in domibus Regu^. As for those which go gaye in Kings
houses, and either mousell the laboring Ox, or else spoil the poor Parish
in the Country, be of the Devils ordinance. This mouselling of the Ox that
treads out the corn, which is the taking away of the livings from the poor
Ministers in the country, and the poor people in the Parishes, who pay their
tithes to Nonresidentes, you hear that it comes not of God but of the
devils ordinance. From which we beseech almighty God to move his Majesty's
heart that he may shortly deliver us. And speaking of putting unpreaching
Prelates out of their place; Yea say they, and it were great pity; seeing they
have paid the first fruits unto the Kings Majesty, and no small reward unto
other men. And perchance bought their offices dearly; Now to put them out of
these livinges with the loss of all those charges which they have bestowed in
rewards, or other ways to get such livinges, were great extremity. But woe,
woe, (says M: Leaver) unto you hypocrites, that stumble at a straw and leap
over a block: that strain at a gnat, and swallow up a Camel etc. And well
may it be said, they stumble at a straw and leap over a block, or they
strain at a gnat, and swallow up a Cammell; which for pity suffer
unpreaching Ministers to continue in places: for is their any comparison
between the loss of a dumb dogs living, and the loss and great damage of
many hundred souls? But M. Leaver goes forth bouldly threatening both those
spiritual and temporal Lords, and says. God will pull you down, rather then
maintain, or suffer you in so high authority, to use such uncharitable,
ungodly, and cruel pity. Which heavy wrath of God, even according to M.
Leavers threatening very shortly afther fell upon the^ all; a woeful tragedy,
and worthy to be remembered. To conclude, M: Leaver escaping from the tragical
fury of Queen Maryes time, in his letter to M: Bradford being prisoner in the
Tower, speaking of the excellent reformed Churches where he was then
conversant, writteth thus. I have seen the places, noted the doctrine and
Discipline, and talked with the learned men of Argentine, Basil, Zurich,
Berne, Lausanna, and Geneva; and I have seen the experience in all those
places of sincere doctrine, godly order, and great learning. Happy are the
Churches that are so well reformed, and worthy to be so highly commended.

Th. Beacon
To M: Leaver I will join M. Thomas Beacon, a man to my self very well known
to be for his virtue, learning, and diligence in preaching the word of God,
most worthy to be honored. Who suffered great persecution in K. Henry the
eights time. And again in Queen Mary's time and lived and died at
Caunterburie, a diligent writer and preacher of the word of God in Queen
Elizabeth's time. In his book entitled, nomb: 118
The Acts of Christ and of Antichrist, he says. Christ breathed upon his
Disciples and gave them the Holy Ghost, saying, take ye the Holy Ghost, that
they being endued with his spirit might bring forth the fruits of the same,
and thereby known to be his Apostles. But Antichrist does breath the spirit of
Satan into his shavelings and will that they be known to be his chaplains by
their long gowns, nomb: 42
shaven crowns, horned cappes, staring tippets etc: And again he says.
Christ said that men should know his Disciples by their charity, if they
loved one another, as he had loved them. But Antichrist causes his chaplains
to be known by their habits and vestures, by their long gowns and shaven
crowns, and punnisheth them if they use not their habits. And yet again he
says; Christ says the kingdom of God comes not with waiting for, that is to
say, with outward observances and external ordinances at the appointment of
men, Antichrist says wear this cappe, or that coule, this gray habit or that
white habit. Ye see his judgment, that they are the Chaplines of Antichrist,
and not the Ministers of Christ which love to be distinguished by apparel.

And touching the apparel, M. Fox speaks most plainly as has been in diverse
places noted before: as also where he says. Fox fol, 6 edit:
For diversity of apparel I have not now to stand particularly upon every
kind and form, when, how, and by whoo^ it was invented. Yet because I see that
false opinion of antiquity deceaueth many, in general to speak of the whole I
will recite the words written to Carolous Caluus the french King, by the whole
clergy of Ravenna, about the computation of our Lord 876. Which words shall
suffice as a testimony, both to know what we ought to do, and what was then
done in the Church. The words in their Epistle to the King be these,
Discernendi etc. that is, We ought to differ from the people and others by
doctrine, not by apparel; in conversation, not in vesture; in pureness of mind,
not in garment. And touching the surplis by name, speaking of a wicked
persecutor one Blumfeild, he says. But a little before his death he bragged and
threatened a good man one Simon Harlstone to put him forth to the officers,
because he wore noe surplis, when he said service. Whereby it is pity that
such baits of popery are left to the enemies to take the Christians in. God
take them away, or else us from them. For God knows they be the cause of
much blindness and strife among men. Edit. 2. page 2268. vlt. Ed: page 2065.

But let us see further what M. Beacon says in other points that need
reformation, against the unpreaching (...) And in his answer to the 30. Article
agreeing to that which you heard before of M. Fox, where he says. Every Prelat
or beneficed person ought to discharge his Cure without deputy or Vicar. So
says this noble Martyr of God John Lambard. Where you speak of Prelates
deputies, I think that such are little behouable to Christ flock: it were
necessary and right that as the Prelates themselves will have the Revenues,
Tithes, and Oblations of their Benefices, that themselves should labor and
teach dilligently the word of God therefore: and not to slip the labor from
one to another, till all be left (pity it is to see) undonne. Such does S.
John call fures et latrones, thieves and robbers.

Now to that excellent Martyr and witness of Jesus Christ M. Bradford, M. Bradf.
Ridl, let: to M. Ch, Lib, Epist: Mar, page 69
who with the rest confirming his doctrine with the sheeding of his blood,
commended by D. Ridley thus. M. Bradford a man by whom (as I am assuredly
informed) God has and does work wonders in setting forth of his word: And in
his letter to M. Bradford thus he speaks to him, O good brother blessed be
God in thee, and blessed be the time that ever I knew thee. And as he is so
highly praised for the excellent gifts of God in the wonderful work of his
preaching; so for his continuance and diligence therein even to the time of
his death, it is said in our book of Martyrs. For the time he did remain
prisoner in the Counter, he preached twice a day continually, page 1780: edit,
1570
unless sickness hindered him etc. And further it is there said, Preaching,
reading, and prayer was all his whole life etc. Whereunto I may very fitly
adjoyne the words of M. Musculus how to know a true Minister of Christ upon
these words to the Romans [put apart to Preach the Gospel of God] Vis
cognoscere verum Christi Ministrum? Rom: 1:1:
Vide an sit etc. Will thou know (says Musculus) a true Minister of Christ?
Then look whether he be utterly so separated from all other business, that he
does meditate work, or live, in none other thing whatsoever, but in preaching
and making manifest and plain the Gospel of Christ, and serve therein by all
and whatsoever strength and power is in him. Act. and Mo. page 1780. edit. 1570.
Now this blessed Bradford (says our Book of Martyrs) D. Ridley that worthy
Man and glorious Martyr of Christ afterward according to the order that then
was in the Church of England, called him to take the degree of a Deacon, which
order because it was not without some such abuse, as to the which Bradford
would not consent, the Bishop yet perceiueing that he was willing to enter into
the Ministry was content to order him without any abuse even as he desired.
etc. Wherein ye see both the precisenes of M. Bradford which would not enter
into the Ministry because of the abuse in the book, and the goodness of the
Bishop in leaving out the abuses. But alas such good examples are rarely now to
be found, either in Bishops or Ministers. Further in his letters to all
Faithful Professors he says. lib. Ep. Mar, page 441.
If gods word had place Bishops could not play Chauncellers and idle Prelates
as they do, Preistes should be other ways known then by their shaven Crowns
and Tippets. And in another of his letters he says. What can the holy Ghost
do to us above this, to mark us with the congnisance of the Lord of hosts?
This congnisance stands not in forked cappes, tippets, shaven crowns, or
such other baggage and Antichristian pelf; but in suffering for the Lords
sake. Act. and Mon page 1178. edit. 1.
Is it not evident that M. Bradford was such a one as men now call a Puritan?
Which calls forked cappes and tippites not only baggage, but even also
Antichristian pelf. But he says in his letters to the Universitie of
Cambridge. Will thou consider things according to the outward show? Was not the
Synagogue more seemly and like to be the true Church, then the simple flock
of Christ's Disciples? Has not the Whore of Babylon more costly attire and rich
apparel externally to set forth her self, then that homely Houswife of
Christ. And indeed as M. Fox says in King Edwards time, which was the time of
M. Bradford as you heard before; Notwithstanding (says he) the godly
reformation which was then begun, besides other Ceremonies more ambitious then
profitable or tending to edification, they did still wear such apparel as the
old Papists were wont to wear upon their heads, they had a Mathematical
cappe with four Angles deviding the whole world into four parts. I know not
whether M. Fox in these words condemns the square cap with more scorn and
dispite, or M. Bradford in calling it Antichristian pelf. Yet what Ceremonies
more ambitious then profitable, or less tending to edification were used in
King Edwards time, then are at this day retained in our Churches of England?
But let us go forward with M. Bradford, and let us see what he says to the
Lordship of Bishops. Harpsfild that subtle Archdeacon of London coming to
Mast. Bradford being in prison and shortly looking for the bitter death of
burning, Thus reasons with him. Tell me says Harpsfield were not the
Apostles Bishops.

Brad: No; except you will make a new definition of a Bishop, that is, give him
no certain place. Harps: Indeed the Apostles office was not the Bishops
office, for it was universal. But yet Christ instituted Bishops in the Church,
as Paul says. He has given Pastors, Prophets etc. so that I trow it be proved
by the scripturs, the succession of Bishops to be an essential point.

Brad: The ministry of Gods word and ministers, be an essential point. But to
translate this to the Bishops and their succession, is a plain subtlety. And
therefore that it may be plain; I will ask you a question. Tell me, whether
that the scriptures know any difference between Bishops and Ministers, which ye
call priests?


Harpsfield. No.


Brad: Well then, go on forwards, and let us see what ye shall get now by the
succession of Bishops, that is of Ministers: which cannot be understood of such
Bishops as Minister not, but Lord it.


Wherein every Reader may observe these things. First that the Apostles were
not Bishops for that a Bishop must have a certain place, and a flock to feed
wherein he must be resident. And not like an Apostle or Evangelist; to travel
from flock to flock, and from place to place. Secondly by the scripture there
is no difference between a Bishop and a Minister: which is so clear and
manifest, that the very Papist himself is driven to confess it. Thirdly, that
it being true which the most rankest Papist for shame cannot deny, that by the
scripture Bishops and Ministers differ not. Then the glorious succession of the
Pope, and all his Diocesan, and Lordbishops, are utterly overthrown. For as M.
Bradford says. What Lordly estate can any Bishop get, when he ought not to
differ from the poor and mean estate of a Minister? Fourthly, that they are
Papists which will have a Minister of the Gospel to be called a Priest: for
tell me says Bradford whether the scripture know any difference between a
Bishop and a Minister which you call a Priest.

Heereunto I will annexe some few sayings out of M. John Bale, Bale.
who being in Germany wrote diverse books and sent them hither. whereby England
received great light and knowledge, and was of such name and note in Germany,
that Pantalio that learned German in his Ecclesiastical Chronicles sets
him down among the three special Englishmen which together with Bucer and
Peter Martyr preached the Gospel in England, during King Edwards time. To whom
Queen Elizabeth in her very young days; when she had translated a book of
French into English, sent

(...) ^omilies.
Yet will I hereunto add one place out of our own English Homilies, appointed
to be read publicly in our Churches at this day. Our Savior Christ (says our
English Homily against wilful rebellion) teaching by his doctrine that his
kingdom was not of this world, did by example in flieing from those that would
have made him King confirm the same: expressly also forbidding his Apostles,
and by them the whole Clergy, of all princely dominion over people and
Nations; and he with his Apostles, likewise namely Peter and Paul did forbid
unto all Ecclesiastical Ministers dominion over the Church of Christ, which
words are there referred to these places of scripture. Math. 20. d: 25. Mar.
10. f: 42. Luke 22. e: 25. Math: 23: a, 8. Luke 9: f: 46. 2 Cor: 1. d: 24. 1
Pet: 5.1.2.3.4.5. Seeing therefore Christ and his Apostles both by their
example practice and course of their whole life, and also by their doctrine,
and all the chiefest of the ancient Fathers in the Primitive Church likewise
by their doctrine and practice of life. And seeing all the principal lights of
the Gospel, which God has set up from time to time in the deep darkness of
Antichrist, together with all the godly Martyrs and lights of the Gospel both
in other Nations and specially in this our own Realm of England, do so
vehemently set forth the deformity, and require reformation of those abuses in
this treatise mentioned and spoken of, yet in our Churches in England remaining
unreformed; Do my Lords the Bishops trow you, which stand so fircely in
defense of those shameful enormities, against such a cloud and multitude of
witnesses, being the most learned holy men and Martyrs; Do they yet (I say)
expect, till the beasts of the field, the fowls of the air, and the very
stones of the street should cry for reformation? What, is it possible to
think, that they themselves do not see and know; that the Plurality of
benefices, Nonresidencies, the horrible abuse of excommunication and such like
are untollerable things in a Christian Church? Yet not one of these they list
to amend.

I will hereunto join the prayer of that excellent learned man Doctor Fulke in
his Sermon at Hampton Court, Fulk.
in Queen Elizabeth's time printed and dedicated to the Earl of Warwike: in
which having proved most learnedly the Pope to be the very Antichrist spoken of
by the Apostle, and Rome to be undoubtedly the whore of Babylon spoken of in
the Revelation, concludes his sermon with this prayer, saying. Let us
therefore pray unto Almighty God instantly, that all men in their vocation may
seek the utter overthrow and destruction of Babylon: that Princes and
Magistrates may according to the Prophesies of them, hate her with a perfect
hatred and utterly abolish whatsoever belongs to her: that they may reward
her as she has rewarded us, and give her double punishment according to her
works: and in the cup of affliction that she has powered forth for us, they
may power forth double as much to her. And look how much she has glorified
her self and lived in wantonness (which was without measure) so much they may
bestow upon her of sorrow and torments. That Preachers and Ministers of Gods
word may playnlie and without dissimulation or halting, discover her wickedness:
and earnestly to urge whatsoever has need of perfect reformation: that all
subjects may continue in holy obedience, first to God, and then to their
Prince, to the advancing of the honor and glory of God through Jesus Christ,
etc.

And surely all men without exception which will be saved by Christ, must in
their vocation and degree, not coldly but fircely fight against Antichrist? And
specially now when the first Angel has powered out his Vial upon the throne
of the beast, so that his kingdom waxes dark. Rev. 16.10
Even now all men ought to seek the overthrow, and the utter destruction of
Babylon, and not to be weried with the tediousnes of time: nor to give over for
the pleasures and worldly profitts of this life. And not to say, as the wicked
did in the days of the Prophet Malachi. What profit is it that we have kept
his commandment, Mal. 3:14, 15, 16.17.
and that we walked humbly before the Lord of hosts? Therefore we count the
proud blessed even they that work wickedness are set up, and they that tempt
God; yea, they are delivered. Then spoke they that feared the Lord (says the
Prophet) every one to his neighbor, and the Lord hearkened, and heard it, and
a book of remembrance was written before him for them that feared the Lord,
and that thought upon his name: And they shall be to me says the Lord of hosts,
in that day that I shall do this, for a flock; and I will spare them as a man
spares his own son that serves him. This is ever the condition of those
that forsake God, they repent of any good beginning if they see no worldly
profit, but rather troubles to come thereof. And specially if they see wicked
men preferred and com to promotion, they repine of the continuance in the
serving of God, seeing there is neither profit nor promotion that way to be
gotten. But every one that fears God (says the prophet) though he be never
so private a person, yet speaks even the truth boldly to his neighbor. And
the Lord hearkeheth and hears him, and their words are written up in a book
(Gods remembrance) and they shall enjoye the sweet heavenly promise, for
although they be but weak and sinful men; yet will the Lord spare them as a
Father spares his son that serves him. Neither ought the Preachers in their
place to be silent, nor to count it a wearines to serve the Lord in his temple,
like the Priests in the days of Malachi, or to make light of it; nor to offer
up that which is torn and lame, and sick, Mal. 1.13.
or any of the whore of Babilons dregs, but plainly without dissimulation or
halting and earnestly to urge whatsoever has need of perfect reformation,
until all corruptions and abuses in the Churches of England be restored again
into the first purity; and never cease to call upon God with tears and sorrow
of heart, and upon the Prince with humble suit of speaking, writing, and
preaching, until he abolish whatsoever does belong to that whore of Babylon.

But it is said in the Revelation that after the seventh Angel had powered
out his Vial, Rev. 16.19.
and the horrible earthquake was come upon the earth, the great City was
divided into three parts. This great City can be taken for none other, but
for the territory and dominion of all Nations, Kingdoms, and People bearing
the names of Christians, and subjectes to the great Antichrist of Rome; upon
whose throne the first Angel has powered out his Vial of the wrath of God,
whereby the glory of his kingdom waxed dark. And through the voices,
lightnings, thundrings, and horrible earthquakes that came by the pouring out
of the seventh Angels Vial, That whole great City under the Papacy, and
the whores government is divided into three parts: The first part are they
that do profess the Gospel, and utterly renounce the Pope, and all the
appurtenances of his Church of Rome; which S. John calls the great Whore of
Babylon, which has fully forsaken Christ and married her self to Antichrist.
This first part is so divided from the whore and hates her with such a
perfect hatred, that they cannot abide to kiss or any part of her, neither
finger, hand, nor foot: much less her filthy parts, which are not to be
named, Hos. 2.17.
according to that which is written. I will take away the names of Balaim (...)
folk in hand that men may bear with the time, granting that men may well cut
of the things that are utterly intolerable and manifestly against God, but
yet (avouching) that the things may well be borne with which are either
Indifferent, or not utterly evil. I say that they which speak after that
fashion, do show full well that they have no right meaning in them, nor any
desire that there should be any reformation as were meet to be had. And not
withstanding, the world is full of such disguisers, which would feign have a
particoulored fashion of serving God and a religion that were neither fish nor
flesh (as men say) but half of one suit and half of a another. Here I would
ask these indifferent men and particoulored disguisers of religion, whether
Images are not things indifferent. I trust they will not deny but the Image
and superscription of Ceasar, may be given to Ceasar, and yet I trow they will
not say that it is lawful for Ceasar to set up Images publikly in the
Churches. Let Let them hear what our Engliw Homily says, which all the
Lordbishops do mayntaine to be not only true and good doctrine, but also
publikly to be read in the Church We should not have (says our Homily) Images
in the Temple, Hom, part. 1 against per. of Idol.
though they were of themselves things indifferent. And yet again, our
Homily says expressly; though they be things indifferent to be used in civil
matters, yet are they wicked and abominable to be used in the Church. The
words of our Homily are these. Our Images in Churches, have been, be, and ever
will be none other but abominable idols, part. 3.
and be therefore not things indifferent, (he means) in religious use. And
where the common cloak is for Images, like as for all the rest of superstitious
Ceremonies, that the people by doctrine are taught not to use them
superstitiously, and therefore they may safely be used in the Church; Against
this pild cloak our Homily thus concludes. To conclude (says our Homily)
it is evident by all stories and writings, ibedem.
and experience in times past, that neither Preaching nor writing, neither
consent of the learned, nor authority of the godly, nor the decrees of
Counsels, neither the laws of Princes, nor extreme punishments of the
offenders in that behalf, nor any other remedy or means can help against
idolatry, if Images be suffered publickely. And this conclusion of Images may
be by the self same reason made as well also of the sign of the Cross, the
surplice, and other Ceremonies which serve for religious signification, and
have been with further Idolatry and superstition used by our forefathers, and
yet are still so used by our papists that remain in England, and by all other
the Popish kingdom of Evrope. But in the same Homily it is rightly said of
Images. Take them clean away and then is all the danger gone: for none
worshippeth that which is not; and the very same may be justly said of all the
rest.

As for that intrepretation of the great City wherein Antichrist has so long
reigned, and yet boasts to be the head thereof, if any do mislike it; let
him know that this is not mine interpretation only, but of many that are of
singular learning and sincere judgment. As namely Doctor Fulke whose words are
these in his Commentary upon this place of the Revelation. Fulk Co^m. in Rev.
16:19.
They which in times past with one consent have worshipped the beast, are now
divided into three sects. For some of them do from their very hearts abhor
and detest his tyranie, others do remain in the same slavery still, and the
third kind of men do stick to neither part; But have fallen either to
Epicurisme or Atheism. Unto D. Fulke I will here add also the breife note
upon the margent in our Bible of the Geneva translation, where you shall find
this annotation upon the margent. cap. 16. 19. Meaning the whole number of them
that shall call themselves (...) persevere without corruption. For true
doctrine without true discipline and government, is like good corn sowed
among the thorns that choke it. Now if the Lordbisshopes sometime preach
(which is but seldom) yet being Lords over Gods heritage rather then ensamples
to the flock, what profit comes thereof either to them selves or to their
hearers? Therefore even the Apostle him self says. I therefore so run, not
as uncertainly: so fight I, 1. Cor. 9.26 27.
not as one that beats the air. But I beat down my body, and bring it
into subjection least by any means after I have preached to other, I my self
should be reproved. For a right good preacher leading a lewd life, is like the
Angel of Sardis who having a name that he lived yet was he dead himself; and
carried his flock into the same destruction. Or like the Angel of Laodicia,
who being rich in worldly wealth, yet was he indeed poor, miserable, blind,
and naked. And verily our own English Homily says. The true Church is built
upon the foundtion of the Apostle and Prophets, Hom. sermon. upon which part. 2.
and it has always three notes or marks whereby it is known. Pure and sound
doctrine, the sacraments ministered accordng to Christ's holy infiitution, and
the right use of ecclesiastical dicipline. Here mark that my Lords the
Bishops do say even in the Church Homily, that the true Church builded upon
the foundation of the Apostles, and Prophets, has always this mark or note
of right using the ecclesiasticalll discipline built upon the foundation laid
by the Apostles, as well as of pure and sound doctrine and the Sacraments
Ministered according to Christ's institution. It were good therefore and happy
for them if they would leave all their ecclesiastical discipline which is
neither built upon the doctrine or practice of the Apostles, nor upon any
foundation which they have laid in the scriptures. And I wish that they, and
all other that profess the Gospel of Christ in what degree or vocation soever
they be, might have it imprinted in their hearts, that it is the express
commandment of God, and the words of the holy Ghost, which says of Babylon,
Rev. 18.4.6 7:
Go out of her my people, that ye be not partakers in her sins, and that ye
receive not of her plagues. Reward her even as she has rewarded you, and give
her double according to her works, and in the Cup she has filled to you,
fill her the double. In as much as she glorified her self and lived in
pleasure, so much give ye to her torment and sorrow. Go out therefore, and
touch no unclean thing. Which words of the holy Ghost, and the very
commandment of God, binds not only princes and Magistrates, by their
authority and laws, but also all Gods people every one in his estate, degree,
and vocation; both to hate detest and utterly to abhore the filthy whore of
Babylon with all her implements, and to reward her double according to her
works, and in the Cup that she has filled to us of superstition Idolatry, an
innumerable abominations to fill her the double in detestations, and abhorring
even the very printes and stepes where she has gone. Thus committing my self
and all Gods people unto his mercies obtained unto us by Christ Jesus our Lord,
I end with the prayer for his Majesty taken out of the public service
appointed for the Church in Queen Elizabethes time, after the terrible
earthquake, when men's hearts were a wakened out of security, and trembled at
the presence of God. And now (Lord) particularly we pray unto thee for thy
Churches of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, that thou will continue they
gracious favor still toward us, to maintain thy Gospel still amongst us,
and to give it a free passage that it might be glorified. And to that end, save
thy servant our gracious King James, grant him wisdom to rule this mighty
people, long life, and quietness round about him, detect all the traiterous
practices of his enemies devised against him and thy truth. O Lord thou see
the pride of thine enemies: and though that by our sins we have justly
deserved to fall into their hands, yet have mercy upon us and save thy little
flock. Strengthen his hand, to strike the stroke of the ruin of all
superstition, to double into the bosom of that rose colored whore, that which
she has poured out against thy saints, that he may give the deadly wound not
to one head, but to all the heads of that cruel beast: that the life that
quiuereth in his dismembered members yet amongst us, may utterly decaie, and we
through that wholesome discipline, sweet yoke, and comfortable scepter of Jesus
Christ, may enjoy his righteousness, that the Church may flourish, sin may
abate, wicked men may hang their heads, and all thy children be comforted.
Strengthen his hand, and give him a swift foot to hu^t out the Bulls of Basan,
and devouring beasts that make hauoke of thy flock. And because this work is
of great importance, assist him with all necessary helps both in giuinge him
godly, wise, and faithful Councellers, as also in ministering to him inferior
rulers and officers, as may sincerely, uprightly, and faithfully do their
duties, seeking first thy honor and glory, then the common wealth of his
Realms and dominions, that we may long enjoy thy truth with him, and all other
thy good blessings which in so great mercy thou have bestowed upon us, with
grows in goodness, gain in Godliness, and daily bettering in sincere
obedience. Amen.

Hierom. Lib. 2. Epist. 2. Paulino. Malens aliena verecunde dicere,
quam sua impudenter ingerere.
Willing rather with modesty to speak other men's words, then impudently to
thrust forth his own. T. W.

Ierom concerning some Bishops in his time. Nihil grande est pacem voce
pretendere, et opere destruere. Aliud niti, aliud demonstrare. Verbis sonare
concordiam, re exigere servitutem. Volumus et nos pacem; et non solu^ volumus,
sed et rogamus. Sed pacem Christi, pacem veram, pacem sine inimicitiis, pacem
in qua non sit bellu^ involutum, pacem quae non vt adversarios subiiciat, sed
vt amicos iungat. Quid? Dominationem, pacem vocamus? Et non reddimus vnicuique
vocabulum suum?


It is no great matter in word to pretend peace, and in deed to destroy it: to
make show of one thing, and to demonstrate another: to talk of concord, and
indeed to require a servitude. We also desire peace; and we do not only desire
it, but we entreat for it. But it is Christ's peace, it is a true peace, it is a
peace without enmity, a peace wherein no war should be infolded, a peace
which should not bring under adversaries in subjection, but join friends
together. What? Do we call a Lordship, peace? Why do we not give to every
thing his proper name?

Hierom. ad Theophil. adversus Iohannem Ierosolymitanum. Tom. 2. page 184.

