A MIROVR For Magestrates OF CITIES. Representing the Ordinances, Policies,
and Diligence, of the Noble Emperor, ALEXANDER (surnamed) SEVERUS, to
suppress and hastise the notorious Vices noorished in Rome, by the superfluous
number of Dicing-houses, Tauarns, and common Stews: Suffered and cheerished, by
his beastlye Predecessor, HELYOGABALVS, with sundry grave Orations: by the
said noble Emperor, concerning Reformation. AND HEREUNTO, IS ADDED. A
Touchstone for the Time: Containyng: many perilous Mischiefs, bred in the
Bowels of the City of LONDON: By the Infection of some of thease Sanctuaries
of Iniquity.

By GEORGE WHETSTONES. Gent.

VIRTVTE, NON VI.

Printed at London, by Richard Jones 1584

Author ^^d and allowed.

To the Right Honorable, Sir Edward Osburne, Knight, Lord MAYOR, of the famous
City of LONDON: To the Right Worshipful, his Assistantes, the Aldermen: And
to their learned Counselor, M. Seriant Fleetwood, Recorder of the same CITY:
his approved good Friend and Kinsman.
RIght Honorable, and worthy Maiestrates: Among the Learned, there is a by
Proverb, ORPHEUS can describe Hell, better then ARISTOTLE: raised upon a Fable,
that he fetched his Wife from thence: which is none other, then a confirmation,
of the sound Reason of PLAVTVS: That, Of more validity, is the sight of one
eye, then the attention of ten ears: for, in that a man sees, is Assurance,
and in that he hears, may be Error.

Right Honorable, and Reverent, I use this EXORDIVM, to take away the Contempt,
which, the plain Discovery of my MIROVR may breed, that make so sharp a
Declaration of Vices, as if they reigned without Chastisement? And do I, with
the Deformytie of Rome, reformed, by Addition, entreat of Abuses? or more, of
daingerous Mischiefs, incloased in the Bowelles of this famous City? I do:
and do acknowledge withal, that you are Judges of offenders, within your
limittes, and with the Scourdge of Law, you chasten them, or with the Swoorde
of Justice, do cut them short, as you find them: as you find them, I say:
E^^al-be-it, by the testimony of Holy writ, both you, and all principal
Magestrates, have on Earth, the names and places of Gods: yet with your
favors, in your, and their Judgments, are (often) showen the Infyrmyties of
men: your sightes are not invisible, and (therefore) necessary, that you have
visible Lights, in obscure Corners. A Physician, can not see every secret
grief, but upon Reuealement, may apply a curable Medicine for a hidden
Discease: Euen-so, many can discover the Mischief, the Magestrate sees not:
but the Magestrate (alone, must remedy the same. And where (say you) have I
knowledge, of these concealed Abuses? Forsoothe, In Hell: where al sin and
Iniquity, is as apparent, as Godliness and Virtue is in Heaven, common.

Me seems, I here you answer: That small is the Marvel, if you come not
there, to harken after Offenders: when the sayng is: In Hell there is no
Redemption.

In very truth: If Custom have not made you bold, ye could no sooner enter
into the Common Dicinge Houses, or Hell, in, and about London: (So, I may name
them, by the Authority of CORNELIUS AGRIPPA, who says: that, the Art was,
first, devised by the Devil:) But, you would imagine the Assemblye, dampened, and
you, your selves in danger, to be presently destroyed: Gods vengeance is so
greuouslye tempted: For, the Devil can breathe out Iniquity, no faster, then
his Angels, there assembled, outrage God with the horriblest blasphemies that
may be imagined, and too damnable to be reported: What follows there, where
this despite is done unto the eternal God? Mary, no villainy, may be
unthought, nor vnwrough to prejudice men.

It is every man's Case, that has care of his Posterytie, to be Suitors for
Reformation: the evil, is of the Nature of the Oil of Ieat, that consumes
the Marrow, and perishes not the Bone. The Marow and strength of this happy
Realm, I mean the Ability of the Gentlemen, is much weakened and, almost
wasted, by haunting of these ungracious Houses: Yet, for that the Mischiefs be
not reproved, the Remedies are not applied:

Not so few, as three hundred Gentlemen, of living, are at this Day, more then
half undone, by the dangerous frequenting of Dicing-houses: how many, here
tofore, have been clean suncke, would move pity to number: And for the
welfare of such as shall follow, it is high time, the Corruption were purged:
And as the nombers of Gentlemen, by this means decayed, are great: so, the
nombers of those that live like Gentlemen upon their spoils, are greater: For,
if the Shifters in and within the leuel of London, were, truly, mustered, I
dare boldly say, they would amaze a Petty Army, I pray god, an easy
incourageme^t, arm the^ not to a civil Mischief: for if their forfeats were
well known, I fere, they do acts as ve^trus: but my meaning is, not to suspect
or acuse any in particular, although, there be mani, yt too boldly offend. I
wish yt their Couerts were discovered, and the^ justice would soon find their
faults, or repe^ta^ce, show their ame^dme^t. My Discovery, being by your
wisdoms read, the lothsomnes of this Mischief can not but distemper your
senses: and for your safeties, the Infection, I trust, shall be speedely purged:
And in this common benefit, this glorious Monument shall remain of your godly
Trauayles.

London, as she is the Honor of her Country:
So, is she become the lively Example of virtue.
If this Saiynge, be written upon her Gates, and A Whyp and a Halter the
Sign of a Dicinghouse: Unthrifts and their Familiars, would, quickly, live in
other Corners, It is (almost) incredible, what beastly estate, HELIOGABALVS,
left Rome: as great a wonder, how soon his good Successor ALEXANDER, repaired
her Ruins: A Brief of both, whose Governments, I have set down in the
beginning of this Treatise, to show, how mighty sin will grow with a little
liberty: and how soon, it is quailed with severe Correction.

We have the Image of Virtue, too our Sovereign Queen ELIZABETH: the Sages of
ATHENS, to her most Honorable privy Counsel: grave Judges in iuditiall
places, and worthy Maiestrates, to examine Offenses: by Gods and whose
providence, our Prosperytie, is so famous, as all the world envy and fear
us. How great a foil, wear it then, that we should devour one another, when,
of our superfluytie, many a hungry Nation is satisfied.

The prudent Maiestrates, have alredie looked into our lascivious inclination:
and have enacted Medicineable Laws, for these Infirmyties: But the seuerest
Laws, are not other, then written threatninges, without Execution, of whose
vengeance, all men may hear and no man does feel. In times past, a
Proclamation, would keep men in awe: and now, an Example of Justice, scarce,
makes the wicked to change countenance: but althouge, a Braynsicke Jade, will
run with a Snaffle, a sharp Bitte will bridle him: though an Offender do
jest to here a Penal Statute proclaimed, and say: tush, the effect of this,
will be soon forgotten: yet, in the meanewile, scowrge him with the pain, and
he will cry, Peccaui.

To reform the inconveniences Embleamed in this Myrrour, need neither
Machauils Pollycies, nor new Sessions of Parliament: The Remedies are alredie
established, and Administration, will soon work amendment: Reformation
belongs to the Magistrate although, the benefit be general: I (only) of
Zeal, discover insufferable faults, but deal not with faulty men, whom I
refer to public Justice: And too your Censures I present my Travail, and
at Commandment, my self: Vowinge, in Actions of a true Subject, to seek the
Honor of this famous City: to show my self worthy of my deceased father,
who lived long in good Credit among you, and being dead, is registered for a
good man: no more, but accomplishment of perfect desires,

To your Honor and Worships, George Whetstones.

To the (...), the young Gentlemen, of the Innes of Court.
RIght Worshipful, and Worthy Gentlemen (of the Innes of Court:) unto you,
as unto one of the fairest Ornaments of this happy Realm, I commend the
benefit of this small Treatise: And I am well persuaded, in this Dedication,
that I salute the best part of all the young Gentlemen of England: For, what
Course so-euer, they afterward sollowe, there are very few Gentlemen, but,
either are, or have been of your Society: It is very well known, that these
famous Houses, are the first intertayners of your Liberty.

For, (notwithstanding) in your Governments, there are many good and peaceable
Orders, yet your chiefest Discipline, is by the Purse. Those that are disposed,
studdie the Laws: who so likes, without check, may follow Dalliance: And
(certainly) the wanton Alectiues, which you (continually) behold, are not
unlike the Sirenes Inchauntments (were Poets faynings true:) you co^tinuallie
walk by the Adamant Rocks, which draw Silver and Gold, as fast as Iron and
Steel: you must be armed with more experience then the capacytie of young
years: or else, assure your selves, that Repentance will unloose your Fetters:
there is an old Proverb: Evil Company, corrupts good manners: And (truly) I
cannot see, how young men, of the best education: should escape vnpoysoned, when
vice is so conversant with Elder years.

O how happy were it for your Posterytie, if, the Innes of the Court, were
far from Dieyng-houses, or Dicing-houses, with their Original, the Devil.
But, if you can not be thus separated, this little Book, will (with regard)
guide you as safe, as the Clue of threede did Theseus, in the Laberinth. These
Houses (outwardly) are of the substance of other Buildinges, but within, are
the Botches and Byles of Abhomynation: they are like unto deep Pittes, covered
with smoothe Grass, of which, men must be warned, or else, they can hardly
avoid that their eye can not discover:

You can have, nofairer warnings then the steps of your Companions falls,
nor I, a more fortunate Reward for my travail, then to see you (worthy
Gentlemen) to floorish.

I beseech you, to be advised: It is a more precious matter, to shun a
Mischief, by other men's harms, then to learn the goodness of a thing, by
the loss thereof. This sharp Discovery, will make your fleering Deceivers, my
open Enemies: but I shall be well strengthened, if my true Affection, breed in
you a disdain of their fellowshyp, and let them spurn their woorste, they
hurt them selves, that are angry with good Admonition. I dedicate this Book
to the Magestrates. to whom, appertains the chastisment of evil livers,
your woorst enemies: I dedicate to you (courteous Gentlemen) the Fruits of
Noble Alexanders Counselles, as beseeming your worthiness: I am but his
Trouch-man, and your trusty friend. And (truly) your wisdoms may make his
grave Counselles more profitable then their severe Discipline: for the Medicine
is of more value, that preserves Health, then that which cures Sickness. The
health of a Gentleman, is Honor and actions of virtue: in which, Alexander
(liberally) instructs you: The Malady, nay, death of a Gentleman, is an
undoing to the posterytie, which is hastened, by the sucking of Shifters: Of
whom, I (constantly) hope, the good Maiestrates will ease you: I leave further
Ceremonies, in my Preface, least I seem to judge your Wisdoms, who are (for
Learning) a fair Beauty of the Commonwealth: my plain Method, in writing,
shows you a large hole to see Day, which is ynouffe (with an Advantage) who
retain the virtue, to drayne Honey from a Weed: I end to trouble you, at
this time: but in no time, will leave to be:

Your assured Friend: George Whetstones.

Ad candidum Lectorem: IN LAVDEM OPERIS.
SI te cura iuvat sanctarum (Candide) Legum,
Aut inculpatae praecepta salubria vitae:
Hinc Exempla petas, Morum sit norma tuorum
Hic Liber, et SPECVLO te contempleris in isto,
Nam fugienda tibi quae sint industrius Author
Quaeqae sequenda docet. Liber et labor illius omnis
Huc spectant: Aleas vites, nec Tessera curae,
Nec Gula, nec Luxus, nec desidis Otia vitae
Sint tibi: sed Mores compti, castissima vita,
Et Labor, et rebus virtus exercita duris
Quae Patriam justice defen dear possit in Armis,
Haec Summa est Operis, nostriqae hic meta laboris.
IOANNES BOTREVICVS.

Faults escaped, the Author being absent.
Leaf. Side. Line. Fault. Correction. 1. 1. 16. no common wealth, in no common
wealth. 7. 1. 9. an Absurdity, no Absurdity. 8. 2. 30 his own Daughter. his
own Death. 9. 1. 13. Gaius Caius. 10. 1. 18. Laborers barbarous 15. 2. 19.
knights of ye land. knights of the Band. 21. 1. 2. attempting attempt. 21. 1
2. innoia. muoia 28. 1. 11. forgets gives 26. 2. 22. done due In the next
Line following, for reverenced, read, reserved.

A Mirror for Maiestrates of Cities.
AFTER THAT THE GOOD Emperor Alexander (surnamed) Seuerus, for his sharp
correcting of vice, had restored the authority of the Senate, and had given
breathe unto their good Laws: of whom the one sat without reverence, and the
other were read and not regarded, through the inordinate lyberties, and
Priueleadges given unto vice, by that unclean Monster Heliogabalus, his
Predecessor: Of the sudden, Rome was brightned with the virtues of Justice,
as the world with the beams of the Sun, after a horrible and dark tempest.
But as there is no assurance of fair weather until the sky be clear from
clouds, so (which well forsaw this good Emperor) there can be no common
wealth a grounded peace and prosperity, where there are not Informers to find
out offenders, as well as Judges to chasten offenses: In so much, in the prime
of his Government, accompanied with many grave Senators, as this good Emperor
went unto the Senate, in his passage he might see the Cittyzins busielye
exercised in their several trades: he incountred the Gentlemen in civil
attire, and of every estate, found both himself and his Senators, saluted
with much honor, reverence and duty.

And being in the Senate house, mounted in the judicial Throne, he sat long,
and was little occupied with crimynall causes.

The Senators, no little gloried, that (appealing unto the judgment of
Alexander) they might lawfully boast, that Rome, which was late a Forest of
wild beasts, or to speak more properly, a den of thieves, a Sanctuary for
Ruffens, a privilege for Strumpets: a place in which no vice was forbidden,
nor virtue commanded, by their great wisdoms was brought into so good an
order, as Alexanders eyes could behold no open offenders, nor his ears hear
of any secreat offenses. In-so-much, as after his return to the Palace, they
lauded the Emperor, with many acclamations of virtue, attributing this happy
reformation unto his piety, temperaunce, and Justice: thinking, that in giving
of him this sovereignty, he would return the praises upon their
paineful-trauels, with the encouragement, that the magnanimious Caesar gave
unto his soldiers, saying: that their bloods wrote honor in his forehead, and
therefore how precious he esteemed his own honor, so careful he was of their
welfare. But Alexander, although he were second to none, in the regarding and
the rewarding of virtuous Maiestrates, yet least by thinking, that this
outward reformation, had in the common wealth settled an inward amendment,
and thereby they should grow negligent in the administratio^s of their
weighty charges, he with a light regard, attended his own deserved praises,
to reaue them of the hope of particular commendations: yea, that they might well
know that all that glistered was not Gold, that always the inward heart, was
not discovered by the outward habit: he compared the best governed Commonwealth
unto a fair Aple, which being serched, has a Core, and that the worthy
Senators, might perceive their errors, and to amend what was omitted of their
own duties, and necessary to establish a happy government, in this grave and
prudent Oration he set down the dangerous estate of the public weal: and
with-al, a perfect remedy for the festred and inward maladies.

The first Oration of Alexander, the Emperor, to the Senators.
Most grave and reverend Fathers, we not a little rejoice, through the grace of
the immortal Gods, and your great wisdoms, to behold the famous Rome, but
yesterday (in comparison) infamed with all abhominatio^s, by the priueleges of
our beastly predecessor, who meriteth neither the name of Emperor, nor man,
now in possession of her ancient virtues: And as we confess, that by the
divine and heroyicall blessings, the hoaresed voice of Justice is cleared: So
we like-wise hope, by the same graces, the remembrance of vice and iniquity
shal-be rooted out. But good Senators, to discontinue a prosperous beginning,
with a slothful imagination, that the Common weal is sound, because no
infyrmities appear, is the unhappy mean, to blaste the fruits, of your well
employed wisdoms, and to inpresse an incurable Canker in the bowels of Rome.
The practisers of Chirurgerie very well know, that an old and deep festred
sore, will with easy working of the Surgion, outwardly seem to heal, but if
there be not Corsiues applied, to eat out the root thereof, this over hasty
healing will break forth unto a more grievous malady. Good Senators, unto
you al, it is well known, that the public weal has of long time bin
infected, with the most horrible vices, that ever humanity practiced: yea, so
foul and unclean, as civil creatures are forbod to recite them, by the
sauadge inclination of that Monster HELIOGABALVS, yea so loathsome and fylthy
were his abominations, as the worser sort of people, (his favored servants)
so detested his detestable and vile life, as they hasted his ouer-long proroged
death. Now that the immortal Gods have invested us with the Imperial
Majesty, small is the wonder, though there appear a reformation in the good,
when the very Reprobate were glutted with wickedness. But reverend Fathers,
this sweet alteration is no warrant to the Magistrate, to be slothful in his
function, least in not suruayinge of the best, the best themselves be
corrupted, as Moaths consume the finest garments, where they be seeldome
worn, and less ouer-lookte: And although in the better sort, this
inconvenience is to be feared, in the worser, this mischief is to be certainly
expected: they will upon every temptation return to their naughtines as a Dog
to his vomit, and therefore these dangerous infyrmities in a Common wealth,
must be cured as the skillful Surgion does a festred sore. Their causes must
be searched and their nourishing humors purged, and then amendment follows.
The cause of this inordinate lust, this excessive drunkenness, this outrageous
prodigalitye, and to be short, this hell of iniquity among the Romans, is evil
education: of long time there has bin no man ready to instruct them in
virtues, nor willing to reprehend their vices, the nourishment of these evils
are the Tauerns, Dicing places, and brothell houses, of which Rome has great
store, and they greater store of guestes: so that to rid the public weal of
this dangerous infection, is first and cheefelye to instruct the youth in good
manners, and next to abate the number of these superfluous howses, or at the
least, daily to ouer-see their doings.

Thus in brief, I have declared some of the hydden euilles, harbored in the
bowels of Rome, which to reform your own eyes must be as ready to find them
out, as your ears attentive to hear evils reported: you must be as well
Informers of offenders, as Judges of offenses: for the desire of Justice is to
root out iniquity, and the office of Justices to inquire after evil lyuers:
And without al doubt, in this careful proceedinge, in your visitations, you
shall see sufficient example of sin, to occupy your Judicial places with
correction. This vigilant care, will eternize your good beginnings with glory,
will establish prosperitye in the weal puplique, will comfort the good, and
bridle the wicked: if not through the love of virtue, yet for the chastninge of
vice. Thus, you see it concerns the inrichinge of the common wealth, in the
service where-of the bitterness of death, should unto you deem pleasant: In
particulers, it concerns the prosperity of your Children, Kinsfolk and
Allies, for whose benefit you are borne to travel: also it concerns your
own honor, which you should hold more precious then life: and therefore as
your Sovereign, we conjure you, and as fathers of the Commonwealth beseech
you, that you will continue our good beginning, with the execution of the
Emperors directions: and so we end as we begun, the prosperity of Rome, shall
highly laud the gracious goodness of the gods, and the greatness of your
wysdoms.

WHen the good Emperor, had in few words ended this weighty Oration, (or more
properly grave admonition) the fatherly Senators admiring the sound judgment
of Alex. being of tender years and unexperienced, in pollices of government,
knew straight-waies, that there was a negligence in their administration of
Justice, which his mind (continually exercised for the benefyt of the public
weal) forsaw, and to the profit thereof, in this loving manner the same
discovered.

To witness that they thoroughly conceived the intent of his reposed words, by
their own prudent deeds, they foorth-with wrought out the wholesome effects of
his godly desire: and ye better to search the core of vice and iniquity hid in
the intrailes of Rome. These good Maiestrats used this policy, in disguysed
habits they entered ye Tauerns, common tables, victuling houses, stews and
brothel-harbors, without controleme^t, they viewed ye behauiors of the people,
that they might the better understand the full of their abuses: and upon
diligent search, what found they? forsooth, Rome like a painted strumpet. The
great boast yt they but lately made of her reformation, had no better assurance
then this, a few of the good set forth their good dispositions at large, and
many of the wicked, for a time held in their lewd inclinations: but
counterfetes will unto kind, Coppex may hold print but not bide tutch with
gold: even so these hypocrites, as place and opportunity served, bewraied
their beastly natures. Among these franions, Cosonage was esteemed lawful
merchandise, and dicinge, fair pastime: lechery was held no sin, nor chastity,
virtue: ruffens were honored, and the gods despised: the mouth of virtue was
locked, and vice spoke through a trumpet. To be short, among them was no law
but disorder, nor any thing public but abomination: neither possibli might
it be otherwise: for by ye authority of Heliogabalus, ruffens, bawdes and such
other brothel birds, were made senators, yea, ye basest persons were married to
noble weme^, and they yt could set abroche most villainies, bare the greatest
swayes: and where such liberty is given to offend, sin is so sweet to ye flesh,
yt there will appear no difference between men and beasts, save ye men do
exceed beasts in beastlines: and in this accords divine Plato, who says, yt
those cities, in which there are no severe laws to correct sin, ar rather
forests of monsters then places habitable for men, and where as there was this
corruption in nature, there could be no alteration hoped for but by discipline,
which the sequel well proves.

The change of the government, from a most vile unto a most virtuous Emperor,
purged simply, ye corruption of ye people, for although ye exercise of
naughtiness, were not so open as before, yet ye evil disposed knew where to
stawle companions even in the fore named Hell houses, and which was most to be
lamented, among the scum of the City, I mean Ruffians, Bawdes, Brokers,
Cheters, Shifters and others: in these fylthie places, worthy Gentlemen and
substantial Cittezens were daily found, the one through unthriftiness to
wast their patrimony, the other by couetousenesse to purchase the Devil and
all.

When the grave Senators, had entered into the depth of these foul ulcers of
the Public weal, they found that Dice, Drunkenness and Harlots, had
consumed the wealth of a great number of ancient Gentlemen, whose Purses were
in the possession of vile persons, and their Lands at morgage with the
Merchants, and how both the one and the other, were confederate to spoil these
Gallantes. They truly certifyed the Emperor, the dangerous estate of the
Common wealth, how that by the corruption of these houses, the Gentlemen had
made this exchange with vile persons: they were attyred with the Gentlemen's
bravery, and the Gentlemen disgraced with their beastly manners: And so much the
case was the more to be pitied, for that the remedy was to be doubted: for
al-be-it their infections grew by the fylthie conversation with ruffens,
Bawdes, and such brave baggages, which was hard to be cured, that which
should comfort them in well dooinge, I mean their Lands, were in the
possession of the Marchantes, who of the gain of their bargen will wage
friends to countenance their deceitful dealinges, and then let them bark
their worst, their adversaries will byte them with their own teeth. Thus,
poor Gentlemen, they are sure to impair their liuinges: how-be-it (perhaps)
they amend their lives.

When the good Emperor, had attentively herd this (lamentable) report, he
foorth-with made this short answer.

Grave Fathers, you have certifyed us no more, then by reason we sensibly
foresaw: it is therefore now convenient, that we by severity pluck up the
roots of wickedness, which by sufferaunce are grown to mighty bodies of sin.
Therefore our pleasure is, that by express Commandment, the Cittizins of Rome
be-warned to appear (to morrow) be-fore us, in the Theater of Rome, where
they shall openly know their faults: and by the graces of the immortal Gods,
and counsel of our grave Senate, we shall set down remedies for this
dangerous mischief. This reposed speech of the Emperor, promised good
success to his grave determinations: in so much, as the Senators settled in
this hope, made (forthwith) Proclamation of the Emperors Commandment.

And at the appointed time, the grauer sort of the Cittizins, with a multitude
of the Communaltie being assembled, the Emperor and a chosen company of
Senators, with a stern countenance passed by the people, and mounted in the
Chair of Majesty, as one distempered with a great passion, with an angry
Countenance and a still tongue, he settled his eyes upon the Cittizins: And
not-with-standing they saluted him with many dutiful acclamations: as, Live
long, O noble Emperor, the chosen of the Gods, the Glory of the world, the
Sovereign of Kings, and prosperytie of Room: yet he seemed never a whytte
the more assable, as willing they should know that his wisdom had searched
their corrupt consciences, and (therefore) little regarded their dutiful
gratulations: In the end, when the regard of his displeased Countinaunce, had
made them scilent with fear, or (rather) half dead with sorrow, he quickened
them again, with this sharp Reprehension: as follows.

Alexanders Oration, to the Cittizyns of Room.
IF we knew, by what proper name to call you; by that name we would will you
to give attention, to the words we purpose to declare: If we should greet you
with the reverence due unto Priests, we should highly offend the Gods and
delude men: for, in you there is no Relygion to serve the Gods, nor Charytie to
live Neighbourly among men. If we should salute you, as Senators, your own
consciences would witness that we mocked you: for the good Senators, travel
for the benefit of the Publique-weale, and you (only) labor for private
lucre. It were ridiculous to call you Gentlemen: for they, by their magnanimous
Virtues, enlarge the bounds of the Empire, and you, though you have craft to
dispossess Gentlemen of their lands, yet you lack valor to keep the enemy
from the sackyng of your Cytties. What? would you that we should call you,
as the ancient Cittizyns were wont to be called, good people of Room?
Believe me, this is no proper Title for you: for they and you differ in
conditions, as good does from bad. Those Cittizyns or good people of Room, by
their Virtues, crowned Room with the Honor of a City, and more, with this
Title: The Head of the World: For, as divine PLATO says: it is not sumptuous
Buildings, that gives name of a City, but the Ciuilytie and worthiness of
the Cittyzyns: And on the contrary-parte, you pollute Room with so many
abominations, as where in times past, she has ^e^ called the head of the
world, she may now be as aptly called: the tail of iniquity: If none of all
these titles belong unto you: what name should we then give you? you be of Rome:
live in Room, and have your sustenance from Rome: all this has Moathes in
cloth, Canker-rust in Iron, and Caterpillars in fruict: Then, you Moathes,
Canker-rust and Caterpillars of Room: give ear unto my words, which show you
a more assured benefit then your own trauelles: The large Privileges of
Abuses, which you (of long time) have inioyed, have (by sufferance made a
custom of sin: and therefore (in charytie (we are (first) bound, to admonish you
with good counsel: if that work no ame^dme^t, the^ (of necessity) we must
chasten you with the Rod of Justice: But, admit this liberty were without
check, you would be the confusion of your own-selues: you have experience of
the Vermins to whom, we (rightly) compared you: the Moathe, consumes the
Cloth, and (in time) for lack of sustenaunce, starueth it self. The like
does the Caterpyller among Fruict, and with continuance, the Canker-rust in
Iron. And you, that devour the wealth of the CITY, dwell upon the
Possessions of the Gentlemen, and oppress the multitude with bondage: what
gain you by this? By Cruelty, you purchase hatred of your Neighbors, and the
Ambitious, will envy your abundance of wealth: and then, this follows: If
they can not be strengthened with foreign power, your familiars, will invade you
with civil discention: For, among those that have lived prodigally, this rule
is observed: when their Purses are empty, their heads are occupied with a
thousand mischiefs, to compass a new supply: And (which is most to be
feared,) they be not so perrillous cunnyng in their practices, as they are
Deuillysh resolute in their Executious: If they sell you their lands, for
money to spend riotously, when that help is past, they will cut off your heads,
fire your Houses, Pride and want, cause of Sedition.
and sack this famous City, to sustain their lascivious humors: For
(without special grace) in proud minds, want can not suppress desire to
spend: You have read the experience in the History of unthrifty CATTILINE
and his Confederats, how he murdered the worthiest Cittezins, without mercy,
made spoil of their Gooddes without law, and beseaged Room with a shrewde
danger: you are like to be partakers of their Afflictions, unless you be
more moderate in gayning of Gentlemen's liuyngs, and they less riotous in
spending of your money. When PHILIP King of MACEDONS, made war upon the
PERSIANS, having intelligence, that they abounded in all manner of delicate
vyandes, sumptuous Garments and wastful expenses: he forth with retired his
Army, and said: it was needelesse too make war upon those, that within a
while, would cut one another throats. And truly, though PHILLIP his answer
were short, his judgment was weighty: for as mighty Ryuers will soon run
dry, when their noorishyng Spryngs are turned another way: so wealthy Cities,
can not, but be subverted, when every man does clean contrary to his function.
Among the Philosophers, MAN is called, MICROCOSMOS, or a little world: for
that in him is figured, a Model of the glory thereof. If he resemble the whole
world, it were an absurdity too make him a Figure of a wel-gouerned
Commonwealth: a man consists of diverse members, as head, body, Arms,
legs. etc. So does a good Commonwealth, of diverse estates: as of a King as
Supreame-head and Co^mau^der: of godly Prelates, as the heart and nooryshers of
divine virtues: of grave Judges, Maiestrates and Counselors, as the body and
strength of Common prosperytie: of worthy Gentlemen, as the Arms, hands and
executioners of the Maiestrates grave pollycies: of aduentrous Merchants, as
the legs and trauaylers into foreign countries, for their own Countteyes
co^modytie: of Plowmen, and inferior people, as the feet, which must run at
the commandment of every other member. I say, where all these estates,
dutifully, do their Offices: where the Prince does (justly) command: the
Maiestrates (advisedly) direct: and inferior Subjects (faithfully) obey:
there, where this Concord is, peace and prosperytie, floorysheth in their
Cities, and fear, pineth the envy of their borderyng enemies. On the
contrary part, where the head is crowned with a Pantofle, as the Subject of
the unconstant multitude: where the passages of the heart, which is the Organe
of the Soul, are fixed with the continual exercise of sin, (the Figure that
the Prelates sownde Doctrine, are but words of warnyng, and no causes of
amendment: Where the breast and body lies naked to every peril, I mean, the
good Maiestrates, are neither reverenced, feared, nor obayed: Where the hands
are bownde to the knees, in token, that the Gentlemen are thrawle to the
Marchantes:

Where, on the knees is fastened a Cap and a feather, and about the legs, a
Sword and a Target buckled* in sign, that the Cittizyns desire the honor
they can not govern, and leave their trauayles, which would inritch the
Commonwealth: And where the feet, which should trudge for every necessary,
should be fettred, in a pair of Stocks: as witness of the poor Laborers
bondage and oppression, who, for their necessary trauelles, ought too be
cheerised. I say: as a man thus deformed, buckled and bownd on a heap, would
soon perysh, for want of sustenance: euen-so, a Commonwealth, thus confused,
would soon be confownded, for lack of good Order. What Prince, that is Head
and Sovereign, of such a sauadge and brute people? that will not (rather)
wysh, a Royal Tomb, then a Princely Palace? for, in the one, he is
priuyleaged against the outrage of enemies, and in the other, he is not safe
from the Treasons of his own Subjects. And therefore, you Vipers, which destroy
one another, if our loving persuasions, may not alter your lewd dispositions:
take the advantage of time and my nakedness, give me an untimely death, rather
the^ a dishonorable reign: for (truly) I had rather die, while the walls of
Room do stand, then live to see her sumptuous Buildings on fite, whose
ruin is at hand, unless, out of hand, you amend your corrupt consciences, and
the multitude, their naughty manners.

AT these words, (with tears in their eyes) as Pleadges of sorrowful hearts:
the people shouted forth with a loud cry, their dutiful Affections saying.
O noble ALEXANDER, let the Torture of ten dearhes, be too easy a pain, for
the man, which but ymagyneth thy Death: Live: and live long* O most noble
Emperor, the life of us all, and the light of the Romans glory.

Here Sorrow stopped their mouths: but their dismayed countenaunces, gave full
knowledge of their inward Repentance: so that the Emperor, both in words,
looks and gesture, (more mildely) continued his Oration: as follows.

Continuance of Alexander his Oration, to the Cittizyns.
YOU wish him the vengeance of ten deaths, that should; but imagine our death:
And (certainly) Conscience persuades us, your tongues do truly publysh the
consents of your hearts: but small is the difference, when death and
desolation is the end, whyther you lay violent hands upon us, or murder us
with your horrible vices. The overthrow of a King dome, ends the reign fo
the King.
The body that is in a Consumption, brings the head to the grave: euen-so,
the ruin of the kingdom, ends the reign of the king: he whose head grows
out of his shyn, whose eyes are set in his knees, whose feet are joined to his
shoulders, and his other members (semblably) disordred: would you not (rather)
take him for a Mo^ster then a man? yea verily, and (doubtless) such a creature
would perysh by his deformytie, ware he not by others fostered for a wonder:
even so, his preposterous shape in a Commonwealth, when every estate lives
out of order, will soon come to confusion, and people of the best fortune, but
live as the bo^dmen of their enemies.

The first Erector of the Romayn walls, was ROMULUS, yet Room was nothing so
much bound unto him, for the envyronyng of her fair buildings, with strong
Bulwarks, as in appoinctyng offices, otders and laws among the people, to
govern them in peace and prosperytie: This Romulus, (that Room might
prosper,) hastened the death of his Brother REMVS, an Act (simply) considered
by Nature, very impious, and the vengeance of detestable cruelty: but the
seditious disposition of Remus well po^dred, necessytie approved the seuerytie
of ROMULUS, to be perfect Justice. The love we owe to our Parents, ought to be
very reverent and great, because they gave us life: to our brethren, natural,
because of preuytie in blood: to our friends, Men ar more bound to the
commonwealth then to Parents.
affectionat, because virtue or benefit is ye foundation: But the love we owe
unto our Country, commands us to break all these bands of affection, in
presentyng the dearest friends, offending against the Weale-publique: yea, in
the service thereof, to make it appear, that the prodigal spoylles of our
lives, gives contempt unto Death: That Examples of Kings and Capital
Maiestrates, in this duty, may be Samplers of Virtue unto the inferior
Subjects of Room, I give you to understand, how King LYCVRGVS went into
(voluntary) exile, that his good Laws, might have long continuance among the
Lacedaemonians. King CODRVS (wilfully) ran upon his own Daughter, (only) upon a
Prophecy, that the same should deliver his Country from invasion. AVCVRVS,
King MYDAS Son of PHRIGIA, having knowledge that the ire of the Gods, would
not be pacified, until a living man leapt into a great gaping gulf of the
earth which overthrew many houses, and did much hurt in the Country: The Kings
Son, ANCVRVS, I say, least some should prevent him, (hastily) kyssed the King
his father, his wife and friends, and (courageously) leaped into this Gulf.
What need we further search then the Monumentes of Noble Romans: CVRTIVS, did
the like valiant deed of Ancurus. MVTIVS SCEVOLE, in disguised Habyte, entered
(alone) the Hetruryan Camp, to stay their king, who (daungerously) assaulted
Rome. GAIVS MARIUS, to overcome the fierce Cymbrians, sacrificed his dearly
beloved Daughter CALPHVRNIA: Death was the certain end of al these
enterpises: but these Noble personages, wear wondrous uncertain, whither
their Deaths should rydde their Countries from dangers, or no: But Lovers of
their Countries prosperity, makes neither doubts nor delays, where great
peril asks present succor: But, you will (peradventure) say, that you are
ready to spend your lives, your lands and Goods, to with-stande foreign
Hostilytie, or Domestical ennemies: If you so say, and do so, Duty
challenges all this, and wisdom wylleth a deeper foresight: It is a work of
more thank to preserve health, then to cure Sickness, for, pain and grief
(only) commends Medicine: euen-so, effusion of innocent blood, burning of
Cytties, and rauishment of Virgins, are the effects of most glorious
conquestes: And truly, he that will give cause of sedition, though he after
does his uttermost to suppress the same, is like unto him that does
(wilfully) surfeit, that Physic may heal him: Your excessive Coueitousnesse,
is example of the like mischief: yea, this double danger depends thereon:
By the same, you undo the Gentlemen, which are the Beauty of Rome, and the
strength of the Empire: For (al-be-it) lawe-lesse Wolves will scarre Sheep,
yet maimed men, encourage Cowardes. Your abundance, can not defend Foreign
Invasion, when the Gentlemen's hearts are nipped with want: nay, it is to be
feared, that Envy and Necessytie, will make them to join with the Enemy, to
be revenged of your Cruelties, or too be relieved of your superfluyties.

HEREWITH, the Multitude cried out, alowde: Accursed be he, and unworthy the
name of a Citizyn of Rome, that, by insatiable Coueitousnes and Usury, seeks
this public delolution: whatsoever is thus (unlawfully) gotten, shall be
restored back: Hereafter, such unprofitable members, shall be bridled: Live
virtuous Emperor, and what lack ye find in us, refourme it, and we will obey
you and he that does resist, let him be slain, and buried in Tyber: Your
virtue has restored us to life, that we are dead: unto Liberty, that were in
thraldom: unto Honor, that were dishonored. In Governance, you be our
Father, whom we well reverence: by free election, our Emperor, whom we will
obey: and in wisdom our soundest Judge, whose commau^deme^ts and counsels, we
will execute, as general Laws. Hereat, the Emperor releated, and with much
pain, retained the tears of his eyes, and (in the end) comforted the^, with
this Conclusion.

The Conclusion of AlexANDERS Oration, to the Cittizyns
I Am right glad, that your Protestation declares, that you yet hold some
portion of Virtue: which gives us hope, that the renown of this Noble Realm,
begun by Romulus, shall not end in you: And if you be constant in this
affection, we trust, right shortly to make the Fame thereof equal in
estimation, with the Reigns of any of our Progenitors. And now, I have fownd
again your old name whereby I will call you.

Ye Children and Successors of the virtuous Romans. I say, you victorious
people, branches of Romulus, subduers of Realms, patterns of virtue, and
prowess to all the world, mittigate your covetous appetites, abandon excessive
Usury, exceed not the bounds of your popular state, be charitable, and
merciful unto your own Contrymen, where their necessity may be relieved
with your abundance: Be you ashamed, that laborers, and rude people, should
condemn you of cruelty, for destroying of your Gentlemen (the chief
ornament, and defense of this noble City.) Remember, that if the state of
Senators do decay, the most virtuous of the Gentlemen are elected in their
places: So you, that shall equal them in virtue (for your substance only
cannot make you gentle) shall be advanced unto the state of Gentlemen,
according to your demerits.

Now have we no more to say unto you, but apply your selves to the ancient
and most laudable orders, as we shall endeavor our selves, by example and
diligence, to bring this City again unto perfection.

When the good Emperor had thus ended his Oration, he caused diverse of the
grauest Citizyns, to attend him at his Palace, where he commanded, that by
secret inquiry, they should learn how many Cittyzyns, by Usury, or other
corrupt bargaynyng, had (absolute possession, or Morguage of the Gentlemen's
Lands: and to certifye, (both) the names of the Vserers, and the Gentlemen so
distressed. Upon whose certificate, he dealed with the Creditors of the
Gentlemen, bestowyng a great portion of money out of his own Treasury,
toward a general agreement: as in the end, he concluded, that the
Creditors, should receive the residue of their Debtes, by a yearly pention out
of the Gentlemen's Lands: By which News, their Posterytie might recover, what
their unthriftiness had wasted. The Noble Emperor, having brought to pass
this hye benefit, for the Gentlemen of Rome, with the possession thereof: in
this loving Oration, he instructed them in the Duties of Gentlemen, and
(mildely) reprehended the Dishonours of their Reputation.

The Emperor Alexander his Oration, to the Gentle men of Rome.
GEntlemen of Rome, by the name of Gentlemen I salute you, as Hereditorie Title
of your Ancestors virtues, which I hope will always remain in your hearts:
How-be-it, too excessive prodigality, has much wasted your livings, and
impaired your credit. But with the blame of your lauiciousnes, I am bound (by
the woorking of pity) to show the cause thereof: Which (although it be no
excuse in Justice) yet it justly moves commiseration. The examples of our
predecessors wickedness, is more liuelye expressed in your works, then may be
showen by my words, and I hope, his worthy confusion, will be cause of your
speedy amendment. Yet, I hold it not amiss, to lay before your eyes, the
monstrous euilles, which you have learned of your late Emperor Heliogabalus:
that, comparing his wretched end, with his wicked reign, fear may reform,
what our loving affection wishes to be amended in you.

This vessel of abhominatio^, so exceeded in pride, that from top to toe, he
was attired in cloth of gold, pearl, and pretious-stones, Vices of
Helyogabalus
and never wore any garment more the^ once, from his bed chamber, unto the
place where he mounted unto his Coch, the walls were decked with tapestrie
full of great pearls, and precious stones. The way as he went, was strewed
with gold and silver, as one disdayning to tread upon earth like other men.
His Charyot was sometime drawn with tame Lions, sometimes with Elephantes, and
sometimes with marvelous fair Women. The Kings which he drew off his
fingers, he never put on again. The vessels of gold and silver, wherein he
was served, was evermore the sees of his seruitors. Such huge prodigality was
joined with his incomparable pride. His gluttony, and voluptuousnes was so
great, as near the Sea, his whole household was fed with most dainty fowls:
and being far within land, they were all served with all manner of fishes,
by Post brought alive from the Sea: Sometime he had for a general service,
pasties of Peacockes toonges, other while Partridges eggs, the heads of
Popiniayes, Fesauntes, and the most daintiest Birds: Neither was this
superfluity alone upon the Tables in his own Palace, but in self same
manner, his Lions, Gray-hounds, and other Dogs of pleasure were fed. He so much
esteemed of things that were dear and rare, that hearing there was but one
Phaenix in the world, he offered two thousand Marks to have it to his
Dinner.

His lechery was so insatiable, and withalso unclean, as common civility
forbids the report.

His Pusalanimitie was such, as he studied how to become a woman, and of most
notorious Strumpets, and Bawdes, he erected a Senate, and in a Capitol, for
the no^ce, he made unto them many Orations, and called them his Companions,
and fellow Soldiers.

That vice might have no stay, nor virtue any passage, he gave free Charters
to all men to use all manner of villainy. And Sabinus, Vlpianus, and other
learned and reverent Judges he banished from the administration of Justice.

He cruelly put to death many worthy personages, and amongst the people many
times let loose Lions, Bears, and other cruel Beasts. In fine, when his
monstrous pride, prodigallitie, and lechery, had consumed all his own
treasure, necessity and a naughty disposition, made him to sell the offices
of Justice. But his own familiar Servants and Soldiers, weary of his
abominations, slew him: and drawing his horrible Carren with hooks through the
City, they tied him to a stone of great weight, and threw him into Tyber, to
the end so vile a body should never be buried: Yet, your own eyes are Judges
that I say the truth. His death and funerals was as vile and filthy, as, what
I have said of his life, was sumptuous and rich.

I have laid the misery of his death before your eyes, that you should expel
the vices of his life forth of your hearts. It was the due of his beastlines,
and will be the reward of your insolent living without amendment.

You are yet young, and by prowess may recover more then you have by
prodigality wasted: A virtuous end repaireth the dishonors of a vicious life:
But shame lives, when lewd men are dead. A prodigal and voluptuous humor, I
know is hardly purged, because the norishments are many and sweet. But when I
consider, that you are Gentlemen, I straightwaies hope, that you will easilye
subdue these affections. There is nothing more precious to man then life, nor
nothing more fearful then death.

Yet the noble Roman Gentlemen your ancestors, in actions of honor,
preferred the last before the first. If you be heirs of their virtues, Usurers
cannot purchase that patrimony: And therefore, great is our hope, that you
will bridle mean affections, when they contemned the greatest. ROMULUS with a
weak strength, and invincible courage, first builded this famous City, and of
his name she is called to this day Room. Numa Pompilius that succeeded him,
both enlarged the bounds, and strengthened her, with many good laws and
orders: And in process of time, the wisdom of the Maiestrates, and valiancie
of her Gentlemen, made Rome, The Sovereign of Cities, the Beauty of the
earth, and Empress of the whole world: And so to this day had remained, had
not the horrible vices of her Emperors Nero, Caligula, Domitian, Comodus, and
Heliogabalus, eclipsed her glory, and polluted her people with abominations:
But virtue is able to perfect more then vice has deformed. We beseech the
Gods, that on our part there may be no defaulte, as we earnestly desite
reformation in you: And then (no doubt) Rome shall shortly have her ancient
honor, and you the reputation of Romulus heirs. This badge of pride, (...)
apparel (...)ye for sage players
Bravery in apparel, is necessary for base persons, that publicly in open
Theaters, present the personages of Emperoures, Kings, Dukes, and such
Heroycall Estates: For that they have no other mean to perform their action.
But the magnanimous Gentleman, carries honor in his cou^tinance, and not
countenance in his Garments.

CICERO discovered the Haughtiness of Caesar in his fore-heade.

ASTIAGES, saw a Kyngly mind in CYRUS, although, he were armed with a
Sheepehooke: man makes the Habyt, and not Habyt a man.

Drunkenness and Glotonie, Dronkennes and glotney, greatly disgraceth a
gentleman.
are foul maymes too Honor, and the greatest deformytie in a Gentleman:

Call Alexander, the great, to witness, who, after he had conquered (almost)
all the whole World, with the Sword, conquered hym-selfe with a Wine-potte:
So that, it is a question, whither he received more Honor, in over coming the
mighty Darius, of Persia, or Dishonor, by being subdued, by the Persians Vices:
If I were a Judge, Alexander, should find a seueare Judgment: for, by his
valiancie, he did but conquer his ennemies, and in his drunkenness, he slew
his friends, and hastened his own death.

Prodigalytie, is so sharp a vengeance, The vengeance of Prodigality
as there needs no Law to chastise the Prodigal man, he does so severely
punish himself. Epicharidus, the Athenian, in six Days consumed his
Patrimony, and al his life after, lived a Beggar.

Pasicirus, king of Cyprus, first (prodigally) spent his Treasure, afterward,
sold his Realm, and (lastly) died (miserably) in the City of Amathuntus,

The prodigal Cleops, King of Egypt, was driven unto such necessity, as he
was feign to live of the dishonest use of his Daughters body.

If prodigality bring Kings to this exigent, who have many supplies; it
speedilye ruineth the richest Subject: yea, (which is worst) their recovery is
as uncertain, as their undoing is certain: For by color of their
Reuennewes, they run in debt the triple value of their Lands. You Gentlemen
of Rome, know this better by experience, then by my information, you feel the
smart of prodigality: by riot you were dtyuen to morgage your Lands, and had
lost the same, and your selves, had not our liberality redeemed both: our
loving care to prevent, that follows after prodigality, which is this
perilous danger:

Men, being (by prodigalytie) Enemies of their own and posteryties
prospetytie: by want and Necessytie, become Enemies of their Countries peace
and welfare, I say, fear of this mischief, and love of your weldoynge, has
repurchased your Lands: receive of us, the Possession thereof, as a Cognizance
of our love, and desire that you may floorysh: Keep your Honor with your
Lands, least our severe displeasure, be heaped upon your vndoynges: Let
virtuous Pollycies and Documents be your studdie: see that your exercise, be
Feats of Chiualrye: use your hands, to the managynge of Arms, The dishonor
of Dicing.
and not your Fyngers to the trippynge of Dice, a Pastyme, so villainous, that
(notwithstanding) the loss be doubtful, the dishonor is certain.

GOBILON, the Athenian, being sent Ambassador, to make League with the
Corrynthians, who, findyng the Governors of Corrynth, playinge at the Dice,
departed without dispatch of his business: saying, He would not stain the
Glory of the Spartianes, in making League with Dicers. The King of the
Persians, sent goulden Dice to king Demetrius, for a reproache of his
Lightness. Cicero, in the Senate House, put Anthonius to scilence, in saying,
he was a Dicer: And (truly) so infamous a pastime, neither beseems the
Gravity of the Magistrate, nor Honor of a Gentleman, for that the gain, is
laden with dishonest practices, and the loss, with unquiet passions.

Learn by the Co^tinencie of the mighty Alexander, and the noble Romain
Scipio, to subdue carnal affections: worthy examPls of continency
the one, having (by fortune of war, the possession of king Darius Wife, the
most beautiful Lady of all ASIA, he neither suffered himself, to be
conquered by her beauty, nor the Queen to be dishonored by his victory.
The other, having like Advantage of the Paragon of Spain, with the semblable
virtue, vanquished his Affections.

On the contrary part, know ye, that Rome (of late) has had more Emperors
brought unto the Sepulture, by Lechery, then in many hundred years before, by
the Lance. Gentlemen, my Kinsmen and Companions. I admonish you from
naughtiness, by the falls of Emperors, kings, and Heroycall Estates: that
you may know, in the punishment of vice, the Gods, neither fear nor spare,
the mightiest of men. On the contrary part I counsel you to goodness, by
the Counsel of our dignity, assuring you, by the exercise of Virtue, meaner
then Gentlemen, become Emperors of Kingdoms. We have no more to say: but
that the Gods impresse in your hearts, the counsel we have blown into your
ears, and that your Emperor Alexander, may behold Rome, Rome again: And
you (Gentlemen of Rome) worthy the reputation of your Noble Ancestors.

When the good Emperor, had ended his Oration: the Gentlemen, overcome with
the Princely favor and affection of Alexander, as (also) voounded, with the
knowledge of their former lasciviousness, discovered a great dismaye of
Spirit:

In the end, with abased Countenaunces, upon their knees, they humbly
acknowledged his gracious benefits: confessed their own unworthiness, and
faithfully promised, to obey his fatherly Counsels. The good Emperor, then,
demanded, if they would be contented, that their Debts should be paid by
yearly pentions out of their Lands, and if they would (sparingely) live,
according unto the proportion of the rest? They al aunswerd with one voice: Yea
(noble Emperor) else were we accursed.

The prudent Alexander, having by these grave Orations, sounded the
inclynations, of the three Estates of Rome. vz. The Senators: The Gentlemen,
and the Citizyns: forsook not ye aduau^tage of the peoples good dispositions,
but while the Virtue of his wise Counselles was workyng in their hearts, he,
with the Advice of his grave Senators, devised many good Laws, for the
abandonyng and banishment of Vices forth of the City: assuryng himself, that
where Discipline was wanting, the sowndest counsel, purged not corrupt manners:
so that, to the love which his Affabylitie had won, he joined dread, through
severe executio^s, of these profitable laws.

Laws, Pains, and Penalties, set down by Alexander Seuerus, to punish
Offenders against the Weale-publique.
In primis For that the Tauarnes, Dicing-houses, and the Stews, Tauernes
stews anb dicing houses
were ye Nurses of all vices, and the Sanctuaries of vicious persons, he
suppressed all such, as were of evil fame: saying* That, if the Owners could
not live, but upon th^^ndoynge of others, it were reason, they should starve,
by the necessytie of their idle bryngyng up.

Item: He commanded that in the Tauarns, Open bothes in Tauernes.
there should be no other, the^ open Boothes, yt the Censors, might see the
behauiors and conditions of ye people that haunted them.

Item: He commanded, that no Gentleman, Gentlemen, for bidden, Tauernes
Romayne, should resort to any of these Houses, upon pain, to lose the name
of a Gentleman.

Item: He commanded, that no Senator, should have more then four Disshes at
his Dinner* Glottony and Dronkenes
nor Gentleman, or Citizyn, more then three: And that, the Common people,
should feed (only) of one Dish, of fish or flesh: saying, that Glotonie and
Drunkenesse, not (only) consumed the wealth of the Weal public, but also,
the health of the people.

Limitation* of Apparel
Item: He commanded yt no Gentleman, Romain, should have more then three Suits
of Apparel: one, for Ordinary days: one other for Festival times: and the
third, for the entertainme^t of Ambassadors: alleging, that all these were
necessary, and what so ever was more, was superfluous. This Law was also set
down by Philip le Bell, to reform the pride of France, and by Fardinando,
King of Arraon, to husbandry the small pentions of the Knights of the Land,
which order he him self erected.

Dyce made bond slaves
Item He enacted, if any Gentleman Roman, or Citizin (...)ome, by playing at
Dice, hau^ting of Tauarns, or any other vnthrifrie exercise, had consumed his
patrimony and substance, and was indebted more the^ he was able to satisfy:
that the^, it should be lawful for the Creditor, to take the part offe^ding,
and to hold him as his bo^d-slaue, so long as the service and labor of his
body were thought sufficient for his debt. Were this a law in England, I fear
me, at this present, we should have more Gentlemen bondmen, then Ye men
trust^e (...).

Lymitation but usury
Item, For that Usury was the decay of a huge number, he enacted, yt no Vserer,
should take (after the co^putation of their money, more then ye allowance,
of.iii.li, i. s. for a. C. ii, for a year. And yt he which refused to deliver
his money at this rate, should from the^cefoorth, be held unworthy ye name of a
Romain, or to take any benefit by the Weale-publique. But should, by ye Cehso^s,
be departed of ye name of a Citizin, and, for ever, after ^huld be (...) on the
crime of Ingratitude.

Item, From hence forth, Money lent to dice players without hope to be recovered.
no necessity be considered in them that consume their substance, in Dice
playing, outrageous expenses or lechery: who so ever lends to them, let it be
at his peril and without hope of remedy. But unto him whom perverse fortune,
long sickness, service, frendeship, thieves, Assinement of Creditors for
distressed persons.
or oppressors have brought unto poverty: If any such come unto the Provost of
the City, and declare his necessity, and whereof it proceeded, upon the oath
of one Se^ator, and two honest Co^moners, that his words are true, ye Provost
shall assign one rich man of the City to lend him a po^^^n of money, taking
assurance for the payment thereof, for the gain before limited.

Item, He enacted, that if any Citizin of Rome, were found idle, by the space
of one whole day, unless, Idle persons set a work
upon a Festival. Day, having no lawful nor approved excuse: that then, he
should be first whipped, and after, by the Conseruators, he should be set to
the trade that he was of, and for every day, that he was openly seen, to be
idle, the person, to whom he was committed, for one month, should set him to
what labor he pleased, as his slave or bondman, giuyng him, meat and drink,
only.

Item: He commanded, For Corrup-of victuales
that the Controwlers of the Markettes, should be honest men, and not
coueitous: and (for the auoydyng of the Infection) that they should diligently
forsee, that the Victualles, which were sold, should be sweet and wholesome for
to be eaten.

Late sappors,
Item: To avoid cause of Infection, and horrible Diseases, he prohibited
Ingurgitations, Bankets, late Suppers and long.

^aysome occupations.
Item: He commanded, that men of corrupt and noisome Occupations, should dwell
out of the common passage of the people: And that the streets of the Cities,
should be kept very cleanly and sweet.

Sweet keeping of baynes
Item, He commanded that the Baynes, by discreet keepers, should be kept very
neat and sweet, that neither the eye nor Nose, should find any thing unpleasant
or noisome. By which cleanliness, Rome was preserved from sundry sicknesses
which (undoubtedly) do grow of corrupt exhalations, venting out of men's
bodies.

Hospitals for poor people*
Item, Of his own charge, he builded three Hospitalles, to relieve the Aged,
blind, decreaped, and other poor people, infected with incurable Diseases

Cure for deseased Vacabondes.
Item: He commanded, that unto a number of young diseased vacabunds, there
should be ministered, a thin Diet, an excessive labor, and cleanly lodging:
saying that the contrary, were the causes of their Diseases, and, therefore,
this the most hopeful Medicine, to recover their health.

Provision of Corn,
Item: He commanded, that all the Forfaytures which were levied, upon the
Gooddes of Offenders against the Law, should be employed upon Corn for the
provision of the poor.

Item: He commanded, that no man should wear in his Apparayle, no manner of
Stuff, A law for The setting of Poor people a work.
other then was made within the City of Rome.

The like Statute was established in all the Cytties of Italye: by means
whereof, Rome and all the other Cities were stoared of good Workmen, and the
poor people, no excuse for Idleness.

Item: He commanded, Vitayling and bordell-houses
that in vittailing and Bordel-houses, the Doors should not be open from the
Sun-settyng until the Sun-risyng: by which Pollycie, the Conseruators knew,
what manner of people repaired unto them.

Item: Every Cittizyn, was straightly forbidden, to eat or drink in any
Tavern, Cyttizyns for bydden. Tauernes.
or vittayling House: which Houses, were (only) tolerated, for the
intertainment of Strangers, which repaired unto the Cyttie about lawful
business,

Item: He commanded, that all corrupt and deceitful Bargayners, Corrupt and
deceatfull Bargayners. Punished as Petty theaues
should be punished with the Whyp, as Thieves, that stole privily, without
any violence: affyrming, that it was but a fantasy, and a laughyng-matter, to
make a difference, between stealyng and deceitful bargayninge. But, were this
a Law with us, we should have more weeping in London, then laughing in three
of the greatest Shiers of England.

Item: He commanded: unequal comparysons
that if any bace condicioned person, by the presumption of wealth, should make
any saucy comparison with any Gentleman Romayne: immediately, the said
Franklyne, should become the Gentleman's Bondslaue, with whom he compared,
until the said Franklyn, had made the Gentleman his superior, as well in
wealth, as dignytie: And this Law hindered many quarrelles, which (otherwise)
would have grown of unequal comparysons.

Plays abolyshed
Item: He commanded, that the Plays, called Florales and Luberalos, and the
beastly Ceremonies of Isis, should be banished and abolished, as the most
venymous Alectiues and styrrers of Lechery,

Item: He ordained, yt if any man were found playing at the Dice, Diceplayers.
he should be taken, for a frantic or a natural fool, which could not govern
himself and his gooddes and land, should be committed to sage and discreet
Governors, until he were again enabled by the Senate.

Unto these Laws, was added this Confyrmation.
These Laws, decreed by the Senate, enacted by the people, comfirmed by the
imperial Majesty, be (for ever) established: and (never) by any other Law,
Custom or Ordinance, be abolyshed. And who, that with violence, resists
against them, let him be taken for a Rebel and Ennemie unto the Weale-publique.

Of the great VVisdome of ALEXANDER, in electyng of Grave Counselors,
Officers, and Admynistrators of Justice.
THE Noble and virtuous Emperor (prudently) forsawe, that the seuerest laws,
were (without execution) but like unto painted Fire, which gives no heat: or
(as the Philosopher, Cleanthes says:) Like unto Cobwebs, through which, the
Hornets break when the small Flies are entangled. And (truly) without due
Administration, law is like to a Backswoorde, the edge whereof, smites the
poor, and the blunt back, the higher powers. But to avoid this parcialytie:
the good Alexander, made choice of such worthy Maiestrates, as (plainly)
refuted this Maxim of Aristotle.

Amor et odium, et proprium commodum,
Semper facient Iudices, non cognoscere verum.
In Englysh, thus:
Love, Hate, and private gain,
From upright truth, the Judge does always strain
None of these Affections, could (neither) blind their eyes, nor bind their
hands: They measured Justice, neither by the mightiness nor meandness of the
Person, but by the equity of the cause: and it stood them in hand, to deal
thus uprightly: for if any corruption were found in their Judgments, the
Emperor himself, did (severe) Justice upon the unjust Maiestrate, that
abused his Auctorytie, and injured the people: let Vetronius Turinus; be
example, for many.

This Turinus, was a man of much Honor, great learning and wisdom: and for
many virtues, was of the Emperor (singularly) favored: but, abusing the
Emperor and his own good fortune, under color of often and familiar
conference with Alexander, he received many Brybes to obtain great suits, above
his power to compass: which being proved against him, the Emperors sentence
was: That in the Market place, he should be bownde unto a Stake, and with a
Smoke of green Sticks and wette Stubble, should be smoothred to death: And
during the time of his Execution, he commanded a Beadell to cry: With Fume
let him die, that Fumes has sold.

Thus, no known Offender, escaped the vengeance of his seuerytie: and (which
won him as much love, as his Justice did fear,) he encouraged and comforted
good and virtuous men, with many great gifts and favors.

That Rome might prosper, by the confusion of vice: Conseruators and their
chardge.
First, he ordained (according to the counsel of PLATO,) threescore grave
persons, which were named, CONSERVATORS of the Weale-publique: Education of
children.
for every Tribe had two: Room being divided into thirty Tribes: whose
Office, was (chiefly) to see, that the children of the Romans, were well
brought up and instructed, according unto the capacities of their wits, from
the Age of.vii. years, unto.xvi. years: and that, in their Pastimes, plays
and recreations, were nothing dishonest.

Item: That the Maidens, during the said Age, Education of maidens
were brought up in shamefastnes, humblenes, and the exercise of Huswifrye: and
that they should not be seen forth of their Fathers-houses, but (only) in the
Temples.

Item: their charge was, Riotous house holders
to controwle Howse-houlders of every degree, if there were fownde any excess
in their fare, or cost upon their own, or their Wives Apparayle, more then by
the Laws, was limited: or if they were Company-keepers with any riotous or
dishonest person.

Item: Twice (by the week) they were bownd to make Presentment of the
Disorders which they fownd, unto the Provost of the City, Presentation,
twice by the week.
reserving unto themselves, the education of the Children: which
they-them-selues reformed, by giving of sharp Admonytion unto their Parents.

The Provost punished such, Provost of all the City.
as offended in other Articles, against the Statutes and Ordinances, in such
cases provided.

Item: The Emperor augmented the number of Praetors and Questors, Pretores and
Questors
but appoin^ted every one a several Charge.

Item: He made choice, Puruiours of grain
of very honest men to be Purueiours for grain, but changed them every year,
least, continuance corrupted their consciences.

Item: He apoincted Baylyffes, Receivers, Surueiours, and such like Officers,
but favored them not, saying: they were necessary evils: And if they hastily
gathered much riches, he would take away all that they had. Telling them. Let it
suffice, that you have taken so long pleasure with my goods: and beware that
you take not from other men unjustly, least I be more angry with you.

Item: To be Judges of these Officers, as also of the behauiours of all the
people of Rome, Censors, and their office.
saving the common people, were they Senatores, Gentlemen or Citizens. This
prudent Emperor appointed two of his privy Counsel, worthy and grave
Senators, to be Censors in Rome, whose names were Fabius Sabinus, and Catillius
Seuerus. The office of the Censors, were to note the manners of every person,
above the degree of the common people.

So that if a Knight, Judge, or Senator, did any thing unseeming the Honor of
their Degree, their charge was, to degrade him of his office, or Dignity. In
which, they used such rigor, as no man might (lawfully) boast of favor. In
so much, as ye Emperors Palace was not free from their jurisdiction. For they
meeting with Aurelius Philippus, (who was sometime the Emperors shoolmaster,
and after wrote his life) riding in a Chariot, looking to be saluted as a
Senator, they forthwith executed an ancient law upon the said Philippus:
which was, that no bondman, although he were manumissed, should be a
Senator: And at that time, it was lawful for no person under the degree of a
Senator to ride in a Chariot. Philippus was sometime a bondman, and
therefore, for breach of this law, the Censors sent him first to prison, and
after, forbad him to come to the Emperors palace, but (only) a foot, and his
copped Cappe upon his head: which fashion was only used of them that were
enfranchised. Some of the Noblemen thought, the Censors dealt very sharply
with Philippus, considering, that he was a man of much honesty, and great
learning, and so certefied the Emperor. But the Emperor approved their
Justice, and answered:

If the common wealth may evermore have such officers, in short space, there
shall be found in Room more men worthy to be Emperors, than I (at my first
coming) found good Senators.

And undoubtedly, where the offenses of the best are never pardoned, the worst
will amend for fear of extreme vengeance. The proof appears in Alexanders
government: who (by the severe execution of the laws, so brideled the
dispositions of the wicked, that it may be said, they grew to be virtuous
rather by custom, then good inclination. Yea, it is written, that his
severity thus much profited: As leading a great army against Artaxerses, the
Persians, said, he had brought an army of Senators, rather than of Soldiers,
when at his coming to ye Empire, the Senators (many of them) were as
dissolute as common Soldiers. A wise policy of Alexander.
And one especial cautle he used in the search of men's behauiours, he
would many times in disguysed habyte, with diverse others by him especially
elected, take upon him the Office of the Censors: and in every corner, he had
(secretly) such faithful Explorers, as men's proper Houses, were no Couerts
for naughty practices, nor the Senat-house, for partial Judgments. And (by
this Pollycie) he discovered many naughty matters, besides common trespasses:
as the Treason of Oninius, the false accusation of Geminus, by his Lybertines,
or Copyholders: as (also) of the mortal malice of Duillius and Gotta,
toward the said Geminus. In so much, as the people, seeing nothing that was
evil, could escape his vengeance, al men endeavored to do well, to purchase his
favor.

King Henry the seventh, Imitator of Alexanders government.
THE (most Noble and prudent) King, King HENRY, the seventh, the Queens (most
excellent Majesty's Graundfather, and Root of Englandes happiness, was a true
imitator, of this (most worthy) Emperors government: by whose singular
wisdom, England, which at the beginning of his Reign: was a deformed, and
decreped Commonwealthe, by reason of the long time of the Cyuylwarres which
during syx Kings Reigns made barrayne feildes, and fatt Churche-yardes)
before his death, repossessed her Ancient Virtues, renown and prosperytie. So
that it is a question, whither this famous Realm is more bownd to eternize his
glorious Memory, in regard of his Prowess, or Pollycie: when by the one, he
planted Peace in her bowelles, and by the other, banished war from the
Terrytories. He knew, that to reform so disordered an estate, it was more
needful to execute, then to make Laws: and (therefore) not trustyng the
corruption of common Informers, who, for lucre or gain, attemptyng many
vexations against poor men, and for fear, seek to please the ritche:
Inclynation of Common Informers
he committed the execution of the Penal Laws, to the charge of these two
worthy Cou^sellers, fir Richard Empson, Knight, and Richard Dudley, Esquier:
who so severely chastened the rich and great Offenders, as they stirred the
inconstant co^munaltie, after the death of the virtuous Henry the seventh, to
seek their lives: who had their wills, for fear of Commotion, thease two
worthy Maiestrates wear beheaded: And (undoubtedly) their deaths, is a
testimony of as great virtue, as their lives, a Monument of Justice: for the
multitude, The lewd affections, of Common people.
are the mortal Enemies of their own welfare, and friends and followers of
their own confusion. One said to Antisthenes: The people speaks much good of
you: Why? said he: what hurt have I done? As who should say: they seldom
praise, but such as do evil: No Ethnicke, deserved to live, better then
Socrates, yet the people would have him dead. The Athenians had a Law, every
year, by the most voices of the people, for ten years, to banysh two of their
principal Maiestrates: On a time, a poor man, came with a white Paper in his
hand to Aristides, the just, and willed him to write: Banish Aristides. Why?
(quoth he:) do thou know Aristides? No: (quoth the other:) Has Aristides
done thee or any of thy friends, hurt? Neither (quoth he) but I will have
Aristides banished. The worthy Scipio was banished by the people, whom he often
had saved.

I omyt Themistocles, Photion, and many mo, whom Histories record, to show
the light Judgments of Commons, Dante, the Italian Poet, saithful truly of
them: it is seldom seen, that the people cry not:

Viua la mia morte, innoia la mia vita: Let live my death: let die my life:
Yea, those great estates, that seek to please the people, for the most part,
have had the ends of enemies to their Country.

When Cicero saw that Caesar was in hye favor with the people of Rome, he
cried out: It is great pity, that the affability of Caesar, should be the
overthrow of the Weale-publique. And (truly) Cicero, prophesied rightly: for,
by their favor, Caesar judged the Judgments of the Senate, and sent the good
and grave Cato to Prison, whose virtues, obtained reverence of the woorst
livers.

But (notwithstanding) the Affections of the multitude, coueiteth their own
vndoynges, yet their encouragement proceeds of greater capacyties:

And (therefore) the ready way to keep them in awe, is (severely) to punysh
their Chief-taynes.

In all tumultes, it is (evidently) seen, that if their Captains yield, they
run away: if their Incouragers be dismayde, they sing, Peccaui: do Justice
upon the great Offenders, and the meaner will soon amend: Alexander (in his
Government) found it true: who, in the Execution of the Laws, made no
difference of persons: save, that, to the inferior people, he was (evermore)
most merciful.

FINIS.
AN ADDITION: OR TOVCHSTONE for the Time: exposyng the daingerous Mischiefs,
that the Dicyng Howses (commonly called) Ordinary Tables, and other (like)
Sanctuaries of Iniquity, do daily breed:

Within the Bovvelles of the famous-CITIE of LONDON.

By George Wherstones, Gent.

Imprinted at London, by Richard Jones.

MAIESTRATES OF CITIES. The dangerous Mischiefs, that the DICING-HOVSES, and
other like Sanctuaries of iniquity, do breed in the City of LONDON.
IT is sufficiently expressed, that, by the virtue, diligence, and wisdom, of
the right Noble Emperor, Alexander: Rome, (the most ouglye, and monsterous
Commonwealth of the world, so was she deformed, with horrible and beastly
vices, fostered by Heliogabalus, and other wicked Emperors,) was brought unto
such perfection, as she might (lawfullye) be entitled: The Temple of the
Gods: The Fowntayne of Virtue, and, The Nurce of Learning: so free was the
Exercise of Piety, The wounds of a Common wealth
Justice, Temperance, and all other Divine, Moral, and Heroycall virtues. In
curyng of which dangerous Infirmyties of the Commonwealth, Alexander
performed the Offices of a skylfull Physician and Surgion: he did not
(ignorantly) apply Medicine, to the outward sore, until he had searched the
inward cause: He found, the outward wounds of the Weale-publique, was Pride,
Prodigalytie, Dicynge, Drunkenness, Lechery, Usury, Coueitousnes etc. The
suppressing of which Passions, consisted not (alone) in chastisment of
Offenders: He (prudently) foresawe, that ye Boatman lost much labor, that with
a Dish, stood all day ladyng out of water, when a quarter of an hours work,
would mende the breach of his Boat, which was the cause, although the water
were the annoyance: he knew, that every River had a Spryng, every Disease, a
nooryshing Humor, and every vice, a special succor: Reason instructed him,
that no Thief would be so bold, as to rob by the hye way, if he had no Covert
to shroud him: If there were no Brothell Houses, Shame would delay Lechery. But
for Tauerns and tiplyng Boothes, Drunkardes should be sober against their wills:
But for Ordinary tables, Dicers should (many times) be idle, or better
occupied, then in swearyng and consumyng their Patrimony: These causes being
stopped, the vicious (perforce) must change their course. And therefore, the
good Emperor, as the best remedy for the maladies of the Commonwealth,
purged Rome, of thease Sanctuaries of lewd and dishonest persons, as the
perfect mean to cure their vile and naughty dispositions. And (certainly) his
Government, Order, and Discipline, may be, A Myrrour for Magistrates of all
Cities: who are like to find no lack of Disorders, to exercise his Politic
Orders: for, in the heart of the best governed Cities, Vice has her Mansion,
as a Core in the inward substance of the sowndest Quince. But, leauyng the
Discovery of the Infyrmities of Foreign Cities, London, the Capitol City
of England (and at this day, the Paragon of Christendom,) prowdely bears
many a dangerous Infyrmytie, which, the Wisdom of the Maistrates, must
(speedely) heal, or else, ouershortely, the wickedness of her people, will
abate her prosperytie.

A Remembrance, of the Disordered State of the Commonwealth, at the Queens
Majesty's coming to the Crown.
THE Queens most Excellent Majesty, (even our Gracious Queen Elizabeth) by
Gods grace Sovereign Lady of this famous City, and of England, France and
Irelande (in advantage,) sole Princess of Peace, and second to no annoincted
king, in the exercise of all the Capitol Virtues: let Gods blessings be my
Testimony, (plentifully) heaped upon her Exellencie, and (for her Holiness
sake) upon her true Subjects, and many a hungrye Nation, besides: Her sacred
Majesty, (I say) at such time, as she was crowned with the Sovereignty of
these Realms, fownd ENGLAND, and (specially) LONDON, far out of temper,
(besides Cardinal Superstition) with carnal and unchaste infections of Rome,
as (also) puffed or half poisoned, with the pride of Spain.

For the saluynge of which, and all other Infirmyties, of the Commonwealth,
her Godly wisdom, with the Public assent of her Subjects, established many
Medicinable Laws, whereby, all the priuye Maladies of the Commonwealth, might
receive perfect cure, if the Penal Laws were as severely punished, as they be
(prude^tly) established.

Negligence in Maiestrates causes bouldenes in evil lyuers.
But, the (only) lack of this Admynistration is, the Maiestrate punissheth,
but what is presented, and the Injured (in many wrongs) sustain their losses
without complaynt: Thus, lack of diligence, bouldneth the evil lyuers to
offend, with Halters about their necks.

The godly Divines, in public Sermons, and others, in printed Books, have
(of late) very sharply inuayed against Stage plays (improperly called,
^nvaying against stage plays.
Tragedies, Co^medies, and Moralles,) as the Sprynges of many vices, and the
stumblyng-blockes of Godliness and Virtue: Truly, the use of them upon the
Saboth day, and the abuse of them at al times, with scurilytie and unchaste
co^ueiance* ministered matter sufficient for them to blame, and the Maiestrate
to reform.

Playinge at dice invented by the devil
But, there are in the Bowels of this famous City, far more dangerous
Plays, and little reprehended: that wicked Plays of the Dice, first invented
by the Devil (as Cornelius Agrippa, writes,) and frequented by unhappy men:
The detestable Root, upon which, a thousand villainies grow.

Ordinary Tables Nurses of Iniquity
The Nurses of thease (worse then Heathnysh) Hellish exercise, are Places
(called) Ordinary-tables: Of which, there are, in London, more in number, to
honor the Devil, then Churches to serve the living God: neither are they
(improperly) named: for, in very truth, Difference of ordinary Tables
they are the Ordinary Intertayners of naughty persons, and the Sinckes of
all abhomynation. But some will hold it convenient, that I make a Difference
of Ordinary Tables, because, of the civil usage and Orders of some of the
keepers, as in respect of the Honorable and worshipful repair unto them. In
very truth, in some of these places, Vice is so modestly quallyfied, as they
may well be called: tolerable euylles. And (although) Socyetie be a pleasing
Affection, I hope, (as occasion will fall out) to satisfy the better sort of
Gentlemen, that, the refraynynge of the best of these badde Houses, will be
more profitable, Honorable and pleasant, then the frequentyng of them.

The namyng of the ciuiller sort, of these Houses, I omyt: because, in
reportyng of the viler sort, and horrible vices that they foster, is far from
my intent: either in name, or figure, to discipher any person that keeps
them, or any Guest that haunteth them: This work is not made particulerly to
blame any person, but generally to blason abuse.
protestyng before God and man, that my labor searches the root of this
foul ympostume, which vomiteth a number of several filthy colored
Corruptions: only, to admonish the greener sort of Gentlemen, who are aptest
to receive the Infection, and to lay before the Magistrate, the Poison of
thease Ulcers: to whose wisdoms, the cure belongs: and in this travel, I
suppose, I deserve well of the worst livers, in that I (charitably) admonysh
them, to reform the euylles, that Time may discover, by their undoing: And so
to my purpose,

THere are within the Subvrbes of London, diverse worthy Houses, Innes of the
Court, places of much reverence.
called, Innes of the Court and of the Chau^cerie: Places, where the Laws of
this Realm, are (publicly) read, studied and learned: Places, of much
Honor, and Reputation, as well, in respect of the Reuerentnesse of the
Personages, which govern them, as (also) for the exercise of the Laws)
which are the strength and Ornaments of every well governed Commonwealth,)
every Gentleman, and (almost) Yeman of Abylitie, sends the ripest witted of
his Children, unto some one of thease Houses, to study the common Laws of
England. And (truly) the good Father, in this charge, discharges the love of
a Father toward his Son, and the duty of a friend, toward his Country:
for by such as are learned in the Laws (if they abuse not their knowledge)
besides an especial benefit and reputation, which they (privately reap) unto
themselves, the Ignorance of their Neighbors where they dwell, ^^^^^ng houses
in a hindera^ce to the stud e of the law
is (profitably) instructed: But, by reason of Dicyng-howses; and other
Alectiues too unthriftiness, the good Father, which is at charge, to make his
Son a Lawier, to do his Country service, through the looseness of the
Son (many times) spends his money to the vndooyng of his posterytie. One
scabbed sheep infecteth a hole flock


The swarm of Unthrifts, which live upon Shifts, in, and within the City
of London (first seize upon these Yonglynges: by their lewd conversation, they
draw them from Studdie, and do acquaint them with these wicked Ordinaries:

Wheare, the Bravery of the Company, the glee and Revel that they keep, Dye
ing houses, causes of pride
were able to bring a stayde man unto their Society, but are sure to inchaunt
a light yongman, which comes (rawly) out of ye cou^rey. What follows? Pride
(straightwayes) infecteth him with desire to be as brave as the best:

Well: if he have living, either in possession or possybilitie, he shall find
sweet Baits to choke him. Most of these wicked places, Three dangerous
gwestes belonging to ordinary tables
noorish three Guestes that will soundly bowrd this unexperienced young
Gentleman, and of his abylitie will maintain them selves. These be the names of
their faculty.

The brave Shifter: the Bawd, and the Broaker.

The brave Companion, who in Apparayle, Description of brave shyfters
countenance, and bouldnes, will cheacke-mate with men of right good worship,
and living, when he (perhaps) in a Green Thycket gets a Masked face, a
Pystoll, and a Whypcorde, and has Inheritance in the I Will of Snatch:
Aduentureth to Cape Gripe: I know not by what conning shifts. But if I did, I
think it necessary to conceal them, least the instruction would prove more
hurtful to the evil inclined, then the Admonition, profitable, to the well
disposed: But this, I am assured, and many a Gentleman's undoing, witnesses as
much: that these expert Shifters, by falce Dice, slipperie casting, or some
other nice Slight: although all the Day, they dallye with young Nouices.
Brave shiffters live up on the cosenage of play
as a Catte does with a Mouse: yet, before Bed time, they will make their
Purses as empty of Money, as the Catte the Mouses headde of Brains.

If a man had none other Fly suckynge of him, he should find, a few of
Ordinary Dinners would suppe a great deal of Substance. But, as a slain
Carckase, in an open Field, is a Pray pray, for many kinds of vermyn. Even
so, a plain minded man using these deceitful houses, is an assured pray for all sorts of shyfters.

The man that is enticed to be a Dicer, of his own accord will be a
Horemaster: But (say you) if he have not acquaintance, the banishment of the
Stews will keep him chaste. But say as the Proverb is. Money will hyre a guide
to go to the Deuile: And (certes) as daily gheasts at ordinary Tabls, a man
shall find neat Bawdes, Brokers of Bawdry. haunters of Dycing houses*
that only live upon the brocage of love, fellows that will procure
acquaintance for a dumb man. These be no bashful Besogniers, but such as
glory in their faculty. Their common talk shall be Ribaldry, and matter of
their profession. To conclude, he that has advantage, slily blows a meeting
of fair women into my young masters ears: His company needs not to be
desired. Incontinent desire makes him wood of their society. Gods blood, lets
go, straight he cries, and with more haste, then good speed, they go to
some blind brothel-house where (peradventure) for a Pottle or two of wine, the
imbracement of a painted Harlot, and the French Pockes for a reckoning, the
Punie pays forty shillings, Cossonage of ^awdes.
and yet my brave Besognier has a more costly reckoning to give him. He will
accompany him familierly up and down the City, and in the end will come
unto a Mercers or a Gold-smythes shop, with whom he had before set his match,
he will cheapen, Velvet, Satin, Iuels, or what him lyketh, and tender his own
and companions credit for payment: He will with so boulde a countenance ask
this frendshyp of the Gentleman, as the other shall be to seek of excuse to
deny him: Well, although the peniworthes of the one, be not very good, the
payment of the other, is sure to be current: thus, by insatiable Riot, whereof,
Dicyng Houses are the Fowntaynes, the welthiest of our young Gentlemen, are
soon learned to sing.

Dives eram dudum, sed tria, me fecerunt nudum,
Alia, vina, venus, tribus his, sum factus egenus.
I wealthy was of late, though naked now you see:
Three things have changed mine estate. Dice, Wine, and Lechery.
But (without doubt) the infection of thease Tabling Houses, is so pleasant,
that a man which has lost all his money, by the exercise of them, even, in the
place of his undoing, he will (moneylesse) be an idle looker on, of other men's
unthriftiness.

Then seazeth the third of thease Gheastes upon this needy Gentleman, which
is: The Broaker: Brokers for money and their Cossonage.
who is (either) an old Ba^ckrupt Citizin: or some smoothe condicioned
unthrifty Gentleman, far in debte: some one of these will help him to
credit, with some of their Creditors, with a single protestation of mere
courtesy: But (by your favor) upon this double vzance: the Citizyn Broaker,
after deduction for his own pains, consideration for the time given, and
loss in sellyng of the wares considered: will bring him. L V. pounds, current
money, for a. C-pownds good debt: The Gentleman Broaker, will deal more
Caualiero-like: he will be bownde with him for a.C, pownds, shaarynge the Money
between them, not without solemn protestation, faithfully to discharge his
own fifty powndes, and (if need be) the whole hundred powndes: Assurance
(trust me) as good as a Statute Staple, and a measure of his foot, as sure as
either. But, let all this mischief go: here is want supplied, which breaks
Brazen walls: and Money received, which betrayeth Kings. blinds Judges,
and judges Justice: and for the same, but Incke, Wax and Parchement,
delivered: Mary (sir) a merye exchange: a merry Exchange (in deed) if a man
should (always) be so busied in receiuyng, as there might be no leisure fownde
for repayment: A good lesson for young Gentlemen.
But (unhappy young Gentleman) what so thou be that art thus matched: though
thy coueitous love of Money is (lightly) such, as thou had rather become
Debtor for forty powndes, then to spare forty shyllynges out of thy own
Purse: yet learn this Lesson (as a sound Counsel:) that thou weart better give
one of these Franions, ten pownds, then to be bound for fiftene: for, what so
remains, thou sauest, when all that thou venturest, thou loosest: and be thou
sure, though thou will find no leisure to satisfy thy covenant, thy Creditor
will work thee an Arrest, that shall give thee little ease, and less
Liberty, until he be fully contented and paid. Prodigality a passion
incurable.
But al in vain Medicine is applied to incurable Maladies: as smallie avails
good Counsel given unto the Prodigal.

^ib. de liberalit
Prodigalytie and Coueitousnesse, are two extreme Passions, and as violent are
their cures: Begerie, is the end of Prodigalytie, and Death, of Coueitousnesse:

Yet, as Iouius Pontanus says, the Coueitous man is the worst of both: for he
does no man (not so much as himself) good with his goods: when the Prodigal, by
the undoing of himself, inricheth many. Thus, what may be best said of
Prodigalyte, concludes an undoing of him-self and posterytie. The famous
Lawier Vlpianus says: the prodigal man, neither observes time, nor makes end
of riot, until riot has, both consumed him and his Patrimony. The sage Solo^,
made a law, to defame prodigal men. The Areopagites, and criminal Judges of
Athens, punished prodigal me^, as idle, vagrant and unprofitable me^. The.x.
Governors of Rome, made a law, yt prodigal me^, should neither have ye
gouerme^t nor disposition of their own goods: but unto him should be given a
Curator, by ye appoinctme^t of ye Judge. By the commandment of Q. Pompeius,
Praetor, Q, Fabius, ye Son of Q. Fabius, Vale. Max. li 3. Cha. 5.
the great (surnamed) Allobrogique for ye riotous dispending of his Patrimony,
was indicted by this law, and committed unto ye government of a Tutor. Were this
law executed in England, we should have more Wards, of.xxxv. then.xv. years of
Age. The Gretians, had a law, yt whosoever had unthriftily consumed his
patrimony, should not be buried in ye sepulcher of his Ancestors, for yt he was
held unworthy the Honor of his Ancestors, yt dishonoreth himself, and
robs his posterytie. The ancient, grave and politic Co^mo^-wealth me^,
thus severely chastned Prodigalytie: though prodigal men had no care of
the^-selues, they tendered the posterytie of their posterytie: they (like unto
careful Physicians, that provide preservatives because the infection of the
Plague is dangerous) sought ye means, yt Prodigalytie might not be nooryshed:
fore-seeyng that prodigal men, neither reverenced good Counsel, nor feared
Disciplyne.

And (surely) it is a work of greater Justice, mercifully, to find a way to
preserve men from offending then (severely) to punish every offense.

Suppress these unthrifty Houses, and you shall keep many a man's Lands from
sellyng, many a man's neck from the Halter, and the Commonwealth, (perhaps)
from a more dangerous mischief.

I have (but yet) begun, to anatomize the Head, of this villainous Sanctuary of
Iniquity, a heap of euilles follow. The deceit of Dice, the charge of
Lechery, Cosonage and Brocage, is all that I have yet laid upon our unhappy
Gentlman:

These (only) pray upon Gould, Silver, and such light carraidge. These be but
suckyng Flies, the bityng Scorpions come after. A Bird that has but one
feather limed, by striving, fetreth her whole body: Even so, the unfortunate
Gentleman, thrust behind the hand, by the hazard of Dice, through a vain
hope, to redeem himself, follows his mischief, to the spending of the
last payment of his Land, And to help him forward, some one Spy or
Pettifogger of the Law (the reverence done unto the Law and good Lawiers
reverenced, A Petifogger a most dangerous brother.
) I may justly say, the Scum of all villainy, is (euer-more) sneakyng in these
Ordinary Houses: This notable Companion, keeps an Alphabet, of all the rich
Gentlemen's names, that frequenteth the Ordinaries: Exercise of ordinary Table
petyfoggers.
his eyes are settled upon their dispositions, and his exercise is, daily, to
search the Rolls, and the Office of the Statutes, to learn what Recognizances,
Morguages and Statutes do charge their Lands: This is the most pernicious
Broaker, the other helped the needy gentleman to money at fifty in the
hundred loss, but he helps him to sell free land at five years purchase.

I must here digress from the prodigality of the gentleman, unto the
covetousness and usury, I can not properly say of the Citizen, although he
dwells in ye City: for the true Citizen (whereof London has plenty) lives
upon his trade, be he an aduenturer abroad, or a mecanicall crafts man at
home. Covetous Citizens hunt ordinary tables to undo Gentlemen.
But these shames of good Citizens tradeth but to a dycing house, or at the
furthest trauaileth to a bowling alley, and with ease and safety gets
wealth as fast as the other do with great hazard and travel. They come not to
play the unthrifts, but to pray upon unthrifts: and yet for company, and to
avoid suspicion, they will sometime play the good fellows. All the rest are
but instruments for these dangerous catchers. These need not too greedily
seek for purchases, the necessity of the gentlemen makes them fair offers:
and their spies, the petifogger and others gives them knowledge where there is
sound dealing. Among them there is such deceit colored with such cleanly
shifts, as many gentlemen are for a trifle shifted out of their livings without
hope of remedy. The extreme dealing of covetous Citizens have settled a deadly
envy between Gentlemen and merchaunts.
The extremity of these men's dealings has been and is so cruel, as there is
a natural malice generally impressed in the hearts of the gentlemen of England
toward the citizens of London, insomuch as if they odiously name a man, they
forthwith call him A trim merchaunt. In like despite the Citizen calls
every rascal A ioly Gentleman.

And truly this mortal envy between these two worthy estates, was first
engendered of the cruel usage of covetous merchaunts, in hard bargains gotten
of Gentlemen, and nourished with malicious words and reuenges taken of both
parties. Tim. 1. cap. 6. The (...) of covetousness.
S. Paul by good warrant says, That covetousness is the root of all
mischief. S. Augustine says, that the covetous man is subject to all evils,
for that all evils come of covetousness. He moreover says, that wild beasts
have measure, for being hungry they pursue their prays, and being full are
satisfied: but the covetous man is never satisfied. He neither fears God, nor
reuerenceth man, pardons not his father, nor acknowledges his mother, makes
merchandise of his children, regards not his brother, nor yet keeps faith
with his friend, bears false witness, offends the widow, and destroys the
Infant. O how great is ye folly of our understanding, to lose life, to seek
death, and to banish ourselves from heaven: Four wheels of the chariot of
covetousness. The two horses. The waggoner. The two whippes.
S. Bernard says, yt the accursed chariot of covetousness, is drawn with
four disloyal wheels of vices, vz. Pusalanimite, Cruelty misprising of God,
and forgetfulness of certain death. The two horses are named Theft, and
Hardness. The waggoner is Earnest desire to have, who uses two sharp
whippes: the one called Disordered appetite to get, the other, Fear to loose.
The opinion of Apuleius in his first book of Magic is worthy to be read,
who writes thus. The Philosopher Socrates had not so much riches as Lelius,
nor Lelius so much as Scipio, nor Scipio so much as the rich Crassus, nor
Crassus so much riches as he desired. The Emperor Pertinax was so covetous,
Pertinax Emperor.
as he would inuit his friends unto two small slyces of meat and a dish of
apples, and when he would seem most sumptuous and magnificent, he added the
two genitories of a cock. Iouian Pontanus says, that Pope Martin was so
covetous, Pope Martin.
as he would steal every night the burning tapers in S. Peter's Church. The
same Pontanus says, that a Cardinal named Angel, Cardinal Angel.
every night would steal away from his own horses bottels of hay, and sell
them to other ostlers, until his horsekeeper one night (taking of him tardy)
swinged him currantly. Covetousness a dangerous enemy to the common wealth.
To conclude the evils of covetousness, with the dangers it brings the
common wealth unto. Men that have licentiously spent their substance, and find
no liberality to supply their wants, wish straight ways an alteration of the
estate, and what in them lies practices the sam. They fawn upon ambitious
men which are in authority, and between whom of the noble men is envy,
disdain, or private displeasure, they help forward ye faction, they seek
matter of sedition, which being not wisely suppressed, civil commotions,
battle, and destruction of people oftentimes follows. Read ye histories of
Rome, and you shall find, that covetousness and usury have begun many
commotions, and could not be ended until the instruments and bonds of debt were
cancelled. We need not search so far, England and al other nations carry a
large testimony in their own Chronicles of this foul matter, and therefore
Thucidides says not improperly, That covetousness is the nurse of murder,
theft, perjury, treason and all abominations: not for that covetous men
practice these villainies, but for that by extreme necessity they drive men to
these wicked shifts.

I heard a French Gentleman resolve a problem very pleasauntly and pithily. A
problem pithily answered by a French Gentilman.
An Englishman demanded the cause, That the young gentilmen of France
flourished more than they of England, considering that the one were consumed
with daily war, when the other had continual peace to strengthen them. O
quoth the French Gentleman, The quietness of your peace interrupteth not the
deceit of your Citizens, who with the feeding of your pride, deuoureth your
livings: when with us the troubles of war so fear them, as to save the
sword from their throtes, they give us the gold in their chests. Foul fall
covetousness and usury which proves his saying true, and more grace or few
days happen unto covetous wretches, who with the undoing of many in the end
undo themselves.

Socrates common wealth poor.
Socrates found that abundance of wealth was the overthrow of many common
wealths, and therefore in his own common wealth, he would have the common
people poor, and the rest not to have too much: saying that wealth bred pride,
and pride all mischiefs, when poverty brought forth Science, and all good
Arts, and Science all manner of earthly happiness. Thus one mischief draws
on an other, and dyeing houses are the fountains.

These wicked houses first nusleth our young gentlemen in pride, and
acquainteth them with sundry shifting companions, whereof one sort couseneth
him at dice and cards, an other sort consume him with lechery, an other sort
by brocadge brings him in debt, and out of credit, then awayteth
covetousness and usury to sease upon his living, and the uncivil Sergeant
upon his liberty. To ruin is thus brought the gentleman, a great estate and
strength of this Realm, principally by the frequenting of dicing houses.

Let us search deeper into this ulcer, there is more foul matter behind, we
have but yet spoken of the better sort of dicing houses, which are chiefelie
for intertainement of Courtiers and other Gentlemen, which by reason of their
attendaunce and business keep no certain houses. If ordinary tables be
tolerated for their necessity, what warrant have the ordinary table-keepers
within the heart of London, Ordinaries for Citizens and the inconvenience.
(which are commonly called dicing houses) for Citizens? In every City,
Citizens have houses of their own, have wife, children and families to care
for: and sure the inconvenience cannot but be great, when a man leaves his
own house, and the company of his wife and family, and dineth at a dicing
house. In many well governed common wealths, Citizens by especial Laws were
forbidden to eat and drink out of their own houses, unless one neighbor
invited an other: but sufferance has brought this mischief to such a custom,
that if there were many more Citizens ordinaries, they should not need to fawn
upon the inferior sort for want of company of substantial Citizens. But
before we enter further into this mischief, Keeper of these houses shame (...)
ye condition of the keepers of these places is to be considered, for the most
part the masters of these houses, in times past have been bankrouts, and what
may be expected of men of their dispositions? mary a continuance of their
faculty, to live upon the goods of other men. Hither repair al ye close
shifters, here many notorious cousinages are smothered, ye masters of these
houses want no guests, for where carrion is, crows will be plenty, and where
money is sturring, cheters will not be idle. Young citizens for ye most part
depend upon their credit, and therefore are loath that there should be an open
testimony of their unthriftiness. All the better for ye biting cheter. Close in a
chamber a cogging knave gets more money in an hour, than many an honest man
spends in a year. And this one thing is much to be lamented, the unthrifty
citizens consume other men's goods, who perhaps labored painfully to get the^
(when gentlemen although they undo their posterite) spend but their own goods
and lands. The ears of the magistrate are daily full of the breaking of young
merchants, and here I lay before their eyes the causes thereof, even these
wicked ordinaries. They be places unto which magistrates come not, and
therefore the abuses unknown unto them. But I think it a work of much honesty
to reveal them, and in the magistrate a work of more justice to reform them,
and undoubtedly although this be true that I write, and the evils far more than
I discover, yet in discovering of the faults and faulty men, I find my
conscience so free from their shifts, as in writing my name to this book, I
presume, that no man (as faulty in that part of reprehension) will say, Turpe
est doctori, cum culpa redarguit ipsum.

But as one that means not to complain his losses, to ioyn my own example
with admonition I constantly determine to cross the streets where these vile
houses are planted, to bless me from the inticements of the^, which in very
deed are many, and the more dangerous in that they please with a vain hope of
gain. A dicers opinion of the fi st making of dice and cards.
Insomuch on a time I heard a distemperate dicer solemly swear, yt he
faithfully believed, yt dice were first made of the bones of a witch, and cards
of her skin, in which there has ever sithence remained an enchantment, yt
whosoever once takes delight in either, he shall never have power utterly to
leave them, for quoth he, I a hundred times vowed to leave both, yet have not
ye grace to forsake either. But for all his judgment, if Socrates alterd his
natural inclination of insolency by philosophy: if the wise Ulysses could
eat of the herb called Lotos, and yet by the pleasantness thereof would not be
enchanted to remain in that country, when his companions and servants
(forgetting their natural land) coueted to remain still in yt region where that
herb grew, and but only by violence they could not be brought back again to
their ships: if heathen men only by philosophy could master their
dispositio^s, christians by prayer and philosophy may overcome an enticing
mischief. But unto this possibility of reformation, wise men are to give
light credence. Old Judge Chomley evermore answered naughty livers that sued
for mercy, desiring him to regard the frailty of young men, by the bold and
unlawful actions of his own youth, and by the testimony of his grace, good
fortune, and present authority, to conceive hope of their amendment: O my
friends, judge Choml^ys answer ^o thieves that sued for mercy.
quoth the Judge, I tell you plainly, that of twenty that in those days were
my companions, I only escaped hanging: and it is very like, that some one of
your fellowship is by Gods goodness reserved to be an honest man, but you are
found offenders by the Law, and truly justice (whose sentence I am sworn to
pronounce) commands me to commend your souls to Almighty God, and your
bodies to the Gallowse. This notable Judge in his answer was not short and
sweet, but round and severe. Great is the pity that of twenty offenders
there should but one become a good man. How high a work were it then of
charity and mercy to preserve men from notable offenses? Certainly far
greater, than to pardon offe^ders. For by the wisdom of the first, vice shall
be driven to her shifts, when the mildness of the second many times breeds
presumption. If the good magistrates of this City, used the diligence of the
fore reported Censors of Rome, in short space the case would be altered, and in
time custom would make men honest, which without discipline can have no
beginning. There is an old proverb, The eye of the master, does as much work
as the hands of the servant. If the magistrates surueide but these vile houses
by honest conseruators, you should find the painful travels of capital
Magistrates much eased, many men's lives shall be saved, Gentleman shall have more
land, and Citizens greater store of money: which metal is the greatest
strength of a City, for where money is not scarce, Citizens forbidden to
purchase land.
traficke is plenty, which chiefly supporteth al Cities. And therefore in many
well governed common wealths, Citizens (to the end they should only imploie
their money in traficke) were forbidden to purchase land, other than a garden
for recreation. But to my purpose, these deuellish houses are causes that
merchants have so much land, and Gentlemen so little virtue.

It is already showen, to what extremity the better sort of these houses
bring a great number of our flourishing Gentlemen. To what misery the second
sort (called ordinaries for Citizens) bring a great number of young
merchauntes. Now remains the discovery of the third sort of these hauntes,
which are placed in Allies, Ordinaries for masterles me^, shifters, etc.
gardens, and other obscure corners out of the common walks of the Magistrate.
The daily guests of these privy houses, are maisterles men, needy shifters*
thieves, cutpurses, unthrifty servants, both serving men, and prentises. Here
a man may pick out mates for all purposes, save such as are good. Here a man
may find out Brauoes of Rome and Naples, who for a pottle of wine, will make
no more conscience to kill a man, than a Butcher a beast, hear closely lie
good fellows, that with a good Northren Gelding, will gain more by a halter,
than an honest yeoman will with a teame of good horses. Hear are they, that
will not let to deceive their father, to rob their brother, and fire their
neighbors house for an advantage. These frannions will not stick to spend
frankely, although they have neither lands nor goods by the dead, nor honesty
by nature. But how will this hold out? fire will consume wood without
maintenance, and riot a weak purse without supply. The Gentlemen (for the most
have lands to make money, and young merchants ways to get credit, but the
most of these idle persons have neither lands nor credit, nor will live by an
honest occupation: forsooth they have yet hands to filch, heads to deceive,
and friends to receive: and by these helps, shift meetely badly well. The
other upon current assurance, perhaps get money, for twenty marks or twenty
pounds in the hundred. But these that worst may hold the candle they upon
their own, or masters apparel, brass, pewter, sheets, shirts, etc. find
Brokers, or fripperers, that for a shilling in the pound, for every month,
will bouldly, for half the vallue take these paunes. Certainly it seems
that London is sore charged with these makeshiftes, for that almost in every
streate and lane there dwells two or three of these petty brokers, or
cherish-theeues. (...) called cherish^^ (...).
And I pray to God, that in Cheap side, and other principal streates,
although gould, silver, silks and other costly merchandise be openly in the
shops, that in many men's cofers there lie not Cardinal Campeius sumpter
riches. Learn this Cardinals name.
Fifty or sixty in the hundred is sweet gain, and a double par^ne takes
away all fear of the statute. A Iuish usury, high time to be rooted out of a
Christian government. By over long sufferaunce how much London has blemished
her ancient virtues, and indaungered her peace and prosperity, is not to be
recounted. In the time of King Henry the third, the good citizens of London in
one night slew five hundred Jews for that a Jew took of a Christian a penny
in the shilling usury: and ever after got them banished the City: if the like
Justice were done upon Iuish Christians, London would have many houses empty,
and her Churches and Churchyeardes would he too scant to receive dead carrions.
Truly these Atheists deserve worse than Jews, for they more sharply execute
the trade of Jews. The Jews spoil not one another, but Christians, whom they
esteem as dogs, when these counterfets make no difference of persons. The
good Maiestrates must ouerlooke this evil, or else the evil will ouerrule
their prosperity. It is a great miracle (but that God is merciful) that this
City is not always grievously afflicted with the plague, when sacred is the
authority that says, The plague shall not depart the house of the swearer. I
imagaine that disers cure one poison with an other, who gape so wide to
blaspheme God, as they swallowe the Devil into their bowels, upon whom no
plague but hell fire will fasten. How needful a thing is it to look unto
these places where this outrage is ^one unto God. Third you they may not he
made instruments to nourish traitorous practices? The conspiracy of Madder and
Barloe, was hatched in a tabling house, in the white friars. Where is the
current of news but in tabling houses, foreign explorers and faulse
subjects, there hear much matter entreated at counsel bordes. Where is a
desperate Athiest like unto harebraine Someruile so ready to be found, as in a
tabeling house? Obstinate Papists that dare not live in the country for fear
of the statute, monthly shift their lodgings, and without suspicion here
daily receive their diet. Lance an old feastred sore, and you are like to
find corruption more than of one humor. But admit they prove no baits for
such purposes: they are the sinkes of the fore reported mischiefs. The undoing
of many, and the honest gain of no man. The Gentleman excuses his repair to
them, because he keeps no certain house, and likewise alleges
conversation of equals: but as he finds no thrift in the first, so he is
often deceived in the second. A tabling house is like unto a strumpet, who is
ready to receive every man's money. And many times men of great worship, are
hearded, and braued, with inferiors to some of their servants. The Gentleman
of Naples is highly to be commended, for this honorable disposition, how mean
so ever his living be, yet he will furnish his own table: The honorable
disposition of the Napo^^ion gentleman.
so he both auoydeth the controulement of superiors, and the cheekemate of
inferiors. Would our English gentlemen did the like, they would like very well
of the change. By this frugallitie, the Napolitane lives Cauelie (...) like
with a 100. trownes a year, and our riot makes no show of so much a month.
But you will say they starve themselves: but did ever any see a man to die of
hunger, where meat was to be sold, if he had gaie clothes to his back, it
seems he contenteth nature, which is plenty enough, we for our glutonie are
every where called English bellies. Very few of our gentlemen die old men by
inordinate feading, our memory, wit, and mind, which is immortal, is daily
dulled, weakened and almost slain by surfets. Let us excuse the matter as we
please, we receive no better remedy by our excuse, than Mahomet had for the
fawling sickness, by coloring his disease, in giving out that his passion
proceeded of the brightness of an Angel, which in those fittes revealed
heavenly matters unto him. But if men will deceive them selves by deluding
others, they shall find had I wist a bitter pill to digest. I need show no
other examples than the daily falls of young Gentlemen that trust to the
fortune of these intising dicing houses, where virtue is shut in the cole
seller, and vice and all cosoning villainies, set in the chief places of the
hall. And therefore happy is he, that is either advised by good counsel, or
warned by other men's harms.

A care to continue ye prosperity of this famous City, will no doubt cause
her Capital magistrates shortly to look into the behauiours of riotous
Citizens, their unthriftiness consumes more than their own goods, and
undoes many, that travail painefully for their living. The example of
monthly justice, suffices to dismay the third sort of unthrifty livers.
There are more executed from Newgate and the Marshalsies, than in three of the
greatest Cities of France, and yet I truly say, that more offenders are
favorably quitted, and pardoned in London in one month, The exceeding ^ercie
of ye Queens Majesty eterni^ed by (...).
than in Paris in a whole year, so exceeding great is the mercy of our most
good Queen Elizabeth, the remembrance whereof may not pass without zealous
thanks unto God for her thrice excellent Majesty, least strangers condemn
her natural subjects of ingratitude, who to eternize this precious virtue of
mercy, rooted in the magnanimous heart of her excellency, in commemoration
thereof, have written many learned books. Others have raised disputationn,
whether it be a virtue more holy, in her Majesty, or dangerous for her true
subjects: for fear least her clemency extend unto persons of the disposition
of the frosen snake, which the pitiful husbandman cherished by the fire,
until she offered to sting his children: and truly whether presumption or
necessity were the cause, I leave to judge: but I crave Gods wrath as justice,
if I speak not the truth: In Rome, even in that Rome, where the Pope and her
woorst enemy reigns, among English fugitives, not worthy of the benefit
of her good subjects, plenty, peace and prosperity. There was (which with
mine own ears I heard) that wished imprisonment in the Fleet at the Queens
mercy, rather than liberty in Rome. It is apparent that her Highness
mildenes exceeds, and it seems that the Popes bounty is not very
plentiful, save unto such, as rather carry sedition than zeal in their
countenance. When such as cannot be contented to be good subjects, affie more
in her clemency (if shame held the^ not back) than in the Popes holiness,
for all his golden shows. In my book entitled, The blessings of Peace, this
digression shall be lively set forth. In the mean space and many happy years
after, I humbly beseech Almighty God to forget our unworthiness, by
remembrance of her worthiness, that she may in all felicity still reign among
us as the image of his glory, and the comfort of all true Christians. Amen.

Again to my purpose: Though there cannot be too much good spoken of her
Majesty's gracious and sweet mercy, yet severity may no ways be termed
cruelty, so that no more than Law be ministered to notable malefactors. London
is so plentiful of notorious couseners, cheters, and dishonest livers, and
withal so blemished with heinous cousenages and deceites, as a young man,
unless he have an old man's experience, can hardly avoid their snares.

Many new kind of shifts, which none but the Devil could invent, and very
Atheistes execute, by the wisdom of grave Maiestrates have been syfted
forth: wherein reverent personages were in danger of dishonor, and innocents
in hazard of death. It is a matter of fresh memory. The public mischief
that of late years was hatched in these wicked houses, and growento the great
loss, hinderance, and half undoing of more than two hundred Gentlemen, honest
citizens and yeomen, yet God which is just, has rewarded many of the deceivers
according to their evil deseruings.

No man was ever assaulted with a more dangerous strategeme of cosonage than
my self, with which my life and living was hardly beset. No man has more
cause to thank God for a free delivery than my self, nor any man ever saw,
more sudden veligeance inflicted upon his adversaries, than I my self of
mineas lively appears in the end of my book entitled The rock of regard,
imprinted many years past.

And although to cure the extremity I then fared as a man sore scalded with
fire, which in hope of ease leapeth into cold water, which presently stripeth
off his skin. So I that had experience of strangers huge ^eceite, thought that
the pleasing persuasion of near friends, would turn to a comfortable
remedy, but I find the old Larkes song true: There is no trust in fair
words, nor assurance in natures obligations. But after three years and more of
costly suit my grievous oppression (God be therefore praised) has pearsed the
inclining ears, of the right Honorable, and Gracious Judge, the L. Chauncelor
of England: by whose wisdom and grave judgment, I constantly believe, for he
releued and released of the toil of Law: upon whose commandment, with all
humility, reverence and duty I attend, beseeching Almighty God to preserve
the blessed estate of ye Queens most excellent majesty here upon earth, the
lieuetenant of his divine graces: the right honorable Lords of the privy
Counsel, the true images of wisdom: and all other Capital and good
Magistrates, the strong pillars of this happy government. And to the friendly
readers of this book, I wish the benefit of my travels, and to the
reprehenders amendment of life.

FINIS.

