THE POOR MAN'S ADVOCATE, OR, A Treatise of Liberality to the needy.
Delivered in SERMONS By WILLIAM WHATELY Minister of Banbury.

PROVE. 19.17. He that has pity upon the poor, lends to the Lord; and that
which he has given, will he pay him again.

LONDON, Printed by G. M for George Edwards, and are to be sold at his house in
Greene-Arbour, at the sign of the Angel 1637.

To all the Faithful Servants of God that are rich in this world, the Author
wishes treasure in Heaven, and therefore dedicates this ensuing Treatise.
TO you, well-beloved in our Lord Jesus Christ, does this small Treatise offer
it self, and has shrunk it self into this little quantity, that hiding it
self in a narrow room, it may accompany your purses in your pockets, and so
warn you to pull them forth more frequently and more willingly for merciful
deeds, then perhaps you have heretofore accustomed. Neither does this little
book barely request at your hands your constant practice of liberality toward
your needy brethren, but does even require it at your hands, as a thing
absolutely necessary to your salvation. It cites you before the tribunal of
your own consciences, and making evident proof that your Lord and Master,
whose Lord and Master, whose stewards you are, has commanded you to be
plentiful in those kind of expenses, does as an advocate, demand and request
of the judge of that court, (even the conscience of every one of you) to make
and register a firm order and decree (if it will show it self a just and
righteous judge) that from henceforth you shall be large and abundant and
forward and ready to this good work so often as occasion shall offer it self,
yea that you shall studiously seek after all occasions to do it as often as
may be. No man can be saved without good works, more then without faith,
because that faith is not lively which produces not good works, and chiefly
those good works that do specially pertain to every man's state of life, as
this does to the state of wealthy Christians. He that resolves not to obey God
in doing every good thing required at his hand, is no more upright, then he
that resolves not to obey, in leaving every wicked thing prohibited. Many
think themselves sound, if they purpose to cast off every know evil deed,
though they settle not in themselves, a like firm determination to perform
every know duty. But herein they beguile themselves. He casts not from him all
his transgressions, nor has respect to all Gods commandments, that casts not
from him faults of omission, and endeavors not to put in practice
affirmative precepts. Gods authority must be no less submitted unto, when he
requires a thing, then when he prohibiteth, when he says this do, then when
he says, this do not. So hollownesse appears as much, in not doing the one,
as in doing the other. Yea carelesnes and unwillingnesse to know good duties
argues guile of heart, as well as carelessness or unwillingnes to do what we
have known. That you may therefore approve the sincerity of your souls in the
working of mercy and bounty, as well as other virtues, I have here declared
unto you the necessity thereof; And so beseeching you to read what follows,
with a will to be convinced and to practice, and beseeching the Lord, to teach
and persuade your souls, in this matter, I commend you to his favorable
guidance, April 27. 1637.
and shall rest ever

Studious of your spiritual welfare. WILLIAM WHATELY.

To the merciful Christians inhabiting in or about Banbury.
Alms in Greek comes from a word that signifies to pity, (...) whence the
Latin Eleemosyna French Aulmosne. English Alms ab (...) misereer.
because all our alms should proceed from a merciful and pitiful heart, in
the Hebrew (...)
and Syriack tongue it is called righteousness, as if it were by right due to
the poor. Pro. 3.27.
Withhold not they good from the owners thereof, so the orginall runs. Pro.
11.18.
To him that sows righteousness, shall be a sure reward. Therefore has the
Author of this ensuing Treatise by demonstrative arguments prooved the
necessity of this duty, and fully answered the sophismes and seeming objections
which the wrangling wit of man will be ready to invent and urge against its
performance. He has laid down likewise certain rules to direct men how
rightly to give, prescribed means to enable them, and added motives also to
quicken them to this laudable work. And as he most frequently and earnestly
presses this duty upon the consciences of his hearers, so he shows himself
to them in this (as in all things,) a pattern of good works, Tit. 2.7. His
holy life is a true counterpane of his doctrine, he has a purse for the poor
as he advises others to have, and gives the tenth as he exhorts others to
give. Well knowing, that it is the duty of a Minister that would be found
faithful both (...) 2 Timothy 2.15. and (...) Gal. 2.14. to teach and to tread
the way to Heaven. Phil. 4.9.
Those things (says the Apostle) which ye have both learned and received, and
heard and seen in me, do. More might I say without either falsehood or
flattery, but this will be thought too much by him who thinks so meaneby of
himself, that this very Work was almost extorted from him with importunate
solicitations. The poor he pleads for, are not such as are strong and able
to labor for their living, but such as are weak, impotent, Esaias 5 d. 7 ^^at.
26. (...) 5, 36.
and unable to take pains, and there are three degrees of such needy persons.
1. Some are utterly destitute of all the means of preservation of life, these
we are bound (says a Learned Divine) to relieve out of things necessary to our
state, since the life of our neighbor is more to be esteemed then our outward
state. Others are in great need having but little to maintain themselves or
theirs, we are bound to relieve these out of those things which are necessary
to the decency of our state. A third sort have something, Occurere est
succurrere.
but yet not that which is sufficient or competent, we are bound to relieve
them out of those things which are superfluous to the decency of our state. For
order of relieving, coeteris paribus, other things being equal, we must
relieve such as are in greater necessity. Secondly, n the like necessity those
are to be preferred to which we owe most love, as those that are near to us in
blood before those that are farther of, Mat. 15.5, 6. the poor of our own
family, Deuteronomy 15.7
town and country before strangers, 1 Timothy 5.8. the household of faith before
the ungodly, Gal. 6.10. This scattering Prove. 11.24. is increasing, this is no
spending but a lending, Pro. 19.17. no laying out, but a laying up. Luke 12.33.
It is a blessed thing thus to give, Plus pauper tibi cansert quam a te
accipit. Ambr.
Acts 20.35. the gift will prove more beneficial to the giver then to the
receiver, if thou give a penny, the poor man gives thee a good prayer and
blesses thee in the name of God, of which Job made great reckoning, Job 20.13.
and 31.20. Pro. 22.9
And for this thing God will bless thee in all thy works, and in that thou
putst thine hand unto, Deuteronomy. 15.10. and bless thy posterity, Psalm. 37.26. Act.
10.5 (...) Pro. 11.25. Eccles. 11 1. Mat. 5.7. Heb. 13.16. 2 Cor. 9.6.
Our charitable actions ascend up to be a memorial before God, or a standing
monument and remembrance, as the word signifies, we shall hear of them at
the resurrection, Luke 14.14. God has made many ample sweet and precious
promises to the merciful, to reward them abundantly, Pro. 11.25. Mat. 10.41,
42. Luke 6.38. Heb. 6.10. He has promised Temporal blessings they shall not
lack, Prove. 28.27. They shall have comfort in sickness, and be delivered in
time of trouble, Psalm. 41.1, 2, 3. Spiritual, Breaking off of sins and
pardon, Dan. 4.27. Perpetuity of righteousness, Psalm. 112.9. Eternal, A
certain treasure in heaven, Luke 13.33. Receiving into everlasting
tabernacles, Luke 16.9. Possession of eternal life, Mat. 25.34. Oh let us
therefore do good, be rich in good works, ready to distribute, willing to
communicate, 1 Timothy 6.17. Beneficence to men is there expressed in the variety
of four Epithets, both to show the vehement intention of Saint Paul's desire of
good works, and the important necessity of their performance, this if we do,
Ver. 8.
we may lay hold on eternal life, as he there adds, may be as sure of it
as if we had it. Let us give then that which we cannot keep, that we may
gain that which we cannot loose. Luke 16.9
Let us make to our selves friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness, that when
we fail, they may receive us into everlasting habitations.

Your true Christian friend, E. L.

Perlegi hunc tractatum in quo nihil reperio quo minus cum utilitate imprimatur.

THO: WEEKS. R. P. Episc. Land. Cap. Domest.

THE POOR MAN'S ADVOCATE, OR A Treatise of Liberality to the needy.
PROVE. 28.27. He that gives unto the poor shall not lack, but he that hides
his eyes, shall have many a curse.


THis sentence is left in GODS Book to quicken men unto a much neglected duty,
for that end it delivers a promise and a threat; showing in the former, what
good shall come to them that are careful of the duty, in the latter what evil
shall befall the promise note a duty standing in an action, that is, Giving,
and the object of the action, to the poor. Every man knows what it is to give.
as giving is strictly taken, viz. a bestowing of a thing upon another of my
own free will, which he cannot challenge of right otherwise. Now this giving
is a thing much in use, but not to the right object here named, which are the
poor. Much is given away to the Rich and those that need it not, as it were
the pouring of water into the Sea, but into the empty vessel nothing is
powered; but the duty which God would commend, is that which has for its object
a poor needy distressed man, who is destitute of things necessary and knows
not by what means to relieve himself.

A poor man is one that wants things needful for him. But you must conceive,
that here is not meant a scant, backward, niggardly giving, but a constant,
cheerful, discreet, and upright giving, and this is the duty commended, now
follows the reward, No want, he shall be secured from necessity and penury.
God will take order that those men shall not be brought to penury themselves,
which are so charitable and liberal, that they be ready to supply the wants
of others. This duty shall be rewarded with freedom from want, but you must
consider that the Holy Ghost uses a figure here, where less is spoken and
more is understood, for he means he shall have abundance, God will increase
his store, as it is said elsewhere, Pro. 11.15.
He that waters shall be watered also himself. You see first the promise,
next the threat, in which note also the fault and the punishment.

The fault is, hiding the eyes, which intimates a not giving, by the cause of
it, not caring to take notice of the poor man's want and of ones duty to supply
the same, but using fond shifts and excuses to withhold a man's self from the
duty. He hides his eyes from doing a good work that refuses to know the
necessity of it, and to take notice of the fit occasions to do it, either not
confessing that the thing generally considered is needful, or when particular
opportunities of doing it shall offer themselves, finds out some shift or
other to cause himself to believe, that then he need not do it. This is the
fault, omitting acts of merciful bounty out of carelessness to know or
acknowledge the occasion, yea wilful ignorance and denying the same? What is
the punishment of it? much of curses, as it is word for word, one that shall be
plentiful in curses. A curse is a speech tending to pronounce or wish not any
small but some great evil or mischief upon man, that is man's curse. But Gods
curse is both a pronouncing of evil and that in wrath and indignation, to show
his detestation of the person, and also an executing of the evil pronounced
upon the offender to his ruin and destruction. A curse notes the denouncing
and bringing upon a man some great evil as a forerunner of eternal
destruction, and such as shall certainly bring that after it. So you have the
meaning of the words.

Here are four several points which for brevity sake I will confirm and
prove severally, and apply jointly and all at once. The first point is,

Giving to the poor is a necessary duty, I draw this point out of the Text in
this manner, what is commended to men with a gracious pracious promise, and
whose contrary is threatened with a curse, must be a duty sure as all will
yield; now so is this work of giving to the poor as you see with your eyes,
wherefore it must be undeniably concluded a duty, that is, a thing not which we
may do if we will, and if we will not we may choose, but whereto our
consciences are tied by the authority of God the sole Commander of the
conscience, and which if we omit, it shall be reputed a transgression. Now
that it is a duty, you shall perceive by the many Texts of Scripture which do
most expressly require it. Deuteronomy. 15.9. If thine eye be evil against thy
poor brother, and thou give him naught, and it be sin unto thee, and verse
the 10. Then shall surely give him, and thine heart shall not be grieved, when
thou give unto him, and verse the 11. Thou shall open thine hand wide unto
thy brother, to thy poor, and to thy needy in the land. Not giving is entitled
a sin, giving, and that without grief, and that with a wide hand is
enjoined, Eccles. 11.1, 2. Cast thy bread upon the waters. Give a portion to
seven and to eight, that is, to many still and still. Lo giving, and a
constant giving to many is required. Luke 11.41. our Savior says, Give alms
of the things you have, and behold all things are clean unto you, It is a duty
that gives unto our selves the lawful use of all Gods creatures if we impart
them to the poor, for alms is a gift bestowed on a needy person, and 12.33.
Sell all that you have and give alms: if a man want money, yet if he have
money worth that he may spare, he must sell and give, you see, and in some
cases must sell much to bestow in alms, yea and in some cases all, as they did
in the beginning of the Gospel. Act. 4 34 35.
And Luke 3.11. when the people (meaning the common people) came about John
Baptist, asking him what they should do, you know what his answer was, Let him
that has two coats give to him that has none, and he that bath meat do
likewise, whereby you may conceive that this giving is not a duty confined unto
men of wealth that have great abundance and a large overplus of things, but it
lies on the consciences of those that be themselves but mean, if they meet
with those that are meaner then themselves, in case they have any thing to
spare, and another be utterly destitute. And you know well what Saint Paul
says, 2 Cor. 8.7
See that you abound in this grace also.

I have alleged store enough of proofs, you shall hear reason also.

nothing at all, or very little, would thou not think it a duty of some
good person or other to furnish thee with things needful; He must tell a rank
manifest lie to his own heart that will return any other then an affirmative
answer to this question: Therefore it is a manifest duty necessarily arising
from that great and plain maxim. Do as you would be done to.

and supplying their wants, and keeping them from undergoing much hardness,
yea and from perishing, and so deserves to be called a good deed, a good
work, as being truly beneficial and comfortable to them to whom we ought to
wish and do well. For it pleases God to provide so in ordering the world,
that some shall have need and others shall have abundance, that He may try the
dispositions of the latter by the former. Ioh. 12.8.
The poor ye shall have always with you, and seeing the poor cannot be
succored but by giving to them, and that succored they must be, seeing God
does own them for his children and servants as well as the rich, therefore it
must be a duty to give unto them.

Paul, by many thankesgivings unto God, 2 Cor. 9.12, 13.
whilst by the experience of this ministration they praise God for your
professed subjection to the Gospel of Christ, and your liberal contribution
toward them; this good work is such as makes heaven resound with thanks and
praises. If the tongues of any Receivers be silent through unthankfullnesse,
yet their very loins do bless God in their kind, but those that are not
quite destitute of grace will open their mouths to bless God the giver of
all, when they find others to open their hands and give them that which
helps to comfort and cheer them. How can we be so careless of Gods honor,
as not to know our selves bound to do that, that makes for his honor so much
as this good work does, that is so fruitful of thanks unto him.

The fourth reason (which I shall press most upon you) is this. behooves every
man to have firm and evident proofs of his being a true and not a false
Christian, seeing upon that point, does all his comfort in death and after
death, and his hopes of remission of sins and eternal happiness depend; for
not every one that appears to others and believes himself to be a true
Christian shall inherit eternal life, but he that is so indeed and truth. Now
bounty to the poor is a reciprocal note of soundness in Religion, and
convertible, so that whosoever professes Religion and is merciful to the
poor, He is such an one indeed as in appearance he seems, but contrarily,
whosoever professes Religion and is hard, miserable, niggardly, and cannot
find in his heart to give to the poor according to his means, that man look
he never so fair to the worlds eye and to his own, pray he never so often,
hear he never so many Sermons, fast he never so frequently, frequent he the
Sacrament never so constantly, read he the Scriptures never so daily, be he
never so earnest a condemner of other men's faults, and public abuses and
disorders, and let him in all other things that make the greatest show of
Religion be never so abundant, I say the man that gives not to the poor, (all
these things notwithstanding) is but an hypocrite, a dissembler, a false
hearted man, one in whose services the Lord takes no delight, and whose
devotions he will not regard: which I shall prove to you by clear and manifest
Texts of Scripture, and effectual reasons taken out of the Scripture and
grounded on it. Look in Isay 58.7. Is not this the fast that I have chosen to
deal thy bread to the hungry, to bring the poor that are cast out to thy
house, and when thou see the naked that thou cover him, and that thou hide
not thy self from thine own flesh. The Lords intention is not to confound the
duties of the two tables, but this he means, that that is true fasting which
makes a man truly merciful and bountiful to his afflicted brethren. You loose
your labor in fasting if by your fasting you be not enabled to
bountifullnesse toward the poor. So Saint James says. 1. last. True Religion
and undefiled before God the Father, is this, to visit the fatherless and
widow in their distress, and to keep ones self. etc. Here also the Holy
Ghost means that that habit or virtue of Religion or worshipping God is in it
self sincere and upright, and to God acceptable, and in his esteem spotless
and without blemish which produces such mercifullnesse in the performer, that
it makes him voluntarily and of his own accord helpful to the distressed
Saints. Look into the story of the rich man, Luke 18.18. and 24. He was
desirous to inherit eternal life, He came to Christ to learn the way to life,
he knew the commandments. He had diligently kept them in respect of outward
carriage even from his youth, being such a one as Paul in his Pharisaisme, in
respect of the Law unrebukeable, yet lacked he one things, as our Savior tells
him, that is, to sell all and give to the poor and follow Christ, and because
he went away sorrowful and would not buy heaven at that rate, our Savior
says, it is as possible for a Camel to go through the eye of a needle as for
a rich man (He must needs mean such a rich man as this was that would not sell
all and give to the poor at Christ's special command) to enter into Heaven.
Now Brethren he that will not at Christ's ordinary commandment give away a
little, would not at his special commandment sell all and give it away,
therefore he cannot get into heaven, and therefore if he profess Religion he
does but dally with it and play the hypocrite too in professing it. Yet another
proof, Mat. 25.41. to the end. Those that called Christ Lord and so made a
show of Christian Religion are in this name bidden to take their portion with
the devil and his angels in those eternal prepared flames, for that they had
not ministered to Christ in his necessities, not meaning it of his personal
necessities which they never lived to see, but of his necessities in his
members, and those whom he will cast from him at the last day were undoubtedly
but hypocrites if they professed Religion, and so shall they be then
entertained that are not liberal to the poor, wherefore they be but
dissemblers how godly soever they seem. Jam. 2.13.
Judgment without mercy shall be to the merciless. and he to whom
unmercifull judgment belongs, is but an hypocrite. Pro. 21.13
He that turns away his ear from the cry of the poor he shall cry and not
be heard, and he that shall not have his cry heard, is but an hypocrite, and
Saint John says, let us love in deed and truth, showing it by not shutting our
bowels of compassion against our needy brethren when we have this worlds goods,
and then says, hereby know we that we are of the truth and shall assure our
hearts before him. 1 John 3.17, 18, 19. Whosoever professes to believe in
Christ and has an open heart and hand to his penurious Brother, and shows
himself to love by his deeds of mercy, may by this know that he is of the
truth, that is, a true believer. He that has no true charity, no true faith,
no true obedience, no true wisdom, seem he never so religious is yet
destitute of the power of Religion, because these graces cannot be separated
from true devotion to God, and the right worshipping of Him, must needs beget
and increase the same; Now there is no faith without works of mercy, Iam. 2.14
For what will it avail to say I have faith and have no works (he means
specially of these works of mercy though not only) will that faith save.
There is no love without works of mercy and bounty to the poor, For he that
has this worlds goods and sees his brother have need, 1 Ioh. 3.17.
and shuts up his bowels of compassion against him, how dwells the love of
God in him? There is no true obedience without works of mercy, for obedience is
a walking in all the ways of God and doing all that he requires, of which
this giving to the poor is one as plainly required as any other, and more
often then very many other. There is no true wisdom without these works of
mercy, for the wisdom that comes from above is pure, and full of mercy and of
good fruits. So now it is more then undeniable, that all shows of piety are
counterfeit where giving to the poor is wanting as a companion of them. And
yet one more reason shall confirm it and I have done with this point.

religious and is under the power of covetousness is surely but a dissembler,
for it is a thorny ground that is choked with the deceifullnesse of the riches
of this world. Now he that gives not to the poor is possessed and overcome
of covetousness, because the love of money keeps him from following the
directions of Gods word in the using of it, and so he loves money more then
God, more then his poor brother, more then the rewards of God, and more then
heaven it self, and therefore he is but thorny ground, an arrant hypocrite,
and so will Christ account him and censure him at last. Wherefore my Brethren,
you cannot but acknowledge the necessity of this good work, without it all your
religion is in vain, as you have heard it proved undeniably. So have I done
with the first point, the next is,

Bounty is the best means of proventing poverty, I say to the poor, this
particular kind of bounty is the certainest way to escape penury, nothing can
more effectually deliver a man from need then to be liberal to them that are
in need. In due order and manner I shall strive to make this Paradoxe good, for
nothing seems to the miser more absurd then this, that his giving away his
goods will cause him to lack nothing. But look what our Savior says, Luke
12.33. where commanding to sell and give alms, he bids make bags that waxes
not old, If any thing will secure from need it is to have full bags safely
laid up, and you see that this almes-giving is providing a man full bags, for
it were in vain to bid make bags, if his meaning were not that they shall be
filled, He that sows liberally shall reap liberally. 1 Cor. 9.6
Do you not see that giving is nothing else but sowing! and there is never an
husbandman amongst you but knows that sowing is the way to be rich, and to
keep away necessity. He that has much and good land to sow, and seed to sow
it, and does sow it, he, if any man, hops to escape wants; if therefore Saint
Paul may be believed, giving liberally will make a man rich, Eecles. 11.2.
therefore Solomon having bidden give to seven and to eight, adds the reason,
for thou know not what evil shall be on the earth, as if he had said, that
this is the best way to be secured against all hard chances that may befall,
There is that scatters and yet increases. Prove. 11.24, 25.
Lo this scattering brings no loss but gain, to the scatterer, the liberal
soul shall be made fat, and he that waters shall be watered again. By being
watered and made fat, is meant being stored with good things, and to have
store, is the best prevention of want. Let us show you reasons too, why this
must needs be so.

First, This is to be a good Steward.
we all confess that God is the Great Lord and Master of this Family of Heaven
and Earth, and that riches do not come to men either by fortune or chance, or
by their own industry, or the love of their friends, or any like secondary
means as the highest cause, but all is from the dispensation and appointment
of God, who is the Ruler of all things, making rich and making poor, and
setting up one and pulling down another. Wherefore all men be but his
servants and stewards to whom he pleases to commit more or less as himself
sees fit; and hence it follows, that it must needs avail much to the
continuation and increase of any man's wealth, that he be found a good Steward
of the things committed to him by his Master, for whom will a man rather
entrust with his estate, then those whom long experience has approved to be
faithful. Now to communicate our substance to the poor with a large and
enlarged heart and hand, this is to do the office of a good and faithful
Steward, as Saint Peter teaches in so many words, 1 Pet. 4.9, 10. Use
Hospitality one to another, that is one act of bounty to be practiced,
specially toward the poor, and then he adds this reason, as every man has
received the gift, so minister the same one unto another as good Stewards of
the manifold graces of God. Do you not perceive that the due discharge of our
Stewardship stands in ministering unto another the gifts that God has given us,
wherefore he in whom the Lord does find this fidelity shall never be put out of
his office, but rather the Lord will deal with him as in the Parable, the King
did with his good and faithful servant, to whom, he gave this praise saying,
Well done, and added this reward, thou have been faithful in little, be ruler
over much. Faithfullnes in using what we have, you see to be the best means of
being entrusted with more, and consequently of being freed from wants. Now
liberal distribution to the poor is a being faithful in what we have, this
therefore if any thing will cause the Lord to give us more and more, and never
to wax weary of giving to us, if we will give unto others for his sake and
according to his commandment.

Pro. 10.22.
Solomon has told us, It procures Gods blessing which makes rich
that the blessing of God makes rich and adds no sorrow therewith, that is,
gives a comfortable and delightful increase of our estate even such as is
worth having and is truly beneficial, for to have a great estate as a great
burden upon our shoulders, and to be but a horse to carry a great load of
gold and silver through the world, this is not to be a master but a slave of
riches, now such comfortable wealth does not spring from man's wit or pains,
but from the blessing of God, if you give credit to Solomon, for if he
vouchsafe not his blessing, as the Watchman watches and the builder builds
in vain, so does the Husbandman plow and the merchant traffic and the
labourer labor in vain, either no increase will come or none but a vexing and
cumbersome increase, now the Lord has expressly promised his blessing unto
those that will open their hands to their poor brethren, saying in the
fore-alledged place of Deuteronomy. 15.10. Because that for this thing the Lord will
bless thee in all thy works and in all that thou put thine hand unto. Do
you not all seem covetous of Gods blessing, do you not beg it for your selves
and for your children and friends, hereby making a show as if you counted it
the most desirable of all things, the most assured cause of all prosperity, if
you be any other then hypocrites in begging Gods blessing, you must do that
for which he says he will bless you, and in what, in all your works and
affairs, yea and all you put your hands unto. Certainly God will never be
found a promise-breaker, what he says with his hand, as Solomon professes in
his prayer, that his own experience had taught him. So we conclude our reason
evidently and ungainesayably, unless a man will deny Gods power and truth, the
efficacy of his blessing, what will surely procure Gods blessing upon a man's
affairs and estate, that will save him from wants, so will giving to the poor
do, seeing he has bound it by promise to the liberal giver to the needy,
therefore this is the best way to be freed from wants.

A third reason I will add, It is a lending to God. Pro. 19.17
to lend unto Almighty God will surely procure abundance, for he will never
prove bankerupt, he will never borrow without a purpose and resolution to
repay, and without actual repayment, and that in the fittest time and manner.
The necessity of many great personages causes that they are driven to borrow
and cannot make satisfaction back again in due time. The covetousness of
others causes that though they have much lying by them, yet they cannot bring
their hearts to part with any portion to pay their debts, as we see in
experience, so that the sums that are owing from such will never secure a man
from want, but must be reckoned amongst the number almost of desperate debts.
But I hope no heart amongst you will intertaine so base and wretched a conceit
of Almighty God, wherefore to have him in our debt is a sure means of having
enough to preserve us from need. Now you know the place well enough where he
has given his bill to you for the repayment of what you give to the poor,
saying, Prove. 19.17. He that gives to the poor lends to the Lord, and that
which he has given he will pay him again. Lo brethren, the bill of Gods hand
as I may call it, in which he has both acknowledged the debt and promised
payment. Be it known unto all men by this present promise, that I the Lord God
of Heaven and Earth, do owe and acknowledge my self to be indebted to every
merciful liberal man, all those sums of money which he has bestowed, or
shall bestow in relieving the distressed, to be paid back unto him
whenever he shall demand it; for a bond or bill that names no day, binds to
payment at demand, and to this payment well and truly to be paid, I bind my
self firmly by this present promise, sent, sealed, and delivered by Solomon
my known Secretary or Scribe. Brethren unless you will proclaim the Lord an
insufficient or a dishonest debtor or paymaster, you see that giving to the
poor is the best way of saving your selves from wants, for lo the Lords bill
for your security, you shall have it again every farthing token as you use to
speak, and that far surer then checker, which yet the proverb has
chronicled for greatest assurance.

reason, It will cause prayers, and God will hear crying against, therefore
for Exodus 22.27.
that you may believe a point to natural reason so unbeleeveable, what will
cause many prayers and supplications to God for you, that must sure cause Him
to give you all good things in abundance, and so deliver you from penury and
necessity, you will yield this to be a truth, if you account prayers worth any
thing, as Saint Paul certainly did, and for this cause so often required them,
saying, Brethren pray for us, and again, I beseech you in the name of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and for the love of the Spirit, that you strive in prayer to God
for me. The prayers made to God by his servants upon due ground and warrant
cannot be in vain, if God have not in vain taken to himself the name of a
God that hears prayers, now you know the poor will surely pay back to you
their prayers to God for you, 2 Cor. 9.14. or if any should be so unthankful
as not to do it, yet the household of God will, to whom you ought most to
abound in bounty.

The Lord says, that a poor man wronged will cry and God will hear his cry
for he is merciful, Exodus 22.23.
and will it not follow on the contrary, a poor man refreshed will pray to God
for you, and God will hear him, because he is merciful. If his mercy will
moove him to punish the oppressor of the poor, the said mercy must needs moove
him to reward the succourer. And if he be carnal that God will not hear his
prayers for himself, yet his prayer for his benefactor he will hear, as well
as his cries against his wrong-doer. Wherefore this giving is an undoubted
course to procure all abundance of all good things, and to chase away wants and
necessity. I know not how a point should be accounted proved and confirmed,
sufficiently, if you will not count this point so, and believe it accordingly.
I come to the third point, Hiding ones eyes, that is, hindering himself from
knowing or resolving to do this duty by putting any shifts and pretenses
before his mind, this is to hide the eyes. I conceive, and I think none of you
will object against the so interpreting the phrase. The point is

It is a sin to hinder ones self from knowing and resolving to do his duty
with idle shifts and pretenses, with excuses and allegations of this or that.
There is a double ignorance of a duty, one of a duty in general considered as
a duty univerfally, as not to know it is a duty to pray, to releeve the poor,
which is a kind of denying the proposition of a Syllogism, that the
understanding must make. There is an ignorance of a duty in particular, to wit,
that this work now at this time, with these circumstances, is a duty, and this
is a denying of the assumption, and each of them will hinder the conclusion of
the conscience, therefore one must do this. Now to make ones self ignorant of
a duty either of these ways by seeming reasons and objections is a sin, and
the not doing of a duty which we have made our selves so ignorant of, will
make us subject to curses you see, as well as if a man plainly refuse to do
it without any such pretenses, for he that hides his eyes shall have store of
curses. This is that which the Scripture calls winking with ones eyes, Mat.
13.15.
and detaining the truth in unrighteousness. Romans 1.18.


This is that Saint Peter calls a not knowing willingly, 2 Pet. 5.3.
as the men of the old world knew nothing of Noah's going into the Arc, which
had been taught to them sixscore years together, because with carnal
objections they had blinded themselves. This is a kind of refusing to know
judgment. That this is a great fault, I shall prove to you by two reasons.

good and not to be so; for because he would not seem to offend, he invents
devices and shifts: if the answer should be downright, I know it is a duty,
but I will not do it, Such a flat opposition to conscience will make a man to
be condemned of himself, but because he would maintain in himself an
opinion of himself that he is good, and yet is not willing to be good in truth
(and show it by doing the thing commanded, though his corruption stand never so
averse to it) therefore he seeks about for reasons to hide his eyes, to make
him believe it is no duty, that he may at once both serve sin, and not be
known to himself to serve it. As did the proud men to whom God sent Jeremy
with a commandment that they should not go down into Egypt but tarry in the
land, Jer. 43.2, 3
they would not seem so rebellious as to say, though God bid us tarry here yet
we will not, but they hid their eyes by making themselves believe that Jeremy
was enticed by Baruch to prophecy this against them, that he might deliver
them into the hands of the Babylonians.

Open rebellion faith, I will not do it though it be a duty, hypocrisy will
deal more finely, and say I would do it if it were a duty, but it is not,
though it have none but frivolous allegations to disprove it: hence comes
this hiding of the eye, therefore it is a great offense.

eyes causes the Lord at last to make men blind, even to strike them with a
spirit of blindness, that they shall be so hood-winked and muffled as the
lightest and brightest truth that is, shall never sink into their minds, and
so they will be hardened in sin against all reproves and exhonation and
admonitions, that nothing will work them to amendment, and so by utter
impenitencie and hardness they tumble themselves headlong to the pit of
perdition, as you see in the Prophet Isay, God says, Make the eyes of this
people blind and their heart fat, that is, as much as if he had said, all thy
labor with them shall profit nothing, they shall grow harder and harder,
blinder and blinder, the more they be taught and instructed. Why? What is the
reason that God will sell them over to their own hardness and blindness?
That place alleged also, Mat. 13.14, 15. leads us to the reason, Their eyes
have they closed, least at any time they should see and convert and be healed.
A refusing to know by closing ones eyes against light with fond excuses, that
is the true sin which God punishes even with giving them up to utter
impenitencie and blindness, so this that is a fruit of guile and procurer of
utter hardness is a fearful sin. Now of the last point. He shall have
curses enough.

The omitting of good duties will bring many curses, sins of omission bring
men under the curse, as Christ does declare in bidding men depart from him
cursed, because they had not visited him, and the Law that says, Cursed is he
that does not establish the Law, and the omitter of an enjoined duty does not
establish the Law, therefore he is cursed.

A wrong to God and man.
They wrong God and man too, and therefore God and man both curse him that is
guilty: He that refuses to do that which God enjoyneth him to perform to
any man for his benefit, is injurious to God that commands the doing of that
good, and to man that should enjoy the benefit of it. The Steward which is
wished by his Master to give so much to such a Servant, and keeps it
himself, is a thief both to his Master, and also to the person whom he has
defrauded of his Masters allowance; Hence it is, that men in anger many times
will (though they should not) wreake themselves upon them with curses and
imprecations, and God always will punish their unfaithfullnesse to himward
with execution of the curses denounced against them. Thus have I made good
these several points.

I will do the best I am able to make them Useful to you, and that in way of
reproof, instruction, and comfort.

First, for reproof, Uses. 1 For Reproof.
I beseech you brethren be willing to receive reproof, for the reproves of
wisdom are wholesome reproves, and tend to life, and give me leave, yea give
your own consciences leave, to reprehend and chide you thoroughly, for your
great back wardnes and unwillingnes to this work, whereto the God of Heaven
has made so plain and merciful a promise, and for your frequent falling into
that sin, against which you read and hear so fearful and hideous, and
grievous a threat of many curses. What a naughtiness is it in a man! that has
the will of God evidently revealed unto him in the Scriptures, and that is not
ignorant of those Texts that command duty and forbid sin, yet to fall still
into the sin forbidden, and still to be found careless of the duties
required, yea so to fall into the faults and fore-slacke the duties, that he
scarce ever takes notice of his offending either ways, to find fault with
himself for it, or to acknowledge his evil carriage therein. Whence can this
contrariety of our lives to the sacred Scriptures arise, but from not believing
the Scriptures, that is, our making God the author of them a Lier. Beloved in
our Lord, come and lay your lives to this Text, here God you see has
undertaken to save from want all those that by the exercise of bounty have
been careful to supply the wants of the poor. Say then, how comes it to
pass that you have been so backward to those costs, so negligent of this
service, so unwilling to lay out your money to this good work. Whence is it I
say that you stand so averse to this service? you may ascribe it to other
causes, if you lust to deceive your selves with your vain reasonings, and be
not willing to see your own badnesse, but the true cause and that that does
indeed render you so slack to such expenses is nothing but that cursed bitter
root of unbeleefe. You give no sound credit to the promises of God in his Word
made to the bountiful, nor to the threats denounced against those that hide
their eyes; I say you do not thoroughly and in your hearts assent to them. It
is a most easy thing to brag of faith and to affirm with our mouths, that
we believe the Scriptures, but to believe them indeed is not easy, and this
is the cleerest distinction between a sound faith and a bare boasting and
bragging of faith, the one is effectual and works by obedience, and the
other is powerless and cannot sway the heart to obey. You are therefore now to
take notice of your unbeleefe, to ascribe your niggardliness to that, and
abhor that evil root that brings forth such bad fruit that grows on that
root, and to abhor your selves that you have not yet so far prevailed with
your own hearts as to make you believe the holy Scriptures seriously and
thoroughly. For let us a little reason with you about this matter, do you not
find a great difference betwixt your disposition to other costs and those of
giving to the poor! you are ready to the other, to this mavelous backward;
in the other you are free, in this sparing; in the other you are constant, in
this seldom; the other you part with as if you saw some reason for them, these
you part with as if there were no cause at all that you should part with them.
This could not be if you did thoroughly believe this present Text of Scripture,
other costs you extenuate both before and after the bestowing, pish, it is but a
matter of six pence, let it go, these you aggravate and make great, why, I pay
six pence by the week or a shilling, and for pounds, your bounty (of the most)
is never wonted to such high sums. To works of kindness some are pretty
forward, to superfluous expenses about their bodies, houses, and children, to
trim and set them forth, very forward: to works of riot and luxury many be
over forward, but to works of pity and to bestowing on the poor, oh how
quite contrarily affected. I pray where has God promised to preserve you from
need if you lay out your money in rich and fair clothes, in plenteous
banquets, in visitings, in feasting, in courtesies or the like, no where that I
can remember. But if you lay out for mercy to the needy, lo here and in many
places besides, you have a promise that you shall not want, did you believe
this and those promises, by how much such giving is more acceptable to God, and
should be more profitable to your selves, by so much you would be more forward
and plentiful therein; oh therefore see, confess, bewail this niggardly
disposition with the very fountain of it, infidelity, not believing that the
Scriptures be from God and so most undoubtedly true, and shall most certainly
be fullfilled in every promise and every threat.

Furthermore consider, how glad you are to fight against wants by such means
as natural reason does prescribe, and what pains you take to keep out
penury. The worldly ways of not being pinched with penury are carefully
followed. What makes the ventrous Merchant to live within a few inches of death
upon the floating waves, and to commit himself to the danger of Pirates,
shipwreck, diseases, and to undergo the trouble of being imprisoned in his
ship for many months together, and the labor of a tedious journey! why, this
is the means to save him from want and to make his state plentiful. Why does
the Tradesman lay out his stock, frequent markets and faires, toil and take
pains in getting together commodities and selling them again? why, else he
could not maintain his charge, nor hold up his credit, nor escape want. What
makes every man so thriftie, so painful, so careful of his estate, he might
sure spend all else and come to want. Lo when reason prescribes to prevent
wants, you do not stand on points of hazard, labor, or anything. Surely if
you gave credit to Gods promise as well as to the counsel of natural reason,
you would try his way as well as the ways of the world. It is undeniable,
every man would save himself and his from need, and if you were persuaded,
that giving to the poor would do it, you would as certainly, willingly, and
abundantly give, as you are careful to save and get, and use all good
husbandry in all other things. And a little more to aggravate this great fault
of niggardliness in giving to the poor; Let us suppose that some mighty and
rich Monarch should send his Son or Servant unto you, requiring you to
furnish him with things necessary for such an occasion, and withal promise of
his honor, that you should never want any thing, if he found you for his sake
liberal to such persons, would not you be at much cost for them, would you
not even strain your selves to the utmost for them. Lo now beloved, a King
might win you to lay out half your estate, yea all and more then all, even
so as to run far in debt, if he would say to you, thou shall never lack if
thou will do this kindness for me. But the promise that God has here made,
works upon you no more then if you had never heard a word of it, and yet it is
one of the sentences that is to be read, and I think is read often in your
ears. Surely I conclude against you, whatsoever your tongues say, yet your
hearts do not verily believe the Scriptures, and therefore the Word you hear
profits not, because it is not mixed with faith in you that hear it. Will you
not find out your infidelity to condemn it in your selves by improoving your
unwillingnesse to give to the poor as a just proof of it! if you do not
observe the root upon which sins do grow, you shall never mend them because
you shall never see their hatefullnesse and dangerousnes, but if you inform
your selves aright of the close and secret vices which produce neglects of good
duties in you, those omissions would so much humble you as to procure a
reformation.

I have reproved you enough, Use 2. Of Exhortation.
I proceed to exhort and provoke you to this duty and to deter you from this
sin. Here is a duty giving to the poor, here is a sin hiding the eyes, what
say you? will you perform this duty hereafter? will you take heed of this
sin? It is certain, that hearing without resolution to obey is mere
hypocrisy, and a loath some abuse of Gods ordinance; you stand all here before
the Lord as if you were his people and would obey him. Now show your selves to
be either true or false, true by consenting to the Word and settling your
hearts in a purpose of obeying, or false by the contrary. Make this conclusion
with your selves, has the living God my Master not alone enjoined me to give
unto the poor, but also undertaken to provide for me and mine, that no want
shall befall us, if for his sake we will put upon us a liberal resolution, and
has he made me know that store of curses shall pursue me if I fore-slacke
this duty upon any pretexts or excuses; well then, I do even covenant with my
self through his help to be more abundant in this duty, then ever I have
been. Lord thy commandment should bind me though no promise were annexed,
out of a mind willing to subject it self to thee, I should perform that which
thou requirest though thou did not threaten. A good servant will address
himself to his masters work upon a bare bidding, though his master threaten
him not for negligence, but if his master be so urgent as to quicken him by
promises and threats, because it is a proof that his master is earnestly
desirous to have that work well looked unto, he will be so much more careful
and diligent. Therefore now, I will no longer hide mine eyes, I will no more
send my wits about to find out shifts and evasions, whereby I may wind my
self out of the hands of mine own conscience, but I will through Gods help,
I will give liberally to the poor, and if I find my heart backward, and my
hand bound up with the cords of niggardliness, if I find a kind of rising and
grumbling against the duty, I will break through that backwardness either by
fair means or by foul, I will help my self by the remembrance and
consideration of this promise, or threat, or both. I will demand of my self,
and say what meanest thou to be averse from a duty that shall be so profitable
unto thy self, by giving to this man, thou shall not advantage him so much as
thy self, thou shall a little supply his need for the present, but thou shall
save thy self from need for ever; I, I my self shall be the gainer, I shall
interest my self into that express and evident promise of God, which I hear,
He that gives shall not want. I shall assure my self upon the truth of the
most faithful God, not to be delivered over unto penury. But contrarily, If I
yield to mine own pinching humor, and stop mine eyes, and hold my hand, and
do not give when God calls for it in the necessities of his people, I shall
hinder my self, endammage my estate more then ten times so much money can
hinder, for the loss of half or of all mine estate, were not so great a
misery, as to lie open to curses, yea to many curses. O I will never save a few
pence, shillings, or pounds, so foolishly I set by them to make my self
obnoxious to a multitude of curses. Brethren I pray you stir up your
resolutions to this duty by the consideration of this threat and promise, if
when you be in hearing, you would cause your selves to be persuaded, and set
down this conclusion. I see this is a duty, I see God has promised abundant
reward, I see he has threatened heavy punishment, therefore J will resolve to
obey, so obedient hearing would bring forth fruit, those resolutions would at
length take place in your lives. Gods Spirit would incline you to obey if you
would thus strive to incline your selves to obey. But when you hear with an
evil and stiff heart, and will not so much as labor to work your wills to a
firm purpose of practicing, it cannot possibly fall out, that you should put a
duty in practice after hearing, upon which you did not setledly resolve in
hearing.

But that I may not exhort in vain, I will speak in order of four things.
First, I will show you Rules for the due performance of this work. Secondly, I
will prescribe you means that will enable you to it. Thirdly, I will take away
such excuses as may else keep you from it. Lastly, I will subjoyne motives
that will induce you to it.

First, Rules for right giving.
then you must have direction for the due and orderly performance of this work.
Our bounty to the poor must be regular and orderly, for not all giving but a
due and prudent giving pleases God, and procures this blessing, and not all
refusing to give, but hiding the eyes, that is, refusing to give when one
should give, does procure this curse, therefore in the 112. Psalm where he
commends this duty very largely, he says, A good man is merciful and lends
and orders his ways by Judgment, that is, with prudence and discretion, now
these directions about giving show 1. Who must give. 2. To whom it must be
given. 3. The gift to be given. 4. The manner of giving, which being declared,
the duty of giving is plainly set out to us.


1. Who must give, To this I answer, all must give if occasion serve, but
chiefly the wealthy. Not only those that have abundance, but those also that
have a small portion and are themselves none of the richest, must give to the
poor, even to such as are poorer then themselves, and pressed with greater
need, you shall see this answer consirmed in both parts. When the common people
came to John Baptist demanding what they should do, his answer is recorded,
Luke 3.11. He that has two coats lt him impart to him that has none, and he
that has meat let him do likewise, you perceive, that God does not bind
only men that have great store of goods to communicate, but those also that
themselves are but slenderly provided for, yet having something to spare are to
impart that they can spare, unto such as are in greater need then themselves:
he does not say that he which has but one coat, must leave himself naked and
give it to him that had none before, but he that has two, not alone he that
has 5. or 6. or half a score, but he that has one more then his own need
requires. I pray you that are men of meaner rank, not to post of this work
from your selves to your more able neighbors, if you will believe John
Baptist, he that has a little must impart of that little to him that has
less, does not the Apostle Paul give us a most worthy example in the
Thessalonians, of whom he witnesses, 2 Cor. 8.2
that their deep bounty abounded to the riches of their liberality, though
they were a very poor people, (partly because they had suffered great
persecutions for the Gospel, as Saint Paul witnesses in his Epistle to them)
yet they made a shift to gather a great sum of money, to send unto the
brethren at Judea, which it may seem did then suffer greater hardness then
themselves by famine, here is a true praise to have a heart richer then a
purse, and a far larger quantity of mercy then moeny, so now lower persons
must not exempt themselves, or suppose that God dispenceth with them from
giving to the poor. But this work especially belongs to the wealthier son,
who being as it were a full Cisterne, may best let go the cock of bounty to
the releeving of the thirsty, therefore it is charged upon them in special,
saying to the rich, 1 Timothy 6.17.
Give in charge that they be rich in good works, ready to distribute, apt to
communicate. As seeing is the work of the eye as an eye, going the work of the
foot as a foot, so is giving even a plentiful and constant giving, the work
of a rich man as a rich man, and as a candle is of no worth if it give no
light, nor salt if it have no savor, so neither a rich man farther then he
has bounty, it is the special service of his special place, so all must be
givers, the rich most of all; but now the second question must be answered.

2. To whom must we give?

The Text answers the question, to the poor. A poor man, is he that either
wants necessities altogether, or has them in scant measure, these be the
principal objects of bounty. It is not unlawful to give to a wealthy man, but
merciful giving, for which God will account himself as it were beholding,
must seek for its object a needy person, one that wants the necessaries which
should make his life comfortable in a fit measure, I was hungry and you fed me,
and Job caused the loins of the poor to bless him, but you must be informed,
that there are two sons of poor men, some upon whom idleness and
slothfullnesse and a resolution not to work and take pains, does bring
poverty, according to that of Solomon, The idle person shall be clothed with
rags, and the sluggards poverty comes as an armed man, now of these that is
true which Saint Paul says, He that walks inordinately and will not work,
let him not eat. The sluggard that will not labor in sujmmer, Solomon says,
shall beg in winter and have nothing, you see that these men that be able to
work, and out of sluggishnesse will not, are exempted from the number of those
to whom the Lord would have our hands open to give. To feed them is to sat
vermin, as it were, to feed mice, rats, and polecats, yea it is to feed vice
it self to whom they make themselves servants, this is a very ill employment
of mercy, indeed if sickness lie upon them or the like misery, that they
cannot work for the present, they must not be suffered to perish for want of
help, bu else they must be compelled to cast off idleness by being put to it,
either to starve or to earne something for their own bellies, and therefore
most wisely and equally do our laws punish with a mulct those that do releeve
such vagrants, but some poor there be through Gods hand crossing them:
weakness, sickness, blindness, lamenesse, and a great charge, want of
work, or the like things (which no labor of theirs could prevent) have made
penurious and filled them with necessity, as it were with emptiness, these be
the proper objects of mercy and bounty, the fittest persons in the world to
whom a gift may be given, as it is expressed in the Law, Deuteronomy. 15.7. If there
be among you a poor man within any of thy gates in thy land, thou shall not
harden thy heart, nor shut thine hand from thy poor brother, but shall open
thine hand wide unto him, so Levit. 25.35. If thy brother be eaxen poor, and
fallen into decay with thee, thou fhalt releeve him, but of poor men some be
such as show forth holiness, these chiefly must be releeved, for Saint Paul
says, Distributing to the necessities of the Saints, Romans 12.13.
and Christ says, Mat. 25, 40.
In that you have done it to any one of these, you have done it to me, yet so
that we must remember the commandment of Saint Paul, that wishes to do good
to all, and he treats particularly of doing this kind of good. All whom God,
not their idleness makes poor, must be releeved, but chiefly the godly
poor, so you have two rules.

3. A third concerns the gift it self, in respect of the quantity and quality
of it. First, for the quality of it, it must be our own, every man must sit
under his own vine and fig tree, and therefore must give away no figs nor
grapes but his own, Justice must be joined with bounty, Justice must gather
together, and mercy must spread abroad, the Prophet bids, do justice and love
mercy, but to give away another man's goods is to commit theft, which no
bestowing of the thing stolen can possibly excuse, he that hops to make
amends for his wrongful getting by bestowing, suppoe it were the whole (much
less some part of the whole) is abominable to God, for he goes about (as I
may say) to bribe God, and to make him a partner in the spoil, therefore Saint
Paul wishes a man not to steal but to work with ones hands the thing that is
good, that he may have to give to him that needs, we must resolve to be
rightly interessed into that which we communicate to others you see, for giving
is transferring the givers right to the receiver of free will, now how is it
possible that he should pass any right from himself to another which never
had it in himself! wherefore an unjust man makes himself utterly incapable of
giving alms, till he have purged his goods, and separated that which was his
own from that that is not his own, by a due and just practice of the work of
restitution. Now for quantity, Saint Paul determines it, saying that the same
may be as a matter of bounty, 2 Cor. 9.5
and in the same Chapter, but this know, Ver. 6.
that he that sows liberally shall reap liberally, and that it may be
liberal it must be fitted to two things; first, the necessity of the receiver,
secondly, the ability of the giver, so the Lord commands in the law, as
before, Thou shall give him sufficient for his need in that he wants, and S.
Paul says, That your abundance may be a supply for their want, and their
abundance for your want, that there may be an equality, and after, the
ministration of this service supplieth the necessity of the Saints, Ver. 12.
this is one thing that must limit the gift, the other is the ability of the
giver, as Saint Peter says, Let him that ministers do it as of the ability
which God has given, and the Disciples purposed as they were able to send
relief to the brethren in Judea, only we must take heed that we do not
streighten our selves in our own conceits, and make our selves believe our
ability is less then it is, this is to give sparingly, but we must follow the
Thessalonians who were forward according to their ability, and rather beyond
it; though one man cannot supply the wants of all, yet each must open his hand
so that all together may bring things to such an equality, that he that
gathered little may have no lack, as Saint Paul says, yea if the time be
hard, and great need lie upon the brethren, then we must practice our Lords
advice, Luke 12.33.
and sell and give alms, as we read that the believers did in the beginning
of the Gospel at Jerusalem, Acts 2.45. and 4.34.
who sold their possessions and laid the money at the Apostles feet, and
distribution was made, as every one had need, and so it came to pass that none
of them wanted. The praise of giving in this kind is that it be a liberal
gift, as S. Paul calls it, with blessings and not sparingly, an abundant gift
is with blessings, with blessings to God from the receiver, and blessings from
God to the giver, therefore covetousness must not measure out the gift, but it
must be riches of liberality. A more particular rule for the quantity of giving
I cannot name, and if our hearts be upright this is sufficient, and the Lord in
not appointing for every man a more particular quantity, does but try the
naturallnesse of our love as Saint Paul speaks.

Now for the manner of giving, it must be given cheerfully, freely, willingly,
and of a ready mind, as Saint Paul tells us, 2 Cor. 9.7
That God loves a cheerful giver, and says, if there be first a willing mind
a man is accepted, which have begun not to do alone, 2 Cor. 8. 10, 11, 12.
but to be forward or willing.

A forwardness, willingness and promptness of the mind is required by the
Apostle, as waters come out of the fountain, as light comes from the Sun,
what good things are done out of an habit of virtue, must be and will be done
gladly, the soul contents it self in them, and does them with delight and
alacrity, this willingness is a proof that we count it no loss so to give
but a gain, that we do it as a man that sows Corn, which rejoices to have
the opportunity of sowing, because he knows the end shall be advantage, the
work will recompense it self, then is it the naturallnesse of love, for what
things operate according to their own nature, they do it freely, as a stone
goes easily downward, but upward it goes by force and compulsion, what is
wrested out by importunity and earnestness, as a thing compelled can scarce be
called a gift, and this is the first rule for the manner of giving.

2. The second is, you must give constantly, to seven and also to eight, as
Solomon says, even so often as the necessities of the Saints require, for the
Apostle says, distributing to the necessities of the Saints, he does not say
distribute but distributing, using the participle, which notes a continued act
of distribution, so says Saint Paul of the Philippians, Phil, 4.16
You sent once and again, to my necessity, a well head, or a spring runs
with a constant stream and will not be dry, so should merciful deeds flow
from us, how else do we abound in this grace! he that gives but seldom,
abounds not in giving, no more then he that seldom prays and hears, abounds
in praying or hearing, 2 Cor. 9.11.
being enriched in all things to all bounty, which causes through us
thankes-giving to God, and that you having always all-sufficiencie in all
things, Ver. 8.
may abound in every good work, this abundance cannot be without a constant
stream in giving. Saint Paul treats chiefly of works of mercy, when he bids
us not to be weary of well-doing. We must not wax weary of giving no more then
men do of sowing, so long as seed time lasts, so long will there be casting
in seed, every day is our seeds time, (blessed be God we have so long a seeds
time) our seeds time lasts so long as life lasts, we have good ground, so
long as one poor man or woman lives, that fears God at least, so long as we
have the poor with us (as we shall have always) so long we must be doing good
unto them, if our mercy must imitate Gods, sure it must be constant, for so is
his to usward, indeed if we give not constantly, we give not out of a true
habit of mercy, for those acts that do flow from habits will offer themselves
upon every occasion, and so you have the second rule for manner of giving.

3. The last is, we must give in an upright and sincere manner, that is to
say, not induced to it by sinister and corrupt motives and ends, but by due and
just motives and ends. For the truth and sincerity of every action, is taken
from the inducement that leads unto it, and the end at which the agent aims
in it, now the right and due motives to bounty, must be love to God, and man
for Gods sake, as Saint Paul tells us, that Charity is bountiful, as also
obedience to Gods commandments, and faith in Gods promises, these are the
three most solid and powerful motives to every good work, by which we ought
to be swayed in the course of our lives, and so to this good work in
particular, obedience, faith, love, for so the Apostle tells you, You know the
grace fo our Lord Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 8.9
how that he being rich, was made poor for us that we, etc. and says John, 1
John 4.11.
if God so loved us, we ought also to love one another, 1 John 3.16.
and hereby perceive we the love of God to us that he laid down his life for
us, therefore we ought to lay down our lives (much more to give a part of our
goods) for the brethren. But there be certain corrupt and evil motives and
ends, (for those two terms note but the same thing in different respects)
which we should carefully remove from us.

The first is vainglory, to be seen of men, for then our Lord tells us we
have received our reward, this is hypocritical, pharisaicall, guilefull, a man
serves sin in it, not God, nor man, though it may profit the receiver, the
givers soul shall be no whit advantaged by it, these thoughts of gaining the
praise and esteem of men, are to be thrust out of our minds, that they may
not pollute our merciful deeds.

Another end and motive there is worse then this, and that is a conceit of
satisfying for sin, or deserving life eternal, this is to make our deeds stand
in steed of Christ's obedience, of his sufferings and righteousness, this is to
offer strange incense to God, a thing deserving cutting off in the old law,
this is to overvalue our deeds, and under-value Gods Justice and kingdom; A
sudden oath or taunting term or the like called venial sins, were not
such offenses to the divine Majesty, if the giving of a groate or shilling to a
poor man might propitiate for them, heaven were an easy purchase and too
cheap a pennyworth, if a man might buy it by giving alms, these fancies do
so putrify works of mercy, that they become odious unto God, because he that
does them puts confidence in the flesh, as Saint Paul calls it, and therefore
causes his alms to be but a work of the flesh, which kind of work cannot
please God: J have done with rules of mercy, I go to the next point and will
give you some means of helping you to be merciful.

That a man may give, Means to enable men to works of mercy.
he must have money to give, and he must have an heart, he must have a will,
and he must have a gift too, for he that has nothing cannot give though he
would, he that wants a heart cannot give, because he will not, both therefore
are requisite, and I will show you what must be done for the getting of both,
and because the heart is the more needful of the twain as I suppose, I will
begin there, hearken my beloved Brethren, I will show you how you must work
your hearts to a merciful liberality, to that end you must do these three
things.

1. You must seriously consider of those commandments, promises, and threats,
which are found in Gods Book cooncerning this duty, pressing them upon your
selves, get into thy closet, search the Bible, turn to the precepts to this
duty, and say, is not mercy plainly, often, earnestly required? and shall I
dare to disobey so many evident and urgent precepts? Why do I come to Church,
if for fashion sake, then I am an hypocrite, if because God bids me, does not
he that said hear the Word, say give to the poor? and if conscience bind me
to the one, does it not bind me to the other? say to thy self, shall I dare
to live in the manifest breach of so many clear commandments, as do enjoyne
giving to the poor, I must not, I will not, I dare not, if I do I shall give
the devil so great advantage in the day of conflict, that I shall never be
able to escape grievous terrors, for he that keeps all the commandments and
breaks one will be found a transgressor of all, and little will it avail me to
have seemed religious if I be not merciful, so the like in regard of promises
and threats, urge them and press them upon your selves, till you have even
compelled your unwilling will, to resolve to interest your selves into so many
promises, and to shun the danger of so many threats, if we would thus hide
the Word of God in our hearts it would work, J mean God by it would work
(for it is his Ordinance) even every grace in our hearts.

2. But to meditation you must add prayer, beseeching God to give you this so
worthy a grace by which you shall be made so like unto himself, that you may
know your selves to be his children, hereby says our Savior, You shall be
known to be my Disciples, John 13.34.
if ye love one another, and hereby shall we be known to love if we pity and
releeve, Hereby we know we are translated from death to life, 1 John 3.14.
because we love the brethren, and hereby we know that we love the brethren,
because our hearts and hands are open to them, for love is bountiful; O Lord,
say, implant mercy in my heart, O make me liberal of my money, as thou wast of
thy blood. O let me have an heart to give out of my purse to those for whom
thou gave thy self a ransom, enlarge my heart with Christian charity and
compassion, that I may be ready to give, willing to communicate; Thou that
tellest me, thy self art pleased with such sacrifices; O work in me that that
is well pleasing in thy fight, and let me be pleased to offer such sacrifices
as thou art pleased to accept; Thou gave this grace to the Thessalonians,
give it also to me, and cause this grace to abound in me; The spirit of God
will hearken to our supplications and work these virtues in us if we seek
them from heaven, and then indeed be these graces worthy the name of graces,
when a man has gotten them by calling on God for them as the fruit of his
Spirit.

But yet another thing must be added to meditation and prayer, and that is
practice.

3. A man must begin to give, that he may get an habit of giving and press
himself to be much in doing a good work, till he have made it easy and
delightful to himself, you know what great perfection practice does bring to
them that were but very bunglers at the first, the most niggardly spirited man
or woman in the world, if they will set themselves to cross their base minds
and churlish thoughts, and say well I will be no longer a niggard, I will lay
up something for Christ's members and good works, and so open his hand the next
occasion that comes, to bounty, and so again and again, shall at length
find as great a promptness to it, as he found a backwardness before, you
must offer violence to your uncharitable hearts, and exercise your selves in
giving, and that will at last make you free in giving. I have showed you how to
get an heart; Now I will tell you how you must get something to give, and that
must be done by three other things.

1. You must use diligence. 2. Thrift. And 3. You must lay up something in
store for mercy.

First then, he that would be merciful to the poor, must be diligent in his
calling and in the labors thereof, the diligent hand will make rich, and so
provide matter for bounty, Saint Paul wishes, Ephesians. 4.20. To labor with the
hands the thing that is good that they may have to give, this is one end that
we must propound to our selves in the work of our vocation that God may so
bless us, not alone that we may have enough for our selves, but get some
overplus too, for the relief of others, but a sluggard can never give, he will
be like an empty pitcher or barrel, he that cannot put his hand to his own
mouth, how should he put it to another mouth! Be you therefore painful that
God may prosper you and may replenish you with good things, that you may
communicate them to others.

Secondly, thrift must be as it were the purveyor for liberality.

Thrift is due saving from sinful and needless expenses. Oh how much might
our ability be for mercy, if we would carefully cut off superfluities, the
vessel that runs our unduly will be empty when men come to draw out of it,
so will the state be if we let it leake as it were a cracked or broken vessel.

You will ask me from what must I save?

I answer, from riot, luxury, drunkenness, gaming and such sinful expenses,
by which men serve the devil and the flesh, from needless journies and
contentious suits in law from excess in works of kindness, from excess in
attire, feasting, household stuff and the like, and why my Brethren should you
not be willing a little to take off from your own superfluities to help
others wants, and deny your selves of that which is much more then enough, to
administer to them that have less then enough, sure the Lord did not give you
riches to play the Diveses and pamper your selves, but to act the part of good
Jobs, and make the poor man's back and belly to bless you, I confess the
Lord allows you to enjoy the liberal portion he gives you, and you may
lawfully do it, but he commands you to give to the needy, and why should you
not do that also, either you have enough for both or not, if you have, why do
you not perform both, if not, why do you not cut off the less worthy
expenses for the more worthy? Therefore let your care be to look that nothing
be wasted or misspent, that there may be enough for so profitable a service, how
much might be saved from idle courtesies, from over fine fare and garments, and
how abundant might we be then in works of mercy and yet be never a whit the
poorer at the years end, but the last thing to make a man able to deeds of
mercy is,

3. He must lay in store for mercy, he must have a poor man's box in his
house; when David minded to build an house for God, he provided all things
before hand in abundance, so must we lay up materials for the building of
mercy, that we may not be to seek at the time of using, this course Saint Paul
prescribes to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 16.1. and said that he had taken the
like order with the Church of the Galatians, Let every one lay in store by
himself as God has prospered him, that there may be no gathering when I come.
He that has something lying by him which he did sequester formercy, will give
with a free heart, but it will come hardly if nothing be provided for it, if
you ask me how much you must lay aside, I answer, Be sure you do it in
convenient abundance, rather with the more then the less. And I suppose it is
a quantity that may well be spared of most men, the tenth of their commings in
for pious uses, so shall one be sure he is rich in good works, and that he has
done as much this way, as in ordinary times God requires of him, for the Jews
had the poor man's tithes as well as the Levites, But try this way first, cast
aside thy tenth penny, and if thou find Gods blessing so liberal that thou
can well spare it, give it still, if not according as thou art prospered.
Beloved, now I have showed you how you may fit your hearts and your hands for
this much commended service of mercy, let me go on to remoove those excuses by
which men are wont to hinder themselves from mercy, and as it is in my Text, to
hide their eyes. Objections against giving answered.
Those are taken from four heads: first, from others, secondly, from
themselves, thirdly, from the poor, fourthly, from the effects they think
will follow of such giving.

First, from others, 1. Objectio^ from others.
they allege they give as much as others do of their estate, and perhaps
more, well, let us see how this reason runs: I must do as my neighbors do,
now they give not so much, therefore need not I. Brethren, thee give after
thine ability, not after thy neighbors niggardlines, most men are backward and
sparing this way, but the niggardise of one is no excuse for that of another.
And again, how know thou that thou give as much as others of thy means,
do thou know all that they give: do they acquaint thee with their whole
bounty: They may give much that thou hear not of, be not so uncharitable as
to count them vainglorious, that will give nothing but in public, a man may
easily deceive himself with this reasoning: 2. Objections from a man's self
but other excuses are taken from a man's self, and these are principally five.



Solomon in another case, If thou say I know it not, does not God ponder the
hearts, does not he know it? Pro. 24.12. Can you mock God with pretending
ignorance.

Secondly, if you know it not, is it not for want of enquiring, and seeking to
know, how comes it you are so inquisitive of other things that nothing can
escape you, and here you be so careless of enquiring, that you know nothing:
So it is often your fault not to know, and one fault cannot excuse another. A
second excuse is,

will not know what is enough, if thy great abundance be little enough for
thee, can thou think so short a pittance as thy brother has much enough for
him; thou have variety of food, diverse pounds or hundreds by the year, he has
scarce any thing, and must you allege, I have little enough, he that is all
for himself counts all little enough, if we had charity we would think if
so much be but sufficient for us, O how far is so little from sufficing him,
this objection savours too strongly of being lovers of our own selves, to be
accepted with God. But now another objection.

thee give too, therefore thou must do both; and thou must provide for both,
and not strive to do the one in so over large a measure as to omit the other
altogether, save from vanity and thou shall have sufficient for both uses,
provide moderately for thine own, and thoushalt have sufficient for the poor
also. Another objection.

to give, but I have it not. To this I answer, self. I answer, It may be so,
but thou may give so moderately, as still to have some to give, so this
excuse is frivolous. The last excuse is,

in clothes, etc. they are far inferior, those of mercy are nothing in
comparison of the other, certainly this ought not to be, for God bids feast
the poor, not the rich, that is, rather then the rich, wherefore in doing so
much less for mercy, then courtesy, thou make it evident that thou do not
enough for mercy, yea, but my place requires so much, I answer, and does not
thy place require riches in mercy as well as in clothes and other things, know
therefore, that until thou art as abundant in deeds of mercy, as other things
less necesssary, God will not think thee to have done enough, and what will
it avail thee then, if thou make thy self believe thou have done enough. 3
Objections from the poor.
Now objections come from the poor.



I answer, Sol.
all are not so, give to them therefore that be thankful.

Secondly, one man's fault must not dispense with another man's duty, thou art
unthankful to God yet he gives, so must thou.

And lastly, take heed thou do not causelessly accuse them of unthankfullnesse
which thou can not prove.



I answer, prove this, then thou art a slanderer as well as a niggard, and here
be two faults in one.



I answer, 4 Objections from the effects of giving.
now the last objecitons are from the effects of so giving.



I answer, for this expense, here we bewray mere wilfulness in taking up
fond and false objections. A man may be very bountiful and yet reserve
sufficient for all other good uses too, as Saint Paul says, 2 Cor. 9.8
That having all sufficiency in all things, you may abound in every good
work, for God is able to make all grace to abound to you.

Lastly, Ob.
if I give so much away, I shall never be rich.

I answer, Sol.
here is an excuse worse then the fault, for here is a charging God with flat
falsehood, he says, give and thou shall not want, thou say I shall want if I
give, he says, he that gives shall be blessed, thou say, he shall not, he
says, he that waters shall be made fat, thou say, he shall be made lean,
he says, he will repay it, thou say he will nor repay it. Is not this an
horrible presumption to impute falsehood to God? and then this objection
arises from a principle most abominable, viz. this, what I cannot be rich if
I do, that I will not do, Why? must not Gods commandments be obeyed if they
will keep thee from riches, does he not say, labor not to be rich, and does
not he say, he is not worthy of me that will not loose all for my sake, so
thou must be ready to do what God bids, though it would keep thee from
riches, for what if we be not rich, what hurt is that? we may be saved though
we be not rich, but if we will not do our duty we cannot be saved. Besides,
if thou be not rich in the world, thou shall be rich in good works and
that is the best riches. I cannot bethink myself of other objections, but that
they mnay all be resolved into these: O now hide not your eyes with these
frivolous excuses: but for all this the niggardly heart will grumble out, thou
should give, but to make thee see why thou should give, I will set thee
down Motives enough to giving. Motives to give.


First, does not God give to all richly to enjoy? why should not thou imitate
thy Father and be bountiful like him?

Secondly, from thy self, art not thou a steward? and why should not thou
bestow thy Masters wealth after his commandment? may not thou thy self
need, and would thou not in thy need be releeve? why should not thou know
it reason, to do to oaths as thou would have them do to thee: why should
not thou sow such a crop as thou would reap?

Thirdly, from them to whom thou should give, are they not brethren to thee,
sons and daughters to God, has not he tied them to thee by many bonds, the
same God made and preserves them, the same Savior redeemed them, they have
the same faith, the same spirit, the same baptism, head, and wilt not thou see
reason to give to them that are so near thee?

And fourthly, from thy wealth, is it not uncertain and fickle? why then
should thou not do good with it whilst thou have it, for when it is gone,
nothing will comfort thee but the remembrance of the good thou have employed it
in, as we see in Jobs case.

But lastly, consider the fruit of this giving, and it cannot but win thee to
giving, for it is of all the things in which we may bestow our goods the most
advantageous, it does the greatest good, extending to the most and greatest
things, and in the largest measure. It does good to the soul for the present,
in ministering an assure argument of uprightness and so of unspeakable comfort,
chiefly in the day of temptation, this giving assures the conscience before God
as Saint John says, so can no other expending. It does good to the name,
procuring more honor to ones self, and more honor to ones Religion, then all
the fine clothes in the world, and all the gay buildings, those do not prove a
man good, merciful, charitable, this does; it does the greatest good to the
state, for it is a sowing that will bring in harvest, it will secure from
wants, which no riches can do. It does the greatest good to the seed, for they
shall enjoy the blessing, yea it does all these things too, in the greatest
quantity, for to no other giving are half so many promises made, and our good
shall be according to Gods promises. It does good for longest continuance, for
it does good after death. The money so bostowed shall follow one, yea it shall
follow him at the resurrection, for then shall these expenses be remembered,
praised, rewarded. It does good with most case, for here needs no toiling, no
great laboring, sweating as in other things, for God will bring the fruit to
our hands by a secret blessing (as he makes the corn to grow when it is
sowed) whilst men sleep and do other things, not thinking of it, yea it does
all this with most assurance, one cannot loose this gain for God is the
assurer, and if we will live by faith, here is no hazard at all, he that has
Gods word cannot loose his reward. Lo now store of reasons, and those clear,
and those weighty, to persuade you. O Brethren be persuaded, be persuaded, get
this blessing, get security against wa^ts, rush not upon many curses, what shall
I say more? the Lord bade Moses speak to the rock, and it gave water, will
you be harder then rocks? he commanded the clouds to send down Manna, will
you be ebellious above the senseless clouds? yea he bade the ravens bring
bread and flesh to Eliah, will you be worse then these ravenous fowls? O now
pow redowne showers of bounty upon your needy brethren, and God will pow
redowne showers of blessings upon you. Bethren be not forgetful hearers but
doers of the work that you may be blessed in your deeds. Give that you may
never want, hide not your eyes that you may not inherit many curses, I require
you to be doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving your own selves.

And this if any amongst you heretofore have done, 3. Use of comfort.
or hereafter will do, to them we must speak a word of encouragement, assuring
them that they shall find God true, they shall not want. Their seeds-time shall
bring in h arvest, God will bless their seed sown, he will enrich them to
all bounty; God will perform his promise to them and to their seed. Whosoever
will give liberally to the poor, that is, bestow as much in merciful expenses
as in works of superfluity, and kindness, here he has Gods word, he shall
not want, let him acknowledge the sufficiency and faithfulness of God, and
go away assured, that the Lord will abundantly supply all his needs according
to the riches of his grace in Christ.

FINIS.

