GOOD NEWS FROM VIRGINIA.

SENT TO THE COUNCIL and Company of VIRGINIA, resident in England.

FROM ALEXANDER WHITAKER, THE Minister of HENRICO in Virginia.

WHEREIN ALSO IS A NARRATION of the present State of that Country, and our
Colonies there.

Perused and published by direction from that Counsel.

And a Preface prefixed of some matters touching that Plantation, very
requisite to be made known.

AT LONDON, Imprinted by Felix Kyngston for WILLIAM WELBY, and are to be sold
at his Shop in Paul's Church yard at the sign of the Swanne 1613.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, MY VERY GOOD LORD, RAPH LORD URE, Lord President of
Wales: Continuance and increase of all Honor and happiness, from Christ Jesus.
RIght Honorable, amongst the many discouragements that have attended this
glorious business of the Virginian plantation: none has been so frequent, and
so forcible, as the calumnies and slanders, raised upon our Colonies, and the
Country it self. These being devised by the Devil, and set abroach by idle
and base companions, are blown abroad by Papists, Players and such like, till
they have filled the vulgar ears* And having once entered, then they run (like
wild fire) from man to man: for as wild fire, hardly finds a house which is
not matter combustible; so these idle tales hardly meet a man who gives not
(passage at the least, if not) credit to them: whereupon the Devil and his
associates (of all sorts) hold and practice this rule, Calumniare audacter,
aliquid haeret.
as a sure Maxim, speak any thing, some will believe it; be it never so
false, some will entertain it, Truth and Innocence shall never so wipe it
off, but some thing will stick behind. Our only comfort is (next to the
assurance of Gods acceptance of the work) that men of honorable minds, and
ingenuous dispositions, and all that are godly-wise, will check and control
these idle and slanderous surmises, as they meet with them: and for their
better assistance, encouragement and direction in so doing, our Counsel and
Governors hold it needful to make known to the world, such relations and
informations as we receive from thence, from men of judgment and experience,
and of approved faithfulness and integrity. And therefore though this ensuing
Treatise (written by Master Whitaker, one of our Ministers in Virginia) was
spoken there, and sent hither rather for the private use and encouragement of
such, whose purses here, or persons there were ing^ged in the action, then
with any intent to make it public: yet for the reasons aforesaid, it was held
fit after mature consideration to diuulge it, that so the naked and plain
truth may give a just affront to the cunning and colored falsehoods devised by
the enemies of this Plantation.

And because the man was once so well known to me (as he is still, and ever
shall be beloved of me) I was desired by them, that may command me to peruse
the Original it self, and for that I had (as they probably thought) some
knowledge of his hand, to consider whether truly or suspiciously it bore his
name. And if I found cause of the least suspicion, to reject it: but if, by
true and infallible tokens, to be his hand, then to give some testimony to the
world of a truth so evident?

Two points therefore I perceive needful to be made known, The f^rst point:
who Master Whitaker is that wrote this Treatise.
which I desire all men to take notice of, from me, who have peculiar reason
to know them both, so well, as few or no other can: first, who the Author is;
and then, whether this come undoubtedly from him or no.

The Author is Master Alexander Whitaker, Preacher to the Colonie at Henrico,
under the government of the valorous and worthy Knight Sir Thomas Dale, with
whom also he went: he was son to that reverend renowned, Doctor Whitaker: a
Master of Arts of five or six years standing in Cambridge: was seated in the
North country, where he was well approved by the greatest, and beloved of his
people, and had competent allowance to his good liking, and was in as good
possibility of better living, as any of his time: he had also some means of
his own left him by his parents: all which notwithstanding, he mee^ely of
himself, for ought I know, entertained a purpose of going to Virginia, to
assist that Christian plantation in the function of a Preacher of the Gospel.
And having after many distractions and combats with himself (as he told me)
settled his resolution, that God called him thither, and therefore he would go:
He accordingly made it good, notwithstanding the earnest diswasions of many his
nearest friends, and the great discouragements which he daily heard of,
touching the business and Country it self: and arrived there with Sir Thomas
Dale, by a very speedy and safe passage (scarce of eight weeks long) in May
1611. from whence he has since then written many comfortable letters, both to
the Counsel and Committies, and his private friends: and of late (after he had
been there a year and more) has sent us this little Treatise, which as I
know assuredly to come from him, and to be a great part of it written, and all
of it subscribed with his own hand. The second point That it is assuredly
(...) and written with his own hand.
So I dare say, if he had thought we would have published it, he would
otherwise have adorned it: for I know (and so do others that know him) he is
able to have written it in Latin or in Greek, and so to have decked it both
for phrase and style, and other ornaments of learning and language, as might
show him no unworthy son of so worthy a father: And I dare say, if he live,
(be it in England or Virginia) he will in due time manifest to the world by
true and good evidence, that God has made him heir, as of diverse of the holy
virtues, so of a good part of the learning of his renowned father. And the more
liberal am I in giving him his due, the further he is off from me, and by
that means can be the less sensible of it.

Nor speak I this so much for his sake (though I love him above many, and know
it above any other) whose own deeds will sufficiently approve him. As for the
truth which is so much suppressed, and that Christian plantation so much
disparaged in this base world: for are they not so impudent as to say* who go
thither but base and banke-rupt persons, and who have no means of their own?
or else such as are persuaded and wrought upon to go? And when they come there,
are they not starued, and do they not die like dogs? But how false this is in
respect of the Country, the narration interlaced in this discourse from him
that lives there, will declare: and how slanderous the other is to the persons,
I shall in some sort make it appear.

I therefore hereby let all men know (and malice it self shall never disprove
it) that a Scholar, a Graduate, a Preacher, well borne, and friended in
England, not in debt nor disgrace, but competently provided for, and liked, and
beloved where he lived, not in want, but (for a scholar, and as these days
be) rich in possession, and more in possibility, of himself without any
persuasion (but Gods, and his own heart) did voluntarily leave his warmenest,
and to the wonder of his kindred, and amazement of them that knew him,
undertook this hard, but in my judgment, heroical resolution to go to
Virginia, and help to bear the name of God unto the Gentiles. Men may muse at
it; some may laugh, and others wonder at it. But will you know the reason? God
will be glorified in his own works, and what he has determined to do, he
will find means to bring to pass, for the perfecting therefore of this
blessed work; he has stirred up able and worthy men to undertake the manning
and managing of it: Magistracy and Ministry are the strength and sinews; nay
the very life and being of a Christian body politic. Therefore seeing without
these all emptying of purses here, and ventering of persons thither, is to no
purpose. God in his wisdom provided, and in his mercy provoked, godly and
able men to furnish both these functions: and such as might at home have lived
in places of honor and command, or in fashion competent and convenient to
their conditions.

And this, Right Honorable, is one of the four Arguments, and as it were
plain demonstrations, that have convinced me to believe that assuredly God
himself is the founder, and favorer of this Plantation. And I will crave
leave of your Lordship to put them down, because I am of mind, that the want
either of knowledge, or consideration hereof, has been, and is the cause of
the error and misprision of the world, touching this business; and do think
that if men did ruminate, and advisedly consider of these particulars, they
would reprove themselves for their former thoughts, and say plainly, Digitus
Dei est hic.

1 The marvelous and indeed miraculous deliverance of our worthy Governors,
Sir Thomas Gates, Liefetenant general, and Sir George Summers, Admiral, with
all their company, of some hundred and fifty persons, upon the feared and
abhorred Islands of the Barmudaes, without loss of one person, when the same
hour nothing was before their eyes, but imminent and inevitable death; as
never ship came there that perished not, so never was it heard of, that any
ship wrackt there, but with the death of all or most of the people, save only
this of ours. Oh how the world should have rung of it ere this, if a far
less deliverance had happened to any of the Jesuitical plantations: and
surely the Counsel of Virginia do wrong themselves and the business: nay
they must give me leave to tell them they obscure the glory of God, if they
take not order, that a full complete and plain narration of that whole
action, both danger and deliverance be published to the world.

2 The full discovery (by means of their former deliverance) of those Barmuda
Islands, which hitherto have been held in the world, as inaccessible, so not
habitable, but so fearful, hideous and hateful, as it seemed a place
abandoned of God and Man, and given up to the devils power and possession, and
to be of all known places in the world, a very hell upon earth, rather then a
place for men to dwell in. But those honorable Gentlemen, being by the heavenly
Pylot preserved upon them, where all men else perished, living there almost a
year (till they had made themselves two little ships of Cedar) found it so
goodly, so rich, so plentiful, so healthie, and so temperate a Country, as
in so long a time, scarce three died of 150. In so much as hardly could they
get their men away, when they departed: these Islands being then discovered, and
since possessed and planted by us, are found a habitation of such safety and
security (having no enemy within nor any to be feared without, because the
entrance is so difficult:) and of such plenty of all things for life; and of
so good temper for health; and fraught with so many rich commodities for
satisfaction of the Adventurers, as for the present they be even as a new life
and a seminary to Virginia: and for the future times, it is likely will prove
a matter of greater consequence, then most men think of, and of more worth,
then any Islands or continent discovered in our age.

3 The special and most fatherly providence of God over this action, in
upholding it when man had forsaken it, and giving it life again when man had
left it for dead: for had not Sir Thomas Gates and Sir George Summers come into
Virginia from the Barmudaes even when they did, the poor Colonie (which during
that year of their absence, by enduring the misery of misgouernement, had
fallen into all extremity of distress) had been gone away, and our Plantation
possessed by the Savages: and (which was much more miraculous) when they being
come in, and in all about 240. persons, and in such extreme misery and
famine, as the Honorable Commander was even forced to yield to that which
others moved (but himself had rather have died then done) namely to put
themselves to the Sea to come for England, and quit the Country: and when this
(full sore against his heart) was put in execution, and every man aboard, their
Ordenance and Armor buried, and not an English soul left in James Town, and
giving by their peale of shot, their last and woeful farewell to that pleasant
land, were now with sorrowful hearts going down the River: Behold the hand of
heaven from above, at the very instant, sent in the Right Honorable La war to
meet them even at the rivers mouth, with provision and comforts of all kind:
who if he had stayed but two Tides longer had come into Virginia, and not
found one English man: whereupon they all with as much joy returned, as with
sorrow they had come away, and making as it were a new entry and possession,
took up their Ordnance and their Armor, and the next day received their
Honorable Lord General, with all joy and applause, and from that day by Gods
blessing they never wanting government, they never wanted bread, for him that
would take pains and do his duty. If ever the hand of God appeared in action
of man, it was here most evident: for when man had forsaken this business,
God took it in hand; and when men said, now has all the earth cast off the
care of this Plantation, the hand of heaven has taken hold of it: God
therefore be glorified in his own work.

But it will be here said by such as are strangers or enemies to this
business: if this Country be so rich and plentiful, and your Commanders so
wise and provident, as you pretend; how could it be that they being there, and
not hindered by war nor invasions, should fall into such extremities of want,
as to be feign to quit the Country, and come for England, or else there to
starve for want of food.

Indeed (Right Honorable) this Objection is of such moment, as though I am
unwilling to be large, yet must I needs spend some lines in giving answer;
which shall be such, I hope, as shall give satisfaction to the indifferent, and
stop the mouths of the malignant.

Let therefore the Christian and courteous Reader be pleased to know, that when
the two forenamed Commanders, in the great ship (called the Sea-Venture) were
lost, and yet saved upon the Barmudaes, their Fleet consisting of six or seven
ships more, and fraught with almost four hundred men landed (after a long and
terrible tempest) in Virginia, where so many men wanting their Governors, and
being too many to be commanded by the Colony they found there before them, fell
first into factions, and at last into plain distractions: and so one year of
misgouernment overthrew that body, which till then had prospered, and by good
government was brought to so good a state, as at their landing they had corn
sufficient in store, a harvest in the ground, good store of living cattle, and
had the Savages in good correspondencie: but this one, yea our want of
government) the mos^ disasterous accident that ever befell that business)
brought all to nothing, for it hindered the building of houses, and planting of
corn, nay it burnt up the houses, and consumed the provisions; so that of good
store of poultrie, it left not one alive, and of six hundred living Swine, not
three: and which was worse, consumed our men, and which was worst of all, it
lost us the Savages, which since has cost many a man his blood, and to this
day is not recovered.

All this while were the Commanders, and their company in the Barmudaes, where
no man dreamed of them, but all the world held them dea^ men; and being there
where none could hear from them, nor they from any others: after almost a
years absence, they go out of the rocks, in the two ships themselves there
made, and going for Virginia, they landed there in the beginning of May; where
expecting to find a full and well planted Colony, of six or seven hundred men,
well stored with corn and cattle: (in assurance whereof, they had carried no
live Hogs with them from the Barmudaes, nor other provisions, more then for a
months voyage, which they might have done in as great abundance as they could
have carried) they contrariwise found a poor Colony, of not an hundred men,
who had endured all miseries, and more then ever we heard of; all the
liue-cattell, corn, and other provisions spent, and the Savages their deadly
enemies. At which meeting, though there was joy to see them, who had been held
so long in the bottom of the sea; yet their sweet congratulation was sharply
sauced, when it was known they had no provision of their own, the Savages
sought their lives, the earth could yield none, where none had been planted,
and if it had, yet in May the old being spent, the new is not ready. All which
considered, it soon appeared there was no humane help left on earth, but with
all speed to hasten for England for new provisions: which motion, though so
harsh to the honorable Commander, as he had rather there have starued, yet
being carried by voices, he would not overrule: and so having buried their
Armor and Ordnance, they went away as we heard before.

All this to be true, I know well, and if any man ask how I know it, for their
satisfaction I answer; I have it from the faithful relation of that religious,
valoutous and prudent Gentleman, Sir Thomas Gates, then and yet our Liefetenant
general, who being himself in his own person a doer of much, a sufferer of
more, and an eye-witnes of the whole, has since related this and much more
unto me, face to face: and all that know him, know him for such a man, as well
deserves to be believed.

All which then being true (as is also well known to many my betters) then let
any reasonable man judge (especially if he be experienced in such affairs)
if there were not a necessary cause of their coming away, and yet neither
fault in the Governor, nor want in the Country.

My fourth and last Argument is, the stirring up of so many Honorable and
worthy persons of all conditions, to disburse so freely and so willingly, such
fair sums of money, and some of them even a good part of their estate, and
that without any certain or apparent hope of speedy profit. This to do
willingly and voluntarily, and without assurance of gain, cannot be, but the
working of God to some higher end then ordinary. And if it be said, there be
some, that wish their money in their purses; it may be so, but for one so
base-thoughted man, I dare say we have many, that wish a great deal more out
of their purses, conditionally this happy business may take good effect. And
this, though it be much, yet in my judgment is but little, to this that
follows: that God should vouchsafe to stir up such able and worthy men, for
the functions both of Magistracy and Ministry, who upon very uncertain hope
of profit, and most certain danger of life it self, should put themselves
into this business, and voluntarily undergo the danger of sea, and all the
miseries and difficulties that necessarily and undoubtedly attend a new
Plantation. To have done this upon pressure, or by calling of Superiors or
command of a State, had bin little; to have done it upon safe and fair
terms, and without danger, had been no great matter; to have done it upon
expectation, and assurance of high rewards and present profit, had been
nothing: but to do it voluntarily, upon sight of danger present and certain,
but of gain future and contingent; seeing it is contrary to the course of
reason, and cannot proceed from folly or madness (they being wise men) nor from
humor and rashness (being stayed men) nor from malecontentednes (being men that
lived in good respect at home) nor in the conceit of meriting (being not
Papists, but of sound religion): It must therefore needs proceed from ye
extraordinary motion of Gods Spirit. For if any out of ignorance or malice do
object, they had nothing to do at home; it is false and frivolous; false, for
they were me^ employed; frivolous, for many more had less to do the^ they, yet
would not go.

As for those that think they wanted in England, do they not see how in
disgracing the persons, they honor the Country? for if they went from England
to Virginia, because they were in want, and voluntarily stay there still; then
it follows that Virginia is able to supply the wants of England. But how idle
and slanderous that imputation is, may easily appear, if we take a view of
the persons themselves. And to begin with the Magistrates and Commanders,
what Noble man is there in England? what Coronall or Captain in the
Low Countries, but knows, and will acknowledge, that the Right Honorable, the
Lord La war, and the Right worthy Knights, Sir Thomas Gates, Sir Thomas Dale,
and Sir George Summers, be persons of honor, estimation, and good respect, and
had both means and employment at home of their own: but to speak of them and
other religious Gentlemen and Captains, who voluntarily left their easy,
pleasant, and wealthy lives in England, and betook themselves to this voyage; I
will leave it to some who are better able to do it, according to their desert
and worth: I will contain my self within my element, and speak of them of my
own function: and amongst them, of those two especially, Master Glouer, and
Master Whitaker, because they went by my knowledge, but not by my procurement;
for I testify it for truth, they moved me that they might go; not I them, that
they would go. Master Glouer an ancient Master of Arts in Cambridge, an
approved Preacher in Bedford and Huntington-shire, reverenced and respected,
and never wanting a competent stipend, yet of himself (I know not how, nor
why) made known his desire to go to Virginia, Master Beard.
to a Reverend Preacher in Huntington, and procuring his letters to me; upon my
answer came up, being a man I had never seen before: and so being well liked
of the Counsel, and conditions being tendered him to his content, he went away
with Sir Thomas Gates in June, 1611. but being in years, and of a weak
constitution, endured not the sea and sickness of the Country, so well as
younger and stronger bodies; and so after zealous and faithful performance of
his Ministerial duty, whilst he was able, he gave his soul to Christ Jesus
(under whose banner he went to fight; and for whose glorious names sake he
undertook the danger) more worthy to be accounted a true Confessor of Christ,
then hundreds that are canonized in the Popes Martyrologe.

Master Whitaker, a man borne, brought up, qualitied, and qualified, settled and
provided for, as you heard before (of whom I have spoken the more, because he
was of long time so well known to me) though he lived as well, and in as good
case and credit, as most young men in our Church: yet voluntarily, and not
suddenly; but after serious deliberation, ouercomming (as himself said) many
inward temptations, and outward discouragements and disswasions; removed
himself from a good stipend of value and certainty, About forty pound a
year in a cheap Country.
and put himself into this dangerous voyage, where now he diligently
preaches, and Catechizeth: and thereby, and by other Ministerial duties,
public and private (and otherwise also, for he is otherways qualitied) he
performs daily and diligent Service, acceptable to God, and comfortable to our
people; over whom he is Pastor: and from whence, as a token of his love and
duty to the Counsel and Adventurers, and as a testimony of the good liking
he conceiues of the Country (by these almost two years experience) he has
sent us this plain, but pithie and godly exhortation, interlaced with
narrations of many particulars touching the Country, climate, and commodities,
worthy to be known of all, especially coming from one of his place and
profession, and of so good experience in the matter he writes of. There is also
(besides it may be some others whom I know not) Master Bucke, an able and
painful Preacher: of whom I can say the less, because he was of Oxford, and
unknown to me; but of whom I have heard Sir Thomas Gates give a good and
worthy testimony, and he came to the Counsel, and to this employment, with
the commendation of a right reverend Prelate: (...) Ra^^^s ^^^d Bishop of
London.
but no matter though I say nothing of him; seeing I doubt not, he will shortly
give notice to the world what he is, and what the country of Virginia is, and
what hope there is of that Plantation; for the service whereof he hazarded his
dearest life, and the rather do I expect it from him, because he is a man now
of long experience, About some ^^a^es.
having been there so long a time, and was himself in person, in the danger
and deliverance at the Barmudaes. So that now (for the conclusion) we see to
our comfort, the God of heaven found us out, and made us ready to our hands,
able and fit men, for the Ministerial function in this Plantation; all of them
Graduates, allowed Preachers, single men, having no Pastoral Cures, nor charge
of children; and as it were, every way fitted for that work. And because God
would more grace this business, and honor his own work, he provided us such
men as wanted neither living, nor liberty of preaching at home: (more in my
judgment have they to answer for, who wanting both, will not only not go
themselves, but disparage and deprave them that go) hereafter when all is
settled ^n peace and plenty, what marvel, if many, and greater then they, be
willing to go. But in the infancy of this Plantation to put their lives into
their hands, and under the assurance of so many dangers and difficulties, to
deuote themselves unto it, was certainly a holy and heroical resolution, and
proceeded undoubtedly from the blessed Spirit of Christ Jesus, 1. John 3^.
who for this cause appeared, that he might dissolve the works of the Devil.
And though Satan visibly and palpably reigns there, more then in any other
known place of the world: yet be of courage (blessed brethren) God will tread
Satan under your feet shortly, Romans 1^.
and the ages to come will eternize your names, as the Apostles of Virginia.

And thus (Right Honorable) you have the reasons that have satisfied my
conscience, that this work is of God, and will therefore stand, though man
should unfaithfully forsake it: and I doubt not, but if many others did know
them, and consider of them, they would certainly change their minds, and say
with me, Doubtless here is the finger of God. As for the continual calumnies
and daily slanders raised of the place, Plantation, and persons that are in it:
and the jests of profane Players, and other Sycophants, and the flouts and
mockes of some, who by their age and profession should be no mockers, (for as
for the rest, who can expect any better figs from thistles, or any sweeter
grapes from such pricking thorns) for all those, I say, and all other
discouragements and deprauements of like nature, I profess I like the
business the better, and have more hope of Gods blessing upon it, even of that
God, whose wisdom is but foolishness with worldly men, and whose ways are
hid from carnal eyes.

And these reasons, I confess, have so far prevailed with me, as this
Plantation shall ever have a portion of my poor estate, and my best prayers,
and my personal pains, and presence also, if God had not provided them fitter
men for such a work.

There is but one thing more, that an indifferent Reader may probably stumble
at, which I will briefly, and easily remove. It may be very well, (will some
say) that these Honorable persons, godly Preachers, and valourous Gentlemen
out of their good minds, or desire to see foreign countries, might put
themselves for once into this work, but do they hold on, or are they there
still? and how many of them, having once bin there, will go again? or being
there, would they not full gladly be at home again, if they could? Indeed,
such base words are given out by some, but they be either ignorant, or
malicious; and how can Ignorance or Malice speak the truth? Ignorance cannot,
though it would, and Malice will not, though it can: but will your Lordship,
and all men know the truth? Be pleased then to be informed, that of all the
aforenamed persons of employment, Sir George Summers, that famous Sea man, our
worthy Admiral, that true and constant friend to Virginia (who in his old age
left a pleasant seat, a good living, and an easy life, In Dorsetshire.
to live and die for the good of Virginia) and that godly good Preacher, Master
Glouer, have both of them given their lives in this business, the former in
the Barmudaes, the latter in Virginia; crying to their God with the blessed
Apostle of the Gentiles (their ^ather whom they followed) We pass not at all,
Act. 20.
neither is our life dear unto us, so that we may fulfill our course with joy,
and the Ministration which we have received of the Lord Jesus, to make way for
the Gospel of the grace of God. Job 2.
It was the Devil that said, Skin for skin, and all that a man has will he
give for his life: and he spoke like himself. But these Champions of Christ
said, All we have, and even life it self, will we willingly give, and
consecrate to God, that the Gospel may be preached, and the name of Jesus
Christ called upon in Virginia: and so gave up their souls to God, and their
flesh to nature, honoring, and in a sort consecrating those Heathenish Earths
with their happy bodies, more worthy to be esteemed precious relics, then
thousands that are preserved and adored in the Romish Church: blessed and
glorious shall their portions be at the resurrection of the Just; and in the
mean time their names shall flourish, when the memory of the wicked shall rot.
Of the rest before named, the worthy Knights, Sir Thomas Gates, and Sir Thomas
Dale, Liefetenant and Marshall, Master Whitaker and Master Bucke, Preachers,
are now in Virginia, and have been some diverse years, and every one almost two
years: And of them, Sir Thomas Gates has been here once, and is gone the
second time: Master Whitaker went with purpose to stay three years; which as
he resolved here, so he there performs, and intends, for ought I perceive,
rather to augment, then diminish the prefixed number: This Lord La-war, our
honorable General, having spent some time there, for want of health was
constrained to come home, but with resolution (as his Lordship spoke in an
honorable presence at his return, and since has published) to return again,
and spend his life in the prosecution of that action. And if the Company were
as able to furnish and send away his Lordship with a fleet and power,
sufficient, as his Lordship is ready and resolved to engage his person again,
and with him many worthy Gentlemen and Captains, there would soon be, not a
verbal, but a real answer given to that question, which is in all men's
mouths so common; Why goes not the Lord La-war again to Virginia. And do
thou ask why his Lordship goes not again? I tell thee because thou that
ask the question, and others like thee, will not put to your hands to help
forward so holy and honorable a work: when the danger is past, and profit
comes in, then we shall have partakers enough, but now for laying of the
foundation, the world is content to look on, and ask us why we go not
forward; we can answer with good consciences, we go forward according to our
power, we move as we have strength, and we move no faster for want of help:
let the world be like it self, and he that is filthy, let him be filthy
still, he that rowseth the hog out of the mire or the worldling out of his
sensuality, does but trouble himself in vain. But you the noble and worthy
Adventurers, whose hearts God has touched, whether you be engaged in purse
here, or person there, go forward, and move on, if not so fast as you would,
yet as you may, let this be your comfort (besides the assured hope of gain in
due time) that you move not against, but for and with God: a little strength
does prevail better with the stream, then much against it: so great means
should do no good, if God were against you, but your weak means shall
prevail, seeing you work with God: Go forward in that name and by the
strength of the Lord your God; and rest assured that his goodness will either
raise you more strength, or will make the strength you have already able to
prevail: be not therefore faint-hearted, but remember it is Gods cause you
have taken in hand. It may therefore be hindered, but cannot be overthrown. If
we then, were, so base as to betray and forsake it, God whose it is will stir
up our children after us, and give them that good land to enjoy, which we are
not worthy of, and which nothing but our sins and sluggishnes can keep from
us: Let us not therefore to our own shame leave so blessed a work, to them
that follow us, least the ensuing ages say of us: Proverb.
Why was there such a price put into the hands of fools who had not hearts to
take it? stand to it therefore and be not wanting to your selves, and God will
never be wanting to you, nor it, till his blessed providence has brought it
to pass, that men shall say, God has made his ways known upon earth, and
his saving health amongst all nations, and blessed be the Lord God, of Virginia
world without end.

And thus (Right Honorable) you may see by that, that has been said, in what
terms our Colonies now stand and what they want. It may hereby appear they
have God their friend and protector, they have honorable and worthy
Governors, godly and painful Preachers, a goodly Country, and no want of
necessaries, since they had government, they only want the hands and help of
men willing and able to do such duties of men, as be requisite in a Plantation,
and the expense that principally and almost only now lies upon us, is the
charge of sending away, a competent number of men, the charge whereof will be
about 20. pound a man. If this were done, it would soon appear, that our
cares and cost were at an end, and that a glorious and comfortable Issue is
shortly to be looked for; which howsoever it may be deferred, through the
backwardness of some, backsliding of others, and coldness of all: yet that it
will come assuredly in the end, See the book called, The new life of Virginia.
the goodness, riches, and excellency of the Country, does undoubtedly promise
us, as may appear (beside others) in the book lately put out, of Captain
Smithes (who was there diverse years, and whose pains and service there,
deserves in my judgment high commendations,) and by this exhortation and
narration of Master Whitaker, who now is there: which by direction of authority
is therefore published, that the world may see how false and scandalous those
imputations be that are laid upon the Country and Plantation, by some base
and idle lubbers, that come from thence, and some amongst us that are ever
opposite to all good public works.

And these true and welcome news from Virginia, as they go out to the world
vshered, and attended with this my poor preface, So I send them first to your
Lordship, as having a peculiar interest both in them and me: which I do not
only because your Lordship* amongst many other of your rank and quality, is
a well-willer, furtherer and aduancer of this noble action: But that hereby I
may make good to your Lordship, the truth of something, already past betwixt
us in private discourse. And for that your Lordship knew Master Whitaker in the
North, and by your peculiar knowledge of the man, and the place where he
lived, can be an honorable witness with me, and an evidence beyond all
exception, to a good part of what I have here said: And now what remains, but
that I beseech the God of heaven to bless his own work which we have in hand,
and to multiply his heavenly graces upon your Lordship: That as your Lordship
has bin a Mecaenas of learning, a maintainer of true religion, and a furtherer
of al honorable actions and good works; So you may continue to the end and
advance forward toward perfection: And so with humble recomendation of my
service, do take my leave and rest

Your Lordships devoted in Christ, W. CRASHAVVE.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL SIR THOMAS SMITH, KNIGHT, TREAsurer of the English
Colonie in Virginia: Grace and Peace be multiplied.
RIght Worshipful, the noblest attempts have always had the most doubtful
beginnings, most dangerous enemies. For wheresoever any goodness shall begin
to bud forth, the Devil will labor by all means to nip it in the head.
Wherefore, I do not marvel though there have been great discouragements, and
many adversaries of this Plantation. For the Devil knowing that where Christ
wins, he loses, does with all his might and policy hinder the publishing, and
propagation of the Gospel. Such was his practice to discourage the Israelites
from the conquest of Canaan, raising up ten of their own Princes, that
weakened the hands of their brethren. By his means also there stood up some of
the Disciples that spoke against Peter, for preaching the Gospel to the
Gentiles. Yea, God himself of purpose suffers the devil to rage thus for a
while, that those that are his, might be tried. And this has been the case
hitherto of this godly Plantation, this the success. But since the affairs of
this Colony have now taken better footing, and are advanced by the helps of so
many honorable Adventurers, I was greatly emboldened to write these few lines
of exhortation, to encourage the noble spirits of so many worthy men, to go
forward in well-doing* Wherefore (honored Sir) since all the dispatches of our
affairs pass thorough your hands, I request you to accept of my poor
endeauours, and to publish it to the view of our Adventurers, that the
preiudicate opinion of some, and the disheartened mind of others may be
reformed. The God of heaven and earth crown your undaunted spirit with his
heavenly reward. And Let the beauty of the Lord our God be upon us: and direct
thou the works of our hands upon us, even direct thou our handie works.

From Henrico, this 28. of July, 1612. He that daily prays for the
prosperity of this Plantation. ALEXANDER WHITAKER.

GOOD NEWS FROM VIRGINIA.
ECCLESIASTES 11.1. Cast thy bread upon the waters: for after many days thou
shall find it.
Aude hospes contemnere opes and te quoque dignum Finge Deo --
BE bold my Hearers to contemn riches, and frame your selves to walk worthy
of God; for none other be worthy of God, but those that lightly esteem of
riches. Nakedness is the riches of nature; virtue is the only thing that makes
us rich and honorable in the eyes of wise men. Poverty is a thing which most
men fear, and covetous men cannot endure to behold: yet poverty with a
contented mind is great riches: he truly is the only poor man, not that
has little, but which continually desires more. Riches (as they are esteemed)
have no limits, but still cry, plus vltra, still more. Neither is any man
absolutely rich, but in comparison of a poorer man, of one (I mean) that has
less then he: for if he make diligent inquiry, he may find diverse richer
then himself: if riches of gold and the like, had bin such as the world does
esteem them, it is not likely that Jesus Christ would have taken so poor a
state upon him: when we esteem them at the best, they are but an heavy burden
to some, an Idol to others, and profitable to few.

Wherefore, Solomon having before explained the marvelous vanity of riches,
and how they are wont to be abused, as well of covetous, as of prodigal men:
in the first six verses of this Chapter teaches us how we may use them well,
and God may make the use of them blessed unto us. In the second Chapter, he
has said, I have gathered unto me silver and gold, and the chief treasures of
Kings and Provinces: And I was great, and increased above all that were before
me in Jerusalem: Then I looked, and behold all is vanity, and vexation of the
spirit. In the Fifth Chapter, He that loves silver, shall not be satisfied
with silver; and he that loves riches, shall be without the fruit of it. And
what good comes to the owners thereof, but the beholding thereof with their
eyes. And he adds, The satietie of the rich will not suffer him to sleep.
Again, There is an evil sickness that I have seen under the Sun, Riches
reserved to the owners thereof, for their evil. Now in the beginning of this
chapter, he has set down a remedy to both these evils, whereby our riches
may be made constant unto us: we may take pleasure and profit by them, and our
posterity through many descents may enjoy the^ after us. Cast thy bread (says
he) upon the waters: why? for after many days thou shall find it.

The sentence is Rhetorical, full of figures, and needs some explaining. Bread
in Scripture is usually taken for all kind of meat and drink, as may appear,
Genesis 18.5. and in diverse other places: but here (I take it) it is more
generally put for all kind of Alms, of what nature soever: not only for meat
and drink, money, apparel, or the like, but also for any kind of thing,
whereby we may relieve the necessity of our neighbor. Waters also are here
metaphorically put for all those men, who stand in need of the alms of our
liberality, whether they be such as cannot, but gladly would requite us, or
else such as being able, forget to be thankful.

So that the plain meaning of the words is this. Give liberally thine alms to
all sorts of men, that may stand in need of thy help: hide not thine eyes at
the miserable state of the afflicted; neither stop thine ears at the cry of
the poor, though they be not able to recompense thy well-doing: reproach not
thine enemy, when he is punished, but rather overcome his evil deeds with thy
goodness; neither suffer any to return empty handed from thee, whom God shall
offer to thy liberality. For though thou can not presently expect a
plentiful reward of thy well-doing, though the persons, to whom thou have cast
thine alms, be not able to requite thee, or forgetful of good turns, yet be
assured of it, that God beholds thy charity, and will at his appointed time
requite thee, even in this world, if it be good for thee, thou shall taste of
his bounty; but in the world to come he has reserved for thee a most
glorious crown of blessed immortality. This is the soul and substance of
this short sentence.

The words naturally divide themselves into two principal parts. A
Commandment to be Liberal and Charitable: and a promise of reward, which
hereafter we shall find. The Commandment also contains in it five points,
touching the doctrine of Liberality.

1 The duty to be performed, Cast thy bread: be liberal to all. 2 The manner
of bestowing our alms, by casting it away. 3 What is to be given, Bread; all
things needful, yea, and of the best kind. 4 Who may be liberal: even those
that have it: Thy bread, it must be thine own. 5 To whom we must be liberal;
to all, yea, to the Waters.
First, we will briefly speak of these five points of this Commandment as they
lie in order; and then directly come unto the promise more particularly. The
enjoined duty is Liberality, which sometimes is termed Alms: sometimes more
largely is used for all kind of good works, and very often is signified by the
names of Charity and Brotherly love: all which being in sense and
signification one, shall in the naming of them, be used all as one. Liberality
is the true practice of Christian Humanity and Brotherly courtesy, one toward
another. A virtue commanded by God, and commended by the examples of the best;
which makes us accepted of God, and desired of men. Faith gives comfort to my
soul, and ministers peace to my conscience: Hope teaches me not to be hasty,
but to wait patiently the appointed time of God; but the practice of Love
maintains my Hope, and assures me that my faith is effectual; and moreover is
beneficial unto others, yea, profitable to all. 1. Cor. 13.
Now abides Faith, Hope and Love, even these three; but the greatest of these
is Love. Wherefore has God made men great, and filled their coffers with his
treasures, but that they should as faithful stewards of Gods store, liberally
provide for the necessity of his Saints? The richest man in the world, has no
right by nature to the things he does possess; for naked he came into the
world, and he must return naked out of the same again. Why then has God made
thee rich, and commended that to thy liberality which was not thine own; but
that thou should be bountiful to those whom he has made poor?

What goodness or excellency did God see in thee, more then in the poorest
reasonable creature, before thou yet wast, that he should make thee rich, and
him poor? does it not befall to thee, as to the fool? yea verily, the
condition of men in this case, Eccles. 3.19.
and the condition of beasts is all one: As one dies, so dies the other; all
go to one place, and all was of the dust; and all shall return to the dust.
But that which Nature has not distinguished, the wisdom and bounty of God
has by a property of calling altered, and lending his treasures to the rich
men of the world, has showed to them an example of his Liberality, to this
end, that they might be open-handed to others, distributing as faithful
stewards of his gifts, according to the necessity of the Saints. Wherefore our
Savior Christ proclaims, Matthew. 24.45.
Who is a faithful servant and wise, whom his master has made ruler over his
household, to give them meat in season. Blessed is that servant, whom his master
when he comes shall find so doing. Galath. 6.
Saint Paul exhorts us to do good to all, but specially to the household of
faith: and writes to Timothy, 1. Tim. 6.17.
to charge them that be rich in this world, that they do good, and be rich in
good works, ready to distribute and communicate. Titus 2.
He shows Titus also, that the end of our Redemption is, that we might be
zealous of good works: and therefore wills him to affirm, Titus 3.
That they which have believed in God, might be careful to show forth good
works, etc.

But alas, the practice of this age is far otherwise. For those that have
wealth, either abuse them to the satisfying of their prodigal lusts, in
Whoring, Dicing, or Drinking, till all or the most be spent; or else (as
others) use them only to look upon them, or that it might be said they have
them: few or none there be, that use them aright to the glory of God, and
relief of his children. God gave commandment that there should not be a
beggar in Israel: but how many idle persons have we in the streets of our
Cities, in the Highways, and corners of our paths, which day and night call
upon the passers by, and yet remain unprovided for? How many hungry, naked,
fatherless, widows, poor men and oppressed, perish for want of that which
God has lent to these rich thieves? (for no better then thieves are they,
keeping up that which God gave them to disperse to holy and good uses). But
what says Solomon, Prou. 28.27.
He that hides his eyes from the poor, shall have many curses.

What shall we judge then of those men, who being rich in substance, and poor
in good works? if Paul may be heard, Titus 3.
they have not yet believed Christ died for them. 1. John 3 17.
If Saint John may judge, they have no love of God in them, For whosoever
(says he) has this worlds goods, and sees his brother have need, and
shuts up his compassion from him, how dwells the love of God in him?
Surely, Christ that shall judge every man according to his works, when he
shall call them to render an account of their Stewardship, will pronounce a
heavy sentence against them: Mat^h. 25 30
Cast those unprofitable servants into utter darkness, there shall be weeping
and gnashing of teeth.

Go too now, James 5.1.
you rich miserable men, weep and howl for the miseries that shall come upon
you. Remember the churlishness of Nabal, 1. Sam. 25.
and forget not the tormented tongue of Dives. Make haste either to repent
betime, Luke 16.
or make account to hear the dreadful sentence of the great Judge, Matthew. 25.
Go ye cursed, etc. for ye have been uncharitable. But you (my brethren) in
whose hearts the love of God abides, show the bowels of your compassion to
your fellow servants, as need requires. Remember the afflictions of Joseph,
Prou. 1^.^
and be assured of this; that he that has mercy upon the poor, lends
unto the Lord, etc. You will help your friend, because he loves you, and is
the companion of your estate. Nature teaches us to commiserate the distresses
of our brethren, because we are of the same flesh, and have our parents common.
How can we then withhold the hands of our relief from those that stand in need
of our help? We are all fellow-seruants of one Lord and Master, Jesus Christ.
We have all one common Father, God the maker of heaven and earth. We are all
members of one mystical body, most unseparably united to our head Jesus
Christ, by the power of the Holy Spirit. How then can we see our
fellow-seruants, our dear brethren, yea, the members of our own body to
pass by us, hungry and naked, unfed, unclothed? Take heed (I beseech you) that
Lazarus starve not at your doors, nor David's messengers return empty. 1
King. 17.
If Elijah come to soiorne with you, thrust him not out of doors, thou know
not how soon God may alter the times, and restore thine estate. The Church of
Macedonia is commended, 2. Cor. 8.
because, though they were in want themselves, yet they supplied the extreme
want of other Churches, 1. Cor. 16.1.
yea, if the Saints at Jerusalem want, or the Churches a far off, lay up the
first day of every week somewhat to send to their relief. And so you doing,
may gather comfort to your selves, that you shall hear that comfortable
sentence, Venite benedicti patris quoniam fuistis liberales: Come you blessed
of my Father, receive the kingdom prepared for you; for you have been
liberal, etc.

I might say much more in the commendation of Liberality: but the time
requiring less, I come now with haste unto the second point of the
Commandment.

The second manner how.
Cast thy bread, etc. What? has God given us goods to cast them away? Eccles.
3.6.
yea verily, for Solomon says, There is a time to seek, and a time to lose; a
time to keep, and a time to cast away. Which time of losing and casting away
the Scripture, here notes. But by this word of casting away, is meant no
violent rejecting, or negligent losing of some things that we hate or do not
greatly esteem: but a liberal giving away of such things as we do possess:
which may appear by these reasons.

First by the nature of the original word (...) which most usually signifies
to send out, Mittere and emittere: and so it is used by Moses, Genesis 7.7. where
he says, that Noah sent out the Raven, and afterward the Dove twice, he
uses this word continually, (...) and emisit: and so has both Pagninus and
M^rcerus expounded it. Secondly, it may appear by the agreement of the Text,
with the verses following: for the Doctrine handled is touching Liberality,
allegorically compared to the seed of bread (for so bread may be here
understood) which husbandmen cast not away, but sow as well in moist, as in
drier grounds: and so Tremelius does interpret them. Now as husbandmen do not
cast away their seed, which they fling into the ground, for hatred or neglect,
but under hope of Gods blessing: even so liberal men exercising the works of
charity, do not cast away their alms, as one that casts a bone to a dog,
or flingeth dead flowers from him, etc. but freely bestow the alms of God
without pride, vainglory, or disdain, yea, without hope of any restitution,
or any other recompense, besides the acceptance of God, and the reward which
God shall give unto him in this life, but especially in the great day of his
harvest. And with this does agree that saying of Solomon, There is that
scatters and is more increased. Prou. 17.24.
So that the spirit of God teaches us by this word of casting, how we may
scatter our good deeds and bestow our alms, as that they may be accepted of
God and profitable unto us. As, many ask and receive not, James. 4.
because they ask amiss: so the most that cast away find not, because they
be illiberall in their liberality, or because they give amiss.

Let us then learn from hence to cast away our bread freely: freely we have
received our goods from God, let us freely give: so shall we become followers
of God and our liberality draw toward the perfection required of us. The
commandment of Christ is, Matthew. 5.48.
that we should be perfect as our heavenly father is perfect. Now then Gods
liberality being perfect, let us also be perfect in our good deeds: this is a
point very needful for us all to consider; for God requires liberality from
us all; and very few among the diverse multitudes of giuers give aright, it
shall be counted a high point of wisdom in us: first, to inform our selves
thoroughly, by what means our charity may become perfect and acceptable in
the sight of God, before we reach out our hands to give. Our great Master
Christ, the mouth of God to man, handling the doctrine of liberality in his
Sermon on the mount, Matthew. 6.1.
has taught us many rules touching the right manner of giving alms, which we
may refer to these five points.

faith, for without faith it is impossible to please God; Heb* 1.6.
therefore without faith our alms cannot please God: the sum of which faith
is this: first, that God will accept of us and our alms for his son Jesus
Christ's sake; for no work of any man can please God, before the man himself
be approved of him, and then all our good deeds shall be accepted of him.
Secondly, that we be not hasty in expecting a present recompense of reward,
but to wait patiently upon God by faith for the good success of our alms.
James 5 7.
So husbandmen that cast their seed into the ground, stay until the time of
harvest, depending upon God for the fruitful increase of their labors. 1. Cor.
3.
So Paul does plant and Apollos does water, but even both these do wait upon
God for the blessing of their Ministry: This is the cause why heretofore much
of our alms bestowed upon the affairs of Virginia have been so cast away,
that they could never be found again hitherto: for many of us have not been
reconciled to God, nor approved of him. Some of our Adventurers in London have
been most miserable covetous men, sold over to Usury, Extortion and
Oppression. Many of the men sent hither have bin Murderers, Thieves,
Adulterers, idle persons, and what not besides, all which persons God hates
even from his very soul: how then could their alms or any thing else which
they do, be pleasing unto God? Such men's prayers are abominable in the sight
of God, how much more their Alms?

The second rule in giving is, that we give in Paul, 1. (...)
Though I feed the poor with all my goods and have not love, it profits me
nothing. The sum of which love is, that out of mere pity, compassion and
fellow-feeling of our neighbors wants, we cast our bread to him; not for
constraint of law, and custom of parishioners, neither for any sinister
respect of praise or vainglory. Wherefore the same Paul says, Rom 12.8.
He that distributeth, let him do it with simplicity: and our Savior Christ
commands, Matthew. 6.3.
that when thou d^est thine alms, let not thy left hand know what thy right
hand does.

bountifully and with a cheerful mind: 1. Cor. ^.^.
but as every one wishes in his heart, so let him give, not grudging or of
necessity, for God loves a cheerful giver: He that sows sparingly shall
reap also sparingly; and he that sows liberally shall reap also liberally.
Yet notwithstanding this bou^tifulnes has two proper limits, beyond which it
is not to pass. First, we must be bountiful only according to ability;
for if we give all at one time, we may leave our selves naked, and be
disinabled for giving any more hereafter: Deuteronomy. 15.4.
therefore those Papists that give away all and turn begging Friars are to be
blamed, Luke 3.11.
for God that has said, there shall be poor always with you, forbids in
the same place, that there should be any beggar in Israel; and the rule of
John Baptist is, that he that has two coats should not give away both of them,
whereby he might be left naked, but he must give one away, and reserve the
other for himself. The second limite of our bounty is, that we give more
Saints, and this Saint Paul teaches, Romans 12.18.

The fourth rule of right giving, arises from hence, which is, that we give
our alms with discretion. First, that we communicate such things as the need
of our neighbor requires; the thirsty man must have drink, the hungry and
naked, meat and apparel, the imprisoned for debt, money and the like. (...)
Secondly, we must not defer the time of our relief, lest that we give too
late, when the case of our neighbor is past help: Bis dat qui cito dat: The
Physician comes too late when the patient is dead. Prou. 25.11.
But a word spoken in season is like apples of gold and pictures of silver:
whilst thou may, then do good, thou know not then what may befall
afterward. Eccles. 11.6.
In the morning sow thy seed, and in the after noone let not thy hand rest,
for thou know not whether shall prosper, this or that. Surely if there were
ever any opportunity given of setting forward this Plantation, the season is
now most fit. Strike then whilst the iron is hot, do this good work whilst
you may, before it be too late. Thirdly, we must choose such a place as may be
void of vainglory and hypocrisy. Our left hand may not know what our right
hand does: Matthew. 6.
Honores palam dandi sunt, elcemosinae clam: Honors may be openly given for
the encouragement of others; but alms deeds must be given in secret: then thy
Father that sees in secret shall reward thee openly.

The last rule of giving is, that we give in Justice; even thine own, Isa.
58.7.
not another man's. The true feasting is to break thine own bread to the
hungry, to bring the poor that wander into thine house.

Thirdly, what is to be given.
The next point to be handled is, wherein we are to be liberal, what we are
to give: Solomon has shut up all under the name of Bread, whereby (as I said
before) is meant all things wherein we may relieve the necessities of our
neighbors: for if a man shall cast his drink, apparel, gold, and the like
upon the waters, he shall after many days find them: but Solomon included al
these alms under the name of bread, because he would enforce this doctrine
under one Allegory of sowing, and therefore does suite his phrase with words
of most significancie. Again, bread is the staff of good nourishment, and the
most usual kind of alms which we give. This article then of this
Commandment is, that if our neighbors do stand in need of our help in any
thing wherein we may help them; we are not to withold our hand from them,
but to cast our alms liberally unto them.

And this must needs be the meaning of the holy Ghost, Romans 12.13.
for Paul teaches us to distribute according to the necessity of the Saints:
but the Saints need many things very often beside bread, yea besides food and
raiment, wherefore our alms must needs be cast out, according to the several
necessities of those that want.

The wants of men be diverse; some are of the mind, some of the body, and some
be of the outward goods: and thus have the Divines divided them.

The distresses of the mind are most grievous and needs the best relief; but
of them all, ignorance of spiritual matters is most common, most dangerous.
The bread that must relieve this, Prou. 10
is the mouth of wisdom, which is liberal in instruction, which is as finest
silver, which shall be fruitful in understanding, which does know what is
acceptable, which is a tree of life and which feeds many. This was the alms
which Paul went to cast away in Macedon, and liberally distributed in Mars his
street in Athens. And this is the alms which may be most profitable unto
this barbarous Country of Virginia, where the name of God has been yet
scarce heard of. The wants of the body be many, but not so dangerous: and
those be principally hunger, thirst, sickness, and wounds: according to which
cases our alms must be bestowed. The sentence of the great Judge shall be
according to the tenor of this: Matthew. 25.
When I was an hungry you fed me, when I was a thirst you gave me drink,
when I was sick you visited me. As for the helping of wounded men, our
Savior Christ has given us a notable instance and encouragement to be
merciful toward them, in the case of the wounded Jew, whom when neither the
Priest nor the Leuite that passed by would relieve, Luke 10.30
a Samaritan most liberally provided for; even so let us do. The wants of our
neighbors outward state are most and every where common. First, we must
freely give to the poor, as clothes to the naked, liberal gleanings to the
stranger, fatherless and widow; Justice in Judgment to the oppressed, etc.

Secondly, we must freely lend whereby we may be oftentimes as beneficial to
our neighbor as by giving. Mat. 5.41.
Concerning which our Savior Christ says, From him that would borrow of thee,
turn not away thy face. And the commandment of God is, Thou shall open thy
hands to thy poor brother, and lend him suffiicient for his need which he
has. Deuteronomy. 15.8.


Thirdly, we must freely forgive and remit the due debt which our neighbor
does owe unto us, if it so fall out that God bring him into decay and extreme
poverty. Exodus 22.26.
So the pledge or pawn which our neighbor leaves with us, if it belong to
his necessary use, as his raiment or the like, we are to restore it to him
again, before the Sun go down. And this is the exhortation of Nehemiah to
the hard hearted rulers of the Jews, Nehem. 5.11.
that oppressed their brethren with Usury and the like. And thus many ways
may we cast away our bread, and for all these kinds of Alms, bread is here to
be taken.

Wherefore seeing there be so many ways to exercise our liberality, let us
not think it sufficient to be bountiful in one kind of good works, and hard
hearted in others, but that our liberality may be profitable to us, let us
give in all, as the present need requires. Some men will give alms at their
gate, of the scraps of their table, but will not part with one penny of money
to any charitable deed. Others will be ready to spend their voice in the
instruction and reproof of their neighbor: or it may be to speak a good
word for him, but will part with none of their own goods to help them. And
some men will be only liberal in building of Churches, Hospitalls and the
like, which indeed be good works, yet are they neither meritorious, nor the
most principal, for many times the gift of a piece of bread, or a cup of
cold water is more needful, Solomon puts bread the cheifest alms, and
Christ at the day of judgment, will not condemn men for want of buildings,
but of other more needful alms, and less chargeable. But if the Church of
Rome will maintain the merit of their Abbeys, Matthew. 25.
Nunneries, Temples, let them hear a great school man of their own, Thomas
Aquinas who reckoned up the several works of charity belonging to the body,
Aquinas 2.2. quae. 32. ar. 2.
has either forgotten or neglected such buildings: he has shut them up all
in this one verse visito, poto, cibo, redimo, ^^go, colligo, condo, the meaning
whereof is that true liberality consists in visiting the sick, giving drink
to the thirsty, meat to the hungry, in redeeming the captive and imprisoned, in
covering the naked, in gathering or calling home poor traveling strangers to
his house, and in burial of the dead, but in all these he has made no mention
of those buildings. Wherefore let us learn not only to spend Gods alms, but
to be such provident Stewards or prouiders for the servants of God, as that we
may be liberal in all kind to give them meat, drink and other of Gods goods
in necessity according to the several necessities of them.

The fourth point in order to be considered is, Who.
who may properly give alms which may easily be determined, if we consider
the diverse kinds of good works which we have now lately rehearsed. For he
that is not able to be liberal in one kind, may be fit for another, which
may be noted in the alms of Peter and John entering into the Temple, Acts 3.1.
when they restored the lame cripple to his health, to whom they said in this
manner, Silver and Gould have I none, but such as I have, that give I thee.
Whence we may conclude that Every one may be a giver of alms. For he that
has not the riches of wealth and cannot give much, let him give a little
according to the measure of his ability. Wherefore our Savior Christ
commends the liberality of the poor widow, Mark. 12.41.
which cast into the treasury but two mites, which was all that she had.

Those also that have not money and goods to help their neighbor, let them
lend the help of their bodily labor, of their callings, or the virtues of
their soul and body unto them, and this was Peter's Alms.

And these whom poverty, age or subjection (unto the hard government of others)
has made unfit for these two: let them exercise their Liberality, in praying
for the relief of those that want, which is the proper calling of Almes-men,
and Hospital children; yea it is the duty of us all.

This is the doctrine, and I beseech God to stir up your minds to the
practice of liberality in all things toward all men. And remember the poor
estate of the ignorant inhabitants of Virginia. Cast forth your alms (my
brethren of England) and extend your liberality on these charitable works,
which God has called you to perform. Let not the servants of superstition,
that think to merit by their good works (as they term them) go beyond us in
well doing; neither let them be able to open their mouths against us, and to
condemn the religion of our Protestation, for want of charitable deeds.

It may be some men will say the work is great, I am not able to relieve it,
I answer the work is such and such order is now taken, that those that cannot
give much, may be liberal in a little. Those that cannot help in moneys by
reason of their poverty, may venture their persons hither, and here not only
serve God, but help also these poor Indians, and build a sure foundation for
themselves, but if you can do neither of these, then send your earnest prayers
to God for the prosperity of this work.

The first point in order, and last Article of this commandment remains now
to be handled: which is concerning the persons to whom we are to be liberal,
To whom
that is to all men in general, who stand in need of our relief and help.
For if corn be cast upon the waters, or very watery grounds, it cannot prosper
or bring forth increase: So if good works be bestowed on unthankful or unable
persons; we are not to expect a recompense of reward from them. From whence
we may gather an argument from the less to the greater: that if we are to be
liberal to such as cannot or will not requite us, or to such as will not
deserve our kindness, how much more to them, that may deserve our good will,
or will make conscience (if they can) to be thankful unto us in the best
manner? So then if we must be liberal both to good men and bad; to thankful
and unthankful, to our enemies and friends, it follows that we must be
Charitable to all men.

Galath. 6.10.
And this is the rule of S. Paul, do good to all, but specially to the household
of Faith. Though the children of God be chiefly to be respected: yet are we
not to withhold our alms from any one, if they need our help. The rule of
Christ is answerable: Give him that asks, Matthew. 5.52.
and from him that would borrow of thee turn not away. Do good to them that
hate you, and pray for them which hurt you, and persecute you. And so Paul
expounds this rule of Christ: If thine enemy hunger, Romans 12.20.
feed him, if he thirst, give him drink. If then we must feed and cloth our
enemies and persecutors, how much more our friends and helpers; it remains
then that we must do good to all.

From hence we may take just occasion to blame the uncharitable disposition of
hard hearted rich men, and wealthy Parishes, which suffer multitudes of poor
men and women to perish in their quarters for want of their relief. The
commandment of God is, that there should be no beggars in Israel. But look
into the streets of our Cities, and pass from them into all the quarters of
England, and you shall find neither Court nor Country, City, or Village,
without the importunate crauings of those that cry Give, Give. From hence it
is that so many base thieves, and petty robbers, lurk in every corner, until
the common trees of execution hang them up. From hence it is that so many poor
men's children, wanting the charity of others, to see them brought up in
learning and some honest vocation, were better if they had never been borne,
then to live in such misorder, as most of them do. Repent therefore betimes,
you able misers, lest the woe of Saint James fall upon you, James 5.1.
lest God hear the cries and curses of the poor, and heap miseries, without
measure, upon such miserable men. And now let me turn your eyes, my brethren
of England, to behold the waters of Virginia: where you may behold a fit
subject for the exercise of your Liberality, persons enough on whom you may
cast away your Bread, and yet not without hope, after many days to find it.
Yea, I will not fear to affirm unto you, that those men whom God has made
able any way to be helpefull to this Plantation, and made known unto them the
necessities of our wants, are bound in conscience by virtue of this precept, to
lay their helping hands to it, either with their purse, persons, or prayers, so
far forth as God has made them fit for it. For it is evident that our wise
God has bestowed no gift upon any man, for their private use, but for the good
of other men, whom God shall offer to their Liberality.

Wherefore, since God has opened the door of Virginia, to our country of
England, we are to think that God has, as it were, by word of mouth called
us in, to bestow our several Charity on them. And that this may the better
appear, we have many reasons to encourage us to be Liberal minded and
open-handed toward them.

First, if we consider the almost miraculous beginning, and continuance of this
plantation, we must needs confess that God has opened this passage unto us,
and led us by the hand unto this work. For the Mariners that were sent hither
first to discover this Bay of Chaesapeac, found it only by the mere
directions of Gods providence: for I heard one of them confess, that even
then, when they were entered within the mouth of the Bay, they deemed the place
they sought for to have been many degrees further. The finding was not so
strange, but the continuance and upholding of it has bin most wonderful. I
may fitly compare it to the growth of an Infant, which has been afflicted from
his birth with some grievous sickness, that many times no hope of life has
remained, and yet it lives still. Again, if there were nothing else to
encourage us, yet this one thing may stir us up to go on chearefully with it:
that the Devil is a capital enemy against it, and continually seeks which
way to hinder the prosperity and good proceedings of it. Yea, has heretofore
so far prevailed, by his Instruments, the covetous hearts of many back
sliding Adventurers at home, and also by his servants here: some striving for
superiority, others by murmurings, mutinies, and plain treasons; and others
by fornication, prophanenes, idleness, and such monstrous sins; that he had
almost thrust us out of this kingdom, and had indeed quitted this Land of us,
if God had not then (as one awaked out of sleep) stood up and sent us means
of great help, when we needed most, and expected least relief. The saving of
those two honorable Knights, Sir Thomas Gates and Sir George Summers, with
Captain Newport and the rest of the Adventurers in the Sea Venture, as also
their happy deliverance out of those uninhabited and unfrequented (because
feared) Islands of the Barmudaes, could proceed from none other, but the
singular providence of God. If this worthy Governor, Sir Thomas Gates, had
bin hindered but one week longer, it might be feared that the famine, which had
by that time devoured the most of our countrymen here, would have consumed the
rest. And when he considering that his weak means was not able to restore,
or sustain the burden of such woeful distresses, had shipped the few
remaining for England, and had forsaken with Hannibals sighs, the first
builded Iames-Towne: upon the sudden news met him, of the coming in of that
Honorable Lord La war, with a fresh supply. Whereupon he presently returned to
the Town he had so lately forsaken. Since, when this English Colony has taken
better root; and as a spreading herb, whose top has bin often cropped off,
renewes her growth, and spreads her self more gloriously, then before. So this
Plantation, which the devil has so often trodden down, is by the miraculous
blessing of God revived, and daily grows to more happy and more hopeful
success. I have shut up many things in few words, and have alleged this
only to prove unto us, that the finger of God has been the only true worker
here; that God first showed us the place, God first called us hither, and here
God by his special providence has maintained us. Wherefore, by him let us be
encouraged to lay our helping hands to this good work, (yea Gods work) with all
the strength of our ability.

Secondly, let the miserable condition of these naked slaves of the devil move
you to compassion toward them. They acknowledge that there is a great good God,
but know him not, having the eyes of their understanding as yet blinded:
wherefore they serve the devil for fear, after a most base manner,
sacrificing sometimes (as I have here heard) their own Children to him. I
have sent one Image of their god to the Counsel in England, which is painted
upon one side of a toad-stoole, much like unto a deformed monster. Their
Priests (whom the call Quiokosoughs) are no other but such as our English
Witches are. They live naked in body, as if their shame of their sin
deserved no covering: Their names are as naked as their body: they esteem it
a virtue to lie, deceive and steal as their master the devil teaches them.
Much more might be said of their miserable condition, but I refer the
particular narration of these things to some other season. If this be their
life, what think you shall become of them after death? but to be partakers
with the devil and his angels in hell for evermore. Wherefore my brethren, put
on the bowels of compassion, and let the lamentable estate of these miserable
people enter in your consideration: One God created us, they have reasonable
souls and intellectual faculties as well as we; we all have Adam for our
common parent: yea, by nature the condition of us both is all one, the servants
of sin and slaves of the devil. Oh remember (I beseech you) what was the
state of England before the Gospel was preached in our Country? How much
better were we then, and concerning our souls health, then these now are? Let
the word of the Lord sound out that it may be heard in these parts; and let
your faith which is toward God spread it self abroad, and show forth the
charitable fruits of it in these barren parts of the world: And let him know
that he which has converted a sinner from going a stray out of his way, shall
save a soul from death, and hide a multitude of sins.

But if any of us should misdoubt that this barbarous people is incapable of
such heavenly mysteries, let such men know that they are far mistaken in the
nature of these men, for besides the promise of God, which is without respect
of persons, made as well to unwise men after the flesh, as to the wise, etc.
let us not think that these men are so simple as some have supposed them: for
they are of body lusty, strong, and very nimble: they are a very
understanding generation, quick of apprehension, sudden in their dispatches,
subtle in their dealings, exquisite in their inventions, and industrious in
their labor. I suppose the world has no better marke-men with their bow and
arrows then they be; they will kill birds flying, fishes swimming, and beasts
running: they shoot also with marvelous strength, they shot one of our men
being unarmed quite through the body, and nailed both his arms to his body
with one arrow: one of their Children also, about the age of 12. or 13. years,
killed a bird with his arrow in my sight. The service of their God is
answerable to their life, being performed with great fear and attention, and
many strange dumb shows used in the same, stretching forth their limbs and
straining their body, much like to the counterfeit women in England who feign
themselves bewitched, or possessed of some evil spirit.

They stand in great awe of their Quiokosoughs or Priests, which are a
generation of vipers even of Satan's own brood. The manner of their life is
much like to the popish Hermits of our age; for they live alone in the woods,
in houses sequestered from the common course of men, neither may any man be
suffered to come into their house or to speak with them, but when this Priest
does call him. He takes no care for his victuals, for all such kind of things
both bread and water, etc. are brought unto a place near unto his cottage and
there are left, which he fetches for his proper need. If they would have
rain, or have lost any thing, they have their recourse to him, who coniureth
for them, and many times prevails. If they be sick, he is their Physician,
if they be wounded he sucketh them. At his command they make war and peace,
neither do they any thing of moment without him. I will not be teadious in
these strange Narrations, when I have more perfectly entered into their
secrets, you shall know all. Finally, there is a civil government amongst
them which they strictly observe, and show thereby that the law of Nature
dwells in them: for they have a rude kind of Commonwealth, and rough
government, wherein they both honor and obey their Kings, Parents, and
Governors, both greater and less, they observe the limits of their own
possessions, and incroach not upon their neighbors dwellings. Murder is a
capital crime scarce heard of among them: adultery is most severely punished,
and so are their other offenses. These unnurtured grounds of reason in them,
may serve to encourage us: to instruct them in the knowledge of the true God,
the rewarder of all righteousness, not doubting but that he that was powerful
to save us by his word, when we were nothing, will be merciful also to these
sons of Adam in his appointed time, in whom there be remaining so many
footsteps of Gods image. Wherefore you wealthy men of this world, whose bellies
God has filled with his hidden Treasure: trust not in uncertain riches,
neither cast your eyes upon them; for riches takes her to her wings as an
Eagle, and flies into Heaven. Prove. ^3.^
But be rich in good works ready to distribute or communicate. 1. Tim. ^.
How shamefully do the most of you either miserably detain, or wickedlie
mispend Gods goods, whereof he made you his stewards? The Covetous person
seeks to hide his talent from the good of others and himself, honoring it as
his God, which should be his servant. The Prodigal men of our land make have
to fling away Gods treasures, as a grievous burden which they desire to be
eased of. Some make no scruple at it, to spend yearly an hundred pounds, two,
three, five hundred, and much more about dogs, hawks and hounds and such
sports; which will not give five hundred pence to the relief of Gods poor
members. Others will not care to lose two or three thousand pound in a night,
at Cards and Dice, and yet suffer poor Lazarus to perish in their streets for
want of their Charitable Alms. Yea diverse will hyer gardens at great rents,
and build stately houses for their whoores, which have no compassion on the
Fatherless and widows. How much better were it for these men to remember the
afflictions of Joseph, to extend the bowels of their compassion to the poor,
the fatherles, afflicted and the like, then to mispend that which they must
give a strait account of at the day of judgment? Are not these miserable
people here better then hawks, hounds, whores and the like? O you that spend
so much on them, think it no dishonor to your persons, no impouerishing to
your state, to bestow somewhat to the raising up of Christ's kingdom, and
maintenance of so holy and heavenly an action as this is, God of his goodness
that has given you ability to perform it, make you willing to help it
forward with the best of your power.

For after many days thou shall find it. Hitherto have we spoken of the
commandment and the several branches of the same: Now follows the reason of
this Commandment which the Holy Ghost uses here to stir us up unto
liberality, which is taken from the reward which we shall have of our
well-doing, for after many days thou shall find it, the some of which reason
is, that though God do not presently reward our well doing, but do defer the
requital of it for many days, yet thy good works shall not perish, but God at
the appointed time, shall abundantly recompense thy liberality. Out of this
reason we may gather two notable conclusions touching the reward of
liberality. First we may conclude from hence, that God does not always give a
present reward to the good works; he does for the most part defer his rewards
many days, sometimes many years, yea sometimes even till death it self,
when he will never cease to reward us according to our works, with
unspeakable joys of blessed immortality. And the wisdom of God does thus
defer his rewards for most singular reasons. For if God should presently reward
good works, who then would not be a prodigal giver, who then would be a
faithful giver? For when a man is certain of present gain he will not spare
to give abundantly, because he sees an exceeding profit ready to be put into
his hands for so doing: and this would stir up the most covetous wretch in
the world to be liberal, gaping out of mere covetousness, after an ouer-plus
of reward. Wherefore God has made the time and condition of his rewards
doubtful, that we might not be covetous of the benefit: but that he might
exercise our faith, and teach us with patience of hope to expect the appointed
time of his reward. The principal point of perfect charity is, that we give
in faith, whose true nature is to depend upon God for the good success of our
alms, Heb. 11.1.
for Faith is the ground of things that are hoped for, and the evidence of
things that are not seen: now if we should have the reward of good works in
the view of our eyes, and ready as it were to be put into our hands, what place
would then be left for practice of faith whose object is unseen, whose hopes
be of afterward? Wherefore S. Paul advises Timothy to charge them that be
rich in this world to be rich in good works, 1. Tim. 6.
not for any present reward which they were to have, but only for the benefits
to come, laying up (says he) in store for themselves a good foundation,
against the time to come, that they may obtain eternal life. The message
which God sent to Cornelius by his Angel is worthy to be noted of us. Acts
10.4.
Thy prayers (says the Angel to him) and thine alms are come up into
remembrance before God. Cornelius was a man that had given much alms to the
poor, which God did not presently reward, for he did seem rather to have
forgotten his liberality, wherefore now he says that his alms are come up
into remembrance, the meaning whereof must needs be, that though God did seem
to neglect his liberality, yet he had not forgotten his alms, but now meant to
reward them. 2. Kings. 4.10.
The Shunamite woman that Provided a chamber, table, stool, and candlestick
for Elisha. Acts. 9.36.
And Tabitha, which is Dorcas, that was so full of good works and alms* deeds
which she did, were both at the first view rather punished for their good
works, then presently rewarded: for the first lost her only son, the second
fell sick, and untimely died. But mark the end, God forgot not to requite
them, even in this world, for the Shunamite had her son restored to her alive
by the prayer of Elisha* and Dorcas by the ministry of S. Peter was raised
again to life. By this that has bin said, it may easily appear, that God
does out of his infinite wisdom defer the time, and prolong (many days for
the most part) the reward of our alms and liberality; from whence we may
learn, that it is the property of true charity to neglect the present reward.
1. Cor. 13.
For Love the mother of liberality is not covetous, but is bountiful, it
believes all things, it hops all things: and Faith the ground and first
pedigree of right giving, does not make have, Isa. 28.16.
but reposeth it self upon the expectation of hope. Wherefore in communicating
our goods, and distributing our alms, let us have no covetous eye, aiming at
the present profit: but let us depend with faith upon the future blessing which
shall come in due season. For if we would thoroughly consider the thing as it
is, we shall find that all the reward of our well doing comes not from any
merit or desert of ours, but only from the mere mercy of God. What man can
say that the goods which he possesses be his own? Or what have we that we
have not received? When we have made the most and best of our selves, we are
but the stewards of Gods goods, and the Almners of his purse. Why then should
we look to be paid extraordinarily for the giving of that which is not our
own, but which we are commanded by our Master to bestow? We have more need
to pray with David, Psalm. 130.^.
O Lord if thou be extreme to mark what is done amiss, who may abide it?
And to confess, that when we have done all that we can, we are but
unprofitable servants. Luke 17.20
It follows then that all the good which we do receive, comes not from our
deserts, but only from the riches of Gods bounty, which rewards us
according to our works done, without any desert of ours whatsoever. Wherefore
the eyes of liberality do not look after the reward of the work, but they
search how to do the work, how to give the alms, so as that they may be
pleasing to God, and of him accepted, and by him (if he see it good) rewarded.

Let then your liberal minds (you honorable and charitable Adventurers of
Virginia) be stirred up to cast your alms on the waters of Virginia, without
hope of present profit. The base affections of the Usurer will not look for
the overplus of increase, until the couenanted time of his loan be expired.
The husbandman casting his seed into the earth, waits upon God until Harvest
for a fruitful crop: verily he that believes does not make haste. Be not over
hasty with God: God will not yet reward you, that he may make you more famous
in the world, that the world may see your zeal, and bear witness to the
patience of your faith, not to greedy haste of covetous desires. The work is
honorable, and now more then ever, sustained by most honorable men. O let us
not then be weary of well-doing: forty years were expired, before Israel
could plant in Canaan, and yet God had called them by the word of his mouth,
had led them himself by an high hand. Yet may you boldly look for a shorter
time of reward. The returns which you have from the East Indies, though they
be exceeding rich, yet is the adventure doubtful, the expense chargeable, and
the expectation of return, of three years continuance.

Let me advise you to be as liberal in adventure hither, and I dare affirm,
that by Gods assistance, your profitable returns shall be of more certainty,
and much shorter expectation. Remember, I beseech you, how many lives were
lost, how many years were spent, what discouragements, what great losses the
Adventurers of Spain and Portugale suffered and underwent, before they could
be settled in the West Indies, or receive any profitable return from thence:
and now behold what rich loads, what profitable returns are yearly shipped
from thence. Shall our Nation, hitherto famous for noble attempts, and the
honorable finishing of what they have undertaken, be now taxed for
inconstancy, and blamed by the enemies of our protestation, for
uncharitableness? Yea, shall we be a scorn among Princes, and a laughing
stock among our neighbor Nations, for basely leaving what we honorably began;
yea, for beginning a Discovery, whose riches other men shall gather, so soon
as we have forsaken it? Awake you true hearted English men, you servants of
Jesus Christ, remember that the Plantation is Gods, and the reward your
Countries. Wherefore, aim not at your present private gain, but let the glory
of God, whose Kingdom you now plant, and good of your Country, whose wealth
you seek, so far prevail with you* that you respect not a present return
of gain for this year or two: but that you would more liberally supply for a
little space, this your Christian work, which you so charitably began. As for
those spirits of slander, whom the Devil has stirred up to speak evil of
this good Land, and to weaken the hands of our brethren, lest they should go
forward, and pull Satan out of his Dominions* Let them take heed, lest the
punishment of Shammua and his nine companions, the faithless searchers of the
Land of Canaan, do befall them: and that they never live to taste of the
commodities of this good Land.

But lest I may seem to exhort you to an unprofitable Liberality, or to argue
God of forgetfulness to those that serve him faithfully: hear now what a
comfortable promise of reward God has made unto us in these words: which is,
That after many days we shall find. If God should have commanded us to cast
away without finding, some discouragement there might have been to our weak
nature; but since God has assuredly promised us, that we shall find in the
end, who will not obey the command? who will not be Liberal. God has been
always found true in his word, most faithful in his promises. Genes. 12.
If God do promise Abraham that his seed shall inherit the Land of Canaan:
Abraham's posterity shall after many days in the appointed time be planted
peaceably in the land of Canaan If God promise Solomon wisdom and riches: ^.
King. 1.
Solomon shall be wiser and richer then any Prince of the earth. If God
promises that he will give his only Son, that whosoever believes in him
shall not perish, but have life everlasting: John 3.
his Son Jesus Christ shall be borne into the world at the appointed time, and
undergo the weight of Gods wrath for redemption of believers. Shall God then
faithfully perform all his promises in so great matters, and be unfaithful in
lesser matters: oh let no such base conceit of the Almighty enter into our
minds, as to think that he that spared not his own Son, Romans 8.32.
to perform his promises to us, will be so unmindful of us in so small a
thing. The promises of God are many, Prou. 10.24.
and most bountiful. There is that scatters (says Solomon) and is more
increased: and in the next verse he adds: The liberal person shall have
plenty, or (as the Hebrew text is) The soul of blessing shall be made fat,
and he that waters, shall also have rain. Most comfortable is the promise
of Liberalitis, set down by Isaiah, Chap. 58.8. And if thou be liberal, thy
light shall break forth as the morning, and thy health shall grow speedily:
thy righteousness shall go before thee, and the glory of the Lord shall
embrace thee. What can be said more to encourage us? Prou. 19.1^
Yet Solomon adds: He that has mercy on the poor, lends unto the Lord;
and the Lord will recompense him what he has given. Wherefore, what is with
Liberality given, is not cast away, but lent unto the Lord, unto him that is
able to repay us, Psalm^ ^^
for both the heaven and the earth are his; and who is also willing to
recompense it, for he has promised so to do, and confirmed his word and
promises by the Sacraments, his seals. We do willingly lend to a good
Creditor, especially if we have his bond, with his hand and seal to pay us.
What, shall we trust man, and distrust God? O far be it from us, my brethren,
let no such distrust possess our uncharitable minds. If we desire any more
promises, let us observe what counsel Christ gave unto the Pharisees: Luke ^^^.
Give alms of those things which you have, and behold all things shall be
clean unto you: which is as much, as if he should say, give alms, be
liberal; for in so doing, your goods shall be sanctified unto you, and you
shall attain to an holy and pure use of your goods. The Scripture is plain in
this point.

I will now come therefore to give you a view in brief, of those commodities
and rewards that we shall find here, after not many, but a few days.

First, our Liberality grounded on faith, and practiced in love, will be a
means to help our souls forward in their passage to heaven; for they are the
highway and trodden path, wherein we must walk to everlasting life.
Therefore, the more any man abounds in good works, the more comfortable shall
be his passage.

Secondly, they are such necessary fruits of faith, that faith cannot go
without them: for where no good works are, there is no faith; and where true
saving says is, there will be showed good works; yea, we cannot hold true
faith from doing good: read for the proof of this, the Epistle of Saint
James, and the first Epistle of Saint John, besides the places which we have
heretofore alleged.

Thirdly, Liberality is a notable means against covetousness: for where true
Charity dwells, there is no room left for Covetousness to harbor in: two
contraries cannot be both at once in one subject; God and the Devil will not
dwell together, neither can Covetousness and Liberality be linked together in
one breast.

Thus shall the Lord abundantly reward our souls for our liberality, and many
ways more besides if we be truly charitable. But the bounty of God would
have us to taste of some temporal blessings besides, and after a few days, if
we be cheerful giuers, return a plentiful reward home unto us. Wherefore
that I might content the longing minds of every man, I thought it fit in the
last place to recite a few commodities which in short time we may find here in
Virginia, for the charity bestowed in this Plantation. The whole Continent of
Virginia situate within the degrees of 34. and 47. is a place beautified by
God, with all the ornaments of nature, and enriched with his earthly treasures:
that part of it, which we already possess, beginning at the Bay of
Chaesapheac, and stretching it self in Northerly latitude to the degrees of
39. and 40. is interlined with seven most goodly Rivers, the least whereof is
equal to our River of Thames: and all these Rivers are so nearly joined, As
14. or 16. miles.
as that there is not very much distance of dry ground between either of
them, and those several maine lands are every where watered with many veins
or creekes of water, which sundry ways do overthwart the land, and make it
almost nauigable from one River to the other. The commodity whereof to those
that shall inhabit this land is infinite in respect of the speedy and easy
transportance of goods from one River to the other. I cannot better manifest it
unto you, but in aduising you to consider whither the water or land has been
more beneficial to the Low Countries: but here we shall have the commodity
both of water and land more ready with less charge and labor then has been
bestowed by them in turning land into water. The River which we inhabit
(commonly called Powhatans River) ebbeth and flows 140. miles into the maine;
at the mouth whereof are the two Forts of Henrico and Charles: 42. miles upward
is the first and mother Christian town seated, called Iames-Towne, and 70.
miles beyond that upward, is the new town of Henrico built, and so named in
the memory of the Noble Prince Henry of lasting and blessed memory: ten
miles-beyond this Town is a place called the False, because the River has
there a great descent falling down between many mineral Rocks which be
there: twelve miles farther beyond this place is there a Crystal Rock
wherewith the Indians do head many of their arrows: three days journey from
thence is there a rock or stony hill found, which is in the top covered all
over with a perfect and most rich silver oar. Our men that went to discover
those parts had but two iron pickaxes with them, and those so ill tempered that
the points of them turned again and bowed at every stroke, so that we could
not search the entrails of yt place, yet some trial was made of that oar
with good success, and argument of much horpe. Six days journey beyond this
Mine a great ridge of high hills do run along the maine land, not far from
whom the Indians report a great Sea does run, which we commonly call a South
Sea, but in respect of our habitation is a West Sea, for there the Sun
sets from us. The higher ground is much like unto the molde of France, clay
and sand being proportionably mixed together at the top; but if we dig any
depth (as we have done for our bricks) we find it to be read clay, full of
glistering spangles. There be many rockie places in all quarters; and more
then probable likeliehoods of rich Mines of all sorts: though I knew all, yet
it were not convenient at this time that I should utter all, neither have we
had means to search for any thing as we ought, thorough present want of men,
and former wants of provision for the belly. As for Iron, Steel, Antimonium,
and Terra sigillata, they have rather offered themselves to our eyes and hands,
then bin sought for of us. The air of the Country (especially about Henrico
and upward) is very temperate and agrees well with our bodies. The extremity
of Summer is not so hot as Spain, nor the cold of Winter so sharp as the
frosts of England. The Spring and Harvest are the two longest seasons and most
pleasant, the Summer and Winter are both but short: The Winter is for the most
part dry and fair, but the Summer watered often with many great and sudden
shewers of rain; whereby the cold of Winter is warmed, and the heat of Summer
cooled. Many have died with us heretofore thorough their own filthiness and
want of bodily comforts for sick men; but now very few are sick among us:
not above three persons amongst all the inhabitants of H^nrico; I would to God
our souls were no sicker then our bodies, and that other of Gods blessings
were as general and common as the bodily health. I have seen it by
experience, and dare boldly affirm it, that sickness does more rage in
England quarterly, then here yearly. I doubt that hereafter when our
Hospital or Guest-house is built up, you hear of many more cut off by the
sword of Justice (unless the better people be sent over) then perished by the
diseases of the Country.

The natural people of the Land are generally such as you heard of before. A
people to be feared of those that come upon them without defensive Armor, but
otherwise faint-hearted (if they see their Arrows cannot pearce) and easy to
be subdued. Shirts of Male, or quilted cotton coats are the best defense
against them. There is but one or two of their petty Kings, that for fear of
us have desired our friendship; and those keep good quarter with us being very
pleasant amongst us, and (if occasion be) serviceable unto us. Our eldest
friends be Pipsco and Choapoke, who are our ouertwhart neighbors at
Iames-Towne, and have been friendly to us in our great want. The other is the
Werewance of Chescheak, who but lately traded with us peaceably. If we were
once the masters of their Country, and they stood in fear of us (which might
with few hands employed about nothing else, be in short time brought to pass)
it were an easy matter to make them willingly to forsake the devil, to
embrace the faith of Jesus Christ, and to be baptized. Besides, you cannot
easily judge how much they would be available to us in our discoueries of the
Country, in our buildings and plantings, and quiet provision for our selves,
when we may peaceably pass from place to place without need of arms or
guarde.

The means for our people to live and subsist here of themselves are many and
most certain both for Beasts, Birds, Fish, and Herbs. The beasts of the
Country are for the most part wild: as Lions, Bears, Wolves and Dear: Foxes
black and read, Rakowns, Beuers, Possowns, Squerrels, Wilde-Cats, whose
skins are of great price, and Muske-Rats which yield Musk as the Muske-Cats
do. There be two kinds of beasts amongst these most strange: one of them is
the female Possown, which will let forth her young out of her belly, and take
them up into her belly again at her pleasure without hurt to her self,
neither think this to be a Travelers tale, but the very truth; for nature has
framed her fit for that service, my eyes have been witness unto it, and we have
sent of them and their young ones into England. The other strange conditioned
creature is the flying Squirrell, which thorough the help of certain broad
flaps of skin growing on each side of her forelegs, will fly from tree to tree
20. or 30. paces at one flight and more, if she have the benefit of a small
breath of wind. Besides these, since our coming hither, we have brought both
Kine, Goats, and Hogs, which prosper well, and would multiply exceedingly
if they might be provided for. This Country besides is replenished with birds
of al sorts which have bin the best sustenance of flesh, which our men have had
since they came; also Eagels and Hawks of all sorts, amongst whom are
Ausprech, fishing Hawk, and the Cormorant. The woods be every whereful of
wild Turkies which abound, and will run as swift as a Greyhound. In winter
our fields be full of Cranes, Herons, Pigeons, Partridges and Blackbirds: the
rivers and creekes be over spread every where with water foul of the greatest
and least sort, as Swans, flocks of Geese and Brants, Duck and Mallard,
Sheldrakes, Diverse, etc. besides many other kinds of rare and delectable birds,
whose names and natures I cannot yet recite, but we want the means to take
them. The Rivers abound with Fish both small and great: the sea fish come into
our Rivers in March, and continue until the end of September: great sculles of
Herings come in first: Shads of a great bigness, and Rock-fish follow them.
Trouts, Base, Flounders, and other dainty fish come in before the other be
gone: then come multitudes of great Sturgeons, whereof we catch many, and should
do more, but that we want good nets answerable to the breadth and deapth of our
Rivers: besides our channels are so foul in the bottom with great logs and
trees, that we often break our nets upon them: I cannot reckon nor give proper
names to the diu^rs kinds of fresh fish in our rivers; I have caught with mine
angle, Pike, Carpe, Eele, Perches of six several kinds, Crea-fish and the
Torope or little Turtle, besides many smaller kinds. Wherefore, since God has
filled the elements of earth, air, and waters with his creatures, good for our
food and nourishment, let not the fear of staruing hereafter, or of any great
want, dishearten your valiant minds from coming to a place of so great
plenty: if the Country were ours, and means for the taking of them (which
shortly I hope shall be brought to pass,) then all these should be ours: we
have them now, but we are fain to fight for them, then should we have them
without that trouble. Fear not then to want food, but only provide means to
get it here. We have store of wild-foule in England, but what are they better
for them that cannot come by them, wanting means to catch them, even such is
and has been our case heretofore.

But these are not all the commodities which we may find here: for the earth
will yield much more fruit to our industrious labors, as has been proved by
the Corn and other things which we have planted this last year. I have made
proof of it with the help of three more, being a stranger to that business
and having not a body inured to such labor, and set so much corn, horis
succisiuis vnius septimanae, in the idle hours of one week, as will suffice
me for bread one quarter of a year: and one commodity is besides in this
corn, that from the time of setting, unto the time of gathering, five months
will abundantly suffice: for we set corn from the beginning of March, until
the end of May, and reap or gather in Iulie, August and September. Our English
seeds thrive very well here, as Pease, Onions, Turnips, Cabbages, Coleflowers,
Carrets, Time, Parseley, Hysop, Marioram, and many other whereof I have tasted
and eaten.

What should I name unto you the diverse sorts of Trees, sweet woods and
Physical plants: the diverse kinds of Oaks and Walnut-trees. The Pines,
Pitch-trees, Soape-ashes trees, Sassafras, Cedar, Ash, Maple, Cyprus, and many
more which I daily see, and admire at the beauty and riches which God has
bestowed upon this people, that yet know not how to use them.

Wherefore you (right wise and noble Adventurers of Virginia) whose hearts God
has stirred up to build him a Temple, to make him an house, to conquer a
Kingdom for him here: be not discouraged with those many lamentable assaults
that the devil has made against us: he now rages most, because he knows
his kingdom is to have a short end. Go forward boldly, and remember that you
fight under the banner of Jesus Christ, that you plant his Kingdom, who has
already broken the Serpents head: God may defer his temporal reward for a
season, but be assured that in the end you shall find riches and honor in this
world, and blessed immortality in the world to come. And you my brethren my
fellow laborers, send up your earnest prayers to God for his Church in
Virginia, that since his harvest here is great, but the laborers few, he
would thrust forth laborers into his harvest; and pray also for me that the
ministration of his Go^pell may be powrefull and effectual by me to the
salvation of many, and advancement of the kingdom of Jesus Christ, to whom
with the Father and the holy Spirit, be all honor and glory for evermore,
Amen.

(...)

