TRVTH AND ERROR DISCOVERED IN TWO SERMONS IN St Mary's in Oxford.

By ANTONY WHITE Master of Arts of Corpus Christi College in Oxford.

OXFORD Printed by JOHN LICHFIELD Printer to the Famous University for Henry
Curteyne. 1628.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL Sr HENRY NEVILL OF PILLINGBERE IN Berks his much
honored Patron.
Sir
THE life of man is a continual warfare, both against vices that assault the
will, and errors which invade the understanding. Against these enemies of the
soul do those sermons serve; especially the latter, whose chief employment
is, to weaken error by cutting of the auxiliary forces which bad affections
lend it, what service I have herein done to the church and truth (which done by
so raw a soldier in so short a velitation can be but small) I bring under
your view, and the like courteous eyes of those to whom you shall please to show
it. I should much fear the exactness of your judgment, did I not know it
tempered with that candor which uses well to accept the honest endeavors of
the weakest. In this assurance I leave you to the reading of these following
sermons, resting always

Your Worships in my best services ANTONY WHITE.

PROVE. 23. VER. 23. Buy the truth but sell it not.


IT were as fruitless a diligence for a Divine in writing of this nature, as
this excellent book of Proverbs is, to enquire out methodicall connexions of
sentences, as it were for an artist to study the coherences of Bedes axioms:
Not therefore to trouble you with anxious prefaces this way let it suffice you
(men, fathers, and brethren) that our royal Preacher does in this verse
commend to his studious hearers, a commodity fittest for humane nature to
desire and enjoy, Truth: concerning which, his advice has two branches, one in
terms affirmative, it is to be bought, the other in negative, it is not to
be fold; of the first whereof hopeing that the God of truth will assist me,
and presuming that your love of truth will accompany me, I purpose for to
speak.

Where first I must with Solomon take it for granted, that there is a truth,
and that it may be bought. Cicero in Lucullo.
For I hope I am not come amongst those Academists of whose school, those in
Cicero, with Cicero himself were, who with an incongruous confidence deliver,
that there is nothing of whose truth we may be confidently assured. Vide Lact.
lib. 3. cap. 6.
Lactantius answers this folly wittily: Si nihil omnino scias, id ipsum nihil
possesciri, tolletur: if no truth may be known, why would they have that pass
for truth that nothing can be known Nay whereas it is their ambition to
confute the opinions of all other men as false, how can this be without a
secret profession of some truth, for what can give the foil to falsehood but
truth? Besides whereas they allow some verisimilitude, herein they confess a
truth, unless which Austen laughes at, Aug lib. 2. contra Academicos
they will profess that what they see is the likeness and purtrature of that
which they never saw.

This ancient fancy has not yet given up the ghost even in our days; nor
will, as long as there remains in the world, so much ignorance, lazines;
jealousy, pride, prophanes for each of these lend somewhat to this opinion: an
ignorant man lead by the examples of those many things which he is not able to
comprehend, concludes in have that nothing may be comprehended; as if nothing
were to be bought, because through his blindness he sees nothing in the
market. The lazy one, quickly weary of the search of truth, impatient of any
longer labor, rests contented with the first appearances of things, and gives
up the verdict to his shallow judgment that there is in every point well nigh
equal probability, but no pressing certainty. The jealous person casts his eye
upon the dissenting varieties of Doctrines that are in the world, and yet all
eagerly defended by learned Patrons: he observes that what one cries up for an
holy truth, an other cries down for blasphemous error, that both sides with
confident asseueration produce and plead their evidences, and withal, that
princes and rulers of the earth do equally serve their turns, with either
doctrines to manage their affairs, hereupon he is suspicious that there is no
constant verity in whatsoever is proposed, but that it is for politic ends
only, that men have avouched this or that for truth: or it may be, because he
finds by some experience that those upon whose judgments he has relied, have
sometimes deceived him (though this were his own fault to take things so
ouerhastily upon trust) yet to ease himself, he will unadvisedly complain of
that great uncertainty that is in all things, thinking it best for the time to
come rather to suspend his assent, then venture a new cosening: the vpshot of
all is this, that he will be so bablish, as because there is much deceit and
sophistication in wares therefore he will conculde no wares are good, or
therefore he will buy none: The contentious man, who in the pride of his wit
glories that he is able to gainesay whatsoever any shall aver for true,
Anaxagoras.
(for there wanted not an* odd fellow that would cross you if you said the
snow is white) he at last comes to be so far transported in opinion as to
think there is nothing but opinion, which you well know falls short of
certain knowledge, and is as the schools speak always cum formidine
oppositi with some suspicion that there may be falsehood in it. Aquinas 2a. 2ae.
q. 1. artic. 4.
Lastly there will never be wanting the Impious person, who to find some
shelter for his irreuerence to God, and good things, his greatest enemies, he
will as far as his profane wit can help him, call in question even the
first and best known truths; to which improbous labor I suppose he much
forces himself, knowing how much it might concern him, that there were no
God to punish his villainy, no immortality of that soul, no resurrection of
that body, that must be reserved for eternal torments, nor any rule of that
goodness by which he must one day be judged: but these unworthy conceits are
as (more then my hope is) far from any of you my beloved brethren, who have
learnt in the school of Aristotle (herein well deserving of humane nature)
that every man has in him that which is accommodate to truth, Vide Arist lib.
1 de moribus ad Eudemum, and lib. 1. Rhetor. cap. 5.
and that he is not denied the finding out of many certainties, nay you have
been taught in a higher school, that truth (the noble plant that came down
from heaven) shall spring out of the earth also as David sings, Ps. 85.11.
and that many shall run too and fro, Dan. 12.4.
and knowledge (knowledge not mere opinion) shall be increased) as speaks
Daniell. But this will better appear when I shall somewhat open the kind and
nature of that truth whereof our author here treats. Solomon who wrote so
many books even to weariness of flesh gives this as the Epitome of all, Fear
God and keep his commandments, Eccl. 12.13.
which being the whole duty of man, may well be thought the chief scope of
those writings wherein he has preached to posterity: more particularly, for
this book of his parables, he salutes his reader in the very entrance with a
discovery of his full drift, which is, Prove. 1.2.
that men should know wisdom and instruction, and that they should perceive
the words of understanding, now the understanding he promises, is not (as we
may well suppose) only of earthly and worldly things, which we can all well
and soon enough find out without the help of so great a teacher, but of
those better, higher matters, belonging to the service of God the tranquillity
of souls, and the welfare of all societies, in that great house of God, the
world. It remains then that the truth here spoken of, should find an
interpretation agreeable to the maine scope of the author and consequently
import the true knowledge, which appertains to the true worship of the most
true God, in whose right service, stands the whole duty and felicity of man;
Following then this sense, as knowing none other to follow, I must a little
resume my former observation, that Solomon supposes there is such a true
knowledge in divine matters, and that we may be possessors thereof, for why
should we be set to buy that which is not, and to what purpose is it, if it may
not be bought? herein we have the more sober scepticks of our age somewhat
yealding and plyant. Vide Mont. ess. lib. 2. cap. 12. and Charr. de la sag.
lib. 2. cap 2.
For Montagnie and Charron those two French writers that call for such a
suspense of judgments, almost in all inferior things, allowing us rather to
cheapen then buy: yet they willingly grant divine verities, which when revealed
from God, we must with ready submission assent unto, as unto uncontrollable
truths. But whether our Pyrronists even in faith, will grant so much or no, we
will confidently auerre it upon these grounds. First we confess God to be our
father and Lord: now a son honors his father, and a servant his Lord, Mal.
1.6.
as the Prophet Malachy, but not only by the spirit of prophecy (as I take it)
but following herein the very light of nature well inferres. For there cannot
be a closer sequence then of these terms: pater, filius, obsequium, dominus,
servus, hominium, obedience is due from the son to the father, homage from
the tenant to his Lord. If then at the very instant of our being, that bill was
drawn whereby we stand obliged to God, it is necessarily requisite, that there
should be some certain rule of that worship which we owe to him, and that we
should be acquainted with it. Our very nature confirms us in the
acknowledgement that such a truth is likewise to be found. lib 3. cap. 10.
For as Lactantius well shows, even by the testimony of those, who saw nothing
but by the twilight of nature, man is naturally inclined to some religious
conceits. lib. 1. de legibus. Vide Purch. pilgrimag. passim.
Philosophers have differenced him from all other creatures by this
inclination, so that indeed, as Cicero long ago observed, and our late
nauigations have plentifully discovered, there is not any so wild a portion of
mankind which does not serve some deity, striving to content it with those
kinds of worships which they hope will be accepted. Is there then this
propension of all to some religion, and is there no religion which may truly
satisfy it? Why is our understanding desirous of the knowledge of an infinite
truth, if it be not capable thereof, why capable, if there be no way to enjoy
it? Why does our will not stay it self upon any finite object, but is still
pressing forward to an infinite goodness, if there be no certain course to be
made partakers thereof. I will first believe that God gives, and our nature
receives so admirable a property in vain, before I can be persuaded that there
is no true religion, which only is that which can give rest to these restless
appetites of our souls. Add in the last place that man, a creature of one of
the highest forms (for he is but little inferior to the Angels) should be
one of the foolishest and most wretched, if religion were merely but a name or
fiction, or if having truth in it, could not, possibly be possessed by us. For
as Ficinus well shows, De relig. Christ. cap. 1.
many, as the Apostles forsake all things, all men something, out of the love
or fear of a Godhead: we quit present things in hope or dread of future, our
consciences are continually exercised either in feasting our selves for the
observed, or vexing our selves for the omitted duty to that divine power which
we acknowledge: now if all this were utterly in vain, we are most vain and
miserable, especially, since we observe in inferior creatures no natural
disposition to abstain from present good things in expectation of future, or
carry themselves in such a voluntary strictness. We may not, who for want of
time must be feign to leave out some thing necessary, stand too long upon
superfluous matters, and therefore will upon the premises which even nature may
subscribe unto, conclude, that there is some where extant a form of the true
worship of God, whereof man may be partaker. But the troublous dispute of the
world is, what this true worship is, wherein it consists, where to be bought,
by what means to be purchased. Let me hasten then to these points, not unfit
for this place, necessary I am sure for these times, wherein so many are at a
stand which way to take, not a few have turned their backs to that wherein they
ought to have proceeded: and all of us (God pardon our coldness and
faint-heartednesse) not so forward to uphold and beautify the truth which we
do embrace.

The phrase of buying, here used, somewhat directs us in our inquiry: for the
law of this action is, that we consider of the wares that are tendered unto us.
He that would have us take things because offered, does not fell but impose
and tirannize. A man may safely suspect his dealing that would have us choose
and wink, or buy in the dark. The baseness of falsehood shuns the light, but
truth as Tertullian speaks, Lib. cont. valent. cap. 3.
nihil erubescit nisi solummodo abscondi, is ashamed of nothing but to be hid:
it calls for all eyes, and fears not the seuerest trial; if it were only
gilded over, it might forbid touching or scraping, but being massy and solid
gold throughout, the more you handle and examine it the brighter it will
appear. It cannot therefore be but a* Turcisme in the Church of Rome, De
Turcarum sententia vide Lod. Vivem de verit Christ. fidei lib. 4.
which allows not the people of God to try before they trust, but because she
finds the ignorance of the most to be her greatest revenue shakels the souls
of infinite numbers in the prison of a dark implicit faith, as if they could
not be holy but in stupidity, nor good Christians unless they turn beasts and
be led without reason: but shall we with such curious diligence, survey the
nature and conditions of those wares, that are commodious for the body, and
shall we trust a few plausible words of the Chapman and go no farther, in
matters of that moment, as religion is, upon the truth whereof dependes the
salvation of our souls? Why? Is it not possible for men to be men and err,
are not many false prophets gone out into the world, are there not many
falsehoods for one truth, and does not falsehood at the first blush sometimes,
seem as truth? Was there never any rotten wood varnished or painted, was it
never known that a strumpet put upon her the attire and gestures of an honest
matron? Now how shall all this fraud be discovered, if we will put out our
own eyes and not use that discretion which God and nature has left us for the
differencing of things. I confess indeed that if we will resign up our
selves, wholly to some others opinion and degrade our selves of our own
understanding, we may fall upon some truths in the worship of God, but this is
by chance not judgment, and is not much better then if we should again build
up the Acts 17.23.
Altar to the unknown God. To remedy all these inconveniences, let us embrace
the allowance of the blessed Apostles, 1 These. 5.21.
of St Paul who exhorts us to try all things and hold that which is good: 1
John. 4.1.
of St John who bids us not to believe every spirit but try them whether they
are of God: 1 Pet. 3.15.
of St Peter who requires, that we be ready always to give an answer to
every man that asks a reason of the hope that is in us. This that we may be
able to do, let us go on and show the best means whereby we may discern
truth from falsehood in matter of religion.

Where first it is no reason why it should not easily be granted, that that is
truth which bears conformity to the mind of the first truth, God: for our
understanding is no otherwise true, then as it is even and adequate to things
themselves, considering them as they are, nor are those Entitles true but as
they are agreeable to divine understanding, which is not only the measure but
the cause of all things, but if in any thing certainly in religion that is
most true, that bears correspondency with Gods mind and will: for who should
prescribe what belongs to his honor but himself? Shall man who knows so
little in and about himself? (especially since his understanding grew crazie
by his fall) attempt to define how his maker shall be served? The effect of
this presumption, is too well known in the superstitious, who measuring God by
themselves, thrust such unseemly kindnesses upon him as are wholly unworthy of
his majesty: yea (to speak the truth) worship their own fancies instead of a
deity: what an ill-favored and misshapen piece of honor would it be, which a
silly country fellow should lay down for the right service of our king, and
may we not quickly imagine, what an untoward form of divine worship, that
would prove, which poor ignorant man, a worm and no man devises. No, no, let
us let God alone with his own honor: he is best known how great he is to
himself, and can surely tell us what his will is, he cannot be deceived
because most wise, he will not deceive, because most good. It is by the sun
that we behold the sun: it must be by God himself that we can know God:
and therefore for this point, we may set up our resolution with Ambrose in his
epistle against Symmachus: 2. Epist. cont. Symmachum.
coeli mysteria doceat me Deus ipse, qui condidit, non homo qui seipsum
ignorauit, cui magis de Deo quam Deo credam? As for the mysteries of heaven,
let God teach us who made us, not man who knows not himself, concerning God
whom should we better trust then God himself? That of Saint Hilary is of kin
to this, Lib. 1. de Trinit.
concedamus cognitionem sui Deo: idoneus enim sibi testis est, qui nisi per se
cognitus non est; let us leave to God the knowledge of himself, and since he
is not known but by himself, he is fittest to be his own witness; but let
us with attentivest reverence, mark the severity of God himself in the
prophecy of his servant Esaias, Es. 29.14.
the words whereof his own son repeates in the fifteenth of Matthew, Mat.
15.9.
In vain do they worship me teaching for doctrines the commandments of men.
Now since the conceit of man, is so vain a measure of divine worship, and that
God must be honored after his own way, it remains to be but enquired where
the seat of his will is * Saluianus readily answers us, De guber. mundi lib.
3.
ip sum sacrae scripturae oraculum, Dei men's est, the oracle of holy scripture
is the mind of God. Ioh. 77.17.
If it be truth we seek for, thy word O Father is truth says our Savior.
Behold the loving care of God to man; when by reason of our lame and blind
understanding we could not soar up to God, to enter our selves into his
acquaintance, he has descended down to us; by those who have been from
everlasting in his bosom, his dear son and spirit, he has conveied unto us
his counsels, 2. Pet. 1.21. Greg. mag.
and by the men who spoke and wrote as they were inspired, has sent us (as
Gregory's phrase is) diverse epistles concerning his will: here then may we
rest, that whatsoever his word enioineth, is wellpleasing, whatsoever it
forbids is unacceptable to him, whatsoever is of a middle nature, it is
uncertain whether it may be welcome; It is most certain it is not expected.
They are then too daring that thrust upon the people of God, as necessary to
their salvation or their makers worship, those obseruances, that we are sure
are beside, they are not sure are not against this written word. If it were
possible in these contentious times, for any one man of an humble and
indifferent spirit, no more to hear of those differences of religion, which so
much troubles the world, then that good poor man in the story of* Alexander
did of those wars that had filled all Asia in his time, Vide Curtium in lib. 4.
and had been long round about him, before he had diligently read over the
holy scriptures, and if afterward there should without all forestalling
persuasions or Oratory inference be nakedly laid down the articles of our
doctrine and the tenants of the Romish Church, it were not possible but he
should admire the sweet consent, which our religion has with Gods word, and he
would more then wonder from whence all the rest were fetched, and would conclude
that if what they teach in many points, be true, there has crept into the
world a new Gospel, whereof no footsteps in the many writings of the holy
Prophets and Apostles do appear. These additaments are styled sacred
traditions, but by what chain were they let down from heaven? Or how can
their necessary use by prudent hearted christians be embraced, when they are
already bound to believe, 2 Timothy 3.15.16.17.
that the Scriptures are able to make us wise unto salvation as Saint Paul
says, and that they are of sufficiency for all those things, whereby the man
of God may be perfectly furnished to every good work: men may be wise above
that which is written, but then they are wise above sobriety; for it is a
luxury in religion to desire more, then what will instruct us to every good
work here and fit us for eternal salvation hereafter.

But here we must go one step farther to quit that objection which good
souls, do many times make against their own good; for they willingly
granting that God has made the scripture a perfect register of his will, and
that it is a great contentment to man, that God himself is become his teacher,
by whom if he be deceived he may say as he of old, Rich. de So vict.
Si error e Domine a te decepti sumus, if I am in an error thy word has
deceived me; yet how shall these writings be understood by us? For we hear
many and those none of the meanest clerks, complaining of the great obscurity
to be found in that book, and how shall we Puisnes and Pigmes in comparison
of others reach to the sense thereof; buy the truth we would, but it is
somewhat above the proportion of our states and abilities: to this I can give
no better answer, but do ye with humble diligence and teachable affections
read over this heavenly book and you will answer your selves: for doubtless
you shall find many easy places therein, and those will encourage you to read
the rest. Even this writing of Solomon though it contain parables high enough
for the most reaching understanding, yet withal it certifies us in the very*
entrance that they are framed to give subtilty to the simple, Prove. 1.4.
and to the young man knowledge and discretion; and will the spirit fail of
the end proposed? Experience will teach us otherwife, for howsoever we shall
meet in scriptures with some of those depths wherein Eiephants may swim, and
if they will be too curiously and presumptuously venturing, be drowned too;
yet we shall also light upon exceeding many foords, and those streaming
likewise with the waters of life, wherein those that are yet but lambs may
wade and be refreshed; admirable is the temper of holy scriptures, as the
Author thereof takes care of all and is rich to all that call upon him as
speaks the Apostle, Romans 10.12.
so is the style thereof disposed and bending toward all, that approach with
reverence: it so exercises the wits of the most learned, as that it satisfies
the desires of the most ignorant: God is the Father and lord of us all, and he
speaks as becomes both those titles; for having differing children and
servants and having commandes for all of them, he must needs attemper his
speech to each several capacity, that every one may know his duty in the place
he holds under him. Vide Vivem de verit. fidei lib. 2. cap: de virtutibus
evangelii.
Howsoever then the old Philosophers savouring of the heathenish envy and
pride, and mindeing only the benefit of a few, profess they will write
obscurely, and to the most as good as if they wrote not at all, Arist. epist.
ad Alexandrum de libris phyfic. auscult.
witness the epistle of Airistotle to his greatest scholar, yet to conceive
so of God, the author of mankind, as well as of the Bible, were the impeachment
of his wisdom and goodness: for what shall he be the God only of
universities, shall the witty only ingrosse him? No, 1. Reg. 20.28.
doubtless he is a God of the* valleys as well as of the mountains and the
showers of his gracious pleasures shall equally descend on both: there are in
every corner of his family souls sick, and to be cured; hungry and to be fed;
naked and to be clothed lost and to be found, and therefore there is doubtless
in his word, that medicine, meat, succor, salvation, that shall be fit for
all, there is a spiritual market where all may buy: but here is the folly, we
are many of us lazy, and then lay our sloth upon obscurity of scriptures, and
some of us it may be drunk with inordinate affections, and then like
drundards though the way be broad and plain enough yet we find fault with the
narrowness and unevenness; yea by the abuse of our selves and the word of
God, instead of buying his truth we purchase that his grievous judgment, that
seeing we shall not see, and hearing we shall not understand, that so that of
the Apostle may be verified: Mat. 13.14. 2 Cor. 4.4.
if the Gospel be hid it is hid unto them that perish, in whom the God of
this world has blinded their minds, that the light of the glorious Gospel of
Christ should not shine unto them. Much fault may be in our selves, that we
miss of so rich a bargain as truth; but came we with honest minds to the
word, we should find, that though many hard things therein surpass our
understanding, yet if we practice, but so many duties of piety, and embrace so
many articles of faith, which we may clearly understand, there will remain
of easy lessons such store, as shall serve to the attainment of eternal life.
Thus have we laid down the prime and master direction how to descerne
falsehood from that heavenly truth which we would buy; showing that nothing is
to be retained as necessary to the true worship of God, which bears not
conformity to his will, whereof the letters patents are the holy scriptures;
but further, because in the ware it self, which we would get into our hand,
there are found certain proper qualities or characters whereby it may be
distinctly known from sophisticate falsehoods, it will not be impertinent to
admonish somewhat herein.

The first innate property of this truth, is that it is always one and the same,
even as God himself the parent thereof is, in whom is no variableness or
shadow of turning says St James, Iac. 1.17. Ephesians. 4.5.
as one Lord so one faith, is St Paul's doctrine; to imagine that diverse and
contrary traditions in religion may be true, is to bring in a plurality of
Gods. For the one and simple understanding of one God, cannot possibly cast
forth the beams of two truths. Well then may Austen call that opinion of
Rhetorius, Aug. de haeres. cap. 72.
haeresin nimium mirabilis vanitatis, an heresy of a prodigious vanity, who
held that all heretics though of never so different fancies, did yet speak
the truth, as if any thing could swerve from it self and remain it self; no,
no, truth is more uniform and constant, insomuch that if we survey all the
parcels of this rich and beautiful commodity, we shall find each several to
agree with the rest in admirable consent; whereas if we take into our hands
the infinite pieces of falsehood, we shall not only perceive them opposite to
truth, but incoherent one to another, nay in the same cause or question it will
not be hard to descry the premises, and the more removed co^sequences mutually
to wound one another and be both false; but truth cuts not her own throat, but
rather each part of her (if of so partlesse a thing I may so speak) lends
stron succor to the other.

The second native note of divine truth is, that it still reflects it self
upon the glory of its Author, and therefore she, as wisdom in the book of
Proverbs, gets her to the top of the high places, Prove. 8.2.3. Psalm. 29.1.2.
she stands at every entrance and sings that Psalm with a cheerful voice,
Give unto the Lord O ye mighty, give unto the Lord Glory and strength, give
unto the Lord the glory due unto his name: all her cry is that flesh and blood
may be humbled, and the Father of spirits glorified: she bids miserable man at
last know and acknowledge his misery, and begin to confess himself altogether
unworthy of the least of his provoked makers mercy: she preaceth to him, not to
stand upon the prerogatives of natural goodness, she counsels him to cast
away the insolent conceit of his own merits and satisfactions, and rely only
upon the free and undeserved grace of God for his salvation: she commandes him
to submit all his own wisdom, greatness, power, to the power, greatness,
wisdom of God: she inioines him not to take in any partners into his redeemers
honor, but to let him have all the glory of his own works without a sharer:
this voice thus advancing our creator and restorer, is high and true; but when
I hear a skreaking, that I am not so poor but that doing what I may do, by
my depraved nature, I deserve at leastwise in congruity, that God should look
favorably upon me, and when his favor is received, I then can do those
works which by their own proper dignity, may merit heaven and bring God under
a debt: when I hear a noise that I must get me some of the ouerflowings of
other men's goodness, or pay some of mine own satisfactions to help out the
merits of my savior (as if there were some want in him of whose fulnsse we
may all receive grace for grace) when I am solicited in performance of
religion, John. 1.16.
to do besides and sometimes against the command of God, as if I might be a
thought wiser then my maker: these sounds must needs be untuneable to truth,
since they set not forth the grace and glory of God in that highest strain,
which heavenly doctrines should reach unto.

Thirdly if amongst a heap of fruitless and comfortless doctrines that
usually lie upon the stall, we would find out and buy the truth, let us
enquire after that which contains the most certain and safe method of our
reconciliation with God: for since religion (as that noble Frenchman has it)
is the art of saving man, Mornaeus de verit. rel. Christianae. cap. 20.
which cannot be but in conjunction with God, and since it is confessed on all
hands, that sin has made a great gulf betwixt God and man; that must needs
be the only truth, which will tell us how a friendship may be made up again
betwixt the creator and his creature, hence some say religion takes his name,
because it does Vide Lactant. lib. 4. cap. 28. and Aug. de civ. dei. l. 10. c.
4.
relige or bind together again what was unhappily disunited. But be that as
Grammarians can agree, it will be agreed by divines, that all mankind, should
be utterly lost, if being by sin brought unto the very margent of that
bottomless hellish pit, there should be no bridge appointed, to conveigh us over
in safety to the mercies of heaven, but herein the grace of God, (which the
scripture has the honor to publish helps by bringing us certain news of an
Emmanuella God-man, a mediator, who by his infinitely meritorious sufferings
(for what cannot the blood of the son of God obtain) paid off all the scores
of his Fathers justice, extinquished all the fiery fierceness of his wrath and
reconciled us to his everlasting love, wherein is everlasting life and health:
when we were enemies says the Apostle, Romans 5.10.
we were reconciled to God by the death of his son, and being reconciled, we
shall be saved by his life. This is a true saying and worthy by all means to
be received, because it can only give assurance of peace to our troubled
consciences, whereas all other ways in the case of man's reconciliation with
God, are but as thin, rotten, short threads, applied to the bowing of a
mighty Cedar, to a poor shrubbe of wonderful great distance from it, even
ties and bands weaker and vainer then vanity itself.

Fourthly, it may pass for an individual mark of true religion, that it is a
leader to true sanctity The wisdom that is from above, Iac. 3.17.1.27.
is first pure? says St James, and in the last verse of his first chapter he
gives this character thereof, charity toward others and cleanesse in our
selves. Not that all professors of the truth, are presently possessed with
sanctity, not that the sanctity which is in the best, is in this life perfectly
squared to the exact rule of truth; but our meaning is, that what is divinely
true does in its own nature necessarily tend to the purging of our souls from
corruption, and the introducing of holy innocence, charity and every other
virtue: It must needs be so, since truth is the daughter of God, the Holy of
holies; when therefore we hear a doctrine that favors our sensuality, that
gives dispensation to carnal liberty, that lendes patronage to the fopperies
of our time, vt honest peccare videamur, that we may seem honestly vain; The
voice thereof, bewraies the falsehood of it, nay it is a very unlucky truth (if
any truth can have that misfortune) which when entertained moves no man the
more to the love of God or practice of any goodness. In a word since it was
wisely said, Summa religionis est imitari quem colis, Aug.
it is the abrigement of all religion to imitate him whom a man worships: it is
but froth, that is not able to imprint in our accounts the lively resemblance
of that holiness which is in God. If it cannot beget virtue but serves only to
make us hide our badnesse, it has but the force of an humane law; if it do
but only pare off, but not root up vices, it is but a lecture of heathennish
philosophy: if instead of crossing, it gratifies the ill humors of the flesh,
and world, it is the doctrine of devils; but if it be fitted to the rendering
of a man, not only a full renouncer of his own lusts but a sincere imitator
of his makers holiness, this is the truth, that is fallen down from heaven,
to bring us up thither.

Fifthly I must adioiyne this, as a cognizance of the best religion, that it
calls especially for the inward man: for nothing can be more agreeable to a
spiritual and invisible nature, then a spiritual service: surely the Father
seeks such worshippers, Ioh. 4.23.
as speaks the son, and I hope many such he will find, though I cannot but
fear there will be still more, who supposing that God loves, whatsoever they
themselves admire, and going about to put upon him their own humors, place all
religion in external gawdes and shows, what a deal of mechannicall religion,
is there in the world whilst the Pharisaicall Jew is busy in the washing of
his cupps, and platters, Mat. 23.25.14.
and makes his observed prayers long even to hoarsnesse, but to have a clean
and sincere soul is his least care. The blind heathen plays the Antique in
gesture before his God, Lact. Lib. 4. c. 3.
and when his ceremony is ended, his religion is ended. The silly Papist with
his fingers turns over his beads, with his knees creeps to his image, with
his tongue performs his confessors task, and then he has done with God till
the next holy day: nay whilst so many amongst our selves mere Mimicks in
religion, are zealous rather in their eyes, ears, hands, tongues, then in
their hearts, that find all religion in the temple, and in the temple leave it
as they find it, neither bringing in nor carrying away any in their minds,
which should be the hourly living Temples of God, beautified with modesty
perfumed with innocence, and stored with the sacrifices of flagrant love to
God, his causes, his servants: services of the body were decent, have their
place, but not as distinctiue notes of a true religion, which rather calls for
the offices of a good and well guided mind.

Lastly I may not omit without wronging my wares, that the truth which must be
bought, will be known by her antiquity and lastingnesse, because it is the of
spring of him that was, and is, Rev. 4.8.
and is to come: here those of the Church of Rome will be ready to plead a
purchase, nameing us Popes and ancestors for many years, in whose hands their
doctrine has bin kept, we deny it not to be too old, and yet we grant it
not to be old enough: for antiquity has its degrees; we yield the second, but
the first is the best, and that is ours, we say not this or that Pope but with
Ignatius Christ is our antiquity; Epist. ad Philadelph.
nor to use Cyprians Apology, do we so much attend, what any others before
us, have done or taught, Epi. 63.
sed quid, qui ante omnes est Christus prior fecerit, what Christ who was
before them all did, and commanded to be taught and done; and this truth which
in the Primitive times was clearly professed and in the darker days of
Antichristianisme preserved, both in the Oracles of the uncorrupted word, and
in the hearts of persecuted witnesses, our eyes (eyes blessed if thankful)
behold it, not new but renewed, and vindicated from the tirannie of former
times, if it had stood only upon humane props; frauds and forces might by
this time have undermined it, but by a higher hand, it has hitherto
miraculously continued, and no doubt will to the end of all things; since there
is no reason why God who is if I may so speak as wise at first as at last, and
as strong at last as at first, should either change his mind or not afford his
support.

Having thus showed where truth is shopt, and how it may be discovered the
only labor that is left me, is, to stir you up to be so affected that it
may be possessed by you: where not to be so arrogant as to chalk you out a
way of study in arts and sciences, and languages, and such like helps, to the
inquisition even of divine truths, this I leave to the Gamaliels and masters
of the Israel at whose feet I wish I might have longer sat. I shall only
account it my duty, to admonish you and my self in a few words of the chiefest
qualities wherewith we should be invested, who are enjoined to buy the truth.

And here let a high love and esteem of this ware be first wrought in us: for
doubtless here is a thing of rich value before us, since the holy ghost does
so solicit us to the purchasing thereof, we may well give it out, that this
is that one pearl of great price mentioned in the Gospel, Mat. 13.46.
which caused the wise merchant to go and sell all that he had and buy it, for
if it be an excellency, drawing toward Angellicall perfection, to consider of
things as indeed they are: if it be so sweet a food to the soul of man to
contemplate of those matters whereof she is capable without mistakeing: if it
be the noblest schollership to copy out into our understandings, that which
is originally and eternally in Gods: if God be so jealous of his honor, and
so unlike those so ciable Gods of the heathen, that one only prescribed worship
can content him; how should we be ravished with truth in which all this is
found, we cannot but long to buy it, if we once be thus persuaded of the
worth of it.

Therefore I hope the next thing will be heeded by us, which is, as heartily
to be affected with the excellency of scriptures, above all other writings,
since in that holy paper is unquestionably wrapped up this heavenly ware; 2. Tim.
3.19.
much time would then be spent as was done by Timothy in knowing the sacred
letters, and not suffer our selves to be so bewitched with the name of humane
polite literature, that Philosophers, Historians, Poets, yea and those Divines
too, with whom Aristotle is more frequent then Paul, should take up our
solemnest, and devoutest studies, and the Bible be only read at some by
hours, rather because we would not be altogether ignorant, the^ that we would
be very skill full in it: surely they are worthy to be deceived in divine
matters, who are infected with the humor of Angelus Palitianus who would not
vouchsafe the reading of scriptures, Vide viuem de very. fidei lib. 2. cap. de
veter. Testam.
as not containeing elegancies suitable to his wit and style, as if he meant to
be saved by Criticismes and quainter phrases. St Austen bewailes this vanity of
his, lib 3. conf. cap. 5
with whom whilst not converted Tully above all compares seemed worthier of
his study, then any of our inspired authors, we may think it a malady of great
wits which had need to be cured by such repentance; let good wits therefore
take heed of it.

Now as we love truth and the records of it, so if we would store our selves
therewith, I know nothing more necessary then to come with honest and purged
affections: for a mind blurred with sensual vanities, worldly corruptions,
devilish wickedness, can hardly take the fair impressions of truth. Sap. 1.4.
Into a malicious soul wisdom (as it is in the book of Wisdom) shall not
enter nor dwell in the body that is a subject unto sin, If pride be the
domineering sin in us, (...)
and has given us any of the waters of strife to drink, Lord, how hard we
study, yet not to buy but disgrace a truth: if it has bin our ill luck to
have vented an error, we take it our credit to defend it, and though we are
conscious of the falsehood yet we must not seem to err: In our conferences
which should serve to put up truth before us, it is victory that is only aimed
at. A modest man dares scarce speak what is true for fear of putting us into
the contrary error: and as the leaven of pride is so sour, so is it
wonderfully swelling, as if plain and certain truths were occupata materia, a
matter already taken up by others of low and vulgar wits, and unfit for the
sublimity of our spirits: we range after curious speculations that still will
run away from us, or if caught will be of no use: we peremptorily determine
where we should only religiously admire, again, if this spirit haunt us, a
new error pleases us better then an ancient established truth, thinking it a
brauer act to be the master of a young vanity, then the disciple of an aged
truth, no wonder then if some, now and then, pick out of their authors such a
point for their venting, which others saw as well as they, and could have
bought it; but being but a toy and not worth the expense, have wisely scorned
it, these marketings can hardly be avoided by men of pride, humility is more
thirsty and still on the getting hand; because indeed blessed be him, who as
he frustrats proud wits, Luke 1.15. PS. 25.9.
so has he promised that the humble he will teach his way.

Now as the fate of pride is, so is that of worldlings, so is that of
sensuality, so is that of envy, sois that of uncharitableness; all these hang
plummets upon the soul, and suffer her not to ascend up to many truths; nay
though our understandings be sometimes of their own natural vigor soaring,
yet as the very Eagles made for stight, can only flutter, not mount when
weighty stones are tied to their feet; so these base and unworthy affections
cannot choose but clogge and press us, when we are to raise up our spirits to
any high point: but did we carry in our breasts, contented, chaste, moderate
peaceable affections, endeavoring nothing more then, to be holy as God is
holy, 1. Pet. 1.16.
the eye of our souls would often see more clearly and pearce more deeply into
heavenly mysteries: that rule of our Savior is most divine: Ioh. 7.17.
If any man will do the will of my father, he shall know of the doctrine
whether it be of God.

Much here might be added concerning those many preiudices whereof we should
also rid our selves, before we can entertain truth; it is true it is true, is
the cry of many, but why, it is attended with signs: Mat. 24.24.
yea but false prophets shall do wonders even to the deceiving of the elect
themselves, if that were possible: it is confirmed by the sufferings of the
professors: (...).
yea but it is not the pain but the cause that makes a martyr: it is
accompanied with prosperity: yea but the Apostles and that church wherein the
faith was most purely kept, (...). 11.37.
were destitute, afflicted, tormented: it is followed by multiudes, yea but it
was never so well with the world that the best thing should please the most:
(...). 7.13.
and the broad way hears ill: it is bequeathed by our ancestors: but walk
not in the statutes of your fathers, Ezekiel. 20.18.
I am the Lord says God sometimes by his prophets: it were ill with truth if a
long custom could prescribe against it: it is taught by great Rabbis: but
they list not to be men, nor ever could produce any character that exempts them
from ignorance: it is delivered by those of reputed sanctity: yea but our
savior mentions false prophets that shall come in sheep clothing: Mat.
7.15.
nor is I will not say a counsel of Saints but men, a quire of Angels to be
welcomed with any other curtesy then a curse, Gal. 1.8.
if they bring things contrary to what has bin received from Christ. I wonder
at our sottishness that can be patient to have our understanding giued by
these weak preiudices: that we may break them, let us be persuaded of this
easy truth: 2. Cor. 1.24.
that none but God can Lord it over faith: because he alone is set above error
and deceit: the Apostle says it upon deliberation what David did in have,
every man is a liar, Romans 3.4. Ps. 116.11.
what through Ignorance, what through negligence: what through malice; small
reason have we then to prime our consciences upon any one sleeue, not knowing
whether he will run with them.

To avoid all these impediments to the procuring of truth, let us in the last
place commend prayer unto you: by which holy men have confessed that they have
more profited then by reading, hearing, Aug. Epist. 112.
or any other diligence: Job. 32.8.
for if it be true what Elihu says, there is a spirit in man, but it is the
inspiration of the Lord that gives understanding: and it being most true what
our savior has, that his Father will give the spirit to those that ask him;
Luke 11.13.
who can doubt but that devout prayer is one of the currantest coins, whereby
we may traffic with God, for the obtaining of those illuminations that shall
bring truth with them into our breasts.

Thus have I (reverent Fathers and brethren) brought you what I have conceived
in this argument. I am not much acquainted with your ears and therefore know
not how to fit them: only I thought that a discourse of truth, and the
purchase of it, might not be unsuitable to that place wherein is held so famous
a Mart of truth: or did the considerations of mine own meannesse deter me,
since I knew I came amongst the wise, with whom as Prospers phrase is, truth is
not then only great, when great ones teach it. But if you will except, Vide
Prosp. praesat. in 2. l. de vita contempl.
we need no encouragement in this kind, for we have bought truth already then
I have nothing to say but this, evermore defend it with your tongue and pen,
and if need be seal it with your blood: ever more adorn it with the
holiness, and integrity of your lives, that so when this life shall be
changed into a better, you may with souls full of truth the more comfortably
come into the presence of the God of truth, to whom Father, son and holy
ghost be ascribed all glory and praise now and for ever.

FINIS.
JAMES I. VER. 16. Do not err my beloved brethren.


IF error were only the disease of the ignorant, it might reasonably be said
unto me, Physician heal thine own country flock, and come not hither where
various learning has provided sufficient preservatives against this evil, or
if this malady of the soul, might be cured by a bare information of the
understanding the matter more conveniently might be left to your public
schools, or private studies, then brought up into your pulpit, but since
experience abundantly teaches, that the most dangerous, and troublesome errors
have had their birth; and breeding amidst the tongues, and pens, of men famed
for their wit and learning; and since the affections, (which many times are as
inordinate in the greatest clerks, as the simplest Idiots) do (though very
irregularly I confess) too too often lead the understanding: I could not take it
so misbeseeming a work for a preacher, who has so much to do with the
ordering of men's affections, to take in hand this subject in this place, let
me then once more (Reverent Fathers and beloved brethren) venture upon your
patience, and as heretofore I have from that wise king invited you to buy the
truth, Prove. 23.23.
so suffer me now from this holy Apostle advise you to fly error.

A thing (if yet I can entitle it to entity) well worth our speediest flying
from it, or chasing it from us. Errorem definirefacilius quam finire Aug. lib.
1. contra Academicos cap. 4.
For if we define error, which is sooner defined then finished said Licentius,
what is it but a pitiful deformity, and incongruity betwixt our
understanding, and the things which God and nature have established? For as it
is the justice of truth to consider every thing as indeed it is, herein nobly
doing right to the first truth, God (the fountain of that settled being which
things have) so on the contrary injurious error is a false witnes-bearer
against God, reporting otherwise of things, then God made them, or then he
would have them to be apprehended by us; either fastening upon things what
belongs not to them, or denying to them what does. Alas how have we lost God,
and the tracks of things as he has left them to us, yea how have we lost our
selves, and the indowments wherewith we were trusted! For whereas reason was
bestowed upon us, to be a lamp whereby we might discern betwixt truth, and
that which is the shadow thereof, error has put out this light, and so
deprived us of that which is the soul of the soul to use Philo his words even
as the apple is the eye of the eye. De mundi opificio.
Philosophers speak of a natural appetite which the soul of every man has
to know what is true in things; and therefore howsoever there may be found
thousands, that most gladly would deceive others, scarce one among them would
willingly be deceived himself. Yet I know not how error has somewhat dulled
this appetite, I am sure it cannot satisfy it, but frustrates the honest
desires of the soul; and instead of her due meat, feeds her either with
incertaine opinions which breed crude, and undigested tenants in the judgment,
or else with certain falsehood the very poison of the mind. Nor is error only
dangerous to the first harborers of it, but like the plauge, it runns from man
to man; no man almost being content to err to himself, but has a longing to
transmit his erroneous conceits to others, as it appears in all Heretics.
But the malignity of error is never of greater force then when it lights into
men of our calling, for when we have once lost part of our priestly pectorall,
Exodus 28.30.
our vrim our light of true doctrine, and have clad our selves in the dark hue
of falsehood, we conueigh our fashion unto multitude of souls, and cannot
perish alone. By this you see the perrill, and cannot but welcome our Apostles
admonition, calling you from it.

But then is an admonition in this kind, so much the more to be heeded, the
fouler the error is concerning which the warning is given. Such a one is this
which Saint James means; for if you will surveigh the verses bordering upon my
text, you shall find him laboring to root that impiously absurd conceit out
of men's minds that God is a solicitor and temptor to sin, The devil greedy
after the destruction of souls, was it seems impatient of any long delay, ere
he wrought his feats, and therefore not tarrying until the Gospel of our
Savior were generally planted and strongly rooted in men's hearts by the
preaching of the apostles, he very early began to sow his tares, where the
Lords first husband men had cast in their good seed. Nay so diligent was the
malice of Satan, in his hireling Simon Magus, the Patriarch of heretics, that
the Apostles were prevented, Haeretic. Fabul. compend. de Simone.
for as Theodoret writes when he had quitted Samaria, he traveled into diverse
parts, where the Apostles had not preached, forestalling as he went along the
minds of men, with his detestable impostures, that the doctrine of
Apostolical teachers, might wholly be shut out, or enter with greater
difficulty; now among his pestilentiall errors, Aduers. haereses cap. 24.
that was one, as Vincentius testifies, that God the creator was author of the
evils, even of sin; an impiety which wanted not abettors in all ages; For
besides Simon, Cerdon, Marcion, Florinus in the first times, and the Manichees,
with the Priscillianists, afterward, even our present age has afforded that
impure sect of the Libertines foully guilty that way. It is probable that some
in the Apostles time had drunk of Simons cup, which might move Saint James to
give caveats to his scholars, that they err not in this point: Howsoever we
deem of the occasion, moving him to write, his admonition, is so much the
waightier, the more grievous the error which he speaks of, is: an error
primae magnitudinis of the biggest size. For if God be an author of, or a
tempter to sinful evil; if we cannot be content to say that he permits
offenses, but will have him to necessitate them; if we cannot rest satisfied
with that truth, that God does in his infinite wisdom make use of the wicked
wills of his creatures, to his own glory, but we will further say that he
makes their wills so wicked; if when men are read to be hardened by God, we
will pronounce that he does it, not only by witholding grace, but infusing
malice: if when we speak of Gods concurring, with every work of his
creature, we will not distinguish the action it self from the obliquity, but
promiscuously entitle God to both: Lord what confusion will there be in all
things, let the pale betwixt just and unjust, holy and profane be pulled
down! For if God solicit and impell men to evil, when I sin I sin not, for
why should it be my fault to be lead by God, nay this confounds God and the
devil making them all one; then which what more horrid blasphemy can be
conceived. And as for the attributes of God, which are indeed himself, not one
of them can stand with any honor, if this error be not demolished; for how is
he goodness it self if such streams of evil do flow from him, how is he
all power when he is the parent of defects, and impotencies? What justice is it
to punish those crimes which he himself makes, and plague in another his own
fault; and if he incline, yea drive a man to sin, that so afterward he may
show his mercy in remitting it, Aug.
alas, as that father says it is but a maleuolent good will to make any one
miserable to appear himself merciful. A more sacrilegious indignity against
God cannot be offered, then by this abominable error; not is there any more
pernicious to humane society. For it erects a profane sanctuary for all
offenders, every one sheltring his iniquity, under the authority and patronage
of God himself. There is in man a natural humor not to own his offenses,
and he is glad if he can translate them upon another; this error affords the
boldest shift, when it proposes God the author of and mouer to sins, none if
this doctrine were current, but would freely and riotously offend when they
have not fault, but necessity, yea divine authority to charge in whatsoever
they do. This I speak to discover the weight of the Apostles admonition, who
gives warning in a matter of great importance, this error not only grating
upon, but casting down the very foundation of all religion.

But although our Apostle has especial reference to this one particular most
impious error, yet there is no doubt, In locum.
but as Paraeus rightly comments the admonition here given extends to our
auoidance of all other foul errors about the doctrines of faith. For if we
be untouched of this falsehood, there are besides this, many others, injurious
to God and dangerous to souls, wherewith if we are likely to be tainted, our
Apostles watchword is still in force. Err not my beloved brethren. Let me then
(taking my text in its just latitude) enter into that, whereunto I have
destinated my meditations, for this place and time; which is to lay down a
course how we may recover others and preserve our selves form errors in
religion, that so this monitory speech of out Apostle may take effect among us.
And of this, as God, the hour, and your patience will permit.

Concerning our recovery of others fallen into error, though herein much may be
said, yet in this scantnesse of time, it will be thriftiest for me, to observe
only our Apostles method herein, first we must have a care as well to instruct
them, as condemn them, so does Saint James; who together with his cry Nolite
errare, uses very powerful arguments, drawn from the nature of God, and the
true causes of sin; whereby he proves that God cannot be a tempter to evil,
as reading the chapter you shall perceive. And indeed it cannot be but a
fruitless imperiousness to command a man not to err and not teach him with
all the folly of his error, and what reasons there are to withstand it; and
here I cannot but dislike the course taken up by some of our calling, who
sometimes in the pulpet do with greater eagernes of passion, inveigh against
popish errors, then soundness of judgment, and choice of arguments refute
them; this rather advantageth then reformeth falsehood; putting this frump into
our adversaries mouths; we see a will rather then a power in our opposits to
convince us of error, for we hear much noise, little reason; and who are they
that we should credit them, upon their bare words, and weak assertion only:
but this is a fault most seen in the country, and therefore not to be
insisted on in this place.

A second direction is afforded from the courteous language of Saint James in
our text; the matter which he confutes, comes not short of blasphemy, yet the
Apostle abstaines from that harsher term, and molifies that had opinion into
the gentler name of error and now he calls from this error he salutes his
scholars after a mild and loving manner, Err not beloved brethren. If we
could do any good upon others errors, this behavior is of all others the most
winning; to come to the handling of our brethrens sores, with brotherly minds,
full of love and compassion. Aseruant of the Lords, especially he that does the
Lords service in freeing men's souls from error, 2. Tim. 2.24.25
Must be as Saint Paul describes him, gentle to all men, apt to teach,
patient, in meekness instructing those that oppose themselves, if God
peradventure will give them repentance, to the acknowledging of the truth; and
surely great reason we have to show humanity to humane errors; remembering how
difficult a matter it is for poor ignorant men, so every way beset with the
snares of error, to escape all danger, yea not forgetting that we our selves
are but men, and may possibly have as great stains, in our judgment, as those
we would expunge in others; how soever, by dealing with our brethren after a
fair, and mild demenaour, we shall render them more docile, and tractable, it
being the nature of many to lend a more patient ear to those of whom they have
an opinion that they proceed in love: the mind delights rather to follow then
to be lead, and rather to be lead, then drawn, violence making it the more
contumatious: it fares with him that has put on error, as it did with him in
the Apoloag whom the sun fairly and serenely shining upon, might have wood
to cast off his cloak, which the blustering wind made him to keep closer on;
and surely there are some that if gently admonished will both reverence their
instructor, and embrace his advice, but if over roughly and smartingly handled,
Salvian,
will rather be exasperated then reformed facti sunt ingesta acrius veritate
peiores; they are made worse by a truth too too eagerly put upon them. They
seem then smally acquainted with the discretion of admonishers, or condition
of humane nature, who fly into the face of their erring brethren, with biting
inuectiues, and rigorous punishments, as if it were all one to rail and
convince, condemn and teach, or as if it were a brauer thing for Christians to
employ power then love, in the correcting of their brethren; I speak not
against the due punishment of men obstinate and irreclaimable, but that they
may not be so, I would have all loving means first tried to recall them; yea
and when a severe stroke is given I would have it inflicted with demonstration
of unfeigned sorrow and love, as the primitive Church did her censures with much
mourning; as may be gatherered by St Paul's epistles with whom to correct and
lament are symonimas as the iuditious writer of the Trent counsels history
has noted, 1 Cor. 5.2. 2 Cot. 2.4. Histor, Confil. Trident.
who observes farther, that in those times the excess of charity in correcting
did make the corrector feel greater pain then the corrected; the proceedings
of latter times, have bin so harsh and feirce, that it may be thought that
some have been so far from greiving at the errors of others, that rather they
have been glad of them, especially if they be such, the sedulous discovery
and punishment whereof would as they hoped insinuate them into the favors of
the great ones, of the world, men thus being more beholding to the errors of
others, then their own virtues for their preferments, or if this humor has
not took them, it is to be feared another has, full of malignant vaineglory;
while they somewhat reioiceat the daily outbursting of error, that so they
might have work, if not for their authority to use the rod, yet for their
learning to employ the pen or tongue in confuting them. I think it a worthy
work to convince erroneous doctrines, and I hope this place will never want
those, that shall perform it readily and solidly, but to desire errors to make
ostentation of this skill, is a perverseambition, void of all brotherly
charity, Epist. 132. ad Florenlinam.
non vt quod scimus doceamus aliorum ignor antiam opt are debemus says Austen,
to the end we may teach the world what we know, we may not wish for the
ignorance or error of another. But so much shall suffice for the course
intimated in our Apostles proceeding, fit for us to take in the recovering of
others from their errors; how we shall preserve our selves, it remains to the
prescribed.

Error is a sickness of the soul: and the chief part, at least the first
degree of the cure, is to know and stop the fountain of the disease. The
causes of error are many; I will not touch upon those which may crave the mercy
of our excuse and pity, and which are now so incident to our nature, that they
are past our avoidance; for it is mischife sufficiently known and felt, that
our first parent his inordinat and ambitious desire of ouerwide knowledge,
brought himself, and his unhappy posterity into the dark prison of ignorance;
where lying, and God as David sets it forth, Psalm. 14.2.
looking down from heaven upon the children of men, to see if there were any
that would understand, he finds not one they are all corrupt as in their wills
so in their understandings: he that reads the third to the Romans where this
passage of David is alleged shall perceive, Romans 3.9.11.
that no favorable synecdoche can save any of the posterity of Adam from his
epidemicall contagion: And although God the great Physician of souls, by his
spirit, by his begotten word the son, and by that word which he put into the
mouths of his prophets, and Apostles, has purged the minds of many of much
ignorance, and made their understanding more clear and lightsome; yet whether
it be that the disease, is too deeply rooted in our nature to be driven out
upon a sudden, or whether it be that God will have sOme relics thereof
abide in us, to contain us within the bounds of humility, and does not think
it fit we should enjoy all our happiness at once: whatsoever the reason is,
even the best men do ofter find in themselves certain grudgings of this
malady. Not only they bewray their ignorance but their error, as David
ingeniously confesses that before he went into the sanctuary, the school of
God, Psalm. 73.17.22.
in a matter of no small importance, he was foolish and ignorant, and even
brutish before God. The truth is (for an Apostle has taught it) that in this
life, 1. Cor. 13.9.
we know but in part, and no wonder is it, if this penurious and incomplete
knowledge leave us in the hands of diverse errors. But this natural seeblenesse
of the understanding (although questionless it be the parent of sundry
mistakes, I come to pity not to lash; especially where there is a care to
heal and strengthen such weakness of the mind, by those wholesome remedies
which God has prescribed; and there be no willing fomentation of, but all
manly resitance against erroneous fancies; and if also since we want the
happiness of being free from error and ignorance, we want not the wisdom to
be forry for our defects, andto pray for their forgiveness and covering in
Christ.

The leaders into errors against which my discourse is specially bent, come
forth not so much from the coasts of a naturally weak understanding, as of
some morally bad affections, which must be subdued or error will be
victorious. For that the affections are of great force, to sway the judgment,
we need not marvel, since the will is the most imperious faculty of the
soul, and makes use of the understanding but as a councellor; now as when a
prince is strongly let upon a thing, and is resolved to have his own way, the
counselors many times what for fear, what for love; or very flattery are
plyant enough to his purpose, and willingly suffer themselves, to be corrupted,
that they may appear serviceable; so when once the will is in ordinately
affected and mainely bent to that ill upon which the affection is placed, it
gives little leisure and no leave to the understanding to dissent from it, yea
it dimns the eye of the sold, that it cannot discern the truth, or fashions
the sight to its own wrong guise, Iud. 16.16.19.20.
when I read the story of Sampson I meet with no unfit Emblem of this the
affections dealing with the understanding; Dalilah first allures the man to
betray his own strength and then puts him into the hands of his enemies; so
do the affections first emasculat the vnderstaning, and corrupt its abilities,
and then deliver it over into the hands of some dangerous falsehood. To the
making good this point I supose every man's experience will afford evidence. For
who cannot witness so much, that when his mind has been transported with
the violence of some bad passion, or desire, he has conceived so and so of
things and has been somewhat eager in the maintenance of his conceit, who
afterward, when this storm of passion is gone over, and the soul has
recovered her wonted tranquillity and cleerenesse; observes his mistake,
changes his opinion, and grows somewhat ashamed of his understanding. Now if
the sudden vntuly commotions and wanton desires of the mind vitiat and
ravish the understanding, and beget diverse errors, how should not such be
pestered with these misshapen bratts, in whom unbridled sinful affections keep
a standing court, and whose whole life is an habituated vitiousnesse: Nor is it
nothing to our purpose, that we may observe those grand masters of error, the
heretics in all ages, for the most part have been ill mannered men, and such
in whom the distempers either of the concupiscible or irascible part, of the
soul, have been eminent. St Paul prophesying of the last perilo us times
shows that men shall be self amorous, 2 Timothy 3.1.2.3.4.5.6.8.13.
covetous, boasters, what not, and afterward declares that of this rotten
timber should teachers of falsehood be made deceiving, and being deceived,
resisting the truth, as Iannes and Iambres did Moses: nor can I think that
always the heresies of these men did produce their vitiousnesse, but rather
that the vitiousnesse of these men did thrust them upon their heresies. They
were first men of corrupt minds and then reprobate concerning the faith, as
the Apostle orders his description: and surely if we take a list, of the
present errors of the Church of Rome, which we most condemn, it were no hard
matter to find out their genealogy and show that the greatest part of their
false doctrines, and bad practices, come as it were out of the loins of
covetousness, or ambition, or licentiousness. If then we would not fall back
into the same, or plunge our selves into as bad errors, we must take heed of
certain vicious humors and affections, the accustomed originalls of false
opinions in matters of religion, the chief whereof I shall name unto you.

And first omitting to charge that natuall flatnes and dullness of spirit in
some (which I had rather commiserat) there is a voluntary sluggishnesse and
affected laziness of the mind, which cannot but expose a man to error; for
since error easily follows an ignorance of the truth, and since truth does
commonly keep so much state, as not to reveal her self to any but those who
studiously seek her; this slothful, and negligent fort of men must needs
miss her, and fall into error, since they will not take the pains of diligent
inquiry into things; there is naturally in all of us a cloudines and foggy
darkness of ignorance, and nothing will so much thicken it, in our breasts, as
this (...), Isdor Pelusiot ep. lib. 3. epist. 191.
this spiritlesse, and languishing sloth of the mind: if the soul be of never
so rich metal, idleness will fennew and rust it, and make it unserviceable,
in the war we have against error. Observe the inclinations of these men, and
see if they be not worthy to be mistaken; out of a love they have to ease
their own understanding, and to give the powers, both of body and soul some
rest; in the questions o religion, they accept them with ready faith, as they
are stated by others, reputed learned, or as they are vulgarly held; 1 Thessalonians.
5.21. 1 Ioh. 4.1.
as for that advice of the Apostle St Paul, prove all things, and hold that
which is good, or that of St John, try the spirits whether they are of God, it
is with them too cumbersome, and tedious a business; but while they give this
prone assent to assertions, and will not take the pains to examine them; while
they thus have made an absolute resignation of their judgments, to the brains
and faith of others, and think it reason enough to believe, their elders in
time, or betters in place, though they speak without reason; Lord whether will
these be carried; into what pit of error may they not quickly fall! Since it
may be their luck, not to meet, with the best leaders, and the leaders of
these bear their faith along with them. To this mischief men are not always
subject, whose capacities are not great, or whose understanding is yet in its
minority; but even free and able men put themselves into the hazard, Minutius
in Octavio.
to live the more easily and idly, taedio investigandae penitus veritatis,
cuilibet opinioni temere potius succumbere malunt, quam in explorando pertinaci
diligentia perseuerare, as he said not amiss in the dialogue of Minutius
Faelix. out of a weariness to search deeply into truth, they had rather
rashly I may say basely fall into the hands of any opinion, then perseueringly
endure the pains, of a thorough enguiry. But I dismiss these.

The next sort of men most obnoxious to error, are of a more elate and lofty
spirit, Act. 8.9.
Simon Mangus consorts, that would have himself thought to be some great one,
as it is in the acts, and all antiquity proclaims his pride, a malady
discovered by St Paul, in the sixth chapter of his first epistle to Timothy, 1.
Tim. 6.4. 2 Pet. 2.10.
and by Saint Peter in his second epistle and second chapter thereof, in the
fase teachers, and seduced seducers of their time, and we may not wonder if the
man that is possessed with the spirit of pride be carried into errors, if we
shall observe his manners, and garb a little. For first, whereas there is
nothing that does cast a sooner, or thicker mist before the understanding, then
an opinionate dotage upon our selves, this arrogant man setts too high a price
upon himself, and his own abilities; and whether his pride be conioined with
ignorance or learning (as it is hard to say which is the more unlucky
conjunction) he is confident he erres not, and so indeed draws nearer to
error, the wind of pride hurting his eyesight, this man casts a scorn upon
what so ever elder times, or riper judgments can shes him, contrary to that
which he has conceited. Nectorius boasted Saram scripturam seprimum, Vincent.
Lyrin. cap. 42.
and solum intelligere, he first and alone understood the scriptures, and all
other Doctors before him mere Ignaroes; he deserved to err, that would be
wise alone. Thus a proud man, as if all the light were in himself, disdaines
the soclety of other men's judgments: of which branne are those of our times
with whom (saucily herein leuelling God with themselves) 1000 years are but as
Ps. 90.4.
yesterday, no regard had by them to Godly antiquity, and the constant
judgment of the Church in the best ages thereof: and what may we think of
their spirit, by whom the most renowned divines of our present times, to whom
the happy reformation of our Church next under God is so much indebted are
sleightned and cast off as tribolary writers. I do not say but that there are
blemishes of judgment in the ancient, and errors may be found in our modern
worthies; and I account it a seruility unworthy of free and generous
Christians, to mancipat our understandings to the judgment of others, which
may carry us into errors as soon as any other thing, as I have already noted:
I only call for so much modesty, and good manners, that when we perceive a
doctrine to be generally received, by holy and learned men, in our own and
elder Churches, we take them along with us in our inquiry after truth, and not
hastily break from them, to follow our wone way upon a presumptuous conceit of
our wone judgments which we have as much if not more reason to mistrust, as
we have to misdoubt other men's. Again whereas natural reason is but a blind
and wandering guide in matters spiritual, this man is too ftifly addicted to
the dictats thereof, it is a foul stain of judgment when a man conceiues
that there are the same bounds of things natural, and of his own apprehension
(for things may be in themselves, though they be not understood by us) and it
is an uneven measuring, of a man's sese when he imagins there is same latitude
of his own, and humane understanding, as if he knew as much as another can
know; but solly is then enraged even to balsphemy, when in an over proud
indulgence to his own wit, a man shall think that God were able to speak or
do nothing which he is not able to comprehend: of this giantlike presumption,
was Eunomius of whom Theodoret reports that he gave out, he had the same
notice of God, Haeret. fabul. comp. cap. de Eunomio.
as God had of himself as no odds were to be put betwixt a finite, and
infinite knowledge: for as Lactantius wisely says: Nibilinter deum hominemque
distaret, siconsilia illa may statis aeternae cogitatio assequeret ur humana,
there were no distance betwixt God and man, Lact. lib. 1. c. 1.
if humane cogitation could attain unto the counsels of the aeternall
majesty. And indeed while we extol the sovereignty of our reason, we unawares
debase the dignity of that thing whereof reason is the teacher. For it can be
no great matter which so narrow and shallow a thing, as humane understanding
lest to hyis own forces, can help us to the knowledge of: nay it may sooner
be an error then a trifle. Add hereunto that whereas an ill carriage of our
selves toward the scriptures, (the rule of truth) is the readiset downfall
into error: the proud person either vainly supposes it cannot be Gods word
which exceeds his wone wit; of saucily murmures that God should challenge our
assent, and give us not always logical demontrations of what he faith (as if
it were not enough for this supreme legislator to pronounce a truth or law
unless he argue it before the tribunal of our reason) or else he gives a
faaint credit to whatsoever crosses his affection, or if he must needs
interpret, he has a will rather to wrest the scriptures to his opinion, then
bend his opinion to the scriptures to impose his sense upon the word, then
setch his sense from the word, as if he meant to lead, and not to follow the
holy ghost; and these interpretations are for the most part made in have, for
he takes it to be a kind of disparagement, to the nimblenesse of his wit to
seem to doubt, or deliberat long, and whiles he makes more care to hasten
then examine his opinion, he speedily pronounces and as easily errs. for want
of mature deliberation; there is one evil of pride more; (making way to error)
not to be omitted, it is a studiousnesse of nouelty; I know not how the wit of
man heated by pride, disdaines as a wretched thing, and a matter of no glory to
tread in the steps of others, that have gone before, and thus while we are
desirous to say what others have not hit upon, the imagination hunting and
ranging about; some pretty and perhaps probable strange opinion is started up
before it, which it runns away with in very quick sent and great delight, we
are marveilously favorable to our own conceits, and although at first we give
not any strong belief unto them, yet we lend them many hearty wishes that they
were true; and with long well wishing, in time they come within the consines of
some settled allowance, and at last pass into our immovable assent; and now
when all is done, the thing will be found to be of more finenesse then
strength, of more subtilty then truth: these are the perils of pride, if it
be joined with learning, but if the proud spirited man is not conscious of
much learnning, yet if he finds some falshes of goodness, in himself, he
thinks that want abundantly supplied by certain revelations of the spirit,
whose great acquaintance he professes himself to be, that now he thinks that
he has arrived to an impeccancy of judgment in matters spiritual: and (as
Vincentius speaks of some, Cap. 37.
that boasted of the grace of the spirit indiuiduated to them) that he is
ordered by God, that carried as it were by Angels hands, he can never dash his
foot against any stone of error: but alas this is the pronest way to the
wildest error, when every outleaping and wantonness of fancy (as it happens
among fanaticall enthusiasts) shall be reputed an inspiration and revelation of
the spirit: nor does pride by so many ways lead into error, but which is
worst, leaves the mind as a final pray to it: for it makes the understanding
fierce and intractable: every contradiction, every affront from truth is
reputed a contumely, the misshapen issue of the mind being borne must now be
kept; all retractations are baseness, and dishonor; thus, that men may not
seem to be men, and to have erred they are become heretics: so contumatious a
murse of error is pride.

To pride in the thired place let us adioine as of nearest familiarity with it,
the angry spirit of faction and contention, Romans 2.8. Iam. 3.17.
to be contentious and not to be obedient to truth, are things coupled
together by Saint Paul, and St James has rightly observed as of envy so of
strife, where it is there is (...) an unsettled and tumultuous confusion, and
every evil work, the observation has place, if we apply it to the state of
the soul, there cannot be but much confusion, and intercourse of error, where
contention has got in. Do but observe the men who know not how to hold any
thing without passion, how often they shame reason, to gratify their
pettishnesse: if a question be moved, which moves their choler with little or
no choice they will cross whatsoever you propose, their humor carrying them
not so much to know as oppugn truth, against which if they can be witty, it
is a brave sufficiency; and when once in the rage of pride and anger, their
error is marched forth, it is a difficult matter to work a retrait, and though
you may conunice them, they will not be persuaded; their fury will proceed in
the brable, until they have improved their brable into a heresy, this
pettishnesse when it is sowred into malice, has often carried some (who would
be at the most diametral disagreement, with their adversaries) not only to
dissent from their persons, but their doctrines, even when they have been most
sound and orthodox. And here let me give warning, that in matter of religion,
we use no inordinate have in binding our judgments to the opinions of others,
whom either the fame of learning, or the greatness of place, or the neerenesse
of blood, or the likeness of manners or the sweetness of profit (all which
have great forces upon the mind) has wrought into our estimation; for this
casts us into faction, wherein if a man be once embarked, he will run a
hazard of erring, because he has left the guidance of reason, and is lead only
by certain preiudices, and anticipations borrowed from the persons of men,
which strongly sway which side soever be taken. Lastly I must report, as an
occasioner of some errors a too violent opposition of some errors: for since it
cannot be denied but that there are dangers on either hand of truth, and since
it must be confessed, that truth has not the good hap always to meet with
well advised champions, it may possibly fall out, and usually does, that while
thy oppose some falsehoods with an extreme, and unlimited detestation, while
they take that to be best in religion, which is at furthest distance from the
error they come to oppugn, and while they are over impetuously carried to the
slaughter of their adversaries opinions; in the servor of contentious zeal
they fling themselves into points every way as crronious as those which they
have incountred; and so have not left but changed a falsehood, and it may be to
the worse, and have been found liers against God, at least for him which Job
blames. Job. 13.7.


I have done with the angrier part of the soul; she has her lustfulnesse
also, as great an enemy to truth: let me then in the fourth place, indite
covetousness, and ambition, who perverting the judgment, must needs induce
error; how many false visions did covetousness help the lying Prophets too of
old? Esaias 56.11.
The priests in Esaies time were become shepherds that could not under stand
for they were as greedy as their dogs, they looked to their own way, 1 Timothy 6.
Tatus 1.11.
every one for his own again from his quarter. Who were they in the Apostles
time, which corrupted, betrayed, forsook the faith, but men who supposed gain
to be Godliness, and who were spotted with filthy lucre, 2 Pet. 2.14.15.
as St Paul gives us their character, those as St Peter says, who had hearts
exercised with covetous practices, right Balaamites; were the men who forsook
the right path and went actray, Ifid. de scripe. eccli.
loving the wages of unrighteousness. Even that famous Osius of Corduba if
Isidore charge him justly, consented to the Arrian impiety, that in his old
age he might not loose those riches which he had got together in his youth; and
certainly the fear of losing, the hope of gaining these temporal things has
so prevailed with many, that we must conclude with holy Paul, 1. Tim. 6.10.
the love of money is the root of all evil, which while some coueted after,
they have erred from the faith, and peirced themselves (I am sure the Church of
God) through with diverse sorrows. And indeed I see not how truth can be
thought upon in the dust, and noise, of worldly employments, or grow up amidst
the choking thorns of worldly cares: how can the breasts of men be wells of
the pure and living water of truth, Genesis 26.15.
when covetous lusts, as so many Philistines have stopped them up and filled them
with earth. A worldling already has admitted, that grand error into his heart,
that riches is the sovereign good, fom which idolatry, a man may quickly slip
into any heresy that will sort with it, Col. 3.5.
such a much worm considers not what is true, but what is profitable: nay such
a man fears some truth as much as a theife, least it come forth to take his
purse, and lessen his heap. The like accusation is to be framed against
Ambition, for let a man inordinatly affect worldy grace or preferment, if he
cannot thrive in the way of truth, his discontented and reuengefull heart, will
turn over unto such opinions, which may be professed with better preferment.
Besides the men that study preferment, are of a very supple and plyant
understanding, and can believe at the pleasure of another, at the disposition
of him, who disposes of the dignities he expects; as if he had lost his own
soul and were wholly actuated with the soul of his Maecenas, In the mean
while how can ye believe as our savior told the Jews which receive honor one
of another and seek not the honor which comes from God alone, Ioh. 5.44.
how can a man always think aright that must think as the grandees, who often
are as great in crime as place, will have him. The Apostle has a text, perhaps
misread, doubtless misunderstood by the Eceboliuses of our age who are too often
found (...) when it should be (...) serving not the Lord but the time, Romans
12.11. vide stephani lecti. varias.
and that in the most reprobate sense of the phrase; for they observe not the
season (as the Apostle might mean) wherein they might best do good, but
whereby they might be most great, by applying themselves to the humors of
those, who if soothed, are likeliest to prefer. Ere I altogether dismiss
this point, let me touch an evil, near of kin to ambition and as dangerous
to truth: Gal. 6.12. Acts. 15.1.
Certain popular men there are, such as those false Apostles in the days of
the truth, who would have blinded the religion of Christ with the ordinances of
Moses and superadded circumcision to baptism perhaps that both Jew and Gentile
might be pleased; such as these I say there are, who to gain good estimation
with different sects, give fair quarter to all opinions; and these commonly
talk of reconciling religions, and composing of controversies, that all may
go away contented. I know it is a commendable endeavor of Godly men, to seek
the union of Christian churches; and let them be detested, who by needless
strifes and exasperations, make the rents of the Church wider: those I here
intend, who love their own fame, more then peace, and peace more then truth:
which they care not how they pare to the quick, that they may gain the
applause of moderate and well tempered men.

In the fifth and last place we are to brand a licentious and dissolute life, 1 Timothy 1.19.
with the style of corruptor of the faith, some putting away a good conscience
(which inferrs the leading a bad life) concerning the faith, have made
shipwreck says St Paul, and St Peter repors of the bringers in of damnable
haeresies that they had their pernicious, 2 Pet. 2.1.2.10.14.19.
or as some books lascivious ways, that they walked after the flesh in the
lusts of uncleanness; that they had eyes full of adultery and that could not
cease from sin, great promisers of liberty to others they themselves being
the servants of corruption, as the Apostle largely describes their manners: Now
such as these having hearts already full of sensuality, there is no room for
heavenly contemplations of chaste truth; whatsoever vigor, and cleerenesse and
intentiuenesse of the mind, is requisite to the right discerning of things, the
very strength of the soul, is lost in the arms of Dalilah; frugality and
sobriety (the sinews of a sound judgment) are loosed; besides there are not
any of those holy and severe truths in Gods word but these men wish and long
they were false, and a little matter will improve a wish into a belief, quod
volumus facile credimus; as on the contrary he is apt to take those doctrines
to be true which are indulgent to his dareling vices; he would feign sin with
some warrant, that he may pacify fame abroad, and conscience at home if it
were possible; nature a hominis procliuis in vitia vult non modo cum venia sed
cum ratione peccare, Lib. 4. c.
says Lactantius and therefore he sedulously hunts after and would gladly
find out some doctrines under whose protection he may offend, in this purfuite
even the passages of scriptures are serched into by some, to see what patronage
they will afford to their intemperances, that so they may securely enjoy the
pleasure of ill deeds; making that their poison which is appointed to be their
medicine.

Thus have I (Fathers and brethren) as breifely as so many particulars would
permit, showed that they are our morrall evils to which we may lay most of
our errors in matters of religion; that wherein I should now enlarge my self,
but cannot (unless I should trespass to much upon your patience) is, that for
the avoidance of error we would all of us study true piety, which standing in
the fear of God, must needs be the beginning of saving wisdom, this fear it
being grounded in love, will make you still have an eye to your fathers will:
and if a man will do the will of my Father says his son he shall know of the
doctrine whether it be of God: now the will of God is, that you be
industrious, humble, peaceable, moderate in your desires, religious in your
lives, and every way contrary to the misbehauiored men which I have set before
you: be thus and the victory against error may soonest be atchiued; sooner a
great deal, then by all the provisions of natural wit, or secular learning.
One of the heathens had this speech, Aug. ep. 20. Socrates.
Quibus satis persuasum vt nihil mallent esse quam viros bonos his reliqua
facilis est doctrina: so may I say divine knowledge will easily impart it self
to such, who can be persuaded to desire to be nothing so much as true hearted
Christians, and can be content to be guided by Gods spirit, for such have the
unction whereof St John speaks, 1 Ioh. 2.20.
and shall know all things, all things meet for such knowledge, and service of
God here, as shall make them partakers of his sight and glory hereafter. David
gives every good man great assurance when he asks, what man is he that
fears the Lord, and subioynes; Ps. 25.12.
him shall he teach the way that he shall choose, and who is lead by God is
out of the road of destroying error. O lord, by thy word and spirit guide us
all here present, by thy son, who is the truth, bring us to thy son who is
the life; and that it may please thee to bring into the way of truth all others
that have erred and are deceived we beseech thee to hear us good Lord; Letany.
to whom all praise and glory be ascribed now and ever.

FINIS.

