AN answer to a certain Book, written by Master William Rainolds Student of
Divinity in the English College at Rhemes, and entitled, A Refutation of
sundry reprehensions, Cauils, etc.

By William Whitaker, professor of Divinity in the University of Cambridge.

Printed at London for Thomas Chard. 1585.

To the right honorable Sir William Cecill, Knight of the Garter, Baron of
Burghley, Lord high Treasurer of England, and Chancellor of the University of
Cambridge, Grace and peace.
IT is not unknown to your Honor, how the adversaries have never ceased since
the beginning of her Majesty's most happy reign until this day, by their
books in great numbers written and published, and by all other means, that
possibly they might devise, to trouble the state of the Church, and to diffame
that holy religion of Christ, which through Gods great mercy, and godly laws
of our gracious Souereign, is according to his holy word established amongst
us. What they have wrought with many of al estates, and how mightelie they
have prevailed with that strong and effectual illusion of Satan, which has
advanced Antichrist unto that supremacy of power, authority, and credit in
the world, whereof the holy ghost by SS. Paul and John has foretold, lamentable
experience can witness in the backsliding, and continual falling of many away
from us, to their own final perdition, to the grief of the godly, and to the
great encouragement and comfort of the enemy. And among other examples of this
Apostasy, I offer to your Honor one very notable, even the man with whom I
have in this book to deal, who having been late not only a common professor
of our religion, but a public minister and preacher of the same in our Church,
has not only revolted from us, through some worldly tentations, and run over
into our enemies ca^p, but has also lifted up his heel against us, and in open
writing most maliciously and bitterly railed at us. Occasion of uttering his
conceived malice against us, in his late writing he takes by a certain Preface
of mine before the answer to D. Saunders demonstrations of Antichrist, which
being not very long, and handling no great variety of matter, I never thought
could have provoked the Adversary so much, or procured so long and large a
Confutation. I looked rather that the substance of my book concerning
Antichrist, should have bin answered by some that would maintein Sau^ders
arguments, whereby he laboreth to prove that the Pope cannot be Antichrist;
which being in deed a weighty and most material controversy, required the
learning and diligence of the most sufficient scholar amongst them. Neither
could I otherwise suspect, but seeing I had written in latin against a latin
Adversary, he whosoever should take in hand to set forth any thing against
me, would have done it in the latin tongue. But M. Rainolds, who was appointed
(as he says) to answer my book of Antichrist, and in all his actions
professes himself to be ordered by those, to whose government he has
submitted himself, pretending in show to publish a confutation thereof, has
written only against the preface, wherein are handled other matters, and so
has answered nothing to the principal question, whereof the book, that he
would seem to have confuted, specially entreats: and further has written
not in latin as I did, but in english, as liked best his governors and himself.
Whereupon I was at the first partly persuaded to pass over this Refutation of
his with silence: and the rather, because I listed not to reason or deal
against such a one as he is, of whom for many respects I could not conceive
any hope at al, that ever my labors should do him good, having thus embraced
pernicious and deceitful error, and wilfully cast away from him the love of
the truth, which once he had in show received, which he pretended to believe,
and which he did in deed profes. Which kind of men through Gods justice for the
most part are given over into such reprobate hardness of heart, that they can
never after be reclaimed, but continue always desperate to their everlasting
destruction. Notwithstanding, when I perused better the contents of his book,
and took advise of the godly, what were best for me to do herein, whether I
should make answer to this man, or rather obeying king Ezechias commandment,
let him alone, and say nothing to him, I was in the end resolved to set forth a
plain and sufficient answer to his whole volume, not for his sake, of whom I
have no hope, nor respect, but in regard of others, who thereby may either be
confirmed in the truth, or preserved from error.

I see the Adversaries drift especially was, to breed in the minds of our
countrymen a misliking of this our religion, which himself having once liked
well, was after (I know not how) moved to mislike. The which he endeuoreth to
perform by some other means, then heertofore have commonly been used, as any
man reading his book may soon observe, wherein he shall find continual
allegations of testimonies out of our own writers, craftily brought in, to
show a dissension of judgments amongst our selves, that so his readers may be
induced to think the worse of our doctrine, and of us al. A devise full of
fraud, dishonestie and malice, to take advantage of men's infirmities and
imperfections against the eternal truth of God, which he cannot by ordinary
and lawful kind of reasoning refute. Between Luther and Zuinglius about the
Sacrament, was a sharp contention, hotly debated in many books, and the same
has continued since to the great hindrance of the gospel and offense of many.
In which contrary writings and discourses, are found oftentimes harder speeches
of either against other, then were to be wished, yet such as the godly
servants of the Lord in contention about the truth, sometimes ar moved to utter
against their brethren. S. Paul openly and sharply reprehended S. Peter to his
face, whereat wicked Porphyrie catched a like occasion to rail at Christian
religion long since, as our adversaries do at these days. What a violent and
troublesome contention was there between Theophilus of Alexandria, and good
Chrysostom of Constantinople? Who knows not how sharply Cyrillus a learned
and wise Bishop of Alexandria has written against Theodoritus a godly and
catholic Bishop, in a controversy touching the catholic faith? Both Bishops,
both catholics, both learned, both godly, both excellent pillars of the
Church: and yet he that reads both their writings, would think that both
were dangerous enemies of the Church and faith of Christ, and of all
Christians to be avoided. So in the books of Luther and Zuinglius, and those
that maintain either part, appears (I grant) great sharpness and
bitterness of dissension: who all notwithstanding, if ye set the heat of
disputation aside, were as godly, as learned, as zealous Christians, as the
world had any. Now comes in M. Rainoldes like a crafty enemy, and
gathering a heap of such speeches, out of sundry their books, has in diverse
places of his confutation inserted the same, as any occasion would serve, to
make his readers acquainted therewith, that seeing such earnest contention
among the chiefest professors of the Gospel, they may be further withdrawn in
alienation of mind from the love and liking thereof. Wherein also to help
his purpose, he has used two kinds especially of unlawful sleightes. One is,
to report among others the testimonies also of open Adversaries to the doctrine
of the Gospel, as namely of Gabriel Fabritius against Beza, and of Castalion,
and such others, as either being professed papists, or doubtful protestants,
ought not in this case to be regarded. Another is, to falsify the judgments
and sentences of our writers, and so to make most untrue reports of them. As
for example, in his 12. cha. pa. 356. he affirms, that we begin secretly to
disprooue the Churches faith, touching the manner of Christ's crucifying,
namely, that his hands and feet were pearsed with nails, and for proof
hereof alleges testimonies out of Marlorate, Musculus and Bucer, in whom no
such thing is in any place to be found. And that every man may perceive what
pleasure he has, and what liberty he takes to himself of speaking and
reporting any thing untruly, he accuses Castalion to have made a discourse in
the Preface written to K. Edward the sixth, before his translation of the Bible,
in proof that Christ is not the true Messiah; which verily is a foul
slander, as any man may judge that reads the same: so be charge us with
the abominable heresies of the Trinitarians, Libertines, Anabaptists,
Antinomi, David George, and such like, whom we detest as much as they, against
whom both we have written more then they, and our Magistrates, both
ecclesiastical and civil, have also seriously proceeded. With such
allegations of al sorts, out of al writers, for all purposes, has he fraughted
and stuffed his book: other substance and weight of matter is there none
therein, so that of it self it might be thought most unworthy of answer. Yet
because such books do harm abroad, and it is expedient to have the
adversaries folly and weakness detected, I have undertaken this labor of
answering M. Rainolds, and that in english, for the same consideration that
caused him to leave the latin, and write in the english tongue: which I think
he has not done, so much for want of skill therein, as that his writings might
commonly be read and understood of englishmen. This my labor I offer to your
Honors good acceptance, humbly beseeching you, that I may publish it under
the safeguard of your honorable protection. And as you have been always a
zealous lover of Christ's Gospel, and by your godly wisdom have done your
endeavor to advance greatly the Lords cause from time to time, and to hinder
the practices of the enemy, so I beseech the Lord to increase in you all those
Christian virtues, to the benefit of Christ's Church, and the common wealth of
this Realm. Thus I commend your Lordship to Gods most merciful and gracious
preservation, beseeching him to prolong your days upon earth, with
multiplication of all graces necessary for this life, and for the life to come.

Your Lordships to command, William Whitaker.

AN ANSWER TO MASTER RAINOLDS PREFACE.
WHether Master Rainolds were appointed by his governors to make this answer,
page 3.
as he says, or else of his own accord took the matter in hand without
commission of any superior authority, I take it to be a thing of small regard,
both in respect of himself, and of his work, and also of those his
superiors, to whose direction he professes to have committed himself, and
all the gifts he has. Only this thing I cannot believe., although it be no
more material, then the other, that he was so loath to take upon him this
buisines, as he pretends. For if we consider not only the manner of his
writing, wherein appears as great malice against the truth of God, as
shameless railing at Christ's gospel, and professors thereof, as notable pride,
presumption, and hardness of heart, as ever has done in any enemy heretofore;
but further also how necessary it was for him, being a Renegate, and of a
Minister and Pastor of a Church become sodenlie a seminary Priest, and
therefore living in great suspicion* among his fellows, to approve by some
public testimony his unfeigned conversion to their synagogue, we shall not
easily be persuaded to think there was in the man such unwillingness in this
matter at the first, as he would have us to suppose. But as vain declamors are
commonly wont to excuse themselves with pretense of being loath to attempt so
weighty a matter, that they may seem somewhat unwilling to do the thing,
which in truth they do most willingly and studiously, so Master Rainolds
could not devise a more commodious beginning of his declamatorie preface, then
a protestation of lothnes to write that, which any man may casilie judge he
went about with all his will, industry, and ability.

And that you may the rather imagine he was forsooth very loathe to take this
matter in hand, he can show you diverse reasons, that made him so loath: and yet
the true reason, that ought indeed to have hindered his course, he touches
not, that herein he was to set himself against the known truth, to write
against his conscience in open maintenance of wicked heresies, to fight for
Antichrist against the Lord, and finally to commit the sin, that either in
property of nature is the greatest of all, or comes nearest unto it. One
reason was, he says, because he saw many in that society, as willing and
more hable to undertake, and dispatch a greater matter then that. As willing
Master Rainolds? why? then have you dissembled before in telling us you were
unwilling: now by your own confession you were willing enough, but there were
many also in your College, as willing as you. Whereof surely we have no
doubt, that you are all most wilfully bent, and earnestly disposed to do
what harm any of you possibly can to the Church of England. As for your
knowledge and ability to perform against us any notable enterprise, we have
no care, we stand in no fear of you, we know what pith is in the strongest of
you. And for your self, Master Rainolds, I am of opinion, that you may
truly take the garland from your own head, and give it rather to many
others of your fellows.

Another reason he faineth to be, Page 4.
for that he thought it some injury to Catholics to dispute against that
savage and barbarous paradoxe, namely that the Pope is Antichrist. What
injury could this be thought done to your Catholics, Master Rainolds, to
write in defense of your Pope, and prove him not to be that Antichrist, then
which a greater pleasure can no man do for him, and for his Church, it being
apparent, and so of many Christians believed, that he is indeed no other, then
the very Antichrist himself? In which respect perhaps your conscience told
you, that if you opposed your self against this truth, therein should you
offer injury to your Pope, and Pope-catholike brethren, whom the same so
specially does concern.

You say I know not what Antichrist is, Contrae Sander. pa. 6. in principio.
against whom I write, and that sometime I make Antichrist to be the wholl
Catholic and universal Church, whereof the Pope is head: which to be a
pregnant untruth, he that looks one the place, may see. Have I said, the
Pope is head of the Chatholike universal Church? or the Catholic universal
Church is Antichrist? what will you be ashamed hereafter to write, that in the
first entrance write thus untruely without shame? and yet having your self
avouched so notorious an untruth, you dare make mention of Lucians true
history, which book, as may seem, you have not only read over with
diligence and delight, but also translated into English, and propounded unto
your self as worthy of your imitaion. For to give you that praise, that of
due belongs unto you, Lucian, if he lived, could hardly coin more passing
untruths, or scoff more kindly at Christ and his gospel, then you have
done.

A greater reason was, he says, for that he abhorred to deal with heretics,
page 5.
who pass al other in pride and ignorance, and of all heretics, he makes us
of England to be the worst. Indeed true it is that heretics for the most part
are obstinate and past amendment, and therefore a great wearines and vexation
of mind is it to maintain contentions, and disputes with them, whereof in the
end small profit does redound. But this complaint of heretical wilfulnes
nothing touches us, who by Gods grace are far from al kind of heresy, and
hold no other doctrine then that which the Prophets and Apostles, and Jesus
Christ him self have taught us, and which is plainly contained in the books
of canonical scripture, from which if laboring to dissuade us you cannot
prevail, no marvel is it. And in defending the same, we are content to be
esteemed of you contentious, proud, ignorant, and as you list. We are not so
much in love of your society, nor seek your favor and commendation so
greatly, that we will join in unity with you against the Lord, his truth,
and Church. If you think we are proud, tell us wherein our pride consists.
If in that we will not yeald unto you, nor give over maintenance of the
Gospel, pardon us, Master Rainolds: modesty in the Lord is an excellent
virtue, but the modesty that betraieth the truth of God is accursed. Other
pride (I doubt not) we are as clear from, as your self or any of your
fellows. And for ignorance, we may think it was some spice of pride in you to
object it unto us, who for any thing that appears have no cause to brag of
such knowledge, or to challenge more to your self, then you may safely grant
to an other. For tell us what learning is, wherein it consists, and how it
may be gotten? Unless you have some special means, and as it were some secret
way to attain unto it, which others have not, I see not why we should think
that you have gotten a greater measure of learning and wisdom, then others who
have used as great endeavor as your self. And what the matter should be, I
know not, that you are sodenlie become so learned and that we have lost all
learning. But were you as learned as ever any was, or could be, your learning
shall not be hable to hurt the cause, that we defend: your learning shall in
the end deceive you: and you that now boaste of your knowledge, shall then be
ashamed of your ignorance. To know Christ out of his word, is true knowledge,
sound learning, and perfect wisdom.

Certain examples you rehearse of our ignorant assertions, only thereby to
make our cause seem odious to the simple: but the reasons of our assertions
you pretermit, which is your common slight, continually to tell your readers
that such and such opinions we hold, and not to show the manner, nor to
remember or answer our reasons. Wherein I desire the reader to consider how
untruely Master Rainolds has charged me with a wicked heresy, that in this
man he may behold the conscience of a Papist. He sets down for one of my
sayings, that Christ is not begotten of the substance of his father: a slander
most manifest, in a matter of greatest moment. I have not written thus, no, I
never thought thus. I abhor with my heart all such blasphemy against the
Person of our savior Christ. But in the mean time what has this slaunderer
deserved? Let the reader equally judge between him and me, and by trial
hereof esteem more indifferently of the rest of his malice.

Now the greatest cause of all that made him so loath, page 7.
was, he says, because he found in our doctrine no stay or certentie, which
yet, if it were true, should have ministered unto him greater will and courage,
for so much as the doctrine that stands upon no certain stay is easily
disprooued and overthrown. But in truth Master Rainolds perceiving our
doctrine to be grounded upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles which
may not be removed, and knowing we will not yeald to men's doctrines and
inventions whatsoever, differing from the holy scriptures, but rest our selves
wholly upon the written word of God, I think he was indeed somewhat
discouraged, as great cause was he should, being sure his engines could not
prevail against the same.

And what greater steadfastnes in religion can be required, then to hold Gods
word, which we profess to be the ground, whereon we build our faith? If you
can show, wherein we swerve from it, we will not refuse your instruction. But
say not now we are unstaid, when as you know we rely our selves wholly
upon the word, unless you will deny Gods word to be a certain rule and stay
of doctrine. We plant not our religion in man's judgment and uncertainty of
Traditions, in vain ceremonies and devises, as you do, but in matters of
faith and religion we depend upon God, who in the scriptures of the old and
new Testament has delivered to his Church one certain, uniform, and perfect
doctrine, to which we add nothing, from which we take nothing away, in which
we settle and ground our selves. But let us hear how Master Rainolds can
prove, that the Protestants have no certain faith. For this he has
propounded to himself to declare especially in this preface. And I desire the
godly readers to mark his proofs, which shallbe I trust to their comfort,
and confirmation in the truth.

Page 9.
concerning the Princes supremacy in matters Ecclesiastical, wherein is no
such difference as he pretends, if he listed rightly to understand the case.
The title of supreme head of the Church has been misliked by diverse godly
and learned men, and of right and properly it only belongs to the son of
God, and may not be communicated unto any man whosoever. And therefore never
did our Church give that title in such words unto the Prince, not yet did the
Prince ever challenge the same, and so herein is no dissension. For the Princes
lawful supreme authority in procuring for the Church a good and peaceable
estate, in defending of the same, by maintaining Gods true religion and
worshipp against heretics and schissmatikes, in remoouing of manifest abuses,
and disorders, in causing the ministers of the Church, according to their
offices and vocations, to execute their duties faithfully, in punishing them,
if they be found negligent, and all this with assistance of godly and learned
Ministers of the Church, by that absolute and immediate commission, which every
sovereign Christian Prince has received from the Lord God, being not subject
to any foraine power of Priest or potentat, this also all Protestants
confess, with full consent therein, condemning the Popes Antichristian
supremacy, who contrary to Gods word chalengeth a sole and supreme
government over al Christian Princes and Churches in the world. Is this now a
good proof that Protestants have no certentie in their faith?

page 11.
touching baptism, Master Rainolds thinks he has found some contradiction
between the communion book, which affirms that by baptism children are
regenerate, and wherein the Minister exhorts the people not to doubt, but
Christ will give to the Infants baptized, eternal life, and between the
disputation in the Tower of London the second day, (...)
wherein the doctors teach, that al those who are baptize^ are the sons of
god. If your eyes were matches, things that are but one, would not thus appear
double unto you. Babtisme is the sacrament of new birth, wherein our adoption
by Christ is sealed unto us, and we are made the sons of God, as many as
believe, both sacramentallie, and spirituallie: the unbelievers only
sacramentallie. Wherefore this is not so to be understood, as though whosoever
is baptized, shall therefore be sure to have eternal life. For Simon Magus was
baptized, and yet condemned: and so also many more besides notwithstanding
their baptism, shall be excluded from fellowship with the Saints in Gods
kingdom. So that to be baptized proves not necessarily assurance and
certentie of life everlasting in all persons. Why then might not the Doctors be
bold to say, that baptism of it self has not this force to make any the
child of God, and that in baptism none can be made the children of God, if
they be not his children by election? For doubtless he that comes to be
baprized, unless he be one of Gods elect, can not in baptism receive the gift
of adoption, which only belongs to those that are predestinate and elect:
and election is not begone in baptism, but was before the foundation of the
world.

Master Rainolds has noted a manifest difference, page 12.
as he thinks. The book has set down an order of private baptism, and I
find fault with women's baptism. It is sufficient for answer to you, that
private baptism is one thing, and women's baptism is another. Private baptism
has been sometimes maintained and used in the Church, but women's baptism was
never allowed in any tolerable state thereof, neither does the communion book
make any mention of women, nor does give any authority to women, to minister
baptism. And therefore reproouing and disalowing of baptism to be done by
women, I have not thereby spoken any word against our communion book.
Concerning necessity of baptism, wherein you would fasten upon me some
suspicion of Anabaptisme, I grant baptism is necessary, if it may be had
according to Christ's ordinance and institution, so that the contempt thereof is
damnable: but not in such sort necessary, as that the lack thereof without
contempt shall bring a man into the state of condemnation. If you will thrust
out of Gods kingdom all that are not baptized, you shall take away from the
Lord many of his dear children, whom yet he will not deliver over to your
cruel judgment, and power of Satan.

page 13.
But yet there is an order for confirmation of children, which (for any thing
I know) is in all communion books the same. Show us what fault you find with
us for it, and answer shall be given you: sure I am in respect hereof you have
no cause to complain of our uncertainty in the faith. Page 14.


hell, I grant, there has been some diversity of judgments, yet so as the
truth of that article is confessed of all. The manner of his descension may be
doubted of by many protestants, but your opinion that Christ in soul descended
into hell to fetch up the souls of the faithful deceased before his passion, is
generally improoued. Calvin says not, that Christ was damned alive in soul
upon the Cross, as you foully slander him; but that Christ, taking upon him
self our sins and punishments, suffered in mind those pains of hell for a
time, which we otherwise should have sustained for ever. Deny this, and deny
the justice of God to be satisfied, which takes away al hope form us of
escaping the torments of hell, and being thoroughly reconciled with the Lord.

page 14.
As for Caluins Autotheisme, as you fondly term it, I have answered if you
can. And if you list to read more of this matter, I refer you to that which
Lambertus Danaeus has written against Genebrard and Iordane of Paris
concerning the same. Our doctrine in this behalf is no other, then has been
the catholic doctrine of Christ's Church evermore. In laboring of malice to
blaze abroad some heresy of Calvin, your selves are now become defenders of
heresy against the blessed Trinity. For tell me, Master Rainolds, if the
substance of the Godhead be the same in the son and the father, and the
substance of the father be God of it self, must not the Godhead of the son
be of it self?

But you confessing in words Christ to be God, in denying him to be God of
himself, take his divinity from him indeed For God is of himself God, by
property of his own nature and substance: which in denying, you are proceeded
as far, and somewhat farther, then the wicked Archeretike Arius. I could
turn you over to your own schoolmen, and bid you to strive against them, In
Centil. conclus. 62. Quod Christus secundum existentiam diuinam non est filius
Des.
letting Calvin alone. Look upon William Ockam a famous schooleman, who was
not afraid to publish this position amongst his hundred divinity conclusions,
That Christ according to his divine being is not the son of God: which how he
expounds, there may you see: but if Calvin had written in such terms, who
could have stayed the outrageous cauilling of these men? Page 15. etc.


Master Rainolds urges against us grieuouslie, which yet touches not the
matter in hand, concerning our vnsteadfastnes in doctrine, but serves only
to procure envy. Sturres and tumults for matter of Religion he rehearses,
that have been in Germany, in France, in Bohemia, as though it were
sufficient for their condemnation that they once resisted, and did not by and
by admit whatsoever violence was offered either to Gods truth, or to
themselves, contrary to promise, to oath, to public edicts, to law, whereby
they were warranted to do, as they did. More of this matter will I not
answer, being of an other nature, and cleared long since from crime of
rebellion, not only by just defense of their doing, but also by the
proclamations and edicts of princes themselves.

page 18.
so was it publikelie defended: and the truth thereof since has been amongst
us generally acknowledged. Can you object the private judgment of so few
against the common consent of a wholl Church, and thereof conclude, that in our
Religion we have no certain stay? Then may we in like manner, and by as good
reason argue against you for a thousand such matters, wherein has been no small
dissension amongst your divines, that the Papists have no cettaine ground of
their faith.

A Cardinal of Rome has openly defended and taught that the Apostle
permits one wife to priests, and to others more: and that plurality of wives
is not forbidden either by the law of god or nature. You know whom I mean,
even Cai^tane your Popes legate, and the great adversary of Luther. Look
Katharine, who has noted this amongst his manifold errors. And another Popes
legate writ and published in printe a treatise in commendation of a foul
sin: for which he was greeuoslie punished by your Pope, being preferred to a
great Archbishoprik. Pighius says, that Justice in us is a relation, wherein
he has exceedingly offended your friends. May we now by your example hereof
conclude, that this is the doctrine of your Church: that thus you believe
generally, or else that there is no stay in your religion?

page 19.
to gather an argument of our inconstancy in matters of faith, is too childish
and absurd. Our religion is not like yours, consisting in outward show of
gestures, garments, and behavior; so that our external ornaments may be
changed, without any alteration or change of our doctrine

Master R. omitting certain small differences of feasts, Page 19. etc.
etc. wishes the reader to consider the general changes, that have been in
our Church and realm, since this schism (as he calls it) first began. And
first he calls to remembrance the Act of six articles established in the
latter days of king Henry the eight, which in the beginning of his sons
reign was straightwaies disanulled, and the Church reformed, which reformation
was overthrown in Queen Mary's reign, and after renewed by her Majesty that
now reigns. And of all this what can Master Rainolds conclude against the
unity and certentie of our profession? what alteration has been in the Church
of God in times past, we may read not only in gods book, but in
Ecclesiastical histories. Sometime religion prospered well, and flourished,
especially the Prince being godly, and zealous to promote the same: sometime
again superstition, heresy, idolatry mightelie prevailed, the Prince being
an idolater or heretic. Yet notwithstanding the truth of gods word and
Religion remained one and steadfast, howsoever the outward state of the Church
or common wealth was diversely changed. And if at the first when the Lord began
to work some reformamation in this Church, perfection in every point was not
forthwith attained and established, no marvel is it, considering both the
greatness of the work, and the malice of manifold enemies that withstoode the
same. Yea if in our communion book alteration has been, according as to the
Church seemed most convenient, yet that was not in substance of Doctrine, but
in matters of ceremony, neither can you charge us more for changing our
communion book, then we can you for changing and reforming your Missales, your
Portasses, your Breuiaries, and a number such other books, even of late
years, in daily and public use of service amongst you As for Anabaptists,
Atheistes, Puritanes, the family of love, our Church and Religion utterly
condemns to the pit of hell: and if there be such amongst us secretly, so
have there always been heretics and wicked persons in the Church, and in
respect of them our Religion is no more to be accused, then the good corn may
justly be condemned, because together with it many tares and weeds spring up,
and cannot be avoided.

Further Master Rainolds says, page 22.
if he should note the difference between our Protestants and those of other
nations, he should never make an end. But let him note, what him list, and make
an end when he please; greater difference shall he not find amongst the true
professors of the Gospel, and Churches reformed, then may be amongst the
children of God. When such bitter dissension was between the East and west
Churches, about the day of Passover, and the same continued so many years
with great offense and alienation among the faithful, yet they ceased not for
all that to be still the Churches of Christ. Neither is it ever to be hoped
for, that such perfect concord shall be among the professors of Christ's
religion, that they shall all agree most jointly together in the truth, or
in every particular point thereof. Your unity although it be not so entire and
general, as you would have it thought, yet if it proceeded of knowledge of the
truth, and faithful submission with hearty obedience to the same, it deserved
great commendation: but springing from such fountains, as it does, of brutish
ignorance, and fear in the most, of vain ambition, worldly pleasures, and
filthy covetousness in the chiefest, though it be through corruption of man's
nature mighty, yet the causes being marked, it appears to be but carnal,
tyrannical, and devilish. For this most wicked persuasion being once
imprinted in men's hearts by the subteltie of Satan, that all men must obey the
Pope, whatsoever he teach and command, without examination, or resistance,
upon pain of eternal damnation, an easy matter is it upon this foundation to
raise up and maintain any unity whatsoever. And although this worldly
provision for keeping of unity be not amongst us, yet through Gods grace and
blessing al Churches reformed agree soundly in all articles of faith, that are
substantial and necessary to salvation, and shall so do unto the end. page
25.


The grounds and heads of disputation received among the Romish Catholics,
Master Rainolds reckeneth many, and first the scriptures, wherein he does not
so much honor to them for placing them in the first room, as injury and
disgrace in joining with them any other. For as they are grounds of all true
doctrine, so are they only grounds; and as in matter of faith arguments ought
principally to be drawn from them, so such arguments only conclude
necessarily, as even your own Thomas of Aquine does directly confess. Thom.
1. part. 1. qu. artic. 8. ad. 2.
Traditions of the Apostles are but devised and forged things, which you make
your second head, and therefore no stay for a man to settle his conscience
upon. For, tell me if you can, which be the Apostles traditions, how many, and
where they may be found. If you cannot satisfy this demand, as you cannot
indeed, how may you then make any reckoning of that, whereof you have no
certain knowledge? how can you without falling build your faith upon
fantasies, such as they are? The Apostles doctrine we have in writing: other
traditions of the Apostles we receive none for our belief.

Concerning the catholic Church, which is your third head, we reverence and
love it as the spouse of Christ: but we know that her duty is, to hearken
only to the voice of Christ her husband, and that she has no authority to
add so much as one iotte to his word, or any ways to dissent from it. And
further we know, that your Romish synagogue is not that Catholic Church of
Christ, whereof we speak.

For general councels and Doctors, which are other twoe of your principal
heads, we esteem and regard them in their place: we thank God for them, we
read, allow, and commend them, so far forth, as they agree with Gods word. If
you think they never disagree from it, your own masters will correct you, and
tell you an other tale. Are not these then goodly grounds and heads of faith,
that even your selves are enforced oftentimes to disauow? As for your supreme
pastor of the Church, we know him not by that name, if you mean any other but
Jesus Christ alone. For who so else takes that honor and office upon him to be
the supreme pastor of the Church, he is a thief, an Apostata, an Antichrist:
make as great account of him, as you list. And where you say we care for none
of these grounds, you speak untruely, your selves indeed caring for none
but only the last, which is in stead of all the rest. The determination of
your supreme pastor, that is your scripture, your Apostolical Tradition, your
Church, your councels, your Doctors, your Faith, your salvation, your only
stay in this world, and in the world to come.

page 26.
because we admit not the authority of Tobias for invocation and help of
Angels, nor of Ecclesiasticus for free will. But you must first of all prove,
which never shall you be hable to prove, that Tobias and Ecclesiasticus be
canonical scripture, before you can infer that we deny the scripture. These
books are not the holy Canonical scriptures, as we have proved against you
by most invincible and manifest demonstration, by councels, Fathers, Doctors,
your own Cardinals, and schoolmen: and we rejoice with all our hearts, that
such popish doctrine has no better scripture for proof thereof, then
Apocryphal, which because it has a counterfayte stamp, is no current money
among the Lords people.



Nice, the first, and the second. In the first is condemned the Popes
supremacy, Can. ^.
in the second is established the Idolatrous worship of Images. The first
belief you will not allow, the second we detest. Let Counsels therefore be
esteemed as they deserve: let their decrees be examined by Gods word: and if
they agree, let them be received for that agreement: if not, let them be
rejected for the contrary.

The same judgment have we of ancient fathers. page 27.
Learned and Godly men we grant they were, but yet men, having their
infirmities and imperfections. Their learning, their zeal, their ages were noe
privilege unto them, but that notwithstanding they might be deceived in their
writings and expositions of scripture. And take you this, Master Rainolds, for
a sure conclusion, that in the sayings of those, who are all of them subject to
error, there is no stable and steadie ground to build our faith upon, lest
perhaps we build upon error, in stead of truth, upon the sand, and not upon
the rock. So that without trial and examination no sentence of a father, nor
of all fathers may safely be received.

page 28.
as to believe whatsoever they have said: we are no more partial unto them in
this behalf, then we are unto the ancient fathers: our religion and faith
hangs not upon the sayings of men, be they old or young, but only upon the
canonical scriptures of God. And as for Augustine, Jerome, and Cyprian, they
are as much ours in the most and weightiest controversies, as Luther, Calvin,
or Melancthon. And if they, or any other be against us, so long as scripture
is for us, our cause is good, and we will not be ashamed thereof.

Divinity rests upon these fathers, page 29. etc.
whom you so scornfullie compare with the old fathers. We use not to allege
for proof of any doctrine, Thus says Calvin, Bucer, or other: but thus says
the Lord, thus says the Prophet, thus says the Apostle, thus the Evangelist,
thus is it written in the scriptures, thus we read in some book of the old
or new Testament. Notwithstanding we use also to read the fathers both old
and new, as much as your selves, and oftentimes we rehearse their sentences and
expositions, not as proofs in doctrine of them selves, but to stop your
mouths, that cry so loud in the ears of the simple, that all the fathers
are against us, it being most true, that they are notably and generally (as
I have said) for us, You talk in this place, as one that would say
something, and tells a long tale, but in the end forgets of what he meant
to speak. Of all that you say, make your conclusion, and then shall appear,
how empty and barren a declamor you are.

Now, says Master Rainolds, if these serve not, page 31.
a man would think their martyrs testimony should be irrefragable. And
think you then the argument to be so sure and necessary, that is drawn from
authority of a martyr? will you grant this reason to be invincible, A marttr
has said it, therefore it is true? what say you then of Cyprian the martyr,
of Justinius the martyr, of Irenaeus the martyr, who notwitstanding their
blessed martyrdom, are known to have maintained opinions against the truth?
If martyrs then may have their errors, how may the testimony of martyrs be
always irrefragable? you see (good readers) how pithie a disputer this man
does show himself to be. If his loose rhetorike helped him not a little
better, then his logike, he were in very weak and miserable case.

page 32.
what can you, Master Rainolds, conclude against us? In matter of discipline
great difference heretofore has been amongst the Churches East and West,
Greek and Latin. If then some such be in our reformed Churches, can you
thereof truly gather, that therefore they are not the Churches of Christ?
Tell us what you mean, if you have any truth or certainty in your meaning.

Next Master R. reckeneth up sundry Popes, that are amongst the Protestants in
stead of one true Pope: page 33.
which I know not whereto it serves, but only to show that the protestants
have so great detestation of the Pope and his tyranny, that they cannot endure
in any professor of the Gospel, any small shadow of such Lordelines, as
the Pope usurps over the Church. Your true Pope, whereof you speak, is as
much as a true Antichrist, of whom the scriptures have foretold. The name,
the person, the authority all Protestants abhor, and accurse to the prince
of darkness, from whence it came.

Again he is in hand with general Councels, and says it is impossible, page
34.
that ever we should once imagine how any Council amongst us should be
gathered. His method is according to his matter, confused, and disordered,
leaping and iumping from one point to another, like a wild bucke upon the
mountains. Although we have not a Pope, as you have, yet by Gods grace
general Councels may we have, if Christian princes that profess the gospel
will jointly take upon them the care thereof. And general Councels have been
assembled and held many hundred years before your Pope by such a name was
ever known or heard of in the world, and so may they again both Christianlie
and generally be held, allthough your Pope with all his proud clergy were
returned from whence they came. That hitherto no such Christian Councels have
been gathered, it may be imputed to the general troubles in all Christian
countries, and to the adversaries, that have been raised up by your Pope and
his Cardinal satrapes, to hinder, as much as in them lay, all means, whereby
a Christian general Council might be gathered. Howbeit if a general Council
cannot be procured, to be celebrated with quietness, there is no doubt
notwithstanding, but that the Lords cause may without it daily more and more
prevail, as it has done heretofore in times most persecutions.

To the section that follows, containing only a recapitulation of these
former discourses, page 34. etc.
I have no need to make any further answer.

Your complainte against us, for refusing all grounds of disputation, page 38.
how vain and untrue it is, has been showed. The only true and certain
ground of religion and of all disputation about the same, which is the
authority of God revealed unto us in his holy word, we embrace, we hold, we
rest upon it: which for so much as you have fully tried to be against you, so
that you cannot thereby approve one article of your popish faith, nor
disprooue any doctrine that we maintain against you, therefore desperation
drives you indeed to refuse this ground as insufficient, and to seek other
grounds, of which we have noe warrant in Gods word. And although it please you
for this cause to rail at us, and say we are worse then the heretics of old
time, yet we know that the ancient godly fathers in confuting all heretics
used only arguments drawn out of the scriptures, and plainly taught that
by no other weapons an heretic can be put to flight. I know they charge them
oftentimes with the judgment of Churches, successions of Bishops,
determination of Councels, name of Catholics, not as though this were a
necessary conviction of it self, but thereby the rather to induce them, to
believe the doctrine to be true, which they see from the first planting thereof
in the Church to have remained. Your case is nothing like, seeing you have
only the bare title without the thing, and as it were the empty casket
without the treasure.

But for so much as you accuse ^s for casting away the grounds of Divinity, I
desire every Christian man to weigh with himself, what ground it is, whereon
al your religion and Church stands. First the scripture must not be scripture
in any other sense, then as the Pope will expound it: so that the scripture
being the meaning of the scripture, and the meaning of the scripture being the
Popes exposition, hereof it follows that the scripture is nothing else but the
Popes interpretation. So likewise in Traditions, Doctors, Councels, Churches,
if any thing dissent from the Popes understanding and determination, it is
rejected, abolished, condemned, and finally all faith, all religion, all
Divinity of Papists is only the Popes sacred will and pleasure. Now then
this being their own certain resolution, I would gladly be informed, how by
the same a man may be assured of any faith, it being further also agreed and
confessed among themselves, that the Pope may fall into heresy. Then who
sees not that their ground being shaken, and their stay failing, all that is
builded and vpholden thereon is clean overthrown? If they say, the Pope
falling into heresy, forthwith cease to be a Pope, I demand who they are
that must judge the Popes cause, and give sentence against him? And if the Pope
be obstinate, and teaching heresy, and therewith infecting the world, will
notwithstanding stoutly stand in defense of his doctrine, and will keep his
chair, what shift have you then, or what can you do against him, seeing he is
your Pope, your head, your author and founder of all your faith? Thus a man
going with you along, and coming to the end of all, finds no stay, but must
wander still, as in an endless Labyrinth, wherein he shall at last languish and
perish everlastingly.

That you wish we would be content to yealde to the very scriptures
themselves, page 40.
doubt you not, Master Rainolds, thereof, but we are most ready to yealde unto
them: if ye would be as willing, the controversy might have thereby, and by
other good means, an end. But your conscience tells you, scripture will not
serve you, and therefore in a word you deny the wholl body of the scriptures.
Think not (good reader) that herein I have spoken rashly without reason, I
know what I speak, and thy self considering the matter advisedly wilt say
as much. For in making an old rotten translation, (as I may boldly call it,
being compared with the original word of scripture, although otherwise I give
to it that reverence, that the antiquity thereof deserves) full of wants,
faults, errors, ouersightes, imperfections, and corruptions of all sorts, as
in this book hereafter (god willing) thou shall perceive, to be the
authentical word of God, and denying the original faithful text, which
Moses, the Prophets, the Apostles, the Evangelists did write, to be the word
of God, what do they else but plainly as it were with one dash of a pen
cancel the wholl sciptures? Herein may thou see what conscience these men
make of scripture, that do cast away the very authentical text and books of
holy scripture, preferring before them a homely latin translation, which,
besides it is such as I have said, no man can tell from whence, or from whom
it came. And this forsooth is their scripture, coined and canonized of late in
the council of Trente, and never before: and other scripture have they none.

Hitherto Master Rainolds treatise has been general of the English
Protestants, page 41. etc.
now he craves leave of the reader to descend and apply the same to his
adversary, whose book he is to examine: and first he notes the fashion of
Heretics always to have been to invade the chief pastors of the Church.
What heretics have used commonly to do appertains nothing unto us: we
could no otherwise do, but when we espied the wolf devouring the flock, and
Antichrist sitting in the temple of God, give warning thereof to all, cry out
against him, and call him by his proper name, the very Antichrist of whom
Saint Paul to the Thessalonians, and the scriptures in other places do mean.
This has been the judgment of al reformed Churches from the beginning, and
will be to the ending of the world. And although Sanders has taken great pains
in this behalf to prove their Pope to be no Antichrist (for then all were
utterly lost) yet how little he has by his demonstrations prevailed, the
godly reader may easily judge by the answer set forth, which Master
Rainolds because he cannot orderly and thorowlie disprooue, carpeth at some
parts thereof in the residue of this his preface. But being appointed, as he
says, to answer the book, it had been more for his commendation and credit
of the cause, to have perticularlie refuted my wholl reply, then thus to pike
certain parcels at his own choice, and to pretermit all the rest. Yet let us
see what he can say, whereby it shall appear, how little he had to say.

In the first demonstration of all, Page 44. etc.
D. Saunders endeavors to prove, that the great Antichrist must be one
singular man (for proof whereof he allegeth sundry reasons, which are
severally answered) and lastly, as the chiefest, that all the fathers have
spoken of Antichrist, as of one man. Doctor Saunders, and parcel of my answer
are here by Master Rainolds repeated, but the principal ground thereof is
omitted. Whereas it is by Saunders affirmed, that all the fathers have spoken
of Antichrist, as of one only man: although this be untrue, and can never by
Saunders or any Papist be proved; and although further it is one thing to
speak of Antichrist, as of one man, and plainly to say, that Antichrist is
one man: yet supposing this were true, that Saunders means, notwithstanding
his demonstration holds not, being taken from the authority of men, from
whom no demonstration in divinity can be drawn. This is the sum of this
answer which Master Rainolds accuses of Antichristian arrogancy, seeing the
fathers write according to the apostolical faith and tradition, as he says.
But how may it appear, Master Rainolds, that the Apostles taught or delivered
such a faith unto the Churches concerning Antichrist? if this faith be
contained in their writings, tell us in what book, in what place, in what
words. If in secret tradition, we admit no proof (as you know) from such
uncertain and blind traditions. And if you your selves oftentimes do dissent
from the fathers, give us also the same liberty of dissenting from them upon
as good ground and just causes as you have any. The fathers speak diverse
times not according to the tradition and faith Apostolical, but according to
the common received opinion, them selves in plain terms confessing that they
speak but coniecturally: and if there was not in that age so full and clear
knowledge of Antichrist, as at this day, no marvel may it seem to wise men,
for so much as now Antichrist is not only borne and bredde, but grown to a
strong man, and perfectly discerned and acknowledged, by all marks essential
to be Antichrist. They forsawe him, we see him: they knew he should come, we
know he is come: they feared him, we have felt him: they geassed at him, we can
point him out with our finger: finally they might be deceived, but we cannot,
unless we will stop our ears, and close our eyes, and suffer our selves
willingly to be abused. page 46. etc.


In the second demonstration Doctor Saunders commends the Church of Rome by
testimonies of writers, ancient and later; thereby to make us believe, that
seeing it has been so highly praised, it cannot therefore possibly be the
seat of Antichrist. Here I gave Doctor Saunders a distinction between the
elder Roman Church and the younger. The ancient Church of Rome indeed was
worthelie extolled and magnified of the fathers for constant keeping of the
faith, although even then in that Church the egg was laid, whereof shortly
after Antichrist was hatched: the distinction M. R. raileth at with all his
might, but cannot disprooue with all his learning, it being evident in all
histories, that after the days of those godly fathers the Bishop of Rome was
made head of the universal Church, wherein he was publicly proclaimed to be
the Antichrist, that should come: and afterward continually both religion,
learning, and good life died by little and little in that Church, as has been
testified and complained of by infinite writers. So the difference between
that Church in former and latter time is no less evident, then between a man's
youth and doting age, if you consider all parts and properties of a true
Church. And yet, says Master Rainolds, if it be lawful thus to answer. then
shall no heresy ever be repressed, forgetting fowlie, that heresy must be
refuted and repressed by scripture, which never changes, but abides for ever,
though Churches vary both from others, and from themselves.

In the third demonstration, Page 50. etc.
wherein Saunders affirms the succession of priests in the Roman Church, to
be the rock against which the gates of hell shall not prevail, I deny the
outward chair or succession of bishops to be the immovable and invincible
Rock, whereon the Church is builded; which is the son of God himself, the
only foundation of the Church. For outward succession is no more certain in
that Church, then in others; and it has been diverse times broken of and
discontinued by vacations and schisms for many years together. If then the
Church had been builded upon this tottering rock of external succession, at
Rome, it had oftentimes been dashed and overthrown: but thanks be to God, the
Church is builded upon a surer rock, then is the personal succession of your
Popes, or else of any estate of men in the world: and therefore, whatsoever
becomes of your Pope or of his chair and succession, the Church falls not,
but abides and remains for ever. Your stories written in time of
Antichrists tyranny, what cause is there why we should any whit regard
them, the authors thereof being infected with the errors of the Pope, and
daring not write for the most part otherwise then might well stand with his
humor? And to all histories, that since the defection have commended the faith
of that Church, we oppose the word of God, which plainly conuinceth it of
manifold and damnable heresies, besides we could allege sundry writers in all
ages, that openly have reproved the same.

The former distinction concerning the Roman Church, page 25.
here Master Rainolds takes in hand to disprooue, and to show, that my
paradox (as he calls it) is impossible. First he says I granted the Church
of Rome to have been pure, godly, Christian, for six hundred years after
Christ, which forsooth I never granted (as he means) that simply and
absolutely no manner of corruption in any part of doctrine had taken place
therein: but only according to the state of those times, and comparison of
that general apostasy which afterward ensued. So your conceit M. R. that this
alteration should wholly be wrought within the space often or twelve years, is
so vain and childish, that nothing can be devised more foolish and farther of
from the purpose. No, M. Rainolds, notwithstanding Antichrist was not openly
advanced in the Roman Church before Bonifacius the third, yet was there in it
no small preparation for entertayning of him before that time through
corruption of doctrine and manners in that Church: and though it was in many
things corrupted before, yet had it also great sincerity, which by little and
little decayed more and more till Antichrist came, and was revealed: and after
Antichrist was seated there, yet was not therefore all purity lost by and by,
but in continuance of time it fainted and languished, having received deadly
poison, and no remedy being provided. Wherefore this roye of yours, was indeed
a vanity of vanities fit for such a vain sophister as you are.

But now because Doctor Saunders and M. Rainolds boldly affirm that by
testimonies of stories no heresy was brought into the Roman Church, or any
change of doctrine ever made in the same, let me put them in mind briefly,
Sigisb^rt. Gemblacensis. in Chronico, Ann. 1088.
that Sigisberius the moncke an Historiographer, mentioned by them both,
expresselie chargeh Gregory the seventh and his successors, for maintaining
and practizing not only an error, but an heresy also, in taking upon them
authority to excommunicate the Emperor, and other civil Princes.

This heresy has ever since continued in that See, and is at this day, by
the Pope and his Popelings avouched: and therefore by confession of their own
Historiographers, Page 55.
some heresy has taken place in the Church of Rome, contrary to Doctor
Saunders, and Master Rainolds proud assertion.

That the Roman Church of later time, has not changed the faith which the
ancient Roman Church professed, Master Rainolds promises now to prove, by
such testimonies, as I must needs allow for upright, and sufficient. My self
is the first: then Calvin, Luther, Martyr, Illyricus: none of which ever
dreamed of such a matter, as he takes in hand to prove by their confession.
That I have said the first Roman Church held the purity of faith, nothing
concerns the later Church; and in what sense I have so said, is before
declared: not thereby to justify that Church in every particular doctrine,
custom, or ceremony, but only that the principal and substantial articles
of Christian religion were in it maintained against the heretics of those
times. Then that Calvin, Lu^^^. etc. do grant, that the primitive Roman
Church maintained and believed the Popes supremacy, the sacrifice of the
Mass, real presence and Priesthood, is most untrue, as further in discourse
of this book shall appear. And therefore the conclusion that of these
premises should ensue, is like the untimely fruit, that ere it be ripe
falls down to the ground.

And as for the common place that follows concerning the continuance of
Christ's universal Church, page 57.
to what purpose does it serve or what argument may it afforde you? we believe
and confess to the comfort of our souls, that Christ's Church has continued,
and never shall fail so long as the world endures, and we account it a
profane heresy, to teach that Christ's Catholic universal Church has perished
from the earth at any time. For this assertion (as you truly prove) shakes
the foundations of all faith and religion. But as you have effectually and
inuinciblie by manifold scriptures euinced that Christ's Church can never be
rooted out, and no man in the world can open his mouth against you herein, so
if you had also proved by like evidence of scripture that the Catholic
universal Church of Christ is nothing else but the outward succession of the
Roman see, then had you proved your matters soundly, and confuted our
opinion truly, and proceeded orderly. But having spoken much concerning the
perpetuity of Christ's Church, which no Christian can deny or doubt of, you
bring us no text not reason to show that Christ's Church either is the Popes
succession, or else depends upon the same. For as touching external show and
succession of Churches the scriptures have foretold, that Antichrist shall
seduce great and small, Apoc. 12.61. and 13.16.
rich and poor, free and bond, and that the Church shall fly into the
wilderness, and there remain, of al which no word could be true, if the
Catholic Church were tied to the Popes Chair, and the Popes Chair were the
rock that can not be removed. And yet notwithstanding this general
dispersion and flight of the Church under Antichrist, the Catholic Church
shall for all that continue, although not in that outward strength and glory,
in which sometimes it has appeered and flourished.

Now this long discourse following, is visible, Page 59. etc.
and the Testimonies of Melancthon, Oecolampadius, Calvin, and Illyricus at
large rehearsed to that purpose; all this argues nothing else, but pitiful and
gross ignorance in this man, who not knowing what he avouches, or what he
refelleth, yet lays on such load, as though with every blow he felled his
adversary to the ground. The militant Church of Christ to be a visihle
company, who has from the beginning of the world denied? or who could ever
otherwise imagine, but that men, whosoever they be, are visible and may be
discerned? This therefore required not so many proofs as you have brought,
being liberal where no need is: neither in this respect do we mean that
there is an invisible Church, by which we understand the elect, the faithful,
the members of Christ's mystical body: who although they may be seen
outwardly, in that they are men, yet their election, their faith, their
spiritual adoption and conjunction with Christ, in which respect they are
truly his Church, can not by outward sense be perceived. The number of
professors is visible, but the number of the elect is not visible, that is, can
not by sight and sense be tried, discerned, and separated from all others. This
is the meaning of that distinction, which you ought to have known before you
labored to disprooue it. But if taking upon you to refute a thing, whereof you
are ignorant, you fail shamefullie, and make your self very ridiculous to
your reader, it is no marvel, and you can blame no other then your own self.

For what conceit was this that you have nourished in your brain, Page 64.
and uttered in this book, that we should make the Church of Christ to be
invisible in such sort, as you maintain the body of Christ to be invisibly
in the Sacrament, and hereupon note a wonderful contradiction in our doctrine.
I may truly say your case is lamentable, and so is theirs that depend upon
you, to be thus absurdlie and wilfully blinded in matters of faith, and as it
were to grope for light at noone day, which shows in you indeed a notable
reprobation of understanding, as a just punishment of your Apostasy. The
Church is not invisible, because the men of whom the Church consists are
invisible (for the faithful and elect in that they are men, are no less
visible then the rest) but because the elect of God can not be perceived and
acknowledged, by outward sight of our eyes. Of Christ's body you teach most
falsely, that his very true natural humane body is in the Sacrament, yet
that no sense can perceive it to be there: which is to deny and overthrow the
truth of his humanity. Therefore you see (if any faculty of seeing remain
in you) that between this doctrine The Church of Christ is invisible, that is,
not able by our eyes to be discerned, and this, The body of Christ if it were
present in the Sacrament bodelie (as you teach) should be visible, that is,
seen with our eyes, is not so much as a shadow or fancy of any contradiction.

After all this Master Rainolds makes a long discourse of David George and
Sebastian Castalion, page 66.
of whom or for whom I have for my part noe need to answer. David George
was a damnable heretic, and his heresies were by Protestants not Papists
descried and refuted. Castalion you slander most shamelessly in saying he
denied Christ to be the Messiah, as hereafter also in your book you have done.
His preface which he writ to King Edward before his translation of the Bible,
contains no such argument, and leads wholly to another end, if you had
either wit to see it, or good will to acknowledge it. Therein he disputes
that some part of those promises that are contained in the Prophets, and
namely concerning the great knowledge that should be under Christ, is not yet
accomplished: his opinion of which matters I leave to himself: but you have
not done well to charge him untruely with so foul a blasphemy. page 70.


As for the great straightes into which Calvin and Luther disputing with the
Jews have been driven by reason of this supposition, concerning the Churches
fall, I know not any, seeing they never imagined any such fall, as you do. No
the heavens shall sooner fall, then the Church: and therefore you mistake the
matter wholly, and like an ignorant sophister make impertinent discourses. The
promises of almighty God concerning the largenes and beauty of his Church
under Christ have been accomplished. The Gospel has been preached
throughout the world, the Church has spread it self over all nations, and
never since has it been shut up within the limits of one country and
people, as the Synagogue was. But as the Prophets foretold that the Church
should be thus mightelie increased and multiplied, so the Apostles have
prophesied that in the Church should be a defection, that Antichrist should sit
in the Temple of God, and that the Princes and people of the earth should be
drunken with the cup of his spiritual fornication and abominations. As we
confess those Prophecies to be fulfilled, so must we likewise acknowledge the
truth of these, and thereby we are hable to stop the mouths not only of
Jews and Turks, but of all papists also, in this controversy of the churches
outward increase and decaie. Your monstrous railing in the next section I
pretermit, beseeching God to open the eyes of all Christians, and to give them
understanding hearts, that they may discern Antichrist from Christ, falsehood
from truth, and heresy from pure religion.

But where you say that there be many worse Antichrists then the Pope, page
73.
and compare certain of your late Popes with some of our English
Superintendents, as you call them, in respect of their behavior and
conversation of life, you still misconstrue the matter, and speak beside the
purpose.

Your Popes might have used greater show of honesty and godliness, then they
have done, and yet be never the further of from their kingdom of Antichrist,
which although it be much furthered and maintained by their pride, cruelty,
covetousness, and such other most monstrous and outrageous demeanor, as they
have used these many hundred years; yet it consists principally in that
doctrine of Antichristianitie, which they hold, and by all possible means
defend, most contrary to the holy and Catholic religion of Christ.

And yet if your comparison were admitted, and the lives of those Antichrists
thoroughly examined, it would appear, that there have not lived ever in any
state from the beginning of the world more wicked, vile, and abominable men,
then have been the Popes of Rome for diverse hundred years together by
testimony of their own histories. They have in tyranny exceeded Nero, in
pride Nebuchadnezer, or Alexander the great, in other common vices, them that
for the same have been most infamouslie renowned in the world: wherein if any
professor of the gospel should resemble them, or come near unto them, it
were a just shame unto their person, but yet no disproofe of their religion.

Now Master Rainolds proceeds to another point, page 75.
namely the want of religion and conscience, which he says I have showed in
this answer. A greauous accusation, in matters of Religion to want religion,
and where greatest conscience is required, to have no conscience at all. But if
you examine his proof, then shall you easily perceive the cauilling spirit of
this accuser, whereof you have already had, and shall hereafter have most
evident demonstration. The fault no dout is very heinous, whereupon he frames
so sore an indictment, or else he a malicious enemy, that for no cause accuses
so bitterly. If I have not set down every word of Doctor Saunders book,
does it therefore follow that I did it of an irreligious or unconscionable
intent? What man preten^ing conscience or religion, would thus surmise, seeing
for his life he can not show, that I have concealed or omitted the least moment
of any one argument, that I have taken to answer in his book? If then I have
cut of in one or two Chapters some part of his words being long and tedious,
for no other cause in the world, but only to avoid prolixitie, what blame I
have therein deserved, I put it to the verdite of all indifferent, religious,
and conscionable men to pronounce. These men in pretending to answer our
books, may deal as they lift, may omit any thing at their pleasure, may
sert down no more then shall like them best: may report things that were not
written, and all this shall escape in them without reproof: If we leave out a
few words, being nothing else but words, for cumbring out books and readers
with multitude of unnecessary talk, this must be made a great crime, here is
want of Religion and conscience, and this must suffice to discredit all the
rest with those, that will believe such subtle and slanderous persuasions.

The same practice he obiecteth also to Master Doctor Jewel, page 75.
the late worthy Bishop of Sarisburie of blessed memory, who yet I am
persuaded has dealt as faithfully and sincerely with Doctor Harding, as any
adversary has ever done with another. In his Reply he has printed D.
Hardings wholl book, omitting nothing from the beginning to the end, and made
to all that he alleged for maintenance of his several causes, a most learned
and perfect answer, the which as yet was never refelled, nor never can be, I
am sure. Now consider the dealing of Doctor Harding in his Reioynder, which
besides it is made but to one only article of seven and twenty, it has in
a hundred places omitted much, so as in truth not half the Reply is entirely
repeated and answered. In the defense of the Apology he has indeed abridged
Doctor Hardings Confutation, being of such length and bigness as was not
convenient wholly to be printed with the defense. But let them, if they can
show some argument dissembled or passed over in silence, in all that which in
the impression is omitted. Which for so much as they cannot, it is no matter,
though many legions of such idle words, as he has filled that book withal,
were suppressed and drowned. And I pray you, how has D. Harding behaved
himself in his detection? Has he done, as you accufe M. Jewel for not
doing? Nothing les. Then why should M. Jewel be accounted more worthy of
blame, then D. Harding, having made no other fault, then that wherein D. Harding
has much more offended then he?

That I have in those places omitted some words, I grant, Master Rainolds:
page 77. etc.
and the cause thereof I have truly declared. But tell me where is any part or
proof of Saunders demonstrations unanswered. If you will examine what I have
answered to every one in order, you shall find I have not dealt any ways
untruly or craftily, as you would have men think I did, but soundly and
sufficiently disprooued, whatsoever he has disputed in any Chapter of those
forty demonstrations, short or long. If you be angry with me for not reciting
all his words, and answering them particularly, this understand that I for my
part would rather grind in a mill, all the days of my life, then be bound to
answer such infinite loquacitie, and garrulitie, as Doctor Saunders, and your
self, and other your companions use in your writings. You pour forth such
floodes, or rather seas of words, that it is a most intolerable wearines to
wade therein, although danger of drowning, or taking great harm there can be
none. But as to answer your words is a thing most tedious, besides it is
unnecessary, so your reasons again are answered with as great delight,
comfort, and facility. And if you think I have not thoroughlie answered
every demonstration of Doctor Saunders, it is free for you to resume or
prosecute the controversy, which no doubt at this time you would have done,
being thereto so specially by your superiors appointed, but that you mistrusted
somewhat in your cause, and in your self. And although you promise some thing
shall follow hereafter, yet considering both the practice of Papists, and a
prouisoe which here you make, I think we are to look for little more at your
hands in defense of Saunders demonstrations. Their practice is, lest they
might be thought unable to answer our books, to set forth some answer to a
part, and then so dainlie to break of with pretense of necessary reason, and
promise of proceading further at a more convenient season, and yet never to
perform any such matter. So the defender of the Censure in the mids of his
answer picketh a quarrel to make an end for that present, as though he meant
at better leisure to finish the whole. But it rester has he left it then, and so
is like to do still. So Master Rainolds purposing perhaps some such matter,
has yet provided aforehand, that if he fail in further answer, it shall not
be taken in evil part, seeing he has restrained his promise with that
exception, if he be not let by those that have the regiment of his life and
studies. It may be, that they being discreet men will suffer Master Rainolds to
proceed no further, lest as of that, which he has written already, no great
profit has redounded to their cause, so in that which is to follow concerning
Antichrist, he rather hurt them much, then help them any thing at all.

Master Rainolds concludes his preface with a certain Advertisement to the
Reader, page 84.
wherein first he notes what kind of printes and editions he uses of such
books, as commonly he alleges, not of the ancient fathers (for of them he
alleges very few) but of the late writers, with whose testimonies and
sentences he has fraughted his book from one end to another. If any man have
pleasure or purpose to peruse his authorities, therein he may be something
helped by this direction, which M. R. has so carefully, though not much
needfullie, gathered and prefixed before his book. Albeit I think that not
many Readers, of what judgment soever they are in religion, considering how
little weight of matter is in those allegations, will greatly cumber themselves
with seeking the impressions, turning the volumes, and perusing the quotations,
the labor being far greater, then the profit.

Secondly, he talks much and dispureth to and fro by what name he may call
us, Christians, pa. 86.
or Catholics, or heretics, or protestants, or Zuinglians, or Sacramentaries,
whereof no dout there was great cause in this manner to advertise the reader.
You call us indeed at your pleasure by such names as your maliciouse and
railing spirits can invent, sometime by one, and sometime by another.
Christians and Catholics you will not have us named, reserving that
denomination to your selves, to whom notwithstanding of al professors of
Christian religion the same does least appertain. For our parts, so long as
we are sure that the doctrine, which we follow, is the eternal word of God,
and gospel of his son Christ, as we are by Gods grace most sure, seeing it
is plainly set down in the holy scriptures of the old and new Testament, we
care not what you think of us, or what you speak of us, or by what names you
reproach us. If you blaspheme the doctrine of Christ, and call it heresy, not
fearing or sparing the Lord himself it is no wonder if you revile us with all
opprobrious names that can possibly be devised. We tell you notwithstanding
that if a Christian be he that believes in Christ, according to his word; if
Catholics be they that profess the universal faith of Christ; we are truly
Christians, and Catholics, believing so, and professing so. Lutheranes we are
not, Zuinglianes we are not, Caluinists we are not, because we mantaine not
any private or proper doctrine of Luther, or Zuinglius, or Calvin, no more
then the faithful ought in the primitive Church to have been called Paulines,
or Petrines, or Athanasians, or by the name of any other such minister of
Christ. Be ye called diversely, Franciscanes, Benedictines, Dominicanes,
Jesuits, and whatsoever other title ye can take up: we are not grieved at the
multitude and variety of your names, who being in truth almost any thing
rather then Christians, delight in any name rather, then in the name of
Christians. But to us this one name is sufficient, and such as are equivalent
therewith: we are content with it: we desire no other. As for the name of
Protestants if you think it belongs not to us, give it them whose it is:
being not a name of Schism or sect, it may as well be used, as the name of
Catholics: and for distinction sake only, being begone first at the diet of
Argsburgh, we are enforced to use it.

Lastly Master Rainolds protests his readiness to submit himself to the
truth, page 92.
to defend a fault, or to correct it. This indeed is too great indifferency
and readiness, whereby it appears you are not resolved in your self, but can
be content to apply your judgment and trauail in defense or reproof of any
opinion, good or bad, true or false. Correct your faults Master Rainolds, but
leave of to maintain them. I have in this book made them plain enough both
to your self and to others: you cannot but see them, God give you grace to
acknowledge them, to be ashamed of them, and, as you have promised, to correct
them. You know that in this book you have wrangled without measure, you have
railed without shame, you have committed as foul and notorious faults in
reasoning, as any man could do: your Logike is naught, your divinity is
worse, and your conscience, as it may seem, is worst of all. If there yet
remain in you any drop of that simplicity, which you profess, then give
over defense of such untruth, reform your judgment, and return by
repentance from whence you are fallen, If you continue in willful Apostasy,
your blood be upon your own head, you have been warned, and would not harken.
I refer you to the Lords judgment, who shall get glory either by your
conversion and salvation, or else by your final hardening, and condemnation:
The Lord has made all things for himself, yea the wicked for the day of evil.

M. RAINOLDS HAS DIVIDED HIS BOOK INTO Chapters: which division I have
orderly followed in mine answer. The argumens of his Chapters is set down in
the table following.
CHAP. 1. Concerning the Epistle of S. James. Page 1. CHAP. 2. Of the
Canonical Scriptures, and English Cleaergie Page 20. CHAP. 3. Of Luther
preferring his private judgment before all ancient fathers. Page 47. CHAP. 4.
Of Priesthood, and of the sacrifice continued after Christ. Page 58. CHAP. 5.
Of penance, and the value of good works, touching justification, and life
eternal. Page 92. CHAP. 6. Of reproouing the ancient fathers for their
doctrine touching good works. Page 133. CHAP. 7. Of Master Jewels challenge.
Page 146. CHAP. 8. Of Bezaes translating a place of scripture, Act. 3. and of
the Real presence. Page 172. CHAP. 9. Of certain places of Saint Chrysostom
touching the Real presence. Page 193. CHAP. 10. Of the place in S. Lukes
Gospel, which Bezae is charged to have corrupted. Page 209. CHAP. 11.
Concerning the translation of the English bibles. Page 218. CHAP. 12.
Concerning the latin bible, which Master Rainolds maintains to be more
sincere, then the Hebrew now extant. Page 227. CHAP. 13. Of the new Testament
in latin: and a comparison of the vulgar translator with all other of this
age. Page 32^. CHAP. 14. Wherein Master Rainolds laboreth to prove, that it is
the very way to Atheism, and infidelity to leave the ordinary translation
of the Bible, and to appeal to the Hebrew, Greek, and such new diverse
translations, as the Protestants have made. Page 345. CHAP. 15. Of the New
Testament set forth in the College of Rhemes. Page 364. CHAP. 16. Of the
faults found in the Annotations of the New Testament. Page 377. CHAP. 17. Of
certain blasphemies contained in the Annotations. Page 401.
AN ANSWER TO MASTER RAINOLDS REFVTATION.
CHAP. 1.
Concerning the Epistle of S. James.

ALThough our Adversaries have continually endeavored to abase and extenuat the
authority of the holy Scriptures, The Papists are enemies of the scriptures
in many respects.
by matching with them the credit of Traditions devised by men, by submitting
them to the judgment of Fathers and Councels, and hanging them upon their
interpretations, and most notoriously by bringing them into captivity under
the Pope, so that his pleasure and determination must stand for their true
sense and meaning, as it is confessed by them selves, and known to the world:
yet will they seem nevertheless to be very zealous in defense of the
scriptures, and charge the Protestants with that impiety, whereof them-seues
are most of all guilty. As this has been their common practice of long
time, thereby to make some believe that we contemn the Scriptures of God,
which of all Christians are to be had in most high regard and reverence, and
of us always have been esteemed no otherwise, then their incomparable
majesty and authority requires, being the word of the eternal God: so of
late Edmond Campian in his book, made this the first and principal cause of
his Challenge, Camp. ra. 1.
for that he saw us through despair (as he says) compelled to lay hands,
and offer violence to the holy books of the Bible. For proof whereof Luther
is charged to have written contemptuously, and contumeliouslie of the Epistle
of Saint James: which though it had been true, and could not have been
denied, yet did it nothing at all touch us, who therein agree not with Luther,
neither are bound to justify al his sayings and private opinions, no more then
they will be content to avouch what-soeuer has been spoken or published by any
one or other famous man of their side? We no more bound to defend Luther in all
his sayings, then they will be bound to defend whatsoever has bin said by
their writers.
Which thing if they will take upon them to perform, then let them profess
it, or else they offer us the more injury, that object still against us a
saying, which was never either uttered, or allowed by us.

This might suffice men of indifferent reason: but our adversaries will yet
continue wrangling about nothing, and will trouble the world with frivolous
writings, being neither ashamed, nor wearied of any thing. For what matter is
it worthy so much ado, and so many words, whether Luther ever spoke so of
Saint James epistle, as Campian says he did, or no? If he had so spoken, as in
truth he has not, for any thing I can understand, what have they won? what
have we lost? what matter was it, to multiply words so much about? Is this the
controversy between us and them? do we strive about men's words and writings?
Is Luther our God, or the author of our faith, or our Apostle? No, they shall
not bring us thus from the defense of Gods truth to skirmish with them about
men's sayings: we will not leave the great questions of Religion, and fall to
dispute about matters of other nature and condition, such as this is concerning
Luthers particular judgment of S. James Epistle. The truth of Gods word is it
for which we contend, against the which if any man have spoken any thing, let
him bear the blame himself, and let not the common cause be charged
therewith. So if Luther, or any other learned man of our side, have either
interpreted the scriptures in something amiss, or have doubted of some one
book of Scripture, whereof doubt also has been of old in the Church of
Christ, we are not to defend their expositions, or to approve their judgment:
and therefore in vain do these men spend so much time, and take such pains to
prove, that Luther uttered reproachful words against the Epistle of Saint
James: which, as though it had been a principal matter for their advantage,
not only the Censurer in his defense, and Gregory Martin in his discovery,
have spoken thereof, but now also my new adversary Master Rainolds in his
book against me begins with the same, and says, he has thought good to
set it down, and prosequute it somewhat more at large. But I for my part
have not thought good to spend my time, and comber the reader about such
unnecessary, and impertinent discourses as these are, which the adversaries
devise, and wherewith Master Rainolds has stuffed his book: only it shall be
sufficient, for answer to Master Rainolds, who in truth deserves no
answer, playnlie and briefly in every point to clear the truth from his
cauils and slanders, for the satisfying of the godly in this behalf.

And first, what a silly argument he gathers, M. Rainolds argum. that we
have left no ground of faith, because Luther somewhat touches the credit of
Saint James epistle.
for that Luther has written somewhat hardly of Saint James his Epistle, that
therefore the Protestants leave no one ground, whereupon a Christian man may
rest his faith, I trust any man of mean discretion, can easily perceive. For
the injury done to Saint James Epistle by Luther should not be objected
against the Church of England, which does receive the same, as the Canonical
word of God, but against Luther, if he did so deserve, and such as maintain
Luthers opinion herein. But neither I, nor any other that I know in our Church
ever denied, much less does the whole Church deny that epistle to be worthily
rekned among the books of sacred Scripture, S. James Epistle not doubted of in
the Church of England.
nor have taken upon us to defend either Luther, or any other, for rejecting
the same. Indeed because Campian rayled upon Luther, charging him to have
disgraced that epistle with despitefull terms, I answered, that Luther had
not so written of it, as Campian affirmed, which still I may truly hold, for
any thing has been showed, either by any other, or by Master Rainolds him
self, who, like a profound scholar, handles this worthy matter thus at
large.

Furthermore how does that follow Master Rainolds, that if Luther thought
Saint James epistle not to be Canonical, or equal in Authority with the
epistles of Saint Paull, and Peter, that therefore he left no ground for a
Christian man's faith, to stay upon? are all the grounds of our faith in Saint
James epistle? is all foundation of Religion overthrown, if Saint James
epistle should not be Canonical? Do they that deny or doubt of that epistle,
destroy the credit of all other books of holy scipture? God forbid, that so
we should think. Diverse ancient learned men and Churches have denied the
Epistle of S. James.
Amongst the Ancient writers of estimation, Eusebius calls this same epistle
of Saint James, about which you make so great ado, in plain words, a
Bastard. I think you will not say that Luther has written worse, or more
against it. Eusebius. lib. 2. ca. 23. Ieron. in catal.
And Saint Jerome says, It was affirmed, that this epistle was published by
some other under the name of Saint James? whereby appears that many
Christians in ancient time thought it to be in deed counterfeit: and yet did
they not therefore overthrow all the foundations of our faith. Eusebius. lib. 7.
ca. 25.
Dionysius Alexandrinus writes (as Eusebius reports) that many of his
predecessors utterly refused, and rejected the book of Revelation. Council.
Laod. cap. 59. Iunil. lib. 1. cap. 3.
And so does the Council of Laodicea leave the same out of the number of
Canonical books. Iunilius Africanus, an ancient father, rejects not only
the books of Judith, Hester, and Maccabees, as they are worthy, in that they
are not canonical, but also of Job, Ezra, and Paralipomenon, which
notwithstanding are canonical scriptures. And nevertheless for all this they
left some stay for Christians in the other books of Scripture, wherein a man
may find sufficient ground to build his faith upon. Yea Jerome was not afraid
to discredit the truth of the history, written in holy Scripture, concerning
David's marrying with Abisag, calling it, according to the letter, that is, the
true and natural sense, Hier. epist. 2. Vel. figmentu^ esse de mimo, vel.
Atellanarum ludicra.
no better, then either a poetical fiction, or unseemly jest: and therefore
deuiseth a proper Allegory of Wisdom, which cherishes and refreshes a man
in his age. I will not urge Father Jerome for his vnreuerent words, but sure I
am he has deserved more reproof for the same, then Luther has done, for any
thing ever uttered by him against S. James Epistle. By these examples you may
learn not to be so rash in your judgment, and hasty in your conclusions, as
you show your felfe to be in the very beginning, that because Luther denied
Saint James epistle to be Canonical, following the ensample of others, hence
do gather, not only that he, but we also, although herein disagreeing from
him, and denying no one book of Canonical scripture, neither of the old, nor
new testament, do raze the foundation of faith, and leave no ground for
Christians to stand upon. We leave such ground, and thereupon do build our
faith, as ye shall never be hable to shake with all the force ye have. Verily
your Pope, and ye all that hang upon him, cannot well stand on this ground,
because it is too narrow, and slippery for you, and therefore ye seek larger
room, in the Fathers, Counsels, Traditions, whereof you speak. The grounds of
Popish faith.
These are in deed fit grounds for your Church to be founded upon, the
corruptions of Fathers, the decrees of men, superstitious inventions, forged
traditions: whereunto if you did not more lean, and somewhat stay your
selfs, then to the books of holy scriptures, your Church, your Pope, your
Cardinals, your monks, your friars, your selves should surely lie in dust
shortly.

But now to come to Luther, whom still you chardge, and me also, about Saint
James epistle, I could use as many words against you, if the cause required, as
you have against me, and handle the matter by points as you do: but what end,
or use should there be of such kind of writing, or what profitt could arise
thereby to the Church of Christ? Had you clearly gained all that, for which you
contend, yet had you not proved any thing at all against our Church, or faith,
nor yet against me, but only that Luthers writings have been changed, and
altered: which because you have so paynfully euicted, I pray you take it unto
you, and use it most to your advantage. Howbeit for all your needles and
unthrifty labor spent herein, yet does Campian still remain chardged with
that untruth, whereof you would so feign acquit him: which you may sone
perceive, if you call to remembrance what Campian in his book objected to
Luther, concerning this epistle of Saint James: namely, that he called it
contentious, swelling, Campian. Rat. 1.
dry, strawen, and thought it not worthy an Apostolic spirit. All this does
Campian avouch Luther to have written of Saint James epistle. Now if Luther
have in deed thus written, then have I unjustly accused Campian of untruth:
if otherwise, then has Campian slaundered Luther fowly. To know the truth
herein. I used all convenient diligence in examining all the copies both Dutche
and Latin, that I could get: and when I found in them noe such words, but
rather the clean contrary, I was persuaded, as I had good cause, that all this
was but a forged matter, and therefore said it was untrue. Afterward it fell
out, that I light upon an old Dutch Testament of Luthers translation, with his
prefaces, wherein I found something, like in one point to that which Campian
had objected: the which when I had read, I dissembled not, but confessed it in
my answer to Gregory Martin. And in that preface Luther in deed writes, that
Saint James epistle is not so worthy, as are the epistles of Saint Peter, and
Paul, but in respect of them is a strawen epistle. His censure I mislike, and
so himself, I think, afterward, seeing those words in latter editions are
left out. Yet I trust every indifferent reader will grant, that there is ods
between this that Luther writes indede, and that which Campian says he writ.
For it is one thing to speak simply, and another thing to speak in
comparison. Campian says, Luther calls Saint James Epistle strawne: Luther
says, That it is in comparison of Saint Peter's, and Saint Paul's epistles,
strawne. If you can by all your wisdom prove these to be all one, and will
farther busy your self about trifles, I am content to give you the reading,
but I will not vouchsafe to answer any more such strawen, or rather wodden
replies. And sure, Master Rainoldes, if you can write nothing to purpose, and
yet will needs be writing something, it were better for you to sit down and
pick strawes, then so to trouble your self and others, wherein you shall
purchase nothing else but commendation of a strawne writer, and your book
shall be judged more worthy to be burnt, then to be answered.

But seeing you have taken in hand to prosecute this matter so largely, M.
Rainolds helps not, where greatest need is of his help.
why do you fail in that thing wherein most of all we need your hand and
help? For this that you bring concerning strawne, has already been confessed
so much as is true: your part had been now farther to have showed, that Luther
likewse called the same epistle contentious, swollen, dry, not worthy an
Apostolical spirit, as he is accused by Campian in the same place. But for
proof hereof you can bring forth nothing and therefore you confess, that
Campian laid more to Luthers charge concerning this Epistle then was true: so
that if in one poor word you have a little avouched the credit of your
Jesuit, for whom you fight: yet in three or four other you have condemned
him: which you slily pass over notwithstanding, as though Campian had never
spoken so, or you had nothing to do therewith. Indeed I grant it makes small
matter, what Campian has lied of Luther: but you that take upon you to defend
him, may not think you have performed your duty, if of much that he has said,
you be able to justify his saying in one little point, and in three points have
failed. Wherefore either cease to quarrel still about this one word, or show
your proofs for the rest also, or acknowledge your lewd and miserable
wrangling, as in deed you must, howsoever the matter stands concerning Luther
in this behalf. For what if Luther had plainly and constantly affirmed of
Saint James Epistle, as much as Campian has objected, though untruly? Is this
a cause sufficient why you should make all these outcryes generally against all
Protestants? why then may not we by like reason complain of all Papists for
that, which Cardinal Caietane has written both of other books of holy
scripture, and namely of this same Epistle, whereof we speak? was not
Caietane a pillar of your Church, a peer of the court of Room, the Popes
Legate in Germany against Luther? Does not this famous Cardinal of Room set
down in plain words, that the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews does
gather insufficient arguments to prove Christ to be the son of God, that the
second and third of John are not Canonical scripture, Cardinal Caietane
denies sunday books and parts of Canonical Scripture in the new Testament,
where fore Catharinus has written against him.
that the Epist. of Jude is Apocryphal, that the last Chap. of S. Mark is not
of sound authority, that the history of the adulterous woman in S. John is not
authentical, and namely of S. James Ep. that the salutation is profane, having
nothing of God, nor of Jesus Christ?

But what speak I of Caietane disalowing certain books, and parcells of
divine scripture, whereas Hosius another Cardinal, and one chief founder of
all your late sophistications, has written most dishonorably, and vilely of
the wholl scripture? for thus he says: Scriptura quomodo profertur a
Catholicis, est verbum Dei: quomodo profertur ab haereticis, Hofius contra
Brent. lib. 4.
est verbum diaboli: that is, The scripture, as it is brought forth by the
Catholics, is the word of god: as it is brought forth by the Heretics, is the
word of the devil. So that by this notable Cardinals judgment, if a
Protestant, that is in their language and meaning, an heretic, shall allege
for proof of Christ's eternal divinity the beginning of the Gospel written
by Saint John, this scripture shall now become of Gods word, as it is, and
always shall be, the word of the devil, because it is used by such as they
account and call heretics. O blasphemous hand and tongue! And can you prove
this Master Rainolds? can the word of God be made the word of Satan? It will
not stand with your honesty to maintain it. Gods word, by whome-soeuer it be
uttered, though by the devil himself, is not the word of the devil. God is
immutable, so is his word. Then has Hosius blasphemed, in calling Gods word
the devils word: which you ought to consider, who think you have found
somewhat against the Protestants, when you show what Luther has written in
some disgrace of Saint James Epistle. I can further put you in remembrance,
what others of your side have taught and maintained to the great slander and
derogation of the Scriptures, and that not in one word or two, but in earnest
and long discourses. Pighius Hierarch. li. 1. Cap. 2.
What does Pighius labor to persuade in one whole Chapter, and often in other
places by occasion, but only that the Scriptures have al their credit and
authority from the Church, as though they had not any of them selves, and from
the lord, by whose spirit they were written. For thus he says, All authority
of Scripture among us depends necessarily upon the authority of the Church:
Neque enim aliter cis credere possemus, nisi quia testimoniumillis perhibenti
Ecclesic credimus.
for we could not otherwise believe them, but because we believe the Church
giving testimony unto them. And again, The primitive Church has made
certain proof unto us, that the writings of all the Evangelists are of
canonical truth, and not the Evangelists themselves, that were the writers.
And against SS. Mark and Luke he disputes at large, and boldly avouches,
that they were not meet witnesses of the truth of those gospells which they
writ, Marcum and Lucam nonsuisse testes libneos veritatis scriptorum ase
Euangeliorum Ecclesie.
and therefore even while they lived, that credit was not given to their
Gospels for themselves, no not of those that certainly knew they were written
by them, yea and farther also had their very principal copies written with
their ownehands, but for the Apostolic Church. Yea this presumptuos and
arrogant spirit of Pighius proceeds farther yet and says, that the Gospells
were written by the Evangelists, not to the end that those wrytings should
bear rule over our faith and religion, Non quidem vt scripta illa praeessent
fidei religionique nostrae, sed subessent potius. Hoc Euangeli um, inquit,
vnicum solumque designans Eu^ gelium esse, no^ que nos Matthaei, Marci, Lucae,
Ioannis que dicimus Euangelia quat uor. Hier. li. 3. ca. 3. Ceusur. Colonien.
page 112. Cusan. epist. 2. and 7.
but rather be subject thereunto. And yet a little more blasphemouslie, That
they are not the true Gospel, which Christ, ascending into heaven, commanded
his Apostles to preach to every creature. What should I rehearse his often
reproachful comparisons of scripture to a nose of wax, and a rule of lead,
which may easelie be turned, bowed, and applied every way at our pleasure?
which also the Censure of Colen has affirmed of them in like manner. And to
the same effect has Cardinal Cusane long before set down that the Scriptures
must be expounded diversely, and framed to the time, and practice of the Church,
so that one time they are to be understood and interpreted one way, and an
other time an other way. Which is more unreasonable and absurd by many degrees,
then if one should prescribe, that the Lady must conform her self to the
fashion and manners of her handmaide.

William Lindane has been and still is a stout Champion for the Pope, Lindan
Pan. Lib. 1. c. 17.
in whose defense he has uttered many bold blasphemies against the
Scriptures, as namely that the Evangelists took in hand to write the Gospels,
Non vt aliquam totius Euangelij methodum insormarent, non vt Christianae fisdei
summam consor. berent. Lib. 3. cap. 1.
not to the intent to set down any form of the wholl Gospel, or to write the
sum of Christian faith. And that the authority of the word not written is
greater then of the word written, which question he says may easily be
determined howsoever to some it seems full of difficulty and perplexity:
Lib. 3. cap. 6. De to to in vniuersum sacrae scripturae corpore accipiendum.
and that whereas Saint Peter has affirmed of Saint Paul's epistles, that in
them are somethings hard to be understood, the same must be taken and meant
generally of the wholl body of the Scriptures: so that according to this
man's doctrine there is not in all the scriptures one easy sentence, and S.
Peter was ouerseene to say, that but somethings in the epistles of Saint Paul
were hard, (...)
when he should rather have said that all things were hard. (...) Lib. 1. cap.
22.
Furthermore that it is extreme madness, to think the wholl and entire body
of Evangelical doctrine is to be fetched out of those sole Apostolic letters
written with incke, Dementissimae insaniae. Ex pusillo noui testanmenti libello.
and that little small book of the new testament. Thus scornefullie wirteth
this proud Papist of the divine scriptures, and exemplifieth his meaning by a
notable similitude, that it is as great a want of wit to esteem and judge
that al Euangelical doctrine is comprehended in the books of the new
Testament, as if one should say, that the wholl frame of the world is
contained in some one sensible creature. So that by his comparison the doctrine
of the gospel does infinitely in largenes excel all the scriptures of the new
testament. Such mad and wicked sentences has he throughout his wholl book
many.

Ambrose Catharine says, It is the Popes proper privilege to Canonize
scriptures, Catharin. in epist. ad. Galat. cap. 2. Ipse canoniz at scripturas,
and reprobat.
or to reprove scriptures, to Canonize true Saints, and to reiecte false:
meaning thereby that the holiness, authority, and estimation of scriptures
proceeds from the Pope. Wherein yet he seems to have foulie forgotten that
canonical scriptures are a great deal more ancient, then the Pope: and
therefore could not receive their Canonization from him. But thus they utter
their mind, that scripture is no otherwise the word of God, then as it is
approved, authorized, and Canonized by the Pope, which is in effect to bring
the holy ghost under the censure and approbation of a man, and such a man as
he. I omit, because I will not be tedious, a number of such sayings more,
wherein the holy scriptures of God are shamefully and intolerably dishonored
by these men in their writings and disputations: and yet to procure a little
envy to Luther, they accuse him with out all measure continually for calling
the epistle of Saint James a strawne epistle, not absolutely and in it self,
but only in respect of S. Peter and Paul's epistles. Thus much now have I
thought good (for satisfiing of the godly) to answer. If you will not be
satisfied, you may write again twice as much more: who can let you? this
matter requires no longer talk.

CHAP. 2.
Of the canonical Scriptures, and English Clergy.

FRom Saint James Epistle Master Rainolds proceeds to entreat of other
books, refused by the Church of England, which yet he says were not further
disprooued in times past, then that epistle of Saint James: whereupon he would
have his reader believe, that in alowing some books, and rejecting others, we
are led by opinion and fancy, not by learning, or divinity. Wherein, Master
Rainolds, your self have showed, that opinion, not learning, ruled you, when
you writ this. For Saint James epistle was never disprooued by the wholl Church
of God, but only by some of the Church: but those books that are refused by
us, were by the wholl Church distinguished from the canonical scriptures, and
had no greater credit, then they are of with us, as shall appear.

The reason therefore of our refusing them, is not, as you imagine, because
they contain some proof of your Romish Religion, which we cannot otherwise
avoid, but by denying the books to be of Canonical authority: but because
they do bewray themselves of what stamp they are by most evident marks: and
therefore have bin generally of the wholl Church heretofore set in the same
degree, that they are left by us. These Reasons you saw coming against you,
and because you durst not openly encounter with them, you steal by an other
way, and let them pass. But I must call you back a little, though it be to your
grief and trouble: and require of you a plain and direct answer, how those
books of the old testament, which are commonly called Apocryphal, written
first in Greek, or some other foreign language, can be Canonical? For all
books of holy scripture in the old Testament were written, and delivered to
the Church, by the holy prophets of God, being approved by certain
Testimonies to be indeed the Lords Prophets. Therefore Abraham answered the
rich man, Lue. 16.29.
requiring to send Lazarus to his fathers house, They have Moses and the
Prophets: whereby it is plain, that the wholl doctrine of the church then, was
contained in the books of Moses, and the other Prophets. 2. Pet. 1.19.
And Peter says: we have a more sure word of the Prophets, meaning the
scriptures of the old testament. And so the Apostle to the Hebrews writes
that God spoke to our fathers by the Prophets. Heb. 1.1.
By which testimonies of Scripture it is proved, that none could write books
to be received of the Church for the Canonical word of God, but only they
whom God had declared to be his Prophets. But the writers of those Apocriphal
books, were no Prophets, as may easily appear: For then they would not have
written their books in Greek, as is confessed most of these were, nor in any
other tongue, then that which was proper to the Church of God in that time, as
Moses and the Prophets after him, writers of the holy scriptures, had done.
The Church was then amongst the Jews, and the Prophets were the messengers,
and ministers of God in that Church, and unto it they delivered, and dedicated
their books. Wherefore the Greek tongue, being not the tongue of Canaan, nor
of the Church then, was not chosen by the Prophets to write, and set forth
therein the doctrine and Religion of the Lord: so that the very tongue wherein
these books were written being not the tongue of the Prophets, does plainly
convince them to be no prophetical, and therefore no canonical books of the
old Testament. And here I omit particular arguments, which might be brought
against every one of those books severally, whereby it may be proved
inuincibly, that though you entitle them with the name of Canonical scriptures,
yet they had not the spirit of God for their father.

Against this reason you bring Saint Augustines authority, De doct. Christ. l.
2. 8.
who reckons them amongst the Canonical books of scripture, and so you say
did the Catholic Church of that age. But that this is a most manifest
untruth, appears by S. Jerome, Praesa. in Pro. Solom.
who plainly writes that the Church reads those books, but receives them
not amongst the Canonical scriptures. So although Saint Augustine had thought
them to have been of equal authority with the writings of the Prophets, which
are called properly Canonical: yet was not this the common judgment of the
Church in those days, as Saint Jerome does let us understand, who lived in the
Church of that age. In what sense S. Augustine calls these books canonical.
Saint Augustine calls them indeed Canonical, by a general and improper
acception of that word: because they are red in the Church, and contain
profitable and Godly instruction: but yet not so, as though there were no
difference between them and the other which are undoubtedly Canonical. For
in that very place Saint Augustine opposes Canonical scriptures to such
books, as by perilous lies and fantasies might abuse the reader, Periculosis
mendacus and phantismatibus.
and bring prejudice to sound understanding. And then gives a rule to prefer
those books that are received of al Catholic Churches, before them, that some
Churches receive: and of those that are not received of all, to prefer those
that the most and of greatest authority do receive. whereby you may see the
vanity of that you said before, that the catholic church then judged them to
be canonical. And further if Saint Augustine himself had been of your
opinion, he would not have given this admonition to prefer some before some:
but would have straightly, and precisely charged, that no difference should be
made, but all received alike, being al of like authority. As for Daniel,
albeit some part of him be written in the Chaldey tongue, yet was it
understood of the Church, being then in captivity under the Babylonians: and
that tongue is but a diverse Dialect from the Hebrew, and differs littel from
it.

My second reason, Page 21.
you say, is of more force: and if I prove it, you promise to be of my
judgment. Let us then set down the reason first, and see the proofs
afterward. I said, between thosde books Apocryphes of the old Testament, and
Saint James epistle there was this difference, that they were refused of the
wholl Church, and so was not Saint James: wherefore we had reason to reiecte
them, and not this. By the wholl Church I meant, not only the primitive Church
of Christians, as you supposed, but the Church of the Jews before Christ,
which never allowed those books for Canonical, as your selves confess: which
is an invincible argument against them. For had they been Canonical, that
Church would not, nor ought not to have rejected them: and other Church there
was none then, to allow them. So by your judgment it must be thought that
diverse books of Canonical scripture were never received for many years in
any Church: which how absurd it is every man sees. The Apostle writes, that
unto the Jews were committed the oracles of God: Romans 3.2.
whereby is meant his word: But these books the Jews never received, and
therefore they are of another sort, then those that contain the oracles of
God. And that the Jews did not amiss, in rejecting them, it may be
understood in that they were never reproved by Christ or his Apostles for the
same. Their false expositions of scripture are often times noted, and their
errors confuted: but they are never found fault with, for refusing these
books of scripture, whereof if they had been guilty, they should not have
escaped reprehension. This argument you deal not with: but expound my words of
the primitive Church, whereas I spoke specially of the Church before Christ.
For though the Catholic Church never thought these books to be Canonical, as
that word is properly taken, yet it used in some places to read them, for
instruction of manners, Hieron. praef. in Solom.
not for confirmation of faith, as S. Jerome teaches: but the old Church of
the Jews never vouchsafed them so much honor as to read them publikelie. And
that the Catholic Church received not these books for Canonical, though it
read them, you have already heard the witness of Saint Jerome: who also in
another place writing expressly of the Canonical books, Hieron. in prologo
Galeats.
excludes these out of the Canon, and calls them Apochryphall. Hereunto
might I add many testimonies of Councels, and writers, both old, and new,
wherein appears what judgment the Catholic Church had of these books.

Gregory the great, who in your opinion was the head of the Catholic Church,
being Bishop of Rome, Writers old and new esteem those books for Apocryphal
and therefore one that by likelihood should not be ignorant of the Churches
judgment, calls the books of Macchabees not Canonical, yet set forth to
the edification of the Church. Greg. in Job. li. 19. cap. 16.
Thus for 600. years after Christ you see these books were not esteemed in
the catholic Church for Canonical: which also must be thought of the rest,
whereof we speak, seeing there is one and the same judgment of the^ all. And
that this judgment has ever since continually remained in the Church, is
proved by c. 49. in Graeco Veronensi.
Damascene, by De sacram in prol. li. 1. cap. 7.
Hugo S. victoris, by in Leu. li. 14. cap. 1.
Radulphus, by in prol. in li. Apocryp.
Lyrane, by in prol. Iosu.
Hugo Cardinalis, and many more, who plainly do affirm those books in the
old Testament, that the Church of England now accounts Apocryphal, to be
so, and not, as you would have them taken, canonical. Yea since your
Tridentine assembly Arias Montanus, a man of your own side, though not so
absurd, and corrupt in judgment, as most of you, in his Hebrew Bible
interlined, is not affrayd thus to write of the same books, and that not in a
corner, but in the very forefront, and principal leaf of the book. There are
added (says he) in this edition the books written in Greek, Bibilia Montani.
1584.
which the catholic Church, following the canon of the Hebrews, reckneth among
the Apochryphall. Thus it is evident, that these books have been, and are
refused by the catholic Church, and that our Church iudgeing them Apochrypall,
consents with the judgment of the catholic Church; and yours in receiving
them for canonical, have not herein a catholic judgment.

Now for Saint James epistle, where you demand how it may appear that it was
not refused by the wholl Church, I would know, whether you will say it was
indeed refused by the wholl Church, or no? if you will so say, then you shall,
as much discredit the authority thereof, S. James epistle was never rejected
by the wholl Church, but by some particular Churches only.
as ever Luther or any Protestant has done. For as the wholl Church never
received any book for canonical, but that which was truly Canonical: so
the wholl Church has never refused any as Apocryphal, but such as were indeed
Apocryphal. If then the wholl Church of Christ has refused Saint James
Epistle, it will necessarily follow, that S. James Epistle is not canonical.
But that the wholl Church ever refused it, is untrue, as maybe proved by the
testimonies of writers, and Histories of the Church. Euse. l. 2. c. 23.
Eusebius, that was the greatest adversary of it, and did most sharply
censure it, yet in the same place confesses, that both that and the rest were
received and published in most Churches. Wherefore when you say, (...).
that for this part you must credit me upon my word, herein you bewray either
great ignorance, or desire to quarrel. The difference then which I put
between the Apocryphal books of the old testament, and these books of the
new, that they were rejected by the Church wholly, these not so, is fully
proved: whereupon it follows that the Church of England had greater reason
to refuse them, then these, and was therein led by learning, and knowledge, not
by fancy and opinion, as you say. What learning, or what divinity is your
Church led by, first to esteem of these alike, then to allow for Canonical,
such books, as you confess, and can not deny to have been refused by the
wholl Church?

Where you say, my reasons make most against my self, page 23.
I know not how I could have written more plainly, and more consonantlie to
my self, then I have done. But some are so froward, that though it be beaten
into them with hammer, yet they will not seem to understand. I say Luther
followed the judgment of the ancient Church, in refusing Saint James Epistle.
what makes this against my self? Can you deny but some of the ancient
Churches refused it? Does not Eusebius prove it, when he says, it was
received in most Churches? Then it follows, not in all Churches. And would
Eusebius have called it a Bastard, if some Churches had not so accounted of it?
But what if some refused it? does it follow therefore that the wholl Church did
so? you may not think, M. Rainolds, to cast upon us such a miste, but that we
shall be hable to epsy your walking along. Saint James epistle was never
refused of all Churches generally, it was refused only by some: Luther in
refusing it agreed with the ancient Churches, not with all, but some, as many
as refused it. But the greater number of Churches received it, as Eusebius
witnesses, and our Church is led by Gods spirit, and true learning, to follow
them. But for the Apochryphall books of the old Testament, I have proved
sufficiently, and can further declare, if need require, that both the greatest
part of the Church, and the wholl Church has reproved them. As for that
Jerome says, The Church reads them, it makes little for their credit, S.
Jerome a great enemy to those apocryphal books.
seeing he adds immediately, it was, to edify the people, not to confirm the
authority of Ecclesiastical doctrine: and that though the Church read them,
yet it receives them not among the canonical scriptures: wherein he has
plainly cast them down from that height of authority and majesty, whereunto
you would so feign lift them up.

The Tower conference is here brought in to no purpose. Page 25.
Their scope was to show, that in the primitive Church, not only some
particular persons, but wholl congregations have doubted of many books of
Scripture, and yet notwithstanding lost not their dignite of true Churches of
Christ: and therefore that Luther doubting, or denying some of them, cannot for
that cause iustelie in any indifferent judgment be condemned, seeing
whatsoever they object against Luther in this behalf must light upon the
ancient Churches and fathers, that have thought herein, as Luther did.
Wherefore your conclusion that you set down in the end of this your idle, and
wandering talk, is only devised of your self, and not maintained by us. For
you father upon us, that we think we may refuse all such books, as of old
have been doubted of: page 28.
which is as far from our thinking, as heaven is from earth: and if any man
have ever uttered such a thing, as I think none has, it is his own private
conceit, not the approved and constant judgment of our Church. The books in
the old Testament, that we refuse, besides that they carry in their foreheades
evident notes of Apochryphall writings, have not only been doubted of, but
clean cast away by the Church of God, as has been proved: all the books in
the new Testament do we wholly admit as canonical, not refusing any parcel
or word thereof, because we acknowledge in them the spirit of God, and see no
reason to move us otherwise. For though they have been doubted of in former
times, yet it was upon no certain ground, and by few, in comparison of those
that received them, undoubtedly. Page 29.
Thus in a word the neck is broken of al your notes that follow, where in you
labor to say as little in many words, as possibly may be said. That we
rent from the body of the Scriptures in the old Testament, Toby, Judith,
Hester, Baruch, Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus, Maccabees, the prayer of Manasses, the
song of the three children, the story of Bell, herein we do the canonical
Scriptures no injury, dividing from them such books as are not of that
absolute authority, that they which are in truth canonical, may remain
entire, and wholl together: no more then the shepherd does injury to the
sheep, in sorting the goats and other cattle from them.

But which of our brethren are they, that join to these the two books of
Cronicles, and the song of Solomon? If you can name any such in these days, it
will soon appear they are not brethren of ours. You will not (I suppose)
charge us therewith, and yet perhaps you will have men suspect us as guilty
thereof. But your boldness is intolerable, that knowing both the common
consent, and practice of our Church, do notwithstanding both labor to cast
wrong fully upon us some suspicion for refusing these, and furthermore also
plainly and most falsllie avouch, that we deny sundry books of the new
Testament, setting down in a row Saint Lukes Gospel, M. Rainold accufeth us
for denying some Canonical books of the old Testament, and diverse of the new,
which all the world knows to be a great slander.
the epistle to the Hebrews, the epistle of Saint James, the second of Peter,
the second and third of Saint Iobn, Saint Jude, the Apocalypse, a part of Saint
John's Gospel. What meant you, Master Rainold, thus to say, and thus impudentlie
to lie? Are you gone to Rheames, and have you left all conscience behind you?
Care you not to publish in printe to the world so great, so many, so manifest
untruths? before you use to make your sacrifice at Mass, do you not use to
confess your lies, as sins, and yet will you print your lies, without
repentance? Of these our Church denies nor one, doubts not of one. If you
mean some Protestants in Germany, whatsoever they think of Saint James, S.
Jude, the second of Saint Peter, the second and third of S. John, yet the
epistle to the Hebrews, and the Apocalypse of Saint John they do receive as
canonical. Saint Lukes gospel came never yet in doubt or question amongst us,
and I muse what the occasion should be of this your so foul untruth. If
because in the Tower conference of the fourth day one said, that the Laodicean
Council omitteth S. Lukes gospel, it is too frivolous, seeing that was a slip
of memory or oversight in him. And though the Council had so done, as it has
not, yet how follows it that we therefore do so?

Judith, Macchabees, the counterfaite Hester, (for the right Hester we embrace)
is proved already false: and that our own doctors refuse it, is an other
untruth. For were it, as you say, of that conference, yet is it but one
single man's sentence, and that by way of arguing.

Been habet, It is well, pa. 30.
but so simply and fondly, that every one may see you are a trifler. It is
well, I said, that Campian could not charge Luther, for denying a book, which
never any Church denied, but for denying such a one, as had been heretofore
by some Churches denied. And although I seek not herein to defend either
Luther, or those ancient Churches that refused the same, yet is Luthers
offense not so heinous, as it should have been, if this had first proceeded of
himself, without example of other Churches. If you will burden us with
refusal of S. Luke his Gospel, the known truth will easily acquit us of
that accusation. But nothing can be so falsely surmized, that you will not
find in your hearts to burden us withal. As for Atheism, I doubt not but
your own conscience does tell you, our doctrine is far from it: which when
you forsook, I will not say, how near you approached to Atheism, in yealding
to the strawne opinions at Rome, but I am assured, you went from Christ, to
follow Antichrist: and of a minister of the Gospel, became an open enemy of
the Gospel. If you repent not, it had bin better for you never to have been
borne.

page 13.32.
as you and your companions shall not be hable to heal his wound. And though
he live still, and breath, yet is he scarce hable to stand on his feet, and
carries upon him that mark, that shall daily more and more discover him to
the Saints of God. Aerius, Vigilantius, Iouinianus, if they taught any thing
against the truth of Gods word, let them be esteemed as they deserve. We lay
the grounds of our religion, not upon the writings or opinions of men, be they
good, or badde, learned, or unlearned, Catholics, or Heretics, but upon the
written word of the eternal God: and therefore we pray not, as you do, nor
offer sacrifice for the dead, we worship not, nor invoke Saints, we think
the honorable estate of marriage is pleasing to the Lord as well as single
life. For thus have the Prophets, the Apostles, the Lord himself taught us:
As for Marcion, Cerdon, the rest, we abhor them with all their damnable
herisies, because the word of God condemns them: the more is your fault, in
saying they are our fathers. But you have drawn since your departure so hard a
skin over your conscience, Foul untruths affirmed of us by M. R.
as you fear not to utter any untruth be it never so desperate. You say we
match S. Luke and the Apocalypse with the book of Judith, and that we say
most plainly we are not bound to admit those, and all the forenamed books,
but may refuse them: which for shame of the world you would never have written,
but that like an Atheist your pen is a ready instrument to publish any
untruth. The book of Judith in deed admit we not: and that is no blasphemy:
prove it if you can. But what should I require you M. Rainolds, to prove any
thing, that have taken upon you to say al things, and prove nothing?

Page 33.34.
that we are like those old brutish heretics, called Alogi, who denied the
Apocalypse of Saint John, because we say, we know as certainly the scriptures
to be scriptures, and every book thereof, as we know the sun, to be the
sun, which is as contrary to those Alogi, as the light is to darkness. But
who ever doubted of the sun, you say, that it is the sun? of Saint James
epistle Luther doubts, and the Lutherans: wherefore you say, I condemn them
for the veriest sottes that ever lived. Not so, Master Rainolds, if you could
see. For though we are as fully persuaded of the one, as of the other: yet
does it not follow that the clearnes of this truth appears alike unto all, We
must be persuaded and assurede of many things that are not seen, no less,
then of those things that we see with our eyes.
but to such only as it is reueiled unto. Know you not as undoubtedly there
is a God, as you know there is a sun? If not to you, yet to all Godly, the
knowledge of the one is no less certain then of the other, though we cannot
behold god with our eyes, as we may seethe sun? Will you then conclude, that
al are stocks and stones, which cannot perceive this so clear, and evident a
truth? Do not your selves think all those books, for which you contend with
us, to be as truly canonical, as that the sun shines? you will not, I am
sure say otherwise. Do you then besides an infinite number of ancient
writers, condemn those of your side, for stocks, and sottes, that denied
them? To omit the rest, of whom I spoke before, Sixth. biblioth. lib. l. Driedo
de Catal. serip. li. 1. c. 4. ad difficult. 11.
was Sixtus Senensis a sotte, for denying your books of Hester? was Dryedo a
sotte, for denying Baruch? Thus must it be, or else, your argument is too
childish, I will not say sottish.

Traditions, such a one as M. R. divinity could afford. Page 35.
It cannot, he says, be proved by scriptures that S. Mat. S. Mark, S. Luke,
S. John his gospel, and S. Paul's Ep. are Canonical scripture, that is, penned
by divine inspiration: then we must believe some what, which by scripture
cannot be proved, and so tradition is established. I would your other
traditions were of this sort, then should we sooner agree. But between this,
and the rest of your infinite traditions, there is no likeness. For this is
grounded upon the word written: the rest have no footing on that ground.
Although it is not expreslie set down in thus many words, S. Matthewes gospel
is Canonical, How we know the gospel of S. Matthew, S. Mark. etc. to be
canonical scriptures.
and so likewise of the rest, yet that we cannot otherwise come to the certain
knowledge and belief thereof, but by report, is a vain, and foolish
fantasy. For the history it self and doctrine therein contained, do
plainly show and convince the book to be Canonical, that is, written by
divine inspiration: so as although the Churches commendation and testimony of
it may confirm our judgment in believing the same, yet our faith is builded
upon the written word it self. And so your other argument falls of faith by
hearing, and hearing by the word of God. Romans 10.17.
For when we hear the doctrine of these books preached unto us, we believe
the same in every point: whereof it must needs follow, that the books are
Canonical, containing so heavenly and spiritual doctrine, as the like can
not be written of any, but the spirit of God only: so being enforced to
allow, and embrace by faith the doctrine of those books, how can we but
acknowledge the books themselves to be canonical? wherefore in that you say,
we find not this word in the scriptures, unless you think no word is found in
them, but such as is set down in express terms, you are abused. For this
word is found in them by necessary collection, and so be not your vain
unwritten Traditions, and therefore are neither part nor parcel of Gods divine
word.

But here is by the way to be noted, how this man seeking to disprooue my
comparison of the sun, page 36.
has suddenly overthrown the principal stay of their religion, which is
the visiblenes of the Church. That which is known by sense, says he, is no
article of faith: for these two are directly opposite. Then the Church is not
known by sense: and so visiblenes is not a mark of the Church. For if it be,
then is it not an article of faith, to believe the Church. Thus sometime you
can reason well, but then it is against your self. The similitude was brought
not to match our belief of scripture with knowledge of the sun, that as we
know the one by sense, so the other: but that we have certain and undoubted
belief of the canonical scriptures by themselves, as we know the sun by it
self. Your belief in deed of the books of scripture is natural, and to use
your own example, such, as when you believe Tusculans Questions to be written
by Tullie. For as you are led thus to believe of this book because it has
been so accounted in all times by constant tradition ever since: so likewise
you have no better reason to discern the canonical scriptures from other
books, but only this common received opinion of the Church, which you call
Tradition. We have this as well as you, and we have also an other, better and
surer then this, which you have not: yea, which you blasphemously deride, the
testimony of the spirit, whereby the authority of the scriptures is sealed in
our hearts and we are thoroughly induced to receive them, as the most blessed
Testament, and truth of God. For example, that there is a God, who created
heaven and earth, both the Scriptures teach, and the creatures themselves
confirm, so as no man ought to stand in doubt thereof, Yet notwithstanding
this persuasion cannot be faithfully settled and rooted in man's heart, unless
it be approved, and as it were sealed unto us by the holy Ghost: without the
confirmation whereof, great doubtfulnes and distrust will arise in our minds
continually, through the great corruption of our nature. Even so that these
scriptures are in truth the very word of God, not only them selves do
prove by their subject matter, and argument, but also the testimony and
judgment of the Church, which ever so esteemed them, may inuinciblie argue the
same. And yet for all this that we faithfully receive them, and submit our
selves unto them, as to the word of God, without wandering or suspicion, Gods
holy spirit must inwardly persuade our hearts, that this indeed is his
word, and therefore of us by all means to be embraced, and believed. Thus it
appears how false it is, that you have noted in your margent, that the
Protestants refusing the Church, believed not the scriptures. We refuse not the
Church, but we know the Scriptures of God have greater credit and assurance,
then the only approbation of the Church.

Augustine, the Council of Carthage, or any other, page 38.39.
both in what sense those books of the old Testament are called canonical by
them, also how the other of the new Testament were refused, or received in
times past. You shall never be able to prove that you set down in your
margent, wherein the sum of your wholl speech is briefly comprised, that S.
James epistle, and the epistle to the Hebrews, have been as much doubted of,
as the books of the old Apochryphall Testament, which the Protestans reject.
The most you can allege is, that some Churches have doubted of those epistles
but I have before showed, that the wholl Church rejected these of the old
Testament. This was mine answer to M. Martines demand: this is mine answer
still, which you cannot with all your endeavor take away. Something you write
for a color and fashion, but you come always behind with your reckning.

It offends you that I said, we have seen, we have confuted, we have trodden
under foot all the arguments of the Papists, and whatsoever they could say.
Unless you have some new harvest growing, which yet has not been reaped, I
might truly say, as I said: for you have uttered all your store, such as it
was, and we have seen, and confuted it long ago, and that by the written word
of god, against which, no tradition, no religion, though never so ancient, so
universal, so glorious, may prejudice any thing. What reasons moved you to
depart from us, and become a feedes-man of the Pope, I leave to the Lord, and
your own conscience: for any thing that I could ever see (and I have labored
to see the truth, and what could be said against it, by the best of your
side) I do with all my heart rejoice in the cause which we maintain against
you, and I think it to be the iustest, and honorablest defense, that ever was
undertaken. What you have learned since you went, and how substantiallie you
confute my brag, as you call it, shall hereafter further appear, as it has
in part already done.

CHAP. 3.
Of Luther preferring his private judgment before all ancient fathers.

HEre again is repeated an other quarrel about Luther to no purpose in the
world, but only to discredit him a little with the simple sort. For our
adversaries are so wasted and spent for good reasons, that whatsoever they
light upon, though never so unfit to frame good arguments of, they handle it
with great earnestnes, like seely fletchers, that having no store of steles
left in their shop, are saine to make their blots of every crooked stick.
What makes it againest the truth of our reliligion, if Luther preferred his
own judgment before the fathers? is our doctrine therefore false, and yours
true, either in wholl, or in part? Others desire to reap great profit of a
little labor: but you are content to take a great deal of pain, for no
commodity at al. I would not herin vouchsafe you an answer, but that I have
respect to the readers weakness, who by such slanders may be abused. Your
title shows plainly there is in this Chapter no truth to be looked for at
your hands: page 42.
you say Luther preferred his private judgment before all ancient fathers and
Doctors: wherein you would have men think, he was immeasurable arrogant, and
wilful. But Luthers spirit was far from this insolent, and immoderate
presumption, as may by his own words appear, which you have noted.

For he says not, that he more sets by his own private judgment, then he
does by all the fathers, and Doctors, as you report, Luth. cont. Regem. Angl.
fol. 342. vnius maiestatis aeter nae verbum, Euangelium. Dei verbu^ est super
omnia, etc.
but that he sets against the sayings of fathers, of men, of Angels, of
Devils, the word of the only eternal majesty, the Gospel. And again
immediately he says. The word of God is above all, the majesty of God makes
with me, that I care not though a thousand Augustines and Cyprians stood
against me. Gods word is of more authority, then all men, or Angels.
Is this to set his private judgment against all the fathers? is this pride?
is this presumption? must Gods word, and majesty, and Gospel, yeald to the
judgment of fathers, be they never so many? This forsooth is your modesty,
that though the Lord has spoken it, yet if the fathers say any thing against
it, you will not prefere your judgment, grounded on the scriptures, before the
ancient fathers. Accursed be such modesty, that does so great injury, and
dishonor unto god. This civility toward men, is treason, and blasphemy
toward the lord. Remember what Elihu says. Job. 32. v. 21.22.
I will not now accept the person of man, neither will I give titles to man. For
I may not give titles, lest my maker should take me away suddenly. If this
affection was in Luther, as it was, what fault can you find therein?

You ask of me the reason, why I so busily defend Luther. I ask of you the
reason, why you so continually accuse Luther. If you seek for some reasons to
accuse him, I cannot want better reasons to defend him, your accusations being
so untrue. That you say, we advance him into the place of Christ, or at least
among his Apostles, belike you imagine that Luther is to us as your Pope is to
you, whom you more esteem, and honor, then Christ, and all his Apostles.
For say they what they will, their saying has little force or authority, if
it like not your holy father: but his saying must prevail, whatsoever they
say to the contrary. You think it good reason I should give over all defense
of Luther, seeing he bare extreme hatred, as you say, against the
Sacramentaries: and here you bring in much to that purpose, which yet you know
is not the matter you took in hand. But it is always the property of such
discreet, and worthy writers, whatsoever they find, though from the cause, to
hale it in by some means in one place, or other. I answer in a word, Luther
dissented bitterly from Zuinglius, and O Ecolampadius, in the matter of the
sacrament, as it falls out often times, that sharp contentions may arise
amongst Godly and learned men: yet it is no cause, why we should not answer
in Luthers behalf, when he is wrongfullie charged by you. Therefore you come
to scanne my defense of Luther particularly, page 48.
and find your self occupied in devising diverse senses of Luthers words, and
then disputing against them. First, if all the fathers teach one thing, and
bring scriptures for them, and Luther the contrary, and bring scriptures for
him: whether in this case Luther may prefer his judgment before all the
fathers? This is not the case. M. R. that Luther meant: you must therefore
proceade further yet in your suppose. Next then you put case, If a thousand
Augustines, and Churches teach some doctrine, citing no text for it, and
Luther bring some text of scripture after his sense, against the same: the
matter is not in citing textes, but in delivering the doctrine, that is
approved by the text. Then leave your childish trifling, and take Luther as he
meant. If Augustine, or Cyprian, or any other father maintain any thing
against Gods word, Luther, or any other minister of Christ, may in such case
prefer his judgment, warranted by the word of God, before theirs. If you
deny this, you are not worthy to be called a Christian: and yet closely you
do deny it, in that you reprove Luther, and condemn him for saying the
same. And where you say, I can bring no instance that ever the ancient
fathers did so, have you forgotten what fell out in the Council of Nice,
Socrat. l. 1. c. 11.
when the fathers agreeing to dissolve the marriage of ministers, were
withstood by Paphnutius, One man maintaining the truth of Gods word may
lawfully dissent from others, although never so many. August. cont. petil. l.
3. c. 6.
and yealded in the end? Here one Paphnutius judgment was preferred before all the other three hundred fathers. And so often times the judgment of many has
been corrected by one. S. Aug. says, whether of Christ, or of his Church, or
of any other thing, that appertains to our faith, and life, I will not say
we, not to be compared to him that said, though we, but as he added: If an
Angel from heaven shall preach any thing besides that ye have received in the
legal and Evangelical scriptures, let him be accursed. If we may accurse
them, how many, and whosoever they be, that teach contrary to the Prophetical,
and Apostolical scriptures, then may we prefer our judgment in such cases
before them. Saint Augustines words you see, are very sharp, but he learned
thus to speak of the Apostle him self. August. epi. 19.
In an other place Saint Augustine says; For all these (fathers) yea above all
these, the Apostle Paul offers himself: I flee to him, I appeal to him from
all writers, that think otherwise. This was S. Augustine bold to write, even
to S. Jerome, and feared not any suspicion either of arrogancy or heresy for
the same: such accoumpte then must be made of the truth, that we must stand
with it against all the world, and not for reverence of men's persons give it
over, or betraie it, or be afraid to defend it. If this be so, as you will not,
I am sure, for shame or fear deny openly, then have you nothing to burden
Luther in this behalf.

When you say, Though the fathers in the Counsels of Nice, Ephesus, Chalcedon,
had alleged no direct and evident place against Arius, Nestorius, Eutyches,
yet the Christian people were bound to believe them, grounding them selves
only upon the catholic and universal faith of the Churches before them, it
is boldly, and bluntly spoken. These godly and catholic fathers assembled in
Council against those heritikes, confuted them by the authority of Gods word,
and as it were cut the throat of their heresies, with the sword of the spirit.
This was only the weapon then used, and with this they prevailed, The
councels and fathers confuted all Heretics by the scriptures.
as likewise have all other godly councels ever done against all heretics, and
enemies of the truth. For in Religion there is no truth, but grounded upon
scriptures: no error or heresy, but repugnant to scriptures: no heretics,
but refuted by scriptures. They dealt not against the heretics, as you
imagine, omitting scriptures, and grounding upon the faith of Churches: but
they proved their faith to be grounded upon the scriptures. So Cyprian, a
wise and Catholic Bishop writes, that in controversies of Religion, we must
have recourse to the origin of truth, Cypria. de unit. Eccles. and in Epist.
ad Pompei.
whereby he means the scriptures, and that the cause of heresy is. for that
the head is not sought: which he declares, further adding, that the doctrine
of the heavenly Master is not kept. And therefore, if those fathers had
objected nothing, but the common belief of the Churches, against those
heretics, they had taken a wrong course, and should never thus have stopped
their mouths. But they had a surer way to convince heretics, then you have:
who being of all heretics the greatest, would take away all means of
confuting heretics, that so your selves might not be espied, or not controlled.

As for Heluidius, Ambrose. Epist. 81. and 79. Hieron. cont. Heluid.
who denied the blessed virgin to have remained a virgin afterward, the
fathers Jerome and Ambrose, alleged against him not tradition only, but the
scriptures especially: although what Saint Basil has written of this wholl
matter, you may read in his sermon of the Nativity, wherein he is not
affraied plainly to affirm, that after she had borne our savior Christ,
Basil. de Christi ^tiuit.
whither she married again, or remained a virgin still, belongs longs
nothing to the mystery of faith.

Again you imagine a third sense of Luthers words, Page 51.
by supposing a thing impossible, that if all Churches and fathers teach
against Scripture, and Luther with Scripture, then Luther may think himself
a better man then they al. What Luthers meaning was, you have heard, and
therefore it skilleth not what you suppose further. Indeed M. R. as you say,
the Church falls not from Christ to Apostasy: but this is true as well of
the Church in the old Testament, as in the new. yet as the visible Churches
of the Jews fell away from God, and became open enemies unto our savior
Christ: so it might come to pass since Christ, that the particular Churches
and congregations did corrupt the doctrine of the Gosepll, and slid into that
Apostasy, which the Scriptures foresaid should ouerspread the Churches
afterward. 1. Tim. 4.1. 2. These. 2.3.
But the Catholic Church, which is the number of Gods elect, can no more fall
away from Christ into Apostasy, then the course of heaven can be changed.
For it stands upon Christ the rock: and hell gates shall not be hable to
cast it down.

Here again you come in with Luthers opinion of the sacrament, page 52.
wherein as he dissented from us and the truth very much, so your popish
Transsubstantiation, then which was never a more impious, and absurd heresy
maintained in the Church, he utterly abhorred. And what though herein Luther
something swarued from the truth? might he not therefore, being in other causes
assured thereof out of the word of God, reject the opinions of such as
dissented from the same? By this reason no man in defense of Gods truth may
challenge, or bid defiance to the adversaries thereof, seeing they have no
privilege or Charter granted to them, but that them selves may also be
deceived. Luther was an excellent man, and a worthy seruante of Christ, whose
Ministry especially it pleased the Lord to use, in revealing to these times
that son of perdition, who sits in the Temple of God, and aduaunceth him
self above God yet was Luther a man, and therefore no marvel if he were not
exempted altogether from ignorance, and infirmity. And what miserable
perverseness is it in you, that being not able to maintain your own heresies
against Luther, will think to escape in the judgment of men, from being
condemned, because Luther him self in one point of doctrine erred? May no
man convince error, but such a one, as is free from erring at all him self?
the scriptures are left unto us, to be our rule of truth: by them must all
doctrine be squared, and directed, they sit in the hiest seat of indgement to
give sentence in every cause. With them did Luther cut down your errors: of
them have we learned to think of the sacrament otherwise then Luther did: to
them do we submit our selves in every thing we teach, and are contented that
our wholl Religion be tried by them: so that if you, or any other can show
wherein we disagree from them, we are ready, and willing to be reformed. But
one error of Luther cannot serve to excuse infinite errors in the popish
Church. Thus have you my answer, as plainly as I could devise, in this
matter: which though you have handled at large, as became a man of your
learning, leisure, and discretion, yet in the end, you cast it away from you
as not worthy to have any time bestowed about it. Now therefore I trust herafter
you will be better occupied.

CHAPTER. 4.
Of Priesthod, and of the sacrifice continued after Christ.

SEeing you will needs be called and accounted Priests, and that in the proper
sense, page 56.
and signification of this word, I require no pardon at your hands for terming
you, as I did. For if Christ be the only Priest of the new Testament, and his
sacrifice never to be repeated, as we are plainly taught by the word of God;
what Priests can you be, but Baalites, and what sacrificers, but Antichristian?
show your order, your Author, your institution: otherwise we must esteem and
speak of you, Heb. 5.4. The Popish priest hoode was not ordainied by Christ
but is contrary to the Priesthood of Christ, and therefore worthy to be
contemned and detested of al faithful Christians.
as such a generation deserves. It is not lawful for any to take honor to
himself, but he that is called of God, as Aaron: If you can prove that God
has called you, it is meet you be received, and reverenced, as the ordinance
of God in all functions deserves: but this can you never do, and therefore
both your name, and your profession is of all the godly to be detested, as a
venomous plant, never planted by the heavenly father. Mat. 15.13.
Two ways you have chosen, by which you will prove your selves lawful
priests: principally, you say, by mine own words, secondarily by deduction out
of the scriptures. Let us consider of both these arguments in order, and so it
shall appear in the end, that your Priesthood was hatched of an ill egg. page
57.


And here you declare evidently to the world in the very begininng your
pitiful ignorance, M. R. affirms that we deny Melchisedech to have been a
Priest: how untruely all the world ca^ witness. Genesis 14.18. Psalm. 110.4. Heb.
7.1.
not knowing against whom you fight. For was it ever of us doubted, that
Melchisedech was a Priest, and offered sacrifice? does not the scripture teach
the same most expreslie, and that in many places? yet you say, you could
never obtain so much of our brethren: which argues that God has smitten you
with marvelous senslesnes, and as it were suddenly bereaved you of your
understanding. Thought you any so simple as to believe you, that we deny
Melchis. to have been a Priest, and to have done the office of a Priest, which
consists principally in making outward sacrifice? Bestowed you so litlte time
in reading the writings of those you call our brethren, that you know not what
their judgment was herein? or could you find in your heart at adventure thus
to report of our brethren in a matter whereof you were ignorant what they
taught? Take heed Master Rainolds, you may abuse the ignorance of some, but
God will be revenged of you for your untruth. As for your reason, that if
Melchisedech sacrificed, that was in bread and wine, because there is no
mention made in the scripture of any other sacrifice, I marvel you see not
the loosenes of this conclusion. M. Rainolds thinks Melchisedech could not
make sacrifice, unless it were when he met Abraham with bread and wine.
For how is the head and body of this argument joined together? Melchisedech
was a Priest, therefore he sacrifided in bread and wine. Of sacrificing in
bread and wine, there is no word in the scripture, which only records, that
Melchisedech brought forth bread and wine; whereby is noted that Melchisedech
presented Abraham with victuales, Genesis 14.18.
when he returned from pursuit and slaughter of the kings: which is so clear
in the text, that it is confessed by your own Champion Andradius. Is this then
an excellent proof that Melchisedech sacrificed in bread and wine, Andrad.
Defens. Council. Trident. lbi. 4.
because he relieved Abraham and his servants with bread and wine? And that
seeing the Hebrew word which the holy ghost used, never signifies to
sacrifice, in any one place of the scripture, but only to bring forth, as all
men know that have but a little taste in the Hebrew tongue. Hetsi in the Hebrew,
(...) in the Greek, and proferens in the latin Vulgar edition it self.
But if he sacrificed not thus, then says M. Rainolds, his sacrifice is not
mentioned in scripture. And what if the scripture has not particularly set
down what sacrifice Melchisedech offered? was it not sufficient to declare
that he was a Priest, unless it were also added, what manner of sacrifice he
offered? will you not believe the scriptures testifying that Melchisedech was a
Priest, unless you understand what sacrifice he made? How many Priests does
the scripture speak of, and yet omitteth their kind and manner of sacrifice?
Can you then reason, they were no Priests, because it is not expresslie noted,
in what things they offered their sacrifice?

Furthermore, was not Melchisedech a King also? and yet we read not any where
in scriptures what Kingly duties were performed by him, unless you will
acknowledge this to be a token of his royal dignity, that he relieved Abraham
and his men with provision: which though it be no proper mark of a King,
seeing it may be done by others also that be no kings, yet does it rather show
unto us a Kingly estate in him (as it is alleged by learned men) then a
priestly. For to bring forth bread and wine, that is, meat and drink for the
sustenance of a multitude, must rather be thought a princely magnificence,
then a priestly sacrifice. Seeing then it is as necessary for us to believe
that Melchisedech was a King, as that he was a priest, because he was a figure
of Christ, not only concerning his preisthoode, but also his Kingdom: M. R.
argument proves Melch. to be no king
then must you as well note unto us what princely act of his the scripture
reports, as you demand of us what sacrifice he offered. For if this
proves not he was a King, then to use your own words, there is no syllable
in the scriptures of any kingly deed, that ever he did: and so by your
profound and invincible reason, as you call it, we must be forced contrary to
plain scriptures to deny he was a king. For that he was a priest, besides he
is so called in the scriptures, may also further appear unto us by his doings,
in that he blessed Ahraham, which duty belonged to the priest, as well as to
offer sacrifice. Thus your goodly argument, whereof you bragg so much, if it
be of such invincible force, as you pretend, though it may put a sacrifice in
Melchisedechs hand, yet it takes the kingly crown from his head. Wherefore
you see, if you can see any thing, that your proof whereupon you lean, will
not one lie fail you, if you press it too much, but also break in pieces,
and hurt your selves.

You see therefore how little cause you had to charge my fellows and masters,
page 58.59.
as you name them, with stubbernnesse, who never denied, nor doubted, but that
Melchisedech was a very priest, and executed the office of a priest, which
chiefly consists in sacrifice and oblation, as the Apostle teaches. Heb.
5.1.
Then your fellows and masters must needs be stubbernly set in maintenance of
falshoode, if they either taught you thus to write, or will commend you for
writing thus beyond all compass of modesty and truth. But now, as though
Melchisedechs sacrifice could have been no other, save that which you dream
of, you gather of my acknowledgeing him to have offered sacrifice, that
therefore he did it in bread and wine: which is an absurd, and senseless kind
of gathering, meet for such a petty proctor of the Popes sacrifice, as Master
Rainolds is. The scriptures testify that Melchisedech was a priest, and this
both I, and all my fellows and masters ever confessed. That the sacrifice
which Melchisedech offered, was bread and wine, the scriptures no where give us
to understand, and therefore we believe it not, and you can never prove it.
You allege the testimony of Moses thus: Melchisedech rex Salem, Genesis 14.
proferens panem and vinum (erat enim sacerdos Dei altissimi) benedixit ei.
Melchisedech king of Salem, bringing forth bread and wine (for he was a Priest
of the most high god) blessed him, that is, Abraham, you must have a divine
power of working miracles before you can prove hereof that Melchisedech
offered bread and wine in sacrifice, Melchisedech brought forth bread and wine:
(...) he offered sacrifice in bread and wine. Upon such loose arguments hange^h
the popish Priesthod and sacrifice.
seeing your own translation says no more, but that he brought forth bread
and wine: and that was, as I showed before, for an other purpose, then to offer
sacrifice: unless with the same mouth, wherewith you said even now, that we
deny Melchisedech to have made sacrifice, you will also further say, that to
bring forth bread and wine is to offer sacrifice: whereas no man sees not,
that this may be done many ways, and for many other uses, then for this of
sacrifice. Wherefoe your reason, Melchisedech brought forth bread and wine, is
not of the same length with your conclusion, that therefore he offered
sacrifice in bread and wine.

But that you say is a reason of his priesthood, which I deny, and it is the
thing in controversy: and should by you have been proved, not barely
affirmed. For though as you report the words of Moses, it may seem that the
reason of Melchisedechs bringing forth bread and wine was, for that he was the
Lords priest, yet Moses in in his own language says not so, but thus, And he
was a priest of the most high God, as it is also translated by Pagnine, and
Vatablus, and Arias Montanus, according to the original verity. And though
sometime it may so be taken, yet how can you prove that so it must of
necessity here be taken? And if it be, your sacrifice for all that will not
here of follow, as you may learn by Andradius your greatest Doctor, Li. 4.
Defen. Trid.
who makes that a reason why Melchisedech, being a Cananean, and joined
perhaps in blood or friendship with some of the Kings that Abraham slew,
notwithstanding was so far of from seeking to be revenged of Abraham, that he
met him friendly and presented him with gifts, because the bonds of country and
kindred are not so strong, as of godliness and religion. popish arguments
confuted and rejected by papists them selves.
So the reason is not as you imagine, He offered sacrifice in bread and wine,
therefore he was a Priest: but by Andradius judgment, he was the Lords
Priest, and therefore he refreshed Abraham a true worshipper of the Lord.

But what if all this were granted without resistance, that Melchisedech
offered a sacrifice in bread and wine? it must be cast in a strange mould,
before the sacrifice of your Mass can any ways be framed hereof. For first
this sacrifice might be a figure of Christ's body and blood, represented and
offered unto us in bread and wine with out any such unholy sacrifice as is
imagined in your Mass. And so did the ancient fathers mean, when they
applied this history of Melchisedech to the sacrament of Christ's supper. How
the fathers apply Melchisedechs fact to the sacrament of Christ's supper.
Wherefore when you have dug as deep as you will yet shall you not find the
mine or spring of your sacrifice here. Again, what resemblance is there
between Melchisedechs bread and wine, and your Mass, wherein you teach is
neither bread nor wine remaining at all? That you bring out of Musculus and
Calvin, concerning referring those words (and he was a Priest) to that which
follows, and he blessed him, you are not hable to confute, and therefore you
do well, and wisely to note it, but show no reason against it: and so likewise
you set before your reader an other place of Calvin, wherein he writes that
their opinion is confuted, who seake out the chief resemblance between Christ
and Melchisedech in offering of bread and wine, seeing the Apostle who stands
upon other points not so notable, and principal, as that, speaks not so
much as once thereof. This was to hott for you to bear, and therefore you let it
fall to the ground, covering it with the naked names of Hierome, and Gregory
Nazianzene. Out of Caluins words by you repeted, you will the reader to note
two things, Page 62.
which being noted never so much, make nothing for your profit. The first is,
that Calvin, and the Caluinistes (as it pleases you to speak) find nothing
wherein Melchisedech sacrificed, and so by sacrificing prefigured the sacrifice
and Priesthood of Christ: whereunto I have already answered, and further add
now, that we find in Melchisedech as much as the Apostle has found, We
expound and understand the fig^re of Melc. in such sort as the Apostle has
taught us
and the Apostle has found as much as truly can be found: unless you will say
the holy ghost was grossly and foully ouerseene in omitting the chiefest thing,
wherein Melchisedech represented our savior Christ. We think it no shame to
find no more then the clear light, and wisdom of Gods spirit could find,
wherewith the Apostle, examining and searching thoroughly the wholl history of
Melchisedech, has not given the least inkling of your surmised sacrifice. He
shows diverse properties in which Melchisedech was a figure of Christ,
comparing not any sacrifice of Melchisedech with the sacrifice made by Christ,
but the person of Melchisedech with the person of Christ. So you have found
such a property betwenee them two, as he never saw, and therefore must needs
account your selves wiser then he, which we by your leaves cannot acknowledge,
and therefore refuse your invention.

The second is, that the ancient fathers acknowledge Melchisedech to have
sacrificed in bread and wine, and so to have foreshewed Christ's sacrificing in
like manner. What is to be answered to the fathers comparing Melchisedeches
bread and wine to the Lords supper
To this an easy answer may serve. First, that whatsoever the fathers teach
without warrant of Gods word, must be judged no better then stubble and straw,
which has no use in the building up of gods spiritual Temple, but serves
only to be burnt. Secondly, that the fathers, not one of them all, apply
this of Melchisedech, to the Popish mass, which was not hatched in the days
of the ancient fathers, but is a latter bird of Antichrists brood. Thirdly,
that none of the ancient fathers do prove by this any real sacrifice of the
Church, wherein Christ is to be offered continually, as the Papists do most
wickedlie and horribly maintain. Lastly the fathers only meant to commend
the excellency of the Lords supper, which Christ instituted in bread and wine,
by this fact of Melchisedech, that brought forth bread and wine, as it were in
these signs shadowing and figuring Christ unto us, who long after appointed
the same to be sacraments of his body and blood. This was the cause why they so
often allege this example of Melchisedech, as you may perceive by Cyprian, who
says. In sacerdote Melchisedech sacrifice, Dominici sacramentum praefiguratum
videmus: that is, Cypr. ep. 63.
In Melchisedech the Priest we see the sacrament of the Lords sacrifice
prefigured. Thus Cyprian writes in the same epistle, that you allege here, by
whose words you may learn to what purpose the fathers applied that of
Melchisedech, far otherwise then you do. And in that Cyprian calls bread
and wine his body and blood, therein is no difficulty, meaning sacraments of
his body and blood. As for the new oblation that Irenaeus speaks of, Iren.
li. 4. c. 32.
it is the prayers and alms of the faithful, which they offer unto God in the
celebration of the Lords supper: which is so far from your sacrifice, that you
may as soon make the north and south pole meet together, as this testimony
of Irenaeus with your idol of the Mass.

In that you bear your reader in hand, I have dissented from Calvin, and the
Protestants, that argues a weakness of your brain, which causes you to utter
such idle talk. All Protestants, not only I, confess that Melchisedech was
a Priest, and that he offered sacrifice: does it follow therefore M. R. that
the sacrifice was in bread and wine, as you pretend? whom then do I forsake?
with whom do I join? what fantasy is this that troubles your head so much?

In this taking you begin to throw out arguments, Page 63.
which must needs be full simply and miserably made. Howbeit sooner may you
devise many formal syllogismes for your facrifice, then make one sound reason
in divinity for confirmation thereof. Thus you have framed your argument with
your own hands: A Sillogisme of M. R. examined and answered.
That Christ did, and appointed to be done, that may and ought to be done: But
Christ at his last supper offered sacrifice according to the order of
Melchisedech, and appointed the Apostles and priests to do the same: Ergo the
Apostles and priests may, and ought to offer sacrifice. This syllogism seems
to be terriblye compounded, and to prove inuincibly the sacrifice of the
Mass: doutlesse Master Rainolds is persuaded he shall herewith fray us all
away. But be not dismayed (good Reader) the light drives darkness before it,
and truth cannot be vanquished with an army of false arguments, be they never
so cunningly framed, much less with such slender sophismes as these. Your
Assumption has two parts, and they both are false: whereof the conclusion
following cannot be hable to look the truth in the face. For where you say I
have acknowledged the former part, I acknowledge no such thing, nor ever did.
Two graund and capital untruths in the assumption of M. R. Syllogism.
Christ at his last supper offered no sacrifice according to the order of
Melchisedech: Christ appointed not the Apostles, nor any else, to offer the
same. Neither of these parts shall you prove whilst you live, though you live
the last on the earth. For what sacrifice offered Christ at his supper? and
what was the effect thereof? was this a sacrifice according to the order of
Melchisedech? then was it not the same he offered on the Cross: for that was
not of Melchisedechs order, being not in bread and wine, as you will have it,
but the very body of Jesus Christ. But your Church maintains that the
sacrifice which Christ offered at his supper, was the same that he offered on
the Cross. Thus handsomelie your dreams hang together.

Again if Christ at his supper offered such a sacrifice, as was prefigured by
Melchisedech which you affirm, then must it follow that Christ fulfilled that
figure perfectly, and so the same sacrifice nead no more to be offered:
whereof ensues the desolation of your masmo^gers, whose occupation only and
wholly stands in renewing the sacrifice of the mass. Then would I demand
what virtue and effect that sacrifice had, which you teach to have been offered
by Christ at his supper? Did Christ thereby fully appease the wrath of his
father? Did he fully redeem mankind? Or did he these things, but yet so
slenderly and insufficiently, that there needed another sacrifice after,
namely his own death upon the Cross? Answer plainly as becomes a divine,
yea a Christian, yea a reasonable man. A true Syllogism opposed against M.
Ram. false and heretical Syllogism.


And because you framed an argument for me, as you say, I will do as much for
you, and thus I frame you another. If Christ offered are all external
sacrifice of him self at his supper in bread and wine, then did Christ fully
redeem mankind by a sacrifice made in bread and wine: But Christ redeemed not
the world, by a sacrifice made in bread and wine, but by the sacrifice of his
own body upon the cross: Ergo Christ offered no such sacrifice, in bread and
wine at his supper. The parts are plain, and need no further proof. And
where you say, that seeing Christ was prefigured by Aaron and Melchisedech,
therefore he offered a sacrifice both in bloody manner, as Aaron did, and in
unbloody, as did Melchisedech, I see you labor to put life into the dead
carcass of your argument, but all in vain. For it cannot be showed either by
scriptures, or else by any ancient fathers of the Church, that Christ offered
any real sacrifice, but only in bloody manner. Heb. 10.14.
Wherefore the Apostle so often repeateth the word (Once) excluding thereby all
other manners of offering this sacrifice, but one. By one oblation (says the
Apostle) has he made perfect for ever those that are sanctified. Tell us what
manner of oblation that was, bloody, or unbloody? bloody, I trust, you will
confess: and therefore no unbloody was necessary, which neither could have
helped, seeing without shedding of blood there is not any remission of sins.
Heb. 9.22.
Whereby also may appear that though the sacrifice of the mass be gainful to
such Popish Priests, as M. R. and his companions are, yet in truth being
unbloody, it is utterly unfit, and unable to purchase remission of sins.
Such merchandise is lightly to be valued, as it deserves.

But to answer a little further, concerning Melchisedech, the similitude
between him and Christ consists not in offering unbloody sacrifice, In what
respects Melchisedech was a figure of Christ.
as you untruely and wickedlie imagine, but as the Apostle teaches, in that
Melchisedech, was both a king, and a priest, and is set forth unto us in the
scripture as eternal, and more excellent then Abraham, and the Leuitical
priests. In these respects was he a figure of Christ the eternal king and
priest, far excelling all the priests of the Leuiticall order. Because these
things make nothing for your sacrifice, you devise a matter that was not, to
prove a thing that is not, and so build one lie upon another, the unbloody
sacrifice of Christ upon the unbloody sacrifice of Melchisedech. But this is
the just judgment of the Lord upon you, that seeing you have trodden under your
feet, the blood of the everlasting Testament, you should be given over to
effectual illusions, to embrace an unbloody sacrifice, which is the devise of
your own brain, for the true and glorius sacrifice of Christ upon the cross.

This former argument of M.R. has begotten another like to it self, Page 64.
or rather more monstrous. Thus it stands; An other Syllogism of M. Rain.
like to the former, answered.
They who may and ought to offer sacrifice, as did first Melch. and afterward
Christ, are truly and properly sacerdotes: But priests of the new Testament
may and ought to offer sacrifice in such sort: ergo they are truly and properly
sacerdotes, priests. The Minor is the same with the conclusion of your other
argument, as evidently false, as the word of god is clearlie and vndoutedlie
true. For if your priests offer sacrifice, as Melchisedech and Christ did, then
are they priests of Melch. order, and not priests only but kings. For so was
he the figure, and so is Christ the truth. You cannot pull in sunder these two
offices, but if you will needs be priests, and that properly, according to this
order of Melchis. then seeing that order of priesthood has a kingdom
inseparably annexed to it, it must necessarily follow, that you are also
kings, and that properly, which were a very proper thing indeed, and
greatly to be accounted of. Popish priests if they be according to
Melchisedechs order, must not be priests only, but also kings
If you divide these offices in sunder, it is blasphemy; making a Priest
according to the order of Melchisedech, whoeis not also a king: If you take
both jointly to your selves, then will every hedge Priest be a gentleman, a
lord, a King. As this is most absurd, and monstrous, so is that also, that you
should be priests according to Melchisedechs order. For then further ought you
to be eternal, without beginning or ending of days, without father or mother,
as Melchisedech is described unto us in the scriptures, and as Christ is in
truth, and only Christ. So taking upon you this priesthood of Melchisedech,
you commit horrible sacrilege, and treason against the person of Christ our
savior, who will in time tread such vermin under his feet, that creeping on
the earth do presumptuously challenge to themselves his special prerogatives
and royalties.

S. Augustine calling the ministers of the Gospel Priests, speaks
improperlie, Page 65. August. de eiuit. dei. Lib. 20 cap. 10.
as has been answered. For although he says, that all Christians are
improperly called Priests, and others in the Church are so called properly, yet
he means not that there are any such priests in the Church, as Melchisedech,
or Aaron, or Christ was: but only that they are so termed by an usual, and
peculiar name, which is not in custom of speech given generally to all
Christians. This to have been S. Augustines meaning, and the judgment of the
Church heretofore, we may learn of Peter Lumbard, How the fathers call the
ministers of the Gospel Priests. Sent. lib. 4. Did. 12.^.
to let the ancient writers pass. For Peter first asks this question,
whether that which the Priest does, may properly be called a sacrifice and
oblation. His answer he makes thus, To this may be said briefly, that which
is offered, and consecrated of the Priest, is called a sacrifice, and oblation,
because it is the remembrance, and representation of the true sacrifice, and
holy oblation that was made upon the altar of the cross. If then there
remain in the Church no sacrifice in proper and natural sense of the word, as
your own doctor, and Master of sentences confesses, there can not be
remaining any Priests, that may so be called properly. For such as the kind
of sacrifice is, such is also the kind of priesthood: if the sacrifice be not
a sacrifice properly, the priesthood cannot be a Priesthood properly, but only
by a figurative and improper manner of speech.

That Augustine was a priest himself, Page 66. August Cofes. Lib. 9. cap.
11.12.13.
you labor to prove out of his book of Confessions: in which place though he
speak of an altar and sacrifice, yet he means not such altares and
sacrifices, as you have erected and offered in all places. This sacrifice that
he speaks of, is the sacrament of Christ's death, the altar is the Lords
table, the remembrance of his mother in offering this sacrifice on the altar,
is giving of thanks to God for her in celebrating the Lords supper. Although I
deny not, but the superstition of praying for the dead was then crept into the
Church: so that if you will needs urge that Monica desired to have prayers
made for her, I will not greatly stand with you herein. But that any real
sacrifice of Christ, as you mean, was offered for quick or dead in those
days, that I deny, and you can not prove it by this, or an^ other testimony
of S. Augustine.

Where I say, that Christ has committed his Church to be ruled by Pastors and
Doctors for ever, and not to Priests, page 67.
you demand whether this appointment had effect or no and give me warning to
beware (as though some danger were at hand) what I answer. But we shall
easily, I trust drive away this craking Annibal from the gates of our City,
who comes only to make a show, and has no force to hurt. Ephi 4.11.
Ministers of the Gospel are ueuer called priests in the new Testament.
That Christ ordained Pastors and Doctors to rule his Church, the scripture is
plain, so that you may not forshame deny it: now if these were priests truly
and properly, then should they have been so called, and by this name commended
unto us in the scriptures. But whereas their office is declared diversely in
great variety of names, yet is this name never once given unto them in no
Gospel, in no epistle, in no book of the new testament. And may we think
that if the ministers of Christ in the new Testament were by Gods institution
very Priests, as these men bear us in hand, and had commission to offer so
excellent a sacrifice, as no Priest ever the like, save Christ himself, may we
think, I say, or is it likely that this name should never have been found in
all the new Testament in this sense, where are so manifold titles given unto
them, as of Elders, Overseers, Rulers, Shepherds, Watchmen, Ministers,
Stewards, Servants, and such like? Of all which names none pleases their
humor: but Priests they will be called and accounted, as though Gods spirit
which appoints offices in the Church, could not have given fit names unto
them, but would rather give them any name, then that which is their proper
name. Any man then, that has but half an eye, may soon see, that the holy
ghost in avoiding this name so carefully, has given our Popish Priests a
clean wipe, and both left them out of the door, and shut the door against
them: and though they strive never so much to creep in, yet are they to be
driven away by lawful authority, and kept forth, as they that have nothing
at all to do in Gods house.

But here M. Rainolds has gotten a doughtie argument, which I think because
he knew not how to bring it in fitly in some other place, has halde it in here
out of place. He bids me show where this Church for many hundred years was
gogouerned thus, which is as common an argument with them, to use his own
words, as Dunstable hiewaie. For this reason is even their common pack-horse to
bear the wholl burden, when all other fail, where was your Church, where
were your ministers before Luther? Whereunto, that you may perceive how far
we disagree from the Donatistes, of whom you speak, I answer, that our
Church was never so straited, but that it might be found in all countries
christened, and our ministers had the chiefest rooms, till Antichrist by little
and little had driven them out: and then afterward the Lord continually raised
up, and provided for his Church, such pastors and doctors, as were necessary
for the gathering of the saints together. Further answer in this place is
not needful.

As for Augustine the monk, Page 68.
and Laurentius, and the rest, whom you call the first Apostles, and
conuerters of our nation, I neither acknowledge them for Apostles, nor Priests:
yea sure I am, if they were true Apostles, then were they no Priests, and if
they were Priests, their Apostleship was of a wrong stamp. And though Beda so
call them, yet it follows not that they were popish priests, seeing he used
but the phrase of common speech, by which the preachers and Ministers of the
word and sacraments were so called: in which respect my self also called S.
Jerome a priest of the Roman Church. But this though an usual, yet is it an
improper kind of speech.

What wants in reasoning, you supply in railing. page 69.
John Bale you call a sincke of iniquity: Calvin, you say, is more execrable
then the rest: of such flowers Master Rainolds garden (good reader) has
abundance, as lightly thou shall find any where. Those servants of Christ,
of whom you speak your pleasure, have noted the fathers for their declining
from the purity of the gospel, and that may they in some things worthelie do,
even as Paul did Peter. And touching this matter we have in hand, there were
amongst them some superstitious offerings, The fathers acknowledge not the
Popish sacrifice.
which even the papists themselves have abandoned: but that the fathers were
priests in our meaning, or thought they had any real sacrifice of Christ's
body and blood, you have not showed, nor can. Tertul. ad Scapul.
The fathers deny that any such sacrifice remains. Tertullian says, we
sacrifice, for the safety of the Emperor: but to our God, and his: but as God
has commanded with pure prayer. Tertullian knows not of any external
sacrifice among the Christians: for then would they have offered that also for
the Emperor. Justin, in dial. cum Tryphone.
And Justinius Martyr before him, says, that Christians have learned to offer
the sacrifice of supplications, and thanksgiving only. Which he would not
have said, if Christians had learned to offer the sacrifice of the mass. S.
Chrysostom. says, Chrysostom. in epist. Hebr. hom. 13.
If Christ be perfect, never sins, alwaie lives, why should he offer for
us many sacrifices? And again, There is no other sacrifice: one has purged
us. After that remains fire and hell. S August. says, Christ only is our
priest, our sacrifice, our Temple. August. de fide ad Pet. Di^. c. 2.
I omit many more: by these testimonies the Godly reader may understand, that in
the primitive Church was no such sacrifice, nor priesthood, as the Popish is
pretended to be. And therefore I see no cause, why I should be afraid to stand
in maintenance of M. Iuell that godly and learned Bishops challenge in this
behalf, which has not hitherto, nor cannot be disprooued. And though you, as
also many of your fellows are still pinching at it, yet you are all content to
let it rest, as Doctor Harding left it, which was full greatly to your
discredit. And as for the Doctors that Calvin alleges, although they force
the scriptures, as he says, manifestly to a wrong purpose, in applying
Melchisedechs example to the matter of the sacrament, yet none of them proves
that sacrifice, that Master Jewel denies, and therefore you do but idlelie
and triflinglie spend your time, and trouble your reader with your follies. But
you would, I dare say, better intertaine him, if you had any better
provision. Calvin. de vera Eccl. reform.
Yet you might have seen that Calvin in that place censureth those fathers
with these words by you alleged, for an other place of scripture wrongly and
strangely applied, not for defending the unbloody sacrifice as you affirm.

Then you come to lift at my argument, page 74.
which I gathered out of the Apostle against your sacrificing Priests: but your
strength fails you much in this enterprise. The Apostle says, that Christ
has (...), that is, an everlasting Priesthood. Heb. 7.24.
Here you rehearse diverse interpretations of the Greek word, (...), which the
Apostle uses: although there are none but meanly seen in that tongue, that
need your help therein. For that properly is (...), that passes not away
from one to an other. And herein the Apostle compares our savior Christ with
the Priests of Aarons order, and shows a manifest difference, that the
Leuitical Priesthood rested not in one man, but went from man to man, by reason
of death, which suffered not one and the same Priest continually to enioie his
office: but Christ lives for ever, and therefore his Priesthood abides with
him only, The Apostles reason excludes the Popish priests no les then the
Leuitical.
and is not in execution enlarged to any other. And this reason of the Apostle
debarreth as well the popish, as the Aaronical priests. For the Priests of the
popish order are no more exempted from necessity of dying, then were those
priests of Aarons stock, so that they are no less opposed unto Christ, then
the other.

Herein therefore lies the force of the Apostles argument, that the Priesthood
of the new Testament belongs only unto him, that is immortal: for otherwise
he had not put any necessary difference between that and the other: whereof
it does inuinciblie, and necessarielie ensue, that the only priest of the new
Testament, is Jesus Christ. This Chrysostom concludes out of the Apostles
words most plainly: Chrysostom. in Hebr. 7. homil. 13. S Chrisost. plainly
condemns all popish priests
As there were (says he) many priests, because they were mortal so there is
but one, because he is immortal. For can they answer for them selves, that
though they die, yet Christ lives, whose partners herein they reckon them
selves to be? might not the Jewish priests likewise have said as much, seeing
it cannot be denied, but their priesthood also was referred unto Christ? But as
those Priests together with their Priesthood expired, when our savior Christ,
the true Priest and sacrifice, was exhibited, so their was no place left for
other Priests, nor other sacrifice, all figures being in Christ most fully
and perfectly accomplished. Yet as though Christ had been either a mortal
priest like to Aaron, and his children, or his sacrifice had not at once
satisfied the wrath of God, they substitute to Christ an infinite multitude of
priests, far more then were ever the Leuitical priests, and take upon them
blasphemously to offer again daily the same sacrifice that Christ once
offered, which is impossible for any to offer, but only the son of God
himself. O that Christian people would consider the horrible dongeon of
iniquity, that lies hid under the abominable sacrifice of the popish mass,
then which the sun did never behold a thing more loathsome and detestable in
the eyes of the God of heaven.

This therefore is a sure reason, and shall stand against the gates of hell, and
force of all papists, that Christ is a Priest for ever, and has an
everlasting Priesthood. Therefore he is the only Priest of the new Testament,
and his Priesthood is not communicated to any other: and so your priests are
no priests, your sacrifice is no sacrifice, your Religion is no Religion, your
Christ is no Christ, your God is no God. Depart from them whosoever will not be
partakers of their condemnation.

To show this reason to be childish, Page 76.
you have brought indeed a childish exception. Christ is (you say) a true man
for ever, a king for ever, our doctor, master, and teacher for ever: yet are
there many men, kings, doctors, and teachers, besides Christ. An objection of
M.R. answered.
This man is suddenly so drowned in the dreggs of popery, that he has lost
all taste and sense of truth: for else he would have been ashamed of such an
answer, which nothing comes near the matter. We speak of those offices,
which Christ was appointed to bear by the anointing of the holy ghost, and
special commission from God: you bring instance of things that be of an other
condition and nature, as to be a true man, an earthly King, an outward
minister of the word, and such like. Christ is our only king, Prophet, and
Priest: so that in this sense, in which these are given to him, none can be
King, Prophet, or Priest, but he. For he only is our spiritual King, he only
is our teacher, and author of all heavenly doctrine, he only can offer the
sacrifice propitiatory for the sins of the world. If you think any can be
a King or Prophet in this manner, but only he, you take his honor from him,
and give it to an other, to whom it does not appertain: which you do indede
most notably in sesing your selves upon his Priesthood, which does as truly
belong to him alone, as the other of his Kingdom and Prophecy do. Now then
weigh with your self, what a witles objection you have made: and if you can
bring no better defense for your Priests, then your have hitherto done, you
have good cause to be sorry, and ashamed that ever you changed your copy, and
of a minister of the Gospel, became a priest of the popish order. God give you
grace to repent, that the fruit of Christ's priesthood may not be denied unto
you another day.

That which follows, is but a supply of superfluous words, without wit,
without learning, without truth. The comparison you make between an earthly
prince and Christ, does nothing fit your purpose. For if you have as lawful
authority under Christ to exercise a priesthood, as the civil governors have
under their prince to execute their office laid upon them, then show your
commission, and we require no more. For as no man dare presume in the affairs
of the state to command or enterprise any thing in the princes name without a
sufficient warrant from the prince: so may no man take upon him any
ecclesiastical function in the Church, vlnes he have a commandment from the
Lord. But Christ never gave you any such commandment, he never laid upon you
any such office, he never called you to this honor, to be his fellow priests:
else bring us your Charter, that we may se it, and show us your letters of
orders, that we may try them. And further you are to consider that although
the prince bestow offices and preferments upon his subjects, as pleases him,
yet his Regalities he keeps to himself, and no subject will presume to
challenge them. Pharao gave Joseph as great authority, as any princes use to
give any of their servants: yet the chair of estate he kept to himself, and
therein he was above him. But you most rudely and arrogantlie intrude your
selves into Christ's seat, and will not only be his vicepriests, but as good
priests as he, joined in the same commission with him, according to the same
order of Melchisedech, that he was of: and so you are not content with such
offices as he has appointed unto you, but you claim his chiefest
principalities, which is no less a fault, then high treason against the hiest
majesty.

M. Rain. makes an end of this treatise with an other foolish cauil taken out
of the communion book, wherein, he says, commission is given in some cases,
to the minister, to remitt sins. why say you, in some cases? The Minister
of God has power to forgive sins, not in some cases only, but in all
whatsoever, if the sinner repent and believe the gospel. This authority is
given unto him by Christ, this the parliament, and communion book confess,
this the ministers daily practice amongst us. Nevertheless you are still as
far from your purpose, as before. For this makes not our ministers to be
priests, but preachers of repentance, which bring the glad tidings of the
gospel, to all those that be heavy laden, and desire to be refreshed. Neither
have they power themselves to forgive sins, Mar. 2.7.
(for God only forgiueth sins) but having the word of reconciliation
committed unto them from God, they offer pardon, and in his name pronounce
pardon to the sinner, that turns from his sins unto the Lord. If you know
this, why strive you against a known and confessed truth? If you be ignorant
what commission the ministers have received of Christ, then be content to learn
it out of the word of god. As for your priests you have alleged nothing, to
prove their calling and authority lawful, and I have showed that the
scriptures giving all priesthood, after Melchis. order, to Christ only, have
wrung in sunder the necks of your popish sacrificers, and therefore it is the
duty of all Christians whose salvation consists in the sacrifice and
priesthood of Christ, to think of you, as you are indeed, enemies of Christ,
Baalites, idolatrous Antichristian Priests whose punishment shall be with the
Beast in the lake that burns with fire and brimstone for ever. The Lord open
the eyes of his people, that they may see your wickedness, and beware of you,
least they be in wrapped in the same condemnation with you.

CHAP. 5.
Of penance, and the value of good works touching justification, and life
eternal.

IN the beginning of this Chapter M. Rainolds chafeth and lays about him on
every side, Page 82. etc.
striking now at one man, now at another, sometime this way, sometime that, as
though he were suddenly fallen into some malady, and great distemperature in
his head. The occasion rises upon my words, in saying our adversaries doctrine
cannot stand, unless we will allow for good those things that in the writings
of the fathers are most faulty. And who knows not, if he have read any
thing in the fathers, The Popish religion gathered of the corruptions of
fathers, and former times.
but that the popish religion for the most part is even a very scomme of
ancient and new errors, or as it were a body consisting of rottennes and
corruption? Their free will, their merit of works, their purgatory, their
sacrifice for quick and dead, their transsubstantiation, their Popes
Supremacy, their superstitious fastes, their worshipping of Images, their
praying unto Saints, their praying for the dead, their satisfaction,
forgiveness by works of penance, whereof Master Rainolds has now taken in hand
to speak, and other many more the like points of false doctrine they can as
soon prove out of the scripiures, as they can draw a fountain of water out
of a flinte. And therefore although for a fashion, in defense of some of these,
they pretend scriptures, yet being easily beaten from them, they fall at last
to rail on them as not containing sufficient doctrine, and rather will be tried
and judged by the writings of fathers: at whose hands albeit they find not
such relief as they would make men believe, in no one controversy between us
and them, as has been oftentimes plainly proved, notwithstanding by reason
of the fathers manifold ouersightes and slips, and the corruptions that daily
increased in the Church, they may bring somewhat, such as it is, for their
maintenance. wherefore that we will not admit the fathers for judges in
matters of Religion, but hold them hard to the trial of the Scriptures, which
they cannot abide, this does put them out of patience, and drives them into
vehement passions. But let them mend themselves where they can: they shall
never get at our hands more then this, to receive that which the scripture
delivers, to reject that which the scripture reprooueth: to read the fathers
with indifferent and free judgment, waying all their doctrine in the balance
of gods word, and thereby either alowing, or refusing the same. This we must
do, or else of fathers we make Gods, of men's writings we make canonical
scriptures, of doctors opinions we make articles of faith. And herein we do no
otherwise, then we are taught both by scriptures, and fathers to do, as has
been showed a thousand times, This shall be your answer, and more you are not
to look for of me, neither in this question of penance, nor in any other: and
though it be your grief to have your nose held to this grindstone, yet shall
the truth thus be cleared from your mistes, and God shall have the glory.

Where I have said, Page 87. True repentance wherein it consists.
that repentance consists in inward sorrow for our sins, and amendment of
life, not in outward penalties, and chastisments of our bodies, M. Rainolds
grants the former part, but denies the latter. Join them both together
(says he) the^ greatly please God. Though he labor with all his force to
smother the truth, and keep it from shining forth, yet is he constrained to
confess that no external chastisment of the body, or rigorous manner of
discipline, whatsoever we can submitt our selves unto, profits any thing,
without the inward grief of mind conceived for our sins. Wherein as he has
given a right sentence agreably to gods word, so has he marked with a black
cole the superstition of the Romish sectaries, whose whole repentance is nothing
else, but a voluntary affliction of their bodies, by abstaining from meats, by
whipping their carcases, by putting on rough apparel, by lying hard, and such
other outward exercises, of which the Apostle generally pronounces, 1. Tim.
4.8.
they profit but a little. Then he must confess, that Repentance stands not
in outward penance, as they term it, but in the inward sorrow of the soul.
For this alone pleases God, and turns away his wrath from us although we
do not join therewith external penance: but external penance is nothing
worth, unless we have an inward sorrow. Seeing then true repentance may stand
without that painful, and extreme punishing of the body, I conclude by
necessary consequence of reason, that it is not any part of true repentance,
although sometime it has a profitable use, for the furthering and practizing
of repentance. If you grant this, as you must, then we shall agree in this
matter. For I deny not, but some outward penalties may be used, and do
please God, not of them selves, but because they help as means in true
repentance. As for example, he that offends in eating or drinking too much,
must not think tha he has sufficiently repented of his sin, if he punish
him self by fasting never so much, unless he be also inwardly sorrowful for
the same, and purpose ever after to live soberlie: which affection if it be
wanting, though a man fast all his life long, yet he has not truly repented.
But the godly Christian, who has perhaps oftended in surfeting, or
drunkenness, and is truly sorrowful therefore, has repented, though he fast
not every Fridaie from morning to night, but uses a sober and moderate diet
every day. Nevertheless if he prescribe unto himself, without superstition of
satisfaction or merit, some abstinence for a time, that thereby he may be
further estraunged from that vice, who will deny but this is well and
Christianlike done? And this was commanded by God in public and private
fastes, and practiced by the godly, as we read in the scriptures. Thus may
you see what an idle head you have, that allege so many testimonies of
scripture, to prove a thing, which no man ever has denied. I perceive your
leisure is great, but you should have more discretion to use it well. In a
plain case, wherein we need not your help, you bring plenty of scriptures:
in a matter of controversy and debate, which beggeth relief at your hands,
you pass by, as though you heard not: which yet I impute not to want of
compassion, but of ability. We dispute not whether the children of God have
used, and ought to use sometimes outward punishing and afflicting of their
bodies (for this we do willingly confess) but whether this outward affliction
be a proper part of repentance, and whether it satisfies for sins. The first
is an error, the second is an heresy, or rather blasphemy. These things you
should have proved, for these we deny: the other being not denied, required
no proof.

The Apostles place was rightly alleged, Page 90. Colos. 2, 23.
and you cannot tell how to shift it from you. He condemns the superstition of
such, as put holiness in outward things, and namely in punishing of the body,
which Ambrose calls vexing of the body: Oecumenius, not regarding the body.
whether this belong to you, let all the world judge, seeing you make it a part
of repentance, and think to deserve thereby a great recompense at the hands of
almighty God. But because you perceive the edge of this scripture to be
sharper then you would, you seek to blunt it some what, and therefore say, it
is obscure: whereas nothing could be spoken more plainly, if the light of your
understanding were not dammed up.

The reason, which I brought against the works of satisfaction, page 92.
Satisfaction for sins wrought only by the sacrifice of Christ's death.
is grounded upon the rock, that never can be shaken, even the word of god,
that abides for ever. For as the redemption of mankind is to be ascribed
only to the sacrifice of Christ's death, and cannot without singular
blasphemy be assigned to any other thing: so likewise is the satisfaction for
sin appropriated to the same sacrifice of Christ, and cannot without like
blasphemy be given to any works of man, how excellent soever. You make it a
small matter to satisfy for sin, that teach it is in the power of man, by
his own pains and penance, to appease the wrath of God, whereby it plainly
appears, you neither know the grieuousnes of sin, nor the justice of god,
that requires a greater punishment for sin, then any man is able to suffer:
yea you charge the Lord himself with injustice, in that having laid the
guiltines of our sins upon his son, and punished them al in him, is not
content with that punishment and satisfaction, If we do satisfy for our
sins, then has not Christ satisfied for them.
but exacteth of us a further payment and satisfaction for the sins, for
which Christ has once sufficiently satisfied already. The prophet says: He
is punished for our transgressions, Esai. 53.5.
he is bruised for our iniquities, the chastisement of our peace is laid upon
him, and by his stripes are we healed. And immediately again he repeateth the
same, and says, The Lord makes the punishment of us al to light upon him.
Ve^. 7. 1. Ioh. 1.7.
The Apostle John says: The blood of Jesus Christ does purge you from all
s^^ne. Apoc. 1.5.
And in his revelation he says: that Christ has washed us from our sins in
his blood. Thus are we taught in the scriptures of God to believe, that our
sins are forgiven, and we reconciled to God, not for any thing that we can
work or suffer, but only for the death and blood-sheading of Christ. So all
your satisfactions are hanged upon the hedge, and serve for nothing else, but to
plunge you deeper into the pit of condemnation, which you shall never escape,
so long as you trust to any satisfaction, but only of Christ.

As for your Tridentine council, which you allege, it is but a babble. A
child may soon epsy the vanity and falsehood of this divinity, that you
deliver us here, by warrant of that Council. Council. Trident sess. 14. ca. 8.
This it is, The satisfaction which we undertake for our sins, is ours, but
yet by Christ Jesus: which in effect is all one, as if they had said that
Christ him self has not satisfied for our sins at all, but only has
purchased to us a faculty and ability every man to satisie for his own
sins. The scriptures teach that Christ himself has sati^fied for our
sins. 1. Pet 2.24.
This is the mystery of your satisfactions, a mystery of great impiety. For
the scriptures teach the clean contrary. S. Peter says, that Christ has
borne our sins in his body upon the cross. And how has he borne them, if he
has not satisfied for them? did he take them upon himself to return them
back to us again? or did he not perhaps fully satisfy for them? Tell us then
how far Christ has satisfied, and how much remains for us to satisfy,
that we may know how to divide aright the satisfaction between Christ and us.
But accursed for ever be they, that deny the satisfaction of Christ to be most
perfect, and will supply it by their own diligence and labor. Christ has
perfectly redeemed us, therefore Christ has perfectly satisfied for us. The
work of Christ's redemption is our satisfaction
For this redemption consists in fully satisfying the warth of God against
sin. Neither is it possible for any to satisfy for sin, but a redeemer
only. For this cause was the name of Jesus given to our Redeemer, because he
saves us from our sins. Matthew. 1.21.
And how is this salvation wrought? 2. Cor. 5.21.
In that he became man for us: that is, our sins were imputed to him, Heb.
10.14.
and he made a sacrifice for them: and by this one oblation has consecrated
for ever those that are sanctified. Then is there left to us no part of
satisfaction, but when soever we repent of our sins, and believe in the
satisfaction of Jesus Christ, we are clerelie acquitted of all our offenses,
for the merit of that perfect sacrifice, which Christ offered for us. If you
deny this, think of your self as you list, you have no more part in Jesus
Christ, then has an Infidel.

That you rehearse out of Brentius, page 93.9.4.
and Andreas Fricius, is idle, and serves only for stuffing. Brentius says
truly, we must not only take away nothing from Christ that belongs unto
him, but not give him more, then the scriptures have taught to be due unto him.
For he is iniuried and dishonored both ways: nevertheless this, that you will
seem to give him more then we, is by no means to be accepted, for so much as
it takes from him a thousand times more, then it can pretend to bestow upon
him. For in ascribing that virtue to the sacrifice of Christ, to make our
works of force to satisfy for our selves, you pull away from it violently
that full and perfect power of satisfying once for all of it self, which does
truly and properly belong unto it? so herein you may well be compared to
those wicked Jews that made cursie to our Savior Christ, and yet did buffet
him on the face with their fists. Andreas Fricius if he have any private
opinion of his own, let him take it to him self: he may not obtrude it upon
the Church, without warrant of Gods word. And yet out of his words by you
rehearsed, what can you gather, serving for proof of man's merits or
satisfactions?

What your opinion and judgment is, Page 95, etc.
M. Rainolds, of my learning and writings, I trust you think I make no great
account. Verily among the wholl rabble of popish proctors, there is none, that
I have read, of less wit and learning, then your self. What account your
fellows make of you I cannot report, but if they esteem you for one of their
worthies, you are more beholding to them, then you have deserved of them. For
alas what have you brought, the in truth is worthy answer? what have you
said, wherein appears any learning more then most common? what cause have
you thus to brag in your self, thus to contemn others? God give you grace
to see, to know, to examine your self, that you may perceive your own
weakness and poverty. If I should boaste of my self, mine own tongue would
condemn me: this childish and profane manner I leave to you, and your
companions, who hunte so greedelie for the praise of learning, that you despise
the simplicity of Gods truth and Gospel. Yet there is none of us, how
unlearned soever you think we are, but by the grace of God and light of his
word, can easily discover the falsehood, and corruptions of your Religion. Let
us now consider upon what points you were bold to utter so fondly your
judgment of me, and thereby make trial of that profound learning, which you
take to your self with out cause, as shall here, and every where appear.

First you charge me, Page 98.
that I understand not M. Martins meaning: which though it were true, yet were
it (I trust) a venial offense. But I perceived his meaning well enough and
framed mine answer directly to the same. The question was: whether to
attribute to our sufferings the virtue of satisfying for our sins, be not
injurious to the passion and satisfaction of Christ, I said it was, and so I
say still. Master Martin alleges against me the words of the Apostle Saint
Paul's, who says, we shall be heirs with God, Romans 8.17.
and follow heirs with Christ, if we suffer with him, that we may be glorified
with him. Mine answer was, that our sufferings are required, not as causes of
our salvation, and eternal glory, yet to be borne of necessity, unless we will
fall away from his grace and glory. Wherein now have I swarued from M.
Martins purpose? His argument was you say, to prove, that good works are not
injurious to salvation, because the scripture requires them as necessary to
salvation. But why tell you not, how M. Martin meant they are required as
necessary? then had you disclosed your own folly. For we grant they are
necessarily required in that sense, that the Apostle teaches, and are not in
that respect any ways injurious, or derogatory to the sacrifice of Christ.
But this proves not that they satisfy for our sins: for then should they
be efficient causes of our salvation, as you would have them to be thought, and
then should they derogate greatly from the merits of Christ. Were you so
astonished, that you could not make mine answer agree to M. Martins argument? or
had you a pleasure thus to cavil?

Secondly you say, page 99. etc.
I understand not S. Paul alleged by M. Martin, your self setting down such
an exposition of his words, as both is contrary to his wholl doctrine, and
disprooued by the very words themselves. For where you say, this place of the
Apostle proves inuinciblie, that works are the efficient causes of our
salvation, it shall easily appear, that herein you do not only misconstrue
the Apostle, but utter blasphemy against the blood of Christ: such a notable
expositor are you become of the holy scriptures. S. Paul says, we are joint
heirs with Christ, Romans 8.15.
if so be we suffer with him, that we may also be glorified with him. Does this
prove our works or sufferings to be causes efficient of our salvation? By
what divinity? by what Logic? by what sophistry? wherein lies the
invincible necessity of this consequence? does not the Apostle himself
conclude the contrary in the words immediately following, when he says, Romans
8.18.
I account that the sufferings of this present time, are not worthy of the
glory that shall be reueiled unto us? Our sufferings are not worthy the glory
of heaven, and therefore deserve it not
If then there be not any proportion at all between our sufferings and
eternal glory, as the Apostle plainly affirms, how can our sufferings be
causes efficient of that most excellent glory and salvation, which Christ
has purchased for us? does he not call it our inheritance, when he says, we
are the heirs of god, and fellow heirs with Christ? then does it follow most
inuincibly, that it is not obtained by our works, but does belong unto us by
the right of our adoption, whereby we are made the sons of God. Nevertheless
as the father requires obedience of his son to whom he leaves his
inheritance, so the Lord most justly may exact of his children to whom he has
prepared a kingdom, Eternal life belongs unto us by right of our adoption,
and is not purchased of us by our works.
all duties of service and obedience. And as the obedience of the child is not
the cause efficient of the earthly inheritance, no more are the works of
godliness, wherein the faithful are occupied, causes efficient of immortality
and salvation. When the earthly father says to his natural son and heir,
thou shall inherit my lands, and goods, if so be thou will obeie my will, can
your wisdom hereof gather an invincible argument, that this obedience in the
heir, is the proper and efficient cause of that inheritance? so when the Lord
speaks to his children in like manner, I will give unto you eternal life, if
you can be content patiently to wait for the time of your full deliverance,
and to suffer afflictions in this life, as it is necessary for you to do, who
but a blind papist will argue hereof, that these afflictions endured in the
mean time are causes of eternal life, which is the free gift and grace of God?
and yet is this M. Rainolds invincible argument, or rather invincible sollie
and ignorance.

Now where he makes a comparison between Christ's sufferings and ours, page
100.
and because Christ's sufferings merit eternal life, No comparison between the
merits of Christ, and our good works.
reasons that ours therefore do the same, he deserves that all the boys in
the school should clap their hands against him, as not only disputing most
absurdlie, but dishonouring our savior Christ intollerablie. Will you match
your selves with Christ, your works and your sufferings with his? you make a
very unequal and most unreasonable comparison. For is there in you that
perfection of virtue and excellency of grace that was in Christ, whereby he
fully satisfied the law of God, and therefore deserved worthelie the Kingdom
of heaven? All our righteousness is imperfect, all our obedience is full of
infirmity, whatsoever we can do or suffer, is stained with some pollution of
sin, and therefore of due can merit nothing at the hands of God, much less
the Kingdom of heaven and life everlasting. Thus your sum was not rightly
gathered, as you may see. Page 102, Romans 6.23. Eternal life is a free gift,
and therefore is not obtained by merit of good works.


Thirdly M. Rainolds says, I understand not S. Paul, alleged by my self,
that eternal life is the gift of god. Whereupon I gather that seeing it is the
free gift of God, our works are not the causes thereof. For if our works were
causes efficient of eternal life, the Apostle would not say that eternal life
is given freely unto us by God, seeing to give freely, and to give upon
desert, cannot be verified of one thing. But eternal life is a free gift, (...)
as the Apostle does affirm expressly, and therefore is not purchased by merit
of our good works: where is to be noted the opposition between eternal death
and life, touching the cause of either, which the Apostle does so plainly
propound unto us. The proper working cause of death is sin: so the Apostle
says, The wages of sin is death: Romans 6.23.
so that no man's labor is more truly the cause of his reward, then sin is
the cause of death and condemnation. Why did not S. Paul on the other side say
likewise: the wages of good works is eternal life? Nay why said he the clean
contrary, that eternal life is the free gift of God? Can you tell us any
cause, but onelly to exclude from our works all merit of eternal life? And
where the Apostle admonishes us, Phil 2, 12.
to finish our salvation in fear and trembling: his meaning is nothing less
then to ascribe the finishing of our salvation to good works, as though the
Lord began, and left the rest for us to finish: but to teach, that we must
run our race in careful obedience to Gods commandments, until we come to
the end of our course, and receive our reward. Nether may you bear us in hand
here, because the kingdom of god is called in the scriptures a reward of our
weldoing, therefore it depends upon the worthiness and merit of our good
deeds. For it is a free reward of only grace, not of desert or merit: as the
father rewards his son of love and favor, not of debt, seeing he owes him
nothing at all. This you have bin answered a thousand times: and though you can
say nothing to purpose against it, yet you will not submit your hearts to the
truth of God, but seek occasions of wrangling without end.

Fourthly you say, I understand not the state of the question, page 103. etc.
whereof I write: and then you make a long discourse of grace, and works, of
mercy and justice, to prove that in the regenerate there is not any
contrariety between these, but that they may stand well together. A man would
think your self were not altogether ignorant of the matter whereof you speak,
taking upon you to reform the judgment of an other: yet have you herein
bewraied more want of skill, then I would have thought had been in you,
unless perhaps you dissemble your knowledge, which I do not easily believe.
For although grace is not contrary to works, because the cause cannot be
contrary to the thing, whereof it is the cause, yet who sees not that grace
may have an other effect besides good works, where of it self, alone is the
cause, and must not in that respect be joined with good works, but discerned,
and distinguished from them? By grace in this controversy I understand, not
those graces of Gods spirit, which are infused into us, when we are regenerate,
as our adversaries do, making grace and works all one, but the love and
mercy of God, as the scriptures have taught us to take the same: as when the
faithful servants of God are said to have found grace in the eyes of the Lord:
and when the Apostle writes, 2. Tim. 1.6.
that grace was given unto us in Jesus Christ before all worlds. And so
likewise in this question must it be taken, when we are said to be elected,
called, justified, and saved by grace, that is, by the love of God, where with
he embraced us freely, unless you will say we had grace and good works
inherent in us before we were create^, yea before the world it self was
framed. From this grace proceed both good works and our salvation, yet so as
salvation is to be imputed, not to our works, but only to grace, and
although these two are not contrary the one to the other, yet in the matter of
salvation there is not the least cooperation between good works and grace, but
works are wholly excluded from all society or fellowship in that business.
Romans 11.6.
So the Apostle has plainly taught: If by grace, not of works. Again, If
righteousness be by the law, Gal. 2.21. Rom, 4.2.
then has Christ died in vain: Again, If Abraham were justified by works,
he has whereof to boast, Gal. 3.11.18,
but not with God. Again, the just shall live by his faith: but the law is
not of faith. Again, f the inheritance were of the law, then were it not of
promise. wherefore in effecting our justice and salvation, good works may not
draw in the same yoke with grace, notwithstanding otherwise they agree well
together. Thus have I briefly answered all your frivolous discourse, and
showed that you obiecting ignorance of the question to me, in truth never
understood it rightly your self.

The scriptures you bring for your purpose to prove that eternal life is of
works, as well as of grace, are but wrested, and shamfullie abused by you. When
S. Paul says, Romans 2.6.
that God shall render to every man according to his works, we confess, and
always have, that God not only does recompense the wickedness of the sinner
with deserved punishment, A reward we confess, merit we deny.
but also rewards the virtues of the godly with life, and felicity
everlasting. And when Christ shall sit on his judgment seat, every man
shall be tried by his works, which in the wicked do deserve condemnation of
themselves, and in the children of God are signs and fruits of their faith,
whereby they have laid hold upon Jesus Christ their only Savior and
iustifier. But make your argument good, if you can, which you gather of these
words, God shall render to cuerie man after his works, therefore good works
are efficient causes of our salvation: or as you most untruly and wickedlie
do set down, good works and evil are laid in indifferent balance, so
that one is the cause of heaven, as the other is the cause of hell. This
divinity M. Rainolds you never learned of Saint Paul, Pa 2.105. M.R. says
that good works and evil are laid in indifferent balance, that good works are
the cause of heaven, as evil are the cause of hell.
but have drawn it out of the stinking puddle of popery: and it smells so
lothsomelie in the noses of the godly, that if your senses were not by custom
of such filthy doctrine altogether stuffed, you could not abide the savor
thereof. Do good works deserve heaven, as evil do hell? what Prophet or
Apostle ever said so? sin is indeed the cause of death, and deserves
everlasting pain, because it is a transgression of Gods law: but good works
are not the cause of heaven, nor can deserve eternal life, because they do
not perfectly answer the justice of Gods law, which pronounces them
accursed, Deuteronomy. 27.26. Gal. 3.10,
that abide not in all things written in the law, to do them. Are your good
works so absolute, and entire in every respect, that being examined by the
law of God, and laid in the balance of perfect justice, they are found in
nothing too light? if you say so, you are past all shame, you forget your
selves, you know not God: if otherwise, how can you escape the curse, but
only by forgiveness through Christ? And so it follows that eternal life is
not of works, but only of grace and mercy, whereby our sins are pardoned,
Psalm. 32. Romans 4.7.
and our iniquities covered, according to the doctrine of the prophets and
Apostles. Thus your balance is proved to be false, and you shall one day see
the difference, when you are laid in the balance your self.

That God is called a just judge, An objection of M.R. answered.
not only in respect of the wicked, whom he punishes, but also of the
godly, whom he rewards, and that he will render in just judgment to every
man according to his works, what can you gather hereof against the free grace
of our justification and salvation? Is just reward, and free grace so great an
enemy one to the other, that they cannot be coupled together? This detecteth
your gross blindenes, that think the undeserved mercy of God to be contrary
to his justice, as though because he gives eternal life, as a just judge,
therefore does not give it freely, but in respect of the worthiness of our
work. When god elected us to be his children, before we had done good or
evil, yea when he gave us the first justice, as you call it, when we had
committed many sins, and oftentimes offended him, was not this of only
grace and mercy, without our worthiness and desert? you will not deny. Yet in
this remained he just, unless you say that God is unjust in some of his
dealings. Then is your argument in miserable case, whereof you make so great
account, God does give to his children eternal life of justice, therefore not
of grace. God is just, in that he keeps promise, and does not deceive his of
that reward, which they hope for: but the promise is free. For freely he
promised, and freely he gives. Yet in that he bound himself unto us by his
free promise, it was just that he should perform the same, not for that we
have justly, and worthily deserved any part of that reward, but because it is
meet that God be always faithful in his words. And as for that you allege
of Reward, and Rendering, you have been answered, that this reward and
retribution is of the free mercy and grace of god: which answer you cannot
disprooue, and therefore whatsoever you have said, is to no purpose at al. Saint
Augustine now must help you, or else you are gone. Yet says he not in these
testimonies, that works do fully and perfectly deserve the crown of
immortality, as you say, and more too. The most he says, is, In what sense
the fathers affirm that heaven is due for our good works
that the crown is due unto our good works: which in some sense is true. For
it is that reward, which God has prepared and promised to the work, not
because the work is worthy thereof, but because it pleases him so
graciously and liberally to bestow such excellent rewards upon us, that have
deserved so little. This will I make plain to have been S. August. meaning by
his own writings, and then also further declare, that this was the constant
and catholic belief of Christ his Church, by the testimonies of other
ancient Fathers. August. de perfectione iustitiae.
Thus writes S. Aug. And that what the just Judge, when he shall sit on his
throne, shall find secret, or not thoroughly purged, by his mercy may be
forgiven, that by seeing God, the wholl may be made sound and clean. For
judgment is without mercy, but to him which has done no mercy. But mercy
does surmount judgment. Which if it were not so, what hope had we? for so much
as when the just king shall sit on his throne, who shall glory that he has a
chaste heart, or who shall glory that he is clean from sin? Therefore then the
just being fully and perfectly cleansed by his mercy, shall shine as the
sin in the kingdom of his father. here S. Aug. plainly teaches, that when we
come before the tribunal seat of Christ to be judged, we had no hope to
escape condemnation, but that we trust our sins shall be forgiven: whereof it
follows, that our good works cannot deserve, or by their merit procure unto
us eternal life. For if we be justified and saved by pardon, we cannot any
ways say truly, that justification and salvation comes unto us by our
deserts. In an other place he writes, Cont. Julian. Lib. 6. Cap. 1.
That our justification is wrought by remission of all our sins. If our
justification consist in the forgiveness of our sins, how can it be ascribed to
the worthiness and perfection of our works? Again in an other book he
teaches that Christ's justice is our justice: and so that we are justified not
by our merits or righteousness, but by the justice of Christ imputed unto us.
These are his words: In psalm. 21. exposit. 3.
How then says he, of my faults? but because he prays for our faults, and
has made our faults his faults, that he might make his justice our justice,
speaking of our savior Christ. In manuali. Cap. 22. Meritum meum miseratto
Domini.
And that you may know what merits Saint Augustine trusted unto, I will further
set down one other place out of him. All my hope (says he) is in the death
of my Lord. His death is my merit, my refuge, salvation, life, and
resurrection: my merit is the compassion of the Lord. I shall not be void of
merit so long as the Lord of mercies shall not want. And while the mercies of
the Lord are manifold, I am also manifold in merits. Thus S. Augustine
stands not upon his own merits, as proud Pharisees and papists do in the
sight of God, but falls down flat in confession of his guiltines, and flies
only to the mercy of God in the merits of Christ. And this is our very
Doctrine that we hold, and our hope of salvation that we have, for which we
are by the Adversaries so much accused, and reviled.

Origene lived before S. Augustine two hundred years, and was for his learning
and skill in the scriptures universally renowned, although he be not sound in
every point of Christian faith. Let us (...) what he has delivered unto us
concerning this question in hand, whether our works can merit the kingdom of
heaven. These are his words: Origin. in ep. ad Roman. c. 4. lib. 5.
But when I consider the loftines of the words, in that the Apostle says, to
him that works, recompense is made according to debte, I scarcely believe,
that there can be any work, that may of due demand the reward of God, for
so much as even this same, that we can do, or think, or speak any thing,
Quod erit debitum illius, cuius gratia nos praecessit?
we do it by his gift and bounty. Then how can he owe us any thing, whose
grace did preuente us? And therefore we must rather consider, least perhaps,
that he said, To him that works, the reward shall be imputed according to
debt, ought to be understood of the debt due to the wicked work. For that
debts are called sins in the holy Scriptures, you shall often find. Then he
alleges sundry places to this purpose, and afterward proceeds thus:
whereupon the same Apostle in an other place says, the wages of sin is
death: and he added not and said likewise, And the wages of justice is
eternal life, Vitam vero ae ternam soli gratiae consig naret. I think it
should be assignaret
but he says, But eternal life is the gracious gift of God; to teach us, that
wages which is like to debte and reward, is a recompense of punishment and
death, and to assign eternal life to grace only. And thus determining that
reward according to debte belongs to the wicked in respect of their works,
but not the believers, he goes on forward and says, To confirm as it were
his former saying, to him that works not, but believes in him, that
justifies the wicked, his faith is imputed for righteousness. the Apostle
takes a testimony out of the psalms, and says, Cui Deus accepto sert iusti
tiam sine opers bus.
As David does declare the blessedness of the man, whom the Lord accounts
righteous without works. This is Origenes judgment, that our ill deeds
deserve of due and debte punishment, and condemnation, but that our good deeds
cannot merit the reward of eternal life: and so has he discovered the
inequality of those balances whereof you speak

S. Ambrose speaking of David says, that he desired to depart out of this
place of pilgrimage to the common country of the Saints, Ambros. de bono mor.
Cap. 2.
entreating that for the pollution of his abode here, his sins might be
forgiven, before he departed out of this life. For he that receaueth not here
remission of his sins, shall not be there: and he shall not be there, because
he can not come unto eternal life, Quia vitae aeterna remissio peccatoru^ est.
for so much as everlasting life is forgiveness of sins. In these words we are
taught that whosoever will have eternal life, must look to receive it, not for
merit of his good works, but through forgiveness of his evil works: and this
namely he affirms of David, the holy Prophet and servant of god, with whom
in godliness and good works our Papists may not any ways compare.

Saint Jerome has many goodly sentences in his books against the Pelagians,
flatly overthrowing the popish doctrine of justification by merit of our
works: as when he says, Hieron. ad Cte siph. aduers. Pe lag.
that before God, who sees and beholds all things, and to whom the secrets
of the heart are not unknown, no man is just. If in the sight of God, no man is
just, as Jerome truly according to the holy scriptures maintains against the
wicked Pelagians, who then can trust by his justice to be saved? or how can any
man otherwise be saved, then by the clemency, mercy and forgiveness of the
judge? can he that says and confesses, I am unjust, I ask pardon of my God
for my sins, say with the same mouth, I have deserved heaven by my good
deeds? Again S. Jerome says, this is the only perfection of men, if they
know them selves to be imperfect. And you says Christ, when you have done all
things, say, we are unprofitable servants, we have done, that we were bound to
do. If he be unprofitable, who has done all things, what shall we say of
him, that could not fulfill all things? Si inutilis est, qui fecit omma: quid
de illo dicendum est, qui expl^re non potuit? Lib. 1. aduers. Pelag.
and he proves at large that never any either did, or could fulfill all,
that of due was required of him. In an other book he says, then are we just,
when we confess our selves to be sinners, and our justice consists not of
our own merit, but of Gods mercy, the Scripture saying, the just man is an
accuser of him self in the beginning of his speech. Our righteousness by Saint
Ieromes doctrine consists not in the merits of our good works, but in the
confession of our sins, and mercy of the Lord. Furthermore he says in the
same book: In Deuteronomie it is plainly showed that we are saved not by our
works and justice, but by the mercy of God, when the Lord says by Moses, say
not in thine heart, when the Lord shall destroy them before thy face, the Lord
has brought me in for my righteousness, etc. If the Israelites could not
deserve the land of Canaan to be given unto them for their righteousness, who
can trust to receive the land of life for his worthiness? This was S. Ieromes
faith, and this he constantly defended against such wicked heretics, that
troubled the Church of Christ then, Mare. Erem.
as our Papists have long done. S. Mark the Eremite has written a book
against those, that think they are justified by works, wherein thus he writes,
Therefore the kingdom of heaven is not a reward of works, (...)
but the free gift of the Lord, prepared for faithful servants.

S. Gregory came after S. Augustine the space of two hundred years, Greg.
Moral. lib. 2. cap. 40.
yet held he the same truth, concerning this point, as by his writings
appears. As if (says he) a mind that is tempted, and taken in the need of
his own infirmity, should say, Grace has begotten me in the first faith
being naked, Nudam me in prima fide gratia genuit, ^udum eadem gratia in
assu^tione saluabit.
and the same grace shall save me in the last day being naked: And further
adds, that though a man have some virtues, yet it is best for him, to cast
him self down, to acknowledge his own infirmity and wantes, Ad solam
misericordiae spe^ recurrat.
to f^^e to the only hope of mercy. And thus writes the same Gregory in an
other place, Every sinner turning to God with weeping, In Ezech. lib. 1. hom.
7. in sins.
now begins to be just, when he begins to accuse that which he has done.
For why should he not be just that now is cruel by tears against his own
injustice? Therefore our just advocate shall defend us to be just in judgment:
quia nosmetip sos and cognosci mus, and accusamus imustos.
because we know and accuse our selves to be unjust. Let us therefore put our
confidence not in our tears, not in our deeds but in the allegation of our
advocate. Could any thing be spoken more directly against the vain and
damnable persuasion of Papists, that think they shall be saved by their doings
and sufferings?

Now let us descend lower to S. Bernard, who lived after Saint Gregory five
hundred years, and see how the same doctrine has been continued, and believed
of the godly. Bernard. (...) Cant. sermon. 23.
Thus writes Saint Bernard: It suffices to me for all righteousness, to have
him alone merciful to me, to whom alone I have sinned. All that he has
decreed not to impute to me, is as though it had not been at all. Hominis
iustitia, indulgen. tia Dei. Sermon 61.
Not to sin, is Gods justice: man's justice is the mercifulnes of God. In
another sermon upon the same book, If (says he) the mercies of God are from
everlasting and for ever, I also will sing the mercies of God for ever. Shall I
sing mine own righteousness? Lord I will remember thy righteousness only. For
that is mine also. For thou art made unto me of God righteousness. Need I fear
lest that one be not sufficient for us both? It is not a short cloak, which (as
the Prophet says) cannot cover two. Thy righteousness is an everlasting
righteousness. What is longer, then eternity? It will cover both thee and me
largely, being a large and everlasting righteousness. And in me it covers the
multitude of sins: in thee O Lord, what else, but the treasures of piety, the
riches of goodness? Here S. Bernard teaches us two points against the
Papists: one, that our righteousness, whereby we are justified before god, is
the righteousness of Christ imputed to us: an other, that we are saved not by
the goodness and desert of our works, but by covering and forgiving of our
sins. Epist. 190.
Thus in an other place says he to like purpose, A man was indetted, and a man
made payment. For if one (says he) died for all, therefore all are dead, Vt
satisfactio vnius omnibus imputetur, sicut ommum peccata vnus ille portauit
that the satisfaction of one might be imputed to all, as he alone bare the
sins of all. Again in this same epistle he says, Therefore where
reconciliation is, there is remission of sins, and what is that else, but
justification? If remission of our sins be our justification, then can not
the Popish doctrine be allowed, which teaches that we are justified and saved
by our merits. Yet further in an other place the same good father. Ad. milit.
tem pli. cap. 11.
He that has taken away the desert of sin, by giving unto us his
righteousness, he has paid the debt of death, and restored life. For so, death
being dead, life returns, as sin being taken away righteousness comes
again. Furthermore death is abandoned by Christ's death, and Christ's
righteousness is imputed unto us. Mors in Christi morte fugatur and Christi
nobis iustitia imputatur.
Thus plainly does Saint Bernard teach imputed justice, which our Papists now
a days make a mock at, but to the destruction of their own souls.

One other place more out of S. Bernard, wherein he writes most sweetly and
comfortablie, that the testimony of a good conscience consists in three
things. For first of all, it is necessary to believe, that thou can not have
remission of thy sins, but thorough the mercifulnes of God. In. Annuntiat.
Marie. ser. 1
Secondly, that thou can have no good work at all, unless he also give it.
Lastly that thou can deserve eternal life by no works, but also it must be
given unto thee freely. And of this last point thus he adds, Now concerning
eternal life, we know, that the sufferings of this life are not worthy the
glory to come, no not if one man should suffer all. For man's merits are not
such, that for them eternal life is due by right, or that God should do any
injury, unless he sholulde give it. For to omit, that all merits are the
gifts of God, and so man for them is rather made debtor to God, then God to
man; what are all our merits to so great glory? Quid sunt me rita omnia ad
tantam gloria^.
Thus notably does S. Bernard approve the verity of our faith and doctrine,
concerning the cause and means of our salvation, and treads down and
stampeth under his feet all Pharisaical and Papisticall merits.

And for so much as M.R. has a special grace, more then any of his fellows, to
obiecte one Protestant against an other, and with such oppositions has
replenished his book, I may be bold to put him in mind, what one of his
graund masters has taught touching this principal controversy of our
justification and salvation: Pighius against the Papists in the matter of
justification teaches the very same that we do.
I mean Alberte Pighius, who notwithstanding he were a captain Papiste, and
has written much in maintenance of Popish religion, yet in this matter has
given al papists the slip, and has subscribed to our doctrine. Out of his
long discourse I will set down only this sentence: And thereof is it that our
righteousness is placed in Christ's obedience, Pighius Co^trouers. 2.
because the same is imputed to us being incorporate into him, as though it
were our own: so that by it we are accounted righteous. And as once Jacob,
being not the first borne by nativity, hyding himself under his brothers
garment, and having put on his coat, which smelled most sweetly, did
insinuate him self to his father, that under an other man's person he might
receive the blessing of the first borne: so also it is necessary that we lie
hid under the precious pureness of Christ our eldest brother, that we savor of
his sweet smell, that our sins be buried and covered with his perfection, and
that we thus offer our selves to our most loving father, that we may obtain of
him the blessing of righteousness. Herein as Pighius agrees with the truth and
with us, so has he much offended his own friends for thus leaving them in the
plain field. Tapper the wise Deane of Louaine writes bitterly against him
for his opinion herein, and says he learned it by reading Caluines
Institutions. Which perhaps was true, seeing of him also he learned much more.
You see, Master Rainolds, our doctring justified both by the scriptures of God,
and by the testimonies of most learned and godly fathers, and by consent of
as learned a Papist, as your Church has in these later times bred any. Now
then peruse over again your wholl tale, and weigh it in a true balance, and
you shall find it lighter then any fether.

Fiftlie you object, that I understand not our own doctrine, and here
according to your manner, Page 110. etc.
you wander up and down, as a man that had lost his way, who though he know
not whether to go, yet will be going still. It pitieth me to see your miserable
folly, and blindness, wherinto you are willingly fallen. But thus will the lord
deal with such as wilfully give over the known truth. Where I say, that we
must necessarily suffer with Christ, if we will be glorified with Christ, this
seely sophister asks, how this stands with our doctrine of only faith: as
though there were any likeness of contradiction at all, between these two
sayings. For know you what is meant by only faith? If you do not, you are
to blame to charge me with ignorance of that, which your self do not
understand: Justification by faith only excludes not necessary duties of
Christian obedience.
if you do, then can you not but plainly perceive, that the doctrine of
necessary suffering with Christ, is not any way contrary to the Doctrine of
our justifying by faith only. Although we truly teach, that only faith
does justify, because it is the only instrument, by which we take hold upon
Jesus Christ, and so are justified: yet we teach that iustifiing faith can
never lack good works, and hereof it follows that whosoever has faith,
must also bring forth the fruits of faith, which are good works, and that
necessarily, thereby to declare, and testify his faith, as the Apostle Saint
James does fully prove. This necessary conjunction of works and faith, the
effect and the cause, does not disprooue, but that our apprehension of Christ
is to be attributed to only faith: Faith although it never be alone yet it
apprehends Christ, and justifies alone.
as the beholding of the light is the only and proper function of the eye,
although the faculty of seeing cannot be divided from the sense of feeling.
Yet no man will say that we perceive the brightness of the sun by our
feeling, but by our seeing only. So though our faith can never be alone, but
is always fruitful of good works, yet it only does iustifye, and not good
works, in that it only lays hold upon Christ our righteousness. You have a
weak head Master Rainolds, if you stagger at this. But blessed be God, that
strikes his enemies thus with giddines.

To like purpose serves that you allege out of Illyricus and others,
concerning the controversy, whether good works are necessary to salvation.
There is none so ignorant, but knows the judgment, and resolution of the
Church. And although Illyricus be earnest, How good works are necessary: not
as causes of salvation, but as effects of a iustifiyng faith.
and says, they are no way necessary to salvation, yet he confesses a
faithful man must needs do them, as duties necessarily required by the Lord:
not that they are any ways the cause or merit of salvation. If you
understand the proposition thus, then in this sense they are not necessary:
for then should they derogate from the merits of Christ. But as effects of
faith, and justification, so are they necessary: and this doctrine as it is
true, so is it far from all papistrie. For papists teach that works are
efficient causes of their salvation, and that is most false, and injurious to
the blood of Christ: Christians hold that good works are necessary fruits
of faith, and that those who are justified, and reconciled with God, must walk
before him in new obedience, and serve him in righteousness and holiness all
their days. You wish I were a Papist for mine own sake: and for your sake
again I wish that you were none. Which of these wishes is better, the day of
the Lord shall make manifest. In the mean time enjoy that happiness, which you
have purchased by your falling from us, or rather from Christ: I will be no
companion of your Apostasy.

CHAP. 6.
Of reproouing the ancient fathers for their doctrine, touching good works.

IF wrangling were any ways to be commended in these great and weighty
controversies of Religion, Page 114. etc.
then had Master Rainolds deserved praise and thanks for his pains in this
behalf. But as in all debating and trial of truth it is acounted an dishonest
part to devise false shifts for maintenance of untruth, The fathers in their
writings have sundry weeds growing with the good corn.
so in matters of Gods worship and Religion to use crafty cauillation is a
most wicked and damnable practice. The ancient fathers holding the ground and
foundation of doctrine, did oftentimes build thereon stubble and straw,
partly by some superstitious opinions which themselves conceived of such
inventions, and partly by the sway and violence of custom, whereby they were
carried to a liking of those things, which they saw commended, and practiced by
others. And yet God forbid that because of some errors which they held, we
should raze their names out of the Calender of Gods Saints, or think
otherwise then reverently of them.

Among other infections that reigned in the fathers days, this was not the
least that they hoped in some sort to make some part of amends to God for
their sins, by voluntary punishments, which they sustained in this life.
Whereof although by a consequent it follows, that they did injury to the
satisfaction of Christ's death, yet they meant not directly to take any thing
from it, but trusted by it only to be justified and saved. Nevertheless being
ledd by a likely and probable persuasion of man's wit, that God would spare
them, if they punished them selves, they trusted by this means to make some
recompense for their offenses, and therefore suffered much hardness, travail,
and penalty in the course of their life: which if they had done simply with
desire and purpose thereby to make themselves fitter for the service of God, it
had been a godly and profitable endeavor. And this no Protestant misliketh,
seeing the Apostie has taught, that it is expedient for all Christians to beat
down and subdue their own bodies. 1. Cor. 9.26.
But to put any confidence of appeasing Gods wrath in these actions devised by
them selves, cannot be excused in any whosoever.

Howbeit I would not any should think that when the Fathers speak so often of
Satisfaction and Penance, Satisfactions not always meant in respect of God.
they mean allwaies a satisfaction unto God for sin, as the Papists do. For
those satisfactions were nothing else, for the most part, but penalties
appointed by the Church, for such to endure, as had by some open falling into
greater transgression given a public offense to the Church of Christ. Such
were brought under penance by the censure and discipline of the Church, which
when they had accrodinglie performed, in token of their unfeigned repentance,
then were they received again into the company of the faithful, and then was
satisfaction made, namely in respect of the Church. Of these Ecclesiastical
satisfactions we read often in the fathers and councels: but hereby is not
meant that by these they purchased remission of their sins at the hands of
God. And yet I deny not but many did put too great superstition in these
outward exercises, trusting something thereby to find favor with God, the
rather for their hard usage of themselves. Which though it be an error, yet
were they notwithstanding good men, and holy fathers, as I called them.

In which respect, when you labor and spend much of your oil, to prove me
contrary to my self, you may see what a trifler you are, and how unworthy of
answer. Were not the Apostles holy men, Holy me^ may have and had their
errors, and that in weighty causes of religion.
when they dreamed of an earthly kingdom in this world? yet this opinion is
contrary to a principal article of our faith. were they void of holiness, when
they believed that the gospel was to be preached to the Jews only? which is
greatly derogatorie to the grace of God, and salvation of his people. Then
every error does not overthrow all holiness in the servants of God. In the
primitive Church many holy fathers were infected with the error of Christ's
reigning a thousand years on earth, who notwithstanding are worthelie
accounted Saints of God. Cyprian and many godly Bishops with him erred about
the baptism ministered by heretics: yet lost they not for all that the opinion
and name of holy fathers. Thus the vanity of your challenge appears in
finding fault with me, for calling the fathers holy, whom I charged with
error: it being such as in them did not raze the foundation of the gospel.

Your argument of the Church is frivolous. True it is, that he that makes a
schism in the Church, and cutteth himself from the same, cannot be saved. But
to err in this point as the fathers did, is neither schism, nor so dangerous
to salvation as schism. Nether is it like to the error of the Galatians
altogether. For it was in the fathers only an oversight of infirmity, by
leaning somewhat too much to their own reason, and not considering the matter
so deeply as they ought: and yet they held not, that works are to be joined
with Christ, as necessary causes of our justification and salvation, but
ascribing the wholl work of our redemption unto Christ, they erred a little in
applying this redemption unto themselves. Your case is the same that was of
the Galatians. For as they thought to be justified by the works of the Law, so
do you: as they were warned of their error, so are you: as they without
repentance lost the benefit of Christ's sacrifice, so shall you. If the fathers
had been as often and plainly admonished, as you have been, they would being
holy and sincere men, have reformed their judgment: and keeping the head,
though they erred in some part, the Lord will not impute that error unto them
for condemnation.

All that you allege here out of that worthy servant of Christ M. Luther, Page
120. etc
I acknowledge for true, seeing it is the very same that the Scriptures
themselves have taught. For this is the voice and doctrine of the gospel,
that by faith only in the mediator, who by his sacrifice once offered upon
the cross has reconciled the father unto us, we are justified and saved. Then
to live straightly, and to do good works with this purpose and persuasion, that
thereby we shall obtain justice or salvation, is contrary to the truth of
Christ's gospel, and may not in any be allowed, although otherwise most
learned and godly. Will you reason hereby against Luther and me, because we
charge the fathers with some oversight in the truth of this doctrine, in that
they thought somewhat too well of their own deeds, we must therefore repute
them for wicked men, and make them no better then Papists? They erred not
so much as you, they erred not so wilfully as you: and therefore though there
besome likeness between their error and yours, yet we account not of them, as
of you, who besides that you err in this point of justification most
damnablie, have also multiplied your errors in other articles, and almost left
no one ground of pure religion unshaken. And therefore you greatly deceive
your own heart M. Rainolds, when you think your self to be in the same case
that the fathers were in, because sometime the fathers gave more to their
works, then they should have done, you trusting to be justified and saved by
the worthiness and merits of your works, which the fathers did not. So between
you and them there is a great space of distance: although I grant that some
things which they have written of this matter, and practiced in their lives,
tends somewhat to your heresy of justification by works. For the mystery
of iniquity, which in papistry is fully finished, began to work in the
Apostles age, and so continued still forward in the fathers days, until it
came to his height and perfection in the kingdom of popery. They slipped a
little, you are fallen headlong into the pit: they were ouerseene through
infirmity, you are blind of malice: they scattered some darnell in the Lords
field, you have plucked up by the roots the good corn. They have suffered loss
of this building, being not agreeable to the foundation, yet are saved: you
overthrow the foundation it self, and therefore cannot in this opinion be
saved.

The contradiction which you have found in my words, Page 124.
is a knott in a rush: your head is crazie, I perceive, by your wandering and
frivolous talk: or else your wit is often very fugitive. Although the fathers
sometime do require satisfaction by works, not only in respect of the
Church, but of God, as appears by Saint Cyprian plainly in sundry places,
and therein have obscured the doctrine of repentance and Justification, yet
they never meant so groslie, Satisfactions in respect of God, taught and
practiced in the primitive time, what they were.
as you do, that this satisfaction of theirs should be a worthy and
sufficient recompense to god, for their sins committed against his most
holy majesty: but that they ought to crave humbly for pardon at gods hands,
by humbling themselves be fore him in fasting, and praying, and punishing their
bodies in this life. This appears by the 55. epistle of Saint Cyprian, as I
noted: Ne exoretur precib. and satisfactionibus.
who speaking of Christians committing Idolatry, says, They make
intercession, that Christ may not be entreated by prayers and satisfactions.
This godly father ascribes remission of sins to the pardon of Christ, being
entreated by prayers and satisfactions. If remission be of pardon, then is it
not of satisfaction, as you mean: if it be obtained by prayers, then is it not
given to the worthiness of our works. Again he says, I embrace with ready
and perfect love, such as return with repentance, confessing their sins
with humble and simple satisfafaction. Satisfactione humili and simplice.
What else does he mean by this humble satisfaction, but humble and earnest
supplication for pardon? in his book against Demetrian he says, speaking to
the heathen, we exhort while there is leave, that you satisfy God. And can the
works of such men make a full satisfaction unto God? No: But Saint Cyprian
expounds himself by and by in these words: Thou even at thy hour of death,
and end of this temporal life, entreat God for thy sins, who is one and
true: pardon is given to him that confesses, and to him that believes,
gracious remission is granted of Gods mercy. Thus with this godly father, to
satisfy God, is to make humble suit and request to God for our sins:
Salutaris indulgentia.
and gracious or saving indulgence is the effect of this satisfaction.
Although their meaing was nothing so corrupt as yours, yea for the most part
was sincere, yet the manner of doctrine is unsound, in that our satisfaction is
required as necessary, whereas Christ has already made a full satisfaction for
us: and by occasion hereof it grew in time to be an opinion received of the
most, that these satisfactions did in some part appease the wrath of almighty
God, and deserve reward, which is contraie to the Gospel of Jesus Christ.
Where is now that contradiction M. Rainolds, which you imagined? look better
what you say, or else we may worthelie think your dealing is very childish,
and indiscreet, and nothing seemly for a sober man, or learned divine.

But little hope is there of more honest dealing at your hands, who as may
seem, Page 127.
have hardened your face against the truth, and set your self wilfully in the
chair of scorners and slaunderers. Foul slanders and blasphemies uttered by
M.R. against the truth of Christ's gospel.
For your railing at our doctrine of only faith, is too impudent, as though
it leaft no place for bewailing of sins, for fasting, for praying, for
watching, for giving alms, for doing good works: yea you call only faith,
only fancy, and imagination. You were a very evil scholar in our schole,
who in all the time you tarried amongst us, and had the charge also of a Church
committed unto you, did no better learn the doctrine of justification by faith
alone, then thus untruly, and blasphemouslie to report of it. Does faith
exclude good works, because it alone does receive and embrace Jesus Christ our
savior and redeemer? is the faith of Christians, whereby alone Christ is
apprehended and applied unto them, no better then a vain imagination and
fancy? Repent M. Rainolds of these spiteful and malicious slanders against
the eternal truth of Christ's Gospel: or be assured your portion shall be
with infidels and renagates in the lake that burns with fire and brimstone
for ever.

Now that you bring against me, to prove us to be Ministers of Antichrist,
page 128.
by the same reason that we prove you to be priests of Antichrist, let us in a
word consider the force of it. I say, that seeing of Christ's priesthood there
be two parts, the one to offer a sacrifice once for all, the other to make
intercession for us, the Papists overthrow both, in that they teach that
Christ is offered daily, and that there be innumerable Mediators. Master
Rainolds says, If they be Antichrists for offering sacrifice, we also are
Antichrists for praying: for so much as the one belongs to his Priesthood, as
well as the other. A blind and witles cavil. They pretend to offer a
sacrifice, no less then Christ himself, to make atonement betwixt god and
man. An ignorant and unlearned objection of M.R. refuted.
This sacrifice is offered already by Christ, and never must nor can be
offered again: and therefore they are indeed Antichrists, in denying the
only absolute sacrifice of Christ. Again in appointing so many Mediators,
by whose intercession they may be brought into Gods favor, they do open
injury to the other part of his priesthood, which is to offer prayers for us,
that by the worthiness and acceptance thereof, we may be reconciled with God
Do we pray in this manner, that for the virtue and merits of our prayers, God
would be gracious unto us, and to others? Noe, but only for the merits of
Christ: where as you pray to be heard of God, not only for Christ's sake,
but also for the worthiness and merits of a thousand Saints, and so bereave our
savior Christ of these two principal offices belonging unto him only, as he
is our Priest. Had you but a grain of true divinity in you as bigg as a
mustard seed, you could not thus groslie be abused with such absurd, and
peevish sophistication.

CHAP. 7.
Of M. Jewels challenge.

IT much offends you, Page 129. etc.
M. Rainolds, that I will seem to uphold the challenge, which that learned and
godly Bishop of Sarisbury, M. Jewel, did once make against your side. But as
the author thereof, while he lived, maintained the same most truly and
worthelie against your betters, so I have no cause to be afraid of any thing,
that can be alleged in disproofe of it, by you, or your companions, who may
not rightly be compared with D. Harding, and such others, as then took part
with him against the Bishop. And you may be ashamed to make mention of that
challenge, which you have so long ago given over, as a desperate cause, wherein
the chiefest adversary could not make show of proof, without using the
testimonies of forged and counterfeite writers, as Amphilochius, Clemens,
Abdias, Hippolytus, and such others, whereof no more accounte is to be made,
then of fables, and shameless forgeries. Such were the chiefest proofs, which
D. Harding was able to bring, and whatsoever he brought, has been fully
answered in the Reply by the Bishop himself: which book as yet though it
has been in some parts nipped at by diverse, yet thoroughly confuted was it
never. What you can do in this case may easily be geassed: and God knows,
full little have you done to any purpose, as shall appear.

Your beginning is of an other matter. Page 130. etc.
For this question of Peter's being at Rome, M. Jewel made not any part of
his challenge, knowing well enough, that this might easelie be proved by
testimony of fathers a great many. And this was I not ignorant of neither,
when I said, that no Papist can prove, that Peter indeed was at Rome. For
albeit I know that diverse have so written, since the Apostles times, yet can I
not receive this as a sufficient proof, neither yet ought you, there being
against it so many reasons out of scripture, All Popish religion hangs upon
a twine thread of Perers being and sitting at Rome: which can not be proved,
nay rather is disprooued by the scriptures.
whereof every one has more weight, then all the testimonies of fathers
alleged. You know, and can not deny that your wholl Church and religion is
built upon Peter's sitting at Rome: which being a matter of such consequence, as
that the wholl is vpholden, and sustained theruppon, so as if it shake, all is
in danger, if it fall, al is clean overthrown: it ought to be made manifest to
al Christians, that Peter was at Rome, by greater proof and warrant, then is
in the writings of men, which being as good as any of that nature can be
afforded, is not of sufficient strength to stay the conscience desirous to be
soundly and perfectly resolved in points of faith and religion: but now
further being by sundry testimonies of holy scriptures utterly discredited, it
must be thought that they have small conscience of truth, or regard of their
everlasting estate, that hang the salvation of their souls upon so uncertain
and rotten a stay. The first reporter of Peter's being at Rome was Papias, a man
of mean credit and authority in the Church of God, Eusebius. lib. 3. ca. 39.
and as Eusebius writes of him, a father of diverse fables: a fit father of
your faith. Of him Hegesippus received this, and of Hegesippus others, as in
writing histories the latter follow those that went before: so that this wholl
matter is grounded upon Papias word, for which your pope has good cause to
give him thanks. Now the scriptures in many places weigh so strongly on the
other side, that if many a thousand such as Papias should tell us Peter was at
Rome, their report were not to be trusted. Peter promised to remain with the
Jews, Gal. 2.9.
and be their Apostle: and Paul assigns unto him the Apostleship of the
circumcision. Gal. 2.8.
If Peter were Bishop of Rome, how was this promise kept? Saint Paul writes an
epistle to the Romans, wherein he saluteth many persons by name, but of Saint
Peter he makes no mention: and from Rome he writes many epistles at sundry
times, and sends salutations to the Churches from many faithful, but of Saint
Peter in none he speaks ever a word. Doubtless it was because Saint Peter was
not there. Genebr. Chre^^ nol. l. 3. saecu. 1.
And if he had been Bishop, as your men affirm, twenty five years almost, it
may be thought strange how it could come to pass, that when Saint Paull writ
to Rome, and came him self to Rome, and tarried at Rome, writing from thence so
many epistles, S. Peter should ever be absent for his charge.

Other arguments might I use against this common opinion of Peter's sitting and
dying at Rome. But as you lose all, if you can not prove him to have been
Bishop there, so though you could prove it, and we should of necessity
confess it, yet had you gained nothing at all. For though it must needs follow
if Peter were not Bishop of Rome, that all your religion is false flowing from
that head, yet being granted that Peter had been Bishop there, it makes
neither hot nor cold for proof of any point in question between us. page
133. Liui. decad. 4. lib. 5.
Of this therefore no more now.

The largenes of the challenge containing in number seven and twenty articles
of controversy, you labor to extenuate, by an old history recorded in Liuie
of Titus Falminius host, who by diverse manners of dressing and preparing one
only kind of meat, furnished his table with great variety of dishes. And
would you bear us down, Master Rainolds, that this multitude of articles is
but of one matter, drawn forth into sundry parts, by skilful varying and
mincing the same? If any will look upon them, he shall soon be hable to
control you. The first of Private mass, the second of receiving in one kind,
the third of common prayers in an unknown tongue, the fourth of the Popes
supremacy, the fifth of the real presence, the seventh of elevation, the eight
of Adoration, the ninthe of Hanging the Sacrament under a Canopy, the tenth of
Accidents without subject, the fourtenth of worshipping Images, the fiftenth of
reading the scriptures in the vulgar tongue, the seauententh of the sacrifice
of the mass: can you deny that these controversies, being the arguments of
several articles, are diverse and differing one from an other? And are not
these weighty points, general heads, principal questions, great mysteries,
and keys, as Master Jewel calls them, of your religion? some of the other
articles (I grant) have more affinity together, yet not so great, except in
one or two, but that they may in reason and nature be distinguished, and stand
each by them selves without necessary support or defense, from others. And
what though there had been a nearer respect between them, might they not
therefore be propounded and handled severally? The manner of your own
schools, and controversy lectures, prove the contrary, wherein every
question according to the subject matter is divided into sundry articles, and
every article has a special treatise. Your tale therefore of the Calcidian
host, who entertained the Roman Captain with one only kind of meat dressed
diversely, commends the cunning of that cook, but serves nothing to your
purpose, though you set it out with as great show as you can.

Three articles you acknowledge to be of weight, page 138.
The primacy of the Pope, thereall presence, and the sacrifice: wherein you
have uttered your judgment of the rest, that they are not of such weight as
your Church would have them to be esteemed. And of these three you might with
as good reason except the two latter, and so make the first only a matter of
weight. For that indeed is the substantial point, in mainteance whereof all
your labors are bestowed. Otherwise were it not for defense of your Popes
wicked, unreasonable, Antichristian monarchy, you could easily agree with us
for these two, and all the rest, I doubt not. But what think you then M. R. of
private Mass? Is it a thing of no weight as here you would have it accounted?
there is not, I suppose, any thing in your Church more used, or better liked.
Your half communion, your latin service, your Images, your keeping the
scriptures in a tongue unknown to the people, and other such heads of your
Romish religion, are they of no weight? are they trifles? are they not worth
the striving for? Then let your men give over all defense of them, let private
masses be abolished, let the communion be administered in both kinds,
according to Christ's institution, let the public prayers be said in the tongue
that every country uses, let Images be burned and Idolatry forbidden, let it
be lawful for the people of all countries to read the scriptures in their own
language, let there be no controversy about the other articles. For while you
stand so stiffly in maintenance of all these and others, you cannot truly say,
and bear us in hand, they are not of weight in your account.

That Master Jewel promised to give over and subscribe, Page 140.
if any of those articles could be proved by scriptures, councels, or
Doctors, within 600. years after Christ, it was not because he meant ever to
subscribe to your doctrine, or was unstaid in his religion, but of a most
assured knowledge and resolute persuasion that you were utterly destitute in
this behalf of all truth and antiquity, as indeed you are. Otherwise you may
remember that our religion is grounded only upon the holy scriptures of God:
and therefore though you brought against us writers and fathers never so many
for these matters, as you can bring not one of credit and age, yet will we
never subscribe unto you, having once subscribed to the certain truth of God
revealed unto us in his holy, perfect, and written word, by which al
sentences, opinions, and writings of men whatsoever, must be examined.

Now comes M. Rainolds to avouch the truth of these three notable articles,
page 142. etc.
out of ancient writers against the Bishop of Sarisburies challenge: and first
of the Popes supremacy. Where (good Reader) I pray the consider the wrangling
and cauilling spirit of this sophister. Such tricks of untrue dealing has M.
R. used many.
Master Jewel in that sermon wherein he bad defiance to the Popish sectaries,
speaking against their private mass, and single communion, and having proved
by evident testimonies of antiquity the contrary use and practice of the
Church, in the end names sundry Bishops and Doctors of the Church, of whom he
says we have learned these heresies, as our adversaries account them. Among
other he reckeneth Anacletus, and Sixtus, that were Bishops of Rome. Master
Rainolds taking upon him to prove the Popes supreme authority by the same
witnesses that M. Jewel here alleges, brings in the decretall epistles set
forth under the names of these two Bishops, which no man of wit, or judgment
can once imagine to have been written by them, they are so foolish and
unlearned: but yet the Church of Rome makes no small reckening of them, being
the best evidences she has to show for her unlawful and tyrannical
usurpation. To what purpose M.R. do you object those Epistles in the cause of
supremacy against M. Jewel speaking of private mass and half communion? Have
you thus sold your self to devise crafty sleights, that you may abuse the
simplicity of your Reader? Master Jewel speaks of one thing, and for proof
thereof appealeth to those two Bishops among others: you bring against him
their forged writings for an other matter, Reply Arciela 4. Diuis. 3.
wherein Master Jewel himself has already showed his judgment of them.

But you say, Page 145.
what other books has he seen of theirs beside these epistles? And what
though he has not seen any? what though there are none to be seen? might not
he therefore say that we have learned of them this doctrine, which no man can
doubt, but they followed, and practiced, and left to their successors behind
them? for it being the clear doctrine of Christ, and his Apostles, those
godly and faithful Bishops so near the Apostles time departed not from it.
De consec. dict. 2 peracta.
And a Bishop of Rome, Calixtus by name, reports that the Apostles ordained,
and it was the practice of the Roman Church, that after consecration, all
should communicate, unless they would incur excommunication. It is but loss
of time to answer such palpable cauillation, as this book has almost nothing
else. And were it not for regard I have to the godly, that desire the
adversary may be answered, though never so unworthy of answer in respect of
himself, and might be offended, if he should pass without answer, I could
easily have suffered M.R. to have enjoyed quietly the fruits of his labors,
and otherwise spent my time more profitablie to my self and others.

Next in like manner S. Leo, and S. Gregory, two other Bishops of Rome, Page
147. etc.
but long after, are objected: and M. R. translateth out of the Centuries a
great deal, to show that by confession of the more famous and learned
Protestants (as he says) the Roman sea had primacie over all Churches in
Christendom.

True it is that the Centurie writers in that Chapter do largely and plainly
discover the mystery of iniquity, Cent. 5. cap. 7. Col. 774. etc.
that in those days did mightelie work for the obtaining of that universal
primacie, which afterward with much endeavor was gotten. And as the Church of
Rome was then in great estimation and authority, far beyond other Churches;
so the Bishops of that sea used all occasion to increase the credit and
prerogative thereof, especially this Leo, and Gregory also not a little. All
this, as it is in the Centuries discoursed, we confess, and withal justly
mislike and condemn that ambition in those Bishops: but what gather you hereof
M. R. for your purpose? does this prove the Popes supremacy? Great and many
untruths avouched by M.R.
does this disprooue Master Jewels challenge? Do the learned Protestants also
confess the same? what notable and shameless untruths are these? Not one of
all these examples alleged, does argue the Popes universal power or headship
over Christ's Church, nor comes near unto it. That Leo calls it the
chiefest Church: that he requires Anatolius Archbishop of Constantinople to
make relation unto him, if any matter of controversy should arise: that he
wills Maximus Archbishop of Antioche to write to the sea Apostolic, how the
Churches there increase: that he reproved other Bishops, if they did ought
amiss: that he appointed in some places orders, and ceremonies, and did these
and many other such things, as in his epistles is manifest, although he took
upon him more then he might or ought, and for advancement of his own seat,
encroched much upon the liberty of other Churches, yet never meant he to make
himself universal Bishop, Though Leo dealt in more matters then appertained to
him, yet was he far from the top of the papal supremacy.
and head of the Church, which your Pope claims, and M. Jewel denies. This
was his endeavor to lift his chair above the rest, to be accounted a chief
Bishop, to be had in greatest regard, to procure to his seat a principal
reverence, to obtain privileges, and prerogatives above others: but of this
pontifical power, and universal jurisdiction, which afterward your Popes
usurped, he never dreamed, for ought that you have alleged, or can furthermore
allege out of his Epistles. And though you could, what had you greatly gained
against M. Jewel, who requires a lawful and irrefragable testimony, his
being partial, as in his own matter, and for his own commodity? Yet how
far Leo was from the papal supremacy, may in one example appear, that he
had not authority to call a council, but was feign to be an humble suter to
the Emperor, Epist. 33.
that he would by his commandment summone a council of Bishops in Italy:
(which yet he obtained not) that the same Leo fell on his knees before
Valentinian: Leo was of mean jurisdiction and authority in respect of the pope.
to have a council that a Council by the Emperor Martian being called at
Chalcedon, he labored instantly to have it somewhat differred until a more
convenient time, and could not prevail. Does it not evidently hereby appear,
that he was not accounted, neither by the Emperor, nor the Bishops of
Christendom, Head of the Church, and universal Bishop? And this is the thing
in controversy, whereof you have not showed any proof as yet, for all your
childish bragging: and what you will hereafter do, I need not greatly stand
in doubt.

For your demonstration following, which you full ignorantly and vainelie
commend, Page 150.
comparing it to the brightness of the sun in a summers day, has no light at
all in it, to show that thing, which you have taken in hand to prove, no more
then the moon in the wane gives light to passengers at midnight. And doubtless
unless the Lord had in his displeasure toward you, bereaved you of common
judgment and reason, you could not yeald your understanding captive to such
loose and light persuasion. The question in controversy is, whether the Pope
were acknowledged for head of the universal Church within six hundred years
after Christ. Cent. 5. p. 781.782.
This you say appears by the confession of the Centurye writers: and so you
translate out of them many authorities, which being all put in one, conclude
nothing to this purpose in the end. They show how the Popes have labored to
get superiority to themselves, especially in the example of Leo, who as he was
learned and eloquent, and stoutly maintained the Catholic faith against
Eutyches, so is he truly noted of ambition more then beseemed the minister of
Christ. But admitting the Popes testimony for the Popes primacie, what have
you found in the Centuries against Master Jewel? that they warned Bishops of
other provinces to come to general councels? this is not the thing we require.
Let them write to whom, and whither they list: this officious writing proves
not universality and supremacy of power, as any man may easily understand.
That Leo could not appoint a Council, that he sued to the Emperor to call a
Council, that the Council was gathered by the Emperors, not by the Popes
authority, I have already showed. What makes then the writing of a few
letters to prove the Popes power in summoning counsels? that they were
presidents in general councels? And can you or dare you avouch that this was
so in all general counsels? And though it were, what matter makes it for
your purpose? A general council must have a president: which presidencie if
it were granted to the Bishop of Rome in respect of his place, which was the
first amongst Bishops, will you of your wisdom hereof gather, that he was
Universal Bishop, and head of the Church? A senseless and frantic
conclusion. That he confirmed general Counsels? This is like the rest, a
worthy reason forsooth. All Bishops were bound to maintain and approve the
godly decrees of counsels, that so heresies might be repressed, and the
purity of religion preserved. Is it then a great marvel, if the Bishop of
Rome, that was accounted first and chief, confirmed good councels, and
disanulled wicked? who is he that has the reason of a man, that will hereof
conclude in sadness and sobriety the popes supremacy? If M.R. be blinded, it is
no wonder. All this, and ten times as much, can not prove that the Pope is the
head of Christ's Church, or that he was so esteemed in the primitive age: and
therefore that you allege out of Luther, that before Bonifacius the third, in
the days of wicked Phocas the Emperor, the Bishops of Rome had no greater
authority then other Bishops, is true. For albeit they had gotten greater
privileges of honor and other preferments, partly through the reverent
opinion, which the Emperors and Bishops had of them, partly by their own
seeking, as appears in stories most evidently, yet soueraintie of power,
and jurisdiction over the wholl Church had they none, until Phocas the tyrant
bestowed it upon Boniface the Pope, a worthy founder of the Popes Antichristian
supremacy.

How Leo behaved himself in magnifiing his own dignity above measure, page
154. etc.
is to plain by his writings: so as although he thought nothing less, then of
that pontifical supremacy and authority which afterward in that seat of
Antichrist was erected, yet has his pride been justly and worthelie
reproved, for claiming more honor then belonged unto him. But you must
remember that all authority and honor is not that universal supremacy of
power, which your Pope chalengeth and usurps: the which neither Leo desired,
nor yet Gregory the great, who succeeded him in that sea almost two hundred
years after, did exercise, for any thing that you have alleged in proof
thereof.

The Centurie Collectours declare indeed how that mystery of iniquity wrought
and increased then in the Roman sea, Centur. 6. p. 425.
in that the Bishops thereof took upon them more rule and authority over
their brethren, then they ought: and namely this Gregory, in whom the virtue
and godliness of Roman Bishops died. But have you found in the Centuries such
plain proofs ot the Popes supremacy, as you affirm? First, you bring
nothing, but the speeches or practices of Gregory, Gregory the great was no
Pope, such as the l^tter popes have been. Regist. lib. 11. ^p. 54.
who was a Bishop of Rome: secondly you can not thereof gather that he was
universal Bishop, or head of the Church. For that he calls the Apostolical
sea head of all Churches, he means nothing else, but that it was the chief
Churhc, Lib. 7. ep. 62.
which is confessed. That he says, the Church of Constantinople is subject to
the Apostolical sea, who denies this? but what subjection mean you, M. R?
that the Roman Church had power over the Church of Constantinople, to
command, ordain, disanull at her pleasure? that is utterly false, and
disprooued by all stories that have written, testifiing that the Church of
Constantinople accounted her self equal in all privileges too the Roman,
save only that the Roman in order was the first. That he intermedled in the
doings of certain Bishops of diverse provinces, it is evident: but not in all
Churches of all provinces over the world. For the Church of Christendom was
then divided into parts, and the same were assigned to the government of
Patriarchs. The Roman province was greatest, containing the Churches of the
west: wherein Gregory had authority, not by Gods word, but by appointment of
man: and yet his authority was no other, but the same that the other
Patriarchs practiced in their provinces, and namely S. Chrysostom long before
Gregory over Thrace, al Asia, and Pontus, as Theodoretus writes. Theod. lib.
5. cap. 28.
What can you allege more for Gregory, then I can for Chrysostom? Gregory
reproved and corrected Bishops of Cicilie, Afric, Spain: Chrysostom
punished and deposed Bishops of Thrace, of Pontus, of Asia. Hereof is concluded
no less the supremacy of Chrysosto^me, then of Gregory: such notable
demonstrations can you make.

Yea how much S. Gregory always abhorred that tyrannical supremacy, Page
159. etc.
which your Pope of long time has usurped over the Church, S. Gregory was not
only himself no universal pope, but has also in plain words condemned
both that office and title universally.
is manifest, in that he so often and so bitterly inueicth against the name of
universal Bishop: which he would not have done, condemning it wholly as most
wicked, unlawful, ambitious, profane, Antichristian, if he had thought his
own episcopal government and jurisdiction had extended over all Churches. For
as John of Constaninople challenged that name, in the same sense and meaning
does Gregory reject it: but John meant only thereby to make himself a
chief Bishop over all Bishops, and to bring under his jurisdiction the wholl
Church of Christ: and therefore it is evident, that S. Gregory utterly
misliked, that any Bishop whosoever should have an universal authority over
the whole Church, which is to bring the Church in subjection under him.

That this was the meaning of that title of vniuerssall Bishop, S. Gregory
himself does testify in these words, who by the name of universal, Lib. 4.
epist. 38.
goes about to make subject to himself all the members of Christ. And does
not you Pope affirm, profess, defend, proclaim by all means possible, that
all the members of Christ must be subject to him, and that no hope of salvation
remains for any, but such as continue in his obedience? Then deny if you
can, but that the self same authority which Saint Gregory reproved in John
of Constantinople your popes have approved in themselves, even this last 13.
Gregory, who lately deceased: and therefore by judgment of S. Gregory many
hundred years ago they are Antichristian Bishops, The popes of Rome with
their universal supremacy long since condemned by Saint Gregory a Bishop of
Rome.
and not Catholic pastors of Christ's Church. Wrangle all ye can, S. Gregory
has plainly condemned your Popes for taking upon them both the name, and
office of universal Bishops. Andreas Fricius, whom here again you allege, I
have not to deal with all: what thing was meant by this name of universal
Bishop may better be learned of S. Gregory himself, who knew best the
meaning thereof. If you require further proof, consider that S. Gregory
reports also that the council of Chalcedon offered that name to Leo, Lib. 4.
cap. 32.
but he would not accept of it. Did the Council mean to take from all other
Bishops of the world, yea themselves, all bishoplie grace and power? what
madness is it thus to think? what impudency to stand in maintenance thereof,
as you do?

Futher, when the Bishop of Alexandria Eulogius, in a letter called Gregory
universal Pope, Lib. 7. epist. 30. Indict. 1.
meant he to deprive himself of all bishoplie authority? Nothing less. And
yet Saint Gregory reprooueth him for so writing, and will not suffer himself
to be so called. The name then signifies that universal authority over all
Bishops and Christians, which John claimed, and your Popes obtained, and long
practiced, and will not yet give over. This was unlawful in John: this
Gregory condemned not only in others, but in the Bishops of Rome also:
therefore your Popes by witness of S. Gregory a Pope, are clearly convicted of
unlawful and Antichristian usurpation. If your Pope refuses this name of
universal Bishop, why does Bellarmine, his greatest divine, Cou^reon. 3. Quest.
4.
reckon this for one of the Popes names of dignity? but chiefly why does the
Pope mislike the name, and allow the thing signified by the name?

Concerning the two other articles, page 164. etc.
of Real presence, and sacrifice, you are content to say little, which in
effect is nothing. For what have you brought to prove either of these your
opinions? you tell us Saint Gregory was a Priest, and said Mass according to
your popish fashion: but when will believe your report, you have told us so
many untruths? That Bibliander calls him the patriarch of ceremonies: that
Melancthon says, he horribly profaned the communion: that Illyricus
rehearses out of a popish writer certain of his miracles about the sacrament:
that Paulus Vergerius has written a book against his trifles and fables: that
M. Bale prefers Latimer before Austen the monk, whom he sent into England:
that the Bishop of Winchester. M. Horn calls this Austen a bussard: It is
not Austen that he calls so, but Bonifacius whom they name the Apostle of
Germany.
what makes all this (I beseech you) against Master Jewels challenge? how
conclude you hereof your Real presence, or your sacrifice of the Mass? surely
your masters that set you on work, and made you an instrument to publish these
things, abused you much, that you might abuse others more.

To Luthers judgment of Saint Augustine, page 166.
that after the Apostles the Church had not more excellent and worthy doctor
then he, I willingly subscribe: but Luther accuses the sacramentaries (as he
calls them) for mangling and abusing him in the question of Real presence:
herein I have nothing to answer in Luthers defense. Saint Augustine teaches
no otherwise of Christ's presence in the sacrament then we do, as by the large
treatises that have been written of this matter, does appear: yea neither
Zuinglius, nor Calvin, nor any other of our side, has more fully and
directly written a against the Real and corporal presence of Christ in the
supper, then S. Austen has in sundry places. That Luther judged otherwise, it
was his error, which he retained of his old leaven, wherewith in time of
papistrie his judgment was corrupted. Hereof what argument can you frame
against M. Jewel? some thing would you feign say, but your words have no pith
of reason in them.

Saint Chrysostom (you say) has written six books of Priesthood, page 168.
and none of ministerhood: verily this is a very poor argument for the
sacrifice of your Mass. If this reason hold from the authority of
Chrysostom, I trust the like will not be denied, taken from the authority of
the scriptures. In the new Testament, Ministers are named six and six times,
priests in your sense never: therefore no Priesthood remains, and so by
consequence no sacrifice. But concerning the name of Priest, how it has been
used of the ancient writers, not in the proper and natural sense, but after
the common custom of speech, I have already before declared. Thus have you M.
Rainolds uttered all your skill in confutation of the Bishop of Sarisburies
challenge. Howbeit if D. Harding were alive, I suppose he would think you had
deserved small thanks. Meddle no more M. Rainolds in this matter: the more ye
stir, the less ye prevail: your learning is not much, your judgment is
less, you are but a weak instrument to deal with him, whom D. Harding could
not match. M. Jewels challenge is proved wise, true, learned, to the praise of
Gods truth, shame of papistrie, and worthy commendation of that famous
Bishop, whose memory is everlasting, and most honorable among the godly.

CHAP. 8.
Of Bezaes translating a place of scripture, Act. 3. and of the Real presence.

MAster Rainolds leaves M. Jewel, page 170. etc.
and proceeds to maintain a quarrel of M. Martine against Bezaes translation
of certain words uttered by the Apostle Saint Peter, and recorded by S. Luke.
Act. 3. v. 21. It were a vanity to spend many words about so small a matter:
and therefore suffering, this man, that knows no measure either of speaking,
or holding his peace, to talk his pleasure, I will herein use no more words,
then the thing requires, that is, as few, as I can possibly.

The words are these, (...), in latin, word for word, quem oportet quidem
coelum recipere: the words both in Greek, and latin are ambiguous, as any
man may see: in which respect Beza thought better to translate them thus, quem
oporter quidem coe locapi, which, in effect and true meaning, is al one with
the other, but yet some thing plainer. This worthy matter you handle by
several points, as becomes a man of such discretion.

First, you say, it is saucy and malapert for any man, of purpose to restrain
that, page 172.
which the holy ghost has left at large. If this be so, then has your vulgar
interpreter been over saucy and malapert often times. Examples of such saucines
I might allege many in his translation, if cause required. I grant a man
cannot be too precise, and religious in translating the words of holy
scripture: and that it ought to be the especial care of a godly translator,
neither to restrain, nor enlarge any thing, as far forth as he may perform
by skill and diligence: for so much as the text may afford a doctrine, sometime
in his original and natural words, which by altering in the translation is
soon marred. But these admit no other sense, then one; and therefore no
matter whether a man say, that heaven must receive Christ, or Christ must be
received in heaven; the meaning is all one. For as for the conceit of some,
which you affirm may perhaps be true, that Christ should receive heaven, it
passes al compass of reason or divinity. How, I pray you, does Christ
receive heaven? by his divine power? but the Apostle speaks of Christ's
ascension, as in the text appears, and all interpreters understand the
words: how then does Christ receive heaven in his humanity, wherein he
ascended, and whereof the Apostle speaks? tell us if you can. Again, why
says the Apostle until the time that all things are restored, if he mean
that Christ's divinity received heaven, which then received it no otherwise,
then it has ever, and shall ever receive it? for that by taking heaven should
be meant the rule and government of heaven which Christ at his ascension
received, this interpretation I know seems but absurd to your self: and
therefore you may leave it for others to defend, whom for this matter Beza
has fully answered. Your second and third points, where in you urge and
prosecute M. Martins reprehension, I omit, as un worthy of answer. Beza
transtated the place truly in sense, as your self cannot deny: the cause that
moved him a little to alter the words, was to avoid doubtful and ambiguous
construction. That Illyricus is not contented with this translation, what
marvel, seeing he will have Christ's body contained in no place? If you be of his
judgment, you may use his authority against Beza herein. But where has
Calvin reproved Bezaes translation of these words? why have neither you, nor
Gregory Martine noted the place, or set down the reprehension? you have good
cause to be ashamed of such egregious trifling. page 175.


Beza has sufficiently cleared his translation from charge of corruption in
sense by S. Nazianzens authority, Nazianz. de filio Conc. 2.
who reports in Greek, these words of S. Peter even altogether in such
sort, as Beza has expressed them in his latin translation. So all you have
to say against Beza or me in this matter, is for rendering a verb deponent by
a verb passive, keeping threrein the sense most truly, and exactly.

Your friuolus inuectiue against our translations and translatours, I pass
over. page 176.
M. Martine has written of this matter so much already, as your wholl College
of Rhemes could utter: unto whose unlearned and weak discourse, which he
calls (a discovery) a learned Doctor has made answer long ago. Martins
discovery.
The answer you have amongst you, confute it if you can. Otherwise in this
behalf think your selves fully satisfied.

Here are we entered into a large treatise of Real presence, page 178. etc.
for which M. Rainolds seems to be very zealous and careful, lest it should
receive some discountenaunce by the former words of S. Peter, as needs it
must, translate them how you list, so you translate them truly. For Saint
Peter, speaking of Christ's humanity, says, that heaven must receive him,
until the time that all things are restored. Hereof it follows, Act. 3.21.
that Christ as touching his humanity is not received or contained in the
sacrament, or else in any other place, then heaven. This is a plain, a
certain, Christ ascending in his humanity into heaven has left no place for
Real presence in the sacrament.
an invincible truth: so not we have taken from you Christ's Real presence,
but Christ, in carrying up his body out of this world into heaven, has
himself actuallie overthrown your fantastical imaginations of his bodelie
and carnal presence on the earth.

Before you come to answer this argument, according to your old wont you
speak and spend much idle talk, wherein nothing asks answer, but that by
conference of other places you would weaken the force of the word, (...) which
Saint Luke uses in reporting S. Peter's words. For you say that this
proves Christ's body to be contained in heaven no more, then Saint Luke,
writing that Samaria received the word of God, (...). Act. 8.14.
affirms the word of God was contained in Samaria. An objection doubtless that
came from a deep understanding: to make the word of God, which was to be
preached over the wholl world, of like nature with a body, which must be
contained in one place. If you can see any thing, you may soon see that the
word, receive, is otherwise taken here, as also in the two other places, which
you allege of receiving children and Apostles in Christ's name. Saint Peter
speaks of local receiving or containing: the other places understand a
receiving of relief, or entertainment. Your reproaches, as they well become
your person, so being usual, require no answer, but are to be contemned.

Being come to the matter in hand, page 183.
you show your self more hot and hasty in words, then discrete or pithie
in your arguments. For that I said it is a contradiction, to maintain that one
and the same body should together both be visible and invisible,
circumscriptible and incircumscriptible, as you do most fondly imagine and
teach of Christ's body, you charge me with infidelity for denying gods
omnipotency, which every Christian professes in the first article of the
Creed. Of Atheism and infidelity take heed your self, M. R you have
already made a dangerous step. The papists to prove their Real presence are
feign to flee to Gods omnipotency, and thus to argue: god is able to make his
body Reallie present in the sacrament, therefore so he does.
God forbid I should be guilty of that sin, whereof you do without all
conscience or reason accuse me. God is omnipotent, and ever was, and ever
will be. But his omnipotency proves not your Real presence. For have you
learned to conclude, that seeing God is omnipotent, and has power to do all
things, therefore he does al things, yea offers violence to his own body for
maintenance of your absurd and heretical assertions? must Gods omnipotency
attend upon your fancies? Cannot god be omnipotent, unless your real presence be
granted? No such matter, thanks be to God: and so your accusation of
infidelity is vain and childish. Albeit I suppose you are not ignorant
altogether of your own scholastical doctrine concerning Gods omnipotency. Your
schoolmen teach that God cannot do any thing wherein a contradiction is
implied: Thom. 1. p. 25. q. 3. art.
and that all other things he can do, and therefore is omnipotent. The popish
schoolmen confute the popish fantasy of Real presence.
But herein a manifest contradiction is implied, that Christ's body should be
visible and invisible together, that it is compassed and circumscribed in one
certain place, and that also it is contained in an infinite number of
sacraments, without any circumscription of place. And thus your own schoolmen
teaching, and that truly, that god cannot do any thing, wherein is included a
contradiction, because he cannot lie, have in deed ground to powder your
conceit of Real presence, which without most clear contradiction can never be
maintained. For if Christ's body be visible, how is it then invisible? If
Christ's body have all properties of a natural body, whereof this is one, and
that most necessary and inseparable, to be contained and circumscribed in one
certain place: how can it then be true that his body is in infinite places
without any circumscription at all? Never deny for shame, but if there be in
the world any contradiction, this is one. And yet here Master Rainolds takes
in hand to prove contrary to the doctrine of their own schools, M.R. goes
about to prove that God can make two contradictorie propositions true.
that God works as flat contradictories, as this: then which none can be
devised more flat. But these examples, Master Rainolds, which you bring, are
nothing like this, whereof I speak.

For concerning the holy virgins birth, therein is no contradiction. There was
a miracle indeed, that a virgin should bear a son contrary to the course
of nature. For to be a virgin, and yet to have a child, are not
contradictorie, if she have conceived and brought forth by miracle, as did the
blessed virgin: M.R. objections nothing to the purpose.
but to be a virgin, and not a virgin at once, this is the contradiction. So
for Christ's body to be visible and invisible, local and not local at once,
is in every respect the like contradiction: and therefore impossible to be
true.

Your other example of Christ's entering in, the doors being shut, what show of
contradiction has it? Can you prove he entered through the doors? and if he
did, then was there an alteration of qualities, and that by miracle, either in
Christ's body, or in the doors, but no contradictio^ in nature: unless you know
not what is a contradiction. Your third and last example of the fire in
Nabucadnezars oven, which consumed the Ministers, but hurt not those that were
in the midst of it, appears to be of no weight, by that has already been
answered. You imagine belike that in every miracle a contradiction is implied:
which is absurd. If you can prove that this fire was both hot and cold, then
you say something to the purpose: but that it burnt up some, and hurt not
others, is no co^tradiction, because by miracle the force thereof was
repressed. Thus are you truly and fully answered to your simple sophismes: and
your Real presence is disprooued by the eternal law of God in nature,
whereunto he has even bound himself, never to do any thing, wherein there
is a contradiction to be found, as your own Divines have well and truly
taught. Then may you see that my argument was not taken out of Aristotle and
Euclide, as you say, but is grounded upon the eternal decree, and most
unchangeable truth of God: to which your Real presence must give place, being
nothing else, but an irreligious and co^tradictorius devise of your own brain.
Page 185.


By this is answered that which follows, wherein are alleged certain
miracles, vainly and altogether from the purpose. The question is not, whether
is more repugnant to nature, to be borne of a virgin, or a body to be
incircumscript (although herein you speak without reason or authority) but
whether it be either agreeable to nature or Gods will, that one and the self
same body be at once circumscript and incircumscript, as you defend Christ's
body to be.

First you say the body of our savior Christ was incircumscript in his
nativity, M. R. affirms heretical untruths of Christ's body.
resurrection, and ascension. Although this be most false and heretical,
destroying the truth of Christ's humanity, yet if it were granted, it argues
nothing, unless you will say, that when it was incircumscript, it was also
circumscript, as now you affirm of the same body: for you confess his body
is circumscript, and yet you say the self same body is incircumscript: and
herein is an evident contradiction, which when you labor to defend, what do
you else, but with intolerable boldenes maintain most monstrous absurdities?

Likewise S. Peter's body you say was incircumscript, by Paulinus authority,
who says S. Peter came out of the prison being shut. And meant Paulinus, that
Saint Peter came through the walls or doors of the prison? so says not the
scripture. If the iron gate opened of it own accord unto him, why also might
not the doors of the prison open, and give place unto him?

Secondly you say, Christ's body was invisible, when he passed through the
midst of them, that would have cast him down headlong from the hill. This is
more then you learned in the text. Luc. 4.30.
The scripture says that he passed through the midst of the^: But not, that
he passed invisibly. Christ was able to escape their hands as well being
visible as invisible. Also Elizeus was invisible, you say, and I say, it is
untrue. 2. King. 6.18.
For though the Syrians saw him not, yet remained he still visible: but the
Lord cast a mist before their eyes, and stroke them with blindness, that they
could not see him: and so the scripture plainly affirms. The same may be said
of Felix, whom his enemies could not see being amongst them. It was the Lord
that shut their eyes, and blinded them with giddines, who has (as by this your
reasoning may seem) taken from you also all your light of understanding.

Thirdly you say, the first heaven, according to the opinion of Philosophers,
being a perfect natural body, is notwithstanding in no place. Be it even so:
then I say, it is not in a place. Say you the same of Christ's body, and
then shall you prove your self to be a perfect heretic: and so must you
say, or else you say nothing to the question,

Can you deny, M. Rainolds, but that Christ's body is altogether of the same
substance with our bodies, and has the properties of a true and natural
body? speak plainly, and tell us your mind, lest you give us cause to doubt
of your soundnes in this article, as you have here given very great. For if
you confess this to be true doctrine, as you must, unless you be indeed one
of those heretics that held the contrary, why bid you me look how I free my
self from the filthy and wicked heresies of the Ebionites and Nestorians.
Mark I beseech you (good reader) how this prating patron of Real presence,
M.R. says it is heretical to affirm, that Christ's body is consubstantiall
to ours.
would have it seem to savor of wicked heresy, to affirm that Christ's body
is a true body, consubstantiall to ours: and all this, because the same wicked
heresy of real presence can never be defended, unless this be denied. Yea
Master Rainolds says, those heretics not only may, but must thereof infer,
that Christ was begotten between our Lady, and Joseph. Wherein as he has
avouched a plain heresy, which he cannot clear him self from, unless he
will openly recant his own words: so is it most false, that he says it must
be inferred hereof, that Christ was begotten as other men. No such necessity,
Master Rainolds. That he was miraculouslie borne of a virgin, is no reason but
that his body may be of the same substance with ours, a true and natural
body, endued with the same qualities and properties, that ours are, save
sin, from his conception, and glory from his ascension: whereof in saying it
must follow, that Christ was not borne of a virgin, you have uttered in plain
terms an heretical assertion: defend it, or retract, whether you will. For
if this follow thereof indeed, which is heretical, then that must of
consequence be heretical, which yet is a most true and Catholic doctrine.

A third answer you make out of Chrysostom, page 188.
who surely answers nothing at all for you? He exhorts that we believe
Christ's words, This is my body, to be true, Chrysostom objected by M.R.
makes against hi^.
although we see not his body with our eyes. And who confesses not this? we
grant that the bread is Christ's body, as Christ said, who ever said the
truth. But the meaning is, that the bread is a sacrament of Christ's body,
Chrysostom. Hom. 83. in Mat.
as S. Chrysostom in the same homily twice or thrice in plain speech
affirms: not that the bread is changed into Christ's natural body, which
Chrysostom never once dreamed of. And that you may perceive he meant no
transsubstantiation, the same he said of this sacrament, he also says by and
by of baptism: wherein your selves accord with us, that no transsubstantiation
is wrought. As Christ is in the supper, so is he in baptism: invisibly,
mystically, truly in both: carnally, bodily, reallie in neither.
Chrysostom has spoken never a word for you.

But M. Rainolds according to his manner translateth a pace out of the
Centuries, out of Melanchthon, page 189. etc
Westphalus, and Luther: and with their sayings fills a number of pages,
only to show there is a difference of judgment among the protestants about
the sacrament: which to be indeed true all the world knows. But what hereof
will you have your Reader to conclude, Controversy among the Protestants about
the sacrament confessed.
when he sees that Luther, and some others mislike our doctrine, and reasons
concerning the sacrament of Christ's supper? That neither he, nor we teach
thereof a right? That you hold the true part? That no credit in other points
is to be given to any of us all? This is the mark whereat you aim here, and
else where, in citing so manifold testimonies out of our writers: which slight
although you must confess is false, and know your self there is no plain
dealing nor soundnes therein, yet you are content for advantage to set it out
with greatest countenance, that it may bleare the eyes of the simple. If Luther
teaching otherwise of the sacrament, then Zuinglius and Oecolampadius did,
disputed against their reasons, this is no matter to marvel at: for granting
the premises to be true, it is to late to deny the conclusion.

The argument that is grounded only upon reason, in matters of Religion and
faith, we grant most unfeignedly to be no lawful weapon in the Lords
warfare. And therefore whatsoever they have said against Philosophy and
reason, Arguments taken from reason in matters of Religion what force they have.
when it disagreeth from the faith, which in the scritures we learn, all that
we allow with all our hearts, and never used thus any argument taken from
natural reason against either you, or Luther. For reason must submit it self
to faith we know, faith must not be restrained or stretched according to
reason. But when reason in not controlled of faith, then I think you will not
say, but an argument builded upon reason makes a necessary proof. Now in this
matter faith and reason are not contrary: no faith teaches that Christ's body
is without the properties of a true body: al reason proves, that if Christ
have a true body, as he has, then his body is endued with natural qualities
and properties of a body. Reasoning against this sound and immutable reason,
you plainly show your selves to be void of reason.

Now that one and the same body (as Christ has but one only body) should be
at once of contradictory dispositions, as namely both visible, and invisible,
both in a certain place, and in no certain place, as you teach, and boldly,
but most untruly maintain, this is contrary not only to reason, but also to
faith, which teaches that God cannot lie, and therefore never can make two
contradictories true; for in the one always an untruth of necessity rests.
As for example, if Christ's body be always visible and circumscripte, then is
it a manifestly, to say, the same body is invisible and incircumscripte: but
Christ's body is always both visible and circumscripte: and therefore in saying
his body is invisible and incircumscripte, you cannot be excused from untruth
and contradiction. In faith is no contradiction: in your assertion there is a
foul and palpable contradiction: wherefore your assertion is not of faith. If
I had to deal with Westphalus or Illyricus, further would I answer there
speeches: but as you make them here to serve your purpose, I have not any more
to say unto them. Then leaving them, I return to your self M. R. to examine
what you bring for defense of the cause, which you have taken in hand to
maintain.

The testimonies of Cyrill and Damascen you lightly pass over. page 198. De
Trinit. lib. 2. The fathers against the Real presence.
Cyril says that Christ touching the presence of his flesh is absent from us.
Which though it be contrary to your Real presence, yet you say, you believe as
your Creed: your belief perhaps is according to some new Creed: for of this
belief, one part cannot stand in the same Creed with another. First the
true, ancient, and Catholic creed teaches, that Christ is ascended into
heaven touching his humanity: whereunto Cyril agreeablie writes, The true
Catholic Creed is contraie to the Popish Creed
that he is absent in flesh. your newfangled Popish Creed would have us
believe, that Christ touching the presence of his flesh is in the sacrament. If
his flesh be in the sacrament, then is not his flesh absent, but the
scriptures, and fathers and al Catholic Creeds do set it down as a ground
of faith, that Christ's flesh is only in heaven, and there remains until he
come again in carnal presence to judge the world. What have you to answer
now? forsooth, now must you fall into your former contradiction, that Christ's
flesh is visible in heaven, and invisible in the sacrament: which doctrine is
repugnant to divinity, to reason, to sense, to all principles of truth, as you
have heard already: or else must you say, that Christ has two bodies, one
visible, and an other invisible: which though it be heretical, yet is it less
absurd and unreasonable then the other. But answer what you list, this is
sufficient to overthrow your real presence before God and all his saints, that
Christ's flesh is absent from us: the sacrament is with us: and therefore
Christ's flesh is not in the sacrament. Your assertions are to gross; your
answers are absurd: your Real presence is a real contradiction.

Cyrill, you say, was no sacramentarie. No verily: for your sacramentary
heresy was vnhathced in Cyrills time. But did Cyrill ever teach your real
presence? a place you bring, that makes nothing to this purpose. Cyrill
speaks not a word of the sacrament, Cyrill. in Ioh. lib. 4. c. 13.
but generally that Christ gives us his flesh: which is true of those also
that never received the sacrament. Wherefore Cyrill meant not any real
presence, as you full ignorantly allege him. He only disputes against the
infidelity or curiosity of such as enquire, A popish ignorant argument, Christ
gives us his flesh to eat: Ergo we eat Christ's flesh Really in the
sacrament.
How it is possible that Christ should give us his flesh to eat. we know that
Christ can give, and does give his flesh to all faithful: and make no doubt,
nor question thereof. But think you all means of eating his flesh is
removed, if real presence be denied? Consider this point a little better M.
Rainolds; and I doubt not but you shall easily epsy your own oversight. That
you bring out of Peter Martyr, is idle. That which he says, if Cyril should
avouch, it were not to be granted, your selves will not maintain: namely
that Christ does dwell in us corporally, and mingleth his flesh with our
flesh. Then to what use serves your real presence? tell us if you can: but
prove by scripture that which you tell; else we shall not greatly regard what
you tell us.

Damascen you are content to handle as lightly. Damas^le orthod. fide. lib. 3.
cap. 3.
He teaches against your real presence, that the nature of Christ's body
remains circumscript and visible, as it was. So your fantasy of Christ's body
being present in the sacrament reallie, but incircumscriptly and invisibly, is
proved to be vainer then any dream. Al you allege at large for the real
presence out of him in an other place, Lib. 4. c. 14.
may shortly be dispatched. That Christ can make the bread his body, we
grant. For Christ being god can do whatsoever he will. Only show that Christ
will make of real bread, his real flesh, and then this controversy is brought
to an end. The Catholic faith teaches that Christ's body was made of the
virgin once: the Popish faith that it is made of bread daily.
Christ indeed makes the bread his body, not really, but sacramentallie. For
Christ has not a body made of bread, his body was made once of the pure
substance of his blessed mother: and other body then this, or oftener made then
once, has he none. Whereof all doctrine that teaches Christ's body is made of
bread, is impious and heretical: the popish doctrine of Real presence
teaches that Christ's body in the sacrament is made of bread, by changing the
bread into his body through force of consecration: wherefore we may boldly
and truly conclude that the popish doctrine of Real presence, which Master
Rainolds holds, but miserably defends, is both wicked and heretical.

CHAP. 9.
Of certain places of S. Chrysostom touching the Real presence.

Two places out of S Chrysostom were alleged by M. Martin, page 20^. etc.
to prove thereall presence. The first out of his second homily to the people
of Antioch, Christ. hom. 2. ad pop. Antio.
wherein by an excellent and fit allegory, he compares our savior Christ to
the Prophet Elias. For as Elias ascending bodelie into heaven, left his cloak
with Elizeus his scholar, so Christ the son of God as^ending up, left his
flesh with us. S. Chrysostomes meaning to any that reads the place is
evident enough: and M. R. though he multiply words after his simple manner,
yet my former answer he cannot disprooue. That Christ left unto us his flesh
in the holy sacrament, who ever doubted? that therein we receive his true and
natural flesh, we believe, we teach, and always did. But the Real presence of
his flesh, such as you maintain S. Chrysostom never knew and we utterly
deny. Christ left us his flesh: therefore he left it Really. A false popish
argument.
For can you reason thus, and reason truly, that if Christ left us his flesh,
he left it in real presence? this is the point: this prove if you can: else
you talk to no purpose. Christ left his flesh, that is, a sacrament of his
flesh, wherein is most truly and effectually, but spiritually offered unto
us, and of us received, the very flesh of Christ.

Having spent many unprofitable and superfluous speeches, at length you force
the comparison, and show a threefold difference between Elias leaving his
mantel, and Christ leaving his flesh. And are you indeed in your right
understanding? who, I pray you, M. R. denies this? you migh allege not three
onley, but three and three points of difference between Elias and Christ's
leaving the one his mantel, the other his flesh. This then being wholly
granted, what is your argument? will you reason thus, There is great
difference between Elias leaving his cloak, and Christ leaving his flesh:
Strange arguments that M.R. has learned of late to make.
therefore Christ left his flesh unto us reallie? If this be not your argument,
frame an other your self as you can.

Elias left his cloak, Christ his flesh. Flesh indeed differs from a cloak:
and so the difference is clear, but your argument is blind. How Christ left
his flesh, I have said already.

Christ left his flesh with us, and yet carried the same with him into heaven:
Elias leaving his cloak lost it. And how gather you hereof an argument for
real presence? Christ carried with him into heaven his flesh in the natural
substance thereof: Christ left with us his flesh in a sacrament of his flesh.
If you still urge, that Christ's flesh is there, and Christ's flesh is here,
let Chrysostom declare his own meaning, whose words you seek most
shamefully to abuse. For that Saint Chrysostom spoke thus, not of the carnal
and natural substance of Christ's flesh, but of the spiritual presence
thereof, S. Chrysostom in his (...) ordes dri^e^h away all n^^^es of popish
Real presence.
we may perceive by his words a little before of Elias: Afterward (says S.
Chrysostom) Elias was double: there was an Elias above, and there was an Elias
beneath. Elias touching his natural substance of body and soul, was only
above: though in some kind of presence true also it is, that Elias was
beneath. Even so our savior Christ in carnal presence of his body is above:
but in an other manner, namely in spiritual presence of the same he is
beneath. This is Saint Chrysostomes plain meaning: which God wot makes full
meanly for proof of real presence.

Elias shed not his blood for his people, but Christ shed his blood, and
imparted the same unto us. And would you have us think, that because Christ
imparteth unto us his blood, therefore we drink it reallie? what should one
answer such unworthy and senseles arguments? Leave your geasses, and speak
to the purpose

Here you talk, page 209.
as well becomes a man of your profession, falsely, vilelie, blasphemouslie
against the true doctrine of Christ's sacrament. I am unwilling to answer such
profane speeches of an opprobrious and slanderous enemy. So much only will I
speak as shall serve to stop the mouth of this railer. Do we think no
otherwise of our communion, then as of common bread and wine, without all
grace, virtue, and sanctification? M. R. reports falsely of our doctr^ne
touching the sacrament.
do we make it a bare figure of Christ absent? Have we as good figures at our
common breakefast, din^ers and suppers? Thus you say, but all the world knows
you say most untruly. Common bread, common wine, We deny ^hrists bo^y to be
Really present in the supper: Ergo we make the supper a bare figure of Christ,
Thus our papists vnlearnedlie reason.
bare figure was never any part of our doctrine: this is your unlearned
collection of that we deny the real presence. For had you but half an eye,
you might see how this slander is easily disprooued. In baptism, a sacrament
of Christ's own ordinance, there is not any real presence of Christ's blood
or body, as your selves confess. Now if one had as heretical a judgment of
this sacrament as you have of the other, he might charge you as justly for
denying Christ's real presence in the sacrament of baptism, as you do us, for
denying his real presence in the sacrament of the supper. For if you reason
with any truth against us, that we make it common bread, common wine, a bare
figure, without grace, virtue, or sanctifying power, because we affirm that
Christ is not present carnally and grossly therein: then must it as truly
and necessarily follow, that the water of baptism is common water, The popish
argument makes the sacrament of Baptism no better then a bare element.
is a bare figure, is void of all spiritual effect: because in baptism there
is no real presence. And surely by this your kind of argument it plainly
appears, you have no other opinion thereof, then, as you have said, of common
water, wherein is neither grace, nor virtue, nor sanctification: and of a bare
figure, such as you may have enough, whenever you wash your hands.

Certain sentences of Zuinglius you snatch, to prove we think as b^sely and
contemptiblie of the sacrament, as you report of us. Zuinglius says, it is
nothing but a commemoration. Zuinglius means not that the sacrament is only
a bare remembrance of Christ's death: he teaches and protests the contrary
in a thousand places. His meaning is no other but to show, that Christ is not
offered really in the sacrament, but that therein is set forth unto us a
remembrance of his sacrifice: he opposes commemoration, not to the spiritual
presence, and participation of Christ, but to the imagined real and
substantial presence of Christ's body. So when he speaks of only figures,
nothing but bread, he excludes not the spiritual, but carnal presence, and
that with the bread is not joined any material thing besides. Also that he
compares the sacrament to a Kings banner, which is a token of his presence,
serves only to show that Christ is not bodily, but spirituallie present. And
therefore for ought you have alleged, Beza has truly said, that there is no
coatrarietie between the doctrine of these most excellent men, Zuinglius,
OEcolampadius, Calvin, Bez. in. epist. 1.
touching the sacraments. For they taught both soundly in truth, and most
consonantlie among them selves.

Thus all your notes following of difference between Saint Chrysostomes text,
and my answer is discharged: and whatsoever else you babble in this place, to no
purpose in the world, but to show your ignorance.

The cloak, you say, was a more lively figure of Elias, then your bread and
wine is of Christ. Now this touches neither Zuinglius, nor Calvin, but Christ
himself, who appointed these to be figures and signs of his body. If you
rail at Christ, no marvel though you rail at his ministers.

By it Elizeus you say, received great grace and strength: that your bread
should give grace is against your wholl doctrine. Indeed we say that with the
bread is not mingled grace; for then both godly and wicked should be partakers
of Christ's grace: but in the right use of the sacrament, to the faithful person
is given most plentiful and excellent grace.

The cloak, you say, had a virtue surmounting the ability of man. Yet I
trust you will not say, this virtue and grace was in the cloak reallie, as
you teach that Christ is in the sacrament. That you say, our bread is nothing
but a sign or banner, as it were a maipole, or token of a tavern, such words
do well be seem your spirit, Master Rainolds. The time will come, when the
mouth of blasphemy shall be stopped.

The other place of Saint Chrysostom has less force for proof of Real
presence, page 214. etc.
although Master Rainolds deck and garnish it all he can, as if he would make
say thereof. The most that Saint Chrysostom says is, that Christ sitting
with his father above at the same moment is handled with all men's hands:
Chrysostom. de sacerdot. l. 3.
wherein first of all private mass, used in the Popish synagogues, ^eceaueth a
blow. For Chr^sostome says, Christ is handled wit^ all m^ns hands (...) the
Popish mass the priest only h^ adl^h all, that is handled. (...) who is so
^imple not to see (...) m^^ni^g of that godly and eloquent father, in this
kind of speech? Do all men handle Christ with their hands indeed? does Saint
Chrysostom mean a real handling, as a man handles bread? The papists will
have Christ's flesh ^andled Really.
do yourselues think thus groslie, ^r else for a show pretend you to maintain
the same? That Christ may thus be handled taken up, laid down, broken, eaten,
swallowed, removed from place to place, tossed to and fro, and all this, as you
speak, really, is monstrous, and loathsome doctrine, in the ears and hearts of
all godly and reasonable men. This S. Chrysostom once to have imagined, never
shall you show in this world. Chrysostom means the sacrament of Christ,
which we handle indeed, and which in some sense in called Christ himself.
This to be most true, is plain by Chrysostom in the same place. S.
Chrysostom expounds his own meaning.
For he says, We see the Lord sacrificed, and the people are sprinkled, and
made red with his blood: and this done plainly without deceit in the sight of
all men. If Chrysostom may be allowed to expound himself, your gloss of real
handling Christ in the sacrament must give place. For if he meant, as you
mean, that Christ is handled indeed, then meant he also that Christ is
sacrificed indeed in our sight, that the people are dyed and embrued with
blood indeed, that all men see the same indeed. For these speeches are all of
one stamp, all after one sort to be understood: as one part is true, so is
another. Then tell us M.R. if Christ be sacrificed indeed, if the people be
embrued with his blood indeed, if this be evident to all men indede: you may
not urge us so extremely in one, and give us the slip in all the rest. Let us
then consider what reply you make to this answer, which to be true and
sufficient you can not deny. page 220.217. The papists say they see Christ
Really sacrificed in their Church.


First you say, I am ignorant of the catholic faith. For in the Church
catholic we see Christ offered. Then you maintain that S. Chrysostom, in
saying we see Christ sacrificed, speaks properly: for this, you say, is
seen in the catholic Church. The godly, I grant, see in spirit this
sacrifice of Christ: and thus the oblation of Christ is seen in the catholic
Church. But we speak of a real sacrifice of Christ, which no man sees, nor
ever shall see. For a real sacrifice proves a real death: and so Christ when
he was sacrificed reallie, died also reallie. But no man sees Christ dying,
who died but once, and now lives for ever. And they that really sacrificed our
savior Christ, did in that act really and wickedly murder him: and so your
Priests if they be real sacrificers of Christ, are in the same action also
real murderers of Christ. Take both, or refuse both: if you take upon you
the one, you must not, nor cannot deny the other. Murderers of Christ you will
not be accounted, and yet you profess your selves to be sacrificers of Christ,
and that openly: which is al one, as if the Jews should confess, that they
crucified Christ, but yet they murdered him not: wherefore it is in a word an
heresy and blasphemy, to say Christ is sacrificed in the Church, otherwise
then in a sacrament and remembrance of that one sacrifice, as both Chrysostom,
and the fathers write commonly: in which manner, and no other, he is seen to
be sacrificed in the Church. That you add of seeing god, is poor divinity:
and being admitted that we see Christ in the Catholic Church, how follows
your reason, therefore we see him sacrificed: if you have either wit, or
religion, your self may see you speak without al wit and religion.

Secondly you answer, (...).
that I am ignorant of the Lutheranes doctrine: and then, as you are wont, you
rehearse certain places out of Luther, whereunto I have no need to answer. How
cunning you your self are of that doctrine, let others judge, when you say,
Untruths boldly set down by M. Rainolds.
they acknowledge bread to be the body of Christ. Does Luther or any Lutheran
teach that bread is the body of Christ? Do they adore it, as you also affirm?
This to be false who knows not? They neither acknowledge the bread to be
God, nor give any godly honor to it. And that might Kemuitius have taught you
in the same place that your self allege. He says we adore in spirit and
truth, Kemnit. exam. pars 2. de Euchar. cap. 6.
not the bread, but Christ in the action of the Lords supper. And so do we
also acknowledge and teach that Christ in the supper is to be worshipped, and
adored in spirit and truth of all Christians.

That you allege out of Master Calvin for your third answer, page 223.
as it is of us entirely allowed, so it notably detecteth the falsehood of your
slander, when you write and bear your reader in hand, that we make the
sacrament a bare sign and figure. For we teach, and ever did, Calvin de coena
Domini.
as Calvin does in this place, that it is joined to his truth and substance:
and not only represents, but also exhibiteth unto us the body of Christ.
Now then this being our doctrine touching the sacrament, as your self may see
in these words of Calvin plainly declared, cease for shame hereafter contrary
to your own knowledge and conscience to charge us for making the sacrament a
naked and only figure. But now Master Rainolds draw these things to the
point, and match them with your conclusion, and then see what agreement there
is between them. Can you gather of that Calvin says, we see the body of
Christ in a sacrament, that therefore we see Christ visiblie sacrificed in the
Church? such reasons are too lamentable, as here, and every where you bring us.

Then Master Rainolds admitting this to be indeed a phrase of speech, page 224.
asks whether it follow, that therefore it is a phrase of speech also to say,
that Christ's body is there at all. I answer expounding Chrysostom by
Chrysostom, and that in the same place and words, as Christ is handled with
all men's hands, S. Chrysostom rightly expounded.
so is he visiblie sacrificed, and so are the people made red with his blood:
that is, by way of a sacrament. Therefore set your heart at rest M. R. out of
this place shall you never prove your real presence. That you add of
figurative expositions, is superfluous.

Of Saint Chrysostomes vehemency in amplifications, page 226.
known to all that know Chrysostom, this place has a lively example, peruse
it your self, Master Rainolds, compare one speech with an other, and say, if
you can, otherwise. That you ask, whether he amplify a lie or truth, I
answer, his amplification is true, as he meant it, and as it must of
necessity be expounded. Of Priests and sacrifice enoughe has been spoken
before. Such priests as Chrysostom after the common manner of speech speaks
of, we acknowledged, which were the Bishops and Pastors of the Church. And
concerning the amplification, which you say it is impossible to interpret of
our communion, if you had will, this thing is possible and easy enough. We say
therefore with Saint Chrysostom, we see Christ, that is, we see a sacrament of
Christ. For Christ him self I think you will not say is seen. We see Christ
sacrificed, that is, we see the sacrament of Christ's sacrifice administered,
wherein Christ's sacrifice is recorded according to his commandment. The
Priest is bent to the sacrifice, that is, the minister of Christ ministers the
sacrament of the sacrifice, and offers the sacrifice of prayers and thanks
giving. The people receive the precious blood. nay M.R.S. Chrysostomes words
are more vehement then so: he says, the people are sprinkled and imbrued with
his blood: belike S. Chrysostom was here somewhat too vehement in your
judgment. The exposition I leave to your self, and tell us withal how the
people are thus sprinkled in your Church, that come not once near the cup.
Holy water sprinckling you have enough amongst you: but this sprinckling of
blood, whereof S. Chrisost. speaks, you must needs confess cannot belong to
the people amongst you. Christ sitting in heaven is received in the Church, and
who sees not the meaning, that Christ sitting in heaven as touching his
bodily presence, is in the sacrament spirituallie received? This Doctrine is
the Doctrine of our Church: and for this no man amongst us needs to fear the
controlement of any co^missioner, so his meaning be sound, as Chrysostomes
was, to declare a true spiritual presence and communication of Christ in the
sacrament, not to ^^si^^ate a ca^nal being and receiving of Christ therein,
which Saint Chrysostom in many places most plainly confuteth, and which he
never thought any man once so fond to imagine.

That Chrysostom compares this sacrifice, with the Leuiticall sacrifices,
(...). ^29.
and that of Elias, proves not yet a Real sacrifice of Christ in the
sacrament. Another (...) argument of M.R.
Let your reason thus be framed according to your mind. Chrysostom compares
and prefers the sacrament of Christ's supper, wherein the sacrament of
Christ's death is represented and re^orded, to the sacrifices of the L^uiticall
Priests, and of Elias: therefore as they offered some Real sacrifice of a
beast, so the Priest now offers a Real sacrifice of Christ. This conclusion
holds not, Master Rainolds, it is too weak. Were you not at Rhemes, you
might see the force of Saint Chrysostomes comparison to lie herein, that the
old Priests were appointed to sacrifice only a lamb, or goat, or kowe, or
some other brute beast: but now the son of God himself is most lively, yet
spirituallie, not reallie, sacrificed in the Church, when the sacrament of this
sacrifice according to his institution is received. Your eloquence in the end
is nothing else but childish railing, necessary for such a cause as you have
taken in hand to maintain, which cannot otherwise be vpholden, or continue in
any reasonable account.

CHAP. 10.
Of the place in S. Lukes Gospel, which Beza is charged to have corrupted.

BEfore you come to the matter, page 23^.
it pleases you a little to whet your eloquence in railing at Beza, a man
though much hated of Papists, who love none that loves not their Pope, be he
never so learned or godly, yet known to all men, even his enemies, to be
endued with excellent graces of Gods spirit, which have shined in him notably
to the glory of God, and profit of the Church. Your spiteful reproaches cast
against him and others are now of all esteemed, as they are in truth, fained
and slanderous, unworthy of any regard or credit. His skill in the bible
has sufficiently appeered, to your grief: and if you, Master Rainolds, would
herein compare your self with him, it were a token of your singular boldness
and arrogancy. His skill in murdering men, you say, was better, which
argues you have no conscience to devise to speak, to write, most untruly.
But say your pleasure, your reward with God and men is certain. Many I know
have written against him much: and you may know that he has fully answered
them al. But of your Remish or Romish college of English students, I know not
any that has written ought against him in that tongue, which he could read
and understand.

The words are in Luke. 22. v. 20. which in the Greek that Beza translated, by
construction indeed require, tha the cup, which is called the new Testament,
should be shed for us. In which respect Beza translateth them otherwise. For
further knowledge hereof, you refer your reader to M. Martin: and so do I
for answer, to M.D. Fulke. And here you might as well have cut of this long
tail of your treatise which has not in it one drop of learning or profit: you
rail at me, you rail at Beza, you rail at the holy communion, page 235.
which you call profane and bakerlie: but reason, scripture, or proof, you
bring not any for your sayings. I see you are a resolute man: continue thus a
while, and I nothing doubt, but he whose ordinance and sacrament you have thus
boldly and wickedly blasphemed, will be avenged upon that profane heart and
tongue of yours. But let us hear what you say.

First, page 239.
whereas I said if they understand by the cup, the blood in the cup, as
they do, then is there mention made of double blood; you tell me, I lie
groslie and intollerablie: such courteous speeches I have no cause to thank you
for: but let all men of wisdom be judges, whether I have not said the truth.
Thus you make S. Luke to speak, this cup, that is, this blood, is the new
Testament in my blood, which is shed for you. Is not here by your construction
mentioned first one blood, then an other? your reply is pitiful M. R. For to
say, This Christ is Christ the son of God, this God is God of heaven and
earth, as it signifies not a double Christ or God: so is it nothing like this
saying of yours concerning the blood in the sacrament. For you cannot make the
construction, as you pretend, this blood is the blood of the new Testament: the
wordsstand otherwise: unless you will commit a greater fault, then that wherewith
you charge Beza so hainously. S. Luke speaks not, as you make him, this blood
is the blood of the new testament: but, this cup is the new testament in my
blood. If by cup, he meant blood, as you affirm, then our savior Christ his
blood was the new Testament in his blood. And is it all one to say, This blood
is the blood of the new testament, and, this blood is the new testament in my
blood? If it may be lawful for you, to alter and expound the words at your
pleasure, then can you help your selfs well enough: but your exposition must be
squared according to the words, not the words framed to your exposition.

Again, page 240.
you say, where Beza corrects Saint Luke in the latter part of the sentence,
I rail at the first, so that between Beza, and me S. Luke has never a word
right: wisely considered doubties. The words are right, your exposition is fond
and wicked. The cupp you make to be the blood of Christ, who as yet was not
crucified, nor his blood shed. If your doctrine be true, Christ's blood was
shed already, and that reallie: else it could not be in the cup reallie. The
papists teach that Christ's blood was reallie in the cup before his passion.
But if Christ's blood was shed sitting at the table, who was he, M.R. that
shed it? who made the wound? who opened his side? who thrust his weapon in
his heart? who pierced his hands and feet? This must you tell, if you
maintain that his blood was then reallie shed, and powered forth into the
cup. But by the cup M.R. is meant the wine in the cup, which is the new
testament, that is a sacrament of the new testament in Christ's blood shed for
us on the cross. This is a true and plain sense, agreeable to all analogy of
faith, standing with the words themselves, followed of the ancient fathers.

When at length will you make an end of this railing? it is to unseemly, to
loathsome, page 241.
to odious: Indeed M.R. it must needs appear a great absurdity to all
learned and godly Christians, who know and rightly esteem the price of our
redemption, that to be shed for our sins, which was in the cup. the blood of
Jesus Christ, which was shed once, not in the cup, but on the cross, for our
redemption.

If you urge S. Lukes words, as they stand in grammatical construction, I
answer that as the cup is called Christ's blood, and Christ's testament, that is
by a figure, the sacrament of his blood and testament, so is it also said to be
shed for us, by a figure, sacramentallie. But all men of skill and judgment
may soon see, that in these words there is some change of grammatical
disposition, usual in the writings of the Apostles and Evangelists. Your
discourse about Tautologies in the scriptures, is altogether vain and
frivolous.

To S. Basils testimony you answer much in words, and nothing in matter.
page 244.
For what cause have you thus to reproach Beza for his translation of these
words, seeing you cannot deny but S. Basil has reported that text of S. Luke,
even as Beza has translated the same: and you confess that Saint Basil has
truly delivered the sense thereof? so all that you have said or can say
spitefully against Beza, must appertain to Saint Basil no less, Basil in
Ethic. (...).
whom yet you will not seem to touch. But the thing truly and
indifferently considered, Beza is no more to be accused, then S. Basil. you
tell us of heretics a long tale, which is no better then waste paper. Use it
your self, or bestow it at your pleasure. Of such badde stuff base account
is to be made.

Whereas I spoke a few words concerning figurative speeches, page 251.
which the adversaries cannot abide to hear of in the sacrament, I have (as it
were) opened at unawares a flood-gate to M. Rainolds flowing utterance, Qua
data porta ruit. The stream is so strong, and runs so violently, carrying
all manner of baggage with it, that vain it were to resist it. Let it
therefore pass down, and do what mischief it can: great harm, I trust, it
shall not do. Thus much you must confess that in the sacrament figures are
found: and yet when we oppose against your monster of real presence a most
true and evident answer that the words were figuratiuelie spoken, and must
figuratiuelie be expounded, you rage above all measure. But quiet your self
Master Rainolds, and somewhat stay your intemperate affection; never shall you
prove while papistrie has a man living to speak in defense of it, either by
scripture or ancient writer, that these words must figuratiuelie be
understood, This is my blood, this cup is the new Testament in my blood,
more then these, This cup is shed for you. Leave your babbling: Figurative
speeches in the very words of the supper by the Adversaries confession.
and speak to purpose: prove this if you can. Wherefore finding in the
Evangelists words such manifest figures, what reason have you to condemn us
for using the same being a most common and familiar kind of speech? Because
it stands not with your real presence. Let your real presence hardly shift
for it self, we are not bound for cause and respect thereof to wrest the
scriptures, to forge monstrous interpretations, to change the sacrament into a
real sacrifice of Christ: which heathenish kind of doctrine never any but
Antichrist and his ministers maintained. The scriptures, the old fathers, the
ancient Church of Christ taught and believed otherwise, as has been showed
and proved inuinciblie to your faces. Your pages following filled with rouing
testimonies I pretermitt: your contumelies being no lawful arguments require
no answer.

CHAP. 11.
Concerning the translation of the English Bibles.

MAster Martins book of Discovery is answered long since from head to foot
in every part: page 262.
you have the answer amongst you, say to it what you can with truth and
learning. To brag of your fellows book, which being thoroughly and soundly
disprooued, you cannot with all your skill maintain, is a childish vanity: to
acknowledge no Reply, which you cannot but know, or to make light account of
it, whereunto you cannot truly reioine, is wilfulnes and partiality. Our
translations and translatours have been sufficiently cleared, for the most
part, of such faults as were objected: and though it is not denied, but in
every ont of them some fault or other may be found, worthy reproof and
correction, yet may it most truly be affirmed, that of all our translations
none can be noted so full of imperfections and errors, as your latin vulgar
translation is, which you not only follow but commend for the best of all,
yea prefer before the original text it self, against knowledge, reason,
and conscience. This whole chapter you might have spared, handling such things
as have been so well handled in your judgment by Master Martin: but the
occasion serving you to utter some part of your humor, which so boileth in
your stomache, that it would burst the vessel, if it breathed not forth, you
could not pr^termit. Briefly let us peruse this little, or nothing rather, that
you bring.

You shall do me mischief enough M. R. and be sufficiently avenged on me,
page 264. etc.
if you can prove all that you have here propounded against me. Big words,
bold bragges, terrible threats: a man would think my case were very
miserable, that have to deal with so cruel and mighty an adversary. I may
indeed be sorry for my chance, to be thus cumbred with an unlearned and
ridiculous trifler, that seeks only by show and multitude of words to
dazzle the eyes of simple men, and somewhat disgrace the truth of god. A man
that has but a drop of learning cannot be deceived by such painted and pelting
stuff: the unlearned that cannot judge, may think M. R. has said some what
to purpose.

an Image, or (...) a carcass. And what came in your head to charge me with
translating psuche a carcass? where have I so translated it? or where is it so
found in any of our translations? For my part I never so translated it, I never
saw it so translated, I never thought it lawful so to translate it. Beza I
grant translated it so in his latin translation once, but afterward upon
better consideration, he changed his translation, as you may see in the latter
editions. As for eidolon, it is truly and properly translated an Image, as any
man will confess, that knows the nature of the word, and as it has been
largely proved in sundry discourses. It was then far from wit or learning in
you Master Rainolds, to say that as well might minister be translated a slave,
or homo a dog, as eidolon an Image. For among the words, wherewith the
learned Grecians commonly express the same thing that we call an Image, is
eidolon, as fit and natural as any other. Your sacred Images are eidola: and
if eidolon signify an Idol, then are they Idols, as in truth they are. By
use and custom of speech, an Idol and Image somewhat differ, as every man
knows. All Idols are Images, not al Images Idols. But the Lord has
forbidden al graven Images no less then graven Idols to be made for worship
sake Wherefore your Images, All images made for worship sake are very Idols.
which you make, which you garnish, which you erecte, which you worship in your
unholy Synagogues, are Idols. The picture makes not an Idol, but the
worship. The pictures of Jupiter or Mars, were no Idols, according to the
received sense of this word, unless they were worshipped: so likewise the
Images of Saints, if they be abused to sacred worship, in which respect you
call them sacred Images, are no better then profane, wicked, abominable Idols.
Then your argument to prove us Idolaters for honoring the Queen in her Image,
etc. is childish. This honor to the Prince is civil, not religious or divine,
such as the honor is, wherewith you worship your Images of all sorts: so this
honor is far from Idolatry, your honor is mere Idolatry, and you are
Idolatrous worshippers of Idol Images. That Ecclesia signifies an assembly,
or congregation, who can deny? and so may it rightly be translated: although
we in our translations do willingly use the common word Church, as you cannot
be ignorant. So Episcopus we translate most commonly a Bishop, and Euangelium
the gospel, and to conclude, we refuse not the usual phrase and manner of
speech, but only when the superstitious abuse of words was to be avoided.
Therefore that form of preaching which you have here devised of your self is
fittest for such a preacher, as your self: we use not so to preach, or so to
speak, or so to write: it was no doubt a wise conceit to occupy your self
withal.

page 270.
to object want of both to me. For show us M. R. if you can, any word in our
Bibles absurdly or falsely translated, by me maintained. The same word may well
be translated in diverse places diversely: and so (...) Io. 3.8. is rightly
translated the wind, which in other places is not so to be translated. And are
not you a modest man, that because in this one place (...) is so translated, as
the word well bears and the sense requires, would make men believe that it
is every where else so translated, and that the holy ghost, we call the holy
wind? you have good cause to be ashamed of this so shameless and impudent
dealing. Eucharistia you will not have translated thanksgiving, but Eucharist:
and by Eucharist you mean the sacrament of Christ's supper. Now where is
Eucharistia taken thus for the sacrament in the scriptures? why have your
selves translated Eucharistia, thanks giving? 1. Tim. 4.4. Nothing to be
rejected, that is received with thanks giving. Will you mende your translation
thus, Nothing to be rejected, that is received with the Eucharist? As
Eucharistia is used by Godly writers, both Greek and Latin for the sacrament,
so we also use the word Eucharist in the same manner, as you might hear in our
sermons, and may read in our writings. And so we call, it the sacrament of
Baptism, not of washing, as you charge us: notwithstanding that Baptismus in
the general signification of the word, is nothing else but washing, and so is
used in scripture often times, and so have your selves translated it. Marc.
7.4. Whether I have truly said of your translation, that it is of all others
most corrupt, I am content to refer it to the judgment of all the wise and
Godly readers. page 271. etc.


tending to such Atheism, as you charge us withal? Atheist I will not call
you, Master Rainolds, but I may truly say of you, as you have continually
given undoubted proof, that you have no fear of God before your eyes. Speak
or write of us your pleasure falsely, foolishlie, boldly: your judgment
shall be as deep as any Atheist, unless you leave your lying and railing
against Gods truth. Other confutation or condemnation shall not need, then your
own conscience, which can tell you these reproaches are untrue, proceeding
only from wilfulnes and malice. Our translations favor no such Atheism, as
you without wit or learning imagine. For does it follow, if we translate, Thou will not leave my soul in grave, that the blessed soul of our savior was
mortal, and died in the grave, and that the immortality of the soul is
destroyed? does not the scripture oftentimes use this kind of speech? Psa.
44.25.
Our soul, says David, is humbled in the dust. Again, The waters have entered
even unto my soul. Psa. 69.2. Psa. 119.25.
Again, My soul cleaneth to the ground. Again he says, psalm. 22.21.
deliver my soul from the sword. And in an other Psalm he says, O Lord thou
have brought up my soul out of the grave. Psa. 30.3.
And such phrases in the scriptures are usual, of which I trust you will not
gather that men's souls can be covered with dust, drowned with water, killed
with swords, buried in the grave, and to conclude, that they are mortal. If
you were not possessed with a spirit of wrangling, there needed no words in
this behalf.

Castalion or Illyricus have written against Beza or Master Carlisle, with some
others, against some places translated in our Bibles, makes nothing to
purpose. I have not said otherwise, but that some things may be amended:
whether yet so as these men have avouched, I leave to be considered of the
learned. Howbeit you may not reason thus, because some men have found a fault
with the translations in some one place or other, whether with judgment and
reason, or fancy, that therefore the wholl translation is false, corrupt,
wicked, no better then Mahomets Alcoran, as you have here written, after your
accustomed manner, blasphemouslie.

The rest you leave to Master Martine, page 275. etc.
whose reasons stand as yet, you say, unanswered. Belike the answer you have
not seen, or not perused in differentlie. But M. Martin. and all his reasons
have been answered largely and pithely long ago, and nothing has been
replied on your part. What conscience and Religion is to be used in translating
the scriptures, I know, and am far of from allowing such liberty, as a man
may take in translating profane authors: neither did I ever like the daintines
and curiousnes of some, that refuse the usual words of scripture, because
they are not Ciceronian. As for the names of priest, Altar, penance, I would it
were as you say, that not only the words were changed, but the things
utterly removed from the hearts of al Christians. For your priests are no
lawful priests, your altar is erected to an Idol, your penance is contrary to
true repentance. The words Church, Christ, Apostle, are as common in our
translations, sermons, and all treatises, as any other. That which follows
of Atheist, Saducee, Libertines, Academikes, Sacramentaries, containing only
matter of reproach, I am content to let it pass.

CHAP. 12.
Concerning the Latin Bible, which the adversaries maintain to be more
sincere, then the Hebrewe now extant.

A Man would think that common reason, page 281. etc.
and some regard of learned judgments might more prevail which our
adversaries, then that they should openly defend so foul an assertion, as in
this Chapter Master Rainolds takes upon him to maintain by warrant of the
Tridentine assembly, that the vulgar latin translation is more sincere then
the Hebrewe and Greek text of scripture. For though he add this exception, in
sundry places, yet their meaning is, that not only in certain places, but
generally their latin Bibles are more pure and incorrupt then the Hebrew and
Greek text, because universally in their translation they pretend to follow
the latin, and not the Hebrew of the old Testament, nor Greek of the new: and
so was it in their assembly of Trente decreede. Admit this were true, that you
entend here to prove, does it follow therefore that the Latin Bible is wholly
to be preferred before the Hebrew and Greek? Though the hebrew ^ext were in
some places not so pure as the latin: translation yet might not this be a good
reason to prefer the translation before the text generally.
to be only followed in translations? to be used only in all divinity
excercises? If the latin were in some places purer then the Hebrew, might not
yet the Hebrew be in many more purer and sincerer then the Latin? Then this is
but a slender shift, to pretend more pureness in the Latin in diverse places,
then in the original text, and hereupon to thrust the text behind the
translation: which is more foolish and unreasonable, then to make the Lady
walk one foot like a servant, and set her handmaide one horseback, because
perhaps the servant is thought in some things to be more excellent then her
mistress.

Lucas Brugensis, Freneis. Lucas in Epist. ad Serletum.
a man of your own household, and one that has taken much pains. to correct
your Latin translation, confesses, that many faults have crepte into the
same by diverse occasions: which, he says, is no marvel, seeing the like has
fallen out in the very fountain it felfe, as it is plain in the new
Testament in Greek. For (says he) of the old in Hebrew, I will speak
nothing: not daring to affirm, that such faults have taken place in the
hebrew text of the old Testament. But you are bold blindelie and bluntly to
avouch that both these fountains are not only corrupted, but more corrupted
also then your translation, which Lucas was afraid and ashamed once to
insinuate. Your reasons, if you bring any, shall in their several places
following be examined but good reason for your defense in this behalf, am I
assured can none be brought.

Three things the Reader must carry in mind at your request. First, Master
Martine. Secondly, Gregory Martine, to whom you refer your self, has
written of these points, it has been already confuted, and yet stands
confuted; and therefore no more needs to be answered. What causes moved you
to prefer the latin before the Hebrew or Greek, it shall appear in place:
reasons I know are rendered in the preface of your translation by your Remish
translatours, but such as any man of skill and knowledge may easily epsy to
be simple shifts and pretenses only to rid your selves from the original
text of scripture, The papists condemn the Original text and defend the
vulgar translation, because that serves their turn nothing so well in show as
this.
which is far more express and pregnant against your doctrines then the latin
translation. Which though M. Rainolds here closely denies, yet in examples
every where may be seen, and some I will set down, partly for M. Rainolds
sake, and partly to show I have no need of his excuse from a lie.

In the 14. Chapter of S. John's gospel ver. 26. where our savior Christ
tells his Apostles, The holy ghost shall bring into your remembrance,
whatsoever I have said to you, the Remish translators have made him thus to
speak, shall suggest unto you all things, whatsoever I shall say to you,
according to the latin vulgar, that it might be more easily supposed,
whatsoever the Church should afterward determine, is from inspiration of the
holy ghost.

Ephesians Chapter. 2. verse. 10. the Apostle in the Greek writes that we are
created in Christ unto good works: you translate after your latin, in good
works. This corruption is advantage to your doctrine of good works.

In the same epistle Chapter. 5. verse. 32. you translate this is a great
sacrament, to make men think that the scriptures affirm marriage to be a
sacrament of the Church: whereas if you had truly translated it according to
the Greek, This is a great mystery, the occasion of that surmise had been
removed. In the epist. to the Pihl. Chap. 1. v. 27. the greek word, which
signifies a sign, or token, or proof, is in your latin vulgar translated a
cause: and this translation do you keep, the rather thereby to induce your
readers to believe, that as the malicious dealing of wicked adversaries against
the godly may truly be said to be the cause of their perdition, so likewise
the patience of the godly is a cause of their salvation: whereas the Apostle
only says in this place, that the raging of the enemies against the Church
is a manifest argument of their condemnation, and the constant suffering of the
godly is a certain sign and testimony of their salvation, who sees not
herein what cause you had to like better of the latin translation, then of the
original text?

Luke Chap. 10. v. 35. the words are in the Greek, whatsoever thou spendest
more: which you translate, whatsoever thou shall supererogate. This corruption
makes some show for your works of supererogation.

Luke Chap. 1. v. 48. the blessed virgin says, God has looked on the low
estate of his handmaid: you translate, the humility of his handmaid. This
corruption helps your doctrine of merits. So an other corruption in the same
Chapter, v. 28. tending to the same purpose, where you have translated, Hail
full of grace: the Greek and original text has only, Hail thou freely
beloved. In the Epistle to the Hebrews, chap. 13. v. 16. you translate, with
such hosts god is promerited: which is both a fond and false translation, the
Greek words being, with such sacrifices God is delighted, meaning alms and
distribution.

In the second Ep. of S. Peter Chap. 1. v. 15. you have strangely translated
the Apostles words, I will do my diligence, you to have often after my decease
also, that you may keep a memory of these things, and upon this disordered
translation you have made a long note of Peter's care and protection of the
Church after his death: whereas the Apostle in his own words says no more,
but that he would endeavor daily, that they also might have remembrance of
those things after his departure. A pretty slight in translating for
advantage, where the Apostle says, he would endeavor that they might remember
those things after his decease, to make him say, that he would have them in
remembrance after his decease; and then of this false translation to note what
a pastoral care S. Peter has for the Church after he was deceased. In the
epistle of S. Paul to the Romans chap. 11. v. 6. the common translator has
left out this whole sentence together, But if it be of works, it is no more
grace: or else were work no more work: and these words have you also in your
English translation clean omitted, as though they were no part of scripture,
being the Apostles undoubted words no less, then the other that went before.
What cause was there of this dealing, but only to smother that clear
opposition between merit and grace, which the Apostle has in his own words
declared, if he might be suffered to speak all.

A number such places could I allege, where the vulgar translation, differing
and swaruing from the undoubted original text, is by you followed, because it
carries some sound and show of your opinions and errors. Many excuses may you
make for your selves, and your translatours have in their preface handsomely
laid out their excuses, (which I doubt not shall be weied and examined
thoroughly) but soon may any man perceive, what cause indeed moved you to be
so friendly to the translation, and so hard to the text: because the text
does plainly discover your nakedness, the translation brings some small
rags to hide it.

Before you answer my arguments alleged for defense of the Hebrewe and Greek
text, page 285.
you set down certain words of mine, wherein I seem (you say) to avouch,
that only to be the word of God, which is written in the language, wherein
first the holy ghost by the Prophets and Apostles uttered it. No cavil so
simple which M.R. will not use.
My words are plain, Master Rainolds, my meaning cannot seem ambiguous: you
seek not for truth, but for a cavil. The word of God I know may be uttered
in other languages, then wherein first it was by writing delivered to the
Church: and translations agreeing with the original text are the word of God.
For Gods word is not the language, but the doctrine. Howbeit translations set
forth by sundry persons are so far forth only the word of God, as they
faithfully express the meaning of the Authentical text, the which being
written by the Prophets and Apostles, chosen instruments for that purpose, is
wholly and undoubtedly the word of God. Then it may worthelie be wondered at
in you, who taking upon you to translate the new testament into english, have
not translated the text of the Apostles and Evangelists, but the translation of
S. Jerome or some other, you know not whom: which translation in very many
places is corrupt, and therefore in those places cannot be the word of God.
Religion and reason would have required that in translating the scriptures you
should have followed the original fountains, Absurd to translate a
translation of Scriptures rather then the fountains.
yea although the latin translation had been much perfecter and purer then
it is: how much more ought you to have so done, seeing it be wrayeth so
manifest and manifold corruptions as it does?

But your reasons, page 287.
whereby you labor to justify your doing in this behalf, must be examined.
M.R. reasons, why they might translate according to a translation, answered.
Our Savior, the Euangilists, and Apostles (you say) cited places of the old
testament, not according to the Hebrew, but according to the Septuagints.
First, Master Rainolds, your comparison is not equal. What are ye to Christ,
to his Evangelists, and Apostles? will you be bold to take as much upon you,
as they might? herein doubtless you have not so wisely be thought your self.
Then, show if you can a place alleged by our savior Christ, or any
Evangelist, or Apostle, swaruing in sense from the Hebrew. They cite not
always the words, but they keep most truly the sense and meaning ever more.
Lastly it is one thing to translate the scripture, and an other to cite a
place of scripture. In citing a place, it is sufficient to observe the true
meaning, in translating it is necessary to keep the words, as near as may
be. Our savior, his Evangelists and Apostles were no translatours of
scripture: but they truly delivered the sense of such places, as they
alleged out of scripture.

The Apostle (you say) alleging a place out of the psalm, Psa. 19.5.
Their sound is gone into all the earth, followed not the Hebrew. First I
answer, the sense is all one, Romans 10.18.
whether you translate, their sound or their line is gone forth: secondly John
Isaac can tell you, Contra Linda^. lib. 3. p. 148.
that the hebrew word Kau must signify not only a line, but also as much as
Kol, a sound: which if it be so, Act. 13.41.
then has the Apostle kept the very word. The place in the Acts which S.
Paul cites out of the Prophet Habacuc, has no difference in substance. The
Prophet says, Behold among the Gentiles, etc. The Apostle cites the place
thus, Habac. 1.5.
Behold ye scorners. Howsoever some diversity may appear in the words, the
purpose of the Prophet and Apostle is all one: and this was the thing which the
Apostles regarded in alleging authorities out of the old Testament.

Your third example in Saint James shows, Iam. 4.6.
that the Apostle cited the words of the Greek, and not of the hebrew: which
is granted to be oftentimes in the new Testament used. But to allege the
sense of a place, and therein to follow some translation, is another thing, then
to translate the text it self. The Hebrew text is to this sense, He mocketh
the mockers, and gives grace to the meek: Pron. 3.34.
Saint James rehearses the words thus, God resists the proud, and gives
grace to the humble. The sense is not altered, seeing these mockers are the
proud men of this world, and God mocketh them, when he resists them.

But tell me now, whether you think the Hebrew in these places to be corrupt,
or no. I think you dare not so affirm, seeing your latin vulgar, which you
account authentical, agrees with the Hebrew, for the two last places. Then
what is your argument out of these examples? gladly would I understand, if you
could tell. That Christ and the Apostles cited places out of the old testament
according to the Greek, Have an eye to M.R. conclusion, and it shall appear he
speaks beside the purpose.
was it because the Hebrew was contaminated, as you speak? If it were, then
must you confess your latin translation, which you so much esteem to be full
of corruption. Would you translate these places according to the Greek,
because you find them cited by the Apostles according to the Greek? Expound
your dream, Master Rainolds your, self, and tell us what you saw. Calvin you
charge for cutting the place of James clean away. Lay not the Printers fault
upon Calvin. If he had meant, as you surmise, he would have cut the same
sentence out in Saint Peter also. But there you have it set down in the text,
and expounded in the commentary.

Your spposes have small weight to ground an argument upon: page 290.
you may devise and imagine any thing what you list. Every canonical book of
the old testament is extant in the same language wherein it was written. As for
your books of Tobie, Judith, Machabees, it is no matter in what tongue, or by
whom they were set forth. That S. Matthewe writ his Gospel in Hebrew, is
affirmed, I grant, by ancient fathers, but affirmed only, not proved: and
arguments there be many to the contrary. But admit that so it were: the
Greek was set forth in the Apostles days, as the same authors confess, and
by them commended to the Church, as the true and authentical history written
by S. Matthewe, and of us is so to be accounted. As for the Hebrew of that
Gospel now extant, your self believe not, I think, it is the same, that,
Saint Matthew writ, if he writ any at all in Hebrew. Look now to the force of
this supposition a little better your self, and if you have grace to consider
it aright, which you say is wanting in me, you will confess it proves
nothing.

My words by you translated I acknowledge: page 291. etc.
out of which three things you note.

Secondly, fountains are more pure and wholesome, then the latin edition.
Verily this I believe, and this can I prove, and this shall in the discourse
following appear, whatsoever you have alleged, or can allege to the
contrary.

In your entry to the question you think to gain credit to your vulgar
translation by S. Ieromes authority, page 294.
who was requested by Damasus Bishop of Rome to correct the latin translation
of the new Testament. Hier. in prefat, in nonu^ Test.
S. Jerome I reverence, Damasus I commend, the work I confess to be godly
and profitable to the Church. But if Jerome or Damasus may bring any weight
of commendation to your latin translation, how much more ought we to have in
high and holy reverence the Hebrewe and Greek text, which was written, not by
Jerome, or any such father of mean credit, but by the Prophets, by the
Apostles and Evangelists, not at the request of Damasus, or other like Bishop,
but by commandment from God, and direction of the holy Ghost? S. Jerome
took pains at Damasus request in the four Evangelists: of his own accord in
many books of the old Testament: but this makes nothing for your assertion,
but much rather against it. For of this it plainly appears at the first to
every one, that in S. Ieromes days, the vulgar translations were greatly
corrupted, and that S. Jerome reformed the same by the Hebrew and Greek text,
In S. Ieromes days the Hebrewe and Greek text acknowledged more sincere then
all translations.
which argues that the text was in those days generally without
contradiction acknowledged to be purer then all translations whatsoever. Then
if such corruption crept into the Hebrewe and Greek text, as you affirm, it
was after S. Ieromes days: but when and in what manner, you cannot tell.
Again that you say this edition of S. Jerome was by Damasus supreme
authority commended to the Church, may easily be disprooued: or if he
labored to have it in the Latin Churches received, yet could he not bring it
to pass. Ieromes translation not especially used in the Roman Church for two
hundred years after Jerome. Greg. in. epist. ad Leand.
For both other Churches used it not, and in the Church of Rome it was not in
any singular estimation for the space of two hundred years after S. Jerome,
and Damasus, as we may understand by S. Gregory, who writes, that in his
days the Roman Church used two translations, an old and a new. This new is
the same, which now is called the old. The name of High Priest, if you think
it makes any thing for the Popes supreme authority, you are abused through
your own ignorance. It was a name belonging as well to every Bishop,
especially of the chief Churches, as to Damasus. But of such speeches you can
be content to take advantage to the abusing of the simple.

Four things do you propound to your self to prove, concerning your vulgar
translation: First, Master Rainolds has thus divided not amiss: now let us
examine his proofs of these points for performance of his promise.

page 297.
I have spoken nothing against you, but rather much and all against my self.
If you can make your saying good herein, we shall have cause much to commend
your wit and learning. The reason that you have brought, is by you uttered in
these words following. For if the fountains were so pure in the times of S.
Jerome and S. Ambrose, and the Church then troubled with great diversity of
their Latin Bibles, reformed one to the purity of the fountains and
originals, and we now find those fountains and originals differing from that
reformed bible, why shall we not conclude, that the fountains have in the
mean season been corrupted? And what cause have you thus to conclude? where
have you learned to make such conclusions? think you that this conclusion is
ought worth? Let us way it a little together, Master Rainolds, and then shall
we better esteem the value of it. First you grant the fountains were pure in
S. Jerome and S. Ambrose days: the translations corrupt. Doubtless it greeueth
you to confess thus much, but the necessity of confessing the same enforced
you. Then four hundred years after Christ by M. Rainolds confession the
fountains of the Hebrewe and Greek text were pure, The fountains of the
Hebrew and Greek text pure for the space of four hundred years after Christ
by the adversaries confession.
and all translations were reformed by them. Now let us know some certentie of
the great alteration that followed. What cause was there that the fountains
and originals remained pure so long, and then after began to be so shamefullie
and universally corrupted? Again, what was the cause that the latin
translations were so greatly corrupted for so long a space, and never since
could be corrupted? Tell us some truth, show some reason, allege your
authorities, speak to purpose, and leave these untoward presumptions. The same
means that kept the text pure all that while, why might it not continue in
times following? if you lay the fault of corrupting the fountains upon the
Jews, as you do, were there no Jews in the world, for the space of four
hundred years after Christ, or were they either unwilling or unable to attempt
such a matter? it cannot be denied, but that within the compass of those
years the Jews had as great opportunities and greater, to have performed so
wicked an enterprise, then since that time can be devised. Their malice against
Christian religion was no less then, the number of their learned Rabbines was
as great then, the troubles of the Church of Christ by reason of the great and
general persecutions, gave better occasion to them then: therefore if this
corruption has thus mightily prevailed in the text, may it please you to
inform us how and when it began: which request ought not in any wise seem
unreasonable unto you. For if you may demand of us the time wherein
corruption began to enter into the Church, and otherwise will not believe us
that there is any in the Church, may not we likewise require of you by as good
reason, what time this foul corruption, whereof you speak, first began to
sease upon the text of scripture? and if you cannot tell, how may you look to
be herein believed? The Jews must be charged for all, and the hatred which the
Jews bear to our religion, must be an argument that now all is corrupted in
the Hebrew.

Saint Jerome said he was ashamed to see the Christians thus unworthily and
untruly charge the Hebrew verity with corruption: H^eron in. c. 17. Ierem.
And so may we also truly say, that it is a shame for these men to slander
the Hebrew text, and to accuse the Jews of that fault, whereof they are not
guilty, for ought that can be proved in this behalf against them. August. de
civit, Dei. lib. 15. cap. 13.
And S. Augustine entreating at large of a place, read otherwise in the Greek
and Latin translations, then in the Hebrew text, not only discharges the
Jews from all suspicion of corrupting their books, but gives this rule, that
whenever there is found any variety or difference in the texts, we should
give greatest credit to that tongue, out of which the interpreters have made
their translation. Upon which place Jews Viues writes thus, Ludou, Viues ibid.
This same does Jerome avouch, and this reason it self teaches: there is none
of sound judgment that thinks otherwise. But in vain does the consent of
good wits thus think. For stout senslesnes, as it were an hill, is opposed
against it: not because these men are ignorant of those tongues, (for Augustine
knew not the Hebrew and the Greek, but meanly) but there is not in these men
that modesty of mind, that was in Augustine. He was ready to be taught of
all: they will never learn but always teach that they know not. Thus has
Viues wtitten of you Master R. and such absurd and sensles fellows as you,
that against reason and truth will defend your translations, although differing
never so much from the original tongues, because you are too stout, and want
modesty.

And for the Jews thus much may be answered, that howsoever they mislike and
hate our religion, yet the text of holy scripture they have evermore, and yet
still do keep most religiously and carefully. Which may appear, for that
there be, Joan. Isaac. Contra Lindan. lib. 2. pa. 77.
as Ioannes Isaac, a learned Jew, writes, above two hundred arguments against
the Jewish opinions more evident and express in the Hebrew text of the old
testament, then they be in the latin translation. And so likewise says
Andradius, Andrad. lib. 4. Defens. Trident.
that they, which holylie and religiously handle the Hebrew text, find
therein far more not able testimonies of Christ, then in the Latin and
Greek copies. which also Saint Jerome long since has witnessed, Hier. epist.
74. ad. Marcell.
saying, that when he of purpose compared the Hebrew text with a Greek
translation, to see whether the Jews had not changed some thing in the Hebrew
books through envy that they bare to Christ, he found therein much more for
confirmation of Christian faith: which could not have been so, if the Jews
had of malice to Christ corrupted their Bibles, as now is by our adversaries
untruly surmised.

What madness then should drive them to corrupt the text, to no hindrance of our
religion, to no furtherance of theirs? who doubts, but if they had meant such
a thing, they would have practiced their skill in those places especially,
that do most directly concern the Gospel of Christ, which being otherwise,
your conjecture of the Jews dealing about the Hebrew text is foolish, and
false.

You declame against the ignorance and reprobate mind of the Jews: you set
forth the promises made to the Church, of having always the truth. And think
you that this makes any thing for you? Do these promises of gods spirit and
truth made to the Church belong only to the latin Church? are they included
only in the latin translation? What shall become then in your judgment of
so many Churches in Greece, in Armenie, in Arabie, in all places of the world,
that have no skill of your latin Bibles? Have they no spirit, no scripture, no
truth? does your Tridentine decree appertain unto them also of using only
the latin text in sermons, in lectures, in expositions, in disputations? what
mean you to talk in this manner?

You say, God has promised the Church, that she shall be a faithful and
perpetual obseruer of his word and testament, that is, according to your new
commentary, that the Church shall lose the pure fountains of the Hebrew text,
but shall keep a pure translation for ever. And see you not the vanity of this
devise? Confessed you not even now, that in Damasus days all the latin
translations were corrupt, whereupon S. Jerome was entreated to take upon him a
labor of correcting them all? Was not the promise, whereof you speak, made to
the Church, M.R. dreams hang not handsomelie together.
before S. Hierome set forth his correction? and yet the Churches latin
translations were, as your self confess, in his time full of diversities and
corruptions. Then if the Bibles in latin were so much corrupted, before S.
Hierome, by your own confession, notwithstanding the promise that God made the
Church of keeping his word and testament, can you by this argument prove, that
by force of this promise the latin Bibles have not been corrupted since Saint
Ieromes time, and the Hebrew have? August. epist. 58. ad quaest. 2.
S. Augustine says it came to pass by Gods special providence that the Jews
being so continually tossed to and fro, and still continuing their hatred
against our savior Christ, yet kept the holy scriptures, that the truth of
Christ's Gospel might so much the more be approved amongst all men, because it
received so sure and weighty testimonies of the most malicious enemies. And to
this purpose he applies the verse of the Psalm, Lord kill them not, lest they
forget thy law, but scatter them.

Furthermore, all that you can say against the malice, falshoode, and ignorance
of the Jews, nothing touches the new testament: for corruption whereof in the
original Greek, I marvel what you can devise, seeing it was kept not in the
custody of Jews, or paganes, but of most Godly and learned Christians. Yet
do you reprove it also, as well as the Hebrew, of the old testament. what
reason have you M. Rainolds so to do? was it also corrupted since S. Ieromes
time, as you said of the other? The commentaries and writings of the Greek
fathers will easily convince you if so you say. For the text that we have, is
the same which they followed, expounded, and set down in their writings,
except there be in some few places some small difference of reading. If the
latin Church had any promise to keep Gods truth and testament in a latin
translation, will you deny that the Greek Church had not the same promis to
keep it in the original text? while you seem to avouch the truth of gods
promis toward the latin Church, as though you cared nothing how the Lord dealt
with others, so he kept touch and covenant with yourselues, you make him by
your argument to be unfaithful toward the Church of Greece, and all other
Churches else in the world. Thus are you driven into absurdities and
contradictions, as needs you must, when you mainetaine willfullie such false
assertions, as these.

That Calvin affirms the Roman Church to have been more constant, Page 300.
and less given to novelties then the East Churches, whereby she obtained
greater fame and credit, then the rest, nothing concerns this matter. For
though it be granted the Grecians were more factious for the most part and
wavering, then the Romans, yet might they retain the original text of
scripture, as faithfully as they. No people so froward, so malicious, so
presumptuous, so contentious, so hard to be brought under the obedience of gods
laws, as the Jews, and yet for all this perverse disposition in them, it is
most certain, that they had evermore, and have still the books of scripture
in highest reverence, The Jews always most dilingent in keeping their Bibles
from corruption.
and keep them with greatest diligence, so as they would not alter one letter
in them for all the world. And notwithstanding the Romans greater constancy
and staiednes then the Grecians, yet were the latin Bibles in S. Hieromes
time, more corrupt for the new testament, then the Greek fountains were.
Which may be understood undoubtedly thereof, for that in any controversy
about the latin translation, they always had recourse to the Greek copies,
and have prescribed the same rule to be followed continually: and Saint
Hierome himself reformed the latin translations according to the Greek then
extant, and read in the Greek Churches. Thus then you may perceive, that to
be constant in the profession of Gods truth, and to be careful to keep the
text of scripture from corruption, are two diverse things: which you might have
soon considered, if you had but looked back to that your self have written
before. For these are even the same Grecians, whose exemplars Saint Jerome
followed in correcting the Evangelists, and which he calls waters of the
most pure fountain, and sundry wise commends. Hieron. Marcellae.


page 303. etc.
you bring us forth a place out of the prophet Esaie, Chap. 9. First in that I
say the Jews have not corrupted the hebrew text, I say no other thing, then
that which the most learned Papists of all times have affirmed: M.R. in this
controversy has his master papists adversaries to him, namely. Isaac,
Clarius, Valla, Andradius, Montanus, Lucas, Bellarmine, and many more.
and that by the same argument, which my self used, that then this corruption
most certainly would have appeared in those places that directly concern
our Savior Christ: amongst the which this that you mention here is notable:
And although I will not deny but that the Jews might have some purpose to wrest
it from the sense, that it might be aplied to any rather, then to Christ, yet
the corruption is not so great as you would have it seem, consisting not in
change of any letter, but only of the points. The letters remaining without
alteration, whatsoever is amiss in the points, may easily be corrected.
Furthermore if we read the word with the same points, which now it commonly
has in the Hebrew Bibles, whereby the verbopassiue is turned into an active,
yet the place notwithstanding proves inuinciblie the Divinity of our Savior
Christ. For as well does it confirm this doctrine, if we read, Vajikrae.
and vocabit, that is, God the father shall call his name wonderful, etc, as
if we read, Vajikkare.
vocabitur, his name shall be called wonderful. Although, you that take upon
you such profound knowledge and cunning in the Hebrew language, should not have
been ignorant that this is the phrase of that tongue. That the Jews refer the
last name only, which is the Prince of peace, Sar-shaelom.
to the Child borne, all the rest going before to God him self, this I grant
to be a malicious construction of the words, but no corruption of the text.
One thing is it to expound the words in a wrong sense, an other to falsify
the words. You hoped no doubt to have gained much more by this place, then
will any ways be yielded unto you: for that you add of the Churches
authority, which you call the supreme ground and stay, is nothing worth,
being an old worn and wasted sentence, brought in rashelie without credit or
countenance. The words are plain of themselves and have in them authority
and stay sufficient to prove the truth of Christ's divinity, and to confute
the enemies thereof.

An other such place you obiecte out of the Prophet Jeremy, page 306.
Chap. 23. v. 6. wherein that some corruption has been committed either in
letter or point, may be imagined, but cannot by evident demonstration be
proved. ijcro.
What moved S. Jerome to translate thus, vocabunt eum, They shall call him, I
will not dispute. The reason might be in the variety, and incertentie of
points, or in the ambiguous acception of the word. But because M. Rainolds
charge the Jews with so foul a corruption of this place, only to discredit
the divinity of our Savior Christ, he must remember, that the Seventy
interpreters translated it in the singular number, according to the Hebrewe now
extant, In comment. ad Hier. ca. 23.
as S. Ierom also makes mention, yet were they never challenged for partial
interpretation of the scriptures, being (as many write) wonderfully assisted
and governed in that work, and not smallie had of ancient time in regard. And
this was long before our savior Christ was come in the flesh, and therefore
undoubtedly the place was not corrupted by the Jews for such a cause as you
imagine, unless you will say the Jews in hatred of Christ corrupted the
Bible diverse hundred years before Christ was borne, and before they had cause
to conceive any malice or displeasure against our savior Christ. And so your
Lyranes surmise is plainly disprooued, in which you rest your self, as in a
certain verity, and upon his word are boulde to pronounce sentence against
the poor Jews for committing a crime, which by clear evidence of greater
authority they are not guilty of. Neither makes it less for Christ's
divinity, to read it, vocabit, He shall call him, that is, God the father, or,
every faithful man shall call him, The Lord our righteousness: then if we read,
vocabunt, They shall call him the Lord our righteousness. And Saint Hierome (as
you might have seen, had you looked on the place your self) translateth the
text after this manner, Et hoc est nomen, quo vocabunt eum (sine vocabit eum)
Dominus iustus noster, wherein he shows plainly there is no substance of
matter more in the one, then the other. If this be so shameful and so notable a
corruption, as you in countenance and show pretend, S. Hierome was greatly
ouerseene, that not only gave no warning thereof in his Commentary, but used
the same also in the text it self. But what will you say to those learned men,
who having more skill in the Hebrew tongue then you, Master Rainolds, or else
your Lyra, thoug a Jew borne, have translated the word as it is now read in
the hebrew Bibles, no otherwise then your selves would have it to be
translated. I mean Arias Montanus and Vatablus, as in their translations you
may find: who if they have rightly and well translated the word, then may
you see, that no such wickedness has been practiced in this place, as you
have fathered upon the Jews. And furthermore compare an other like place in
the same Prophet, Chap. 33. v. 15. Where this word is used in the singular
number without controversy, the Prophet speaking again of the same matter,
and almost wholly in the same words. Thus you may understand that the
integrity of this place may be avouched, and the Jews delivered from your
unjust accusation many ways.

One example more you give mean an other kind, Page 310.
wherein no kind of corruption appears at all. In the Prophet Esaias chap. 53.
verse. 8. the old latin translation stands thus, propter scelus populi mei
percussi eum, For the sin of my people have I smitten him. The Hebrew text is
something otherwise, Miphshahh (...) mi negahh lamo.
propter defectionem populi mei plaga ipsi, that is, For the transgression of
my people was he plagued. Your self confess there is agreement in the sense,
as indeed every one may see: yet by and by, as a man without memory or
reason, you say the sense is inuerted, and greatly altered. Something would
you gladly say, but nothing to purpose can you say. The sense in the Hebrew
now extant, agreeing so fully with the translation of S. Jerome, which you
hold as authentical, and consonant to the verity of the ancient Hebrew
Bibles, how can you probably charge the Jews with corruption of this place,
there being no difference, and therefore no corruption in the sense, by your
own confession? If they corrupted the text, it was because they would corrupt
the sense: but here the sense runs as pure and clear in the Hebrew, as in
the Latin: therefore this text is not corrupted by the Jews.

What Luther has written of the Jews and Rabbines endeavor in this behalf,
makes nothing for your advantage. Yet as though it had been by plain
demonstration declared, that the bibles are corrupted by them, M.R. takes upon
him now to show the sorts and manners of their corruption.

And two he notes: Page 314.
by plain alteration of points, letters, and syllables: by dividing words,
which by the Prophets were joined together. And that you may know he has
plentiful store and variety of examples, Sernetus is alleged, neither Jew
nor Rabbine, who by dividing a text of the Apostle in the Greek, corrupted
the sense. Thus trimly can M. R. prove the matter he goes about, although he
speak never a word to the question. The controversy is whether the Jews have
thus corrupted the Hebrew Bibles: M.R. alleges an example, wherein Seruetus
of late thus corrupts the Greek Testament. No man now can say, but he has
well performed his part, and proved inuincibly both manifest corruption in the
Bibles, and showed also the manners thereof. More perhaps anon will come to his
hands: for as yet nothing has he found. page 316.


* M.R. says he could note sundry other particular errors in the Hebrew, but
that he wants a piece of that insolent vain, which many of his adversaries
have. If he wanted nothing else, he need not greatly to complain: but doubtless
much greater want has he of truth and learning, then insolency. One thing
here he confesses which the Reader may remember, M. Rain, has made a notable
confession against himself.
that howsoever some gross errors have crept into the fountains and
originals, yet commonly, and for the most part the text is true and sincere.
Thus M.R. has voluntarily protested for the Hebrewe and Greek text. And are
there no gross errors in your latin translation, or not so many as in the
fountains? it shall be proved there are not only grosser faults in yo^^
translation, but also more manifest corruptions, then you can imagine in the
text.

In that you demand, page 317.
what reason I have to think the Hebrew text so pure, I answer, the care
which God has for the truth of his word, and the diligence of them, to whose
custody the same was committed. Against this reason you argue, but without a
good argument. That diverse books of scripture have perished, is not denied.
But the Canon of scripture being after the captivity gathered by Ezra, and
other Prophets, and delivered to the Church, that since that time any parcel
has been lost, you cannot prove. And those that are lost of which you reckon
some, in some you are deceived, they are wanting without any loss or decaie
of necessary doctrine for the Church in those times, wherein they were not
extant. And that the Jews have been more diligent to keep their Bibles from
corruption, then Christians have been to keep their translations sincere, who
can doubt, considering that in S. Ieromes days the common translations were
most faulty, as himself is a witness, but the Hebrew text remained true,
sincere, incorrupt, and was a rule to follow in reforming the translations used
in the Church? And your self even now confessed of your own good accord, that
the Hebrewe text was for the most part and commonly void of all corruption:
which being true, shows a wonderful providence of the Lord watching over the
books of his heavenly word, to defend them from such infections, as otherwise
through negligence and malice of men they were subject unto.

Now if the Jews were either so negligent, or so malicious, as you imagine,
and the Christians so careful for preservation of the Bible, how then came it
to pass, that in the Hebrew copies was found so great truth and sincerity, in
the common translations such notorious errors and corruptions, Andrad. Defens.
Council. Trident. lib. 4.
and that for so many hundred years after Christ? Andradius a doctor of your
own schools, and a great master in your Roman synagogue, has told you
already, that you have herein unadvisedly and foolishlie deemed, that
therefore more credit is to be given to the latin edition, then to the Hebrewe
books, for that these were corrupted through the treachery of the Jews: and
says, you cannot either note the time, or describe the authors of that heinous
fact, or assign the place, or show such other circumstances, which might
convict the Jews of this sacrilege, and that therefore the whole matter hangs
upon bare suspicio^, for which we ought not to charge in this manner the holy
books of the hebrews, so ancient, so commended by our elders, so renoumed by
testimonies of al ages. page 320.


I grant, of some corruption in the Bible, but that not great, and such as
has happened of negligence, rather then purpose, and may easelie both be espied,
and amended, and nothing so gross or common, as in your latin Bibles may be
seen. Is it reason, think you, that for as much as some letters have been
mistaken in the Hebrew, therefore the wholl text should be condemned? Is there
not such mistaking of letter for letter, and word for word in the latin
vulgar translation? who knows not there is? shall we then use your argument
against the translation, which you have devised against the fountain? There is
no reason to the contrary. For if diligence has been bestowed in purging and
reforming such errors of the translation, More reason had it been for the
Council of Trent to have taken order that the fountains might be cleansed, if
there be in them any fault, then the latin translation.
why may not the same be done in restoring the original text to the natural
truth and sincerity? The errors rising upon the similitude of letters and
words, may in the Hebrew, as well as any other language be corrected. That in
these examples by you alleged out of the Psalms. 100. v. 3. and 59. v. 10.
any such error of mistaking has been committed in the text, would have been
by you more substantially proved. For my part I think not, and so do the best
Hebricians that I have read both protestants and papists. The text in the
hebrew is easy enough, and yealdeth a true and godly sense. Your last example
Genesis 3. v. 15. proves no error in the Hebrew, but only in your latin
translation. The Hebrewe in all the copies old and new (unless one wilfully
corrupted by Guido Fabricius) has one reading, whereby a comfortable promise
is set forth, that the woman's seed shall bruise the serpents head: your
translation contains gross impiety and blasphemy, referring that most
excellent work to the woman, which only appertains to the seed of the
woman. About this, you say, the Protestants keep a stir. And cause, I
think, M.R. is angry with us for making sturr about the chief promises of our
redemption: Such regard have the papists either of their own, or of our
salvation.
wherefore some stir should be kept: unless it be no matter, if whatsoever
belongs unto our savior Christ, were applied to the blessed virgin his
mother, as in this place most horribly, and in the Psalms already has been
notoriously performed by you, in token of your great love to our Lady, but
small regard of our Lord.

we have charged the Apostle with any error, is a bold and manifest untruth.
Page 324.
Between the Apostles citation. 1. Cor. 2. v. 9. and the Prophet Esayes
authority Chap. 64. v. 4. there is some diversity in one word. The Prophet
has, expectanti ipsum, to him that waits for him; the Apostle, diligentib.
ipsum, (...).
to them that love him. Which diversity came not through oversight or error in
the Apostle, but either that the Apostle, followed the common reading of the
Greek, or, as his manner for the most part is, did take the sense, not tying
himself to the words. For they that love God, are such and only such as wait
for him: and this waiting for god arises of the love of God. You think the
Apostle and Prophet in these words declared the unspeakable joys of heaven,
which are prepared for the children of God, and therefore you frame an
argument against justification by faith, Proud blasphemies uttered by M.R.
against Gods word.
which you in your accustomed spirit of blasphemy call our mathematical
solifidian fancy, because the Apostle writes, that God has prepared so great
things for those that love him. By the things which the eye has not seen, the
ear not heard, the heart not conceived, is meant the doctrine and mysteries of
the gospel, which the Lord has reueiled to such as wait for him, or love
him. And to let you expound the words according to your own sense, does this
make any thing against the doctrine of justification by faith only, that God
prepares everlasting and inexplicable ioies for those that love him? For whom
should they be prepared, but for such as indeed love him? But is our love
worthy that reward? Is it given to such as love him, in respect, and for the
merit of their love? This must you prove, if you will refell our doctrine in
this behalf. But this was no matter to be handled in this place. It was a
poor glance, and did no harm.

M.R. brings in a troop of authorities together, page 326. etc.
to prove that false which I have said, and all true that he says; long
sentences are translated out of Castalion, D. Humfraie, Pelicane, and Munster,
whereby howsoever it fares with his cause, the volume of his book is well
increased. For whereto serve these testimonies alleged? That through
negligence or ignorance of the writers and printers some faults may be found
in the Hebrew Bibles, I think there be none that will deny: but what makeh all this to purpose, seeing there be a thousand times more such faults in your
translations then can be found in the fountains? your long speeches and
discourses either in other men's words, or in your own, when they come to
scanning, are short enough, and therefore may in a short answer be discharged.
Your comparison of Jews and Protestants in railing at the Pope and Roman
Church, I pass over.

Master Rainolds wills me to consider: page 332.
One, the great diversity of reading. That in the text is such diversity, I
deny. The Jews may perhaps in their Commentaries be of diverse opinions,
touching the reading, but in the text little or no diversity shall you find:
in so much that Ioannes Isaac affirms, Lib. 2 page 69.
there is so great consent and agreement in the Bibles, that no book of the
bible can be showed written with the hand of a Jew, which either has any
thing that others want, or wants any thing that others have. This may
plainly argue an exceading care to keep their Bibles from all manner of
corruption: although this that he writes may almost seem incredible.

An other experiment is, that the Hebrewe printes want something now, which
certainly was in the first originals. Example hereof you bring the psalm.
144. Which being made according to the Hebrew Alphabete, as diverse other are,
one verse is wanting wholly therein, the 14. in number, which should begin
with Nun. What cause there was of omitting this Acrostiche I will not take upon
me to understand. It is not of later times corrupted, seeing the Chaldee has
not that verse. And as it is now in the Hebrewe, so was it in Saint Ieromes
time, and before, when the Hebrewe Bibles were accounted most pure: and yet
then in the Latin psalter a verse was supplied. So that howsoever the matter
stand, this proves not the translation to be of greater purity and credit,
then the fountain. Cause there was doubtless, why the Prophet left out the
order of the letter, but whether such as the Rabbines and Talmud^sts have
devised, I cannot affirm. The like example have you in the. 36. Psalm of your
edition, which being made after the same manner of the Hebrew Alphabet, you
have not in it the letter Am. Reasons thereof are alleged both by Jews, and
learned Papists; but the place for all that they think not to be corrupted, as
you peradventure will rashly pronounce. As for that in the Greek and Latin
of this Psalm there is a verse answerable, the first word whereof in Hebrew
begins with Nun, Nasman.
Fidelis, Dominus, etc. this proves not the fountain to be corrupt or
imperfect: but the Septuagintes finding no verse for the letter Nun, and
thinking perhaps there was some want, repeated the. 17. verse following, the
first only being changed. For this verse supplied by them, and the other
following, is al one, excepting only the first word. It seems not that the
Prophet was altogether so curious to keep the order of letters, that if any
be wanting in a Psalm of that kind, we ought therefore to suspecte corruption
in the Hebrew. In the Psalm. 25. no verse begins with Vau: and two begin
with Resh: and two with Pe. Wherefore you see how little proof of corruption
this reason makes, whatsoever you in your ignorance esteem of it.

That which Master Rainolds hitherto has said, as though it were greatly to
purpose, Page 333.
and worthy to be remembered, he gathers now into certain conclusions, and
as the smith, he beats still upon the same anuill. I have already answered
enoughe to the wholl: If any thing further be offered in this repetition, it
shall be hand led. First it is neither Iudaical, nor injurious to the Church, to
think more reverently of the Hebrew fountains, then the latin translation,
as has been showed. Yea absurd and unlearned is it to prefer the
translation before the text, upon certain (I know not what) blind surmises.
Secondly, if the heresy of the Arrians corrupted the Latin Bibles, as you
imagine, whereupon they needed such correction and reformation by Saint Jerome,
how came it to pass, that the Greek translation of the seventy, and the
Greek of the new testament, was not by that means much more corrupted, for so
much as that heresy prevailed much more in the Greek then in the latin
Churches? why notwithstanding this heresy, do the fathers appeal to the
Greek fountains of the new testament, and by them amend their translations?
The Arrians would have corrupted the spring rather, then a stream: and Saint
Jerome had more cause in respect of them to suspecte the Greek, then the
latin. Whereby it is plain that your geasse of the latin translations, being
troubled and corrupted by the Arrians, is vain, and nothing but a geasse at
all adventure. That you say the Canon of the scripture in those days, was not
by general authority confirmed and received, though it be great untruth,
yet for as much as it pertains not directly to the matter, I will not stand
upon it.

Two authorities M. R. alleges out of the commentaries of S. Hierome upon
the epistle to the Galathians. The Apostle in the 3. Chap. cites two
testimonies out of Deuteronomie, not altogether according to every word in the
Hebrewe text. Saint Jerome among other reasons hereof uses that for one, that
the Jews perhaps have changed something in their originals. If the Apostle had
always bound himself to the words, in rehearsing authorities out of the
old testament, this reason had been of weight: but seeing the Apostle Saint
Paul and other Apostles use not preciselie to recite the words of the text, but
the sense, Saint Jerome had no cause to suspecte such a matter in these places.
For compare the (...) Prophets and Apostles words together, and no difference
in, sense shall ye find. Deuteronomie Chap. 27. v. 26. the words stand thus in
the Hebrewe; Accursed is whosoever performs not the words of this law to
do them. The Apostle to the Galat. chap. 3. v. 10. alleges them thus,
Accursed is every one that abides not in all things that are written in the
book of the law to do them. Here you have more words, I grant, but what
diversity is there in the sense? again Deuter. Chap. 21. v. 23. the words
are these, Accursed of God is he that is hanged. Saint Paul Galat. Chap. 3. v.
13. alleges the words thus, Accursed is every one that is hanged on a tree:
in words a little alteration, in matter and meaning none at all.

S. Jerome, or since, Page 336.
in such manner as you pretend, when will you prove unto us M.R? hitherto
nothing have you done, as plainly appears, and now are you spent almost, so
that little more may be looked for at your hands. Concerning points, pricks,
distinctions, resemblance of letters, malice of the Rabbines, and such like
conjectures, I have before answered. And lastly touching the confession of
some Protestants, has been declared it makes little to your purpose.

Here M.R. answers a question, which reasonably is demanded, Page 339.
namely, when these corruptions came into the Hebrewe Bibles? that is, whether
before Christ's time, or between that and S. Ieromes time, or since? S. Ieromes
age, S. Jerome since. These parts are handled by Master R. severally.

M. Rainolds says, it might be that Christ objected the same unto them,
although not recorded in the Testament. Remember then that this be put among
the traditions unwritten of your Church: and so you need not to seek for
other answer, as you do. Yet our savior Christ when he says, ye have heard
it said, thou shall love thy neighbor, Mat. 5.43.
and hate thine enemy, accuses not the Scribes and Pharisees, for corrupting
the letter of the text, by adding thereunto the second member, but for gathering
out of the text wicked doctrine, that for so much as we are commanded to love
our neighbor, (that is, as they expounded it, our friend) therefore we are
licensed to hate our enemy. This false exposition of the scripture, not
corruption of the text, does Christ correct. For that in wicked Manasses days
diverse books were lost, I have before answered: If Christ reprove not the
Jews therefore, no marvel, seeing that loss was not through their
negligence, but many hundred years before: yet maintenance of open corruption
in the text had deserved in them sharp reproof, although them selves had not
been the first authors of that corruption.

S. Augustine in many places by occasion, speaks of difference between the
Hebrewe text, and the translation of the 70. interpreters, which he much
esteemed, even as you do now your latin translation. Yet in this diversity
does he not at anytime accuse the Hebrew of corruption, but rather imagines
some mystery in the Septuagints translation. Which plainly proves, that the
Church believed not the Hebrew to be corrupted then. Yea, S. Augustine makes
it a matter, not only of great absurdity, August. de Ciuit. lib. 15. c. 13.
but also notable impiety to say, that the Jews could conspire together in
such sort, as that they might, though never so peeuishlie and malitiouslie
bent, corrupt the books of Scripture, being so many, and so generally spread
abroad.

Page 340,
you prove by testimony of Justinius Martyr, in his disputation with Tryphon,
wherein he alleges three examples of notable corruption committed by the
Jews. A place of Justinius Martyr answered.
A short answer may serve. Justinius spoke of suspicion, more then knowledge,
as being not very skilful in the Hebrewe brewe tongue: and if we diligently
examine the places, it will sone appear, that no such matter can be proved. The
first is out of Esdras Chapter 6: The words are these: Esdras spoke unto the
people, this pascha is our savior and refuge, etc. Now in the hebrew no such
words are found: no truly, nor never were, which I prove, because they are
not in your latin translation. And this against you is an argument strong
enough, that maintain your latin text to be the authentical word of God. If
any thing want, it wants as much in your latin Bibles, as in the Hebrew:
and so no more corruption here in the Hebrew text, then in the latin. Again,
the Greek now extant has them not: and whatsoever can be said, no more shall be
proved against the verity, and synceritie of the hebrew fountains, then of
the latin translation in this behalf, and so no advantage shall redownde to
your opinion and defense.

The second place out of Jeremy the 11. Chap. v. 19. is by your own
confession void of corruption in the hebrew bibles now extant. Your argument
for real presence out of this place is singular. The Prophet you say calls
Christ's natural body upon the Cross by the name of bread. That is untrue:
he speaks not of Christ's body, nor of the Cross, nor of real presence in
the sacrament. And was Christ's natural body hanging on the Cross nothing but
bread? was bread crucified for you? Else how makes this for your real
presence? A strange presence, a goodly religion, a wonderful argument.

The last place in the 95. psalm. v. 10. is no otherwise in the hebrew now,
then not only in the Greek, but in the vulgar latin, and Saint Ieromes
translation also, The words a ligno, From the wood, your own fellows have
confessed not to be of the hebrew verity, but of Christian devotion. Then is
it plain enough, that whatsoever Justinius supposed, the hebrew text was not
corrupted: And so your argument from Justinius authority is sufficiently
cleared; and it is showed that these three examples prove nothing against the
Hebrew original text now extant.

S. Ieromes age errors and corruptions have still increased and multiplied, Page
345.
you affirm to be very probable. This was something faintlie and doubtfullie
spoken. That it may seem unto you probable, is not sufficient to cause you
cast away the Hebrew text, and take in stead thereof a latin translation,
which to be since S. Ieromes time shamefullie corrupted, is not only
probable, but very certain and evident, as shall appear. So although it could
be proved not only by probable conjectures, but by clear and substantial
demonstrations, that the Hebrewe Bibles were somewhere corrupted; yet for all
that, no reason have our adversaries to make greater account of their latin
translation, then of the Hebrew fountain, seeing it may and shall effectuall^
be declared, that the same vulgar latin translation, which by them is
preferred to the rome of the authentical written word of God, before the Hebrew
and Greek originals, is full of gross faults, errors, and corruptions. Where
I demand how the Church can say she has kept faithfully the word of god, if
she have lost the original text thereof, Master Rainolds answers she has
conserved the scriptures faithfully, although not in this, or that language.
But why in the Latin language more, then in the Hebrewe, Greek, or any
other, has she conserved the scriptures? what think you of the Greek Church?
Did she lose the word of God in her own tongue, and kept it in the latin?
And must she now, and al other Churces in the world, fetch their text of
scripture out of the latin translation? must only latin among them be used
in sermons, lectures, disputations, and all other such exercises, as your
fathers of Trent in their late meeting have appointed? Or grant you them
rather no use of the scriptures at all, nor judge them Christians, because they
will not be obedient to your Pope? whatsoever you say, no reason can you
show, why the Church should keep the word of God and Testament of Christ her
spouse in an other tongue rather, then that wherein it was written and
delivered unto her: why in the latin more, then in some other language, and
specially the Greek, seeing that Church ever was larger in number and circuit
then the latin, and now not any latin Church at all in the world remaining?
That which follows in certain pages, is nothing else but rouing talk, not
worthy the reading: where no argument is framed, nor reason used, no answer
can be required.

Gregory Martin has his answer long ago: page 355.
his Discovery is disprooued, and his objections refelled thoroughly orderly,
and learnedly. It will be too great and troublesome a work for you to
maintain that quarrel: better it is to leave it to some other, that can do
more therein then your self, if any such be amongst you. As for that notable
corruption of great moment and importance by him objected out of the 22. Psalm.
v. 17. read the answer. Very like a letter was mistaken in the writing and
printing, as may fall out in books set forth with greatest diligence and
conscience so Genebrard your Hebrew professor at Paris imputes not the
corruption of this place to wilful malice in the Jews, but to chance,
Genebrard in Psalm. 21.
by reason the two letters were so like: and proves by testimony of learned
Jews, that the best and truest copies had Caaru, Caaru.
they dug, not Caari as a Lion, Caari.
and that when Caari is written, it must be read Caaru. Who ever denied but
some fault by this means might come into the Bibles, Fortuio and casis.
such as in your translation are plentifully found? is this a reason then of
moment and importance to prove the Hebrew Bibles so full of corruption and
errors, that they must be cast away, and the latin translation Canonized for
authentical scripture, and received in their place? (...), and much worse.

Consider now and peruse the sum of your wholl discourse. Very few places
can the adversaries find in the hebrew text, that may probably be once
suspected of corruption.
Let us grant that these by you hitherto rehearsed are indeed corruptions,
which yet is plainly false, and not anywaies to be granted: but let us for
your cause suppose such a thing. Tell us I pray you, how many corruptions have
you found? score them up, and let us know the number. with all your skill, labor
and conference, yet were you not able to object ten places out of the Hebrew
Bibles, which you might probably charge with corruption. A manifest proof and
certain argument of rare and notable purity in them, far above not only the
diverse translations of old time, but also your vulgar latin edition, which
you notwithstanding boldly, but most untruly, maintain to be sounder and
purer then the Greek text in the new testament, and the Hebrew in the old.
Let us therefore somewhat examine your latin Bibles, whether in them such
corruptions may not be found, as you have charged the original text withal:
whereby it shall appear, that there are in your Bibles of the vulgar
translation corruptions of all sorts great plenty, yea almost innumerable,
and therefore that your argument against the fountains is absurd, Infinite
notorious corruptions in the vulgar latin translation authorized by the
Tridentine assem blie.
and most unreasonable, to condemn them, because of some faults imagined,
whereas you approve a latin edition ten times worse then you can once with
show of truth suspect them to be.

In the first Chapter of Genesis, v. 30. certain words are wanting in your
vulgar Edition, Genesis 1. v. 30.
which are not only in all Hebrewe books, but in the Greek translation aso,
which is by many hundred years far more ancient then the latin: and therefore
if your latin will be tried by the verdit of these two witnesses, it shall be
convicted of manifest corruption. For where the Prophet Moses plainly writes,
that as the Lord had given to man for his meat every herb and tree that
yields fruit, so he had also provided ^uer^e green herb to be meat for the
beasts and birds, Col jerck ^^eseb.
and creeping things, these words so material and necessary are in your
latin books no where to be found. How can you think to excuse this from
corruption.

In the second Chap. v. 8. Genesis 2.8.
the scripture says both in the hebrew and greek text, that God had planted a
garden in the East, Mikkedent.
and so is it understood of the learned writers, that the garden, wherein Adam
for a time remained, was sited in the east: but your translator makes the
Prophet to speak otherwise, A Principio.
that the Lord God had planted a garden of pleasure from the beginning. Is this
kind of translating to be allowed in the word of God? I think none of sound
judgment and good conscience will so esteem.

In the third of Genes. v. 15. a Capital and intolerable corruption has
been committed and still is continued and maintained by you in the words,
Genesis 3.15.
wherein the Lord made unto man the first promise of that redemption, which
should be wrought by our Savior Christ, and in which the sum of the Gospel,
and all hope of our salvation is contained, that the seed of the woman should
bruise the head of the Serpent. For thus speaks the Lord to the Serpent. H^^.
I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her
seed. He shall bruise thy head, and thou shall bruise his heel. Thus has the
Prophet Moses reported the words of almighty God and so have the seventy
interpreters translated them according to the Hebrew original verity. Which
notwithstanding, in steed of He shall bruise thine head, (...)
your latin translation has, She shall bruise thine head, Ipsae.
and this, She, is meant the blessed virgin. A foul, a dangerous, a
damnable corruption, thus defended and expounded. Yea the very enemies them
selves, that have never so little conscience and fear of God, do confess that
it ought to be read otherwise, then it is in your latin translation, seeing
it disagreeth from the Hebrewe, and some ancient copies also of the vulgar
latin edition have ipse, Andrad. lib. 4. Defens. Trid.
and not ipsa. Yet howsoever not only the Hebrew and Greek texts lead us to
the true meaning of Gods promise made to mankind in Jesus Christ, yea and
further some copies of the vulgar translation agree therewith, nevertheless the
Church of Rome (that you may the better perceive whose Church it is) not
regarding all this, embraces, allows, maintains the evident corruption, as
as you may find not only in the Latin books of the vulgar edition
reformed according to the Tridentine Councels appointment, but also in the
Catechism set forth by authority of the same Council: Catechis. Trident. in
artic. Et in Iesum Christum.
and in the books of sundry Papists, that have willingly soulde them selves
to love and defend all Antichrists doctrine. In the margent of your Bibles is
printed for a fashion the true reading: howbeit this not only excuses
nothing your wilful maintenance of detestable corruption, but may rather make
the same appear more odious to all the faithful. For if you can set the true
word in the margent, why might you not receive it also into the text, but
only for that you are determined already to be ashamed of nothing that may
any ways bring advantage to your corruptions, though it be to the certain and
everlasting damnation of your souls. And what go^lie man shall patiently
endure this blasphemy in your English transalation of the old testament, when
it comes forth? where our comfort and hope has been, that he (who is the
woman's seed, our blessed Lord and savior Christ) should bruise the serpents
head, now we must turn it another way, and say thus, she shall bruise the
serpents head. If still you will speak in defense of this corruption, you
shall but bark against heaven: it is too manifest, too heinous, too impudent.

In the fourth of Genes. v. 8. Genes. 4.8.
your latin translation has these words, Let us go forth, ^^^odiamur (...)
in Hebr. question.
which are not in the Hebrew text, nor yet in the Chaldee paraphrast: and S.
Jerome has given a note upon them, that they are superfluous, and ought to be
removed. And in the 15. verse of this Chapter one Hebrew word, taken.
that signifies wherefore, or doubtless, is untruely rendered by your
translator thus, Nequaqu^^ ^ra fie^^
it shall not be so. For the Lord said not, that none should kill Kain, but
that whosoever killed him, he should be punished seven fold. It may not be
granted to any translator of scripture thus to thrust in words at his
pleasure, whereby the sense is manifestly changed.

In the sixth Chapter and 5. verse, Genesis 6.5.
where the Lord complains of man's corrupt nature, and says, that the very
frame of the thoughts of his heart is only evil always, your translatour
has left out two words of great moment, frame, and only: jetsee. rak.
and so like wise in the eight Chapter following, verse 21. Genesis 8.21.
where again the Lord sets forth the wickedness of man's corrupt nature and
says that the imagination of man's heart is evil, ra^^.
your translator of his own head has put into the text a pretty word, and so
makes God to speak otherwise then he spoke, In mala^ proua.
that it is prone to evil. Who sees not that by this word is diminished that
corruption and sinfulness whereof almighty God accuses mankind, and
wherewith he declares man's heart to be replenished from his infancy? This
translation likes you well, because it does not so fully bewraie the
infection of original sin, as the true text of scripture does, and therefore
not so plainly confuteth your heresy of freewill in man to please God before
he be regenerate. In the 9. Genesis 9.6.
Chap. 6. verse where God ordains an everlasting law against murderers, that
he who sheddeth the blood of man, his blood shall be shed by man, these last
words by man, establishing the Magistrates authority, Baadam.
are not expressed in your traslation. This to be a fault of great importance
any man may easily understand.

To proceed a little further in this first book of holy scripture, and to
discover some more gross corruptions of your latin translation therein
committed, (for I may not stand to note every petie fault) in the 36. Genesis
36.24.
Chap. v. 24. the Prophet writes that Ana the son of Zibeon found mules in
the wilderness: but your translator tells us he found warm waters, Haijemim.
aquas calidas.
and so by his great cunning has turned mules into water. It may be said
there is great likeness between the words in Hebrew: which I grant to be so.
But this discharges not the translation from a fault. And howsoever those
words are like, yet from whence did your translator fetch his other word,
Warm. For though we suppose the word may signify water, yet to call it warm
water, is more then can be warranted. In the 41. Chap. v. 54. there passed in
the former editions of your translation a notablefault, Genesis 41.54.
which yet of late for very shame has been amended by Hentenius of Louaine.
For where the Prophet speaking of the general famine that was over all
countries, says that in all the land of Egypt was bread, your books clean
contrary to the text and story read, that the famine also was in all Egypt.
And thus has it gone maine hundred years in your Latin Bibles. Now at
length you have been content to acknowledge a fault in this place: and why not
as well also in others, wherein as evident faults may be found as this? And
seeing you can be brought to acknowledgement of some corruptions in your latin
Bibles, by like reason you may be induced also to confess more faults where
more faults may be found, as there may full many throughout your whole
translation.

In the 49. of Genes. v. 22. Genesis 49.22.
Jacob compares Joseph his son to a fruitful bough by the well side: which
words in your latin translation are otherwise set down thus, and he is
comely to behold. If you say that in the sense is no difference, yet you
make no sufficient answer: bhalei. bhaijn. Et decorus aspectu.
forasmuch as translating the text of scripture we must retain the very words
as well as we may, and not take liberty of leaving the words, because we
think we swerve not from the sense. For the words may have some other, or
farther meaning, then we suppose, even in such places as seem to be most
easy. And if you impute this as a fault to us in translating, why may not we
likewise blame your translator for the same, who has so much offended therein?
But let us go on. In the 24. verse of this Chap. Jacob says of Joseph that his
arms were strengthened: and in your translation it is as contrary, as may be,
that they were weakened or loosed. Again in the end of this Chapter a wholl
verse together is omitted by your tranflators. The purchase of the field, and
the cave that is therein of the children of Heth: of which words not one is
found in your translation, and so where the Chapter contained 33. verses, your
translation has 32. Tell us by what reason it was lawful for the author of
your translation to put so much our of the text, or for you to allow him in so
doing.

It were a work of great labor and length to go through every book of
scripture in this order: and therefore it shall be for our purpose sufficient, of
infinite faults that might be noted book by book, Chapter by Chapter, verse
by verse, to discover only certain, as they come to my hand, such as by
reading and conference every one may observe.

In Exodus the. 15 Chapter. 19. verse your translator has committed a double
fault, first in translating a word, second in pointing amiss. The Prophet
says that Pharoes Horse went with his Charet and Horsemen into the Sea: Sus
Parbho.
And so is it in the Septuagintes translation truly according to the Hebrew
verity. But thus it stands in your translation, The Horseman went in,
In^ressus est eques, etc.
Pharoe with his Charets and Horsemen, agreeing neither with Greek, nor
Hebrew, nor the right sense.

In the 21. of Exodus 3. verse, Exodus 21.3.
a law is set down for hebrew servants, that they should be released of their
service at the end of six years, and then is further added in what sort they
should be sent away, namely that if the servant bring with him nothing but
his own body, Begappo.
that is, if he come alone, as the 70. have interpreted the text, having no
wife, then he should go out himself alone, and not his wife with him, as is in
the verse following expressed. Your translator has misconstrued the law, and
marred the sense, in turning the hebrew thus, Cum quali vest intrauerit, cum
taliexeat.
with what manner of garment he entered, with such let him go out. And so also
in the 10. verse following, where God commands that if one has betrothed
his maid to his son, and after take him another wife, he shall not diminish
the food of the former; your translator has made aother law for this, that he
shall provide a marriage for the maideseruant, Prouidebit puellae nuptias.
which is utterly from the meaning of the law.

And in the seventh verse of this Chapter before, he has also mistaken a
plain law concerning maid servants, wherein God forbids to send them
away, after their years were out, haehhabadim.
as the menseruants are sent away: but your translator says she shall not go
out, as the maid servants are accustomed to go out, Sicut ancillae exere
consueuerunt.
then which nothing almost can be devised more contrary to the Law. in the.
24. Chapter. 11. verse. the Prophet speaking of the chosen men of Israel that
went up into the mount, and saw the Lord, says that God laid not his hand
upon them: which thing he notes for a special rememberaunce, that althouh
they saw God, yet because they presumed not, but obeyed the commandment of
God, therefore ^o harm befell unto them. This in your translation is otherwise
reported in these words; Neither laid he his hand upon them of the children of
Isaell that had gone back a far of. Qui procul recesserant.
Who seeeth not a manifest difference between the true text, and this
translation?

In Leuiticus Chap. 4. v. 8. Leuit. 4.8.
Where is commanded that the Priest shall take away all the fat of the
bullock that is offered for sin, your translator has thus mistranslated the
words, and the fat of the calfe he shall offer for sin: Et adipem vituli
offeret pro peccato.
and so partly by untrue translation, and partly by misplasing of the
words, has wholly corrupted the text. In the 7. Chapter. v. 19. Leuit. 7.19.
the flesh that touches any unclean thing is forbidden to be eaten, and must
be burnt with fire. Then immediately it follows thus in your translation,
the unclean shall eat thereof: Iramundus. Mundus.
and of late for the unclean in your reformed editions is put clean: So your
translations affirm that either the unclean or clean shall eat of the
flesh, which god commanded to be burnt, and none to eat thereof: an evident
corruption, by r^ason of a word omitted in all your vulgar translations both
old and new.

In the book of Numbers Chapter. 4. verse 46. Number. 4.46.
your translation has, whom Moses and Aaron made by name, Fecit. Paekad.
in stead of this, whom Moses and Aaron numbered. In the margent indeed of your
latter corrected editions there stands the word to be reckoned, Recenseri.
for no other purpose I think, but to be a witness of corruption against your
translations. For if that word must be supplied, and if you see and confess
your selves so much, as apprereth, in that you print it in the margent, why
might you not well receive it into the text it self? If it have any right to
stand in the margent, more right has it to be admitted into the text.

In Deuteronomie Chapter 4. verse 33. is a like fault to this, Deuteronomy. 4.33.
but something worse in your latin translations. Moses says, did ever people
hear the voice of God speaking out of the mids of a fire, as thou have
heard, and lived? Vajechi. Et vidisti. Et vixisti.
your translations all have thus, As thou have heard and seen. In some copies
you have given us a marginall correction, but that is not much truer then the
corruption of the text, save that this speaks of living, and the other of
seeing. So in the. 15. Chap. 10. v. in stead of these words, God shall bless
thee in all thy works, Mahbaseca.
your translation has, God shall bless thee at al times: first taking time In
omni tempore
for works, and then leuing out the affix, thine. In the. 33. Chap. 10. v. a
word of weighty and necessary force is omitted by your translator in
declaring the office of the Levites, which especially consisted in teaching
the people the law of God: and so says the true text. joru.
They shall teach Jacob thy judgments, and Israel thy Law. But in your latin
books, the word that signifies to teach, which was most to be respected,
and whereupon depends that which follows, is both in the text and margent
of your translations wanting, and thus stand the words; They have kept thy
word, and observed thy covenant, thy judgments O Jacob, and thy law O Israel.
Now I appeal to the conscience of all the learned, whether this be not a
notorious deprauing of Gods word, where it is prescribed that the Levites
should teach Jacob and Israel the judgments and law of God, to leave out the
word whereby they were charged to teach: and whereas the duty of teaching
Jacob Gods judgments, and Israel his law was laid upon them, to make thereof
an other sense so much repugnant, that they have observed the judgments of
Jacob, and the law of Israel. Iudicia tua o Jacob, and legem tuam o Israel.
Ios. 11.19.
Hard it were for any man in translating so few words to make so many
faults.

In the book of Iosue. Chap. 11. v. 19. the holy ghost has noted, that not
one City of all the land of Canaan made peace with the children of Israel,
hishlimah.
excepting those Hiuites that dwelt in Gibeon. But your translation tells an
other tale; as contrary to this as can be told, that there was not a City,
Quae se non t^ae deret.
which did not yeald it self to the children of Israel. An other reading in
your margent of late has been devised, and that neither agreeing in truth
with the text, as by comparing the same together any man may perceive.

In the book of Judges Chap. 15. v. 14. When the Philistines met Samson being
bound, Iud. 15.14.
the scripture records, that the spirit of the Lord coming upon him, the
cords that were upon his arms becam as flax that is burnt with fire. Your
translator in stead of flax has put wood, Ligna. Odorem.
and for the heat of the fire, or some such like word he puts the smell of
the fire. And yet that wood is so easily consumed with the only smell of
fire, I think you will not say for maintenance of your translation against the
original text. What then remains but to confess as needs you must, that
here has been, and is a foul corruption?

In the 1. of Samuel Chap. 9. v. 25. these words are added to the text, 1.
Sam. 9.25. Strauitque Saul in solario, and dormiuit.
And Saul spread upon the top of the house, and slept, there being nothing in
the text either of spredding or sleeping, or any such matter. If therefore you
wl be tried by either hebrew, or Chaldee, or sundry exemplares of your latin
translation, you shall confess a corruption in this place, and so in deed you
do, but will not yet amend it. How be it better were it not to acknowledge a
fault, then acknowledging one, still to retain the same. And in the 19. Chap.
24. v. the scripture tells that Saull put of his clothes, and prophesied
before Samuel, and fell down naked all that day and night. So has the
Hebrewe, so the Greek, and so your own Masters confess it should be. Which
notwithstanding as it were in open and presumptuous maintenance of your
corruptions against the sincerity of the text, in your books you read thus,
Cociuit.
and he song naked. This came to pass by negligence in the writer, mistaking
one letter for another. But why will ye not be brought in this clear light of
knowledge, whereby such gross faults are easily espied, to amend your books,
to remove the fault, to restore the right word to his place? you see belike
what danger might ensue of mending any thing: if once you should begin, you
wist not how to make an end, and therefore you are determined to stir
nothing, for fear you bring down all upon your heads.

In the second of Samuel Chap. 6. v. 12. a number of words are added together
in your translation, 2. Sam. 6.12.
more then can be found in the true text, that David hearing how Obed edom had
been wonderfully blessed by keeping the arc in his house, Dixitque David, ibo
and reducam arca^ cum been dictione in domum meam.
said, I will go and bring back the arc with a blessing into my house. These
words may seem to be fit for the place, and it may be supposed that so
David either spoke or thought. But what of that? may we therefore conuaie thus
cunningly into the text of scripture whatsoever we imagine fitly to agree
therewith? The Hebrew has no such saying, nor the Chaldee, nor yet the Greek:
it is therefore a manifest corruption of your translator.

In the first of Kings, 1. Reg. 2.28.
the 2. Chap. and 28. verse. your translator has notably falsified the text,
in putting Solomon once for Ioab, and again by and by for Absalom, and telling
the story thus: And a messenger came to Solomon, that Ioab had declined after
Adonia, and had not declined after Solomon. Which is an absurd translation,
having no coherence with the story, and plainly striving against the text.
For thus the words should have been translated, There came tydinges to Ioab,
(for Ioab had declined after Adonia, but had not declined after Absalom.) He
that looks on the place, shall straight epsy a foull fault in your
translation. In the 22. Chap. 26. verse, of this book, Filium Amelech.
Ioas is called by your translator, the son of Amelech, for the Kings son,
by taking the word that signifies in Hebrewe a King, Hammelech.
for the proper name of a man.

The book of Job is a precious part of holy scripture, as it has been
always esteemed in the Church of God: and therefore great pity is it to see
the same so miserably mangled by your translator, as any of skill may perceive
it to be, if he list to take a little pains in conferring the true fountain
and your translation together. In the 1. Chap. v. 21. these words are added to
the text, Job. 1.21.
As it pleased the Lord, so is it come to pass. A godly saying, who can
deny? but that may not excuse your books from corruption, unless it can be
showed to be a part of the text, which, I am sure, it cannot. In the 3. Chapter
and last verse, the holy man says, Job. 3.26.
I had no peace, I had no quietness, I had no rest, yet trouble is come, meaning
that he lived in continual awe of God and looked narroulie to al his ways,
fearing lest at any time he should provoke the Lord to bring upon him some
grievous judgment, and that now notwithstanding this endeavor and care,
trouble and misery was fallen upon him. But your translator has made him
speak otherwise, Have I not dissembled? have I not kept silence? Nonne
dissimulau^? etc.
have I not been quiet? This translation accords not with the words, and
much less with the sense.

In the fifth Chap. 5. verse Eliphaz says, Job. 5.
that the hungry shall eat up the harvest of the ungodly, and take it from
among the thorns: but in your translation he says, and ipsum rapi^t armatus.
the armed man shall take him away: which is an other thing, though it be a
true thing.

And in the verse that follows, Nihil in ter^^ sine causa fit.
Nothing is done upon the earth without a cause. Again in the. 7. verse he
says, the sparks fly upward: your translator says, Man is borne to labor,
and the bird to fly, and anis ad volatum.
turning the sparks (which the Hebrewe terms the sons of the coals) into a
bird. In the. 6. Chap. 1. v. Job wishes, that his grief were perfectly
weighed: Job. 6.1.
your translator has added hereto words of his own applying a speech to Job,
which whether he would acknowledge may well be douted, I would my sins were
waighed, whereby I have deserved wrath. are blackishe with ice, and wherein the
snow is hid. Of these words your translator has framed a proper sentence or
proverb, They that fear the ice, the snow shall fall upon them. Qui timent
pruina^, ^rruet super eos nix. Job. 9.12.


In the 9. Chapter he showing at large the wonderful and omnipotent power of
God, says in the 12. verse, If he take any thing by violence away, who shall
make him restore it again? The author of your translation, not marking well
the words, has turned them thus, Si repent ininterroget. quis respondebit?
If he ask suddenly, who shall answer him? And in the. 13. Chap. 4. verse,
where Job calls his friends Physicians of no value, your translator names
them, Cultores peruersorum dogmatum. Job. 14.4.
embracers of perverse doctrines. In the 4. verse of the. 14. Chap. Job says,
who can bring a clean thing out of filthiness? not one: your translation has
these words, who can make a clean thing that is conceived of unclean seed?
is it not thou, who art alone?

In the 31. Chap. of this book. 19. v. he says, Job. 31.19. Si despexi
pretereuntem eo quod non habuerit indumentum.
If I have seen any perish for want of clothing, etc. which to be the true
reading, is confessed by your own Masters, and proved by the Hebrew text. But
your translation makes Job thus to speak, If I have despised him that passed
by for because he had no garment. Which, words carry with them an other
sense, then the former will admit. And though in your last editions some of your
reformers have in stead of him that passed by, placed in the text, him that
perished, yet this salve has not made the wound wholl. For first you keep
still the word despising in stead of seeing, and further that your vulgar
translation ought not to be corrected in that other word, as of late it has
been, by whose authority and judgment soever, may be known by Aquinas and
Saint Gregory, and many more, who in their commentaries upon this book have
set down the words in such sort, as I have rehearsed out of your
translation. If this be a fault, as you have granted, in correcting it in some
part, then have your latin Bibles been faulty this thousand years
together: and if you may now by comparing your vulgar latin with the Hebrew
reform this corruption though it be of so long continuance, why may you not
as well in all other places, where your translation does plainly disagree from
the Hebrew, as it does in a thousand, fyle it and make it as even as you can
with the Authentical text?

In the 33. v. 6. Elihu says to Job, Job. 33.6.
for that he had wished to have God answer him, behold I will be according to
thy word for God. This to be the true meaning, the words do show themselves:
and therefore it was a marvel that your translator would turn them thus, Ecce
and mesicut and te fecit Deus.
Behold, even me has God made as thee. And in the 25. v. where Elihu declaring
how God deals with his children in punishing them for a season, and
afterward restoring them to health, says thus, his flesh is made fresh, as
in his childhood, your translator has altered the words and the sense in this
sort, his flesh is consumed with punishments. Consumpta est earo eiusa
supplicits.
Such faults as these, which are indeed gross and great faults in
translating the scriptures, is your translation of this book replenished
withal. I have not labored to note every particular fault: for that had been
a business too tedious. But of many I have picked out certain, whereby the
reader may conceive what to judge aright of your wholl translation.

Now let us come to the book of Psalms, which of all books of scripture is
in your translation most corrupted, so as I may truly affirm that in some
one short Psalm in latin more may be found, then you shall ever find in the
Hebrew text of all the books of the Bible. Which came to pass by this means,
for that in S. Ieromes days the other books in the latin translation were
corrected according to the Hebrewe, but this book only although it needde as
much correction as any other, The book of Psalms in the latin vulgar
translation most corrupt.
yet because it was in the corruptions thereof so generally used, as it could
not be changed without much trouble and offense in the Church, was not dealt
withal by S. Jerome, but suffered to remain as it was, and to carry still
about with it those manifold and grievous sores, which should with diligence
in time have been cured. This being by the best of your own side confessed, it
is a wonder, that Genebrard your Hebrew Doctor of Paris would labor so much
with all his wit and cunning to make some agreement between your translation
and the text: wherein as he has taken very great pains, so has he showed
himself in many places altogether ridiculous in devising such seely shifts,
as he is enforced for some show of consent in the meaning, howsoever the
words sound most diversely. And when he has searched all the corners of his
head for reasonable expositions, yet is he feign oftentimes to give over, and
let the words quietly pass without his construction. If I should gather and
set down in particulare discovery the corruptions of this book, this only
work would be a volume of greater quantity, then is the Psalter it self.
Therefore as hitherto I have done, so will I proceed, to take a little of much,
and in certain evident examples of sundry places, set before the readers eyes
how unworthy your translation of this book is to be called by the name of so
worthy a scripture.

In the second Psalm a text that concerns our savior Christ as notably as
any almost in the old Testament, psalm. 2.12.
is shamefullie perverted in your translation. For where the Prophet David
exhorts al to kiss the son, Na^heku-bar.
that is, to submit themselves to Jesus Christ, and his gospel, setting forth
in these words a plain testimony of his Godhead and distinct person, your
translation says no more in this place but only thus, Apprehendite
disciplinam.
Apprehend discipline: which though it be a good admonition, yet is it far
short of the true sense, and excellent doctrine therein contained. And this
may be an argument of great weight to prove, that the Jews are not honestly
dealt withal by you, in that you accuse them to have corrupted the Hebrewe
text for malice against our Savior Christ. For if they had been moved indeed
with such a devilish intention, would they have suffered this text to have
stood in such sincerity, especially having so great opportunity to change
the words, as was offered unto them by the Greek and latin translations?

In the 3. Psalm, the Prophet says, psalm. 3.8.
Thou have smitten all mine enemies upon the cheek bone^ your translation has
thus, Lechi.
thou haste smitten all those that are mine enemies without a cause. Sine cansa.
Howbeit Genebrarde stoutly defends your translation in this place, and
obiecteth ignorance to those that reprove it. Let all your Hebricians be
judges, and let John Isaac a Jew, and a learned Jew in that tongue, answer
Genebrarde. If this had been so clear a case as Genebrarde makes it, could
Isaac with a number more, as Vatablus, Pagnine, Tremellius, all as good
Hebricians as Genebrarde (no disgrace to him) have been ignorant thereof?

In the fourth Psalm, psalm. 4.3.
being but a very short one, your translation has three evident faults,
which cannot by any shift be excused reasonably. First there is, how long
will ye be of a heavy heart, Vsque quo graui ^orde.
in stead of these words, how long will ye turn my glory into shame? for
this to be the true reading, even your Genebrard was compelled to acknowledge:
and therefore he deuiseth and imagines what the Septuagints perhaps followed.
And about this place Lind^^e has kept a stir, if he might by any means
save the credit of your translation. But Isaac his master in the hebrew tongue
has sufficiently taken him up for his dealing herein. Olei.
as Genebrard confesses, saying it was done by the 70. interpreters
propheticallie: which yet he cannot prove, and we will not grant. Com^ungimini
for silete.
And before in the 5. verse is one word put for an other to some change of the
sense.

In the 12. Psalm, Psalm. 12.6.
being according to your editions the 11. (which difference in numbering
continues to the end almost, and this may fuffice to have been once
remembered) where the Prophet brings in the Lord speaking, I will up, and set
him at liberty, though he lay a snare for him, these words are thus
translated in your latin Psalter, I will deal boldly in him: Fiducialiter
again in ^o.
of which words Genebrard himself cannot devise a convenient interpretation,
and therefore he wandreth up and down, and vanishes away in the mist of his
own conceit.

In the fourteenth Psalm your latin translation has three wholl verses
together more, psalm. 14.
then are to be found either in the Hebrewe or Greek: and are taken out of
Saint Paul in the third to the Romans, being gathered by him out of several
places of the scriptures, Hier. in promoe 10. Es^i.
as Saint Jerome has noted. But some in former times more hasty then well
advised, seeing the Apostle allege so long a sentence together, thought the
same was written in some place of the old Testament, as it was by the Apostle
recited: and finding it no where, supplied it in this place because of some
words, which the Apostle there has rehearsed out of this Psalm. And thus
much do your own men confess, even Genebrard him self, testifying that in
the Hebrew now extant nothing is wanting. If then nothing wants, as he
confesses, is it not a plain case that these three verses ought not to have
any room in that Psalm, and therefore that your Psalter has in this place
more then it should have? which I think we may truly and properly call a
corruption.

In the 34. Psalm the Prophet says, psalm. 34.8.
that the Angel of the Lord does pitch his tents about them that fear him:
Choneh.
in your translation thus we read, The Angel of the Lord shall send round about
those that fear him, Immittet in circuitu.
that is, says Genebrard, his help and defense. Well helped doubtless. Where
the text is so plain, to make such a simple translation as this, which without
supplying some necessary word, can have no show of good sense, I know not how
it may be excused from a fault. So in the 37. Psalm where the Prophet
teaches that we ought not to be immeasurable grieved or disquieted at the
prosperity of the wicked, and exhorts us to trust in the Lord, Psalm. 37.3.
Pascere side. pasceris in diuitiis eius.
and to feed, that is, to live by faith, your translation says thus, Trust in
the Lord, etc. and thou shall be fed with his riches.

In the 51. Psalm thus speaks the prophet in his own tongue, psalm. 51.8.
behold thou louesl truth in the raines, (that is inwardly in the affections)
and have made me to understand wisdom in secret: but your translator has
given us an other sense, Behold, thou have loved truth: the uncertain and
secret things of thy wisdom have thou made manifest unto me. If the first be a
true sense, as it is: the second must be reputed, as it deserves. In the 62.
psalm. 62.5.
Psalm the Prophet speaking of his enemies devising to overthrow him if they
might, says, They take counsel only how to cast him down from his
dignity, their delighte is in lies. This construction agreeeth well, this
sense is plain. Now compare here with your translation, and you shall see that
it is most fond and disorderly. thus it stands, Veruntamen pretium me^^^
cogitauerunt repellere^^^curri in sit.
Notwithstanding they have thought to put back my price, I have run in
thirst. Is not this a proper kind of translation? yet something of late has
it been corrected in one word, but nothing at all amended in the sense. I have
runned, they say, should be changed into they have runned: (...).
wherein they grant their latin translator was greatly deceived in
translating the greek word I have runned for they have runned: and yet the
hebrew word signifies neither of both. But as they acknowledge a fault in this
word, so when it is thus mended by them, how much nearer are they to the right
sense? verelie no thing, or but little: and Genebrard though he make a poor
sense of the words, yet how his sense agrees with the hebrew text he cannot
declare. Again in the 9. verse of this Psalm the Prophet says, Trust in him
evermore, ^ecol hheth hham.
O people: your translation has an other reading thus, Trust in him all the
congregation of the people: Omnis congregatio popul.
wherein is a manifest diversity. The hebrew no man dare say to be corrupt:
then it follows that the greek translator deceived the latin, and was
deceived himself.

In the 65. Psalm, Psalm. 65.14.
the last verse, in stead of these words, The pastures are clad with sheep,
Induti sunt ar^^tes ouium.
The vulgar translation has thus, The Rams of the sheep are clad. And
because this is something obscure and imperfect, therefore Genebrarde
expounds the matter, and tells wherewith these Rams are clade, forsooth
with store of fine and white wool. Yet in the text is no mention either of
Rams, or wool.

In the 68. Psalm, the 7. verse, the Prophet reckneth this among the praises
of the Lord, that he makes such as are alone and solitary to have a family,
wherein to dwell. Your translation speaks after an other sort, that he
makes those that be of one behavior to dwell together in a house. Vnius ^oris.
This verelie was not the Prophets meaning. And then it follows in the
Prophets own words, But the rebels (he causes to dwell) in a dry or
thirsty place: which words in your vulgar Psalters are unto wardlie
translated thus, Similiter eos q^iexasperant. qui habitant in sepulchris.
Likewise those which exasperate, which dwell in graves. And yet has Genebrade
taken some pains here to frame a sense in some reasonable construction in this
wise: Those that exasperate and provoke God by their sins, and dwell in the
graves of death, God brings them forth by his merciful and mighty hand.
Here we have a sense indeed, such as it is, but a sense contrary to the true
and manifest words of the Prophet. For David declares how god will punnish
his rebels, by setting them in a dry place: Genebrarde by his exposition has
made the Prophet to promis deliverance unto them from destruction. Again in
this Psalm, v. 14. David says, though ye have lien among the pots, etc. Your
translation has, Pater ^^di^s ^^res.
in the midst of the clergy, or of the lots. And what should this mean?
forsooth Genebrarde says, by Lots is understood extreme distress and
danger, as when the lots are cast upon a man's life. He has deserved doubtless
great thanks for his pains, especially seeing himself confesses that
this place has tormented all interpreters, and that upon the same, as upon a
gibbet have the wits of all hanged. Now has Genebrarde taken away the gibbet,
and released his friends from cruel vexation, and that by changing without
any great trouble, pots into lots.

In the 73. Psalm David declaring the great prosperity of the wicked, Psalm.
73.4.
says in the 4. v. that there are no bands in their death, or until their
death: and that their strenghth is lusty. Look now upon this translation of
yours, Non est respectus morti eoru^ and firmamentum in plaga ^^rum.
There is no respect to their death: and there is strength in their sore, and
tell us how it accords with the text. The words are diverse, the sense is
changed, and therefore the corruption cannot be excused.

In the 74. psalm. 74.^.
Psalm the Prophet complaining of the wicked, says, they have burnt all the
synagogues of God: which text in your translation is straungelie altered and
corrupted in this manner, Let us make all the festival days of God to cease.
Quiescere faciamus omnes dies festos Dei.
Themselves confess the place is not faithfully translated, by reason that
the Greek word was utterly mistaken of their translator. For where in the
Greek it was translated thus, Let us burn, the latin translator not looking
so narrowly to his copy as he ought, (...)
took one letter for an other, and so has given us another word and an other
sense. And notwithstanding they acknowledge both the corruption and the cause
thereof, yet keep they still the same so certain and clear a corruption in
their Bibles, and use it in their Offices, and Breuiaries even those that were
corrected and printed last by the Popes commandment.

In like manner and by like occasion has been committed a fault in the 84.
Psalm, psalm. 84.12.
wherein your translation has these words in all your books old and new
without any correction: Quia misericord. and veritatem diligit Deuteronomy.
Because God loves mercy and truth: And are not these good words? who can
say otherwise? the words in deed are good and godly: but the translation is
naught. For this should the translation of that text have been, The Lord God is
our sun and shield, as Genebrarde and your own men cannot deny. In the 88.
Psalm David says, shall the dead arise and praise thee? But your translation
is ridiculous, shall the Phisicians raise up? turning dead into Phisicians,
Aut m^dici suscitabunt.
and rising into raising. Here Genebrarde to mend all that is amiss, has
invented a new sense thus, shall the Phisicianes raise up, that is, the dead,
that they may praise thee. Phisicians are appointed to save alive, if they can,
not to raise the dead: for if one be dead, it is to late to call the Phisician.
I marvel he was not ashamed to make so lewd a gloss.

In the 92. Psalm your translation has plentiful mercy, psalm. 92.11.
Miseric^rd. vber^. (...) for (...).
for fresh oil: which error did grow by mistaking a Greek word that
signifies mercy, for an other that signifies oil, because they are
something like in certain cases.

In the 132. Psalm the Lord says, psalm. 132.15.
I will plentfullie bless her vitailes: in your translation, (...) for (...).
vitailes is turned into widow. and thus is it read, I will bless her
widow. This Genebrarde cannot deny to be a fault, and shows how it came, by
mistaking a word, and not looking to the original verity. Yet for all this
your books are not corrected, but still you keep and use such witles, and
palpable faults in your Bibles: you read, you sing, you preach these and
many more the like corruptions for the true word of God, and text of scrpiture:
you see these things, and will not for all that be brought to reform them.

What can we say or think of you, but that you are set and resolute to do
amiss?

It is a wearines to wade any further: and therefore I will for this book
content my self with these examples and proofs of notable corruption therein
committed by your translator, whosoever he was.

And because I have been already something long, I will be shorter in that
which follows, and as it were but glaine one by one, where I might take up
wholl handfulls together.

The book of Proverbs has not escaped the foul hands of such corruptors
rather then translators, as by many places of the same may too plainly be
perceived. Prou. C. 4. in fine.
In the latter end of the fourth Chap. a great many of words together are
added to the text, as is acknowledged by the adversaries themselves. In the
sixth Chapter the vulgar translation has, Thou have fixed down thy soul with
the stranger: Whereas it should be thus, c. 6.1.
thou have shaken hands with the stranger. And after the 11. verse. a wholl
sentence is thrust into the text, which ought to have no place therein. Again
in the 26. verse of his Chapter, where Solomon says that by reason of a harlot
a man is brought to a morsel of bread, the words of your translation are
these, the price of an harlot is scarcely the worth of one loaf: Pretium
scorti est vix vnius panis. c. 7.1.
no doubt wisely and cunningly translated. In the 7. Chapter after the end
of the first verse is an other addition of a wholl sentence: and so also is
there in the end of the 9. Chap. C. 9. in fine.
And in other places sundry more, not only of words, but of whole verses and
sentences: which cannot any ways be otherwise accounted then a thing
unlawful in Gods word, and by no means to be defended.

In the 12. Chap. your translation has, Prou. 12.29.
he that neglects a loss for a friend, is a just man. A wise saying perhaps.
But Salomons sentence in this place is far otherwise, The just man is more
excellent then his neighbor. In the 16. Chap. a true weight and balance (says
the wise man) are of the Lord: prou. 16.11.
and then immediately it follows, And all the stones or weightes of the bag
are his works. sacculi.
these last words are thus translated in your books, And all the stones of the
world are his works, seculi.
by a small change of the bag into the world. This you will say was the
writers fault, and not the translators. Verelie so I think: for no t^anslator
of any skill could be so much deceived in the Hebrew word. But why then keep
you this corruption still in the text of scripture? why will you not amend a
fault so foul, and so sensible, that it may be felt with the finger? And thus
has it gone in your books of many hundred years, as may appear by Beda and
other latin writers in their commentaries. commit our works unto the Lord,
Deuolue. Reuela.
in your translation we are bid to reveal our works unto the Lord. In the 20.
Chapter your vulgar translations have corrupted and falsified a text
diuersely. Prou. 20.25.
Some copies read thus, It is ruin to a man to call down the saints: others,
to note the saints: others, deuocare. denotare. deuotare. deuorare
to vow the saints: others to devour the saints. And this last comes nearest
to the truth, for Solomon says, indeed, It is a man's ruin, to devour a holy
or sanctified thing. Kodesh. prou. 30.33.
In the latter end of the 30. Chapter, whereas Solomon says, (he that presses
or churneth milk, brings forth butter, so to press and force wrath, causes
strife,) your translator has told us a pretty tale in this sort, He that
presses strongly the pappes to draw forth milk, he brings forth butter,
which thing yet I believe was never seen. But such absurdities in your
translation must be borne withal. In the last Chap. among the other praises of
a worthy and excellent woman that is one, prou. 31.19.
that she puts her hand to the wherle: for which your translation says, Ad
fortia.
she puts her hand to valiant things. Such as these, be there many faults
in your translation of this book, which might in all translations deserve
reproof, and require correction, but most of all in the holy scriptures of
almighty God.

In the book of the Preacher Solomon says in the very conclusion, Eccle.
12.14.
God will bring every work into judgment, with every hidden thing, whether
it be good or evil: your translation goes something wide from this true
sense, and tells us that God will bring into judgment all things that are
done, for every error, Pro omni errato. Cant. 1.2. and 4.10. Cant. 2.17.
be it good or evil. In the book of Canticles by mistaking an hebrew word,
your translator has put thy p^ppes for thy Love diverse times. In the 2.
Chapter for Bether is put Bethel, and so still is it standing in your text, and
of long has stood, as appears by Gregory and S. Bernard: and yet is it a
plain corruption in the judgment of al, that can judge any thing, insomuch
as Genebrard has not feared to make a change of the words even in the text
it self, which he has printed with his annotations. In the 4. Chapter in
steed of these words between thy looks, Cant. 4.1.
your translation has far otherwise, absque eo quod intrinsecus latet.
torque. crine.
besides that which lies hid inwardly: and afterward for one chain of thy
neck, it has one hear of thy neck. All this perhaps in your judgment seems
little, who have learned more highly to esteem the word of your Pope, then of
God, and therefore so your Pope may gain something, or loose nothing, you care
not how corruptly or sincerely Gods word be red and set forth amongst you.
But they that consider how holy and precious a thing the word of God is, and
what charge the Lord has given to keep it faithfully, must needs confess
that these are indeed gross corruptions, and ought with all diligence to be
searched, and removed out of the Scriptures.

The books of the holy Prophets allthough they are not so generally and
foulie defaced, as some other Scriptures, by this corrupt kind of translating,
and by such faults as have since the translation grown by sundry means, yet
are they not in your vulgar edition so incorrupt and sincere, as they ought to
be, seeing they may by the authentical text easily be amended. I might set
down sundry proofs and testimonies of such imperfections, as I have now done
in other books. And it were a thing greatly to be wished, that some man of
learning and judgment would thoroughly and perfectly discover the corruptions
of this wholl translation: whereby it would fully appear what shame or truth
there is in the Church of Rome to prefer it before the faithful original
books of holy scripture, as it does now in part appear by this that has
been before alleged. I verelie am afraid lest I have already wearied the
reader with multitude of examples: and the thing, which I took in hand to
prove, I have not only in this treatise sufficiently, but also most
plentifully performed.

The translation of the new testament is something more tolerable in respect,
then of the old. Yet he that will look narrowly into the same, shall find
cause and matter enough of complaint against either the ignorance, or
negligence, or malice of some, by whose fault it has been noe better preserved
in that holy pureness and integrity, which the word of God does require, and
especially this so singular a part of his word. Wherein already both Valla,
and Faber, and Erasmus, and Beza, and Camerarius, and many mo have labored to
show the errors of that translation, for which their pains as they have
deserved great thanks of all the godly, so have they received much hatred
and discurtesie at the adversaries hands.

For avoiding tedious length, more then were in this answer convenient, I
referr the readers for the new testament to those learned writers, by perusing
of whom, and of that which I have gathered here together, and thus
particularly noted, he shall manifestly perceive that in the Romish vulgar
translation are manifold and almost infinite faults of all sorts, by adding,
by omitting, by mistaking of letters, points, syllables, and words, by wrong
interpreting the original text. Which faults they shall never be hable to
approve or justify, though they weary themselves never so much with traueling
and toyling, and seeking some defense. When they have said, what they can say
for maintenance of these corruptions, it shall for all that still appear by
all learning and true evidence of reason that they have neither the old nor
new Testament in the entire and original truth thereof.

CHAp. 13.
Of the new Testament in latin: and a comparison of the vulgar translator with
all other of this age.

NOw M. R. begins to declame against. page 361.
the new Testament in Greek, as he has in the former Chapter done against
the old Testament in Hebrew. Wherein how vnlearnedlie and unworthily he has
behaved himself, the wise reader may perceive by that which has been
answered to his particular reprehensions. And as no cause can be alleged to
prefer the latin translation of the old Testament before the Hebrew
fountain, so no less absurd and unreasonable is it to leave the Greek, and
follow the vulgar translation in the new testament.

Their chiefest reason of greatest show and likelihood against the Hebrew text
is the malice and impiety of the Jews, who being enemies of Christian
religion may therefore be thought to have in many places corrupted their bibles
of purpose to disgrace and discredit the Gospel of Christ. But as this is
proved most untrue, so being granted for true, it can be no reason against
the Greek testament, which ever since the writing and first publishing thereof
remained in the custody and handling of most godly fathers, Churches and
Countries, who had as great skill and care to preserve it from corruption, as
had the latins to keep their translations pure and sincere. Then what reason
can you bring, or what color of reason can you pretend in the new testament to
cleave only to the latin, and to reiecte the Greek? The latin, you say,
is purer, then the Greek. So have your fellows of Rhemes indeed told us,
and this they make their principal ground, whereupon they have been bold to
follow the latin, and not the Greek, in translating the new testament. But
what advantage soever you think to make of this, or any other such reason,
true it is, and by trial so shall be found, and has heretofore by diverse
sufficiently been proved, that the latin translation of the new testament is
more generally and notoriously corrupted, then you shall ever be hable to
avouch of the Greek original text. That Beza writes against Erasmus in
commendation and defense of the latin translation, it is evident, he means
not wholly to excuse it from corruption in all places, but only in certain,
which Erasmus found fault withal. For otherwise Beza shows the vulgar
translation to be full of corruptions, as if you read his annotations, you may
perceive. Wherefore this testimony of Beza served your Remists to little
purpose, but that they have a slight to make such things as are spoken, in
some respect, seem to be uttered without exception, as in this place and many
others may be seen.

Your assertions are now to be examined by which you labor to strengthen the
Remish slander of corruption against the Greek testament. Page 363.
Three in number have you brought, of no importance, as shall appear, so that
we may easily think they are indeed your own. The first is, the difference
of our Greek copies now, M. Rai. arguments against the new testamente in
Greek confuted.
from the old. It may perhaps (I grant) be proved, that in the Greek copies
of the new testament some diversity may be found. So was there much greater
difference in the latin translations, as your self cannot deny. Then what
makes this for the latin translation, against the Greek fountain? if you
say the latin was corrected, I answer, it was indede corrected, but according
to the Greek, and the Greek now remains still, which may be proved to be
not only as pure, as the latin, but purer by many degrees. For what reason
have you to say, that the latin translation ever since the correction has
been preserved faithfully without corruption: but the Greek text it self,
after which it was corrected, became forthwith distayned and replenished with
gross corruptions? Our Greek testament for the most part, and in a manner
every where, agrees fully with that copy, which the ancient Greek Church
used, and which therefore undoubtedly was the true original Greek text of
the new testament. And as the old latin Church reformed her translations
according to the copies used in the Greek Churches, so shall it never be
proved, but that the same Greek copies have continued still as free from
corruption, as the latin translations have: wherefore the difference of our
Greek copies now from some old, makes nothing against the purity and
authority of our Greek Testament, unless you can show by evident proof, that
the Greek Testament now extant differs from that, which the Greek Churches
in times past generally used. Some difference there might be (I deny not) in
such infinite multitude of copies. But what then? is no copy now therefore to
be allowed? May we not also show the like difference between these latter
editions of your latin translation, and some other of elder time? you know we
can, and it is by your own writers confessed, and acknowledged. Is this then a
learned observation? is this a good conclusion? is this a sound reason against
the greek testament? such arguments run for current at Rhemes, where popish
blindness reigns: but being a little opened and laid forth in the light, are by
and by espied to be naught. Of this difference twoe examples you allege: the
former, is the story of the adulterous woman in the eight of S. John: which
although some Greek copies have wanted, as apeereth by the Syriake
interpreter, by Chrysostom, by Nonnus, by Jerome, yet others of as great
authority had it. So this difference is not through later corruption, nor
proves no more that the Greek testament now is to be rejected, then it was
in S. Chrysostomes days. And furthermore this story being in your vulgar
translation, what can you devise against the Greek, more then the latin? The
Greek and latin agreeing, how is the Greek more corrupt then the Latin? The
other is in the Epistle to the Ephesians, Chap. 3. verse 14. Wherein Saint
Jerome says certain words were added in the latin, Domini nostri Jesus
Christi, not being in the Greek. But that herein Saint Jerome was deceived,
appears by S. Chrystome, who reads the words in the Greek as you may see
in his Greek commentaries. And by this one example we may further note, what
diligence Saint Jerome used some time in correcting the latin according to the
Greek, that denies words to be in the Greek, which yet are found in Saint
Chrysostomes copies, and many more.

of rash additions, which have been made in the Greek text. Page 365.
If this be an argument of any force against the testament in Greek, it must
have much more weight against your common translation, which is so full of
additions both in the old testament, as I have showed, and also in the new, as
has been faithfully declared by others. Your examples are but twoe: the one
in Saint John's Gospel Chap. 8. verse. 59. It may indeed appear that those
last words of the verse, passing through the midst of them, and so departed,
have been added. But this corruption may be espied, and corrected by ancient
copies, and so in this respect no cause to reiecte or disallowe the wholl text
in Greek. The other is the conclusion of the Lords prayer, For thine is the
kingdom, the power, and the glory for ever and ever. Amen. This piece, as you
call it, your latin has not, our Greek copies have. That some had it not in
times past, I confess: that others had it, is plain by the Syriake
translator: if you suspecte our copy of corruption, why may not weas probably
suspecte the same of yours? and we have as just cause to be offended with you
for omitting this, as you with us for so glorious singing and saying of it.

pa 3. 67.
that the Greek testaments oftentimes omit that, which they should not.
Examples in Luc. Chap. 1. v. 35. and Chapter. 17. v. 36. For the first, you
might have found, that in many greek copies now extant and used, the words
(...) of thee, are not omitted, and that has Beza noted, and therefore
supplied those words in the greek of the last Geneuian edition. Your reproach
of Anabaptisme is ridiculous. The same may be answered of the second. For that
3 6. verse of Luc. 17. is extant in sundry greek editions, as well as in your
latin translation. But what makes all this to purpose? Conclude hereof an
argument, if you can, that therefore the greek testament is more corrupted,
then the latin. What a pitiful syllogism will this be, that must severally
of these places be concluded, that therefore the greek testament is more
corrupt, then the latin vulgar edition, because the latin is in some places
not so faulty, as some Greek copies either are, or have been supposed to be.

page 371. etc.
why your Latin translator ought to be preferred before all other, touches
not the cause in hand, as your own words do witness. The controuesie is
not, which translation is best, and most to be preferred, but whether this
latin edition of your translator, whosoever he were, be worthily of your
Church preferred before the original fountain. Admit he was endued with such
qualities as are most requisite in faithful translators of scripture, and in
respect thereof deserves greater creditte, then the rest: does it therefore
follow, Master Rainolds, that we must prefer him before the writers of holy
scripture themselves? was he of sounder religion toward God, endued with
greater grace and spirit, more void of partiality and affection, then they?
Otherwise if you compare him with other translators, although I know herein
your judgment is altogether partial, yet as this reason may advance him to
higher estimation then other translators: so must it cast him down as much and
more beneath the writers them selves, in that they being chosen instruments of
God for that purpose, were most plentifully endued and assisted with all
graces of the holy Ghost, which can not be avouched of that translator, how
excellent otherwise soever he were. Other surmises and geasses of corruptions
in the original text more then in the translation, as they are by you often
repeated, and by sundry impertinent testimonies of our writers idlelie
enlarged, so shall they never be truly and substantiallie proved, whereby it
might appear that the latin translation is more to be allowed and esteemed
generally then the Greek text.

To oppose some of our new translators against your old, page 375. etc.
were verelie an easy matter: but thus should we slip away from the
question, and fall to other discourses, wherein the controversy lies not. If
we should attribute as much learning and diligence to your translator, as such
a man could have and use, yet would you confess (I trust) he were still far
inferior to the Prophets, Apostles, and Evangelists, whose writings remain,
and are the holy canonical scriptures of God. These writings do we oppose
against your translation, and these do you wickedlie and shamfullie dishonor,
in preferring the translation of such a man before them. This you are not hable
either reasonably to defend, or colourablie to excuse, and therefore you run
another way, as though you chased your enemy, whereas fear causes your
felfe to fly. All this talk of Erasmus, Luther, Zuinglius, Oecolampadius,
Castalion, Calvin, Beza, and their translations, is from the purpose. We make
no such account of any of them, as you do of yours, to allow and receive
whatsoever they have translated, without examining their translations by the
text. we prefer whom we know to have dealt in that work most faithfully,
and if we find by skill and trial some oversight in the translation (as in the
best some may be found) we cleave to the original text of scripture, and not
after your preposterous manner, to the corrupt translation. Now of all
translations set forth by Protestants of all countries, sure I am you cannot
show any so repugnant to the verity of the Hebrewe and Greek fountains, as
I can show, and as it has been showed that yours is. That Luthers and Bezaes,
and the other several translations have been by some in certain places
reproved, is true. But what kind of argument call you this, because some
errors have been noted in this or that translation, therefore to conclude the
wholl translation is naught, or worse then yours? Emserus a papist (you say)
has gathered out of Luthers translation fourteen hundred foul lies. If I
said, that this in him were a foul lie, I should say truly: Luthers
translation has been sufficiently commended and maintained by men of greater
wisdom and learning then Emserus. That Zuinglius also misliked Luthers
translation in some parts, and Beza the Basil translation, and that of
Castalion, and Molinaeus Calaines, and Bezaes translations, which matters are
by you at large rehearsed, as thouge they made somewhat to purpose, I grant
and give you leave to make thereof what you can. But if this seem in your
judgment a thing so odious and slanderous to our translatious, that thus they
have been severally charged by some, what may we think and say of you, that
not content to accuse our translations (though far better then any you have)
of such impiety, dare affirm the original books them selves now extant to
be so full of gross and notorious corruptions (which you shall never prove)
that your vulgar translation known to be most corrupt, is purer then they?
what soever has been said by any against our translations, is in no respect
of like hainousnes to this, seeing that not only the books of scripture were
written and set forth at the first most purelie, but the means also have
evermore been as great to keep and continue them in the same purity, as any
translation whatsoever.

Your judgment of our English Bibles is answerable to that spirit, where with
you are poffessed, and of the abundance whereof you write. Nothing else they are
(you say) but corrupt gutters flowing from corrupt and stinking lakes, M. R.
contumelies against the English translations of the scriptures
the best containing wicked, horrible, and ethnicall errors, A slander most
wicked, horrible, ethnicall, of all men to be detested: never shall you prove
any word hereof true. Gregory Martine has labored herein, and performed
nothing: your skill is only in open railing: other deed of moment can you do
none against us. If you find fault with us for correcting our Bibles, show
us, if you can, that either it is unlawful to translate the Bible into our
own tongue, or else after is has been translated, to reform the translation
in such places wherein some errors have escaped, or to translate it over
again. No translation of the scripture can at the first be so perfect and
sincere, but it may be afterward amended, as God shall reuele to his Church
the faults thereof. Otherwise if it were any fault to amend a fault, why has
your Council of Trident taken order for the correction of your latin
translation, and for a better edition thereof to be published, then heretofore
has been? yea why has Pope Pius reformed your Psalters, Breuiaries, Offices,
and such other books, as are with you in greatest use and estimation? If this
seemed requisite, why may not we look to our translations like wise, amend
the imperfefections, set forth better? But your grief is, that we have
translated the scriptures at all: although (I trust) you will not now condemn
the thing plainly, seeing your selves at length have given us an English
translation of the new testament, which if you think to be so absolute, as it
shall never need any reformation, your judgment is to be pitied rather, then
confuted.

Twoe reasons are alleged, page 387.
why you may not translate the new testament after the Greek: The reasons
why the Rhemists have not translated the new testamen^ according to the greek.
first, because you think your latin Testament to be truer, then the common
Greek copies now extant. Thus you tell us what you think, but reason or
proof of this so absurd a thought have you none. Let me answer you, as Saint
Jerome answers Heluidius the heretic in this point, H^eron aduer. Heluid.
tibi stultissime persuasisti Graecos codices esse falsatos: Thou have
persuaded thy self most foolishlie that the Greek books (of the new
testamente) are falsified: and why may you not as well think, that the latin
testament is corrupt, as the Greek? what argument have you more for the one,
then the other? But your second reason is more absurd, wherein you profess
that although you had the true originals, yet could you not make in these days
a better translation. Wherefore could you not? the thing is not hard if you
had simple and willing minds. But now may we see by this your protestation,
that whatsoever you speak against the corruption of the original books, in
respect where of you will seem to prefer your common translation before
them, yet although you had as true originals as ever were or could be wished,
notwitstanding you would still make more account of your translation, then of
them.

That wherefoeuer we find fault with your translation, some one of our own
brethren stands with you in defense of your translation, is untrue. I have
showed examples enowe of gross and manifest corruptions in the translation of
the old testament, which none our brethren as you call them, ever went about
to excuse. Valla, Erasmus, Beza, have noted many in your translation of the
new, althoug I grant that both Erasmus does instlie reprove Valla, and Beza
has worthelie reproved Erasmus in some places of their reprehensions. And so
may it fall out to those that take pains in correcting a book full of
corruptions, as your latin translation is, sometime to find a fault, where
none is and the latter corrector to dissent from the former. Your Tridentine
decree which you commend, being set forth by so many excellent godly learned
men, as you say were impiety to compare all the scattered synagogues of
Lutherans with them, has been tried and examined by more godly and learned
men, then ever were in that synagogue assembled, wherein neither godliness nor
learning, but Antichristian tyranny prevailed.

One example I alleged of corruption in your latin Testament: page 391. etc.
and that I might have gathered many more, is evident by that which has been
declared before. In the 1. Cor. 15. v. 54. these words are wanting in your
translation, when this corruptible has put on incorruption, which yet are
found in all greek copies now extant, and were not only in the old greek
testaments, as appears by S. Chrysostom, but also even in the ancient
latin translations thereof, and that by your own co^^ession. Hereunto you
make long and frivolous answers by distinctions of points.

First you say, when this mortal shall put on immortality, are not of the
text, seeing they are set down in the lines immediately going before.
Thirdly, Chrysostom by Jerome, then Jerome by Chrysostom. Yet may it seem
otherwise to indifferent men, that Chrysostom and the Church of Constantinople
had as true copies, and as great varictie of books, as Jerome could have any.
For where should Jerome seek for true and faithful copies of the new
Testament, but in the Greek Church? and in which more then in that? and who
liker to have the truest, then Chrysostom? I think therefore no man of
discretion can otherwise judge, but that it is much more likely S.
Chrysostomes reading to be true, then S. Ieromes, if they diffent, especially
other latin translations agreing wiht that text, which S. Chrysostom
followed. And Saint Hierome many times in his Epistles and treatisies
reprehendeth the common latin reading, The vulgar translation of the new
testament reproved indiuerse places by S. Jerome.
even the same that is now current in your latin testaments. Whereby may
appear that the same was not in his iugdement every where so entire, as you
affirm. That Saint Chrysostom makes against us, and approoueth your reading,
I wonder with what face you could avouch. Let any man read S. Chrysostom in
Greek, and if he find not the text in him set down as our Greek testaments
read it, both in the first and second place, I am content to yeald the wholl
to Master Rainolds. And so likewise reads Oecumenius this place. I grant S.
Ambrose has it only in the first place, yet other latin fathers read it
according to the verity of the Greek, as your self confess, which as much
as I maintain. Fiftlie,

That not here only, page 399. etc.
but in other manifold places also you keep the errors of the latin
translation contrary to the truth of the Greek copies, is a thing that has
been plentifully proved by many, and therefore to say so, was no brag.
Aria Montanus how good a priest soever he be, doubtless is not of your judgment
concerning the Hebrewe and greek originals of scripture, and therefore cannot
allow that wicked decree of the Tridentine Council, wherein the corrupt
translation is confirmed and established for the Canonical word of God, by
general consent and commandment, the true and original Canon of scriptures
being there rejected and disgraced. Now then whether in this and such other
respects I had not just cause to call you (...), injurious to the Bible, I
refer to the judgment of all godly and wise readers. For what greater
injury or contumely can be offered to the holy Bible, then not only to
approve a translation, that is full of corruptions in all parts thereof, for
the authentical Bible and word of god; but also to cast away the original
Bible it self, as corrupt, and to give no further credit unto it, then it
agrees with your translation? And therefore that you malitiouslie avouch of
us, that we have no Bibles, may most truly be said of you, that you have
willingly refused the fountains of Gods most pure and blessed word, and have
not amongst you in public regard and authority the true Bibles indeed, which
you have wickedlie both contemned and condemned. Your repetitions to the end of
this Chapter, full of outrageous untruths and slanders, require no answer in
this place: you have been fully answered before, and the wholl world can
testify to Gods glory, and your confusion, that not one tittle of Gods word
and scriptures is by us denied.

CHAP. 14.
Wherein Master R. laboreth to prove, that it is the very way to Atheism,
and infidelity to leave the ordinary translation of the Bible, and to appeal
to the Hebrew, Greek, and such new diverse translations, as the Protestans
have made.

THis absurd Chapter M. R. page 406. etc.
begins with Castalion, translating long sentences out of the preface of his
Bible to King Edward the Sixth: wherein how untruly it is objected unto him,
that he thinks the Messiah promised in the law, not to be come as yet, and
that he would have every man left to his own private judgment, I will not
loose time to declare. Let Castalion say and write what he list, and let M. R.
allege at his pleasure store of testimonies out of such authors, who can
deny him liberty so to do, or who can think him worthy answer therein,
when he has so done? As Saint Jerome being urged with Tertullians opinion,
answered, De Tertulliano nihilamplius dico, quam Ecclesia hominem non fuisse:
That he was not a man of the Church, so will answer no more about Castalion,
but that he was a man not sound in some points of the Catholic faith and
religion of Christ, as by his dealings and writings has appeered: and
therefore we make no great account of him, nor have regard what assertions he
held, what counsel he gave, what can be rehearsed out of his works. All this
was vainly brought in and no less vain is it, that you talk of neglecting
all antiquity, and suspending our religion upon the only testament translated
after the new guise, where (you say) is found more variety, then there are
conlours in the rainebowe. Do we neglect antiquity, or you rather? For which
is more ancient (Master Rainolds) the Hebrewe and Greek, or the Latin? and
do not you suspend your religion upon the testament translated, that have noe
scripture in your Church, but only a translation, of which I may truly
say, that greater imperfections, and more corruptions are found therein, then
in all our English translations together can be espied? we depend not upon any
translation, English, or Latin, or of other language, no otherwise then the
same agrees with the original text: but your wholl Church indeed is hanged
upon the latin translation only, which how bad it is, has partly been
showed already, and if need require, shall much more be discovered. That you
ask which Hebrewe, which Greek I mean, are you so ignorant not to know the
Hebrewe Bible, and greek testament? How many Hebrews, how many greeks have
you, unless you mean certain editions of the greek testament, wherein is
found small variety of any moment. page 411.


To prove that the departing from the latin translation is the very
introduction to Apostasy, you propound one example of the heretics in
Germany, called Antinomi, who hold, M. Rai. charge us with the heresy of
the Antinomies most untruely.
as Sleidan writes, that how wickedlie soever a man lives, yet if he believe
the gospel, he shall be justified: and this you say is the very conclusion
of the Protestants common doctrine of justification by faith. What need you, M.
Rainolds, in this place thus falselie, and malitiouslie to slander us? Do we
teach any such doctrine as this in our Church? do we give liberty of
licentious life to the professors of the gospel? does justification by faith
infer this wicked and detestable conclusion: your conscience can tell you,
that you speak untruly. If hope of repentance be left for such slaunderers
and blaspehmers, God give you repentance: otherwise I doubt not the Lord will
avenge in time such reproaches against his holy religion. Let us now consider
your proceeding against these men.

page 411.
fathers and counsels are by them (you say) not regarded: which I grant may
well be, that such wicked men will regard neither fathers nor Counsels: but
this can not be understood of us, who have the fathers and the Counsels in
such reverence and regard, as meet is we should. Then Saint James is also by
them rejected, as contrary to Saint Paull. Saint James, be they Antinomi, or
whoesoeuer, let them answer for it them selves, this appertains not unto us:
but hereof has been said enough before. Thirdelie, the epistle to the Hebrews
is denied by Beza and Calvin to be Saint Paul. What then? Illyricus, he is fo
far from denying this Epistle to be Canonical scripture, that he thinks the
same to be written by Saint Paul himself, and to be amonst excellent and
necessary part of the Scripture, as you may read in his preface upon that
epistle. Fourthlie, Saint Peter's place is brought in, which helps little, 2.
pet. 1.20.
whether we read the words (by good works) according to the latin
translation, or leave them out, according to the greek verity. That our
calling and election is confirmed by good works, makes nothing against
justification by faith. Will you say we are elected and called by our works?
that is gross herefie, worsse then Pelagianisme. But Saint Peter bids us to
make our vocation and election sure by good works, and yet you know your
selves and grant, that our vocation and election is wrought without any
means of good works, because we are elected before the world, and before our
vocation our works were only wicked, what makes all this then for merit of
good works, that they are testimonies and arguments of our election and
effectual vocation? 1 Pet. 1.2^
Saint Peter, against which no exception can be made, whereby you say is
proved first, that we have free will: which I grant we have, after we are
regenerate, Secondly, that we purify our selves from sin, as though we
denied that after grace received we ought, and in some measure might labor
against the sins and corruptions of our soul. Thirdly, that good works are
necessarily required of Christian men: this indede confuteth those heretics of
whom you speak, but makes nothing against us, who think, teach, and
continually preach, that good works are necessary for all Christians,
otherwise they shall never see the kingdom of god: so that we are as far from
that damnable heresy of the Anabaptists and Antinomies, as heaven is from
earth. Further you proceed to a place of Saint Paul. Phil. 1. v. 28 where any
man of knowledge may soon perceive that your translator was deceived foully,
when he translated (...), cause, the word signifying not a cause, but a plain
declaration, or proof. And this is the manifest meaning of Saint Paul in that
place, that as the malice and rage of the wicked enemies of the Church is an
argument of their condemnation, so the patience of the godly in suffering such
afflictions is an evident proof that they are the children of god, and
therefore shall inherit eternal life. Not Beza therefore, but you, and your
translator have altered the text, and perverted the sense of this scripture. As
for your other argument our of Luke. 7. v. 47. of the woman to whom many sins
were remitted, it has been answered so fully and truly by sundry learned
writers, that I might wholly pass it over. A chie^^ place of the papists for
merit of works answer and expounded
Only this in brief I say to stop your railing mouth, that (...),
because, is often times used for (...), therefore: and that so in this place it
must be of necessity expounded, may appear by an invincible reason, which
your selves cannot deny. For that woman being so deeply drowned in deadly
sin, how could her love deserve the grace of God, and remission of her sins?
does your scholasticall Theology maintain, that a sinful creature, lying
in state of condemnation can by love merit pardon of his sins? Tell us plainly,
if this be your doctrine, your religion, your divinity. If then this be most
false and impossible, confess that the love of that sinnfull and miserable
woman, was not be cause of forgiveness of her sins, but the effect following,
and not going before the same. This doctrine is true and Catholic, the
contrary wicked and heretical, and therefore no cause had you to rail so
mightily at Beza and us for translating and expounding this word as we do, and
as the proportion of faith, and circumstance of the place most undoubtedly
and necessarily requires. For our savior Christ shows the cause of her so
great love to be the forgiveness of the great and many sins. They to whom
little is forgiven, love a little: they to whom much is forgiven, love much. She
had much forgiven, therefore she loved much. And this the Fathers also
acknowledge to be the true and natural seuse of the place, although you abuse
their names to the contrary. S. Gregory as he is also by Thomas alleged,
Gr^g. (...) 83.^^ Luangell.
writes thus, The debt being forgiven to both, the Pharisie is demanded who
should more love him that forgave the debt. You see that Gregory expounds
this of the love that followed the forgiveness of the d^bt. And so likewise
Saint Ambrose upon this place, Ambros. is Luc. 7.
Because (says he) there is nothing which we can worthelie render unto God,
woe be unto me, if I love not. I dare say Peter rendered not, and therefore he
loved more, etc. Let us therefore render love for debt, charity for reward,
thanks for the prise of his blood. Thus Saint Ambrose planlie she weth, that
this love in that woman did spring from remission of her sins, C^nus. l. 12.
c. 12.
as it must in us also proceed from the same fountain. I could also put you in
mind what Canus a schooleman of yours has written of this place clean
overthrowing your opinion, as if he had of purpose devised a shift for you.
Notwithstanding that the fathers sometime write, our sins are washed a way
by tears of repentance, I grant: wherebie they mean no other thing, but
that by our earnest sorrow and repentance we receive a sure testimony to our
souls of the remission of our sins. Your discourse about Musculus exposition
I pretermit, with all your monstrous reproaches, and blaspemies of Lucianical
only faith, etc. except the devil him self stood by them, and suggested to
them such construction, etc. fitter for you to utter, then me to rehearse or
answer. page 428.


This wholl matter again M.R. lays out in particular distinctions, whereunto
has been answered enough alreadle, and more then nedd, but only in respect
of that intolerable and outrageous Importunity, which this cauiller has used.
If this be an unlawful shift in expounding of scripture, to try and correct
the translation according to the Hebrew and Greek fountains, then have all
the ancient fathers of the Church exercized continually wicked shifts, who
both appeall them selves to the authentical fountains, and counsel all
others to do the same: far otherwise then your fathers of Tre^ have done, or
will suffer others to do. whotie their faith wholly to a bare translation, and
give no creditt to the Canonical fountains: wherein they have not only use de
damnable and miserable shift, but at once have rased out the wholl scriptures
from beginning toending. Great. did. 9. vt veter.
S. Augustine says, the books of the old Testament must be examined by the
Hebrew, and the new by the Greek verity. Saint Ambrose says, Ambrosade
incarn. cap. 8.
The authority of the Greek books of the new Testament is greater. S. Jerome
is every where of the same mind: In the new Testament (says he) if there
arise any question among the Latins, Hier. ad son and Fret.
and there be difference in the copies, we repair to the fountains of the
Greek tongue, wherein the new Testament was written: and so likewise in the
old. In his preface upon the five books of Moses: he esteems it an absurd
and impossible thing, that the latin copies should be purer then the Greek,
and the Greek then the Hebrew. Again in a another place he says, if truth is
to be sought, in a Euang. ad Damas.
why reiurne we not to the Greek orignal? speaking of the new Testament. And
such sayings has he many, always preferring the Hebrew and Greek before al
translations in the world. But all this by M.R. simple verdite was but a shift
in him, and all the ancient learned godly fathers. For it is the high way to
Atheism in his opinion to do as they did, and as they have also taught us to
do.

Zuinglius exposition of love for faith, page 429.
I will not maintain. It may seem more curious, then necessary. In the text
is no difficulty, if the simplicity of truth may be received. As for
Tertullians complaint of certain heretics, that either refused, or mangled,
or corrupted the scriptures, it touches us no whit at al, who acknoweledge the
wholl body of scriptures, and are so far of from wilful corruption thereof,
that of purpose we would not alter one letter in the Bible, to win the wholl
world. Therefore we little regard your furious and senseles railing against us,
where with you have stuffed all parts of your book, that never was scorpion
fuller of poison, then it is of venomous and stinging reproaches.

Leaving the Greek, you return again to the Hebrew, Page 431.
against which you have devised pretty reasons, to prove there is no hold in
it against contentious heretics. The blasphemy of which assertion, M. Rain.
says that in the Hebrew text of scripture there is no hold.
I dout not every reasonable man at the first will epsy and abhor. For
seeing it pleased the Lord, of all tongues of men under heaven to choose that
tongue, wherein to write his word and oracles, that his Church might have a
most perfect and certain rule of religion, shall this Papist come and
control the wisdom of God for so doing, and say that of the Hebrew little
hold can be taken to bind a contentious heretic? Thus it appears, that
although we had the very same Autographall and authentical copies, which
Moses and the other Prophets did write with their own hands, yet would this
Seminary papist and his fellows make less account of them then of their
translation, as being less hable to bind heretics then it.

The reason is, the diverse significations of every word almost, which may
seem perhapes to some simple body to make for their translation against the
Hebrew. Whereunto I answer, first that although the Hebrew were so uncertain
in respect of the manifold and diverse significations of words, as they would
have it, yet were there noe cause why the latin translation should more be
allowed for the undoubted word of God, then the Greek or any other in the
world. They are all noe better then translations; and what warrrant is there
for one more then an oother, but only in commendation of greater sincerity,
and that in respect of faithfully expressing the Hebrew? Secondly this
variety of significations is not lately begone, but was always from the
beginning: which notwithstanding the Hebrews could speak, and write their
minds as plainly and certainly, as any other people: and the scriptures
were read and expounded in that language many hundred years before any part
of them was translated into Latin. So that this reason makes them now no
less hable to bind heretics, then they have evermore been from the
beginning. And what tongue (I pray you) were the scriptures written in, which
the Apostle exhorts Timothy to read, that he might stop the mouths of
heretics, and which he says are profitable to convince the Adversaries, but
in the Hebrewe and Greek? your latin translator was then unborn, when yet
the scriptures in their original tongues were able to bind and confute all
heretics. Your example out of the Psalm 55. ver. 21. shows a plain
corruption in your translation. For that Hebrew word with these letters and
pricks cannot signify to reward, as your translation has, but upon those
that have peace with him, as our translations for the most have according to
the Hebrewe.

The second reason is, page 433.
many substantives may have diverse deriuations from diverse verbes: and one
example is brought out of the 60. Psalm, v. 6. To this may be answered as to
the former, that if this diversity of deriuation cause a diversity of
expositions, it makes no more against the Hebrew text now, then ever since the
hebrew was first written.

Thirdly, page 434.
touching the literal sense of the hebrew words, you demand what masters we
shall follow. If a controversy be about the signification of a word, whom
should we follow rather then the most learned masters of that tongue? they
can best resolve us that know the tongue best: and as this for words in all
other languages is the only way, so likewise if we doubt of some word in
hebrewe, what means may we use to be instructed and satisfied, but to learn
of those that are most skilful in the tongue, and best know the natural force
of the words. Who can deny that this is much better, then as your translator
oftentimes does, to call black white, and to give a signification of a word,
which all Hebricians can tell, is clean amiss. Examples hereof are in your
translation plentiful, as if before you knew not, now by that which I have
already alleged, you may understand. That which follows of Calvin, Beza,
and the rest, has nothing, but a poor brag not worth the mentioning.

To your question, page 437.
whether I think it flat Atheism and Turkery, to deny that Christ was borne
of a virgin, I answer, no Christian can think otherwise but that it is
indeed plain Atheism, to deny this so principal an article of our faith.
Then you require what scripture I have to prove this verity. I answer, I
prove this verity by a plain text of scripture, in Matt. 1. v. 23. (...)
Behold a virgin shall conceive. etc. But this, you say, proves nothing by
mine own rule, by Bezaes common kind of scanning such citations, and by the
protestants interpretation of this place. What rule, what scanning, what
interpretation of ours can you allege against this most sufficient and
evident proof? Did ever Beza, or I, or any other protestant speak any thing
against this truth? If you can charge any of us, we desire no favor at your
hands. But what cause or reason have you thus to say? Because this text is
not according to the Hebrewe, but the seauentie as you affirm. Which to be a
foul untruth and tending to Atheism and Turcisme, who sees not? For if the
Angels words rehearsed in Saint Matthew be not agreeable to the verity of the
Prophets words, then may Turks, Jews, Atheists, and wicked heretics indede
at their pleasure not only dispute against this article of our faith, but
also condemn it, and we shall not be hable to convince them. This advantage
gives M. Rainolds unto them, when he says, Saint Matthewes text is not
framed according to the Hebrwe, but the Greek translation. M. R. denies the
text of S. Matthewe touching Christ borne of a virgin, to be according to the
Hebrewe.
Thus while you labor to prove that we in cleaving to the Hebrewe text, do
open a gappe to Atheism, your self in denying S. Matthewes text to be fully
agreeable to the Hebrewe, have opened a broad gate to all Atheists and Turks
in the world. God forbid that we should ever utter word so much serving for
defense of Atheism as you have here done: or else set down in word or writing
that S. Matthewes place is not according to the Hebrew. If you take part with
the Jews, and openly maintain, that the Hebrew word signifies not a
virgin, but a young wench, then will I answer you as the godly fathers have
answered those wicked enemies of Christ, that (...) signifies a young wench
indeed, but one that is a virgin, being derived of the root that signifies
to (...). (...).
So Saint Ie^^^^ writes, that this word not only signifies a young maid
or virgin, but more also, a virgin kept hid^ and secret, by great diligence
of he parents: and further also, a young virginus of tender age, not an old
virgin, as some be. And although the word in Hebrew had signified only a
wench, yet the Angel and Evangelists expounding it of such a wench as was a
virgin also, this may suffice all Christians to believe and hold, that our
savior Christ was borne of a true virgin, let Jews, Turks, Atheists, and
heretics, say what they can to the contrary.

Master R. is afraid lest men should think he studied to disgrace the Greek
and Hebrew tongues, page 435. etc.
which he confesses to be great helps to the attaining of the true sense in
sundry places of scripture, and shows what pains the Catholics have taken
in setting forth the Bible in Hebrew and other languages. I grant you have not
disgraced the tongues, but the scriptures written in those tongues you have
indeauoured as much as in you lay to disgrace, although do what you can, you
shall never be able to disgrace them truly. And herein may you firlie be
compared to the Jews; for as they keep the Hebrew text most carefully, but
yet have lost the true meaning thereof: so you have indeed printed the old and
new testament in Hebrew and Greek with diligence and great cost, but in the
mean time you deny them to be the authentical word of God.

This treatise you conclude full discreetly, that first we must be sure of our
faith. That is a very good thing, but how this should be wrought, you tell us
not. The latin translation is for this purpose no fitter, then the Hebrew and
Greek fountains, but rather many ways more unfit, being only a
translation, and that an imperfect, a corrupt, an obscure translation: and
though it were as excellent as ever any translation could be, which God knows
is far otherwise, yet might it not attain to the divine perfection of the
original text that was written, and published by the wisdom of Gods holy
spirit, and ministry of the Prophets, Apostles, and Evangelists. But (say
you) let us hold the Church, then our Greek and Hebrew may do us some good:
let us depart from her, our Greek and Hebrew will turn to our perdition. And
I grant M. R. that to talk of the Greek and Hebrew, unless we hold the right
faith in the true Church, helps us nothing, but rather increases our
condemnation. But this is true no less, I am sure, of your latin, then of the
Greek and Hebrew, unless there be some secret virtue in that, which is not in
the other, that to talk of it, though a man hold not either faith or Church,
may be a profitable thing. If this be not your meaning, then have your words no
sense nor force of reason in them: a meet conclusion for such a discourse.

CHAP. 15.
Of the new testament set forth in the College of Rhemes.

AS Master Rainolds has he^herto defended with great endeavor, page 443. etc.
and small success their latin vulgar translation so now is he come to
maintain in like manner their Rhemish late English translation of the new
Testament, whereof himself may seem to have been a principal author, or at
least some special dealer in the work. First he rehearses my words at large
written in my preface concerning that translation, and sets upon them six
marks, whereof he intends in order and severally to speak. But before he
come to the particulare scannig of my words, he breaks out into immoderate
and immodest railing, wherein is nothing worthy answer: and therefore
suffering him to play his part with Ajax or Hercules, of whom he speaks,
let us procead to the several points, and so shall it appear whether I have
uttered any thing but a certain truth, or whether he had cause thus
strangely to behave himself.

page 445.
whereupon this man takes occasion to talk of new Testaments and
translations hereof set forth 5000. years ago. And have we not just cause to
admire his wisdom and granitie, that could devise and handle in this sort
such a simple fantasy of his own brain? since the world was created, never
was found such a translation as the Rhemish is; therefore (says Master
Rainolds) there have been translations of the new Testament ever from the
creation of the world. If any man else can so understand it, I am content to
let it be so taken. To me it seems strange, that any man of reason should
think and write thus absurdlie, thus peeuishlie, thus falsely, unless it were
to make him self ridiculous, and odious to all the world. But of this so
foolish a conceit of his, we need not to speak more words. Now will Master
Rainolds prove indeed that worse translations of the new Testament have been
by us set forth of late, then theirs is, and therefore that I have said
untruely, that theirs is worst of all.

His argument is thus framed: page 450. etc.
a translation that transformeth God into a devil, must needs be worse then
theirs: But seven of our translations, (whereof some have been set forth within
these five years, transform God into a devil. Therefore these are worse then
theirs. His assumption he proves by a place translated in the first of S.
Peter, Chap. 2. ver. 8. And here is made a great stir with long sentences out
of Illyricus, Beza, Castalion. The indifferent reader will be content with a
short reply, when a longer is not requisite. Now then what is this heinous
fault of our translations? Because they have translated (...), unto the which
thing they were ordained. A grievous accusation, but a faint proose: the
translation is right, and no more transformeth God into a devil, then do S.
Peter's words themselves, which were written by direction of Gods most holy
spirit. Here is no place to make discourse of this question, whether God be
author of sin: which as it is a most impious assertion, so have you most
falselie objected it unto us sundry times, and never could prove it once.
This place of S. Peter we cannot otherwise translate, unless we would willingly
translate amiss: and S. Peter's own text being sound, our translation agreeing
fully therewith, cannot lead men into any such damnable opinion, as that is,
whereof you speak. Yet says M. R. very confidentlie, find you any so
wilful and horrible an Atheism in ours, and hardly set a fire on them all.
Take heed what you speak. Is this wilful and horrible Atheism? are all your
books worthy to be burnt, if any such can be found in them? will you stand
to this? How then have you translated the place your selves? Let us look now
on your translation: thus it is, wherein also they are put. This cannot be
true, following your latin, which has quo, for quod: and therefore in your
margent you mend it thus, whereto also they are orderned. And how differs
this from ours? what Atheism is in ours more then in this? or why deserves
ours to be burnt rather then this? Burn your own if you list, Master
Rainolds: and if you speak as you think, you have pronounced them in your
judgment worthy to be cast into a fire: and so perhaps you could be content,
so that ours might burn withal for company.

The three points following, page 455. etc. 2.3.4.
are hudled up, and answered together, concerning unaccustomed and monstrous
novelties of words, whereof their translation has such examples, as the like
in no other can be found, so as a man may justly call it a new fangled and
ridiculous translation, devised rather to amaze the readers, and make the word
of God a laughing stock, then to edify the Church of Christ. The Rhemish
English translation most foolish and new fangled.
For who has ever heard or read such words and phrases, as they have used
and affected in their translation, whereas they might have retained as well the
common and known manner of speaking, that their translation set forth in
English might have been understood of English men? But they of purpose have so
framed the same that the English is in many places as obscure in words, as the
latin: which thing is in all translations a foul fault, but in translating of
scripture most intolerable? And what reason should be hereof, but that men
either should contemn, or not understand the scripture, which yet they will
seem to translate for the benefit of the Church? Unaccustomed novelties of
words and phrases in the Rhemish translation.
if you require examples, take but the book, and read a little, and soon
shall you see strange affectation of novelties in words and speeches
throughout their whole translation. There shall you find. The Matt. 1.17.
transmigration of Babylon: Mat. 13.28.
The enemy man: Luc. 13.3.
unless you have penance: Mat. 6.11.
Give us to day our supersubstantiall bread: Luc. 10.35.
whatsoever thou shall supererogat: Rom 13.13.
Not in chamberings, and impudicities: Gal. 1.14.24
an emulator of the traditions of my fathers: I expugned the faith: Gal. 4.^7.
They emulate you not well, that you might emulate them: 1. Pet. 2.5.
Be ye also your selves superedified: phil. 4.10.
Once at length you have reflorished to care for me: Iud 4.
Denying the only dominator and our Lord: Ephe. 1 14.
to the redemption of acquisition: Ephesians. 6.12.
against the spirituals of wickedness in the celestials: Marc. 5.22.
the Archisynagogue: Gal. 5.21.
Ebrieties, commessations: Apoc. 1.10.
the dominicall day: 1. Cor. 10.11.
But they are written to our correption: phil. 2.20.
That in the name of Jesus euerr kneebowe of the celestials, terrestrials, and
infernals: Phil. 2.7.
But he exinanited himself: Hebr. 13.16
For with such hosts God is promerited: Heb. 13.1.
Let the charity of the fraternity abide in you: 1. Tim. 6.20.
O Timothy keep the depositum: Hebr. 2.17.
that he might repropitiate the sins of the people: Matt. 27.59.
wrapped it in sindon, and laid it in a monument: Joan. 6.45.
All shall be docible of God: Joan. 5.2.
Upon probatica a pond: Joan. 8 46.
which of you shall argue me of sin? Joan. 15.25.
they hated me gratis: Joan. 18.1.
beyond the Torrent Cedron: Joan. 19.14.
It was the parasceue of pasche. These and such like are the goodly flowers of
their translation, besides the obscurity and ambiguitie of sentences, by
reason of leuing out the verbs and other words in the English translation,
which may in latin more easily be understood. Yet have they dealt something
reasonably in adding a Dictionarie to their translation, if it had been
somewhat larger. Hereby the reader may judge, but better by reading the
translation it self, whether I have not truly said of it, that it is a
strange translation indeed, and such a one, as hard it were to find the like.
But Master Rainolds answers, that we rather delight in such novelty, then
they, seeing they retain the ancient words, Mass, Priest, etc. and we refuse
them: hereof has been spoken before. And as for certain names of persons and
places which some of our interpreters do reduce to the Hebrewe sound, they
cannot much trouble the reader, and they are rather used in books, then
speech. Your accusation Master Rainolds of greater novelty in articles of
faith amongst us, is false: and concerning the books of Judith, Machabees, and
the rest of that sort, we have spoken sufficient before: your other railing I
omit.

What cause have we to be affraide of your translation? page 459. etc.
of God, that is it which we have translated and printed, and published so
often. I wish indeed for my part, that your translation might be printed alone,
and all men suffered to have and read it, that so by comparing it with ours,
and with the original text, and by considering the wholl shape of it, they
might the more abhor your irreligious and profane handling the Testament of
Christ. Your Annotations joined with your translation are deuilish indeed and
dangerous for all Christians to read, and therefore the godly wisdom of
magistrates cannot suffer such books openly to be sold. You speak your
pleasure of Master Jewels dealing with Hardinges books, but falselie, all men
knowing the contrary: and so further you proceed in blasphemous railing
against the truth of Christ's gospel, which now in England is professed,
calling it an Atheistical gospel. Such new terms of blasphemy have you
devised and used many, so as we may perceive that you have profited well in
your school of Apostasy, and are now come to the highest form and chair of
scorners. Page 464. etc.


Where the Rhemish translators would seem so preciselie to translate the
latin translation, as making the same account of it that we do of the Greek,
I thought to admonish the reader, that this thing is not by them so truly and
exactlie performed every where, as it is constanlie pretended: but that these
translators sometime leave their translation which they translate, and follow
the greek rather then it. Two examples hereof I noted, of which Master
Rainolds speaks much, and more then enough, amplifying that in ten pages,
which might have been comprised in as many lines, such leisure and pleasure
has he to run at large, as a wanton whelpe that can not be kept from ranging
abroad, nor brought to follow the mark. I purpose not to run after him, for
then should I be as ill occupied as he: but keeping my purpose and manner, I
will come to the matter in question. The first example is in the 12. Chapter of
Saint Paul's epistle to the Romans, the 19. verse: where the Apostle forbids
us to revenge our selves, (...).
for so much as vengeance belongs to the Lord. Non vosmet ipsos defende^tes.
The common translator has expressed it otherwise, as though the Apostle would
not have us to defend our selves, making defense ^f our selves and reuengement
all one, which yet are two diverse things in them selves. Our Rhemists in this
place follow not their old translator, but the Apostles Greek text; and thus
they have translated it, not revenging your selves, my dearest. Who sees not
that here they have left the latin word, and followed the Greek, which
differs from the latin? Now Master Rainolds to prove himself a notable
Grammarian, tells us the latin agrees with the Greek, and the English with
the latin, and all is right. For he affirms, and by some unfit examples
would prove that (...) signifies to defend, and Defendo signifies to
revenge, alleging also some Dictionaries for his opinion. But, to make a short
reply, let M. R. bring us forth any one example out of good author Greek or
Latin, wherein the words are so used, as he teaches, and then shall we
easily yeald in this case. By implication and consequence I grant the one
word may perhaps be used sometime for the other: but I appeal to all learned
Grecians and Latinists in the world, whether it be not true that (...)
properly signifies only to revenge, and not to defend: and so likewise
Defendo to defend, and not to revenge. Therefore to translate the one for the
other, as it is altogether improper, so is it most dangerous in the
scriptures, because thereof may follow errors in judgment, and practice of
life. And it appears that Thomas of Aquine took the word Defendentes in the
proper signification, expounding it by Christ's precept, that if we be stricken
on the one cheek, we must be so far of from defending our selves, that we
must be willing rather to turn the other also to him that smote us: and by
Christ's example, who being buffeted on the face, defended not him self. Yet
after he shows that some defense is lawful by example of Saint Paul, who
procured him self to be defended from the Jews that lay in wait for him.
Thus we may see that your Saint Thomas used the word simply and properly,
and thereby was feign to seek some new exposition, which he nedd not to have
done, had he been as good a grammarian, as you Master Rainolds are.

The other example is in S. Matthewe, page 470. etc.
the 4. Chapter. 16. verse: wherein you have also followed the Greek rather
then the latin, translating not according to most of your latin Testaments,
which I have seen, the people that walked in darkness, but after the Greek,
the people that sat in darkness. A small matter in it felfe, I grant, yet great
enough to show that you have not so preciselie followed the latin translation.
as you would seem: which also in other places appears, by comparing your
translation with that. For in the very first Chapter of S. Matthew, the 19.
ver. you have omitted these words, (...). Vir cius.
Her husband, which your latin books have truly translated according to the
greek. Whereof reason it were, that you should be accountable, for what cause
you have removed those words clean out of the text, if they were not rather
left out by oversight. For I trust you are not ashamed that Joseph should be
called the husband of the blessed virgin Marie. Again in the 13. to the Romans
v. 9. instauratur, you translate, is comprised, by no grammar, I am sure, nor
dictionary, I think. The sense, I grant, is true, and well agrees with the
Greek, but the latin word is left. If you listed not to translate, is
renewed, or repared, as the word signifies, you might have kept the word, and
according to your new found manner of translating and speaking have translated,
instaurated. Such examples are there in your translation many more, if we
should peruse the wholl, which is not necessary. Neither have I much blamed
your translation in this respect, Master Rainolds, for not iumping always with
your latin, as you have untruely told your reader: but for leaving the
Greek, and following the latin, translating only a bare, (I will not speak
as you do, a bald) translation, and for translating it after such a fashion,
as never scripture was translated, nor any other book I suppose: and for
applying the text most absurdlie and violently to some colorable maintenance
of your Antichristian Church and religion.

CHAP. 16.
Of the faults found in the Annotations of the new testament.

FRom the translation, which how vain and childish it is has been declared,
now let us proceed with you to the Annotations, which are meet handmaides for
such a maistres. But before you come to speak of the particular faults, that
were found therein, you discourse of many matters according to your common
custom idly, and railingly, whereunto it booteth not to make answer: and
therefore passing over what you have written of M. Jewel, M. Horn, etc. of
Tower and Tiburne disputation, of the Churches stabilitie, of M. Foxes
monuments, of Luthers judgment concerning the sacramentaries, I will come to
examine your defense of those faults, that were noted, and that as briefly as
I can, reserning these causes to the large confutation of those Annotations,
which in convenient time through Gods goodness will be (I hope) performed to Gods
glory, defense of the truth, and disproofe of popishlies and heresies. Three
kinds of faults were observed: the first of errors in matters historical:
the second of false conclusions and arguments: the third of certain blaspemies
against the holy Apostle.

In the first order were reckened certain traditions, page 484. etc.
which having no ground in Gods word, nor much differing from mere fables, are
in your Rhemish Annotations notwithstanding gloriously avouched, as behouefull
for all Christians to believe. And first of the wisemen that came from the East
to visit our savior Christ, three things are affirmed, first that they were
kings, secondly that they were three, Popish traditions full of fables and
vanities
and lastly that their names were Gaspar, Melchior, and Baltasar, as now
commonly they are called. For the first, Master R. demands a reason, why I
should think they were no kings, himself not hable to show any, why he
should say they were kings. But if reason may rule him, for which he calls,
as though he would yield unto it, if it were given him, three reasons will I
propounde, wherebie I am moved not to believe that these men were kings.

First, because the Evangelist calls them by noe such names, The wise me,
that came to worship Christ, said to be kings against reason.
which yet he would not have omitted, if the truth had been according to your
tradition, considering how this would have made for the honor of Christ, that
so soon as he was borne, kings should have sought him far, and done unto him
homage and worship. And when you maintain your opinion by this argument, for
that it is honorable to the person of our savior Christ that so we should
think of them, you charge therein the holy Evangelist for omitting somewhat,
that might have greatly advanced the honor of Christ, if he had truly and
fully reported the same. Secondly, it is not credible, that Herod's would have
admitted into his kingdom and chief City three Kings with their troops,
especially there being enemity betwixt him and the kings of Persia: neither
could they have so secretly come to our savior Christ, and escaped out of the
country again, but that being kings, and therefore no dout accompanied in
some princely sort, they must needs have been discried. Thirdly if they had
been, as you imagine, kings, yea and Monarchs, as great as the king of France
and Spain, or the great Sophie of Persia, which you suppose might be, then
would they not have left our savior Christ and his Mother in that poor
estate, that she was able to offer no more, but a pair of doves, according to
the oblation of the poorest amongst the people. If you can remove the ground
of these reasons, I will confess your opinion has in it more probability then
I thought, although to believe it, as you do, for a certain truth, I cannot,
because thereof I know no sure reason can be alleged. The fathers I grant
some of them speak of these wise men as of kings, taking that word in a larger
sense, for great and honorable personages, such as may be thought that they
were: but the ground of their opinion is a place of scripture misunderstoode,
in the 72. Psalm, concerning the kings of Tharsis, Arabia, and Sheba, that
should bring gifts, which cannot be applied to these, for so much as those
countries are not Eastward from Judea, and the scripture plainly says, that
these wise men came out of the East. Therefore whatsoever any father has
written to this purpose, is lightly to be regarded, having no better ground
then a manifest wresting of scripture and turning South into East.

Now that they were also three, page 489.
how may it be proved? forsooth here is a mystery of the blessed Trinity,
whereunto Saint Augustine most sweetl^e alludeth. At this most heavenly
mystery, Master Rainolds, none will be grieved, save only most wicked and
detestable heretics indeed. But how appears it, that these wise men did
represent and signify that mystery? Saint Augustine and Leo say so: and
therefore we must believe it is so. Which argument I will admit if because
their oblations were of three things, therefore it follow necessarily, that
themselves, who offered, were three. Yet Master Rainolds has a better reason
then this, if it will be accepted. The Evangelist (says he) speaks of them
in the duall number, and therefore they were more then two: but we need not to
believe that they were more then three. Neither need we to believe that they
were just three: for the Evangelist speaking of them indefinitlie, as he does,
we may as well think they were more then three, as well as three, and so also
indeed some fathers have thought. So that this hangs upon a slender threede
of man's conjecture, which cannot be warranted by mystical expositions. And if
herein were contained so sweet and excellent mysteries, much may we marvel,
why the Evangelists would not plainly write, for better understanding of
this mystery, that they were neither fewer, nor more, then just three.

Lastly, touching their names, page 490.
Master R. asks, seeing they were not nameles, why their names were not
Gaspar, Melchior, Baltasar, rather then William, John, and Thomas. I grant as
well may we think the one as the other: but reason is there none to think
either. That their names might have been continued in the Church, I deny not
as well as those forcerers names were, of whom S. Paul makes mention. And so
stands your argument, Their names might be such, therefore they were such:
they might be three, therefore they were three: they might be Kings, therefore
they were Kings. And thus in Popish traditions the argument holds well a
posse ad esse, contrary to the rules of all Logique in the world. But enough
of these three counterfaite Kings, of Colen.

That John the Baptist was an Eremite, page 482.
and patron of Eremiticall life, is as likely as the other. First, scripture
have you none for this Tradition of yours: for then it were not a right
tradition, if you could bring something out of scripture for confirmation
thereof. The Evangelists say not, that he lived alone from company of men in
the wilderness, as your Eremites did, but that he lived in that country of
Judea, which in respect of other parts thereof more populous, Hier^^. in vis a
Pa^li.
was called the desert of Judea. Then whatsoever you allege out of fathers,
may in a word by another father be disprooued, who denies that Elias and John
were Monckes, and says that Antonius and Paulus were thought to be the first
fathers of Eremites.

Concerning the stone that hitt S. Page 493.
Stephen on the elbowe, and now is kept at Ancona in Italy, Master Rainolds
will not stand greatly in maintenance of this fable, but refers us to Saint
Augustine in a counterfaite sermon. Yet that such a thing might be, he proves
by example of Aharons rod and the Manna, which were by Gods special
commandment preserved in the Arc. But was there any like commandment, or
cause to keep the stone, that rebounded from Saint Stephens body? show us
some, and then we say no more.

For Elias coming before the last judgment are alleged sundry Doctors. page
494
So then belike all is safe on their side, if they can approve their opinions
and expositions by Testimonies of some Doctors. But this will not serve, unless
the Doctors saying be warranted by Gods word, as we have a thousand times
told them. Now this imagination of Elias coming is by the words of our
savior Christ plainly confuted, who teaches that Elias, Mat. 17.13.
according to the prophecy of Melachie, was come already: and the Apostles
understood that he meant of John the Baptist, who was Elias, not in person,
but in spirit and power. Then the prophecy of Elias coming being fulfilled
in John Baptist, as our savior himself has taught, vain is it to dream of
an other coming then that, whereof no word can be found in all the scriptures
of God. Wherefore as you compare the fathers with us, to make your cause seem
the more probable, so will I compare the scriptures with the fathers, whose
authority is much more incomparably above theirs, then theirs is above ours,
by how much God is more above man, then one man is above another.

page 497.
are most incredible and monstrous, such as I gathered some out of your
Annotations upon the new testament, as your selves had delivered them unto us.
You cannot otherwise do, but take upon you some seely defense of your
fellows Collections, whether with greater ignorance, or boldness, I can not
tell. Christ and Peter walked on the waters, Matt. 14.26.
therefore it is evident, that Christ's body may be in compass of a little
bread. This to be a most false argument, not only in true Divinity, but also
in natural reason, is manifest. For had Christ or Peter a body, that both
walked on the water, and walked not on the water at one time? Do the
scriptures so teach, or is there no such thing to be found in them? If not,
then is not this like to you imagined presence of Christ's body in the
sacrament: which being granted according to your doctrine of
transsubstantiation, infers most necessarily, that Christ's body at once
is both compassed in a little bread, which is contrary to the nature of a man's
true body: and also is not compassed therein, as sitting in heaven, and having
the natural properties of a true body, which cannot be brought within so
narrow a compass as is your wafer cake. This is repugnant to scripture, to
reason, to Gods ordinance, and therefore a most absurd and impossible thing
is it, that Christ's body should remain a true natural body, and yet at once
be contained in so small a compass, as you teach. In that Christ and Peter
walked on the water, no such inconvenience nor absurdity can be found, whether
the waters were made by miracle firm as the ground, or the bodies were
sustained by Gods power, that they suncke not. Christ might bear up himself
and Peter from sincking down, by his divine power, and change no natural
property of his or Peter's body: but Christ's body can not be brought into
that slender compass of your mathematical cake, without destruction of all
properties incident unto a natural body. So then between these two is no
likeness at all, as any man not blinded with Popish folly, and not wilfully
shutting his eyes against the clear light may manifestly perceive. Wherefore
distrusting this argument, you protest that your note consists not so much
thereupon, as in the authority of Epiphanius, who has not any word at all
to this purpose. For tell us, Master Rainolds, does Epiphanius draw an
argument from Christ's walking on the water, to prove his body reallie
present in the sacramental bread? No such matter can you find in Epiphanius,
or any ancient father of Christ's Church. That which Christ has said, he that
believes not to be true, is fallen from grace and salvation, as Epiphanius
writes: but Christ has never said, that his body should be in the compass
of a little bread. Howbeit what talk you of a little bread? when you teach no
bread at all remains, but only signs and shadows of bread. False is your
doctrine, and foolish is your argument: but bad reasons are good enoughe for
such a bad religion.

Peter's walking on the water, page 498
is gathered an other argument of like quality, to prove the Popes supreme
authority: which argument was first invented and devised by Saint Bernarde in
his second book and eight Chapter to Eugenius a Pope. Many waters are many
people: Peter walked on the waters, therefore Peter and his successors are
rulers over many people, says good Saint Bernarde: to whom your Pope is
greatly bound for devising such a fine argument, which no ancient Doctor was
able to find. But must we now receive Bernards fantasies, for substantial
proofs of the papal supremacy? No Master Rainolds, Saint Bernarde has no
warrant to make allegories at his pleasure for confirmation of that
Antichristian tyranny, which in those days was established. Your comparison of
this argument with that of Christ's about the brazen serpent, and of Paul's
concerning Isaac and Ismael, is no better then blasphemous. Might Saint
Bernarde with like authority reason thus, Peter walked on the waters,
therefore he and his successors are supreme governors of the universal
Church, as Christ did show the manner of his death by the lifting up of the
brazen serpent in the desert? or as Saint Paul did prove the haued and
persecution of false brethren against the true Christians by example of Ismael,
and Isaac? Had Bernard the fullnes of wisdom and truth, that was in Christ?
was Bernard always directed with that spirit, wherewith Saint Paul expounded
the scriptures of God? Here we may see how baselie you think of Gods word, to
match therewith men's seely expositions and applications, such as Saint
Bernards often times were, and this most notably is.

supererogation, page 499.
out of the Samaritanes words, whatsoever thou shall bestow more, or as it is
by them translated, Luc. 10.35.
whatsoever thou shall supererogate. This argument (says Master Rainolds)
follows well enough, and is Saint Augustins conclusion, to prove that Saint
Paul did supererogate, when he might have received all duties for preaching the
Gospel, but would not. That men may remit some part of their due, and do more
toward men outwardly, then they can of necessity be urged to do, no man
will deny: and thus may one man be said to supererogate toward another: but
what makes this for works of supererogation toward God, who requires both
inward and outward obedience of us in most absolute manner?

Page 499.
whereof yet Master Rainolds being ashamed, says it is not their argument,
Matt. 17.^
but only a deduction, that Christ may give us his body in form of bread
and wine. A proper deduction no doubt, of a glorious body to prove no body.

page 500.
because they are like to Angels is a very bad argument, Mat. 22.30.
considering that neither Angels can so do, for then were they of equal power
with God: and though Saints are like to Angels, as in other things, so in this,
that they marry not, yet it follows not that therefore they are equal to
Angels. You are glad of such arguments, having no other; but if ye had better,
ye would not esteem such.

sindon, page 501.
Therefore Christ's body on the altar must be laid in pure linen. Mat. 27.59.
In this argument Master Rainolds cannot tell what I mislike, whether the real
presence, or the linen used at the altar, as it was in the sepulcher, or the
relation from one to the other. I answer in a word, I mislike all, there
being no truth in any of all.

page 502.
Ergo we must go to the holy sepulcher in pilgrimage: Matt 28.1.
This argument Master Rainolds confesses cannot indeed prove that we must,
but that we may go in pilgrimage, by example of those godly and zealous
women: which yet is a false and fond deduction, seeing there is no such like
cause for us to go, as was for them.

page 504.
cannot prove that he is in the sacrament in form of bread, Mark. 16.12.
for so much as in Christ's body noe alteration at this time was wrought, but
only the disciples eyes were held, that they know him not, as Saint Luke
expreslie notes. Luke 34.16.


exorcisme in baptism, argument you say you made none of Christ's saying to
the dombe and dease Ephpheta. Mat. 7.34.
If no argument, no proof,if no proof, then no cause to use by example of
Christ such exorcisme in you baptismes. page 505.
Luke 1.3.


Saint Lukes preface before his gospel cannot by any means excuse the second
book of Machabees from being Apocryphal, wherein the Author craves pardon
for his so slender writing of that history. There is no likeness of comparison
at all between the Evangelists endeavor to learn and write the certain
truth, and that authors confession of his infirmity and imperfection in
writing his book. One thing it is to enquire the truth with all diligence, and
so having found the same to set it forth in writing most exactlie: an other
having written a book, to desire the readers favor and forgiveness, in respect
of the writers simplicity and vnskillfulnes. The first detracteth nothing from
the wisdom and majesty of Gods spirit, to search the truth by all such means,
as by which the same may be learned: the other argues a conscience and
acknowledgement of wants in writing, which cannot be applied to the holy
Ghost, who whatsoever he takes in hand, most wisely and excellently
performs the same. Does Saint Luke any where excuse his want of utterance,
his rude, slender, and unlearned manner of writing? Nothing less: nay he
protests in the same preface that he has attained to the exact knowledge of
every thing, and that he writes a most certain and undoubted truth: so
far of is he from craving pardon of any man, which the simple writer of that
book of Machabees, in regard of his own weakness and vnhabilitie, thought it
expedient for him to do. Your places out of the Apostle are frivolous,
bewraying your gross ignorance. S. Paul says, that in some part he had
written boldly to the Romans. (...) 15.
What then? did he therefore crave pardon for his so bold writing unto them?
Does he not show immediately the cause of this boldness to be, for that he was a
minister of Jesus Christ among the gentiles? That he faith he was conversant
among the Corinthians in weakness, in fear, and trembling, 1. Cor. 2.3.
what concerns this the writings that he published to the Church? The
greatness of the Lords work in hand made him to tremble, but for his writings
he feared not the judgment of man, nor ever submitted them to man's discretion.
That he desires them to bear with his folly, etc. 2. Co. 11.1.17
he speaks not to excuse any folly in him self, who had always most
wisely and gravely behaved himself toward the Corinthians, but to reprove
rather the singular arrogancy and folly of the false Apostles, who being in
no respect comparable to the Apostle, yet bragged immoderatlie and preferred
themselves before him. This is another case, Master Rainolds, unlike to that
whereof we spoke.

Men of good will, page 505.
Luc. 2.14.
to whom the Angel wishes well, are by our new divines of Rhemes expounded
for men endued with free will. And thus says Master Rainolds was it taught in
the old gospel. But what gospel he means, it were a good thing to
understand. For S. Lukes gospel teaches no such thing, which yet sure I am is
the old and true gospel of Christ. E' (...), which word S. Luke in that
place has used, never signifies free will, but favor and good will, which one
bears toward another: S. Augustine was by ignorance of the Greek tongue
deceived: and any man may soon perceive that the Angel speaks of Gods
love toward mankind, which then most notably appeered, when the Son of God
was borne of a woman. For our papists to gather hereof man's free will, is too
childish and absurd abuse of holy scripture.

Christ preached out of Peter's ship: Luc. 5.3.
and therefore our Rhemists make an argument that the wholl Church is Peter's
shipp. If such allegories may go for sound proofs, then will it be easy not
only for the Pope to prove his primacie, but for all other heretics that
ever were, to justify their detestable opinions what-soeuer. That by Peter's
ship the fathers have taught the Church of Christ to be resembled, no man
denies: but they conclude not, nor apply their allegory so far as you do,
to prove that as Peter was owner of that ship, so he and his successors are
governors of the wholl Church. Such allegories as this of yours may please
fools in their merry conceits, but wise men will esteem them no better then
they deserve.

Barnabas laid down the price of his land at the Apostles feet: page 510.
Act 4.37.
where upon our Rhemists make a long annotation of reverence due to sacred
persons, either Prophets, Apostles, or Popes. Who can otherwise think but
that hereof they meant to make an argument for kissing of the Popes feet,
least any thing concerning the Pope should want due confirmation? yet Master
Rainolds calls this and the rest merry conclusions, and complains of
mockers. Indeed such merry conclusions have you devised many in your
Annotations, fitter a great deal to bring your wholl Religion into derision,
then to edify in true faith. Thus have you long, and yet still would you mock
the world, but your mockeries are well espied, the Lord be praised for it.

The Queens Eunuch of Aethiopia came to Jerusalem to worshipp: ergo
pilgremages to holy places are acceptable to God. page 512.
Act. 8.27.
This reason why it should not be allowed, Master R. says he cannot guess,
and desiereth me if I have any hid imagination, to impart it unto him: which I
am very well content to do. The cause that moved this noble man of Aethiopia
to travail so far, was for that in Judea only was the visible Church of
God, and in Jerusalem stood the Temple, wherein only sacrifices might be
offered to God. Which being so, necessary was it for him to repair thither,
for the exercise of his religion in the Church of God, and place particularly
thereunto appointed by the Lord. This can you not apply to Rome or Jerusalem
now, or any other place in the world, and therefore manifest dissimilitude and
inequality is there between this Eunuchs iourneying to Jerusalem, for so
godly and necessary causes, and popish pilgremages to places abroad for noe
cause, but only for idle and wandering superstition.

page 515.
Phil. 2.10.
and making courtesy at the name of Jesus, Master Rainolds is very earnest,
and concludes in the end that I am an Atheist, and make no account of Christ,
for denying that, seeing we yeald this honor of capp and courtesy to the
letters, name, seal, and seat of the Prince. If this be a true argument,
Master Rainolds, as you in your vehemency would have it seem, how comes it
to pass, that Gods name amongst you is not honored with like reverence of
capp and knee whenever it is heard? will you put of your capp when the Prince
is named, and will you make courtesy at the Popes name, at his triple crown, or
cross, and will you never once stir your cappes, or bow your knees, when
God is named? Is this your Religion, is this your fashion? Then let me conclude
against you, as you have done against me, that you are by your own argument
very Atheists, such as make no account of God himself. For otherwise this
conclusion of yours, that I am such a one for not honoring the name of Jesus
in such sort, is falssie, though most maliciously, devised. That Jews and
Infidels have abhorred the name of Jesus, I grant, but no more the name of
Jesus, then the name of Christ, seeing Jesus is Christ, and Christ has as much
deserved to be hated of them as Jesus. Christ's name may a thousand times be
heard amongst you, and noe man moves capp or knee: Jesus is noe sooner
sounded, but every man by and by puts of his capp, and scrapeth on the
ground with his foot, and yet not always, and in all places, but in the
Church, and specially at reading of the Gospel. This may breed a more
dangerous opinion, then it can remove any, that Jesus is better then is
Christ, and more worthy of reverence, which is wicked to imagine.

Now Master Rainolds having in particular made some seely defense, page 516.
(...)
as you have heard, for certain of their annotations upon the new Testament,
noted as notorious absurd, and ridiculous conclusions, because he knows the
matter is not yet sufficienly answered, adds in the and a further proof and
confirmation of the arguments by example of the scripture it self, wherein
diverse reasons may be found, and namely touching the resurrection, which if
they be examined according to philosophy and humane wisdom, will follow no
better then theirs have done, but may be thought as improbable and weak, as
any that they have made. This discourse does Master Rainolds in many words
prosecute, with great superfluity of speech, and many opprobrious terms after
his old manner. But when he has talked his pleasure at full, an answer in
one word shall overthrow all, that he has builded, and as it were cut in
sunder the thread of all that he has sewed thus loselie together. Whatsoever
is affirmed or denied in scripture, although it be most contrary to man's
reason, yet is it true and certain, and must without contradiction be
believed, because the Lord, whose word is truth has said it. The resurrection
of the flesh cannot (I grant) be proved by philosophical reasons and
arguments, but Gods word has set down this for a principle of our faith, that
our bodies shall rise again, and whatsoever reason judges thereof, faith
makes no doubt but so it shall be. But now Master Rainolds, what makes this
for your former collections? because we must believe Christ and his Apostles in
all that they teach, though natural reason will not so easily yeald, must we
therefore allow whatsoever our nouices of Rhemes have fondly without
authority of Gods word concluded in their Annotations for maintenance of
Popish heresy? This forsooth is your argument, if you meant to make any
argument at all: if you thought not to drive your speech to this conclusion,
then have you ranged at randon all this while, and spoken never a word to that
purpose, to the which you should have directed your talk.

CHAP. 17.
Of certain blasphemies contained in the Annotations.

Hitherto has appeered with what conscience and spirit you have translated and
expounded sundry places of the new Testament wresting and writhing most
violently the text of holy scripture to confirmation of your Popish errors
and absurdities. page 52^.
Wherein I doubt not, but whosoever shall consider with himself advisedly
your manner of collection, your argument, your application of scripture, and
shall examine a little how your conclusion follows upon your proofs with out
all coherence or consequence of reason, must needs greatly mislike your wholl
Religion, that is builded upon so weak, so tickle, so ruinous a foundation.
For unless it be granted that of every thing may be concluded any thing, and
that the word of God may be made appliable to all purposes, opinions, and
doctrines, it is impossible that these and such like arguments of yours, as you
have in your annotations gathered upon the words of scripture, should have in
them such strength and truth, as Divinity and religion requires. But further
when your blasphemous audacitie in controlling the word of God shall be
perceived, it must of necessity breed in all such as fear God, and reverence
his word, a far greater alienation of mind from you, and from all your
damnable doctrine. Examples of such blasphemies some I alleged, whereof now
Master Rainolds in his last Chapter entreats, and with his accustomed boldness
of defending any thing labors to justify the same.

The Apostle in his epistle to the Hebrews entreating at large of Christ's
priesthood, page 529. Sec.
compares Christ with Melchisedech, and by this argument proves that Christ
is a priest for ever, because he is a priest according to the order of
Melchisedech: which he confirms by testimony of Moses and David. In all
which treatise the Apostle although he fully shows what resemblance was
between Melchisedech and Christ, yet he makes not any mention of the mass,
nor of the unbloody sacrifice of Christ's body and blood in bread and wine,
nor of any such matter, as by the papists has been imagined. Which because
our Rhemists understood to be greatly prejudicial to their sacrifice of the
Mass, they have most shamefullie and blasphemouslie behaved themselves in
handling this scripture, as to any that compares their annotations with the
text it self may easily apperee. For they have plainly written in their
annotations, that all that the Apostle has alleged, concerning the eternity
of Christ's person, and his perpetual intercession for us, and everlasting
effect of his death, proves not that in proper signification his priesthood
is perpetual. Hebr. 7.17.
Whereof what other thing can possibly be collected, but that the Apostle has
not by sufficient reasons proved that thing which he took in hand to prove,
that Jesus Christ is a priest for ever after the order of Melchisedech? For
these men boldly affirm that all this proves not that in proper
signification Christ's priesthood is perpetual: then the Apostle in proper
signification has proved nothing less, then that which he went about to
prove, concerning Christ's everlasting priesthood, wherein all our salvation
consists, and has but used a slight to make men believe a thing, which
either he could not prove, or at lest has not effectually proved. Our
papists will have the principal respect of resemblance between Christ and
Melchisedech to stand in offering bread and wine, whereof forsooth must arise a
perpetual sacrifice to be continued in the Church. Now hereof the Apostle
has not spoken so much as one word, nor given the least signification of such
a matter. What other thing is it then but plain blasphemy for maintenance of
an idolatrous sacrifice to charge the Apostle that he has not proved Christ's
priesthood to be perpetual, which yet he has by most necessary and
substantial arguments proved? For as the Apostle reasons, if Christ's
person be perpetual, as it is; and if he make for us perpetual intercession,
as he does; and if by his one sacrifice offered once he has wrought a full and
perfect redemption, as he has; then is it hereof in proper signification
proved, that Christ's priesthood also is perpetual, and then have these
malapert papists blasphemed in denying the Apostles arguments to be good in
proper signification, which is in effect to take from them all credit and
authority. Let Master Rainolds devise what cunning shift he can, yet in truth
never shall he be hable to wipe out this blot of blasphemy: when the Apostle
has of purpose labored to prove Christ's eternal priesthood, and proved it
indeed most inuinciblie, for these Collegiates of Rhemes to come in with their
censure upon the Apostle, and to set down in plain terms that all this
proves not the matter in proper signification, and that the Apostle has
omitted the chief and proper proof thereof. This is a blasphemy against
Christ, and against the holy spirit of God, by which the Apostle in writing was
directed.

But what can Master Rainolds say in excuse of this so manifest blasphemy?
page 534.
He asks first, Where say we that of all those things proposed by the
Apostle, it follows not that Christ's priesthood is eternal? Must you again
be put in mind of your own Annotation, which your self have at large
rehearsed? Have you not therein expreslie in writing published, All this
proves not that in proper signification his priesthood is perpetual? And
what differs this from that, which I have affirmed of you? Has the Apostle
propounded any thing concerning your pretended sacrifice. If he has, show us
where, in what words, after what sort. If any thing at all can be showed to
this purpose, as nothing indeed can, and without this be showed, in your
opinion the eternity of Christ's priesthood is no wais sufficiently proved,
do you not plainly declare your judgment to be that it follows not of al
those things, which the Apostle has said that Christ's priesthood is
eternal? yea but M.R. says, that they have avouched the clean contrary in
saying, that all the fathers gather of this deep and divine discourse, the
eternity of his Priesthood. The fathers indeed have gathered of this discourse
most truly the eternity of Christ's Priesthood, and therein they confute your
wicked dannotation, that says, all this proves not Christ's Priesthood to be
perpetual. They understood the Apostle rightly, and they expounded his
meaning faithfully. Show me now one ancient father if you can M. R. that ever
said as you say, that all this alleged by the Apostle proves not in proper
signification, that Christ's priesthood, is perpetual: or else that he taught,
as you teach, that Christ must continually be sacrificed in form of bread and
wine. This is the point, this show us, if you can. For in your Annotation no
such thing is showed, and all the fathers confess with one consent, that the
Apostle has proved soundly the eternity of Christ's Priesthood, and that no
other sacrifice remains to be offered, but only a remembrance and sacrament
of that one everlasting sacrifice to be continued in the Church to the end of
the world.

Secondly it is confessed by Master Rainolds that the Apostle makes not any
express mention of that oblation of bread and wine. page 536.
But what reason was there, why the Apostle entreating of Christ's eternal
preisthood, omitted the principal part thereof? Consider good reader, into
what miserable straites these men are driven, and what absurd devises they are
enforced to forge. For their best excuse is that because the Jews believed not
the first, singular, and sovereign sacrifice of the cross, therefore he would
not urge them with this secondarie and dependente sacrifice of the Church.
Which in truth is nothing else, but a seely shift to salve a desperate sore.
For first it is evident the Apostle writ to those that were not ignorant of
Christian religion, seeing they had learned already the principles thereof,
and are exhorted by the Apostle to proceed to perfection therein. Hebr. 6.1.
Secondly whereas the Apostle has discoursed so plentifully of the principal
and sovereign sacrifice, what reason was there to keep silence of the
secondarie sacrifice, as you call it? Might they hear of the greater, and not
of the less? Might the Apostle urge so earnestly unto them the sacrifice of
the cross, and might he not in a word mention the sacrifice of the Altar?
Could the one be more offensive unto them then the other? Let all men judge
what truth there is in this devise.

Of that which follows concerning this matter, nothing deserves answer,
page 540.
save only that Master Rainolds asks of me, whether Melchisedech did not
sacrifice? I say, no doubt Melchisedech did sacrifice: for otherwise he had
not been a priest. But Saint Paul (says he) makes no express mention
thereof. What then, I pray you? Forsooth by Master Whittakers judgment Saint
Paul omitteth some principal part of Melchisedechs priesthood. Who ever heard
a more foolish collection? it was sufficient for the Apostle that Melchisedech
was a priest, which is confirmed by plain testimony of scripture: to rehearse
any special kind of sacrifice by him offered was nothing necessary to the
purpose in hand. And therefore the Apostle has not omitted any principal part
of Melchisedechs priesthood, unless you will say it cannot be proved
necessarily, that one has been a priest, except every particular sacrifice
that ever was offered by him, be recorded and avouched. This being most
absurd, see how vain a conceit of yours this was, that the Apostle has
omitted some principal part of Melchisedechs priesthood, because he has not
declared expresselie what special sacrifice Melchisedech offered.

An other example I noted out of the sixth Chapter to the Romans, page 543. etc.
in that notable place, where the Apostle writes that the stipend of sin is
death, but life everlasting is the gift of God. Romans 6.23.
Upon these words our Rhemists have noted, that the sequel of speech required,
that as he said, death or damnation is the stipend of sin, so life
everlasting is the stipend of justice, and so it is. Wherein every man may
behold their intolerable saucines and presumption in setting the holy
Apostle to school, in controling his speech, in corrupting his meaning. For if
the case had stood so clearlie and roundly as these men teach, that even as
condemnation is the stipend of finne, so is eternal life the stipend of
justice, it had been as casie for the Apostle to have so written, as to alter
his words, and having said that death is the wages of sin, to affirm after
an other manner of speech that life everlasting is, not the wages of justice,
but the gift, and free gift of God. And doutles according to the doctrine of S.
Paul, and the holy ghost, it is no other, but proud blaspemie to say, as the
Rhemists say, that as death is the stipend of sin, so life everlasting is
the stipend of justice: seeing the one stipend is of mere due, and desert, the
other only of grace and mercy: so that if God would enter into judgment
with us according to the rigor of his justice, we could not challenge
everlasting life for any justice that we had wrought, as all the scriptures do
most abundantly and plainly teach. Their only excuse hangs upon Saint
Augustine who in a certain epistle writes, Epist. 105. (...) Sixtura.
that everlasting life is repayed to our merits going before, and yet may it
well be called grace, because our merits are wrought in us by grace, not
gotten by our own ability: to like effect he writes in diverse other
places of his works and treatises, as every one knows that has been
conversant in reading his books. What then? shall we grant Saint Augustine to
be an author of this Popish and Sorbonicall doctrine of justification by merit
of works? Nothing less. The answer is easy, and no more easy then true,
that by merits Saint Augustine understands good works after the manner of
speech in latin, and by stipend or reward he means that benefit or gift
which God repaieth to good works, and to the workers of justice. What
difference then is there between our Sorbonists, and Saint Augustine, with
whom we also consent? In words may seem no difference at all: in substance
and truth of doctrine as great difference, as is between heaven and earth,
life and death, God and man. We know and confess with Saint Augustine
according to the doctrine of holy scripture, that life eternal is a reward of
justice and good works, but not as death is a stipend of sin, according to
the Sorbonists and Rhemists religion. And howsoever Saint Augustine pleases
them in his exposition of this place, the which notwithstanding being rightly
understood makes nothing for them, yet other fathers have observed of the
Apostles words set down in this manner, that eternal life is only a gift,
not deserved, but freely bestowed, and that this was the cause why the
Apostle applied not the name of stipend to life everlasting, as he had done
before to death. Look upon Origin in his commentaries upon the fourth of the
Romans, and the latter end of the sixth. And this as it is sound and sincere
doctrine, so must it also of all Christians necessarily be confessed. For he
that sins, has deserved death worthily, in respect of the sin committed,
which is a transgression of Gods will and commandment: and for which without
remission there is no hope to escape eternal condemnation. But can he that
works well, for one, or two, or more good works, claim unto himself as a due
debt, the kingdom of heaven for the same? For what if the Lord will examine
our works straightly according to his law in every circumstance, our inward
zeal, love, intention, desire of Gods glory, continuance and perseverance in
well doing, conformity of our will with the rule of Gods word, and shall find
in the work and in the worker great infirmity, many wants, much
imperfection, manifold sins in the mean time, both in thought, in word, and
deed, shall the good works notwithstanding being thus tried and found in
themselves insufficient and unanswerable to gods justice, and also having
many sins inherent together with them in the same person, stand up before
the Lord, and challenge of right the reward of life everlasting in his
kingdom? Never durst yet any child of God upon trust and confidence of his
own justice, challenge such debt at the hands of God, or yet appear at all in
his presence.

The Prophet David although he were a holy man, and had not only repented
hartelie for his wicked deeds, but also brought forth manifold fruits of
repentance and regeneration, yet desires most humbly of the Lord that he
would not enter into judgment with him, psalm. 143.2.
for so much as if he would so do, neither he nor any man living could
escape condemnation. And again: If thou (says he) wilt mark our iniquities,
O Lord who can stand before thee? psalm. 130.^.
Wherein he plainly teaches, that for a man to trust in his works, how good
or glorious soever they are or seem to be, and upon this confidence of his
merits to look for heaven as a due reward at gods hands, is not only to
deceive himself, but to incur that judgment and condemnation, which the
Lord for his sins, and unworthiness, that by examination he finds in him,
might justly cast upon him. Therefore he says in another Psalm that they are
happy, not which have good works wherein to trust, psalm. 32.^.
but whose sins are forgiven, and whose iniquities are covered. And this have
also all the godly fathers of Christ's Church evermore confessed, that their
works of due and debt deserved nothing of the Lord but punishment, and
therefore disclaiming all their merits, and acknowledging their own manifold
transgressions and imperfections they fly to the Lords mercy only, and
trust to be saved by grace and remission of their sins, not by desert or merit
of their righteousness that they have wrought.

Yea the Roman Church it self which most of all magnifieth the merits of
works, yet being secretly, and as it were unwittingly carried away with sway
of this truth, has sometimes made open confession thereof, and taught all her
children to sing an other song, then that which now so commonly is heard
amongst them of justification and salvation through merit of their works. For
in the service that is prescribed for the dead this prayer is set forth to be
used of all, and is oftentimes repeated, Domine quando veneris iudicare terram,
vbi me abscondam a vultu irae tuae? Quia peccaui nimis in vita mea. In officis
defunctoruns
Commissa mea pauesco, and ante te erubesco: dum veneris iudicare, noli me
condemnare. Quia peccaui nimis in vitamea. that is, O Lord when thou shall come
to judge the earth, where shall I hide my self from the presence of thy wrath?
Because I have si^ned exceading lie in my life. My misdedes I am afraid of, and
I blush before thee: when thou shall come to judge, condemn me not. For I have
sinned exceadingly in my life. Thus is every one taught to pray, and this you
confess to be a good prayer, and necessary for all to use, as at other times,
so especially when death approaches. And verelie howsoever it is now for a
fashion with great countenance, and vehement disputation avouched by some,
that we merit heaven by our good works, yet I am persuaded that no adversary
of conscience can otherwise think, or dare in peril of death otherwise say,
but that he has deserved for his sins punishment and death everlasting, and
cannot avoid the same, if God will render to his works the reward that of due
belongs unto them: and therefore casting away all trust in his works, will
ask pardon and mercy, not claim any debt or due reward of the Lord. So though
in their life time many of them be obstinatlie bent, and have in their mouth
nothing so much, as good works, merit, reward, due, debt, recompense for
their well doing, yet the time drawing near, when they must hold up their
hands at the bar^e of the Lords judgment seat, and there must make answer
for themselves, and their works must be tried by the law of God, they give
over their former confidence, they have no joy in themselves, yea they
distrust their own works, they tremble and quake inwardly, they are in
fearful heaviness and perplexity of mind, they know not whither to turn
themselves, and if God give such grace unto them, then they see and forsake
their error of deserving heaven, then they confess they are sinners, and
therefore guilty of death, and then learn that lesson in their end, which
before in their life time they would not understand.

Yet does every faithful Christian, keeping as much as in him lies the
commandments of God, hope for the kingdom of heaven, ask eternal life, yea
and also in some sort promise to his works the crown of glory, not for
merit and worthiness of his works, but in respect of Gods mere mercy, who
has promised to bestow upon us and our works greater reward, then we can
possibly deserve. This is the difference between the doctrine of Christ, of
the Prophets, of the Apostles, and of the fathers, which we follow, and the
doctrine of the Sorbonistes, and Rhemists, and all Papists, which who so
holds shall be sure never to be saved. Thus appears how vain and childish
it is, that you entitle your school of Sorbone with the names of Solomon,
David, Esaie, Jeremy, Peter, Paul, Augustine, as though they had ever been
entered into that College, and taken degree in your school: whereas whosoever
marketh the point of difference between their doctrine and that of Sorbone,
shall plainly perceive they were no Sorbonists, nor ever allowed the
Sorbonicall and pharisaicall justice of merits. How ignorantly you object
shameful ignorance to me, may appear by that which now and before has been
answered, it being indeed manifest that your self either know not the true
state of the controversy, or else have replied never a word aptly to purpose.

Soli Deo sit gloria.

ERRATA.
Pa 37. lin 17. strange. p. 86 15 there p. 143.1. meaning. p. 144.17.
renegates. P 294 21 as well p 334.5. is as corrupt page 351, 20. (...) and in
certain copies p. 159. the last line, and page 160. the first line read it
thus; before Valentinian to have a Council: that a Council by the Emperor.
etc. Other errors perhaps have escaped: but the reader (I trust) will easily
epsy, correct, and pardon them.

Imprinted by THOMAS THOMAS Printer to the University of Cambridge. 1585.


