The Rock of Regard, divided into four parts.

The first, the Castle of delight: Wherein is reported, the wretched end of
wanton and dissolute living.

The second, the Garden of Unthriftiness: Wherein are many sweet flowers, (or
rather fancies) of honest love.

The third, the Arbor of Virtue: Wherein slander is highly punished, and
virtuous Ladies and Gentlewomen, worthily commended.

The fourth, the Ortchard of Repentance: Wherein are discoursed, the miseries
that follow dicing, the mischiefs of quareling, the fall of prodigality: and
the souden overthrow of four notable cousners, with diverse other moral,
natural, and tragical discourses: documents and admonitions: being all the
invention, collection and translation of George Whet^tons Gent.

Formae nulla fides.

To all the young Gentlemen of England, to whose perusing this Book shall
happen: George Whetstons wishes both health and good hap.
WOrthy Gentlemen, I have presented unto your friendly acceptaunce, a work so
worthless, (in respect of the homely handling thereof) as will (I fear)
neither content you in reading, nor any ways commend my pains in writing: and
yet I am right well assured (curious contentment set apart) it imports
necessary matter of direction, for unstayed youth, who having the raines at
liberty, are so hot ^n expense, as that they be many times surfited with
incumberances, yea, tired out right with prodigality, before they be brought
into any perfect order of spending. For whose behalf and forewarning, I have
collected together a number of my unlearned devises (invented for the most, of
experience) and more boldly, then well advised, have guarded them, with the
title of the Rock of regard: not for that it contains only needful
matter, but for that you, having noted the discommodities of the unnecessary,
might read the necessary considerations with more regard. And for that it
behooves the master of every feast, to provide diverse dishes, to please the
diverse appetites of his diverse guestes: the like consideration now moves me,
who having invited a number to peruse my unpolished labors, as near as I can
to use such Decorum in my doings, as every desire may be satisfied. And sure I
hold it necessary, that matters of advise (to work attentio^) be sometimes
mingled with delight: and further, for that I know the most part of youth (to
whom I chiefly dedicate the fruit of my travel) are so careless of their
commodity, as they set light of sound advise, unless such persuasions be
sauced (in some respect) with their own desires, so that to win them to the
reading of that which is profitable, I have likewise presented them with matter
of honest pleasure. And yet, least they lighting on some discourse of worth,
should by and by be led away, with the sight of some wanton devise, I have
published my travel, under these four following titles.

The first is, the Castle of delight. Wherein (to join commodity, with the
readers pleasure) are many moral and needful considerations. For who so
notes there, the issue of the Countess of Zelants hate, may happily fear to
execute a strumpets bloody revenge. In Cressids complaint, the subtilties of a
Courtisan discovered, may forwarne youth from the c^^panie of enticing dames.
The adventures of Rinaldo (which may very well be termed a Laberynth of love)
discourses the inconueniencies of jealousy: and by the overthrow of
Frizaldo, is shown the reward of lawless lust and treachery.

Some there be, that having eyed my former unthriftiness, do gape (percase)
to view in this book, a number of vain, wanton, and worthless Sonets, in
some respects I have satisfied their expectation, moved to suffer the
imprinting of them, not of vain glory, but of two good considerations: the
one to make the rest of the book more profitable, and (perhaps) less
regarded, the better saileable. The other and chiefest, in plucking off the
visard of self conceit, under which I sometimes proudly masked with vain
desires. Other young gentlemen may reform their wanton lives, in seeing the fond
and fruitles success of my fantastical i^maginations, which be no other then
Poems of honest love: and yet for that the exercise we use in reading loving
discourses, sildome (in my conceit) acquiteth our pains, with any thing
beneficial unto the common weal, or very profitable to our selves, I thought
the Garden of Unthriftiness, the meetest title I could give them.

The third is, the Arbor of Virtue, the which I chiefly published, for the
delight of virtuous Ladies and Gentlewomen: and yet (my lusty Gent.) it
contains matter very needful for you to note: As in making choice of a wife,
rather in owed with virtue, then money, as Sir Vlrico did. And in reading the
complaint of Alberto and Vdislao, you may see how foul a fault it is, rashly
to judge ill of women's behauiours.

The fourth is, the Ortchard of Repentance, the which for the most part, I
planted with experience: the fruits therein growing (think I) be hoalsome,
although to curious appetites, not greatly toothsome. But what for that? the
smarting wound is cured with fretting plasters. Even so, abuse is to be
reformed with sharp reprehension, then sure it were not Decorum, in inueying
against a Cousener, Cheter, Dicer, Quareler. etc. (who for the most part) live
without good order, to use any mild and plausible kind of writing. The
inconveniences that rise of these professions, are the fruits of forewar^i^g,
that my Orchard (gallant Gentlemen) affords: and yet to afforde you a good
peniwoorth, it marreth the markets of a great many. The Cousner will chafe to
see his practices published: the Cheter will f^me* to see his crosbiting and
cunning shifts decyphered: the Dicer will swear to hear his cogging and
foysting aduauntages discovered: the Quareler will stamp to hear his braules
and brables bayted at: the Merchaunt will storm to see his new kind of
Vsuries revealed: the Lawyer will be in a wonderful heat, to hear his double
dealings, his dilatorie delays, and unconscionable aduauntages disclosed: al
these men's displeasures have I hazarded, in opening (for your behoues) their
mischiefous subtilties: and trust me, not one of these sorts of men, but his
teeth waters with the desire of your lyuinges, yea he daily studieth to
bring you in lash: so that it behooves you to look warily into your estates,
else you shall light into the snarts, of some of their dangers.

Now, worthy Gentlemen, have you heard my honest intent as touching the
imprinting of this my book, mine was the pain in framing the plots, wherein
these fruits and flowers grow, yours is the pleasure and profit of both, marr^
if you m^suse my welmeaning so far, that you (where ^ea room serves you to
avoid the sands of wanton love) will wilfully run upon the rocks of unlawful
lust, the folly is yours, and no fault in me^or if you (where you may gather
friendly friuts of admonition, that will cure your wounds of prodigality, and
preserve you from the infection of cousening cutthrots) will continually be
smelling unto unthrifty flowers, you not only vamly spend your time, but
work a discredit unto my painful labors. Wherefore I earnestly require you,
that you use the first increase of my baren brain so rightly, as I may be
encouraged hereafter to bente my head about some matter of more worth, rather
then by the misuse of them, to be discouraged, from attempting any honest
labor. And thus wishing good success in your virtuous enterprises, I commit
you to the pleasure of the highest. From my lodging in Ho^^orne the 15. of
October 1576.

(...) That this is such good Reader see and say,
Be judge thy self, I cannot tell thee all,
To speak to short, defame the same I may,
And better rest, then rise to catch a fall,
Yet this I say, who so most faults shall find,
In trying like will come an ace behind.
R.C. in praise of Whetstons and his Rock of Regard.
REader reward, this gallant gift with thanks,
Whose worth is much, although the price be small,
Biancaes life, and Cressids subtle prankes,
Of wantons shows, the fortune and the fall,
Frizaldoes foil, at point of all his hap,
Of lawless lust, foretells the after clap.
What are the joys, and lovers daily wrongs,
Their sweet, their sour, Rinaldo here does show,
The moral heed, in all these thriftlesse songs,
Does prove him blessed, that least of love does know,
But that that bears the pearl of praise away,
This Poet does, the fall of vice bewray,
Bare fast he setts, the maskes of peevish pride,
He finds their faults, that fostereth fraud with pence,
His searching Uerse, the couseners traynes has spide,
Which hyde their craft, with cloak of plain pretense,
The end of bralles, the beggary following dice,
For^warneth youth, from haunting either vice.
The virtuous praisde, the vicious here are blamde,
Here lives their fame, that Uertues soldiers ware,
For your behoof this worthy work was framde,
Of more empress, then gold or jewels far,
Lo thus from toys, has Whetston weand his Muse,
In thundering Uerse to threaten foul abuse.
Humfrey Turner in commendation of Whetston and his book.
REader for this his gift, with thanks good Whetston pay,
The worth runs far, beyond the price, as seeing thou will say.
The matter in which wooorke at large here to report,
(Unable man) though feign I would, my skill a mile comes short.
Where he the substance shows, I should a shadow make,
In praise of him, yet needs my Muse, some pains will undertake.
And first I know of zeal, for yonkers heed he made,
This gallant book, which setts to sale, the craft in every trade.
With moral meaninges saust, delight it yeldeth store,
The virtuous praisde, the vicious checked, here is: and would you more?
If this may not suffice, your selves peruse the book,
And you shall find to please your mind (percase) more then you look.
Abraham Fleming upon G. Whetstons work.
Who wishes with pleasure refreshed to be,
A Castle of comfort and passing delight,
Erected of purpose, (lo) here he may see,
And painted with colors of pure black and white,
No bulworcke, no fortress more strongly prepared,
And therefore well named the Rock of Regard.
Who wishes for vauntage, to vewe and behold,
Unthriftines Garden where weeds do abound,
He has leave to enter, and is not controld,
(...) (...) when she perceived his mistrust, she left him and fled to Pauy,
where she interteined Ardisino Valperga, Earl of Masino as her minion: but
weary of his custom, she chose Roberto Sanceuerino, Earl of Giazzo for her
lover. Valperga thus scorned, railed at her inconsta^cie, Bianca Maria, by
Valperga thus openly defamed, practices with Gazzo to murder Valperga, which
when Giazzo neglects, with very hate she leaves Giazzo, and falls in love
again with Valperga, with whom she practices to murder Giazzo, which
Valperga discovered to Giazzo, and they both in such sort painted out her
lewdness, as for very shame she left Pauy, and fled to Mantua, where she
interteined one Dom Pietro, a lusty young captain, to whom she bewrayed the
injuries of Valperga and Giazzo. Dom Pietro by and by promised, in penance of
their shameless reports, to dispatch their lives, which in part he wilfully
performed. For one day, taking Valperga at advantage, he soudenly slew him,
the murder and the murderer discovered, Dom Pietro was taken, and confessed
the whole matter, he in hope of ame^dment was pardoned, and Bianca Maria
Countess of Celant, was condemned to be beheaded, whom you may suppose upon
the scaffold, ready to be executed, to complain as follows.

THE DISORDERED life, of Bianca Maria, countess of Celaunt, in form of her
complainte, supposed at the hour of her beheading, for procuring the murder of
Ardissino Valperga Earl of Massino.
AMong their falls, by wanton fate untwist,
Let my lewd hap, remembered be I pray,
To salve whose harm to late coms had I wist,
Blood cries for blood, he craves none other pay:
For conscience sake, behold then now I wray,
With trickling tears, my deadly cheakes that warm,
The true report both of my hap and harm.
Good Ladies first, to you this tale I tell,
To you as chief this drirye plaint I preach,
Your hie estate, your vices cannot quell:
But as you live your fame or shame does streach,
With vauntage sure (such notes does honor reach)
Your praise is raisde, as far is blasd your blame:
Thus are your lives, y payst with parcial fame.
Let me be proof, and warning for you both,
Whose filthy life, so foul report has spread,
That lo (constrainde) I show the shame, I loath,
My wanton toys, in thousand books are read,
My birth, my blame, how lewd a life I lead,
My passing love, my peevish hate withal,
My murderous mind: in fine my filthy fall.
First for my birth, I must confess, was base,
But bags I had, this baseness to supply,
The Vicount Hermes her first husband kept her short
My form was fine, I had a gallant face,
A sugared tongue, a passing pleasant eye,
Good gifts besides, to hoyse my hap on hie:
These lures in love, the Uicount Hermes brought,
Who kept me short to tame my wanton thought.
But (ah) to soon my Lord to heaven did wend,
Bianca Maria was her name
Who maugre will, Bianca kept in fame,
The coupe thus broke, wherein I long was pend,
Go^sago a lord about Mantua, an earnest suter.
I set my self, to sail with open shame,
Gonsago yet, did like me with my blame,
But lo I stoopte, unto the Celant Count,
He loud me well, I likt a loft to mount.
She married, the Count of Celant, a lord of Sauoy.
Consent of friends, accorded with our wills,
And we forsooth in haste must married be,
But raisde a loft, I quight forgot what quills.
What feathers first, to honor made me flee?
As priests forget, the silly clearkes degree,
So I from cart, a Countess framde by fate,
Through scorn abusde, my honor and estate.

The kest rill kyte, to cause the heron to quake,
Kitt will to kind.
The ravening wolf of lambs to stand in awe,
The myllers mare, a manage good to make,
Or apes to dance, while mules lie at the stake,
A botelesse toil, in fine you sure shall find:
For counterfettes will still return to kind.
And think you those, that wear dame Fortunes crown,
Whose homely friends, did hold the ploughe of late,

No, honor stoupes to nature, not to fate:
Yet Fortune heaues, a thousand to estate.
As in good mood, she did of late by me,
Who never knew, the use of dignity.
As by abuse, Pride.
one proof shall well appear,
First for my pride, my betters did me scorn,
The poor did fawn, godwot, for very fear,
My luring life, did move my lord to mourn,
Whose ielous sighs, foreshewed he feared the horn:
Yet wisely he, his shrewde mistrust to show,
Usde secret nippes, my faults to make me know.
I saw, and smilde, to see his true mistrust,
And yet in show, I sight throw sollen will,
As who should say, to think thy spouse unjust,
Thou do her wrong, she never meant no ill,
She has been true, and so she will be still,
For all his wit, thus found I out a wile,
To quench suspect, forsooth a little while.
But ravening currs, their chaps can hardly hold,
When carren lies, before their hungry jaws,
The straggling kite, with chickes will sure be bold.
If once a wynge, she spies a flight of dawes.
So ramping girls, regard no modest laws,
As proof appears, by this my filthy flight,
I left my Lord, and stoale away by night.
Who hearing once, of this my gadding mood,
My vital thread, vntwiste good care (quoth he)
In fine her hate will sure suck out my blood,
She loves me not, there is no third degree,
Thus led with fear, at large he let me flee,
I pinchte with need, to praying forthwith fell,
And for my self, I shifted pretty well.
To plant my wares, Pauie a town under the government of the Duke of Mantua.
in place of brauest vewe,
In Pauie town, a stately house I took,
I deckte my self, with weeds of lightest hew,
To lure guestes, I sparde no wanton look,
Valperga first, Ardissino Valperga
was choakt, with Cupids hook:
Count of Massino, her first mynion at Pauie.
He sight, he sobd, he cursed his sorry chance,
He surde, he searud, he did attendaunce dance.
But squemish then Bianca Maria was,
His secret sighs with scorn she quited still.
Note.
A parle yet, at length, was brought to pas,
Where safely he, might show his hidden will,
With sugared words, he wraid his suites at fill,
His life, his death, all in my power lay,
I was so kind to loath this Lords decay.

Whose foul offense, with countenance is held,
So wantons forced, with their agreeing will,
When lust assaults, will after learn to yeald,
Note.
No fame nor shame, can make them keep the field,
To true a proof, appears by mine end:
Then sin not, dames, in hope for to amend.
I show not this, to shape mine own excuse,
My life I loathe, to salve my foul amiss:
But for your heed, I blase this vile abuse,
Beware, beware, of Venus beastly bliss,
It feeds the flesh, and sterues the soul I wisse,
It honor stains, it is a shrine of shame,
A bitter sweet that breadeth naught but blame.
In me too late, these faults I did forsee,
Valperga so, my wanton humor fed,
My fare was fine, I lackt no goulden glee,
The art of Love, for exercise I read,
And thus my life, in Venus court I led:
With wealth at will, I could but wish and have,
The toy I lackt, I need not twice to crave.
And think you dames these visards yield such sights,
As wanton girls may sighe to see their shame,
No: meekenes marres the maskes of fond delights,
And fasting must, their frolic bodies ^ame,
To Scriptures read, they must their leisure frame,
Then loath they will, both lust and wanton love,
Be sure else, such ryggs my case shall prove.
But at my call, why did Valperga stoop?
Why did not he, foresee the fruits of lust?
Why did he come, at every wanton whoope?
Why, why did he, Bianca Maria trust?
Which to her Lord, had shown her self unjust,
A man he was, whom weakness cannot scuse,
How could he then, let love him so abuse.
How could he (ah:) Perforce I show my shame,
As one whose tongue, a truth, will neatly tell,
I reaft his life, why slay I then his fame?
No reason why, save I can nothing well,
For through my lure he (won,) to folly fell,
If not so witcht, who list like case to prove,
Shall find, fine heads, are fraughted first with love.
Then since his joy, all in Bianca lay,
What scuse has she, with hate to pay his love?
Be not abasht, the truth in words to wray,
Which thou in act, untimely late did prove:
What sullen mood, this peevish scorn did move?
And am I forced, to show the fault I shame?
Since needs I must, Good Ladies, note the same.
They say, who so with dropsy is aprayde,
The more he drinckes, the more he does desire,
The greedy churl, is never well appayde,
Although he reap the gain he does require,
So lust in rampes, is such a raging fire,
That most it heates, when most the same is drencht,
A hellish flame that never can be quenched.
Idleness and pride, the cause of wanton love.
This fire in me, was kindled first with pride,
But raysde to flame, with ease and wanton thought,
It raged so, no reason could me guide,
My husbands sport, so small allayaunce wrought,

Valperga then, a while suppressed this fire,
But he decade, oor change I did desire.
Roberto Sanseuerino Earl of Giazzo, Valpergas great friend, was her second
lover. The traynes that entice to love.
Giazzo next, was fauord in my sight,
Who forced me not, his friend he loved so,
He knew I was Valpergas sole delight.
He scornde my winckes, my wanton love in show,
My privy sighs, my wily signs of woe,
But Spaniel like, by stripes to kindness moude,
The more he scornd, the more this lord I loud.
And when I saw he shunde inticeing baits,
Immodest rigg, I Ouids counsel used,
Where cleanly, I did color shame with sleightes,

My pen did paint, what bashful tongue refusde,
Which few suffisde, he knew love kept no law,
He was my joy, of him I stood in awe.
This proferd grace, did stowpe Giazzo straight,
He loud his friend, but more his own delight,

No marvel why: Biancaes beauty bright,
Her brave arraye, and she a Countess hight,
Would force a man, himself and all forgo,
And could he choose, when love was offered so?
No: need to run the creeple sure will teach,

As foxes hate the grapes, they cannot reach,
Note.
And wily saints, with shows are seldom won,
When as assuerde, their squemishnes is done.
Even such a saint, Giazzo proved in fine,
He loud no grapes, before he reached the vine.
Well, thus at length, I w^n my wished joy,
He came, in whom, my heart did wholly dwell,
To make him sport, Bianca was not coy,
She knew her game, and straight to daliaunce fell,
Where as this Lord behaude himself so well,
That lo I loath Valpergas drowsy sport,
And so with scorn I stayde his often resort.
Thus reft (good soul) of her he heald so dear,
His woonted suits, a fresh he put in ure,
He sight, he served, he looked with sorry cheer,
But when no suit, nor service could procure,
My straggling love, to stoop unto his lure,
By need inforst, his dotage then he reft,
And so with loss, my wanton pleasures left,
When mystes of lu^^e, were cleared from his eyes,
Disdain forthwith, transformd his love to hate, Peevish hate insueth passing
love.

Fie on my life, and lewdnes, loud he cries,
He heaues me up to filthy Faustines state,
A Layis bird, for Masseline a mate,
A filth, a flurt, a bitch of Megraes kind,
A rigg, a rampe, and all that came to mind,
But when I heard, my blame, he blased thus,
Impatient I, began to stamp and stare,
To wail, A woman's deadly hate.
to weep, to wring my hands I wo^s,
To freate, to fume, to tear my golden hear,
In fine, as madd as ever was March hare,
I vowde to reaue Valperga of his life,
Which I performde (aye) me through peevish strife.
While sport was quick, I did Giazzo move,
To slay this Lord, in grace which whilome stood,
But disposest, to win his own sweet love,
Unciuil wretch, accoyde through sullen mood,
He blasde me forth, as bird of Layis brood,
Leave off (quoth he) I loath thy heavy cheer,
Valpergas tongue, shall buy this babble dear.
With which suffisde, I fell to kisses straight,
And shewde my self, more gamesome then of yore,
Giazzos friendship toward Valperga.
To tyce him on, I laid this wanton bait,
But he which long, Valperga held in store,
Within his heart, my hatred did abhore:
Yet nay the less, my love he so did like.
As still he said, he stayde for time to strike.
But when I found, what fine delays he used,
All sweld, with wrath (quoth I) the proverb says:
Proferde service, is ever more refusde,
And offerde love, is quited syld with faith,
Without the hook, the bait no poison has,
Note.
Yet happily he, for all his wiles may prove,
My peevish hate, oore ways my passing love.

An honest color to dissemble a lewd revenge
Where in and out, Giazzo erst did go,
I told him plain, his market clean was mard,
I meant my faults, unto my lord to show,
If which suffisde, I would no more do so,
To feign with change, I did Giazzo pray,
With kindness shown, contented for to stay.
Nigh tired he, my greedy lust to glut,
Full well appayde, for truth my fay^ings took,
He took no heed, how oftentimes is shut
In sugared bait, a foul and filthy hook,
How hate is hid full often, with friendly look,
Ne how the lewd, when grace is not their stay,
Note.
Refuse no mean, to work their foes decay.
Even such a filth I (forced) confess I was,
I used this show, to chase my foes mistrust,
Thereby to work his fatal end (alas)
When least he thought, I would have been unjust,
Such cankered hate, my murdrous heart did rust,
Unto which end, She practiced with Valperga whom late she scorned, to slay
G^azzo, who should have slain him.
I for Valperga send,
With ill, for good, to quite his faithful friend.
I knew the force, of new revived love,
How peevish hate, more perfect made the same,
I likewise knew, new friendship how to move,
With pleasant looks, y mixed with pretty blame,
I checked him first, for foyling of my fame,
Perdona moy, ore shows again with view,
Dear dame (quoth he) I yield, your tale is true.
Even so (quoth I) and smiling used these words,
Confessed crimes, does open penance choose,
What plague you please (quoth he) your thrall accordes,
That he or you, shall execution use,
Such power (quoth I) I mean not to refuse,
Yet hoping that, those faults you will amend,
I pardon all, and take you for my friend.
And when I saw him eager of delight,
A sighe I fetched, and did Giazzo name,
Valperga said, A policy.
Giazzo to his might,
UUas sure his friend (quoth I) I think in name,
But (ah) his deeds, will never prove the same,
And though I, loath, to sow seditious strife,
Yet needs I must, for safeguard of thy life.
In sooth (sweet friend) thy dangerous state I rue,
This traiterous mate, to move thine overthrow,
By guile God wot, with me in friendship grew,
Betwixt us friends, he first did hatred sow,
He forged faults, to keep me still thy foe,
And yet my heart, for all that he could say,
Did love thee well, although my tongue said nay.
Which when he smeld puffed up with fury straight,
He vowde thy death, for robbing of his joy,
Which bloody words, did force me to vnfraight,
This bitter speech: Auawnt thou peevish boy,
Thy filthy sight, Bianca does annoy.
Believe me, Lord, this tale is very true,
Begin with him, before he do with you.
These forced words, did raise a soar mistrust,
Or happily else Giazzo might a smoakte,
But yet he vowde, to feed my filthy lust,
With bloody blade, his traiterous breath to choke,
And leave he took, he said to strike this stroke,
Note.
But lo he went forthwith to Mantua,
Unto his friend, these secrets to bewray,
Which treason when Giazzo understood,
Who can avoid (quoth he) a strompets hate?
And thundering out, the storms of furious mood,
UUith terms of scorn, he did Bianca rate,
Out filth (quoth he) twixt friends which sowes debate,
And in despite, a libel he inuents,
UUhich (Lords) to you, Bianca here presents.
An Inuectiue written by Roberto Sanseuerino, Earl of Giazzo, against Bianca
Maria, Countess of Celant.

Or sower slowes, upon a vine to grow?
UUho ever heard, and coward first in feeld?
The foreward wight, soonste feared with sight of foe?
UUho ever knew, in time of any mind?
Good fall to bad, or kitt to flee from kind?
If proof ne pears, who may Bianca blame?
UUhose father rose, to wealth by filthy fraud,
Her mothers life, y shrinde with endless shame,
Whose grandam was, in drowping days a bawd:
She only left, of all this beastly store,
Must needs be worse, then parents were before.
What marvel then, if she did flee by night,
And sent a horn, unto her Lord and fere,
To blow the death, of all his brave delight,
That gadding mood, she learned of sa mere,
UUho lightly vailde, at ery wanton whoope,
How could she then, but to Valperga stoop?
Ne can she choose, but prove the Proverb true,
(UUon with a word, and lost with one ill look)
Giazzo knows, Bianca seeks for new,
He whilome was, a vowell in her book,
Giazzo wrought, Valperga out of grace,
Giazzo scornd, Valperga has his place.
Yet both in lashe, at length this cressed leaves,
And Megra like, pursues their love with hate,
Such is the fruit, of ruffians, roages, and thieves,
UUhich framde her heart, Giachemo Scapar^one her fa^^er a great Vserer.
when she was formde by fate,
Her fathers live ( Scappardone being dead)
And diverse seeds, does diverse natures breed.
(O happy man) Giazzo scorns her love,
( Valperga blessed) that knows her murdrous mind,
UUee have enough, her truth let others prove,
And rest content, with what we left behind,
UUe suckte the sweet, let others drink the draffe,
UUee eat the corn, what skilles, who chewes the chafe.
The Countess of Zeland, continues in her complaint.
NOw gallants judge, if it with honor stands
For any Lord, a Lady thus to rate,
Or blase with scorn, their pleasure at her hands,
If it ne grees, with glory of their state,
Help to excuse Biancas deadly hate,
Who now begins, such bloody news to blase,
As endless shame, her infamy will raise.

For once report, will much enlarge her miss,
In women's moodes, there is no mean they say,
They (scorned) love, so huge their liking is,
Of force as great, their hate must be ywis,
What folly then Giazzos mind did blame,
To think my wrath, would cease through open shame.
How could he wene, my friendship for to force,

Since shame compelles the bad, to fall to worse.
Where discord is, new wrong increases strife.
Revenge is sought, where injuries are rife,
Wast then the way, to reaue my wrangling hate,
Inuectiues vile to set up on my gate.
O, no, God wot, my mighty little heart,
Was well nigh burst, my blame was blased so,
These rymes I soung, with notes of musickes art,
Bianca namde, in every wanton show*
Constraind me wretch, from Pauie for to go,
To Mantua then, I did my journey take,
Where open house, I kept for credits sake.
And placed there according to my will,
With bloody hate my murdrous heart was bent,
Giazzo Lord, Valperga eake to kill,
A thousand feats of murder, I invent:
As many fears my purpose did prevent:
I loath, yet would, and willing, stood in awe,
Such brunts they bide that venture breach of law.
Till vice, virtue has vanquished in the feeld,
Then reason, law, rule, fear, and all adieu,
Their minds, their hearts, to naught but folly yield,
In spoil, they sport, they laugh at mischiefs new:
The proof of which, alas, to late I rewe,
For when my fear, my fury put to flight,
I living did, till I had wrought my spite.
And since this act to do, my mind did mase,
This train I laid, to tyce a trusty friend:
In place of vene I gallants gave the gase,
Their bonets vaild, Bianca straight did bend,
Through friendly show, a bon iour for to send,
To parle often, I did my self apply,
Before I trust, by talk each youth to try.
In making love, they pretty prattle used,
But naught it vaild, to hault before the lame,
For I of yore, with wily words abusde,
As children brent do after dread the flame,
At sugared speech, I made a sporting game,
But ah (ay me) to work mine overthrow,
Untimely came, Dom Pietro a lusty young Captain her lusty lover.
to Mantua dom Pietro.
This captain stout, went flaunting too and fro,
Till lo (ill luck) me wretched, he espyes,
My gallant port, beseemde a countess show,
My beauty then, my brave arraye he eyes,
While blinded love into his fancy flies,
And stryuing (he) does cause his fire increase,
Thus wars he found, when most he hoapte of peace.
Unarmed yet, to match with Cupids force,
With Conges kind, he wrayde his loving mood,
Next sighs he sends, to move me to remorse,
Then paintes his pen, thus strange his fancies stood,
My yea would save, my nay should shead his blood,
Quick aunsweare make, Dom Pietro has decreede,
To live in joy, or else to die with speed.
These lines receiude, I spyed my nouis heat,
Who looked and lackt, the recompense of love,
UUhich scorn in me, did cause him more to sweat,
He sight, I smilde, his joy, my noy, did move,
Which thwarting shows (past hope) inforst him prove
If that his lute soon might (his passions shown)
Could force his sweet, his hard mishap to moan,
But when I saw, his love did still increase,
As he one night, lamenting lays did yell,
My gates were open, in sign and show of peace,
In came this Lord, in mind his grief to tell,
But lo abashte, he first to blushing fell,
In chamber frayes, of both my self the best
This onset gave, to cheer my chosen guest.
Biancas breach, of chaste and modest law,
May seem full strange, to you my loving Lord,
To open my gates, to one I never saw,
UUhen known friends, so falsify their word,
Dread not (quoth he) Dom Pietro does accord:
From sorrows free, yet free Biancas slave,
To like but what, his love, desires to have.
I aunsweard soon, with sugared shows full often,
Such Lords as you, fair Ladies still beguiles,
But suites obtainde, they silly souls are scofte,
Then choice, in change, your love, and faith, exiles,
Not so, in me (quoth he) I want such wiles,
For proof, command, what service pleases you,
The which performde, then think Dom Pietro true.
In hoape (quoth I) your words and deeds are one,
I first will trust, your faith, then after taste,
To quite your love, Bianca is your own,
Dom Pietro straight, did execution haste,
And bashful erst, his best beloude imbraste,
UUith sugared wiles, I so this gallant wrought,
As sure I was, a Goddess in his thought.
Assurde of which, to sauce his sweetest sport,
A sighe I fetched, and squemish faynde to be,
UUoe worth (quoth I) Giazzo lewd report,
Valpergas scorn, two Earls of hie degree,
Their traytrous tongues, so sore have slaundred me,
That death I wish, but destnie will not so,
And they triumph, that wrought my timelesse woe.
Dom Pietro then, did bluster forth this speech,
(Ah) verlets vile, from natures law which swer^e,
Ere long I sure, your traytrous tongues will teach,
To slander her, whom duty wills you serve,
And then he vowde, with speed their flesh to carue:
Soon shall they prove (quoth he) if I do feign,
And you shall see, if deeds and words are twain.
I glad of which, yet sad I seemde in show,
And sighing said, look to your self, my sweet,
Your hurt, my death, in heart I love you so,
UUhich friendly words, his fury more did heat,
Fare well (quoth he) till I have wrought this feate,
This hand and blade, their babbling tongues shall worm:
UUhich words with deeds, he (cruel) did perform.
For lo one night, he did foreshaule their way,
But weaklie armde, Valperga was intrapte,
Giazzo blessed, was absent at this fray,
Oore wayde, with force, Valperga was intrapt,
That (ah) his death, untimely there he rapt,
Who dying cryde, Dom Pietro did the deed,
Straight, hew and cry, to search him out does speed.
He found, forth with, unto the Duke was brought,

The suite of friends, in grace, Dom Pietro wrought,
To salve my miss, repentance came to late:
Good Ladies yet, note well my fall, and fate,
My wealth, my weades, my sweet delights to shoe,
Entice, not warn, without the sauce of woe.
But listen well, unto my filthy fall,
The thought of wonted pleasures increases the mysers pain.
Payse, bliss with bale, sweet life with sower end,
And you shall find, my joy oore wayde with thrall,
Of freedom rest, in prison closely pend,
Distressed, vnhelpt, forsook of kin and friend,
Yea, more then straying, so foul my follies ware,
As gould, ne vayld, to clear my clouds of scare.
Ne could I (wretch) take well in worth my woe,
My former sweet, did so increase my sour,
My homely cheer, my costly cates did show,
My prison vile, of yore, my princely bower,
My laughing friends, by foes that then did lowre,
Controwld and scornde, who thousands did command,
Once crave and have, denyde now each demand.
My loathsome couche, presents to my vewe,
My beds of down: with thought of sweet delights,
Thus day and night, my wilful harm I rewe:
Each thought of grace, my conscience guilt affrights,
Yet (loath to die) against repentance fightes,
Till due desert, by law and Justice lead,
Did dome my miss, with toss of my poor head.
The which in place, I ready am to pay,
Acknowledging, my faults before you all,
God grant my life with such effect you way,
As you may be forewarned by my fall.
Of lawless love, the end is bitter gall:
I now have said, and for their witness cry,
How so I liude, I do repentant dye.
The Argument, for Cressids complaint.
THE inconstancy of Cressid, is so ready in every man's mouth, as it is a
needelesse labor, to blase at full her abuse toward young Troilus, her
frowning on Sir Diomede, her wanton lures and love, nevertheless, her company
scorned, of thousands sometimes sought, her beggerie after bravery, her
loathsome leprosy, after lively beauty, her wretched age, after wanton youth,
and her perpetual infamy, after violent death, are worthy notes (for others
heed) to be remembered. And for as much as Cressids heirs in every corner
live, yea more cunning then Cressid her self, in wanton exercises, toys, and
inticements: to forewarne all men of such filthes, to persuade the infected, to
fall from their follies, and to raise a fear in dames untainted to offend, I
have reported the subtle sleites, the leaud life, and evil fortunes of a
Courtisane, in Cressid: name, whom you may suppose, in tattered weeds, half
hungerstarued, miserably arrayde, with scabs, leprosy, and mayngie, to
complain as follows.

Cressids complaint.
YOu ramping gyrles, which rage with wanton lust,
Behold in me, the bitter bloumes of change.
Forworne with woe, who wallowes in the dust,
And lepre like, is double mayld with maynge,
For my desert, this fortune is not strange,
Disdain my life, but listen to my moan,
Without good heed, the hap may be your own.
Though now I am, anointed with annoy,
My hyde bepatcht, with scabs of sundry hew,
I sometime was, the star of stately Troy,
With beauty blist, my venes as Azures blewe,
No fault in me, but that I was untrue,
In Priams court, who did not Cressid like,
In lue of love, who gave she not the gleake.
Where I was loved, I seemed always strange,

My gadding mind, had such delight in change,
As seldom twice, the best I did embrace,
And once beguild, with beauty of my face,
With ebbes of grief, did fall his floods of joy,
He su'd and served, but Cressid then was coy.
I did entice, king Priams sons to love,
And did repine, the poorest, should go free,
My thralls for grace, a thousand ways did prove,
On whom I smyld, a happy man was he,
The wisest wits, were thus bewitched by me,
But as the hawke, in mewe, at random lives,
Yet diet keeps her gorge, as seldom greues.
So I that liude, with store of food at large,
When hunger pincht, on lusty youths I prayed,
If boystrous lads, my gorge did ouercharge,
For tyring meat, the deintie boys were wayde,
Thus with a mean, my prime of pride was staide,
Then was I fair, my train with oil was strickt
My feathers fresh, were daily prunde and pricked.
No toy, no gaude, ne strange devise I see,
Though not the first, the same I second had,
Glad was the youth, that fastened ought on me,
Of brave array, in change, I still was clad,
My cost to see, the courtly dames were mad,
They did repine, the peers should Cressid love,
When rascals, scarce, to them did liking move.
Such fancies strange, were figurd in my face,
As few there were, The property of a courtesan to maintain one with the
spoil of another.
but my good will did move,
I traind them on, with outward show of grace.
My garter one, another had my glove,
My colors all, did wear in fine of love,
But where in heart, I loved and liked best,
He ever wore the spoil of all the rest.
Sir Diomede got, both brooch, and belt of cost,
The which in right, to Troilus belongs,
An eyesore sure, to him that loved me most,
Who might repine, but not revenge his wrongs,
Least notes of hope, were turned to desperate songs,
The rest did love, as courtiers do in show:
But he good soul, did pine away with woe.
Yet cruel I, did smile to see his smart,
Who sometime warmd, his woes with slender hap,
Which freesd again, with frownings overthwart,
And when with joy, he pratled in my lap,
With peevish speech, I would his pleasures snap,
For wronging whom, the Trojans did me paint,
In heart a fiend, in face and form a Saint.
Then judge you may, my beauty bare great sway,
Which thus inthrawld, by love a Princes son,
My state no less, that durst his suits denay,
A world it was, to hear what praise I won,
A wonder, more, how soon my pride was done,
My form did fade, my beauty proved a blase,
Or as a toy, which forced fools to gase.
Painting common among Courtisans.
Declining yet, I had a present shift,
A painted face, did please a gasinge eye,
But surfled stuff, proved no enduring drift,

With open mouth, the same in court they cry:
Poor Cressid then no sooner came in place,
But forty frumpes, were framed by her face.
Some said that I a passing picture drue,
Some would have drawn, the figure of a sot,
The crabtreeface, would have me mend his hue,
Some in my cheek, did feign to clear a spot,
And all to rub my starche away, godwot,
If messellike, my painting so they pilde,
They smylde and said, my silk no color hilde.
My self did laugh, to see my painting clearde,
The straung defects, that withered age did bring,
A horseface then, a tawnie hyde appearde,
A wrinkled mumpes, a foul misshapen thing,
A sea of hate, where lively love did spring,
Thus beauties beams, to clouds of scorn to change
So soon, me thought was sure a myrrour strange.
How evil the courtesies of a Courtesan is acquitted, if she live to be aged.
Yet so I preast, amid the Courtly crew,
Who once espyde, a fresh the sport begone,
Some said I looked, now of a passing hew,
A scarf some cryde, to keep goodface from sun,
Thus was I scornd, when youthful pride was don,
Some wild me learn, anew my A.B.C.
With backward read, from H. to skip to B.
But as the Hawke to gad, which knows the way,
Will hardly leave, to cheake at carren crows,
If long vnserude, she waits and wants her pray:
Or as the horse, in whom disorder grows,
His iadish tricks, again will hardly loose:
So they in youth, which Venus joys do prove,
In drouping age, Sir Chaucers iestes will love.
My self for proof, when wanton years were worn,
When looks could yeald, no love, but loathsome hate,
When in my face appeard the form of scorn,
When lust for shame, with me might sound debate,
Although I did turn tail to fowls of state,
At vauntage yet, with baser birds I met,
On kytes I prayde, till I could partridge get.
But I so long, on carren crows did pray,
My poisoned blood, in color waxed pale,
In natures aid, mine age had wrought decay:
Now listen rampes, for here begins my tale,
Before my bliss, but now I blase my bale,
For Physickes art, my surffets can not cure
Bound so perforce, the worst I must endure.
In seeking sport, The diseases that follow wanton and disordered living.
my hair did shed in jest,
A sorry joy to ceaselesse sorrow plight,
French feauers now, in me can take no rest,
From bones to flesh, from flesh in open sight,
With grinckcomes grease, behold a monstrous wight,
My lovers old, with (fawth) their brows does bend,
Of Cressids lust, lo here the loathsome end.
Glad is she now a brownebreade crust to gnawe, Beggerie the end of Courtesans.

Who deintie once, on finest cates did frown,

Where half mislikt, were stately beds of down,
By need enforst, she begs on every clown,
On whom but late, the best would gifts bestow,
But squemish then, God dyld ye she said no.
From top of state, to tumble thus to thrall,
Too froward sure, dame Fortune was in this,
But highest trees, in fine have hardest fall,
A merry mean, her parciall hand does miss,
She pines with pain, or bathes her thralles in bliss,
Best therefore then, for to withstand her might,
With sword of fame, in Uertues band to fight.
But (ah) in vain, I frame excuse by fate,
When due desert, does work my overthrow,
Ne was I first by Fortune stauld in state,
My room by birth, did high renoune bestow,
Though wicked life, has wrapped me now in woe,
A warning fair, a myrrour full of moan,
For gadding gyrles, a bone to gnaw upon.
Take heed in time, least Had I wist you rue,
And thus perforce, I hold my tired tongue,
Me thinks I hear, the bell to sound adieu,
My withered corpse, with deadly cold is clung,
A happier turn, if I had dyed young,
My shrouding sheet; then had not been of shame,
Who dying now, does live in filthy fame.
Siu^ bonu^^ sine malum, fama est.
The Argument, for the discourse of Rinaldo and Giletta.
GOod Reader (to continue thy delight) I have made change of thy exercise of
reading bad verse, with the proffer of worsser prose: requesting (as erst I
have) that thou will vouchsafe my well meaning, and mend what thou sindest
amiss. This discourse was first written in Italian by an unknown author, the
argument of whose work insueth. Rinaldo masking with fair Giletta (at her
brothers marriage) was so straungly surprised with the love of her, that
necessity inforst him to discover his sorrows: Giletta sufficiently persuaded
of his constancy (after long suite by Rinaldo made) was in the end contented
to love: After these two (secretly) had thus assured them selves, Rinaldo fell
sick, in whose absence one Seigner Frizaldo* (by her parents consent) was an
earnest suter to Giletta* who (inferring on the familiarity, between Rinaldo
and Giletta) became jealous, to quench whose mistrust, Giletta (for fear of
her friends displeasure) wa^ forced to make a show of good will toward
Frizaldo, whom she loved not, and to hate Rinaldo, whom she liked as her
life. Rinaldo (unacquainted with his maistresse meaning) by the perverse
practices of Frizaldo, was driven into despair, in so much as he leapt into
the river of (...), of purpose to drown himself: But weary of this
enterprise, (laboring for life) he recovered the shore: afterward was known
unto Giletta, and having notice of Frizaldos treachery, he slew him in a
combat, and after, with the consent of her friends, married Giletta.

The story at large.
IN Italy (near to the river of Poo) there dwelled a noble man of great
reputation, called the Lord de Bologna, who (besides his special credit* with
his Prince, his destered company: among the noble men, his uncontrolled sway,
both in court and country: the great possessions, inheritaunces, revenues,
annuities, and other commodities he had, to maintain his honorable calling,
to work his chiefest comfort) had by the Lady Katherine his wife, a toward
young Gentleman, to his son called Petro de Bologna, and also a daughter whose
name was Giletta, at that time unmatched, both for virtue, beauty, and shape.

Petro de Bologna, having ouerrun ninetene or twenty years (still ouerlookt
with the counselling eyes of his natural parents assured friends, and careful
tutors) became not now only desierous of more liberty, but won with the
intising pleasure of the Court, and finding in him self sufficient cause of
desert, he bent him self wholly to profess the exercises of a perfect
courtier, where in in short time, he so greatly profited, as that he was
reputed to be one of the gallantest Gentlemen in all Italy. Petro de Bologna
(attaining this estimation) lived awhile vnwitcht, with the alluring beauties
of brave Ladies, yet on the souden, subjected with the sight of fair Juliet (a
noble man's daughter of the said country) and joining her excellent shape, with
ye report of her matchless virtue, he forthwith transformed his late liking,
unto such faithful love, as secretly he vowed, that neither change nor chance,
should (whiles life lasted) remove his affection, and to make his thraldom
known, by continual service, he craved reward. Maistresse Juliet finding his
words* in works, and perceiving by the often alteration of his color, what
humor most of all fead him (joining the assured knowledge of his loyal love,
with other his deserts) presently in thought she gave consent to love, so that
afterward she used toward Petro de Bologna, what honest courtesy she could.
The news of this love, was so^denly spread throughout ye whole Court, and in
the end it came unto their parents ears, who waying the equality of the
match, gave willingly consent, unto that, these two lovers most desiered. And
to exile all jealous mistrust that lingering might breed, the marriage day was
in great haste appointed.

To honor which, a world of people resorted unto the Lord de Bolognas castle.
For the intertainment of which guestes, there neither wanted costly cheer,
curious shows, or pleasant devises, that either money, friendship, or cunning
might compass. And to be short, diverse Gentlemen that were the bridegromes
companions (the more to honor the marriage) presented him one night with a
mask, so curiously set forth, as it yealded a singular delight, unto all the
beholders. Among the which maskers, there was one Roberto Rinaldo (a Gentleman
of better qualities and shape, then either of birth or living) made choice to
mask maistresse Giletta, the bridegromes sister. But on the souden he was so
surprised, with her passing beauty, as he fared as one, whose senses, had
forgone their dutiful office, he often forgot to use due reuerenc^ unto his
maistresse. Sometimes he masked without measure, and many times when the rest
presented their Ladies with voluntary prattle, he used silence. Thus
continually visited with passionate fits (of the beholders marked, of his
maistresse misliked:) time in the end, forced him and the rest from dancing,
which done, the maskers were invited unto a costly banquet, who (marching with
their Ladies) with manly force encountered with many a monster, whose gross
bodies, were tra^sformed into a sugared substance. The maskers now (on easy
request) did off their visardes, as well to make them selves known unto their
maistresses, to manifest their zeal toward the Lord of the house, the
bridegroom and his fair bride, as to show their desire, to delight the whole
company. Rinaldo (greatly ashamed of his disordered masking) with blushing
cheeks oftentimes, very earnestly beheld fair Giletta, Maistresse* Giletta
seeing him in these passions, and knowing his wonted audacitie, was assured
somewhat was amiss with him, so that to be better acquainted with his
malladie, with a pretty smyle she used these speeches.

Quoth she: Friend Rinaldo, I suppose your visard did you great wrong this
night, for that by your imperfect sight, you mistook your choice, so that
wroth with your fortunes, or angry with poor Giletta, she has noted a number
of souden alterations in you, but if either be the cause, remove your choler,
and comfort your self, that you tempered your tongue so well, as she knows
none of your secrets.

Rinaldo glad of this opportunity, answered: My souereine maistresse, in very
deed, I greatly mistook my chocie: For whereas I had thought and determined,
to have made it so in different, as I might have used my tongue at will and
pleasure, I confess it fell out so vnegal, as I (forced) must yeald unworthy to
be your slave, so that musing on this mistaking, I not only masked mute, but I
forgot to present you with my willing service. Rinaldo being newely entered
into his answer, the Revels broke up, and every man went unto his rest, so
that he was forced to discontinue his suite, and bid his maistresse fare well:
which reverently done, he forthwith went into his chamber, and so to bed, but
his sleep he divided on those, whose heads were free from fancies: For he
(God wot) one while, matching his base estate with her high calling, saw an
impossibility of favor. Anon, joining her courteous disposition with the
force of love, was fed with slender hope Thus hanging between hap and harm,
the more he striued, the more he was measht, in the nextes of restless fancy:
but in the end, resolved to prosecute his suit, he soudenly caused his man to
light a candle, and then to pro^^er his service* to paint his sorrows, and to
use excuse for his late silence, he invented these verses following.

THe pyning wight, presented with relief.
With souden joy, awhile forgoes his sense:
The retchlesse youth, likewise besiegde with grief,
With fear dismayed, forgets to use defense:
Such is the force, of hasty joy or woe,
As for the time, few knows what they do.
And I unawares, with both extremes forgone,
Subject to love, that never felt his force,
One while dismayed, I starude in wretched moan,
And straight through hope, I tasted sweet remorse,
Soust with these storms, when I should move my s^it,
Small wonder though, a while I masked mate.
And yet (God wot) my sighs did plead amain,
They broke the clouds, that cowred all my care,
My ruthful looks, presented still my pain,
As who would say: When will she cl^^re thy scare?
Attending thus, when you should note my case,
The time forewent, ere I could sue for grace.
But now (constraynd) need makes the creeple go,
My festred sore (of force) some cure must seek,
My wounds so bleed, I can not hide my woe,
My hurt is heald, if you my service like,
Let egall love, go bath in wished bliss,
Suffiseth me, my maistresse hand to kiss.
Lo thus, dear dame, you know my case and cure,
It rests in you, my life to save or sp^ll,
If you desire, I should these storms endure,
Command my death, and I will work you^ (...),
If not in time, him for your servant ch^se,
Who living dies, till you his ser^^^ce use.
Roberto Rinaldo

This little leisure, together with the disquietnesse of mind (as appears by
the plainness of this invention) wrought an alteration in Rinaldos muse, yet
for that his devise, somewhat answered his own estate, he was content to
present it to maistresse Giletta, and perseuering in the said purpose, the
next morning he clothed him self in russet satin, guarded with black velvet,
which witnessed he did both hope, and dread: he thus appointed (choosing a
place of most advantage) willingly lost these verses. Giletta by this evening
fare well, looking for such a morning welcome, was the first that found them,
who soudenly withdrewe her self, with earnest desire, effectually to peruse
Rinaldos devise. Which done, one while she scorned his base estate, and
straight she was contented of Rinaldo to be beloved: so that (her mind
distempered with the contrariety of fancies) neither angry nor well pleased,
she wrote this following answer.

Although it pleased you this other night (occasion by me unhappily ministered)
to intertaine time with an ordinary profession of love, yet (master Rinaldo)
you do both me and your self great injury, to continue your needelesse
labor with such importunancie to me. For that you trust to overthrow my
virtues, with the assault of wanton persuasions, your self, for that I am
assured you war in vain, but for that I want wit, to incou^ter you, in words
or writing. I will henceforth likewise want will, to take knowledge of either
your exercises. Thus much (being your first attempt) I thought good to
answer, least you should think with needelesse niceness I acquitted your
courtesies. And for that you know the success of your faultlesse adventures,
I trust to be no more troubled in answering your idle letters.

Giletta de Bologna.


This letter so soon as Giletta had surely sealed, she presented her self in
the great chamber: Rinaldo (delighted in nothing so much, as in the sight of
his maistresse) with the first saluted her. Maistresse Giletta, courteously (as
she did the rest) acquitted him, dissembling as then, her knowledge of his
verses, but notwithstanding this careless show, her mind was combred with a
thousand contrary fancies, one while she mistrusted the invention to be his
own devise, an other while she feared to deliver her answer: now she loved,
straight she scorned, and yet in her greatest disliking, she liked to look on
Rinaldo, and as it is the nature of lovers (subject to a thousand distresses)
to search all means to be assured of their choyces loyalty, so here
maistresse Giletta (newly entered into that profession) by the often beholding
of Rinaldo, and marking the color in his apparel, took occasion under the
color of a pleasant request, to be acquainted (perhaps) with his inward
disposition, in so much, when as other Ladies, charged such as they thought
well of, with service, Quoth she, for that I know (master Rinaldo) you are a
very good Poet, I inioyne you without further study, to show in vearse, to
what end you wear black upon russet: quoth Rinaldo (willing to obey this
iniunction) dear Lady, although my sight in Poetry be but small, yet will I
(to satisfy your request,) supply my inabilitie of skill, with the ability of
good will: and to execute the same, he called for pen, ynke, and paper, in the
presence of a number, writing as follows.

WHen Summers force is past, and Winter sets in foot,
The heart and strength of herbs and trees, is nourisht by the root.
The frostes and froward blasts, does nip the naked spray,
The Summer liuerie of the bows, with cold is worn away,
Yet lives such roots in hope, that Phoebus glimering beams,
Will once dissolve sir Hiems force, his frostes and ysie streams,
And lend relief at length, when he their lack should see.
With coats of leaves to cloth their arms, fit garments for a tree.
Even so both hope and dread, does wage continual fight,
Dear dame, in me, whose Summers joy, you raisde with friendly sight,
But love, unlooked (God wot) to yoke my wanton years,
Straight used his force, and base desert, consumd my joy with fears,
It raised frostes of scorn, my fire to overthrow,
This chaungd the Summer of your sight, to Winter of my woe:
Yet fled my heart to hope, who faintly feeds me,
Your pity passes poor estate, where faithful love you see,
He shows by secret signs, your virtues every one,
And says your beauty breeds no pride, that brueth all my m^ne.
But maugre friendly hope, base hap with me does strive,
Who wears my flesh, with withered fear, how so my heart does thrive
Which is the very cause, why I these colors wear,
The ground of hope, bewrayes my heart, the gards my desperate fear:
But if with grant of grace, my griefs you mean to quite,
Both hope and dread shall soon be chaungd, to colors of delight.
Roberto Rinaldo.

These verses were reasonably liked, both for that they were done of the
souden, and that they somewhat answered the demand, and yet this proffered
love to Giletta, bred no suspicion, for that every one thought, Rinaldo on so
good occasion, could not otherwise choose, but proffer some show of loving
service: After many had thus commended ye readiness of Rinaldos wit, by proof
of this invention, at the length (quoth Giletta half smyling) master Rinaldo,
you have clearkly answered my question, and now knowing your cunning, I may
happily set you a work in matters of more importance. Rinaldo (glad of this
commendation) made answer, her causes could never weary him, for that he had
both left his own, and al other business, of purpose, to do her service. The
music now (a while) commanded them from prattle, and the gallants addressed
the^ selves to dancing, where Rinaldo, to make amends for his other nights
negligence, requested to lead maistresse Giletta the measures. Giletta,
although at the first made the matter coy, yet won by importancie, accepted his
courtesy. Rinaldo somewhat encouraged by hope, bestowed him self to the best
liking he could, and (to report the truth) with the perfection of Art, he made
full satisfaction for his former disorder. The dauncers now wearied with
heat, applied themselves unto more cooler pastimes, and Rinaldo and Giletta
went to take the air at a medowe, where Giletta to bewray her knowledge of his
verses, used these speeches.

In good faith (although against my will) I see it is my fortune to be
acquainted with your secrets, so that before mistrusting, that I am most
assured of, by your passionate verses which (by fortune) I perceive, that the
late mistaking of your love enraged you, yet for that they appertain not unto
me, and that ye shall remove your anger from me (if you will stay my return) I
will fetch them, and make restitution, assuring you, that I neither have, nor
will, reveal the knowledge of them to any alive. To stay her departure quoth
Rinaldo (softly distrayning her hand) since my fortunes were so evil to lose
them, for that seeing an inpossibilitie of hap, I would have concealed my
harm, I am glad my fortune is so good, that they light into her hands, to
whom in right they belong, unto whose power (with vow of continual service)
I subject my life, living, and liberty. Maistresse Giletta raking up her
conceived love, in the ashes of secrecy, thus answered: If I were so simple to
be bewitched with shadows, your intising words, might no doubt work spoil of
mine honor. In the chiefest hope of my well doing, quoth Rinaldo, (disturbing
her tale) you have truly described my present condition: for being reft of
heart the only stay of life, and dying through despair, I am in no better
state then a shadow. Well quoth Giletta, since your wit serves you to flourish
on every word figuratively spoken, I will deliver the rest of my mind in more
plain speeches. First I must confess, my inabilitie, and unworthiness, to
entertain such a servant: then grant your wisdom to be such, that you will
not bestow your able service, but where you see sufficient ability, for your
well deserving zeal to have deserved hyre. Now to your verses I thus much
conceive, that to color that, your own color bewrayes, I mean your love
else where bestowed, for that I (unhappily) ministered some speeches of
mistrust, to dymme mine eyes with a vain flourish, til time fits your better
fortunes, you use this fond profession of love. Thus much I gather both by
your words, and works, and thus much I had thought to have delivered in, in
embassage, unto this teltale paper, (making show of the letter she had written)
but knowing (quoth she) letters to be very blabs, I am glad opportunity so
serves, that I may deliver in words, both what I think of you and your suite,
with this she put up her letter again, I think for that she would not
discomfort Rinaldo with the sharpness thereof, who feign would have fingered
the same, only to have bestowed his skill in answer: but to show his able
force to encounter her in words, in deed quoth he, letters are but to be used
in necessity, and yet where griefs can not otherwise be uttered, necessary
instruments. But I find this benefit in my bondage, yt if I were both bard of
tongue and pen, my flaming sighs, my frosen tears, my wan looks, and withered
flesh, would witness with what devotion I served: which zeal through my
changing color by you noted, I not a little ioyed, and I no less sorrowed,
you would not take notice, to what Saint I used this devotion, when as Rinaldo
calls heaven and earth to witness, that neither beauty, bravery, or any
other inticement joined with the credit, of the greatest Lady in all Italy,
could subject his liberty, til Gilettas virtue, matched with matchless
beauty, reached the pitch that stoupt his mou^ting thoughts, to whom, and for
whom he uses this suite, and suffers these sorrows. Giletta seeing the
continuance of his vehemency, was pretily well persuaded of his loyalty, in
so much as after a number of other proffers and defenses, in hope (quoth she)
of your ready duty, I admit you my servant, with promise to measure your
reward beyond desert. Rinaldo glad of this conquest, after double vow of
faythfulnesse, reverently kissed his maistresse hand, and for that time
committed her, a Dio.

I will now ouerleape, what a number of sour and sweet thoughts fead these
unfeigned lovers, one while they were distempered with dread: anon quieted with
hope: now desierous with secret vow to warrant each other love: straight
hindered by some unfortunate accident, still meashed in the snares of misery,
till time that either (with out condition) might gage the other loyalty,
faith, and constancy, provided this wished opportunity, which was: On a day
ye Lord Sonsago, father to the late rehearsed bride, to perfect the glory of
the said marriage, invited the Lord of Bologna, and his son in law, with
other of their friends, and allies, unto his castle, at which place Rinaldo
with the rest of the ruffling youth, on small warning, and less bidding, as
ordinary visitors of such pastimes, presented them selves. The dinner solemnly
ended, every one was addressed unto ye sport most agreeable to his or their
fancy, some fell to dancing, some to putting of purposes, and such volu^tarie
prattle. But Rinaldo and his Giletta, otherwise affected, then to listen to
those couterfet contentme^ts, (to find opportunity to discourse of more
serious matters) with a chosen company conveyed them selves, unto one end of
the great chamber, where Rinaldo, to pass the time, in reporting the strange
effects of love (playing on a Lute) soung the following invention.

In bondage free I live, yet free am fettered fast,
In pleasure pain, in pain I find a thousand pleasures plaste,
I frye, yet frosen am, I freese amid the fire,
I have my wish, and want my will, yet both as I desire,
I love and live by lokes, and loking works my woe,
Were love no god, this life were strange, but as he is, not so.
For through his awkward fitts, I suck such sweet in sower,
As I a year of dole would bide, to have one lightning hour.
I like no life, but such, as works with his will,
His will my wish, my wish to love betyde good luck or ill,
No choice shall make me change, or fancy new desire,
Although desire first blew the cole, that set my thoughts on fire.
But fire, frostes and all, such calm contents does move,
As forced I grant there is no life, to that is led in love.
Yea base I think his thought, that would not gladly die,
To lead but half, of half an hour, in such delight as I.
Now thou dear dame, that workste, these sweet effects in me,
Uouchsafe my zeal, that only seek, to serve and honor thee.
So shall my thralled breast, for fancies free have scope,
If not, it helps, I have free will, to love, and live in hope.
Roberto Rinaldo.

These Uerses although they were in number few, yet the sweetness of the tune,
together with the rarenes of the invention, running altogether upon
contraries, made them to be singularly well liked, especially of mystresse
Giletta, who could now no longer dissemble her love: In so much as to further
occasion of knowledge, she requested of her servant, to have a coppie of the
said Uerses. Rinaldo of nothing more desirous, then with courtesy and service,
to present his mystresse, having this Sonet already fair written, first
satisfied her request, with the delivery thereof, and next solicited his own
sorrows, with these persuading words.

My good mystresse, I am glad (quoth he) your ear was so ready, to hear my
strange estate discoursed, as that your heart consents (in perusing this
worthless Sonet) to continue in your remembrance my sower passions, never
appeased, though sometimes comforted with the sweet effects of hope. So that
if it please you to note the sequel of my life, you shall easily see ye
subjection of my liberty, which known, I no otherwise conceive of your
courteous disposition, but so often as you read my craving words, seeing them
confirmed in works, so often you will be ready to perfect my unsure hope, with
assured hap: I mean, bestow your love on him, who were it not to do you
service, would through the extremity of love, rather wish to die then live. My
good servant (quoth Giletta) I think your cure stands not upon such
necessity, but reason in time may qualify your raging fire, and wisdom
warm your frosen fears, or at the least wise warn you from such intemperate
affections. O, no (quoth Rinaldo) time has made both extreemes more extreme,
for when as reason would have quenched, my burning love, with the thought of my
vnwoorthines, the remembrance of your worthiness, made my heat more fervent:
when hope would have warmed my frosen doubts with the knowledge of your great
pity and compassion, the consideration of my base desert, straight made my
cold more cruel: So that intertayning time with these thoughts, time has
brought both extremities, now to such a mischief, that necessity (perforce)
commaundes me to seek qualification at your hands, in whose good will, the
termperature consists.

I think (quoth Giletta) my mild disposition, in very deed, makes you a
great deal more desirous, yea your knowledge of my inward lyking by my outward
looks discovered, makes you so earnest a suter: But if I were persuaded your
love to be as great in zeal, as in show, yet for that I know not whether it
tends to honesty or my dishonor, I can hardly aunsweare your suit, if any
way, with the spoil of my good name, you seek to feed some foul affection,
your love I loath, and so you sue in vain. O my sweet mystresse (quoth
Rinaldo) your words at one instant have ioynde two co^traries, in such mortal
fight, as to whom the victory will incline, is as yet doubtful, I mean hope
and despair: for I earnestly beholding your lokes, when as you said, they
shewde you loved, in very deed to my judgment I saw in them the very Image
of love: therewithal (quoth I) to my self: Love cannot hate the welwillers of
love. But as I was continuing this fancy, with the continuance of other your
comfortable speeches, on the soudaine, an If, distrusting my loyalty, clean
altered the case: For trust me (sweet mystresse) my faithful love, unspotted
with villainous desire, when you used those speeches, straight murmured at your
suspicion, yea dread still persuades me, your over often mistrust, will hinder
the acquitall of my deserte, and yet hope destrous of victory, wills me not to
be discomforted thorough your wise misdoubte, least silence in me, should
work in you a greater suspicion: wherefore before God and you, I protest with
my heart, yea if you please, to use the world for after witness, I will swear
unto you all, I never had the thought, that tended unto your dishonor: then
dashe (good Lady) this hard condition of foul desire, from out the other
couenaunts of love, and take my vow of faithfulness, for the warrantyse of my
honest and true intent. Suits must have an end, and sorrows a salve, either by
the benefit of fortune, or violence of death: For I, thorough the extremity
of sorrow, being now brought to the exigent of desperation, am forced to sue
unto you for atonement, presenting unto me in this case, both the image of
good fortune and death: of good fortune if you love, where you are loved: of
death, if you hate where you are honored. Sufficient trial you have had of my
loyalty. Since so (good Lady) say yea, or no: either answer will work
appeasement of my sorrows, the one with death, the other with delighte. Soft
(quoth Giletta) haste makes waste, your Harvest is yet in grass, you may very
well stay for aunsweare. These words with a smyling countenance delivered,
she forced to depart, yet not in such have, but that Rinaldo had leisure
enough to rob her of a kiss, which fed him with such a sweet conceit, as
that he was persuaded, with the assault of importunancie, on ye next adventure
to conquer her straungnes and attain good will, so that to lay his siedge with
the better advantage, to her doubtful words he thus replied.

More haste then need, does turn to waste,
and waste does al things mar,
Your Harvest, is in grass good Sir,
as hasty as you are.
This doubtful jest, among my joys,
my mystresse late did poppe,
But I reply, that backward haste,
can never blast my croppe.
For since (sweet wench) my seed of love,
has taken root in time,
And clear escapt the frostes of scorn,
that pincht it in the prime.
Now that the spring time of your grace,
has raisde it to an ear,
The kindly riping of the same,
in faith I little fear.
For scorched sythes, like Summers sun,
will hasten on this wheat,
And storms of tears, as heavenly dew,
shall nourish with the heat.
The ielous weeds of foul suspect,
which lovers joys does sting,
Shall cropped be, with hook of faith,
that favor freash may spring.
Then banish dread, from thee dear dame,
my speed will work no waste,
Since that the season serves so well,
our Harvest for to haste.
Roberto Rinaldo.

These verses were written in have, and presented in as much haste, such was
Rinaldos hasty desire a fresh to follow his suit: and yet not so hasty, as
of Giletta heartily wished, the heat of eithers love, for eithers sight so
hastily thyrsted. But now to cut off ciccumstances, Rinaldo, upon this new
onset, charged his maistres with such vehement persuasio^s, as her niceness
was of no force to make further defense, in so much, upon a modest occasion,
she yielded to love. This sweet consent by Giletta pronounced, with soudaine
joy so spoiled Rinaldoes senses, as for a time, he fared like one in an
ecstasy. But so soon as this fit was ouerblowne (quoth he.) Rinaldo how
bountifully has Fortune dealt with thee? How blessed is thy estate? can thou
tell? O, noe. Thy joys so hugely flow, as the least of a thousand comforts,
thou can not utter. And could good Giletta so much tender thy distress?
Could she brook Rinaldoes poverty? And could she love the wight unworthy
to be her slave? Her self said, yea: Then (as homage of his saved life) most
worthy mistress, of thy unworthy servant, receive, with vow of
continuance, Faith, honor, love, and service. I crave no more save faithful
love (quoth Giletta.) Giletta herself, in discharge of her duty, will use
toward her Rinaldo, honor and obedience. Whom if she find constante, let
fortune do her worst, she has her contentment, and yet my good Rinaldo
(quoth she) foresight is the only instrument of quietness. I know my father
and other friends, if they knew of our love, with storms of displeasure,
would hinder the accomplishment of our desires, if whose good will by any
means, may be won, the execution of our joys, I mean our marriage day is
well delayed, but if they nill consent, happ well, happ ill, Giletta submittes
her self to Rinaldoes good will. My good maistresse (quoth he) your poor
servant (full satisfied for his hard fortunes fore past, as also to come)
subjects himself to your wise consideration: Yea, Rinaldo will not in one jot,
contrary Gilettas direction, although he purchase death with the execution of
her pleasure. Well quoth Giletta, let time work her will, yet live thou Rinaldo
assured of thy Gilettas love, who likewise lives in hope of thine: But in hope
sweet mystresse (quoth Rinaldo) there is no hope without mistruste, and
causeless mistrust woorketh two injuries: The one in distempering the
mistrusters mind, the other in suspecting the well meaning friend. But the
offense toward me I freely pardon, so that thou will (to work thine own
quietness) take knowledge, how that my heart is close prisoner in thy breast,
which may not be removed without thy consent. And for that we must attend
time, for the perfection of our joys, to intertaine time without distruste
of loyalty, Dear Lady, of thy poor servant, vouchsafe to take this
Diamond, whose poesy is: I will not false my faith: Protestinge before the
highest, to accomplish those words in works. Giletta willingly receyuinge
this ring, in this sort acquitted him: My good Rinaldo (quoth she) I gratefully
accept your gift, and that in absence, you may both think of me, and your
vow, for my sake wear you this Jewel, wherein is written: Fortune may hinder
my love, yet none but death shall break my vow. These two lovers having by
secret oath, thus warranted each others love, least their ouerlonge talk,
might breed suspicion, now conveyed themselves into the thickest of the
company, where after they had a while showed themselves, Rinaldo in respect of
his late conqueste, had the ordinarye pleasures, the which he saw in skorne.
In so much that to perfect his contentemente with sweet imaginations, he
conuayed himself into his chamber: where, in praise of his good mystresse, and
triumph of his Fortunes, he wrote as follows.

Beauty leave off to brag, thy bravery is but brayd,
Thou may (God wot) thy visard veil, thy wanton maskes are wrayd.
Thy toys in thy attire, thy plumes fortells thy pride,
Thy coyues, thy caules, thy curling cost, thy surfling helps are spide.
Thy gases are for guestes, that garish shows will eye,
Else who so blind, but that he can a painted visage spy,
Then go and market keep, where chafe is sowld for corn,
I hold (Got wot) thy vauntes as vain, thy lures, and love I scorn,
For I beloved am, of one that thee does pass,
In faith as much as finest gold, excelles the coursest brass.
She needs no frizling feats, nor bumbaste for her breasts,
No glittring spangles for the gase, no ierkyns, iagges, nor iestes,
Her only self a sun, when thou art iudgde a star,
Her sober looks works more regard, then all thy ruffling far.
The reason is, the heavens, to reap the praise alone,
Did frame her eyes, her head, and hands of pearl and precious stone,
Which jewels needs no help, their beauties for to blase,
When bravery shadows foul defectes, or serves for wanton gase.
Besides her feature rare, her further fame to raise,
Her wit, her words, her works in show, does win a world of praise,
Then beauty have no scorn, thy room for to resign,
To her, whose sundry marks of grace, thus shows she is divine.
If not, thy champion choose, if any dare auowe,
I do the wrong, thee to abase, and her so to allow,
And him I challenge forth, by force of fight to prove,
She has no match, whom thus in heart, I honor, serve and love.
Roberto Rinaldo.

These Uerses although they were too affectionately written, yet for two causes
they were of Giletta very well lyked: the one was thoroughe the humor,
wherewith most women are infected, desirous to be praised: the other for that
Rinaldo was the man that had so highlye commended her, whom she wished to be
as far ouerseene, in affection, as in his invention: and although she
acquitted not his pains, with her pen, yet with other courtesies she
sufficiently wrought his contentment. In this sort, in absence, with letters,
in presence, with lokes, signs, and loving greetings, now and then, with a
stolen kiss interioyned, for a space these lovers, ye one the other
delighted. But (oh) I sighe to report, how soudainly fortune threatened the
spoil of their desires, yea when they thought themselves of her favor most
assured, such are the chaunges and chances of love. But since her thretning
(after a number of griefs by these two lovers suffered) turned into grace:
with more willingness, I enter into discourse of their sorrows as follows.

Rinaldo (unhappily) matched with an ague, through the extremity of his
malladie, was forced to keep his chamber, so that by this accident exiled from
the sight of his fair maistresse, the fury of his fever was no sooner
ouerpaste, but straight he was charged with fearful fancies, Passing love the
cause of jealousy.
continually dreading how that his absence would turn his Ladies love to
mislyking: thus hourly visited with intemperate fittes, (poor man) he was
brought so low, as that, a live, he represented the very image of death. Good
Giletta sorrowing the long absence of her Rinaldo, in the end hearing the
unwelcome news of his dangerous sickness, presently fared, as though she had
felt the extremity of his fitts: one while, she determined, to go her self
and comfort him, straight she dreaded the suspicion that might grow thereof,
especially, for that Seignior Frizaldo, by ye procurement of her friends, was
so hot a suter, Frizaldo a suter to Giletta.
as without some ielous thought he could never part her sight: yet
notwithstanding all these hinderaunces, in the end she was resolved, to
visit her louinge Rinaldo, not by secret stealth, but with such a chosen
company, as it could be no otherwise thought, but that only for courtesy,
she went to comfort him. Seignior Frizaldo (with the rest of the Gentles) would
needs wait of mistress Giletta, whose service I am assured was ill accepted,
and himself to Rinaldo worse welcome: An unwelcome guest.
But secret griefs, shadowed with fained good will, Giletta outwardly for his
courtesy, thanked Frizaldo, and went with him and the rest, to Rinaldoes
lodging: which Courtly company at their first coming, were brought into the
sickmans chamber, whom when Giletta espied, to lie languishing in his bed, to
comfort him first of all she used this greeting: How fares my good servant
(quoth she.) Rinaldo on the soudaine vewing his Lady, was so overcome with
soudaine joy, as on the soudaine, the answer of his estate was far to
seek: which when Giletta perceived, in this sort she continued her comforting
words: what man (quoth she) be of good cheer, a lusty heart will soon
conquer this sickness, dismay not your self with fear. By this time a sighe
had vntyde Rinaldoes tongue, who very softly for fear of suspicion, thus
replied: In very deed sweet mystresse (quoth he) if I had had the use of my
heart, long or this my griefs had been eased: but, ah, my heart else where
attends, it is Giletta (and none else, that may dispose ye same. Well (quoth
she) since I have the use thereof, I am taught by good authority, to keep
the sound from the sick: your body is now distempered with a fever, your heart
with me fares no worse then mine: so that at the least I will have the
bestowing thereof, till I see you in perfect health, yet think that the comfort
both of mine and your own, shall be applied for your relief. Here Giletta gave
liberty unto the rest for to greet Rinaldo, who bestowed their talk (as they
thought) to his great delight: But Rinaldo, that rather regarded the sober
looks, and modest behavior of Giletta, then the shyning bravery of the rest,
gave small ear, unto their pleasant prattle: Yea, seemed half offended with
the continuance thereof, as who would say, the sight of their wantonness,
wrought a fresh remembrance of his wretchedness. And truly there can be no
greater torment unto the pe^siue wight, Others pleasures a grief to the
wretched.
then to be thrown into the company of the pleasant: not for that he
repineth at them, but that he cannot attain their happiness. The company
perceiving the small comfort, Rinaldo took in their persuasions, on the
soudaine became silente, so that Giletta had now liberty to make an end of
her tale: who (for that night drue near) knit it up with this farewell. I
see well good servant (quoth she) that our company (although we came for
courtesy) is rather a cumber then a comfort to your sorrows, and therefore
we will now betake you to God. But to witness, I always wish your
contentment, A secret virtue in giliflowers.
vouchsafe this posie of Giliflowers, which carries this virtue, that about
whose head they be bestowed, the same wighte shall not be much frighted with
fearful fancies. God grant that be true (quod Rinaldo) for trust me, sweet
mystresse, the disquietnes of my mind hurtes me more, then the distemperature
of my body, but how much of this virtue fails in your flowers, so much I
already find in your friendly words, and to continue in remembrance, your
care to cure my miseries, wear you, good mystresse, this Rosemary branch.
Giletta willingly receiving the same, for that she was to depart, with the help
of another Gentlewoman, raised Rinaldoes pillowes, and laid his bed
furniture handsomely about him, where Giletta bowing over him, to amend some
thing out of order, by fortune left with Rinaldo a kiss, the comfort
whereof exiled the grief he should else have conceived, by her departure: but
I am assured this poor stolen kiss, no more pleased Rinaldo, then it offended
Frizaldo, who (god wot) with great impatiencie, murmured at these two lovers
familiarity, and although the rest took no heed of their speeches, yet his
ielious suspicion, both read the letters of their flowers, and wrested out the
sense of their subtle words. Nevertheless (for the place sake at that time)
he hid his conceived hatred, toward Rinaldo, with a friendly farewell. But
in the way homeward, he pincht Giletta, with this scoffinge request: Away
with this Rosemary (quoth he) lest it hide some infection (being sometime
sick Rinaldoes) That may offend you, (quoth Giletta) if it were any ways
infected, by this time the open air has purged it, but if before this time, I
my self am infected, it smally helps to throw away this poor branch, and
so your counsel is out of season, and yet for the same I courteously thancke
you. Well quoth Frizaldo snuffinge at this aunsweare, you were best to perfect
your delighte, to wear a Rose with your Rosemarie, meaning the first letters
of those two flowers, aunsweared her lovers name, Roberto Rinaldo. These
words stroke poor Giletta dead, and yet she pretily (dissemblinge her
knowledge of Frizaldoes mind) found out means, to cut off those cross
speeches, with argument that meetely well contented him. But, poor wench, so
soon as she was bestowed alone in her Chamber, solitariness wroughte a
fresh remembrance of Frizaldoes doubtful words, but yet after she had a
space bewailed her Fortunes, she wisely entered into the consideration of her
own estate, and waying, how greatly that Frizaldo was favored of her
friends, and on the contrary part, Rinaldo of small account, she concluded
(to please all her friends, and content both her lovers) to use this policy.
Frizaldo whom she smally esteemed, she mente to feed with courteous delays:
Rinaldo, whom in deed she honored, she determined in heart to love, and in
show to hate, thinking by this means that she should extinguish and quench
Frizaldos ielous suspicion: Ielosie can never be perfectly quenched.
which in very deed, contraried her imagination. For although he liked
Gilettas intertaynment, yet he continually feared her affection toward
Rinaldo, yea he eyed her with such mistrust, as that she could hardly find
occasion to acquainte her Rinaldo with this devise: notwithstanding hopinge of
favorable time to execute her purpose, she continued her fained good will
toward Frizaldo, but Rinaldo she would neither see, send, nor write unto: Who
wonderinge at this insolency and straungenes, although he had hardly
recovered his empayred health, yet he adventured abroad, to learn the cause
of this soudaine alteration. But his overmuch temeritie and making have
herein, had wroughte woeful waste of his life, had not God wonderfully saved
him. For, repayringe unto the place of his wonted joy, and accustomed comfort,
he found his mystresse dallying with a fresh gallant: On him she would not
vouchsafe to look: Yea, if on occasion he saluted her by the name of his
mystresse, very disdainful^y and scornefully, or not at all she aunsweared
him: On him she frowned with a cursed countenance: On his enemy she fleared
with a delightsome favor: with him she would not speak: with his enemy she
continually talked. Which unfriendly welcome was far worse (God wot) to
Rinaldo, then his late sickness: But worst of al he digested the report of the
Courtiers, who (inferring on their familiarity) gave out for certainty, that
Segnior Frizaldo, should marie with mystres Giletta. These news poor Rinaldo
was like enough to credit, himself seeing such apparaunte proof thereof, yea
he credited them so far, as he could not away with any thought of hope. In
so much that scorning both Court and company, as one forsaken of himself,
he forthwith went unto his chamber, whereas passionately discoursinge on his
hard Fortunes, which plaint, he powdered with a thousand sighs, by chance
he fastened his eye, on the Jewel which Giletta had bestowed on him, and with
little lust reading the posie thereof, supposinge she had falsified her vow,
touched with the proof of his wretchedness, he forthwith wrote these under
written Uerses.

For faithful love, the hate I find in lue,
My vow performde, the false of her behest,
The small reward, I reap for service true,
Her joy to see, me plunged in unrest,
Does force me say, to find an end of pain,
O fancy die, thou feedest hope in vain.
I sue for grace, she smyles to see my smart,
I plead for peace, she seeks to sow debate,
My sour her sweet, my grief does glad her heart,
I fawn, she frowns, I love and she does hate,
Since so, I say, to find an end of pain,
O fancy die, thou feedest hope in vain.
Starve thou desire, which keeps life in love,
And so my thought, from showring woe shall cease,
But love alive, while fancy hope may move,
A living death, my sorrows will increase,
Wherefore I say, to find an end of pain,
O fancy die, thou feedest hope in vain.
My fancies dead, I end of woes should find,
My eyes, nay seas (God wot) of brackish tears
Would leave to love, whom love has made so blind:
My thorned thoughts, no more should foster fears.
But oh (aye me) for to proroge my pain,
My fancies live, and feeds hope in vain.
Do what I can, I pray on plighted troth,
A (simple) think, she will not break this bond,
I vow to love, I will not false my oath,
But, ah, I find her false, and I too fond:
Wherefore good death, at once delay my pain,
My fancies live, and feeds hope in vain.
Roberto Rinaldo.

Unto these Uerses Rinaldo set a very sollem note, and the night following,
he bestowed himself under Gilettas chamber window, where (playing on his
lute) he very mournefully sounge this passionate invention, of purpose (like
unto the Swanne, that sings before her death) to bid his mystresse adieu for
ever.

Good Giletta, hearing this sorrowful farewell, much lamented her servants
estate, yet durst she not at that instant any ways comfort him. The cause
was, Segnior Frizaldo, was then in her chamber, who knew very well, that it was
Rinaldo, that with his sollem music, saluted mystresse Giletta, yea he knew
by the over often changing of her color, how (notwithstanding her
dissimulation) she greatly sorrowed Rinaldos distress: and therefore he
thought best, during his discomforture, by some slye policy, at once to
overthrow him with distrust: and until the execution of this treachery, he
thought best, to give him this bone to gnaw upon. First to show his credit to
be admitted into her chamber at that time of the night: Next (to prove his
authority) he called Giletta, by the name of his subject: Who duetifully
answered him, with ye title of her sovereign: which done (quoch he looking
out of the window) it is for you sake (fair Lady) we are presented with this
sweet music, and although your unknown welwiller, makes show of the
sorrows he suffers not, yet courtesy wills you to intercept his pains with
thanks. Poor Rinaldo hearing Frizaldos tongue, made no stay for Gilettas
thanks, but returning to his chamber (as one that had foregone his senses (a
while in sighs he uttered his plainte. And after his sorrow was somewhat
eased, (quoth he) alas good Giletta, thy exchange is very hard, to leave to
be Rinaldos mystresse, to become Frizaldos subject, But Rinaldo, worse is thy
hap, that thou must serve her, that is subject to thy mortal enemy, thy
thraldom is intolerable, thy tornients without end, with violent death
dispatch both thy servitude and sorrows, so shall thou force them to pity,
that now triumph at thy miseries. In this sort Rinaldo continually raged at
his fortunes. Well, how ever Rinaldo fared, Giletta was not free from sorrows:
for good soul, she thought it hie time to acquaint her servant with the
continuance of her love, and although she had attempted many ways, yet she
found no current opportunity for discovery thereof, till in the end, she
determined, by letters to deliver the Embassage of her mind, to which effect,
she one day wrote these lines following.

MY Good servant, I cannot but sighe to think on thy sorrows, who inferring
on my strangeness, have my faithful love in suspicion: and yet I cannot blame
thee, that know not, what necessity inforceth my coyness: Alas, I live in
the gase of Ielous distruste, who with Lynxes eyes, watches my behavior, so
that of force, I am forced, to rarrie a show of hatred, where in heart I love.
But of this assure thy self, although Frizaldo (whose familiarity woorketh
thy fear) wears both my glove and Garter, yet Rinaldo has, and shall have
my heart. So that (sweet friend) from henceforth (having my constancy thus
warranted) when most I lowre, contrary my looks with smiling thoughts. And
thus till more fortunate time, do perfect our wished desires, thy loving
Mystresse, wishes thee well to fare.

Giletta de Bologna.


When good Giletta had thus ended her letters, for that she durst not trust
Rosina her waiting woman with the delivery of them, whom she knew to be too
well affected toward Frizaldo to work him such an injury, she determined
to be the Ambassador her self, to accomplish which devise, she made an apple
hollow, wherein she bestowed this letter, which she closed so cunningly,
that none by the outward show, could perceive ye inward charge thereof: But oh
the force of ielosie, Frizaldo for that he could not always be present to eye
Gilettas behavior, won her waytinge woman to watch her so narrowly, as she
might be able to yield account of all her doings. This traiterous maid to
her mystresse, so trustily performed his request, as although Giletta practiced
this devise, in her secret closet, yet through the cranell of a wall, she had
notice thereof, so that the night following, she came to the fingering of this
apple, and finding these loving lines in the body thereof, she forthwith went
to Frizaldo, to whom she delivered both the letter and apple, but he that
foreknew Gilettas love, toward Rinaldo, was rather glad, then sad of these
news: For by this means, he spyde occasion presently to overthrow Rinaldo
with despair: To further which villainous treachery, as near as he could, he
counterfeted Gilettas hand, and then in steed of her courteous lines (in her
name) he wrote this uncomfortable letter.

RInaldo, A treacherous part.
thy dissembling, has wrought my displeasure, and although I will not show how
nor wherein thou art unjust, yet know thou, I know so well thy villainies, as no
excuse shall remove me from revenge. And if my unpleasant looks any way
offend thee, assure thy self my heart ten times more abhors thee:
thereof let this my hand writing be a witness, which I my self deliver, to this
end, that thou may at once, end both thy hope, and unregarded suit, by her
that hates the more, then she loves herself.

Giletta de Bologna.


When Frizaldo had made an end of this letter, he bestowed it in the apple,
and wild Rosina, to lay the same where she found it, the next day, he
brought Giletta where of force she must see her loving Rinaldo, and of purpose
seemed careless of her behavior, that she might have opportunity, to salute
her sorrowful servant. Poor Giletta unacquainted with this treachery,
simply delivered Rinaldo the apple: saying, the virtue in the fruit, was of
force to end his sorrows. Herewith she hasted after Frizaldo, without either
answer or thanks, at her servants hands, who receiving this courtesy,
beyond all hope, as one amassed, at so soudaine a joy, it was long ere he
tasted this apple, and finding a letter enclosed therein, I can hardly report,
the one half of his delight: But this I am assured, for his fair mystresse
sake, he a hundred times kissed both the seal, and superscription, before he
adue^tured to take knowledge of the hidden message therein: but when he ripped
it open, and found the forecited news, alas poor man, his late sweet motions
so increased his sour passions, that if it were possible, for any to taste
more miseries, his fare exceeded the torments of Hell.

Ah God (quoth he) how may it so sweet a face, should be matched with so
cruel a heart, such heavenly looks, with such hellish thoughts, so fair a
creature, with so foul conditions, and so modest a countenance, with so
merciless a mind. O Giletta, what meanest thou so to eclipse thy honor,
darken thy virtue, and spoil thy wonted report of pity, by murdering of thy
faithful friend? Had thou no fear of infamy? no thought of former vow?
Might not remorse of conscience, withdraw thee from disloyalty? Made thou
no more account of love, then like unto a garment, at thy pleasure to put off
and on? Could thou do Rinaldo such injury, as to let another devour the
fruits of his toil? Would thou suffer Frizaldo to reap the crop of love,
that Rinaldo sowed with sighs, weeded with faith, did nourish with tears, and
ripened with continual service. Suppose, I admit the force of thy second love,
in excuse of all these wrongs, with what face, could thou triumph in my
miseries? Yea desire my death, that loved thee so dear? Trust me, cruel
Giletta, if thine own writing had not been witness, I would never have
thought thee inconsta^t, nor had not thine own hands delivered the instrument
of my destruction, I would hardly a credited thy letters, but on so certain a
proof, in vain it were to hope. Ah, God, how rightly did thou hit my
fortune when as thou said, thy apple would ease my sorrows: in deed I found
in it my death, and only death must cure my grief. And since so subtily, thou
prophesiedst my destruction, since it agrees with thy will, thy wretched
desire, shall forthwith be wrought. In this desperate mind Rinaldo hasted unto
the river of Poo, where by the shore side he saw a simple man, to whom he
delivered a scroll, wherein was written: Giletta false of faith Rinaldo nipt so
nigh,
That lo he chose before his time, in stremes of Poo to die.


Which verses he requested the poor man to deliver at the Lord de Bolognas
castle, to maistresse Giletta, and then without using any other speech, he
lept into the river. The poor man half amazed, at this wilful act,
forthwith hasted unto the Lord de Bolognas castle, where after he had
delivered the writing to Giletta, he showed for certainty, he saw Rinaldo
drown him self. The news was unwelcome unto every hearer (save only to
Frizaldo, that trained him into this mischief) but especially to Giletta this
tydinges was too too grievous, she weapt, she waylde, she blamed her and his
unlucky fortune, Frizaldos jealousy, her friends untowardness, and chiefly
her own nycenesse, as instruments of Rinaldos lamentable destnie: in so much
as, neither show of pleasure, company of acquaintance, or persuasion of
friends, could move her unto any comfort. Well, leave we sorrowful Giletta,
continually bemoning the death of her best beloved servant: and turn we to
Rinaldo, who after he had a while felt the fury of the floudes, was weary of
dying, so that for life he labored unto the shore, which happily recovered,
he felt his stomach at that instant rather ouercharged with water then love,
yet for that by sight of his sowre-sweete maistresse, he would not renew his
sorrows, nor that he could brook, in the court to be frumpt and slouted at,
he consented in a forest near adjoining unto this river, in misery to
consume the residue of his life. And abasing his mind, unto the condition of
his distress, he was content to take a hollow cave, for his house, and
herbour, the bare ground, both for his bed and bedding. For companions, to make
choice of wild beasts: to bemone his fortunes, unto the wild forests, to make
the night raven his clock, his harmony of hellishe noise of monsters, and his
food the fruits of ye earth, O strange effects of love, that could veil his
mind to vouchsafe these miseries: that lately held at will, almost what he
could wish. But leave I now to write of love his force (whom no man hitherto,
could either truly define or describe) and turn again to poor Rinaldos hard
estate, who roming in the wild forrestes for food, espied an apple tree, the
fruit whereof, put him in remembrance, of the apple Giletta delivered him,
wherein he found a letter that forced him to this penance, ye sight whereof with
sorrow, not only slaked his hunger, but moved him to such impatiencie, that in
despair, and despite of the fruit, upon the tree he carved this invention.

O Needless fruit (of sin the mean at first)
Thou forcedst Eve, and Adam did entice,
To byte their bale, for which the earth was cursed,
And headlong they, from virtue fell to vice,
Thou were the bait, that Paris gave the Dame,
Who in reward, set stately Troy aflame.
Thou did convey, the loving write that wood,
Dianas nymphe, from chaste, to foul desire,
By thee too soon, I (wretched) understood,
Gilettas scorn, that chaung'd her love to ire,
And not content, but when my woes were dead,
With former cares, thou combrest fresh my head.
O envious fruit, in whom few virtues are,
Thy show is all, but who so on thee feeds,
Shall hardly find, thee help, but health impair:
Then since to man, such plagues thy beauty breeds,
Would God thy guilt, upon each apple tree,
Igrauen were, for every eye to see.
Roberto Rinaldo.

Rinaldo thus freshly entered, into the consideration of his former love,
likewise felt his former unquietness of mind, feign would he have found out
some little spark of hope, but out alas, the sour letter his sweet maistresse
delivered, together with her hateful show against him, and her loving zeal
toward Frizaldo, so hugely increased his distrust, as by no means he could
away with hope: in so much (quoth he) O cowardly wretch, why do thou not by
death, at once dispatch thy sorrows: rather the^ to die a thousand deaths, by
pr^roging a lothed life, can thou brook continual bondage, when with one
blow thou may rid thy wretchedness, set fear aside, use force upon thy
self, thou have lived an exile too long, since thou see no hope of
attoneme^t at home, nor fealest quietness abroad. In this desperate passion,
Rinaldo was determined to commit murder upon him self, and yet he thought best
to defer the execution, until he might convey him self near unto Gilettas
lodging, that there her eyes might be witness of his loyalty, and her own
cruelty. To has^e^ which folly, the next night he took his journey toward
Bologna castle, and by the way he devised this petition.

Even with the blood, that issues from his heart,
Rinaldo (wretch) this sorry boune does crave,
There may be graven (by some continuing Art)
These woeful words, upon his timelesse grave.
Lo here he lies, that reaped hate for love,
Which hard exchange, to slay him self did move.
These verses Rinaldo determined to write with blood yt issued from his deadly
wound, and coming unto the place, of his desired rest, he drew his dagger, in
mind to finish his sorrows But finding his enterprise (by reason of ye dead
time of night) unlikely to be troubled, before he executed this tragedy, he
weakly wrested forth this heavy farewell.

Oh God (quoth he) that the groans, proceeding from my gored heart, might now
awake Giletta, that she might see the use of my murdering knife, then would my
yawning breath, my bloody sighs, and deadly gaspes, no dout bedew her cheeks,
which hitherto my intolerable miseries, with ruthful tears could never wet:
so should she know my escaped dangers, were but lightening joys, for to
enlarge my sorrows: so might she see, the unfeigned confirmation of my
loyalty, accuse her of inconstancy: so seeing so unnatural a tragedy
executed (by the dome of her scorn) upon her faultlesse servant, remorse
might happily move her to repentance, and pity win her from her wavering
fancies. But (oh) I tire time with too needelesse a tale: she quietly sleeps,
to whom I thus sorrowfully talk. Fare well Giletta, farewell. These naked walls
(besprent with blood) shall shortly bewray my moan. My breathless corpse, shall
witness my constancy, and purchase (I trust) so much pity, as
(notwithstanding my careless provision) to be bestowed in some forgetlesse
tumbe. I can not stay thy answer, and therefore I leave it to thy courtesy.
Come wished death, now use thy force, my will is made, the time and place
fitteth my desire, my tears and sighs are already bestowed, these wa^^es (my
executors) only wants their hire: my waste blood I bequeath the^, only to
continue remembrance of my loyalty. etc. Good Giletta continually lame^ting
the loss of her servant, both night and day was smally disposed to rest, in so
much that leaning in her chamber window, she heard (though not perfectly) this
sorrowful discourse, and being moved with pity (as Rinaldos complaint grew to
an end) she used these words. Yonder man's tongue, moan, and miseries, works such
fresh remembrance of my good Rinaldos destruction, An vnlookte for comfort.
as for his sake, I will apply unto his sorrows what honest comfort I can.
Therewithal she prepared her self to learn his cause of grief: Rinaldo
amassed with this souden comfort, held his hand from his throat, till Giletta
was at his elbowe, who very modestly demanded, both what he was, and what
forced him so pitiously to complain. Rinaldo, on this small encouragement,
began now to mistrust ill measure in others, and yet to try in whom the fault
might be, he at the first, both hid his name, and the true cause of his grief
from Giletta. Giletta earnestly noting the order of his talk, began now to be
so distempered with the thought of Rinaldo, as she fell straight thus to be
move his hard fortunes. Ah, good Rinaldo (quoth she) whersoeuer thy body lies
in thought I so perfectly behold thy image, as in every mournful tale, my
thinks I hear thy tongue. Woe worth thee Frizaldo, to cool whole jealous
distrust, I used show of hate where in heart I loved, and yet Rinaldo, thou
art not blameless in that, when as I made thee privy to the cause of my
strangeness, thou wilfully afterward did drown thy self* Herewith,
Rinaldo to make Giletta partaker of his new conceived joys could not choose
but discover him self, whom when she perfectly knew, And lives Rinaldo yet,
(quoth she) and therwithal embracing her best beloved, with very joy fell into
a swoone. Rinaldo seeing his Lady and love to faint, spared for no kisses to
fetch her again. She being revived, and the heat of their joys somewhat
qualified, I want skill, to will, to show what desire the one had to delight
the other, but this I am assured, they in such sort ouerwent the night, that
morning willed them away, ere either of them had thought of former sorrows, or
sought to work for future joys. The woman's (...).
But as it is said, the woman's vnt, is more readier the^ ye man's, in practices
that answers their liking: experience here makes proof of no less. For when
Giletta espied Rinaldo in a brown study, with debating, which way they might
best, easiest, and soonest, perfect their (...) delights, she comforting him
with a pretty smyle, willed him to commit that charge unto her, but in any case
she warned him to live a while unknown. Rinaldo faithfully promised to obey
her direction, who after he had given, and taken a hundred loath to depart
kisses, forthwith posted unto the next uncouth place, and Giletta secretly
conveyed her self unto her chamber: Who the next day forsook her mourning
weeds, and with a cheerful countenance, she bid her friends Buon giorno:
who rejoicing to see her so pretily comforted, applied them selves, unto such
exercises and persuasions, as they thought would best work her contentation.
Especially Frizaldo, who (after it was given out Rinaldo was drowned) was so
much of Giletta misliked, as that she could neither abide his sight, nor would
patiently hear his name, now seeing her stormy anger somewhat appeased, by
little and little renewed his loving suite. Giletta now to work sure, (because
he should no more suspect fraud in her overmuch familiarity) made the matter
somewhat strange, and yet not so strange, but that Frizaldo might pick out
encouragement to continue his bootlesse suite. Who refusing no advantage,
charged her, and double charged her with importunate persuasions: she at every
assault, seemed somewhat to relent, yea, in the end she was content patiently
to hear his request, and if she chanced to cross him with froward language,
she would comfort him with some fained good look. Gilettaes father seeing some
likelyhoode of the match he long desiered, I mean between Frizaldo and
Giletta his daughter, furthered Frizaldos desire in what he could, in so much
as coveting a speedy dispatche, he one day enjoined his daughter to give him a
direct answer off, or on. Giletta modestly answered, ye promise she made
Rinaldo, was such a corsie to her conscience, through ye fear of infamy, as
although she had sufficiently tried (and by trying liked) Frizaldos honest and
faithful love, yet she feared to give her willing consent, to yt she heartily
wished. Why quoth her father, your promise died with Rinaldo, and though he
desperately dispatched his life, neither law of God, nor Nature, can forbid you
marriage: and to make you ye more willing to yt I wish, there shall be
proclamation made, yt if Rinaldo wtin one month come in and make clame to
Giletta, he should be indifferent-heard, if not, Frizaldo to have her as his
lawful wife: by this means (quoth he) the clattering tongs yt thou fear,
(would note thee of inconstancy) well persuaded of his death, by reason of his
absence, will sure be staid. Giletta thus proffered, what she had thought to
have requested, set niceness aside, and fayning her fathers persuasions to
have conquered her, upon this condition, yealded to marry Frizaldo. The Lord
de Bologna, made no delay, but presently upon this consent, assured Frizaldo to
his daughter Giletta, and caused proclamation to be made. This news wrought joy
on al sides: Rinaldo laughed to hear this proclamation, for that he knew how to
provide sour sauce for Frizaldos sweet delights. Giletta smilde to see how
wi^el^ly, she had won her fathers consent, to have Rinaldo, who she knew was
ready to make clame. Gilettas friends rejoiced to see her sorrows appeased: but
Frizaldo above the rest triumphed in show, he made no account of the prouiso in
his assurance. For why, he thought a dround man would hardly clame his right,
the kind intertainment of his maistresse, so laded him with joy, as yt he bad
iealouzie go trudge, distrust adieu, and al other hindrances auaunt: one while
he inuites his friends, another while he makes choice of martial calengers and
champions, for iusting, turn, barriers. etc. Now he co^sults, with carpet
knights, about curious masks and other delightful shows: anon he runs unto the
tailers, to see his apparel made of ye straungest and costliest fashion, thus
was he occupied in provision of bravery against his marriage day, he had no
thought how Rinaldo would be aue^ged of his treachery, overthrow him in combat,
wear his weeds, marry his wife, and use his provision of pleasure, for ye
honor of his own wedding: he would not see secret hate yt lay hid in Gilettas
loving looks, as ye snake lurkes in ye sweet grass: his blind affection made
him forget the villainy he had offered Rinaldo, so that prick of conscience
could move him to no repentance. For having reached ye height of his desires, he
made her the instrument of his destruction, by whose dishonest service, he
attained this show of preferment, I mean Rosina, Gilettas waiting woman: who
seeing ye preparation for her maistres marriage, began to loure on Frizaldo, ye
reason was, at such time as he was out of Gilettas favor, to currie friendship
with her, he told this da^sel, in respect of her courtesies, and in despite of
her maistres injuries, he would marry her: which fair promise, this foully
falsed, might very well force ye poor wench to frown. Which Frizaldo seeing,
likewise saw without wise foresight a hindra^ce to his desires, and devising how
to repair this breach of amit^e, he called to mind what small trust was in a
woman's secrecy and waying what mischief he had executed, to compass his
loving affairs, now to perfect the success he long looked for, he concluded
(in acquitall of the poor wenches courtesies) to shorten her life. O wretch
spoiled of pity, rest of humanity, catyfe more cruel then any Tygre, how
could thou profess to love, with so bl^ndy a mind, especially to acquit
her with such cruelty, that spoiled her credit to do thee courtesy. But why
wear I time to wonder at thy unnatural villainies, which spendst thy life
without thought of virtue, and diedst without show of repentance. And now
again, unto this tyrant Frizaldos actions, with a friendly countenance, he
came unto Rosina, and after his courteous salutations, Fair words makes
fools feign.
he hayted his poisoned enterprise with this sweet persuasio^. Sweet wench
quoth he, thou see a great preparation (supposed) for a marriage between thy
maistresse and me, if which were true, in faith I should do thee too too much
wrong, to whom I am in conscience betrothed. But for that thou may now find
performance of that in deeds, yt hitherto I promised in words, I give thee to
wit my intent. Thou very well know my faithful love once toward Giletta,
her small regard of me, my suite, her scorn, yea her cross answering of all my
amorous actions, so that my necessity enforst, I shund her sight, that nothing
esteemed my service, daily pleaded with tears, and solicited with sighs,
which discourteous (nay cruel) usage (as thou know full well) soudenly changed
my love to hate, so that continuing (or rather increasing) my malice, I have
hitherto sought, how to be avenged. And lo, a happy opportunity, her coyness
is come down, and now she is content to love the man, that she so highly
hated, yea, to allure him with friendly looks, whose tears sometimes could
purchase no ruth, I mean my self, she is thus affected to: Who (in truth)
rather seeks to be revenged, of her former cruelty, then to reward her
present courtesy, and to use avenge more currantly. Upon this new
reconcilement, I shadowed my displeasure, with the show of wonted kindness of
purpose, when she thought her self most assured, then to give her the slip,
and now the (supposed) wedding day draws near, but her delight far enough
off. Now, now, sweet wench, the accomplishment of my promise, and thy
comfort approaches, it is thou shall enjoy the benefit of this preparation.
Frizaldo means to marry none but Rosina, whom he will shortly espouse:
Wherefore (quoth he) to work both secretly and safely in this matter, I mean
the night before my (supposed) marriage with Giletta, to convey thee to my
house, and the next morning to make thee my wife* This current tale not a
little pleased Rosina. She thought all was gold that glistered, she never
remembered how the poisoned hook, lay wrapped in pleasant bayte, how the
Crocodile obtaines her pray with pitiful tears, nor how subtle devises, are
(^or the most) compassed with sugared words, she never dreaded ensuing danger,
but presently consented, to what Frizaldo should demand, yea, she thought
every day a year, until she had overtaken this appointed hour: at which time
according unto promise, Frizaldo with two other ruffens, to whom he had
delivered his mind, repaired to this mistrustlesse maid, whom Frizaldo wild
quickly to prepare her self to ride with those his men unto his house, and he
him self would make what speed he might after. She (that was ready an hour
before Frizaldo came) made answer, she was in a readiness to perform his
pleasure, and so with more haste, then good success, away she packs. But so
soon as these two ruffens had her in the forest (to sour her sweet
conceits) they made her acquainted with Frizaldos commandment. It was his
pleasure she should be slain, whose dome they promised, and would obey, and
execute, and therefore they willed her to use her prayers, for no persuasions
might purchase grace. The poor wench thus beset with naked swords, and seeing
(by their stearne countenances) how those traitors were spoiled of pity, began
very lamentably to cry and scrike out: which these graceless variets hearing,
commanded her forthwith to forsake her ouerloude clamors, and fall (if she
would) quietly to her prayers, if not, they would abridge her short time of
repentance. Good soul, she seeing them so furiously bent, became forthwith
silent, and only to proroge her life, (I think) with small devotion, she fell a
praying, for when she settled her self to most patiencie, she would soudenly
exclame of Frizaldos tirannie. Rinaldo, who (since his own wilful exile) lived
in this forest, by fortune heard Rosinaes pitious complaint, and being well
armed, hasted to learn the cause of so great an outcrie, who espying a
gentlewoman, upon her knees between two ruffens, that with naked swords were
ready to shorten her life, set spurs unto his horse, A unlooked for rescue.
for her more speedy rescue. The varlets seeing an armed knight make toward
them (without damaging the Gentlewoman) forthwith fled to save them selves.
Rosina thus happily preserved, through very joy fell into an ecstasy, but being
both revived and comforted by Rinaldo. Rinaldo presently perceived, how that he
had wrought this saftie unto Gilettas waiting woman, and greatly wondering at
the rareness of the chance, was earnest to know what led her to this
misfortune, she not knowing (by reason he was armed) that when she had so often
wronged to pleasure Frizaldo, was the man that saved her life, which Frizaldo
traitorously sought, from the first to the last, laid open all Frizaldos
treachery, and further she said, that to morrow he should espouse good
Giletta. Nay, quoth Rinaldo, I my self hope to hinder that match, and to
morrow (quoth he) we will both go to Bologna castle, in the mean while he
prayed her to rest contented, with his intertainment. This long looked for
morrow morning, is now at length come, and yet not so fortunate as to some
wished for, but to him to whom it was most dangerous, it was best welcome, I
mean to Frizaldo who (having a lightening delight, against his souden
destruction) very early gets him up, bravely arrayes him self, and accompanied
with diverse gay gallants, with delicat music, awakens Giletta. Giletta that
lived assured of Rinaldos challenge, seemed greatly contented with Frizaldos
readiness, and with what speed she might, she decked her self as bravely as
she could. The bridegroom and the bride being ready, the Lord of the castle,
with the Lady his wife, accompanied with other their friends (with what honor
they could) accompanied them both toward the church. But lo (by the way) an
unlooked for let, in view of the whole company, there posted toward them a
knight, accompanied with one only Gentlewoman, the knight (well mounted upon a
black horse) was armed all in black armor, save upon the left side, about
his hearts defense, there was graven a white Turtle Dove, with this poesy,
Once chose, and never change, the strangeness of which sight enforst them to
stay, to know the knights errant, who being arrived among them, his
Gentlewoman was straight ways known, which strange adventure, greatly
increast their wonder, and more greatly Frizaldos fear. Well, this
gentlewoman, upon her knees requested both pardon, and respyt to speak, which
granted, she made first report of the love between Rinaldo and Giletta: then
of Frizaldos liking and jealous distrust, further how Giletta fained to fancy
him, and to forsake Rinaldo, which devise she wrote in a letter, and enclosed
it in an aple, thinking by ye delivery thereof, to acquaint Rinaldo with her mind.
But (quoth she) this aple came to my unhappy fingring, yt which I delivered to
Frizaldo, who took out ye comfortable, and counterfetted in Gilettas name, a
cruel letter, yt which he wrapped in ye aple, and wild me to bestow ye same where
I found it: ye day following, Frizaldo allured Giletta, where of force she should
see Rinaldo, who delivered Rinaldo this aple. Rinaldo reading the counterfetted
letter, desperately drowned him self: Which ill news so discomforted Giletta,
as she repined at all the instruments of his ill fortune, especially at
Frizaldo, whose name she could not abide. Frizaldo seeing his suits so smally
regarded, with show of malice, in despite of her (as he said) promised me
marriage. Since Giletta won from this displeasure, Frizaldo with fair words,
promised now to perform yt in deed, ye hitherto he promised in word, I mean,
under ye color of marriage, won me to go with two ruffens to his house, who by
Frizaldos appointment, in a forest not far off, were ready to murder me, had
not this knight in happy time recovered me. I now have said, use your
pleasure, and if you please pardon me. This strange discourse, made them all
secretly to grudge at Frizaldo. But Giletta, being perplexed, both with malice
and fear, with malice against Frizaldo, for his too apparent treachery, with
fear, for Rinaldos absence, who she little thought to be the instrument of
this discovery. Frizaldo perceived (by the alteration of countenances) what
hearts were won from him, by Rosinaes too true a tale: and although he found him
self guilty, yet he began to clear him self with this shameless answer.
This strumpet (quoth he) won by some ruffenly companion, that repineth at my
good fortune, or thinks by this means, to be avenged, for Rinaldos desperate
and foolish end, without shame in her self, thus shamefully slaundereth me:
But for that words will hardly quench the suspicion, that her infamous tale
has fired, I will presently in combat prove my innocence, and (I trust)
discover her treachery, if any dare maintain her untrue sayings true. Frizaldo
had scarcely concluded his challenge, ere Rinaldo thus replied. Notorious varlet
(spoiled of all humanity) I am he that will maintain her sayings true, and in
revenge of thy treachery, will (I trust) soon separate thy condemned soul
(without speedy repentance) from thy carren body. Go arm thy self, I attend
thy coming. Infamous ruffen, will thou (quoth Frizaldo) and counterfetting
(through necessity) fury in stead of fear, forthwith he went to arm him
self. The rest of the company, rather desirous to see an end of this
accusation, the^ the solemnising of the marriage, attended Frizaldos return,
who sone came, very richly armed into the field. The knights now swear that
either quarrel is just, and at the trumpets sound so fiercely incountreth
other, that both horse and men fall thundering to ye earth. Frizaldo trusting in
his force, Rinaldo both in his force and honest quarrel, either quickly
recouereth him self, and (forsaking their shiuered spears) with arming blade,
freshly falls a hewing at others skonce. The knights thus furiously fighting,
the standers by pray as they are affected, the indifferent, victory unto the
innocent, Rinaldos friends unto the unknown knight: but Giletta above the
rest, wishes Frizaldos overthrow, whom she knows to be faulty in the
quarrel. Still they fight, and yet the victory doubtful, one while Rinaldo
has the best, and straight a cross blow makes him lose his advantage.
Remorse of conscience nothing weakeneth Frizaldo, but Rinaldos honest cause
doubleth his strength, so that the longer he fought, the fearcer he was, and
yet Frizaldo valiantly mainteines his dishonest quarrel. But what does might
avail, when God assistes the right. Frizaldo for all his force, in the end
began to faint: which Rinaldo espying, and eying his Ladies beauty, assaild
him with such fury, that ere long he sent him dead to ye earth. The battle
thus fortunately won, Rinaldo vnarmes him self, and clames Giletta as his wife,
the people at the sight of Rinaldo shoke the earth, with clamors of joy.
Giletta (that lately wondered at Rinaldos absence) now charged her father with
his promise: the Lord de Bologna, with the rest of his friends, agreed Rinaldo
and Giletta should forthwith be married. The courtly company that came to
honor Frizaldos marriage, had his dishonest actions in such disdain, as now
they would not vouchsafe to see him honestly buried. But with all their
provision of bravery, on Rinaldo they willingly attended, glad was be yt could
with any courtesy present him. The marriage rites solemnly pronounced, these
faithful lovers repaired to Bologna castle, where they were welcomed, with
what pleasure might be had: yea, to conclude, for to work satisfaction for
their long miseries, there wanted nothing, that coin, cunning, or credit might
compass. And thus after fortune had long threatened the shipwreck of their
delights, their constancy conducted them to the port of their wished desires.

El fine fa el tutto.
Epilogus.
Vide the fall of the C. of Celant fol. 16. a. Cressids complaint ^o. 22. d
Vide C. of Celant. fol. 2. a and fol. 10. b.
Lo here the fruits, of lust and lawless love,
Lo here their faults, that vale to either vice,
Lo Ladies here, their falls (for your behoue)
Whose wanton wills, sets light by sound advice.
Here lords may learn, with noble dames to match:
For dunghill Kyte, from kind will never slye:
The vessel long, will of the liquor smatch,
Wherewith at first, the same we taste or try.
Here Cressids life, her luck, and loathsome end,
Their Fortunes paint, that Cressids heirs are,
Her fall does will, all wantons to amend,
Their lightning joys, are joined with years of care:
Vide C. of Celant. fol. 7. b. and fol. 13. b. Vide Frizaldo fol. 45.
Here youths, that see, a strumpets angry mood,
May happily fear, to execute her hate:
Their hard luckes here, yt purchase love with blood,
Are warnings meet, for such as sow debate.
And to be short, the sour in sweetest love,
Does prove him blessed, that least thereof does prove.
Formae nulla fides.

THE GARDEN OF Unthriftiness, wherein is reported the dolorous discourse of
Dom Diego a Spaniard, together with his triumph.

Wherein are diverse other flowers, (or fancies) of honest love. Being the
inventions and collection of George Whestone, Gent.

Formae nulla fides.

The Argument.
DOm Diego a Spaniard, falling in love with fair Geneuora, was in the prime of
his fancies, with like love by Geneuora friendly acquainted. Afterward
Geneuora (else where fancying) had Dom Diego in such disdain, as still she
crossed both his suite and service with scorn. Dom Diego seeing an
impossibility of favor, exiled him self both from court and company, and
vowed to live and dye in the Pyren mountains, unless Geneuora, would both
remove her misliking, and friendly fetch him home again: who solemnly
perseuering in this senseless vow, you may suppose among the Pyren hills, to
wrest forth this following complaint of his wretchedness.

DOM DIEGO HIS dolerous discourse.
I (Wretched) weary am of toil, good death delay my pain:
My words in wast, my works are lost, my wishes are in vain.
I serve with faith, my hire is fraud, I love and reap but hate,
And yet this woe does wrong me most, I mourn without a mate.
For if one drop of hope were seen, though dride with scorn in sight,
I might with pyning Tantale join, who sterues in sweet delight.
Or if I could but half the hill, roll up the tumbling stone,
I had a mate of Sisyphus, to match with me in moan.
But, oh, O not my hap more hard, they have a scambling joy,
But I no thought of sweet remorse, my sovereign is so coy.
My joy in was, my woe in is, and so is like to be.
My fancies turn, to fiery sightes, alive, my death to see.
The court, the court, where pleasure lives, with pain increast my care,
Each blisie seemde bale, each gleame of grace, did mist my joys with scare.
Each show of sport, my sorrows moude, each pleasure made me plain,
Yet there I preast, to feed on sight, digesting dire disdain.
Were love not blind, this life were strange, for one to love his foe,
More strange to haunt a place of harm, but most to joy in we.
But (Oh) who feels, his aukeward fittes, and suckes ye sweet in sour,
Shall bide a year of dole with ease, to feel one lightning hour.
Such life I lykt, til sogge of scorn, did rise to dampe my joys,
Till secret sighs, wrought open scoffs, till flontes did quite my joy.
Until the colors which I wore, my secret mourning wrayde,
Till dauntes of friends, till frumpes of foes, my feeble hope dismayde.
And till her blondie hate was seen, of every beetell sight,
Till then I never shronke, but sought with zeal, to quench her spite,
But then (quoth I) Dom Diego wretch, bid Court, not care adue,
Some uncouth haunt, thy fortune seems, thy harms alone to rue.
Thou gave thy word, to die her love, let word, in work agree:
Her checking change, her scorn for faith, is no excuse for thee.
A Hermits life, beseemes thy luck, go haunt the Pyren hills.
To touch the food, we may not taste, increases hungry wills.
Therewith I vow'de, in desert houltes, alone to rue my harm,
Where fretting sighs, does serve for fire, my frosen flesh to warm.
My food, is aples, hawes, and heepes, such fruits as feed a beast,
Wild monsters are companions mine, in hollow caves I rest.
A crabtree staff my surest steed, my sterued legs to ease,
My thoughts new wounds, increases still, when cares I would appease.
The watchful clock, the warning bell, the harmony I hear,
Is dreadful noyes of dreadlesse beasts, of whom I live in fear.
My study is to way, and wail, that fortune thus does lowre,
Where wealth by want, once love by scorn, my sweet by present sour.
Where feathers flue, about my helm, a willowe wreath to wear,
My weeds of worth, by cote of leaves, sharp flows, for deintie fare.
My stately home, by hard exile, delight, by wythred woe,
Does force (god wott) my wasted tears, through grief, a fresh to flow,
My lute that sometime lent me ease, has neither frett nor stringe,
My sugared voice, with howling hoarst, forbids me now to singe.
My penns are worn, my incke is done, my paper all is writ,
Yet half my passions and my pain, unpainted are as yet,
So that for only exercise, in trees and Marble stone,
My grief to case, I forced now, do grave my wretched moan.
Live long in bliss thou lofty Beeche, wherein this vow is writ,
No luring friend, nor lowering foe, Geneuras faith shall flitt.
To witness now, her foul untruth, Dom Diego writes below,
Her vowed faith, from known friend, is reft by sawning foe.
But chief of all, thou sacred stone, remain thou sound and safe,
Continue thou these letters fresh, which are my Epitaphe,
Hard by this rough, and ragged stone, Dom Diego (wretched* lies,
Geneuras hate exiled him, yet loving her he dies.
This homely tumbe, is all my help, to bring my death to light,
This must record my faithful love, and show my Ladies spite,
In time I trust some forest Pan, or wandering pilgrim may,
Peruse my woes, and to my sweet, this sour message wray.
To save my faithful boon unbroke, to show my service just,
My souereignes scorn, with face of faith, her treason cloakt with trus^,
Me wretched Dom Diego forced, before my time to die,
My bones unburied by this tumbe, makes proof it is no lie.
And now good death, with speed divorce, my soul from lothed life,
My joys are worn, my pleasures past, my peace, is chaung'd to strife,
I see no mean of quiet rest, but only death by thee,
Then spare them death, whom pleasure hauntes, and use thy force on me*
Dom Diego having for the space of 22. months, thus lived an exiles life,
only accompanied with sorrow, wretchedness and misery, which comfortless
companions no one hour forsook him: it chanced that Dom Roderico (a special
friend of his) had occasion to travel into Gascoine, and as he iourneyed (in
the desert forest, whereof this wretched lover was made free citizen) he mist
of his way: in the end finding out Dom Diegos homely caben, of whom he
demanded the way to Barcelone, and having his answer, as he departed, he
espied in a corner of his cotage, two fair saddles, upon the one of them was
engraven this Poesse in Spanish: Que brantare la fe, es causamuy fea,
To violate faith, is a thing detestable.
Dom Roderico reading this poesse, called to remembrance, Dom Diego, in all his
devises used ye same, and to be short, he so handled the matter, as the
hermit, who^ he knew not (so was he ouergrowne with hair, and worn with
woe) confessed himself to be Dom Diego his friend, and taking him a side, he
delivered the whole cause of his exile. Dom Roderico, seeing this foster lovers
miserable estate, vowed (with what possible speed he could) to work his
remedy, who (for more haste) forsook his journey, and returned home unto his
own castle. At his coming home (making no semblaunce of his knowledge) he
road to the place, where fair Geneuora with her mother soiourned, of purpose
to learn what new gallant had wooed her, and finting him to be a young
gentleman of Biskaye, who shortly after (by her own consent) was minded to
steal her away, Dom Roderico, so cunningly coined with Geneuoras Page (who
wholly knew his mystresse secrets) that he certainly learned the night of these
lovers departure. The same night, accompanied with ix. or x. Gentlemen his
companions, and friends, he lay in wait for this Biskayne lover, and his
Lady, who (about x. or a xi. of ye clock, only accompanied with two or three
gentlemen his companions) came merely on their way. Roderico, so soon as he
saw ye instrument of Dom Diegos misery, set spurs unto his horse, and with
spear in Rest, so rudely welcomed this Biskayne, that for all his coat of
plate, he pearst through both his sides. The soldiers of this amorous
captain, seeing their master thus infortunately slain, and waying their
unable force, to encounter with Dom Rodericos company, saved themselves by
flight, and left woofull Geneuora to shift for her self: on whom Rodericos
servants soudainly seized* and blinding her with a scarf, with speed co^uayd
her, where wretched Dom Diego lived. Dom Diego somewhat comforted with the
sight of his sweet mystresse, began amain to crave recompense for his
faithful service. Geneuora so soon as she saw Dom Diego, and knew that sir
Roderico for his cause, had murdered her minio^, answered him (and exclaimed
on the^ both) with what opprobrious speech she could, yea the more they
persuaded her with friendly requests, ye more perverse was her refusal. Dom
Diego thus seeing an impossibility of favor, with inward sorrow fell into a
swoon. Dom Roderico, seig the distress of his dear friend, and ye
continuance, or rather increasing of Geneuoras disdain, commanded presently
her throat to be cut. Dom Diego half revived, seeing one ready to execute this
judgment, proffered what reskue he could. Oh good Roderico stay (quoth he) I
allow of thy honest zeal, yet attribute my wretchedness to fortune, not her
fault: Wherefore for the love thou bear to me, for the love I owe to her,
see Geneuora without further damage, safely conveyed home. Geneuora seeing him
offer reskue and crave her safe conduite, whose death, her frowardnes well nie
had wrought, on the soudaiue was won unto pity, and lovingly embracing Dom
Diego, she offered satisfaction for his sorrows, and for an earnest penny
she freely Dom Diego, late the miserablest creature living, unawares became the
happiest man alive, whose matchless pleasures appear in this under written
triumph.

Dom Diego his triumph.
WHo can report that never tasted bale?
What difference is, tweene sorrow and delight?
And who may tell, a more triumphant tale,
Then he in joy, that late was kept in spite?
I am the man: in moan there was none such:
My moan is past, my mirth must be as much.
Since so: alone, I rule in throne of joy,
Of pleasures mount, I weald the golden Mace,
Then leave to brag, you Princes proud of Troy,
Your brayd delights, by me can have no place,
Once beautes bliss, to vaunt does make you bold,
I have such hap, and ten times more in hold.
And by your lean, your Ladies blemished are,
Ask Theseus, who first lopt fair Hellens love?
Sir Diomede, the spoil of Troylus ware,
Suppose them true, whom none could ever prove,
Your lightning joys, such lasting woes did brue,
As you may wish, your fames to die with you.
But Lady mine, I wrong thee much in this,
To peize thy praise, with such as liu'de or live,
For natures toil, some ways disabled is,
She frames our form, but can no fortune give,
But thou were shapt (for fear of fortunes spite,)
Of precious moold, by force of heavenly might.
By heavenly might, and worthy well such toil,
Whose lively limms, the Indian riches show,
Her hair five gold, her front does yuorie foil,
Her eyes give light, as diamonds there did grow,
Her words of worth (as cause does cause her speak
Tweene rocks of pearl, their pleasant passage break.
What should I say? of truth from top too to,
These precious gems, in beauty she does stain,
And more then that (besides the outward sho)
Their virtues she, with vauntage does retain.
So that of force, I (forced) must her define:
Not bound to kind, but wholly is divine.
Thrice happy man (whose love this Saint did lure)
Dom Diego late, even very wretchedness,
Now may thou daunt (thy vauntage is so sure)
That none alive thy pleasures half possess,
Through chance of love, do thousands chance on death.
But dying I, my love inlargde my breath.
The scource of woe, is sauourie sauce to taste,
Our sweet delights, if once delight we feel,
The rough repulse (if battring tire be plaste)
Amends the spoil, when walls (perforce) do reele,
Of every thing, the goodness does increase,
If once before, the loss did us distress.
Sufficient proof, my lingering love can shoe,
I tired hope, ere time my truth could try,
Yea desperate wretch, forworne with wreake of woe,
I left my suit, and sought the mean to die,
Now winning her, whose want wrought such annoy,
On former griefs, I graft my fruits of joy.
In wax say I, men easily grave their will,
In Marble stone, the work with pain is won,
But perfect once, the print remains still,
When waxen seals, with every browse are done:
Even so in love, soon won, as soon is lost,
When forced through faith, it bydes both fire and frost.
I can not vaunt of easy conquered love:
I grant with faith, I foil Geneuras scorn,
But now in peace, Distrust shall never move,
One ielous thought, of wild Acteons horn,
And yet forsooth, this fear he lives in,
To lose the wight, with words, that words did win.
O happy love, whose torments prove so sweet,
O friendly foes, whose treason, tried my truth,
O luckie man, Dom Roderic to meet,
Geneura thou, thrice honored, for thy ruth,
Thou, only thou, (the rest of small avail)
Did save my life, when hope and all did fail.
Now forth, I throw, my Gauntlet for this grace,
To challenge such, as seek to foil thy fame,
For sure the Arms, that durst my sweet embrace,
Dares to defend, the honor of her name,
If which I fail, in prison let me sterue,
So doom my fault, for so I should deserve.
The complaint of two lovers, restrained from their wished desires, by the
displeasure of their friends.
WE lucklesse wightes in thraldom lincked still,
May sit and singe, our lays of deep lament,
Whose wayward friends, accoyde in sullen will,
Both stir and strive, to sunder our consent,
And yet (God wot) (...) a sting is in vain,
One will serves both (...) and in pain.
Have they desire, we should be shrinde in clay?
By sundring us, that loves each other so?
Will they not know, Love does no Law obey?
Nor how he wrappes, the wysest wightes in woe?
Think they that force, can force our selves to hate?
O, no, in vain, they seek to sow debate.
Our plighted faith, shall never falled be,
Constrainte of will, our wishes cannot yoke,
Our words in works, in weal, and woe agree,
Such care we have, to keep our vow unbroke,
O love through whom, we live in this unrest,
Once ease thy thralles, that thus obey thy hest.
Remove their wrath, that works to wrack our will,
That after storms, we may some sun shine see,
The fault is thine, if love betyde us ill,
Which bound our selves, that thou might set us free,
Wherefore vouchsafe (to sour our sweet at last)
That gleames of Grace, our clouds of woe may wast.
The Device of a Gentlewoman, to persuade her lover of her constancy,
notwithstanding her show of hate, which she only used to quench the ielous
suspicion of her friends.

By sowsing of our ship, in seas of ire:
Since sullen thoughts does so our friends accoy,
As wayward will, still wresteth our desire:
I see no means, more meet for our behoue,
Then sail to strike, till storms (...) and gone,
Our looks must hate, although (...) heart do love,
Yea far from wish, our words must menace moan.
And yet this show, of force must needs seem strange,
Unto us both, tweene whom was never strife,
But let it help, I never mean to change,
But keep my vow, vnfallsed as my life.
These simple shifts, we silly wenches work,
To quench or cool, our ielous friends suspect.
Whose Lynxes eyes, in every corner lurcke,
To tric, and spoy, what works our defect.
Thus farewell friend, I will be short with thee,
Thou know my love, in darkest clouds will shine.
And though in show, my words from works agree,
Yet think I am, and ever will be thine.
The rejected lover, with earnest desire, pursues the sight of his disdainful
Mystresse.
THe dampe of do^le, has chaoked my delight,
Sharp frumpes (...) frostes, does nip my silly joy,
My glymering grace, is darkened with despite,
Yea sullen thoughts, my sovereign so accoy.
As mistes of scorn, still falls on my faith,
My clear conceiptes, are clowded oore with care,
And yet my heart, aye me no power has,
To shun the storm, that shows all this scare.
O strange effects, of blind affected love,
To haunt the ill, whereby our mischiefs move.
Much like the fly, that buzzeth by the flame,
And makes a sport, to see the candle light,
Till she unawares, be sindged in the same,
And so with death, does buy her fond delight.
Or as the mouse, that frisketh by the trap,
At length is moved, to meddle with the bayt,
Which weaues (God wot) the web of her mishap:
The bridge does fall, and she is baind with weight,
Such sweet conceits, enticing sorrows breed,
To sterue with woe, when joy makes fare to feed.
With which effects, I find my fancies witcht,
I feel the flame, yet can not shun the fire.
Th'inticing trap, I see on treason pitched,
And yet the bayte to byte, I have desire,
But (O ill hap) to work my harms increase,
Both mischiefs want, the forerecyted force,
I find no death* my sorrows to appease,
And so my state, then other misers worse:
But sure my fault, or fate ordaines it so,
And therefore I, do take in worth this woe.
A Gentlewoman falsely deceived with fair words, forsweareth hereafter to be
won with flattering promises.

And so escape, the trains of trustlesse men,
I find too true, by witness of my woe,
How ye fair words, with faithles works they blen,
Much Siren like, with sweet enticing call,
We silly dames, to witch, and wrap in thrall.
O cruel friend, whose false of faith I rue,
Thou forcest me, to count all men unjust,
For if that vowor oath might make one true,
Thou use such, as well might force to trust:
But I betrayed, by too far trusting thee,
Will henceforth take, fair words even as they be.
I will be deaf, though thousands sue for grace.
My sight as dym, if lights in silence plead,
Salt tears, no oath, within my heart shall place,
For this shall be my song, and daily read:
Poor I that lived, in thraldom linckt of yore,
Unbound at length, will learn to love no more.
The pitious complaint of Medea, forsaken of Jason, lively bewraying the
slipperie hold in sugared words.
A Mid the desert woods, I rue and show my fate,
Exild (O wretch) from courtly joys, bereft of princes state,
O love, from whence these plagues proceed,
For service true, is this thy meede?
What vaileth now my skill, or sight in Magiches lore,
May charmed herbs, suffice to help, or cure my festred sore,
A salve I shapt, for others smart,
My self to aid, I want the Art.
I made the wayward Moon, against the Sun to strive,
And ghastly ghostes, from burial graves, full often I did revive,
To counterchaunge, the same with death,
In flower of youth, some yealded breath.
What future harms insude, I showed to other wights,
And wanted skill for to prevent, my present pensive plights.
Why did I leave my native soil,
In foreign land, to have the foil?
Thy love ( O Jason false) to win I sparde no pain,
Although Medeas loyalty, be guerdoned with disdain,
The goulden fleece, thou were to blame,
To bear away, I won the same.
But lordly looks full often, and slippry service eke,
To harmless Ladies have been vowde, to catch ye suitors seek.
And then depart, from plighted oath,
Their sugared words, yield sealdome trothe.
Where be ye careless vows, and feareles oaths thou swear?
When I imbarkt from Colches coast, ye mountain waves did tear?
Where is thy faith, for goulden fleece,
To crown me Queen, of famous Greece?
Might not thy traytrous mind, in lue of friendships lore,
Forsake me (wretch) among my friends, but yt with sail and ore
Thou me conuaydst to place unknown,
Among wyld beasts to make my move.
Who against their savage kind, do work me (wretch) no ill,
But seems for to lament my case, or else the Gods y will.
My lothed life, should lengthned be,
To guerdon my iniquity.
The forsaken lover, prettily nippeth his Ladies inconstancy, for that (as he
thought) she matched with his baser in account, wherein coulerablie he
discovers both their names.

If happily he, his wished haven espies,
With restless toil, does plie to be on shore,
Hail in a maine, my mates, he cheerely cries,
But when with rough repulse, from blissful bay,
He is inforst, on seas again to stray:
Unhappie wight, then drownde in deep despair,
Powers forth his plaintes, with floods of brackish tears*
With whom I now, do claim a party share,
^ Imbarkt in hope, where will the stearne did wild,
Thy faith was guide, which falsed me beguylde.
My sails of sighs, my tackle framde of trust,
With bliss, and bale, thus armed was my bark,
Now vaunst on high, now thrown down to ye dust,
Now fraught with joy, now forced to care and carke,
Yet quiet calm, at length of friendships lore,
Did seem to guide, my shiuered ship to shore,
And entering in, the narrow brook of bliss,
Triumph (quoth I) dame Fortune has the foil,
The mends is made, that quiteth every miss,
Aduentrous boy, now reap thy fruits of toil,
But trust to top, of Fortunes fickle wheel,
Thy faith did slide, and I began to reele.
For bitter blastes, of rage, and deep disdain,
My ankers lost, my ship so sore they shook,
That I again, was glad broad seas to gain,
To escape the flats, within thy blisselesse brook,
And whilste in hope, I wind and weather wait,
A baggish bank, I saw, to pass thy straight.
Agrieud whereat, through hate I houng the lip,
And said too true, that waves, and women gree,
Which saues the boat, and spoils the gallant ship:
So Ladies love, lights often in base degree:
And then I vowed, from which I will not swerve,
To haunt you both, no more then need shall serve.
The lover attributes his curelesse wound to chance, by loving long.
LOng have I lost my liberty,
Alas through love, (long) have I so.
(Long) have I stood in ieopardie,
In loving (long) through pyning woe,
Whose constant truth long, has den tryde,
Though (long) his suit has been denyde.
By batteri^ (long) the brazen wall,
The cannon shot, does clean deface,
The longest trees in time do fall,
Which (long) before had Boreas base,
The little brook in running (long)
Does turn into a river strong.
Then may it be I loving (long)
My pyning corpse by (long) delay,
Can (long) abide the fury strong,
Of ghastly death which (long) does stay,
His lingering stroke to have it so,
That loving (long) should work my woe.
A Sonet, wherein is shown the strange effects of love.
IN care I joy, my mirth is moved by mo^re,
With floods of want, I wear to ebb my woe,
Appayd I rest, in restless grief to groan,
By fainting hope, my friendly hap does grow,
In waves of bale, I bathe in wished bliss,
My wealth in woe, in pain my pleasure is.
But how these hang, if so she search my harm,
These few suffice, the same to show my (sweet)
To raise her joy, my self I wholly arm,
To freese, or f^y, as she shall deem it meet,
I bound, am free, and free, I yeald her slave,
That Is my delight, that she desires to have.
And since my sport, does make my sovereign ^oy,
And mirth she finds, to thwart my faith with fr^ps,
I sad, am glad, my noy, may force her joy,
My sour, her sweet, my dole may clear her dumpes,
Yea life I wish, this were to do her good,
Each day to waste, a drop of guitlesse blood.
The lover wearied with a number of delays, sues unto his Lady for pity, or
otherwise her speedy denial, by death to work a speedy dispatch of his
languishing days.
IF pity may prevail, to pearse your heart with ruth,
Sweet maistres lend your listening ear, to hear your servants truth,
Whose faith has chose you judge, and jury if you please,
If not, desert, shall try this cause, your deintie mind to ease.
The whole record, is writ, for rafing with my tears,
My witness is, my withered corpse, ny famished with fears,
A thousand sighs besides, in open court will swear,
You are the Saint, which with my heart, I honor, love, and fear.
Disdain, that works delays, mistrust that moves my moan,
No witness has to hinder right, but false suspect alone,
Yet boulstred up by scorn, they scoff my loyal love,
And kept me play, with foreign frumpes, til pricked by meede to prove,
If pity could procure, your heart, my harm to rue,
I found remorse, was preast to hear, the plaint before your view,
And now good Lady note, my witness and my woe,
If I deserve your love for love, give verdite yea, or no,
For daunted with delays, for hap or harm I iumpe,
And know you once if sullen will, my faithful love does frumpe:
I will not languish long, in cursed Cupides flame,
Death in despite, shall rid me dole, and you shall bear the blame,
But if with sovereign grace, you may your servants state
Yeald recompense, of love betimes, least liking come too late,
To cool his flaming heart, by Cupide set on fire,
Through heat whereof a Whetstone cold, consumes with hot desire.
The thought of wonted joys, doubleth the miserable man's grief.
I That whose youth, was lul'd in pleasures lap,
Whose wanton years, were never chargd with care
Who made no flight, but reached the pitch of hap,
And now besieged, with grief at unawares,
How can my heart, but bleed to think on this?
My joy with was, my woe is joined with is.
With is? (Oh yea,) and ever will be so:
Such hell is thought, to muse on joys forgone,
For though content, would feign appease my woe,
This myrthlesse note, continues fresh my moan,
O dear delight, with whom I dwelt in joy,
Thy sowrest sweet, my sorrows would destroy*
Destroy it would, but Oh, those days are past,
When to my will, I found dame fortune wrought,
My fancies clear, with cares are over cast,
Yet bootelesse hope, will not forsake my thought,
But still proroges, my grief, that else would dye.
To vain effect, when I my toyling spy.
The hap, and hard fortune of a careless lover.
MY heart on hayh, with careless mind, I rau^ging freedoms field^,
Blind Cupide, by arest unawares, to beauty bad me yeald,
What yeald (quoth I) at beauties beck, as Venus slave to serve?
May he whom freedom, always (...), by bondage stoop to sterue?
No, Cupide, no: with me go tell, dame beauty bears no sway,
Nor pleasure with her painted sheath, can make me Cupide pray:
This answer made, with winged feet he took his flight away,
And did impart, to beauty straight, his rest I would not bay*
With anger fraught, who forth with wild, an army should be had,
And captains having charge them selves, in armor should be clad,
Her self she plaste in foremost front, with Pleasure in her hand,
And Lady Love elected was, high Marshall of her band*
Fair Venus in the rereward went, her son in ambush lay,
Thus Beauty and her warlike crew, did mearch in battle ray,
But I poor I, which feared no force, in freedoms lease at large,
Pursude my sport, with careless mind, of Love I took no charge,
But all too soon, I heard a sound, of dub, dub, in my ear,
And therewithal I saw in sight, ten aunchents to appear:
Which poudred were with pyned hearts, in bloody colors set,
Which forced me flee to wisdoms wood, to escape Dan Cupids net.
But crafty (he) in scoute there lay, who first gave charge on me,
And brought me bound to Beauties bar, her prisoner for to be,
Then stinging love, enforst me pray, Dame Pleasure plead my case,
But Beauty said in vain I sude, in hope of future grace.
For martial law, forthwith (quoth she) thy heart in bale shall bounce,
Therewith she chargd her Marshal high, this sentence to pronounce,
To bate thy pride, which would not stoop, when beauty bent her lure,
Thy casting shall be clods of care, Saunce hope of happy cure.
With floods of tears, thy dazeld eyes, thy sickly cheeks shall stain,
And Fancy with his sleating toys, shall harbor in thy brain,
Thy heart shall poudred be with pain, thy guts with grief to boil,
Thy seething sighs, shall scalde thy lips, to taste of inward toil.
Thy intrales all shall parched be, with flames of fond desire,
The heavy perse of bodies grief, thy pyned legs shall tire:
Despair then was the hangman made, which doom did Beauty please,
And I to bondage was bequeathed, to live in little case,
Wherewith the Gem of Venus band, vnprayd of her bon gre.
Did beg me* wretch at Beauties hand, her prisoner for to be.
And after vow of loyalty, did let me go at large,
Yea further paid my farewell fee, my bondage to discharge,
In l^e whereof at her command, my service lo is pressed,
As homage due, for saved life, yea, more her slave I rest.
The absent lover in pawn of his constancy, sends his heart to his Lady.

This pyned heart, bepoudred all with tears,
Whose poesy is ( No fate, my faith can move)
A rare ascorde, in prime of rouing years.
When fancy sets a thousand thoughts on fire,
When faith is choakt, with smoke of filthy change,
When folly fumes, when flameth fond desire,
When raging lust, beyond his bounds does range,
When every bayte beguileth, brainsicke youth,
When new found love, the old exileth still,
When sugared words, are sauced with untruth,
What strange consent, subdude my wanton will?
Forsooth (sweet we^ch) this stay thy virtue wrought
Thy rare report, this Metamorphose made,
And lest my youth, should wrong thee with some thought
I use this help, all vain desires to vade,
In absen^e lo, to leave with thee my heart,
That al my joy, may live where thou do rest,
I likewise use, to free thy hidden smart,
By secret sighs, which flies from covert breast,
My heart to send, to join in aid with thine,
That thou may joy, although in pain I pyne.
The lover neither greatly favored, nor openly refused, compares the
wretchedness of his estate, unto the pains of hell.
Tantals grief,
Who hunger sterues in seas of deintie fare,
Which fails to eb, when he should find relief,
And flows again, his hope with woes to ware,
And how in vain, poor Sisyphus does moan,
To mountain top, who still does roll the stone.
And reaching thus, the point of all his pain,
For joy he leapes, down falls his fruits of toil,
Straight back he runs, to fe^ch the stone again,
A new he rolls, but reapes his former foil,
These be their plagues, which light in satan's trap,
To wish and want, to hope, and have no hap.
If then it be, a hell, in doubt to live,
My self by proof, can blase thereof the pain,
Who finds grace, where scorn but late did grieve,
And fead with hope, with hate is steru'd again,
For all his suite, who can no answer know,
If his sweet maistresse, loves him yea, or no.
If secret yea, this Item would but give,
I love in heart, where most in show I hate,
To free suspect, thus straungely do I live,
To plight my faith, where scorn does feign debate,
Unto my smart, it were a sweet relief,
Then should my lute, sound notes of joy, not grief.
Then would I laugh, to see my Lady pout,
And smyle when most, she wrou^g her mouth awry,
A sign of faith, should seem each thwarting flout,
And jealous fear, far from my heart should fly,
Although in arms, my foe did her embrace,
If once she fleard, with fancy on my face.
If open no, would will my suites to cease,
I know the worst, and so adieu to smart,
A hasty death, my sorrows could appease,
Or languor would soon pierce my pyning heart,
Thus death were worsse, how so my fortune ^ell,
But now alive, I feel the pains of hell.
By gleames of grace, I reap a hot relief,
With storms of scorn, I freese again with fear*
Thus floods of joy, do fall to eb with grief,
And doubtful hope, desired hap does wear,
In favor most, I move her still to love,
Soft she replies, I must your patience prove.
I fear to say, be plain with yea, or no,
Least in her pettes, no, please her peevish thought,
And scorn with all, my joys do overthrow,
So forward haste, with backward speed were bought,
Thus am I forced, to dance attendance still,
God grant for all, in five I get good will.
G.W. to the sign of the brazen bell.
AND not without desert, I thee a tyrant call.
Which save a scorn thou madst of me, to each mishape art thrall,
Thy credit is the church, O false unfriendly bell
When as thou soundest the marridge* joys, or ringst the careful knell.
The soldier in distress, by the alarm makes,
And when good hap does him advance, thy sides he rudely shakes,
Digressing from his state, to toil of baser chance.
A thrall thou art, to Hick and Steven, in every morris dance,
The hind does deck his horse, with belles to make him free,
The harmless fool, upon his cap does make a scorn of thee,
Besides to savage beasts, a servile slave thou restes,
The deintie dog in Ladies lap, is iueld with thy iostes.
The mounting faulcon loft, bewrayes by thee her stand,
By thee the hobby dares the lark, before he well be mande.
Of yore this phrase I learnd, when things ne framed well,
A capcase for the fool to call, a cockscomb and a bell,
Then can that thus art scornd, besides thy servile strokes,
A triumph make upon his tears, whom love, ne lust prouokes.
To like thy maistresse looks, and love her as his life,
Who well is bent to quite thy toil, when stinted is his strife,
He sure would thee advance, from brass to glittering gold,
If that by pearcing peales thou would, his sorrows once unfold,
Thou see what sighs I send, and how my suites be paid:
Thou see my maistresse smyle with grace, and grant she erst denayd,
Thou see me Cupids thrall, her love in league with hate,
Thou see my bliss is wayd with bale, when wrath does weaue debate:
Thou see my greatest joys, are counterpeisde with pain:
Thou see my mirth is mixed with moan, when jealousy does reign,
Yet when she smyles, thou spar'st, my sorrows to deface,
And when she frowns, thou fearst to speak, to win her wonted grace.
Well, since through fear or scorn, thou lettst me languish still,
I present now will plead for grace, to win my wished will,
And first good tongue prepare, to tell a lovers tale,
Sound forth my joys, aduaun'st by hope, by dyre despair my bale,
And when mistrust infectes my Ladies hautie heart,
Then scalding sighs, give you the charge, to show my ceaselesse smart.
But if she list to toy, and smyle with friendly face,
With easy force then arms assay, thy maistresse to embrace:
Then sorrow seek revenge, upon her ruby lips,
Then wounded heart receive the cure of cruel Cupids nips,
Thus forward vaunce your selves, the master griefs to wray:
The silent man still suffers wrong, the proverb old does say.
And where adventure wants, the wishing wight ne thriues.
Faint heart, has been a common phrase, fair Lady never wives.
The lover blames his Ladies mistrust, wherein is figured the passions of an
earnest lover.
WHat fancy fond did force your mind,
My dear to judge me so unkind,
As one of wits bereaved,
To break the bonds of loyalty,
As one deuoyd of honesty?
No, no, you are deceaud.
For where such perfect amity,
Is linckt with true fidelity,
By no means Iunos jealousy
A sunder may it part.
For since with you, I fell in love,
Assigned by the Gods above,
My heart did never seek to prove,
From yours once to start.
For proof to try what I have said,
Mark how my flesh, away does fade,
And inward parts does fret:
For who can hide the slankering fire,
But that it will show forth his ire,
By virtue of his heat.
So those ypearst with Cupides dart,
Cannot so closely cloak their smart.
But that they must complain,
Their scalding sighs, their sorrows show,
Their color fading too and fro,
Bears witness of their pain,
Their sour sitting in secret nookes,
When others laugh, their lowering looks,
Declares them caught in Cupides hooks,
And fare as men forlorn.
Their often making of their moan,
Their solemn sitting all alone,
In places secret and unknown,
Still cursing they were borne.
Are tokens true the Peet says,
To whom these Turtles vow their faith,
If fayning we may trust.
Certes these torments all men grieve,
And therefore sure I do believe,
Their sayings to be just.
Wherefore to guerdon loyal love,
My dear such fancies from you move,
As Envy late did feign.
For truly I protest to you,
The heavens shall fall ere I untrue,
My loyalty will stain.
And time I trust will so provide,
When eluish Envy shall her hide,
From bale to bliss truth shall us hide,
To top of Fortunes wheel.
Where we to banishe fell annoy,
Still live repleate with blissful joy,
Still lauding of the blinded boy,
Whose force we often did feel.
Till time obtaines that happy day,
Let no conceit your mind affray,
In judging me untrue.
Which blessed hour shall hap with speed,
Or else my will shall want his meede,
And thus sweet wench adue.
The unfortunate lover determines rather desperately to end his sorrows, then
to proroge them with bootelesse hope.
THe traiterous mate, by law adiudg'd to dye,
If fear of death, should work this foul effect,
In hope Saunce hap, his secret to escrye,
Or slander forge to peach the vnsuspect,
Proroging thus, his life by dallying death,
Besides his gilt, with shame should stop his breath.
In desperate frayes, where ransom is denyde,
Base were the mind, in hope of grace to yeald,
Whose courage else, might dau^t his enemies pride,
And so by force, with fame, to win the field,
For where our wrong, does work our overthrow,
In vain we hope, to wear away our woe.
And why should I, with hope persuade my thought,
To bath in bliss, past bonds of my desert,
For my base hap, my love to high is sought,
Whom favor none, but frownings overthwart,
Alas can reap, at my sweet maistresse hands:
I love, she hates, and thus my fortune stands.
With withered woe, my life I wear away,
Where often I hear, thundering in my thought,
Through love of her, my friends and foes to say,
Upon my self, I wilful murder wrought:
Then since my death, this strange report shall shape,
In vain for grace, till later gasp I gape,
Nay, wretch divorce, delays from wished death,
Cut through ye thread, which care co^sumes to slow,
Thy mounting mind, despises servile breath,
And can thou yeald, to fortunes overthrow?
Thy dome is death, by Ladies scorn decreed,
Needs most thou dye, then best to dye with speed.
Some friend will write, on my untimely tumbe,
With faithful zeal, I so my Goddess served,
My life, my love, my living all and some,
I reaft, and left, before my fancy sweru'd,
And when my suit, her moved to angry mood,
To work amends, I sacrifisde my blood.
Verses of complaint, devised for a well meaning lover, to move his maistresse
to pity.
NOw cease good Lady cease, to weaue my further woe,
Where scorn has worn my joys to eb, let pity force them flow.
To you, I sue and serve, to you I wail and weep,
For you my restless eyes does watch, when other men do sleep.
To you my sighs I send, which makes my heart to bleed,
For you my tears, like Tiber streams, from dazeled eyes proceed:
No wealth I do enjoy, but that I wish you part,
No grief does gaul, your dainty mind, but I do ease your smart.
To roll in bags of gold, in choice I would detest,
In faith for to enjoy your love, and harbor where you rest,
If you I might enjoy, I now forworne with woe,
To former joys would be restorde, in spite of him says noe,
No torment then should vex, or nippe my heavy heart,
All gulfes of grief, shall soon be damde, which drownes my joys in smart,
Of age, I should triumph, and death I would defy,
And fortunes force I could withstand, for all her cruelty.
In you to save or spill, in you to make or mar,
In you it restes to end my woes, or cause my further care.
Twixt life and death I stand, twixt hope and deep despair,
Till loving lines for pyning woe, returns a luckie share.
The complaint of a gentlewoman being with child, falsely forsaken.
WHat gulfes of grief, may well receive,
The tears which I in vain do spend,
What faithless wight, durst once deceive,
By falsehoode foul, so firm a friend,
With lose, who wrayes how well she lou'de,
When choice for change his fancy moude.
Though reason would, I should refrain,
His blame, my shame, for to bewray,
Good Ladies yet, my pinching pain,
Inioynes me here, the truth to say,
Whose wretched plight, and pensive state,
Surmounteth far, Queen Didoes fate.
What meanst thou wretch, from joy exilde,
To yeald unto his fained tears?
With careless vows why were begilde,
And fearelesse oaths, the traitor swears,
Ere nuptial rites, why did thou trust,
His faith, and yield unto his lust?
Thou Jason false by periurde flight,
Thou Theseus theft, decypherest plain,
I Dido wretch (thou Troyan knight)
Here equal griefs, in breast sustain,
I justly say, which words I rue,
All men be false, and none be true.
The fruits ysprong, by our desire,
My wealth, thou waste, might move thy heart,
To grant, the rightes, which love require,
And search a salve, to cure my smart,
But since thy faith, thou do forgo,
Come death and end my wretched woe.
Yet Ladies all beware by me,
To rue sweet words, of fickle trust,
My heaped harms, let warning be,
How filed talk, does prove unjust,
And rule your love by reasons lore,
Least future plagues, you do deplore.
Against one which wrote a slanderous libell in dishonor of a Lady.
YHacht thou were in enuies nest,
Whose murdering tongue, might not suffice
To work a Ladies great unrest,
But that with pen thou did devise,
Uile vice to paint, in virtues place,
Her spotless life, for to disgrace.
Whose sacred head, with wisdom fraught,
Is guided by Dame Pallas skill,
Her deintie mind Minerua taught,
The good to love, to leave the ill,
Then may it be, she does deserve,
Report from reasons lore to swerue.
Noe, no, thou wretch, and Uiper vile,
From natures law, which do rebel,
The world does know, thy guilty gile,
In dungeon darcke, hence forth now dwell,
For all men does, thy sight repine,
From manly acts, which do decline.
The heavens do frown, with earthly food,
Thy carren corpse, should nourisht be,
Thou only bird of Uipers brood,
And bitter branch of rankors tree,
A Harpie for thy filthy factes,
For God and man, abhorres thy acts.
Unseene henceforth, thou caitife couche,
Thou murderer vile of others fame,
How durst thou once presume to touch,
The honor due unto her name,
And make report that Dian chaste,
Fair Venus knights in bed imbraste.
Allotting to her harmless tongue,
All rusticke speech, with Stentors voice,
Disdayning them whom love has stonge,
For that with change, she makes her choice:
Not careful of her curious charge,
But gladly rows in every barge.
How may it he such fertile soil,
Well tilde and sown with happy seed,
Can choose in recompense of toil,
But yield thee fruits of Venus meede,
Why work I her so great abuse,
For giltlesse fact, to frame excuse.
My pains herein deserves no praise,
For all men knows, more then I write,
But thou that did this rumor raise,
If that thou dare so show thy might,
As truth maintain thy slaundrous words,
Committing trial to our swords.
Who ready am her to defend,
Till wounded corpse, with blood begord,
Of worldly woes do make an end,
By froward force, of slaundrous sword,
Or recant, to make will I,
And for offense, her mercy cry.
The unfortunate lover is persuaded his misshap to grow by destiny.
Hellens fa^e, ne Parris fair,
Untimely which did weaue the Troyans woe,
For former faults, the Gods agreede in ire,
With future panges, their vengeance down to throw,
And making choice, as instrument withal,
That Parris love, should king Priames thrall.
Such heaped harms, within the Heavens been,
For one man's case, to cause another care,
Unfriendly so, the fates men's happes do spin,
In partial wise, to yield each wight his share,
Then love, why should I curse, or skorne law,
Or blame the dame one whom I stand in awe.
Her virtues rare, her pearelesse beauty bright,
Her Pallas wit, I ioynde with Sabas skill,
My restless eyes, which couets so her sight,
Are not the fates, which forces me this ill,
For hier sprites, devised long ago,
My youthful years, should pass in pyning woe.
The discommodities of forced marriages, by the example of Venus and Vulcan:
supposed for the more plain explayning of the inconveniences, to be written to
a covetous carle, having but one only daughter, refused the offers of diverse
gentlemen, some being of good worship: and married her, unto an old crooked
coffing crust, for his great wealths sake.
IN prime of pride, when Venus mind, to Iunos rites aspirde,
A wealthy cruste, to catch her up, her father then desirde,
Perusing well his subjects states, who best might be her fear,
At length he chus'de a Croydon chuffe, to woo his daughter dear.
Whose wealth I do confess was great, y got by endless toil,
At smithes forge, with daily heat, his apish face did broyle.
This gallant squire, a wooing rid, his face be grimde with dust,
And coming to her fathers house, this dainty Dame he bust.
Who at the first this Lady bright, some monster thought to be,
Retyring back, affright she was, his vglye shape to see.
But in the end her fathers threats, and Vulcans gifts full brave,
Did force her dainty mind to yield, this crabtree piece to have.
The marriage rites in have were wrought, in presence of them all,
Then he this pearelesse dame conuayde, unto his rusticke hall.
Whereas the rest solemnised, her friends they did depart,
The which once done, then straight begun, the sum of all her smart,
For he fell to his former toil, before the dawning day,
Where bounsing blows on stythie smit, the sturdie steel to fame,
(Debard of rest) did force her wish, to taste of wedlockes game.
And as it is no news to tell, at all nor seeming strange,
How lovers they do never lack, whose minds be bent to change.
Here mighty Mars, y cleaped God of war and battle ray,
Enforste to yield as Cupids thrall, and eke his hestes obey.
Determined to give attempt, to fraught his heart with blis,
Though conquest hard, yet glory great, quoth he the guerdonis.
Before her eyes his siege he plants, like Phoebus rays that shan,
Assault he gave, she did resist, he made no battery than.
But one repulse his valiant heart, in no respect amasde,
He shot again, the bulwarks fell, and all the walls were raisde.
The fort thus won, as he did wish, he trod on pricking thorns,
To gain the spoil of Vulcans toil, and arm his head with horns.
The which without resistaunce great, he ioyed at his will,
But Jealousy the gulf did force to fear and dread that ill.
Which in the end, when true he found, he framed by his art,
A chain to tie these lovers fast, so that they might not starte.
And then for all the Gods he sent, to see this laughing game.
Where they in meede of pleasures past, received open shame.
Lo here the bitter fruits wherewith, such marriages be fraught,
Where wealth does win the woman's will, and virtue set at naught.
Such chance may hap to the old snudge, inforst by greedy gain,
Where pence possess the daughters love, the man she does disdain.
And so fare well at this my verse, me thinks I hear thee snuff,
But doggrell rhyme, were far to good, to greet a dunghill chuffe.
The forsaken lover shows to what intent he wears Tawnie, bewraying the
bondage that wanton Dames bring their thralles unto.
MY fancy once in fair carnation stood,
And truth to say, I lived in delight,
But lo (such is the fruits of wanton mood)
Both Dye, and days, are changed with despite,
In Tawnie now, I forced am to go,
(Forsaken wretch) my mystresse storne to shoe.
And would to God, who notes my wretched weeds,
Would wisely shun, the baits that beauty lay,
Her sweet receites, an ill digestion breeds,
Once bound enough, her thralles must needs obey,
Yea worse then that (though love seem nere so hott)
When all is done, forsaken is their lot.
This is the badge, that Cressids heirs do give,
They lure with grace, and loose with deadly hate,
Beware of them you that in freedom live,
If not, behold, a pattern of your fate,
Even I my self, do wear this Tawnie hue,
To show I served, a Cressid most untrue.
The rejected lover, determines, either to purchase his Ladies speedy
reconcilement, or else desperately to die.
OF thee, dear dame, feign would I learn the truth,
If he that bringes, the innocent in band,
Or (so betrayde) who slays him faunce ruth,
Is thought herein to have the bloudiest hand*
If he that does, the faultlesse first betray,
Then cruel, note the words, that I shall say.
I am the man, that long can hardly live,
You with your scorn, betrayde me to despair,
Then though my hand the deadly wound do give,
The murderer, it will be said you are,
But if you shame, such foul report to prove,
Now yield, sweet wench, or never grant to love.
Behold the blade, that shall confirm my faith,
My woes consent, in wanton years to die,
I live to hear, but what your aunsweare says,
Once lapt therein, my life or death does lie,
For trust me now, I (wretched) have decreede,
To win your love, or else to die with speed.
The lover being wounded at the Bathe, sues unto his Lady for pity.
I Bathing late, in Bathes of sovereign ease,
Not in those bathes where beauties bliss does flow^
But even at Bathe, which many a guest does please,
But lo mishap, those waves has wrought my woe.
There love I saw, her seemly self to laue,
Whose sightly shape, so sore my heart did heat,
That soon I shund, those streams my self to save,
But scorching sighs, so set me in a sweat,
That lo I pine, to please my peevish will,
And yet I freese, with frostes of chilling fear,
Thus in extremes, I live and languish still,
Without relief, my restless woes to wear.
I blame the bathe, as bruer of my bale,
To give me dregs, when others drink delight
Thus to the streams, I tell a senseless tale,
Time to beguile, when absence spittes her spite.
But now perforce, I sue to thee (sweet wench,)
With tears I plead, for pity and for ruth,
But if thou scornst, my scorched heart to quench,
Do but command, and death shall try my truth,
This blemish then, by thee, the bathe shall get,
Which many one, to health has helped of yore,
A mean to mashe men, in dame beauties nett,
And can not give, a salve to cure their sore,
Which if you shame, then say no more but so,
I yield to love, those words will ease my woe.
The lover to his Lady in Durance.

bewail no more your fate,
For why the Gods to pity dreast,
will change his stormy state.
And grant you joy, at your desire,
though rancor rage like Aetna fire.
Her aunsweare.
THe proverb says, whilst grass does grow,*
For want of food the steed does sterue,
So hope perplexed, with pining woe,
From reasons lore so often does swerue,
That dyre despair, does win the forte,
Where hope for succor should resort.
A description of Jealousy.
A Fearful thought, which never does remove,
But when in arms, he holds his hearts delight,
A wrangling hate, where once was passing love,
Often cold with hope, yet never quenched quite,
More clear in sightes, then words this woe is seen,
Sown by suspect, but rooted with debate,
Wacht with mistrust, whilst that the ear is green,
Through ripe mowne down, with sith of mortal hate,
Is jealousy.
To a disdainful Dam.
DIsdainful dame why did thou scorn, the wight that wished thee well,
May peevish pride a harbor have, where beauty does excel?
No rascal here did seek to sport, or join with gentle race,
Though hautie looks (thy form except) were shown in basest place.
The haggard gill, despises often, to pray on princely foul,
To straggle out at carren crow, and check with ugly Owl.
Thy gadding tricks, pursues her trade, with vauntage in defect,
Hail fellow met, with basest sort, the best thou do detect.
Believe how that thy form was framde, by fond Narcissus glase,
Dame beauties gifts full fickle are, and fade as does the grass,
Thy goulden hairs, to hoarie graie, will change their glittering hue,
Thy Lays life, and luring looks, no doubt thy bane will brue.
Thy face so fresh, in prime of youth, will wrinkled be with age,
Then taunting tongue, from scorneful nipps, dame nature will assuage.
Thy mountain breasts, which bears such breadth, thy pride in princely gate,
Thy graces al in tracte of time, will change their former state.
Then shall thou feel the force of scorn, what fruits from pride proceed,
The Ace of hearts, will haunt the stock, thy chiefest help at need.
The lover in praise of his Lady.
APelles, O, thou famous Greek,
Thy praise unto my ears does sound,
Since thou so far abroad did seek,
In countries through the world so round,
Till thou had drawn forth Venus shape,
Whose beauty past, Sir Paris rape.
O that thy fortune had been such,
To light whereas, my Lady lives,
Whose glistering beauty, is so much,
As to think on, my heart it ryues,
For Venus she does pass as far,
As does the Sun, each shyning star.
Each gift, which nature could devise,
By art my Lady, E, retaynes,
A sacred head, which to surmise,
The truth, all other far it stains,
Her hairs be of so glistering hew,
As gold they stayne, to outward vewe.
Her crystal eyes, her sugared tongue.
From whence such pleasant words do floe,
That lyking binds, both old and young,
The ground to love, where she does go*
Her cherrie cheeks so fresh of hew,
Her veins much like to Azurs blewe.
Her Rubie lips, her snowish neck,
Her proper chin, her crystal breast,
Her pleasant veins, whose pappes do deck,
Her comely corpse, so finely preast,
Her slender arms, with milk white hands,
Would catch the Gods in Cupids bands.
Her other parts so finely wrought,
Do pass my wits for to recite,
For why it seemde dame Nature sought,
In Court, each gorgious gearle to spite,
When first of mould, she did her frame,
She is so beautiful a dame.
Noe marvel though, the Grecian king,
Did shape his course, through fishfull flood,
From hateful Troy, his wife to bring,
Or else in Phrygia leave his blood.
If half such beauty, in Hellen were,
As is in this my Lady fair.
If Briseis beauty, were so bright,
Her comely syces, so excelled,
None may blame Achilles flight,
When raging love, his heart compeld,
To leave his Lord amid his foes,
A salve to search, to cure his woes.
Nor yet Ulysses none may blame,
Though frencie, he himself did feign,
Because without reproachful shame,
He would avoid the Grecian train,
The which to Troy, their course did shape,
To fetch again Sir Paris rape.
If that the beauty, equal were,
Of chaste Penelope his wife,
To match with this my Lady rare,
For whom I hazard would my life,
Amid a troop of Troyans fell,
My fancy she does feed so well.
An answer to a Gentlewoman by love constrained to sue to him whom of late
she scorned.
NIe driven to death by raging love, reuiu'de by happy means,
I smile you seek, ye erst you scornd, with those your silver streams.
Now time performs, my words prove true, when as I was your thrall,
Your sugared joys, in flowting me, would turn to bitter gall.
Else not the name of Goddess just, dame Venus does deserve,
Unless her servants, she advance, and makes her foes to sterue.
Your scalding sighs, let witness be, what sorrows I sustainde,
When as with pitious plaintes I showed, ye panges that most me painde.
But thou spronge up of Tigers seed, ungrateful dame I say,
When as with tears, I su'de for grace, would smile and go thy way.
Now let me laugh a while I pray, to see plungde in pain,
This is the salve to cure the smart, that thou art like to gain.
For why the child, but young once burnt, the fiery flame does dreed,
So I once bound and now am free, will taste no lovers meed.
The contemptuous lover finding no grace where he faithfully favors,
acknowledges his former scorn, used toward love, to be the only cause of his
miseries.
IN bondage as I live, attacht with Cupids mace,
Exilde from joy, bereft of bliss, past hope of future grace,
My self is judge, I do deserve,
Without relief in pain to sterue.
I smilde when I was free, at those which fettred ware,
But I (God wott) with beauties bait, was caught in Cupids snare.
When least I thought of such a woe,
My choice, in change, was sleating so.
But now with soaking sighs, to one I sue for grace,
Whose presence when I do approach, she st^aight does shun the place.
My sight, my sighs, my tears nor truth,
Her stoanie heart can move to ruth.
Yet love, that lives by hope, a fresh enforsed me to prove,
With pen to plead, what bashful tongue, dismayed was to move.
But lo in vain to her I write,
For love my guerdon, is despite.
I serve a froward saint, a Tigers whelpe I ^roe,
She smiles to see me wade in smart, her wish my wretched woe.
And yet in truth she blameless is,
My only fault inforceth this.
She is but instrument, my self, the very cause,
Why I consume with cureles grief, for scorning Cupids laws,
Wherefore (since love is sworn my foe)
Divorce me death, from lingering woe.
And then for others heed, this silly boune I crave,
That I upon my timelesse tomb, this Epitaphe may have.
The thing, that causde me here to lie,
Was scorning love at liberty.
Epilogus.
Vide fo. 65. fo 73. b. 80. and 95
FOr wantons heed, here wrayed is the thrall,
Of loving worms: how both they freese and fry,
How sweetest thoughts, are sawst with bitter gall.
Vide* 93.
How care, them cloyes, that live in jealousy,
What ill success, stolen marriages ensue,
Vide. 93.
How forced consentes, ^ield bear a loving heart,
Vide 74.75 b.
How sugared words to late, fair Ladies rue,
Vide 72. a.
How vain they strive, that lovers seek to part.
Vide 90. a.
How envious tongues, are apt to sow debate,
How fancy bringes, the stoutest minds in awe,
Vide 97.87.
How lovers wrongde, from love do fall to hate,
Vide 94,
How ramping rigges, regard no modest law.
How lingering love, does often mislyking move,
Vide 93.
How gallants gifts, fond women often allure,
How pride and ease, prefer men's thoughts to love,
Vide 100.
How lawless lust, all mischief puts in ure.
How scorneful dames (ye set men's suits at naught,)
Of such as served, are glad to seek relief,
Vide 74.2.100.
How loving thralles, from setters free are taught,
To shun the snares, that snarled them in grief.
And to conclude, in every Page is wrayde,
A lightning joy, a life of lack is love,
Who loves least, which proves is best appaide,
For women's minds as wether cocks will move.
Wherefore these toys, who list to read aright,
Shall find Loves woes, not how to love I write.
FINIS.
The Arbor of Virtue A WORK Containing the chaste and honorable life, of a
Bohemian Lady, to the which is adjoined, the complaint of two Hungarian
Barons, that wagerd the spoil of her Chastity.

Wherein, are the several praises of certain English Ladies and Gentlewomen:
being the translation, collection, and invention, of George Whetstons Gent.

Formae nulla fides.

To the right Honorable, and virtuous Lady, Iana Sibilla Greye, now of Wilton,
George Whetstons, wishes a long and happy life.
RIght honorable, and virtuous Lady, I find, that our chiefest and greatest
encouragement unto virtue, is to hear the memory of the virtuous, continued
with the careful reports of worthy writers: for that such testimony is both
a president for our lives, and also foreshewes after death, our fames. Likewise
it as necessary, to register the lives of the leaude, that the terror of their
punishments and infamy, may fear us to offend. So that moved with these
consideraetions (among a number my leasurable labors) I have faithfully
(though not curiously) translated the modest and noble life of a Boemian Lady,
with the fall of two Hungarian barons: which unadvisedly wagered the spoil of
her chastity. Which simple toil of mine, as a testimony of the reverent
duty, I owe unto you (under the title of the Arbor of Virtue) I humbly present
to your Ladyship, to the intent that when you are wearied, with the dispatch of
necessary cares and causes, you may recreate your honorable mind, with the
mylde report of this Ladies good behauiours. Wholly assured that as you lively
present her virtues: you will likewise, both defend her fame, and my honest
endeavor, with the countenance of your regarded name. From my lodging in
Holborne, the.15. of October. 1576.

Your honors during life to dispose. George Wh^tstors.

The Argument of the following discourse of Lady Barbaraes virtuous behauiours.
A Boemian knight, named Vlrico, married a virtuous Lady, called Barbara.
Vlrico being a little nipt with poverty, would feign have supplied his want,
by service in the wars, which adventure, he long delayed, through the i^alous
suspicion of his wives behavior, notwithstanding his imaginations quieted, by
the direction of a cunning Negromancer, named Pollacco, he craved
intertainment of the king of Hungary, the king (vouchsafing his request)
employed him in the wars against the Turk: the wars ended, Vlrico (laden
with honor) returned unto the kings court, where one day the Lord Alberto, the
Lord Vdislao, and he reasoned of women's behauiours. The Hungarian barons held
opinion, there was no woman so chaste, but might be won to wantonness. Vlrico
(in his Ladies behalf) reasoned to the contrary. In the end, they grew into
this heat of argument, that both the Lords wagered their lands to his, that
if he durst abide the trial, that the one of them, within two months would
obtain bodily delight with his wife. Vlrico accepted of their lay, the wager
being set down in writing, the King and Queen were both witnesses of the
match. Alberto gave the first adventure in these loving affairs to win her
to wantonness. The Lady finding his humor, by policies (as a thief that
sought to rob her honor) caused him to be imprisoned, where to bridle his
wanton affections, she made him to spin for his victuals. Alberto (in hope of
liberty) discovered to the Lady the whole wager, and how that the Lord Vdislao
would come about that enterprise, who in very deed shortly visited her castle:
whom she likewise made forth coming, and in penance of his offense, he
reelde the thread Alberto spon: the King and Queen hearing of their success,
had the Lady in high estimation, awarded Vlrico the land, and banished the
barons for their slanderous opinion.

The Arbor of Virtue.
AS supreme head of Hungary, a king there whilcome reigned,
Coruinus hight, whose worthy force, a world of praises gained,
What law and justice, once had made, through rule he never broke
He cherisht friends, he chaste his foes, with many a sturdy stroke,
Ymou'd through zeal, with clattering arms, he stoupt S. Mahomes pride,
The Turkish crew from Christian bounds, he chaste on every side,
This noble prince unto his spouse, a gallant Lady chusde.
A matrone in her maiden years, such modesty she used.
By whom she had three valliant sons, three virtuous daughters eake,
Which worthy ympes, in wisdoms lore, did live without their like.
Besides with haps to heap his joys, his subjects greede so well,
That foes could find, no hollow hearts, against him to rebel,
As vassell to which noble king, there was a Boeme knight,
A valiant and a ventrous Lord, Vlrico was he hight.
In prime of force, he plyde the wars, his parents purse to ease,
His parents dead, he home returned, his tenants pence to fease.
But small was left to pray upon, his ancestors did desire,
By dint of blade, not bags of dross, to honor to aspire.
Which when Vlrico wisely wayde, and wanted on account,
He bent him self with hassard life, by service for to mount.
But lo by lot, he hit in love, a wonder small to tell,
Save that his Ladies virtues did, her beauty brave excel.
Her portion yet (God wot) was small, yet all in wisdom lay,
A dowry little reackt upon, where churles does bear asway,
But Beauty here affection raysde, then Virtue friendship wrought,
These two conioynd, in seemly dame, in love Vlrico brought.
The earth (quoth he) is sure the Lords, the fruits thereof his wrack,
And may it be, the beggar then, shall clawe his servants back,
O no, no wight as yet has seen, the righteous beg his bread,
Although the lewd through foul offense, are often nipt with neade,
And if I should for gain (quoth he) unto some wanten bend,
Which venture into Cornwall would, her honesty to send.
Vlrico (hapless) then should be, a common scorn of men,
Delight to dele, from pleasure pain, should change his fortunes then.
To swim in wealth he means not so, to hassard his delight,
He somewhat has, and more may get, by manhood, and by might,
Thy choice, if once, thou winst thy choice, in spite of Fortunes wrack,
Will save what thy adventures gains, for to relieve thy lack.
Then may thou live in foreign soil, without a jealous brain,
Then may thou taste, at thy return, sweet pleasure for thy pain.
Why standst thou then amasde (quoth he) thy honest suite to move,
The silent man, the proverb says, has sildome hap in love,
Confess that constant, long thou liu'dst, y linckt in beauties bands,
And challenge freedom for thy truth, at thy sweet maistresse hands.
This wayd, Vlrico hies in haste, whereas his Lady lives,
And there her friends in her behalf, him intertainment gives,
As time did serve, he showed his zeal, unto his only joy,
She likte his words, but more him self, how so she seemed coy,
His gallant shape, his virtues strange, his honor never stainde,
His truth once known, the truth to tell, her love, had soon obtainde,
And quickly eake, with friends consent, them Iunoes rites does glad,
He had his will, and she her wish, and what would more be had?
The nuptial feasts, y finished, Vlrico with his dame,
Bids friends adewe, to castle his, they do their journey frame,
Where one does raise the others joy, one rids the others care,
And thus contented with their choice, in joy their days they wear,
Till need at length Vlrico nips, who was in spending free,
His rents but small, these two accounts, will hardly well agree,
And yet to poll his tenants poor, his honest mind does greaue,
What then, he feign would serve his leage, but loath his wife to leave.
See here how passing love is apt, to raise a jealous fear,
Withouten cause, we so do dread, the thing we hold full dear.
Vlricos mind, despises want, yet dreads to seek relief,
In absence, least his Ladies change, should work his greater grief,
And thus in silence long he mournes, and ebs his joys with woe,
Till secret sighs, and heavy looks, his inward harms foreshewe,
Which happily when his spouse espide, to clear his clouds of scare,
Sweet heart (quoth she) unto thy wife, thy hidden sorrows share,
So shall thy cares abridged be, so shall I know thy mind,
And happily in my counsel thou, some comfort sweet may find.
These words Vlrico likte so well, as straight he tells the truth,
Of present want, of mean to wealth, in order as insu'th,
Mine own (quoth he) you know my state, or present lack withal,
Our charge is great, our minds are high, our living is but small,
Of force we must our bravery leave, or seek some way of gain,
And vayling to the valliant mind, is sure a matchless pain,
This is the mean to mend our want, to serve my souereine leage,
Who now is bent with might and maine, the Turk forto besiege,
Those wars, ere this, I well have tryde, under Cilia Count,
Those wars, I trust, shall force thy fear with wealth, and fame to mount,
But ah (aye me) I loath, yet would, unfold what makes me stay,
But since sweet wench, love is the cause, allow what I shall say,
Long wished, at length I won thy love, O gem of al my joy,
As loath I am to leave thee now, least absence make thee coy.
I call to mind fair Helens mood, who trudged with Trojan knight,
When as her Lord was forced from home, with foreign foes to fight.
The ruffling rout at Ithaca, Ulysses far from home,
Does force a thousand fearful thoughts, within my head to rome.
Then Penelopes constancy, this dread would gladly wear,
She plaste alone, without her leake, a fresh does raise my fear:
The speech of woman's meekness eake, my thoughts does run among,
And straight my thinks I motions hear, that do Vlrico wrong.
In mind I view, what battery is, against thy beauty bent,
In thought I see, what sharp assaults, in sugared words are sent,
What fearelesse oaths, what careless vows, do flee, to foil thy fame,
In sine thou forced, with yealding will, do blot thy name with blame,
Then rage I straight, ye (harmless) against, as though these toys were true
And straight I check, those raunging thoughts, with reason that ensue.
Vlrico fie, why wrongs thy wife, so foully with mistrust,
Whom hitherto thou could not find, in word, or deed unjust,
Whose modesty thou see abhorres, with rufflers for to prate,
To save thy wealth, whose mind to work, gives wanton youth ye mate,
Whose life, with foul and leaude offense, report could never spot,
What cause have thou Vlrico then, her fame with fear to blot?
To break this brall, fair Barbara (so was this Lady namde)
With pretty nippes, with pardon mixed, this answer forthwith framde:
Well said (quoth she) first feign you fear, to free my shrewd mistrust,
That choice and change, in wanton court, will make you prove unjust,
But simple I accept your show, and faith I trust to find,
But to my Lord, if so he please, I yet will show my mind,
I long ere this, have wayde our want, and thought on means of gain,
And sure I saw, the way for wealth was as you did explain.
Yet durst I not, unfold the same, unto my loving Lord,
Before his words foreshewd his thoughts, with mine did well accord,
By service you shall credit win, by service likewise fame,
By service you shall riches reap, as you deserve the same,
By service, favor with our prince, acquaintance in the court,
You sure shall find, slack not these helps, your wife does you exhort:
If God with children, bless our life, their youth from vices freed,
Your credit after in the court, will stand them in some steed,
And in your absence I so well, will to your causes see:
As you shall have relief abroad, sufficient left for me.
Yea sure, to brave it with the best: yet live within our bounds,
Such skyll I have to most avail, to rate and rent our grounds,
And know you once, my heart is high, if living, there to stretch,
Yet stoop I will to please my Lord, to live as rents will retch.
And thus Vlrico do thou hear, what thy poor wife can say,
In wealth, in want, abroad, at home, thy will she will obey.
Whose modest tale Vlrico heard, with patience to the end,
And said, to use her sound advise, long erst his thought did tend:
And now I am resolved (quoth he) the wars sweet wife to ply,
Let worst betyde that may befall, I sure with fame shall dye.
Yet ere I go, my friends shall know my mind, and state at large*
But of my land, my house and goods, none shall but you have charge.
And in this mood, from friend to friend, so long he did resort,
That at the length Pollaccos skill, he heard by fond report,
Of whom was said by secret Art, he could such wonders do,
As none could work an act in thought, but he the same would shoe.
He could inform the loving worm, if his fair Lady fainde,
Or if she loved, yea if she had, her honor ever stainde,
For ramping rigges to Venus joys, their nature proane that feales,
He could work means of sport without, a Tympanie with heales.
Strange charms he had to force them love, that late to hate were bent,
He could foretell, what hap, what harm, the heavens to us meant,
With thousand sleights of hidden skill, which I omit to write,
Yet turn I to Vlricos thought, when rumor did recite,
Pollaccos learning thus at large, who said in his mind,
To free my jealous head from fear, a mean now shall I find,
Pollaccos knows if that my wife, her self will faithful show,
Or if she does her honor stain, I absent, yea, or no,
If in this journey she be just, then dread for aye adue,
If she be false, I fellows have, whose wives are found untrue,
Once fear, yet frets my heart as sore, as if such fault were wayde,
With that Vlrico posts with speed, to crave Pollaccos aid.
And coming to his homely house, he does Pollacco greet,
And craves to speak a word with him, where he should think it meet.
They both unto a Garden walk, and thus Vlrico said,
Your special gifts in secret Arts, to me of late bewrayde,
Compels me now ( Pollacco friend) to crave your friendly might:
My suit is small, and yet be sure, great gain your pain shall quite.
In what I can Pollacco said, I rest at your command,
Then use your Art (quoth he) I pray, to grant this poor demand.
Truth is, I mean with speed to serve, my souereine in the wars,
Yet jealous thoughts, I wot not why, with this accord still iarres,
Sometime my Ladies zeal in show, does banish dread with hope,
But straight again, mistrust does give, to fearful fancies scope,
And thus to naught avail, I wear my golden time in woe,
Such is the force of passing love, to fear for every show,
But now Pollacco to my suite, by art I crave to know,
In absence mine, if that my wife be faithful, yea, or no,
Let worst betide, yet so I shall, my dread exile (quote he)
Such feats you can, and therefore now, let will with skill, agree,
Pollacco masde, to hear this tale, to this effect replyde,
That Science to, her scholars yet, such secrets had denyde,
And how should I, dissolve this doubt, that learned judges dread,
Conceive the best, ne wrongs the worst, saunce knowledge of the dead,
And therefore Sir Vlrico cease, your suite surmounts my skill,
What so (quoth he) of skill befalles, grant but agreeing will,
Whereon Pollacco thus replyde, since nycenesse will not serve,
I grant I know by Art this act, but use from law does swerue.
Yet breach of law I hazard will, to free Vlricos dout,
Stay here (quoth he) to work this feate, I will now go about.
Anon he comes, with picture framde, much like Vlricos wife,
So long (quoth he) this form keeps fair, she lives an honest life,
If yellowe, tempted then she is, if black with merry gayles,
Unto the Cornish mount god buoy in have, her honor sails.
This known (appayd) Vlrico said, in hope thy words are true,
Hold here thy hyre, my heart is easde, and so good friend adue.
Away he goes, and to his wife, his household charge commits,
Which done, while wind and whether served, unto the seas he gets:
Such speed he made, as soon he at Albe regale lands.
The king there lay, Vlricoes suite, who shortly understands,
And gladly entertained him, yea, gave him pay in peace,
Which grace, when foes inforst in fight, did double force increase,
As proof ere long appeared plain, the Turk began to stir,
Which causde the king to cry alar'm, to chase this graceless curre.
The valliant wightes, in armor dight, their forward minds do show,
Each thing prepared for soldiers use, to wars these gallants go,
Mustapha Basca, had the charge, of all the princes power,
Vlrico was his Colonel, preferred in happy hour.
Post haste they made, until they came, within their enemies sight,
Then bustling to their bloody tools, they show good wills to fight.
At trumpets sound, the horsemen fling, the shot to skyrmish fall,
The archers with their feathred darts, both horse and man does gall,
The fury of the forward wightes, to handie strokes then bring,
Here houlbards hew, there bloody swords, on battered targets sing.
Some faint with wounds, some flee for fear, some fight to save their friend,
Thus either side, king Harrie knockes, both does receive, and lend:
The battle long continued hot, each would feign victor be,
But to be short, for all their force, in fine the Mahomes flee,
The Turk his pride abated well, and all things quiet made,
Mustapha Basca, and his charge, returned with honor lade.
The Ladies now (with many a kiss) receive their souereine Lords,
And every man to see his friend, a buon venu affordes.
In court there does no triumph want, these captains to delight,
At iustes, some use their force in sport, that late did fiercely fight:
Some makes report of wreakefull wars, the bliss, and cake the bale,
Some loytrers in their Ladies lappes, does tell a wanton tale:
Some have an ore in others boat, some colors do expound,
And some does note their heavy looks, whom Cupides dart did wound,
Sir Vlrico, among this crew, some exercise did use,
To whom at length Alberto said, sir knight, I can but muse,
That you that have a Lady fair, two years from her have stayde,
You know a woman's force (God wot) a long is easily laid,
You know that love with leisure ioynde, makes wantons to be bold,
She has her will, health, wealth, and ease, she rules and not contrould,
With all these helps she sure will wish, to taste some wanton joy,
Then if she have her wish at will, think you she will be coy?
Whereto Vlrico thus replyde, I answer not for all,
But sure my wife will constant be, what fortune so befall,
She is no gadder far from home, she helps not beauties blase,
Her words and works are modest both, she gives no youths the gase*
With honest exercises still, she fancies fond preuentes,
To hear my good success abroad, her careful mind contents.
Sir knight quoth Vdislao then, ^ince so you love your wife,
Beshrewe me if that my reply, do sow sedicious strife,
You have enough, what would you more, let others have a snatch.
Alberto said, will he or nill, she would in corners catch:
And to be short, both Lords affirm, that Lady lives not,
If that a wise and valiant knight, her honor can not blot.
Vlrico did deny it flat, they still affirmd it true,
And thus they plead until the queen, their controversy knew,
Who for that these barons so wrought, a slander to her sect,
Their foolish, rash, and judgment false, she sharply did detect,
Alberto (fuming at this cheacke) this answer made the queen,
Not for to move your grace to wrath, our argument has been,
Yet if Vlrico like the match, my land to his I lay,
How that ere twice the Moon has cast, her horned head away,
I battle will his brows so well, as horns thereon shall grow,
Provided that his wife before, the wager does not know.
And further, if I win her love, his Lady so he use,
As if that she her honor did, in no respect abuse.
The young Lord Vdislao would, the self same wager try,
Vlrico armde him self to take, their proffers by and by.
Indentures to assure this match, engrossed were in haste,
The covenants as before expressed, were in the perchment plasie.
The king and Queen gave free consent, the wager should be laid,
Th'indentures sealed, by either part, and all things sure are made,
It was agreed Alberto should, the battering tire lay,
If Lady Barbara did resist, Vdislao should assay.
With sharp assault of wanton words, to batter down her praise,
If two months she could make defense, these Lords, their siege should raise,
And lose their living for their hire, which small misliking breeds,
See, see, the fond effects of hope, Alberto forward speedes.
And spies in fine the castle walls, wherein this Lady lay,
Who safe arrived at his Inn, straight chaungde his riding ray,
And clothd a new, as pleased his mind, it was not long ere he,
To see Vlricos castle hyde, his hearts delight to see.
To purchase welcome first he told, Vlricos happy state,
And having causes in those coasts, he durst not pass his gate,
Before he had, to her his wife, those welcome tidings shard,
To find occasion to return, how she his Lady fard.
Dame Barbara (joyful of these news) requested him to take,
In worth: such intertainement, as her power was to make,
The Lord Alberto made no bones, to be his Ladies guest,
But like a Courtier brave and bold, vouchsafed her request,
Till supper time with honest talk, she wisely held him tacke,
When supp he should, of dainty fare, she saw he had no sack,
Alberto (feasted like a prince) pricked forth with pleasant brain,
Assayed many times to fall, into some loving vain,
Dame Barbara though feign she would, have broke this botelesse prattle,
Least he should think, his welcome heard, did hold him tacke in ^atle,
Which courtesy he construed thus, The Dame that is content,
To listen to a tale of love, to love will soon consent:
Forgetting how of force they must, some such discourses hear,
Or to to coy, their friends forsake, which manners will not bear.
But leave I that. Alberto thought, his match was meetely sure,
And still to stoop, this modest dame, he threw his wanton lure,
He flattering questions moved often, she pretily answerde all,
At length, into his loving suit, he soberly did fall.
And with a sighe dear dame (quoth he) admit my faithful zeal,
Who forced through love, must needs unfold, that feign I would co^ceale,
Your beauty, birth and comely shape, report so hie has prisde,
That trust me as I heard you namd, in thought, I thus surmisde,
This Lady staynes, sir Paris rape, in face, in form and hew,
And as he loved through brute of fame, so I in faith do you,
And try who list, love wounds so sore, if he empayreth health,
His thralles can hardly be restord, by reason, wit, or wealth.
Their souereignes grace, must be their salve, naught else ca^ work their rest,
Unless they will abridge their days, of both the bads, the best,
I love I grant beyond my reach, for to recant I strive,
But love I must, and loath I am, to live and die alive,
My help is on my self, that I untimely murder try,
My woes consent, yet have I vowde* in your sweet sight to die.
Despair has sped me to this place, my sorrows to appease,
My tale is told, you know my truth, preserve me if you please,
This loving zeal, so sharply shown, did strike the Lady mute,
Her answer now, was far to seek, she hated so his suit,
Alberto, that did note this change, in words, in looks and all,
Thought how his shape and friendly shoes, had brought her heart in thrall.
And therefore to untie her tongue, he s^ily stole a kiss,
She little said, and yet she thought, there was no woe to this,
And as she musde, she found a mean, his follies to reprove,
But yet the feate (...) be wrought, with fained show of love,
Which she (...), as if she lou'de in deed,
Or that her ^^use of straungenes late, of passion did proceed,
Alberto thus aduaunst with hope, afresh now pleades for ruth,
She stands not greatly on his suit, but falls to feign his truth,
The knight (by proof of pleasures past) when she this issue took,
Though^ (...) sugared words, she had devoured Cupids hook,
And (as he thought) to free suspect, for oaths he spared not.
That neither change, or any chance, should him, with falsehood blot,
Few words to waste, she faind at length, she was content to love,
And pointed both a time and place, a pleasant taste to prove.
But least by absence from your Inn, quoth she, suspicion grow,
I now bequeath you to your case, when to return you know.
Alberto luld with thoughts of joy, unto his lodging goes,
Who thinks, each hour a year till that, the morrow morning shoes.
Well yet at length, the hour came, that flattred him with grace,
Who all too hastle hide him self, to his appointed place,
Arrived there a pretty minx (directed well before)
Unto a lodging brought this Lord, and locked fast the door,
When he was safe away she went, for joy Alberto hopt,
But see, a change, too late he spyde, he was in prison popt,
The windows made of iron bars, the walls of stone and clay.
A bed he found, but far unfit, he thought for Venus play,
Is this a place of joy (quoth he) O no I am betrayde,
He had no sooner spoke these words, but came saire Barbaras maid,
Who at a grate Alberto calls, to whom she used these words,
This is the courtsie sir knight (quoth she) my Lady you affordes.
First like a thief since that you sought, to rob her of her fame,
She has in prison laid you fast, your lawless love to tame.
And further (to allay your heat) unless you daily spinne,
This distaffe laden full of flax, your fare will be but thin,
This said, the distaffe in she throws, and bad him thus adieu,
My tale is told, you know your task, now work as pleases you.
Alberto at these sorry news, straight to this choler wax,
Shall I from martial exercise, fall now a spinning flax:
Shall I that lived at liberty, in prison thus be pend,
Shall I be sys'd of meat and drink, that late so much did spend?
And shall a Lady foil me thus, whose heart the stoutest quaild,
There with he strove to break the doors, but small his force auaild.
His grief but green with terms of hate, he blamed this Lady often,
And supperlesse so went to bed, which was not very soft,
But in respect of other plagues, he thought the hardness small,
Who tired with tormenting thoughts, a sleep did quickly fall,
When he had sleapt the night away, and cares digested well,
Sharp hunger so assayld this Lord, as he to spinning fell,
His goutie and ill shapen thredes, so moved him to smyle,
That well he likt the exercise, his sorrows to beguile.
At dinner time dame Barbaras maid, was to Alberto sent,
To share his lowance like his work, to whom this courtoll went,
And rudely calls to see the yarne, he had that morning sponne,
Alberto (eger of his meat) deliuerd what was done,
By Saint Marie (quoth this queen) your buswiuerie is good,
And after she had frumpt him well, she fetched his sorry food,
A week or more, these hungry meals, in worth Alberto took,
In hope of grace, which came so slow, as he his hope forsook.
See, yet desire of liberty, see now the fruits of need,
See here how thieves their fellows peche, see, see, how hope does feed,
Alberto for dame Barbara sendes, to whom he shows at large:
The wanton wager, words, and works, as I have given in charge.
And how that Vdislao would, ere long attempt the like.
Which strange discourse the Lady did, into a wonder strike.
Oh God (quoth she) what cause give I, men should suspect my life,
I never clim'd beyond my reach, I am a loving wife.
And comes there yet another Lord, that would my virtues stain,
Well let him come, he shall abide, hard penance for his pain.
This said, she wild the gaylor see, Alberto spinne apace,
His news thus recompensed were, whom now I leave a space,
To show what rumor in the court, in every corner roung,
Some say Albertos joys were such, as loath to part he soung.
Vlrico often his image viewd, to see what hue it bare,
And all the while it yealowe seemd, he lived in perilous fear,
But when it turned to white again, what so the courtiers say,
He knew Alberto had the foil, and he had won the lay,
The other competitor thought, his fellows joys too great.
So that to have a share with him, he posted till he sweat,
And posting thus he at the length, Vlricos castle spyde,
And making then more haste then speed, post haste he thither hyde,
Who safe arrived where he did wish, to make his welcome more,
He had an errant ready stamped, yea two or three in store,
He first commended to this dame, her husbands happy health,
His special credit with his prince, his fame and heaps of wealth,
And how on causes of his own, into these coasts he came,
And how he heard in happy time, his friend Vlricos name,
And also how not far from thence, did dwell his Lady fair,
And how he bound by courtesy, to see her did repair.
The Lady smiled in her mind, to hear this current scuse.
And yet dissembling what she thought, she friendly did him use.
Yea courteously she craved he would, his causes yet adiourne,
And at his friend Vlricos house, with her awhile soiourne.
Her gentle offer to accept, this Lord was nothing nice,
And yet ere long her courtesse, he bought at too hie price,
Well both (contented, as it seemd) into the castle go,
Where as fair Barbara glads her friend, with welcomes great in shoe,
She talked, she walked, she satt, she stood, as likt this gallant best,
Yea many a strange discourse, did pass, between her, and her guest,
In sinc to towle, this lord in love, a sighing she began,
And asked how Alberto farde, as if she lou'de the man,
The lord, Vdislao did take, this motion in good part,
Who smyld and said, in secret thought, Alberto had her heart,
And for to strike her in a mase, quoth he, I wott not well,
Since last he vew'd these country costs, where as my friend does dwell,
Fair Barbara, as though she feared, this lords welfare did feign,
And is he not (quoth she) returnde, unto your court again?
This lure thus thrown to work some hope, in Vdislaos breast,
The Lady broke the prattle off, and fell to feast her guest,
The lusty Hungarian lord, likt well, her kindness shown,
Yet still he for advantage stayde, to make his passions known,
Whose subtlety, when she espide, t'imbolden him the more,
Against her will, her eyes d^d seem, more wanton then of yore,
And trained thus to treat of love, at length his tongue found scope,
She made it nice, yet not so strange, but he might feed on hope,
He feeding still, on show of grace, was loath to leave the feeld,
She faring, as she likt his talk, by piece meals began to yield.
In fine she fainde how that his suit, had won her to agree,
And how she would sometime that night, her lovers lodging see,
Until which time this frolic lord, committed her a Dio,
A fainde good night, she likewise gave, and wild her seruannts shoe,
Him, where he should that night be lodgde, whose lodging was prepared,
Next chamber to the prison where, Alberto hardly farde,
Well Vdislao went to bed, full fraught with secret joy,
And still he looked when his fair dame, would keep her promised foy,
But all in vain, he gapt for grace, she glad he had him caught,
Yet see, the fond conceits in love, in hope, the night he watched,
He hard no noise, no mouse could steare, but straight in thought he smild
O welcome Lady (quoth his heart) but when he was beguild,
He Sopor blamd, for charging her, with to much drowsy sleep,
But of his faults, and wager fond, at all he took no keep,
Well all this night with fancies tossed, no sleep lodgde in his breast,
When morning came, this comfort came to set his heart at rest,
Dame Barbaras maid, brought him a reele, and yearne Alberto made,
She told him he, should reele the same, for that he had assaide
To rob her Lady of good fame, to her then life more dear,
If he refusde, to do his task, he should have sorry cheer,
Look you for neither meat nor drink, before your work be done,
And sir (quoth she) t'incourage you, the thread Alberto sponne,
He is your neighbor, fare you well, I can no longer stay,
These sorry news Vdislao nie, out of his wits did fray,
Alberto took his pennaunce ill, but he did ten times worse,
He raged, he rau'd, the Ladies scorn, himself, and all did curse,
But what for that? how so he did, himself agreeued feel,
One of these evils, he needs must choose, to ster^e or else to reele,
And of both bads, the best he chusde, in fine to work he fell,
His rash attempt, had this success, which he deserved well.
Now that this virtuous dame has got, the conquest of her foes,
These lordinges pennannce for their pride, she to their servants shoes,
In whose behalf, her bouutie here, I must of force commend,
They wanted not, for dainty fare, how so they fast were pend,
These barons men, (at liberty) straight posted to the Court,
And of their lords imprisonment, there make they large report,
These news of note, about the Court, went flinging every where,
So long as both the king and Queen, these gallants fortunes hear,
The king to learn the certain truth, to Lady Barbara sent,
His chauncelour, and other Lords, where as they found fast pent,
Lord Alberto and Vdislao, Alberto spinning thread,
And Vdislao reeting it, with fretting well nie dead,
The Lady shewde the new come Lords the matter all and some,
And how to tame their lawless love, the barons bid this dome,
The Chauncelor what erst is shown, returned to the king,
Whose pleasure was, he should with him, with speed both parties bring
They al arrived at the Court, the king judged out of hand,
Vlrico had the wager won, and he should have the land,
And more against the spoiled lords, with justice to persevere,
In penance of their lavish tongues, they were exilde for ever,
Fair Barbara, for foyling them, did to this honor mount
She was the chief about the queen, in credit and account,
Whereas she lived many days, and held her wish at will,
Now being dead in worthy fame, her virtues lives still.
Virescit vulnere virtus.
The complaint of the Lord Alberto and Vdislao, the two Hungarian barons, that
unadvisedly wagered their land, to win the virtuous Lady Barbara to
wantonness: Who having the foil (besides the loss of their livings) for
their slanderous opinions, were condemned to perpetual exile.
COme gallants come, by both our falls take heed,
With our fond faults, you most infected are,
You work more wrong, in slander then in deed,
And yet in deed, your flattery works scare.
Learn, learn, by us, too lavish speech to spare,
Large offers though, fair Ladies often entice,
Think there be dames, that will not veil to vice.
First mende your own, ere others faults you blame,
See that your life, before you teach you try,
Pluck out the beam, that blindes your sight with shame,
So may you find a moate in others eye,
What yet you note, reprove not openly,
Observe this course, hear, see, and say the best,
For lavish words, procures much unrest.
Had we but wayde, that half experience shows,
We might have lived, in honor as of yore,
The want we wail, and warn you by our woes,
The least of which, your hearts would much abhor,
Their exile.
For what may be, then this a mischief more,
Once lusty Lords, now prisd at lowest rate,
And free men borne, to live in banished state.
What noble mind, whose hands could weapons use?
Would brook his hands, should either reele or spinne,
To feed on crustes, what fool would not refuse?
Whose coursest fare, a mess of meat has bin,
In this distress, perforce we lived in,
Too hard a plague, say you for fault so small,
We think not so, that have indurd the thrall.
For who at full, may value honest fame?
Whose wound so deep, as his that slanders carud?
Our slaundrous thoughts, suspected every dame,
Our slaundrous toungs, said all from virtue swaru'd,
For which exile, we worthily desaru'd,
She used us well (whose praise we sought to spoil)
In huswiues trades, for meat to make us moyle.
Our land we lost, by law and wager both,
He won it well, that ventured for the same,
But worse then these (the which to show I loath)
Our follies lean, a memory of shame,
Unto us both, a corsiue to our name,
Well what is paste, too late we call again,
Suffices now, we warn with proof of pain.
And know ye first, what raisd this slaundrous thought,
Forsooth our lives, in loytring daliance spent,
We other doomde, by faults that they had wrought,
And joined with this, their spoils, by fond consent,
Which yealded bound, unto our loving bent,
Did make us think, at every wanton whoope,
To lures of love, a Lady fair would stoop.
What yet we thought, our toungs did sore recoyle,
In slaundring them, our lives for to accuse,
For who so vaunts, of any loving spoil,
Confesses how, him self he does abuse,
The greatest vice, that worthy mynds may use,
Deserving well, their worth, who should not praise,
Deserving ill, much less a thousand ways,
Oh stay we here, what means our advise?
When we God wot, so much of counsel need?
And how again, shall we unhappy rise?
Alberto speak, what way shall we proceed?
And art thou mute? Vdislaoes heart does bleed,
Oh (men forlorn) how wretched is our state?
Whom heaven and earth, oppress with heaps of hate.
Who will esteem, our manhood and our might?
By Ladies force, to card, to spinne, and reele,
Where so we live, all women will us spite,
And cause they have, with such disdain to deal,
Yet plagues ynow, we else in penance feel,
O slander thou, on us these haste brought,
Foul fall the cause, thou harboredst in our thought.
Had wretched we, for treason banished bin,
Some would have ru'de, our misery and moan,
But slaundrous speech, is such a hateful sin,
As slanders falls, lamented are of none,
In books of shame, their faults are rolld alone,
Their names are scornd, their presence ten times more,
All filthy vice, that all men thus abhore.
This rests then, for us unhappy men,
To lead our lives, in houltes and uncouth woods,
A hollow cave, to make our homely den,
To foil hunger, with apples, hawes, and buds,
For nobles borne, God wot, but sorry foodes,
There we, poor we, must rue our harms alone,
Or monsters make, companions in our moan.
O friendly death, our worldly farewell give,
From hated flesh, our loathed life divorce.
Spare them good death, the which in pleasure live,
And use at once, on us thy matchless force,
To thee alone, our woes sues for remorce,
When all is done, our help remains in thee,
Then strike with speed, our sorrows for to free*
In praise of the right H. the Lady I.S.G. of Wilton.
WHere love affects, or flattery forgeth praise,
There fayles no will, fair Ladies fames to wray,
But Art I lack, such parciall notes to raise,
Truth guardes the check, in what I write or say,
And warded thus, when all their wit is shown,
I boldly vaunt (although in barren verse)
This Lady stains, their Ladies every one,
She shows in works, what they in words rehearse,
Past natures reach (a gift of great imprise)
Her faultlesse life, puts slander to his shifts,
And yet she has what Nature could devise,
To set a gloss, upon her gallant gifts,
Besides all this, she has such fortune lent,
As both commends, and does her self content.
In praise of my L. E. R.
THe pearls of praise, that deck a noble dame,
Exceed the price, of any Iuellers show,
Yea beauties gifts, are but a gloss of fame,
In virtues soil, these precious iuels grow,
And that the dame, whom I do here commend,
Has store of both, my able proof attend.
A passing wit is, lodged in her head,
The which is decked, with hairs of golden hew,
Her modest eyes, are sild with gases lead,
And yet they stain, bright Diamonds in view,
Her words of worth, does win her tongue such praise,
As when she speaks, the wisest silent slayes.
Besides her shape, which sightly is in show,
Her mind is with, these noble gifts possessed,
Her bounty does, beyond her beauty go,
A care she has, to ease the thrall distressed,
Thus is she decked, and this is she I say,
That wears and bears, these pearls of praise away.
In praise of my L. Cecil of Bourlegih.
THe cruel wars, that Nature long did move,
By force to pluck, good Virtue from her throne,
Appeasd in peace, to show the fruits of love,
Of precious mould, kind faults to work anon,
And having shapt this seemly dame of clay,
For Uertues help, she sent her straight away.
When Virtue viewd, dame Natures worthy skill,
With great delight, she kissed this Ladies face,
And then (to show, that Nature wished her will)
She posted to, her treasure house of grace,
Her golden shows, where she good Lady spoils,
To deck this dame, thus was she both their toils.
And with these gifts, into the world she came,
Whereas she does, in worthy credit rest,
Yea sure her life, so beautifieth her name,
As Envy graunts (who sildome says the best,
Her wit, her weeds, her words, her works and all,
So modest are, as slander yealdes her thrall.
In praise of Maistresse M.H. now Bridges.
Beauty with brags of late, wild virtue yeald her thrall,
But soon ye Gods to stay their strife; a parliament did call,
And fame with thundering tromp, was wild their subjects ^i^e,
By credit of their thrals to show, who was of gretest might,
Beauty against this day, her prowdest shows prepared,
And sure a troop of gallant gyrles, her seemly self did guard,
Their spangels, wrought, a gase each dame in feathers slauntes,
Their straung attyres, their cuts and cost, foreshewd, their scorneful vau^ts,
They looked all askaunce, when beauty claymde her right,
That lo the Gods amassed were, to see so proud a sight.
Anon good Virtue comes, with train of bashful Dames,
Whose modest looks, wrought more regard, then Beauties blasing flames,
A silence now was made, that they their suits might move,
Both Ladies sue for sovereign rule, and thus their titles prove,
Proud Beauty vaunts on power, poor Virtue on desert,
And by your leave, for all her bragges, the worst had Beauties part.
Her shows were blemished much, with surfling and such like,
Which known, beauty (through fear of foil) into a mase did strike.
Who gasing round about, fair Brydges did epsy,
Whose seemly feature form and shape, did much delight her eye,
And scorning other proof, she Bridges called in place,
Who (to set forth, her sightly self) apeard with vashfull grace,
Quoth Beauty? see my ^oyle, you Gods, now judge aright,
Half part with you quoth Virtue straight, my gifts adorn this wight:
For bounty guides her thought, which beauty far excells,
And pity rules her noble heart, where pride in Beauty dwells,
To love, and Lawless lust, where beauties lures do train,
She winns a calm, yet frie^ndship firm, with show of chaste disdain,
A mean contents her mind, where Beauty is extreme,
What botes thee then, good beauty thus, to strive against the stream,
She only shall suffice, if thereto thou agree,
To show and prove, by dome of Jove, the best of thee, or me,
I will (quoth Beauty) stand, to that that Jove awards,
Jove waying well their worthy work, thus beth their toil rewards.
He ruled Virtue should, be always best in name,
Yet Beauty during Bridges-like, should sway in equal fame.
Lo thus between these Dames the bloody frayes did seace,
But Bridges bore the praise away, for making of this peace.
The praise of mistress A. C.
IF Troyians stout, that fought in Hellens* band,
Small wayd their lives, their Lady to preserve,
What doubt, what death, what hell should me withstand,
To work C. will the captain that I serus,
Who does in deed, as far fair Hellen pass,
As good, does bad, or gold the corsest brass.
For first she has in feauture, form and face,
What Hellen had, or beauty could devise,
And therewithal, she has so chaste a grace,
To hold them back, with fancies fond that frie^,
That (lo) they choose to pine in secret pain,
Before their suits, should move her to disdain.
She shows them grace, that sorrows their amiss,
Beyond desert, her bounty does reward,
Her modest mind, by virtue guided is,
Her sober looks, does work a rare regard,
Although in court, her room is hie, she knows,
Yet likes she not, to feed on curious shows.
A care she has (which shows, a loving wife)
To love and like, but what contents her fere,
With these good gifts, commended is her life,
Such one is Q. whom I have praised here,
Even she, is she, deny it who that dare,
That does both kinds, and virtues jewels ware.
In praise of mistress A. H.
Vain is the vaunt, that runs beyond desert,
Small is the praise, that proof will not commend,
Shame is their fall, that mounteth fames by art,
Truth is the guard, that writers does defend,
And Truth I have, my naked Uerse to clothe,
But skill I want, this pear^lesse piece to praise,
In fairenes who does pass the Dame in troth,
Whose beauty wrought, the Troyans bloudye frai^s,
Withal to show, what nature did pretend,
In framing her, an endless fame to find,
She wrought such means, as virtue does commend,
Her gallant shape, with worthy gifts of mind,
What would you more, then fair and virtuous both,
That both she is, but search where she does live,
(Beyond my reach) report their telling troth,
This modest maid, a matchless praise does give,
Lo this is al (though further would my will,)
I write of her, for want of able skill.
The saucie pesaunts present, unto his sovereign mistress.
LAdy receive thy pesaunts gift in gree,
(Whose will is much, although his worth be small)
A gift it is, that best beseems thee,
Whose virtues hold, thy beauties rare in thrall,
So that, since that, your live without a match,
Guard you your fame, with this well meaning watch.
Think that you live in gase of enuies eyes,
Whose sight ^oth search, in secre^st thought of mind,
Think false suspect, about you still has spies,
Will forge offense, where they no fault can find,
Think deep disdain, would blot your life with blame,
For that alone you wear the pearlesse of fame.
And yet fair dame (incountring all their might)
These following rules, if you imprint in mind,
Your envious foes, shall pine away with spite.
First choose a friend, whose words in works you find,
With courtesy, a stranger intertaine,
But loving suits cut off with chaste disdain.
Think s^gred words as Sirens songs, do wound,
All is not gold, in sight that seems gay,
In careless trust, is ever treason sound,
Then shun the baits, that philed tongues do lay,
With proud revenge, rack not your yielding foe,
Lest nettels do, among sweet flowers groe.
Mount with your mind, by Virtue to the skies,
Uaile yet your ears, the mysers moan to hear,
From all extremes, in spite of enuies spies,
In calm delight, your days, so shall you wear,
Thus (sovereign) ends, your sausie pesaunts song.
Accept it well, or else you do him wrong.
Epilogus.
Lo Ladies hear (if you can use it well,)
An Arbor fenst, from burning fire and frost,
A place it is where pride shall never dwell,
Nor fortune work a mase, do she her worst,
A place wherein the worthy dame should live,
Whom no extreme, may change from virtuous thought,
Even such a place, my Muse (fair dames) does give,
To you, the which, with double toil is wrought.
Here may you see, by lamps of others lives,
A president, to live in worthy name,
Here may you see, when death your days depriues,
In spite of death remembrance of your fame.
Virescit vulnere virtus.
The Ortchard of repentance: Wherein is reported, the miseries of dice, the
mischiefs of quarelling, and the fall of prodigality.

Wherein is discovered the deceits of all sorts of people.

Wherein is reported, the souden ends of four notable Cousiners.

With diverse other discourses, necessary for all sorts of men. The whole
work, the invention and collection of George Whetstons Gent.

Formae nulla fides.

(...) am nothing dismayde with such nyce findfaultes misliking. Suffiseth me,
if the learned and well disposed, take my pains in worth: among the which, I
chiefly seek to please your worship: the authority of whose patronage, will
both defend and commend my travel, desiring you to take it, as a testimony
of the faithful zeal I bear toward you, and being encouraged, with your
favorable acceptancu, I will not fail (God willing) to enterprise some work,
that shall better deserve your countenance, content the reader, and commend my
pains. From my longing in Holborne, where I daily pray for the prosperous
health and hap, both of you, and your good Lady. The 15. of October 1576.

Your worships most bounden G. Whetstons.

The honest minded man's adventures, his largess: and his farewell to the
world. A work discovering, the subtilties of all sorts of men.
REpyne not, friends, to view the form of scorn,
Skew not to see, a figure fresh of ruth,
A crooked piece, with withered age for worn,
In drouping days, whom begg^ri^ pursuth,
A sorry crop, for seed of all his youth,
Who moylde, who toyld, who gaped after gain,
When loss ensude, a poor reward for pain.
2
Though strange at first my tale may seem in sight,
Yet wisely wayde, the cause appears plain,
Why backward hap, my foreward hope did quite.
Why loss I found, where I did look for gain.
Why poverty, I reapt in lue of pain,
For try who list, and he by proof shall see,
With honest minds, the world will hardly gree.
3
Which of it self, The kingdom of the world described.
a kingdom is of sin,
The devil is prince, whose pomp does never fade,
Deceit and Craft, his chiefest counselors bin.
Extortion foul, The devils officers.
his treasurer is made,
Covetousness, is merchant of his trade.
Uile Usurie, his racking rents does rake,
As auditour, account does Briberie take.
4
Within his court, these vipers bears sway:
First false suspect, high chamberlain they call,
Who raps the^ down, which mount by honest way,
Disdain controuls, the wightes which be in thral.
Then grudge the guard, does place them in the hal.
Mistrust and spite, does daily watch and ward.
And malice is, the captain of the guard.
5
Envy and Hate, the presence door does keep,
Which eluish elfes, dame Virtue still deryde,
Or if she knock, the sottes will be a sleep,
Next to the devil, the court does Lechery guide,
On whom attends, dame Pleasure, Lust, and Pride.
What office bears, the Glutton with the rest,
Or drunken sot, to show it were a jest.
6
Debate and strife, the coasts does daily scowre,

Though Fortune laugh, ye world on the^ does lowre,
Her subjects sleep, and snore like fatted swyne,
When hunger sterude, with want the virtuous pyne,
No wonder though they lead this loathsome life,
For worldly rule, with virtue is at strife.
7
But I too long, do tire you with this tale,
To wray the rule, the worldly wretches have,
Who bath in bliss, when others boil in bale,
Who do command, when others gladly crave,
Yet shame and all, they leave to fill their grave,
I meant and mean, to show his overthrow,
Whose honest mind, became his chiefest foe.
8
His first adventure in the court.
I first by cost, did seek in court to mount,
A needful help, in court to purchase grace,
But fowly short, I fell upon account,
The flatterer thriueth in the Court.
I quite forgot, to flatter and to face,
The thrall to scorn, the best for to embrace,
I su'^ I served, I did attendance dance,
And still I thought, desert would me advance.
9
Note.
I looked aloft, and brau'd it with the best,
The charge mine own, no countnance did I lack,
Whilst pence were ryfe, I was a welcome guest:
I aided those, whom spiteful scorn did sack,
In unkind recompense.
Which one aduaunst, were first yt threw me back,
With conges kind, the gallants would me grief,
With cap and knee, the meaner did me meet.
10
The sneaking curres, by bryberie laid a train,
A mile to catch, before they fell the crumbes,
I thought desert, perforce would fasten gain,
On me which gape, but gained naught but plumbes,
For former graunts, still nickt me oore the thumbes,
The drawlatch thriu'd, my self who helped to grace,
As well as he, which bare the proudest face.
11
Ne enuide I, of either part the thrift,
Since Fortune smylde, upon the silly sot,
I thought aloft, no doubt she would me lift,
So spent in hope, for fear I spared not,
By cost I said, that worship still was got,
But I so long, did spend upon the store,
That all was gone, then could I spend no more.
12
Then countnance straight, For sakt bravery, and leave thy credit in the court.
with sower face did frown,
And credit next, began to slip aside,
Disdain and spite, with speed then threw me down,
In this distress, whom erst I helped I tryde,
Who gave good words, but no relief applyde:
Thus quight forsook, I in the briers stuck,
And cryde perforce, a vengance of ill luck.
13
I thought mishap, my fortune did withstand,
And mere good hap, to others gain assignde,
I little thought, that Item in the hand,
Remembrance was, a friend in court to find,
Or some for some, could lead a stately mind,
Ne flattery I, did fear should be prefarde,
Ere service true, had reapt his full reward.
14
I could not think, Description of the court.
the court two faces had,
In favor fair, fresh, sweet, fraught with delight,
When in disgrace, the wrongside turns as sad,
Sullen, sour, sharp, the show of deep despite,
As Sirens songs, bewitch the simple wight,
I quite forgot, in short to show you plain,
The proverb old, fair words do make fools feign.
15
I simply meant, but subtly was beguilde,
A Crocodile, deceiues with fained tears,
But pray obtaind, it turns to monsters wild,
Fained friends
With feigned friends, in fine even so it fares,

They crouch and ^reepe, til they have that they wish.
In your distress, they wey you not a rush.
16
But certes they, which never ta^ted bal^,
Persuaded be, that all men bathe in blis,
So sure he thinks, truth seems each sugared tale,
Whose honest mind, did never mean amiss,

Both loss and gain (he says) does Fortune give,
And still he hopes, on after hap to live.
17
My self the proof, which reackt my courtly fall,
A backward blast, a fit of froward fate.
Some other way, to hay she would me call,
With double mendes, to vaunce my poor estate,
As gleames of joy, do follow clouds of hate,
Thus lights I held (bewitched with fair words)
Or bushes beat, while other lymde the birds.
18
I still relie'ud, the wights that were distressed,
Although they would, they could ^^ me no good.
Which cold excuse, soon cut off my request,
A night cap sure, or else a lyned hoode,
Beseemde my skonce, I swear by sweet S. Roode,
Which like a fool; on would and could di^ feed,
When simple I with deed, relieved their need.
19
These hashards hard, might honest minds defile,
What Harvest worse, Misery can hardly win the virtuous to vice.
then weeds to reap for corn?
But though the lewd, do laugh if Fortune smile,
And frown as fast, if that the fyxsen scorn,
Yet wealth, ne woe, no friendly mind can turn,
For happ they leave no honest way unsought,
But feeds on hope, by value of their thought.
20
Well, thus perforce, I left the costly Court.
Hie time to trudge, when coin, and clothes were spent,
The soldiers gain, was rounge with sweet report,
By them which wist not, what their losses meant,
At ventures yet, to see the wars I went,
Resolved by them, to rise or leese my breath,
For servile life, I worse despisde then death.
21
Appointed well, His second adventure in the wars.
and soldier like arayde,
I left my friends, and throngd amid my foes,
Although at first, the thundering shot me frayde,
In fine saunce fear, I lent such lusty blows,
That soon my fame, throughout the Camp arose,
With better pay, to credit then I grue,
And thus a flaunte, to care I badde adue.
22
In desperate frayes, gave charge my band and I,
By manly force, our eager foes to foil,
Not one then fly, but rather chus'de to die,
And where they foyld, I let them fleece the spoil,
For truth to say, that tithe, deserude their toil,
I never nickt the poorest of his pay,
But if he lackt, he had before his day.
23
They cheerisht thus, A good Captain makes good soldiers.
when need inforst them fight,
On foes they slew, in face of all the shot,
As wolves the sheep, do spoil or sore affright,
Their enemies so, did fly or go to pott,
Such lyll they laid, upon their pates God wott,
Since fame I reapt, thus by their restless pain,
I could not choose, but let them gleane the gain.
24
Such was my hap, to reach the honor still,
In hie attemptes, I gave the overthrow,
Thus fortune long, did frame unto my will,
But I forgot, how soon she plays the ^^rowe,
Even where of late she favor most did show,
I ouerslipt the time that served for thrift,
As though the wars, ne did their chances shift.
25
In poor repasses, whose courtesy is such,
To leave to cut, till lurchers old have carved,
They seeldome say, shall surfeit of too much,
Yet happily may, with want be hunger starved,
Who so in spoil, so stays till all be served,
Besides his blows, an easy burden bears,
Each for himself, where soldiers shift and shares.
26
But whilste I stood in tickle fortunes grace,
And swam in wealth, of want I never thought,
I took no heed how age drew on a pace,
Or bruised bones at home for safety sought,
To live upon the gain that youth had caught,
But when I could, since then I would not thrive,
When feign I would, then could with me did strive.
27
The sowvre sauce of sweet reported war.
For when the wars, any chiefest strength had worn,
When wounded flesh did faint at bloody blows,
When fortune thwart, her fawning face did turn,

When foul debate among our soldiers rose,
When treason foyld, where force could never speed,
When hollow hearts did droupe away at need.
28
When thus of wars, I felt the sower taste,
Which seemed sweet; by speech I heard of yore,
For worn with toil, I homewards trudgst in haste,
My skin well paid, with wounds and bruses sore,
But sure of pence, I had but slender store,
Thus did I spend the time that serude for thrift,
And left old age in drowping days to shift.
29
Yet simple I, did thus persuade my mind,
How that the wars do naught but honor yield, His last adventure in the
cou^trye made him a stark beggar.

And cost in Court, did cast me far behind,
My way to thrive, was tilling of the feeld,
A charge God wott, unmeet for me to wield
A farmer fresh, I fell then to the plow,
And cost abridgst, yet cares I had ynow.
30
I then did trust, the truth of every swayne,
And thought that I, a sight of lubbers kept,
UUhen others housd, my hay lay sowst in rain,
My corn did shead, Ill seruaunds.
before the same was reapt,
Or spoild with beasts, whilst lasie Robin slept,
I bought at worst, yet sold I under foot,
A poor increase, can spring of such a root.
31
Thus long with loss, the Farmer stout I playde,
Till out of house and home, pure need me pressed,
UUith beggerie bitt, then was I sore dismayed,
To try my friends, yet I my self addressed,
UUith squaymish looks, who intertainde they guest,
UUith sower shows, An old proverb, beggars must be no choosers.
my want could well endure,
For small relief, then, none was better sure.
32
In what I could, my host then did I please,
UUith quippes, In what contempt the rich have their poor friends.
and nippes, who cut me ore the thumbes,
But floutes in faith, could not me so disease,
That from the board, I gathered not the crumbes,
For poor men pincht, are glad to pray on plumbes,
Hayted and baited, time thus did I wear,
Hard lodgde, worse clothd, not cloyd with costly fare,
33
This companion was Craft.
And fettered thus (God wot) in chains of wo^,
I sleeping once, me thought before my view,
A mate I saw, that erst I did not know,
God speed (quoth he) quoth I the like to you,
Acquainted thus, such friendship did ensue,
As I to him, my former Fortunes shoe,
My hap, my harm, my want, my weal, my woe.
34
Which to discourse, a tedious tale I told,
Which well he marckt, and smyled in his thought,
Good friend he said, thou waxest very old,
For whom foresight, some succor should have sought,
But well I see, thou youth have spared naught,
Yet all thy life, thou moyldst and toyl^st for gain,
Hard was thy hap, that loss still aunsweard pain.
35
No fortune yet, but folly in thy self,
That loss thou reapst, in recompense of pain,
Thy course was wrounge, a pace to prowle up pelf,
For falsehoode must, or flattery compass gain,
Or else in faith, thy moyling is in vain,
Deserte is dasde, with dyrefull enuies driftes,
And honest minds, are put unto their shifts.
36
But listen well, and I will shortly show,
How that thy want in drowping days shall die,
The way I know, how every state does grow,

Thy conscience yet, must bear with briberie,
Lewd counsel
With falsehoode, fraud, fear not to use deceites,
To fish for wealth, those are the sweetest baits.
37
If thou do love, a faithless priest to be,
If Courtiers life, in thee has lyking wrought,
In merchauntes fraud, if thou would deeply see,
If Lawyers gain, does tempt thy greedy thought,
If through the wars, aloft thou would be brought,
In country cares, if thou would beat thy brain,
If Cheters craft, thou weanst, is full of gain.
38
If by these trades, relief thou meanst to reap,
Do thus, and thus, and thou with wealth shall swell,
With that he wrayed, of huge deceiptes a heap,
The least whereof, would send a man to hell,
At which amasde (quoth I) good friend farewell,
I like theee not, thy counsel is full evil,
I lived well, I will not die a devil.
39
At which adue, my mate to sigh I saw,
Who sorry was, Note.
he had bestowde such talk
On me, whose tale, to no deceit could draw,
And in this chafe, away the man did walk,
And waking then, I up and down did stalk,
Who in my self, did find a hell of thought,
To see what wyles, to compass wealth are wrought.
40
Desire of wealth, Desire of goods draw our minds from goodness.
forthwith my heart did wound,
My honest mind, did blame my greedy venye,
Thus in my self, a heap of harms I found,
Afraid of fraud, yet glad to compass gain,
Thus both I blamde, and thankt the cousiners pain,
But as by chance, The remembrannce of death, hinders us from wickedness.
I looking in my glass,
Me thought I saw, how death by me did pass.
41
With that (quoth I) away with golden glee,
Auaunt desire, The godly co^remue riches, compassed by deceit.
of greedy gathering gain,
Would thou him bind, which whilome lived free,
Away go trudge, thy toyling is in vain,
The world I scorn, with my sweet Christ to rain,
No subject I, of satan's Emiyre came,
Christ is my leage, to serve the devil I shame.
A Larges to the world.
42
My knowledge yet, unto the world y known,
The knowledge of decceite, is necessary for the good.
May happily warn, my friends to shun this bait,
Among the lewd, this seed is hugely sown,
They daily take, this bitter sweet receite,
For why their food, is rapine and deceit,
My larges yet, to all I franckly give,
A large larges.
Within this world, that have desire to live.
43
The Cleargi.
The Clergy they, no worldly creatures are,

Heaven feeds their souls, their paunche has pouer fare,
They goods despise, but what with Scriptures gree,
To help the poor, whose want they daily see,
Well these I see, esteems not my gift,
To get their thanks, and have I near a shifte?
44
Yes, yes forsooth: (well fare the fruits of fraud)
They wedded are (a needful help against sin)
Their sons full often, desires more a gaude,
Then at their books, their fathers fame to win,
Their daughters scorn, to knit, to card, or spinne,
They Gentles are, as brave as is the best,
They royst in silks, and gad to every feast.
45
With small expense, this pride is not maintaind,
And when you die, your living bids adue,
If naught you spare, their bravery then is staind,
They must forsake, their wonted Courtly crew.
Or make some shift, though shame thereof ensue.
Which to prevent this counsel Craft does give,
To proule for them, whilst you in wealth do live.
46
Scorn you the Pope: scorn not to clawe his coin,
His titles leave: lease not the self same gain,
(You colors have) how so you pence purloine,
Decayed schools, you may erect again,
You may relieve, the needy mysers pain,
With many more, whom penury does pearce,
For lack of skill, which scapes my worthless vearse.
47
The Courtier he, The Courtie^
will thank me for my gift,
He spends much, yet little has to spend,
Some say this course does seeldome compass thrift,
Yet freely here, his state for to amend,
To brag it out in bravery to the end,
The Courtier young, a lesson lo I tell,
The elder sort, does know the form full well.
48
For credit sake, you needs must bravely serve,
And credit won, is quickly worn away,
Get up your crumbes, therefore, ere grace does swerue,
Fawn still on them, that bear the greatest sway,
Attendaunce dance, when others plie their play,
The mightiest please, how so their minds are led,
For wisest wits, with some conceits are fed.
49
With lawyer soon, see thou thy self acquaint,
UUhich knows what gifts, are in the Princes hands,
UUhat lies conceald, by reason of attaint,
UUhat fee, what farm, among his leages lands,
Draws to an end, that clarkly understands,
UUhat office yeeldes, a gain above the rest,
UUhat penal law, to beg for thee is best.
50
UUho finely draws a pattent for a need,
And Pattents see, you always have in store,
A time may serve, when happily you may speed,
UUhich fitted not so well a year before,
And by the way, this care have evermore,
UUell to foresee, to whom you wray your mind,
Least in your suits you slender favor find.
51
Your charge is great, shift therefore for your self,
For facion sake, yet flatter to their face,
But use no course, in prowling up of pelf,
And if mishappe, does throw one out of grace,
Be ready preast, to prease into his place,
For why your joy, comes by your neighbors thrall,
Then be not nyce, to rise where he does fall.
52
The soldier stout, whom fortune still does toss,
The soldier.
To shadow fraud, forsothe has fynest shoe,

Yea life full often, to reach relief must go,
Her faintes his friend, there fightes his mortal foe,
Here bulletes towze, at unawares him meet,
There hawlberds hew, here bilmen does him greet.
53
If in this dole, he chance to reach a rap,
In faith at home, he finds a could relief,
Best therefore then, whilst fortune fittes for hap,
He shift for one, for fear of future grief,
The soldier once, is never tearmde a thief,
How so he wrongs, how so he spoils and spends,
And reason good, his life often makes amends.
54
The poorer sort, yet seeldome compass, thrift,
To help whose want, Mast Craft does use this way,
(A petty help) for such as love to shift,
To watch and ward, to filche his fellows pray,
To sack the wight, that gladly would obey,
To spoil his friend, as one he does not know,
If ought be said, he took him for his foe.
55
But now to you, which have both charge and sway,
You must be brave, for fame and credit sake,
Yet must you pinch, no soldier of his pay,
Lest nipt with need (poor slave) his heels he take,
In heat of blows, before his head does ache,
What then (well kept) a few will do more good,
Then store of lowtes, which fear to loose their blood.
56
Dead pays will help, to cheerish all the rest,
And likewise you, shall find therein some gain,
And when to filch, your soldiers are addressed,
Fleese you their pray, the^ chide them for their pain.
For straggling out, from resdue of their train,
Ne spare to spoil, when force does foil your foe,
Take time and tide least fortune play the shroe.
57
The lawyer he, The Lawyer.
wc doubts that dulls his brain
For ten years space, his time in study spends,
Ere practice his, does purchase stoare of gain,
Too long a plague, so long to fawn on friends,
And spend on stoare in hope of after mends,
And therefore sure, deceit deserves no curse,
For working means, mean while to fill his purse.
58
And yet in ^ooth, a grote will buy his gift,
A book of notes, remembrance it is to ease,
Wherein is writ full many a pretty shift,
Post facto stuf, and Non est factum please,
By larger grauntes, the lease away to fease,
Conditioned releases, how to frame,
By former words, the latter for to lame.
59
Such quillets nyce, when thus you noted have,
Some practice needs, must print them in your thought,
Set such at Law, in words as late but straue,
And when they both in backhouse ditch are brought,
To poule them both, let some devise be wrought,
Forget not this, when writings hit your hand,
(If youths them owe) with doubts to lame his land.
60
With hope of gain, his greedy mind else move,
To void some grant, or work some leases wrack.
A lease of trust, then must the title prove,
At leisure yet, this timelesse trust turn back,
Your interest small, his greatest right will sack,
For once in proof, this proverb still does last,
A little lyme, A foul will fetter fast.
61
Physicians.
Physicians now, that weyes how weak we are,

Old Gallens drugges, our time vnfitteth far,
Augmented then, his cures abroad must raunge,
For healthlesse men, on every hope will change,
But once reteynde, be sure thou use this course,
Another blame, although thy self be worse.
62
The practice of a lewd Physician.
See your receites, some lightning yield at first,
To work conceits within your patients thought,
Persuade him still, his pain is at the worst,
Yet heal and harm, till wished gain be wrought,
But for the poor, see some relief be sought,
And for your pains, let rich men (grieved) pay,
No cure performde, your custom will decay.
63
Officers.
But now to you whom office does advance,

You come deuaunt, upon a sorry chance,
Yea stock you set, upon a tickle maine,
Durant levy, no longer lastes your gain,
And ere you sway, some thousand pounds must fle^,
Which is not raysde (in have) upon your fee.
64
In ten years space, five hundred marks a year,
Unto his heir, who purchase not to leave,
One officer by honesty, discovers the deceites of the lewd.
Shall sure be blamde, of mysers every where,
If truth cause lack, most say the rest deceive,
If all be false, few will such faults conceive,
Once wrong you must, a thousand for this gain,
How void you then, the penal statutes pain.
65
You are forbid inroulements for to raze,
To fit your friend, or foil your hated foe,
To save old seals, to give forged writtes their grace,
To change records, a friendly turn to show,
For once you may both help and overthrow,
Yet use you must, both means by sly devise,
But frosted be, for fear of slippery yse.
66
Provide a cloak, to color still your crime,
Then work your will, Apollo often does fleepe,
But if your wyles, do come to light in time,
To salve such miss, A notable cloak.
some careless servant keep,
Plague him with blame, when you the profit reap
What if sharp checkes, do put you in some fear,
The gain remains, ye tauntes in time does wear.
67
Mas gaylor, Gaylors.
needs, must taste of this my gift,
Extortion cries, against his iron fees,
What then in hold, this is your only shift,
With shackles huge, your prisoners to displease,
Thus pincht (good souls) they will pay, pray, and please,
Pence poucht ne dread, although they stoutly crake,
To use redress, poor prisoners vnde lack.
68
Now gallants learn, whom bravery still consumes,
To royst in silks, Young Gentlemen.
to flaunt in colors gay,
To pranke your wives, up in their Pecockes plumes,
To snuff to scorn, to look beyond your sway,
To find a mint, to feed your minds with play,
To hawk, to hunt, to boast, to braule, and fight,
Which are the thoughts that feed you with delight.
69
This cost is more, then careless, youths forethinke.
But cost, ne care, their hautie minds can veil,
Sith not, see ^ines, your farmers Eofers shrink,
Of timber trees, then strike the lofty sail,
The bodies next, will serve for board and pale,
If all these helps, your charge will not defraye,
But still your names, in merchauntes iornalls stay,
70
To flote your minds, if house and land must flee,
To two or three, the same give grant, and sell,
Cave emptor, to thy assurance see,
Hap well, hap ill, some speedeth pretty well,
The rest must take their fortune as it fell,
Shift you for one, the world to fraud is bent,
Coin stays your friend, when fleering words are spent.
71

Whose Lynxes eyes, in young men's state do pry,
Merchaunts.
Their loss your gain, their spending is your thrift,
They broche your bags till all their living fly:
But holla hoe, a bug is Usurie,
He houldes you back, from three times ten to take,
On morgage good, least no return you make.
72
What rests then, your coin will rust saunce use,
And statute loan, cannot content your thought,
Well fare a shift, both law and them to abuse,
You know in prime, each thing is easily wrought,
The dog to draw, the horse to order brought,
The skillesse youth, is won with every gaude,
The reason is his thought is free from fraud.
73
To work this feate, see that you use this course,
Religion without devotion.
When doleful knell, does bid a churl adue,
Send straight to know, on whom death vsd this force,
Not to this end your neighbors fate to rue,
But of his heir in have so (...) a ^ew,
If he be young, well left and easily won,
To feed his dame* see words and works be done,
74
Some pretty sum on small assurance lend,
If youth be slow, at leisure bid him pay,
Some times bestow, Crosbytinge, a cusnage under the color of friendship.
good counsel as his friend,
But help him to each toy, to make him gay,
To pay for all, at length, will come a day,
By peecemeales thus, in lash he will be brought,
In danger once, let this devise be wrought.
75
Get some to rest, Note this policy.
and vex this thriftlesse youth,
Not at thy suit (although by thy consent)
To free himself from catchpoles little ruth,
For thy goodwill, to thee his mind is bent,
To moan his state, his time and coin misspent,
To feign thy heart, to his behoof is fixed,
Then let advise, with pretty tauntes be mixed.
76
But to conclude, Be dasigerous to enter into a statute to a merchant.
lend him his turn to scrue,
Yet bind him sure, least he do slip away,
In statutes, which, lands, goods and body sterue,
Twenty to one, he forfets at his day,
The vauntage then, will double vsaunce pay,
Extent on land, the sale will slander so,
That fee in fine, on easy prise will go.
77
You Burgoses, Burgoses.
which sell the costly stuff,
That wares to ebb, our gallants goods and land,
This lesson learn, and utter wares enough,
Beyond the price, of paying down in hand,
His state and stay, To take ware on trust, a notable usury.
first wisely understand,
Close fisted then, deliver him thy ware,
But bind him sure, if thou his payment fear.
78
If day he break, A worthy custom in London.
let Commens be no Leache,
No forfet once, the city custom gives,
In the hoystinges, an outlawes note him teach,
Bear with his talk, his crakes, and yreful tauntes,
Law will him stoop, Selling wares on credit, collusion.
in spite of all his vauntes,
Collusion thoe, this dealing some do reake.
Yet iumpe thou thus, a penal law to break.
Scriueners.
Come Scriueners come, the fry of all abuse,

Why blush you so, you need not frame excuse,
You are to help a thousand with your pen,
Chetors, Cousners, merchauntes, your selves like men,
Good reason you have store of subtle skill,
Since you are means, each misers bag to fill.
80
Be sure you have, the grounds of law by ro^e,
What words unlose, and what as fast do bind,
Each quillet nyse, see that you nearly note,
In paper book, as tendes to fraud you find,
In morgages, leafes, couenauntes unkind,
Conditions, bonds, feoffments, Graunts, and cetera,
In some one point, the crafty lack still play.
81
For craft is that, that does you credit gain,
Rich Burgoses, your chiefest clients are,
Money takers
They lay the plot, but you must take the pain,
Money takers to meash in meats of care,
They fast, farewell, such will no vauntage spare,
Thus since your trade, does tend to falsehoode vile,
Good reason you, acquaint your self with guile.
82
This monstrous mate, had need of thousand shifts,
Cousiners.
To feed the thoughts of those whose form he bears,

A simple look, to free rash youths of fears,
A flatterers tongue, to feed believing cares,
A harlots face, to witch with wanton sight,
A tyrauntes heart, to wound the harmless wight.
83
A scriueners fist, a lackyes leg to trudge,
A merchauntes mind, to mountains that aspires,
A gluttons throat, to show he is no snudge,
What gain may be, vngleand, this monster then desires,
What youth vnspoilde, whose wreake this feend conspires,
And since this mate, so manyes turn must serve,
This course, for cheates, Craft wills him to observe.
89
First flattery thou, must prye abroad for pray,
Thou wily must, each gallauntes state escrie,
Companion like, with them, thou needs must play,
If able youth, Dice need, to nip thou spy,
Unto his helps, be sure thou have an eye,
And one some lose, draw near and note his moan,
And proferre him, supply on easy lone.
90
Now merchaunt hide, thy hook in golden bait,
In plain, John's name, yet let this dealing be,
His simple show, Note this policy.
will color foul deceit,
To make false deeds, let master Lawyer see,
To get them sealed, use scriueners policy,
To meash him sure, let flattery still assay,
But be not yet, to eger of your pray.
91
With friendly show, first work him in conceit,
Then Epicure, thy bounty, let him feel,
To witch his wits, make mystresse Mynxe a bait,
He snarled once, ryng out the Cousners peale,
To forge, to raze: such stuff then make him seal,
As over soon, will put him to his shift,
Noe force for that, he might have eyde his thrift.
92
But fraud bewrayde, By the imprisoning of the complainant, the cousiner
agrees without open shame.
if wronged youth complain,
Then tyrant start, to save the rest from shame,
To stay his suit, by catchpoles lay a train,
With Actions huge, his crased credit lame,
In prison popt, there is no laughing game,
There friends do fail, if money ebbeth low,
His suit is cold, his lawyer will be slow.
He nipt with need, and rest of freedom both,
As one half dead, in have will sue for ease,
First make it coy, as men to greement loath,
Right Cousiners stand upon their credit.
His slaundrous plaint, so does your truth displease,
As trial must this foul report appease,
In fine yet come, and ere you go agree,
And featherlesse, let my young master flee.
94
Make shifts.
An other sort of cheating mates there are,

Whom thriftlesse life, has wrapped in heaps of care,
In prison thrown, of succor clean dismayde,
Whose wealth is worn, of friends, whose woe vnwayde,
Whose hautie hearts, against thraldom yet do spurn,
Need works for these, some shifts, to serve their turn.
95
If any such, ripe wit, or learning have,
Want ioynde with Craft, this counsel does bestow,
(To f^aunte it out, in outward show full brave)
Counterfeit Astronomers.
To feign each act, yea thought by art they know,
A salve for love, fools fortunes for to shoe,
Goods stolen or lost, with a vengeance for to fetch,
Phisitian^
Or feign thou art for every grief a leach.
96
But at the first to make your cunning known,
A baude or two, send pryinge round about,
Bands.
UUhere loving worms, or sickly wightes are thrown,
Old churles some have, some love and reap a flout,
Some sickness catch, by keeping revel route,
To wightes thus grieved, though slender help you give,
Use show of skill, in hope to make them live.
97
If fortune hap, to hitt some hearts desire,
You need no trumpe, your knowledge for to spread,
But by the way, give mother Be her hire,
Then will she prate to bring a patch to bed,
And vouch for proof, how such and such have sped,
Although in truth, this shifting is but theft,
Your coats for this, the hangeman silde has reft.
98
You holy gyrles, Courtesans.
the hindmost in my gift,
Be foremost yet, in fraud and foul abuse,
While beauty lastes, in blooming years to shift,
For your behoof, this counsel craft does use,
To make it nyce, large offers to refuse,
Alooft to stand, if Vobis (rich) do sue,
The more you flee, the more he follows you.
99
If careless boys, your coyness cannot brook,
Such gallants win, with outward show of grace,
They swallowing up, with sugared bayte the hook,
With careless toys, their fancies can not chase,
And when you stoop, their hot desires t'imbrace,
Look to your match, the world is full of wyle,
And well you wot, how sugared words beguile.
100
Still have an eye, to beauties vading blase,
And prye for dames, which soon in prime will be,
On painted stuff, Painting, may help a courtesan, but there end is a band
and a begge^.
though often gallants gase,
The wily sort, your surfling straight will see,
To fit their turns, stricke not to play the Be,
Scorn not for gain, in age to hold the door,
They once were young, yt were your bands before.
101
And now (my larges given) farewell foul guile
Farewell (O world) no wile shall make me rich,
My mind abhorres, wealth won by falshoodes vile,
To mount by fraud, I loath such lofty pitch,
I can not scratch, the harmless, ere they itch,
If due desert, proud Flattery pyneth still,
I list not fawn, play hypocrite that will.
102
Fare well, His farewell to the world, a degression that shows a of all this
couetousness^*
fare well (O world) farewell again,
Thou now God wot, from wonted course do reele
The clergy once, in preaching took great pain,
Whose words in works, bare witness of their zeal
Most now in words, but few in works reveal,
They teach with tongue, when thought on tything is,
O wicked world, thy wealth is cause of this.
103
O world accursed, in court thou set pride,
Whose mynions are, fraud, flattery, and disdain,
They pyne desert, before his truth be tryde,
They forge offened, well meaning minds to stain,
They cast at al, yet sildome lose amain,
Woe worth ye world, thy bravery works the wrack,
Of such in court, as well deserve, and lack.
104
The soldier stout, foreseeing small relief,
For service done, if spoiled honre he comes,
As forced to play, no soldier but the thief,
When fortune fits, to gather up his crumbes,
For once at home, poor store of pence he thumbes,
O world thy wealth, with rulers works so,
As what they have, they hardly will forgo.
105
The law first made, to weed out wrongs for right,
To yeald amends, unto the poor oppressed,
^s wrested now, for favor or for spite,
Arbitriment, best for poor men.
Now money, so corrupts the Lawyers breast,
That daying is, for poor men's suits the best:
Yea such effects, in worldly much does lurk,
As judges harm, where help they ought to work.
106
Fine fare and sloth, discases strange do breed,
And grieved wights, will spare, no cost for ease,
But golden fees, so does Physicians feed,
As seelde or nere, they rich men's pains appease,
With drinks and drugs, they still do them displease,
O wicked world, thy wealth first wrought their grief,
Thy wealth again, does hinder their relief.
107
Desire of gain, make offices so heap,
As sold they be, not given, who best deserves,
Who buyeth dear, seelde thriues by selling cheap,
Who wrongeth yet, from honest getting swerues,
No force for that, few now such course observes,
Thus pelf (O world) first makes the Doner foul,
To leauie mendes, the Done needs must poule.
108
Each pleasant pain, each sweet enticing sour
O world thou workst, our wanton years to witch,
And not content, we should our selves devour,
But churles thou sett'st, to clawe us ere we itch,
Thou burnst the bird, and bastes the bacon stitch,
O spiteful world, thou hap frank hearts do grutch,
And grieuest churles, by giving of too much.
109
The merchant once, bent all his care to seas,
In foreign soil, he sought desired gain,
Then was his toil, Usury, a new trade of merchandise.
to common wealth an ease,
And he deserved, his wish in lie of pain,
But now at home, he finds a sweeter vain,
Sance venture now, he will in wealth abound,
Foul fall the wight, this second trade that found.
110
The reachlesse heed, youths have in large expense,
To flaunt it out, their cost, no care, to thrive,
Inticeth churles, with show of good pretense,
In prime of pride, Cousiners not without friends of calling.
their maintnance to deprive,
For lymed once, small boots (the wronged) to strive,
Right Cousners have such helps, and friends at need,
As struange it is, to see how ^leare they speed.
111
Thy pride, O world, does breed such wanton thought,
As most men now, receive dame Venus hyre,
To stoop fair dames, such sharp assaults are sought,
Such proffers large, such wiles to win desire,
As wonder it is, what fortes are set on fire,
Who sins not, is such a gnawing bone,
To raise this siege, that few will throw a stone.
112
Fie on the world, fie on thy soul deceites,
Fie on thy fraud, thy flattery and thy pride,
Fie on thy shifts, thy subtilties, and sleites,
Fie on thy cloakes, thy filthy crimes to hyde,
Adieu, adieu, I can thee not abide.
And thee O God, for evermore I laud,
For keeping me, untainted so with fraud.
113
A comfort to the godly in misery.
For though I have, consumd my days in thral,
Now death draws near, my count is quickly made,
And well I wot, death does all sorts appall,
The prince, the poor, yea men of every trade,
Who lewdly lives, with recknings huge is lade,
Thus worldlings grief, where mine does eb, does flow,
A sorry sweet, to end with sour woe.
114
Through conscience, I feel no thought of hell,
A bold challenge.
I conquered have, of dreadful death the fear,
Where is thy sting, where does thy fury dwell?
Where is thy force (O Death) where is thy spear,
Assault say I, that with my Christ I were?
I ready am, both evening, noone, and morn,
The devil, the world, and all their works I scorn.
Lenuoy.
115
YOu worldlings chief, to you this tale I tell,
God grant my words, be to your wounds a leache,
The fruits of fraud, untold, you know too well,
Yea better then, my naked Muse can teach,
But to this end, this dririe plaintes I preach,
That henceforth you, to getting have such eye,
As you may live, as though you daily dye.
116
And least the lewd, should wrest my word amiss,
I do exempt the good of every trade,
The which I trust, will not repine at this,
To show thy praise, this checking verse was made,
The Clergy first, at whom a glaunce I had,
Of them there be, great store of preachers good,
To show the truth, that will not spare their blood.
117
There are in court, that live in worthy fame,
And well deserve, renoune, and credit both,
Some officers, will take no bribes for shame,
Some laweyers, are to sow dissension loath,
And citizens, with whom I seemde so wroth,
I needs must grant (how so my Muse did square)
Of every trade, a number honest are.
118
The soldier now, whom I do honor much,
(How so I touched) their faults that do offend,
I grant we have, of noble soldiers such,
(As maimes to fame) that will those vices shend,
I blame none such, the rest I wish amend,
Physicians good (as many sure there be)
Will not repine, the lewd reprou'd to see.
119
How so I touched, some scriueners faults at quick,
There are of those, I know of honest fame,
Such have no cause, against my Muse to kick,
Nor yet the lewd; that wisely weyes the same,
I blase abuse, yet touch no creatures name,
Yea to be shore, ^^ypt no foot of men,
That truly can, with malice charge my pen.
Veritas non querit angulos.
G.W. opinion of trades (as touching gain) written to his especial friend,
master R.C.
MIne own good friend* since thou so feign would know,
What kind of trade, does yeald the surest gain,
My judgment now, of some I mean to show,
And after toil, which quiteth best thy pain,
The merchant he, which cuts the mounting seas,
With course direct, as lies his best avail,
The Spanish mart, whose mind sometime does please,
With further reach, some hoyst their houering sail.
Some pass Marroccos straights, by painful toil,
Some seek to reap, the fruits of Ciprus soil,
But how or where, they rome with oken blocks,
Their lives, their goods, does rest in Neptunes hands,
In rage some times, who rolls them on the rocks,
Or driven unknown, they sink on Sillaes sands,
The gotten gain they looked, thus hapless lost,
In lue of toil, them selves be quite undone,
Now unto him, which furrows on the coast,
And hassard gains, on waltering waves does shun,
Who gropes the ox, who sheares the sheep for gain,
Is often doust, with dewes of rotting rain.
The handie craft, who wins his bread by toil,
With sweat of browe, he gropes for others gain,
He tylles the ground, he sowes with seed the soil,
When others reap, the harvest of his pain,
To lodge the Lord, who buildes the stately hall,
Yet glad to couch, in cabben clad with need,
For others joy, who lives him self in thrall,
Who killes the sheep, yet of the ^oad does seed,
His summers toil, does serve for winters store,
From hand to mouth, good soul he has no more.
The captain he, which climbes for high advance,
By piercing blade, imbrude in enemies blood,
In martial shows, who foremost leads the dance,
His soldiers trainde, in warlike order good,
The pyke men plaste, to stay the horfemens rage,
The Musket wild, aloof, to souse them down,
The byll men fresh, when handie strokes must gage,
When gallants having charge, does cry Aloun,
Then tantara, he bids in battle ray,
Be mearching mates, in hope of happy day,
But when to join, the bloody trumpe does sound,
The horsemen fling, to break the pikemens ray,
The roaring gunnes, does terrify the ground,
The feathred flightes, the enemies face does fray,
The currier swift, does rid the skonce of ache,
With streams of blood, the joining valleys flows,
And wounded wightes, for life their heels does shake,
Who scapeth then, next brunt may go to pot,
Thus dangerous stands, the soldier state God wot.
The courtier now, which hops up by degree*
And happily heau'd, to height of high renown,
If he do swerue, from top of tickle tree,
His courtly friends, will help to throw him down,
Who fawned erst, then wrayes the form of hate,
(He honored late) now glad to crouch and creep,
Yet Envy vile, with spite and foul debate,
So wreastes his guilt, that grace does always sleep,
Expeuterand toil, is guerdond with disdain,
A bare reward, in recompense of pain.
The clown does clawe, more coin out of the ground,
Then he whose skill, does reach the state of stars,
Of yore though men, though learning were renound,
Wealth with those wit^^^ now at mortal wars,
By Physic (...) to credit many amount,
Where lack of (...), The three following, are the trade of surest gain.
does murder many one,
A sorry trust, tide to so hard acount,
To lend him pence, that pays the death for lone,
And yet no doubt, his gain is gauld with grief,
When conscience his, does call him murdring thief.
Great be the rents, the Clergy does receive,
More great their charge, the count if conscience take,
If errors their, the simple does deceive,
For both their miss, amends their souls shall make,
This desperate cure, agrees not with my mind,
Although the gain, does tempt my greedy thought,
If so it be, that my^^es of feaude does blind,
Or falsehood faith, from former grace has wrought,
If trades of gain, be spyste, with deep deceit,
The Lawyers hook, lies hid in sweetest bayte.
It choketh fools, which hunger after strife,
Suppose that cra^t, does fore abuse his skill,
He sleas the purse, the others soul and life,
By learnings lack, and error often does kill,
He roystes in sylkes, which merchants fetch a far,
Him glad to please, the simple soul does moyle,
His sugared charm, witch Angels to the bar,
His piercing pen, the soldier often does soil,
For solace sake, if he will to the court,
If any be, he soon shall see the sport.
He little weyes, so law be on his side,
The thundering threats, which Lordly might does move,
If that his cause, with country men be tried,
More hearts he has, for fear then they for love,
He often pulles, a personage from the priest,
And ouerrules, by law, both might and right,
A kildowe sure, whom no man dare resist.
God shield, that I with such a b^g should fight:
And thus thou hearst, of trades what I can say,
The law for game, does bear the bell away.
Formae ^ulla fides.
R.C. answer to G.W. opinion of trades.
I Thought (my George) thy Muse would fully fit,
My troubled mind, with heast of settled doom,
And tell the trade, wherein I sure might sit,
From nipping need, in wealthy walled room,
But out alas, in tedious tale,
She tells the toils of all,
And forgeth fates, to attend estates,
That seeld or never fall.
Bereauing so, the hope that erst I held,
To find at last, a sight to set me sure,
In profits path, my thriftlesse feet to weald,
Or walk the way, that age might well endure.
Since hapless haps, or conscience crackes,
Or toils of tedious weight,
She proves the fees, of all degrees,
Each course with cares affraight.
And yet I smell, whereto thy tale does tend,
And smyle to see, thy queint conceit therein,
I write not here, thy meaning to amend,
Against thy words, this answer I begin.
In prime to touch, the merchants trade,
Which furrows fishfull floodes,
Whose hap thou say is lightly hurt,
With loss of life and goods.
Thou say his ship, sits sincking on the sand,
Of Sillas seas, or on Caribdis rocks,
When nothing less, the sea more sure then land,
Then fenced fortes, more trusty hollow blocks.
Let Neptune rage, with wayward waves,
A fig for Aeoles winds,
By anchors stay, in harbor gay,
The merchants succor finds.
As for the man that furrows in the field,
Distrusting gains, that waltering waves afforde,
The fees that ox, and fruitful sheep does yield,
And parched fields, and northren dewes accord,
His pains do passing pleasure quit,
When greenie lands appears,
He smyles in sweat, when harvest heat,
Dries up the corned ears.
The crafts man, he that lives by handie skill,
By toil and trade, obtains needful gains,
Ynough's as good, as any feast, since will
And quiet mind contented so remains,
He lives at rest in mean estate,
Contemning fortunes blast,
While such as hye aloft to fly,
He sees to fall as fast.
The noble heart, whom nature pricks to prancke,
In martial fields, amid the clattering crewe,
For high renoune, to furnish up the rank,
Thy Muse to daunt (oh) how the same I rewe.
Since pen, ne tongue, nor mind can match,
With due deserved hire,
The factes of those, which force their foes,
By helmets help retire.
The courtier he, that hops for high degree,
At last attaines, his well deserved hap,
For service done, he must rewarded be,
And gwerdon his, the mark he leueld at,
Which gotten, if he loose again,
The fault ascribe his own,
But settled wits, escape the fits,
To careless courtiers known.
The masking mind, that mounts amid the stars,
And wakes to write, by skill of planets course,
Foretells of dearth, of plenty, peace, and wars,
Of temperate times, of hoarie Hyems force,
Not only skill, but lasting fame,
When death depriues his days,
He reapes with groates, to guard his coats,
Art thriues at all assayes.
Physicians dregs, who tastes not betime,
May come too short, if faintness fear to bleed,
Mas'doctours drink, deserves this praise of mine,
I never knew the man, it stood in steed,
Yet one kind tale, and one kind drink,
One doctor sure has got,
A tawnie velvet coat and pouch,
What others get God wot.
Though rents be great, that runs to clergies share,
And more the account, their souls does rest upon,
Yet Christ his truth, to preach if nere they spare,
But feed the flock, the account is cast anon,
And in reward of service done,
At last appointed hour,
Where Christ does reign, they shall attain,
To shroude in heavenly hour.
The Lawyer he, the man that measures right,
By reason, rule, and law, conioynd in one,
Thy rouing Muse, squares much with his delight,
Whose only toil, all states depend upon:
For Lawyer gone, good right adieu,
Dicke Swash must rule the reaste,
And madding might, would banish quite,
Tom Troth from English coast.
In corner close mid books of crabbed sense,
For ten years day, fith sore he beats his brains,
To find the right, of things from soul offense,
Who can deprive such toil of hoped gains.
In doubtful doomes he reaues the right,
And throws force along,
With doubtful praise, his fame to raise,
In faith thou do him wrong.
A brief discourse, of the discommodities of quarelling written at the request
of his especial friend and kinseman, master Robert Cudden of Grayes In.
AS manhood is a virtue great, where wisdom rules the sword,
As great a vice it is to brall, for every trifling word,
The railing speech, the fearelesse oaths, the standers by affright,
When quarellers like curtall curres, do bark before they bite,
But if their brauling turn to blows, his count comes very scant,
For six pence strife, to buy a sword, and buckler if he want,
A reckning worsse to catch a lick, but worst the loss of life,
One of which evils, lightly haunt, the man which lives in strife,
Who so is hurt does feel the smart, who hurtes in fear does live,
His foe to seek a sharp revenge, some desperate stroke will give,
If lucklesse blow should plerte the heart, the one to death gives place,
The other lives in slender hope, to have the princes grace.
Though suite of friends, his pardon gets, appeal does pinch his pursse,
But gnawing of the conscience guilt, then all will grieve him worsse,
What greater spite than spoiled limbs, with houghed less to limp,
Or with a wood, or iron hand, the maimed arm to y^^e.
This moan he finds at strangers hands, a cold amends in faith,
A proper man, as one shall see, see what mishap he has,
But they that know his bralles, does say, no force, it skilleth not,
His hassard hap, has hit the white, at which his sold shot,
His friends do count, by this mischaunce, how he does nothing loose,
Who else would kill, or sure be kilde, a sorry choice to choose.
But (ah) good couse, at this my verse, the reader smyle I see,
Who says, behold how far from words, his deeds do disagree,
If half this reason ruled his rage, his rashness had not caught,
A maimed hand (which true I grant) nor trial had me taught,
The goodness half of such a lym, which by the loss I find,
But since mishap would have it so, this shows an honest mind,
To warn his friends the vice to shun, whose proof be wrayes the woe,
If late repentance wrought him help, he would no more do so.
The unhappy man contemns Fortune, and cleaves to Hope, assured once to
reach good hap by virtuous Industry, in the despite of Fortune:
Sweet is the thought, where hope persuadeth hap,
Although the mind, be fed with faint desire,
The dunghill drone, would mount to honors lap,
If forward thoughts, to Fortune could aspire,
The ventrous knight, whom Valor does aduau^ce,
First cuts off dread, with hope of happy chance.
If hope of fame, suppressed not fear of death,
In face of shot, the soldier would not run,
Or recke so small, the loss of lively breath,
If spoil thereof, a slender glory won.
Nor merchants would, so seek out foreign soil,
If hope of gain, ne recompenst their toil.
The murdrous mate, the traitor, and the thief,
By conscience guilt, that bathes in bitter tears,
In hope of grace, does suck out sweet relief,
Which wears to eb, their flowing tide of fears,
Then since she feeds, the wights forworne with woe,
Why should I faint, though Fortune be my fo.
Whose thought does climb, by virtue, not by vice,
To whom perforce, proud Fortune yeldes a thral,
Suppose (sly hap) may hinder my device,
Fear feeds the heart, that faintes for every fall,
If first come short, then frame a new account,
The forward mind, a thousand ways may mount.
Thou see that doultes, whom only hap advance,
Dare ouerrule their betters far in wit,
Which vailde their hope, to every sorry chance,
What may he then, whose hap with skill is knit,
Bare sway by will, as well in wrong as right,
Grudge may his foes, but not withstand his might.
Yet hardly men* by virtue do aspire,
Spite sowes suspect, till their desert be tryde,
But once aduaunst, is that the wise desire,
In favor they, for fortunes change provide,
Then though at first, thou light in Enuies trap,
Small were thy loss, which never erst had hap.
If so it be, in hope I forward set,
To raunge the world, as fortune shall me drive,
A happy toil, if credit so I get,
As sure I shall, for what is he alive,
But has good hap, within so large a scope,
God and Saint George, send fortune as I hope.
How great a folly the conceit of excellency is.
WHere as dame Nature has bestowed, a special gift of wit,
And learning won by travel long, with natures lore is knit.
If wisdom then do rule his tongue, the trial of his skill,
A passing praise among the wise, no doubt but win he will,
But once infect, with fond conceit, how he does others pass.
So feeding on his painted speech, will prove a passing ass,
Or if he seeks by reasons rule, the scoffer to disgrace,
Which makes a scorn, of sound advice, and loves to floute and face.
Or when his equalles list to sport, to waste their sharp annoy,
His glorious tongue, is gravely bent, to countermaund their joy.
If once they do espy his vein, their vice they will him take,
Then sots will straight be on his top, the residue sport to make,
If argument his betters move, how so the same does grow,
If he defend or prove with them, before their mind he know,
Too malapert they will him recke, and so their tale adiourne,
Thus too familiar speech in him, unto contempt will turn,
Where happily else, to try his wit, them selves will him request,
To show his reasons and his mind, which side he likes best,
For often the best, the baser choose, and leaves the high estate,
But knows again, when to be strange, lest he should prove check mate
In honest mirth, is wisdom seen, as time thereto does fit,
For grauest heads must have a mean, for to refresh their wit,
Few words they say, in order plaste, the wise man's tale does wray,
And silence is an answer fit, the noddies tongue to stay,
But over halte in seeking praise, some minds persuade the still,
Their knowledge silence will conceal, what then auailes their skill?
When as between the both extremes, a modest mean does lie,
For to direct the wise man's tongue, as needs the use shall try.
Against ingratitude.
PEriander of Corinth sometime prince,
A law ordainde, ungrateful chuffes to pain,
Which was on proof, who could a churl convince.
To reap rewards, vnrecompenst again,
To levy mendes, he should no longer live,
For why (quoth he) such men deserves no grace,
As gladly take, and grudge again to give,
A needful law, this shameless sect to chase,
For what may be, a viler fault then this,
To be unkind, to father or to friend,
Or how may men, amend their foul amiss,
Which scorns ye wights, which daily them defend.
A Farmer once, a frozen snake did find,
With pity moved, who laid her by the fire,
The snake revived, did show her self unkind,
But what ensued, he slew her for her hire.
A moral rule, ungrateful wights to warn,
How thanklesse they, do quite a friendly turn,
But out alas, those varlets be so stearne,
That viper like, they law and duty spurn,
We daily see, the parents painful toil,
Their restless care, their children well to train.
We likewise see, how thanklesse children spoil,
Their parents goods, or wish them dead for gain.
The good man often, the friendlesse child does keep,
And fosters him, with many a friendly grote,
who seeks his spoil, when he is sound asleep,
Or gives consent, to cut his masters throat,
We see some men, aduaunst to honors hye,
By help of such, which once did bear a sway,
Which quite forget, what feathers forced them fly,
If founders theirs, by froward chance decay,
The traitrous mate, whose prince does call to grace,
Is subject straight, to sow seditious strife,
No marvel then, to root out such a race.
If Corinth king, ordained loss of life,
But if in ure, we now should put his doom,
Ungrateful gnufes, each gallows so would cloy,
That scarcely thieves, to hang should have a room.
To ease the just, whom daily they annoy,
Yet doubt I not, some means would be preparde,
To cut them off, for both may well be sparde.
The evil fortune of a covetous person, and what profit arises by the death
of a churl.
A Desperate wight, his fortunes foul to free,
(By wilful death) to rid his cares did choose,
But as he trudgd, to totter on a tree,
Untimely there, his loathed life to loose,
(A rare good hap) a pot of gold he found,
The gold he rapt, his rope he left behind,
Anon a carle, came sheaking through the ground,
In steed of gold, a rope who there did find,
Which hapless sight, so nipt him at the heart,
That lo for woe, he pissed where he stood,
At length (quoth he) this cord shall cure my smart,
And so he hung himself in fullen mood.
The sight were fair, if every bough did bear,
Such kind of fruits, till caren churles were choakt,
Whose deaths enforce, a thousand well to fare,
Their lives the poor, as many ways has yoakt.
The worms rejoice, upon a churl to gnawe,
The poor man then, whom he did pinch of yore,
Has penny dole, and meat to fill his mawe,
Where scarcity was, forthwith appears store.
Pray for his soul, the common people cry,
As for his life, the world full well may spare,
His hordes of gold, about the house then fly,
Catch who catch may, his goods a hundred share.
His heaps of corn, to every market sails,
Which close he kept, in hope of some dear year,
And where he sparde, the parings of his nails,
His son may spend and make his friends good cheer,
If such increase, comes by a carrens death,
Who would not wish, a cord to stop his breath?
A brief description of death.
DEath is a pillar to the Prince,
true justice to uphold,
A terror to the traiterous mate,
his secrets to unfold,
A steadfast stay to commonweals,
a web of worldlings woe,
A father to the harmless wight,
unto his friend a foe.
An Epitaphe upon the death of Henry Cantrell of Lincolnes Inn Gent. by his
friend R. C.

But lives (ay) amidde the glorious crew,
Lament not then, our Cantrell is alive,
In heaven, on high, with changed life a new,
Then death no dole, since life therein remains,
But glad, he gone, to bliss from worldly pains.
From wreake of woe, from cut of cares anoye,
From fainting friends, from dole of doubtful dome,
From vain delights, the counterfeit of joy,
From sobbing sighs, whence sorrows seeds do come,
From dread to die, since death does clear us quit,
Lament not then, good Henry Cantrells hit.
The dalying days, that here we lead alonge.
On earthly mould, fills up the sack with sins,
Here mirth with moan, is always mixed among,
To sour our sweet, here fortune never linnes,
Hence pleasure parkes, no joy can here remain,
No swalowed sweet, not purgde with pills of pain.
Then laud the Lord, lament no whit at all,
Though it has pleased, his will and heavenly ^est,
From wretched us, this happy youth to call,
For (sure I say) his soul him liked best.
Thus best he calls, and leaves the worst alone,
His mercy such, our heaped sins to moan.
How great a vice it is either for the virtuous, or valiant man, to
accompany himself with men of base condition, when as (acknowledging his
duty) he may adventure into the company of the best.
WHere virtue may, or valor one advance,
To base his hap, a loute to live below,
Or credit seek, with men of meanest chance,
A fearful heart, a dunghill mind do show,
On thorns no grapes, but sower flows does grow,
Even so by sottes, no fame, but shame does rise,
A fair catch, for such to count thee wise,
The forward mind, does covet this at least,
To prease, where he is poorest of the train,
And not to live, with those (himself) the best,
For sure he shall, a lousy kingdom gain,
Where under him, do none but beggars rain,
By learninges lore, who does the idiot school,
In fine will prove himself a passing soole.
The highest trees, does keep the under spray,
From Phoebus gleames, from, sugared dewes that fall,
So mounting minds, aloft does bear the sway,
When meaner wits, does live below in thrall,
They suck the sweet, when sottes do gnawe the gall,
They wrong, by might, their will makes right a mome,
Who pricks at such, but seeldome s^ooteth home.
Such is their force, where credit bears sway,
A perfect tale, although the wronged tell,
Their thwarting speech, what they mislike, will stay,
The wronged wight, with wrath may happily swell,
And pleades a fresh, though not so passing well,
Then sausie knave, how ma^lapeart he is,
Away go pack, your purpose you shall mis.
But if the sot, which in their favor stand,
Do slammer forth, a patched tale of lies,
Their helping speech, will force him understand,
The way and means, afresh for to devise,
To frame his talk, from show of truth to rise,
A virtue strange, their words can bring to pass,

UUhat freer life, then others to command?
UUhat happier state, then for to live in rest?
What greater wealth, then what a man demand?
UUhat credit like, the countnaunce of the best?
For thralles it were, a heaven to reach the left,
But they aloft, whom virtue does advance,
If more may be, enjoy more happy chance.
UUho will not then, both seek and double seek,
To reach this hap, with hazard at the first,
The foreward wight, though fortune give ye gleeke,
A fresh will toil, till that his har^ does burst*
If still she frown, in faith the man is cursed,
A fall (says he) who recketh such a loss,
An ass shall ride, and no hie sturring horse.
For proof again, the huge and mighty oak,
UUhose withered root, from falling cannot stay,
But down he comes, by sturdie Boreas stroke,
His fall god wot, does crush the under spray,
Even so it fares, with those that bears sway,
If by mishap they wrapped be in thrall,
The poor does bear, the burden of their fall.
For where as minds, by mischief rais^e too hie,
Sedition sow, their native soil^ to wring,
UUhen Princes might does make such rebels fly,
The leaders chief, well horst away do fling,
UUhen pesaunts stay, and Sursum cord sing,
They sue for grace, safe in another land,
When toyling thralles, are trussed out of hand.
If in abuse, of both their states be best,
Although the best, in faith is very bad,
Deserving well, they are far better blessed,
They roist in silks, when clownes in rags are clad,
They have their will, and what can more be had,
Who will not then, how so sly hap says nay,
Seek out this chance, if virtue says he may?
An Epitaphe on the death of the right worshipful master Robert Wingfield, of
Vpton in the county of Northampton Esquier.
TO show their cause of dole, whom Wingfields death does pearse,
Good muse take thou a little pain, his virtues to rehearse,
He well was known to spring, from house of ancient name,
Yea leave his Arms, and blase his acts, and you shall see the same.
His zeal to serve his God, his care to save his soul,
His stout contempt of Romish rags, their tax, their tyth, and toule.
The Gospel, that he loved, his life that showde no less,
Bare witness that in words and works, the truth he did profess.
Believe his blessings else, which he receyu'd from hie,
The first long life, in happy health, till age inforst him die.
And then this comfort sweet, to free his age from fears,
He saw his children live and like, in credit many years,
Sufficient wealth he had, enough he thought a feast,
He had enough, he spent enough, and with enough deceast.
His credit with his Prince continued from his youth,
(A sight most rare) in office plast, he trust, returnde with truth.
Full fifty years and twoe, a Justice place he used,
For common peace, and profit both, he seeldome pains refusde,
He weeded wrongs from right; by law, and not by ame,
He kept this course, to help the poor, the lewd again to blame.
His life upright and just, he ioyde in no man's thrall,
His dealings were both loved, and likt, among his neighbors all.
His bounty at his board, his store for every sort,
The hie, the low, the rich, the po^re, wrought him a rare report.
And thus long time he liu'de, in credit and in love,
Till death to work, his joy, our grief, his force began to prove.
But yet he sickness sent, for to forewarne him first,
Whose honest mind, whose conscience clear, straight bade him do his worst.
And so with hope of heaven, unto the grave he vailde,
Of which he glad, his friends as sad, if sorrow ought preuailde.
Viuit post funera virtus.
An Epitaphe on the death of the right worshipful master John Ayleworth
Esquier.
IF men may wail their loss, that death has rid from woe,
Then give me leave to weep my fill, my sorrows so to show.
And though to bathe in tears, small botes, now he is gone,
Yet none can leave, so firm a friend, and show no sign of moan.
When brainesicke I a bruise, with over bravery caught,
He first did cure my need with coin, then soundly thus me taught,
Be stayde: for rolling stones, do sildome gather moss.
I tryde his aid, I likt his words, and still shall rue his loss.
His loss not I alone, but thousands more lament,
His children, friends, and servant poor, with brackish tears are sprent.
But Oh you fillie poor, whom need does nip and pearce,
With heart, with hand, with might and maine, your heaps of woe rehearse.
Cry, out of cruel death, for reauing your relief,
You are the wightes, that have (God wott) the greatest cause of grief.
When hunger faintes your hearts, when you with cold shall frease,
The lack of Ayleworths food and fire, your starued limms to ease.
When might would mar your right, his counsel sound and sure,
His open purse to plead your cause, the pains he but in ure.
When you (poor souls) shall miss, with him that was your stay,
Then shall your griefs appear as green, as he had did to day.
These were his fruits of faith, these alms he did of zeal,
He wayde no show, his words, in works, the Gospel did reveal.
EXHORTATIO.
O life of much avail, O worldlings it ensue,
So shall you not be led by gold, but gold be ruled by you,
So shall you keep him bright, that mouldeth in your chest,
So shall the world speak well of you, your conscience so in rest.
The sweetest joys of all, though death your farewell give,
So, so: your souls with his in heaven, your fames on earth shall live.
An Epitaphe in the order of an admonition, written on the death of his very
friend John Note of Grayes Inn Gent. Untimely flaine the 2. of November 1575.
WIth tears in thought imprint, both frem and known friend,
Three special notes of much avail, by Notes untimely end.
1.
Note first his honest life, of every sort was loved,
Learned he was and virtuous both, his manhood thoroughly proved,
A gallant wit he had the which he gouernde so,
As did content all sorts of men, when cause the use did show.
He had both health and wealth, his fortune was to hard,
And yet in spite of froward chance, Fame shall his virtues guard.
2.
His life would followed be, his death forwarnes his friends,
(A note of worth) of quarreling, that still with mischief ends.
And yet with such abuse, I mean not him to tuch,
But this I say (he proved it true) by once he fought to much,
3.
An other note he leaves, the which to show I quake,
His speeding wound so reft his sense, as word he never spoke.
Gods pleasure in the cause, I leave for to dispute,
He knew his thoughts, we know his life: then judge it were better mute.
Yet learn you by his fate, (if you examples fear,)
You have no charter of your life, then best you do prepare,
Your selves each hour to die, least you be tarde took,
You are here warnd, with over proof, into your conscience look.
Hora mortis incertissima.
An Epitaphe on the death of his especial friend, Thomas Cornelius Gent slain
in the Prince of Orange his service in Holland.
YOu lusty youths that sometime were his friends,
Cornelius life, here may you lively read,
In spite of death his virtues never ends,
Whose worthy paths, are meet for you to tread,
At home he seeld, in any quarrels fell,
All sorts he pleased, he used himself so well.
When Flushing frayes, were roung with sweet report,
Our English youths, post have them thither hie,
Where as they found (God wot) but sorry sport,
Far from the speech, that of the gain did fly,
With whom in hope, who hap did well deserve,
Away he goes the Orange Prince to serve.
And plaste at length, among the drunken Dutch,
He quite forgot, he went to fight for pence,
The mark of fame, was that he sought to touch,
The which he hit, before he parted thence,
With slender pay, at first he was content,
And yet his mind, still with the foremost went.
Though harebrainde youths, at such preferment spurn,
And gape for charge, ere they them selves can guide,
Although he had, of friends to serve his turn,
He l^^t such suit, till his desert were tried,
In all Al-armes, to fight he soon was pressed,
In heat of blows, as forward as the best.
That he vnsawe, syld, skirmishes there were,
(Such pains he took, to scale the fort of fame,)
The coin he had* he grudged not to share,
For their relief, that sickly were or lame,
Of every sort thus won he worthy praise,
From best to worst, that served in Holland fraies.
Two years and more he tasted soldiers toiles,
And did escape when other men were slain,
But keeping still a coile in bloody broiles,
(I sighe to show,) God wot he caught his baine,
Who being dead, though no man may revive,
Yet shall my Muse, his virtues keep alive.
Mors honesta ignominiosae vitae praeferenda.
VVhetstons inuectiue against Dice.
MY Muse to mount Parnassus hill,
Which whilom tokst delight,
Fair Venus joys to set to view,
And wray blind Cupids spite.
Go shrowde thy self in Limbo lake,
This dririe tale to tell,
Of Dice, to figure forth the fruit,
A second show of hell.
There crave the aid of wrathful sprites,
The Authors of this art,
And join with them such hellish impes,
As waytes to work our smart.
For sure their plagues to paint aright,
Beseems well the toil,
Of him that pend the pains of hell,
How Plutoes thralles do broile.
The lusty youth, with living left,
Whose woe is wealth and ease,
To line his purse with powling fines,
His tenaunts pence does fease,
Then does he bear a lofty sail,
As one that dreads no want,
These sneaking curs now raunge abroad,
A cheating merchaunt lokes like a sneaking cur.
To find this nouis haunt.
One bitten dog above the rest,
Does great acquaintance crave,
Whose kindred blasde, and friendship voucht
He treates of counsel grave.
Trust me good cus, trust me he cries,
Crosbiting a kind of cousoning under the color of friendship.
When first I left my guide,
This town did weaue my web of cares,
Before that craft I spyde.
Each shifting slave, did search the mean,
A mate to make me meet,
Then he the names bewrayes of some,
Himself to make him sweet.
The lusty brute which fears no fraud,
Does count his cunning blist,
Who thinks he has a saint in hand,
Yet shakes sir Satan's fist.
Their friendship new, by greeting often,
Now grafted in their breast,
His kindred coynde in cousners stamp,
Inuites him as his guest.
Who kindly thanks him for his cost,
And craves amends to make,
Then trudge they to some tabling house,
Their hunger for to slake.
Where dainty fare great store they find,
Their naperie fair and sweet,
And gallants gay, with Conges kind,
Their coming for to greet.
A bounsing gyrle they sildome miss,
To furnish forth their mess,
Whose chyrping tongue, with pleasant speech,
Does cheer her chosen guess.
There shall you hear described plain,
Each foreign town and tower, The table exercise.

Augmented news of warlike frayes,
Where fortune late did lowre.
As cold as snow, some couch their scoffs,
And some to railing pressed,
In plesaunt speech some play the K.
And makes thereon a jest.
And some so plainly figures forth,
The fruits of Venus court,
That honest ears does scorn to hear,
Their vain and vile report.
Their dinner done, they leave this speech,
The gamsters call for dice,
Where posting Jack to rub the board,
Does come even with a trice.
To you, you furies, now I leave,
This foul abuse to wray,
Their foysting shifts my Muse does mase,
Their oaths my pen does fray.
Ten mine alowde some cogger cries, The fearelesse oaths that dicers use.

Three mine some youth does say,
Gods blood eleven, (well sworn in faith,)
The caster cries to pay.
Six is the maine, what do you set,
Well ten to six I have,
Two flues (gods heart) then for the house,
The boxer straight does crave.
And nine: Come ye and nine this crown,
Well, chance at it I say,
Aumes ase (gods wounds) it is not my luck,
Two maynes to throw this day. Murderers of oaths.

Some hypocrites, do murder oaths,
Fair Gamsters for to seem,
But of both evils, to choose the best,
The doubt were hard I deem,
Perhaps some gallant fortune hauntes,
Good hap his hand does guide,
His purse aflote, within his breast,
Does lurk disdainful pride.
Money lightly wonn, is as lightly spent.
Then roists he in his rattling silks,
And sorts with Venus dames,
Whose luring looks, enforce his heart,
To fry in Cupids flames.
To train him in, he shall enjoy,
Each outward show of bliss,
In secret sport they will be coy,
They fear to do amiss.
A suit of Laune my Lady lackes,
Luers to stoop a Curtisane.
Or else some trifling cheane,
A cawle of gold, and other knackes,
My nouis purse must gleane.
The haggard then that checked of late,
Will stoop to fancies lure,
And inward bend at every beck,
No storm shall change procure.
Her crystal eyes shall still be fixed,
To stare upon his face,
Her dainty arms shall try their force,
Her lover to embrace.
Her Rub^e lips, by stelth she will,
Be joining unto his,
With courage vaunst, her friend to force,
To fall to Venus bliss.
Then will she play Galatheas part,
To make his joy more sweet,
By striving yield, who never thought,
A rape unpunishable.
From such devise to fleet.
To frame excuse for late offense,
The queen will cog apace,
She will allege his sugared words,
His gallant gifts of grace:
So wrought within her horish mind,
As naught auailde defense,
For to withstand his sharp assaults,
She lies it was his pence.
Naught craving for her kindness showen,
Save constancy in him,
Then she that rues her chastise spoild,
In seas of joys shall swim.
Which subtle speech does force her friend, Fairewords makes fools feign.

Within his mind to say,
In beuties show, my choice does pass,
Sir Paris pearelesse pray,
Aduentrous boy, now bathe in bliss,
In scorn of Fortunes rage,
Thy good success, in former suits,
Good hap does still presage,
But all this while, his purse is sick,
It purges more and more.
Then runs he to his former vain,
To cure his soudaine sore.
Where coemates, if he chance to lack,
The devil is in the rome,
The master will supply the want,
Till more resort does come.
Who chiefly in this hellish house, Like master, like scholars.

Does God in pieces tear,
With quick repentance then he cries,
A beast he is to swear.
Which words more true is then his oath,
When most he cogs and scowle,
For one may shape an Oxes sconce,
By pattern of his iowle,
My young man's purse, that erst was sick,
Here reapes but small relief,
His new receite does scowre to fast,
Cheap side must cure his grief.
Then to the Goldsmithes straight he runs,
Where most his credit is, A notable usury.

Cracked Angels there be current coin,
Eight shillinges worth a piece.
Four pound in twenty, for a month,
In faith is pretty gain,
The lender may well live thereon,
The payment is the pain.
Then as a man with love once matched,
At length yet won the fort,
His Lady yielding to his lust,
Both infections can hardly be cured.
Does thyrst for Venus sport.
So does this youth to be at dice,
Think every hour three,
One bone was sure, the frame of both,
In nature so they gree.
Now fortune frowns, that late did laughe,
There is no certainty in dicers fortunes.
To quite him for his scorn,
Ill luck does change his chance of gain,
Good lot is quite forlorn,
One by and maine, at every throw,
His Angel runs astray,
He fretts and fumes, he stamps and stares,
He leaves a maine to pay.
His setters some, they loosers be,
They will not so be served,
They will be paid gods wounds his heart
Forthwith shall else be carved.
With money lost, his color stirde,
He bids them do their worst,
And if they dare appoint the place,
Gods blood he will be first.
Dicers quarrels.
The box then at his bosom goes,
His dagger now he draws,
They parted are, they do agree,
Abroad to try them dawes.
Then Smithfeeld ruffians flock apace,
And Fletestrete hacksters hew,
The enemies meet, of ircksom hell,
They do present the show.
Draw, draw, the villains kill, they cry,
Then some do show their strength,
Some thrust five yeards ere foe do come,
To keep him out at length.
The broken blades they busse about, An il wind that drives no man to profit.

The more the Cutlers gain,
Some hops for need, which feign would go
Some lies in streate nie slain.
Some siouins sleues will buttoned be,
That down their weapons fall.
The Barber waits, the wounded wights
Looks like the whited wall.
To rue his hap on every side,
His fained friends do flock,
His minion kind to wrap his wounds,
Will now bestow her smock.
Not all for grief of his mischaunce, Some visit the sick more in hope of
gain, then devotion.

This kindness they do show,
But greedy gaping after gain,
If death should ease his woe.
His danger past, by Surgions art,
They do present their bill,
The which defraide (with other charge)
His feeble purse does kill.
He keeping home when debtes were due.
And payment none was made,
Does breed mistrust in Merchants minds,
His credit ginns to vade.
To sell his land, full loath he is,
A thread he fairly spinnes, What ensues after morgaging.

To morgage it he fully minds,
To thrive he now begins.
Now blewberds bags does bear the sway,
Old snudges smell him out,
Good simple souls they plainly mean,
Yet trauerse every doubt.
An hundredth pound they venture will,
On land five hundredth worth,
In Scriueners craft consist their law,
Poor subtle men forsooth.
The ruddockes read do tempt his eyes,
The instruments be made,
In faith to sour his sweet receite,
Before digestion had,
A statute a perilous bond.
Some unadvised statute he,
Without defesaunce wrought,
Does enter in, their gold to gain,
Their guiles he fears naught,
They perchment reap, he gold does gleane,
Who toils in straitest yoke,
For present state, I will not judge,
Hereafter strikes the stroke.
Now he for fear of sergeants sauce,
That sickness late did feign,
In every streate, which sight presents,
His presence you may gain,
The Mercers books for silks be crossed,
A welcome guest.
His debtes be now befraide,
The remnaunt does the dice consume,
Of all, which worst is paid,
Redeeming day, draws on a pace,
His money clean is gone,
Credit once lost is not easily obtained again.
His creditors through late mistrust,
Forsooth will lend him none.
Then does he trudge to Holdfastes house,
His great distress to wray,
Of him to get a longer time,
His money for to pay.
Who aunswers, fair, that God forbid,
My conscience I should stretch,
To take advantage of a day,
(Oh false dissembling wretch,)
The fained words he simply trustes,
The merchaunt did accord,
As though bare words were good discharge, Bare words an ill plea, against
matter of record.

For matters of record,
Now is he forced to try his friends
His money to provide,
Where he on flocks may see them fleet,
Which fawned in his pride.
Yet some there be for his distress, Necessity tries frend^

Whose hearts with bale will bleed,
And finds the mean to lend him coin:
Well fare a friend at need.
Aduaunst with joy, to pay his pence,
In haste now is he gone,
But cut throat gives a cooling card,
For money he will none, A cooling card.

His land is his, by forfaite plain,
Which is too sweet to lose,
For kindness yet, he will be frank,
He plays now with his nose,
Hold twenty pounds, besides to drink,
How like ye of this match.
For five to have fiftene with him,
In faith is but a snatch.
The youth again, will have his land,
Or else (Gods wounds) he swears,
The pillorie for cousining him,
Shall moth eat both his ears,
And in this chafe, he does depart,
Sub penas for to fetch,
Which raunge abroad in every streate,
To catch the cousining wretch,
Who caught, his prankes of deep deceit,
The youthlings p^aint bew^^yes,
And shows ere time of forfeit cam^,
He gave him longer days,
To answer which denying all,
The crafty carle now speedes.
With rough reply, the plaintine soothes,
His plaint of truth proceeds,
The gnawing worm, of conscience vile,
Now bites at Blewbeards brech,
He fears sol fa, in cousners cliffe,
His ears too hye shall stretch,
Which makes him trudge, to find his mates,
The fry of Satan's crew,
For to consult how to avoyde,
The shame that might ensue.
The pack of knauerie then they open,
Their crafty bonds* they view,
One shifting knave, a forfeit finds,
To make their enemy rue.
Lewd counsel.
The rest with open mouth does cry,
To catch poor cousenee,
By durance hard, to make him yeald,
Which else would not agree.
Then lay they trains, of Comin seed,
Comin a Gauntalias a Serpent.
To toll this pigeon in,
Whose chiefest feathers soon be pulde,
Once snarled in their gin.
The counter serves, him for a cage,
Where breeding holes there be*
But lover lights, to escape away,
This dove cote lackes we see,
For him that ear^t did raunge abroad,
This air is not fit.
The Bench he thinks, more freedom has,
For to refresh his wit.
More haste then needs, he finds a mean,
His cause^ to remeeue,
And that the body come with him,
The writ does charge the shreene,
Well mand then comes he to the bar,
The judge commaundes away,
Then tipstaues snatch him up in haste,
They make no long delay.
Safe locked they leave him under charge,
Until the court does rise,
Then guarded to the mershals house,
This lusty gallant hies,
Who passing through the porters lodge,
Then finds no jesting game,
For Burton with his book of doom,
Requesteth him his name.
Roger Woodcocke of unthrifts row,
What gentleman or squire,
Ten grotes and two pence you must pay, A gentle admittance

I do but right require.
Which paid, a while to view the house,
He lets him go at large,
But soon the vermin comes again,
To give the second charge.
Your worship knows the loss says he, A gentle persuasion.

My master should sustain,
If any prisoner should escape,
Their ease his little gain,
And therefore each of you he may,
By law in yrons lay,
Yet he for pity trusts you,
Your penance is to pay.
For them three halfpence in the pound,
Your actions yeald thus much,
Which trifle for your ease to give,
Your worship need not grutch.
Then may you in the garden walk,
When you have paid your fees.
Thus every way the poor is pincht,
To pluck him on his knees.
An answer fair the prisoner makes.
Which does content the time,
Then he to seek his fellow mates,
The stayres straight does clime,
Some subtle lawyer soon he finds,
The Kings Benche never without a subtle Lawyer.
Who great acquaintance craves,
To whom he shows, his lucklesse lot,
Enforst by shifting slaves.
And lastly, to his skill commends,
If iron fees be due.
Extortion plain, the Lawyer says,
His words be very true,
The statute here at large I have,
Set down for prisoners ease.
The Gaylor can by law receive,
A groate, no more for fees,
And in your other causes I
The snudge will sharply yoke,
But look your counsel lackes no coin,
For money strikes the stroke.
Which money killes the heart of him,
Whom present need does pine,
Yet he at first, do share him fees,
As though he had a mine,
And all on hoyh, he rashly reakes,
His prisonment a scorn,
And vainly vaunts, to plague his foe*
Saturday a heavy day to needy prisoners.
Till Saturday at morn.
Corrections then be sharply given,
To them which money lackes,
Now Burton comes for iron fees,
My youth now stoutly crakes,
If he extort where is no right,
The statute to prepare,
And swears to make him pay the pain,
And damage for his share.
Might ouercomes right.
But here no lawe^ nor right do rule,
N^ vaileth threats nor crakes.
With boltes and shackles on his shins,
His load and heels he shakes.
Where late was gold, an iron chain,
Do well beseem the neck,
His wrystes in stead, of braslets brave,
With manacles be decked,
And now they will him cool his feet,
He cloyde with yrons great,
For all his law, Necessity obeys not law.
is glad to pay,
Yea more then that entreat.
Thus he that thought Caribdis rocks,
By wisdom to escape,
By folly fell in Sillaes gulf,
His greater griefs to shape,
How speedes he now in all his suites,
When all his pence be spent?
Unfeed do Lawyers ply his cause,
Till new receipt of rent?
Nay, Nihil dicet, a vauntage a cousiner seeks.
Niclas nihil dicet sure,
To nip him to the heart,
In execution lays him up,
For fear that he should start,
He fast, his fained friends yet free,
To see him be not rash,
And Mynx his minion has a mate,
And leaves him in the lash.
For Haggard like, she will not stoop,
But where she gets her pray,
His coin consumd, his courage coolde,
In hope she will not stay.
What restes now, to this lucklesse man,
What pen his woes can wray,
Of friends forlorn, A miserable estate.
of freedom reft,
And he at beggars bay.
Thus gaulde with grief his Lawyer yet,
This slender shift does use,
And says that prisoners be oppressed,
And all men do refuse,
To ease their wants, and therefore sure,
The best is to agree,
He may the better plague his foes,
Abroad when he is free.
Which freedom so does feed his heart,
Whom present bondage nippes,
That he through hope before his hap,
For joy now hops and skips,
And then in have, for holdfast sends,
Agreement for to make,
A nyce companion.
But once or twice he must be praid,
Ere he the pains will take,
And then with one or two he comes,
And up and down he iets,
Now do I smile to show the speech,
Betwixt these counterfets.
The one through necessity, the other through hypocrisy.

The proverb verified.


The youth that roughly rayld of late,
A pitious plaint does paint,
The devil him self in Christian show,
Does counterfeit a Saint,
But after many words of grief,
That either part can say,
The youth perforce the candle holds,
And bears the blame away,
And gladly yealdes him self in fault,
Whose craving suite now is,
That cutthrote will, release him of
The penance of his mis,
And take such order as they both,
In friendly league may live.
The more that he in prison spendes,
The less he has to give,
As though that conscience moved his mind,
The merchant does lament,
Through peevish pride and hautie heart,
His pence and time misspent,
And order takes his own the gain,
The loss he leaves to him,
Which thought without dame wisdoms bark
In seas of joys to swim.
From prison free he nothing minds, The law prouides a remedy, for extortion,
etc. but the lack of execution emboldeneth churles to break the^,

The statute to prefare,
Nor for the cousning shifts he used,
To cloy the churl with care.
But runs unto his former vain,
If ought he have to play,
To posting then he somewhat puts,
His commons to defray,
Some Cheater happily will him teach,
Some coging tricks at dice,
Whereby he may maintain him self,
If therein he be wise.
Then is he set a sale to toule,
Some other yonkers in,
To make them bite at unthrifts bayte,
While he their pence does win.
Some can not brook this servile life, Ventures barge.

But needs in ventures barge,
Will seek a price, but how they speed,
I leave to show at large.
The sweet report of soldiers gain, Soldiers gain.

By them that lack the sower,
Persuadeth straight some ventrous mind,
To scale dame Fortunes bower.
But Flushing frayes, Flushing.
has wrought such fear,
That they suspend their hope,
If one did gain, then two were slain,
The third did stretch a rope,
And beggars most returned again,
Unto their native soil,
For Holland yealded little thrift,
In lue of all their toil.
And some with trifles seeks to thrive,
But few do speed so well,
And with a little happily learnes;
Repentance for to spell.
The serving man, Of seruingmen.
that plyes this vain,
A shorter cut does make,
He has no fines to fill his purse,
Nor racked rents to rake,
His way for to supply his want,
Is by the Scottish cog.
But finely he must strike his dye,
Least yrons do him clog.
And worse then that, to make him sure.
The hangmans cog.
In haste does hangman speed,
Where he in cogging winnes the coat,
For that he strikes him dead.
Of husbandmen. etc.
The plowman, and the poorest sort,
Which toils and sowes the soil,
And six pence by the day does gain,
In recompense of toil,
If he at night, consume at play,
The price of all his hire,
His wife with hunger well may sterue,
His children freese for fire.
O horned hap, of hateful harm,
O venom vile to tell,
O greedy gulf of endless grief,
O horror next to hell,
O foul infection, fraught with care,
O sink of such a sent,
Which never leau'st thy poysned thrals,
Till all their wealth be spent
For not in vain, Agrippa writ,
The fiends of ire you made,
An Art most fit for hellish ympes,
And not for Christians trade.
Pride.
A spring from whence all vice did flow,
Of peevish Pride the nurse,
For note the dicer, roystes in silk,
Lechery.
When pence be pert in purse.
Then must he prease in pleasures court,
To be of Venus train,
Which soon will purge his foggie purse,
From all their pinching pain.
His body erst that able was, Sloth.

To serve at each assay,
By sloth, etc. is so weak,
That faintness bids him stay,
To show the valor of his mind*
Till natures grief be easde.
His fearelesse oaths will fear the devil, Blasphemy

When loss has him displeasde,
When malice moves him to revenge, Wrath.

His quarrels do excel,
His careless slashing at his foe,
Does wray the form of hell.
An Epicure for his fare, Gluttony. Covetousness.

Such is his costly cates,
His mind is bent to snatch and catch,
Yea more to rob his mates,
When all is spent and credit cracked, Despair.

Despair then strikes the stroke,
And makes him gape in hope of plumbes,
For pence will shun his poke.
And thus you hear in ragged ryme,
For so be seems the work,
What veins of vice, what lakes of loss,
In dogged dice does lurk,
For lofty verse unfitly serves,
To paint the plagues of hell,
Though not the same, yet next thereto,
This dogrell rhyme does tell.
How youths from rod, The sum of the whole discourse.
to freedom leapt,
Are thrall to sharper whips,
Whom cousner first, whom cutthrote next,
Whom lawyer lastly nips.
The branches of the cousners tree,
Are whordome, theft, and pride,
From rutthrotes rout, does bondage spring,
With loss on every side.
The Lawyer lickes that they have left,
And lets him sink or swim,
Pure need then makes him lean on those,
That erst did live by him.
Although at large I here do touch,
Each vice in his degree,
Exceptions
A special meaning has my words,
To grant that some there be,
By rules of law, which rightly live,
And not which rules the law,
To wrest the sense to serve their turn,
Their clyents coin to clewe,
Some merchaunts rise by honest means.
And not by crafty shifts,
Some tabling halles in faith I judge,
Are free from cheters driftes,
The which I trust will not repine,
Or quite my toil with blame,
Nor yet the guilty well may grudge,
Which wisely ways the same.
Quod nocet docet.
Fifty apples of admonition, late growing on the tree of good government:
bestowed on his especial friends and companions, the Gentlemen of Furniuals In.
Serve, love, and dread you God on high, obey your Prince on earth,
God 1. Prince. 2. Officers. 3
Unto your betters duty show, be they by rule or birth.
Law. 4. Expense. 5. Scarcity. 6.
Live you within the bounds of law, and tether of your fee,
For lightly after one years store, of scarcity comes three.
Study. 7. Fraud. 8.
Use study when your wits are fresh, and aptest to conceive,
But study not the fruits of fraud, your neighbor to deceive.
Use exercise with such a mean, as works your bodies wealth,
And too much toil does hinder strength, Exercise. 9. Sloth. 10.
and sloth impayreth health,
Make choice to choose such company, Company. 11. Unthrifts. 12.
as are of honest fame,
For to be seen with thriftlesse men, impayreth your good name.
Use modesty in all your words, despraise no man too much,
For lavish speech breeds great unrest, Modest talk. 13. dispraise. 14
in you and them you tuch.
Make you no show of such conceit, The conceit of excellency. 15.
how others you excel,
For if you do, the wise will say, wit with a fool does dwell.
Enforce your self, silence to use, when others tell a tale,
For babble then, Silence. 16.
both troubles them, and sets your wits to sale.
Have care to use some recompense, Recompense. 17 Ingratitud. 18
where you beholding are,
For trust me with ingratitude, no honest mind can bare.
What so your friend commits to you, Secretnes. 19. Tongue. 20.
be ever secret found,
Who gives his tongue much liberty, does all his body wound.
Beware of taylers curious cuts, for they will shake your bags,
The merry mean I hold for best, Taylers. 21. Apparel. 22.
tweene roysting silks and rags.
The tippling tavern, Tauernes. 23. Drunkenes. 24
and such like, to haunt have small desire,
Of all reports it is the worst, to be a drunken squire.
Who quarrels much has care enough, with mischief often he ends,
Sau^ce need throw not your selus in brals, Quareling. 25 Pertaking. 26*
in need assist your friends
Shun you ye trains of wanto^ dames, Wanton dames. 27.
whose bayts are sweet in taste
But yet in truth, health, wealth, and fame, the courtesan does wast.
As high way unto beggerie, beware of dogged dice.
The greatest cause of blasphemy, Dice. 28.
a vain of filthy vice.
Out of the merchants iurnals keep, Wares on trust. 29.
buy sildome wares on trust,
Such usury bites above the rest, do try it who so lust.
Morgage. 30. Cutthrots. 31.
In need make choice to sell out right, before you morgage land.
What so befalls, look for no grace, at any cutthrotes hand.
Sealing and safe keeping of writings. 32.33
Look what you seal, read ere you seal* therein trust no ma^s truth
And writings sealed, keep safe your own, lest had I wist ensuth.
Suretiship. 34. Friendship. 35
Have great regard to suretiship, all is not gold that shines,
Yet stretch your selves, to help your friend, with penury that pines.
When wedlock life, does like your mind, match with a virtuous maid
Marriage. 36. An ill wife. 37
The mischief of the contrary, a plague next hell is said.
Country. 38. London. 39.
And married well, the city leave, sing then Pierce Plowmans song,
For women used, to London once, will ever thither long.
Neghbors. 40 Good report. 41.
Where so you live, have great regard, to use your neighbor well,
A good report in my conceit, does riches far excel.
House keeping. 42. Poor. 43.
What some consume in painted pride, good house keep you withal.
Relieve the poor in any case, let chaps walk in your hall.
Servant. 44. Flatterer. 45.
Entreat your honest servant well, give him his hired due,
The flatterer and the make bate wretch, in any wise eschew.
Wrangling in the law. 46.
Account that wrangling in the law, is enemy to rest,
A spoil of fame, a loss of time, a thief that robs your chest.
Duties of an honest man. 47
This reckoning make to serve your selves, you are not only born,
Your country, friends, and children look, each one for some good turn.
Relief. 48.
Three sorts of men, with special care, salve you their needy grie^e,
The scholar forced from his book, abroad to seek relief.
The soldier spoiled in ye wars, whose hassard works your peace,
And next the simple husbandman, who toils for your increase.
So spend your time, Fame. 49. Death. 50.
as you may leave, some monument of fame,
Prefer an honest death, before a life prorog'd with shame.
Quod cauere possis, stultum est admittere.
A caveat to G. W. at his going into France, written by his friend R.C.
POst haste, since so thou make, the coast of France to see,
Thy friends advice in baren verse, good George yet take with thee,
Have thou a haught disdain, which art a Bryttan bred,
At thy return, to prove how that, French follies filles thy head,
In native soil disguised, thy self God shield thou show,
In coat, in cloak, in hat, in hose, a French man like to go,
French shoes, made fast with points, in doublets side and wide,
Which French men wear (God wot) for ease, suit not thy self through pride
What tends to thy thrift, to follow, not refuse,
Keep thou one servant and no more, but not as french men use,
For wages pay not words, as is the guise of France.
Array him not, in tattered rags, french like, or nakt to dance.
One meal, no more a day, is pittance very small,
To like well of, such french like fare, few English yeomen fall,
Let gesture, words, nor weeds, enforce thy friends to say,
Behold a frenchman where he flaunts, if face be turned away.
Which face french like to suit, good George take special heed,
In taste the baits are very sweet, that do such cankers breed.
For to pronounce thy words, yea french and all first lose,
Before thou spoil thy English tongue, with snufling in the nose,
Thou know what I mean, thy wit is good and quick:
Yet wise men often before they look, fast in the mire stick.
But ere thou rashly leap, the ditches I reveal,
The plainness of my Muse bewrayes, my warning is of zeal.
My joy thy profit great, if thy return do show,
Thy travel tends to countries good, not french man like to go.
The rage of retchlesse youth, thy travel did allay,
And not thereby with proudest show, to royst in garments gay,
That thou can yeald account, what is the countries state,
What news of note, do run abroad, as well of love as hate.
These fruits thy friends expect, at thy return to reap,
But stay I here, into advice, my Muse too far does creep,
She meant not to direct, how thou should use thy time,
She meant french follies, for thy heed, to touch in naked rhyme,
Well, since she rou'd so far, allow what she has said,
M^ inward wish (for thy avail) she has no more but wrayde.
Viue and vale.
Whetstons Dream.
I Waying once, my harms by others health,
By just account, I found the self same thing,
Which weaud my woe, did work another wealth,
Which wrought my pain, to some did pleasure bring
Thus cloyd with care, to s^ my lucklesse lot,
My senses fayld, as though I ^ere a sot.
Yet Sopors beams, so could not clear my breast,
But storms of care, did shower in my thought,
Thus slumber sweet, did yeald but little rest,
For pinching pain, suppressed that pleasure wrought,
But as my woes, did wander here and there,
My thought I saw, an aged man appear.
Yet such a one, as care me seemd to cloy,
Patience.
And Patience, he did name him self to me,
Who bad me straight, to bannish all annoy,
And of these doubts, I soon an end should see,
Then I with him, pursude the most resort,
Unto a place, which seemde a princes court.
Whereas my thought, sat crowned a famous queen,
By due desert, to bear the regal sway,
Whose princely rule, has seldom erst ben seen,
As though the Gods, dame nature did obey.
That justice should, degrade them of each grace,
Her to inuest, with rule of virtues mace.
Upon whose grace, did nobles grave attend,
By whose foresight, in peace her subjects live,
And valiant peers, were ready to defend,
If foreign force, would once adventure give,
By warlike frayes, to work our great unrest,
With fire, sword, and piercing spear in rest.
Within this court, clothed in honest show,
Was Envy, Hate, Ambition, and Deceit,
On whom to wait, whereas these fiends did go,
Base minded wights, were ready at the gate,
Which never sought, that virtue should advance,
Their hautie minds, to height of happy chance.
There might I see, of men another race,
Which seemd to wayle, their woes with weeping eye,
Whom these same sprites, had shaken once of grace,
By false suspect, and filthy slatterie,
And well I marked, how they did crouch and creep,
And all for grace, which evermore did sleep,
Then I espide, another valiant crewe,
Which looked aloft, by virtue to aspire,
Unto the room, to their desert ydewe,
If due desert, had reapt deserved hire,
But virtue gapt, and gained naught but plums,
For flattery caught, before they fell the crumbs.
Quoth grayberd then, such once was my good hap,
To be aduaunst, to height of great renoune,
But I too soon, was caught in Enui^s trap,
Where false suspect, by flattery kept me down,
Then patience I, perforce a virtue made,
And left with loss the countries tickle trade.
The forth we go, into another place,
By outward show, where saints my thought did sit,
Whose gentle speech, presaged endless grace,
There loose their gain, they voucht by sacred writ,
These prelates were, their words deserved their room,
But sure their deeds, I leave to others doom.
Hypocrisy did bear a vengeance sway,
His double tongue, did bleare the clergies eye,
He still affirmde, it was true that they did say,
Against their device, a thousand woes did cry,
Mas Ignorance, a minister was made,
Who babbled much, yet wist not what he said.
Yet sure this clarke, did so in scriptures creep,
As voucht the same, to cloak each crime he could,
Pasce oues, he took for grasing sheep,
Which well he fed, and daily viewd his fould,
And yet this sot, with pence procured such grace,
As often he wrought, true preachers out of place.

In armor bright, where gallants we espy,
The captain stird, the soldiers raw to train,
Of some vnwisht, unawares their foes drew nigh,
The cannon crackes, like thunder claps did sing,
At trumpets sound, the horse men forward fling.
In foremost frunt, the fearelesse youths did fight,
Which honor sought, and so with honor did,
The fencer there, proved not the forwardst wight,
Base minded Dick, the spoil, not blows applyde,
The coward yet, a loofe did catch a lick,
As soon as he, which throngd among the thick,
When fearelesse blows, had driven their foes away,
To slash and slay the cowards did not spare,
When spoil was given, the soldiers pains to pay,
Who best deserved, did reap the barest share,
Thus valor fought, and falshoode fleest the spoil,
The coward thriu'de, who least of all did toil.
These bloody broiles me thought, we then forsook,
And soon we slipped into a stately hall,
Now well apayde about the same I look,
For glad I was, I escaped the soldiers thrall,
And proudly then, I throngd amid the preace,
For that their weeds bewrayde, the men of peace.
Within this hall, were kept the Princes courts,
Where Lawyers sat, as Judges in the same,
To show their griefs, more have then needs resortes,
Both hie and low, the rich and poor of name,
Pro et contra, for pence at every bar,
In right and wrong, the lawyers were at jar.
In faith quoth I, these men deserves praise,
For Justice cause, which thus imployes their pain,
But I to hie a note, their names did raise,
In right or wrong, they still did gape for gain,
And as I walked, I saw one wrapped in woe,
Which much complainde, of matter de post facto.
Speak English man, what means these words (quoth I,)
Oh sir he said, a quillet in the law
Alas it is, which makes me howl and cry.
And looking back another man I saw,
Of whom I asked, why he did look so glum,
He plagued was, with plees of non est factum.
I smyling then, to hear the clownish drone,
By need inforst, to talk he wist not what,
But as I learnd the cause of all his moan,
More pity sure, a lawyers friend how that,
To pay him pence did enter into band,
The which he sealed, and liuered with his hand.
But after caught, by craft the self same bill,
The former seal, he falsely took away,
An other sealed, the same which he did spill,
And vnsuspect the bond there down did lay,
Which forfet once, in law they fall at jar,
The seal was off, was pleaded then in bar.
There might I see releasses finely framde,
Provided yet, that if such things were done,
Which latter words, by former force were lamde,
Who so releast, a fair thread then he spunne,
With thousand toys, which I do here omit,
Did cousening Craft within his capcase knitt.
I lately feared, to see the fearelesse blows,
The proud attempes, assayd by desperate men,
Here rouled books, my manhood over throws,
I durst not bide, the truncheon of a pen,
Yet well I marked, how mercy bared sway,
The conquered wightes, were prisoners sent away.
But for this grace, their ransom sure was great,
The gaylor fleest, the lawyer had a share,
If pence were spent, cold yrons made him sweat,
Hard beds well paid, poor cheer was costly fare,
Agreeued much, extortion bare such sway,
To patience, I, me thought these words did say.
Can cousening shifts, thus conscience foil in sight?
Where is no right, may hellhoundes thus extort?
Shall perjury condemn the guiltless wight?
And may it be, subor^ing, should support?
The lewd in lies, when grace is not their stay?
Can Justice rule, a right, with parciall sway?
Content thy self, quoth patience then to me,
Good laws are made, to punish their amiss,
But pence their wrong, does color often we see,
And want does ware, the poor man's right I wisse,
And thus thou see, presented to thy sight,
The proverb old, how might does master right.
Then out we go, I glad to leave this hell,
But soon we shipped into as hard a vain,
Where Usurie with bags of gold did swell,
Who much complainde of penal statutes pain,
And ioynde with craft, the same for to prevent,
Now this, now that, the myser does invent.
On casual chance, I may my money lend, A perilous casualtie.

Yet hassard small, shall happen by my mart,
If I my wife, my servant, child or friend,
Do go to Powles, and home again reuert,
Then twenty in the hundred you shall pay,
This gain is small, forsooth does Holdfast say.
Collusion then, did catch him by the back,
And feasde his pence, which song loath to depart,
To leuey mends, the harmles went to wrack,
Thus salued was his sore by others smart,
Covetousness, went myching up and down,
His iacket pilde, and threadbare was his gown.
But banckrowte sure, did brave it with the best,
His cape of cloth, with velvet linde within,
His hoase of silk, with stitches straunglie dressed,
More cost he said, more worship did him win,
But well I marked, how soon this pride decayed,
his heels he took, when debtes should be defrayd.
Some kept their house, and durst not show their face,
Some were betrayde, and came in cutthrotes hands,
Then plees of need, did purchase, little grace,
Past starting now, they tide in Darbyes bands,
In prison vile, of force must lie and rott,
Till they have paid, their debt and cost God wott,

Where underprops, each stagering house did stay,
I chaunste to meet, a silly country clown,
Of whom I asked, what wrought their towns decay,
Who aunswerd straight, your mast^ips honor sees,
Yond goodly place, that plucked us on our knees.
Yond stately walls, our chiefest stones did steal,
UUhich were the stay unto our feeble farms,
For want of strength, then did our houses reale,
And worse then that to work our greater harms,
Enclosures great, so in our commons creep,
UUhere kine we kept, we scase can keep a sheep.
Yet racked rentes, increase our landlords gain,
UUee moile, we toil, we work, both morn and Even,
Our landlords reap, reward for all our pain,
To pay our rentes, and make the world even,
Do what we can, we compass very hard,
UUith farmers now, the wonted world is mard.
UUhen he did raise, besides his Landlords rent,
Old gold good store, to serve him at his need,
The cribel loaf, about his board then went,
Salt beef, good souce, their hungry mawes did feed,
A stand of ale, he ever had in store,
UUell come gossipe, a cruse of ale to the door.
Then droyling Dicke, and toyling Tom did stir,
To mucke his ground, to make a fatter croppe,
To serve his hogs, poor Madge his maid did spur,
For winters cold, he hedge rows large might loppe,
To ride abroad, he seeldome lackt a mare,
And in this sort the fermers life did ware.
But now god wott, our rentes we hardly pay,
To barlie crustes is turnde our cribel bread,
Where beef, brawne, souce, our hungers did allay,
On cruddes and cheese, we hungerly do feed,
A pecke of malte, does make him ale good store:
Welcome gossip, no drink now to the door.
Where Hicke and Tom, his boys about did moyle,
He delues, he digges, he labors for his hire,
And Ioane his wife, perforce herself does droyle,
In steed of wood, now pestrow makes good fire,
Where erst he rid abroad upon his nagge,
For falling now, on ten toes he does lagge.
Thus John Adroynes, did wray the farmers woe,
And I me thought did pity much their want,
Quoth patience then, now time does serve to show,
The cause why care, thy heavy heart does haunt,
Thou say thy want, is weade with others wealth,
Thy harms are payste, with weighes of others health.
Good reason why, thou viewdst in courtiers trade,
Both good and bad, a like did gain expecte,
A like, not so* the good by virtuous aid,
The bad did s^^ke by traynes of false suspect,
The best to throw, from grace despite to spell,
Whilst they by craft, did catch such crummes as fell.
How hypocrites with show of honest life,
In favor creepes, when goodmen be disdainde,
How soldiers win the field with bloody knife,
When cowards filch, which their adventure gainde,
How cutthrotes thrive, where conscience bears no sway,
When simple men, with want are worn away.
Lo thus thou see the toil of good and badde,
Thy own the choice, their want or wealth to shun,
The good with care, when craft with cost is cladde,
Yet if thou meanst the good man's race to run,
Of patience here receive dame virtues sheeld,
Which to thy fame, a sure force will yield,

Ne common speech a cutthroate will thee call,
Report of craft, then shall not wrong thy fame,
Ne men will say, thy pride will have a fall,
This bone he cast, for me to gnaw upon,
And said Adieu, of force I must begone.
I waking then amassed in my mind,
Through this my dream, began check my busy brain,
But better wayde, some fruit therein I find,
Which aunswers full, of this report the pain,
And craves a place, of duty with the rest,
Provided yet, the reader do not wrest,
My words amiss, which do no evil import,
To taunt the lewd, to praise the good a work,
A fancy framde, to teach the simple fort,
What huge deceit, in honest show does lurk,
A toy to warn, the lewd by others shame,
To shun such faults, as breeds filthy blam^
Inventions of P. Plasmos touching his hap and hard fortune, unto the which is
annexed the sundry co^plaintes (...) our notable couseners, the instruments
of his greatest troubles: which in the prime of their mischievous enterprises,
with soudaine death and vexation were straungelie visited. At the end of every
of the said inventions, for the more plain knowledge of them, is the reporters
admonition in prose both pleasant and profitable.
The reporter.
I Have (good Reader) at large reported the adventures of P. Plasmos intermixte
with these following inventions, together with the complaint of certain
couseners. And sure the labor stand very well with my own contentment, for
that the accidents of his evil fortunes, might have forewarned other young
Gentlemen to have shunde the like follies: and that the fall of ye said
Couseners might have taught other greedy carrens, to have respect unto their
consciences. And now to the condition of P. Plasmos in the Prime of his
unthriftiness it appears by his fond triumph that he was infected with
(self lous) the overthrow of many young Gentlemen, who seeing sufficiency in
themselves to be advanced, to win credit and acquaintance, so far pass
the bounds of their ability, that long before, countenance takes notice of
their deserts, by the inforcemente of necessity, they are glad of mean
maintenance, at home with their friends. Such Gallantes by the sequel of P.
Plasmos Fortunes, may learn to understand their mishappes, and in reading of
his fantasies may likewise see the counterfeit of their own follies: whose fond
triumph in this sort begins.

P. Plasmos triumph.
PAris usurped room resign, in Lady Pleasures Court.
Thy mungrell choice in such a slurte, deserves a foul report,
Whose kytish tricks, in gadding mood with every check to stray,
God knows I want both Art and wit, in colors fresh to wray.
Suffices yet, thy mart to mare, she bitt at every bait,
Where one good turn, in toil thou reapst, thy passage was not straight,
Why wrong I thus, poor Hellen now, she was to good for thee,
Whom fate did cast from Priams court, a sheepeherd poor to be.
Whereas in Ida mount, thou wraydst thy willful will ywisse,
Which wealth and wisdom did refuse, to bathe in wanton bliss,
Yet sure thy bliss was brude with bale, thy self will judge the fame,
What blush not man to blase a truth, in faith it is no shame.
Thy ielous thought suppressed thy joy, thy foes increast thy fear,
Thy love in Arms, lou'de larumes wild, imbracements to forbear,
Thy kinsemen slain, thou rest of love, and life in little time,
What peevish pride then moves thy thought, dame pleasures mount to clime?
Auaunt, auaunt, give place to him, whom fortune still does guide,
Whose choice does pass without her plague, fair Hellen in her pride,
Within whose heart does pity rule, in whom dame bounty dwells,
To whom fair Venus yeeldes her ball, her beauty so excels.
Her constant love, long wished I won, she mou'de no goddis ire,
She shed no blood, she slew no friend, she set no town on fire,
Her modest life eriles mistrust, and jealousy does chase,
In faith I fear no loud Al'armes, when I my love embrace.
And yet I dare with Paris join, if Paris scorn her praise,
I enter now the listes of love, my Ladies fame to raise,
And proudely there my gauntlet throws, a quarrel straight to snatch,
UUith him y^ dare maintain she lives, which may fair Lymos match.
Let lingering lovers reft of rest, whom scorn has left in lash.
Let careless suitors try their force, to praise their painted trash.
Let happy wightes, which bath in bliss, my sharp encounter prove,
UUhom Venus with aspect of grace, has linckt to yielding love.
And let them eake through passing joy, which stands in pleasures grace,
Bestow their force if that they dare, my fortunes to deface.
UUho bathes in waves of wished bliss, with brave delight who maskes:
UUho finds amends for every miss, who has but what he asks.
The reporter.
It seems by this devise following, that Plasmos triumph was but a voluntary
invention, otherwise if it had been devised of any certainty, his pleasures
would a been of longer continuance. Likewise it seems his Lady Laymos that
he so highly commended, was in very deed as fair as Flora, as faithful as
Faustine, as loving as Layis, as meek as Medea, as honest as Hellen, as
constant as Cressed, and as modest as Maria Bianca, and therefore worthy of
estimation. But digressing from the cause of the invention, for that the
circumstances be long and not greatly material, ye Reader may view the vanities
of a number: who either bewitched with ye outward blase of beauty, or blinded
with the desire of riches (never examining the behavior of their best beloved)
hap well, or hap ill, adventure to marry, who for the most part are haunted
with Plasmos hard fortune, who pretily touches his Laymos inconstancy as
follows.

I Dreaming once (me thought) dame beauty bad me crave,
The thing that fed my fa^cie best, and I the same should have.
My choice was quickly made, I beauty likt so well,
And yet I su'de my maistresse might, her seemly self excel.
Who smyling in her thought, to see my small foresight,
Such one (quoth she) thou shall enjoy, make much of thy delight:
Unto which end forsooth, for fortune straight she sought,
UUho did present a sightly girl, unto my wanton thought.
My promise is performde (quoth she) sweet friend adieu,
My fancy rendered forth with thanks, as though it had been true:
But when I wooke and miste, this passing lovely wight:
A murdered sighe, the fancy checkte, that raisde my late delight,
And fretting, forth I go, fond fancies for to chase,
But lo by Lady fortune signde, I chaunst to spy thy face.
Then to my self I said, cease Plasmos to be sad,
This is the Dame, thou did possess, in dream that erst thou had,
Acquaintance for to crave, aduentrous boy assay,
Thou were not nise, ne I abasht, my secrets to bewray,
I showde thee all and some, what I in vision saw,
Thou wart mine own by beauties dome, unless thou scorndst her law,
My words did like thee well, or praises that I used,
And smyling said, Dame beauties hest, must no ways be abusde;
Thus after slender suit, thou knowste, whom I euioyde,
But easily won, as soon thou were, through sullon will accoyde,
And in thy wrangling rage, I saw thee raunge for new:
I chafte through sight, Dame beauty blamd, cause Laymos was not true.
UUhich soon I did recant, and yielded for to have,
My suit performde at beauties hands, in form as I did crave.
I askst a gallant gyrle, which vaild at first assault,
I askte no faith, nor none I found, in whom was then the fault?
In him who now will learn, to make his match more sure,
And as for thee thou do but kind, to stoop to every lure.
The reporter.
This wrangling hate seems to be but a passion, proceeding of Plasmos passing
love, the which digested, made his affection more perfect: Nevertheless this
following invention, wrayeth the evil fortunes of rash belief and choleric
revenge, after which (for the most) insueth repentance: yet for that ye Sonet
it self, foresheweth but a fit of disquiet mind by love occasioned, it shall
pass for me without any preface.

Foul fall thee false suspect, so thrive thou ielous thought,
UUoe worth you both, you reard the hate, that all my harm has wrought:
You did envy my hap, when late I liu'de in joy,
You slander forged, you moved mistrust, you made my sovereign coy.
She wronged saunce offense, good reason has to hate,
But you no cause of filthy strife, twixt friends to set debate,
But since my heart did yield such motions to believe,
Both heart, head, and every vein, with fretting thoughts to grieve:
First love renew thy force, my joys for to consume,
And when desire has blown the cooles, till all my fancies fume:
Then conscience guilt, detect my follies day and hour,
And base desert exile remorse, see dread, my sweet thou sour,
Disdain, persuade my mind, my Ladies passing love
Is chaungd to scorn, from scorn to hate, from hate revenge to prove.
Tormenting passions eake, abate my pride in show,
Then scaulding sighs present my state, unto my friendly foe:
UUhich when she once has seen, with wrecke of my delight,
Despair, end me dole with death, in my sweet mistress sight*
But least she bear the blame, of this my bloody hand,
I crave upon my timelesse tumbe, this Epitaphe may stand.
Lo hear does lie his corpse,
Himself for woe who slew,
That Ielous thoughts, his Lady blamde,
She ever living true.
The reporter.
These passionate verses wittingly lost, whereas fair Laymos might find them,
of likelyhoode she perceiving his singular good love, having sufficient cause
of quarrel, waxed every day more stranger then other, until poor Plasmos
purse to make attoneme^t, provided some pretty devise, that appeased her anger:
these lovers thus reconciled, it seems Plasmos to requite the friendship of
his purse, in praise whereof, he wrote these verses ensuing.

P. Plasmos in praise of his Purse.
COme pretty purse, the jewel of my joy,
The dainty soil, wherein delight is sown,
Thou well deseru'st the title of a Joy,
Who does not fear, whereas thy force is known?
UUho dare rebel, where thou do rule and reign?
Thou foylest kings, by force of treason vile,
Thou clokest craft, with flattrie, fear or gain,
UUhen Justice should uncase his crooked guile.
By thee escapes the traitor and the thief,
The murdrous mate, which languisht late in woe,
Thou werst to ebb, their tossing tides of grief,
And graftest mirth, where moan but late did grow.
To mask with pride, thou art a visard fit,
Thou heau'st him up, which held the plough of late,
Thou telst his tale, which wants both Art and wit.
Thou wodcocke setst, before the wise estate,
The wily churl, which wrongs the wretch full often.
The cousening mate whose mischief never ends,
Should sol fa singe in couseners cliffe aloft.
But that thou cloakst their craft with wealthy friends,
The thriftlesse child by thee does look full hie,
UUhose sparing friends at home the plough does hold,
In Court thou art the badge of bravery.
UUho does not fawn on gentle master gold?
Deformed girls, by thee are made full fair,
Dame Venus stoupes through thee to Vulcans lure,
The coffing churl, does match with beauties heir*
Such strange consents can Lady Coin procure,
UUhy stay I then, sweet purse thee to embrace?
UUhose aid I used, when fortune most did lowre*
My clouds of scare, thou cleardst with gleames of grace,
My bale to bliss, to sweet, thou chaungst my sour,
Thou sa^'dst my life, with passing love nie pinde,
UUhich friendly turns, are written in my mind.
The reporter.
It is hie time to digress from the report of Plasmos wanton devises, unto
other his inventions, touching his miseries, and repentance, which immediately
followed, his wanton expenses: and for that want, is the contrary unto wealth,
I thought good to pla^e after the praise of his purse, his complaint of want,
the commodities of the one, and the discommodities of ye other duly
considered, are means to persuade the wise in prosperity, to have an eye unto
adversity, and once in favor to make provision for Fortunes change. For few
are so happy, but in their time they are visited with misery: so well beloved,
but once in their life they are as deadly hated: so highly favored, but are as
unhappily scorned: not withstanding all these chances and chaunges, Coin in
the coffer is an assured friend, whereas if thou have respect, but to serve thy
present turn, in prosperity thou art so over prodigal, that when poverty
pincheth, the remembrance of thy former sweet delights, does increase thy
sower passions: proof appears by Plasmos, who being nipped with need,
calls to remembrance what pleasures he had received by his purse, and crossed
every of the said commodities, with the inconveniences occasioned by his want
as follows.

P. Plasmos complaint of want.
I Whilome writ a jest, what joys my purse did plant,
But now I wray with little lust, the woes of withered want.
When Purse with pence did flow, a thousand friends I found,
Now wo^ted wealth does wear to ebb, their friendship runs aground.
When Coin I had in claw, my wrongs wear doomde for right,
Since need did nippe, my rightful suits was ouer^ aid with might.
When wealth I had at will, my wished joys were wrought,
Now want does choke those iestes with care, and cloyes my brains with thought.
With wealth I freedom won, by wealth my woes did wear,
Through lack, restrainte of liberty, does foil my hope with fear.
With Coin I servant kept, which served for mine ease,
By need inforst, now am I feign, to pray, to pay, and please.
I ratlted then in silks, by bravery of my bags,
But pouer man, now am I glad, to royst in rotten rags.
My purse me often prelerd, to play, in pleasures lap,
Well may I wish, but want I shall, by want to reach such hap.
The reporter.
This complaint following, sufficiently shows that Plasmos being somewhat
behind hand by reason of his former unthriftiness, having notwithstanding very
proper living, unhappily hit in acquaintance with certain couseners, who
seeing his sufficient ability, supplied his want from time to time with money,
till they had wrapped him in very dangerous and cumbersome bonds, so that he
had no way to wind himself out of their danger, but either by long leisure,
or sellinge some parcel of his land: but by reason that it was intayled, none
would deal with him, until a recovery were had thereof. Plasmos having no
experience in those causes, and reposing a great confidence in one Liros, one
of the said companions committed the trust of his recovery unto him, Note.
who traitorously persuaded and instructed by Frenos his confederate Plasmos
living for nothing, if he and his fellows eagre desire of the possession, by
Plasmos untimely destruction, had not decyphered their deuilish deceites. But
since the circumstances be long, and in reporting them I should pass my
purpose, I leave their lewdnes unto their own reporting: who in the prime of
their mischiefs, worthily visited with miseries, to disburden their
consciences of a number of villainies, hereafter shall make discourse of their
own dealinges. In the mean while Plasmos having new knowledge of (and not yet
remedied) their indirect practices: and also being a little before maimed on his
right hand, by reason of a certain quarrel that Liros had raised between
certain youths, and himself, the said Plasmos joining the said mischiefs
with other his evil fortunes, complayneth as follows.

P. Plasmos to his mishap.
HOw should I frame my plaint, how shall I tell my tale?
Whom should I blame, whom shall I bane as worker of my bale?
Since heaven and earth, are bent to bruise me with their hate,
What boots me (wretch) to rage at fraud, or rail on lucklesse fate?
Whom never hap did haunt, but thousand harms affraide,
In prime of youth, untimely death, first took my surest aid,
Then rose a lawless friend, that likt my rouing youth,
He gave me will, to suck my wealth (alas the more the ruth.)
I lothed forced thrift, he liked no expense,
And Tutors love not for to toil, without reward of pence,
Which lack to late I rue, The greater mischief mine,
But yet my thought, at which offense, perforce does thus repine.
Why scornde I merchaunts trade, with baits of fraud to fish?
Since craft does only compass wealth, and wealth is that we wish,
Or placed at my book, why plide I not the same?
Why sought I not by moral rules, my madding years to tame.
Since rule must lead our life, or else we live awry,
Why Aristotle's wise precepts, then did I not apply?
Why likt I not the Law, where huge deceites are sown,
Since we by law, do hurt our foe, and hold that is our own.
But leapt to liberty, that long I did desire,
Why was my heart, so set on hoygh, beyond my reach t'aspire?
Why was I wedded so to peevish will and pride?
Since pride are will and foes to wit, and wit our ways should guide.
But most of all to love, why was I wretch so thrall?
Why sought I so, by raging lust, my gadding years to gall?
Since neither love nor lust, does yield a quiet rest,
Why made I choice of both the evils, when bad was very best?
Ah ( Laymos) once my love, by froward fate my foe,
Ah ( Laymos) first by the I knew, the workers of my woe,
But ( Liros) most unkind, both spoild of love and ruthe,
Ah ( Liros) thou do wound my heart, to think on thine untruth.
Why did I trust thy faith, or fearelesse oaths thou swear,
Thy feigned vows, thy sugared words, of my welfare thy care,
Since faith is turnde to fraud, and words to works unjust,
Why likte I wretch thy wilye tongue, since treason quiteth trust.
And did I thus deserve? in faith thy self be judge:
If Plasmos had, did Liros lack? O no he did not grudge,
To give thee what thou would, yea more then thou could crave,
What cankred thought then mou'de thy mind, his life and all to have?
Whose murdrous mark (ay me) my maimed fist can show.
Although thou feardst, to strike the stroke, the strife thy heart did sow,
And should I spare thee then, of death to stand in awe?
O, Noe, my conscience bids me strike, betide what may of law.
Although the worst befall, death quites but death again,
And sure there is no joy to death to such as piue in pain,
Why miste my heart the blow, that hitt my harmless wrist,
My heart it was that wrought offense, and not my faultlesse fist.
My heart did trust these mates, my heart did stir this strife,
My hand did naught, but make defense, to save my silly life,
My heart deuisde the toys, which puffed me up with pride,
My heart inforst my eye to love, which manly fist defide.
And yet my hand, not heart, is plagued for others mis,
Too parcial sure, in my conceit, the heavens were in this,
Too parcial (wretch) not so, it was neither heaven nor hap,
But harebrainde youth, which leapt the hedge, and left the open gappe.
It Was youth which stouped first, to Laymos wanton lure,
It Was youth that likt the wily words, which Liros put in ure,
It Was youth through small forsight, that wrought poor Plasmos thral,
It Was youth, so present want were scrud, that feared no future fall.
It Was youth that made him mask, with visard of delight,
Delight (not so) but dririe dread, to shun the merchants sight,
And Dread the scourge of youth, for safeguard of me wretch,
Did lodge me up with needy grief, while craft did play the leach,
In deed he playde the leach, to ease my present lack,
But what should serve for future store, his physic put to sack.
He toylde in my behalf, God wot I durst not steare,
Least, crafty train should tol me in, the merchants wily snare.
And dread did daunt me so, that death I did desire,
Before a life of freedom reft, my heart did so aspire,
A tail yet cloyde the land, which should me frolike make,
Where ( Timeles trust) to curtoule it, did so the joint mistake.
That land will bleed to death, if conscience work no cure,
Such waste wrought haste, for freedoms sake, to trust ere I were sure,
A pestleuce blow, forsooth it hurt not land alone,
But spoyld my fist by filthy strife, and maymd my heart with moan.
Of which I youth may thank, he snarld me in this snare,
Of force to trust, or else to sterue, with dread, distress, and care,
Where Trust for best I chusd, although it proved the worst,
Such backward hap, does ever haunt, the man that is accursed.
The reporter.
Plasmos digression from one action of misery unto another, yea unto all the
actions of his mishap, (although it be some what tedious) duly considered, is
tolerable for the nature of the distressed man, is to call to remembrance
every special matter of his misfortune, to the intent (although too late) he
may know the commodities of their contraries: and sure, although it was
invented to ease his mind of grief, there be a number of caueats therein, to
forewarne other young Gentlemen, to forestand with good government, their
following ill fortunes, especially the reprehe^sion of his youth, for this is
once, brainsicke bravery (besides his own great expense) inticeth the greedy
churl, to hunger after the gallants living, and for truth, if his conscience
be corrupted with craft, it is an easy matter for him, to overthrow the
mistrustlesse and welmeaning man. But the mischief is ensuing shame, without a
cloak to cover his deceits, who can have no better color, to answer any
complaint of cousnage preferd-against him, then to say the compleynant is an
unthrift, a quareler, a proud and prodigal person. etc. Who to maintain his
bravery, departed, bona fide, unto him being defendaunt, such and such parcels
of land, the compleynants money wasted by unthriftiness, and knowing the
defendant, to be desirous of quietness, to wring more money from him to have
the matter quietly ended, surmiseth these true and slanderous complaints
against him, etc. and although that wise men upon the ripping up of matters,
will smell out such merchants, yet at the first show, yea during the trial,
the wronged youth is blamed, so that in the mean time, the greedy carrion by
unkind verations, enforces the compleynant to agreement, some proof appears
by this invention following, wherein Plasmos supposes justice to be divorced:
and Lady wrong, to be matched with might. It seems on this occasion, being
wronged by diverse lewd and deceitful companions, he preferred his complaint to
certain Commissioners, against them the defendaunts coloring their cousenage,
with the report of his unthriftiness, and having their answers soothed with
the countenance of more wealthy then honest friends, with such cheating
varlots, have evermore in store, lead the said magistrates with such
indiffere^cie, that in stead of redressing, they increased his injuries, by
giving countenance to his enemies, which Plasmos perceiving, (provoked to
impatience) whereas he came to complain of one of the two, he departed
exclayming on them all, and at leisure, invented as follows.

WHy do I live (quoth he) to see this loathsome light,
Since justice is this day diuorst, and wrong is matched with might,
Where cousnage was the clarke, where pollage was the priest,
Where deep deceit, which gave this dame, was father of the feast,
Where bryde men were abuse, where briberie bare the cup,
Where greedy earls as chiefest guestes, in every boll did sup,
Where coin was cater made, where cost the cookerie dressed,
Where catchpoles false did fill the cups, at this great marriage feast,
Where parasites did prate, to free each sullen mood,
Where cheting churles did fill their pau^ch, where poor me^ steru'd for food,
Where countenance once dynde, and might have cheard his mates,
Wide open then, but not before, the porter set the gates,
Yet thousands preast to see, the res'due of the sport,
Some cloyd by craft, lome foyld by force, for succor did resort,
But well I saw (quoth he) which sight I sore did rue,
How blastes of scorn the belly Gods, among the needy blue,
How wealth did smile at want, how riches railde on right,
How virtue was suppressed by vice, how pity by despite,
How false suspect did forge, a thousand flim flam stays.
In rightful suites to tire the poor, with cost and long delays.
Anon the music soundes, and force his office showed,
Well meaning minds he wrapped so hard, that they his heart beshrewd,
First falshoode makes his choice, next flattery takes his chance,
Then tag and rag about the house, deceitful measures dance.
A curious mask at night, the bridemen does ordain.
With shows of fraud to feed their thoghts, which care not how they gain,
Abuse did lead the bride, extortion maskt with craft,
To see deceit come hobbling on, a hundred carrens laughed.
Pure need to get a place, was glad to hold a torch.
But justice during all this sport, was placed in the porch,
Good Lady then (quoth he) alas and well away,
You sometime did possess this place, this whilome was your day.
How happens Lucre, has infected so your mate,
How chances Truth, did suffer Craft, to enter in your gate,
What though that gain did sow, some seeds of Jealousy,
Might not (Remorse) atonement make, between thy feere and theee?
Is Conscience now exilde, who sometime counseld Might,
For to regard dame Justice suite, and not to strive with right?
Are honest minds now fled, does rigor rule the roft?
Is Justice now diuorst from might, does wrong now scour the cost?
Does countenance cloak such crimes, as justice did vncace?
Dare couseners false defend their faults, with show of honest face?
They dare and do God wot, by maintenance of might,
Why live I then alas, he said, since no man favors right?
With that adieu good hope, and welcome woe (quoth he)
I see no gleames of grace appear, my clouds of scare to free.
The reporter.
It is more then strange to see, the filthy confederacle of couseners, how the
wealthy churl, to save him self from shame, when his deceites are discovered,
uses the names of such lewd and careless persons, as to compass gain have a
regard neither to open shame, nor to their secret consciences: and to tire the
compleynant with delays, such as with bold countenance (bolstred with the
credit of the wealthy cousiner and his friends) will abide the trial of the
matter, be^ide the worst that may, he can be but punished, for once the
benefits of the deceit, is in holdfastes handling, so that lightly, he that is
wronged, is like to reap but a cold amends, by his complaint. Among which
fellowship of fiendes, there is ever an odd lawyer, who secretly draws their
subtle deeds and crafty conueyances, and privily gives them instructions,
how to deal in their lewd causes, to forewarne all men of this pack of
pickpurses (making proof by his own hinderaunces) Plasmos describes a
cousiner as follows.

P. Plasmos description of couseners.
A Lawyers head, to draw a crafty deed.
A Harlots look, to witch with wanton sight,
A Flatterers tongue, with sugared words to feed,
A Tyrants heart, to wound the harmless wight,
To toll with cheer, a greedy gluttons gorge.
A Merchants mouth, of falshoode truth to forge.
A Scriueners fist, by nimblenesse to race,
To scrape, to forge, to counterfeit a name,
A Lackies leg, to trudge in every place,
A desperate mind, which dreads no kind of shame:
These lims well linckt, and set on couseners soil,
A work were sure, of all the devils the toil.
For each of them, a fiende in force can bind,
Yet some I grant, by virtue guides their place,
But sildome it is, that Kit ne follows kind,
If one be good, a score does want the grace,
But all in league, their dealings lewd beware,
For then they do, the devil and all of scare.
The reporter.
The Philosopher Diogenes says, that Nature to this intent bestowed two eyes,
and two ears, and but one tongue on any man, that he should hear and see, more
then he should speak. And sure, who soever unadvisedly slaundereth another,
hurts him self. In matters of controversy, who so feels his suite cold,
straight seeks by pretty trains, to take some advantage of his adversaries
words, to which effect, the crafty churl complained on, for any notable
cousenage, to know the compleynants secrets, works means to bring him into
extreme passions of choler, who being greatly wronged, will not only give
knowledge, by what countenance, and in what court he will trounse the
defendant for his deceit, but lightly unadvisedly voweth to strike him, or
calls him craftle knave, cousening churl, etc. Whereupon the defendant, to
work the compleynants discredit, declares to some justice of account, in
what danger of life he stood in the compleynant being mischiefously and
ruffenly disposed, and having color of wrong for slau^derous words he claps
such unkind actions on the compleynant, that will he, or nyll he, he enforces
him to agreement: who so, is so wronged, may take warning to temper his tongue,
by Plasmos penance, who being hugely abused, gave out hard (yet true) speeches
of one of his adversaries, not withstanding, by his own negligence, together
with the extremity of Law, he paid roundly for recompense, who to discharge
his stomache of grief, a ^orrie amends in faith, blamed his tongue as
follows.

P.P. Inuectiue against his tongue.
THy rash revenge (O tatling tongue) I rue,
Although with truth, thou slaundredst late thy foe,
The proverb old, by proof I find too true,
Who fightes with words, does wound him self with woe,
The civil law, so favors fame and name,
As strumpets known, by wantons often resort,
Are sildome put to any open shame.
Les open sight, makes proof of Venus sport,
Who so is touched, with any foul abuse,
Though common speech, the same for truth confirm,
The common law, the guilty will excuse,
If proof by oath, ne makes the knowledge firm,
Thus wanton fylthes, and wily churles are scus'd,
If secretly, they work their foul amiss,
Yet needely they, which are by these abused,
Must have a means, to use revenge ywis,
Where often their tongue, is first addressed to fight,
Whose furious threats, forewarnes their foe of ire,
Which known he straight, does seek to match their might,
And first begins, their griefs for to conspire,
My self by such makes proof, this tale is true,
Who weend to fear, with threatening words my foe,
At which he smilde, preventing what he knew,
Would be a m^ane, to work his overthrow,
Yea worse then that, he tryst me for me tongue,
With actions houge, for slaundering of his fame,
For which my purse, an honest quest so stuong,
That ever since, in faith it has been same.
Thus loss to me, no hurt to him at all,
O babbling tongue, thy rash revenge has wrought,
Else blows in law, had given him cause to brall,
Of both the best, though best revenge be naught,
For bobs do fear, when words not joined with deed,
In wrangling mynds, more ^nackred thoughts does breed.
The reporter.
I may now without offense, enter into the plain discourse of Plasmos,
following for tunes, and inventions, for I have hitherto, laid the cause of
his miseries, unto his youthful unthriftiness, the which I confess was an
instrument: but there were ouerthriftie executioners of his hard fortunes,
whose names and doings, for that it was supposed some of them were alive,
according to my commission, I have left vnreported, wishing them well to fare,
upon their recompense and repentance.

Now returning again unto P. Plasmos estate, who being wrapped in a thousand
miseries and mischiefs, barde of the benefit of his own living, to work his
quietness, forsaken of friends in his distress, and daily tormented with his
enemies unkind vexations, looking unto the condition of his former life, his
exercises and studies, and finding his life full of lewdness, his exercise to
be dallying, dancing, and such counterfeit delights, his study. Wanton
Comedies, Tragedies, and discourses, acknowledging the^e (...), the instruments
of his mishap, sought if the refourming of these abuses, would be a mean of
his better fortunes, so that using one day the reading of scripture for his
study, and lighting on the 102. Psalm, entitled, Domine exaodi oratione^
meam, employing his Muse unto a more better use. then of yore, he made his
humble submission unto the highest, for the release of his miseries, as
follows.

IN gayle of grief in clos^e, of worldly friends forlorn,
Thy mercy Lord to ease my moan, unto my prayers turn,
Hide not thy heavenly face, from him that lies in thrall,
High time and tide good God it is, to hear my plaint and cast,
My days consume with grief, my mirth is maid with moan,
My heart does wast like withred grass, my grave and I am one
My flesh with thoughts does fret, in show I am a ghost,
I drencht in bale, my foes in bliss, I harmd, of hap they bost,
The world co^mends their wealth, and spites my withered woe,
Yea dooms my doings by my dole, theirs by delight in show
Thus wronged, and scornd I am, which cross I do embrace,
Attending when thy mercy (Lord) my miseries shall chase,
Which join with justice thine, to foil my foes in sight.
So shall I praise, and others fear, thy majesty and might.
The reporter.
Plasmos in time, wringing him self out of all the troubles and mischiefs,
that his enemies had wrapped him in, and seeing his estate for his troubles; so
sufficient, as with good government, he might live in indifferent good credit.
On the contrary part, seeing some of his enemies, through their lewdness
stark beggars, and other some of them, to dye soudenly, and miserably, as well
to give God thanks for his delivery, as for the overthrow of his enemies,
made this sonet following.

TO thee (O Lord) with heart and voice I sing,
Whose mercy great, from dole to sweet delight,
From moan to mirth, my troubled spirit did bring,
Yea more thy ire, has foyld my foes in sight,
They live in want, that flourisht late in wealth,
They groan with grief, yea lack both help and health,
Their conscience guilt, does gall them through their gain,
And yet they waste, more faster then they win,
Thus sweet proved sour, their pleasure turned to pain,
Yea living did, to think upon their sin,
Their shadows feared, so souden was their fall,
But more their death, when destenie did them call.
Their moan amasd, a thousand wretches more,
Who sight and shrynkt, through motions of deceit,
To hear report, this thundering threat to throw,
Foul fall the fraud, to breed our bale a bait,
A bitter sweet that rots, ere it be ripe,
A living care, to souls a deadly stripe.
But how with hap, the pikes of harm I past,
Of murdrous mates, of minds on mischief set*
Whose snares for me, them selves did fetter fast,
Whose baits for me, them measht in beggars net,
Inforst men say, of God, lo here the might,
Which heales the harmd, and lames ye lewd in sight.
But I whose scare, thy heavenly help did clear,
Will daily sing, with mind, with heart and voice,
To thee (O Lord) be honor, laud, and fear,
Which foyldst my foes, and madst me to rejoice,
Laud for thy grace, and honor to thy name,
Fear cause thy wrath, does put the lewd to shame.
The reporter.
After that P. Plasmos had thoroughly passed the pikes of his troubles, he
forthwith professed, a new course of life: to witness which reformation
(making poverty his excuse) he sent this following farewell, unto fair
Laymos, and other fine dames, of his old acquaintance* which invention, he
termed his farewell to wanton pleasures.

P. Plasmos farewell to wanton pleasures.
DAme Venus be content, thy servant should depart,
Who long has bathed in brauties bliss, yet swam in seas of smart,
And willing now with loss, to leave his wanton sport,
Repentance has reclaimed him, from pleasures statly court,
Good love my gouernesse, thy charge that erst did raunge,
Is well content, to careless youth, to leave his choice in change,
My colors fresh and gay, my pride in peacocks plumes,
I now resign to Cupides thralls, whose head with fancy fumes,
My sugared words that erst, did wray my suites at large,
My scalding sighs, to quench mistrust, when jealousy gave charge,
I will to salve their sore, whom false suspect does byte,
My vaunting speech I give to those, which soiourne with delight,
And fancy erst my friend, of force I must forsake.
And lust my choice, I leave to those, which rows in leachers lake,
For wisdom rules my will, and reason bids retire,
Least frosen fears, through faythlesse love, does follow hot desire,
Expense does nip my purse, my pride is pincht with pain,
Aspiring mind has caught a fall, my lack is linckt with gain,
Yet loss this lesson learnd, how pence my pleasure wrought,
Not pleasure pence, but purses pain, when need the bottom sought,
A noddie for the nonce, for faithless flurtes to flout.
Poor want was rayd, in ragged clothes, amongst dame pleasures rout.
Which picture when I saw, in favor like my lack,
Disdain my thought, did drown my joy, despair did bruise my back.
Pure need then pricked me forth (in faith) good mistress mine,
Ere scorn should work me out of grace, my service to resign.
For if you rightly wey, my want by former wealth,
Your self will judge, I can not serve, without the aid of stealth.
Then wrong will seek revenge, with trial of his band,
And justice soon will sentence give, to truce me out of hand.
Then conscience will accuse, my cost in Venus court,
And warn my friends by these my woes, to shun dame pleasures sport,
And (loath to dye) will curse, the causers of my smart,
Thus with your blame, my one the shame (perforce) I shall depart.
The reporter.
After P. Plasmos had bid adieu to these counterfeit delights, he made this
ensuing recantation, and since it behooves every man that recanteth, to show
with what errors he was led, as well to discharge his own conscience, as to
forewarne others of the like, P. Plasmos in the said recantation, makes
discourse of love betwixt fair Laymos and him self. Wherein is discovered the
subtle sleights of a cunning courtisane.

P. Plasmos recantation.
BEfore the world, I here recant my life,
I do renounce, both lingering love and lust,
My wanton will, with wisdom once at strife,
Has lost the field, the type of fancies trust.
My sugared tongue, bepoudred all with tears,
To chase mistrust, from my sweet maistresse mind,
With simple speech, from humble sprite now wears,
That favor I, with my sweet Christ may find.
My seattered sighs, which I on earth did strowe,
I gather up, and send them to the stars,
As messengers, of my lamenting woe,
Twixt sine and soul, so mortal is the wars.
Since I repent, no shame it is to wray,
My former life, how far from grace it swern'd,
Although from truth, I silly sheep did stray,
As good men God, so I my Goddess served.
Her favor heaven, I reckt her frowning hell,
I swam in joy, when I attaind her grace,
I sunk in noy, when she with wrath did swell,
Such strange effects, were shrouded in her face.
The religion of wanton lovers like the papists.
Saint Pandor then, my advocate I made,
Who pynde my purse, yet fead my foolish vain,
A thousand scorns, with my fond sight did fade,
My suite in words, such slender grace did gain,
As Gods of old, my Goddess honored is,
Which sacrifice, of kine and calves did crave,
But she inioynd, in penance of my mis,
For fashion sake, that first I yeald her ^laue.
With vow of faith, my suite then must I show,
But suites of lawne with toys of deeper cost,
The duties were, which I for grace did owe,
Such costly grace, then found were better lost.
But mi^^es of love, did so bedim my eyes,
That wealth was slave unto my wanton thought,
Glad was my purse, when he the toy espies,
Which with my love, a perfect liking wrought.
But I too sharp, did spur so free a wretch,
He pynde to naught, to please her peevish mind,
Then lack too late, this lesson did me teach,
I served no saint, but one of Satan's kind.
Who when she fawe, pure need to play his part,
With jealous speech, began straight to feign debate,
My second choice she said, possessed my heart,
As though pure love, had hatched this souden hate,
But well I saw, despite did forge suspect,
And jealous speech, was set to color scorn.
My charge not change, did frame with foul defect.
She fained grief, I wretch with woe forworne.
My plees of want, then purchase little grace,
She wild me love, where I my wealth did waste,
For my nice choice, she reckt her self too base,
Which here and there, in change a new was plast.
Fond fancy then, presented to my will,
In desperate panges, to pine away with pain,
Or purchase pence, on top of Shooters hill,
If I escape, my booty grace would gain.
For him that erst, both hope and hap did vaunce,
To desperate thoughts, to veil his former bliss,
Blame not his mind, to cure this sorry chance,
If ventured life, did work amends of miss.
And sith (quoth I) I must a martyr be,
Then burn to naught, with blase of Cupides brands,
A gentler death, is hanging on a tree,
I may escape, the bowget makers hands.
In spite of scorn, which haunts my Ladies heart,
Then shall I swim, in seas of former grace,
And sorrow shall find, recompense of smart,
With foulded arms, when I my joy embrace.
These drousie dumps, which drives me to despair
Shall purged be, with drugs of droynses store,
I glad, he mad, then mumping in his chair,
When steed is stolen, too late shall shut the door.
Thus I vile wretch, led on by wanton lust,
A triumph made, within my wicked thought,
How I by hap, the harmless threw to dust,
Ere I escapt, or had the mischief wrought,
But oh (sweet Christ) thy grace this folly stayed,
Thou cleardst my sight, which mistes of love did bleare,
Unto whose praise, my conscience has bewrayd,
My former life, deuoyde of godly fear.
Thou crau'st (good Lord) no other advocate,
But prayer mine, to purchase heavenly grace,
The which thou say, does never come too late,
If I repent, when prayer pleades my case.
A contrite heart, is the sweet sacrifice,
That thou do seek, ere we thy favor win,
The which, dear God, with sighs and weeping eyes,
I offer up in recompense of sin.
Attending still, when trial of my faith,
Shall tread down death, and Satan force to reele,
And boldly say, till latter gasp of breath,
My soul through faith, ye joys of heaven does feel.
The reporter.
To make this recantation or repentance more perfect in show and in deed, he
wrote this following admonition, unto him self, which he termed his farewell to
folly.

P. Plasmos farewell to folly.
FArewell you fading joys,
Which fancy forced me love,
Adieu'go trudge, your tickle toys,
Though late, too soon I prove.
O wandering head leave off,
Fond fancies to embrace,
And sugared tongue now cease to scoff,
Or others to disgrace,
Forsake, O luring eyes,
To feign the loving art,
And scalding sighs be you no spies,
To wound a woman's heart.
O mind with verses vain,
No more thy self acquaint,
Forsake in time, fair Venus game,
Ere age does thee attaint.
O heart on hoyh y set,
Be warnd by wisdoms law,
So shall thou escape blind Cupides net,
Of which thou stoodst in awe.
Beware of ten and four,
Which be the cheaters fare,
Least hassards hard, thy sweet do sour,
And make thy purse full bare.
This double charge I give,
To you unhappy hands,
From quarrels fond, y free to live,
As foe to life and lands.
Now last to you my legs,
Which be my bodies stay,
Frame not your gate as men on eggs,
Whom busting does affray.
Nor yet so stoutly stride,
As men's that bears would bind,
For stately steps bewrayes the pride,
Which harbors in the mind.
My other members all,
Be ruled by reasons lore:
Let virtue reign, where vice did stall,
And former faults deplore.
Least future plagues you prick,
To work your greater pain,
For why against the thorns to kick,
I count it more then vain.
Nunquam sero.
The reporter.
I think it good to leave P. Plasmos in this good mood, until time fitteth
(he thus forewarned) for the report of his better fortunes, naythelesse for
others heed, I will make discourse of the souden fall of four of his enemies,
who^ Gods justice worthily cut off, in the prime (or before the acco^plishment)
of their lewd desires: the first of them was Lyros, the only executioner of al
his copartners deceites, who upon the reuealement of his and their mischieues,
fell into an extreme quarterne ague, which haunted him until his death, he
having but one only child, which soudenly, without any show of sickness died,
he for fear of arrest, forsook his house and lived in corners. And yet to
comfort his solitary life, he often song a counter tenure, he being before a
lusty and able man, became soudenly a most weak and miserable creature to
accompany which, he lost the use both of memory and wit. And to make an end
of his miseries, in stead of drink, he drunk poison, so that shortly after
he was in show a most loathsome lepre, who thus distressed, forsaken of friends,
and vexed with his foes, for want of succor miserably (yet repentauntly) died,
whose complaint almost in order as he confessed insueth.

The complain^ of one Lyros a notable Cousener, supposed at the hour of his
death.
Among their falls, by filthy fraud which fell,
Let my mishappe, registered be I pray,
Whose wanton toys, whose wily tricks to tell,
But chief of all, whose woeful plight to wray,
No doubt the lewd, will bring to better stay,
For whose behoof, lo here I paint my thrall,
My happ, my harm, my life, my death and all.
Noe shame it is for me to show my evil,
Though graceless life, from wisdoms lore did swerue.
A sin it were to live and die a devil,
So soul and all, with Tantals hope should sterue,
My warning here, for others heed may serve:
Fresh harms they say, will force men to beware,
When had I wist, comes after still the fair.
Then couseners first, to you my tale I streach,
God grant my words, to heal your wounds avail,
But you will say, my self does need a Leach,
To heir my head, to help each perished nail,
To rid my scabbes, my Leprosy to scaile,
To clear my eyes, which are now dark and dim,
My nummed joints, to make both lith and trim.
I need God wot, if need could favor win,
But out alas, too late does come the cure,
When God is bent to punish filthy sin,
Though long he stays in fine he strikes sure,
Best therefore then, ere you his wrath procure,
You see your help (with his precept agree)
Ante languorem, medicinam adhibe.
Provide a salve, before that sickness come,
Provide a mends, for sin and foul amiss,
Before Gods wrath, your due desert does dome,
For note dear friends, I whilome bathde in bliss,
I swam in joy, my heart at woe did hiss,
I then had strength, with health, and wealth at will.
My hap was clear, I saw no clouds of ill.
Then muse you will, to see so rare a change,
As manly force, to fail in prime of youth,
As fair to foul, as health to scabbes and maunge,
As hap to harm, as joy to grief and ruth,
But listen well and mark what words ensuthe,
And you shall see what forced me to fall,
What wrought my woe, what turnde by joy to thrall.

Next form and force, enforst me to aspire,
Then love and lust, into my breast did glide,
Last fretting thought so set my heart on fire,
That marriage needs, must cool my hoate desire,
He was a wanton liver.
My choice was good, if change had been exilde,
But folly, faith and fancy, truth begilde.
My wandering will directed me this course,
Which brainesicke youth, did duly tread and trace,
And entered once, I fell from bad to worse,
I made a pray, of every yielding face*
Such wanton lust, does follow want of grace,
Ne was this life, defrayde with small expense,
And I (God wott) had not a mine of pence.
While coin did last, yet careless did I spend,
A poor increase, can spring on such a root,
When coin was spent ne did my fancies end,
With youth to strive, for reason it was no boot,
No lack could tread my follies under foot:
While land did last, my want I did supply,
With ^urchases, A backward purchase.
of Dedi, concessi.
My living sold, and money in my purse,
My lavish mind, had never thought of lack,
To ge^t or save, I quite forgot the course,
For every toy my Testours went to wrack,
Which did my bags, unto the bottom sack,
My coin consumde, and yearly rents thus gon^*
What refuge then? once credit had I none.
Yet live I must, need does obey no law,
To work for wealth, yet wi^t I not the way,
The scourge for sin, did keep me still in awe,
I durst not steal, for fear of Tyborne play*
And other shifts, I knew not to assay,
But to be short, to soon, to soon it was known,
My will was good, to take more then mine own.
Then wily mates, whose subtle eyes did see,
In yonkers states, and marked, their youthful vain,
Made choice of me, He was made an instrument to execute other cousners
devises.
the Instrument to be,
In wanton trackes, vnwayed youths to train,
Their wiles, my wish, so sweet was speech of gain,
My tongue was good, my manhood had in price,
My life was lewd, I knew and used each vice.
Companion fit, for rufflers now adays,
Whose wills rule wit, and rage, does reason yoke,
Of which I searched, a crew of thriftlesse strayes,
Whom lewdly I to lewdnes did provoke,
They bitt my bait, but other did them choke,
I bore the name, when others laid the bane,
The shame was mine, and others gleande the gain.
But, Plasmos the man he abused,
Oh, I sigh, to wray what wrought my thrall,
O Plasmos now, I swoone through thought of thee,
I must confess, the goad that did the gall,
Was too too sharp for friendship thine so free,
I turnde my coat, ere thou could fettered be,
My wanton toys, could hardly thee entrap,
My falsed trust (aye me) wrought thy ill hap.
And must I show, wherein I was iniust?
Shame says, conceal, my conscience will not so,
I was a friend, whose treason quited trust,
A counselor lewd, that wrought my clientes woe,
Where I was loved, I hated save in shoe,
Yea twice accursed, for mucke his life I sought,
Whose blood and good, for me he ventred often.
He forged deeds.
I forged deeds, when failed free consent,
I rased roules, to mend what have did mar,
I put in ure, what coemates mine invent,
My words, were grave, as firm my friendship ware,
And yet forsooth, to show what mould I bare,
I prou'de it true, how Cito ad suam.
Redierint, res fictae naturam.
For though my weeds, foreshewde a settled mind,
God knows, my works, my wanton humor wraide,
The wyser sort, my follies soon did find,
They saw full well, my fancies were not staide,
Yet Plasmos he of fraud was not afraid,
And truth to tell, I baynde him with such bait,
As hardly he, could smell out my deceit.
Officers about the recovery of P.P. land suspected the deceit.
Wise officers, my falsehoode yet suspect,
To purchase land, they thought my store to small,
And all to late, to Plasmos they detect,
(As they supposde) I sought to work his thrall,
Their sorry news, did nip him to the gall,
Who like a man of hope, of help dismayde,
Reports the trust, through which I him betraide.
Our foul deceit amas'de the hearers much,
They Plasmos wild, from greement kept aloof,
That open shame our villainies might tuch.
Our falls would be a warning of behoof,
Our fraud thus found, before it came to proof.
What course were best? should we confess our fault?
Noe, noe: we meant to bide the first assault.
In every Court our cousenages did ring*
Which bouldly we, Perjury.
upon our oaths denide,
For we that dared commit so foul a thing,
Upon our oaths, ne cared though we lyde,
Yet durst we not abide till truth were tried,
In couseners clyffes, we feared sol fa to chaunt,
How so we seemde, on honesty to vaunt.
Yea (wretched) I, that bore the blame of all,
Peccaui soung, through prick of conscience grief,
How others escaped, I saw my shameful fall,
I mou'de my mates, to salve our great mischief,
In time: or we, should suffer much repreafe,
But they that used, their ^on^enage in my name,
If worst befell, knew I should bide the shame.
To make amends, would never yield consent,
What should I do? still Plasmos shot at me,
False Frenos, Frenos the Scriuener tha^ deuisde the cousenage.
yet the mischief did invent,
I plowde the land, the profit reaped he,
He bound me so, saunce him I could not gree,
And thus through need (which I to show abhor)
Against my will, look what he would I swore.
Our cousenage known, our likelyhoode of pain,
My earnest suit, to some good end to grow,
Once moved him not, to leave ill gotten gain,
He never blushed, in conscience nor in show,
But craft on craft, he laid to heap our woe,
T'ware strange to hear, the wealthy friends he found,
Which ioynde with him, to make our fraud seem sound.
And boulstred thus, for slaundring us with truth,
Our actions huge, poor Plasmos ouerlayde,
We knew in need, friends faild, the more the ruth,
Thus double wronged (his huge distresses waide)
To clear his land, good store of coin he paid,
Least share whereof, in faith, to me did fall,
Yet of this end, I was the glad'st of all.
From open shame, my self I judged free,
I took no heed, to salve my conscience gall,
But God that does all secret dealinges see,
Provided whippes to scourge our sins withal,
And I that bare the blame of Plasmos thrall,
As sure I was the instrument of it,
The first man was, that God with vengeance smit.
His miseries.
My only child, which should have had the land,
With Plasmos blood, that feign I would have bought,
His son suddenly died.
Not sick in sight, first dyed out of hand,
Which heavy hap distempered so my thought,
As straight I was into a quarterne brought,
A quarterne ague.
Whose frosen fittes, brought down my youthful pride.
Do what I could, it held me till I did.
He brought himself in danger, to play the cousener for others commodity.

His instrument


A house I kept, till I to cousening fell,
But lo beguilde, even with mine own deceit,
My house I left, and did in corners dwell,
To lay me up* still Plasmos lay in wait,
Sometimes I was caught with a Sergeaunts baife.
And through a grate, Presta quesimus sounge,
With care on care, thus daily was I stounge.
He lost his wit He lost his memory.
I that sometime, had wily wit good store,
As one bestrackt, forgot what late I spoke,
For all my cheates, His friends forsook him in poverty.
still was I very poor,
My friends did fail, none would relieve my lack,
On every side, I (wretched) went to wrack,
Yea Frenos he that drue the cousening plott,
Deuourde the gain, and gave me never a iott.
Two years well nie, I lived in this woe,
God wot, not worth the ground whereon I went,
And when I thought, my joys again would flow,
Unhappie I, (that Plasmos murder meant)
Unto such ire, the hie Iehoua bent,
That (ah) in steed of drink my thrist to slake,
I poison drunk, my timelesse end to make.
See couseners see, my present loathsome state,
Lo here the end of all my wanton race,
Behold the man, that was so frolic late,
A leaper foul, in body, legs and face,
At point of death, cries out to God for grace,
A warning fair, a mirror full of moan,
For greedy churles, a bone to gnawe upon.
Amend in time, before Gods wrath you stir,
Beware by me, false Frenos and the rest,
Quod diffeertur, be sure, non aufertur,
Unless even from the bottom of your breast,
You both repent, and to amends are preast,
Lo here my tale, and life will have an end,
God pardon me, and grant you to amend.
The reporter.
The miserable end of Liros, rather wrought a fear in strangers unto ye
horrible cousenage, then any repentance in false Frenos, and other his
confederats: So hardens, the devil ye hearts, and blinds the sightes of
the raprobate, as neither the example of other men's miseries, nor prick of
their own consciences, can reclaim them from lewdenes. And yet although a
while they wallowe in their wickedness, and seem to hold the intising dr^sse
(I mean wealth) of this world at will, in ye pride of their prosperity (ye
most part of such worldlinges) through Gods justice are divorced from their
vain delights. The soudaine fall of this Frenos, proves both the one and the
other, for notwithstanding he saw the wretched death of Liros, and knew that
Liros did execute nothing but his devise and direction, yet seemed he no ways
to be vexed in conscience for this offenses, being the author and only
advantage reaper of his deceit: and yet in ye heat of his unconscionable
provision, he was soudainly arested with death: Whom you may suppose as one
amassed with such soudaine visitation, striving for life, to tell this
disordered tale following.

Frenos complaint.

Our bags of dross, may not withstand his might,
To moyle and toil for pelf what boots it then?
No whit, God knows, if we could see aright.
But worldly cares our minds bewitched so,
As thoughts of heaven, silde in our breasts do dwell,
The proverb says (the more such fathers woe)
Happ'is the child, whose father goes to hell.
But such proverbs, more common are then true,
Silde children keep, that fathers lewdly get,
Goods ill got are lewdlye spent.
And trust me wealth, if after want ensue,
With double grief, the needy thrall does frett,
To what end then, for mucke, take we such care?
To damn our selves, and work our childrens scare,
O wicked world, so sweet thy torments seem,
That when men taste, thy drugges of vain delight,
Their only heaven, thy thralles do thee esteem,
With mistes of mucke, thou blindest so their sight,
That (wretched) they, whilst that in health they live,
As Swine in mire, do wallowe in their faults.
An others fall, nor conscience can them meeue,
To wail their sins, till grisly death assaults,
The thought of whom, as thorns do prick me (wretch)
Alas, When death attacheth the wicked, the thought of their sin is more
grievous then death.
me thinks, I see his ghastly shape,
What did I mean, to name him in my speech,
And can I not his furious force escape,
Oh noe, my sins, begins now to swarm,
To match with him, my self how should I arm?
My conscience cries, confess thy wicked life,
My wicked life, such monstrous fraud presents,
As in my self, I find a hell of strife,
My graceless deeds, the hope of grace preuents,
I see, I see, how fiery fiendes do yell,
Before hie Jove my wicked soul to have,
My secret sins, Our own sins give evidence against us before the highest.
condemns me (wretch) to hell,
They be so huge, that nothing can me save,
Where is the book, wherein Gods will is writ?
They say there in, is balm that sin can cure,
What meant I (wretch) I never studied it?
The book is large, Bible.
my life will not endure,
So long, as I may read, and reap such grace,
The fault is mine, I might, while I had space.
I faint, I faint, my life will needs away,
False Frenos now, of force must yield to death,
These farewell words, good friends yet note I pray,
Prepare your selves ere latter gasp of breath,
So spend your lives, as if you daily did,
Lest tarde you, by death (perhaps) be taken,
Note well my fall, in top of all my pride,
Before I wist, he gave me (wretch) my bane,
My worldly wealth, for which I took such care,
I needs must leave, in no good order set,
A soudaine change, the chance yet nothing rare,
This is the proof of goods, that fraud does get,
Lo this is all, that death will let me say,
But what is short, may best be borne away.
The reporter.
This disordered complaint of Frenos, is answerable unto his disordered
dealing, but most of all unto his sudden death, who having his conscience
unprepared, tormented with the multitude of his sins, stood amazed what to
say: and yet howsoever it hang together, it conteyneth matter of note, which I
leave to the censure of the discrete reader. And now to the rest of this
report, the next that death met with, in this Tragedy of couseners, was
Caphos a merchant, whose name Frenos used in diverse of his crafty
conueyaunces, for that (if need so required) he had friends to countenance,
money to defend, and an indifferent honest report, to color their lewd
practices. But notwithstanding his money, color, and countenance, to set an
honest show in the sight of the world, of his subtle practices, now that
death attacheth him, to make his account before the hiest, you shall hear in
what arerages he finds himself.

Caphos complaint.

As sup the broth, wherein his body boilde,
As good we do, as give consent to evil,
Which sorry doom, my colored scuse has foild,
My conscience throbs, though I no fraud deuis'de,
My only name, that shadowed foul deceit,
In God his sight with Frenos fall is pris'de,
I feel my sins, pluckes down my soul with weight,
Yea Lyros and false Frenos both I know,
But lead the way, that I must shortly go.
Far yet I am unfit for such a journey,
My count falls short, that I to God must give,
If he charge me, with filthy perjury,
It will not serve (to save me from repreue,)
To say how that, for fear of after shame,
A manifest untruth, A pretty kind of perjury.
I durst not swear,
But Frenos got, a post knight of my name,
In steed of me, that did both swear and steare,
I must confess, I gave thereto consent,
And God no doubt, will punish my intent.
My subtle steightes, to shadow foul abuse,
May well lie hid, and no man know the same,
But God does know, the fraud I put in use,
(For others heed) deserved open shame.
The man that is with sickness never vexed, No^^.

Has seeldome care what kind of meat he eats,
When such as are, with surfets often perplexed,
Seem dainty still, to feed on diverse meats,
In worldly churles, observed is the like,
They feed on fraud, till infamy them strike,
Mark well my words, you (worldlinges) of all sorts,
But citizens, your natures best I know,
There are of you have meetely good reports,
For riches sake, and outward honest show,
But how you get, your monstrous heaps of gold,
Your conscience knows, and I can somewhat tell,
Your secret craft, so seeldome is controld,
As what you get, you think you get it well,
But how so here, your reckonings seems true,
A day will come, when you shall count a new.
Be you reclaymde, by others soudaine fall,
Sighe for your own, when others shames you see,
Think that they are but patterns of your thrall,
If justice should on you avenged be,
A thousand ways, the highest seeks to win,
Our worldly minds, from love of worldly joys,
But if we still, will wallowe in our sin,
The plagues are sharp, with which he us destroys,
To stay whose wrath, I hold the next way is,
While we have space, to sorrow our amiss.

With conscience clear, some wards his wily blow,
And some again he gawls with soudaine grief,
Whose thoughts of sin, does work their double woe,
Had I but wayde, the half, that now I wray,
My coemates ends, had made me fit for death,
A sweet com^orte.
But that is past, this is my only stay,
Gods mercy salues, at latter gasp of breath,
And yet thereof, let no man hope to far,
Presumptious sins.
Presumptious sins, of all, the greatest are.
The reporter.
It seems by the deposition in Caphos complaint, that ye direction from time
to time, (as concerning the before reported cousenage) came from some subtle
head. But whose devise or direction soever it were, there is yet an other (a
lawyer it seems by the order of his complaint) that finds his conscience
infected, with Lyros, Frenos, and Caphos fellowship: who likewise attached with
death you may suppose with a troubled mind, to wreast out this following
complaint.

Pimos complaint at the hour of his death.

My wily skill, that chaungde the sense of law,
My cunning Pleas, that made a wrong seem right,
Are now the bones, whereon my conscience gnawe,
They force me grant, the good from evil I knew,
The good I left, the evil too late I rue,
The common law, The common law, was taken out of Gods la^^
the which I studied long,
I find condemns me wretch of many a crime,
The law it self (how so we wreast it wrong)
Of God his law, was founded in the prime,
Then since in one, they both agree in troth,
Abuse of one, must be abuse of both.
And sure the one I turned as I list,
If I were wronged, the law amends could make,
If I did wrong* the law such power mist,
The case was chang'de the wronged might go pack.
Such helps I had, such quillets of delay,
That all seemde true, that (subtle) I did say,
But now I am, attached to appear,
Before a Judge, at no man's faults that winkes,
The devil declares, The devil declares our offenses before God, our
conscience is the witness of our wickedness.
how I have lived here,
My conscience guilt, gives evidence me thinks,
To learn the law, since study I did vow,
For breach of law, I am indicted now.
Before my God me seems I charged am,
For ayding those, with credit, coin, and skill,
Whose lewd deceites, deserved whippes of shame,
And that to make me guilty of their ill,
Consentientes (your law says Io^e does say,)
Et agentes, plectentur pari pena.
My guilty mind, confesses straight the act,
False Frenos fraud, was boulstered up by me,
Condemnde of this, straight comes an other fact,
I wronged men, against all equity,
When law does say, Hoc facias alteri,
In right and wrong, quod vis tibi sieri.
This bitter doom, given by the doom of law,
Mae sinful wretch, as guilty strikes mute,
The men I wronged within my conscience gnawe*
I spared none, through pity, nor through suit,
What law did give, since I for vauntage took,
In breach of law, should I for favor look?
Note.
O noe, I must, in proper person plead,
Plain not guilty, or guilty of the crime,
No foreign Plea, may now delayaunce breed,
Untrauerst goes, the Venu and the time,
No advocate, or letters here may serve,
The Judge is bent to judge as I deserve.
I guilty am, I must of force confess,
Ignorance will not serve.
By ignorance, these faults, yet would I scuse,
But I, vile I, that had men in distress,
And did their Pleas of ignorance refuse,
Me thinks that God, does rule me ore with this,
Non excusat, ignorantia iuris.
And thus I lie, with deadly sickness pinde,
Yea more, my soul beseng'd, with sinful grief,
The more I seek, to pacify my mind,
The further off, I (wretched) find relief,
My dealinges great, or rather great deceit,
Fall out so lewd, as I no count can straight.
Do what I can, the cause that causde my joy,
When flesh, and blood, was fed with worldly gain,
Is now the cause, that causes my annoye,
Now fear of hell, in place of flesh does reign,
The soul and flesh are at continual war.
The soul, and flesh, impugnes the other so,
As what likes one, does work the others w^e.
What mean we then (since the one we must displease,
To serve the flesh, that bears no lasting sway?
And leave the soul, that couets still our ease,
Who (foyling flesh) in heaven does live for aye,
What worser match, can any creature make,
Incerta then, pro certis thus to take.
O sinful wreth, had I this end foreseen,
I had not now, come short upon account,
I would have liked, and loved the merry mean,
Which ever does, to reckoning best amount.
For violents, do sildome long endure,
They always come, from fortune most unsure.
O wicked man, had I seen heaven in thought,
Had I served God, like as in show of zeal,
I had not thus, for poor men's livings sought,
Nor purchased hell, for land for others weal,
Had I well wayde, how tickle was my life,
I had ere this, appeasd my conscience strife.
Or had I thought, (O most unhappy wight)
Look what I gave, that measure should I reap,
I sure had given, to every man his right,
This wicked world, had not luld me asleape,
I had not then, been careless of my end,
My soul had watched, deaths fury to defend.
But (oh) in me, the contrary was plaste,
I was intyste, on baytes of sin to feed,
Which charmed receipts, seemde sugar sweet in taste,
But (oh) they say, sweet meat sour sauce does need,
Need or not need, I prove the proverb true,
My brittle joys, my endless woes do brue.
My conscience loathes, what liked well my life,
My conscience rues, the gain I got by guile,
My conscience feels, the woes of wrangling strife,
My conscience weeps, at that my life did smile,
My conscience bleedes, through that life thought a bliss,
My conscience wailes, what life thought not amiss.
Well, since my life, this wretched woe has wrought,
Would God my life, (nay death through foul abuse)
Were noted so, as all men might be taught,
By scriptures rule, their talents here to use,
And specially, about their studies wall,
For lawyers heed, would God were writ my fall.
Through sight whereof, no doubt they would refuse,
To fish for gain, with nets of foul deceit,
To work delays, they would no pleadings use,
They sure would think, they had account to straight,
My vexed mind, at death still in their eye,
Would will them live, as they did daily dye.
If to such good, my souden fall would prove,
Would life would last, to tell a larger tale,
But how it prove, in vain for life I move,
Death now assaults, and (wretched) I must vale,
My breath does fade, the bell does sound away.
From whence I came, I needs must turn to clay.
The reporters conclusion, as touching the report of Paulus Plasmos adventures,
and Lyros, Frenos, Caphos, and Pimos falls.
WHo tells a tale at large, of others smart,
In his report, some error needs must shape,
Some blamed are, some praisde, beyond desert,
In this discourse (such slander to escape)
It seemd me best, to use but notes of heed,
And leave at full, for to report the deed.
Yet some will say, I wrong poor Plasmos here,
To make his youth, the cause of his mishaps,
When he good soul (who fraud did little fear)
Was slily snarld, in sneaking couseners traps,
In deed, my heart did bleed, his plaints to show,
And much I blamde, the workers of his woe.
And yet forsooth, what so of him is said,
In my conceit, is nothing said but truth,
For sure his woes, if they be wisely wayde,
Some ways may be, imputed to his youth,
For first of all, his bravery was the bayte,
These couseners minds, that egged with deceit.
Then since him self, was guilty of his thrall,
His fortunes wrayd, may wanton gallants warn,
From rash clyming, for fear they catch a fall,
And by his woes, vnwayed youths may learn,
To trust them selves, few others out of sight,
For timelesse trust, wrought Plasmos much despite.
And for their falls, by fraud that sought to mount,
Although that they, not half their faults report,
Yet in their plaints, are notes of good account,
Forewarnings fair, and words of mylde exhort,
And for the rest (how so they lived awry,
Let it suffice, they did repentant dye.
R.v.

Epilogus.
Vide fol. 38.
Lo here the fruits, that grow of self conceits,
Vide fol. 80. vsque. 96.
Lo here their falls, that leap before they look,
Lo gallants here, the sweet inticeing baytes,
Vi. 24. A. and. 50
Wherein lies hid, the couseners poisoned hook.
Vide. 50. us. 66
From maskes of pride, here are the visards plucked.
Vide. 50.
Of dogged dice, lo here the deadly ill.
See here how dry, the lovers purse is sucked,
Vide. 98. and. 99
That yealdes to please, a wanton Ladies will.
Vide. 87.
Who notes here, what treason lurkes in trust,
Before he trust, may happily learn to try.
Vide. 7. A.
Who sees fair words, saust here with works unjust,
May have in scorn, the shows of flattery.
Who marketh here, the bitter end of frayes,
Vide. 36.47.
Of more emprise, may hold a quiet life.
Who sees here, Vide. 73. B.
in law the long delays,
May love the worse, to live in wrangling strife.
Vide. 6.
Without good heed, who so in court does plant,
May here perceive, his beggerie in the end.
Vide. 85.
Who wayeth here, the woes of withered want,
Were worse then mad, beyond his bounds to spend.
Vide. 17. C. vsque. 25. and. 49. us. 66. and. 70. us. 78. Vide. 66.78. Vide.
46.
Who would avoid, the snares that worldlings set,
And who would know, their wiles and foul abuse,
Who has desires, an honest fame to get,
Who in his kind, enticing gold would use,
May here find rules, his life for to direct,
Vide. 45. us. 49
Here lives their fames, that virtues soldiers ware,
And here again, Vide. 16.49.70.
their dealings I detect.
To swim in wealth, that will no vauntage spare.
Here here discourst, Vide. 105. A. vsque ad fine^.
may worldlings see their falls,
Which wey not how, so riches they may win,
Here may they see, how sore Gods vengeance galls,
When he is bent, to punish filthy sin,
All this and more, my Muse at large reports.
All this my Muse (for your avail) did hit,
In (...) whereof, she friendly you exhorts,
To take in worth, what of good will is writ.
Quod cauere possis, stultum est admitter^.
FINIS.
Imprinted at London for Robert Waley.

Anno. 1576.


