A Remembrance of the Life, Death, and Virtues, of the most Noble and
Honorable Lord Thomas late Earl of Sussex, Vicount Fitz-water, Lord of
Egremount and Burnell, Justice of An Air, of all her Majesty's Forrestes,
Parkes, Chaces, and Warrantes, on the South side of Trent, Captain of the
Pensioners and gentlemen at Arms, Lord Chamberlain of her Majesty's Honorable
Household, Knight of the Noble Order of the Garter, and of her Highness most
Gracious and Prudente Pryuy Council.

Who deceased at Barmesey the 11. of June 1583.

The report of George VVhetstones gent.

Formae nulla Fides.
LONDON Imprinted by John Wolf and Richard Jones 1583.

To the right honorable Sir Henry Ratclif, Knight, Earl of Sussex, Vicount
Fytz-water, Lord of Egremount and Burnell. George Whetstons wishes
accomplishment of honorable and perfect desires.
RIGHT NOBLE EARL, in former times, it was held so deep an office of justice,
to eternize the memories of worthy personages deceased, with sumptuous
monuments, and learned Epitaphes, as in the overthrows of war, the dead were
ransomed, to have honorable funerals, at as hye a price, as the living
Captains, in hope of further service. One of the chief of the seven wonders
of the world, was the sumptuous sepulcher of king Mausolus, which his loving
wife Artimisia caused to be erected: and in advantage, she hired with rich
rewards the most famous Poets of Greece to register his life and virtues. The
performing of these loving and natural duties is the cause, that the memory
of so many famous men (long since ingraued) is at this day so fresh, and to
posterity the encouragement to virtue so great. And to say the truth, the
Cronicles of good men's acts, are the guydes of well doing: on the other side,
the blaming of vicious deeds, is the bridle of evil attempts. The noble
Emperor Alexander called Seuerus, would often times say, that his firmest
motions to do well proceeded of this cause, that Historiographers should write
well of him, by the warrant of good desert, and furthermore he feared to
injury any writer, lest he should defame him through a froward and malicious
disposition. Your Honorable Lordship in solemnising most sumptuously the
funerals of the thrice noble Lord and your dear brother, the late Earl of
Sussex, fully assures the world, that you regarded his worthiness far more
then his wealth. And to give him his right, the full report of his virtues,
would be a task as troublesome, as to gase against the Sun painful. But
for that in greatest things, it suffices to show a good will: Much moved by
the passion of a common sorrow for the death of so gracious a Lord, but far
more by the general brute of his divine and heroical virtues: I have written
this small remembrance of his mighty merits, no better garnished, then
precious stones set in brass: protesting that I only have re^^ued my
Instructions of upright fame: stopping one of my ears when affection praised:
and the other when envy detracted. So that (right honorable) you may greatly
pacify your natural sorrow with this precious comfort. That this brief
regester of his worthynes common to the world: May be an Image of honor to the
wise: which present I humbly present under the protection of your Lordship, as
the shadow of your self. Being the heir of your magnanimous brothers honors
by law, and of his virtues by nature. No more but the Lord protect your
Lordship in health and happiness.

Ready to do your Honor service. George Whetstons.

A Remembrance of the most Noble, and Honorable life, death, and virtues, of
Thomas, late Earl of Sussex, Vicount Fitz-water, Lord of Egremount, and
Burnell. etc.
WHylom of Macedon, the mighty King,
By Homer pend, The magnanimus saving of king Alexander when he vewed Achilles
Tomb and Epitaph.
Achylles life did read,
Who forthwith wished, his own renown to ring
Homer alive, and Alexander dead:
Desire of Fame, Contempt of life so bread,
And truth to say, man's life is but a breath.
When Fame outliues, Envy, Time, and Death.
The hope of Fame, as Pallingene does write,
Of yore men's minds, Spes Far^^^ solet ad virtutem impellere multos.
with virtuous thoughts did crown
The Monuments, that Hystoryes resight:
Of worthies dead, which live in bright renown.
(when millions mo, a shallow grave does drown.
Are spurs to thrust, the Coward on the pykes.
And dobbles force, when as the valiant strikes.
Yet far more good, then fame unto the dead
the registers, The benefit of Cronicles
of good men's lives contain:
for in the same posterity may read,
the way to work their own and countries gain,
withal to shun the faults which honor stain.
which well forewaid, it is each writers charge,
of good men dead to show the lives at large.
My self for one, who worst may pay this due,
but want no will, more able wits to whet
this many a day have laid in open view,
their lives and deaths, that did by virtues set
not fed with hope, rewards thereby to get,
for most men know, it is no way to thrive,
to praise the dead, but flatter men alive.
But God forbid the dead should lose his right,
and shame befall, the flattrer at his need
some skill I have on good men's tombs to wright
no grace at all at vain men's bordes to feed,
The confusion of flattery.
and now too old the flattring art to read:
yet thus my name, shall with the best remain,
when flattrers vade, like thunder, smoke, and rain.
Well let this go, and fall I to my task,
a common grief does charge my Muse to wright
a sowresweete song for such his friends as ask
for Sussex Earl, most true and noble knight
of virtue and valor, the mirror bright
with much ado, who vanquished is by death
vanquished, not so, but only reau'd of breath.
The order of the Romain funerals.
His purple robe, does show his honor sound,
his armed sword, the mettle of his heart.
his forward leg in S. Georges garter bound
shows that he would not from his standard start
his staff of peace a witness is of art:
then no man dead may justly judge this lord
who living used, both Cesars pen, and sword.
But to discribe this worthy Peer at large
in virtue he did blase his noble race,
in peace, in war, a man most meet for charge,
whom change nor chance, could mask with double face
a Tutch that tryes fair semblance often bace.
he dreaded these, one God, one king, one law,
and of the rest, he stood no whit in awe.
In tender years whilst virtue might engraue
within his plyant mind, her sacred heast
he bent his ear, to hear the counsels grave
that Science taught and wrote them in his breast
thus still with time his worthiness increast
withal so staid when youth was in his pride, At nyntene years of age, he was
captain of a great charge of Demilances.

as then he wist a weight charge to guide.
Ambassador, Queen Mary* He was Ambassador about the marriage of Queen Mary and
king Philip
a marriage to entreat
between the Queen and Philip king of Spain
this Earl was sent, who in this message great
behau'd him self so nobly, wise and plain
as with success much honor he did gain
and waighing Arms beseemed best this lord
the king gave him a rich and costly sword. King Philip gave him a most rich
sword.

And sure the sword, Arms the proper attire for the nobility.
becomes the noble best
upon his neck a shepe-hooke has no grace
God and S. George, Alloune, set spear in rest
Soundes through the field, where honor geues the charge
AEconomie is never drawn on targe
her dwelling is a sheepe-fold or a stall
For Mars and Minerua the lordings hall.
The preuileges of the roman Captains
Of yore, the sword, these privileges had,
while Rome triumphed, her Captains in the field:
Might break the laws, the sacred Senate made.
The Soldyars will, engrau'd in sword, or shield.
To cunning quirkes of Law, would no way yeald.
The Cause, Millitary Testament.
there lives, in howerly danger stood:
Therefore their acts, held lawful, just, and good.
Queen Mary made him deputy of Ireland and sent after him a patent to be
Justice of an Air, of al her Forests etc. On the south side Trent. And made
him Captain of the pentioners and gentlemen at arms.
well, of the King, this sumptuous sword received,
This Lord in heart, vou'd to deserve the same:
And time well proved, his vow he not deceived*
His puisant hand, the Irish rude did tame:
And of their heads, did buyld a Fort of Fame:
But Envy which, at worthyest deeds does spurn:
Did raise a blame, which to his praise did turn.
Queen Elizabeth.
when home he came, he proou'd him self so just,
As in his brow, the Queen his virtues read.
She found that he, returned truth for trust.
His saying. Alabius iniguis and a lingu^ (...), ^her avit me Deus, quo^iam cor
Regina is mani^^^ ci^^.
And with new trust, she gave his truth her meed.
which made him wright, as he had cause in deed.
From wicked lips and tongues, thou Lord have set me free:
Because my Princes heart, is in the hands of thee.
The true renown of (...).
Her heart, her head, her rule, and blessed Reign,
The King of kings, does govern with such grace:
As that the world, her fame may scarce contain.
In Enuies spite, which shines in every place,
As Summers Sun, does in the Sailors face.
And therefore Just, this Lord should thus confess.
when thousands may, as much as he expres.
Well when he thus, had put suspect to flight:
His Princes grace, by virtue soon he wroght.
The Star appeared, most perfect in her sight.
Then Enuies frowns, he set as light as naught.
For Merit him, in credit daily brought. Her majesty sent him Ambassador unto
the Emperor.

In Ambassadge, he to Vienna went
Who from the Queen to The Emperor was sent.
His weighty charge, The Queens Majesty made him president of York.
Rebellion in the North.
with faithful service done,
Home he returned, with honor for his toil.
And straight was made, the President of York.
In such a time, as uproar kept a quoyle.
And armed the North, unto their proper foil. Pius 5. Pope of Rome.

Through hope, that Im-Pius, of Rome then pope:
By his crossing, could bless them from the rope.
Dismayed no whit, to hear this loud Alarm,
For well he wist, The peaceable victory against the Northen rebels.
that traitors had no might.
Her Highness friends, and subjects he did arm:
And with a few, the Rebels put to flight:
Yer that, the Princes power could come in sight.
without bloodshed, this broile thus ended he,
Save such as died, by justice on a tree.
The stur appeased, and al in order set,
He left his chardge, and to the Court did hy:
For service true, where he such glory gat:
As that he seemed, a Pearl in Princes eye:
No fault in him, til death she could espy.
And therefore now, she caused his travels cease:
And wild him rest, upon a staff of Peace.
The Queens Majesty made him Lord Chamberlain of her most honorable household.
Lord Chamberlain, she of her house him placed.
An office great, and near unto her self,
Thus still he rose; whom spite would have disgraced.
No Perry serud, to set him on the shelfe:
Who only sought for honor, not for pelf.
He serud his Prince, and sought his Countries good.
And for them both, adventured often his blood
When blessed peace his trenching sword did sheath,
A Laurel bow, he managed as well:
In counsel grave, he need not sit beneath.
As time gave cause, his words were short and sure.
His judgments sound, and likely to endure.
He never leaned to favor, gain, or hate:
But still advised what best auail'd the state.
He was a gracious fauorer of oppressed men.
His hand that often the enemy did lame,
He reached to those whose succors were dismayde:
His valiant heart that no mischance could tame,
Did melt to ruth, when wretches cride for aid.
Whose cause to plead, his tongue the mighty frayde.
His eye that had in foreign practice sight:
was never fixed upon the poor man's right.
In this: that he each Christian language spoke,
He honored much, but served his Sovereign more:
Intreatment good, Ambassadors to make,
No man more pressed, nor yet more meet therefore.
whose reach, their wyles so cunningly would shore.
As often they said, by Alligorie thus.
Monstrant viam, Astra Regibus.
But well he knew the stars were thrall to wit,
And therefore walked in wisdoms perfect way:
Who finding where a friend of his had writ,
Hei: nescio quo me vocant fata.
He underneath replied, Fata falsa:
And proved withal, his answer true in this:
Sapiens dominabitur Astris.
On such sure ground, thus builded he his hap:
Sly fortune he did neither trust nor fear:
Still as he walked, he saw the wyly trap,
That Envy set, the virtuous to snare:
And of the same, through wisdom did beware.
So that his foes had evermore the foil, Pericles, spoiling the country of
Sparta, his soldiers spared his land to bring him in suspicion of the Athenian
Senate, who to prevent the suggestions of Envy, gave the said land freely unto
the common wealth. Iust^^. lib. 3.

As those that spared Pericles land to spoil.
O happy man that had thy virtues tried:
As gold in fire, through envy and suspect.
O happy Queen, which had so true a guide,
In peace and war, to govern and dyrect,
Happy Commons, whose weal he did respect.
Thrice happy Realm, that had him for defense:
He blessed alone, that death has taken him hence.
But for his loss, why should we moan, or mourn:
All human flesh a dying day must have:
The stoutest men, that ever Arms have borne:
Maugre their wills, were borne unto the grave.
Asaiels life, his swiftnes could not save.
Sampson, Caesar, and Alexander great:
Were foylde by death, that all the world would beat.
This Tyrant yet, no easy Conquest had:
Although he charged, and charged this Lord again:
In spite of whom, whose wished life did fade,
Like Marble Stone, with mysling drops of rayn:
So stoutly he, endured grief and pain.
But to no boot, auayl'd this valyant strife:
The hour approacht, that must dyssolue his life.
Yet as the Horse, that stricken is in war,
His Rider brings, from danger to be torn:
So brought this Earl, his deadly wound thus far,
when as he seemed, a threshed ear of Corn.
when as flesh, blood, and humors al were worn:
His noble heart, did foster still his breath:
Until his soul, had foyld, the devil and death.
For Nobles lore, his life a Pharos light:
His valor great, the Image of renown,
His end does show, al sorts of men to fight.
In spite of death, their souls with joy to crown.
For when that sickness came to pluck him down.
As one that had both life and death in scorn:
Save for his sins, he never seemed to mourn.
My time is come (quoth.he) prepare my Hearce,
The monster death, no prayer may entreat,
His naked breast, the Cannon cannot pearce.
Even as the weak, he wounds the strong and great,
He holds for fish, what comes in his Net.
The Prince and Peer, to save him from the grave,
No Charter have, more then the wretched slave.
A heavy tale, unto the worldly wight,
That has health, wealth, and in his bowels peace:
which buys and buylds, and wallowes in delight:
That sits him down, and byds his soul take ease:
But foolish man, know that thou shall decease.
The Thunderbolt, the strongest towers tear,
And Time in Time, what worldly is will wear.
what is become, of Caesar's Equipage,
Of Pompeys Rule, of Alexanders Reign:
Of Samsons Strength, of Salamon the sage.
Of Tullies skill, of Mydas golden gayn:
Of them, and al, this only does remayn:
They lived like Gods, and leave as men did take.
And for their pompes, have large accounts to make.
If rule and reign, were seuer'd from this check.
who then could blame, the man that would be great.
The mighty may, both Law and order break;
Command his will, rob, spoil, outrage and beat.
And none that dare, with vengeance once him threat.
Til death appears, then thought of former sin,
That never ends, his torment does begin.
I wish man would, this morral Rule but heed:
The end is that, that makes Fortune good.
The thought of death, more better thoughts would breed,
Which certain is, the end of flesh and blood:
His worldly cups, would seem but dregs and mud:
Ten thousand times he would contemplate thus:
Nemo ante obitum beatus.
No man on earth, in happy state does live:
The Prince that rules, a thousand fears enclose:
Envy, the Peereful many a check does give.
The Magistrate for cares can scarce repose:
The Soldyar stands in danger of his foes.
The Lawyers gain is bought with toil enough.
A paynful life, is following of the plough.
For Adams fault, man with this curse is borne:
He (wretch) his bread, with sweat of brovve shall eat,
Not meant that al should work as men forlorn:
But that al sorts with toil, or care, should sweat.
Their minds should moyle, whose hands are smooth and neat
Which felt, and vvaide, what wise man vvil not cry:
Vt essem Christo, cupio dissolui.
With this advise, his flesh he mortified,
His most godly end.
And to his soul such comfort he professed:
As those which savve how Christianly he dyed:
Admyr'd to hear, the Scripture he expressed.
The good Deane of Paul's, in his funeral sermon.
The Deane of Paul's, thus openly confessed.
Though Glorius fame, his mortal Combats crown,
His fight with death, was far of more renown.
He took a most honorable and prudent order in the disposement of his worldly
causes.
Yet ere he dyed, that none should him misfame:
His worldly vvil, he made such regard:
As for his debtes, was order in the same.
He vvild, that none should of their due be barde.
His servants pains, he nobly did reward.
Which done (quoth.he) when death he savve to prease:
Vain world farewell, my soul thee leaves in peace.
Thus godly he, did end his noble life.
Whose loss is vvayl'd, with many watery eyes,
While word does last, whose fame vvil here be rife,
Whose soul in heaven, whose Corse the tomb does shrine
Whose virtuous deeds, in good men's breasts do shine.
And therefore just, that every eye may see:
Whereas he lives, this Epitath should be.
An Epitaph upon the death of the most noble Lord Thomas Earl of Sussex,
Vicount Fytz-water, Lord of Egremount, and Burnell. etc.
Hear under lies Sir Thomas Ratclife knight,
Of Sussex Earl, and many honors more.
Whose virtues often, put envy unto flight,
Whose knightly force, both France and England know,
True to his prince, and ever had been so.
To hawty to crave, ready still to give,
Image of grace while he on earth did live.
Viuit post funera virtus.


