A remembrance of the precious virtues of the right Honorable and reverend
Judge, Sir James Dier, Knight, Lord chief Justice of the Common Pleas: Who
disseased at great Stawghton, in Huntingdon shire, the 24. of March, Anno.
1582.

The report of George Whetstons, Gent.

Form nulla fides.

Imprinted at London by John Charlewood.

The Right Honble. Charles (...) Bruce of Ampthill (Son and Heir Apparent of
Thomas Earl of Ailesbury) and Baron Bruce of Whorleton 1712



To the right Honorable Sir Thomas Bromley Knight, Lord Chaunceler of England,
and of her Majesty's most Honorable privy Counsel, George VVhetstones,
wishes long continuance of honor, health and happiness. ()
RIght Honorable, so blessed has been the estate of this little Realm,
since the hour of her sacred Majesty's most prosperous reign, as it has
been a question, whether the people of foreign nations, do bemone their
own callamities, or envy our felicity most: and as the godly wise, inserte
the miseries of other people, to the vengeance of God, executed upon their
own bowels, through the tyranie of their Kings, together with the ambytion and
envy of their principal Maiestrates: so do they also acknowledge, that our
especial happiness, proceeds from the divine blessing of the hiest, who in
the heat of percicution graciously sent us, a most gracious Princes, led by
a spirit, only composed of piety, bounty, and pity, and further,
strengthened her highness with a Senate, and other needful maiestrates* so
grave and pollitique, as establish wholesome laws, for the public benefit of
her Majesty's Subjects, and withal, with lynxes eyes so pry into foreign
practices, that by their wisdoms, in the beginning, they return the weapons
provided for our mischeefes, into the practisers own entrails, so that more
for fear then love (being through the world for our prosperity envied) we
have free passage in foreign nations, and find the seal of peace, upon the
Gates of our own Cities* which duly considered, that English subject may
justly be proclaimed enemy to grace and humanity, that renders not hearty
thanks unto God, dutiful obedience unto her Majesty, and reverent love and
affection unto the Maiestrates, for this peace plenty, and protection, and
seeing foreign writers, that have their Colleges environed with Arms, find
means to present the world, with the tirannies of their Maiestrates,
oppressions of the people, and ruins of their Cities. English
Historiographers which have quiet recorse unto the Muses, are bound to eternise
the memories of the good maiestrates disseased (who were the instruments of our
blessings, that the dead may have their right, and the living encouragement to
virtue. Right honorable, bound by these considerations, to discharge the office
of a poor writer, in monuments extant, I have regestred the lives of many
worthy personages disceased, and at this present moved with the passion of a
common sorrow, to show the reverent zeal I bare unto Justice, I have made a
weak remembrance of a few of the precious virtues, which governed the good
Lord Dyer, late chief Justice of the Common Pleas, which I humbly lay before
your Lordships searching judgment, no better garnished then Diamonds set in
Brass, assuring my self that your honor will read his full merit, if not in
my words, in the woorking of your own virtues, who with the wings of this
just Iustiser, are mounted into the sovereign seat, of Justice Capitol,
where poor injured suitors zealouslie pray, long to enioie your countenance
whose conscience is the ease of their oppressions, so that knowing that my
endeavor, shall find grace in your gracious sight, being the dew of this good
Maiestrate, and a testimony of the service I vow unto your virtues. I
boldly approach your presence with this simple present, leaving the view
thereof to your good Lordships most convenient leisure, the 17. of May. 1582.

Your Honors bounden to do you service. George VVhetstones.
A remembrance of the precious virtues of the right Honorable and reverend
Judge, Sir James Dier, Knight, Lord chief Justice of the Common Pleas.
LIdgate, Bawldwin, and many writers more,
the heavy faules of naughty me^ have shown
When their good deeds, The most famous Orrators and Poets of Greece, were
hired by Queen Artimisea to eternise the life virtues of her husband Mausolus.
to tell they all are slow,
Whose virtuous lives deserves to be blown:
with such shrill tru^ps, as made Mausolus known
The cause (think I) through rutheme^s harms they raise
And do envy to sound the worthies praise.
But so or no, the wrong does much increase,
which my weak muse, has labored long to right
Who living in a chosen place of peace,
where virtue reigns, and conquers Enuies might: The weapons of virtue.

who not with lau^ce, but laurel bough does fight
Her Cheefetaines then, of writers justly claim,
That Death not time, their memoties may maime.
Among the more, that worste may pay this debte,
upon the good, I have bestowed my zeal:
Not like their worth, but able wits to whet,
For to expose their virtues every deal,
Who stays were of our happy common weal.
That their good rules, such as succeed may guide,
And live by Fame, as they had never died.
To both effects (who living did no wrong)
The breathles course of good James Dier knight;
Of Common Pleas, A custom with which the Venetians in their funetals, do
honor their Maiestrates
the Lord chief Justice long,
In Scarlet Robes, I lay in open sight,
To show that death, ore honout has no might.
Whose deeds do shine, as Diamonds in the dark
And lives, though dead, if to his Fame you hark.
Like him that long against the son does gase,
To pry into his virtues, dim my eyes:
Whose Monuments, shine as a Pharoes blase,
In Judgment just, Meet virtues for a Judge,
in counsel grave and wise,
Clearer of doubts, in law like clouds which rise.
A live refuge, of those whom wrong did pain,
A Dyer such, as died without a stain,
But to discribe this worthy Judge at large,
Let it suffice to show from whence he came: He was borne in an house of
aunce(...) woorship.

The purple Grape, a Thorn does never charge,
Nor rascal raze, often breeds a Child a fame,
His birth was good, his acts do blaze the same.
In woorship borne, in honor he did end,
Ray sde by desert, Virtue the best Cognizance of a Gentle.
and not by sat, or friend.
In tender years, he was to learning set,
And Vessels long, their seasoned liquors taste:
As time grew on, he did to Oxford get,
And so from thence, he was in Strand Inn p^aste, Strand Inn sometimes an
Inn of Chauncerie.

But him with fame, the middle Temple graste.
The deapth of law, he searched with painful toil,
Not cunning Quirks, the simple man to spoil.
His wi^te was quick, his Judgment was as found,
His Clyents such, as wear with wrong oppressed:
His conscience good, A good example for lawiers.
him first with credit cround,
who with much care, his clyents wrongs tedrest.
By virtue thus, he clymde abooue the rest,
And feared no fall, sith men it was his guide,
When teaching heads, o^te slip inel^cesest pride.
From room to room, he stepped by true degrees,
And mounts at length, to sovereign Justice place
Where long he sat, He lived 23 years to this (...)
chief Judge of common Pleas,
And to say truth, he sare with Justice grace,
Whose sacred will, was written in his face,
Settled to hear, but very slow to speak,
Till either part at large his mind did break,
And when he spoke he was in speech reposde,
His eyes did search, He contraryed Arist opinion, Amor et odium, et proprtum
comodum semper facet indices non cognoscere verum.
the simple suitors heart.
To put by bribes, his hands were ever closde,
His prosesse Just, he took the pooremans part.
He ruled by Law and lystned not to Art.
These foes to truth, love, hate and ptiuate gain,
which most corrupt, his conscience could not stain
The freendles wight, which did offend through need.
He ever more, A good consideration.
with mercy did respect.
The prowder cheete, that did his Trespass feed,
Through trust to friends, with scourge of law he
for by the fault, not friends he did direct. checked
Thus he with grace, the poor man's love did draw,
And by sharp means, did keep the proud in awe.
As good things are, Summum ius est ium. ma iniuria.
by cuill men often abusde,
even so the law, to wrong sometime is wrest:
The law pronounst, no travel herefusde,
To ease their greefes, whom that he found oppressed,
And few so bad as disobay de his heast, The testimony of a good conscience.

This he good Judge, in circute as he rode,
As cause requyrde, still as a Chauncelor stood.
Fit men he did, Sufficient men ought to be placed in offices, because they are
seruau^rs of the common weal.
in office ever place,
and often put by, his friends and nearest kin:
Affirming though the gift were in his grace,
The Common weal, chief intrest had therein,
And therefore meet, the worthy should it win,
Words like himself, who favored public good
Before then gain, that were spronge of his blood.
Where he was borne, all sorts his bounty knew,
He still: stay de strifes, in places as he goes:
At Westminster, his death poor suitors tewe,
Who for the poor, was Judge and pleader both
The rich man's cause, he fauord but in trothe.
Where as he dwelt, the County sounds this moan,
(...), the good Lord Dier now is gone.
And not alone, but all the realm beside,
His fatal loss, have cause for to lament:
Who father was of law, which right does guide
And as his Child, the same to Justice bent
Which to his will the Judge unjust does rent, Sic volo, sic Iubeo, stet pro
ratione voluntas.

But he good man, did wash his hands fro wrong,
And sildome sought, to lay his foe alonge,
He never raylde, nor rag'le atfaulty men,
But in good words, gave sentence of their pain:
Where grace he spi'de, he gave such counsel the^,
As many evil, to goodness he did gain,
From self revenge, he ever did refrain.
And yet severe when it with Justice stood:
A Tullie right, all for his Contryes good.
He did not pry into his neighbors state,
Unless it were for to sustain his right:
His godly mind, flew no ambitious gate,
But in the mean, did evermore delight.
when climing heads, often reach beyond their might
He justly did discharge his charge assynde,
And never wrought, to cross his soueraignaminde
Lords Letters sent, to wink at some abuse,
He aunswerd thus, I am to Justice sworn:
I must offend, or your desire refuse,
which words to deeds, he ever more did turn:
Yet in such sort, as reau'd conceight of scotne:
Thus say lde the best, from Justice him to draw,
When most men make, the mighties will a law.
The Lawyer lewd (as many naughty are,)
And yet the law, Needful reprehention.
to cloak their wrongs do strain:
He thus would check, this string my friend does iar
You of the Law would make a backsword feign,
For others eg'de, for your offenses plain.
You can by law, unpunished steal a Farm,
But mend, or hell will sure your catcas warm.
You not sustain, Non facias altrui quod non vis tibi fieri. Ignorantis iuris
non excusat.
but do the law oppress,
And so a foe unto the Common weal.
Law friends the good, and does the leawd suppress
and you would make, the good her vengeance feel
Your neighbor use, as he with you should deal.
Gods law says so, with which ours ought agree,
Which learn for ignorance no plea will be.
The like advise he daily did bestow,
Upon all sorts, as their vocations were:
The spender, he the pains of want would show,
The greedy man, how that his catke and care,
Fastened on goods for other men to share.
Shroud mes complaints, he in this check did blame
The blind for floth may ill vpbraide the lame.
The laboring man, that lives by sweat of blow,
If him he found, in wrangeling to delight:
He thus would charm: good neighbor ply the Plow
Law tireth such; Suit of law is grievous. to all men.
as have friends coin and might,
Let honest men. be ^aies men of thy right.
Thus he good Judge the poor ma^s wealth did prise
Before their gain, which by the Law does (...).
One all degrees, in counsel or in meede,
He thus performde the office of a freende,
The fatherles and Widows he did feed,
Sustainde their rights, The of fice, of a good man.
their injuries did end,
A Cato right, that did his substance spend
On such as lackt affirming how that these,
His Chuldren were, VVile, kinsefolke and alyes.
For public good, when Care had cloide his mind,
The only joy for to repose his sprights.
Was Music sweet, which showd him well inclind
For he that does in Music much delight, The virtue of Music,

A conscience has, disposed to most right.
The reason is, her sound within out ear.
A Symphathye, of heaven we thinko we hear.
And therefore calde, the Image of the soul,
Forth of the heart, which care and grief does wrest
The Swan in songs, her passing Bell does knowle
The Nightingale* with thorns against her breast,
Does wake to singe, when other birds do rest.
(As showen before) for to deceive their pain,
Whose torments else would make the^ cry amain.
This was his life, to work his Countries weal,
He did his health, with care and studdie vvound;
When as his mind diseased he did feel,
This was his ease, sweet harmony did sound,
Thus all was good, vvhereto himself he bound.
But some the best, ^emo sine ^crimine v^uit.
with envy will assault,
And carping say, none lives without a fault.
I grant it true (but theires more greater are)
the Be sometimes, the huswiues hand does stinge,
But with his Comb, the householde better fare,
So good men do, themselves with trespass wringe,
And with good deeds, a number profit bring.
Now see if these through sorrow purchase grace,
Offend like those, that would their fames deface
No Envy no, thy Bark stays on a shelfe,
The virtuous are, The envious vvound themselves.
with such a Mirror armde,
As do return thy Darts upon thy self,
Their bodies often, I grant by thee are harmd.
but their good deeds are from thy venim charmed,
Wherefore in spite of Envy, Time, and Death,
This Judges fame, my muse shall keep in breath.
Not like his worth, whose life before is told,
the more out loss, his death does now draw near
Yet when he was, infirmed weak and old,
In Justice seat, his judgment still was clear,
Yea to his end he traueld suits to hear.
Years could no whit his memory asswadge,
When many wise are childish in their age.
Well Time, in time, what worldly is will wear,
And more will waste, the world it self to naught,
The Cannons force, the lofty Towers tear,
The strongest man, how proud so be his thought
In trackt of time, unto his Grave is brought.
Even so this Judge, when as his time was come,
Could by no Plea, defer his fatal doom.
When Sickness came, the messenger of death,
He patiently, his sommons did obey:
See here the end, of all that draws breath,
Night clouds (quod he) the sun and brightest day.
The huge high Oak, a blast does ouerwaye.
So Prince, not peer, to save them from the grave,
Noe Charter have, more then wretched stand.
A heavy tale, unto the worldly wight,
That has health, wealth, and in his bowels peace,
But folish man, and foe to thy delight,
Thy sorrow leave, thou liu'ste by this discease.
As buried corn, consumes ere it increase.
For flesh and blood, no lasting life can give,
But being dead, the soul does ever live.
If men with zeal this difference foresawe.
A change in life, The imperious subscription of the Pope in his commissions
and warrants, alluded unto tiranous Princes which make their wyls a law.
I hope would forth with be:
Fiat per me, could never stand for law,
The Cleargies works, should with their words agree,
The Judge would Judge, as he would Judged be,
This sentence would, the murdrers heart affright,
The sheathe shall wou^d; who with the sword does smight
And to be short, all sort of men would learn,
To live, to die, and die to live again:
For what auay les, a world of rule to yearne,
To lose the soul, and leave the same in fine,
Both lands and goods, men must of force resign
And only keep their actions good and bad,
Them to condemn, or else with joys to clad.
More would I say, if grief to ease gave place.
But all in vain, weakness commands my will:
The tired Jade, does trip at every pace,
when pampred horse, do praunce against the hill,
So few words, the sick man's heart does kill.
When healthful men, with long discourses play,
But what is brief, may best be borne away.
These words and more, of more divine regard,
He soundly spoke, when as his heart was ill:
His servant pains he largely did reward,
To Orphants poor, He gave to the Hospytall of saint Bartholmea two fair
houses and to other Hospitalles and alms houses money and lyuinges
whose Father he was still,
Both lands and goods, he did bequeathe by will*
And other gifts of charity did give,
Which escape my Pen, but make his same to live.
Lords claim (quod he) a Heriot of the dead,
A homage dew, and men their rights must have.
Bound to my Prince, by service, love and dread,
Tys just I pay, a Heriot for my grave,
Wherefore I will, her Majesty shall have,
My Diamonde, He bequethed the Queens Majesty his Collar of Esses and a very
ritche Diamond.
and my Chain of honor eke,
So showde his zeal, at death was not to seek.
His worldly will, in order thus dispos'de,
His care was past, he found his conscience clear:
Who yet alive, through hope in heaven repos'de,
And neither hell, the Devil nor Death did fear,
Thus like a Taper light, his life did were.
And in the end at Stawghton he did die:
Where long helyu'de, and little liu'de awrye.
The heaven his soul, the tomb thus shrowds his corse
the world his fame, while world does last will keep
Unto the wise, his deeds remay ne in force;
Who for his death, their hearts in sorrow steep
But wronged men have cause on cause to weep
Wherefore of right, for every eye to see,
VVheteas he lies this moneing rau'de would be,
In obitum venerabilis et Consularis uiri Jacob: Dier Equitis aurati et
iurisperitssimi Epitaphium.
Conditur in tumulo Cato nostri temporis isto,
conditur: O maestas Consulis ex^^ias:
Flet Princeps: lugent proceres: et cord sub imo
plebs fundit refluas cum gemitu lachrymas.
Et merito: nam fautor erat virtutis et auctor
Consilijque simul, Iusticiaeque Parens.
Et vitij durus Iudex, censorque malorum
et pius: et multis vir generosus auis
Et semper bonus ille bonis fuit: ergo bonorum,
sunt illi demium pectora Sarcophagus.
Viuit post funera virtus.

