A PITHIE, SHORT, AND METHODICALL opening of the Ten Commandments. BY Master
William Whately, Preacher of the word of God at Banburie in Oxfordshire.

LONDON, Printed by JOHN HAVILAND for Thomas Pauier and Leonard Green. 1622.

To the Reader.
HEre is for thee (Christian friend) Gods sacred and pure Law, perspicuously
and orderly unfolded, the extent of those glorious beams more now then ever
enlarged, though we have many that have done excellently. For in this short and
pithie Treatise, if thou please seriously to be acquainted with it, as also
make an holy use of it, there will issue three blessed benefits of special and
weighty importance.

First, hereby thou may more clearly know thy self, and discover thy cold
faintness, thy lean and idle services, and crooked disposition, and that
snakie brood of sin that lurketh in thy euer-vitious nature: for it is the
Laws office to detect sin, as a looking glass to bewray spots, and as the
Sun to discover even little motes. Whence is it men see not their misled
lives, but because they are vndisciplin'd in the Lords walks? Can there be a
work of greater consequence then a large opening of these holy rules, which
although the full splendour thereof is reserved for the glory above, yet open
thine eyes to the blessed brightness which shines out of this Treatise, to
discover thy dark ignorance, thy infidelity and stubborn pride, how rich
thou art in folly, how poor in grace, and how conscience hitherto has been
sealed with a cursed brand: here we may be sad spectators of our froward
waywardness, our wandering and groueling thoughts, our barren memories, our
raging discontented passions, and dull edged leaden affections, yea the
disorder of the whole man, turning face to Satan and back to God.

Secondly, it lends powerful aid in the services and worships of God. This
will bring thee with a hunger-bitten soul and heavy heart to behold the Lords
shining face in the preaching of the word, and bends thy will to it with
absolute yielding. This is a notable touchstone to try thy self to the heart
root when thou art to receive that sacramental meat, and will furnish thee
with much store and variety for prayer. Would thou confess against thy
self? behold here a large field: Or would beg graces of God? see here a
sampler: here is matter for meditation, for Christian parlees; this will enable
thee to catechize and instruct thy family, and enlightens thy understanding in
reading the Scriptures, and for days of humiliation, times of precious worth
with Gods people; this work thoroughly looked into, shall cause thee to fall out
with thy self, and shall send thee with penitent eyes to bewail thy wretched
estate, and power out thy soul into the bosom of Christ, and will put such
marrow and strength into thee, that humbly and hotly thou may wrestle with
God.

Lastly, this shall direct all thy paths, and wisely conduct thee through this
thornie life; it will cause thee think well, speak well, and live well, and
furnishes thee with knowledge, faith in God, humble deiectednesse, spiritual
wisdom, a well tuned conscience, a stooping will, heavenly thoughts, a right
fraught memory, and ranks in order thy love, fear, joy, confidence, and all
the rest of those subordinate faculties of the soul, bending them to pursue
what is good, and stand stiffly armed against every evil. And as for being
unspotted of the world, and to live unblameably, wronging neither thy self,
nor any man, in soul, body, estate, name, or place, take this book for thy
counselor. Feast thine eyes then with a subject necessarily useful, and so
exactly compiled, that it cannot but win esteem with every knowing man and
gracious heart. For I must tell thee, diverse friends of exquisite judgment,
hearing that this work was in my hand, did earnestly solicit me to turn it
to common good. Amongst the rest, a learned worthy understanding Divine, Master
R. Bolton, having perused it, commended it unto me in these terms: Me
thinks, in short and little room, it opens and represents the marrow and
mysteries of that adored depth, the banks and bottom whereof, no wit of man
shall ever be able fully to fathom and comprehend, while the world lasts, with
more clear, exact, and compendious dexterity, then I have discovered in
others, though they have also done excellently. And he persuaded with the
Author, and since also with me, to let it pass abroad more publicly. Let then
the more then ordinary parts of the workman, and of such as have commended it,
as also the great pains of our penman, who has told me, he had a long
harvest for this handful of corn, together with the pretiousnes of the
subject, and the goodly meeds thou may gain by it, let these persuade thee
to read it, and that impartially: In the mean time, my prayer and hearty
desire is, that thou may right plentifully prosper by it, and so I rest,

From Blaston 4. of September. Thine in the Lord Jesus, RICHARD LEE.

A PITHIE, SHORT, AND METHODICAL OPENING OF THE TEN COMMANDMENTS.
THE Law of God consisting of ten distinct commandments, is a perfect
platform of our obedience, acquainting us with our duty to God, either 1.
Immediately. 2. Mediatly.


1. Immediately in regard of himself both 1. Principal, in the first
commandment. 2. Less principal, both 1. For the sorts and kinds of service,
which are two. 1. Solemn worship in the second commandment. 2. Common
worship, in the third commandment.
2. For the dedicating of a set and solemn time, viz. one day in seven to holy
and religious exercises, in the fourth commandment.



2. Our duty to God mediatly, in regard of our neighbor 1. Severally. 2.
Jointly.


1. Severally, in regard of 1. Special duties to some, in the fifth
commandment. 2. Common duties to all for their 1. Persons. 2. Things.



1. Persons in regard of their 1. Safety, in the sixth commandment. 2.
Chastity, in the seventh commanment.


2. Things pertaining to their persons, either 1. Goods, in the eight
commandment. 2. Good name, in the ninth commandment.


2. Now follow those mediatly which are in regard of our neighbor, or jointly,
for all these, so far as respects the dispositions and first motions of the
soul, in the tenth commandment.

The first Commandment is, Thou shall have no other Gods but me, or before me.
IT inioyneth the principal worship of God; that is, the making of him our
God, by yielding unto him all such respect as appertains to him in regard of
his being our Creator, and the first fountain of all being. This is a total
and general subjection of the whole man in all the powers of it unto him,
called in Scripture, a being holy as God is holy. Of this commandment we
consider, 1. The affirmative part, that is to say, the special duties it
requires of us. 2. The negative part, that is, what evils it forbids and
condemns in us.


The duties required herein are of two sorts.

1. Duties of dependence, whereby we make him the chief and principal object
of all the powers of our whole man, so far as they are capable of him.

2. Duties of conformity, whereby we order all our powers toward other things
in that manner and measure that he does require, and so become subject to that
authority, power and command, that he has over us, as a creator: who because
he made all things, must needs have right to appoint how all things should be
ordered, used, and disposed.

Duties of dependence are of two sorts.

1. In the principal faculties, called reasonable, because they are all
perfected, and do perform their several operations, by discourse. The
reasonable faculties, which may be exercised upon God, as their object, are
two, viz. the Understanding and Will.

1. Understanding, which is the power of acquainting our selves with the
natures, beings, properties, and differences, by the acts of apprehending,
discerning, applying, and in general discoursing. In this faculty are
required three cardinal and principal virtues.

1. Perfect knowledge of God. 2. Faith. 3. Humility.
1. Perfect knowledge of God, which is a conceiving and apprehending of him to
be such an one as he has revealed himself in his word and works, and that,
according to the means, age and capacity, of every man, for measure and degree
fully.

2. The second cardinal and principal virtue is faith, which is double.

1. Faith to God. 2. Faith in God.
1. Faith to God, which is an assenting to the truth of all that he shall
declare unto us, upon his bare and sole authority, believing because he
speaks, without any further reason, ground or proof.

2. Faith in God, which is an applying of his love and favor unto every man's
self, according to the tenor of that covenant that he does please to make
with us. The former is called believing God, the latter believing in God.

3. The third cardinal or principal virtue is Humility, which is a right
discerning of the infinite distance and difference that is betwixt him and us,
acknowledging his unspeakable excellencies above us, and our most vild baseness
in comparison of him.

The second reasonable faculty is the Will, which is the power that the soul
has, to move it self to or from any thing by settling this conclusion in it
self: I will have or not have, do or not do, such a thing, or that such a
thing be or not be.

The duty of which is, to be carried and moved toward God, with the strongest
of all its inclinations and motions, willing his being and glory above all
things, because that is in it self, and simply the best of all things, and his
favor and grace to us above all other things, because it is to us the best of
all things.

Hitherto of the duties of dependence in the principal faculties will and
understanding. Now follow those in the less principal faculties.

2. Less principal faculties, such as may be perfected, and perform their
several operations without discourse, and therefore are all (excepting one)
common to us with the bruit creatures. These are of two sorts.

1. Inward. 2. Outward.
1. The less principal faculties inward are also two: 1. The senses. 2. The
affections.


The senses called inward are two.

1. Imagination. 2. Memory.
1. Imagination, or the thinking power, which receiving the objects from the
senses does order, move and dispose them according to its own liking: and the
duty of this is, to be thinking of God continually, more plentifully, largely,
constantly, then of all other things. For though he be not subject to sense,
yet from things subject to sense we are bound to form in our selves thoughts
of his excellencies (according to our ability of conceiving,) viz. of his
power, goodness, mercy, wisdom, etc. So as the mind of man should more
abundantly busy it self in such conceits and thoughts of God, then of any
other thing in the world, yea of all other things laid together.

2. The second sense called inward is Memory, which is a power of making that
thing present to the soul, which is absent from the senses. And the duty of
man's soul, so much as concerns this faculty, is a perpetual and continual
remembering of God; that is, a representing of him to it self as present,
though to the senses he do not appear, and that, so as we remember nothing
so firmly nor so often as him.

2. Less principal faculties inward are called affections, which are powers
of the soul, in the reasonable creature, subordinate to the will, whereby the
soul works it self to the seeking and obtaining of good, and shunning and
avoiding of evil. Now of these affections there are 4. which may and must be
set upon God, and that with all their strength, and with the fullness of their
working, and far more then upon any or all other things.

1. The first affection is Love, whereby the soul is moved and inclined to be
one with any good thing; and because God is the best thing, even goodness it
self, therefore should the soul be most frequently and earnestly filled with
such motions and inclinations toward him.

2. The second affection is Fear, whereby the soul is moved from evil, with
a kind of shrinking and fainting, declining from it, when it is coming. Now
because God considered as angry and displeased, is to the creature the greatest
evil (of misery) that can be conceived of, therefore ought it decline his
anger and displeasure, with the most frequent and earnest motions, above all
other evil things, not daring so much as once to make any offer of incurring
his displeasure, yea shunning and abhorring it, more then all other miseries of
punishment, that may be possibly suffered. Now this composition of Love and
Fear is called reverence.

3. The third affection is Joy whereby the soul does receive comfort and
content in a good thing, and is moved to embrace and enjoy the same. And
because God is the chief good, therefore ought the soul to be moved with more
vehement and often motions of gladness for his excellent glory and happiness,
in himself, then for any other thing, and more for his love, favor and good
will, then for any other thing besides his glory.

4. The fourth affection is Confidence, whereby the soul is moved to rest and
stay it self upon any thing, for the obtaining the good it wills. And
because God is of infinite power, and all power is his, neither has any
creature any ability to do any thing without him, therefore must the soul
rest it self wholly and only upon him, according to the truth of his promise,
for the attaining of all good things both spiritual and temporal.

2. The less principal faculty outward, is alone the faculty of speaking,
the Conduit of the imagination, and the Interpreter of the understanding. For
no outward faculty, except only this of speech, can be in any sort exercised
upon God, as its object, but this may: and its duty is to be continually
exercised as any occasion is offered, in speaking good of God. A man is bound
to talk much more of God and his excellencies, to the setting forth of his
glory, then of any other thing, yea then of all things besides: both because
he is most fully replenished with all excellencies; and also because the
affection of love which cannot but rule the tongue, ought to be most ardent
toward him.

Hitherto of duties of dependence. Now follow the duties of conformity, these
also are to be found in all the powers of man.

1. In the chief faculties called reasonable, which are three.

1. The understanding. 2. Conscience. 3 The Will.
1. The understanding, whereof the chief graces are three.

1. Perfect knowledge. 2. Perfect faith. 3. Spiritual prudence.
1. Perfect knowledge of the revealed will of God, according to the measure of
age, gifts, and means, that every man enjoys, so that the mind must apply
it self more to the searching out of his revealed will, then of any other
things. And the matter of this knowledge is the truths revealed of God,
concerning our duty in precepts and prohibitions; and the reward of doing our
duty in promises, or of not doing it in threats, in understanding of which, the
mind must busy it self more then in all other knowledge, after the knowledge
of God himself.

2. The second chief grace of the understanding is Perfect faith to and in the
promises and threats of God, (under which is also contained faith in his
providence, the governing of all things, and that for the good of his, being
one of the things that he has undertaken) whereby we do steadfastly and fully
assent unto them and apply them each unto himself, according to their nature,
and as there is cause and use.

3. The third chief grace of the understanding, is Spiritual prudence, or
wisdom, which is the grace whereby we are able to order our selves, and all
our actions aright, for the attaining of the true ends of our being, according
to the revealed will of God. It is a readiness and nimblenes of mind to make
continual use of divine truths revealed to us. A fruit of the fear of God,
which is derived from the knowledge of him. It has two parts. First,
consideration whereby the mind does seriously ponder and consider of the
truths known. Secondly, heedfulnesse, wariness, or observation, whereby it
attends to all its own actions, and all other necessary occasions, for its
spiritual good.

2. The second chief faculty called reasonable, is Conscience or a knowing
with God, which is a power of the soul, whereby it is enabled to discern of
its own estate and actions, in regard of Gods liking or disliking the same. A
power to judge whether God approve and favor me or mine actions, yea or no:
that is conscience, of which we must consider two things.

1. The acts it is to perform. 2. The rule which it must follow in performing
these acts.
1. The acts it is to perform are twofold, 1. In regard of our actions. 2. In
regard of our estate.


1. The acts it is to perform in regard of our actions are threefold.

1. Good. 2. Bad. 3. Indifferent.
1. Good acts are twofold.

1. Before the doing to call upon us and admonish us to do them.

2. After the doing to bear witness to them, and approve them as well done.

2. Bad acts twofold.

1. Before the doing to curb, restrain and bridle us from the doing, inwardly
telling us that we should not do them.

2. After the doing, to check us, and reprove us, and urge us to confess, and
humble our selves to God for the same.

3. Indifferent acts, to leave them to our wills as indifferent, and to grant
us liberty of doing or not doing them, as occasion shall serve.

2. The acts performs in regard of our estate, to speak peace unto us, to
excuse us, to pronounce us favored and loved of God.

2. The second thing is the rule which it must follow in performing these acts,
that is the revealed will of God, both for the matter, and manner, and measure
of working, and not the will of any creature whatsoever.

3. The third chief faculty called reasonable, is the Will, the virtue of
which is flexiblenesse to the will of God, and that in regard of

1. Things by us to be done and avoided, that is obedience, which is a full
purpose to do all that God requires, and leave all that he forbids for
his sake.

2. Things received, or to be received from him, immediately or mediatly,
whether the things we receive be 1. Good, or. 2. Evil.


1. Good and comfortable, and this is thankfulness, a firm purpose to require
and acknowledge his love by growing so much more constant in loving and serving
him.

2. Evil and miserable, and this is Patience, being a full purpose with all
quietness and without any reluctation of will, though the senses and appetite
cannot but feel a repugnancie to sustain any evil that he will inflict upon
us.

Hitherto the graces of conformity in the superior faculties, understanding,
conscience, and will: Now follow those that are in the

2. Inferior and less principal faculties, and they are either 1. Inward, or
2. Outward.


1. Inward, which are three.

1. The senses called inward. 2. The affections. 3. The appetite.
1. The senses inward, which are two, 1. Imagination. 2. Memory.


1. Imagination, which is bound in regard of 1. The object of its working. 2.
The measure of its working.


1. The object of its working twofold.

1. To stir up readily and nimbly all manner of good thoughts concerning good
things, and to be steadfast and stable in pursuing the same.

2. To keep out and reject all manner of evil thoughts, that they arise not
out of the soul, and to repel them immediately being from without suggested.

2. The measure of the working of the imagination, to be more abundant and
ready, and stable in thinking of things heavenly, spiritual, and divine, then
of things earthly, and temporal, and momentanie here below.

2. The second sense called inward is the memory, the graces of which are in
regard 1. Of the object of its working. 2. Of the measure of its working.


1. The object of its working consists in two things.

1. To retain steadfastly, and readily to recall all good things (as Gods
commandments, promises, threats, benefits, corrections, etc.) for good at the
instant of making use of them.

2. To blot out and extinguish, at least to keep back and not to recall any
evil thing that may infect the soul, or any good thing unseasonably to the
hindrance of its duty.

2. The measure of the working of the memory to serve the soul more readily
in things spiritual, and for spiritual purposes, then for earthly and
temporal.

2. The second less inward principal faculty are the affections, which are
in all, or at least in chief (not to stand upon a more accurate division of
them) seven pair.

1. Pair.
1. Love, which is as before. 2. Hatred, which is an affection of dislike, and
auersenesse from any thing counted evil.
2. Pair.
1. Fear, which is as before. 2. Courage, an affection of resisting imminent
evil danger, not shrinking at it, but rising up against it.
3. Pair.
1. Joy, which is as before. 2. Sorrow, whereby the soul feels the hurt of
any evil present.
4. Pair.
1. Hope, which is a passion of waiting, expecting and looking for a good thing
to come. 2. Despair, which is a passion quite contrary.
5. Pair.
1. Anger, a passion of punishing any thing that does bring evil or hinder
good from us. 2. Kindness, a passion of using well him that procures good or
hinders evil from us.
6. Pair.
1. Shame, a kind of irking dislike within and against our selves, because of
some evil or indecent thing committed by us. 2. Boldness, a kind of
contentfull and resolute liking of our selves within our selves, because of the
absence of things indecent, and presence of the contrary.
7. Pair.
1. Reverence, a dutiful respect to all other in whom we see good things. 2.
Contempt, a base and careless disposition toward one for the evil things we
see in him.
Now the virtues of the affections are twofold.

1. For their object. 2. For their measure of working.
1. For their object that is twofold.

1. Those virtues that tend to good, and are moved by good, be moved and
wrought upon only by things that are indeed good.

2. Those virtues that are moved by or against evil, be wrought upon alone by
that which is evil indeed.

2. For their measure of working that they be exercised upon is twofold.

1. Upon spiritual or Good Evil
things more or less.

2. Upon temporal good things as they are more or less good, that is to say,
helpful to us in the serving of God and assurance of his favor.

And accordingly must the particular duty of every affection be described,
which for breuities sake I surcease to do.

3. The third less principal and inward faculty, is appetite, which is a
power of being inclined to such things as content the bodily senses, and of
being auerse and backward from things that displease them. This is bound to two
duties.

1. Duty to be moved alone toward lawful contents and delights, even such as
God does allow and warrant us to enjoy.

2. To be moderately carried even to those lawful contents, as from the
contratie, even in such measure, as that the motions of our will to things of a
better and higher nature be not interrupted or hindered thereby.

So much of the inward faculties; Senses, Affections, Appetite. Now follow the
outward inferior, and less principal faculties, which are also three.

1. Speech, which must be speaking, 1. Only and constantly of good things. 2.
More readily and plentifully of spiritual then temporal goods.


2. The second outward inferior and less principal faculty is the five
senses, which we must exercise two ways.

1. Alone upon good objects and lawful, such as may not provoke us unto sin,
but rather to good deeds and desires.

2. More nimbly for spiritual then for natural purposes.

3. The third outward inferior and less principal faculty, is the
locomotiue faculty, which must be used alone for good and lawful actions, and
must be with more life, constancy, and vnwearisomnesse exercised, in works
that tend to spiritual good then to the natural.

So much of the affirmative part: the negative follows, containing a
description of the things condemned in this commandment. The sins against
this precept are of two sorts.

1. Of Omission. 2. Or Commission.
1. Sins of omission are by the want and absence of the forenamed graces,
which are twofold.

1. Total, when one is utterly destitute of them, not having them at all. 2.
Partial, when one is defective in either of them, and that two ways. 1. For
matter extensiuely. 2. For measure and degree intensiuelie.

2 Sins of Commission, when a man makes the devil and himself his own God,
as Satan is called the god and Prince of this world, and some men are said to
make their belly their god. This is done two ways.

1. By erecting fained and counterfeit Deities, as the Gentiles are said to
worship devils, when they made gods of Jupiter, Juno, Pallas, Apollo, Mars,
Venus, etc. And the Jews in offering their sons to Molech, are charged to
have offered them unto devils.

2. By being unholy, as Satan is unholy, possessed with corruptions contrary
to the forenamed graces, according to the will of Satan, and for our own
carnal content. These vices are of two sorts.

1. In respect of dependancie, whereby our depending on God is denied, and a
kind of selfe-dependance challenged, in that we carry our selves as if we
were our own, which in very deed we are not.

2. The second sort of vices are in respect of conformity, whereby our
subjection to Gods authority and will is denied, and we carry ourselves as if
we were to be not at his, but at our own disposing.

Sins against our dependence on God, are to be found in all the faculties of
our whole man.

1. In the chief and principal faculties. 2. In the less principal and
inferior faculties.
1. In the chief and principal faculties, viz. 1. In the understanding. 2. In
the will.


1. In the understanding, contrary 1. To knowledge. 2. To faith.


1. To knowledge, there are faults 1. In defect. 2. In excess.


1. In defect two ways.

1. By a careless neglect of the knowledge of God, when one sets not his mind
on work to know him.

2. In blindness, darkness, and vncapablenesse of true knowledge, though he
has used all means, which has two degrees.

1. Natural, common to all.

2. Aduentitious, proper to those that by resisting the means, wink with
their eyes, refusing and scorning to know.

2. The second fault of knowledge in excess, which is called curiosity, and
seems to be double, viz. 1. A busy prying into the secrets of Gods natures
and works. 2. A turning of our search after him into mere disputes and idle
speculations.


2. Now follows the second thing, which the understanding is contrary to,
viz. faith in two respects, 1. In defect. 2. In excess.


1. In defect two ways.

1. The first is called Atheism. 2. Mis-beleefe of God.
1. Atheism is the vice of denying God, which is twofold.

1. Secret. 2. Open.
1. Secret and in the bud, when a man is out of the faintness of his consent
to the truth ouer-ruled with this vice, though he form not such a proposition
in his mind.

2. Open and express, when a man maintains that conceit (that there is no
such God as there is) expressly in his mind.

2. The second defect in faith is, misbeleefe of God, whereby a man conceiueth
falsely of Gods nature or attributes, conceiving him to be other, then he has
showed himself, as Anthropomorphotes, etc.

2. The second thing wherein understanding is contrary to faith is in excess,
by misapplying of Gods mercy, or presumption, whereby a man bears himself
so ouer-bold of Gods goodness, as that he robs him of the glory of his
justice.

3. The third fault in the understanding against our dependence upon God
contrary to humility, is pride, being a lifting up our selves above and
against God, ouer-valuing our selves and vnder-valuing him, of which there are
three degrees.

1. Close and secret, when like a King that keeps within, yet it rules and
bears sway, a man's carriage witnessing that he sets more by himself then God,
so all natural men are proud.

2. The second degree is, when being fatted with wealth it dares show it self,
and a man thinks himself some body, concealing yet that part of it which
stands to abase God, this is high-mindednesse.

3. The third degree, when a man vtters all his evil fancies to himself,
dreaming that he is God, as they that durst say, I sit as God, and what God can
deliver you out of my hands?

2. Sins against our dependence on God, which are found in the Will, are
twofold.

1. Selfe-willednesse, whereby a man moves his will only to himself,
inclining to his own natural or carnal content, more then to Gods glory or
favor.

2. A nilling of God, a willing that there were no God at all, out of
selfe-guiltinesse, as a thief wishes there were no Judge, a traitor that
there were no King.

2. Sins against our dependence on God, are to be found in the less
principal and inferior faculties, which are twofold.

1. Inward. 2. Outward.
1. Inward twofold.

1. In the senses. 2. In the affections.
1. In the senses.

1. In the imagination. 2. In the memory.
1. Imagination.

1. By putting away the thought of God out of ones mind, saying to God, depart
from us.

2. By entertaining hard, evil, and blasphemous conceits against God, as they
that said, Where is the God of judgment?

2. In the memory, a forgetfulness of God, whereby one sets himself not to
conceive of Gods presence, saying the Lord shall not see it.

2. Sins against our dependence on God are found in the affections, viz. in all
of them that are named before, viz. contrary,

1. To the love of God, and that in two respects.

1. By loving of other things, as pleasure and profit more then God, so
covetousness is Idolatry.

2. By hatred of God charged upon all men, Romans 1.30.

2. Contrary to the fear of God in two respects.

1. Fearing men and other things more then him, the fear of man does bring a
snare, says Solomon.

2. By despising him, setting light by his anger, and being as it were
courageous against it, which is security, when a man says he shall see no
evil though God seem angry.

3. Contrary to the joy in God in two respects.

1. By rejoicing in other things more then in God.

2. Greeuing that there is so great power and excellency in God, and a very
envying of him and his felicity.

4. Contrary to the trust in God in two respects.

1. By trusting in the arm of flesh, resting upon outward things as riches,
friends, etc. for any good thing.

2. By distrusting in God, wavering and shaking, out of doubt of obtaining that
good from him that he has promised.

2. Sins against our dependence on God, are to be found in the less
principal and outward faculty, viz. in the power of speaking and that in two
regards.

1. By talking of other things more and oftener then of God.

2. By speaking and uttering hard, wicked, disgraceful, reproachful, and
blasphemous things against him.

So much of sins against dependancie: these against conformitte follow.

1. In principal powers. 2. In less principal.
1. Principal powers.

1. In the understanding. 2. In the conscience. 3. In the will.
1. In the understanding, contrary 1. To knowledge. 2 To faith. 3. To wisdom.


1. To knowledge of the will of God.

1. In defect. 2. In excess.
1. In defect, which are two ways.

1. Not to seek and know the revealed will of God though one has means,
which makes ignorance wilful and affected.

2. Dullness and slownesse to conceive of the truth.

1. Natural in all. 2. Augmented by winding and striving against the light.
2. The knowledge of the will of God in excess by curiosity.

1. In searching into secret things not revealed. 2 In inquiring after
needless and idle fables, and questions for disputations sake.
2. The understanding contrary to faith to and in Gods word and will.

1. In defect. 2. In excess.
1. In defect.

1. Doubting and unsettledness, when one is not rooted and grounded in the
truth, but wauers.

2. Flat infidelity, when a man utterly denies the truth, aggrauated by
wilfulness.

2. In excess, and that

1. By believing lies, and false doctrines and errors, which if it belong and
strong, is called prejudice.

2. Wresting and misapplying the promises of God, without any heed to the
threats and precepts.

3. The understanding contrary to wisdom.

1. In defect. 2. In excess.
1. In defect, folly, which is a perverting of things to ones destruction,
turning all things into matter of making a man's self less good, more evil,
and that has two maine branches.

1. Vanity. 2. Headiness.
1. Vanity, which has also two evil heads.

1. Cousening ones self with false and fained reasonings, judging after the
appearance and show, as the Gentiles vanished in their reasonings, and became
stark fools.

2. Having mean things in high esteem, and high things in mean account.

2. Headiness, which is a mixture of rashness in venturing upon things
unadvisedly, and without due deliberation, and of stiffness in obstinate
persisting in them, what ever come of it.

2. In excess, and there are two faults.

1. Conceit of wisdom, when a man imagines himself wise enough to please God
and be saved, though he be so foolish that he will take no direction.

2. Naughty wisdom, which is

1. Worldly, when a man has his mind so attentive to all opportunities of
getting the things of this life, that he is made careless of heavenly things,
chiefly if any opposition come betwixt them.

2. Fleshly, when a man is attentive to take all advantages and opportunities
of serving his sinful and corrupt lusts, and passions, being wise to do evil.

3. Deuillish wisdom, when a man has his wits about him to defend and
maintain sin, and to infect himself and others more and more, by a
marvelous kind of reaching invention.

2. The sins against conformity in the principal power of the conscience
are twofold.

1. In regard of ones actions. 2. In regard of ones estate.
1. In regard of ones actions they are threefold.

1. In excess. 2. Defect. 3. In mixture both of excess and defect.
1. In excess, by a kind of erroneous proceeding.

1. In indifferent things, by troubling a man's mind with unnecessary
scruples, making him to shun them as sins. This is the fault of many a
sanctified but ouer-tender conscience, and the world scoffs at it under the
name of a spiced and straight-laced conscience.

2. In needful things, by condemning them as if they were sins, and
troubling a man for doing that he ought to have done; as for persecuting a
malefactor, or giving in a just verdict or testimony, as if it were cruelty
and a shedding of his blood.

3. In sinful things, and that two ways.

1. By sinful excuses to maintain them, as if they were not sins.

2. By ouer-vehement checking for them, driving a man from God by despair, not
to him by humiliation, as appears in Judas, if we compare his conscience and
Peter's together.

2. In regard of our actions there is defect, by deadness and secrednesse of
conscience, when it is as it were gagged and tonguetied, and never does trouble
a man for any ill deed.

3. In regard of our actions there is a mixture of both excess and defect, by
guiltiness, when it troubles a man for a small matter, and gives him rest for
a greater evil, as the Pharisees could swallow a camel, and strain at a gnat,
durst not come into the Judgment Hall before the Passover, yet durst hire
false witnesses, and become themselves false witnesses against the blood of
Christ Jesus.

2. Sins against conformity in the conscience in regard of ones estate are
discerned by two things.

1. Guiltiness, when it accuses bitterly, and tells him God hates and will
damn him, which it will do when it begins to look upon sin, unless faith
in Christ come betwixt.

2. When it gives a man false comforts, and makes him believe that all is well,
crying peace, peace, and lulling him asleep, with a false conceit, that God
favors him, and that he shall be safe for all his sins.

3. Sins against conformity in the third principal power called the Will,
contrary to Gods will in two regards.

1. In regard of things to be done by ones self. 2. In regard of things to be
received from God.
1. In regard of things to be done by our selves.

1. By rebellion, a flat badnesse, when a man knowing such a thing to be
commanded, shifteth it off, and says he cannot, but indeed out of some carnal
respect will not do it, or knowing any thing to be forbidden, excuses
himself, says he must needs do it, and so concludes that he will do it.
This is the sin of the unregenerate alone.

2. By hypocrisy, which is a counterfeit goodness, when a man is willing to
seem good by doing some good things, and leaving some evil, for his own
sake, or for sinister and selfe-regards.

2. The will is contrary to Gods will, in regard of things to be received from
God, and that either in 1. Adversity, or 2. Prosperity.


1. In adversity, by impatience, when a man's will arises against either God,
or the instrument, with a kind of violence, and he will not bear this, and
why should he bear it?

2. In prosperity, by unthankfulness, when a man gives himself over to
devour Gods benefits, and makes himself thereby more strong in his
wickedness.

Now follow the faults of the less principal faculties, and they are two.

1. Inward. 2. Outward.
1. The less principal faculties inward are three.

1. The Senses. 2. The Affections. 3. The Appetite.
1. The inward Senses are twofold.

1. The imagination. 2. The memory.
1. In the imagination.

1. In regard of the object of its working. 2. In regard of the measure of its
working.
1. In regard of the object of its working in two respects.

1. In respect of good things. 2. In respect of evil and sinful things.
1. In respect of good things.

1. It is dull and dead, and does not stir them up on just occasions. 2.
Fickle and distracted, and pursues them not, being stirred up.
2. In respect of evil things.

1. It is very nimble and ready to stir them up on small occasions. 2. It is
steadfast and earnest in pursuing them, and will not give over.
2. In regard of the measure of its working, when it is most ready and earnest
and abundant in suing and following thoughts of things earthly more then
heavenly.

2. In the second inward sense, viz. the Memory, and that also in two regards.

1. For the object of it. 2. For the measure of working.
1. For the object of it.

1. In regard of evil and polluted things. 2. In regard of good and profitable
things.
1. For evil and polluted things, when it

1. Retains them steadfastly, and long, and will not suffer them to die.

2. When it recals them readily and mischieuously, when they do most hurt, and
most hinder good things.

2. In regard of good and profitable things, when

1. It utterly puts them out of mind, for want of attending, so that they be
as if they had never been seen or heard.

2. It casts them carelessly away, and as a thing negligently laid up, which one
cannot find when he should use it, even concealing them when he should do
good.

2. The measure of working, when it serves a man's turn more readily for things
temporal and earthly then for things spiritual.

2. The less principal inward faculties are the affections, even as those
seven pair formerly mentioned, which are also faulty in a twofold regard.

1. In regard of the object of their working. 2. In regard of the measure of
their working.
1. In regard of the object of their working in two respects.

1. When those that are made to be set on good objects, they set upon evil, or
upon that, that is but fainedly good: as if a man love, delight in, hope for,
be courageous for, or be kind for, or be bold in, or reverence one for, an
evil thing, or that, that is but in appearance good.

2. When those that are made to be set against evil things, if they be
exercised upon imaginary evils, or upon good things: as if a man hate, grieve
for, be in despair of, fear, or be courageous against, or be angry withal,
or despise one for that that is good, or but in seeming evil, as to despise
one for piety or poverty, to be angry with one for admonition or
plainedealing, etc.

2. The measure of working of the affections, when they be exercised more
plentifully upon things naturally good or evil, then upon things spiritually
so.

Only let it be noted, that in hope three things are to be considered.

1. The thing hoped for.

2. The grounds of hoping.

3. The persons and things from whom, or by whose means the thing is hoped for.

And hope is to be only for good things, to ground it self wholly upon Gods
word, and to look up alone unto God, as the foundation of it; and in this
respect it is called confidence.

And the faults of hope are four.

1. When it looks for evil things; as I hope to see thee hanged, says some
man in his anger.

2. When it is built upon insufficient grounds; as I hope to live merrily,
because I have so good friends.

3. When it does not work according to Gods word, but quite contrary; as I
hope to have heaven, though I live wickedly.

4. When it is more earnest for things temporal then heavenly, as for goods
more then grace.

3. Sins of the less principal inward faculty are in the appetite, which
offends two ways.

1. In the object, when it longs for unlawful contents of the senses, as for
another man's wife.

2. When it longs so eagerly after lawful contents of the body, as to divert
the mind from seeking after things more worthy: as a man is so carried to
sports, that he neglects prayers, etc. both these sins are called sensuality
or voluptuousness, and it is a making of ones belly his God.

2. Faults of the less principal faculties outward, viz.

1. Of speech. 2. Of senses. 3. Of the locomotiue faculty.
1. Of speech, in a twofold regard.

1. Of the object. 2. Of the measure.
1. Of the object, when for 1. Good. 2. Evil.
1. For good, 1. When it is unready to it. 2. When its weary of it.
2. For evil, when 1. Its nimble to it. 2. Constant in talking of it.



2. The measure of the speech, when we be more plentiful in speaking of things
earthly and carnal, then of things heavenly and spiritual.

2. Faults of the less principal faculties outward are of the senses, as
principally 1. Of the eye. 2. Of the ear.


1. Of the eye are three.

1. In looking after vanity. 2. Turning aside from beholding that that might
help to good. 3. Looking more earnestly when the body requires then when the
soul.
2. The faults of the ear are 3 also.

1. When it listneth after evil speeches. 2. When it turns away it self from
God. 3. Its more attentive to hear things naturally good then spiritually.
3. The faults of the less principal outward faculty, called Locomotiue, are
in two regards.

1. Of the object of it. 2. Of the measure.
1. For the object of it, when a man is 1. Lively, in using it for evil
purposes. 2. Weary, in using it for good things.


2. For the measure of it, when it is less lively, and more weary in things
spiritual then in things natural, to go to a market then a Sermon.

Hitherto the first Commandment.

The second follows.

Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image, etc.
THE sum of it is to order us in the solemn worship of God, or exercises of
divine service, called usually, religious exercise. That any thing may be
called an act of divine service, three things are required.

1. That it be done with immediate reference to God, in that himself or some
thing in his stead is the object of it.

2. That it do tend to the doers intention directly and of it self to the
getting or increasing of some or all the chief graces required in the first
Commandment, by winning and obtaining them, or some of them from God, when
they hope to please and content him by such an act.

3. That there be a separating of ones self from all other businesses, to be
employed in such acts wholly and altogether. And every exercise of religion or
of divine service, has diverse particular actions that be as parts of the
whole, and in the orderly uniting of which, the whole it self is accomplished,
and whatsoever is done in such exercise of religion for the end and purpose of
pleasing God, and getting grace with respect of conscience to him, as esteeming
that he must and will have it so, or else thy service shall not be so
well-pleasing and acceptable unto him. This is a part of worship or of divine
service: for example, to offer a young bullock was an exercise of religion,
because the Priest did intend to offer it unto God with an intention of showing
faith and obedience, and that directly. The doing of it in such a place, with
such garments, with such rites, were parts of this worship, or religious
exercise, because in all these the intention of the doer was carried to God,
accounting the service not to be acceptable to him without them, and hoping and
purposing by the due observation of all these things to please God, to exercise
faith and obedience, and other graces, as much as by the very offering it self.

So the sum of this second Commandment is to order us in divine service, and
the parts thereof. This Commandment has two parts.

1. The affirmative. 2. The negative.
1. The affirmative, showing what God requires at our hands.

2. The negative, showing what the Lord forbids.

1. The things commanded are of two sorts.

1. For the performance of divine service. 2. For preservation of it.
1. For the performance of divine service, that it be done according to Gods
commandment, which is the true rule thereof, and that for two respects.

1. For the matter of it. 2. The manner of it.
1. The matter of it, in regard 1. Of the object or thing worshipped. 2. The
parts or kinds of worship.


1. The object or thing worshipped must be

1. The living God alone.

2. God conceived of in the pure apprehension of the mind, not represented to
the eye or senses by any figure or representation.

2. The parts or kinds of worship, that they be by him appointed. And the
services by him appointed are of two sorts.

1. Ordinary. 2. Extraordinary.
1. Ordinary, such as are to be done constantly and in a settled course, which
are threefold.

1. Public. 2. Private. 3. Indifferent.
1. Public, and these are two.

1. Preaching of the word, which is the exposition and application of the
Scriptures, or any points of doctrine therein contained, by a Minister, unto
the people that must attend thereto.

2. The administration of the Sacraments, or seals of the covenant of grace,
either 1. Baptism. 2. The Lords Supper.


1. Baptism, which is the seal of our ingraffing into Christ by the Spirit in
the washing with water.

2. The Lords Supper, which is the seal of our nourishing in and by Christ,
through the giving and receiving of bread and wine, consecrate and broken for
that end.

2. The ordinary services by him appointed in private are two.

1. Conference. 2. Meditation.
1. Conference of any part of Scripture, or point of doctrine therein
delivered, betwixt two or more, for their fuller edification therein.

2. Meditation, which is a serious considering and applying to each ones self
some point of doctrine or place of Scripture for a man's own edification.

3. The services by him appointed, which are indifferent, are such as must be
done both publicly and privately of a Congregation together, or of a few, or
of one alone, and these are four.

1. Prayer, which is a calling upon God in the name of Christ, with petitions
and thanksgiuings, joined with confession of sin and deprecation of
punishment.

2. Reading the Scriptures, or other good books increating of divine matters.

3. Catechizing, which is a plain and easy instructing of the simple in the
grounds of Christian doctrine by brief and familiar Questions and Answers,
either by the Minister in public, or the governors in private, or some able
body in their place.

4. Singing of Psalms, that is, uttering of holy matter in musical numbers
and tune, either with voice alone, or instruments and voice.

2. Extraordinary services by him appointed are such as are to be done now and
then upon special occasion, which are 3.

1. Fasting, which is the bestowing of an artificial day or more in exercise
of humiliation and reconciliation to renew and increase repentance and faith,
for the removing or sanctifying of some punishment, or obtaining of some
benefit at Gods hand.

2. Feasting, which is the bestowing of a like time in exercise of rejoicing
for the testifying and increasing of thankfulness for some special benefit.

3. Vows, which is a binding of ones self to God by a solemn promise, or
rather oath, to do or not to do some thing lawful, possible, and useful for
our increase in godliness.

Hitherto for the matter of divine service: now for

2. The manner of the performance of divine service, which is threefold.

1. A due preparation before. 2. A right carriage in them. 3. A right making use
thereof after.
1. A due preparation before, for the heart being unfit for them, as the
untuned instrument to play upon, must be set in tune: and this preparation is
twofold.

1. Common. 2. Special.
1. Common to all religious exercises, which is fourefold.

1. Knowledge of the nature and use of that service out of Gods word.

2. Repenting or renewing our repentance for our sins, which is washing the
hands in innocence.

3. Some short prayer or lifting up the heart to God for his assistance and
blessing upon the same.

4. Preconsideration of God that is worshipped, of our selves that worship, and
of the fruit and benefit of the worship, that is to be performed unto him by us.

2. The due preparation before, special to some, is fourefold, viz.

1. The word, an hearing ear, that is, laboring to renew in our selves a
firm purpose of knowing and doing the whole will of God that shall be revealed
unto us.

2. Prayer, calling to mind our own wants, sins, and benefits, and Gods
promises, and power to perform his promises.

3. The Sacraments.

1. Examining and judging of our selves. 2. Premeditation of Christ's
sufferings. 3. Stirring up an hungring and thirsting after Christ and his
benefits.
4. A vow, a special deliberation concerning the lawfulness and fitness of
the thing vowed, that it may not entangle us, and do us more harm then good.

2. The second manner of performing divine service, is in a right carriage in
them, that they be done in these four respects.

1. Truly and sincerely upon the right moving causes, Gods commandment and
will, and our own duty and need, and for the right ends, viz. the pleasing of
God, and procuring of grace, and increase of virtue in our souls.

2. Reverently, with a special apprehension of Gods presence and greatness,
and the loving and awful stooping thereto. 1. In our inward man of the heart.
2. In our outward demeanor of the body.


3. Faithfully, with a believing of Gods truth therein, and the promising to
our selves the blessing he has promised.

4. Devoutly, that is, with a diligent attention of the mind to the words and
matter and whole work in hand, and a kindly work of the several affections,
according to the nature of the exercise and its several parts.

3. The third manner of performance of divine service, is a right making use
thereof after, which is done two ways.

1. Common to all. 2. Special to some.
1. Common to all, that we see and observe how we grow thereby in all the
graces of the inuer man, commanded in the first Law.

2. Special to some, viz. to four.

1. To the word, that we do call our selves to an account after, what we
remember, meditating upon it, and applying to our selves, and if we have
occasion, conferring it with others.

2. To prayer, that we wait upon God, observing whether he grant our requests,
and hear us yea or no, and quietly tarrying his leisure, and fitting our
selves for hearing.

3. To the Sacraments, that we have constant recourse to them in all
temptations to confirm our selves in obedience and faith.

4. To vows, that we be carefully mindful of them to fulfill them.

Hitherto of that that is commanded for the performance of Gods service. Now
for the preservation of the same.

2. The second sort of the things commanded, is preservation of divine service
in its purity and honor, for which end are required two things.

1. Church maintenance. 2. Church discipline.
1. Church maintenance, where note

1. Who must yield it. All those that are taught in the word, and are to serve
God.

2. What they must yield, viz. Tithes of their ordinary increase ordinarily,
and offerings of their extraordinary blessings and increase upon special
occasions.

2. The second thing required, is Church discipline, which respects 1. The
Ministry. 2. The whole Congregation.


1. The Ministry, and is an assigning of fit men to fit offices by those that
are entrusted with this work, so that here we must know three things.

1. What officers are required in the Church. 2. What men must be assigned to
these offices. 3. By whom and in what manner.
1. what officers are required in the Church, mentioned in Scripture, seem to
me five, I mean in the New Testament, which are these.

1. Apostles. 2. Evangelists. 3. Prophets. 4. Pastors. 5. Deacons.
1. Apostles.

2. Evangelists, viz. the 12. and the 70 called by Christ to be Teachers first
of Iewrie, after of all the world, and to constitute and rule the Churches
called. Now these in regard of the latitude of their jurisdiction, and some
extraordinary gifts, were extraordinary; but in regard of the parts of their
function, viz. preaching, administering the Sacraments, governing the Churches,
they were not extraordinary, for these things are still to be done, and
therefore to them in these parts of office, do Bishops (as the word is now
commonly used) lawfully by a warrantable and needful constitution of the
Church succeed, being men appointed to do the same things ordinarily in some
precinct or Diocese, that they were to do extraordinarily in all the world.

3. Prophets, which were 1. extraordinarily endued by divine inspiration with
power of foreseeing things to come, or interpreting harder places of Scripture,
who had no power of government above other Ministers. 2. Ordinary men, by
study enabled with gifts to preach the word of God, and accordingly allowed
thereto, without any assignement to any special charge, and such are our
Students in Divinity, Preachers, University Divines, Lecturers, etc.

4. Pastors, called also Bishops, Presbyters, Teachers, and Elders, for all
these names are of one officer, being men assigned according to the orders of
the several Churches, to attend the worship of God, and salvation of men, in
some one settled Congregation.

5. Deacons, called also I suppose, helpers, being men assigned to the helping
and serving of the Pastors, in such parts of the Ministry as they could
discharge, but without power of governing, and therefore called in a special
manner, servants, because they were common servants of the Pastors and people
in what public services of the Church they should be appointed, as reading,
baptizing, if they were able, preaching, gathering and distributing alms, and
the like.

2. The second thing we must know, is what men must be assigned to these
offices, viz.

1. To the higher offices of Pastors or Bishops, men unspotted of criminous
faults in their lives, and of learning and knowledge in the Scripture, to
teach, exhort, and confute the gaine-sayers in some such measure as is not
required of all common Christians.

2. To the inferior office of Deacons, men of unspotted life and sound in
faith.

3. The third thing we must know, is by whom and in what manner, that is, with
what solemnities, and in what degrees they must be assigned. And here I suppose
the Scripture has precisely determined nothing, but left it to the discretion
of the several Churches to take fit ways for their own best commodity: for
there is no precept expressed in Scripture, saying, Let such men in such orders
assign Ministers or consecrate them, nor any equivalent that can be deduced
out of Scripture. And as for examples, that go single without precept, they
show what may be done, and are a good allowance, they cannot prove what must be
done, neither are any obligation to the conscience, for only by the Law comes
the knowledge of sins, and where there is no law there is no sin. Now in
these particulars there is neither any law, nor any uniform example: wherefore
in these cases, there is neither necessity nor sin, but a liberty of taking
different courses in diverse places, as shall seem best to the Churches and
Christian governors; for God knew in his wisdom, that it was not fit to tie
all kinds of Civil Estates and Governments to one order in this behalf, and
therefore has he laid no such tie upon man. And its a rashness in men to tie
themselves or others, where God has not tied.

This is one part of Church discipline, respecting the Ministry, viz. the
assigning of fit men to fit offices. A second is the deposing of the unfit (
viz. those that run into scandalous conversation, and teach false and
dangerous doctrine) from these places, to be done by the same that assigned
them.

Hitherto that part of Church discipline, that concerns the Ministry. Now
follows that which respects

2. The whole Congregation, and is twofold.

1. Private. 2. Public.
1. Private, concerning every member of the Congregation in a twofold regard.

1. In regard of a man's self, if he have sinned to the scandal of the Church,
to confess his fault, and give satisfaction to the Congregation, submitting
himself to censure.

2. In regard of each other mutually, and that three ways.

1. To admonish those that scandalously offend, both alone and with another, or
two.

2. To complain to the Congregation publicly of them, that will not by such
private admonitions repent.

3. To shun the familiarity and society of such as refuse to show repentance
and amendment after these means used.

2. The Church discipline is public pertaining to the governors and rulers
of the Church, which is threefold.

1. To admonish. 2. To excommunicate. 3. To receive the repentant again into
the communion of the Church.
1. To admonish the offenders that are publicly scandalous, and offensive.

2. To excommunicate: now of excommunication it is necessary to show, 1. What
it is. 2. For what offenses it must be executed. 3. In what manner it must be
pronounced and executed. 4. By whom it must be done.


1. What it is, it is the sentencing and censuring of an offender (as one that
in the judgment of charity, can be accounted no better then in the state of
damnation) to be excluded the external communion of the Saints.

2. For what offenses it must be executed, viz. for sins that are, 1.
Scandalous and publicly offensive. 2. Gross, plain and palpable. 3. Stood
in impenitently against admonition.


3. In what manner excommunication must be pronounced and execured.

1. Solemnly and publicly in a very serious fashion.

2. Leisurely and with great deliberation, after much waiting for the
repentance of the offender.

4. By whom this excommunication is to be done. I answer by the Governors of
the Church, or such as they shall commit their power unto. For the power of the
keys is the Churches, and questionless they who have authority to preach and
administer the communion are fittest to exclude the unworthy from the communion.

3. The third part of Church discipline public pertaining to governors is to
receive the repentant again into the Communion of the Church, and to confirm
their love unto them by public approbation.

So much of the affirmative part of this commandment: the negative follows.
Now this commandment is broken, 1. By omission. 2. By commission.


1. By omission of any of the things commanded, either in whole or in part,
either for matter or manner.

2. By commission of things quite contrary, and that two ways.

1. Directly. 2. Indirectly.
1. Directly.

1. For the performance of worship. 2. For the preservation of it.
1. For the performance of worship.

1. By false worship. 2. By abuse of the true worship.
1. By false worship invented by man, 1. In regard of the thing worshipped. 2.
In regard of the worship it self.


1. In regard of the thing worshipped, when worship (that is, any religious
service appointed by God to be done to himself, or any like act in the
imitation thereof) is yielded, 1. To any creature. 2. To the Creator under any
sensible picture.


1. To any creature that is not God, whether 1. To the devil, as Witches and
Magicians do. 2. To Angels or Saints true or false. 3. To the Sun, Moon, or
Stars, or the like. 4. To Images and pictures of any thing whatsoever.


2. To the Creator, under any sensible picture or representation made by man's
hand.

2. Invented worship it self, when its not appointed by God, but invented by
man, which is called will worship, as the former (where there is a mistaking in
the object) is called Idolatry.

2. Abuse of the performance of true worship, and that 1. For the matter of it.
2. For the manner.


1. For the matter of it, and that two ways.

1. By detracting of those parts, which God has appointed.

2. By adding of new parts of men's heads without Gods appointment. Now a part
of worship is added, when some act is by man's appointment performed, together
with those that God has appointed, out of a religious conscience for the
pleasing of him, and getting of grace from him: otherwise acts of solemnity,
in the manner of celebrating any service, not done with respect of religious
conscience to God, nor with intention of pleasing him, and getting grace from
him, but alone for solemnity and orders sake, are not to be esteemed addition
to the worship.

2. The abuse in the manner of the performance, when Gods worship is done, is
fourefold.

1. Impenitently, men living in their sins.

2. Rudely and irreverently, with a contemptuous behavior of body and mind.

3. Hollowly, for mere outward respects, or one cannot tell why, alone for
custom.

4. Formally, with respect alone to the outward acts themselves, not regarding
the use, fruit and power thereof to the soul.

Hitherto for the performance of it.

2. Directly, forth preservation of worship, when it is not preserved and
honored, but discredited and destroyed, and that two ways.

1. By sacrilege, in perverting the holy goods, tithes, and offerings, to
common and profane purposes.

2. By abuse of discipline in a twofold regard.

1. Of the ministry. 2. Of the congregation.
1. In regard of the ministry four ways.

1. When a false ministry is established, that is, a function of doing such
things, as God has not appointed to be done.

2. When wicked Ministers and insufficient, are admitted and tolerated.

3. When good and painful Ministers are excluded for contentions sake.

4. When men not at all assigned to any ministry, are suffered to perform,
and do perform the ministerial actions.

2. The abuse of discipline, in regard of the congregation, and that is two
ways.

1. In regard of private men. 2. In regard of the Governors.
1. In regard of private men, when they contemn and despise the Church
censures, and are obstinate against either private or public admonition or
excommunication.

2. When they do freely and familiarly converse with obstinate offenders,
chiefly the excommunicated.

2. Abuse of discipline, in regard of Governors, is twofold.

1. The abuse of excommunication. 2. The abuse in excess of rigor to the
penitent.
1. The abuse of excommunication is, when it is pronounced and exacted four
ways.

1. For no just cause, as for trifles and small matters, much more for well
doing.

2. Against those that are humble, and ready to show their repentance.

3. By those that have no power, or authority to intermeddle therein. As those
that are not Ministers of Gods word.

4 Carelessly and rashly, hand ouerhead and in private chambers, as it were in
hugger mugger.

2. The abuse of excommunication, in excess of rigor to the penitent, by
rejecting them from public entertainment in the communion of the Church,
though they do relent and humble themselves, and profess repentance. Or on
the other side, by receiving them in for rewards sake, that show none or but a
very ouert and slithy kind of repentance.

Hitherto the direct breaches of this commandment: It is also broken,

2. By commission of sins, quite contrary: Indirectly two ways.

1. By occasions of false worship. 2. By appearances of false worship.
1. By occasions of false worship two ways, first either 1. To others. 2. To
our selves.


1. To others.

1. By making or retaining instruments of Idolatry, as Idols and the like.

2. By commending, maintaining, or persuading any false worship, much more
enforcing unto it by commandments, threats or punishments.

2. To our selves, by familiar society, leagues, and unnecessary covenants
with Idolaters, and an vncautelous venturing upon their books, or going to
their service.

2. The second way, by appearances of false worship two ways.

1. By all kind of allowance by word, or writing, or silence when there is
just cause of speaking, through fear or lucre, or the like, though one in
heart mean otherwise.

2. By joining with them, in the external acts of false worship, pretending or
intending to keep his heart to himself, and not to mean as they mean.

Hitherto the second Commandment: the third follows.

Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain.
THis Commandment enioynes that, which for distinctions sake, may be called
the common worship of God, that is, the right carriage of our selves, for his
honor in all our common affairs, so far forth as we have any thing to do
with him therein. For God being every where present and in all actions, we
having perpetual occasion of a kind of conuersing with him, and those things
that are his, it is meet that in all these, as well as in exercises of
religion, we should show our due respect of him.

The name of God signifies two things.

1. Himself, by any means manifested unto us.

2. All those things, by which (as it were signs) he pleases to make himself
known unto us. All which are referable unto two heads.

1. Common to all, as the great works 1. Of creation. 2. Providence, upholding
and ruling all things.


2. Peculiar to his Church two ways.

1. His Scriptures. 2. His works of grace, and special goodness.
1. In his Scriptures, comprehending under them three things.

1. His doctrine of life and salvation, called usually, the religion of the
Church. 2. His titles whereby he is called. 3. His attributes, whereby he
works.
2. In his works of grace and special goodness, as predestination,
redemption, justification, sanctification, etc.

To take the name of God, is to have any occasion of using, or mentioning any
of the forenamed things, in our common actions of life. In the solemn worship
of God, we are taken up of Gods name, sequestring our selves from all other
things, and giving our selves wholly thereto, but in the common acts of life we
take them up, upon diverse occasions, using them in and with our other affairs.

The parts of this commandment are two.

1. Affirmative. 2 Negative.
1. Affirmative, showing what things are required in this commandment.

2. Negative, showing what things are forbidden.

The duties required, are of two sorts.

1. A due and orderly using of holy actions. 2. The right behauing of our
selves to Godward, in our common affairs and businesses.
1. A due and orderly using of such holy actions, as come to be performed in
and with our common businesses, by which God is called after a special manner,
to inter-meddle with the same. For an holy action is that, whereby God is the
immediate and next object, and by his appointment tends directly to the
exercising of holiness, in part or in whole. Now there are two such holy
actions, which are of frequent use, in and with our common affairs, viz.

1. An oath. 2. A sacred or divine lot.
1. An oath, of which we must know, 1. The nature. 2. The use.


1. The nature, by considering three things.

1. The person to be sworn by. 2. The parts of this oath. 3. The purpose or
use thereof, to which these actions are to be applied.
1. The person to be sworn by, or the object of the oath, which must be God
alone, Thou shall swear the Lord lives.

2. The parts of this oath, or the several actions included and implied in it,
which are four.

1. An assertion, by way of affirming or denying, either barely or with
obligation to or from something.

2. An acknowledgement of Gods omniscience, omnipotence and justice, and other
like attributes.

3. An invocation of him, to bear witness to the truth, of what we say.

4. An imprecation against our selves, if we do speak falsely, that is, a
referring over of our selves, and offering our selves into his hand to be
punished by his power and justice.

3. The third thing to be considered, is the purpose or use, to which these
actions are to be applied, that is the ending of a controversy, that cannot
otherwise be ended conveniently. So that an oath is a religious service of God,
whereby we refer our selves unto God, as a competent and fit witness, and
Judge of the truth and falsehood of our speeches, about a matter controuerted,
for the ending thereof.

2. We must know the use of an oath, in regard of two things.

1. Of just occasions of using it, viz. in a matter of some weight or moment,
either in it self, or in the consequents or effects of it,

1. For the satisfying of another, that requires and will accept it.

2. Binding of ones self either to another, or only to himself, as Jacob
caused Joseph to swear, and Jonathan and David swear to each other, and
Solomon swear that Adonia should die.

2. We must know the just manner, in regard of using it upon such an occasion,
which is either in 1. Judgment. 2. Truth. 3. Righteousness.


1. In judgment, that is, in a serious consideration of the cause of our
swearing, and greatness of the name of God, by which we swear,

2. In truth, that is, a perfect agreement betwixt the meaning of the words of
him that swears, and betwixt both these and the things themselves of which
the speech is, and that agreeably also to the intentions of him to whom the
oath is tendered, so far as he shall manifest his intentions to him that
swears.

3. In righteousness, that is, with reverence to God, care of doing good, not
hurt unto our neighbors, by our swearing, and aiming at the right end, even
the determining of a doubt quietly, by interposing Gods name, to show our high
opinion of him. For now God and man has his due, and that is righteousness in
every act, that every one whom it concerns, may have that which is due to him
therein.

2. A sacred or divine lot, which being of the same nature with an oath (as
concurring with it in the efficient cause Gods appointment, who says, the lot
shall cause contention to cease, and in the matter an acknowledgement of
certain holy attributes of God, and our subjection thereto, and in the end, to
settle quietness amongst men, by making God their vmpire) must needs be
accounted no otherwise of, then an holy thing: And of this consider we also two
things.

1. The nature of it. 2. The use of it.
1. The nature, for the constituting of which, there are three things required.

1. A matter in doubt and controversy, not yet agreed upon.

2. A casual act, that is, an act, the falling out of which, depends merely
upon the disposition of Gods providence (which is foolishly called, luck or
chance) and not at all upon the wit, will, skill, or actiuitie of man, as
Solomon faith, the whole judgment or disposition of the lot, is of God.

3. The referring of that matter in doubt, to be decided by the event of that
casual act, either by agreement of parties, or appointment of superiors,
wherein are necessarily implied and contained three things.

1. An acknowledgement of Gods Sovereignty and wisdom, to dispose of all
things.

2. An inuocating of God to use his power, and wisdom, for the ending of the
present controversy.

3. A tying of our selves to submit our selves to his determination, so that a
lot, is the referring of a matter in doubt unto God to determine, by the
special disposition of his providence, ordering the event of a casual act,
and we may conceive it to be nothing else, but an actual compendium of a
prayer.

2. The use of it, to which end we must know two things.

1. Upon what occasions to use it. 2. In what manner to use it.
1. Upon what occasions to use it. Now there is no use of it, but deciding of a
matter in controversy; All controversies or doubts are of some of these three
things, either 1. Of things past. 2. Of things present. 3. Of things to come.


1. Of things past, which a lot serves not for, viz. to find out who has done
this or that.

2. Of things present, which cannot neither be determined by Lot.

3. Of things to come, which are of two sorts.

1. Contingent, doubtful and uncertain events and accidents, as Hamon used a
lot to find, whether his device against the Jews should prosper, for which a
lot now serves not at all.

2. The dispositions, or distributions of rewards, punishments, labors,
offices, etc. and for these a lot serves, witness Solomon, that says, it
makes division among the mighty. Only controversies about such matters are
either

1. Made and counterfeit, by the vanity of man, when in nature no such thing
does need to be, God having already put the matter out of controversy, as the
case is in all Lotteries, and sure God will not allow us to make a knot for him
to untie.

2. Real and existent in nature, and these are either 1. Triuiall, or 2.
Weighty and of moment.


1. Triuiall and sportfull, which God will not have put to him to end, for it
were an abasement unto him.

2. Weighty and of moment, either in themselves or the effects, and
consequences of them, and these, God that loves concord amongst men, is willing
to decide.

2. Is required, in what manner to use it, when such occasion is offered, viz.

1. With due observation of Gods providence in it.

2. With a willing submission unto his providence in the disposition thereof.

So much for the due use of holy things, that come oftentimes to be joined
with our common affairs.

2. Now follows the right behauing of our selves to Godward in our common
affairs and businesses themselves, so far as they do any way touch God:
that is twofold.

1. Inward. 2. Outward.
1. Inward twofold.

1. In regard of Gods actions. 2. In regard of our own actions.
1. In regard of Gods actions, that he does before, whether general or
special, common or particular, of justice or mercy, to our selves or others.

1. The seeing of him in them, that is, observing and taking notice, that they
be his works.

2. The making a right use of them, to build up our souls in knowledge of him,
and in all holy affections of love, fear, etc. toward him. And here are
especially required two things: for

1. Benefits which our selves receive, a making them means of stirring us up
to thankful obedience.

2. Corrections laid upon our selves, a making use of them to increase our
patience and repentance.

2. In regard of our actions of any kind which we do, viz. a living to God
and not to our selves, and referring them to him by an actual intention of
pleasing and glorifying him, for whatsoever we deliver: eating and drinking by
Paul is ordained to be done to the glory of God.

2. The right behavior of our selves toward God outward in regard of 2.
things.

1. Of our speeches. 2. Of our deeds and actions.
1. Of our speeches and words 4. ways.

1. By good salutations sincerely and respectively uttered, as betwixt Boaz and
his reapers.

2. By a reverent mention of Gods titles and attributes upon any occasion, that
it may appear we fear the glorious name of God.

3. By conferring together of his works and of his word, as we go about our
other businesses, to stir up our selves and others the more to serve and praise
him.

4. By making confession of his truth, and standing to defend it against cauils
according to ones ability.

2. The right behavior of our selves toward God outward is in our deeds and
actions, and that two ways.

1. Generally. 2. More particularly.
1. Generally by two ways.

1. By walking as becomes the Gospel of Christ, urging our selves to a very
precise and wise carriage of our selves, that the name of God by our means may
not hear ill, but well.

2. By resolute suffering for the names sake of Jesus Christ, and for
righteousness sake, which if it be to blood is called martyrdom.

2. More particularly, by a sanctified use of any of Gods creatures, or of any
thing whatsoever that we do, to which end four things are required, viz.

1. Knowledge out of the word of God concerning the lawfulness of our doing
such things or enioyning such, for all things must be sanctified to us by the
word, as a good servant will venture on nothing, but what he knows will please
his master.

2. Craving Gods leave blessing in the use of meat, drink, marriage, or any
thing, as we take no man's goods out of his house, but first we ask him leave.

3. Returning of thanks to God for his goodness, as we thank our neighbors,
if we bring home some borrowed thing.

4. Moderation in the use of them, by proportioning the measure to the end, as
a servant being sent to his masters coffer, takes out so much as will dispatch
the appointed business and no more.

Hitherto of the affirmative part of the third commandment: the negative
follows, showing the sins by which this commandment is broken are 2.

1. By sins of omission. 2. By sins of commission.
1. By sins of omission, in not doing any of the things required (either for
matter or manner, either in whole or in part) when just cause of doing them is
offered.

2. By sins of commission, in doing things contrary to those that are
commanded, and that in a twofold respect.

1. By abusing those holy actions that are to be admixed with our common
affairs.

2. By disorderly carriage of our common deeds.

1. By abusing those holy actions etc. which are two.

1. An oath. 2. A lot.
1. An oath, which is abused two ways.

1. For the taking thereof. 2. For the keeping thereof.
1. For the taking thereof in regard of 1. The matter. 2. The manner of using
when it is taken.


1. The matter.

1. For the object. 2. For the subject.
1. For the object or thing sworn by, if it be an Idol or a creature.

2. The subject or thing sworn to in an

1. Assertiue oath, when the thing sworn to is light and triuiall, too mean
for an oath to be used in it, or plain and evident, not needing an oath.

2. In a permissiue or obligatorie oath, if the thing be either 1. Impossible,
and cannot be done. 2. Unlawful, and cannot be done but sinfully.


2. Follows the manner of using an oath, when it is taken 1. Ignorantly, a
man not being informed of the nature of an oath. 2. Causlesly, without any just
inducement thereto. 3. Irreuerently, without apprehension of Gods greatness.
4. Ragingly, in the bitterness of passion. 5. Maliciously, with intention of
hurting any man. 6. Falsely, and the falsehood of an oath is either


1. Unwittingly, when a man swears as he conceiueth and thinks, but not as
the thing is.

2. Wittingly, and that either 1. Open and manifest. 2. Cloaked and colored.


1. Open and manifest in an oath, 1. Assertorie. 2. Obligatorie.


1. Assertorie, when one does either 1. Know it to be false. 2. Conceiues it to
be false, though it be not so.


2. Obligatorie, when a man never has a purpose to fulfill it, but seeks to
serve his present turn.

2. Cloaked and colored by aequiuocations and reseruations, whereby one
seeks to delude him to whom he swears.

2. An oath abused in regard of the keeping it two ways.

1. When one does neglect to fulfill a lawful oath for fear, lucre, or any
like cause.

2. When one proceeds to fulfill an unlawful oath for vainglory, or a false
conscionablenesse of it.

2. A second holy action abused, that is, admixed in our common affairs, is a
lot, which is abused two ways.

1. In regard of the matter. 2. In regard of the manner.
1. In regard of the matter, when it is applied to end 1. Made and counterfeit
differences. 2. Sportfull and trifling differences.


2. It is abused in regard of the manner, when it is used

1. Ignorantly, without information of its nature.

2. Colludingly, with making a show of lottery, when a man has a close trick
to dispose of the act, seeming casual, at his own pleasure.

3. Profanely, without any regard of Gods providence in it, and with chafing
against the event.

2. Abusing these holy actions, by disorderly carriage of our common deeds, and
that in a twofold respect.

1. In inward deeds. 2. In outward deeds.
1. In inward deeds, 1. In regard of Gods works. 2. In regard of our own
works.


1. In regard of Gods works, 1. When we attribute them to other causes, either
1. False at all, as to fortune and chance. 2. True, too eagerly, so as to
neglect God, as 1. To our friends, if there be good done by them. 2. To our
foes, if they be adverse from them. 3. To our selves and our own industry,
etc. 4. To the course of nature.

2. When we pervert them to evil purposes, as in particular, 1. Good and
prosperous things. 1. To harden our selves in sinning. 2. To nourish pride and
conceit of our selves.
2. Adverse and evil. 1. To murmur against God and fret. 2. To wax obstinate
in our sins, for all that he does correct us.




2. In regard of our disorderly carriage in our own works, when we do wholly
seek and serve our own profit, pleasure, credit in them: but worst of all, if
we seek in them the fulfilling of our sinful affections.

2. Our disorderly carriage outward, and that in a twofold regard, 1. Of our
words. 2. Of our deeds.


1. In regard of our words contrary to four things.

1. To good salutations.

1. By good wishes, uttered 2. ways.

1. Alone formally, without any good desire of heart. 2. Falsely and fainedly,
with a wishing of evil in heart.
2. By bad wishes or curses of all kinds, specially wherein the devils name is
interposed, which is as it were an invocation of Satan.

2. Contrary to the respective mentioning of Gods titles and attributes by two
ways.

1. By heedlesse and formal mentioning them.

1 In admiration, as, good Lord. 2. In entreaty, as, for Gods sake, not
thinking of God. 3. And all such like.
2. By blasphemous, scornful, abusiue mentioning of them, tending to reproach
and disgrace the name of God.

3. Contrary to good conference of Gods word or works.

1. By iangling and wrangling speech of any good thing, merely for contention,
ostentation, victory.

2. By jesting at any phrase or place of Scripture, or any special work of
God.

3. By misalledging or misapplying either the works of God, or the Scriptures,
and that in three respects.

1. In spells and charms, which is to serve the devils turn with them, and
make them as it were sacraments of the devil.

2. In maintaining any wicked practice or false opinion.

3. In maintaining even a good deed and the true opinion, whereto they do not
serve without wresting.

4. By cauilling against the word of God, or any of his works; in seeking to
impute falsehood, injustice, etc. unto the same.

4. Contrary to confession of Gods truth four ways.

1. By denying the truth through fear or lucre against ones conscience. 2. By
oppugning the truth, though it be through blindness and ignorance, but most of
all if it be wittingly and wilfully. 3. By scoffing and deriding the truth of
God with taunts to disgrace. 4. By maintaining, defending, disputing for and
gracing falsehood.
2. Disorderly carriage outward in regard of our deeds.

1. Generally, by a wicked, scandalous, and careless mocking of them that
profess religion.

2. Particularly, two ways.

1. By persecuting any for righteousness sake. 2. By a wicked and unsanctified
manner of doing any thing, and that in 4. respects.
1. Against ones conscience, whether it be a doubting conscience, or a
conscience fully resolved, whether truly or erroneously.

2. Profanely, without prayer or thanksgiving.

3. Superstitiously, and that 2. ways.

1. By putting holiness or unholiness, sinfulness or necessity of religion
in a thing indifferent, which is superstition.

2. By applying things whereto God has neither in nature, or by special
institution appointed them, as 1. By divination of things to come, as in
Judicial Astrology, Pyromancie, etc. 2. To finding out of hidden secrets. 3.
To cure diseases and expel devils. 4. To satisfy Gods justice, and merit
remission of sins, and life everlasting, and such like.


4. A wicked and unsanctified manner of doing any thing immoderatly in
exceeding the measure required for the attaining of Gods ends, and using an
ouerlarge quantity to satisfy our lusts, as 1. In gluttony. 2. In
drunkenness. 3. Vain attire. 4. Sportfulness, etc.

So much of the third commandment:

The fourth follows.

Remember the Sabbath to keep it holy, etc.
IT appoints the consecrating of a special time, viz. one day in seven
(without nominating any date of time whence the computation must begin, for
that must be known to us by some other means, and is a thing alterable, not
vnalterably settled by the commandment) giving six to worldly affairs, and
consecrate the seventh following those six to exercises of religion and piety.
The full sum is, After thou have bestowed six days in ordinary and common
businesses, thou shall bestow the seventh day in exercises of piety and
religion.

This commandment has also 2. parts, namely, 1. The affirmative, showing what
is enjoined to do. 2. The negative, showing what is prohibited to do.


The things commanded in this precept are two.

1. Preparation to the Sabbath. 2. Celebration of the Sabbath.
1. Preparation to the Sabbath in the word Remember, which is done two ways.

1. All the week long by 1. Diligence in the labors of our calling. 2.
Foresight in the labors of our calling. 3. Moderation in the labors of our
calling.


2. On the sixth day toward the end of it, by a seasonable breaking off our
labors, and betaking our selves to make all things ready for the Sabbath, and
so to rest our bodies.

2. The second thing commanded is the celebration of the Sabbath two ways.

1. By some things common to all. 2. By some things proper to governors.
1. By some things common to all.

1. For the matter. 2. For the manner.
1. For the matter two ways.

1. By resting. 2. By sanctifying.
1. By resting, of which we must know three things.

1. Who must rest. 2. How long they must rest. 3. From what they must rest.
1. Who must rest, even all both 1. Men, 1. Governors. 2. Servants, and those
that they govern.
2. Cattle, and Mils, and things of like nature.


2. How long they must rest, viz. for the full space of 24. hours, beginning
the day and ending it according to the usual account of other days in
several Commonwealths, for to begin at Even was the Jews ordinary
computation for all days, and so measure out the Sabbath as well as other
days by a peculiar constitution. But in the commandment is alone required
that there be an whole seventh day, not nominating the periods.

3. From what they must rest, viz.

1. From the businesses of their particular callings, as a Tradesman from
selling, Husbandman from plowing, Lawyer from pleading, etc. In which note 2.
things.

1. How far this rest must extend, and that must be to three things.

1. To thoughts of heart. 2. To words of the tongue. 3. To deeds of the hand.
2. The second thing is with what limitations and exceptions it must be
limited; except in cases*

1. Of mercy, for the releeuing of man or beast in distress.

2. In cases of necessity, for the preventing of imminent and (unless present
resistance be made) vnpreuentable danger.

3. In cases of necessary comforts for the body, and its convenient
strengthening by food and clothing, for a man might lead his Ox to water,
Christ says, and need not fetch in water for him over night.

2. The second thing from which we must rest, is from all manner of profane
sports, pastimes, and recreations, which are more contrary to piety then
labor in calling.

2. A second thing in regard of the matter is sanctifying the Sabbath, and that
two ways.

1. Publicly. 2. Privately.
1. Publicly, in two things.

1. Coming to public assemblies in due season. 2. Continuing at them with
careful attention to the end.
2. Privately, in two things.

1. In things respecting the public. 2. In things without that respect to the
public.
1. In things respecting the public.

1. For preparation. 2. For making use thereof.
1. In preparation thereto by three things.

1. By rising betimes in the morning, as strength will give leave. 2. Renewing
our repentance and washing our hands in innocence before we compass the
Altar. 3. Praying to God specially for a blessing on ourselves, the Ministry,
and assembly.
2. For use making thereof two ways.

1. By conferring with others (chiefly every governor with his family) the
word of God we have heard. 2. By meditating of it every man by himself, that
he may see what he remembers, and make use of it to himself.
2. Privately, in things without that respect to the public, viz. 3. ways.

1. By reading of the Scripture and godly books, chiefly in the want of
public preaching. 2. Singing of Psalms of praise to God. 3. Meditating of
Gods great works of creation, providence, redemption, and of the eternal rest
which we shall have in heaven.
2. The second thing commanded in the Sabbath common to all, is the manner of
doing all cheerfully, consecrating the Sabbath unto the Lord as a delight.

2. Some things commanded in the celebration of the Sabbath proper to
governors are these, namely, that they be diligent in looking to their
inferiors, that they may at the least outwardly keep the Lords day.

Hitherto of the affirmative part of this commandment: the negative follows,
forbidding sins

1. Of omission, in the neglecting of any of the things commanded, either in
whole or in part.

2. Of commission, in doing the contrary in two regards.

1. Before the Sabbath come. 2. When it is come.
1. Before the Sabbath come in 2. things.

1. In an universal carelessness of it all the week, and so by carelessness
or immoderatenesse, so ill disposing of businesses, that they interrupt us in
sanctifying the Sabbath, which foresight, diligence, and moderation might have
prevented.

2. Immoderate toylesomnesse and watching the day before, to the hindering of
one from doing the works of the Sabbath through sleepiness and weariness.

2. When the Sabbath is come.

1. In regard of all men. 2. In regard of governors.
1. In regard of all men.

1. For matter. 2 For manner.
1. For matter two ways.

1. Against resting. 2. Against sanctifying.
1. Against resting.

1. Inward by thoughts, 2. Outward by 1. Words. 2. Deeds.

1. By words either 1. Of our ordinary busisinesses out of the forenamed
exceptions. 2. Of sports and pastimes.


2. Against sanctifying 1. Publicly. 2. Privately.


1. Publicly in three things.

1. A slow and undue coming to Church. 2. Sleeping, drowzing, or like
misbehauiour at the Church, as talking etc. 3. Running away from the
Congregation disorderly before all be concluded, unless upon some necessary
occasion.
2. Privately, in spending the time 1. Idly, in slugging and slothfulness,
as sitting at door, or in the chimney corner, and doing just nothing. 2.
Profanely, in surfeting, drunkenness, riot, reuelling, and the like.


2. In regard of the manner, by being weary of the day, and wishing it over as
a thing burdensome.

2. When the Sabbath is come in regard of Governors, if they command their
inferiors to work or play, or without just cause to be absent from the word
or sacraments.

And yet one way there is a more general breaking of this commandment, by
denying the morality of this law, and cashiering it among other Leuiticall
ceremonies. Indeed the Sabbath is in part ceremonial, figuring both our rest
of sanctification here, and glory hereafter, but that contradicts not the
perpetuity of it. For it is not a ceremony leading to Christ, and at his
coming to determine, as appears Mat. 15.17. I came not to dissolve the Law:
and verse. 19. who shall break the least of these commandments: where each
commandment of the ten commandments is ratified, and consequently this
fourth: Luke 23.56. They rested according to the commandment. And Luke writ
that diverse years after the resurrection of Christ, the things were done after
his death, when all Leviticall institutions lost their power of binding. Iam.
2.11. He that keeps the whole Law and breaks one commandment is guilty of
all. Therefore the whole Law and each principle thereof, does bind us under
the Gospel; also the time of first instituting a particular date of time for
the beginning of the Sabbath, of the old Law, viz. in innocence. 2. The
writing of it in Tables of stone. 3. Putting of it into the Arc proved moral.

So much of the commandments of the first Table, enioyning our duty to God.
Now follow the precepts of the second Table, concerning our duty to our selves
and our neighbors, and first of the fifth commandment.

Honor thy father and thy mother, etc.
THis Commandment enioynes the performance of all such duties as appertain to
men in regard of their place, that is, that respect a special reference which
passes betwixt some men more then others in some special and peculiar bond
binding them mutually one to another.

These duties are of two sorts.

1. Such as concern every man's self. 2. Such as respect others.
1. Such as concern every man's self, which are four.

1. To take notice of his place, and the several duties thereof, that he may
the better perform the same. 2. To labor for all such graces and virtues, as
are requisite for the discharge of these duties. 3. To maintain the dignity
of his place. 4. To be satisfied and contented with the present place wherein
God has set him, and with the dignity and honor thereof.
2. Such duties as respect others in regard of special bonds and obligations
tying them together.

These bonds are of two sorts.

1. Natural. 2. Spiritual.
1. Natural, taken from things natural in this present life, and these are
twofold.

1. Arbitrarie. 2. Necessary.
1. Arbitrarie, such as it is in a man's power to have or not to have, according
to the freedom of his own choice and election: and this is called friendship,
whence we are denominated friends.

2. Necessary, such as are by God and the course of nature established, and
depend not merely upon the choice of will, and these are two.

1. Kindred. 2. Degree.
1. Kindred or neerenesse of blood, whence men are termed kinsmen.

2. Degree whereby one is ranked in a certain order toward others.

Degree is twofold.

1. Of equality, whence men are called equals. 2. Inequality, wherein one is
above another or under him, and this is 1. Superiority, wherein one is
preferred before another. 2. Inferioritie, wherein one stands under or
behind another.

2. The bonds of spiritual things are taken from things that do concern the
estate of another life hereafter. And these are all or the chief bonds that
do pass betwixt man and man, tying them to each other, and causing them to
become indebted in special duties toward such persons, which are not owing in
common to all. Now let us consider the duties themselves depending upon each of
those respects.

1. Of friends.

Friends are those that are tied together by the bond of friendship. Friendship
is a special obligation of amity or good will, uniting the hearts of men
together in a greater neerenesse and dearness then ordinarily is, or is
required of all men.

Now friendship (and so friends) is of two kinds.

1. Common and imperfect, being amity confirmed and strengthened, and raised to
an higher degree then usual, in regard of long and familiar living, abiding,
dealing, or conuersing together.

2 Perfect and more peculiar, which is amity in the highest degree that can be
wrought, through the mutual acknowledgement of each others virtues upon some
good time and acquaintance, and established and ratified by some solemn
covenant, promise, or oath taken each to other, as is to be scene in the
example of Jonathan and David.

The duties of friends are twofold.

1. Common. 2. Proper.
1. Common to both kinds of friendship.

1. To choose and accept none into friendship, but virtuous, honest, and
religious persons: for what communion can there be betwixt light and darkness,
virtue and vice?

2. To carry themselves friendly to each other, and that two ways.

1. By avoiding all those things that may alienate their hearts one from an
other, as unkindness taking, suspicions, iealousies, etc.

2. By doing all things that may more and more show affection each to other,
and win the same, and that most abundantly and plentifully, each striving to
exceed other, and these offices are twofold.

1. Less necessary. 2. More necessary.
1. Less necessary, in courtesies, salutations, gifts, visitations, and the
like points of a certain kind of honest complement, that as little chips
being kindled set the greater wood on fire, so do cause the more needful
services to be more welcome and better accepted.

2. More necessary offices, which are chiefly three.

1. Helpfulnesse in the day of adversity, by a free, willing, speedy, and
plentiful undertaking of pains and expenses for their ease, refreshing, and
deliverance; for a friend is borne for adversity.

2. Plainness and freedom of speech in a loving and with all open admonishing
each other of the sins and faults they commit, if they be any thing palpable,
and offensive, and well entertaining such admonitions.

3. Trustiness in all things, by each other committed unto each others care,
and that is twofold.

1. In secrets revealed unto them, by keeping them fast and close as it were
under lock and key, without futilitie and blabbing.

2. In affairs and businesses to their love and care commended by a diligent
endeavor of effecting them, according to the friends desire, and for his most
advantage, honor, and comfort.

2. The duties of friends proper to the latter and more perfect kind, viz. to
be to each other even as each others soul, as the Scripture says, ( thy
friend which is as thine own soul, Deu. 13.6.) and that in 2. things.

1. In an universal opennesse and communicating of all secrets, counsels,
intentions, purposes, so that a friend should not fear to reveal any thing to
his friend of himself, that himself knows, be it good or evil. For this
friendship is as it were a communion of souls, or a kind of intermingling
their very spirits.

2. In in universal participating of goods, labors, counsels, and all that
each has to other, even to suffering of death each for other, so far as may be
done without sin against God, and without breaking any of his commandments.

Hitherto of the arbitrarie bond which is at men's choice to tie themselves
withal if they will, but being tied they must do these duties; and in tying
themselves they must follow the first rule. Now follows the second branch of
natural bonds, and that is necessary. And first of 1. Kindred. 2. Degree.


1. Kindred is a bond arising from the participation of the same blood or nature
in some known and apparent neerenesse. This is twofold.

1. Proper. 2. Improper.
1. Proper, in that that is called consanguinitie betwixt brother and brother,
cousin and cousin, uncle and nephew, and so in the rest: and the duties of
kinsmen or kinswomen are two.

1. To love each other with so much larger and move fervent love, by how much
they are more nearer in blood, so that as nature does tie them by more bonds,
so they must be affected to each other with more and more vehement amity;
brothers and sisters most; uncles, aunts, nephews, and neeces next; cousins
and cousins next, and so in order; but yet so still, that special graces,
virtues, and benefits may add to the quantity and feruencie of their love.

2. To be more abundantly careful of expressing this their love in all good
offices and services of courtesy, and chiefly of helpfulnesse in adversity, by
comforting, releeuing, succouring, giving, lending, and taking pains, and
undergoing danger each for other.

2. Improper bond, in regard of marriage, which is as it were a resemblance of
kindred, and a legal or secondarie kindred. And the duties of those that are
united in affinity, is to be to those that are thus tied unto them, even as if
they were their natural kinsmen, both in love, and in the effects of love. For
seeing in that one matter of marriage I must stand disposed to these legal
kinsmen as to my natural, (for example, a man may no more marry his wives
sister or mother then his own) it follows by proportion, that the like
account must be made of them in all other matters.

So much of kindred. Now for degree, and first that of equality.

Equality is a kind of paritie or evenness betwixt party and party, arising
from the absence of any notable, evident, and apparent difference in them,
either by any function or endowment, or the like.

The duty of equals is threefold.

1. To think better of their equals then themselves, and to esteem of them
above themselves. 2. In giving honor to go one before another. 3. To be glad
and well satisfied at the raising and advancement of their equals to places
above themselves.
Next follows inequality.

Inequality is an evident difference betwixt man and man, in regard that the
one has more of something deserving esteem and account then another has.

This inequality is twofold, as the causes of it are double, for the
difference is barely in regard of certain endowments or qualities, or else in
regard of some function, office, or estate. From the first men are called
betters or lessers: from the second, Governors and governed.

The first inequality is 1. From age. 2. From gifts.


1. From age, when there is such difference betwixt one another that they might
in course of nature be parent and child each to other. Not all difference of
age makes them betwixt whom it is, unequals, but such a difference whereby one
might be the child, the other the parent in regard of age, and here

1. The duties of the aged are two, viz.

1. To be of a comely, grave, sober carriage, abounding in knowledge and virtue,
as in days and years.

2. To be able and ready in regard of their experience to give wise, discreet,
and sound advice in matters difficult.

2. The duties of the younger in age are twofold.

1. To show honorable respect in carriage three ways. 1. In rising to them. 2.
Giving them the first room. 3. The first words, etc.
2. They must consult and advise with them in doubts, preferring their advice
to their own green conceits.
2. The second inequality is from gifts, and that is twofold.

1. Where those are that are better gifted. 2. In regard of the less gifted.
1. Those that are better gifted are bound 1. Generally, whatsoever their gifts
be 1. To be of a lowly mind and carriage to those that are less gifted, for
all their gifts. 2. To employ their gifts willingly and humbly to the service
of others.
2. They are bound specially if their gifts be


1. Of mind, in wit, learning, and understanding, bearing with the dullness
and ignorance of others, to inform, teach, advise them the best they can, as
they have occasion.

2. Of body, with the pains of their body to help those that are weak and
feeble.

3. Of estate, either in parentage or wealth, to countenance and relieve the
meaner and poorer, being rich and great in good works, and ready to
distribute, according to the eminency of their estate and means. Great and
rich men must practice, 1. Bounty. 2. Munificence.


2. The less gifted are bound to two things.

1. To acknowledge their gifts with all due and respective carriage toward them
agreeable thereto in all civility and courtesy. 2. To be willing to be
beholding unto them, and to enjoy help and assistance from their gifts, as
occasion shall be offered.
Hitherto of unequals without government. Now of those with government because
the difference betwixt them arises from some office or estate which the one
has more then the other.

Their duties are of two sorts.

1. Mutual. 2. Several.
1. Mutual, such as they are reciprocally, and these are three.

1. A special degree of love each to other, according as they are more nearly
combined in their estates. The parent owes a parentall love, the yoke fellow a
matrimonial love, and so in the rest, each must have a more earnest,
plentiful, and steadfast affection to other in regard of their places.

2. A particular mentioning of each other in their prayers unto God.

3. A special care of each others comfort and credit, and endeavor to procure
it more then to other men.

2. Their duties several, such as are peculiar to either.

1. To Governors, toward them that are governed. 2. To governed, toward them
that govern them.
1. The duties of Governors are twofold.

1. Common to all Governors. 2. Peculiar to each kind of Governors.
1. The duties common to all Governors are two.

1. To keep reverence and respect to themselves in the hearts of those that
are under their government, by a virtuous conversation, and by giving
themselves examples to them in all goodness.

2. To exercise their authority over them, to which end it must be declared,
and that in three respects.

1. What be the parts of power and government to be exercised. 2. What is the
next end that all must aim at in their government. 3. The manner of using that
authority.
1. What be the parts of power and government to be exercised, and those are
toward 1. All under their government. 2. To the different kinds of them.


1. Toward all under their government, two ways.

1. To direct them in their ways. 1. By minding lawful and fit things. 2. By
forbidding the contrary.
2. To defend them from the injuries that might be offered them by any other of
the common inferiors chiefly.
2. The second part of power and government to be exercised, is toward the
different kinds of them.

1. To the good. 2. To the evil.
1. To the good and obedient.

1. By praises and commendations. 2. By rewards and recompenses.
2. Toward the evil and disobedient.

1. By reproof and reprehension.

2. By chastisements and corrections, according to the difference of faults and
places differently.

2. The second duty to be declared is, what is the next end that all men must
aim at in their government, viz. the welfare, good and happiness of those
under their government, as well as and together with, their own welfare and
content.

3. The third duty to be declared, is the manner of using their authority to
this end, by the practice of four things.

1. Justice. 2. Prudence. 3. Mildness. 4. Courage.
1. By the practice of justice in a twofold regard.

1. Of persons toward whom government is exercised, by being indifferent and
impartial, the same to all, in the same cases.

2. In regard of the special acts of power, and that in two regards.

1. By commanding nothing but what is lawful to be done in regard of
conscience to God, and forbidding nothing but what may be omitted without sin
against God.

2. By correcting and reproving for nothing but a fault, praising and rewarding
for nothing but a virtue, and that according to the proportion and quantity
both of virtues and vice.

2. By the practice of prudence or discretion two ways.

1. By observing the different dispositions of those that are under ones
government. 2. By making choice of two things.
1. Fit things to command and forbid, and fit kinds of reproves, corrections,
praises, rewards, agreeable to the difference of the persons dispositions with
whom one has to deal.

2. By making choice of fit times and places, wherein to exercise any part of
authority, both

1. In regard of ones self that commands, reproves.

2. In regard of them that are commanded, reproved, etc. The fittest time is,
when neither are transported with passion or distemperance.

3. By the practice of mildness to show it self two ways.

1. In commandments. 2. In reproves and corrections.
1. In commandments two ways.

1. By abstaining from hard, difficult, and painful commandments, unless in
case of necessity.

2. By mollifying commandments with loving, familiar, sweet and persuading
speeches different according to the diverse kinds of inferiors.

2. In reproves and corrections, by giving them

1. Moderately, for kind and measure, so that the reproof and correction
neither exceed the fault, nor the power and strength of the corrected.

2. Compassionately, and with demonstration of love and pity, for the manner
chiefly, when necessity calls to some roughness.

4. By the practice of courage and resolution in going on forward to perform
what is fit, notwithstanding 1. Any importunity, entreaty, and suit. 2. Ill
speeches or show of danger.


Hitherto of duties common to all superiors in government. Peculiar duties of
several kinds of governors both in the 1. Family, of the Master, Dame or
Mistress do follow. 2 Commonweal. do follow.


The Masters duty is twofold.

1. To all his family jointly. 2. To the several members of his family.
1. To all his family jointly, as lie is a common ruler of that society
wholly considered, and so he must regard 4. things.

1. That Gods name be called upon and worshipped in his family; for the
families are cursed that call not upon the name of God.

2. He must have regard to catechize them in true religion, and bring them all
up in information of godliness.

3. He must have regard to provide things necessary for them.

1. In health, [Food, and the like. 2. In sickness Attendance. Physic.

4. He must have regard to ouersee their ways and carriage: and 1. Set them to
fit employments. 2. To redress and reform their disorders.


2. The masters duty is to look to the several members of his family.

1. To those whom it is in his power to choose, as wife and servants, to choose
virtuous and godly ones, a woman fearing God, and servants fearing God.

2. To use them all well, viz. the Wife. Children. Servants.


1. The wife, and that two ways.

1. By familiar and kind behavior toward her person. 2. By liberal and
bountiful allowance of all comforts unto her.
2. The children, two ways.

1. By good education.

1. In younger years causing them to be taught to write and read, etc.

2. In riper years, setting them to some calling according to their capacity
and their parents ability.

2. By good provision for them, 1. Of goods and portion, ever remembering the
distinction of age and goodness, so that the eldest have his double portion,
and the youngest their single portions. 2. Of yoke fellow, husband or wife in
due season fit for them, one that at least is not impious, nor Infidel.


3. The servants in a twofold regard.

1. To employ them moderately in work, neither toyling them, nor giving them
leave to be idle.

2. To reward them liberally with wages and gifts, according to every man's
estate, and ability, and Gods blessing upon their labors.

Hitherto the Masters duty: the Dames follows, and that is twofold.

1. Toward her infants, to nurse them with her own milk, if it may stand
with her health, as the law of nature teaches, why else does God give breasts
and milk at that time? and as godly women have done.

2. Toward the whole family, to ouersee their ways, as the husbands deputy
and helper, still according to his good will and liking, and chiefly to attend
to the maidens.

So much of the governors of the family in private. The duties of the
public governors follow. These are of two sorts.

1. The highest and chiefest governors 2. The subordinate and inferior.
1. The highest and chiefest governors, who must observe these four things.

1. To establish the true religion and worship of God in their jurisdiction,
and prohibit the contrary. 2. To see good, virtuous, and wholesome laws made
for the welfare and good behavior of the people. 3. To defend their own
country and their oppressed neighbors by just wars defensive or offensive.
4. Being a King, to sit personally in the seat of judgment diverse times, yea
usually: for the Kings in Israel succeeded Judges.
2. The second sort of governors are subordinate and inferior.

1. Judges, truly to administer distributive justice in finding out and
sentencing malefactors with all just severity and equity of proceedings.

2. Other officers of all sorts, to be helpful to the utmost of their power to
the execution of all good laws and orders, according as for the most part
their oaths do bind them.

So far of the duties of governors, next are the duties of the governed.

1. Common to all. 2. Peculiar to each.
1. The duties of the governed common to all are twofold.

1. To the persons of their governors. 2. To their power and authority.
1. To the persons of their governors, reverence, and that twofold.

1. Inward, in heart, by standing in awe of them, and not daring to offend them
for conscience sake to God that has settled governors in the world.

2. Outward reverence, 1. In words and speeches. 2. In gestures and behauiours.


1. In words and speeches three ways.

1. To themselves, that they be submissiue and dutiful, mannerly and reverent,
as Sarah called Abraham, Sir. 2. To others before them, that they be neither
over many, nor loud and vehement, but moderate and temperate. 3. To others of
them behind their backs, that they be respective and loyal, for so was Sarahs
very thought of her husband.
2. Outward reverence is in gestures and behauiours, as bowing the knee,
doffing the hat, arising up to them, and all other like respective cariages.

2. The duty of the governed common to their power and authority two ways.

1. By a willing obedience to all their lawful commandments. 2. A due
receiving of all their reproves and corrections.
1. Submissiuely, gently, patiently, though they be unjust and ouer-rigorous.

2. Fruitfully, and with care of reformation, if they be just and causefull.

The peculiar and proper duties are 1. Those that are private. 2. Those that
are public.


1. Those that are private in the family, viz. Of
1. The wife. 2. The children. 3. The servants.


1. The peculiar and proper duties of the wife and yoke fellow are twofold.

1. Sociable carriage and cheerful behavior to his person. 2. Huswifely
saving and thriftie disposing of the goods of her husband.
2. The peculiar and proper duties of the children are twofold.

1. To maintain the parents, if need be, in sickness and age; yea rather to
want ones self, and that his own children want, then suffer them to want. 2.
To be ruled by them in the choice of a yoke fellow, wife, or husband.
3. The peculiar and proper duties private of the servants are twofold.

1. To be trusty in saving and keeping their Masters goods committed to them.
2. To be painful and diligent in their businesses, as well in the absence as
the presence of the governors.
2. The peculiar and proper duties public in the Commonwealth are two.

1. Defense of their persons against all treasons, conspiracies, violence
offered to them by any, according to their places.

2. Payment of accustomed and just dues, as tole, tribute, and the like, for
their maintenance in their places.

So much of the duties depending upon special natural bonds. Now follow
spiritual bonds, with the duties on them dependant, for there is a spiritual
life, and things that do pertain to the spiritual life, and therefore it
cannot be but that some consideration should be set from them to bind men to
diverse special duties. Now there is 1. A spiritual kindred. 2. A spiritual
degree.


1. A spiritual kindred betwixt all Christians, members of Christ's body.

2. Betwixt some Christians peculiar.

1. Betwixt all Christians members of Christ's body, to whom every other member
of the same body owes two things.

1. Brotherly love, which is an accounting of them specially dear, desiring
their good and delighting in it, and grieuing for the contrary, and taking
content in their society above all other kind of people.

2. Special helpfulnesse to them in their crosses and afflictions, doing good
chiefly to the household of Saints.

2. There is a spiritual kindred betwixt some Christians peculiarly, whom God
has made especially beholding or beneficial each to other, as 1. The father
in Christ. 2. The sons in the faith.


1. The father in Christ is that man by whose Ministry it has pleased God to
convert another to the faith and to true piety: he owes three things.

1. A special care to further their proceedings whom he has brought to
goodness, by bold and diligent admonishing, comforting, exhorting, and that
frequently, as occasion will serve.

2. Joy and thankfulness to God for their well-doing and good proceedings in
piety.

3. Sorrow and special humiliation before God for their disorders, decay or
reuolting.

2. The sons in the faith: they owe two things.

1. A singular thankfulness, such as should make them think no cost nor
pains too much to do them good, making account that they owe to them even
themselves.

2. They owe a greater readiness to receive their admonitions and
exhortations, as men having a special power over them.

Hitherto of kindred.

2. Now of a spiritual degree, and that is twofold.

1. Of gifts. 2. Of government.
1. Of gifts, in regard of which some are 1. Stronger Christians. 2. Weaker
Christians.


1. Stronger Christians, that have a greater measure of sanctification, these
must use their strength in a mild and gentle manner, by bearing with the
weaknesses of the weak, and seeking to heal and edify them.

2. Weaker Christians, and of a less degree of gifts of grace. Those must 1.
Reverence the more abundant graces of God in their brethren. 2. They must make
use of them for their own edification, striving hard after the mark, and
laboring to grow on forward to the same degree of grace.


2. The second spiritual degree is of government, here is 1. The governor* 2.
The governed.


1. The governor the Pastor, whose duty in regard of his flock is twofold.

1. Public. 2. Private.
1. Public.

1. To teach them the word and will of God, and that three ways.

1. By reading the Scriptures in the Congregation to them. 2. By catechizing
the ignorant. 3. By preaching to all.
2. To pray to God with them, and become their common mouth.

3. To administer the Sacraments.

1. Of Baptism.

1. To any infants tendered to him. 2. To Infidels, if any be converted.
2. Of the Lords Supper, to men of 1. Knowledge, in two things. 1. In
fundamental points of Christian Religion. 2. In the doctrine of the nature and
use of the Sacraments.
2. To men of life free from public, scandalous, and gross evils.


2. The private duty of the Pastor in regard of his flock is twofold.

1. To ouersee the ways of all, admonishing die unruly, comforting the
tempted, etc. 2. To visit the sick, and comfort and instruct them, chiefly
being sent for.
2. The duties of the governed, the flock, whose duties are twofold.

1. Toward the Pastors person in a twofold regard.

1. To have him in singular honor and love.

2. To afford a rich maintenance, in paying willingly Gods portion the tithe,
unto him, Gods officer to receive his temporalties as he administreth his
spiritualties.

2. The duty of the flock governed toward his spiritual jurisdiction is
twofold.

1. To submit themselves unto his oversight and admonition, with reverence as
to God.

2. To receive Gods word of him rather then of any other, if he be faithful,
and that 1. Obediently. 2. Discreetly.


Hitherto the affirmative part of the fifth Commandment. The negative follows,
showing the sins against this Commandment, which are of two sorts.

1. Of omission, in the total or partial neglect of any of the things
commanded.

2. Of commission, in doing things contrary thereto, and that either in regard
of ones self, or others.

1. Ones self, which is

1. By denying ones place, in conceiving ones self not to be inferior to
those to whom he is inferior; for no man likely will deny his superiority
over others.

2. By a scorning or disdaining to the duties of ones place, as many a man
scorns to be subject, though he cannot but confess that he should so be.

3. By nourishing ones self in those vices that hinder him from the duties of
his place.

4. In dishonouring his place, both 1. In excess, by an ouer-loftie conceit
and carriage of himself therein. 2. By an ouer-base and contemptible behavior
in the same.


2. Sins of commission in regard of others, and that in regard of bonds,
which are either natural or spiritual.

1. Naturally whether

1. Arbitrarie, as friendship, and the faults of friends, which are both 1.
Common. 2. Proper.


1. Common to both kinds of friends, and that

1. By making friendship with unholy and openly wicked men, and being friends
with Gods professed enemies.

2. By abusing of friendship with any.

1. By counterfeiting that love which one does not bear; when a man's words are
soft as butter, and yet they be swords.

2. By treachery and perfidiousnesse.

1. In bewraying their secrets to their hurt. 2. In betraying their persons and
estates to any danger or mischief.
2. The proper faults of friends to the more perfect kind, in forsaking
friendship and breaking it off causelessly.

2. Natural bonds necessary in regard of 1. Kindred. 2. Degree.


1. Kindred, whether it be proper or improper.

1. By a neglect and contempt of our kindred in regard of poverty, or other
like things.

2. By wronging and oppressing them any way for gain sake.

2. Natural bonds, necessary in regard of degree, are both to equals and
unequals.

1. To equals.

1. By a lifting up our selves above them, in false conceitednesse of mind.

2. By lifting up our selves above them in outward carriage, and striving to
take the better of them.

3. By envying and hindering their preferment.

2. Natural bonds necessary in degree to unequals.

1. In regard of endowments.

2. In regard of power and jurisdiction.

1. In regard of endowments alone without government, whether for 1. Age. 2.
Gifts.


1. Age. Here the faults are 1. Of the aged. 2. Of the younger.


1. Of the aged are, 1. To be of a foolish, light, and pettish disposition and
behavior. 2. To give bad and naughty counsel to the younger, encouraging them
to sinfulness, or any ill carriage.


2. The faults of the younger are to be 1. Scornful toward their persons in
contemptuous behavior. 2. To be careless of their advice, and follow ones
own head rather then their directions.


2. The endowments of gifts are here the faults 1. In betters. 2. Of those that
have fewer gifts.


1. Of betters in gifts, are 1. Common to all. 2. Special.


1. Common to all, 1. To swell and be conceited, because of their gifts. 2. To
disdain and contemn those that have less gifts. 3. To use them with
ostentation, and an arrogant setting forth of themselves.


2. The faults of betters in gifts, in special to those that excel 1. In wit
and understanding to ouerreach and deceive others, or bring them into error.
2. Of bodily strength to hurt and mischief others that are weaker. 3. Of
estate, of wealth, and parentage, to disgrace, discountenance, and oppress
others.


2. The faults of those that have fewer gifts 1. To obscure the gifts of others
through envy, detracting from them, as if they were less excellent then they
be. 2. To scorn to be beholding to them, or to make use of their gifts, as
occasion is offered.


2. Endowments were either alone without government, or of power and
jurisdiction with government: with government, whose faults are 1. Common. 2.
Several.


1. Common to both superiors and inferiors.

1. To entertain a special hatred and ill will toward them, even more then
toward others, as often it falls out.

2. To curse them and wish evil to them, and pray to God against them.

3. To seek their disgrace and reproach.

4. To serve themselves of them without any regard of their good esteem and
welfare.

2. Faults with government, which were either common or several: the several
follows.

Several to each, viz. 1. Governors. 2. Governed.


1. Governors, whose faults are 1. Common. 2. Proper.


1. Common to all of them.

1. To lose the authority of their place, and bring contempt upon themselves,
by a wicked and foolish carriage, and bad example of life.

2. To abuse the authority of their place in regard of 1. The end of using it,
in seeking alone their own content and ease, not regarding their inferiors
good. 2. In regard of the manner of using it. 1. Unjustly. 2. Vndiscree^ly. 3.
Rigorously. 4. Remissely.



1. Unjustly, and that 1. By partiality, in having a respect of persons in
their government. 2. By unjust commandments, in enioyning them things that are
sinful, forbidding them things that are lawful. 3. By unjust recompenses, 1.
In praising and rewarding evil deeds, or less good more then the better. 2.
In reproving or correcting for well-doing, or more for smaller faults then for
greater.



2. The second manner of using it is indiscreetly, by excusing any part of
their authority.

1. In unfit times; when either themselves on inferiors are ill disposed by
passion or grief.

2. In unfit places, when the place may make their authority more difficult;
as more public correcting then is fit, and sometimes more private.

3. In things unsuitable to the disposition, power, and ability of their
inferiors.

3. The third manner of using it is rigorously.

1. In condemning hard and difficult things without just cause, or any thing in
a rough or boisterous manner violently.

2. In reproving or correcting, 1. Excessiuely for matter, above the nature of
the fault, or strength of the sufferer. 2. Passionately and furiously for
manner, with bitterness and acerbitie of speech and countenance.


4. The fourth manner of using it is remissely, in being overcome 1. By
entreaties. 2. By foolish pity.


The faults of Governors were 1. common, or 2. proper, which follow.

1. Proper to the several kinds.

1. Private. 2. Public.
1. Private or the householder.

1. In regard of his whole family. 2. In regard of the several parts of his
family.
1. In regard of his whole family, considered as one common body.

1. In performing a false idolatrous worship among them.

2. In teaching them a false religion to the poisoning of them with error.

3. Wasting and consuming his goods, to the bringing of want of things
necessary to them, ill husbandlinesse.

4. In letting them do what they lust, as Solomon speaks of a child set at
liberty.

2. Faults proper to the several parts are 1. For choosing them. 2. For using
them.


1. For choosing those that he may choose, and that 1. By making choice of a bad
woman to wife, for wealth or beauty sake. 2. By entertaining bad and wicked
servants carelessly or wittingly.


2. For using them badly, viz. 1. The wife. 2. The children. 3. The servants.


1. The wife.

1. By churlishness to her person. 2. By grudging and nigardice for her
allowance.
2. For using the children badly, and that 1. In fondness of love to them. 2.
In misgiuing their portions, without regard of age or goodness. 3. In
misplacing them in marriage for sinister respects, even with idolatrous or
naughty yoke-fellowes.


3. For using their servants badly, 1. In ouer-burthening them with work, and
toyling them out. 2. In pinching them in their wages, not giving that which is
couenanted, or giving too little.


These are the Masters faults: the Dames faults are 1. To thrust out her
children to nurse out of niceness and unwillingness to take pains. 2. To be
imperious in the family, in that she must have her own way without and
against her husbands good liking.


2. The proper faults of public governors which are in the Commonwealth,
whether 1. Chief, or 2. Subordinate.


1. Chief and highest.

1. To establish a false religion. 2. To make unjust laws. 3. To make unjust
wars, or lay causlesse burdens and taxations on their subjects. 4. To pervert
the seat of Justice.
2. The subordinate man's public faults are in Judges or other officers.

1. In Judges, by judging 1. Corruptly and falsely for any cause. 2. For hire
and reward.


2. In other public officers, by hindering the execution of good laws for
favor, fear, or money.

Hitherto of faults of Governors. Now secondly of the faults of those that are
governed both common and proper.

1. Common to all, and that 1. Toward their person. 2. Toward their
authority.


1. Toward their person; both inward and outward.

1. Inward in heart, when they set light by them, and care not whether they be
pleased or displeased.

2. Outward, and that in words or gesture.

1. In words, both 1. To them snappish and sullen. 2. Before them loud and
rude. 3. Behind their backs reuiling, cursing, disgracing.


2. In gesture and countenances of contempt.

2. The common faults of the governed toward their authority.

1. By disobedience to their lawful commandments, or obeying their unlawful
commands.

2. By resisting their corrections and reproves.

1. In inward murmuring.

2. In outward opposition, chiefly if they come to blows against them, which
to ones parent was death.

2. Proper faults of the governed are proper to some, viz. 1 Private. 2.
Public.


1. Private.

1. To the wife, if she be 1. Sour. 2. Contentious. 3. Wastefull.


2. To the children.

1. By marrying without them. 2. By casting them off in age, or cozening them.
3. To servants.

1. By slothfulness and eye-seruice. 2. By untrustiness and wastefulnesse in
their goods.
2. The public faults of the governed are in subjects.

1. In treason against the life or state of their Prince.

2. In sedition or rebellion, in a turbulent going about to redress pretended
abuses, whether it be against the Prince or his officers.

Hitherto of sins against natural bonds: Now faults contrary to the duties
whereto we are bound

2. By spiritual bond, and those of 1 Kindred. 2 Degree.


1. Of kindred spiritual, and that

1 Betwixt all Christians, which is brotherhood, and that is schism in rending
ones self from the rest of the members of Christ's body for any dislikes,
chiefly in regard of petie differences of opinion, and falling to rail,
revile, bite, devour, persecute.

2. Betwixt some Christians.

1. Betwixt fathers in Christ, if they seek to seduce them, or make divisions
to draw followers after them, as some did in Paul's time.

2. Betwixt sons in Christ, if they 1. Excessiuely admire them, so as to take
all things on their word, and neglect others in regard of them. 2. If they grow
to dislike and neglect of them, because of their plainness in admonitions.


2. The degree of spiritual bonds.

1. For gifts. 2. For power.
1. For gifts. Here 1. The strong do sin. 2. The weak.


1. The strong, 1. By despising the weaker, and seeking only to please
themselves. 2. Scandalizing them in a wilful and uncharitable and indiscreet
abuse of their Christian liberty.


2. The weak sin, 1. In envying their betters gifts, and seeking to disgrace
them, as the false Apostles did Paul. 2. In harsh censuring them for the
lawful use of their Christian liberty.


2. The degree of spiritual bonds for power and government. Here 1. The Pastor
offends. 2. The people offends.


1. The Pastor offends, for 1. Teaching. 2. Discipline.


1. For teaching.

1. For matter. 2. For manner.
1. For matter.

1. By false doctrine of faith, or manners. 2. By misapplying true doctrine to
grieve the good, harten the bad.
2. For the manner.

1. By vainglorious, and flanting preaching, for ostentation of wit and
learning. 2. By careless extemporarie preaching.
2. The Pastor offends for discipline.

1. By admitting openly, scandalous and wicked men, to the communion, without
reproof and admonition. 2. By perverting the Church censures either 1. Against
the good, as Diotrephes. 2. Against any for malice.

2. The people offend, against power and government.

1. In offending against his person. 2. Against his authority.
1. Against his person.

1. By robbing him of his due and tenths, as chiefly impropriators do. 2 By
persecuting and molesting him, for his faithfulness.
2. Against his authority.

1. Of teaching. 2. Of discipline.
1. Or teaching, by two things.

1. By rejecting truth. 2. By receiving lies, or any thing without trial.
2. Against his authority of discipline, by contemning his admonitions.

Hitherto of the fifth Commandment, enioyning the duties spec^ally concerning
us in regard of place: the sixth follows.

Thou shall not kill.
ANd it enioynes all such common duties, as appertain to our selves and our
neighbors, in regard of the safety of their and our person The substance is,
Thou shall by all good means procure, and by no ill means hinder thine own,
or thy neighbors personal safety.

The things commanded are of two sorts.

1 Some directly commanded. 2. Some indirectly.
Directly in regard, 1. Of our selves. 2. Of others.


In regard of our selves.

1. Love of our selves, true love whereby we do truly and ordinately will and
desire our own good and saftie. 2. The effects of this love, which are both
inward and outward.
1. Inward.

1. In regard of our affections. 2. In regard of our thoughts.
In regard of our affections by moderating them.

1. Toward good. 2. Toward evil.
Toward the good and desirable things which are 1. To come hereafter, by a
good hope of them. 2. That are present, by cheerfulness at them.


2. Toward the evil and harmefull things that are 1. Already upon us, by
patience, in quiet and willing bearing the same. 2. Imminent and to come, by
courage in a resolute setting our hearts to prevent and resist them so far as
may be.


2. The inward effects of love in regard of thoughts by holding them constantly
attendant upon our own preservation in all occasions.

2. The outward effects of love, which are for our natural and spiritual
estate.

1. For our natural estate regarding our bodily condition in this present life.

1. In regard of good and needful things. 2. In regard of evil and hurtful
things.
1. In regard of good and needful things, for the continuance and comfort of
this present life.

1. A due and moderate painfulness and undergoing of labor to get the same.

2. A moderate and temperate use of them, for measure, both 1. Of food. 2.
Apparel. 3. Rest and sleep. 4. Exercise. 5. Even sometimes also nuptial
society of generation and the like.


2. In regard of evil and hurtful things, tending to break off life, or
making it uncomfortable, viz. 1. A wise and discreet shunning. 2. A resolute
and constant resisting.


1. A wise and discreet shunning of those that with safety of conscience we may
possibly shun.

1. By flying. 2. By suffering.
1. By flying all if it may be, such are, 1. Quarrels and brawles, chiefly
private combats. 2. Infections places. 3. Dangerous and mischievous sports, as
football, etc. 4. Dangerous climing, or ways, or passages, or the like.


2. By suffering the less to avoid the greater: as cutting off a limme to save
the life, etc.

2. A resolute and constant resisting of them by Art or force.

1. By Art.

1. Of Physic, some. 2. Of law, others.
2. By force in needful cases, to which end, 1. We must be prepared of
weapons, etc. 2. We must use them. 1. In public. 2. In private.



1. In public by wars, both defensive and offensive.

2. In private for defense against present and otherwise unavoidable violence.

2. The outward effects of love which concern our spiritual estate in regard
of another life.

1. By preventing. 2. By procuring.
1. By preventing spiritual mischief.

1. By repenting or confessing and bewailing sins past, seeking pardon. 2. By
shunning sin and the occasions of sin for the time to come.
2. By procuring our spiritual good by constancy in all good duties for our
spiritual proceeding in grace and glory.

2. Things directly commanded in regard of others.

1. Love to him, that is, an entire and earnest desire of his good.

2. The effects of love, which are 1. Inward. 2. Outward.


1. Inward.

1. In regard of the acts of conversation passing betwixt us.

2. In regard of other accidents.

1. In regard of the acts of conversation passing betwixt us for two respects.

1. The accepting and entertaining of his deeds toward us.

2. The ruling of our carriage to him-ward.

1. The accepting and entertaining of his deeds toward us, whether 1. Good. 2.
Bad.


1. Good and pleasing.

1. By kindness, taking all even the least in good worth. 2. By
thankfulness, in being careful to remember, acknowledge, and requite them.
2. Bad and injurious and displeasing.

1. By meekness. 2. By forgiveness.
1. By meekness, which is a calm and quiet disposition toward him in the
doing, or when we hear of or remember the doing of them.

2. Forgiveness and forgetting them afterward, yea and readiness to requite
their evil with good, but not with evil.

2. The acts of our conversation in regard of ruling our carriage to him-ward.

1. In regard of his hurt. 2. In regard of his good and benefit.
1. In regard of his hurt and evil, by innocence, which is an abhorring and
loathing that we should be a cause of hurt, or wrongful grief to any.

2. In regard of his good and benefit by virtues that make us apt to procure,

1. Courtesy or serviceableness, a readiness to gratify him in any kind
office, though not in strictness required at our hands.

2. Peaceablenesse, by care to maintain all good concord and agreement.

1. Betwixt him and our selves. 2. Betwixt him and others.
1. Betwixt him and our selves.

1. In preventing iarres. 2. In redressing them that are fallen out.
1. In preventing iarres so far as may be.

1. By pleasingnesse and desire to please him, so far as we may reasonably
and lawfully.

2. By passing by and covering his weaknesses and infirmities as natural
disabilities and moral wants, that are not palpable, in not suffering our
hearts to be estranged from him for them.

3 By taking his deeds in the best part.

4. By parting with our own right to him, so far as we may without too much
hurting our selves or wronging our places.

2. By redressing iarres that are fallen out, 1. By care to make amends to him
by all good means if we have done wrong. 2. By willingness to accept of any
reasonable satisfaction, if we have been wronged by him.


2. We must have a care to have agreement betwixt him and others, by care and
readiness to persuade peace, and set them at one.

Hitherto of the inward effects of love in regard of the acts of conversation.

2. Now follows the inward effects of love in regard of other accidents that
befall him any way: as, 1. Congratulation or rejoicing in his good. 2.
Compassion or grieuing for his evil.


Hitherto of the inward effects of love: now follows

2. The outward effects of love, which are, 1. General, in an amiable and
kind ordering of our countenances and whole carriage. 2. Particular. 1. For his
outward estate. 2. For his inward.



For his outward estate.

1. In speech. 2. In deed.
1. In his speech, mild and good language.

2. In his deed, 1. Defense against wro^gs and injuries. 2. Releeuing his
miseries and wants.


2. His particular inward estate of soul.

1. In word. 2. In deed.
1. In word, in regard 1. Of good. 2. Of evil.


1. Of good, to do our best.

1. To show it him. 2. To persuade him to it. 3. To encourage him in it.
2. In regard of evil.

1. Of sin. 2. Of temptation.
1. Of sin.

1. To show it him. 2. To dissuade him from it. 3. To reprove him for it.
2. In regard of temptations and afflictions, to strengthen and comfort him
under it.

Hitherto of the outward estate: now follows,

2. The inward estate of the soul in regard of deed.

1. By giving him good Example of life. 2. By moderating our selves in the use
of Christian liberty for his sake.
So much is commanded directly, whereof hitherto.

Now indirectly some things are commanded in regard 1. Of men. 2. Of beasts.


1. In regard of men, 1. Living. 2. Dead.


1. Living, in preventing that that may probably do them hurt: as, 1. Lives of
mankind beasts. 2. Incommodious buildings, wels, pits, hie ways, etc.


2. Dead, as comely and decent interring of their bodies.

2. In regard of beasts, a merciful using them in giving food, rest, and
quietness necessary for them.

Hitherto the affirmative part. The negative follows: which shows how this
commandment is broken.

1. By omission of any of the former things either in whole or in part.

2. By commission in things quite contrary.

1. Directly. 2. Indirectly.
1. Directly in regard of 1. Our selves. 2. Others.


1. In regard of our selves contrary to the forenamed, 1. Love. 2. The effect
of Love.


1. Love.

1. In excess, self-love, a perverse or ouer-earnest desire of our own
natural welfare.

2. In defect, which is not often scene, in a kind of bitterness, in ill will
against our selves.

2. The effect of love is, 1. Inward. 2. Outward.


1. Inward.

1. In regard of good. 2. In regard of evil.
1. In regard of good, which is either, 1. To come, first by despair thereof,
in defect: Secondly, by a foolish hoping for it, in excess. 2. Present,
contrary to cheerfulness. 1. In defect. 2. In excess.



1. In defect, carnal sorrow.

1. For our own crosses. 2. For the good of others, which is called envy.
2. In excess, by mad mirth and ouer-ioying ofthings carnal.

2. The inward effect of love in regard of evil, either.

1. To come. 2. Present.
1. To come.

1. In defect, timorousness, in dying almost for fear. 2. In fool
hardiness, in excess, by an unnecessary provoking dangers.
2. Present evil.

1. In excess, stupidity, when a man is like a stone and will not feel them.
2. In defect; when a man is carried away with fretting and coffeehouse at
them.
2. The outward effects of love.

1. For the natural estate. 2. For the spiritual.
1. For the natural estate.

1. In regard of the things concerning life. 2. In regard of life it self.
1. In regard of things concerning life.

1. Good. 2. Evil.
1. Good.

1. For getting them. 2. For the use of them.
1. For getting them.

1. By toilsome laboring for them, to the hurting of the body. 2. By
slothful neglect of them.
2. For the use of them.

1. In excess, by taking them excessiuely and intemperatly, where is the
practice of gluttony, drunkenness, and all luxuriousness and not.

2. In defect, by niggardly pinching of ones body, for want of necessary things.

2. Evil and hurtful, in regard of the things concerning life.

1. By excess, here is hazardfulnesse in venturing upon needless dangers, as
combats, dangerous sports, climbing, etc.

2. By defect, here is timorousness, and that, 1. In not daring to use fit
means for preventing them that might be prevented out of fear of the evil.
2. In not daring to hazard our selves to them when our calling requires.


2. The effects of love for our natural estate, in regard of life it self.

1. In defect, attempting wilfully to take away ones life by selfe-murther. 2.
In excess, in using of base and vile shifts to save ones life.
2. The outward effects of love, for the spiritual estate, 1. By impenitency.
2. By venturousnesse upon the occasions of sin.


So much of the sins against our selves: those follow that are against others.

1. Against love. 2. Against the effects of love.
1. Against love.

1. In excess, fondness and carnal love.

2. In defect, hatred, having two degrees, 1. Of dislike of the person, not for
his sin but wrong. 2. A malicious desire of his hurt.


2. Against the effects of love which are in regard, 1. Of his natural estate
of life. 2. In regard of his spiritual estate of life.


1. In regard of his natural estate, which is, 1. Inward. 2. Outward.


1. Inward, respecting 1. The acts of conversation. 2. O her accidents.


1. The acts of conversation passing betwixt us.

1. For accepting of his deeds. 2. For ordering our deeds.
1. For accepting of his deeds.

1. Good. 2. Bad.
1. Good, contrary 1. To kindness, in disdainfulnesse, and scornful
rejecting of kindness. 2. To gratitude.


1. By formal thankfulness in words alone.

2. By unthankfulness.

1. By denying or forgetting a good turn done to us.

2. By requiting good with evil, which is worst of all.

2. Bad, against 1. Meekness. 2. Forgiveness.


1. Meekness.

1. In excess, being too meek, so that sin makes not one angry.

2. In defect, by anger for wrongs too sore, too much, or too long, and it is
1. Unkindness taking. 2. Sullenness. 3. Rage.


2. Against forgiveness, by reuengefulnesse in remembering evil to requite it
with the like or worse.

2. The act of conversation, for ordering our deeds toward him.

1. Evil. 2 Good.
1. Evil, against innocence, which is harmfulnesse and mischieuousnesse (for
too innocent one cannot be) in delighting to hurt others.

2. Good, contrary 1. To serviceableness. 2. To peaceablenesse.


1. To serviceableness.

1. In excess, by charging our selves harmefully, for superfluous kindnesses,
ouer-kindnesse.

2. In defect, by hoggishnesse and churlishness, refusing to do good.

2. Good, contrary to peaceablenesse.

1. In excess, by being of a man pleasing disposition, rather sinning then
incurring their displeasure.

2. In defect.

1. By fained peace to entrap the sooner.

2. Frowardnes and contentiousnesse in causing falling out, 1. Betwixt our
selves and others. 2. Betwixt some of our neighbors and others.


1. Betwixt our selves and others.

1. By procuring jarres. 2. By nourishing them.
1. By procuring iarres.

1. Through crosnesse and thwarting. 2. Through misconstruction of things
indifferent. 3. Through prying into each weakness. 4. Through rigorous
standing upon ones right.
2. By nourishing them.

1. In stoutnesse, scorning to acknowledge and make amends for wrongs. 2. In
vnappeasablenesse, and refusing to be contented with any reasonable
satisfaction.
2 Falling o^t betwixt some of our neighbors and others, in desire to sow
quarrels, and to nourish them.

So much of the effects of love inward, respecting the acts of conversation:
now follows in respect of

2. Other accidents, in regard of his natural estate befalling him.

1. Good, envy, contrary to fellow rejoicing. 2. Evil, 1. In excess, which
is foolish pity. 2. In defect.

1. In hard hartednesse, in careless neglecting his miseries.

2. In cruelty, in rejoicing at his smart, and rejoicing in any evil of his
whatsoever.

2. The effects of love, in regard of his outward natural estate.

1. In word. 2. Countenance. 3. In deed.
1. In word.

1. For matter. 2. For manner.
1. For matter.

1. Mocking, specially at his misery. 2. Railing at him, with ill names and
vpbraidings. 3. Threatening him, with future revenge.
2. For manner, clamorousnesse and crying out, in ouer-loud words.

2. In countenance and gesture, in a sour, fierce, angry, discontented look,
and dogged carriage.

3. In deed, and that 1. By attempt alone, as casting a thing at him to hurt
him, as Saul cast his Spear at David. 2. By effect also in degrees. 1.
Inferior. 2. More notorious.



1. Inferior, that hurts, but kills not, as 1. Oppressing. 2. Smiting.


1. Oppressing and grinding his face with hard dealing of any kind.

2. Smiting, wounding, and mayming him.

2. More notorious, in taking away life.

1. Manifestly. 2. Closely.
1. Manifestly, 1. By weapon. 2. By poison given to him.


1. By weapon, whether 1. Suddenly in passion, or 2. Premeditately, as in lying
for him, or challenging him.


2. Closely, by some device, as David killed Vriah, and so many kill others, by
sending them out to war in hope they shall perish there, and never return.

Hitherto of hurting ones neighbors natural life. Now follow the hurts,

2. To his spiritual life, and that 1. In word. 2. In deed.


1. In word, in four kinds of ill speeches.

1. In poisoning him. 2. Drawing him. 3. In dissuading him. 4. In
discomforting.
1. In poisoning him, with heretical and unsound doctrine.

2. In drawing him to sin, whether

1. To commit it at first, which is, enticing to ill, or

2. To continue impenitently in it, which is, to strengthen the hands of the
wicked, as a flatterer does in commending one for that that is naught.

3. In dissuading a man, from beginning or continuing to do well, by fair or
foul words.

4. In discomforting the tempted, or afflicted, with ill and aggravating
specches, and unfound collections, as Jobs friends did.

2. Spiritual hurt in deed.

1. By molesting and troubling a man, for well doing.

2. By giving bad example, especially being the first inuenter of a sin.

3. By abusing of Christian liberty, to the grieuing of some, or animating of
others in evil, this is to be understood, if the thing be left at ones own
choice to do, and he be not enjoined to do it.

Hither of direct breaches of this commandment. The indirect breaches are, 1.
Toward men. 2. Toward beasts.


1. Toward men.

1. Living. 2. Dead.
1. Living, by doing such things, as in likelihood may endanger them, as 1.
Keeping cruel and mad beasts. 2. In building stairs, or other like things
dangerously, or styles, etc.


2. Dead, by barbarous and inhumane usage of the dead corpse.

2. Toward beasts in two things.

1. In ouer-working them, without fit hartening of rest and prouender.

2. In delighting in their worrying one another for sports sake; for a good man
is merciful to his beast, therefore it is the part of a bad man to be cruel.

Hitherto the sixth Commandment concerning our own and neighbors safety.
The seventh follows.

Thou shall not commit adultery.
ANd it takes order for the preservation of the purity and chastity of our
selves and our neighbors.

The things commanded are 1. Direct. 2. Indirect.


1. Direct, purity or chastity, which is, the right ordering of our whole
man, in regard of the faculty of generation, and it is twofold.

1. Out of matrimony. 2. In matrimony.
1. Out of matrimony, in single life, by restraint of our selves, in regard of
that faculty, both inward and outward.

1. Inward, in holding of the desire it self in compass, that it be not
carried after one, that God has not allowed to take: this is kept in order, 1.
By spiritual means. 2. By natural means.


1. By spiritual means, which is twofold.

1. Earnest praying, if need be, joined with fasting. 2. Meditating on Gods
word, both threats and promises, that we may fear him, and delight in him.
2. By natural means, which are three.

1. Temperance in diet, for quantity and quality, both of meat and drink. 2.
Diligence, in laboring in a calling. 3. Shunning the opportunity of time,
place, and company, fit to inuit to that sin.
2. Outward, in regard 1. Of speech, by modesty and purity of speech, putting
away mentioning of uncleanness, and all manner of incensiue speeches. 2. In
regard of action, both in regard 1. Of things inducing to the sinful act, by
modest, shamefast carriage, free from all such behauiours, as may provoke and
incense. 2. Of the sinful act it self, by possessing ones vessel in
holiness and honor, and keeping the body undefiled.



2. The right ordering of a man's self in matrimony, which in case the
forenamed means will not subdue the desire, one is bound in conscience to
contract, and therefore some duties concern 1. The entering into this estate.
2. The use and enioyment of this estate.


1. The duties required, unto the entering into this estate, are two.

1. A due choice of a yoake-fellow, where some things ate to be respected.

1. Of necessity. 2. Of conueniencie for the matter.
1. Of necessity, which are three.

1. That they be sufficiently distant one from another, in regard 1. Of blood.
2. Affinity.


1. In regard of blood, for the right line upward and downward, abstaining from
all generations; no man ever marying his mother, grandmother, great grand
mother, etc. and so downward.

2. For the collateral line.

1. Unequal, abstaining from marriage, betwixt all that have the place of
parents and children, each in respect of each other, as the uncle from the
niece, so the great uncle, etc.

2. Unequal, abstaining from marriage betwixt brother and sister, and further,
conscience so far as I know does not forbid.

2. Affinity, where these be the rules,

1. A man may marie none of those that are so near to his wife in blood, that
were she a man, she might not marie them, and so a woman may marie none so
near to her husband in blood, that had he been a woman, he might not have
married them.

2. Affinity rests alone betwixt parties themselves, betwixt whom it
befalls, and does not derive it self to any other person. As I only am near
in affinity to my wives sister, so is not my brother, or father, or son, or
uncle.

2. Duty of necessity, that they be of sufficient strength and age for
generation, else it is a weak marriage.

3. Duty of necessity, that they be both free and vncontracted to any other,
else it is a nullitie.

2. Things to be respected, in regard of conueniencie for matter.

1. Of religion, that they serve the same God, and be of the same religion. 2.
Of civil life, that they be
1. Of proportionable quality for age, not one too old, or young for the other.

2. That there be a paritie of parentage and wealth, somewhat near.

Thus far of the duty, at the entrance into the state of matrimony, a due
choice. Now follows the second duty.

2. A due proceeding to it, where also some things 1. Of necessity, must be
done. 2. Of conueniencie, must be done.


1. Of necessity.

1. They must have consent of parents, if they have parents.

2. They must take each other with an express covenant and purpose of living
together during their life.

2. Some things are to be respected, in regard of conueniencie, that the
covenant be 1. Made by degrees. 2. Be published.


1. Be made by degrees.

1. In espousals, which is a mutual giving of the right of each others bodies,
by a serious and solemn promise of marriage.

2. In wedding, by giving possession of each others bodies, in a promise of
living together during life.

2. That the covenant be published and solemnized, according to the different
custom of each country.

2. The duties that concern the use and enioyment of this estate.

1. In regard of the yoake-fellowes. 2. In regard of all others.
1. In regard of the yoake-fellowes selves, by communicating themselves, 1.
Willingly, without grudging or show of dislike of each other. 2. Seasonably. 3.
Sanctifiedly with prayer. 4. Moderately and sparingly, to assuage desire, not
provoke it.


2. In regard of enioyment of all others, by a total abstinence from them,
even in desire, or any thing that may express desire. So much for things
directly commanded.

2. It commands indirectly, 1. Shamefastness, a virtuous kind of shaming, to
do or see any thing that may but carry an appearance of moving such conceits.
2. Gravity, and modesty in attire.


Hitherto the affirmative: The negative follows, showing how this commandment
is broken, by omission and commission, and that 1. Directly. 2. Indirectly.


1. Directly.

1. Inwardly in heart. 2. Outwardly.
1. Inwardly in heart, by inordinate lust, and lust is inordinate, 1. For the
measure, when it is a burning, an eager and a vehement desire, bearing down
the whole soul, and consuming all other desires. 2. For the subject, when it
wanders toward vnallowed persons.


2. Outwardly, and that 1. In rotten communication. 2. In actions that are lewd.


1. Rotten communication.

1. By provoking, foul speeches, chiefly songs. 2. By talking of the lewd
deeds of others, or ones self, with delight. 3. By soliciting, and tempting
any body, as Joseph's mistress did him.
2. In actions that are lewd.

1. Such as lead and induce to the act. 2. The act it self.
1. Such as lead and induce to the act, which is wantonness, 1. Of the body.
2. Of attire.


1. Of the body it self.

1. For the several parts of it. 2. For the whole.
1. For the several parts of it, as 1. The eye. 2. The ear. 3. The foot. 4.
The hand. 5. The mouth.


1. The eye and countenance.

1. By beholding things. 2. By alluring glances.
1. Beholding things incensiue, as 1. Lewd pictures and Images. 2. Filthy stage
plays. 3. The generating of beasts. 4. Nakedness of others.


2. By alluring, and promising glances of the eye, in having eyes full of
adultery.

2. The ear, by a willing listening to filthy tales, speeches and songs.

3. The foot.

1. Running to places of ill resort, fit for that ill purpose. 2. In making
signs of ill meaning, treading on the toe.
4. The hand.

1. In gesturing sorth uncleanness.

2. In touching and toying by any ouer-familiar touches, chiefly of the secret
parts, for which a woman's hand was to be cut off.

5. The mouth, in unchaste kissing.

2. The whole body, 1. In impure embraces and counterfetting the act of evil.
2. Lascivious dancing or reuelling, which is an artificial wantonness.


2. The wantonness of attire, and that 1. By light and indecent attire that
speaks out wantonness and vanity, as laying open the breast. 2. By changing
attire, in a man's putting on woman's apparel, or contrarily, which God calls
abomination unto him.


2. The lewd act it self: which is, 1. In strange and undue abuses of this
faculty. 2. In inordinate abuse of the course of nature.


1. In strange abuses of this faculty, otherwise then agrees to the natural
course.

1. With ones self by committing the sin of Er and Onan. 2. With others. 1.
Of the same kind. 2. Of other kinds, as man or woman with a beast, which is
confusion.

1. Of the same kind, and that 1. Of a different sex. 2. Of the same sex, viz.
Man with man, or woman with woman.


2. Inordinate act of abuse of the course of nature is either out of marriage,
or in respect of marriage.

1. Out of marriage, fornication, which is a mixture of two single persons,
aggrauated 1. By the manner of committing. 2. By the person with whom it was
committed.


1. By the manner of committing, if be done 1. By violence, so its rape. 2. By
charms and spells, so its worse.


2. By the person with whom it was committed, if it be too near of kin or
affinity, then its called incest.

2. Inordinate abuse of the course of nature in respect of marriage, and that 1.
For the own yokefellow. 2. For others besides.


1. For the own yoke fellow, and that 1. For the entering to it. 2. For the use
of it.


1. For the entering into it.

1. In regard of choice. 2. In regard of proceeding.
1. In regard of choice, if one take 1. One that is precontracted. 2. One that
is too near a kin.


2. In regard of proceeding, if one enter it 1. Without consent of parents. 2.
By a forced covenant, or else fained, or extorted by fraud.


2. In regard of the use of it.

1. By denial of ones self to the yokefellow, chiefly in running away in
desertion. 2. By abuse of the marriage bed, and that 1. Vnsanctifiedly. 2.
Unseasonably. 3. Immoderatly.

2. Others beside the own yoke fellow.

1. In polygamie, which is a covert adultery. 2. In flat adultery with
another, not so much as in conceit a wife or an husband, which is, 1. Single,
when one alone is married, and is the worse, if the woman be married. 2. Double,
when both are married, and both receive aggrauations, as fornication did before.

So much of direct breaches, it is also broken

2. Indirectly, and that 1. By occasions of this sin. 2. By the appearances
of evil.


1. By the occasions of this sin.

1. To others. 2. To ones self.
1. To others.

1. In costly attire. 2. In discovering ones self impudently or carelessly.
2. To ones self.

1. By idleness and neglecting ones calling. 2. By intemperance in food. 1.
For quality, which is luxuriousness. 2. For quantity, which is gluttony and
drunkenness. 3. By unseasonableness of meeting, 1. In respect of place,
solitary. 2. In respect of time, in the night. 3. In respect of person, one
that one desires or has sinned with, or is likely to tempt or yield.


2. Indirectly by the appearances of evil, 1. In garish attire. 2. In light
carriage. 3. In company keeping with suspected persons.


Hitherto of the seventh Commandment: the eighth follows.

Thou shall not steal.
ANd it takes order for the right carriage of our selves, in regard of riches or
goods of this world.

The things herein are, 1. Inward. 2. Outward.


1. Inward, a well ordering of the inward man toward these outward goods in
regard of 1. The judgment, by esteeming meanly of riches, in contemning it,
or counting it dung or dross in comparison of heaven, and of little value
simply, because it can do no good, but in this base and worthless life. 2. In
regard of the thoughts, that they be but sparingly bestowed in thinking of
worldly business, even no more then the necessity of our calling induces. 3.
In regard of the affections, which are chiefly six. 1. Love, 2. Desire, 3.
Trust, 4. Joy, 5. Fear, 6. Grief; that must not be at all, or scarce any whit
at all exercised about the goods of this life, for S. John says, Love not the
world, and be contented with that you have; and trust not in riches; and let
the rich man not rejoice in his riches; and care not for to morrow, and let us
use the world as though we used it not.



2. The outward things commanded, are 1. In regard of our own estate or goods.
2. In regard of the estates and goods of others.


1. In regard of our own estate or goods.

1. By a due care of maintaining our estate. 2. Of enjoying and using the same.
1. By a due care of maintaining our estate: and that is, 1. By due getting. 2.
By due keeping.


1. By due getting, to which end 1. We must have a lawful calling, something
to employ our selves in for our own advantage by the common good. 2. We must
use it lawfully, viz. 1. To the right end, the interesting of our selves into
Gods blessings according to his will. 2. In a right manner, with practice of
three virtues. 1. Diligence. 2. Prudence. 3. Cheerfulness.




2. By due keeping, which is thrift.

1. Diligence, is a virtue whereby men do duly apply themselves to the works
of their particular callings: it has two parts.

1. Painfulnesse and laboriousnesse, whereby a man does earnestly perform the
works of his calling whilst he is at them, setting his head and hand and all
to work therein to some purpose. 2. Constancy, whereby a man continues close
at them, till there be a just cause of intermission offered.
The just causes of intermitting our callings are, 1. Spiritual. 2. Natural.


1. Spiritual, 1. For the sanctifying of the Sabbath day. 2. For performing
religious duties on the week day, either 1. Private. 2. Public.



1. Private, as 1. Prayer. 2. Meditation of Gods word.


1. Prayer.

1. Alone. 2. With the family.
2. Public, the hearing of the word of God preached, unless some
extraordinary or special occasion of our calling hinder.

2. Natural causes of intermitting our calling, and these are 1. Necessary. 2.
Indifferent.


1. Necessary, respecting 1. Others. 2. Ourselves.


1. Others, to do service, 1. In the works of an higher calling, as in
public meetings, etc. 2. In the works of mercy, visiting the afflicted. 3.
In works of courtesy, visiting of friends and feasting, etc. so that it be
moderate, not hurting ones estate, and with choice of fit times.


2. Respecting our selves.

1. In sickness, when God does force us to cease from them. 2. In health. 1.
For feeding our selves. 2. For refreshing our bodies with fit sleep.

2. Natural causes indifferent for sports and pastimes: and that we may
lawfully use pastimes or sports, we must,

1. Aim at the right ends, which are 1. Principal, Gods glory, by fitting our
selves the better to serve him in our callings. 2. Inferior, which are 1.
Refreshing of the mind in dullness. 2. Exercising of the body for health.



2. That we may lawfully use sports, we must observe the right rules for
attaining of these ends, for 1. Our affections to sports, that we love them
not, that is, suffer not our hearts to be so set upon them, that we cannot
quietly want them; because we have brought our selves in subjection to them. 2.
The sports themselves, concerning 1. The matter of them. 2. The manner of using
them.



1. Concerning the matter of them, three rules must be followed in choice of
sport.

Rule 1.

1. That the thing used for sport, be a thing lawful and indifferent.

1. In regard of it self and its own nature, as not being forbidden by God.

2. In regard of other considerations, taken 1. From the Magistrate. 2. From
our selves. 3. From our brethren.


1. From the Magistrate, that it be not by his laws prohibited.

2. From our selves, that it be not 1. Ouer-costly. 2. Ouer-dangerous.


1. Ouer-costly for our estates, as taking up more expense then we can usually
allow, 1. For Gods worship to maintain it. 2. For works of mercy to the
poor. 3. For works of mercy to our brethren.


2. Ouer-dangerous to our bodies, as hazarding life or limme in the following
of it, as some sports do.

3. From our brethren, in that it does not trespass and damage them.

Rule 2. for choice of sports.

2. That the thing used to sport be someway beneficial in it self, not barely
serving to content the fancy, else its worse then an idle word, and so a sin.

Rule 3. for choice of sports.

3. That it be a matter so mean and low, as may be abased to so mean an use
as sporting, for serious and weighty things must be handled seriously.

2. The manner of using sports, in regard of the principal circumstances.

1. Time.

1. Not beginning before the use of body or mind do require them.

2. Continuing, and that must be but a little time, even less then usually is
spent upon duties of religion.

2. Circumstance is company, with whom we join in them, that they be at
least ciuilly and morally honest men, not notorious and scandalous sinners.

3. Circumstance is of place, that it be 1. Somewhat retired, not ouer-publique,
for fear of offense and inconveniences. 2. Of honest note, not infamous.


4. Circumstance is price, that we play for nothing, seeing sports are not
appointed by God to transfer the right of goods from one to another, but acts
of our calling, and because this is the procurer of most abuses committed in
sporting through the setting of a greater edge upon a man's desires to them then
they should have to things sportfull, or if we will needs play for something,
the sum must needs be of such a nature, 1. As the players both of them can
well spare without any apparent detriment to their estates. 2. As for the
quantity of it, is not fit to stir up covetous passions. 3. As in other cases
a man of discretion would make none account, nor be no whit at all moved with
the gaining or losing of it.


Hitherto diligence in our callings: the next virtue to be practiced in our
callings is prudence or discretion.

2. Prudence is a virtue of ordering our affairs in such a manner, as we may
attain good and prosperous success therein, or if we be crossed, it befall
not through any default of our own.

The rules of wisdom tend to two heads.

1. To meet with losses. 2. To make our business thrive.
1. To meet with losses and indammagements.

1. By preventing them. 2. By mitigating them.
1. By preventing them so far as may be.

1. By taking good security of those with whom we deal: Take a pledge of his
hand, for a stranger, says Solomon.

2. By secrecy: Keep thy self secret for the wife of thy bosom, says the
Prophet.

3. By a good boldness, to deny unfit requests, chiefly of those that enter
into bonds, or be sureties for them, unless it be 1. For honest men, and
sufficient to our knowledge. 2. For our friends and familiars. 3. For such
sums as we can well pay our selves, without feeling a great burden to our
estates. 4. By dealing plainly and squarely with all men, lest it fall out that
crafty snares take his foot that laid them.


Hitherto of preventing losses, now follows

2. By mitigating losses, and making them as easy as may be, which cannot be
totally prevented, as by revealing ones debts, etc. to his friends, and craving
their help, before it be too late, as Solomon advises in case of suretiship.

2. Rule of wisdom is to make ones business thrive and prove gainful, for
which end some general rules are given in Scripture.

1. Observe and take fit times and seasons, that nature or other occasions
offer, as the Ant that labors in Summer, for that is a season for all
things, as in youth and health to get for age and sickness, etc.

2. To know our estate, and keep all our affairs, bargains, etc. within the
compass of it, as Solomon bids, Know the face of thy flock, Pro. 27.23.

3. To do things chiefly of importance in ones estate, with deliberation and
counsel, for in the multitude of counselors is peace.

4. To fear the worst as well as hope the best, for suspecting what ill may
come, and not only what must needs come.

5. To put all things to such use, as much as may be, that a man may live of
his own and not be ever buying, as Solomon advises, Pro. 27. last.

3. Duty. Hitherto of wisdom in our callings; cheerfulness follows, and it
is a virtue whereby a man goes forward in the works of his calling with an
vndiscouraged heart, even though crosses come, out of the consideration of Gods
good providence in all things, and a dependence upon his truth to cause all
work for the best. And so much for that part of maintaining ones estate which
consists in getting. That follows that consists in keeping, and here comes to
be practiced the virtue of thrift.

Thrift is the virtue of observing due measure in expenses, and it is done by
two things.

1. By cutting off unfit expenses. 2. By moderating needful expenses.
1. By cutting off unfit expenses, which are of two sorts.

1. Unlawful, such as when the matter whereupon they are bestowed is repugnant
to Gods will, as maintaining of Harlots, Bauds, etc. and an hundred such like.

2. Needless, such as come not within the limits of a man's vocation, and
wherein he follows not God (spending because he sees God would have him
spend) but his own lusts, spending because for some carnal end he has a will
to spend, whereof the most usual are these.

1. By vain iourneys from place to place. 2. By vain feastings, and merry
meetings. 3. By vain suits in law to undo another, or seek revenge of him.
4. By vain gifts to ones greater, in hope of aspiring. 5. By vain undertaking
in ostentation to pay for all when he comes in company, etc.
2. By moderating needful and virtuous expenses, in meat, drink, apparel,
building, household stuff, sports and the like to these, framing them

1. To the natural use appointed of God.

2. To a man's own means, gettings, and revenues, for if more come out then
in, there will be emptiness at last.

3. To a man's own estate and place, in regard of government, and authority,
and rank where he dwells: a gentleman must not affect to be like a Lord, a
Lord like a King, in building and such like.

Hitherto of maintaining ones estate:

2. Now secondly of enjoying and using the same by applying our selves to reap
those benefits from them whereto naturally they serve, and which God would have
us to reap by the practice of the virtue of liberality or bounty, or in a
great estate munificence, both in respect, 1. Of our selves, by taking a
comfortable portion for our persons and families, in meat, drink, cloth, etc.
according as God shall bless us. 2. To others, and that both 1. Public. 2.
Private.



1. Public, in being at charges for the common benefit in building, bridges,
hie-waies, free-schooles, colleges, almes-houses, hospitals, etc. which is
right munificence and a being rich in good works.

2. Private, and particular.

1. In mercy. 2. In kindness.
1. In mercy to the distressed.

1. By lending freely to them that need. 2. By giving to them that want.
2. In kindness to neighbors and friends, and all men in the practice of the
virtue of hospitality (by a loving and moderate entertainment of honest men
that shall have occasion to come unto us) and other like courtesies, only know
that mercy must take the upper hand of these courtesies, for Christ says, call
not thy rich friends to dinner, but the poor, meaning call the poor rather.

Hitherto of the duties required in regard of our own estate. That follows
secondly which concerns*

2. The estate and goods of other men, called particular justice, which is the
virtue of giving to every man his own, of which we must consider, 1. The
general rules. 2. The diverse kinds.


1. The general rules, which in Scripture are two.

1. Do to every man, at ye would they should do to you. 2. Serve each other
in love, not looking altogether to serve your selves.
2. The diverse kinds: justice is 1. Of words, called truth, 1. In assertions,
denying or affirming as the thing is. 2. Promises, faithfully resolving and
endeavoring to the utmost of our power to keep them.
2. Justice is of dealings and affairs consisting of many words and actions,
and this is 1. Commutatiue. 2. Distributive.



1. Commutatiue, that concerns affairs that pass betwixt man and man in
regard of the goods of this world: Inioyning us 1. For parting with that that
it in our hands to others. 2. For taking from others.


1. For parting with that that is in our hand to others.

1. To make them satisfaction for all trespasses wittingly or unwittingly done
to them in their goods, by our selves or beasts, etc.

2. To make restitution to them of whatsoever we have unlawfully gotten into
our hands, or if the right owner be unknown or gone, we must restore it to
God for the maintenance of his worship.

2. We are enjoined for taking any thing into our own hands of others. Of
which consider, 1. The general rule. 2. The most eminent and usual kinds.


1. The general rule, which is this, Let no man take any thing but that, nor
any more but that, to which he has sure and plain right and title.

Right is a respect depending betwixt some persons, and some good, out of some
due consideration, in reason, whereby the possessing of that wealth becomes
lawful for those persons. Right is of two sorts.

1. Divine. 2. Humane.
1. Divine, arising from some special institution of God in his word, as that
of the Ministers of the law to tithes, and so now of the Ministers of the
Gospel too, which succeeding in the work of attending Gods worship, cannot
but succeed them in the reward of taking Gods portion, that is, the tenth,
which he has challenged as his own, of all men increase.

2. Humane, arising from the common institution of God, founded upon some
special things considerable in men, and this is also double.

1. Natural. 2. Civil.
1. Natural, that is grounded upon the light of nature going alone, and that
in things of two sorts.

1. Such as have no known and certain owner. 2. Such as have a certain and
known owner.
1. Such as have no certain and known owner, as 1. Public things, the right
whereto must be taken from transaction of public persons. 2. Common things,
as wild-fowle, and which are his that by honest labor without trespassing the
laws or ones neighbors, shall get them. 3. Lost things, which are his that
finds them, unless the owner shall be known, or the laws dispose otherwise.


2. Such as have a certain and known owner, and in these right arises either
1. From the person that departs with goods. 2. From both parties jointly.


1. From the person that departs with goods only and alone, and that is
either

1. By free will, I say, will free from error, deceit, compulsion or force,
open or secret, composition or conditioning, secret or open, and that that is
so passed is gift.

2. By injury offered by him to the person, goods, name, etc. of the other,
according to the quantity or quality of the wrong for matter or circumstance,
and this is satisfaction.

2. From both parties jointly, viz. him that parts with goods, and him that
receives the same too, and that is either 1. Some special obligation passing
betwixt them, of neerenesse of blood, or duty, or the like, whereupon are
grounded inheritances, and the descent of lands and goods, and diverse payments
and dues to princes and officers. 2. Some exchange of one beneficial thing for
another of proportionable value, I say beneficial in it self, and in it own
nature, as 1. Service. 2. Stuff.



1. Service, for Stuff, and service.

2. Stuff, for service and stuff, according to that speech, do vt des, do vt
facias, facio vt des, facio vt facias. And here is the ground of lawful
contracts and bargains, a lawful bargain being nothing else, but the
expressing of an agreement upon such an exchange.

2. Civil, humane right, arising from the laws of each kingdom, state and
society, (which do so far forth, and no further warrant conscience, and give
right before God, as they are built upon the forementioned, either natural or
divine rights) which are referrable to two heads.

1. Rewards, privileges, fees, etc. 2. Penalties, mulcts, punishments.
Hitherto the general rule of commutatiue justice, now follows

2. The most eminent and usual kinds, which are five pair.

1. Pair.
1. Buying. 2. Selling.
2. Pair.
1. Setting or letting. 2. Taking.
3. Pair.
1. Borrowing. 2. Lending.
4. Pair.
1. Hiring. 2. Working for hire.
5. Pair.
Partnership. In buying and selling, 1. The buyer is bound. 2. The seller.

1. The buyer is bound to some things.

1. In regard of the thing bought, that he buy alone, that that is free for him
to buy: no man else being interessed into it by any precedent cheapning or
bargain.

2. In regard of the manner of the buying.

1. For reckonings, that he make straight and true.

2. For price, that he give as much as the thing is worth, in his own esteem.

3. For payment, that he make it with current money, and in the appointed time.

4. For measure, that he satisfy himself with the due measure, and seek no
tricks, for procuring an ouer-plus.

2. The seller is bound to some things respecting

1. The thing sold, that it be saleable for substance and quality, the same
that he would have it taken for, not worse.

2. The manner of selling.

1. For reckoning, that he make it just and square.

2. For price, that he take no more then the worth of a thing, that is, so much
as it is usually sold for, and as may make him a sufficient gainer in his
calling, even so much as he would give, all things considered, if he were to
buy.

3. For the measure and weight, that he use true ones truly.

3. The seller is bound to some things, respecting the person to whom he
sells, that he satisfy himself with customs duly gotten, not by tricks and
devices drawing in any one.

In setting, letting, and taking, the duties 1. Of the setter. 2. Of the taker.


1. Of the setter or Landlord (for the chief setting is of land, though there
be a setting also of other things.)

1. That he set things at a reasonable rate, even as himself would give, and
as the taker may be a gainer.

2. That he set things good and sufficient for the use whereto they be set, not
secretly faulty, as houses or land, in whom some other has some title, or the
like.

3. That he afford to the taker, a quiet use, fruition, and enioyment of the
things set, according to the conditions agreed upon, without any oppressing him
with other services.

4. That in case of Lands and houses and the like, he renew the lease of his
Tenant, (or his estate, as it falls our) upon reasonable terms, rather then
set it to any other, supposing the Tenant to have been a careful and
faithful Tenant.

2. The taker must 1. Take that is free from others. 2. Keep that he takes
without spoil, or waste, or havoc, and use it well whatsoever it be, horse
or other thing. 3. Pay his rent or hire in due time. 4. He must redeliuer it
to him that set it, according to conditions, safely kept and preserved.


In borrowing and lending, the duties 1. Of the borrower. 2. Of the lender.


1. Of the borrower are, 1. To borrow but for his need and use, when he cannot
make any other shift, not otherwise, for why should he make himself a slave?
2. But resolve, and care to repay in due season. 3. Must use the thing borrowed
so well, supposing it to be a thing to be repaid in the same individual thing,
as if it were his own.


2. The lenders duties are 1. To lend freely to the poor (that are honest, and
conscionable of repayment) so much as they can spare. 2. To lend, but for a
moderate gain, (in case they lend to a sufficient man, that shall employ it to
his gain) at most, but for so much as that sum of money laid out in the
purchase of Land or an house, would yield (or if any more, very little, in
consideration of the greater casualties of money, then an house) with the like
ease. and freedom from all travel and expense. 3. To use moderation, in the
taking of morgages and forfeitures. 4. To be as much as may be, without too
much detriment, forbearant in suits of Law.


In partnership, the duties of partners are 1. To make indifferent and equal
conditions of their partnership. 2. To use due care and diligence in the things
that are betwixt them, as their own proper goods. 3. To purloine, and divert
nothing from the common stock without agreement, but to give up an even
reckoning, and make a just division, according to their covenants.


So much for commutatiue justice. Now

2. Of distributive justice, so far as concerns the just decision of
controversies about meum and tuum, and the just satisfaction of damages and
wrongs in ones goods, in matters 1. Civil. 2. Ecclesiastical.


1. Civil, so far as concerns 1. Private persons. 2. Public persons.


1. Private persons, that have causes in courts of justice.

1. That they commence not causeless suits, grounded on spite, or quiddities
of law.

2. That they use no dishonest shifts nor delays, to weary out an adversary,
and by name not briberie.

2. Which concern public persons.

1. All, in regard of public lands, etc. committed to them, that they employ
them faithfully to the public good.

2. Those that have to do in sentencing causes.

1. That they content themselves with lawful and moderate fees. 2. That they
further the right, each to his utmost knowledge and power.
2. In matters ecclesiastical.

1. By bestowing of holy goods on holy things and persons.

2. By a free bringing in of fit men to the ministry, and the places of
charge, which we call benefices, for if the Judge must take no gift, I pray you
may the Patron? Will it not also blind his eyes?

So much for the affirmative part of this commandment. The negative follows,
which is broken two ways, 1. By omission of any of the things commanded. 2. By
doing things contrary thereto, and that 1. Inwardly. 2. Outwardly.



1. Inwardly, in the disorder of the inward man about wealth, viz. 1. In the
judgment, in high esteeming of riches, which is, laying up treasure on earth.
2. In the thoughts, in minding earthly things, bestowing many, yea the most of
our thoughts upon them, leaving none, or the fewer number, for things
celestial. 3. The affections to wealth. 1. Simply. 2. Respectively.



1. Simply, and in it self: love, when a man loves the world for the love of
money, is the root of all evil.

2. Respectively.

1. To our having them. 2. To our wanting them.
1. To our having them.

1. Already. 2. Hereafter.
1. Already.

1. Of confidence, when we trust in riches,.i. promise our selves to live
happily, or to escape misery for them.

2. Of joy, when we are very glad, of having gotten much.

2. Hereafter, desire, when we covet wealth inordinately, 1. For degree of
desiring, in suffering the desire to be earnest. 2. For quantity of the things
desired, when we desire more then enough for necessary uses. 3. For the end of
desiring, when we wish them, either only to look upon, or to set up our selves.


2. Respective, wanting them 1. For the present, in carnal sorrow, whereby we
ouer-grieue crosses and losses. 2. For the time to come, in carking and caring,
which is a mixture of grief and fear for wants doubted of that they will come.


2. By doing things outwardly contrary thereto.

1. In regard of our own estate. 2. In regard of others.
1. In regard of our own estate or goods, concerning 1. The maintaining of our
estates. 2. The using of them.


1. In regard of maintaining our estates.

1. By getting. 2. By keeping.
1. By getting, where are two maine sins.

1. Living without a calling, as vagrants, and most Gentlemen and Usurers. 2.
Abusing a calling.
1. For the matter of it, when it is either sinful or vselesse, as the
Beareward, the keepers of cock-pits, dicing houses, etc.

2. For the end of following it, when one labors to be rich, propounding a
false end to himself in his labors.

3. For the manner of prosecuting it.

1. In excess. 2. In defect.
1. In excess.

1. By toilesomnesse, that is, to eager setting to the works of ones calling,
that one has no time for comfortable refreshing, or exercises of piety.

1. For himself. 2. For his people and family.
2. By craft and worldly wisdom, when a man is so attentive to his gain, that
he neglects justice and honesty, at least the things of a better life.

3. By too much iollitie and liveliness, when a man has no life, but for his
worldly business, because he sees prosperity coming.

2. In defect, by three vices.

1. Idleness. 2. Folly. 3. Dullness and lumpishnesse.
1. Idleness is the sin of slacknesse in doing the works of his calling,
and has two parts. 1. A careless doing of them, whilst we tarry at them,
working as the Prophet says, till one be cold. 2. A causeless departing from
ones business, and bestowing the time in things unprofitable, that are so 1.
Simply. 2. Accidentally.



1. Simply: as 1. Vain twattle, and talk of the lips. 2. Vain books and
Pamphlets. 3. Vain thoughts and conceits.


2. Accidentally.

1. In regard of their quantity. 2. In regard of their impertinencie.
1. In regard of their quantity, because they be used too much, as 1. Sports,
which is sportfulness. 2. Sleep, which is, sluggishnesse.


2. In regard of impertinencie, in that they concern not ones self, as being
a busy body in others matters.

2. Vice, folly is the vice of doing things in such an untowardly manner, as
that one hinders himself, and brings crosses upon himself, and that four
ways.

1. By rashness. 2. Heedlesnesse. 3. Too much opennesse. 4. Credulity.
1. By rashness, venturing upon things hastily, and of ones own head.

2. By heedlesnesse, in casting off the consideration 1. Of a man's own estate,
how far it can reach, or cannot reach. 2. Of the perils and dangers that may
come, in all dealings. 3. Of the fit seasons, of doing and getting things.


3. By too too much opennesse and blabbing.

4. By credulity and too much believing, where the maine fault is, suretiship
and careless lending.

3. Vice, dullness in following ones calling, which is a vice of being heavy,
and troubled in ones calling, and unwilling to follow it, in regard of
discouragement by crosses, and wanting of success.

Hitherto of the faults in getting: now for keeping it, and likewise of using,
for they are near of a nature, and coincident, the same vices crossing the two
virtues of thrift and liberality, viz. 1. In defect. 2. In excess.


1. In defect, nigardice, which is a sparing more then is fit, both

1. From ones self and family, when he cannot afford himself and them fit
food and attire for his place and means.

2. From others.

1. By churlishness, against kindness and hospitality, when one refuses to
give fit entertainment, and perform fit courtesies.

2. Hard heartedness, when one refuses to relieve the necessities of the
poor, and to do other works of mercy according to his place.

2. In excess, which is twofold.

1. Wastefulnesse, in letting those, as bread, drink meat, etc. go carelessly
to loss. 2. Prodigality in expenses. 1. Sinful, as riot, gaming. 2.
Superfluous.

1. Exceeding ones place, when he strives to be as hie as any of his rank,
yea, as some of an hier rank.

2. Ones means, in that his expense procures 1. Indebtednesse, that he goes
into the books and bonds, more then he can well pay. 2. Bareness, in that
nothing remains 1. For himself. 2. For works of mercy.



1. For himself, 1. To bestow on his children. 2. To bear out sickness or
crosses.


2. Bareness, for works of mercy, such as his estate well husbanded would
afford.

So much of the sins against ones own estate: those follow, that are
committed against the estates

2. Of others, our neighbors, by the practice of injustice: injustice is the
sin of desiring and taking that that is another man's, or of hindering another
man from that that is his own. Injustice is practiced 1. Palpably. 2.
Colourably.


1. Palpably and plainly, when there is no color of any cause alleged, why a
man should have that that is another, yet he will have it without any, so much
as a seeming right, and that 1. By taking. 2. Keeping.


1. By taking, 1. In ones own person. 2. In his beast.


1. In ones own person.

1. By fraud and cousenage, whereof the devil and men have invented a thousand
tricks.

2. By force and violence, carrying away our neighbors good, clean against
his good liking, as in robberies and thefts of all kinds.

2. In his beast, by wilful trespassing ones neighbor, in causing ones horse
or ox to feed of his grass or corn, unless in case of necessity, to
relieve a tired beast by the way, or such like indammagement witting or
unwitting.

2. Injustice is practiced by keeping or detaining things that our neighbor
has right unto, as 1. Things stolen by another, where the receiver is truly
accounted worse then the thief. 2. Things lost, when the owner is known or
might be known, if one would use any fit means to find him out. 3. Legacies,
or any other thing committed to ones trust, to bestow upon another. 4. Ill
gotten goods or lands, that ones self or predecessors have sinfully come by.
5. Due satisfaction of damages and trespasses, wherein one has wronged his
neighbor.


2. Injustice is practiced colourably, when the injustice is hidden over with
some show of right, whereof 1. Generally. 2. Particularly.


1. Generally, the maine points are, 1. Falsehood. 2. Rigor.


1. Falsehood.

1. In words, by lying in all kind of dealing, to bring one gains. 2. In
deeds, when they be not agreeable to ones promises and undertakings.
2. The second general rigor or extremity, when a man will take all that he
can make any shift, by any quirke or quidditie of law, in extremity to get or
to keep, for extreme right is extreme wrong.

2. Particularly. The special points are 1. In dealings less eminent. 2. In
dealings more eminent.


1. In dealings less eminent, or the ordinary passages of business, betwixt
private men in bargaining, whereof there are five most remarkable kinds, viz.
1. Buying. Selling.
2. Setting and Letting. Taking.
3. Borrowing. Lending.
4. Hiering. Working for hire.
5. Partnership.


2. In dealings more eminent and public.

1. Civil. 2. Ecclesiastical.
1. Civil.

1. By private men. 2. By public persons.
1. By private men, 1. Betwixt buyers and sellers. 2. Betwixt setters and
letters.


2. Public persons.

1. Betwixt buyers and sellers, the faults are 1. Of the buyer. 2. Of the
seller.


1. Of the buyer.

1. In regard of the thing that he does buy. 2. In regard of the manner of
buying.
1. In regard of the thing that he does buy.

1. For quantity, engrossing, when he buys up the store that God sends, and
forces a scarcity, to enrich himself.

2. For the interest some other has unto it, when he buys it out of another
man's hands.

2. The manner of buying.

1. In regard of price. 2. In regard of reckoning. 3. In regard of payment. 4.
In regard of weighing.
1. In regard of price, when because of the simplicity or necessity of the
seller, he gets it for less then he knows it to be worth, that is, then other
who knew it, and had not such need, but yet were willing to sell, would usually
sell the same.

2. In regard of reckoning, when he misreckons the seller, because of his
simplicity or forgetfulness.

3. In regard of payment, when he paies him false coin, or out of the
appointed season agreed upon betwixt them.

4. In regard of weighing or measuring, when by some devices he gets more then
his due.

2. The faults in regard of the seller, are 1. For the matter. 2. For the
manner. 3. For the person.


1. For the matter sold, if it be insufficient and vnsaleable, as stuff that
is not the same for matter and goodness, which it is made to appear, or land
that is entangled by some former bargain.

2. For the manner of selling.

1. In regard of weights and measures, when they be not the same for heft,
content, and extent, that law does appoint, and usually men in dealing do
expect.

2. In regard of the manner of using waights and measures, when a man makes
show to give weight and measure, but by iogging and other tricks does cut the
matter shorter, as in measuring three quarters of an Ell for a yard, which
lacks about a nail of a yard in measure.

3. In regard of the price, when the seller abuses the buyers necessity or
simplicity, to sell a thing dearer then he knows it to be worth.

4. In regard of reckonings, when the seller ouer-reckoneth the buyer, because
of his carelessness, forgetfulness, or ignorance.

3. The seller is in fault, in regard of the person with whom he deals, when
he labors by odd tricks to get away another man's customer, as by selling for
a while better cheap then he can afford, that after he may fetch it out
again, when he has gotten the customer to credit him.

2. Faults betwixt them that set and let things, and them that take, the faults
are 1. Of the setter. 2. Of the taker.


1. Of the setter, whether he set or let 1. Lands. 2. Other things.


1. Lands and tenements, and that 1. By depopulating of towns and villages. 2.
By thrusting out tenants causelessly in anger. 3. By grinding his tenants.


1. By racking rents to excessive prices.

2. By letting upon hard conditions.

3. By misconstruing conditions, specially to deprive him of his bargain.

4. By exacting hard services above the conditions, as that a poor labourer
must work with him all harvest for a penny or two pence a day less then
other men would give.

2. In regard of other things, which are of other natures, as horses, apparel,
and the like, and that 1. By setting such things, as are known to be naught
and insufficient for his use that hireth the same. 2. By taking too hard a rate
for them, because of the takers need. 3. By turning the loss, (if any come by
Gods hand, not the takers abusing the thing let) upon the taker, by any tricks,
for the thing hired is lost to the hirer, if it miscarie without the fault of
the taker.


2. The faults of the taker are 1. Taking lands or houses over another man's
head, or any other thing out of another man's hand, that is, when he is about to
take it, and has will and means, then by offering more then he is in price
for, or by preventing the tenant with offering before him, to get it from him.
2. Neglecting to pay the rent, or hire of a thing in due time and quantity. 3.
Making waste in land by cutting the woods, or letting it go out of heart, or
the like. 4. Suffering houses and tenements to go out of repair. 5. Abusing
other things hired, as horses by ouer-riding them, and not affording them such
prouender, and hay or grass as is sufficient, and as wontedly men do give to
their own horses.


3. Betwixt the borrower and lender, there are sins 1. Of the borrower. 2. Of
the lender.


1. Of the borrower.

1. If he run in debt carelessly, or through greediness, he that is bold to
borrow, deals foolishly and unjustly too.

2. If he be careless to pay in due time, putting the lender to seek and sue
for his own.

3. If he break and play the banckerupt, only to beguile men, and compound for
less then the sums which he does owe.

4. If he abuse the thing lent, it being such a thing as may be abused, as an
horse, etc.

5. If he wind others into danger, by drawing them to be sureties for him, and
then leaving them in the lurch.

2. The lender sins, 1. If he rigorously exact debts of poor men, and such
as Gods hand by losses and crosses has brought low. 2. If he transgress in
pledges, and in morgages. 1. By taking a pledge of the poor, Job. 24.9. 2. By
taking of any man's things of present necessary use for living. 3. By taking
forfeitures with rigor. 4. By abusing and making worse the things pawned.



4. Betwixt those that hire, and those that work for wages, there are sins, 1.
In the hirer. 2. In the hired.


1. In the hirer.

1. If he pay nothing at all. 2. Too little, that the hired cannot live of it.
3. If he pay grumblingly and unwillingly. 4. Unseasonably, and with many
delays.
2. The hireds sins, 1. If he loyter and work by the halfes. 2. If he bungle
or do his work unskillfully. 3. If he purloigne any of the stuff, or matter
whereon he is to work.


5. Partners sin, 1. If the one put the other to hard conditions. 2. If they
misreckon at parting. 3. If before the parting, either pervert any of the common
goods to his particular use, without priuitie and consent of the rest. 4. If
either be slack and negligent in their endeavors for the common profit.


Hitherto of colorable injustice in dealings, less eminent against
commutatiue justice: Now of that injustice, which is in more eminent dealings
against distributive justice in things 1. Civil. 2. Ecclesiastical.


1. Civil.

1. Of private men. 2. Of public persons.
1. Of private men, in abusing of law and the courts of Justice.

1. On the Plaintifes part. 2. On the defendant.
1. On the Plaintifes part, 1. If he commence wrongful suits, to vex another,
out of hope to bear it out by money and friends. 2. If he use bribing, and
like tricks to bear out his cause whatsoever.


2. On the defendant, if he do 1. Stand in a wrongful cause, by friends, or
tricks of law and delays. 2. If he use bribing and shifting devices.


2. Public persons.

1. Generally. 2. Particularly.
1. Generally, by abusing of public lands and moneys to their own or friends
private advantage, against the true meaning of them that gave such lands or
moneys.

2. Particularly, in cases of administering justice betwixt party and party.

1. By extortion, in exacting ouerabundant fees. 2. By bribery, in taking
gifts. 3. By perverting justice: either 1. In hindering a right sentence. 2. In
furthering a wrong sentence.

2. Against distributive justice, in things ecclesiastical.

1. By sacrilege. 2. Simony.
1. By sacrilege, turning to common uses goods sacred, either 1. By man's
donation. 2. By Gods special institution.


2. Simonie, in taking money for presenting any to benefices, specially unfit
men, or in buying aduowsons.

Hitherto of the eighth commandment concerning goods: the ninth follows.

Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor.
THe scope of which is to save harmless that most precious Jewel of a good
name.

A good name is a fruit of goodness, whereby a man's own heart and the hearts
of others do truly entertain a good opinion of him, as of a good man.

The duties commanded in this commandment, are of two sorts.

1. Concerning our selves, and they are 1. Inward. 2. Outward. 1. In word. 2.
In deed.



2. Concerning our neghbours.

The duty of every man concerning his own good name inwardly respects 1. His
opinion of himself. 2. Other men's opinion of him.


1. His opinion of himself and of his own actions is twofold.

1. Lowliness or sober-mindednesse, a being little in his own eyes, and
esteeming meanly of himself, accounting others better then himself, wherein
to err is a commendable error, and this lowliness is the most graceful
ornament of virtues and commendable sufficiencies.

2. A true censuring and sentencing of our own actions, whether they be

1. Good, in accounting them so, and taking comfort in them, as Paul did in his
upright walking in the ministry of the Gospel, and could profess as much
when time served.

2. Or bad, in esteeming them bad, and judging our selves, and humbling our
selves for them as David said, I have done exceeding foolishly, after numbering
of the people: so, I was a very beast, when he had fretted against the
prosperity of the wicked.

2. A man's good name inwardly respects other men's opinion of him, which is
double.

1. A desire to approve ones self to every man's conscience before God, and to
behave ones self, that all men may have just cause to have him in good
reputation.

2. A right bearing other men's censures, whether they be 1. Good. 2. Bad.


1. Good, whether 1. True, by returning the praise to God, not taking it to our
selves, as Daniel and Joseph did: we may take comfort, but the honor must be
Gods. 2. False, to reject them with grief, as Paul did their fond conceits
that thought he had been Jupiter.


2. Bad, and that 1. True. 2. False.


1. True, to be humbled thereby, yet without deiectednesse, knowing that there
is a means left to recover all again.

2. False, either 1. For well doing, to rejoice in it, or 2. For nothing,
either 1. To despise it, as Christ did the shame. 2. To make use of it for our
humbling in other particulars, as David of Shimeies railing.



So much of the inward duties whereby we should preserve our own good name.
The outward follow, and first in words.

1. By restraint of speech. 2. By use of speech.
1. By restraint of speech, called silence, or taciturnity, to be practiced 1.
Upon occasion of two things. 2. In matters chiefly of two kinds.


1. Upon occasion of two things.

1. The presence. 2. The passions.
1. The presence, either 1. Of our betters and superiors in high degree. 2. Of
our captious enemies. 3. Of wicked men and scorners.


2. The passions that stir 1. In our own hearts. 2. In them to whom we
should otherwise speak.


2. Restraint of speech, in matters chiefly of two kinds.

1. That exceed our place or capacity. 2. That would be hurtful to our
neighbors or our selves.
Hitherto of restraint of speech: now follows

2. Use of speech, both 1. In general. 2. Special.


1. In general whatsoever we speak of, 1. For matter of words or the thing
spoken of, that it be such as we have to do withal, and appertains to our
calling. 2. For manner, that our words be 1. Deliberate. 2. Discreet. 3. True.
4. Modest.



1 Deliberate, setting the watch of wisdom before to examine to what purpose
we speak before we speak.

2. Discreet, fitted and proportioned 1. To the persons Speaking. Spoken to.
2. To time and place. 3. To the nature of the thing spoken of.


3. True.

1. In narrations. 2. In promises.
1. In narrations agreeing 1. To the things themselves. 2. To our conceits of
them.


2. In promises, seconded with a firm purpose and care of keeping them.

4. Modest and sober, speaking with a kind of doubting, and reserving of the
respect of them that think otherwise.

2. The use of speech in special when we are to speak of our selves.

1. Of our own good deeds. 2. Of our bad deeds.
1. Of our good deeds, where must be showed, 1. Upon what occasions we may
speak. 2. In what manner.


1. Upon what occasions we may speak of our own commendable actions, viz.
four ways.

1. By way of apology against slanders. 2. By proposing our selves (in case
age and authority will bear it) to the imitation of others. 3. In condemning
and reproving such as show gross unthankfulness to us. 4. By way of
ouer-entreating that we may better prevail in honest requests.
2. In what manner we are to speak of our own good deeds, it must be done
upon these occasions.

1. With speeches of mitigation tending to give away all the glory from our
selves unto God.

2. With profession of our unwillingness to do it, when the occasion is so
urgent (as in Jobs case) that may well save us that labor.

2. Of our own bad deeds, whether 1. Slanderously. 2. Truly.


1. Slanderously or falsely imputed unto us, by defending our innocence, 1.
Substantially with sound proofs. 2. Mildly and meekely with a calm spirit.


2. Truly laid to our charge and committed by us, whether they be such as are
1. Open. 2. Secret.


1. Open and already known, and ready to come to light, which we must confess.

1. Plainly. 2. Humbly.
2. Secret and kept close alone to our selves, which we must confess but 1. On
very just occasion. 2. With due choice. 3. With due caution.


1. On very just occasion, viz. when our selves 1. Are so doubtful of pardon,
that we cannot by our own endeavors settle our faith. 2. When we are so
weak, that we cannot by our own labor overcome the sin.


2. With due choice of a fit person to whom we may confess, viz. one that is
1. A friend and well-willer. 2. Fearing God in good measure. 3. Of good
understanding to advise. 4. Trusty and able to keep secret, which we may if
not know by experience, yet nearly guess of, by his not being 1. Inquisitiue.
2. Talkatiue.



3. With due and fit caution, binding the person to silence and secrecy by a
solemn vow or oath: fast bind, fast find, says the proverb; and nothing is
more needful to be fast bound then a secret.

So much of the ordering of our words: Now of our deeds and actions both 1.
Generally. 2. Particularly.


1. Generally, that they be such as are 1. In themselves good, lawful, honest,
and of good report amongst men. 2. In their circumstances convenient and
expedient.


2. Particularly.

1. In regard of the choice of our company. 2. In regard of our own carriage.
1. In regard of the choice of our company.

1. That we associate our selves with good men. 2. That we shun familiarity
with bad men.
2. In regard of our own carriage.

1. That we lovingly accept admonitions.

2. That we earnestly reject flatteries, and flatterers.

3. That we keep our promises faithfully (unless the things promised be sins)
or if we be not able, go to the person to whom we made them, and showing our
case crave pardon, if the matter will admit of so doing.

4. Carry our selves lowlily, and equal our selves with them of the lower
sort, and that,

1. In countenance, gate, deportment of body.

2. In ornaments of all sorts, in attire, household stuff, attendance,
building, etc. So much of the duties concerning our own good name: those
follow that concern the good name of our brethren, and they are of two sorts.

1. Inward. 2. Outward.
1. Inward.

1. Respecting our opinion. 2. Our censure.
1. Respecting our opinion of him in two things.

1. That we think well of him till he deserve the contrary. 2. That we renew
our good opinion of him, upon his repentance and amendment.
2. Our censure of his actions, whether they be 1. Certain, or 2. Doubtful.


1. Certain.

1. Good. 2. Bad.
1. Good.

1. To acknowledge them. 2. To be glad of them.
2. Our bad censure of his actions.

1. To see them. 2. To be sorry for them.
2. Doubtful.

1. Whether they were done or no, to hope the best, and not condemn one upon
light conjectures.

2. Whether they were well meant or no, to construe things in the best sense
that may be.

2. The outward duties concerning our brethren, 1. In our ordinary conversation
both for 1. Words, spoken, heard. 2. Deeds.
2. In matters of judgment.


1. Our words in ordinary conversation must be ordered well, and that 1. By
restraining speech. 2. By using speech.


1. By restraining speech, 1. Of their bad deeds. 2. Of their good deeds.


1. Of their bad deeds behind their backs but 1. Upon just cause. 2. In good
manner.


1. Upon just cause.

1. If they be public and openly known to glorify the justice of God, and
edify others.

2. If they be private and known to none, or few but our selves, then 1. To
warn those that might else be infected. 2. To advertise those that have
authority to redress it.


2. In restraining speeches of their bad deeds, in a good manner, that is, 1.
Sparingly, rather with the least then most. 2. Pitifully, with compassion and
loving affection.


2. By restraining speech of their good deeds before their face, but 1. Upon
good occasion. 2. With manifest referring of the praise to God.


1. Upon good occasion.

1. Of encouragement, and that 1. Against temptations. 2. Against oppositions.
2. Of thankful acknowledgement of good received.
2. With manifest referring of the praise to God, that they may not be puffed
up.

2. Our words in ordinary conversation must be ordered well by using speech, 1
In their presence. 2. In their absence.


1. In their presence, of their deeds, 1. Good, encouragement to proceed. 2.
Bad, reprehension and admonition.


2. In their absence.

1. Praise, to stir up others to imitate them. 2. Just defense against
slanders and calumniations.
Hitherto of the right ordering of our selves in regard of our own speeches.
Now for that that concerns the words which we hear others speak of our
neighbors: which is twofold.

1. In general, we must examine that that is spoken unto us, and call for due
proof.

2. In special.

1. For the evil reported, we must 1. Be unwilling to hear it and reject such
tales. 2. Unwilling to give any credit to it, without very sufficient proof,
and then sorrowful for it.


2. For the good reported, we must 1. Be glad and willing to hear it. 2.
Willing and desirous to believe it, if there be any probable proof that it is
true.


So much for the ordering of our words.

Now for our deeds.

1. We must use all civil and respective carriage to our neighbor tending to
grace him.

2. We must by all means strive to draw him to good and virtuous behavior,
that may deserve commendation.

And this for our ordinary conversation. Now for matters of judgment, in it
there are usually amongst us four sorts of men exercised.

1. The witness. 2. The advocate. 3. The jurors. 4. The Judge.
1. The witness, whose duty is to declare 1. The whole truth, without adding,
diminishing, or altering for favor or ill will. 2. Nothing but the truth, no
intermixture of falsehood is allowable.


2. The advocate, pleader, or counselor, who must with an impartial eye seek
to find out, and clear the truth, though it be to the detriment of his client.

3. The jurors, who must 1. Indifferently consider of the evidence, and
thoroughly search it. 2. Bring a right verdict according thereto, without favor
anger.


4. The Judge, who must 1. Give free scope to the proceedings of justice. 2.
Pass a right and impartial sentence according to the proofs that shall be
substantially produced.


Hitherto the things commanded in this commandment. Now of the sins against
it, which are 1. Of omission. 2. Of commission, in regard of the name 1. Of
onesselfe. 2. Of ones neighbor.



1. Of ones self.

1. Inward. 2. Outward, for Words. Deeds.

2. Of ones neighbor.

1. Inward. 2. Outward, for
1. Ordinary conversation, 1. In words. 2. In deeds.


2. For matters of judgment.

This Commandment is broken in regard of our own good name inwardly so far
as concerned.

1. A man's opinion of himself. 2. The opinion of other men concerning us.
1. A man's opinion of himself, and that 1. In excess. 2. In defect.


1. In excess by two sins.

1. Selfe-conceitednesse, which has three degrees.

1. To imagine ones self to have the virtues he has not. 2. To think that
he has more then it is. 3. To be good in his own eyes, because of that he
has.
The second sin in excess is selfe-flattery, which has also four degrees.

1. A counting ones self free from the vices, which he is not free from. 2.
Calling his own vices by the names of virtues, as prodigality, good
neighborhood, etc. 3. Esteeming his gross sins to be infirmities, and small
faults. 4. Imagining to escape reproach for all his great faults, confessed so
to be, because he says in his heart, no man shall know it.
2. A man's opinion or himself in defect, by two sins, 1. Deiectednesse. 2.
Rigorous condemning.


1. Deiectednesse is a false accusing of ones self as an hypocrite (when he is
not) because of afflictions and imperfections.

2. Ouer-rigorous censuring ones own actions, is a condemning of them
excessiuely as foul, wicked, and naught in extremity, when indeed they be
alone weaknesses and imperfections. These two sins are not so usual, but the
children of God in temptation do fall into them.

These things are faults in regard of our own opinion of our selves: those
follow which respect

2. The opinions of other men concerning us, which are, 1. Good. 2. Bad.


1. Good, and that 1. In excess. 2. In defect.


1. In excess, where are four faults.

1. Hypocrisy, a desire to make a show of goodness to men-ward, without any
care of being so indeed. 2. Vain glory, which is an inordinate desire of
praise from men, and is of two kinds. 1. When we do our good deeds only or
principally to be seen of men, which always goes hand in hand with
hypocrisy. 2. When we desire to be magnified, for wit, learning, wealth,
parentage, and such toys, that may befall a bad man as well as a good, chiefly
when in truth we have them not.
3. The third fault is accepting and rejoicing in false praises, as Herod was
content to be magnified as a God. 4. Swelling and being puffed up with true
praises.
2. Faults which respect defect, disregarding a good name, and not caring
whether men think well or ill of us.

2. The bad opinion of other men, concerning us, and that also 1. In excess.
2. In defect.


1. In excess in two things.

1. False shame. 2. Vexation at false reports.
1. False shame, in being ashamed of that that is not shameful, as 1. Of
scoffs and taunts for well doing. 2. Of poverty, a poor coat or house, or a
poor kinsman, etc.


2. Vexation at false reports, and being troubled and led overmuch by what men
will say of us.

2. The bad opinion of other men concerning us in defect: as, impudency, when a
man is not ashamed of his ill works, though all the world talk of them to his
reproach.

Hitherto of inward disorders about our own good name. The outward follow, and
first in regard of our words, and that 1. Generally. 2. Specially.


1. Generally, which is 1. In quantity of words. 2. In quality of words.


1. In quantity of words.

1. In excess, talkatiuenesse and blabbing, when a man is full of words and
ready to tell any thing that is in his mind.

2. In defect, sullenness, restrainednesse of speech, when one will not speak
though he ought, out of his coffeehouse.

2. In quality of words, and that

1. By rash speaking, speaking at all adventures, not caring to what end and
use.

2. By indiscreet speeches, disbecomming the speaker, hearer, time, or place,
or matter, specially meddling with what concerns one not.

3. By false speeches, and that 1. In narrations. 2. In promises.


1. In narrations 1. By affirming, Otherwise then the thing is. 2. By denying,
Otherwise then the thing is.


2. In promises, when one does give them for a shift, without a serious purpose
of performance.

4. By peremptory speeches, in eager affirming or denying in things that have
uncertainty in them.

2. Disorders in regard of our words, specially when we speak of our own
deeds.

1. In excess. 2. In defect.
1. In excess, when we hunt too much after praise.

1. In regard of our good deeds. 2. In regard of our bad deeds.
1. In regard of our good deeds.

1. By boasting of them, in much large and causlesse mentioning them. 2. By
fained extenuating them.
2. In regard of our bad deeds, and those 1. Falsely imputed unto us. 2. Laid to
our charge.


1. Falsely imputed unto us.

1. By passionatenesse at them. 2. By insufficient disprouing them.
2. Bad deeds truly laid to our charge, 1. By false denying them. 2. By
frivolous excusing them. 3. By chafing at the admonisher.


2. In defect.

1. By blabbing our own faults causelessly, or to unfit persons. 2. By belying
our selves for any advantage or fear.
So much of sins against our own good name in words: those in deeds follow.

1. In excess. 2. In defect.
1. In excess by four faults, 1. By ostentation of wealth, wit, learning,
etc. 2. By an hypocritical good life, sinning in secret, though in public
one seem to be free. 3. By insolent lifting up of ones self above his
brethren, in gate, countenance, taking place before them, or the like. 4. By
giving entertainment to flatterers.


2. Deeds in defect by four things.

1. By living in open gross sins, drunkenness, whordome, and the like. 2.
By breaking lawful promises. 3. By dissembling ones estate, and making a show
of poverty, when one is rich. 4. By keeping ill company, and other
appearances of evil.
So much of sins against a man's own good name: now of those that tend to
hurt the good name of another, and first of the inward, in regard of 1. Our
opinion of our neighbor. 2. Our behavior for his actions.


1. Our opinion of our neighbor, both in 1. Defect. 2. Excess.


1. In defect, by 1. Censuring or rash judging, when upon insufficient grounds
we condemn him, as if he were an hypocrite, etc. 2. Continuing to have an
hard opinion of a man notwithstanding his repentance.


2. In excess, by 1. An over credulous believing of every small appearance of
goodness. 2. Having men's persons in too much admiration.


2. Our behavior for his actions, which are 1. Certain. 2. Doubtful.


1. Certain, and those 1. Good. 2. Bad.


1. Good and commendable.

1. By captiousnesse, in desiring to pick quarrels with them. 2. By envy, in
greeuing at them and his praise.
2. Bad and discommendable, which are likewise two.

1. Partiality, hindering a man from seeing a plain fault in a child,
friend, etc. 2. Insultation or rejoicing, in the faults and reproach of a
stranger.
2. Doubtful, whether they were 1. Done or no, evil surmises, iealousies and
ungrounded suspicions. 2. Well meant or no, misconstruing, and taking them in
the worse part. These are inward sins against our neighbors good name. The
outward are 1. In regard of words. 2. In regard of deeds.



1. In regard of words.

1. Our own. 2. Other men's.
1. Our own.

1. Generally inquisitiveness and meddling with his business more then we have
calling.

2. Particularly, in speaking of him, 1. Things tending to his commendation. 2.
Things tending to his discommendation.


1. Things rending to his commendation.

1. In excess, as flattery, when we praise him more then truth will bear. 2.
In defect, and that 1. In deprauing, viz. making his good deeds seem ill. 2.
Detracting, making his good deeds seem less commendable.

2. Things tending to his discommendation, and that 1. In excess, by unjust
extenuating his faults, or defending them and him. 2. In defect, whether 1.
Telling his true faults. 2. Slandering him.



1. By telling his true faults, 1. Unseasonably. 2. Passionately.


1. Unseasonably and causelessly.

1. By way of jesting at him for them. 2. Railing and vpbraiding. 3. Whispering
or privy blabbing and tale-bearing. 4. Open backbiting.
2. Passionately, with extreme aggrauations and words tending to the extreme
abasing of him, as, hang him beast.

2. By slandering him, 1. Openly. 2. Darkly. 1. Open slander. 2. Close slander.



1. Open slander is 1. By telling. 2. By mistelling.


1. By telling.

1. Known untruths of him. 2. Things uncertain and of hearesay alone, as if
they were certain.
2. By mistelling, by 1. Additions. 2. Diminishing. 3. Perverting his meaning.


2. Close slander is by dark and insinuating speeches, and stopping in the
midst of them, sounding ill of him.

These be the faults in regard of our own speeches of our neighbors: there be
other in regard of

2. Other men's speeches to us of him, whether they tell 1. Tales tending to his
disgrace, if 1. we hear them gladly 2. Believe them lightly
2. Things making for his commendation if we be 1. Unwilling and sad at hearing
of them. 2. Hard of belief to entertain them.



So much for words: now for

2. Deeds: where three things are faulty.

1. Drawing him to disgraceful actions, and chiefly of set purpose. 2.
Reproachful carriages, mowing, hanging out the lip. 3. Accepting of persons,
using a rich man respectively, though he be naught, a poor man contemptibly
though he be good.
So are the faults in ordinary conversation. Those follow that are in matter
judicial, and they are four.

1. Witnesses. 2. The advocate. 3. The jurors. 4. The Judge.
1. Witnesses, if they either 1. Conceal any necessary part of the truth, for
fear or favor, etc. 2. If they speak things


1. Uncertain and doubtful whereof they have not sufficient warrant and
knowledge.

2. If they speak things false and untrue.

1. Whether openly and in plain terms. 2. Or obscurely by doubtful words,
equivocations and reseruations.
2. The advocate or pleader, etc. if he plead 1. Falsely. 2. Cunningly. 3.
Fainedly.


1. Falsely, either by denying or affirming otherwise then the thing is.

2. Cunningly, in misurging or perverting things, 1. To justify the
malefactor. 2. To condemn the innocent.


3. Fainedly or faintly, for good causes.

3. The Jurors, if they 1. Take their evidence carelessly. 2. If they bring in a
false verdict for hatred, spleen or favor.


4. The Judge.

1. If he hinder the proceedings of law. 2. If he urge things in extremity. 3.
If he pass a wrong sentence.
Hitherto the ninth commandment: the tenth follows.

Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, etc.
ANd it respects all those things jointly, which the former aimed at severally,
in regard of the very first vndeliberate, unadvised, and vnallowed (at least
not consented to) motions of the heart. Here 1. The things commanded. 2. Things
forbidden.


1. The things commanded are four.

1. A just, righteous, and charitable inclination toward our neighbor, whereby
we stand prone and apt to do our duty to him. 2. The stirring up of all good
motions that may induce us to do him any good, upon any just occasion. 3. A
cherishing of all good motions to his good, that are by God or man put into our
minds. 4. Perfect contentation with our own things.
2. The things forbidden in this commandment are 1. Of omission of any the
forementioned things, or the strength or power of them. 2. In commission.


1. By a bad inclination of heart against others, of which the Scripture says,
The frame of the heart is evil.

2. By bad motions, tending to hurt him in his place, person, safety,
chastity, goods, good name, whether those motions arise

1. From our own corrupt hearts, either 1. Sleeping, in dreams. 2. Or waking,
in fancies of our minds.


2. Or be suggested from Satan, if we entertain them with any the least
delight or pleasure. If we doubt how natural imaginations may be distinguished
from the aduentitious, we must know that the conceits of our hearts are either
1. Mixed. 2. Simple.


1. Mixed, where the devil and the flesh concur in stirring them up, and in
those we are ever faulty, because we join, or rather Satan ioynes with us.

2. Simple, wholly and only

1. From our selves, and here we alone are in blame.

2. From the devil, which if they stay and procure any delight, we are
accessarie to them; if they be presently with detestation rejected, we are
guiltless. And these simply deuillish imaginations show themselves manifestly

1. By their suddenness and independancie upon other thoughts or objects
present, coming in as it were by the head and shoulders.

2. They show themselves by their violence, and stirring, in that they do as
it were ouer-whelme with their force, multitude, continuance, and are more
vehement and distempered then the natural.

For the further understanding of the law, it must be known that every
commandment and branch of a commandment is broken in regard 1. Of our own
actions. 2. In regard of our interest into the deeds of other men.


1. In regard of our own actions, and that 1. Directly. 2. Indirectly.


1. Directly, in regard 1. Of the matter. 2. The causes. 3. The measure.


1. In regard of the matter of the act, 1. By commission of a thing forbidden.
2. By omission of a thing commanded.


2. In regard of the causes, 1. Moving, if it be a selfe-respect, and not
desire of pleasing God. 2. Final, if we arm at our selves alone, not at Gods
glory. 3. In regard of the measure of doing, if we fail of the strength and
perfection required.


2. Indirectly, by things of themselves not condemned, but such as to us prove
1. Occasions of evil. 2. Appearances of evil.


2. Every commandment is broken, in regard of our interest to the deeds of
other men, which are either 1. Good. 2. Bad.


1. Good, and that 1. Inwardly. 2. Outwardly.


1. Inwardly.

1. If we do not allow them, nor rejoice in them. 2. If we do either dislike
them, or be grieved and angry at them.
2. Outwardly, if we 1. Neglect what might 1. Draw them thereto. 2. Confirm
them therein.
2. If we practice any thing that might 1. Hinder them therefrom. 2. Discourage
them therein.



2. Our interest into the deeds of bad men, and that likewise 1. Inwardly. 2.
Outwardly.


1. Inwardly, either 1. If we do not 1. Condemn them in our judgment. 2. Be
grieved and angry at them in our affections.
2. If we do 1. Allow them in judgment. 2. Rejoice in them in affection.



2. Outwardly.

1. By neglecting any thing. 2. By practicing any thing.
1 By neglecting any thing that may 1. Keep them from committing the same. 2.
That may draw them to repentance and amendment.


2. If we practice any thing 1. That may draw and induce them thereto. 2. That
may harden and confirm them therein.


Men are to be drawn to well doing.

1. By words. 2. By deeds.
1. By words of exhorting, and (in a superior) commanding.

2. By deeds.

1. By giving good example. 2. In rewarding. 3. In joining with them. 4. In
procuring for them 1. Leave. 2. Fit instruments. 3. Convenient opportunities.

And by the contrary they must be kept from evil.

Men are to be confirmed in well doing, 1. By words tending to justify, and
commend them. 2. By deeds, tending to countenance and reward them. And by the
contrary they must be drawn out of evil.


Men are hindered from well doing, 1. In word, by dissuading, forbidding,
threatening. 2. In deeds, in withdrawing leave, instruments, opportunities, and
by the contrary they are furthered to evil.


Men are discouraged in well doing, 1. By words tending to deride, calumniate
and disgrace them. 2. By deeds, in punishing them, or causing others to do it,
and by the contrary they are in evil deeds confirmed.


FINIS.

