SIR PHILLIP Sidney, his honorable life, his valiant death, and true virtues.

A perfect Myrror for the followers both of Mars and Mercury* Who (in the right
hardy breaking upon the Enemy, by a few of the English, being for the most
part Gentlemen of honor and name) received his deaths wound, nere unto Sutphen
the 22. of September last past, dyed at Arnam the 16. of October following: and
with much honor and all possible moan, was solemnly buried in Paul's the 16.
of February 1586. By G. W. gent.

Whereunto is adjoined, one other brief Commemoration of the universal
lamentation, the never dying praise, and most sollemne funeral of the said
right hardy and noble Knight. By. B. W. Esquire.

Dedicated, to the right Honorable the Earl of Warwick, by his Lordships
faithful Servant George Whetstones.

Mors honesta, vita ignominiosa preferenda.

Imprinted at London for Thomas Cadman.

FUIMUS
The Right Honble. Charles Viscount Bruce of Ampthill (Son and Heir Apparent of
Thomas Earl of Ailesbury) and Baron Bruce of Whorleton 1712



To the Right Honorable my especial good Lord and Master, Ambrose Earl of
Warwick, Baron Lisle, Knight of the most noble order of the Garter, General
of all the Queens Majesty's Ordinance, through her Highness Dominions, and of
her sacred excellencies most honorable and prudent privy Counsel, be heaped
the true rewards, of his godly and honorable virtues.
RIght Honorable, albeit that sundry of the (Manifold) lovers, of your most
worthy Nephewe, of dear memory, Sir Phillip Sidney Knight, have already
witnessed, their true affections, in publishing of passionate Poems, Epitaphs,
and Commemorations of his neuerdying virtues: yet I hope, my later writing
shall find intertaynment of your Lordship, and favor amongst those, that
truly loved him. Considering that my slacknesse to the world, proceeded from a
diligent search, to set down his divine and heroical gifts, according to
truth: though impossible to give them the life and grace, which shined in his
actions. The learned Lypsius was not deceived, when in beholding of this noble
Gentleman, he advisedly said.

THE EPISTLE DEDICATORIE, Anglia est flos regionum, and tu flos Anglia, England
is the flower of Kingdoms: And thou the flower of England.
Envy his only enemy, will not deny, but that the comfort of his wisdom,
(combined with all morrall virtues) was the rising son of England, and that
his mortal abilities, were generally admired, and especially feared where
the English are not beloved: your Lordship needs not this information, to
know his inestimable valewe, when he was like to possess your temporal honors
after death, and was sure of your virtues in his life.

His loss will make his goodness best known, and soon mist in England,
notwithstanding the records of his life, are profitable for our posterity,
and holy works, that revive him after death. My remembraunces of this worthy
Knight, now with God, I humbly present, under your honors patronage, to whom he
was most dear, and near, that your Lordshippe allowing of my god intent, I
may deceive the envious findefault, of his Idle censure.

The Lord be with your Lordshippe in all your affairs, for whose health, and
honorable prosperity, I do daily pray, and to the end will constantly
remain.

Your Lordships faithful Servant George Whetstones.

To the right Honorable my especial good Lord, Ambrose Earl of Warwick,
Baron Lisle, Knight of the most noble order of the Garter, General of all the
Queens Majesty's Ordnaunce, through her Highness dominions, and one of her
Majesty's most honorable privy Counsel. T. C. wishes increase of all Honor
and Virtue.
ALthough (right Honorable) to bring fire to the Altars when the Sacrafice is
ended; or Epitaphs for the dead when their funeralles are half forgotten, is
to wish for rain when the harvest is past: yet considering with my self the
never dying virtues of the worthy once hopeful Gentleman of England Sir
Phillip Sidney Knight, a man so beloved of al, as obliuio^ fears to persuade
time any ways to impair his immortal fame: and seeing that all in heart and
diverse in their labors did bewail his loss, painting out in Poemes and
Epitaphs his virtues and their own sorrows: amongst who^ a gentleman and
servant of your Honors George Whetstones, had before his going into the Low
Countries written learnedly an Epitaph of his life and death: although destiny
and fate has too untimely ended his days: yet since his works before his
departure were dommitted to my hands, I, thought it my duty and held it as a
religion, first not to deprive the gentleman of that due which his willingness
and labors did worthily deserve: secondly for that his works bewrayed the
virtues of such a Paragon of our time: and lastly and not the least cause, for
that your honors servant had dedicated his Poems to your Lordship; whose
Epistle as he wrote it to your honor I have prefixed. These considerations
(right Honorable) moved me to attempt the impression of this Epitaph, which I
humbly present unto your Lordship: desiring your Honor to vouchsafe of my good
meaning, and not to misconster of my boldness. In which hope testing, I commit
you to the Almighty.

Your Lordships in all dutiful service to command, Thomas Cadman.

To the Reader.
COurteous reader, diverse of my friends (that have observed, my former
readiness, in exposing the lives and virtues, of many worthy personages
deceased, that their good examples might live, in the imitation of their
posterity) have charged me to be to remiss, in setting forth the life, death,
and virtues, of the most learned, right valiant, and best beloved gentleman,
Sir Phillip Sidney Knight. But I satisfied my friends, with this reason that I
certify unto the general reader, vid. that the error that I saw some hasty
writers to commit, for lack of true instruction, and the injury that they
did, unto so worthy a gentleman, in publishing his History, not having
knowledge of the one half of his virtues, (to shun the blame of two such
capital wrongs,) moved me, to be headfull, that I published nothing but truth
of so true a Knight. From this fear, through zeal proceeded my slownes in
writing, which cannot come to late, when good Sir Phillip Sidney lives ever.
And for the comfort of those that loved him, or would be like unto him, I
further say, that the imitation of his virtues, will eternize their praises,
whether they live long, or die soon: for virtue is immortal. Thus wishing, the
wish of al good desiers to the friendly reader I end, commending unto the same
my ready service.

G. W.

Of the life, death, and Noble virtues of the most Aduenturous Knight Sir
Phillip Sydney, etc.
LOng lives the man, that dies in lusty years,
In actions, that Life, and death despise:
Alexander King Alexander was poysened by the envy of Antepater being but 24.
years of age.
the chief of Royal Peers,
(Who won one World, and wished another rise.
That he too worlds, or one might co^quer twice)
In prime of youth, in Enuies bane did light:
Yet lives through fame, in spite of every spite.
And what is Life (the Life of flesh The frailty of fleshly life.
and blood)
A moments joy, a blast, a blase, a breath:
A bitter-sweate, that yeldes no sauery good,
A certain cause, that bringes uncertain death.
A rustie swoorde, closde in a painted sheath,
Which being drawn to set the soul at large:
They only live, whom virtue has in charge.
Fame is the life, Spes famae solet ad virtutem impellere multos.
and joy of valient sprites,
Desire whereof, both drive them on the Pike:
Hap Life, hap death, who first at dangers smites,
In Country cause, both either fortune like.
Death cannot daunt, though death them dead does strike,
And these be they, that Fame with name does Crown:
When shallow Graves the multitude do drown.
Of such a one, and equal with the best,
My muse is bound, the praises to revive:
A Knight he was, that with the foremost prease,
Where martial men, for highest honor strive:
Within whose breaste, the graces all did hiue,
His name (that lives) was Phillip Sidney Knight:
His death blames (not the foe, but) fortunes spite.
Whom to revive, Mars and the Muses meet,
In Armor fair, The order of the ancient Romayne funerals.
his hearse, the have arayde:
And on the same, a robe down to the feet,
About his Healme, a Laurel wreath is brayde,
And by his Sword a Silver pen is laid,
And either said, that he their glory was:
And either sight, to see him vade like Grass.
But to discribe, this worthis Knight at Lardge,
His Life, his death, his gifts from mothers womb*
Beseemes the Muse that Homer had in chardge,
Who wrote so well upon Achilles Tomb.
As Alexander wished, The magnanimious desire of Alexander.
that he were dead:
So Homer lived, his victories to spread.
And for my Muse, (that worst may pay this dew)
I well may say, the dead the does adore:
Azeale that thriues, God wot but with a few,
Flatry does live, It is flattery to praise the living, and lustice to Commend
the dead.
not at the dead man's door.
Liue-men have ears; when Tombs are deaf and poor,
Yet thus my name, shall with the best remain:
When such froth vades, like Thunder, smoke and rain.
Now to this Knight, his house, or Birth to blaze,
May well be spar'e, his praises to procure:
The Iuy bushe, His father henry Sidney lord presidente of Wales and his mother
the Duke of Northumberlands Daughter.
is but a Needles gaze,
To sell the Wine, which of it self is pure.
So sw^tte a Grape, grew on no Thorn be sure,
Sidney his sire, and Dudley was his Dame:
Parents well known of Honor and of fame.
In tender years, The sweet disposition of his youth promised much honor to his
elde years.
where one instruction might,
Grafte Lore and Grace: by which men Honor know:
His virtues blasd so clear in all men's sight,
As by the same, a number did foreshowe.
What fruits in fine, upon those blomes would grow.
Even these (the best) Love, He was in his time and for his continuane reputed
the best scholar in Cambridge.
loyalty, and Zeal:
To God, to Prince, and to the common weal.
His wisdom showed, while Learning might engraue,
Within his pliant mind, her sacred heaste:
He bente his ear to hear the Counsels grave,
That science taught, His travail and knowledge in forayne languages.
and wrote them in his brea.ste
Thus still with time, his worthiness increaste,
His name, his fame, his virtues full of grace:
Was spread, admired, and loved in every place.
To deck his mind, He was honorably intertayned of forayne Princes.
with Language, and with Lore,
In greenest youth, to travail he was set:
By forrayne toys, he set but little store,
Sound knowledge was the Merchandise he fette.
And he abroad, He was always rich in his martial and decent in his usual
apparel.
such worthy praise did get,
As Princes when his fame they understood:
They honored him, by all the means they could.
The French he saw, and at their follies smil'de,
He sildome did their gawdes in garments ware:
In Italy his youth, He spoke the French and Italian language, but their vices
defiled him not.
was not begilde.
By virtue he, their vices did forbear:
Of this bie-speache be evermore had care,
An Englishman that is Italionate:
Does lightly prove a Deuell incarnate,
The Germayne plain, He favored and was much beloved of strangers espetially
the Germaynes.
his humor best did please,
They loved him much, he honored them as far:
And when the good, he gleaned had from these,
Home be returned a perfect man, to serve,
His Prince, He brought Riders and other men of quality into England.
and Country, both in Peace and War.
And after him, men Qualited did baste,
And for our good in England he them plaste.
He often did read, He always was a special fauorer of Soldiers.
which well he did regard,
That prudent Peace, had still to War an eye:
And therefore he the soldier good prefarde,
Whose life, himself, in Ireland did try,
Till Essex di'de the flower of Chiuallry, His service in Ireland in the life
of the late most noble Earl of Essex.

And evermore, the Laurel with the Lance:
He excerside his Honor to advance.
What may be said, to praise this knight to much:
Yea what suffice his virtues to extol:
In greenest years, He was Ambassador to Condole the Emperors death being then
not 22. years of age.
his grauety was such,
As he was sent in message to Condole,
The Emperors death, which rites he did inrowle,
With much regard, of that most follome grace:
As that his name, still lives in that place.
In Court he liu'de, not like a Carpet knight,
Whose glory is in garments, and his tongue:
If men but knew, the half that he did write,
Enough to tire, a memory so young.
Needs must they say the Muses in him sounge,
His Archadia, His Archadia, a book most excelently written,
vnmacht for sweet devise:
Where skill does judge, is held in Sovereign price.
What else he wrote, The last sheppards calenders the reputed work of S. Phil.
Sydney a work of deep learning, judgment and wit disguised in Shep. R^les.
his will was to suppress,
But yet the dark, a Dyamond cannot drown:
What he his works, the finest wits do guess,
The Shepherds notes, that have so sweet a sound.
With Laurel bowghes, his healme, long since, have Cround,
And not alone, in Poesy he did pass:
But every may, a learned Knight he was.
Plesses rare work, Phil. de Pless. de Veritate relig. Chr. vndertake^ and a
great part translated by S. Phi. Sidney, and at his request ended by M. Arthur
Gowlding.
of true Religion,
Confuting those, which no Religion hold:
In vuglar speech, by him was well begone,
A Learned work, more precious far then Gold.
Worthy his pains: and worthy double fold,
If his pen might, the hole with English fit:
Whose words are waid by Judgment, Art, and wit.
The fault that makes, the wisest seem unwise,
A self conceit, His temperance showen by his embleame Spero.
in wisdom to exceed:
Was far from him: the word in whose devise,
Spero, his hope, did from desire proceed.
Honor to gain, by many a worthy deed,
On Hope, truth, zeal Learning, and the Lance:
He built his fame and had no foe but Chance.
In peace he lived, He was generally beloved of all men.
admired of the best,
In peace he lived, beloved of the worste:
In peace he lived, and never man oppreste,
In peace he lived, and ever, with the first.
Laid help on those, whom fortune had accurste,
And to be short, the rising son he was:
That comforted and shinde in every place.
But since Son, The mutability of the world and worldly things.
Moan, and Stars of Heaven must vade,
And all things else, the World conteynes below:
Man can account, his glory but a shade,
His earthly Life, the slaughter of a blow.
As well appears, by this our Common woe,
The worthy Knight of whom this good I sing: Entrance unto his unfortunate
death.

Bids sound the Drome, his follow knell to ring,
But ere it towles, the sorrow of his death,
(The grief of Prince, Pear, and every state)
Let me first show, the cause, that did unsheath,
His trenching Sword (In peace which shund debate)
Even chiefly this to cool the Spannish hate, The first cawses that sent the
English forces into the Low Countries.

Who arm'oe with wroth against this happy Isle:
Our Neighbors burn'de, to make a way for spoil.
For when we heard the outcries of the Dutch,
And how their foes, did make their will a law:
Their harms, that near, did now our safety tuche,
The Lion make (that keeps the Wolf in awe,
That never yet did fear the Eagles clawe,)
And mildly first, did Lick the wounded sheep:
Then sent the Bear, the scattered heard to keep.
To speak more plain, Tch Earl of Lecesteer acco^panyed with a small number
but yet men of such valewe as at sundry times, dismayed and dared the Prince of
Parmaes whole power.
though this instruck'ts the wife,
Our Sovereign Queen, that both the Lion bear:
With pity mou'de, to hear her neighbors cries,
Whom Tyranny, in pieces still did teate.
She Lecester sent, to awe that common fear,
And with him went, in this just cause to fight:
A stout small band, that many put to flight.
Among the best, and with the first in field,
This worthy Knight, inflamed with countries zeal:
His couradge armed, He went unto his Gouerme^t before the going over of the
Earl of Lecester.
to dye ear he would yeilde,
His Horse and Lawnce, to serve the common weal.
He now preferred, and that a mighty deal.
Before his Lands, his after hope, or UUife:
Yea ( Curtius like) more then his proper life.
Of Flushing he, He was made Lord Gouerner of Flushing.
Lord Governor was made,
A charge of trust, which he with truth did keep:
The bording foe, did find he was no shade,
He wakte them often, By his prudency he discovered the practis of La. Mote who
went ab^ut to entrap him.
when they had lust to sleep.
And wacht his charge, as shepherds do their sheep,
His head at home, his Arm was in the field:
To guard the fcend, and make the foe to yeilde.
He crossed the Seaes, not (like to some) for show,
No weighty cause, The death of his honorable father and mother drew him not
from the execution of his charge.
could make him leave his charge:
His Parents deaths, and many causes more,
Were colors just, to set his zeal at large,
Flushing then wailde, to miss her trusty Tardge,
He viu'de her love, and for to do her good,
He vou'de her aid, and sealde it with his blood.
His loving Wife, then came to household there,
The happiest Wife, He was married to the daughter and heir of the right Hon.
Sir Frauncis Walsingham by whom he had Issue a daughter.
and now the heauiest wight:
To sir Frauncis Walsingham, she was heir,
Of goods, and gifts, beseeming such a Knight.
The droomme now soundes, the worthy men to fight,
A Garrison, his charge, well arm'de to shield:
He forwith leaves, and posted to the Field.
As time, and cause, did will assail the foe,
Arm'de with the first, still with the last he fought:
Axell be won, The town of Axell was taken by himself being chief of the
forces there
and eke at Dewsborough,
He well made known the valor of his thought.
At Zutphen last where as his death he cought,
With charge, on charge, and most by men of name:
His death enrowles, a fight of lasting fame.
Which thus fell forth: A breiefe of the valiant service done by the English
near Zut. the 22. of Sep.
of September now past,
The 22. the foe in armor bright.
Into the Town, did with some vittaile haste,
And made a brag, but never meant to fight.
But who can stay the hounde, the Heart in fight,
Or Mars forbid, to venture on the foe:
In open field, that proudly makes show.
Caesar alone, Plu. de uit. Cae. De vitae Alex.
on the fierce Neruij ran,
Alexander leap, from a City wall:
And by himself, the selfsame City wan,
So we that did, proud Caesar sometime gaul.
Whom no man's power, could ever yet appale:
That day made known, the ancient English deed:
Their Uallors left, unto their worthy seed.
A hunting fight, this Skirmidge may be calde,
Of eager Dogs, for as a Leash we fee.
A heard of Dear, These served on horseback The Earl of Essex.
do scatter, kill, and gaulde,
Our men but few, with fury so did flee.
Upon their foes that some amassed be,
Essex that day reui'ude his Fathers name: The Lord W. Sir. W. Russell. Sir
John and Sir Henry Nor. Sir. Th. Parrat. S. Hen. North. Sir. Ihon. Win. 10.
Wot. Esquire.

Lord Willowbye chardged like a fiery flame.
Worthy Russell that will to no man yeilde,
That day saw light, even through the hinmost foe:
Stout Norrys darde, the Spanyard to the field,
Parrat stroke down Gonsago with a blow.
The younger North did forward courage show,
Wingfield did serve like to a hardy knight:
And Wotton preast into the hottest fight.
I. Fis. cf. F. For cl. l. H. es. W. H. es. F. V. es. C. Bl. Es. I. H. es. B.
Wh. es. Rye. Ha. ge. Ri. F. ge. W. Wr. genesis Cap. Swa. etc.
Fisher, Fortescue, Haydon, Hungate, Veare, Blunt,
Hynd, Hawle, Whetston, Fulford, Vdal, Wroughto^, Swane
With more of name the foe did foil and front,
The smallest fear that day was held a shame.
And sure the foe will quite us of that blame,
Count Hannyball was left in field for dead:
And Captain George, Lord Willowby Captive lead. Count Hann. Gone. was mortally
wounded but yet alive. Capt. George taken prisoner. These served on foot, the
Lord And. Sir. H. Vmp. Sir W. Hatton Sir W. Standly Cap. Cosby. Cap. Tho. cap.
Marten Walt. Brown etc.

On foot that day Lord Audely served well,
Vmpton Hatton, as forward as the best:
Standly (now staind) is hard Skirmidge fell,
Cosby deserves, his Honor with the rest.
Thomas was slain, and Mertayne at that Feast,
Brown ventured far, and so did many more:
Unknown to me, whose fames their names will show.
But oh to shade, Sir Phillip Sidney wounded with a Musket shot in the thigh.
this glory with our woe,
Hardy Sydney, much like to Mars in view,
UUith furious charge, did break upon the foe,
A Musket shot, his stately horse then slew.
He horst again, the fight did soon renew.
But fortune, that at his renown did spite:
A bullet sent, that in his thigh did light.
The wound was deep, and shiuered the bone,
His heart was good, and manly bare this Cross:
UUith courage stout, he did suppress the moon,
That many made, which did behold his loss.
Vdal then lite, softely to lead his Horse,
Let go quoth he, A sign of great courage.
till I fall to the ground:
The foe shall miss the glory of my wound.
Forth of the field, with courage stout he rode,
To search his wound, their skill the Surgions show:
What might be bought, to do him any good,
UUhat might be wrought, to mitigate his woe,
What might be sought, to salve his mortal blow,
Was bought, wrought, sought, his wound, his grief, his life
To cure, ease, save, but (O) the fatal knife,
Had grau'de his wound, too deep to draw long breath,
Had forged his grief, too sharp to relish ease:
Had thrust his life, into the mouth of death,
UUhat now remains? since nothing may appease
The Monster Death, that feeds of his disease,
Even only this, to show his godly end:
For sovereign praise, did with his life contend.
UUhen death he felt, lay heavy in his womb,
UUhen life he saw, made haste from him to fly:
My glory now (quoth he) must be my To'mbe,
In which I could, forbear a while to lie.
Not that I faune on Life, He desired respit of life for the service of his
cuntrie and profit of his Servant.
or fear to dye,
But) of mere zeal: if with gods will it stood:
I respit wish, to do my Country good.
For why as yet, my service is but green,
My years are young, and brought forth Leaves of late:
The blomes were fair, but yet no fruit is seen,
I studied have, to benefit the state.
To execute I am fordid by fate,
My Countries weal, by me is new begone:
The hope is lost, my Glass is broke and roune.
My Life is now, even at the will of death.
A chance not strange, although the change be great:
For he that names, his Sword out of the sheath,
Can hardly say, that he shall escape vnbeate:
Unless he fly, ere cause both sound retreat,
The name of War is sweet, the praise is fame:
But hazard bears, twixt Life, and death, the game,
And since my Luck, lights on the worser Lotte,
In worth I take, what desteny did draw:
My loving friends, for you I grieve, God woe,
My servant true, that held my will for Law.
Although my will, thereof still stood in awe,
Your loss is great, because I loved you well:
Receive my love, and so to both farewell.
With that he sight'd their deep dismay to mind,
And turned his head, but left with them his heart:
As he that reads his last request shall find,
Brother (quoth he) to you I must imparte.
Three things of weight, Three weighty precepts unto Sir Robert Sidney his
Brother.
impresse them in your Heart,
Fear God, and live: love well my friends: and know,
That worldly hopes, from vanity do flow.
Words like himself, the Counsels of a friend,
Which Somary, all wisdom do contain:
The fear of God is life, that both not end,
When all things fail, the love of friends remain.
Yea all things else, are pleasure mixed with pain,
Caesar was slain, and Pompey lost his head:
Their climing thoughts, their own decaies have bread.
He felt a change, between our life, and his,
That men's vain hopes, so soundly has discribe,
The healthful talk, but the true feeling miss,
Of heavenly joys, which in the soul abide.
Flesh like the world, and relisheth his pride:
It fears not death, until it feel the pain,
Who knows least, knows then this world is vain. A difference between
the cogitations of the healthful and the sick.

Who did compare, Caius Marius was of that constant cowrage as he smiled whiles
his thygh was a cutting of.
his wound, with patient pain,
Said Marius liu'de, in Sydneys haute desire:
UUho saw his death, his life perceived plain,
UUas wholly bent, by virtue to aspire,
UUho heard his words; his wisdom did admit?
They were so chard'ge, with grace and grave advise,
As they will live, by usage of the wise.
A smaller wound, He lived 26. days after his mortal wound.
leaves many in the field,
A greater hurt, his heart could not dismay:
A month welny, was spent ear he would yield,
Himself to death, Sir Anthony Gweuarro highly commends the Epitaph of Basko
Figueria the Portugal, which was: Here lies Basko figueria much against his
will.
whom death could not affray.
And when that time, brought on his later day,
Demand was made: If he ne feared to dye:
No whit (quoth he,) because I live thereby,
But urged more, then needed in his state,
He gravely did, this perfect answer give:
My death shall (like my life) dissembling hate,
To tell you plain,* to dye I do not geeue.
And yet of both, I rather wish to live,
Which who gaynesaies, unwisely spends his breath:
He feign would live, that most both prate of death.
The cause is shown, why he desired Life,
For public good: but to our common woe:
Our sins did draw, and sharp the fatal knife,
His vital threade, to cut and shread in two.
That his sweet soul, might forth of Prison go,
Which forthwith fle^^^, to Abraham his breast,
Where now it raynes, and still shall live in rest.
Mors honesta, ignominiosa vita preferenda.

A commemoration of the general moan, the honorable and solemn funeral made
for and of the most worthy Sir Phillip Sidney Knight by B. W. esquire,
When winters bitter blast, He was wounded about the faule of the leaf.
the trees began to bare,
Sweet Sydney slain, down fell our hope and pillar of welfare:
He was the rising sun that made all England glad,
He was the life, and light, of those that any virtues had.
He was the muses joy, he was Bellonas sheilde, His virtues and valor.

With in the Town he was a Lamb, a Lion in the Field:
His Life bewraed a love, that matched Curtius zeal,
His Life, no Life, contempt of death, to serve the common weal,
No gift, nor grace, there was, but in his virtues shind,
His worth more worth than Flaunders wealth now by his less we find:
For when his sacred soul, Moan at his departure.
did forth his body fly,
Ten thousand shrikes persude the same, unto the starry Sky,
The stowtest Soldier then showed feminine dismay,
And with their tears, did wash his wound, that brought him to decay:
Some kissed his breathless mouth, where wisdom flowed at will,
Some raysd his head, that lately was the treasurhowse of skill,
Where truth and cowrage lived his Noble heart some fealt,
Some laid their hands upon his breast, where all the virtues dwelt
Some eid his closed eyne, that wacht the poore-mans need,
And when they did unwrap his thygh, his wound did make them bleed.
O honer derely bought they crid, and monde this chance,
So shoke his hand, and said farewell, thou glory of the Lance:
Outcries soon spread his death, The King of Scots wrote a passionate Epitaph.
the moon ran far and nere,
What was he then that mourned not, the doleful news to hear.
The King of Scots, bewrade his grief in learned verse,
And many more their passions pende, with praise to deck his hearsse
The Flushingers made suit his breathles corpse to have, Great cost was offered
to his funeral at flushing.

And offered a sumptuous Tomb the same for to engraue.
But oh his loving friends, at their request did greiue,
It was too much he lost his life, his Corse they would not leave:
And so from flushing port, in ship attyr'd with black, The ship that
brought the body attired and painted with black.

They did imbark this perfect Knight, that only breath did lack.
The wind and Seas did mourn, to see this heavy sight,
And into Thames did convey this much lamented Knight:
Unto the Minories, his body was conuayde,
And there under a martial hearse, three Months, or more was staide.
But when the day was come, he to his grave must go,
An host of heavy men repaired, to see the sollome show:
The poor whom he good Knight, did often clothe and feed,
In fresh remembrance of their woe, went first in mourning weed
His friends and servants said, was thought a heavy sight,
Who fixed their eyes upon the ground, which now must house their Knight:
To here the drome and fife sendforth a doleful sound,
To see his colors late aduaunst, lie trayling on the ground.
Each ornament of war thus out of order borne,
Did pearce ten thousand hearts with grief, which were not namd to mourn:
Some marked the great dismay, that charged his martial band,
And how some horsemen walked on foot, with battel-axe in hand.
Some told the mourning clockes his gentlemen did wear,
What Knights, and captains, were in gowns and what the haralds bear
Some marked his stately Horse, how they hong down their head,
As if they mourned for their Knight that followed after dead.
But when his noble corpse, in sollom wise past by,
Farewell the worthiest Knight, that lived, the multitude did cry:
Farewell that hon'rd art, by laurel and the Lance.
Farewell the friend (beloved) of all, that had no foe but chance.
His sollome funeral beseming his estate,
This by the Heraldes martialled, the more to moan his fate:
Three Earls and other Lords, the Hollands states in black:
With all their train then followed: and that no love migh lack.
The Mayor and Aldermen in purple robes there mourned,
And last a band of Citizenes, with weapons awkeward tourn'd
In follome wise did bring this Knight unto the ground,
Who being their best owed at rest their last adieu to sownde.
Two volley of brave shot, they thundered in the skies,
And thus his funeral did end with many weeping eyes:
Upon whose Monument in letters writ with Gould,
This Epitaph deserves to be, for all men to behold.
Of the most worthy and hardy Knight Sir Phillip Sidney the Epitaph.
HEre underneath, lies Phillip Sydney Knight,
True to his prince, learned, staid and wise:
Who lost his life in honorable fight,
Who vanquished death, in that he did despise:
To live in pomp, by others brought to pass,
Which often he termed a diomond set in brass.

