EFFIGIES DOCTISSIMI UIRI DNI FRANCISCI WHITE, S. T. PROFESSORIS ET ECCLESIAE
CATHIS CARLEOLENSIS DECANI Ao AETA 59 ANNO 1624


Wisdom and grace see in that modest look.
Trueth's (...) errors downfall in this book
Maerebunt piscatores Isa. 19. 8.
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE
BEATI PACIFICI
A REPLY TO Jesuit FISHERS answer to certain questions propounded by his most
grati: ous Matie: King JAMES.

Bv Francis WHITE D. of Div Deane of Carlisle, Chaplain to his Matie.

Hereunto is annexed a Conference of the right: R: B: of St David's with the same
Jesuit.

Cirprianus de lapsis. Nec Ecclesiae iungitur qui ab Eua^gelio seperatur.

VERITAS VNIVOCA. VERITATE APERIT DIES


MENDACIV^ AEQUIVOCU^. ERROR CAECUS ET FALLAX


PISCATORIS RETE HABET RANAS


LONDON

Printed by Adam Islip. 1624.

TO THE MOST HIGH AND POTENT MONARCH, JAMES, OF GREAT BRITAIN, FRANCE, and
IRELAND, King, Defender of the Faith; my Sovereign Lord and Master.
MOST GRACIOUS, and Religious Sovereign, it is apparent, that the external
Tuition and Projection of Orthodoxall Verity, and Religion, next under the
Almighty, does principally belong to Christian Princes, which are by Office
and Vocation, the Lords Anointed, Sons of the most High, and supreme Regents
of this inferior World, under God. The Donates in times past denied the lawful
Authority of Christian Princes, in superuising and external governing
Ecclesiastical Causes, saying, Quid est Imperatori cum Ecclesia? What has
Imperial (or Regal) Majesty to do with the Church. But Optatus styles this
a braine-sick Optat. lib. 3. c. Parmen.
Error, saying, Ille Parmenio furore succensus, etc. And S. Augustine
contesting with these Aug. c. Cresc. lib. 3. ca. 51.
malepart Heretics, says, Jn hoc Reges Deo seruiunt, etc. Kings, according to
the Divine Precept, serve the Lord as they be Kings, when they command good,
and prohibit evil; not in Civil Affairs only, but in Matters which
concern Divine Religion. Jsiodor. Hispal. says, Isid. d. sum. bon. lib. 3.
ca. 53.
Secular Princes sometimes (that is, when they are Christians) have eminent
Authority, intra Ecclesiam, within the Church, to fortify Ecclesiastical
Discipline. Princes of the Earth (says S. Augustine) serve Christ, by making
Laws for Aug. Epist. 48. ad Vincent.
Christ. And again, Civil Virtues (in higher Idem, Ep. 52. ad Macedon.
Powers) avail them not for eternal Beatitude, unless withal they govern
their People in true Religion. And in another Epistle: It appertains Idem, Ep.
61. ad Dulcit.
to Religious Princes, to repress by just severity, not only Adultery,
Homicide, and other heinous Crimes (against men) but also Sacrilegious Jmpietie
(against God.)

The Evangelical Prophet fore-tells, that Kings should be (...) Nursing, or
Foster-Fathers of the Christian Church, Esa. 49.23. Also they are Shepherds of
the Almighty, and concurrents for the building of his House, Esa. 44.28. King
Josiah reformed the Jewish Church, suppressed Impiety, restored true Religion,
2. King. 23. And he was herein so far from transcending the bounds of Regal
Authority, that the Holy Ghost faith of him, Like him, was there no King
before him; neither after him arose there any like. Constantine the Eusebius.
Hist. Eccles. li. 10. ca. 9. Et d. vit. Constable. li. i. ca. 37. Ministrorum Dei
coegit Concilium, lib. 2. c. 43. lib. 3. ca. 6, 10, 12, 16, 17, 18, 23.
Interdum (...) quae ad Ecclesiarum Dei commodu^ spectabant prescribendo. and
ib. ca. 63. and lib. 4. c. 14. c. 18. Festos dies instituit, ca. 22, 23, 27.
Episcoporu^ Decreta co^firmauit. Theoderit. Hist. Eccles. li. 1. cap. 7.
Great, by Imperial Laws established true Religion: He appoints Festival
Days, prescribes what Bishops shall do, for the Churches avail; He (...)
Synods, is himself an Assessor and Agent among the Nicene Fathers; He (...),
and directs the Bishops; He confirms the Decrees of the Great Council of
Nice, and compels his Christian subjects to profess the Faith determined in
that Synod. Now of this Grand Patron of Christian Faith, and the true
Professors thereof, S. Augustine affirms, The God of Heaven enriched him with
such large Blessings in this World, Quanta optare nullus August. d. Ciu. Dei,
li. 5. c. 25.
auderet, as one could not have presumed to wish. S. Cyrill of Alexandria
writing to Christian Princes which did the like, says: The Orient Pearls, and
bright-shining Diamonds of Jndia, do not so much adorn your Royal Heads, as
your care and protection of true Piety, makes your sacred Persons venerable,
and glorious.

Your most excellent Majesty walks in the Religious ways of those renowned
Princes, and their example has ever been the President of the exercising your
Royal Authority in sacred Causes, and of your constant resolution in
professing and protecting true Religion. The Almighty has placed you ( within
your Dominions) his supreme Vicegerent: He has made you greater than Joseph
over his House, and a Joshua over his People; you are a Signet upon the Lords
right hand, never to be plucked off; He has exalted you, in Hominem a Deo
secundum, and quicquid est a Deo consecutum, and solo Deo minorem (as
Tertullian speaks) Tertul. ad Scap. ca. 2.
the immediate visible person ( within your Kingdoms) under himself,
receiving all your Authority and Majesty from his own hand; and he has
made you inferior to none, but himself: and to use S. Cyrils words, uttered to
Cyril, c. Julian. Praef. ad Theodos.
Theodosius, Vestrae serenitati nullus status est aequalis, No State is equal
(much less may ouer-top) your serene Majesty's.

But together with your Regal Power and Angel. Politian. li. d. Polit.
Disciplina. Iacob' primus, M. Britanniae Rex, omni laud mayor, eminet adeo, vt
cum Salomone sapiaetissimo diuinitus judicato, certare post videatur, de
humanaru^ and diuinaru^ rerum scientia.
Authority, the Almighty has enriched your heart, above many other Princes
of the World, with incomparable Wisdom and Judgment in matters Religious and
Divine (as not only your own subjects, but even Forrainers have observed:)
and that is fulfilled in you, which S. Athanasius once uttered in an Epistle to
Jouianus the Emperor, Decora and eximia res est in principe, men's discendi
auida, and rerum Coelestium cupido, inde enim fit, vt cor tuum vere sie in manu
Dei; It is a gracious and excellent quality in a great Prince, to have a mind
desirous of knowledge, and affecting the intelligence of Celestial things:
for hereby it comes to pass, that your heart is indeed in the hand of God.

It is the happiness therefore of your loyal and Orthodoxall subjects, which
answer for Verity against Error, that they may defend the same before a King,
expert in the Questions whereof they dispute, and whose cleare-seeing
Judgment, like the fining Furnace, is able to make difference between Gold
and Dross. And this has animated me, to present my Reply ( To a Jesuits
Answer of certain Questions controuerted between Papals and us) to your most
sacred Majesty. I received the Adversaries Disputation by my Lord Duke of
Buckingham; who enjoined me, in your Majesty's Name, to examine, and answer
the same. I could not but admire your Princely zeal, to have true Religion
maintained, as well by Disputation, as by your just Laws. And although I was
conscious to my self, of the want of those more eminent Graces which are found
in greater Divines; yet having sensibly observed your own unfeigned and (...)
love to the Religion which we profess, and being greatly encouraged by the
Noble Duke (who is your Majesty's very Image, in the constant profession and
maintenance of Orthodoxall Verity) I became obedient to your sacred
Commandment. And now concluding, I most humbly desire you (who resemble him,
that dwelling on high, despises not things below, accepting even the poor
Widows Mite, and Goats hair, where greater Exodus 25.4.
substance is wanting) to give me leave to consecrate this my Reply to your
most serene Majesty. I confess, this Work to be ouermeane, in respect of
your exact Judgment, and excelse Dignity: yet in regard of the Author, it is
a free will Offering, intended to the honor of God, and of your sacred
Majesty, and to confirm your Liege people in right Faith, and true love and
obedience of your most just and gracious Government. As an Angel of God, so is
my Lord the King, to discern good and bad; therefore the Lord thy God will be
with thee, 2. Sam. 14. 17.

Your Majesty's Chapleine, and Servant, FRAN. WH.

TO THE READER.
IT is now two years, since I was first called, by my Lord Duke of Buckingham,
to confer with an Honorable Person, who as then began to make Revolt from
the true Faith and Religion professed in our Church. By this Occasion, J entered
into a Disputation with one Mr John Fisher, a Jesuit, the same person which was
the Author of the two Books, against which my younger Brother, Dr John White,
wrote his Way to the true Church, and the Defense of the same. After my first
Conference with the aforesaid Jesuit, ensued (not long after) a Second, at
which his most excellent Majesty himself was present. The Cause (as J
afterward perceived) of his Presence, was a gracious desire to recover the
foresaid Honorable Person out of the Fishers Net. Then there followed a Third
Conference, between a most Learned and Reverend Bishop, and the said Jesuit,
intended to the same purpose. Lastly, his Royal Majesty, in his deep
Judgment, having observed by the former Conferences, and especially by the
second, that our Adversaries are cunning and subtle, in eluding our Arguments
brought against them, but of no strength (especially in particular Questions)
when they come to the (...), and confirmation of their own Tenet; He was
pleased to have Nine Questions of Controversy propounded to the Jesuit, that
he might in writing manifest the Grounds, and Arguments, whereupon the Popish
Faith in those Points was builded. For his Majesty, in his own Judgment and
Experience, knew most certainly, That Romists are not able to confirm (...)
Faith, either by sacred Scripture, or by ancient Tradition. And therefore their
manner is, when they dispute with Protestants viua voce to avoid other
Controversies, and to set up their rest upon the Questions of the Visibilitie
and Authority of the Church. Therefore the better to discover their
weakness, and to pluck them out of their Fox-hole of Personal Succession,
and Vistbilitie, the King imposed this Task, of writing upon the Nine
Questions. Besides, his Maieftie had experience of the mfaithfull dealing of
Pontificians, when they make Relation of such things as pass by word of mouth
only, in private Disputations: and he well understood, (...) the Cretising
Jesuit had dealt with a (...) Bishop, and with my self: For had we been
Schoole-Boyes of thirteen years old, he could not have made us seem more
childish and unskillful than he did, dispersing Hundreds of Papers, to his
own praise, and our disgrace. Wherefore it was necessary, that some public
Work, containing the Grounds and Arguments of his part, and the Answer and
Reply on ours, might be extant; wherein neither his nor our Yea and Nay,
should take place, sed res cum re, causa cum causa, etc. the weight of matter
on each part, might testify for it self. Now who could command this to be
done, but the King himself? who therefore made the former proposition of Nine
Questions to the Jesuit, that the World might see the uttermost of his
strength; and again, they might have means to judge rightly of our Cause, and
of our proceedings in handling the same. Mine own purpose at the first was, to
have published in Print a Narration of my two Disputations, and (as far as my
Memory would serve me) I had to that end collected in writing the sum of
those Conferences. But observing afterward, by another Disputation which was
printed, that our Adversaries will perpetually tumultuate, and accuse of
falsitie, all things which pass not under their own hands; knowing also, that
my self could not exactly remember all passages of the Jesuits Disputation and
mine, there being not a word written at the time when we disputed; J deferred
the printing thereof, until this greater Work was finished. The Adversary in
this Answer, which his Friend delivered the King, has disputed Eight of the
Questions propounded by his Majesty, and he declineth the Ninth, for Reasons
well known to the World; and in stead of a Disputation, he passes over that
Article of deposing Kings, with a Rethoricall Declamation. But before the Nine
Questions, he places a large Disputation (provided, no doubt, aforehand, and
expecting only a prosperous Wind of Occasion, to send it abroad) touching the
Rule of Faith, concerning Scripture and Tradition, the Notes of the Church,
etc. Then, to counterpoise the Kings Nine Articles, he charge our Church with
Nine remarkable Errors (as he accounts them.) Jn the former part of his
Tractate, is contained the sum and substance of the first Conference between
him and me, before the Lord Keeper, and the Lord Duke of Buckingham. Jn the
Questions of Jmages, Transubstantiation, and Communion in both kinds, is
contained also the sum of the second Conference: but there are many Additions
in each Question; and he handles matters more exactly in his written Work,
than he did in his private Disputations. J have examined his whole Treatise,
and answered every passage thereof, printing his Work verbatim with mine own.
The World must take notice, that I am a constant Preacher, in a Pastoral
Charge, and therefore J could not ose such expedition as other men may, which
employ their whole time and strength in writing. Besides, my Work being
finished before Michaelmas last, bath bin long in Printing, by reason of the
number of Quotations in the Margen. These Citations are for this cause word for
word out of the Authors, placed in my Book, that the Work may be more
useful, especially to such persons as want the benefit of Libraries, and much
Reading, themselves. J have with as much diligence as morally a Scholar can
use, collected my Testimonies out of the very Authors themselves. The Reader
shall not need to fear, or distrust, unless where the Printer has made
Escapes (which cannot always be avoided in a Work of this nature.) And I must
entreat the Reader, where he observes any Error in the Print, to correct the
same with his Pen. Neither must the vnlearneder sort be offended, if they light
upon some hard passages, because the matter it self is many times very
abstruse; and disputing with Adversaries which are Sophisters, I am compelled
to use Schollasticke terms, and to turn their own Weapons upon themselves:
But so far as I am able, I have endeavored to be perspicuous. Of my
Adversaries I request nothing at all (for it is in vain:) But if they reply,
it shall be for their greater honor to set down my Text, as I have done
theirs. And they shall but beat the air, unless they confirm the maine
Branches of their Doctrine by Principles of Divine Revelation, because Humane
Testimony is not sufficient to myse Articles of Faith. And I rest assured,
that each intelligent person will observe by reading this Work, that the
Aduerfarie (notwithstanding he is well verst in Controversy, and has in
substance said as much as his Cause will permit) yet he is deficient of Divine
proof in every Article, and far more specious in eluding our Arguments, than
happy in confirming his own. But if it be certain that Popish Faith wants
the Suffrage of Divine Testimony, then we have sufficient cause to reject
their Doctrine. And if we could not demonstrate, that the Articles which they
maintain against us, were contra verbum Dei, contradictorie to the Word of
God; yet if by deficiencie of proof on their side, it appear, they be extra
and praeter, without or besides the Word of God, they cannot be the object of
Divine Faith. Lastly, I entreat all, of our part, to praise God for the benefit
of true Religion, maintained in our Church, to avoid Contention among
themselves; for in all Ages the same has proved pernicious and scandalous.
Also, to be as devout in the way of Piety, as Adversaries seem to be in the
way of Superstition. And because it has ever been an Honor to our Profession,
to be loyal and obedient to higher Powers, let this be still an indelible
Caracter of every true British Protestant, to rejoice in the peaceable and
happy Government of his most sacred Majesty; and let us all, so far as it is
possible, by our fervent votes and prayers, strive to add increase to his
days, and happiness. Far be it from any of our part, in their secret thoughts,
to misconster his actions, or to entertain the least jealousy of any
abatement of his wonted love to true Religion, planted among us: for assuredly
he understands the Mystery of Popery too well, to think any otherwise of it,
than formerly he has done; and no subject can lay the Cause of Religion more
near their heart, than his most Religious Majesty does. And we have all great
cause to glorify God, who has blessed our Church with such a wise and
constant Defender of the Faith. Now my Conscience urges me to deliver thus
much concerning his Majesty, because the Adversary, in some passages of his
ensuing Treatise (as by reading you shall observe) rhetoriseth suspitiously,
intending (no doubt) to raise some jealousy in credulous minds, contrary to
this which I have spoken. My self therefore, through the gracious Clemency of
his Majesty, being admitted to approach so near, as to be an eare-witnesse of
his admirable Judgment and constant Resolution in point of Religion, and
hereby certainly knowing, that the Jesuit departing from the King, added no
improuement to his Popish Cause, but vanished with foil and disgrace; J trust
J shall incur no Censure from men judicious, and lovers of Truth, for
certifying that, which J observed by mine own experience. And thus commending
my Labors to the blessing of the Almighty, to the examination of my Superiors
in the Church, and to the perusal of those which desire to read them, I
address my self to the ensuing Disputation.

April. 10. 1624.
THE CATALOGVE OF QVESTIONS, DISPVTED in this Work.
1. WHether, of all other, it be the most important Controversy, to understand
the Quality of the Roman Church? Fol. 1. 2. Whether Divine Faith be resolved
finally into unwritten Tradition, or into Scripture? 12 3. Touching the
Visibilitie, and Notes of the Church in general. 49 4. Whether the Roman
Church is the Only, Holy, Catholic, and Apostolic Church? 103 5. Whether
Protestants err fundamentally in the Faith? 146 6. Whether Protestants err
fundamentally about Tradition? 149 7. Whether they do the like, in their
Doctrine about General Councels? 152 8. Whether they err, by denying Papal
Supremacy? 157 9. Whether they err in point of Justification? 161 10. Whether
they err in point of Merit of Good Works? 169 11. Whether they do the like,
concerning the Sacrament of Baptism? 175 12. Whether they err in the Doctrine
of Real presence? 178 13. Whether they do the like about Penance, and
Absolution? 185 14. Whether they err about the Article of the Catholic
Church? 193 15. Touching Worship of Images. 209 16. Concerning Invocation of
Saints departed. 287 17. Touching prayer of the ignorant in an unknown Tongue.
365 18. Concerning repetitions of Pater-Nosters, Aues, and Creeds, with
reference to Merit. 384 19. Concerning Transubstantiation. 390 20. Of Communion
in one kind. 459 21. Of works of Supererogation, and Popes Pardons. 510 22. Of
deposing Kings, and giving away of their Kingdoms by Papal power, directly,
or indirectly. 569
IESVIT. TO THE KINGS MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY.
Most Gracious and dread Sovereign,
A Conference about Religion, between Doctor White and me, was occasion that
your Majesty called me to your Gracious presence, not disdaining to dispute
with one so mean and unworthy 2. Reg. 14.17. Sicut Angelus Dei sic est
Dominus meus Rex.
And as it is the property of the good Angel, first to strike fear and
terror into them to whom he appears, but in the end, to leave them full of
comfort: In like sort, your Majesty: For though the first salutation carried a
show of severity, yet your dismissing me, was benign and You liked me the
better.

ANSWER.
MIrum est, si in facie hominis, tantum interuallum inter frontem and linguam,
vt frons non comprimat linguam: It is strange (says St. Augustine Aug. c.
Julian. Pelag l. 1. c. 5.
that there should be such a great distance between the front of a man, and
his mouth, that the shame of his forehead Maxentius, Men's contentioni Ap. Bign.
in Biblioth. to. 4.
Indulgens, and non sanari, sed vincere cupiens, auersa ab eis quae recte
dicuntur, tantum intenta est in hoc, vt inueniat quod pro partibus suis
loquatur: A contentious mind, desirous of victory, and not willing to be
reformed, but auerse from right sayings, only deuiseth how to elude Truth, and
to speak for his own part. And as for those words of his royal Majesty ( I
like you the better) they were uttered upon this occasion: When the Jesuit
being pressed about I will deal plainly with your Majesty; upon this, the
King said, I like you the better: wherein he was so far, from gracing his
whole Disputation, that not long after, his Majesty told him, He never heard a
verier, etc.

IESVIT.
The grateful acknowledgement and admiration of this your Princely clemency,
makes me desire (from the bottom Funiculus triplex difficile rumpitur
Ecclesiast. ca. 4. 12.
The Law of Nature obliges me thereunto, as being your Majesty's borne
subject, the transgression whereof, were Romans 13. 1.
So that according to the Doctrine of the Catholic Church, I must not only
out wardly observe, but also admit your Majesty's will and command with
reverence, into the secret closet of my inmost conscience and soul. The
Constitutions Romans 13. 5.
member, do strictly command me the same, in seuerest manner charging the
subjects thereof, no ways to meddle in State matters, or in Princes affairs:
much less under pretense of Religion, to attempt any thing, or to consent unto
any enterprise, that may disturb the quiet and tranquillity of Kings and
Kingdoms. And seeing we are so devoted to our own Jnstitute, that our
Adversaries thereupon Colloquiu^ de secretis Iesuitarum.
part of our Constitutions in this point, in manner following.

Vt ab omni specie mali abstineatur, and querelis Decretum 101. Cong. Sanctae
general. and Con. 12. eiusdem and in monitis generalibus,. 18.
etiam ex falsis suspitionibus prouenientibus, quoad fieri poterit occurratur,
praecipitur nostris omnibus Decret. 57. and Can.
audeat aut praesumat. Illa autem omnia, quae a spirituali instructione diuersa
sunt, negotia status

Iubet Regula 41. vt secularia negotia vtpote quae In regulis communibus Reg,
41.
sunt a nostro instituto aliena and vehementer a spiritualibus auocant, multum
auersemur. Iubentur concionatores societatis a reprehensionibus Principum and
Magnatum Reipublicae abstinere, and obedientiam In regulis concionatorum.
erga Principes and Magistratus frequenter and serio, suis in concionibus
populo commendare.

Iubent constitutiones (...) vatijs in locis, vt oremus In Constitutionibus.
speciatim pro Principibus, eorumque spirituali

Extat denique Instructio pro confessarijs Principum, In Instructionibus.
qua nostris serio interdicitur, ne occasion huius muneris, rebus politicis
aut Reipublicae gubernationi se immisceant: iubenter etiam hanc instructionem

J humbly crave pardon for offering so many particulars of our Rule unto your
Majesty's (...), which J should not have done, but out of a most strong desire,
to give your Majesty satisfaction against such wrongful look into them: I
cannot despair, but the Prayers Cor Regis in manu Domini, (...). ca. (...). v.
1.
hearts of Princes, that your Majesty may conceive some better opinion of your
(without (...) so much calumniated) (...), as to judge of us, according as our
Constitutions frame us, and our Actions deserve; not as it pleases
disaffection to paint us forth.

And as your Majesty is a living Monument of that (...) paragon of France,
Henry the fourth, and of his wisdom and other Princely excellencies: So why
may we not entertain afar off, an hopeful thought, that your Majesty may
one day be better informed against so many maleuolent suggestions, and see
that they proceed from another origin, than our desert: as that famous Prince
did, thereupon restoring them, whom sinister information had banished (...)
reports Petrus Matthew, Historiographer of France.
Historiographer of France) he received thanks from all parts of the world,
even out of Peru, and Chochin, Iapon, Goa, and China, with presents of some
singularities of the Country. I observed (says the same Author) the pleasure
which he took in speaking of the same action, and what content he received,
when as a great Cardinal told him, That by this restoring, his Majesty had
gotten two thousand

When as the Jesuits represented unto him the Catalogue of Colleagues, and the
thanks of the three Provinces of France, he used these words unto them, which
should serve as an Epigraph upon all their houses: Assurance follows
confidence, I trust in you, assure your selves of me; with these Papers I
receive the hearts of all your company, and with the effects I will witness
mine unto you: I have always said, That they which fear and love God well,
cannot but held me. I would it had been sooner, but there is means

ANSWER.
Your Oratorie in this Preface is plausible Cyril. Chat. 4. (...), etc.
Ireneus, li. 3. ca. 15. Suasorius and verisimilis est, exquirens (...) Error,
sine fuco autem, est (...).
, and God grant you prove as faithful in deeds, as you are a wily Humiliate
in words. The three grounds of Loyalty and Allegiance to our Sovereign,
related by your self; and his Princely Clemency, which has superabounded,
even toward his enemies, are bonds of Adamant, to tie every honest heart, to a
constant resolution Fides Iesuitica, fides punica, and their pretensions of
love to all those which are adverse to them in Faith, (as his Sacred Majesty
is, and ever must be) are but semblances, and personations of Truth: yet high
transcendent Charity may sometimes suggest Hope, that it is possible, even for
enemies, to be overcome with goodness, Romans 12.21. And therefore I will
suspend odious presages and conjectures.

But it must also be observed, that Jesuits are zealous propugners

But to view a little nearer the flourishes which the Jesuit makes to get
entertainment. Whatsoever he pretends with his Protestations and
Complements, of admitting his Majesty's commands, into the secret closet of his
inmost breast: Yet in the very Allegations and Proofs, brought for his and his
fellows sincerity, toward his Majesty, he lays open that polt-foote,
which he indeauoureth to hide; persuading in this manner: 1. A priori, thus,

No Jesuit observing the Constitutions of his Order, can intermeddle in State
matters, or Princes affairs.

Every Jesuit observes and obeys the constitutions of his etc. Ergo:

No Jesuit medleth with state matters.



Touching the Mayor, we have learned out of your own School, how easy it is
for you to euade. For State matters (according to your Tenet) In ordine ad
Deum, and Ad bonum spirituale, become spiritual matters, and so may belong to
the Jesuits proper cognizance. Also, Princes affairs, when the Pope pleases
to declare them no Princes; are not Princes affairs, but Papal and
Ecclesiastical affairs; and then the Jesuits, statising,

Secondly, a man must be of strong faith to believe your Minor to be Defide, or
of moral certitude, if such constitutions be understood as the words sound. At
least he must be a stranger to the world, and have lived an Anchoret, or
Recluse in some Cave, who never heard of Campian, Parsons, Creswell, Garnet,
Suares, Bellarmine, etc. Did F. Parsons observe these constitutions of his
Order, when he wrote his Dolman against his Majesty's title, etc? Did Creswell
the same, when he published his Philopater? Bellarmine, and Suares, when the
one wrote his Apology, and the other, his Contra sectam Anglicanam? Did
Mariana and Garnet this, when the one instructs how to cure State mischiefs,
by applying a dispatching Antidote to the head; and when the other put his
anointed finger into the Powder? Now, what further assurance have we, That
this fawning persuader holds himself more bound than his fellows, to such
constitutions as he pretends, do oblige the whole Order? But the truth is,
the Jesuitical constitutions are of two sorts: Either Open and diuulged
precepts, blased ad faciendum populum; [Mens bona, fama, fides, haec clare, and
vt audiat Hospes. Pers. Sat. 2.
We Jesuits may not under pretense of Religion, attempt or consent to any
enterprise, that may disturb the quiet of Kings and Kingdoms.]

Or else, private and secret instructions, to be put in ure as advantage for
promoting the Papacy and Catholic cause, shall be offered. These, as higher
and more sacred Principles, ouerrule the former: and so a Jesuit Breaking his
rule, observes his rule. This distinction seems to be employed in the very
title Monita generalia, prohibiting them to interrmeddle with affairs, Quae
adrationem status pertinent, there specifying, Principum foedera, regnorum iura
and successiones. And besides, nay against these, Generalia monita, they may
have special countermanding

Your other argument of persuasion, is, a posteriori, from an example of the
Renowned French King, Henry the fourth, to whom you wish his Majesty to be a
parrallell. Your reference looks this way: Henry the fourth (a wise King) was
prosperous in reentertaining the Jesuits: for he received thanks and presents
from Peru, Ergo:

The King of great Britain shall do well to be better informed of the
Jesuits fidelity, and to entertain them.



Verily, either this Jesuit preuaricateth and pleads against his own Order,
or else he by mistake and forgetfulness infarceth April 1610, which ever
since that time, has been out of date and cassated. An instance more uncouth
and preposterous, in regard of the issue, he could not have light upon. This he
saw well enough, when he presumed thus to write to his Majesty, but he had his
aim another way. And what though he paralogize in the seeming direct proposing
of his argument, yet he has his end in mentioning an instance known to the
world, Direful and Tragical. And so, That troop may hope to intrude by
terror, if they cannot creep in by favor. But alas, What poor flashes of
proof does he point at? That King bad thanks from the uttermost parts of the
world, etc. a deep devise for Jesuits far dispersed to write or procure
letters great ulatorie for the nesting of birds of their own feather. I think
if Jesuits might have Colleges in England, Their remote brethren would thank
us more than we should do them: o, but if the Jesuits were admitted into our
bosom, we should have (as that King had) presents sent of some Singularities,
etc. Rare trinckets, no doubt, for which we could not pay too dear, though
we sold our Religion and Liberty for them. But in the Example cited, that
which surpasses, is, The Army of learned Pens, which by thousands will
march upon the Plain of Paper Monuments, for extolling those which nurse up
that brood. But would to God these men did not write sometimes with blood: How
they requited that Kings

Male ominatis Parcite verbis.

IESVIT.
No labors would we spare, nor any endeavors omit, nor stick to venture the
loss of any thing dear unto

For God (rich in Mercy and Goodness) as he has made your Majesty partaker
of his Power and Authoritis,

ANSWER.
It is sufficient, that you have liberty to deprecate his Gracious Majesty to
forget things past, against himself and the State, and to thank his Princely
clemency for the benefit of his merciful Government, whereof you and others
have tasted beyond expectation. But in stead hereof, you discover in your
selves a restless mind, never to be satisfied, until that (like the Serpent)
having once got in your head, you wind in Zabarel. d. Schism. Quidam summi
Pontifices qui magis ad modum (...) Princepum quam Apostolorum Ecclesiam
rexerunt, etc. Math. Paris. Chron. pa. 507. Dicit Rex (Henricus 3) nec volo nec
audeo, Domino Papae in aliquibus contradicere.
.

Libanius the Sophister, in ancient time, upon the like ground, solicited
Julian the Emperor to Apostasy: but we say with Saint Hilarie Hilar. c.
Aurent.
, Speciosum nomen est pacis, and pulchra est opinio vnitatis, etc. The name of
Peace is specious, and the opinion of Unity carries a fair show, but there is
no Evangelical Peace without Christ (that is, without true Faith and Charity
in Christ.) Saint Augustine Aug. d. ver. Relig. cap. 45.
says, Habet and superbia appetitum quendam vnitatis, etc. Even pride it self
has a certain desire of unity, that it might be Omnipotent. If Peace be
just and honest (says Polybius Polyb. Hist. li. 4. pa. 300.
) (...), It is a worthy possession, and most profitable; but if it be
dishonorable and base, (...), it is of all things most shameful and
pernicious.

IESVIT.
If the requests of the pretended Reformers were such as the Roman Church might
yield unto them, without overthrowing the very foundations of the unity of
Faith: If in stead of Catholic Principles mis-liked by them,

ANSWER.
You should rather say, If the request of Protestants (among whom the King of
Great Britain is most emment) were such, as that the Roman Prelates might
yield unto, without hazard of their usurped Monarchy; If Protestants would
consent to sond the holy Scriptures packing, and not reckon the same among
Divine Principles Bosius. d. sig. Eccles. lib. 16. cap. 10. Scriptura non
refertur inter huiusmodi Principia.
; if they would purchase Papir. Mascon. d. Episc. vrbis. li, 5. in Bonifac. 8.
Prestitit plenam omnium debitorum remissionem, eis, qui limina Apostolorum
inuisissent. Quo anno ingens concursus, etc. Ioh. villaneus se testem facit,
auri and diuitiarum, quas Pontifex, populusque Romans illo anno congescere.
, and not seek to obtain the same by the merits of the Lamb of God; in a
word, if they would permit the Roman Nahash to pluck out their right eye,
that their devotion might be framed according to the rule of implicit Faith
and blind Obedience (...) vita Francifci Assis. cap. 6. Caeca obedientia vt
quis sit sicut corpus sine anima quod requiescit vbi quis posuerit sine motu.
: sensible feeling of her own reviving greatness and lucre, would move the
Roman Mother (being tenderhearted to them which present her with Red and
White Math. Pans Chron. in Henrico 1. pa. 56. Scdis (...) quae nulli deesse
consueuit dummodo albi aliquid vel rubei intercedat.
) to approach toward Protestants, and to hug them in her arms, as Apes do
their Whelps, until with overmuch kindness she crush out their breath.

IESVIT.
But so it is, that those that defre her Reformation, be so many for number,
and for Opinions so divided amongst themselves, that it is impossible she
should satis fie all. Doctrines universally received for many ages, time out of

ANSWER.
Whosoever abides in error ought to reform.

The Roman Church abides in error, Ergo,

The Roman Church ought to reform.

The Assumption is manifest, by the repugnancie of Roman Doctrine, against the
Faith of the holy Scriptures, and against the Doctrine of the Primative Church,
which shall hereafter be proved in every point of Difference between Romists
and us. But as the Synagogue of the Jews hated reformation, and persisteth in
hardness of heart to this day, so likewise Babylon will not be healed, Ierem.
51.9.

The Jesuit delivers three reasons, why the Roman

The first, is taken from the manifold divisions of Protestants among
themselves, etc. But this Argument (to say nothing of the leading part thereof)
is inconsequent: for if Romists err, then they ought to reform, whosoever
they are that admonish them and convince them of error. And when the ancient
Church abounded with Schisms and ruptures Eusebius. vita. Constantin. lib. 2.
cap. 6. Socrat. Hist. lib. 1. cap. 3. (...). Hist. lib. 1. cap. 15. and lib. 6.
cap. 25. Chrysoft. sup. 1. cap. Ep. ad Galath. Hanc ob causam deridiculo facti
sumus, and Gentibus and Iudaeis, dum Ecclesia in mill parts scinditur.
, a means was used to restore unity, to wit, a common submission to free and
lawful Counsels, congregated, not by Roman Popes, but Read hereafter in
(...) Book, pa. 151. Zabaril. d. Scys. pa. 542. Olim Imperator congregabat
Concilium.
: and these commanded points of Controversy to be decided, according to the
rule of holy Scriptures Read. pa. 8. and page 37.
(as I shall hereafter make manifest Iren. (...). 3. ca. 5. Quis autem medicus
volens curare aegrotum, faciet secundum (...) aegrotantis and non secundum quod
aptum est medicinae.
, but according to the divine rule, wherein all things are straight and
perfect. Lastly, when the Roman Church it self is in Constance and Basil, and
in the days of Antipopes,) shall no reformation be required, because the
Parties litigant, being of contrary opinions, the same cannot be proportioned
according to every ones several humor?

The second reason taken from Counsels, Customs, etc. is deficient in both
the parts. For neither are the Romish doctrines, to wit, Communion in one kind,
Popes pardons, Latin Service, Purgatory, Apocryphal Scriptures, Vulgar
Translation preferred before the Original Text, Transubstantiation, etc.
defined Augustine Aug. c. Donat. post. Collat. ca. 15. Quasi Episcoporum
Concilia Scripturis Canonicis fuerint aliquando comparata.
, no understanding man did ever make the Counsels of Bishops, equal to Sacred
Scripture: And some of our learned Adversaries Drieds. d. Dog. Eccles. li. 2.
pa. 58.
confess, That a general Council of Popes, Cardinals, and Bishops, is not
of equal Authority with the College of the Apostles. Others Read. page 154.
and 155. Cusanus, Occham, Panormitan, Almain, forus, Cassander.
also of them affirm, That such Councels are fallible, and subject to error.

The third reason wherein it is affirmed, That Protestants forsaking the common
rule of Faith, present the world, with Scriptures understood by private
Illumination; is grounded upon a false suggestion: for we assume to our selves
no other Illumination than only of ordinary grace; and we maintain no other
exposition

But our Aduerfaries are the men, who dissembling the Greg. Val. in 3. p. Tho.
Disp. 1. q. 1. punct. 7.. 41. Sieve Pontifex in definicndo, studium adhibeat,
(...) non adhibeat, modo Controuersiam definiat, certe (...) definiet. Azor.
Instit. Mor. to. 2. lib. 5. cap. 5. q. 3. Si absque Concilio vllo and
diligentia rem (...), ant (...) definiat, Spiritum fanctum sibi assistentem
peculiariter habet ne labatur and erret, etc. (...); d. sig. Eccles. lib. 16.
cap. 10. Scriptura non refertur inter eiusmodi principia, quamuis illa sancta
and sacra dicatur. Ibid. Sieve fidem spectes, sine qua impossible est placere
Ibid. Ipsa Ecclesia propter Arctissimam cum Deo conjunctionem, non veritati
inuititur, sed veritas inuititur Ecclesiae. Stapleton, Relect. Contr. 5. q. z.
ar. 1. ad. 3. Ecclesia vt corpus and singula membra significat, aedificatur
super Apostolos and Prophetas, id est super Doctrinam and praedicationem eorum:
Non autem Ecclesia, vt capita and magistros significat. Illorum enim
Fundamentum quatenus talium, est Spiritus Christi illis promissus, non autem
praedicatio quam faciunt, aut Doctrina quam tradunt, page 506.
.

IESVIT.
Wherefore, there being no possibility, that the Catholic part could gain
Peace to Christendom, by Quem das finem (Rex magne) laborum.



And seeing nothing hinders, but that your self are these my poor Labors,
for your satisfaction, so White, and me.

ANSWER.
What a vast and impossible (I will not here say, impious) enterprise do you,
in the depth of your sublimated wit, cast upon our Gracious Sovereign? Must
his Majesty have the Office of a Proctor, and Factor, for the Court of Rome;
nay, of a Lieutenant of the Papal Forces, to reunite all Protestants to the
Church of Rome? Had you meant the procuring of a Free General Coancell of all
Christendom,

But your former words show the frenzy of the Demand, (Satis imperite, nimis
obstinate) That those particular Enormities that we Protestants call to have
reformed, are the very Foundations of the Unity of Faith, Catholic
Principles, etc. And so this your dreamed Reunion must be, not to come (on
your part) one step toward us, but our running headlong to you; which is no
other, than a slavish subjection of all Churches to the Papacy, and the
trampling Gods Truth, and Gods People, under the foot of the vnerrable,
uncontrollable Grand Seigniour of the seuen-Hilled City.

It seems you have forgotten, or would extinguish the validity and memory
of his Majesty's most judicious Writings, in maintenance of Orthodoxe Religion,
and of the Liberty of Christendom, and shaking the very Foundations pours
forth her Suppliant Complaint; but to an end opposite to your Projects.

-- Qua Roma patet, fera regnat Erinnis: (...). Metamorph. lib. 1.

In facinus iurasce putes: Dent ocius omnes,
Quas Meruere pati (sic stat sententia) poenas.
TOUCHING THE NECESSITY OF Understanding the Quality of the ROMAN CHVRCH.
IESVIT.
Think best first to show in general Dr. WHITE and me, and is the most
important, and manifest point of controversy, in which all other are inuolued.

ANSWER.
THe most important? Neither most nor important at all, to all, but only to
those who are either inuolued in that Church, or vexed by it. If people may
attain salvation without knowing the quality of the Roman Church, then it is
not of all Questions and Controversies most important, to know whether

But many people may be saved without this knowledge, for all they may attain
salvation which are baptized, and which believe and repent, Mark 16, 16. Acts
2, 38. and which have all Tim. 2, 4. But without understanding the quality of
the Roman Church, people may be baptized, believe, and repent, and have all
the ordinary means of salvation, as appears by the Jews, Asts 2, 41. and
the Eunuch, Acts 8, 37. and Lydia, Acts 16, 14. and many Gentiles Acts 13, 48.
and the elect Lady and her children 2. John v. 1, 2, 4. and the Corinthians,
Galatians; Ephesians, and the seven Churches of Asia, Apoc. 2, 3. etc.

Occham says Occham Dial. part. 1. li. 5. ca. 23. Omnis Ecclesia extra quam
potest esse salus potest contra fide m errare, extra Ecclesia^ autem Romanam
potest esse salus, que^admodum post ascensionem Christi fuit salus antequam
Romana Ecclesia inchoaretur.
that after Christ's ascension many people were saved before the Roman Church
had any being: and AEneas Siluius AEneas Siluius Epist. 288. Ante Concilium
Nicenum quisque sibi viuebat, and paruus respectus habebatur ad Ecclesiam
Romanam.
affirms, the first 300 years, before the Nicene Counsel, small regard was
had of the Roman Church. Johannes Mayor says, Mayor
It were over hard to affirm, that the Indians and other Christans, which live
in remote countries, should be in the state of damnation, because they were
ignorant, That the Bishop of Rome is head of the Church, if they believe other
necessary Articles of Salvation. And Alchasar says, Alchasar Commentar. in
Apoc. ca. 20 ver. 1, 2, 3. Annot. 3. Sect. 9. p. 881. Antequam nuptiae cum
Romana Ecclesia per receptam publicae Christianae fidei consuetudinem
celebrarentur, etc. minus frequens cum Roma Communio satis fuit. Francisc.
Picus. Mitandul. Theorem. 8. Quod si quis forte obijciat non videri sibi
sanctos illos priscos pontificem veneratos (...) fuisse vt primas illi in
vniuersa Ecclesia palam publiceque concesserint, sed neque ad eum pro ambiguis
controuerfisque fidei rebus, sciscitatum semper miserint, imo and in faciem
restiterint atque in scribendis Epistolis non secus cos ac alium quemquam
Episcoporum honorare visi sunt respondendum censeo priscae illius Ecclesiae,
simplicitatem fuisse in causa etc. Et addi forraffe poterit temporaria illa
bona quae nune Ecclesiastici homines possident occasionem dedisse etc. Illud
etiam subdendum quod occupata (...) in rebus Ecclesis, non erat otium de Summi
Pontificis primatu curiose perquirere disputareque, etc.
Before such time as the public nuptials between the Roman and other
Churches were celebrated, by a common received custom, a less frequent
communion with that Church was sufficient.

Seconly, It is no Article of the Apostles Creed, or of any Romans 11, 22. But if
the doctrine aforesaid were fundamental, and of greatest importance, the same
must have been plainly delivered either in holy Scripture, August. d. Doctr.
Christ. li. 2. c. 9. In ijs quae aperte in Scriptura posita sunt, inueniuntur
illa omnia, quae continent fidem moresque viuen di, etc. Idem d. (...). Dried.
d. Eccles. Dogm. li. 2. c. 3. fol. 60. Gerson. d. vit. Spirit. Lect. 2. Coral.
7. and de Seas. Script. propos. 9. Bellarm. d. verb. Dei li. 4. c. 11.
or in all, or some of the ancient Creedes.

IESVIT.
The Church is the pillar and foundation of Truth, 2. Tim. 3, 15. The eminent
Rock and Mountain filling the whole world, on the top whereof stands the
Tradition of saving Doctrine conspicuous and immooueable, Ergo, It is the most
important Controversy of all other to know, whether the Roman Church be the
true Church.

ANSWER.
Four texts of Scripture are produced, to prove, that it is the most important
controversy of all other, to know whether the Roman Church be the true Church:
but neither are the places of Scripture expounded rightly, neither is the
Jesuits islation from them consequent or firm.

1 Although it were granted that the total certainty of Christiantie Romans 1,
6. and such a member as may err Franscisc. Picus, Theorem 13. iuxta (...)
quorundam and juris interpretum aliquornm dogmata, fieri posset vt Romans
Ecclesia quae particularis Ecclesia est contra (...) distincta, in side
aberraret.
and prove unsound, Romans 11, 22. The knowledge of the state and quality of
that Church, cannot be simply necessary, and consequently not a matter of
greatest importance to be understood.

2 The places of Scripture, 1. Tim. 3, 15. Math. 16, 18. Esaias 2, 1. Dan. 2, 35.
prove not the question. The first place, to wit Math. 16, 18. is expounded by
many interpreters of Christ himself, Haimo and Lyra super Math. 16. Glesia
Gratian. Causa (...). (...). 1. cap. Omnibus consid. Super hanc petra id est,
Christum. (...). sup. Ephesians. 2. (...). 20. Super hane petram, id est, super me
aedificabo Ecclesiam meam.
and by the most, of the faith which S. Peter confessed touching Christ.
August. d. verb. Dom. Sermon. 13. Idem sup. Ioh. (...). 124. Orig. sup (...).
Ambr. Epist. 38. (...) in Luc. li. 6. ca 9 (...). Galath. ca. 1. and sup. Math.
Hom. 55. and 83. (...). d. Trin. li. 2. and 6. Gregor. li. 3. Epist. 33. (...)
in Ioh. c. 21. The (...) 22. q. 174. ar. 6. Stella in Luc. 9. Council. Basil.
pa. 145. (...) Contr. Schol. 3.
And our Savior affirms not in this Text, that the Roman Aug. sup. Psalm. 60.
vt (...) Ecclesia super petram, qui factus est petra, (...) andi (...), petra
(...) erat Christus, in illo ergo aedificati (...).
and so the Church is one thing, and the Rock another, because nothing is
builded upon it self.

The second place 1. Tim. 3, 15. (...), that the Church which is the house of
the living God is, (...) the pillar and ground of Truth. 1. If by the Church we
understand the Catholic Church, as it contains the holy Apostles, Occham
Dial. li. 1. c. 4. part. 1. Dried. d. Dog Eccles. li. 2. (...). 58 Generale
Concilium Pape, Cardinalium, Episcoporum, Doctorum, in Scripturis propheticis
(...), non est (...) authoritatis quantae fucrit (...) Collegium.
then this commendation agrees fully and perfectly to it, in respect of the
Apostles, who were led into all Truth, John 16, 13. Aug. sup. Epist. Ioh. tr.
3. Chrysostom. sup. To. Hom. 30. Greg. Mor. l. 18. c. 14. (...). Offic. l. 1. c. 23.
Vincent. Lir. c. Haer. c. 41.
2. If by the Church we understand the Church of Christ, living after the
Apostles, the same is by office and calling the pillar and ground of Truth in
all ages. And some part or other thereof ^ Truth of God (...) to salvation.
Dried. d. Eccles. Dog. li. 2. ca. 3. pa. 58. Glossa Interlin. sup. Math. 16. v.
18. Turrecrem. Sum. d. Eccles. li. 2. ca. 91. Alphons. Castro. d. punit. Haer.
li. 1. c. 5
But the present Church is not (...) and simply, in all things, the pillar and
ground of Truth, but so far only as it teaches the doctrine revealed by the
holy Ghost, and groundeth her faith upon the word of God: Lorca. 22ae. Disp.
37. n. 15. Bellarm. d. verb. Dei li. 4. c. 9. Nihil est de fide nisi quod Deus
per Apostolos aut Prophetas reuelauit.
and this is proved, because Panormit. in 5. Decret. d. Sent. Excom. ca. 28.
Iuditium Dei, veritati quae nec fallit nec fallitur semper (...), (...)
aliquando sequitur (...) quae saepefallit and (...).
in degrees legislatiue, Much. Medin. d. Rect. in Deum fid. li. 5. c. 11.
in sermons, disputations, and other tractats (as our Adversaries themselves
(...). d. Pontif. li. 4. (...). Carbo. (...). Theol. li. 4. c. 18 and li. 5. c.
8. Ex (...) Coneilijs (...) illa sunt ni fuerint approbatione (...) munita,
nullum (...) omnia hujus generis (...) in omnibus errare possunt.
confess;) and they which propugne the infallible authority of the present
Church, restrain the same to the Pope and Council (of which S. Paul is
silent, 1. Tim. 3, 15.) And from hence I infer, That the Church wherein the
Apostles taught and governed, was the ground and pillar of Truth, fully,
entirely, and in all things: But the present Greg. li. 6. (...). 37. (...)
multisint Apostoli pro ipso tamen principatu sola Apostolorum principis seeds,
in authoritate conualult, quae in tribus locis (...) est. Ipse enim sublimauit
sedem in qua etiam quiescere and presentem vitam finire (...) est. Ipse (...)
sedem in qua Euangelistam (...) misit, ipse firmauit sedem in qua septem annis
(...) discessurus sedit. Cum ergo vnius atquevna sit seeds cui ex authoritate
diuina tres nunc Episcopi praesidet (...) de vobis boni audio, hoc mihi imputo.
of which the Apostle speaks literally in the said Text. But although the
Church of Ephesus was by office the pillar and ground of Truth, yet the same
did afterward degenerate and depart from the right Faith; which argues, that
particular Churches, such as were the Roman, Ephesine, Corinthian, etc. are not
in such sort the pillar and ground of Truth, as that they are in no danger of
error Occham Dial. p. 1. li. 2. c. 4. Sancti stante charitate possunt ^
veritatem etc. Error qui (...) non habet, non obuiat sanctitati.
.

The other two places Esaias 2, 1. Dan. 2, 35. are principally understood of
Christ Aug. Psalm. 45. Erit in (...) dicbus (...) mons Domini, sed (...) mons
super alios montes (...). Quia and Apostoli montes, portantes hunc montem.
and his Apostles, and they prove not the Jesuits position, which is, It is the
most important controversy of all other, to know whether the Roman Church is
the true Church; for the present Esaias 2. the same fills not the whole world,
but only a small part of the world; neither did the same anciently, for 500
years at the least, fill the whole world, for many people, both in the East
and West were Christians, without depending upon it: Francisco Picus Orat. ad.
Leo 10. Cerre exiquus Dei cultus nulla been viuendi ratio atque institutio,
nullus pudor, nulla modestia, justitia vel in odium vel in gratiam declinauit,
pietas in superstitione pene procubuit palamque in (...) hominu ordmibus (...),
etc. Sacras aedes and templa Lenonibus and Catamytis commissa quam nesarijs
lupis optimi pastoris ouilia demandata etc.
. If our Adnersaries will contend, That there is in all ages avisible Church,
like unto a great Mountain filling the whole world, upon the top whereof
stands the Tradition of all true doctrine, conspicuous and illustrious. 1.
The places of Esaias and Daniell affirm not this, concerning all times and ages
of the Church. 2. The Scriptures foretell a large revolt and apostasy from
heavenly truth 1. Tim 4, 1, 2. 2 Thessalonians. 2, 2.
. 3. Our Adversaries themselves acknowledge, that the outward face of the
visible Church, at some times has been, and again Greg. Vat. 3. pa. 187.
Errorum Schysmatum, persecutionum fluctibus ita agitari potest vt imperitis sit
(...) difficilis (...) exteriorem pompam habeat. Praefat. O G ad orat.
Francise. Pic. Mirandul. Cum infiniti abusus Schysmata quoque and Haereses per
totum nunc Christianum orbem inualescant. Laurent. Justinian. d. Compunct. 575.
Declinauerunt prorsus omnes Ecclesiae status: qui spiritualia sunt corporis
Christi membra:ex quibus nonnulli alienati sunt ab vtero matris suae, and
loquuntur falsa: aliqui vero abierunt retrorsum, carnis defideria sectantes,
seipsos amantes, and temporalia lucra quaerentes, honorum cupidiscelesti
adulteri and miseri. Ista namque vigent, nedum in inferioribus, verum etiam in
mediocribus, and sublimioribus membris adeo vt confusa videantur vniuersa vt a
planta pedis vsque ad verticem capitis, in hoc corpore spiritualis, non appare
at sanitas etc. Petrus Leidens. Epist. ad Clement.


IESVIT.
If this Church be overthrown the total certainetie of Christianity cannot
but with it fall to the ground.

ANSWER.
The total certainetie of Christianity depends not upon a Church
illustrious, and conspicuous to the eye of the whole (...). d. Eccles. li. 3 c.
2. Ecclesia est caetus hominum ita visibilis and palpabilis, vt est (...)
populi Romani, (...) Galliae, (...) Respub. (...). (...) c. Brent. li. 3. page
155.
. Therefore if such a Church be overthrown, that is, be proved in sundry
Articles to be corrupt and unfound (which is our Tenet concerning the present
Roman Church) the certainty of Christianity may still subsist. The Tenet
which we maintain, touching the quality of the present Roman Church, (...)
to the reformation of errors, and abuses in the same, and not to the
overthrowing of the lawful authority of the Visible Church. The certainetie
of Religion in the time of the Jews, did depend as much upon the authority of
the Visible Church Romans 3, 2. the teacher of heavenly truth, Ezekiel. 44, 23,
Mal. 2, 7. a ministerial Judge of controversies, Deuteronomy. 17, 9. Ezekiel. 44, 24.
and yet notwithstanding the Mal. 2, 8. 2. Chron. 29.6, 7. Esaias 56, 10. Ezekiel.
34. and the religious kings of Judah reformed the same, 2. Chron. 14.3, 4. and
cap. 17.7, 8, 9. and cap. 29.3. etc. and cap. 34.3, 4. and cap. 33.15. Now like
as when a Physician discovers the diseases of the body, and prescribes
remedies and medecines, he does thereby heal, and not destroy the state of the
body; so likewise, they which out of the Oracles of God, have revealed the
errors and corruptions of the Roman Church, and sought reformation thereof
(...) Def. li. d. Offic. (...). pa. 815. In (...), (...) vniuersam immerito
(...) multos esse pios viros non minore quam quisquam ipsorum praese serat,
reformanda Ecclesiae studio and (...) and superstitionum odio (...).
, do not overthrow the certainetie of Christianity, nor impair

IESVIT.
If it be hidden and made invisible, men must needs wander in the search of the
first delivered Christian Doctrine, without Non ad Scripturas prouocandum nec
in eis constituendum, certamen in quibus nulla aut parum certa (...), Tertul.
in praescript. ca. 19
sole evidence whereof, no victory can be gotten against proteruious error, or
at least not victory that is very apparent; neither will answers about
particular Doctrines satisfy a mind preoccupated with a long continued dislike
of them.

ANSWER.
In this Section two things are delivered, First, If the Church be hidden, etc.
Secondly: Controversies cannot be decided by sole Scripture, etc.

To the first I answer, The Church, (that is the society of Christian people,
professing saving Faith) is at no time totally bidden and invisible (...) d.
(...) in Epist. Dedic. (...) non (...) in se, and (...), vt (...) quoddam est,
sed (...) solum, visibilem (...) negamus: Et quod hic (...) est (...), id in
suis partibus personis, (...), (...) visibile affirmamus esse. Nec posse (...),
(...), and (...), (...): sed (...) est, sic esse in se, ac inter suos ^ and
Antiochi, and aliorum temporibus (...).
, but in Persecution, the same may be hidden and unknown to them which (...)
no will to know it, 2. Cor. 4, 3. or which defire to know it, that they may
persecute and oppress it, Reuelat. 12, 14. and pompous. manner visible, Math.
10, 23. and 23, 34. Heb. 11, 38. And in the state of Persecution, when the same
is hidden and unknown to enemies, the friends of this Church, to whom it is
known, may by the Ministry thereof exercised in private Acts 1, 13. etc. 12,
12. etc. (...). Pollidor. d. Invent. (...) li. 5. c. 6.
, receive the certainty of belief: and if it be unknown or hidden to any of
them, these may by private reading, or meditation of that which they have
formerly learned, supply the defect of public Ministry Occham Dial. li. 5.
ca. 34. Fides Cath, Christi poterit remanere in Catholicis dispersis and
latitantibus in terris ab infidelibus occupatis etc. Turrian. 22. Disp. 2. Dub.
4. Conditio aliquando non est immediata propositio per Ecclesiam sed vel per
Concionatorem vel parents, qui docent filios.
, even as some Christians at this day, being slaves in Turkey or Barbary, may
be saved without external Ministry. And it is also possible for such to be
Instruments of converting and saving others Acost. d. Proc. Ind. Sal. lib. 2.
ca. 9. Ecclesiasticae historiae narrant tempore Constantini magni, totam
Iberiam prouinciam quae est Armeniae proxima Christianae mulieris captiuae
opera and signis ad Christum esse conuersam.
, Ruffin. Hist. Eccles. li. 1. c. 9, and 10. Besides, we do also acknowledge,
that the Popish Church, although it were corrupt and unsound in many things,
yet it preserved the Books of holy Scripture, and taught the Apostles Creed,
and sundry parts of Divine verity collected from the same Libauius c.
Gretser. Triumph. c. 13. pa. 103. mansit aliqua lux verbi Dei vt Euangelij
lectiones, Symbola, Oration Dominica and Baptismi substantialia etc. Gomar.
Spec. ver. Eccles. pa. 201. Compertum est etiam nunquam in Papatu tam densas
(...)
: and by these Principles of Christianity preserved in that Church, iuditious
and pious men might with study and diligence find out, what was the first
delivered Christian Doctrine, in such things as are necessary to Salvation; as
in the Jewish Church, when the same was corrupt in manners and doctrine, Mal.
2, 8. Esaias 56, 10. 2. Kings 16, 11, 16. Marc. 6, 34. Hieron. Sup. Nah. cap. 3.
In aduentu ergo Christi and Sermonis Dei and Doctrinae (...) and consummationis
Niniue speciocissimae quondam meritricis: eleuabitur and properabit (...), qui
sub magistris ante fuerat consopitus, and ibit and montes Scripturarum: ibique
inueniet Montes Moysen, and Iesum filium Naue Montes Prophetas, Montes Noui
Testamenti Apostolos and Euangelistas, and cum ad tales Montes confugerit and
in hujusmodi montium fuerir lectione versatus si non inuenerit qui eum doceat,
messis enim multa operarij autem pauci tunc and illius studium comprobabitur
(...) confugerit ad Montes and Magistrorum defidia coarguetur. Espenc. Com. in
Epist. Tit. c. 2. pa. 259. Nonne videtur tum Propheta, tum interpres nostri
(...), and Pastorum filentium ne (...) ignauiam and populi ante cum eis
consopiti, quasi e graui somno excitati studium and ad Sctipturas tum audiendas
tum legendas (...) alacritatem praedicere and quasi digito indicare.
, and pernicious errors and abuses discovered and reformed. And thus although
the true Church be granted at sometimes to be hidden and invisible, in manner
before expressed, well affected people shall not want all means to understand
what was the first delivered Christian faith.

The Jesuit in the next passage labors to make it appear Argument, the
looseness of it will appear. For he proceeds

IESVIT.
By all such means as is of it self sufficient to declare what was the first
delivered Christian Doctrine apparent, victory may be gotten against
proteruious error, and minds preoccupated with long dislike of particular
Doctrines may be satisfied. By sole Scripture no apparent victory can be
gotten against proteruious error, neither can long dislike of particular
Doctrines be satisfied: Ergo, sole Scripture is not a sufficient means to
declare what was the first delivered Christian Doctrine.

ANSWER.
First, If by apparent Victory, be meant such Victory, as proteruious errants
will confess, or persuade themselves to Stephen, Acts 7, 53. and S. Paul, Acts
28, 23. and in the best Councels of Nice, Ephesus, etc. no such apparent
Victory was gotten of proteruious Heretics Eusebius. vit. Constant. lib. 2. c.
71. (...) Socrat. Hist. Eccles. lib. 1. c. 6. (...).
.

Secondly, If by apparent Victory, be meant a true and sufficient confutation
and conviction of Errants, then the Minor is false; for that is a sufficient
means to obtain Victory, by which our Savior himself subdued Satan, Math.
4.4, 7. and the Heretics of his time, Math. 12, 3. and 22, 29, 43. and by
which St. Paul confuted the Pharisees, and other Adversaries, Acts 17, 2. and
28, 23. And whereby the Fathers of the Nicene Council convicted the Arrians
(...) Dial. p. 3 tr. 1. lib. 3. ca. 6. (...). Cyzicen. in Acta. Council. Nicen.
pa. 2.
, Socrat. Hist. l. 1. c. 6. Exquifitis legis diuinae testimonijs. Did. 15. c.
1. (...).
and which are given by inspiration to be an effectual means to reprove and
confute error, 2. Tim. 3, 16. Chrysostom. d. fid. and leg. not Quando haec dicit
Haereticus nos a Sancta Scriptura (...) proferamus (...) enim (...) in (...)
inimicorum Regis (...). (...) Orgelit. in Cantic. (...) hac Sancta Scriptura
omnis armatura (...). (...). (...). d. Diu. Nom. c. (...). Nos (...) Scriptura,
quasi norma and luce adhibita, constanter ad (...) nostra, pro (...) part
(...).
. But the Jesuit may cauil, saying, that even as a sword in the hand of a
Giant, is sufficient to (...)

Answ. First, Our Savior and his Apostles did both use the Scriptures
themselves, and commanded others, even simple men to use them Chrysostom. Genesis
(...). 37. Christus praecepit dioens scrutemini Scripturas, vt non tantum (...)
lectioni vacemus sed indagatis profundis, verum sensum (...) percipere
valeamus, etc.
, John 5, 39. Ephesians. 6, 17. and they are commended who examined Doctrine by
them. Acts 17, 11.

Secondly, they which understand and apply the Scriptures truly, use them as
Christ and his Apostles did, and so the Scripture in their use is a word of
power, and not as a sword in a child's hand.

Thirdly, Scriptures were means to convict Heretics (as they were used by the
Fathers of the Church, and other holy Persons) before any general Counsels
were gathered, to wit the first three hundred years, and before the Papal
Supremacy was advanced in the Church.

Fourthly, it is ridiculous to imagine, that the present Roman Francisc. Pic.
Theo. 18. Persuasissimum nobis esse debet (...) modo eos qui Doctiores, sed and
(...) sunt clarius and exquisitius caeteris, veritatem agnoscere and agnitam
(...) etc. Quis enim ambigat, (...) hominem (...) committere, quem probatae
perspectaeque (...), quam qui bonitatis expers aut indigus, doctrina (...)
pollet. Et D. Ambros. de paradiso (...): neminem debere se alteri credere, nisi
(...) virtutem probauerit.
, Wisdom. 1. 2. Cor. 6. 15.

Fifthly, the place of Tertul. d. Praescript. c. 19. does not (...) the
imperfection of holy Scripture to convict proteruious error, according to the
latter part of my former distinction; for then he could not have said,
Scripturae plenitudinem adoramus; We Let Hermogenes teach Tert. cont. (...).
cap. 22. (...) Hermogenes scriptum esse, si non est scriptum timeat (...)
illud, adijcientibus aut detrahentibus destinatum.
, that it is written: and if it be not written, let him fear the Woe denounced
against them which add or detract any thing from the word of God: but be (...)
of the Scriptures, according to the first part of my distinction, to wit, That
Heretics blinded with malice, and either denying or corrupting the text (...)
Cum ex Scripturis (...) in accusationem (...) ipsarum Scripturarum quafi non
recte se habeant, neque fint ex authoritate etc. Iren. li. 3. ca. 2.
of the Scriptures, Tertul. d. Praescript. c. 17. Ista Haetefis non recipit
quasdam Scripturas: Et si quas recipit adiectionibus and detractionibus ad
(...) instituti sui (...), and fi recipit non recipit integras and si aliqua
tenus integras praestat, nihilomin' diuersas expositiones commentata conuertit.
cannot be so convicted by them, but they will still use cauils, and by
Sophistical slights borrowed from Philosophers Tertul. d. Praescr. c. 7. and
C. Marc. li. 5. c. 19. Chrysostom. prol. sup. 1. Corinthians. Hieron. sup. Esa. c. 19.
and (...). sup. Daniel.
elude the evidence of the plain Texts of Scriptures. But if this argue the
Scriptures of imperfection, it will also prove the Authority of the Church,
and of Tradition, to be insufficient, as appears in the Arrians and Donatists.
And Heretics may with no less pretext, take exception against Tradition, and
Ecclesiastical Authority, than against the Scripture, Ireneus li. 3. ca. 2.
When they are confuted by Scriptures, they accuse them as being not well
written, and destitute of Authority, or else so ambiguous that one cannot find
the Truth by them etc. And in like manner when we provoke them to stand to
trial by Tradition, which came from the Apostles Cum autem ad eam iterum
Traditionem, quae est ab Apostolis quae per successiones presbiterorum in
Ecclesus custoditur, prouocamus eos, aduersantur Traditioni.
etc. they oppose the same etc. And thus they will consent neither to Scripture
nor Tradition Euenit itaque neque Scripturis iam neque Traditioni eos
consentire.
. And Gregory Valence Greg. val. (...). 3. Disp. 1. p. 1. pa. 36. Reuelatio
diuina and propositio
himself says, The infallible teaching and proposition of the Church is no
less obscure unto us than any other Article which we are to believe.

Sixthly, we acknowledge the lawful Power and Authority of the Church Calvin
Institut. li. 4. c. 1. number. 10. Whitak. Duplic. li. 1. c. 9. Christi Ecclesiam
summa veneratione prosequimur, and authoritatem Ecclesie libenter amplectimur:
and (...) Christianum nunquam esse arbitrabor, qui testimonium and iuditium
Ecclesiae nihili fecerit.
, about expounding holy Scriptures, and for maintaining Unity in right Faith,
and appeasing contention, and repressing proteruious Errants, Heb. 13.17. Math.
18.17.1. Timoth. 3.15. 2. Thessal. 5.12.

And in particular, first we believe the authority of Councels (...). (...).
Fid. 2d Gratian. (...). Hist. Eccles. l. 1. c. 7. Socrat. Hist. Eccles. l. 1.
c. 6. Greg. lib. 1. Ep. 24. (...) Walden. to. 1. li. 2. c. 20. De quatuor
conciliis magnis quod Gregorius ea videtur comparare (...), non autem comparar
sed similitudinem quandam insinuat (...) in Enangelio Christus, (...)
perfectificut (...) vester coelest. Matthew. 5.
And all Councels of this nature we reverence with the same honor the ancient
Church did, (...). d. Bapt. l. 1. c. 7. etc. 18. and l. 2. c. 8. D. Andr. C.
Apolog. Bellarm. c. 14. Date nobis (...) legitime congregata and procedentia
Occham. Dialog. part. 3. l. 3. c. 13.
affirming that private Christians and particular Churches, are to submit their
judgment to the authority of the same, except it be manifest that they depart
from Truth.

Secondly, we highly and reverently esteem exposition of Scripture, delivered
by the unanimous consent of the Primative Fathers (...). Epist. ad Micon.
Chemnic. Examine. Council. Trid. part. 1. page 78. Calvin. Commentar. Act. 8.
ver. 31. Praefat. to BB. Jewels works last edit. D. Andr. BB. Winch. c.
Apolog. Belarm. c. 14. pa. 333. (...) Respon. ad Perion. pa. 20. (...). d.
Colloq. Ratisbon. pa. 182. Herbrand. Disp. 41. n. 16. Meisuer. Excub. pa. 43.
: and although we yield eminent and supreme Authority Serran. Apparat. ad
Fid. Cath. Summa quidem Dei eiusque Scripturae authoritas est: verum sua quoque
Ecclesiae iurisdictio, constat sua authoritas.
, because the same is absolutely divine, yet when any question arises
concerning Expositions, we allow not private persons D. Bilson. Govern. of the
Church, ca. 13. pa. 280. Meisner. Excub. Papist. pa. 175. Si omnes ab Apostolis
per omnia secula patres primarium quoddam and maxim controuersum Scripturae
dictum in quo articulus aliquis fidei Christianae fundatur (...) modo adeoque
pleno and vnanimi conseusu exposuerint, tum sane ab ista conformi patrum
expositione, non est recedendum, meritoque suspectus esse debet omnis ille
sensus, qui tanto patrum consensui directo opponitur.
upon uncertain or probable reasons, to reject the sense, which has bin
anciently and commonly received, and against which no strong or solid exception
can be produced. Now this being observed, and other helps of expounding
Scripture used, there follows nothing from our Tenet, whereby Christianity
should be made uncertain, and Disputation from sole Scripture prove fruitles,
or which may hinder apparent Victory (by the same) against proteruious Error.

IESVIT.
The Preface ended, our Adversary descends to his disputation, and herein,
first he sets down a maine proposition,

Secondly, He delivers five Principles manifest in themselves, and
presupposed and confessed by Papists and Protestants.

Principle 1. No man can be saved without firm and sure apprehension of
supernatural Truth, concerning his last end, and the means to

Secondly, Assurance of this kind is not had by clear sight Demonstration,
humane Discourse, or humane Authority, but by Faith grounded upon Gods Word,
revealing things unknown by other means.

Thirdly, God revealed all Supernatural Truth to Christ, and Christ revealed
the same to the holy Apostles, partly by vocal Preaching, but principally by
the immediate teaching of his holy Spirit, to this end, that they should
deliver them to mankind, to be received and believed every where over the
World, even to the consummation

Fourthly, the Apostles fulfilled this preaching to all Nations, and delivering
partly by writing, and partly by word of mouth, the whole entire Doctrine of
Salvation; planted an universal Christian company ^, and to deliver unto

Fifthly, though the Apostles and their Primative Hearers be deceased, yet there
still remains in the World a means, by which men may assuredly know what the
Apostles preached, andthe Primative Church received of them, because the
Church, even to the endof the World, must be founded on the Apostles, and
believe nothing as matter of Faith, but that which was delivered by them.

The former grounds being confessed, a question remains to be examined: What
is the principal infallible means whereby a Christian may

ANSWER.
The Jesuit affirms the latter, and produces four Arguments to prove his
Tenet; and then supposing that he has proved the Question, infers that the
Roman Church is the only true Church, because it is the only faithful keeper
and

IESVITS 1. Argument.
If the maine and substantial points of our Faith are believed to be
Apostolical, because written in the Scripture of the New Testament, and the
Scriptures of the New Testament are believed to come from the Apostles, upon
the voice of perpetual Tradition unwritten; then our

But the maine and substantial points of our Faith are believed to be
Apostolical, because they are written in Scriptures, and the Scriptures etc.
are believed to come from the Apostles by perpetual Tradition unwritten.

Ergo, Our resolution that our Faith is Apostolical, rests finally upon
Tradition unwritten.

ANSWER.
If the second part of the Antecedent, to wit, And the Scriptures of the new
Testament, are believed to come from the Apostles upon the (...) of (...)
Tradition unwritten, be understood only, or principally, be added to
unwritten Tradition, then the Assumption is false.

First, although the Scriptures of the new Testament, are believed to come from
the Apostles, upon the voice of perpetual Tradition, yet because they are not
believed thus to descend by the said voice, as upon the only or principal
ground, therefore it is inconsequent to infer, our resolution that our faith
is Apostolical, stays lastly and finally upon Tradition.

If the Argument be reduced to a Categoricall form, the defect That upon whose
voice the Scriptures of the new Testament are believed to come from the
Apostles, is the grouud whereupon our faith lastly and finally stays.

Perpetual Tradition, is that upon whose voice the Scriptures of the new
Testament are believed to come from the Apostles.

Therefore perpetual Tradition is the ground



In this Argument the Mayor proposition is false, for that is not always the
last ground of Resolution, upon whose voice and testimony we do first of all,
or prioritate or dinis, vel temporis, in priority of time, or order, believe
things: because there may be other grounds of belief, equal, or of greater
authority than the first voice; and the first voice upon which we believe
(...). d. (...). Cred. c. 16. (...) sapienti quis (...) sed id nunc (...) vt
sapientes (...). (...) d. Sacr. Doct. and Deo. l. 1. tr. 2. c. 1. ^ d. fid.
form. Disp. 3. Sect. 12. n. 13. (...) potest ex humana authoritate generari
quandam fidem humanam, praeuiam ad fidem infusam, non tanquam fundamentum vel
rationem formalem eius, sed tanqua
, may be only an introduction or motive of credibility. For example: One may
believe that Moses or the Prophets were the Authors Josephus, Joseph. Antiq.
Iud. l. 18. c. 4. (...).
That Jesus Christ was a wise man, yea more than a man, and that he wrought
many great miracles, and was crucified, and appeared again the third day
alive, and was honored by Jews and Gentiles: yet this voice and Testimony of
Josephus is not the final ground of faiths resolution. If (...) be taken to
these (...), that they proceed

First, that the (...) and (...) of faith, is not always made into that (...),
upon whose voice and (...) ^ as appears by St. John Baptist, for ^ upon his
voice and (...), which did not finally and principally (...) their (...) his
(...), but into the voice of Christ himself, John 5. 33, 36.

Secondly, although the vocal Tradition of the Apostles Eusebius. Eccles. Hist.
l. 3. c. 21. Cum trium Euangelistarum Scripta ad sanctos iam, and ad ipsum
quoque Iohanne (...) probasse quidem (...), and veritatis illis dedisse
testimonium.
to their immediate hearers, was totally and perfectly divine, both in regard
of the matter testified, and in respect of their own persons who were
witnesses immediately sent and inspired of God; yet the subsequent History, and
report of this former, made by those which were remote from the Apostles age,
is not simply and perfectly divine, but only in part, for when it faithfully
reports that which the Apostles said and did, it is divine in regard of the
matter and thing testified, but is humane Anton. Perez. Pentateuch. Fid. vol.
3. Dub. 10. c. 9. Comparatione buius (Scripturae) testimonium Ecclesiae dici
quodammodo potest testimonium bominum vtpote quod in rigore sermonis non
obtineat (...) and (...) ad rationem verbi Dei. page 55. col. 2.
in regard of the quality manner of testification, because these succeeding
witnesses were not equal in verity to the holy Apostles, (...) free from
possibility of error, nor such as immediately heard the Apostles. Hereupon
Aquinas himself holds, (...). l. 12. c. 3. ^
that our faith does only rest upon those revelations which the Authors of
the holy Scriptures published: and Durand ^
with many other Schoolmen ^
says, that the faith which is grounded upon the approbation of the Church is
only acquisite. (...). 22. q. 1. Disput. 2. Dub. 3. Fides acquisita semper
resoluitur in ^ bumanum. Canus. loc. l. 2. c. 8. (...) per fidem acquisitam ita
^ quin formidemus eum possevel (...) vel (...). (...). Picus Mirandul. Theorem.
3. ^ sub esse potest (...) non (...), Deo (...), sed
And if this be true, then because the credit of unwritten Traditions,
depends in respect of us, upon the authority of the Church since the
Apostles,

But if the Jesuit, when he says, the Scriptures of the new Testament are
believed to come from the Apostles, upon the voice of perpetual Tradition
unwritten, do means that the said Scriptures are believed to (...) from the
Apostles, upon the voice of unwritten Tradition, (...), then the assumption is
false: for they are (...) to come from the Apostles by written Tradition, as
well as by unwritten, and more principally upon the voice of the Apostles,
speaking in and by their Scriptures, than upon the only testimony of unwritten
Tradition.

It is usual and common for one man to certify another, of such matters as he
desires he should know, by an Epistle or writing: So likewise the holy
Apostles desiring ^
that all the world, for whose instruction they wrote, should know that these
Scriptures are their work, have declared the same by their own testimony,
John affirms, that he is the Author of his Gospel, and of the Revelation,
John 21, 24. Revel. 1, 4. St. Paul and other Apostles do the like concerning
the Epistles, Romans 1, 1. 2. Cor. 10, 10. Collos. 4. 18. 1. Pet. 1, 1. Iam. 1,
1. Jude v. 1. And that the holy Apostles and Evangelists do speak unto people
of all ages by their books and writings, is affirmed by the Fathers: St.
August. says, ^
Ipsum Paulum audi, etc. Hear thou, even Paul himself. St. Chrysostom. ^
If thou desire, thou may hear Paul, Peter, John, and the whole company
of the Prophets speaking unto thee, take the books of these blessed ones into
thine hands, read their Scriptures, and thou may hear, not Paul only, but
even Paul's Lord speaking unto thee by Paul's mouth.

But it is objected against this, by Bellarmine and others, ^
that counterfeit Authors may speak in the name and person of the Apostles;
to wit, a Bastard Heretic, in the name of St. Bartholomew, or St. Peter, etc.

I answer with St. Augustine, ^
the same may be done in all humane, and ecclesiastical writings, and yet
sufficient means are found, partly in the History of times, partly in the
writings of every Author, to confute Impostors. And concerning the holy
Ecclesiastical, to wit, the perpetual History of the Church, since the
Apostles departure, ^
whereby is produced a moral persuasion and credibilitie, than which none can
be greater in that kind, by reason of the antiquity, number, consent, and
sanctity of the witnesses which testify this: the other totally divine, ^
to wit, the matter, and form of Doctrine contained in the ^ the said books
to be (...) (...) ^ are taken from the internal 1. (...). Prol. ar. 2. Ibid.
Giner. pa. 9. (...). ab Incarnat. Lect. 3. p. 20. Polla. sup. Scot. q. 2.
discurs. 2. p. 14.
matter and majesty of the books; and Gregory Valence ^
^ contained in the same Scripture, etc. And (...) (...) ^
, that the (...) of God is seen by faith in the holy ^ ^
faith, The Scripture is a fair (...) ^. (...). (...) ^
You have before Pet. 1. 19. And (...) August. ^
^. And therefore, as a (...) or (...) others, by the same light or (...)
manifests it self ^
: so the holy Scripture inlightning the Church, demonstrates his own (...) and
virtue. And thus (...) we be first directed and helped by unwritten Tradition
to know the Scriptures, yet the Tradition of the present Church, is (...) the
only last and principal ground whereunto we resolve (...).

If the Jesuits Argument be retorted upon himself, it will demonstrate, that
our Faith is finally resolved into holy Scripture, ^
; for inuerting (...) order of the (...), and retaining the matter, I argue as
follows.

If the maine and (...) points of Faith are (...) to be (...), because of the
(...) of perpetual Tradition unwritten, and (...) Tradition unwritten is
believed to

But the Antecedent is true, Ergo etc.

The Assumption is confirmed two ways.

First, by the practice of Papals which confirm their doctrine of Tradition,
by testimonies of Scripture, alleging, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 15. 1. Tim. 6. 20. and 2.
Tim. 1. 16.

Secondly, because the credit of Tradition, in respect of us, depends upon
the authority of the Church, and the authority

Both these assertions are maintained by the Papals. First, They say that the
authority of Tradition, in respect of us, depends upon the Church. Gretsar.
Si (...) vnde cognoscat propositionem Ecclesiae esse infallibilem, dicat se,
etc. credere fide infallibili, tum ob reuelationem Scripturae testimonium
perhibentis Ecclesiae, etc.
def. Bellarm. d. verbo Dei, lib. 4. cap. 9. Vitus miletus cont. (...). loc.
27. Error. 615. Secondly, They confirm the Churches authority by the
Scriptures, 1. Tim. 3.15. Math. 18.17. Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13, 14. Gregory Valence
tom. 3. disput. 1. punct. 1. pa. 40. and ibid. punct. 7. pa. 327. Driedo.
Dried. d. Eccles. Dcgm. l. 4. part. 3. c. 4. De Ecclesia (...) nunc est
intelligendo eam vt praecisam and abstractam seu nudam, etc. diceret Aug. Ego
huius Ecclesiae homines non agnoscerem esse Ecclesiam Christi, nisi doceret me
(...) Euangelistarum authoritas. fol. 239.
d. Eccles. dogm. li, 2. c. 3. pa. 59. Stapleton (...). Tripl. c. 15. (...) vt
Ecclesiae credamus, non (...) authoritate (...) and (...) ((...) in genere
causae (...)) huius fidei nostrae causa: sed partim ex Scripturis (...) ad
Ecclesiae (...), partim ex ipso fidei Symbolo etc.
triplic. c. 15. pa. 179. And thus will they nill they, they are compelled to
make holy S. Chris. sup. Psalm. 95. Si quid dicitur absque Scriptura, auditorum
cogitatio (...), (...) annuens, nunc (...), and (...), vt (...), interdum vt
(...), (...) vbi e Scriptura diuinae vocis prodijt testimonium, and loquentis
sermonem, and ^. August. sup. Psalm. 67. Dormire inter medios cleros est in
(...) Testamenti authoritate (...), vt quando aliquid ex hijs ^.
When any thing is delivered without the warrant of Scripture, the hearers
thought staggereth, sometimes consenting, and then again (...), and another
while rejecting the same as (...), etc. but when the testimony of Divine Voice
is delivered out of the Scripture, it both confirms the saying of the
Speaker, and mind of the Hearer.

IESVIT.
So it is, that the Scripture of the New Testament (...) not be proved to have
been delivered unto the Church by the Apostles, but by perpetual Tradition
underwritten, conserved in the Church succeeding the Apostles: for what S.
Mark, and S. Luke, and also the Acts of the Apostles were not written by any
Apostles, but were by their lively voice and suffrages recommended unto
Christians as sacred, otherwise (as also Mr. Bilson

ANSWER.
The point which the Adversary endeavors to prove, is, That

The sum of his argument is, Either perpetual Tradition unwritten, is the
only ground of this belief, or else the Titles of the Books.

But the Titles of the Books are not the only ground, because doubt



I answer: It follows not that Tradition unwritten is the Oreg. Arimin. 1.
d. z. q. 1. Ar. 4. Mere credendu^ est, quod contenta in sacra Scriptura sucrunt
a Christo reuclata. Per nullam enim viam hoc scimus, nisi quia hoc credit
Ecclesia, and sic audiuimus a patribus nostris, and sic in praedicta Scriptura
(...).
only or principal ground whereupon we believe the Scriptures of the New
Testament to be Apostolical, although the titles of the Books alone are not
so; for besides the external Titles,

First, the inward Subscription (1. Corinthians. 16.21. and Inscription, (...).
1. Romans 1. 1.) of many of these Books, and namely of all Saint Paul's Epistles
(except to the Hebrews Chrysoft. sup. Romans Hom. 1. Quod autem in Epistola quae
ad Hebraeos est hunc Epistolare adiungendi nominis modum non seruauit singulari
factum est prudendentia. Quandoquidem enim Hebraei non erant amico erga paulum
animo, ne statim a principio nomen illius audientes, toti Epistolae aditum
praecluderent, sapienter illi visum est suppresso authoris nomine illorum
allicere auditum.
) together with the Revelations of Saint John, and the other Canonical
Epistles.

Secondly, In diverse Books there is found apparent testimony, within the
same, that the Apostles were the Authors, John 21. 24. 1. Cor. 15. 10. 1. Tim.
1. 13. Renel. 1. 4.

Thirdly, In those Books which want such inward inscription or testimony, the
matter and form of the Books, their harmony Aug. Epist. 3. quasi amicus
familiaris sine fuco ad cor loquitur doctoru^ and indoctorum. Serranus, Appar.
ad fid. Catholic. pa. 51. Ea vis est Scripturae a Deo inspiratae, vt Dei
majestas in ca eluceat. Etpa. 55. Lux sua se vi, ipsam prodit.
, will prove them to be divine: and if they be divine, then it follows, that
they are Apostolical (either by the Apostles own writing, or approbation)
because the Church of the New Testament is builded upon the foundation of the
Apostles, Ephesians. 2. 20. and our Savior himself did appoint their Doctrine and
Ministry to be the prime rule of Faith, Math. 28. 20. Luc. 10. 16. and c. 24.
48, 49. And whosoever in their days (by preaching, or writing) instructed Aug.
c. Faust. li. 28. c. 4. (...). Apolog. Aug. Ep. 11. Ireneus lib. 3. prol.
Prosola vera and viuifica fide quam ab Apostolis Ecclesiae accepit and
distribuit filijs suis. Etenim Dominus (...) dedit Apostolis suis potestatem
Euangelij per quos veritatem hoc est filij doctrinam (...), etc. 228.
, Gallath. 2. 2. 9.

The titles prefixed before the Books of the New Testament, being joined with
these three grounds formerly expressed, are sufficient to prove, that the holy
Apostles were the Authors, or Approuers of all the Scriptures of the New
Testament: and if these (with other humane motives of credibilitie) be not, the
same doubt which is made concerning them, may with greater probability be made
concerning unwritten Traditions Greg. Val. Analis. fid. li. 5 c. 8. Read before
page 28.
. And secluding the authority of the Scripture it self, no other divine
(...). d. Lazaro. hom. 4. (...) (...) com. Theol. li. 1. tr. 7. ca. 2. n. 3.
itaque qui de hoc Canone (...), excludendus a Theologia, quia aberrat ab ostio,
ficut ij qui in scientijs negant principia.
speaking in them, neither will he believe the present Church consisting of
persons, in whom is possibility of error.

IESVIT.
For we may distinguish three properties of the Doctrine of Faith, to wit, to
be true, to be revealed of God, to be preached and delivered by the Apostles.
The highest ground by which I am persuaded and resolved that my Faith is true,
is the authority of God revealing it; the highest ground on which I am
resolved that my Faith is revealed, is the credit and authority of Christ
Jesus and his Apostles, who delivered

ANSWER.
The last part of the former distinction is denied. The highest ground meaning
divine, which moves us to believe that the (...). d. Vetbo Dei l. 1. c. 2.
Cum sacra Scriptura regula credendi certissima (...) fit. Lib. 4. c. 11. Dico
illa omnia scripta esse ab Apostolis quae sunt omnibus necessaria and quae ipsi
palam omnibus vulgo praedicanetunt. Idem. Clarissima testimonia Scripturae
anteponenda sunt omnibus conciliorum (...).
) gives authority to the Church, for the Church is founded upon the word of
God, Ephesians. 2.20. and the word of God is the immortal seed which produces and
gives being to the Church Gregor. Valenc. tom. 3. q. 1. disp. 1. punct. 7. pa.
194. Aug. li. d. pastor. c. 13. and Ep. 48. and Epist. 166. and d. unit.
Ecclesiae c. 3. and 4 and 16. (...). Imperf. Math. (...). 49. Qui (...) quae
sit vera Ecclesia, vnde cognoscat (...) per Scripturas. Iren. li. 3. c. 11.
(...). sum. li. 3. tr. 3. ca. 3. Si queritur quare credis hoc vel illud, non
est (...) vnica responsio, scilicet, quia ita docet prima veritas. Fides enim
soli primae veritati nititur, nec (...) medium ad probandum aliquem articulum.
(...). d. unit. Eccles. c. 16. Remotis ergo omnibus talibus, Ecclesiam suam
demonstrent si possunt, non in sermonibus and rumoribus Afrorum, non in
Concilijs (...), non in literis (...) disputatorum, non in signis and prodigijs
fallacibus, quia (...) contra ista verbo (...) and (...) redditi (...), sed in
praescripto legis, in Prophetarum praedictis, in Psalmorum cantibus, Ibid.
(...) vtrum ipsi: Ecclesiam reneant, non (...), cationicis libris ostendant,
quia nec nos propterea dicimus nobis credere oportere quod in Ecclesia Christi
sumus, quia ipsam quam tenemus commendauit Mileuitanus Optatus, vel
Mediolanensis (...) vel (...) nostrae communionis Episcopi, aut quia (...)
Collegarum concilijs, ipsa praedicata est, aut quia per totum (...) in locis
sanctis quae frequentat nostra communio tanta mirabilia vel exauditionum vel
sanitatum fiunt.
, Luc. 8.11. Ia. 1.18. ^

(...).
Into this principle St. Augustine resolved his faith against

ANSWER.
St. Augustines words, C. Epist. Manichei. c. 4. Si inuenires aliquem qui
Euangelio nondum credit quid (...) dicenti tibi non credo: ego vero non
crederem nisi me (...) commoueret (...).
do not prove, that after he was fully converted, he resolved his faith
finally and principally into the authority of the Church, succeeding the
Apostles.

First, St. Augustine resolved his faith finally and principally, into that
which he knew to be infallible and totally divine. But he was not so persuaded
of the Church, succeeding the Apostles, because he thought it possible for the
principal members of that Church to (...), and be deceived (...). c. Crescon.
l. 2. c. 21. Ecclesiastici Iudices sicut homines (...), (...).
, and he prefers the authority of the Scriptures, before the judgment of
Councels and Fathers ^ ^ ^ etc. Et per concilia licere ^ emendari, etc.
, (in which some of our adversaries place the (...) of Ecclesiastical
infallibility.) Moreover it appears by Saint Augustine in the second chapter
of this Book, that he did not make the authority of the Church, the highest
ground of resolution of his faith: for he says that manifest verity is to be
preferred before all other tbings, whereby he was held in the Catholic Church
Aug. c. Ep. Manich. c. 4. Multa sunt alia, quae in eius graemio me justissime
teneant. Tenet consensio populorum, atque gentium (...) authoritas, miraculis
inchoata, charitate aucta vetustate firmata, etc. apud vos vero nihil est
horum, etc. sola personat veritatis pollicitatio. Quae quidem si tam manifesta
monstratur vt in dubium venire non possit preponenda est (...) illis rebus
quibus in Catholica teneor.
: but that whose authority must be preferred before all other things, is the
highest ground of faiths resolution.

Secondly, because St. Augustines meaning in this place is obscure acquisite or
Historical Faith, which is an introductio^ to Scot. 3. d. 23. q. 1. Certum est
quod in nobis est fides (...) credebilium acquifita: quod patet per Aug. c.
fundament. Manich, qui dicit, quod non crederet Euang. nisi crederet Ecclesiae
Catholicae approbanti and authorizanti libros illos, etc. Gabr. 3. d. 23. q. 2.
ar. 2. c. 1.
infused faith, and then it is inconsequent to argue, that because Saint
Augustine at his first conversion, and being a Nouice in Faith, did ground his
Historical faith upon the authority of the Church, therefore the authority of
the Church is universally, and after men are converted, the highest ground of
resolution. Most men are at first induced by external motives, to give credit
to the Scriptures, as Canus loc. l. 2. c. 8. Negotium Augustino erat cum
Manichaeis, qui absque controuersia, suo (...) Euangelio credi volebant and
Manich. fidem adstruere. Rogat (...) August. ecquid (...) sint si in hominem
incidant qui non Euangelio quidem credat, quoue genere persuasionis sint eum in
(...) sententiam adducturi, certe se affirmat non aliter potuisse adduci vt
(...), quam Ecclesiae authoritate victum. Non itaque docet fundatam efse
Euangelij fidem in Ecclesiae authoritate, verum simpliciter (...) efse certam
viam qua Infideles sieve Nouitij, in fide ad Sacros Libros (...), nisi
Catholicae Ecclesiae vnum eundemque consensum. pa. 35. Al. Hal. 3. q. 78. memb.
2. Ratio and fides quae est ex ratione, se (...) ad fidem gratuitam, ficut
preambula dispositio ad formam. Disponit enim animam ad receptionem luminis,
quo assentit primae veritati propter se, sed per modum naturae non gratiae, and
dicitur ipsum in (...) seta (...) and tunc ratio (...) humana, quando ei non
innititur fides introducta.
were by the testimony of the woman, to believe that Christ was a Prophet, Ioh.
4.42. Altisiodor. summa in prolog. and li. 3. tr. 3.9.4. But as these people
afterward believed, because of Christ's own words, so they which by the
Churches authority are first persuaded to hear and read the doctrine of the
Scriptures, afterward by the light of grace do perceive the divine Majesty,
wisdom, efficacy, and verity of the said doctrine, and resolve their faith
into the divine authority of the holy Ghost, manifesting himself in the
Scripture, or doctrine of the Scripture.

Secondly, other learned Papists hold that St. Augustine, in the place
objected, by the authority of the Church, understood the Church wherein the
Apostles themselves governed, and of (...). dial. p. 1. l. 1. c. 4.
Intelligitur solum. d. Ecclesia quae (...) tempore (...). Gabr. lect. (...).
can. missae D. (...). in sent. l. 1. q. 1. ar. 3. fol. 50. and quest. vesper
vtrum Petri Ecclesia fol. 278. and 294. Can. (...). Colon. p. 69. Dried. d.
(...). Eccl. l. 4. c. 4. fol. 239. Th. Wald. to 1. l. 2. c. 21. Durand. 3. d.
24.4.1. (...). d. (...). vit. lect. 2. Coral. 7. Et hic apperitur (...)
intelligendi (...) Aug. Euangelio non (...) nisi me authoritas Ecclesiae
compulisset. (...) enim (...) pro congregatione fidelium, (...) qui Christum
audierunt, (...) and ejus testes fuerunt.
and then no marvel if he resolved his faith into the authority of the
Church, because in this notion the Augustine conioyneth the authority of the
latter Church with the former, wherein were the Apostles, yet he did not
equally, and with the same manner of believing ground his faith upon both: for
when a Preacher delivers Apostolical doctrine, we believe both the Preacher
and the Doctrine, and we could not have known the doctrine, but by the
Preacher; yet we resolve not our faith, finally and principally into the
authority of the Preacher, Turrian. 22. disp. 2. dub. 4. Non solu^ inter
Gentiles, sed etiam inter Christianos, antequa^ quis adhibeat fidem humana^,
testimonio Ecclesiae, fidem adhibit Concionatori, vel parocho, etc.
but into the divine verity it self preached by him.

IESVIT.
Upon the former place of Saint Augustine, the Jesuit infers: That because
we have no stronger or more excellent proof than the testimony of the present
Churcb Augustine resolved his faith, that it was Apostolical, finally and
principally into the authority of the present Church.

ANSWER.
Saint Augustine delivers not the former, and therefore the Jesuit cannot
infer the latter: we have indeed no stronger or more excellent moral proof
Occbam. dial. part. 3. tr. 1. l. 3. c. 23. (...) possibilis and sufficiens,
quamuis non sit infallibilis.
, than the perpetual testimony of the Church succeeding the Apostles: but we
have a stronger and more excellent divine proof, to wit, the Prophecy of
Christ and his Apostles, concerning the perpetual preservation of the Gospel
unto the end of the world: also that the Aposcolical Scriptures were once
incorrupt, is manifest August. d. vtilit. cred. c. 3. Voluit nescio quos
corruptores (...) librorum etc. Aug. d. (...). cred. c. 3. (...) couinci potest
(...) Scripturas esse falsatas, etc.
, because they were given by divine inspiration. And it is apparent that they
were not afterward corrupted, because no authority or sufficient Argument can
be produced to procue them in whole, or in part, to have been corrupted Aug.
Epist. 48. Noque (...) integritas atque notitia literarum vnius quamlibet
illustris Episcopi custodiri quema (...) Scriptura Canonica (...) linguarum
(...) and ordine and successione celebranonis Ecclesiastica custoditur, etc.
Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. l. 3.10. (...).
.

Now that which being once known by divine testimony to corrupted, does by
divine testimony appear to be incorrupt, because

The Text of the Gospel was once known by divine testimony to have been
incorrupt, and it cannot be proved to have been afterward corrupted, Ergo,

It does still appear by divine testimony that the Text of the Gospel is
incorrupt, and the resolution of Faith finally and principally rests upon
that divine testimony, and not upon the (...) of the present Church.

Lastly, the harmony and coherence of the Gospel, both with the Scriptures of
the old Testament, Lu. 24.27. Act. 28.23. and of the Scot. prol. 1. Sent.
artic. 4. and ib. Damian Giner. pa. 9. Secunda via etc. Ioh. ab Incarnatione 1.
Sen. pro. q. 2. Lect. 3. page 20. de secundo etc. Bellar. d. ver. Dei li. 1.
ca. 2. Read his words before page 27.
do manifest that the text of the new Testament is incorrupt. For if the same
were corrupted in any part, corruption of words would produce alteration and
difference of matter: but we find at this day a perfect harmony of all the
parts of the Gospel among themselves, and a perfect agreement of the same with
the Scriptures of the old Testament: And from the same being an inward
Argument, we may collect, that the text of the Gospel is at this day incorrupt.

Now having so many Arguments, besides the authority of the present Church, to
prove the integrity of the text of the for we resolve our Faith into the
authority of Gods outward word (expounded unto us by such helps and means,
as both the Scripture it self, and the ancient Church require) as into the
divine motive, and object of belief: and we affirm that his grace and holy
Spirit, working by the outward means, inableth, draws, and persuadeth the
conscience to assent, John 6.45. and 12.37, 38.1. Cor. Cor. 3.5. Act. 16.14. 1.
John 2.20.27. Esaias 50.5. And herein we fly to no private Spirit or Revelation,
but maintain the ordinary assistance of divine grace, according to the
doctrine of the holy Scripture, and of S. Augustine Aug. Ep. (...). tr. 2.
Quicquid illarum Scripturarum est sonat Christu^, sed si aures inueniat. Et
apperuit eis sensum vt intelligerint Scripturas, etc. Ibid. tr. 3. Interior
Magister est qui docet, etc. pa. 741. etc. ep. Manich. c. 14. and ep. 107. and
sup. Psalm. 126. and d. praedest. Sanct. c. 8. and epist. 121. in fine.
, and the common Tenet of the Scholemen themselves Canus loc. li. 2. ca. 8.
(...) 22. q. 1. art. 1. concl. 4. pa. 12. Quantum ad formalem rationem credendi
pendet nostra fides immediate a spirito Sancto illuminante mentes nostras.
(...). Tena. Com. Heb. 11. diff. 1. sect. 5. n. 26. In genere causae
efficientis reducitur assensus nostrae fidei in nostrum intellectum, vt
instrumentum vitale: In (...) vero internum, and habituale fidei vt in causam
propriam and proximam, eleuantem intellectum nostrum ad (...) assensum. (...)
d. ver. relig. li. 1. ca. 14. page 55. Gillius d. sacra Doctr. and essent. Dei
and li. (...). tract. 2. ca. 2. n. 4. (...). Tripl. ca. 16. Ipsa diuini
Spiritus in cord persuasio principalis causa and (...) resolutio fidei (...)
est. (...). Aquin. 22. q. 6. at. 1. Capreol. 3. d. 24. q. vnic. pa. 177.
Arragon. 22. q. 1. ar. 1. conclus. 6. (dicit) fideles credere res seu misteria
fidei, quia Deus illa reuelauit. Quod autem Deus illa (...), immediate credere,
quia interins (...) per specialem (...), iuxta illud: Qui credit in filium Dei
habet restimonium Dei in se. Rich. (...). 2. dict. 23. q. 2. (...). 1. Fides
non est ex auditu solo, sed principaliter per (...) interiorem.
.

IESVITS 2. Argument.
Secondly, J (...) that common unlearned people (the greatest part of
Christianity) are persuaded about all substantial points of Faith, by
Tradition, not by Scripture Common unlearned people have true Christian Faith
in all points necessary and snfficient unto Salvation, but they have not Faith
of all these maine and substantial points grounded on Scripture, for they can
neither understand nor read any Ergo,

Originally, and before they know any Scripture, they have Faith grounded on
the Tradition of their ancestors, by the light whereof they are able to judge
of the truth of Translations

ANSWER.
The question which the Jesuit undertakes to prove in his four Arguments,
is, that our resolution of Faith stays finally upon the perpetual Tradition
of the Church, and not upon the Scripture.

His second argument to prove this, is taken from the manner of vulgar and
illiterate people in resolving their Faith: For if these, being the greater
part of Christianity, do ground their Creed (touching all points of doctrine
necessary to Salvation) upon Tradition of their ancestors, andif they have
true Faith before they know and understand the Scripture, then Christian Faith
(at leastwise among the

And he proves that these vulgar people have Faith touching all points
necessary to Salvation, before they know the Scriptures, because it is
impossible for them to read or understand Scripture until it be translated
into their mother tongue: and they are not able to judge of translations, or
know them to be true, unless they first believe the principal points of
Christian Faith, and by comparing translations of Scripture with the said
doctrines of Faith formerly by them believed, be enabled to

This Paralogisme has certain ambiguous or equivocal terms which must be
distinguished, and then I will apply my answer.

First, the term of Scripture may be taken for the letter and text of the
Scripture, together with the names of the several Books, Authors, and
Sections: and secondly it may signify the doctrine of the Scripture, without
mention of the particular Books, John 7.38. Romans 1, 2, 3, 4.

Secondly, Resolution of Faith, is either distinct and explicit Aquinas 3. d.
25. q. 2. (...). 3. d. 25. q. 3. Gabr. 3. d. 25. q. unit. Notab. 2. Occham
Dial. part. 2. tract. 1. c. 10. Bannes, Lorca, Turrian Malder. 22. q. 2. art.
5. Much. Medina d. recta in Deum fid. li. 4. c. 4. and ca. 10.
, Implicit and Vertuall Ioh. d. Colon. Ex Scoto. Cognoscere confuse, est
cognoscere secundum quod exprimitur per nomen, vel in suo universally tantum.
Cognoscere distinct, est cognoscete secundum quod exprimitur per definitionem,
vel per propria sua principia.
, wherein believers cannot proceed distinct ly, and with explication of the
several reasons and grounds of Faith, but resting themselves upon one prime
and radical ground, are ready, for the authority of the same, to believe all
other particular reasons and verities of Faith, when they are declared unto
them.

Thirdly, Tradition may signify either doctrine of Faith, and

These distinctions premised, I answer the objection, 1. Granting that some
vulgar people, and nouices in Faith Ruffin. Eccles. Hist. 1. li. c. 9. etc. 10.
Christum esse Deum Dej summi filium qui salutem hanc contulerit, docet, eumque
quem authorem suae sciret esse incollumitatis and vitae inuocandum docet etc.
Adest captiua edocet Deum Christum supplicandi ritum venerandique modum etc.
(...). li. 3. c. 4.
, may attain belief concerning such verities of Christian Doctrine as are
absolutely necessary to Salvation, by the Tradition of their Ancestors and
Teachers, without distinct and explicit resolving their Faith into the Text of
holy Scripture, or the particular But withal I deny, that they can have saving
Faith, without resolving the same into the doctrine Card. Camerac. Vesper.
reco^mend. s. Script. Audite quaeso qualiter super sacrae Scripturae
fundamentum (...) domus addificatur and insh uitur omnis Ecclesiae caetus,
omnis status, omnis gradus, omnis sexus.
. For example, It is an Article of Faith necessary to be believed by all
Christians of riper years, that Jesus Christ is the (...) of the World, and the
same Article is revealed and taught in many Texts of holy Scripture. If a
simple rural person believe this Article taught him by his parents and other
teachers, he believes the Doctrine of the Scripture, and vertually grounds his
Faith upon the Scripture, although he know not the Books of the Scripture, or
the particular sentences contained in the same. A man which drinks water
flowing Gregor. (...). li. 30. ca. 12. Iumenta escam accipiunt dum sacrae
Scripturae pabulo, mentes dudum brutae satiuntur. August. sup. Psalm. 8. Ex
.

OBJECTION.
Vulgar andilliterate persons do not know or understand the Scriptures, neither
can they be certain by their own knowledge, that the same are truly
translated in such points as the yare bound to believe, therefore they cannot
ground their Faith finally and lastly upon the Scriptures.

ANSWER.
1. If this Objection were good, vulgar people could not ground their divine
Faith upon Tradition, because they have not distinct knowledge of Tradition, or
of the quality or deriuation thereof.

Therefore I distinguish of Knowledge out of Bonauenture, (...). 3. d. 25. q.
3. Cognitio potest scire aliquid in universally, and ita (...) quod non sciat in
particulari and ita scire vno modo, and ignorare alio modo. (...) potest esse
aliquid duplicitur (...) se, vel in alio. Alexander Hall 3. q. 82. m. 4. ar.
(...) and 2.
that the same is two fold, to wit, either confused and general, or distinct
and special, and a thing may be known two ways, either in it self, or in
another. If vulgar and illiterate people could know that they should resolve
their Faith into them: but if (...). (...). tom. 3. sup. Thom. dip. 1. punct.
7. page 320. (...) cognitio illa sacris expressa literis quam Deus (...)
Scriptoribus indidit, quamque per illos voluit caeteris scripto patefieri,
velut sonoru quoddam verbum Dei est, quo is, videlicet, conceptum aeternae
mentis suae, notitiamque verissimam, hominibus eloquitur atque manifestat.
, and by the inward testimony of the holy Spirit co-working with that Doctrine
Chrysostom. sup. 1. Cor. hom. 7. Fideles per (...) assecuti, in absconditis vittutem
intuentur. Arrag. 2. 2. q. 1. at. 1. c. 6. Fideles credunt res seu misteria
fidei, quia Deus illa reuelauit. Quod autem Deus illa reuelauerit, immediate
credunt, quia interius mouentur per specialem instinctu, iuxta illud: Qui
, then it is possible for them to resolve their Faith into the Scripture,
because they which actually resolve their Faith into the Doctrine of the
Scripture, do virtually and mediatly resolve the same into the very
Scripture, even as he that actually believes the kings proclamation, does
virtually believe the kings authority, although he know the king or his
authority confusedly, and in

The Text of holy Scripture, and the distinct sayings and sentences thereof,
are the principal and final external ground, whereupon the whole body of
the Church must ground their Faith Maclin. in 1. part. Tho. q. 1. ar. 9. Sacra
Scriptura omnibus hominibus communiter proponitur. Aquin. 1. q. 1. artic. 9.
Salmeron. tom. 1. prolog. 1. page 3. Merito igitur vnica nobis Scriptura
commendata est, ad quam ab Ecclesia Catholica atque Orthodoxa intellecta
tanquam ad lapidem Lydium probandi sunt Spiritus doctrinaeque vniuersae, non
secus atque conclusiones per sua principia and actiones per proprium finem
dignoscuntur.
. But as there is a diversity of the members of the Church, 1. Cor. 12.20. so
likewise there is a difference between them in the manner of resolving Faith:
for the stronger and firmer members are able to resolve their Faith distinctly
into Scripture, but the weaker members whose Faith (as Bonauenture speaks) is
diminuta Li. 3. d. 23. Alex. Hall 3. q. 82. m. 4. art. 1. Ad id de mensura etc.
, seeble and imperfect in respect of the distinct apprehension Greg. Nyssen
vita Mosis. Mons arduus and assensu difficilis, Theologia est, cujus vix
multitudo ad radices ascendere potest. Aug. d. Trin. li. 14. ca. 1.
, are guided by the stronger, as children by a nurse. And these little ones are
taught the truth of heavenly Doctrine, 1. By their parents Eusebius. Hist. li. 6.
c. 2. A patre attenta cura and cogitatione laboratum erat vt sacras literas vna
combiberet. Fransc. Picus Theorem 23.
, or ecclesiastical teachers, and they know the Scriptures to be truly
translated, not by their own skill, but by crediting others which are able to
judge. But being thus far directed and persuaded by humane means Bannes 22.
q. 1. ar. 1. dub. 4. Quemad assentimur primis principijs naturalibus ante
notitiam explicitam terminorum, assensu quodam confuso, postea vero habita
(...) assentimur (...): Ita antequam infundatur nobis fides assentimur confuse
articulis fidei per sidem (...) cis qui res sidei nobis proponunt credendas,
postea vero infundente Deo (...) jam (...) articulis distinct and immediate
per ipsam sidem quae illos nobis ostendir.
, then the light of Gods word it self, by the power of Grace, persuadeth them
as a divine cause, to yield full assent to all such verities as are necessary
to be believed by them to salvation.

IESVIT.
And this is that which Protestants must mean (if they have any true meaning)
when they say that the common people knew Scriptures to be truly translated by
the light of

ANSWER.
The sum of the former objection is, Unlearned people are not able without
the help and instruction of others to resolve their Faith into the Scriptures.

Therefore the Scripture is not the final and greatest stay and ground of
Faith.

The Argument is denied: for as in Arts and Sciences, an unskillful person
cannot resolve his knowledge into the first principles, until he be taught the
meaning of words and the sense of rules and precepts; but when he is taught,
and understands these, then he makes resolution into the very first
principles themselves: So likewise in believing, the Object of Faith must be
taught, the sense of the words, and matter declared, the grounds and reasons of
credibilitie delivered, and then the believer principally and immediately,
settles the resolution of his Faith not upon these helps and instruments which
are only dispofitiue Gillius, d. sacra Doctr. and d. Deo li. 1. Tract. 2. c. 2.
Instrumentum quoddam applicans verum motiuum authoritatis Diuinae.
, but upon the first principles themselves expressly or deriuatiuely contained
in holy Scripture.

And whereas Dr. Ioh. Wh. is produced, affirming in the behalf of all
Protestants, that common people know Scriptures to be truly translated by the
light of the Doctrine shining in true Translations.

First Dr. Wh. in the place assigned, speaks not in particular of common
people, but of the true Church Way to the Church, pa. 24.
, in which are found many persons skillful and learned.

h Lactantius d. vero cultu li. 6. cap. 21. Number igitur Deus and mentis and
vocis and mentis (...) diserte loqui Orig. Hom. 2. in Ierem. Cedren. in
Ptolomeo Philadelpho. Rex pulchritudinem sacrae Scripturae videns etc.
Secondly, he delivers other means (besides the light of Ib. page 25.
, to wit, knowledge of Tongues, rules of Art, ministry of the Word, to which
I add analogy of Faith, the testimony of the (...) Church, and best learned
in all ages. All these are helps and instruments of right Translations, and
when the Scriptures are Serran. Apar. fid. page 55. Lux sua se vi ipsam prodit,
and in oculis perspicacibus est efficax, lucernam qui praefert lucem quidem
profert, at ipse non lucet, Lucis proprium est lucere, homunis lucem proferre,
Ita Scripture lux per se lucet, hominum ministerio hominibus efficax etc. Et
pa. 51. Ea certe vis est Scripturae a Deo inspiratae vt Dei Maiestas in ea
eluceat.
. There is (says one of them) such power in Scripture inspired of God, that
the majesty of God shines in it. And this speech is the same in effect with
that of Constantine the great, reported by Theoderet, Greece cap. 25. (...).
Hist. li. 1. ca. 24. Obseruans fidem diuinam, adipiscor lumen veritatis,
sequens lumen veritatis, agnosco diuinam fidem, Marking the divine Faith, I
obtain the light of Truth, and following the light of Quod est manifestatiuum
alterius, simul potest manifestare seipsum, sicut lux quo actu prodit colores
prodit seipsam, and cum ego quicquam loquor, eadem locutione, manifesto rem and
loguelam (says Petrus de Lorca, 22. q. 1. ar. 1. disp. 4. n. 8.) That which is
a manifestator of another thing, may together manifest it self, as appears
inlight which does manifest it self by the same act, whereby it shows
colors: and by speech, for when I speak, by one and the same speech, I
manifest the thing spoken, and mine own speaking. The same is affirmed by
Peresius Peers. Ajala d. Trad. part. 2. page 11.
, Canus Canus loc. li. 2. ca. 8.
, Fra. Petigianus Fra. Petig. 3. d. 23. page 17. Fides praestat assensum
reuelationi, vt (...), non per aliam reuelationem sed per seipsam.
, and Psalm. 119.105.2. Pet. 1.19.2. Cor. 4. 6. And it is the voice and speech
of God Greg. li. 4. Epist. 40. Scripturam sacram Epistolam quandam esse dicimus
omnipotentis Dei ad creaturam suam. (...). 2. These. hom. 3. Aug. in Psalm. 90.
De illa ciuitate vnde peregrinamur literae nobis venerunt, ipsae sunt
Scripturae.
, Luc. 1. 71. And the Jesuit cannot persuade any reasonable man to think that
God almighty who bestowed tongues and voices upon men, with ability so to
express themselves, that others might understand their voice and know them by
it, should speak himself in the Scripture so darkely and secretly, that
people, when they are elevated by grace, cannot discern Aug. d. Trin. li. 6.
c. 10. Alex. Hall. 3. q. 30. m. 2. ar. 3. 2. Aquinas 1. q. 45. ar. 7.
of his power, wisdom, and goodness appearing in them. The holy Scripture
excels all created things in wisdom and perfection, it cannot therefore be
destitute of signs and impressions to manifest unto them which are inspired
with grace unto believing, that God himself is the author.

IESVITS 3. Argument.
If the main and substantial points of Christian faith must be firmly known
and believed, before we can securely read and truly understand the holy
Scriptures: then the main and substantial points of faith are believed, not
upon Scripture, but upon Tradition precedently unto Scripture.

This is clear, because true faith is not built, but upon Scripture truly
understood of man: neither can Scripture Tertul. de prescrip. c. 13.

ANSWER.
The sequel of the Mayor is denied. It follows not, that although the main
and substantial points of faith must be firmly known and believed, before we
can securely read and truly understand the holy Scriptures, in the particular
texts and sections thereof: therefore the said substantial points are not
believed upon Scripture, but upon Tradition unwritten. (...) d. Ecclesia pa.
220. Fides in suo exordio adhuc languida, multis eget adminiculis donec
astipuletur and submittat se Scripturis. At vbi ad maturitate suam fuerit
progressa, amplius haud perinde opus habet illis externis presidijs sed tum
veritate ex ipsamet Scriptura liquidius aspicit, internis quae in ea latent
argumentis, omni humano modo sublimiorib' ducta atque permota, atq, sic fides
illa (...) confirmata suo proprio nititur sundameto nec fulcitur ampli' solis
externis adminiculis.


The reason of the inconsequence is, for that the main and substantial points
of faith, may be known and believed by the doctrine of the Scripture, touching
the said points delivered to by unwritten Tradition is understood doctrine of
faith, neither expressly nor inuoluedly contained in holy Scripture) but into
the doctrine of the Scripture, collected and delivered unto them by others, and
vertually and

That which follows in the objection touching the rule of faith, proves not
that Christian belief is resolved lastly and finally into unwritten Tradition:
because the rule of faith, is not Chrysostom. in symb. Hom. 1. (...). d. Trinit. c.
1. ca. 9. ar. 9. Aug. d. Temp. Ser. 119. Chrysolog. Sermon. 61. In symb. Leo.
Sermon. 11. d. passione Dom. Alex. Hal. 3. q. 82. m. 5. ar. 2. Creatorem caeli
and terrae: a capite Scripturae accipit illud, etc. Qui conceptus est de
spiritu sancto: sumitur iste articulus de Math. 1. Inuenta est habens in vtero,
etc. Cassian. d. Incarnat. li. 6. c. 3. Quicquid per diuersum diuinorum
voluminu^ corpus, immensa (...) copia, totum in symboli colligitur breuitate
perfecta. Paschas. d. spirit sancto prefat.
, and therefore all they which resolve their faith into the said rule, refolue
the same also into the plain doctrine of the Scripture. And that the rule of
faith is such, it appears.

First, by the branches and Articles of that rule, which are; I believe in God,
the Father Almighty, etc. And in Jesus Christ, his only Son our Lord, etc.
With the rest of the Articles of the Apostles Creed, read 1. Cor. 15.1, 2,
3.1. Tim. 3.16. And Tertull. in the place alleged by the Jesuit Tertul.
praescript. c. 13. Regula est autem fidei, vt iam quid credamus profiteamur.
Illa Iren. lib. 1. c. 3. August. Enchyr. cap. 56.
, and in his Book d. vel. virg. Tertul. d. vel. (...). c. 1. Regula quidem
fidei, vna omnino est, sola immobilis and irreformabilis, credendi seilicet in
vnum Deum omnipotentem mundi creatorem, and filium eius Iesum Christum, natum
ex Virgin Maria, crucifixum sub Pontio Pilato, terto die resuscitatum, a
mortuis receptum in caelis, sedentem nunc ad dexteram Patris, (...) iudicare
viuos and mortuos, per carnis etiam Refurrectionem.
rehearsing the ancient rule of faith, does not mention any one Article, which
is not expressly or by deriuation contained in holy Scripture.

Secondly, the rule of faith extends not it self beyond the bounds of the
Gospel, Gallath. 1.8. Tertul. de prescript. c. 6. Ibid. cap. 6. Nobis
curiositate opus non est post Iesum Christum: nec inquifitione post Euangelium,
cum credimus nihil desideramus (...) credere.
but all the main and substantial Articles of faith necessary to be
Augustine August. d. doctrina Christ. lib. 2. cap. 9. In eis quae (...) in
Scriptura posita sunt, Inueniuntur illa omnia, quae continent fidem moresque
viuendi, spem scz. atque charitatem.
and learned Papists themselves affirm Bellarm. d. (...) Dei li. 4. c. 11.
Scripta sunt ab Apostolis ea omnia quae absolute necessaria sunt ad salutem
omnium (...). (...). d. Ecclesia dogm. lib. 2. cap. 3. page 60. Gerson. d.
sensu sacr. Scrip. propos. 9.
: wherefore if the rule of faith be only a summarie comprehension of the main
and substantial Articles of Christianity, and all these Articles are contained
in holy Scripture; then it follows, that the rule of faith, is not unwritten
Tradition alone (according to the Popish meaning) but a Summarie of beleese
contained in the plainer sentences of holy Scripture, either expressly, or by
deduction.

(...), (...) (...), li. 3. d. doct. Christ. c. 2. says, Consulat regulam
fidei, quam de Scripturarum planioribus locis, and Ecclesiae authoritate
percepit.
Let Hierom. Ecclesia Christi quae (...) been and in (...) Ecclesias possidens,
spirit' veritate (...) est, and habet vibes legis (...), (...) and Apostoloru^:
Non est egessia de finibus suis, id est de Scripturis (...), etc.
com. Mich. c. 1. And Durand the famous Schooleman, 2. did. 44. q. 3. n. 9.
Ecclesia licet habet dominationem Dei in terris, illa tamen non excedit
limitationem Scripturae. Cusanus Concord. Cathol. li. 2. ca. 6. In loco
congregationis (...) in (...) ponebantur, Sacra Euan gelia etc. Secundum
testimonium (...) decreuit


Out of the former definition of the rule of faith, it follows, That because
according to our Adversaries doctrine, the belief of Christians touching all
maine and substantial points of

IESVITS 4. Argument.
Those that understand the Scriptures aright, must be such as they were to whom
the Apostles writ and delivered the Scriptures, and whose instruction they
intended by their writing: But the Apostles, as Dr. Field acknowledges, wrote
to them they had formerly taught more at large, that were instructed Ergo, they
that read, and presume to iuterpret the Scriptures, without first knowing, and
firmly believing by Tradition, at the least all necessary and substantial
points of faith, cannot with assurance understand them, but may even in
manifest points mightily mistake: for the blessed Apostles writing to
Christians, that were before hand fully taught already taught, might well
understand their sayings and no

ANSWER.
The question is IESVIT, To which question I answer, That the last and final
resolution thoreof, is not (...) Scripture, but into the perpetual Tradition
of the Church (...) the Apostles.
, Whether the last and final resolution of Faith is made into unwritten
Tradition, and not into Scripture.

The fourth Argument produced by the Adversary, to prove this, is taken from
the necessity of unwritten Traditian to expound the Scripture. And the sum
of the Argument is, Without a precedent instruction, or teaching by Tradition
unwritten, the necessary and substantial points of Faith; we cannot be
firmly assured that we have the right sense of the Scripture, as appears by
the example of the Primitive hearers of the Apostles, who were formerly
instructed by them, and had the right Faith taught them more at large: and then
being thus informed and prepared, they received the Scripture: and we have no
reason to promise unto our selves more understanding than the Apostles immediate
hearers. And the Scriptures without Tradition are obscure, and do only
cursorily touch matters formerly taught more at large, Ergo,

The last and final resolution of Faith is made into unwritten Tradition,

In the Antecedent or leading part of this Argument, some things cannot be
admitted without distinction, and some parts hereof are false, and the Argument
it self is inconsequent.

First, they which in our days understand the Scripture aright, must be such
as they were to whom the Apostles wrote, and delivered the Scriptures etc. not
simply, and in all things (for many things are requisite for the first
plantation of Faith, which are not necessary for the future continuance and
propagation thereof,) but in such things only as are common and ordinary

Wherefore they which in our days understand the Scriptures aright, must
ordinarily have a preuious introduction by the teaching of others, and also
there must be in them a mind desirous of Truth August. d. vtitat. credendi c.
6. Plane ita modificata, vt nemo inde haurire non possit, quod sibi satis est,
si modo ad (...), deuote ac (...), vt vera religio docet, accedat. (...). in
Psalm. 118. sermon. 8. Docet Deus and mentes illuminat singulorum and claritatem
cognitionis infundit, si tu aperias ostia cordis tui, and (...) gratiae
recipias claritatem, and quando dubitas (...) as etc. (...). Orth. (...). li.
4. ca. 18. (...).
, and a resolution and diligence to use the means appointed by God, to learn
the same: but that they must be instructed in the same manner as the Apostles
hearers were, or learn all the necessary points of Faith before they begin to
read the Scriptures without any certain understanding, is affirmed by the
Adversary, but not proved. Also many of of the Old Testament with profit, and
some right understanding Acts 17.11. And to what purpose did our Savior
command the Jews to search the Scriptures, Ioh. 5.39? August. Psalm. 108. (...)
jubet, non in superficie pertransire. Chrysostom. in Genesis hom. 37. August. Epist.
120. Ama Ecclesiasticas legere literas, and non multa inuenies quae requiras ex
me, sed legendo and ruminando, si etiam pure dominum largitorem bonorum omniu^
depreceris, omnia quae cognitione digna sunt, aut certe plurima, ipso
magisinspirante, quam hominum aliquo (...) perdisces. Chrysostom. Genesis Hom. 35.
Magna diligentia Scripturarum lectioni vacemus ita enim scientiam assequemur.
Justinian Com. 2. Tim. 3.15. Christus apud Iohannem ad Scripturaru^ lectionem
prouocat Iudeos, Ioh. 5.39.
And why did the Apostles (preaching both to Jews and Gentiles) confirm their
Doctrine by the testimony of the Scriptures, To. 9.9, 25, 29, 33. and ca.
10.11.13.16. 19. and ca. 11.2.8.9. and cap. 4.3.6.17. Iam. 2.23. 1. Pet. 2.6,
if the people to whom they preached could at all have no right understanding of
the Scriptures before they were fully and perfectly

Secondly, whereas the Jesuit adds for confirmation of his Antecedent, That
the Scriptures without Tradition are obscure, and that the Apostles did in them
only cursorily touch matters formerly taught: both those assertions, according
to the Popish meaning, are false.

We acknowledge that many particular Texts and passages of holy Scripture are
obscure and hard to be understood Parcus, Com. Genesis 4. Non negamus Scriptura^
nihil habere obscuritatis etc. Whitak. d. Ecclesia pa. 220. Sunt quaedam
Scripturae, loca de quibus nihil certo statui potest. Beza d. Not. Ecclesiae
pa. 137. Philip Morn. d. Ecclesia c. 4. Zanch. d. Script. q. 11. Chemnic. Exam.
pa. 57. Fulk. c. Rhem. Pref. fol. 2. Lubbert. d. Script. li. 4. ca. 2. Chimid.
d. Script. li. 4. c. 4. D. Field of the Church, lib. 4. ca. 15.
, 2. Pet. 3. 16. But in such points as are necessary for Christians to
understand, because they are primarie or fundamental, and in such Deuteronomy. 31.11,
12, 13. And that the holy Scripture is in this manner perspicuous, the ancient
Fathers constantly affirm Orig. c. Celium. li. 7. (...) viri scrutando
Scripturam, intellectum eius inuenire poterunt, licet reuera sit multis locis
obscura. Ib. Ita diuina prouidentia etc. non solum eruditis Graecis, sed etiam
reliquis condescendit ad idioticum captum auditurae multitudinis, vt consuetis
. S. Gregory and S. Bernard Greg. ad Leandr. praefat. Job c. 4. Quasi quidam
est fluuius planus and altus, in quo agnus ambulet and Elephas (...). Idem in
ca. 4. Cant. Bernard. Sermon. paru. 64.
compare the holy Scriptures to a River wherein the Elephant may swim, and the
Lamb may wade: S. Ireneus Ireneus li. 2. ca. 46. Sunt autem haec quae ante
(...) nostros occurrunt, and quae cunque aperte and sine ambiguo, ipsis
dictionibus posita sunt in Scriptutis. Et ca. 47.
says, that some things in Scripture are apertly and clearly without
ambiguitie manifested to the eyes of our understanding. Saint Augustine Aug.
sup. Ioh. (...). 50. Quaedam in Scripturis tam manifesta sunt vt potius
auditore quam (...) desiderent.
: Some things are set down so plainly in the Scriptures, that they rather
require a hearer than an expositar. And in another place, Et Id. sup. psalm. 88.
Et si quaedam sunt testa misterijs, quaedam tamen sic manifesta, vt ex ipsis
facilime aperiantur (...).
Although some things are veiled with mysteries, yet again some things are so
manifest, that by the help of them, obscure things may be opened. And again,
In eis quae aperte in Scriptura posita sunt, (...) illa omnia quae continent
sidem moresque viuendi: spem scilicet atque charitatem. Et d. vtilit. (...). c.
6. (...) est mihi creed in Scripturis illis altum and diuinum est: (...) omnino
veritas and reficiendis instaura^disque animis accomodatissima disciplina: and
plane (...) modificata, vt nemo inde haurire non possit quod sibi satis est,
(...) modo ad hauriendum deuote ac pie vt vera religio docet accedat. August.
d. unit. Ecclesiae c. 4. Nec in aliqua Scripturaru^ obscuritate falluntur, sed
notissimis and appertissimis earu^ testimonijs contra dicunt. Et c. 5.6.27. Hoc
etiam praedico atque propono vt quaeque aperta and manifesta deligamus: quae si
in sanctis Scripturis non inuenerentur, nullo modo esset vnde apperirentur
clausa and illustrarentur obscura.
All matters which contain faith, and good manners, are found in those things
which are manifestly placed in the Scriptures. Saint Chrysostom: In divine
Scriptures all necessary things are plain Chrysostom. Hom. 3. These. ep. 2. In
diuinis Scripturis quaecunque necessaria sunt manifesta sunt.
. To the like purpose speaks St. Hierom (...). sup. Esaias. c. 19. and in Psalm.
86.
, Fulgentius Fulg. Sermon. d. confess.
, Hugo Victor Hug. Vict. Miscel. 2. l. 1. Tit. 56.
, Theoderit Theod. in Genesis apud struch. p. 87.
, Lactantius Lact. l. 6. c. 21.
, Theophilus Antiochenus Theopb. Antioch. ad Autolich. l. 2. p. 918.
, Clem. Alexandrinus Clem. Alex. Orat. Adhort. ad Gentes. Cyril. (...). Iul. l.
7. p. 160. Vt omnibus (...) nota paruis and magnis vtiliter familiari sermon
, and the same is the common Tenet of the Primative Fathers. And Gregory
Valence Aquinas Th. Aq. part. 1. q. 1. ar. 9. c.
, Vasques Vasq. in Thom. part. 1. disp. 18. c. 4. n. 11.
, and Gonzales Gonzales in 1. p. Thom. at. 9. page 61.
.

The other clause of the Jesuits speech, to wit, That the Apostles in their
Scripture did only touch matters cursorily, formerly taught, is false.

First, this Assertion is repugnant to Saint Augustine, who speaking of the
doctrine and deeds of our Savior, says, d. cons. (...). l. 1. c. 35.
Quicquid ille de suis factis and dictis nos legere voluit, hoc scribendum
illis tanquam manibus suis imperauit: Whatsoever Christ would have us read
Aug. sup. (...) tr. 49. sanctus Euangelista testatur dominum Christum, and
dixisse, and fecisse quae scripta non sunt: Electa sunt autem quae
scriberentur, quae saluti (...) sufficere viderentur.
Although Christ spoke and wrought some things which are not written, yet those
things which seemed unto him sufficient to the salvation of believers, were
selected to be written. Saint Cyrill also affirms, Cyril. Alex. l. 12. Ioh.
c. vltimo. Non omnia quae fecit Dominus conscripta sunt, sed quae scribentes
tam ad mores quam ad Dogmata (...) sufficere, vt recta fide, and operibus, and
virtute (...), ad regnum (...).
that all things which Christ did are not written, but so much as holy writers
judged sufficient both for good manners and godly faith, to the end, that we
shining in right faith, good works, and virtue, may attain the heavenly
Kingdom. By the judgment of these Fathers, the holy Evangelists committed to
writing so much of our Saviors

Secondly, if the Scriptures contain all things sufficient to Basil. praefat
in Psa. vberimu^ quoddam est and commune promptuarium. Chrysostom. Genesis hom. 3. Non
solum thesauro, etc. sed fonti quoque largis (...). Greg. in Cant. c. 5. (...)
plenissima, etc. sine minoratione ad plenum de (...) imuenitur.
, and confessed by some learned Papists. Vincent. (...), The Canon of the
Scripture is perfect, and in it self sufficient for all matters, yea more than
sufficient. Antonius Perez, Pentateuch. fidei. vol. 4. c. 21. Vincent. Lir.
(...) Haeres. c. 2. Cum (...) perfectus Scripturaru^ Canon, (...) ad omnia
satis superque sufficiat, etc. b Perez. p. 24. (...) autem comparetur vel (...)
Scriptura (...) quae fides docet, tanquam necessaria (...) ad (...) plane
redu^dans est atque (...) in genere regule, quonia^ multa imo pleraque sunt in
(...), quoru^ cognitio necessaria non est, etc.
. If the Scripture be compared and applied with things which faith teaches, as
necessary to salvation, the same is apparently redundant, and superfluous,
according to the nature of a rule: because there be many things, yea most
things in the same, the knowledge whereof is unnecessary. But if the Scripture
contain many (...) superfluous, and more than is needful, it is improbable
(...) think that it is imperfect in Principals, or delivers them (...)
only, or by the way.

Thirdly, the variety and multitude of points and doctrines of faith and good
manners, and the often repeating and declaring of them in the holy Scriptures,
proves that the Apostles (...) fully and perfectly deliver in their writings,
the whole (...) of Christian faith, and not only cursorily touch them.

For all supernatural verity concerning the sacred Deity, Aug. d. genesis ad
lit l. 12. c. 33. Ab (...) diuinaru^ Scripturaru^ (...) solis de hac re (...)
habenda est, recedere non debemus. Theophilact. Act. 1. Non aliquid (...) rerum
pretermiserunt, etc.
. In like manner, the whole doctrine of faith concerning the Incarnation,
Person, and Office of Christ, is revealed unto us by holy Scripture. And for
this cause Saint Cyrill Council. Ephesians. 1. apud Binium p. 692. Amb. Ser. 57. Qui
vult ad Christi peruenire (...) non ingreditur ad illud (...) per (...)
Scripturae secretum. Cyril. c. Julian l. 7. p. 161. Ad sanctas conuertimur
Scripturas, in quib' veritatis (...) fulget, and exacta dogmatum cognitio
coaceruata est, and omne genus bonoru^ documentoru^, quibus quis statim plenus
virtute, and bonorum operu^ gloria conspicuus euadat.
calls the Scriptures Solos fontes veritatis, The sole fountains of verity.
All things concerning Justification, Charity, and good works ( Damasc.
Orthod. fid. l 4. c. 18. (...), etc.
being merely supernatural) are taught in Scripture. The doctrine of the Law,
Gospel, Sacraments, resurrection of the dead, final judgment, etc. is
entirely and fully revealed in the holy Augustine Aug. sup. ep. Ioh. tr. 3. Est
matter Ecclesia and vbera ejus duo testamenta Scripturaru^ diuinarum, hinc (...)
lac omniu^ Sacramentoru^ temporaliter pro eterna salute nostra. etc. Don. d.
Bapt. l. 3. c. 15.
, has only two breasts, wherewith she feeds her children, to wit, the
Scriptures of the Old and New Testament. And that he always understands by
the Old and New Testament, the Scriptures of both, appears by his words upon
Psalm. 22. Aug. sup. Psalm. 22. Fratres sum', quare (...) non intestatus
Aperi legamus, etc. Let us open our Fathers last Testament, and read it. And
(...) (...). Hist. l. 1. c. 7. Trip. Hist. l. (...). c. 5
: (...) and Apostolice (...) nec non antiquorum Prophetarum (...) plane (...)
de sensu Numinis: The Evangelical and Apostolical books, together with the
Oracles of the ancient Prophets, do plainly ((...) evidently) instruct us,
concerning the mind of God. And from all the former, it is manifest, that the
Apostles writings are not patches, and shreds only of Apostolical Doctrine
(as our (...) against all antiquity presumes to affirm) but the very
substance, (...). l. 3. c. 1. Non per alios dispositionem salutis nostrae
(...), quam per cos per quos Euangeliu per venit ad nos. Quod quidem (...)
praeconia (...), (...) vero per Dei (...), in Scripturis nobis tradiderunt,
sundamentum and columnam fidei nostrae suturam. Orig. praef. in Ioh. p. 161.
Quae praedicauit and dixit (Paulus) haec (...) scripsit. Niceph. Hist. Eccl. l.
2. c. 34. Quae presens oratione sua dilucide docuerat (Paulus) (...) per
compendium absens in memoriam (...) dedit, etc.
and marrow of their whole Preaching, containing the sum of the Gospel; by
faith and Euclid and Aristotle from a Master, and precepts in what sort he
shall proceed in his study, and withal, a Commentary declaring the meaning of
these Authors, yet he does not finally (being made learned himself) resolve
his knowledge into the former, but into the principles of these Arts
themselves: so likewise a nouice in faith receives the holy. Scripture by
Ministry and Tradition of the Church, and Precepts and Commentaries, whereby
he is

IESVIT.
Hence I may further infer, that Protestants have not thoroughly pondered the
place of the Apostle unto Timothy, which they (...) vehemently urge to prove
the sufficiency of sole Scripture, for every man, as though he had (...) (...)
have been aforehand instructed by word of mouth, and do thereupon firmly
believe all substantial Doctrines, and know all the necessary practice of
Christian Discipline.

ANSWER.
The Adversary in this passage uses certain Arguments to prove that
Protestants misunderstand the Text of S. Paul, 2. Timoth. 3.15, 16. when they
urge the same to maintain the sufficiency of sole Scripture, to be a ground
for all Christians finally to rest their faith upon.

His first Argument is, The Apostle says not absolutely that the Scriptures
are able to make all men wise unto Salvation, but particularly to Timothy, a
man instructed aforehand, and formerly (...)

To this I answer, 1. That although sentences of holy Scripture are sometimes
restrained to the personal or particular subject of which they are first
spoken, yet this is not general; and when the same happens, it must be
proved by better Arguments than by the bare Emphasis of a word. For God said
to Joshua (a man qualified above the ordinary rank) I will not leave thee nor
forsake thee, Joshua 1. 5. yet the promise implied in this Text, is general
and common to all just persons, Heb. 13.5. Our Savior granted ministerial
power to remit sins, by special commission to the Apostles, and delivering
this commission to them, he breathed the holy Ghost into them, saying, Receive
ye the holy Ghost, etc. (...) 20.22. Nevertheless our Adversaries affirm,
that this authority was not only granted them, but to other Ministers of Christ
which are not personally qualified as the Apostles were.

Secondly, if the particular circumstance of Timothy his person, expressed in
the single word, Thee, 2. Tim. 3.15. do limit S. Paul's doctrine, concerning the
Scripture, in (...) Paul's.

For example, 2. Thessal. 2.15. The Apostle says, Therefore (...) stand fast,
and hold the Traditions which (...) have been In this Text so vehemently urged
by Papists, for unwritten Tradition, is found a personal circumstance, Tee,
(...) Thessalonians which have been my immediate hearers, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 5. and
thereby are infallibly assured that the Tradition which I exhort you to hold is
divine. Also you (...), which have not received as yet a perfect Canon of the
New Testament in writing, I say to you, stand fast and hold both written and
unwritten Tradition.

Thirdly, admitting the Jesuits restraint, and it being granted, that the
Scriptures do only make those people wise to Iren. li. 4. c. 63. Apostolorum
Doctrina etc. quae peruenit (...) ad nos, custodita sine fictione, Scripturarum
tractatione plenissima, neque additamentum neque (...) recipiens and lectio
sine falsatione and secundum Scripturas expositio legitima and diligens etc.
(...). 2. (...). (...). 9. Prome (inquit) Scripturas habes, siquid addiscere
cupis, hinc poteris.
.

(...).
Verily the Apostle in that place speaks only of the Scriptures of the Old
Testament, affirming them sufficient not for every man, but for Timothy, and
not sufficient per fidem quae est in Christo Jesus, that is, (...) with the
Doctrine of Christian Faith, which Timothy had heard and believed, upon (...)
lively voice of Tradition.

ANSWER.
The Apostle in this place speaks of the Scriptures of the Old Testament, but
not only. Timothy when he was a child Tim. 4. 16. This Epistle was written by
S. Paul not long before his death, 2. Tim. 4.6. at which time the greatest part
of the Canon of the New Testament was finished Eder. Oicon. Bib. lib. 4. page
482. Hanc epistola^ omnium quae scripsit Paulus esse postremam, and ab eo iam
ex hoc mundo tr^asituro, Roma ex vinculis ad Timotheum fuisse transmissam,
constans omnium fere Sanctorum est hoc loco patrum (...). Videtur emm tunc eam
(...) cum esset proxim' fini: Ego enim inquit, iam delibor and tempus
resolutionis meae instat. Et iterum, In priore mea defe^sione nullus mihi
adstitit. Chrysostom. in 2. Timoth. Hom. 1. (...), etc. Ambros. Theodorit.
Theophilact. Anselm. in Comment.
; therefore it is not necessary Thou from a child have known the holy
Scriptures, only to the Scriptures of the Old Testament, because Timothy, who
in his youth read only the Old Testament, in the progress of his years read
the New Testament also.

And although no Scripture is able to make wise to salvation, without Faith in
Christ Jesus, yet this proves not the holy Scripture to be an imperfect Rule;
because if Tradition be added to Scripture, yet both these are not able to make
people wise to salvation, without Faith. Heb. 4. 2.

But admitting, that the Apostle in the first Clause, Thou from a Child have
known the holy Scriptures, speaks of the Scriptures of the Old Testament;
yet adding to the same in the latter part of his speech, through Faith which is
in Christ Jesus: if by Faith we understand the doctrine of Faith, revealed in
the New Testament, there is no material or necessary part of doctrine,
touching Christ Jesus, which is not contained in the Scripture. 1. Cor. 15. 1,
2, 3, 4. And this was the Tenet of the ancient Catholic Church, as appears
by S. Augustine, C. Petil. Lib. 3. cap. 6. who says: Proinde sieve de Christo
sieve de Ecclesia, sieve de quacunque alia re, quae pertinet ad fidem vitamque
nostram, non dicam nos nequaquam comparandi ei qui dixit, licet si nos, sed
omnino quod secutus adiecit, si Angelus de Coelo vobis annunciauerit,
praeterquam quod in Scripturis Legalibus and Euangelicis accepistis Anathema
sit. I will not say, if we unworthy to be compared to him that spoke so; but
if an Angel from Heaven shall teach any thing, either concerning Christ, or
the Church, or concerning any other matter pertaining to Faith, or good life,
besides that which you have received in the Legal and Evangelical Scriptures,
let him be Anathema.

IESVIT.
And in the consequent words of the Apostle, so much insisted upon, All
Scripture inspired of God, is profitable to teach, etc. And if Protestants
could so metamorphise the word Profitable, as to make it signify the same with
the word Sufficient, which is very hard; yet were is Homo Dei, the Man of God,
that is, one already Timothy was. The Scriptures for men in this manner before
taught, and grounded in Faith, are abundantly sufficient, who will deny it?
But this proves at the most the sufficiency of the Scripture, joined with
Tradition; not of Scripture alone, or of only, only, only Scripture (...).
(...). Def. page 341.
, as Protestants Books in great Letters very

ANSWER.
S. Paul himself uses both the word Profitable, Verse. 16. and the word (...),
are able to make wise to salvation, which is equivalent to Sufficient, Verse
15. And Protestants alone are not the men which expound the word Profitable, by
Sufficient; for both the Fathers and many learned Papists do the like.
Vincent. Lirinensis Vincent. Lirin. Cum sit perfectus Scripturae Canon, fibique
ad omnia satis superque sufficiat, etc.
, C. Haeres. cap. 2. The Canon of the Scripture is sufficient, and more than
sufficient. Cyril of Alexandria Cyril. Alex. Sufficit Diuina Scriptura ad
faciendum eos qui in illa educati sunt sapientes and probatissimos and
sufficientissima^ habentes intelligentiam, etc.
, C. Julian. Lib. 7. page 150. The Scripture is sufficient to make them wise,
which are brought up in it, etc. Anselm. Anselm. Quae literae possunt te (...),
id est sufficienter doctu^ reddere ad aeternam salutem consequendam.
in his Commentary upon 2. Tim. 3. 16. They are able to make thee sufficiently
learned, to obtain eternal salvation. Gerson Gerson. Scriprura nobis tradita
est tanquam regula sufficiens and infallibilis, pro regimine totius
Ecclesiasistici corporis, and membrorum, vsque in finem seculi.
D. Exam. Doctr. Part. 2. Consid. 1. The Scripture is given us as a sufficient
Rule, etc. Scotus Scot. ^ homini (...) est sufficienter tradita in (...) sacra.
, 1. Sent. Prol. q. 2. Supernatural knowledge, necessary for a wayfaring man,
is sufficiently delivered in sacred Scripture. The same is affirmed by
Espencaeus Espens. Easque posse hominem ad salutem erudire and sufficienter
doctum reddere.
, Commentar. 2. Tim. 3. 16. and Bonauenture Bonauent. Breuiloq. cap. 1.
, Occham Occham. (...). Part. 1. (...). 2. cap. 10.
, Waldensis (...). Wald. Doctr. Fid. Lib. 2. cap.
, and Gabriel Aquin. 3. d. 25. art. 1.
, Thom. Aquinas Aquin. Com. Ioh. 21. Lect. 6. Si quis Euangelizauerit, etc.
Gal. 1. 8. (...) ratio est, quia sola Canonica Scriptura est Regula Fidei.
Edit. Paris. An. 1520. per Ioh. d. Porta.
, Lyra (...), Loc. 16. 29. Illi (...) Mosen qui docuit moralia agenda: and
Propheras qui docuerunt mystica and eredenda and (...) sufficient ad salutem,
ideo sequitur (...) illos.
, Durand. Durand. 3. did 26. q. 2. n. 7. ^, in (...) sacra diffuse
contineatur, etc.
etc.

But the Adversary says, That granting the word (Profitable) did signify
Sufficient, yet S. Paul's Text still falls short, of proouing the Scripture
the only Rule, because it is not said to be sufficient for all men, but for
the man of God; and it is not sufficient alone, and by it self, but being
joined with Tradition.

I answer first, That which is Sufficient in genere regulae, as a Tim. 6. 12.
or other spiritual man, 1. Cor. 2.15. is sufficient for all men, because there
is but one common Object and Rule of Faith for the whole Church, and all the
members thereof Alex. Hal. 3. q. 12. m. 2. ar. 3. q 2. Fides quantum ad id quod
creditur, est cadem numero in omnibus sanctis qui sunt membra Ecclesiae, etc.
Isiodor d. Sum. Bon. Lib. 1. cap. 18. vtrisque manner communis and paruulis and
perfectis.
, containing strong Meat for the Learned, and Milk or plain Doctrine for
Babes. And therefore, if the Scripture be a Rule, and a sufficient Rule, it is
such in common, and in respect of all people, although the manner of applying
and using the same, may differ.

Secondly, That which is Profitable, to make the man of God Qui effectus
pluribus debetur perperam ascribitur vni.
otherwise, this effect of making the man of God perfect, and thoroughly
instructed, could not be ascribed to it alone, as it is manifestly done in the
Apostles speech.

When two persons equally co-worke, we cannot ascribe the whole work to one of
them alone, but to both. Bread alone being one part of Food, is not sufficient
to all kind of Nutriment. the whole Scripture (as Dionysius Carthusian
expounds it (...). Com. Omnis Scriptura etc. id est, tota Canonica Scriptura,
etc. Chrysostom. 2. Tim. Hom. 9 Si quid vel discere vel ignorare op' fit ex illis
ad discemus, si arguere falsitatem inde hauriemus: si corrigi, si castigari ad
exhortationem and solatium si quid desit and oporteat addipisci, ex (...)
discemus.
) given by inspiration, is profitable to teach, confute, instruct, reprove; and
then declaring the greatness of the vtilitic, which is, to make the man of God
perfect, and thoroughly instructed to every good work Oecumen. (...).
: This effect cannot be ascribed to a partial cause, neither can the Apostle
mean, that the whole Scripture is profitable, or sufficient only as one part
of Divine Revelation, but because it contains the

If any shall pretend, That the Scripture is not sufficient of it self to
these effects, because Divine Grace, Ecclesiastical Ministry, Docilitie in
the Hearer or Reader, are necessary (together with the Scripture) to make the
man of God perfect; they must understand, that our question is, Whether holy
Scripture alone be a sufficient rule of Faith? Not whether other adiuuant
causes be necessary for the receiving and applying thereof, that it may
produce Faith. The Earth is sufficient to bring forth food for man, Genesis 1. 29.
although Husbandmen and Exodus 16.6.24. Sap. 16.21. Even so, the holy Scripture
is sufficient, as a Rule, to teach all Doctrine necessary Holy Scripture is
not the only Rule, because by it alone, without Divine Grace and
Ecclesiastical Ministry, etc. we cannot believe, then Tradition and holy
Scripture being conjoined, to make up the Rule of Faith, the same will yet be
insufficient, because without Divine Grace, Ecclesiastical Ministry, and
Docilitie in the people, neither Scripture nor Tradition can produce Faith.

IESVIT.
Hence also we may conclude that the many allegations of Fathers, which
Protestants bring to prove the Scripture to be clear in all substantial
points, are impertinent, because the Fathers speak of men aforehand instructed
in all substantial points, who may by the light of Tradition easily discover
in Scripture, as they that heard Aristotle explicate himself by word of mouth,
may understand his

ANSWER.
Out of your own fancies you may conclude what you please: but from the
Fathers nothing can be concluded, repugnant to that which Protestants hold,
concerning the perspicuity of sacred Scripture, even in it self. Ireneus says
Iren. lib. 2. c. 46. Vniuersae Scripturae Propheticae and Euangelicae, in
aperto and sine ambiguitate, and similiter ab omnibus audiri possunt.
, All the Scriptures both Prophetical and Evangelical, are clear without
ambiguity, and may indifferently be heard of all men. S. Hierom Hieron. super
Esa. cap. 19. Mos est Scripturaru^ obscuris manifesta subnectere.
, It is the manner of the Scripture to join that which is manifest to such
things as are obscure. S. Cyril Cyril. c. Julian. lib. 7. p. 60. Vt omnibus
essent nota paruis and magnis, vtiliter familiari sermon commendata
, That they may be known of all people both small and great, they are
profitably commended unto us in a familiar kind of speaking, that they may
exceed the capacity of none. S. Augustine Aug. ad Volus. Ep. 3. and d. verb.
Ap. Sermon. 13. and d. vtil. Cred. c. 6. and sup. Psalm. 88. Eder. (...). Bibl.
lib. 1. p. 52. Media inter (...) duo veluti extrema sententia D. est August.
Epist. ad Volus. Vbi literas sacras non quidem vsque adeo difficiles esse, quin
ex ijs studio and diligentia tantum quisque possit assequi quantum ci ad
salutem, vtile sit atque necessarium.
, Plain places are found in them to expound and open the dark and hard. S.
Gregory Greg. Praefat. Job. ad Leandr. ca. 4. Habet in publico vnde paruulos
nutriat, etc.
, The Scripture has so much in open (...) as may feed little ones. S.
Chrysoft. Chrysostom. d. verb. Eia. Hom. 2. Scripturae non sunt meralla quae
indigent operarijs, sed thesauru^ praebent paratum (...) qui quaerunt opes in
(...) reconditas. Satis est enim introspexisse vt omni expleti fructu (...).
Satis est (...) aperuisse vt illico videas gemmarum splendorem. (...). d. Sum.
Bon. li. 1. (...). 18. Simplices inueniunt modicos intellectus ad quos ipsi
humiles refugiunt. (...). Explic. Euang. Lectionis sacrae (...) imbecillis
bacculu^ meruosis arma ministrat, etc. Acost. d. Christ. Revel. lib. 2. cap. 2.
Ita prouidit dulcis pater vt multa sint in sacris literis aperta, historica,
(...), etc. Atque hoc est in diuina Scriptura omnino mirabile, nemine^ esse tam
rudem and imperitum quin si humiliter legate multa illic vtilia veraque
intelligat.
, Scriptures are (...) like metals, which have need of workmen to dig them
out, but they deliver a treasure ready at hand, for them which seek hidden
riches in them. It is sufficient to look into them, that you may depart
replenished with all fruit, it is sufficient only to open them, that you may
presently behold the splendour of their pearls. And although the ancient
Fathers do many times refer people to Tradition Cassandr. Def.
especially in three cases: First, For the testifying of the number and
integrity of the Books of Canonical Scripture: Secondly, For the clearing of
some hard or ambiguous Texts of Scripture, from the new and forged expositions
of Heretics: For external rites and ceremonies: yet neither the Fathers, nor
the more learned Papists themselves (...). (...). Com. sup. Genes. (...). C.
Luther, at. 18. Abul. Defens. part. 2. ca. 18. pa. 39. (...) 22. q. 1. (...).
(...), page 38. (...). 4. d. 5. q. 1. (...). 1.
, do hold that there is a large and general Commentary of all the Scriptures,
or of all the difficill places thereof, received from the Apostles, and
preserved until our days; neither do the Fathers (...). Lir. c. Haer. cap.
39. Quae tamen antiquorum patrum sententia non in omnibus diuinae (...), sed
solum certe praecipue, in fidei regula magno nobis studio and (...) est and
(...). (...) ca. 41. Vt ad vnam Ecclesiastici sensus regulam Scripturae
caelestis intelligentia (...), in (...) praecipue quaestionibus quibus totius
Catholici Dogmatis (...) nitantur.
hold, that people cannot read the holy Scripture with profit, or collect the
true meaning of them in points substantial and necessary, without such a
Commentary.

First, If such a Commentary were extant, it must be found in the elder
Fathers, Tertullian, Ireneus, Origin, etc. But the Papists Ioh. Picus. Mirand.
Apol. q. 1. Ego hoe dico and firmiter assero, non valere istam consequentiam,
(...) est contra Aug. (...). Greg. (...), Ergo est haeretica. Quamuis (...)
sanctorum Doctorum Scriptura extra Canonem Bibliae (...), fit habenda and
legenda and non tamen sunt (...) dicta, ita firmae authoritatis and
immobilitatis, vt eis contradicere non liceat.
will not always be tied to their Expositions, as appears by their forsaking
of Tertullian in the Exposition of the words of the Gospel, Hoc est corpus
meum Greg. Val. tom. 4. page 1073.
, This is my body; and by their forsaking of Origin Orig. sup. Math. tract. 1.
In vnoquoque perfecto habente congregationem eorum Genebrard. Collectam in Orig.
in many of his Expositions; and again of Tertullian Tertul. d. pudicit. cap.
21. Si quia dixerit Petro dominus, super hanc petram aedificabo Ecclesiam meam,
and (...) praesumis, adte deriuasse (...) and aligandi potestatem, id est ad
(...) Ecclesiam (...), qualis es (...) atque commutans manifestam domini (...),
etc. Read (...) in (...) (...). n. 186. Censuring and condemning this
Exposition.
in his Exposition of Math. 16. 17.

Secondly, The Exposition of Scripture, given by the Fathers, is many times
repugnant, and different each of them from other, as Sixtus Senensis in his
Bibliotheca, and Cardinal (...) in his Commentaries, and other Pontificians
do show, ^ in Genesis l. 3. c. 2. q. 5. (...). in 1. p. Tho. disput. 8. p-49.
(...). an. 34. n. 213. (...) (...). l. 11. c. 6. (...). c. Cajetan. Gillius
com. Theol. d. (...). and d. Deo. l. 1. tr. 7. c. 11. (...). loc. l. 5. c. 3.
(...). (...). Quest. in 1. sent. q. 5.


Thirdly, the Fathers affirm; that the Scripture expounds it self; Aug. d.
verb. (...). Sermon. 2. Aug. Ipsa verba Euangelica secum portant expositiones
suas. Idem. d. doct. Christ. l. 2. c. 6. Nihil fere de illis obscuritatibus
eruitur, quod non (...) dictum alibi reperitur.
and d. unit. Eccles. c. 5. p. 427. Chrysostom. sup. Genesis Hom. 13. Chrysostom. Sacra
Scriptura seipsam (...). Basil. l. 2. d. Bapt. Eorum quae ab ipso dicta sunt ex
his quae in alio loco dicta sunt veritatem ac salutare discamus. Greg. sup.
Ezech. Hom. 7. Diuina eloquia, cum legente (...) nam (...) illa quisque (...)
intelligit, (...) in eis alti' (...). Acost. d. Christ. Revel. l. 3. c. 21.
Nihil mihi videtur sic (...), vt (...). (...); diligens, attenta, frequens
(...) tum meditatio and collatio Scripturaru^, omniu^ (...) regula, ad
intelligendu^ semper est visa, nam ex alijs Scripturis aliae optime
intelliguntur: tum phrasis ipsa, tum (...) familiaris (...) vt assuetis jam
(...) intelligcntia pateat. Itaque obscura^ aperta, dubia^ certa
interpreta^tur.
And they do not always refer men to Tradition, concerning exposition of
Scripture, but prescribe other rules and means also. Aug. d, Doctr. Christ. l.
4. c. 30. Chrysostom. sup. Genesis Hom. 21. and sup. Romans Hom. 13. and sup. John Hom.
39. Tertul. c. prax. Hilar d. Trinit. l. 5. Ambros. (...). Psalm. 118. Sermon. 8.
Origin. Mat. Hom. 25.

Fourthly, that which the Adversary affirms touching the Fathers, to wit,
that they held the Scriptures to be clear in all substantial points, only to
men beforehand instructed, by the light of Tradition, is untrue; neither do
the Fathers speak of Tradition according to the Romish acceptance.

First, sometimes the Fathers exhort heathen men, which were not instructed by
Tradition, to read the Scriptures. Theophilus Antiochenus says to Autolicus,
(...). (...). Tom. 1. p. 898. l. 1. ad (...).
being as then a Pagan, Verum tu ipse si placet consule liter as sacras: But
do thou thy self if it seem good unto thee, consult with the holy
Scriptures. Also they provoke Heretics, which denied the Tradition of the
Church, to examine truth by Scriptures: August. d. unit. Eccles. c. 2.3.16. and
contra Maxim. Arrian. l. 3. c. 14. Socrates Hist. lib. 1. cap. 6.

Secondly, by Tradition they understand not the fabulous dreams and inventions
of Papals, Gerson. d. fig. Ruin. Eccl. sig. 8. Fabulae sunt and non sanae
Doctrinae, etc. Idem. d. spir. vit. anim. l. 2. Has vero Traditiones hominum
quis cunctas dinumeret in Canonibus summoru^ pontificum in constitutionibus
Synodalibus prouinciarum aut Diocesium, in Religionum regulis. (...). Bacon. l.
3. sent. ^.
who like the Pharisees corrupt the right sense of Scripture, by their
unwritten Traditions, August. Aug. Quod autem nos admonet vt ad fontem
recurramus, id est ad Apostolica^ Traditione^ and inde (...) in nostra tempora
dirigamus, optimu^ est and sine dubitatione faciendu^. Traditu^ est ergo nobis
sicut ipse comemorat Apostolus, quod sit vnus Christus and vnus Deus and vna
spes, and vna fides, and vna Ecclesia and Baptisma vnu^.
d. Bapt. c. Donatist. l.5, c.26. St. Cyprian. Epist. 74. Tertul. d.
praescript. c.21. Ruffin. Hist. Ecclesiast. l.2. c.9.

IESVIT.
I hope I have in the opinion of your most learned Majesty, sufficiently
demonstrated the first ground of Catholic faith, to wit, that a Christian is
originally and fundamentally built upon the word of God, not as written (...)
Scriptures, but as delivered by the Tradition of the Church,

ANSWER.
You have played the Paralogist, and weaued a spiders web, which is fitter to
catch flies, than to persuade so religious, learned, judicious, and resolute a
king, who is like an Angel of God, knowing good and evil. Your objections
being weighed in the balance of the Sanctuary, are found light, they are
Funiculus vanitatis, a coard and bundle of vanity, a potsheard covered over
with the dross of silver. His most learned Majesty (as you truly style him)
honors genuine and Orthodox all Tradition, as no religious king, or good
Christian can do more, and hereupon, to (...). (...) Tom. 1. an. 53. n. 11.
Greg. Val. To. 3. p. 347. Posseu. (...). 1. 2. c. 25. (...). loc. 3.
when you hold that a Christian is originally and fundamentally built upon the
word of God, not as written in Scripture, but as delivered by Tradition, etc.
For if the Scripture, according to the doctrine and Tradition of the Primative
Church, is eminentissimae authoritatis Anton. Perez. Pentateuch. Fid. vol. 3.
disp. 15. c. 12. Respondeo vere ac jure authoritatem Scripturae, praelata^
omnino efse authoritati Ecclesiae, tanquam verbum Dei, omni alio verbo creato,
etiam irrefragabili, quia long majus est Deum per seipsum loqui, quam (...)
Ecclesiae infallibiter loquenti, (...) dirigere ne aberret. p. 101. col. 2.
(...) praef. prol. sup. 1. sent. Scientia sacrae Scripturae habet prae caeteris
dignitatem eminentiae, quasi (...). Sicut enim principium dignius est alijs
propositionibus in scientia, vnde and dignitas (...): sic recte (...) scientia
(...) est, and inter ipsas (...) principatum.
of most eminent authority: If it be the seed, of which faith is first of all
conceived: if it is the Rock, whereupon the Church is built: if the authority
of unwritten Tradition depends upon it, and must be examined by it. If the
Churches authority is (...) from it, then a

First, That which is most excellent in every kind, is the model and pattern
of all the rest Aristot. Metaph. li. 2. cap. 2. Aquin. p. 3. q. 56. ad. 3.
Semper id quod est (...), est exemplat (...) quod est minus (...), secundum
eius modum.
but I trow you will grant the Scripture to be the most excellent part of Gods
word Card. (...). In Vesper. Recom. Script. In cuius montis vertice, Christus
suum habitaculum praedisponens ibi Ecclesiae suae fundamentum posuit and in
altissimo veritatis (...), sacrae scripturae veritate, fundauit ipsam.
, 2. Pet. 1. (...). S. (...) c. (...). Manich. li. 11 cap. 5. and d. Ciuit.
Dei, lib. 11. cap. 3. and Ibid. (...). 14. cap. 7. and d. Unit. Eccles. Aug. d.
unit. Eccles. ca. 16. Haec sunt causae nostrae (...), hec sundamenta, haec
firmamenta. Legimus in Actibus Apostolorum dictum de quibusda^ credentibus quod
quotidie scrutarentur Scripturas, an haec ita se haberent. Quas itaque
Scripturas nisi Canonicas legis and Prophetarum? Huc accesserunt (...)
Apostolicae (...), Actus Apostoloru^, Apocal Iohannis, scrutamini haec omnia
and eruite aliquid manifestum quo demonstretis Ecclesiam.
16. Chris. d. (...). Hom. 4. Oecumen. sup. 2. Tim. 3. Ansel. sup. 2. Tim. 3.

Secondly, A Christian is fundamentally built upon the rock, but the Scripture
is a rock. Cardinalis Camaracensis (...). vespert. (...). sacrae Scripturae
Card. Camerac. Sacra Scriptura Idem. In quolibet aedificio rationabiliter
ordinato, primo praecedit fundatio, secundo procedit aedificatio, (...)
succedit consummatio, hoc igitur modo (...) omnium (...), super Scripturae
sacrae petram (...) suam aedificauit. Idem. Christus Dei virtus and Dei
sapientia Ecclesiae suae domum quam interna mente concepit, super sacrae
Scripturae fundamentum temporali aedificatione compleuit. Chrysostom. Math. Hom. 46.
Jerusalem hic semper Ecclefiam intellige, quae dicitur ciuitas pacis cujus
sundamenta posita sunt super montes Scripturarum.
, In every building orderly framed, the foundation

Thirdly, The seed of Faith is the root and foundation of (...) Christian, the
Scripture is the seed of Faith Aug. d. Ciuit. Dei, lib. 19. ca. 18. Credit
Scripturis Sanctis veteribus and nouis, quas Canonicas appellamus, vnde fides
ipsa concepta est, qua (...) viuit.
( John 20. 41.) for it is the word of God, Luc. 8.11. Iam. 1.18. 1. Cor. 4,
15. And were the Popish Tenet true, that the Scripture is not the whole word of
God, but only a part thereof, yet a Christian must be originally and
fundamentally built upon it, together with Tradition Vinc. Lir. c. Haer. ca. 1.
Duplici modo munire fidem, primo scilicet Diuinae legis authoritate deinde
Catholicae Ecclesiae Traditione. Ib. c. 41.
And Tradition according to the Tenet of

Fourthly, All Scripture given by divine Inspiration is simply and without
exception to be received: and all Tradition repugnant to Scripture is to be
refused Basselis. Praef. prol. sup. 1. sent. Scriptura est veritas aliarum
exemplaris, etc.
. From hence it follows, that Scripture is a rule of Tradition, and not
Tradition of Scripture; and Scripture is the highest rule (as both the Fathers
Athan. d. Synod. (...). Et Seleuc. pa. 673. Hieron. sup. Galath. ca. 1.
and many Papists Aug. Triumph. d. Pot. Ecclef. q. 100. ar. 1. Primum locum
authoritatis tenet Scriptura veteris and noui Testamenti. Andrad. Def. li. 2.
pa. 171. Neminem inficiare diuinorum (...) cognitionem ex (...) literis (...)
petendam (...), illasque imprimis consulendas, cum res (...) in (...)
questionemque vocatur etc. Anton. Perez. Pentateuch. Fid. vol. 3. Dub. 18. ca.
14. Vnde comparatione (...) c. 15. Testimonium Scripturae in seipso (...) and
(...) est quam testimonium (...) quia illud ab intrinseco est verbum Dei, hoc
vero ab (...). Caiet. d. Author. Pap. and Council. p. 2. ca. 4. and Apolog. c.
(...). ca. 23. ad. 5.
themselves affirm) and thus it is certain, that a Christian is orignally and
fundamentally built

IESVITS 2d, Ground.
That there is a visible Church always in the world, to whose Traditions men
are to cleave, and the Church is one Universal, Apostolical, Holy.

ANSWER.
The subject of this Proposition, to wit, Ecclesia, the Church is a word or
term of diverse significations Suar. d. Fid. disp. 5. sect. 6. Ecclesiae nomen
varias habet significationes. Card. Monilian. Theol. Instit. Compend. c. 34. Ne
laboremus in (...) est de singulis (...) significatis. (...). Sum. d. Ecclel.
lib. 1. cap. 2. (...). Quest. Vesp. Recom. Scrip. cap. 3. d. 2. Gabriel. Can.
Miss. lect. 21. and lect. 75. Occham. Dialog. p. 1. li. 1. c. 4.
, and therefore the Jesuit should have declared in what notion he takes the
same, when he says, There is a visible Church, etc. First Cardinal
Bellarmine Bellarm. d. Eccles. lib. 3. ca. 2. Ecclesia est caetus (...) fidei
Christianae (...), and (...) Sacramentorum communione colligatum, sub regimine
(...) pastorum, ac praecipue (...) Christi in (...) Vicarij Romani (...). Tres
sunt parts (...): professio verae fidei: Sacramentorum communio and subiectio
ad (...) Pastorem Romans Pontificem.
, with other Pontificians Greg. (...). Analys. fid. li. 6. ca. 1. Martin.
Eisengren. li. d. Eccles. Cath. ca. 1.
, says, that the Church whereof he disputes, is a company of people linked
together by the same profession of Faith, and Communion of Sacraments under
lawful pastros, (...) under the Roman Bishop, who is Christ's Vicar.

Secondly, The term (Church) is taken in the holy Scripture for the universal
number of holy believers in all ages; and more strictly, for the whole number
of holy believers under the New Testament, Heb. 12.23. Apoc. 5.9. Ephesians.
5.25.27. Aug. (...). c. 56. Quae tota hic accipienda est, non solu ex part qua
(...) terris, etc. Verum etiam ex illa quae in coelis, etc. Templu Dej hoc est
totius summae illius Trinitatis sancta est Ecclesia, (...), vniuersa in Coelo
and in terra Id. sup. Psalm. 56. Nec (...) quae (...) est in hominibus qui
presentem vitam agunt, sed ad eam (...), etiam his qui fuerunt ante (...), and
futuri sunt post nos vsque ad (...) Seculi. Id. sup. Psalm. 90. conc. 2. Orig.
in (...). Hom. 2. Greg. Mor. li. 28. c. 6. and in Psalm. 5. Paenit. (...).
Resol. li. 4. c. 14. n. 10.
.

Thirdly, the Church is taken for the common and universal multitude of
Christian people, of any one or more ages, which are baptized, and externally
profess Christianity. And according Aug. d. Ciuit. Dei li. 18. cap. 49. and
sup. (...). tr. 6. and d. Unit. Eccles. c. 13. (...). Ep. 51. and Ep. 52.
Hieron. c. Lucifer. (...). d. Fid. ad Petr. ca. 43. (...). Naz. c. Julian.
Orat. 1. 1. (...). d. Sacer. li. 3. Greg. in (...) Hom. 11. Chrysolog. Sermon.
47. Franc. Pic. Mirand. Theor. 13.
of that profession, 2. Tim. 2. 20. Math. 13.25.47. Math. 3.12. etc. 22.10.

(...), it is taken for Particular Societies, and congregations Apoc. 1.4. and
2.1. and sometimes it is taken for the Pastors of particular Churches, Math.
18.17. sometimes for the People, Acts 20.28. sometimes for the whole Flock,
consisting of Pastors and People cyprian. Epist. 69. Illi sunt Ecclefia, plebs
Sacerdoti adunita and pastori suo grex adhaerens.
, Apoc. 3.6. But it is never taken in holy Scripture for the Pope and Council
camer. Quest. Vesp. Recom. script. p. 278. Gabriel. sup. Can. Miss. lect. 75.
. If the Jesuit in his Proposition, There is a visible Church always in the
world, etc. understand the (...) (Church) in the first Notion, then it is
denied that we are absolutely to adhere to the Traditions of this Church, or
that the same is always and entirely, One, Universal, Apostolical, Holy,
according to the meaning of the Apostles, Franc. Picus, Theor. 4. In Symbolo
edito Nicece, etc. ^.
Creed.

Secondly, according to the second Notion, the Church is not visible, for a
principal part thereof is in heaven, and the other moetie militant upon earth,
being considered as elect and holy, is known intuitiuely to God only, 2. Tim.
2.19. and morally, coniecturally, and according to the judgment of Charity to
men in this world, 2 Thessalonians. 2.13. Tertul. d. praescript. c. 3. Tu vt homo
(...) vnumquenque nosti, putas quod vides, Vides autem quousque oculos habes.
Sed oculi (...) Cusan. Concord. Cath. li. 1. ca. 4. Nullum est iudicium certum,
de membris Ecclefiae, nisi in modo renatis infantibus.


Thirdly, according to the third Notion, the Church is visible in all ages, and
some part thereof teaches and professes right Faith in all substantial and
fundamental articles. And we are to cleave to the Traditions of the same, so
far as in the delivery thereof it exceeds and transgresses not the bounds
of lawful authority (...). 2. d. 44. q. 3. nu. 9. Ecclesia licet habet in
terris dominatione Dei illa tamen non excedit limitatione Scripturae.
, and teaches according to the rule of Gods word. S. Chrysostom says,
Because Seducers are often found even in true Churches, we are not to believe,
unless they Chrysostom. imperfin Math. 49. Nec ipfis (...) (Ecclesijs) oredendum
est, nisi ea dicant vel faciant quae conuenientia sunt Scripturis.
. And in another place Id. in 2. Tim. Hom. 2. Plus aliquid dicam, ne paulo
quidem (...) fi quid (...), fi quid humamam, sed Apostolo Christum in fe
loquentem circumferenti.
, (...). If the Priest teach any perverse Doctrine, give no credit, yea though
he were an Angel. Nay I will presume to say more than this, (...), one ought
not believe Paul, if he should preach any thing humane, or of himself, but as
he is an Apostle, and has Christ speaking in him.

Lastly, according to the fourth Acceptance, there are ever in the world
particular Churches and societies of Christians, and every one of these
Churches profess some portion of divine verity. But we must enquire by the
rule of Gods word, which of these are pure and orthodoxall, and on the
contrary, Hilar. in Matthew. Canon. 8. Ecclesiae inter quas verbum Der non ^
Ora. 1. c. Arrian. Bonum est, vel potius necessarium, optare gratiam discerquos
abijcere, vt (...) cognoscat, secudum Ioannis Praeceptum (1. (...). 4. 1.) quos
abijcere, (...) vt amicos, and qui ciusdem naturae (...), recipere (...).
, and embrace the Doctrine of the one, and avoid the Corruptions of the other.

Remarkable Observations concerning the Church.
OBSERVATION I.
THe external visible Church is an intermixed August. d. (...). Christ. Lib.
3. (...). (...). de corpore Domini vero atque (...), etc.
or compounded society, body, and state of Christian people professing the
faith and worship of Christ, in which are found sheep and goats, wheat and
tares, gold and dross, good fishes and bad, and vessels of honor and
dishonor.

This common and general society and body consists of diverse particular
Churches, consenting and agreeing in the professing of some part of divine
verity: and of these Churches some are orthodoxall, some are impure in faith
and religion,

OBSERVAT. II.
Whereas the Church has many Titles and Properties belonging to it, and Christ
Jesus the Head thereof has made sundry Promises, and conferred diverse Graces
upon it; we must consider, which part of the Church is the proper subject of
these Qualities, Promises, and Graces August. Praef. in Psalm. 47. Secundam
Sabbathi non debemus intelligere nisi Ecclesiam Christi, sed Ecclesia^ Christi
in sanctis, Ecclesiam Christi in hijs qui scripti (...) in (...), Ecclesiam
Christi in hijs qui tentationibus mundi non cedunt. Ipsi enim digni sunt nomine
firmamenti. Ergo Ecclesia Christi in hijs qui firmi sunt, de quibus dicit
Apostolus, debemus autem nos firmi infirmitatem infirmortum suftinere, Romans 15.
appellata est firmamentum. Tho. (...). 10. 1. h. 2. Aug. c. Don. li. 5. ca. 27.
Quod in Cant. Cantic. Ecclesia sic describitur, Hortus conclusus, (...) mea
sponsa, sons (...), puteus aquae vinae, Paradisus cum cum fructu pomorum, hoc
intelligere non audeo, nisi in justice and sanctis. Bernard. sup. Cantic. Ser.
68. Et quid sponsa, (...) congregatio (...)? quid ipsa, (...) generatio (...)
Dominum, (...) sponfi?
: For it is apparent, That

OBSERVAT. III.
In the visible society of Christian people, there are found (according to S.
Augustine Aug. (...). Psalm. 61. (...) d. Doctr. (...). (...). 3. c. 37. Est
enim ipse (Diabolus) caput impiorum, qui sunt erus quodammodo corpus, ituri cum
illo in supplieium aeterni ignis: Sicut Christus caput est Ecclesiae, quae est
corpus (...) cum illo in regno and gloria sempiterna.
) Citizens of the heavenly Jerusalem, and also Inhabitants of Babylon. And (as
the same Father teaches) Notum est ciues malae Ciuitatis, administrare quosdam
actus, (...) Ciuitatis: It is manifest, that (in the visible Church) Burgers of
the wicked City Babylon, do administer some Functions of the holy City
Jerusalem. Ioh. 12.6. 2. Timoth. 4.10. Apoc. 3.14, 15. Phil. (...)). Ioh. 3.9.

The Promises of Christ made to the Church concerning his August. Ioh. tr. 11.
Quomodo in (...), non obfuit illis (...) de ancillis nati (...), quo min'
tenerent regnum, and terram promissionis cum fratribus, ex (...) acciperent non
illis obsuerant natales ancillarum sed praeualuit seem paternum: sic quicunque
per malos August. ibid. tr. 5. Spiritualis virtus Sacramenti ita est vt lux, ab
illuminandis pura accipitur, and si per (...) transeat, non (...). Idem, ep 3.
ad (...). tants est diuina potentia gratiae vt per malos acquirat bonos, and
per reprobos and improbos, acquirat and colligat probos. Idem, contra Parmen.
Lib. 2. cap. 8. Verba bona quae pro populo dicuntur in precibus, etiamsi a
malis dicantur, Episcopis exaudiuntur tamen non pro peruersitate praepositorum
sed pro deuotione populorum. cbrysof. sup. Ioh. Hom. 85. and sup. 1. (...).
Hom. 8. page 383. Scot. 4. d. 5. -d. 1.
presence and assistance, to his Word and Sacraments, preached and administered
according to his commandment, are fulfilled, when wicked persons execute the
office, and perform the work of outward (...). For although wicked persons,
like the Carpenters of Noah's Arc, reap no benefit to themselves, yet God
Almighty concurreth with their Ministry (being his own Ordinance) for the
salvation of all devout and worthy Communicants.

OBSERVAT. IIII.
Some things are spoken of the Church in common, or general terms, to show
what the whole is in respect of Gods outward (...). Lapid. (...). (...). ca. 2.
v. 4. ^ vel Ecclesiae promittit, quantumuis amplis and vniuersalibus verbis, id
tamen de ^ cum Deo promittente and paciscente servant intelligendum esse.
(...). 71.
.

When our Savior promises, that the gates of Hell shall not prevail against
the Church ( Matthew. 16.18.) he understands such a Church as hears and
obeys his word (...). d. ^. 3.
, and not a visible company or Hierarchy of Prelates, which forsake his
August. d. Unit. Ecclesiae, cap. 18. Ecclesia in his est qui adificant supra
Petram, id est qui credunt verbum Christi, and faciunt, and d. Baptismo, Lib.
6. cap. 24. Nonne illi sunt in Ecclefia, qui sunt in Petra? Qui autem in Petra
non sunt, nec in Ecclesia sunt, iam ergo videamus, vtrum super Petram
aedificium suum constituant, qui audiunt Christi verba and non faciant. Saint
Augustine in these words delivers three things: first, The Church is in them
which build upon the Rock: secondly, They are not in the Church, which are not
in the Rock: thirdly, They only build upon the Rock, and are in the Rock,
Orig. in (...). Hom. 1. Petra est omnis qui imitator est Christi and super
omnes (...), aedificatur Ecclesia Dei. Aug. c. Don. Lib. 3. cap. 18. Petra
tenet, Petra dimittit, columba tenet, columna dimittit, vnitas tenet, vnitas
dimittit, pax autem huius vnitatis in solis bonis est, vel iam spirituahbus,
vel ad spiritualia concordi vnitate, proficientibus, (...) malis, autem non
est, etc. Ibid. Lib. 6. cap. 3. and Lib 7. cap. 51. Idem d. unit. Eccles. cap.
16. Ego ipsam Ecclesiam requiro vbi sit, quae audiendo verba Christi, and
faciendo aedificat supra Petram.
. And this Doctrine of S. Augustine is taken out of the holy Scripture. Matthew.
7.24. 1. Cor. 3.11. and 10.4.

Also when S. Paul says, The Church is the ground and pillar of Truth Hieron.
Sup. (...). 26. Ipsa Ecclesia quae est sanctorum omnium congregatio, pro
aeterna sibi in Domino stabilitate, columna, and firmamentum, dicitur
veritatis. August. Praef. Psalm. 47. Ecclesiam Christi in sanctis, Ecclesiam
Christi in hijs qui scripti sunt in caelo etc. ipsi digni sunt nomine
firmamenti Ecclesia Christi in hijs qui sunt firmi etc. eam firmamentum
Apostolicis (...) appellatam audi and agnosce. 1. Timoth. 3.15.
, 1. Tim. 3. 15. by the Church, he understands the If I tarry long, that
thou may know how thou ought to behave thy self in the House of God,
etc. But they alone are verily and indeed the House of God, which believe and
love the Truth. S. August. Enchirid. c. 5.6. etc. Donatist. Lib. 7. cap. 50.
Wicked people may be called Gods House, because of external calling, and
visible profession, 2. Tim. 2. 20. Sed non sunt de compage domus, They are not
of the frame of the House Gregor. Moral. Lib. 28. cap. 9. Intra has mensuras
sunt omnes electi, extra has omnes Reprobi, etiamsi intra fidei limitem esse
videantur.
, Heb. 3. 6. August. d. Bapt. Lib. 7. cap. 50. All they which covet earthly
things, preferring worldly felicity before God; they which seek their own,
and not those things which are Jesus Christ's, ad vnam Ciuitatem illam
pertinent, quae dicitur Babylonia mystice, and habet Regem Diabolum, belong
only to that City, which in a mystery is called Babylon, and has the Devil
the Head. Aug. sup. Psalm. 61.

Wicked persons August. c. Don. Lib. 1. cap. 9 and 17. and Lib. 4. c. 4. etc.
7. Lib. 5. c. 16. and 19. and 24. and 26. and Lib. 6. c. 3. and 24. and Lib. 7.
c. 50. Id. c. Petil. Lib. 2. c. 108. Id. Enchir. c. 56. Id. sup. Ioh. tr. 45.
Id. sup. Psalm. 47. and 106. Id d. unit. Eccles. c. 19. Id. Ep. 51. Cyprian.
Epist. 55. Orig. in Genes. Hom. 1. and (...) Ierem. Hom. 3. Basil. in Psalm. 44.
Chrysostom. 2. Timoth. Hom. 5. Ambros. in Psalm. 35. Hieron. in Job. 26. and sup.
Ephesians. c. 5. Gregor. in Enang. Hom. 38. and Lib. 4. Moral. c. 9. etc. 15. and
Lib. 20. c. 11. and Lib. 14. c. 19. and Lib. 16. c. 10. and sup. 5. Psalm.
Poenitent. Bernard. in Cantic. Sermon. 68.
(says S. Augustine, Epist. 50.) figuram membri tenent, retain the figure or
outward shape of a member, sed reuera corpus Domini non sunt, but they are not
in truth the body August. d. Doct. Christ. Lib. 3. cap. 32.) In corpore
Christi non sunt, quod est Ecclesia; They are not in the body of Christ, which
is the Church. ( August. c. Crescon. Lib. 2. cap. 21.)

But they which are not of the Body of Christ, nor of the house of God, really,
and in truth, do not constantly preserve, or faithfully deliver Apostolical
Traditions; neither are they one, or holy, nor yet such as the Spirit of God
infallibly, and always directs in their public Doctrine.

OBSERVAT. V.
The qualities of unity, holiness, verity, Apostolical succession, and
other the like, are not always found in the true Church equally, or in the
same degree and measure of perfection; but according to a latitude, and
inequality of intension and remission, and more or less: so that although the
sounder part of the Church, has always the substance of truth, sanctity, and
unity; yet this verity of Doctrine, unity of Charity, sanctity of Manners,
is greater, larger, and more sincere and perfect in some persons and ages of
the Church, Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. l. 3. c. 26. Ad illa vsque tempora, etc.
Ecclesia integra and incorrupta permanserat caeterum postquam sacer Apostolorum
Chorus varium vitae exitum and diuersa mortis genera, pertulerat,
praeterieratque illorum aetas, quibus a Christo donatum erat vt auribus diuinam
ipsius sapientiam coram acciperent: tunc certe falsa and veteratoria impij
erroris conspiratio exordium caepit, idque illorum fraud and astutia qui
doctrinam a veritate penitus alienam disseminare laborarent: quique cum nemini
Apostolorum amplius vita suppeteret, de caetero jam nudo capite (vt aiunt) syn
cero veritatis sermoni falsam and commentitiam doctrinam ex aduerso opponere
pro viribus (...).
, they were in great measure, in the ages immediately abutting upon the
Apostles: But the holy Fathers complain of the decrease and decay of them in
after times Cyprian. Ep. 8. and d. lapsis number. 4. Chrysostom. 1. Cor. Hom. 36. and
Math. imperf. Hom. 49. Hieron. Esaias. c. 24. and sup. Much. c. 7. and sup. Soph.
c. 2. Saluian. d. gubernat. Dei l. 3. Greg. Euang. Hom. 17. and sup. Reg. l. 4.
: And Papists deplore the extreme diminution of them in their days Gerson. d.
Circumcis. Sermon. 1. confid. 1. and d. potest. Eccles. lect. 10. and Epist.
Brugis scripta. Aluar. Pelag. d. planct. Eccles. (...) Eccles. Council. Basil.
apud (...). p. 139. and p. 266. p. 267. and 275. and p. 523.
.

OBSERVAT. VI.
It falls out sometimes in the outward state of the visible Church, that
wicked persons (which are not sound parts of Gods house, nor living members of
Christ's mystical body, Onus Eccles. cap. 43.. 1. Nunc in Ecclesia copiofior
Proh pudor, est numerus malorum quam bonorum, and praeualet impius aduersus
justum.
and greater in power) do possess the chief places of public Judicature,
and Ecclesiastical government: and being thus exalted, and withal abetted by
worldly power, and swarms of time-feruers Occham. dial. p. 3. tr. 1. l. 3.
(...). 13. Quando multitudo clericorum, per auaritiam ambitionem, symoniam and
adias vias prauas, ad ordines dignitates and beneficia, Ecclesiastica
peruenisset, etc. Propter quod procliuiores essent clerici, ad assentiendum
errori Papae and generalis Concilij, quia humani moris est illum vereri, cuius
iudicio and voluntate, nunc erigitur nunc deprimitur. Onus Eccles. c. 42. Et
habebant caudas scil. assentatores, vel sequaces similes scorpionum and aculei
erant in caudis earum.
, whom they Hildegard. part. 2. l. diu. oper. citatur. Onus Eccles. c. 4.. 5.
: And then good men may be disgraced, depressed, and persecuted: the simple,
and they which are negligent, Auentin. annal. Bojor. l. 6. proem. p. 479. Math.
Paris: Chron. p. 7. Clerici and ordinati adeo literatura carebant, vt caeteris
effet (...), qui Grammaticam didicisset.
unlearned, and secure, may be deluded, and error and superstition, craftily
and covertly be brought in, and that is fulfilled which Gregory says; Dum mali
praepositi, suam contra veritatem honorem exigunt, ab omni rectitudine corda
sequentium abducunt Aug. sup. Psalm. 8. Qui gloriam suam potius quam salutem
hominum attenderunt, sine spiritu sancto locuti sunt.
: When wicked rulers seek their own glory more than truth, they misleade
their followers from all course of righteousness.

This happened in the Jewish Church, when the Scribes and Pharisees and other
hypocrites and errants were, (...), master builders, Math. 21.41. And the evil
servant bears rule Matthew. 24. 49. Diotrophes excommunicates and usurps
according to his own will Cassand. Consult. p. 929. Ecclesiae, gu.
bernatoribus quos aliquando hosts Dei esse contingit, etc. Nam vt inquit
August. sunt and intus hosts Dei quorum pectora obsedit, spiritus Antichristi
and tamen gerunt spiritualia and diuina.
: 3. Ep. Ioh. 9. 10. The Arrians in the days of Constantius and Valence did
all the former, in the greater part of the Christian world Hieron. c. Lucif.
and sup. Gal. c. 5. Ingenuit totus orbis and se Arianum esse miratus est. Idem.
sup. Psalm. 133. Ante annos quindecem aut viginti, etc. Omnes Ecclesias has
Haeretici possidebant. Idem. Chron. Anno 364. omnes pene toto orb Ecclesiae,
sub nomine pacis and Regis Arianorum consortio polluebantur. Basil. Epist. 17.
Nobis jam dicere licet, quod in hoc tempore non sit, neque Princeps, neque
Propheta, neque praeses, neque Athanas. l. ad. solitar. vir. agent. Quae nunc
Ecclesia libere Christum adorat? nam si alicubi sunt pij, and Christi studiosi
(sunt autem plurimi illi itidem, vt magnus ille Propheta Elias absconduntur,
and in speluncas and cauernas terrae sese abstrudunt, aut insolitudine
oberrantes, commorantur. (...). Lir. c. Haer. c. 6. Arianorum venenum non jam
portiunculam quandam sed pene totum orbem contaminauerat: adeo vt prope cunctis
latini nominis Episcopis, partim vi partim fraud deceptis, caligo quaedam
mentibus offunderetur.
.

The same happened in the Church of Rome, especially after the thousand year,
one man usurped over the Christian world, making himself on earth, chief and
sole commander over things divine and humane Auentin. annal. Bojor lib. 5. pa.
447. Gregorius septimus Hildebrandus, etc. Primus contra morem majorum,
contempta Imperatoris authoritate pontificatum maximum occupauit: (...) sibi
(...) esse a Christo, se (...); vt liberet ligare and soluere posse, etc. Ibid.
(...) Imperium (...), quod successores per 450. continenter annos inuito mundo,
inuitis Imperatoribus adeo duxere, vt inferos superos, in seruiturem
redegerint, (...); sub jugum miserint, atque cuncta fulmine perterritent: Quo
bruta, tellus and vaga (...): Quo Stix and (...) horrida (...) seeds
Athlanteusq, (...); (...).
: his power was so exorbitant and boundless, that he trod upon the neck of
kings Nancler. Generat. 40. summus pentifex Imperatoris collu^ pede (...), etc.
Math. Paris. Chron. p. 223. Papa definiuit, vt rex Anglorum Johannes, a solio
regni deponeretur, and alius, Papa procurante succederes qui dignior haberetur.
Ad hujus quoque sententiae executionem sctipsit Dominus Papa potentissimo Regi
Francorum Phillipo, quatenus in remissionem omnium suorum peccatorum hunc
laborem assumeret, etc. Papir. Masson. d. Episcop. vibis l. 5. in vit.
Bonifacij 8. Sander. d. visib. Monarch. Tam sacerdotalis quam regia potestas
communicata
, throning (...). 40. c. 6. Si Papa, etc. Jacob. Graph. Decis. Aur. part. 1. l.
2. Omnia regit disponit and judicat, pro vt sibi placet, etc. Apud. eum est pro
ratione voluntas, and quod ei placet legis habeat vigorem. (...). Ancona. sum.
d. Eccles. q. 63. ar. 1. Magis ligat praeceptum Papae quam ligamen legis
naturae, etc. Baron. Anno 373. number. 21. vt plane apareat ex arbitrio dependisse
Romans Pontificis fidei decreta sancita, and sancita mutare.
. All men were reputed heretics or schismatickes, which would not say and
swear as he commanded Fazel. d. reb. (...). l. 8. c. 2. Haereseos incusatur
and damnatur Fredericus, quod inter alia Romanum pontificem, ipsum anathematis
vinculo astringere non potuisse dixerit. Abbas. Vsperg. Anno 1012. p. 241.
: in Synods and Councels, causes were transacted according to his will Bosius.
d. sig. Eccles. l. 5. c. 9. Did. Nugnus. in 3. Thom. Addit. q. 20. ar. 3.
Bellarm. d. Council. l. 2. c. 11. Greg. Val. Tom. 3. d. 1. q. 1. p. 7. pa. 365.
(...). Bannes 22. q. 1. ar. 10. fo. 70.
: and remission of sins, and right to life eternal, were intailed to his
chair Math. Paris. Chron. pa. 223. Quatenus in remissionem omnium suorum
peccatorum hunc laborem assumeret. Bell. d. Eccles. l. 3. c. 5.
.

IESVIT.
This principle is consequent upon the former: and out of it, six things may
be clearly proved. First, that there is always a true Church of Christ in
the world: for if there be no means for men to know that Scriptures and other
substantial Articles came from Christ and his Apostles, and so consequently
from God, but the Tradition of the Church; then there must needs be in all ages
a Church, receiving and delivering these Traditions: else men in some ages
since Christ

ANSWER.
By true Church, we may understand, either an universal maltitude of
Believers, totally in respect of all persons, or distributiuely, right Faith in
all capital points, and ready to embrace all divine

If the name of true Church be taken in the first sense, or for an
Hierarchicall Church, wherein the principal commanders teach and maintain
truth entirely and sincerely, then the Proposition, to wit, There is always a
true Church of Christ in the world, is denied; for it is possible, that the
greater Prelates, to wit, Popes, Cardinals, mitred Bishops, and Abbots (of
which the Hierarchicall Church principally consists) shall be reprobates
Aliaco. l. d. Reform. Romans Eccl. tit. d. ref. relig. Ad hunc statum venisse
Ecclesiam vt non sit digna regi nisi a reprobis.
, blind guides Occham. Dial. p. 1. l. 2. c. 28. A tempore Innocent. tertij non
fuerunt aliqui pontifices in sacrarum literarum peritia excellentes. Alphons.
Castro. c. Haeres. l. 1. c. 4. Cum constet plures (...) adeo illiteratos esse,
vt Grammatica^ penitus ignorent: Printed by Badius. Anno 1533.
, a generation of vipers, wolves in sheep clothing, and such as being armed
with the title of the Leo. Epist. 81. Ecclesiae nomine armamini and contra
Ecclesia^ dimicatis. Cyprianus. d. simplicit. Praelat. Diabolus excogitauit
nouam fraudem, vt sub ipso nominis Christiani titulo fallat incautos.
. And that this is possible, it appears: First, by the example of the
arch-rulers of the Jewish Church, which in some ages, corrupted true Religion,
and persecuted the servants of God, 2. Chron. 36. 14. Moreover all the chief
of the Priests, and the people, transgressed very much, after all the
abominations of the heathen, and polluted the house of the Lord, etc. v. 16.
They mocked the messengers of God, and dospised his word, and misused his
Prophets, etc. Read 2. Kings. 16. 11, 16. Ierem. 2.8. Esaias. 56.10. Malach.
2.8. Ierem. 20.1. and 23.1. 2. Machab. 4.10. Ezekiel. 34.4. Mark. 6.35. Math. 3.7.
Matthew. 23. 13. Luke 12. 1. Matthew. 16. 12. John. 10. 8. Ezekiel. 22. 26.

Secondly, the same apeareth to be true, both by the example of the greater
Prelates of the Asian Churches, which corrupted true Doctrine and worship, and
provoked the Almighty so much, that he removed their Candlestick out of his
place: and also by the example of the West Church it self, wherein Popes and
greater Prelates, have been illiterate, Monsters, Devils incarnate, Apostataes,
men defiled with all wickedness, and abominable sins (as Papists themselves
report Genebrard. Chron. l. 4. anno 991. p. 553. per annos fere 150. Pontifices
circiter 50, etc. a virtute majorum prorsus defecerunt, ^ Job. Sarisbur.
Policrat. l. 6. c. 24. Romans Ecclesia quae matter (...) Ecclesiarum est, se non
tam matrem (...) quam nouercam: sedent in ea Scribae and Pharisei, etc. (...).
in Benedicto 4. Hac monstra, haec portenta, a quibus ambitione, and largitione
sanctissima Petri seeds occupata est. Council. Constable. sess. 11. ar. 5. Foex
vitiorum, (...) incarnarus. Fascic. Temp. anno 1424. Iam con, cum sci, de
conscientia abrasis, solum entia sponsam Christi gubernare videmus: personas
videlicet, conscientia scientiaque carentes, and velut entia insensibilia.
(...). d. Casal. cited by Onus Eccles. c. 43. n. 9. Carnalis jam Ecclesia
dicitur noua Babylon and meretrix magna, quia in ea, vtpote in pluribus and
potioribus membris, ordo virtutum per deordinationem vitiorum (...) est
confusus, nec non sui sponsi Jesus amor turpiter adulteratus and eius cultus
nequiter neglectus, modica quidem grana tritici, sunt in immenso palearum
cumulo, quoniam instorum Spiritus hoc tempore a malis (...) vsque adeo, vt prae
multitudine peruersorum (...). d. planct. Eccles. lib. 2. ar. 5. Nunc autem ex
quo in Ecclesijs sicut in Romano Imperio creuit (...): perijt lex de
Sacerdotibus and visio de Propheta: and ad literam hodie in Ecclesia deficit
Spiritus Prophetiae: etc adimpletur quod scribitur, 3. Reg. 22. Egrediar and
cro spiritus mendea in (...) omnium Prophecarum.
.) And concerning Doctrine, it is evident, by comparing their decrees Occham
Occham. dial. part. 1. (...). c. 26. (...). Disp. cum (...). Si coire nequeant
parts erroris cum virtute, multo minus conuenerint veritas and vicium. Origin.
in Math. (...). Haec alterutrum se sequuntur and non seperantur ab in vicem,
sermo mundus in anima, and vita irreprehensibilis.
says: Omnis congregatio quae potest errare contra bonos mores, potest errare
contra fidem: quia mali mores excacant intellectum: Because evil manners
blind the judgment, therefore every assembly which may err notoriously in
manners, may err against the Faith.

But if, by true Church, we understand a number of Believers, Esaias 1.9.

In the other part of this Section, the Jesuit produces an Argument to
prove, That there is always a true Church of Christ in the world. The sum
of his Argument is: Christ never leaves the world destitute of the ordinary
means of salvation: and people



ANSWER.
It is lost labor to spend time in proouing against us, that (...). d. Eccles.
l. 3. c. 13. Notandum est multos ex nostris, tempus terrere dum probant
absolute Ecclesiam non posse deficere, nam Caluinus and caeteri Haeretici id
concedunt. Gerbard. loc. com. (...). 5. d. Eccles. number. 107. Ecclesiam perpetuo
durasse and perpetuo duraturum esse extra controuersiam ponimus.
: for we have ever acknowledged this. The thing that we deny, is, that
although

Secondly, It is granted that Christ does not according to his antecedent will,
leave the world destitute of the means of Salvation, Math. 23.37. 1. Timoth.
2.4. 2. Pet. 3.9. But notwithstanding this will of Christ (...). Orth. fid.
lib. 2. ca. 29. etc. Manich. Aquinas p. 1. q. 19. ar. 6. Bonauent. 1. q. 47.
art. Vnic. Scot. 1. d. 46. q. Vnic. Occham Richardus. Greg. (...). Durand.
Gabrul. (...), (...). d. Auxil. dips. 34. (...). in 1. p. (...). q. 19 (...).
56. number. 17.18.
, many people may be actually destitute of the means of Salvation, by the
negligence of Gre. li. 5. Epist. 59. Anglorum gentem, Deo annuente velle fieri
Christianam, sed Sacerdotes qui in vicino sunt, pastoralem erga (...)
sollicitudinem non habete.
, and through their own negligence or malice, contemning or repelling the said
means, when they are offered unto them, Acts 13.46.

Thirdly, A corrupt visible Church may truly deliver some parts of sacred
Truth, and among other verities, it may deliver the Apostles Tradition touching
the Canon of the Scripture, Romans 3.2. and Acts 15.21.

Fourthly, If we should grant (which is false, as appears by the Greek
Church) that there was in some ages past, no other Church but the Roman, and
the adheres thereof, and affirm Occham. Dial. p. 1. li. 5. c. 28. Quod si
consilium in Haeresin labererur, (...) Catholici, qui occulte vel public (...)
expediret, auderent fidem defendere orthodoxam. Ille autem qui reprobatis
filijs earnalibus Abrahae potest de lapidibus suscitare filios Abrahae
spirituales, potensest and omnibus in generade (...) conuenientibus in (...)
lapsis, imo (...) mundi, and potentibus secularibus (...) damnatis, de
lapidibus, id est, (...) rudibus and abiectis panperibus and despectis
Catholicis, Dei filios suscitare. Frans. Picus. Mirand. Theorem. 23. Hoc autem
verbo pernitiose vsi in (...) sumus, ob id quod (...) quempiam errare Deus
(occulto suo ^)
, but many among them firmly believing all fundamental (...), were (...) by
adeu out and (...)

IESVIT.
Secondly, this Church must be always visible and conspicious, for the
Traditions of the Church must ever be famous, glorious, and notoriously known
in the world, that a Christian may say with S. Augustine, I believe nothing but
the consent of Nations and Countries, and most celebrious fame. Now if the
Church were hidden in secret, invisible in any age, then her Traditions could
not be Doctrines, ever illustriously known, but rather obscure, hidden, Ergo
the Church the mistress pillar and foundation of Truth must be always visible
and conspicuous, which if need be, may be further proved most evidently.

ANSWER.
The Church according to the Popish Tenet, is said to be Visible, because it
always has such an outward form and appearance in the eyes of the world, as
that people are able by Anton. Perez. Pentateuch. fid. pa. 1. du. 1. c. 2. Si
igitur neque ad sensum Ecclesia potest latere, consequens est, vt in omnium
occulos incurrat, Et proinde quod veritas illius, non solum percipiatur mente
sed etiam sensu.
.

And by the Church in this question, they understand, a company of believers,
professing Christian Faith without error, submitting themselves to the Bishop
of Rome, as to their universal Visible head Azer. Moral. (...). part. 2. li.
5. c. (...). Ecclesia dicitur visibilis, quia in vnius, and ciusdem fidei
professione consistit, sub vno capite visibili, videlicet, summo Christi
Vicario Romans pontifice, etc.
. And they affirm concerning the said Church, that it may at all times be
sensibly known and discerned Stapl. Rel. c. 1. q. 3. ar. 1. pa. 33.
Aspectabilis and sensibus (...). Brellar. d. Eccles. li. 3. ca. 15. Greg. Val.
(...). 3. pa. 88. Ecclesiam omni tempore visibilem, id est, cognitu (...). Jb.
pa. 185. Euidenter potest (...) seculo conspici and (...) and quasi digito
demonstrari.
, and that the place of abode, and the principal members thereof are openly
known, and the external actions of the ^
.

Some few of them acknowledge, that it is possible for the same, for some short
season, to loose part of the external amplitude and glory, and to be
ouershadowed with clouds and (...). (...). (...). 3. pa. 187. (...). Relect. p.
30.
: but yet they all (...) that even in those tempestuous seasons, it is
conspicuous to the world, in regard of the principal members ^ and turgidis
granis est perpetuo (...) and (...).
, and that the common and ordinary condition of the true Church is to be
amply, famously, and in a glorious manner visible (...). (...). pa. 111. (...).
(...) (...). fid. vol. 1. dub. 1. c. 1. ^ illustrior.
.

But our Tenet is, First, That the true Church abides oftentimes ^ Ecclesiae
(...) fuit etc. Altera persecutio fraudulenta etc. (...) superest per (...)
Bernard Sermon. d. (...). S. Pauli. Videbatur (...) cessasse (...), etc. sed
(...) quod (...) est, ipsi. (...), qui ab (...) Christiani (...). Amici (...)
Deus and proximi (...) te (...), etc. Jd. in Psalm. Qui habserm. 6. and sup.
Cantic. sermon. 33.
. And in time of persecution, by either of (...) enemies, it may be reputed a
false Church, or impious Sect by the multitude (...). in (...) c. 16. (...)
Christiani genus (...) nouae and (...). (...). (...). annal. li. 15.
, and consequently be unknown to, the wicked world, under the Notion of holy
and true: and in such persecutions the love of many may wax cold, Math. 24.12.
and iniquity and infidelity so abound, Luc. 17.26. and cap. 18.8. that the
number of right believers shall be few, and the same may be compelled to
exercise their religion in (...) (...). in Luc. li. 10. c. 21. (...). ^ and
Lacus, and Carceres and (...), in illis ^. Symbol. ar. 2. pa. 378. ^ Cryptis,
etc. ^ 18. c. 7. numb. 64. Cultus diuinus and judge sacrificium, (...) temporis,
cessent in (...) and patentibus (...) non (...) in abditis and (...).
.

Secondly, We deny that a natural man is able infallibly to judge and discern
by sense and common reason, or human prudence only, which is the true Church of
Christ ^ sup. 3. c. ^.
, whereunto Cor. 2.11.14.

Now the reasons for which we reject or limit the Popish Doctrine, concerning
the Churches visibilitie, are these.

^ (...). 1.8.1. These. (...). (...). Lib. 3. ^ principalitatem, necesse est
(...) omnem Ecclesia^, hoe est cos qui sunt vndique fideles, in qua semper ab
eis qui ^ ab (...) est ^.
and not what the same must be perpetually. Some teach what the same is by
outward calling, and consequently what in right, by precept and duty, it ought
to be. Some Matthew. 5. 18. (...). Lirin. c. (...). c. Sedula and canta apud se
dogmatum custos, etc.
Texts of holy Scripture describe the inward and spiritual beauty of the
sounder part of the Church, by Allegories and similitudes, taken from external
and worldly pomp and glory: Psalm. 45. 9. Esaias 35.2. and Esaias ^
Some places show what (...) ought to perform, when the public and common
Ministry ^
Lastly, some of the Fathers living in Ages wherein the outward face of the
Church was externally glorious, and not foreseeing what was imminent and
future, might probably suppose, that the same should always retain the like
beauty. And yet S. Augustine, who because of the Donatists, speaks most
largely in this kind, August. c. Crescon. lib. 2. c. 36. etc. Petil. lib. a. c.
104. and contra Faust. lib. 13. c 13. and (...) unit. (...). cap. 25.
uses words of limitation and exception, and affirms, that the splendour of
the Church in time of Persecution may be eclipsed, and the glory thereof
ouershadowed. ^


Secondly, The Arguments against the glorious and perpetual Visibilitie of the
true Church (according to our adversaries ^
Athanasius, Hilarious, Ambrosius, etc. And this may be done by great
multitudes, and by learned persons, and by such as are potent in worldly and
Ecclesiastical power: and in such times the true Church, under the notion of a
true Church, cannot be generally and gloriously visible. Secondly, The prime
Rulers and Commanders in the visible Church do at some times by Ambition, and
other enormious Vices, become (...). (...). d. Planct. Eccles. lib. 1. ar. 5.
Principes Ecclesiae sunt exercitus daemonum, cum deberent esse (...). Lira,
(...). 16. Multi principes and (...), and alij ^ a side, etc. ^.
as our adversaries themselves acknowledge, concerning all other Bishops, but
only the Roman and Occham, Dial. p. 1. Lib. 7. cap. 48. Fabulas and errores
Papae Haeretici, multitudo praecipue magistrorum ambitiosorum, and (...)
sequitur.
and then the number of Infidels, which remain without the Church, being added
to the Church malignant; the total sum of both amounts to a great number,
and in comparison of them, right believers may be few, Onus Ecclesiae, c. 43..
1. Nunc in Ecclesia copiosior (proh dolor) est numerus (...) quam bonoru^, and
praeualet impius aduersus bonum. Aluar. Petag. d. Planct. Eccles. li. 2. art.
5. Mistica Syon Ecclesia caligine peccati and ertoris and ignorantiae (...),
quae tantis muneribus in Ecclesia primitiua, (...) suo sponso ditabatur, etc.
Ad terram de coelo proiectam conspicimus quia quasi inhabitata and deserta est:
Et fi qui supersunt cultores, quasi Arabes and Saraceni sunt.
and their reputation in the world so These. 2.3. etc. 1. Tim. 4.1. 2. Tim.
3.1. etc. Luc. 18.8. Matthew. Revel. 12.6. Aluar. Pelag. d. (...). Eccles. Lib.
2. art. 5. Nunc autem ex quo in Ecclesia sicut in Rom, Imperio creuit auaritia,
perijt Lex de Sacerdotibus, and visie de Prophetis, and ad terram defecit hodie
in Ecclesia spiritus Prophetiae, and (...) quod scribitur. 3. Reg. 22. Egrediar
and (...) spiritus mendax in ore omnium Prophetarum.
But such a perpetual visibilitie of the Church as Romists imagine, is not
compatible with the precedent Predictions. But the Jesuit says,

IESVIT.
Because the Tradition of the Church must be at all times famous, glorious, and
notoriously known in the World: therefore the true Church, which is the
Teacher, Pillar, and Foundation of Tradition, must be at all times famously
visible to the eye of the World.

ANSWER.
Neither the Antecedent nor Consequent of this Argument are firm. It is not
always true, that those things are visible, which make other things famous,
glorious, and notoriously known; for that which is innisible to the eye of the
World, may cause other things to be famous: as we see in God himself,
Athanasius.

Secondly, The Antecedent is false: If the Jesuit, by the word (Must)
understand that, which by an immutable providence of the Almighty shall
infallibly in all ages be fulfilled; it is not decreed by the Almighty, that
the Doctrine and Tradition of Divine Verity shall in all Ages be generally
famous,

But many people, for sundry Ages, have been ignorant of Christ Prosp. d.
voc. Gent. Lib. 2. cap. 6. Acosta, d. Proc. Indor. Salur. Li. 1. c. 5. pa. 133.
August. d. confens. Euang. li. 1. cap. 31. Per multos annos Ecclesia, quae
(...). d. Pontif. Romans l. 3. ca. 4. Antechristus nondum venit, quia Euangelium
nondum suit (...) in (...) mundo.
, and of the whole Tradition and Doctrine of the Apostles, and a large tract of
the World remains at this present day in Heathenish and damnable ignorance
Council. Lateran. sub. Leo. 10. Sess. 8. Iacet desolata Afia, iacet Africa,
iacet AEgyptus, ac bona Europae (...) deserta, abiecta fine lege, sine moribus,
sine (...) Christianae legis consortio, p. 599. (...), to. 4.
; and consequently, to a large part of the World, Tradition is not in a famous
and glorious manner notoriously known.

IESVIT.
Thirdly, The Church is Apostolical, and that apparently descending from the
Apostolical Sea, by succession of Bishops, Aug. li. d. vtil. Cred. c. 17.
vsque ad confessionem generis humani, even Augustine speaks.

ANSWER.
The true visible Church is named Apostolical, not because of local and
personal succession of Bishops (only or principally) but because it retains
the Faith and Doctrine of the holy Apostles, Ephesians. 2. 20. Ambros. Hugo Lira, in
Comment. sup. Fundamentum Apostol. 1. c. sup. Doctrinam.
Revel. 21.14. Albert. Com. Apocal. cap. 21. Fundamenta, etc. (...) sunt super
quorum fidem, and doctrinam (...) Ecclesia fundata est.
Tertullian. d. Prascript. cap. 32. affirms Ad (...) (...) prouocabunur ab
alijs (...) quae licet nullum ex Apostolis aut Apostolicis, Authorem suum
proserant, vt (...), quae denique quotidie instituuntur tamen in cadem side
conspirantes, non minus Apostolicae (...) pro (...) Doctrinae.
, That Churches which are able to produce none of the Apostles, or other
Apostolical men for their first planters, are notwithstanding Apostolical,
for consent of Faith, and consanguinitie of Doctrine. And many learned Papists,
ancient and modern, say Cordub. Arma. fid. q. 1. prop. 2. Dicitur Apostolica,
quia fundata est in doctrina Apostosorum, quo ad fidem legem and Sacramenta,
neque aliam contrariam doctrinam habet, Ephesians. 2. 20. Occham. Dial. pa. 1. li. 5.
c. 24. (...). to. 1. sermon, in Council. Generali. p. 369. (...). summa. d.
Ecclesia l. 1. c. 18. (...). moral. Institut. p. 2. l. 5. c. 21.
The Church is called Apostolical, because it is grounded upon the Doctrine of
the Apostles, in respect of Faith, Laws, and Sacraments.

But personal or local succession only, and in it self, makes Act. 20.29,
30. Even as sickness succeeds health, and darkness light, and a tempest
fair weather, as Gregory Nazianzen affirms. Orat. d. laud. Athanasij
Nazian. Orat. 21. (...). pa. 377.
.

That which is common and separable, cannot of it self demonstrate the true
Church. And the notes of the Church Bellarmine Bell. d. Eccles. l. 4. c. 2.
Notae debent esse propriae non communes. 2. notiores ca re cujus sunt notae. 3.
inseparabiles a vera Ecclesia.
affirms.) Also, the same must be so conspicuous, as that they cannot easily
be pretended by Adversaries Stapl. Rel. c. 1. q. 4. ar. 5. p. 114. Notae
debent esse ita perspicuae vt nec ab Aduersarijs facile (...) confess. c. 20.
Notae quibus omnis de Ecclesia penes quos ea sit dubitatio tolli possit, ita
Ecclesiae propriae vt eas sibi nequaquam vsurpare possint (...).
, or be at all controuerted or doubtful. But personal succession may be
found in a false Church, as appears by the Jewish Church, in the time of the
Pharisees, and by the Churches of the East in the days of the Arrians: and our
Adversaries affirm the Greek Church to be unsound, notwithstanding it is
apparently descended from the Apostles Niceph. Chron. l. 8. c. 6. Stapl.
princip. Doctr. l. 13. c. 16. Graecae Ecclesiae ab ipsis Apostolorum
fundamentis personalem successionem demonstrare possunt. Anton. Perez. vol. 1.
Du. 24. c. 14. p. 70. Baron. An. 44. nu. 12. ex ep. Agapeti. Horant. loc. l. 6.
c. 7. Turrian. Resp. ad Sadael p. 124.
, by a lineall succession of Bishops.

Cardinal Bellarmine Bellarm. d. Eccles. lib. 4. c. 6. Argumentum a
successione legitima adfertur a nobis precipue ad probandam non esse Ecclesiam,
vbi non est haec successio, quod quidem euidens est: ex quo tamen non
colligitur necessario ibi esse Ecclesiam vbi est successio.
perceiving the weight of the former Argument, departs from the common
opinion of other Papists, saying: That although personal succession alone, or
by it self, is not a proper note of a true Church, yet the absence thereof,
proves a nullitie of the Church in them which

But if this be so, then personal and local succession must Bellarmine
teaches) it rather serves to prove there is not the true Church where it
wants, than to argue a true Church where it is: then the same is not proper
and conuertible, and consequently it is no essential mark, because to be
proper and conuertible, Supra. Bellarm. Stapl. (...) lit. a.
own description.

It is likewise remarkable, that the ancient Fathers Iren. l. 4. c. 43. lis
qui in Ecclesijs sunt Presbyteris (...), qui successione habent (...) Apostolis
quicunque cum Episcopatus successione charisma veritatis certum secundum
placitum patris acceperunt. Id. cap. 44. Ad haerere his qui and Apostolorum
Doctrina^ custodiunt, and cum Praesbyterij ordine sermonem sanum and
conuersationem sine offensa praestant. Tertul. c. Haeres. c. 32. Ipsa doctrina
eorum cum Apostolica comparata ex diuersitate and (...), neque Apostolici
alicuius Authoris effe, neque Apostoli.
do not only or principally understand personal succession, when they
mention succession in their writings: because they argue affirmatively from
succession, and not negatiuely only. Therefore Romists in this disputation,
shall do well to begin with the questions which concern Doctrine, and prove
that they have succession of Doctrine, in all those Articles wherein they
oppose Baron. Anno 31. (...). 52. (Ait) magnam esse successionis vim cum ex
cujusuis hominis qui compos sit rationis sententia certum exploratumque
habeatur illic esse legitimum (...), ipsum inquam Catholicam Ecclesiam apud
quam (...) exordio est legitime conseruata. Hosius confess. c. 28. Didicimus
jam ibi esse Apostolica^ Ecclesia^ vbi est Doctrina Apostoloru^, porro Doctrina
Apostoloru^ ibi est, vbi est legitima Episcoporu successio, Idem. c. Brent. l.
2. p. 76. Ibi est Ecclesia vbi est legitima Sacerdotum and Episcoporum
successio and ab hac successione semper veritas est petita. (...) Defens. Cath.
p. 991.
which is against good reason, and against the Custom and manner of the
ancient Fathers Aug. d. unit. Eccles. c. 16. Sed vtrum ipsi Ecclesia^ teneant,
non nisi diuinarum Canonicis libris ostendant, quia nec nos propterea dicimus
nobis credere oportere, quod in Ecclesia Christi sumus quiaipsam quam tenemus
commendauit Mileuitanus optatus, vel Mediolanensis Ambrosius, vel alij
inumerabiles nostrae communionis Episcopi, aut quia nostrorum Collegarum
Concilijs ipsa predicata est.
.

IESVIT.
For how can the Tradition of Christian doctrine be eminently and notoriously
Apostolical, if the Church delivering Augustine; how can we think that we
(...) received manifestly Christ, if we (...) not also (...) Propter quod
vnumquodque tale and illud magis. But the name of Christ his glory, his virtue
and miracles, are to the world famously known from age to age, by reason of
the Church, and her preaching, that in her first Pastors saw them with their
eyes. Ergo, This Church must needs be more famous, more illustrious, as able
to give fame unto the being, and Doctrine, and actions of

ANSWER.
I have showed in the former Section, that the visible Church is principally
called Apostolical, because it imbraceth the doctrine of the holy Apostles.
And every Church is Apostolical, so far forth only, as it consents with
the Apostles in Doctrine, Sacraments, Invocation, and in that which is
substantial in Ecclesiastical policy. And in a precedent Section Occham, a
famous Schooleman, and some others with him affirm, That a true and
Apostolical Church may consist of a few lay people, Occham. Dial. p. 1. l. 4.
c. 9. and l. 5. c. 3. etc. 8. etc. 23.
and if all the Prelates and Clerks throughout the world should become
heretical, God may raise up Pastors, either extraordinarily, Ibid. c. 28.
Ille qui reprobatis filijs carnalibus Abrahae
or else heretical Bishops (...) Pastors, the Church may be reformed by them.

But to the Argument I answer as follows Ib. c. 30. Si tota multitudo
Clericorum haereticaretur, vel Ecclesia careat praedictis, de facto tamen si
remanserint alij Clerici haeretici, possunt aliqui Catholici ordinari, ab eis,
etc quibus ordinatis possunt omnia predicta reparari.
.

First, if the same were wholly granted, nothing could be concluded against
the Church of England from it, because the Bishops and Pastors of this Church,
are able to exhibit a Pedigree or deriuation, both of their Ministry and
Doctrine

1. Of Ministry, in that they have for substance, the same descent of
external Ordination which the Roman Church has.

2. Of Doctrine, because they maintain the Primitive Faith, (...) Dial. p. 1.
li. 2. ca. 4. Sancti aliqua tanqua^ Catholica quaeda^ tanquam ad fidem
necessario spectantia, nonnulla vero tanquam probata tradiderunt.
, or in matters which were not fully discussed, or in points which were not
delivered by an unanimous consent, or in things which are reproved by plain
demonstration of holy Scripture (...). Carmeld. (...). ca. 7. Quamuis sanctorum
Doctorum scripta, extra Canonem Biblie sunt legenda, etc. Cum debita (...); non
tamen sunt (...) firmae authoritatis and immobilitatis, quin liceat
, and wherein the Fathers permit liberty of dissenting, and the Papists
themselves take the like liberty Aug. d. pers. Sanctorum ca. 21. Neminem velim
sic amplecti mea omnia, vt me sequatur, nisi in eis quibus me non errare
perspexerit, epist. 48. Hoc genus literarum ab authoritate Canonis distinguen
dum est, and epist. 111. and epist. 112. Nolo authoritatem (...) sequaris, etc.
and proem. li. 3. d. Trinit. Job. Driedo. d. Dogm. Eccles. lib. 4. part. 5. c.
6. Neque ipsi omnes suas sententias suis libris dictas tradiderunt nobis,
tanqua^ fidei sententias dicentes quidem vel per (...), vel per opinionem, vel
per rationem, solum ipsis probabilem, ac verisimilem super rebus gestis innixi
interdum solis hominum quorundam testimonijs quos crediderunt veraces, and
tamen potuisse falli and fallere.
.

Secondly, the Jesuits Interrogation (How can the Tradition of Christian
Doctrine be eminently and notoriously Apostolical, if the Church delivering
the same has not a manifest and perspicuous pedigree or deriuation from the
Apostles?) is answered: this may be

Thirdly, S. Augustine in the place objected, Epist. 48. confuteth the
Donatists, which confined the Church universal to one country only, excluding
the rest of the world from the communion thereof: against this error he says,
How can we think that we have received Christ made manifest, if we have not
also received his Church made manifest? From hence nothing can be inferred, but
that we receive the true Church, not only at one time, or in one place, but at
all times, and in all places where it is manifest, and that Christ is revealed
and made manifest by Augustine speaks being granted, proves not that the
true Church shall be notoriously eminent and visible at all times: neither does
this Father say, that Christ cannot be manifest but by such a Church only, as
can lineally derive her pedigree by Records and Tables from the Apostles. And
howsoever Papists boast of their own pedigree, yet when their Catalogue of
descent is duly examined, all the passages are not so current in it as

Fourthly, the principle of Aristotle Aristot. Anal. Poster. li. 1. ca. (...)
(...).
upon which the last Argument is grounded, admits many exceptions, Zabarel.
com. ib. Text. 15. and 16. Multas videtur pati difficultates, etc. Aquin. (...)
Quest. 87. ar. 2. ad. 3. (...) habet si intelligatur in his quae sunt vnius
ordinis, etc. Idem. (...). Sent. d. 12. ar. 2. ad. 2. Quando (...) est causa
alterius essentiali ordine.
That, because of which another thing is such, is it self much more such, when
both things are of the same order, and partake the same affection, as Christ
which sanctifies is more holy than they which are sanctified. Fire is hotter
than water, and other things warmed by it, etc. But it holds not in causes
equivocal or partial, or in causes by accident, or of diverse order. The Sun
causes life in plants, and yet the Sun is without life. A whetstone Daniels
wisdom is revealed to Baltasar by the queen, Dan. 5. 10, 11. yet Daniell is
not made a (...) man, nor only known to be such, by that report: so likewise
the name of Christ, his glory, his virtue, and miracles are famously known of
belecuers from age to age, by reason of the Church and her preaching, etc. But
all this concerning Christ is neither principally nor only made known to the
world by the present Church, nor by veluti Preco and Nuntius, like a Crier and
Messenger, but the holy Scripture is the Word, Handwriting, (...) tom. 5. Hom.
d. sui Expuls. (...) manum eius ipsa, mihi murus inexpugnabilis.
and Epistle of Christ, Jdem 2 Thessalonians. Hom. 3. Epistolae quotidie de Coelis
venientes legu^tut. Audiui lectas hic regias Epistolas.
into whose voice and authority all the faithful resolve their beleese
concerning Christ and all his actions: and according to S. Agustine, In sanctis
libris manifestatur Dominus, and ibi eius Ecclesia declaratur, Aug. Epift. 50.
In the holy books of Scripture the Lord is made manifest, and in the same
also his Church is declared: and in another Aug. Ep. 166. (...) d. unit. (...).
c. 3. Sunt certe libri Dominici, quorum authoritati (...) consentimus, (...),
vtrique seruimus, ibi quaeramus Ecclesiam, ibi discutiamus causam nostram.
In Scripturis diuinis Christum, in Scripturis didicimus Ecclesiam, In the
Scriptures we have learned Christ, and in the Scriptures we have learned the
Church. Now if the Scriptures manifest Christ, and demonstrate his Church, they
are of greater (...). (...). Pentateuch. Fid. vol. 3. Dub. 10. c. 14.
Comparatione huius (id est) Scripturae, testimonium Ecclesiae dici (...) potest
testimonium hominum, vtpote quod in rigore sermonis non obtinet proprietates
and requisita ad rationem verbi Dei, etc. Ca. 15. Illud (...) est verbum Dei
(quoad omnia and singula) ca. 14. Hoc vero ab extrinseco, etc.
, and consequently more credible, famous, and illustrious than the Church,
according to the Jesuits Theorem out of Aristotle, Propter quod vnum quodque
tale est, and illud magis.

IESVIT.
Fourthly, the Church is one, that is, all the Pastors and Preachers thereof
deliver, and consequently all her professors and children believe, one and the
same Faith.

ANSWER.
The visible Church in regard of the sound and living part thereof, is one both
in Faith and Charity Aug. c. Petil. Don. li. 2. c. 77. Tenemus charitatem si
amplectimur vnitatem amplectimur autem vnitate^, si ea non per verba nostra non
in part confingim', sed per verba Christi in vnitate cognoscimus. Id. Membra
Christi per vnitatis charitatem sibi copulantur, and per eandem capiti suo
cohaerent quod est Christus Jesus, etc. Theoder. Expos. Psalm. 47. Communiter
omnes in vnam domum rediguntur ob consonantium veterum Dogmatum.
, Ephesians. 4.3.4. etc. But this unity is more or less perfect Anton. Perez.
Pentateuch. Fid. Vol. 1. Dub. 19. c. 3. Vnitas formalis and substantialis and
vnitas perfectiua.
at some times, and in

Unity in all Verity, and in all sanctity of Virtue and Charity is
necessary to Salvation, in praeparatione animi, in the purpose and intention
of heart, Romans 12. 18. and actual Unity in fundamental points of Faith, and
in the maine offices of Charity Heb. 12.14. but perfect concord, excluding all
discord, is not perpetually found amongst the best members of the visible
Church Aug. c. Iul. li. 1. ca. 2. Alia sunt in quibus inter se (...) etiam
doctissimi atque optimi regulae Catholicae defensoris, salua fidei compage, non
consentiunt and alius alio de vna re melius and verius dicit. Hoc autem vnde
Idem sup. Psalm. 45. Anton. Perez. Pentateuch. Fid. p. 1. dub. 8. ca. 3.
Cyprian. tr. d. laps. Inter alia peccata reperta in hominibus ad Ecclesiam
(...) recenset animorum discordias and controuerfias.
. There was contention among the Disciples, Luc. 22.24. and the Affrican and
European Churches were divided concerning rebaptising Council. Carthag. apud
Cypt. and Ib. Pamel. Id. ep. 72. and 73. and 74. and 75. Eusebius. Hist. Eccles.
li. 7. c. 2.3, 4.
, and the Eastrne and Western Churches about the day of Easter Idem li. 5. c.
23.
. S. Augustine says, That good men being but proficients, may be at strife
Aug. Proficientes autem nondumque perfecti, etc. d. (...) Dei, li. 15. ca. 5.
. Aquinas affirms, That discord is not a sin unless it overthrow Charity,
or be corrupted with error concerning matters of Faith which are necessary to
be known to Salvation, or in smaller points with (...) Aquin. 22. q. 37. ar.
1. Cum intentio aliquorum fit ad aliquod bonu^, quod (...) ad honore^ ^
accidens contra bonum (...) vel ^.
. Also discord may happen in the visible (...) Hist. (...) Lib. 6. cap. 4. and
(...) Constantini, Lib. 2. cap. 60. and 61. Greg. Nazianz. (...). 12. (...),
etc. Aug. sup. (...). 45. Nondum ^ (...). sup. Ezech. c. 4. Vereor ne ista
(...) in nostra (...), in qua visio pacis cernitur, quam conteret Dominus
quando irascitur, and indignos nos ^ etc. deficiente autem pane and (...)
Ecclesiae (...) vir contra (...), and (...) discordia est, (...) nobis Christi
tunicam, quam nec milites in passione saluatoris nisi sunt, etc.
, they cannot (...) it. (...). 120.5, 6, 7.

IESVIT.
For if the Preachers and Pastors of the Church disagree about matters which
they preach, as necessary points of Faith, how can their Tradition and
Testimony be of Credit therein, or have any Authority to persuade? who

ANSWER.
First, They which disagree in part, and accord in the maine, may have
substantial (...), although they want the prefection of unity, and these are
of credit, and may persuade in those things wherein they consent: as appears
by S. Cyprian and his. Colleagues, disagreeing with the Romans touching
Appeals

Secondly, When there is discord between (...) in (...) matters, the Orthodox
party, (...) many ((...) all those whose hearts the Lord (...) and moves
Aug. d. Doctr. Christ. Lib. 4. c. 16. Ipsis quoque ministris sanctis hominibus
vel etiam sanctis Angelis operantibus, nemo (...), Doctrinae tum prosunt (...)
per (...) cum Them (...) vt prosint, etc.
) to discern and obey the truth: Otherwise, in the great Dissentions of the
ancient Church, reported by Eusebius, Lib. 2. cap. 60. and 61. d. vita
Constantini (...). Eo vsque diffudit sese vti non ^ hominum ^ licuisset. Eo
(...) ^ Theatris (...) ^.
, no people should have been converted to God.

Thirdly, If (...), take away all possibility of persuading, ^ Vno die centum
and triginta septem cadauera peremptorum. Oath Frising. Chron. Lib. 6. cap. 22.
) must want power to persuade. The efficacy of persuasion depends upon
absolute concord only, as upon a greater motive of credibilitie, and not as
upon a proper efficient: and although Preachers should be contentious, and
factious, yet the Word of Christ truly delivered by any of them, is in it self
mighty in operation, and able to persuade August. d. Doctr. Christ. Lib. 4.
cap. 27. Boni sideles non quemlibet hominum, sed ipsum Deum obedienter audiunt,
etc.
and convert souls: and God Phil. 1. 16, 17.

IESVIT.
And this consent must be conspicuous and evident: For if in outward appearance
and show, Preachers dissent one Field undertakes for Protestants) that their
Dissentions are but verbal. But what is this to the purpose? Do the accused
Dissentioners allow this Doctors Reconciliation? (...)

ANSWER.
The consent of Pastors according to one sense, to wit, expounding Must, for
(...), Ought (as 1. Tim. 3.2.) is to be conspicuous and evident, both in Faith
and in Charity: and when this is fulfilled, the testimony of Pastors is of
greater weight and credit among men. But this perfection of Visitie is (...):
(...). Alexandr. Strom. Lib. 7. f. 541. Primum ergo hoc aduersus nos adducunt
dicentes non oportere credere, (...), etc. Fore (...) in (...) seminentur (...)
vt in fi (...) Prophetice a Domino dictumest, and fieti non potest, vt non fiat
id quod praedictum est esse futurum, etc. Number quispiam aegrotans, and qui vt
curetur opus habet, non admittit Medicum propter eas quae sunt in medicina
haereses, etc. Neque fi appositus sit fructus, vnus quidem verus and maturus,
alius vero factus ex cera quam maxim similis, propter similitudinem est
abstinendu^ ab vtroque, etc. Et quemadmodum si vna sit via Regia, and multae
etiam aliae, ex quibus aliquae ferunt in praecipitium, etc. Cum oleribus.
Hortensibus vna (...) nascutitur herbae, etc.
, if the better part of them observe Unity in the Bond of Peace, in things
essential, and in the common Rule of Faith. And although the quality of
Teachers be a motive of credibilitie, yet the power of persuasion depends
properly upon the Word of Christ; and they which disagree in other matters, and
with a common consent teach the maine and principal Doctrine of Faith, must
therein be credited, because of the prime Author himself Bellarm. d. Council.
li. 2. c. 19. Non nititur salus Ecclesiae praecipue humana industria sed (...)
Dei cum eius Rex sit Deus, etc.
. Non germinat granum Veritatis, sine palea Vanitatis, The good Seed of
Verity, springs not without some Chafe of Vanity Gerson. d. Pace. consid.
3. Dried. d. Eccles. Dog. lib. 4. cap. 2. pa. 224. Ecclesia sub hac
peregrinatione constituta, etc. nondum sine paleis and Zizanijs, etc. etiam in
membris viuis.
. S. Cyprian, S. Augustine, S. Hierome, etc. disagree in some things, and
Tertullian and Origin have many errors, and therein are reproved by others;
and yet the rest of their Doctrine (wherein they teach truly) receives no
prejudice from their contrary errors. The Jesuits and Dominicans, and other
Cornel. Mus. com. Romans 6. page 279. Vigebat Spinosa and molesta nescio quae
Theologia de (...), de Relationibus, de Quidditatibus, etc. Tota pene aetas in
hominum decretis quae inter se pugnantia (...), nullo tempore (...), alunt
perpetuum per secula litem, conterebatur, etc. Is sublimis Theologus habebatur,
qui maiora portenta pro suis Traditiunculis fingere sciat, etc. Hinc Sexcentae
Sectae, Thomistae, Scotistae, Occhamistae, Albertistae, Egidiani, Alexandrei,
etc. O scelus, posthabebantur Euangelia, Epistolae, Christiana sapientia
delitescebat, a paucissimis tradebatur, sed frigide, non dicam infincere, etc.
, desire to be esteemed credible Witnesses, and yet there is no small
contention betwixt them, concerning sundry Questions. Although therefore some
dissension be found among Teachers, yet their whole Doctrine is not thereby
made incredible, neither is there perpetually in the true Church a visible and
perspicuous concord in all things.

In the words ensuing, the Adversary questioneth Doctor Field, because he
affirms, That Protestants Dissentions are not real, but apparent and
verbal. Against this he affirms, Greg. Naz. Orat. 13. Contentio inter nos
fuit, male id quidem non (...) inficiabor (nec (...) Diabolo aditum (...) aut
ansam nec improbis linguis libertatem dari oportuit) non (...) tanta quanta ijs
(...), qui (...) nostras per calumniam insectantur.
That so long as Contentioners rest unsatisfied, and admit no Reconciliation,
saying, That Reconcilers have missed of their meaning; it is vain by
distinctions to color their Discord, etc.

(...). First, To (...) Discord by distinctions, is no means

Secondly, Although A (...) are many times froward, and will not for the
present admit the charitable constructions of moderate persons Greg. Naz. Orat.
14. (...). Quicunque (...) paci student, mediosque se profitentur, ab (...)
male mulctantur, vtpote qui vel contemptui sint, vel etiam bello (...).
, (...) to reconcile them, Exodus 2. 14. Act. 7.27. yet at the last, Unity may
be effected by this means, and peaceable and moderate Christians ought in the

IESVIT.
Fifthly, I infer, That this Church is universal, spread over all Nations,
that she may be said to be every where morally speaking, that the whole known
World may take notice of her, as of a worthy and credible witness of
Christian

ANSWER.
The Church is universal: First, Because of time: for it continues
successively in all Ages, Matthew. 28.20. Luc. 1.33.

Secondly, In regard of Persons and Places, because no Country, Nation, State,
Age, or Sex of People, are excluded Galat. 3.20. Act. 10.34. Apoc. 5.9.

Thirdly, In respect of Faith, because Divine Verity, constitutiue, and which
gives being to the true Church, continues throughout all Ages, 1. Pet. 1.25.
Revel. 14.6. and is found in all the parts of the true Church.

But notwithstanding this, the true Church is not perpetually universal, in
regard of actual amplitude, and diffusion of visible Congregations, throughout
all Nations, and inhabited. Countries of the World Card. (...). Compend. cap.
37. (...) nostra, (...) a sul exordio, fuerit semper Cath and (...),
vniuersitate puritatis, sanctitatis, and veritatis, non tamen vniuersitate
dilatationis, etc.
; for it may in some Ages, in actu exercito, and in regard of actual
residence, remain only in a few Bellarmine Bellarm. d. Eccles. li. 4. c. 7.
Quod (...) sola vna Prouincia retineret veram (...) adhuc vere and proprie
Ecclesia diceretur Catholica, dummodo clare ostenderetur, (...) esse vnam and
candem cum illa quae fuit aliquo tempore vel diuersis, in toto mundo.
grants, That if one sole Province of the World should retain true Faith,
yet the Church might then be truly and properly called universal, if it could
manifestly be showed that the same were one with that Church which was once
universally spread over the world. And although Deiure, by right and according
to the divine Precept, the true Church should at all times remain and continue
in those regions where it was once planted; yet it happens by the malice and
iniquity of man, that those places which once were a Sanctuary of holiness,
are afterward changed into the habitation of Satan, Dried. d. Eccl. dog. li.
4. p. 2. c. 2. Per Haereticos Arium,
and into a cage of unclean Birds.

The Jesuit perceiving that it is impossible to defend a perpetual actual
universality of the Church, presents unto us an imaginary universality:
his words are, She may be said to be every where morally speaking, etc.

I answer: Morally speaking, the Church cannot be said to be, where it is
altogether unknown, and where no means are used, or actions performed, which
are sufficient to make it known. A king may morally be said to be in every
part of (...). Mirand. Apol. q. 1. Rex existens in Palatio, dicitur esse in
alio loco prouinciae, vbi authoritate potestatis suae, and imperio suo aliquid
(...) operatur.
, because his laws, ministers, and government are extended throughout all his
kingdom, and king Richard the first, when he was in Syria Roger. Houeden.
Annal. pars poster. in Richard. 1.
, might be said to be morally in England. But the true Church, in many ages,
has no commerce with Infidels in things spiritual, mediate or immediate: the
Faith, Preaching, and authority thereof, is altogether unknown to many
people, to wit, to the inhabitants of America for 1400. years: to many other
nations of Africa and Europe, for 600. years, etc. And many people, which
hear the fame of Christians in general, as they do of the Jews, have

IESVIT.
A truth so clear, that it may be evidently proved out of Scripture, that
even in Antichrists days the Church Apoc. 18. v. 8.
shall be visibly universal: for she shall then be every where persecuted;
which could not be, except she were every where visible, and conspicuous
even to the wicked.

ANSWER.
Your former Proposition, concerning the perpetual local universality of the
Church, is as clear, as the Sunshine at midnight; and the Arguments whereby
you labor to prove it, are of no force.

First, if it were granted that the true Church, in the reign of Antichrist,
should be visibly universal; yet it is inconsequent: Ergo, The true Chnrch is
perpetually and in all ages Card. (...). Theolog. institut. compend. c. 37.
Ecclesia tamen nostra licet a sui exordio semper fuerit Catholica and
vniuersalis, vniuersitate puritatis, sanctitatis, and veritatis: non tamen
(...) dilatationis.
.

Secondly, the words of Saint John, Apoc. 20. 8. are: And when the thousand
years shall be consummate, Satan shall be loosed out of his prison, and shall
go forth and seduce the nations which are upon the four corners of the
earth, Gog and Magog, and shall gather them into battle, the number of whom is
as the sand of the Sea.

In this Prophecy, nothing is delivered which does expressly or by consequence
argue the visible universality of the true Church in all ages. 1. The nations
which are upon the four corners of the earth seduced by Satan, may be Infidels
Riber. in Apoc. c. 20. p. 399. Seducet (...) ex vniuersis orbis partib' multos,
and in ijs Gog and Magog, etc.
, at least a great part of them, as well as Christians: and although Satan
possessed and deceived them before, yet now when he is loosed, he does in a new
manner, and by a greater efficacy of error deceive Dionis. Carthus. in Apoc.
20. ar. 21.
. 2. The true Church may be persecuted universally by multitudes of enemies
dispersed every where, and yet remain it self, in one or in few places; and
it may also be persecuted, when it professes and exercises religion in
secret, Apoc. 12.14, 15. 3. Many learned Papists affirm, that in the days of
Antichrist, true believers shall cease to be in many places, and the number of
orthodoxall people shall be small, and the same shall profess their faith in
secret, August. Triumph, Aug. (...). Illo (...), Glossa dicit, particulares
Ecclesiae vndique per orbem diffusae subtrahent se ab obedientia Romani
Pontificis, ita (...) pauci ei obediant and Papa tunc temporis circa parts
Italiae se recludet cum paucis, alijs ab obedientia eius substractis.
sum. d. Eccles. pot. q. 21. ar. 4. At that time particular Churches diffused
far and near over the world, shall withdraw themselwes from the obedience of
the Roman Pope, and few shall obey him, and the Pope himself at that time,
shall with a few keep himself (...) the (...) of (...), others being (...)
from his (...). Occham Occham. dial. p. 1. l. 5. c. 30.
, (...) (...). sum. d. (...). c. 30.
, (...) Caiet. Luc. 18. v. 8.
(...) (...). d. Antichristo li. 8. c. 8. 9.12.
, and Barradias Barrad. Harm. Euang. tb. 3. lib. 4. cap. 12. Hieron. sup.-Soph.
c. 2. De Ecclesia videtur prima front esse blasphemum, quod ea futura fit
inuia, and deserta
. Now this former affertion, which is the common Tener of Papists, agrees not
with the speech of our Adversary, when he says, That in the days of
Antichrist, the Church shall be every where visible and conspicuous, even to
the wicked: and he must revoke his bold (...) in his first words; A truth so
clear that it may evidently be proved, etc.

IESVIT.
The reason of this perpetual visible universality is, because the Tradition
of the Church, is as I have proved, 1. Timothy 2. 4. But if the Church were
not still so diffused in the world, that all known nations may take notice of
her, all men could not be saved.

ANSWER.
Although the teaching and Tradition of the Church, is the first Introduction,
to lead people unto the knowledge of the grounds of salvation, and the
ordinary means whereby they receive the holy Scriptures, and rule of Faith
contained in the same (which is all you have or can prove Cassand. def. Iib.
d. Offic. Pij. Viri. page 821. A quibus hanc Traditionem accepimus, testes sunt
(...), caelestis Doctrinae.
) yet hence it follows not, that the true Church is visibly universal

First, you are reproved by the example of the Indians, and people inhabiting
the New found World who are Gods creatures (...). ^ recte dici (...) iftos ad
promissionem Dei (...) pertinere. Non enim Romanos sed omnes genres Dominus,
semini (...), media (...) iuratione (...).
Math. 28.19. Marc. 16.15. Call. 2.28. Call. 3.11, and the Apostles speech, 1.
(...). (...). 4. God will (...) all men to be (...) etc, (...) them as well as
others. And yet notwithstanding, the true Church whose Tradition (according to
your position) is the sole ordinary means to ground Faith on, was not for
many ages either Actually or Moraily visible, universal, or any ways made
known to them.

It seems by the conclusion of your Argument, wherein you insert these words,
That all known nations, etc. that you observed this, but you are no way able
to clear the difficulty: for if because S. Paul says, God will have all men
to be saved, and come to the knowledge of the Truth, the true Church must in
all age be visibly universal, then the same must be so in regard of the
nations inhabiting the New found world, because S. Paul's words, God will have
all men to be saved, and come to the knowledge of the Truth, are universal
(according to your exposition) and must be understood without limitation, or
respect of persons.

Secondly, when S. Paul says, God will have all men to be saved, etc. He (...)
according to the antecedent will of God (as learned Papists commonly maintain.)
But Aquinas p. 1. q. 19. ar. 6. ad. 1. and 1. sent. d. 47. ar. 2. and d. verit.
q. 23. ar. 3. Richard. 1.47. ar. 1. q. 1. Scot. 1. d. 46. q. vnic. Occham,
Gabriel. lb. q. 1. Bonauent. Durand. Herueus, Capreolus.
this antecedent Will (according to some learned Papists) is no formal Will in
God, but is only improperly and metaphorically so called Soto. Mayor. com. 1.
Tim. 2.4. pa. 274. De voluntate antecedenti, id est imaginaria and secu^dum
quid, improprie vel metaphorice dicta. Bannes 1. q. 19. art. 6. Zumel. 1. q.
19. art. 6.
and according to others, which say it is a formal Will, the same produces
not universally either grace of outward calling to Salvation, or inward grace
in them that are externally called, and therefore it is inconsequent to argue,
from this manner of Aquinas, and others say, that the antecedent will of God is
only a velleitie (...) 1. q. (...). ar. 6. ad. 1. Magis dici ^. (...). lb. pa.
595. Voluntas
or wishing that the thing might be, a complacencie in a thing considered
abstractiuely and without other circumstances (...). in. 1. p. Tho. q. 19.
(...). 6. Disp. 56. nu. 18. Pius d. Ponte Ibid. dub. 3. Cordub. lib. 1. q. 56.
Aluar. d. Auxil. disp. 34. nu. 3. Meclin. in. 1. p. Tho. q. 19. art. 6. sect. 2.
, and that upon it alone the Salvation of no man follows. 2. The same is
general in respect of all Chrysostom. sup. Romans Sermon. 2. Quemadmodum enim in Sole
and Luna, (...), vbi neque (...) neque (...) amplius aliquid contributum est,
sed aequa omnibus concessa fruitio: ita and in Euangelica doctrina, imo in hac
tanto before quanto illa reliquis omnibus necessaria magis (...).
and every singular and individual person, and God by his antecedent will
wishes the Salvation of ^ Prosper. d. lib. arb. ad Ruffin. Neque enim remotum
est ab inspectione communi quot seculis, quam innumera (...) lia ^ vera
cognitione defecerint. Aug. epist. 80. Sunt apud nos hoc est in Africa Barbarae
(...) gentes, in quibus nondum est praedicatum (...). Id. (...). 78. Quantae
(...) adhuc (...) sine (...) Euangelio, etc. Quod remansit gentium, vbi nondum
est Euangelium praedicatum. Origin. in Math. (...). 28. (...) non (...), sed
etiam nostrarum gentium, (...) nunc non (...) Christianitatis verbunt. Nondum
est praedicatum Euangelium regni in (...) orb. Quid autem dicamus de
Britannis, (...) Germanis, qui (...) circa (...) apud Barbaros, Dacos, and
(...), and Scythas, quorum (...) audierunt (...) gelij verbum, etc.
and some countries (...) the preaching of the Gospel sooner, and others
latter, some have been (...) in one age, and some in another. 4. Gods
antecedent Will is always the same: and (...) to it he (...) the Salvation of
all men in the time of the Old Testament, Ezekiel. 33.11.

Now from the former positions, it follows, that S. Paul's words, 1. Tim. 2.4.
God will have all men to be saved, etc. do not (...) that the true Church is
visibly universal in all

For if the antecedent will of God (of which S. Paul speaks, 1. Tim. 2.4.) be
only a velleitie and complacencie about man's Salvation abstractiuely
considered (...). d. (...) disp. 34. nu. 3. Si consideretur falus reproborum
secundum se and absolute sic est a Deo (...). Si autem (...) quod (...)
priuationem, ^ splendoris (...) eius in electis sic non est volita a Deo.
and if it respect singular and individual persons as well as whole nations,
and notwithstanding the same, many singular persons and whole nations have
been destitute (and that for a long space of time) of all means of conversion
and outward calling to Christianity: and if the same Will, for some large
tract of time, produces Lichet 2. sent. d. 47. q. vnic. Velle (...) quo ita
placet volitum, quod tamen voluntas tale volitum non ponat in esse licet posset
ponere illud in esse.
, then it follows that the true Church, which is the only ordinary teacher
of saving verity, is not visibly universal in all places of the world in
every age.

The minor is proved from the four propositions formerly delivered.

The sequel is evident by the exposition which our Adversaries deliver of S.
Paul's text, understanding the same of the antecedent will of God, and from the
position of the (...) delivered in this section, which is, That the Tradition
and Preaching of the true visible Church, is the sole ordinary means to lead
people to the knowledge of saving Truth. For if the antecedent will

A contingent cause undetermined, does not produce or argue a constant,
certain, and necessary effect.

The antecedent will of God is a contingent cause (...). quest. 1. Schol. d.
diu. vol. ar. 7. nu. 5. Co^tingentia dicitur de omni (...) quod potest esse and
non esse, etc. Neque opus est vt in hac latitudine denotet imperfectionem
aliquam seu mutabilitatem, sed causam ita potentem operari vt in eius voluntate
sit operari, aut non operari, Scotus. did. 39. q. Vnic. Voluntas diuina nihil
aliud respicit necessario pro obiecto, ab essentia sua: ad quodlibet igitur
aliud contingenter se habet.
in respect of the perpetual visible universality of the Church. Ergo

The antecedent will of God does not produce or argue a perpetual visible
universality of the Church.

For if notwithstanding the antecedent will of God, many singular persons and
whole nations may be for some space of time destitute of outward calling by the
ministry of the Aquinas Aquinas. 22. q. 10. ar. 1. Bannes. lb. Victoria. d.
Indis. Relect. 5. nu. 8.
and his followers) then the antecedent will of God is only a contingent cause,
in respect of producing and arguing outward calling by the ministry of the
Church, and consequently of the perpetual visible universality of the true
Church.

But the first is true, as appears by the Indies Acosta. d. proc. Indorum.
Sal. li. 1. c. 5. p. 133. Multos esse homines suis tenebris relictos, occulto
Dei, veroque (...), negare non possumus, neque homines modo, sed and familias,
and vrbes, and integras saepe prouincias and gentes. Qui and olim fuerunt and
nunc vsque sunt sine Christo, etc.
before Columbus arriving in their coasts, and by many barbarous people Ergo,

The latter is also true.

IESVIT.
Sixthly, this Church is holy both in life and doctrine: holy Martyredomes,
Zeal and Patience in the rigorous treaty

ANSWER.
Sanctity is a property and inseparable quality of the true Church in
respect of all the living members thereof, Cant. 4. 7. Ephesians. 5.26, 27. 1. Cor.
14.33. Romans 1.7. Ephesians. 1.18. and c. 4.12. Phil. 4.21. Coll. 1.12. 1. Cor. 6.11.
1. John 3.18.

And the same is called holy. First, Because it is cleansed and washed from the
guiltiness of sin by the immaculate blood of Christ Turrecr. sum, d. Eccles.
lib. 1. ca. 9. Sanctum idem est quod sanguine tinctum vel (...) sieve emundatu^
etc. Huius significationis genere, maxim Dei Ecclesia sancta appellanda venit,
quae sanguine Christi respersa, purificationem peccatorum accepit, and decorem
induit sanctitatis. Card. Monilian. Theolog. compend. c. 36. Dicitur sancta
quasi sanguine Christi tincta: Christus enim eam lauit a peccatis suis, in
sanguine suo. Ephesians. 5.26.
, Apoc. 1.5. Heb. 10.10. and c. 13.12. Secondly, Because it is pertaker of the
holiness of Christ the head thereof by Grace, 1. Cor. 1.30. Ephesians. 5.30. John
17.19. Heb. 12.10. and because of the special inhabitation and operation of
the holy Ghost August. sup. Psalm. 45.
, Ephesians. 1.13. 1. Cor. 3.17. 1. Thessal. 4.8. 2. Tim. 1. 14. Thirdly, Because
it is called and consecrated unto holiness, 2. Tim. 1.9. 1. Pet. 2.9. 1.
Thessal. 4.7. Apoc. 1.6. Fourthly, Because the Faith, Doctrine, Laws,
Sacraments, and Religion Cordub. Arma. Fid. q. 1. Propos. 2. Bellarm. d.
Ecclesia li. 4. ca. 11. Greg. Val. tom. 3. disp. 1. punct. 7. Bannes 22. q. 1.
ar. 10. fo. 100. August. sup. Psalm. 85. Accepit gratiam sanctitatis, (...)
Baptismi, and (...) peccatorum.
. Iud. v. 20. 2. Pet. 2.20. Tit. 3.5. Fifthly, Because the virtues and actions
thereof are truly and indeed holy, whereas the virtues of Infidels which live
out of the Church are profane and unholy, as bearing the image of virtue, but
wanting the true form and fruit thereof Aug. d. Ciuit. Dei, lib. 5. cap. 10.
and li. 19. c. 25. and Enchir. c. 75. and sup. Ioh. tr. 76. and d. fid. and
operib. c. 7. and d. verb. Dom. Sermon. 12. and d. Temp. s. 32. Prosp. sent. 106.
and d. Vit. Contempl. li. 3. c. 1. and d. voc. Gent. li. 1. c. 3. and d. lib.
Arb. ad Ruffin. etc. Collator. pa. 149. Gregor. Armin. 2. d. 26. q. 1. Capreol.
2. d. 28. ad. 3. and d. 41. pa. 569. Cassalius, d.
.

But our Adversary passes by these causes and reasons of the sanctity of the
Church, being proper and essential (which are delivered in the holy Scripture)
and will have the same to be reputed holy, because of monastical vows of
Poverty, Obedience, and Chastity, and for external Fastings, Whippings,
wearing of Haire-cloth, and other bodily exercises which some Heremites and
Cloysterers perform in the Roman Church.

Touching this Assertion we are to observe.

First that the Jesuit does only affirm these things, but brings no proof,
and therefore it were sufficient for me to say with S. Hierom (...). (...).
sup. Mat. c. 23.
Quod de Scripturis non habet authoritatem eadem facilitate contemnitur qua
probatur, That which wants authority from the Scriptures, may as well be
despised, as

Secondly, when the principal Doctors of the Romish Church, deliver the causes
why the true Church is styled Holy, they either omit these external exercises,
or else only mention them as accessarie, Turrccrem. sum. d. Eccles. l. 1. c.
9. Cordub. Arma. fid. q. 1. propos. 2. Bannes. 22. q. 1. ar. 10. Bellarm. d.
Eccles. l. 4. c. 11. Greg. Val. to. 3. Disp. 1. punct. 7.

Thirdly, these exercises are common to hypocrites and heretics, and they
make not people holy and good which use Epiph. c. Haer. c. 16. Quida^ dece,
etc. sibi annoru^ spaciu^ praefigebant quibus (...) aut castitatem colorent:
hoc tempus continuis precibus traducebant, and id certaminis frequenti
restaurabant, etc. Alij super tabulas dodrantales, etc. Alij super pauimentum,
and alij collectos calculos substernebant, etc. Alij spinas, etc.
, and of many Heretics Montanistae. Euchitae. Apostolici.
, which used these exercises with great austeritie, and yet they were no sound
parts of the holy Catholic Church. And that the Church may be holy without
these exercises, is manifest, by reason and example. The Church which wants
these things, may have all the causes of sanctity, to wit, Faith, Hope,
Charity, Regeneration, remission of sins, etc. Therefore it may be holy
without them. And the Church of the Paul wrote his Epistle, was an holy Church,
yet Saint Chrysostom Chrysostom. (...). 25. in moral. sup. Ep. Heb.
says: (...), etc. There was not so much as any footstep of a Monk, etc.

Fourthly, these monastical vows have many times distained and corrupted the
Church: and therefore they are no main or proper actions of holiness. Aluares
Pelagius Planct. Eccles. li. 2. Ar. 54. fol. 176. col. 3.
says of the Monks and Cloysterers of his age: that they were Paupertatis
professores, sed haereditatum successores: Professors of poverty, and heirs
apparent to every man's land. Matthew Paris In Henrico 3. fol. 592.
says, That the Mendicants in England raised stately buildings, equal to
Princes palaces, and they hoorded up inualuable treasure, etc. And Papirius
Masson d. Episc. vrbis. l. 6. in Clement. 5.
says, Poverty which religious Orders seem to profess, is more hateful to
them than to any other sort of men.

The vow of Chastity made the most of them more impure than dogs, and to
stink before God and men. That many of them were Sodomites, is affirmed by no
meaner man than Saint Bernard Bernard. d. conuers. ad Cleric. c. 29. Post
fornicationes, post adulteria, post incestus, nec ipsa quidem apud aliquos
ignominiae passiones and (...) opera desunt, etc. Nunquid non (...) civitates
illae huius spur citiae matres, diuino prae damnatae iuditio and incendio de
letae (...), etc. Multi nec latere queunt prae multitudine nec prae impudentia
quaerunt.
, who says, Besides fornication, adultery, and incest, the deeds of
ignominy and turpitude, for which the cities of Sodom and Gomorrha were
predamned, are not wanting, etc. Rodericus, a famous Bishop, says Rodericus,
specul. hum. vitae, lib. 2. c. 19. Nec vna vni sufficit muliercula, nisi
retentam habeat domi vt vxorem, Concubinas vero and Adolescentulas quarum non
est numerus, page 305.
, That Votaries says Alphons. (...). d. Haer-punit. lib. 3. c. 5. Tam frequens
(...) est Sacerdotum incontinentia vt si quis illorum castus esse sciatur,
quamuis multa alia illi desint necessaria, ob hoc solum, sanctus a populo
habeatur.
, The incontinencie of Priests is in these days so frequent, that if but one
of them be known to live chastely, although many other necessary (...) lities
be wanting in him, he is esteemed a holy man by the people for this one
quality. Aluares Pelagius says Aluar. Pelag. d. planct. Eccles. lib. 2. art.
51. Sed hodie Cellulae nostrorum Anachoritaru^ Hypochriticarum, a mulierculis
visitantur: quod eis saepe, etc.
, That the Cells of Anchorites were daily visited by women. And in another
place Artic. 27. Per plurimos annos de latere Concubinae qualibet die surgunt.
, Priests for many years together do arise every day from their Concubines
sides, and without going to Confession, say Mass. And in Artic. 7. Apoc. 18.
Custodia omnis immundi spiritus: quia intra Ecclesiam omnia peccata inueniuntur
hodie quae immunda dicuntur, etc. Quis enim Clericorum intra sanctam Ecclesiam
Castitatem seruat per pauci sunt hodie Presbyteri, maxim in Hispania and regno
Apuliae, qui cum sint publici Concubinarij, etc. Nihilominus tota die
celebrant, and dant Ecclesiastica Sacramenta.
, Quis Clericorum intra sanctam Ecclesiam, Castitatem seruat? What Clerk is
there within the holy Church, which observes Chastity? And again, There be
few Priests in these days, in Spain and Apulia, which do not openly foster
Concubines. Dionysius Carthusian says Dionys. Carthus. c. Plural. Ben. art.
13. Pet. Blesen. Sermon. in Synodo. Quidam focarias habent, quidam alienis
abutuntur vxoribus, sicut trahit sua quemque voluptas. Idem. Sermon. ad Sacerd.
Videmus hodie Sacerdotes cum filijs Eli fuscinulas tenentes and cum mulieribus
in atrio Tabernaculi, excubantes: and facti sunt equi Emissarij. Vnusquisque ad
vxorem proximi hinniebat. Videmus hodie Sacerdotes sedentes cum Baltazar in
Conniuijs cum Vxoribus and Concubinis abutentes vasis Domino consecratis.
, Paucissimi eorum proh dolor, continenter viuunt; Few of them (out alas) live
continently. And S. Bridget the Nun in her Revelation says Revel. Bridge. l.
6. c. 35. Paucissimi inueniuntur alij and tam pauci vt vix vnus reperitur in
centum.
, Not one among a hundred. And the same Bridget speaking of Nuns, says Lib.
4. c. 33. Portae indifferenter Clericis and Laicis quibus placet sororibus
introitum dare etiam in ipsis noctibus sunt apertae. Et ideo talia loca
fimiliora sunt Lupanaribus quam sanctis Claustris. Gerson. to. 1. declar. def.
Ecclesiae, page 208. Nichol. Clemang. d. corrup. stat. Eccles. Quid obsecro
aliud sunt hoc tempore puellarum (...), nisi quaedam non dico Dei Sanctuaria,
sed veneris execranda prostibula, sed lasciuorum (...) ad libidines explendas
receptacula, vt idem sit hodie puellam velare quod and public ad scortandum
impellere. Onus, Eccles. c. 22.. 12. Adeo propatula, vt ipsa loca veneris
prostibulo sint similiora quam Dei sacrario: hinc procacitas, stuprum, incestus
(...) sacratarum.
, Talia loca similiora sunt Lupanaribus, quam sanctis Cellis; Such places are
more like Brothelhouses and common Stews, than holy Cells.

The Vow of Poverty brought forth perpetual Theft and Rapine, and that from
the Widow and fatherless. The Vow of Chastity filled all the Earth with the
steame of Brothelsome impuritie: and the Vow of blind Obedience, caused
hateful and direful Murders, even of Kings, and Gods anointed; Touch not
mine anointed: and the sacred History reports to all posterity, That David's
heart smote him, because he cut off a piece of the Kings Garment.

These voluntary Exercises and Devotions carry a great Antonin. sum. Histor.
p. 3. tit. 23. c. 9.. 5 (...). (...) Quidam dixit Vincentio, quid fuit quod
postquam fratres praedicatores, and minores venerunt in mundum nunquam fuit
bonum tempus, etc. (...), Eccles. c. 8.. 4. Abbas Ioach. Vbertinus, d. Casalis.
Bridget. Revel. Extrauag. c. 83.
.

IESVIT.
This sanctity shines not in all the Children of the Church, but in the more
eminent Preachers, and Professors: which kind of sanctity, together with
Miracles, if the Church did want, she could not be a sufficient Witness of
Truth unto Infidels, who commonly never begin to affect

ANSWER.
Sanctity of Grace (which is a perpetual property of the true Church)
shines in all the sound and living members of the Church, Phil. 2. 15. And
whereas the measure and degrees thereof are (...), the most eminent degree of
sanctity is not Esaias, cap. 1.9. and of the Pharisees, at such time as our
Savior was incarnate. Dominicus Bannes, a famous Schoole-man, treating of the
sanctity of the Church, says Bannes. 22. q. 1. ar. 10. p. 101. Summus
Pontifex ratione status and obligationis dicitursanctissimus licet actu non sit
talis. Symmechus, Papa, d. 40. cap. 1. Non nos. (...). Can. Miss. Lect. 49. etc.
, That the supreme Bishop, the Pope, is said to be most holy, because of his
State and Office, although indeed he is not so. Rodericus speaking of the
Clergy of his times, says (...). Episc. Zamor. Speculum, vit. Lib. 2. cap.
20. page 316.
, Rectores moderni, non Pastores, sed raptores, ouium tonsores, non ad viridia
pascua ductores, non piscatores, sed negotiatores, non dispensatores bonorum
crucifixi, sed voratores, etc. Our modern Churchmen Laurent. Iustinianus
says Laur. Just. d. compunct and planct. Christi, page 575. Clericorum (...)
maxima pars, (...) iacet voluptatibus, and bestiarum more, quasi degentium
parum ab illa secularium illorum conuersatio distat. Incedunt quotidie per
plateas, etc. Theatris and spectaculis intersunt and (...) vacant and nugis,
etc. tanquam extranei vineam Domini derelinquunt, inemendabiles permanent,
(...) gerunt cor, obturatas habent aures, sine intellectu sunt syllabarum,
tantum proferentes (...), ab omni spirituali deficiunt gustu.
, The greatest part of Priests and Clerks in our days live voluptuously, and
after the manner of Beasts. Paucissimi reperiuntur qui honest viuunt, rariores
autem, qui pabulum salutis gregibus valiant praebere fidelium; Very few are
found, which lead an honest life; and a far smaller number of such, as are
able to minister the food of salvation to their flocks.

In the next words our Jesuit affirms, That if the Church wanted the
sanctity aforesaid, together with Miracles, she could not be a sufficient
witness of Truth to Infidels, etc.

This Assertion, concerning the perpetuity, and absolute necessity August.
sup. (...). 130. Nec ideo modo non datur spiritus sanctus, quia linguis non
loquuntur qui credunt. Ideo enim (...) oportebat vt linguis loquerentur, vt
significarent omnes gentes credituras, vbi impletum est quod significabatur,
miraculum ablatum est.
, and to many learned Papists, and it is voluntarily affirmed by our Adversary.

First, If the gift and power of Miracles were perpetual, and inseparable from
the true (...) in all Ages, this would appear by some revelation, or promise
of holy Scripture, as well as other gifts and privileges of the same. But
there is no August. c. Donlib. 3. c. 16. Neque (...) and (...) attestantibus,
per manus (...) modo datur Spiritus Sanctus, etc. Xauer. lib. 3. ep. 5. Si nos
linguam calleremus Iaponicam, non (...) quin (...) fierent Christiani, faxit
Deus vt breui eam addiscamus, tum demum aliquam Christianae Rei (...) operam,
nam (...) quidem inter eos tanquam mutae (...) versamur. Greg. Moral. lib. 34.
c. 3. Stunic. d. Relig. lib. 1. c. 14. Modo a nobis signa atque Prodigia non
sunt postulanda, etc. (...). Summa. praedic. Ver. Fides, Delrio. Disq. Mag. to.
2. lib. 4. c. 4. quaest. 5. sect. 2. pa. 683.
, etc. And these gifts were never promised in the Scripture to be perpetual,
and are long since ceased. August. Retrac. Lib. 1. cap. 13.

Secondly, The Fathers which lived since the four hundredth year, affirm,
That outward Miracles, such as the Apostles wrought, were (...) Chrysostom. in 1. Corinthians. Hom. 6. Moral. Quanto certiores and magis necessariae res sunt, tanto
fides est minor, and hoc est (...) signa in praesentia non fiant. Idem, sup.
Ioh. Hom. 23. Sunt sane and hac nostra aetate qui quaerant, quare and nunc
figna non fiunt? Si fidelis es vt (...), si Christum diligis vt diligendus est,
non indiges signis, signa enim in credulis dantur.
in their days, and not absolutely necessary for after times: Gregor. Moral.
27. cap. 11. and Lib. 34. cap. 2. and super Euang. Hom. 29. August. d. vera
Relig. cap. 25. and d. Ciuit. Dei, Lib. 22. cap. 8. and sup. Psalm. 130.
Chrysostom. in Matthew. Hom. 4. and Imperfect. in Matthew. Hom. 49. and sup. 1.
Timoth. Hom. 10.

Thirdly, Many learned Papists hold, That the gift of Miracles is rare, and
unnecessary, in these later times: Abulensis, Leuit. cap. 9. q. 14 Abul.
Leuit. 9. q. 14. In (...) Ecclesia (...) ista necessaria, ad introducendam fide
Euangelij, nunc autem quia sufficienter introducta est, non oportet miracula
vlla esse.
, Trithemias Abbas, Lib. 8. Q. ad Imperat. Max. q. 3. Roffensis, c. Luther. a.
Captiu. Babylon. c. 10. n. 4. page 81. Acosta, d. Procur. Indorum Salut. Lib.
2. cap. 8. page 218 Acosta. Non solum Signorum vis
. Stella in Luc. cap. 11. Cornel. Muss. Conc. Dominic. Pentecost. page 412. And
some of them censure the reporters of Miracles, as Impostors, and gross
Fabulers and Liars. Gerson. Lib. c. Sect. Flagellantium. Canus, Loc. Lib. 11.
cap. 6 (...). Nec ego hic libri illius authorem excuso qui speculum exemplorum
scribitur, nec historiae eius quae Legenda aurea nuncupatur. In illo enim
miraculorum monstra saepius quam vera miracula legas. Hanc scripsit homo ferrei
oris and plumbei pectoris.
. Ludouicus Viues, Erasmus, Occham, Espenceus Espenc. in 2. Timoth. 4. Digr.
21. pa. 150. etc.
.

Fourthly, If Infidels cannot be assured, that the Wonders which they outwardly
behold, are the works of the true God Acost. d. Proc. Indor. Sal. li. 2. c. 9.
Et si in praesentia signa viderentur, quis tamen persuaderet? quis externorum
aures nobis accomodaret, cum tantopere increbrescat malitia?
, and if the same may be the illusions of the Devil (...). sup. Exodus cap. 7.
(...) p. 11. Hinc aperte cognoscitur, multa videri miracula, quae non sunt, and
proprium esse Diaboli, etc. simulare Prophetiam, and miracula.
; then the operations of such Miracles can be no infallible argument of
Verity, and consequently, no means of converting Infidels. But Bellarmine
affirms Bellarm. d. Eccles. lib. 4. cap. 14. Ante probationem Ecclesiae non
est euidens aut certum, (...) fidei de vilo (...), quod sit verum miraculum.
Non constat (...) certitudine cui non possit subesse falsum non esse illusionem
(...). Acosta, d. Proc. Indor. Sal. lib. 2. cap. 9. Denique quid magnorum
signorum consirmatione opus est, vbi potius (...) acutior (...), quae
altitudinem doctrinae nostrae aliqua (...)? Greg. val. sup. Thom. tom. 3. Disp.
1. q. 1. punct. 4. page 99. Ipsa miracula per se, non efficient certitudinem
infallibilem de doctrina, etc. Biel. in Can. (...). Lect. 49. X. Miracula (...)
, That before the approbation

IESVIT.
Holy for doctrine, in regard her Traditions be divine and holy, without any
mixture of error.

ANSWER.
The Church which builds it self upon the foundation of the Prophets and
Apostles, Ephesians. 2.20. And which hears the voice of Christ, John 10.27. is
holy, both for life and doctrine. John 1.8. Even so sanctity of doctrine
excludes not all error. St. Augustine, a man as holy as any since the
Apostles, says, August. d. Animi. orig. c. 1. Neque enim negare debeo sicut in
ipsis moribus, ita multa esse in tam multis opusculis meis, quae possunt iusto
iuditio and nulla temeritate culpari.
I must not deny, but that as in my manners; even so in my works and writings,
many things may justly, and without any temeritie be reprehended.

IESVIT.
For if the Church could deliver, by consent of Ancestors: together with truth,
some errors; her Traditions, even about truth, were questionable, and could
not be believed upon the warrant of her Tradition.

ANSWER.
If Ancestors may err and be deceived, then the later Church may upon their
reports deliver some errors, together with Hieron. sup. Aggeum c. 1. Nec (...)
nec maiorum error sequendus est, sed authoritas scripturarum, and Dei docentis
Imperium.
. The Church may speak of it self, and upon report of them whose Testimony
is humane and fallible: And it speaks also upon the authority of Gods word.
In the first, it may err and be Maioranus. d. vero Dei cultu. l. 2. c. 28.
Quid igitut agere debem' cum quispiam ex patribus nostris sieve vnus sieve plures
aliquid asserrere comperimus quod Catholicae fidei non sit consentaneum? (...)
illud contemnendum est: vtique, etc. At quid de patribus illis, number and ipsi
quoque repudiandi sunt? Nequaquam, sed in caeteris omnibus amplectendi sunt and
audiend. Etenim quamuis errarunt, errare tamen (...). (...) in omnibus, neque
semper errauerunt. Greg. Moral. l. 2. c. 41. Abulens. 2. Reg. c. 7. q. 6.
deceived, and consequently the Testimony thereof absolutely binds not
people to believe. But when it confirms her doctrine and Tradition by divine
Testimony, the Tradition thereof, is the Tradition and voice of God himself,
worthy of all acceptance. Neither is her Testimony fallible and doubtful in
this latter kind, because of error in the first, any Nathan was fallible,
when he spoke by inspiration to David, 2. Sam. 7.5. Although when he formerly
Balaam is a credible witness in all those verities which God put into his
mouth, Numb. 23.5, 18. and 24. 1. And yet in other matters which proceeded from
himself, he was fallible. And Josephus a Jew is credited in the Testimony
which he gave of Christ, Antiq. lib. 18. c. 4 (...), etc.
. although in many other reports he was deceived. The ancient Fathers, Justin
Martyr, Ireneus, Origin, St. Cyprian, erred in some things Francisc. Picus.
Theorem. 23. Multi erroribus de mill annis, and de iteratione Baptismi, etc.
Maculati, beatitudine sunt donati, and ab Ecclesia celebrati: vti Papias,
Cyprianus, Victorinus, Ireneus, etc.
, and yet their authority in other matters, which they delivered consonantly
to holy Scripture, is credible. Our Adversaries confess, that their Canus loc.
l. 6. c. 8. Stapl. princip. Doct. l. 8. c. 15. and Relect. c. 4. q. 2. p. 467.
and 469. (...). Tena. Isagog. script. difficul. 1. sect. 4. (...).
, from which they deduce conclusions of Faith, and yet they will have their
definitive sentences to be of infallible authority. Cardinal Iacobatius
(...). d. Council. l. 5. ar. 10. p. 293. Etsi possit errare, non sequitur (...)
propteria possit recusari, vt suspectum: vt in simili (...) in matrimonio. in
ca. Tenor, and ca. Lator. and ca. consanguinei. d. re iudic. cum simil.
, speaking in the Popes defense, says; That it follows not, because one has
erred, that therefore his testimony is altogether inualid, and to be refused:
And he confirms this assertion by diverse Texts of the Canon Law.

IESVIT.
And whereas some Protestants affirm that the Church cannot err in
fundamental points, but only in things of less moment. The truth is, that in
her perpetual Traditions, D. Feeld 4. Book of the Church, ca. 3. and others.
she cannot err at all. If the Tradition of the Church A proof that the
perpetual Tradition of the true Church cannot be false in any the least point
of faith. See S. Aug. ep. 19. ad Hieronimum.
matters. So likewise, if we grant Tradition perpetual to be false in things
of less importance, we have no solid ground to defend her Traditions, as
assured in other of moment: wherefore as he that should say, That Gods written
word Paul left his cloak at Troas, erreth fundamentally, by reason of the
consequence, which gives occasion to doubt of the truth of every thing in
Scripture: Even so he that

ANSWER.
The true Church in her sounder members, erreth not in points fundamental, nor
yet in matters of less moment, maliciously, or with pertinacie Occham. Dial.
p. 1. l. 5. c. 28. In Ecclesia militante est
: But the same may be ignorant, and also err in secondarie Articles Sed circa
illa quae non sunt necessaria explicit credere non est necesse quod semper in
Ecclesia Catholica sit tale iudicium, quia multa sunt de quibus melius est pie
dubitare, quam vnam partem contradictionis vel (...) temere affirmare.
Nequaquam tamen circa quae cunque talia, Catholici omnes aut pertinaciter
errabunt aut pertinaciter dubitabunt, etc. pa. 497. Idem pa. 1. l. 2. c. 4.
Error qui pertinaciam non habet, non obuiat sanctitati. (...). sum. d. Eccl.
l. 2. c. 112. Quamuis Ecclesia dono and authoritate diuina fulciatur, tamen in
quantum est hominum congregatio aliquid ex defectu humano in actibus suis
prouenit, quod non est diuinum. Lombard. l. 4. did. 18. f. Ita and hic aperte
ostenditur, quod non semper sequitur Deus, Ecclesiae iudicium, quae per (...)
and ignorantiam interdum iudicat. Francisc. Picus. Theorem. 23. Fieri potest,
vt vicarium caput aegrotet, quemad. and natural, and sicut hoc noxios humores,
ita illud praua dogmata, immittat in corpus.
.

The reason of the first is, because the same should then cease

The reason of the second is, because the Church, since the Apostles, is not
guided by immediate inspiration, or by Prophetical revelation, but by an
ordinary assistance of grace, accompanying the use of right means, which
remooueth not possibility of error, but leaves space for humane judgment,
being regenerate only in part, Heb. 5.2. Gal. 5.17. Aug. Enchir. c. 63. to
work by his proper force and power.

Secondly, the Church has no perpetual Traditions, but (...). (...). 74.
(...) Traditio, etc. Si in Euangclio precipitur aut in Apostolorum Epistolis,
aut actibus continetur, etc. obseruetur diuina haec and sancta (...). Idem.
sermon. d. (...). Christiana religio inuenit (...) Scriptura, (...) doctrinarum
regulas emanasse, and hic nasci and (...), quic quid Ecclesiastica (...)
disciplina.
, or which are subseruient to maintain the faith, verity, and authority of
the

Thirdly, whereas the Jesuit says: That even as no untruth can be admitted in
the holy Scripture, in regard of such things as are of the least moment,
without overthrowing the total authority thereof: so likewise no error,
great or small, can be admitted in the doctrine and Tradition of the present
Church, because upon the same will follow the subversion of all her Tradition,
even in matters essential.

I answer: That there is not the same reason of the Scripture and the Church,
for the Scripture is totally and perfectly divine, and must always be so
esteemed; and to admit any Aug. d. Doctr. Christiana lib. 1. ca. 37. Titubabit
aute fides si Scripturaru vaccillat authoritas (...). in Math. hom. 1.
. But the present Church is only the servant of God, and of his word Chrysostom. d.
Lazaro. hom. 4. Etiam fi mortuus reniuiscat, etiam si Angelus de Coelo descedat
maxim omnium credendum est Scripturis, nam Angelorum herus, mortuorum pariter
ac viuentium Dominus ipse eas condi dit.
, John 10.27. and has no credit or authority but from it, and although the
same may err in some things, yet there remains always a higher and more
sovereign Judge Aug. c. Faust. Manich. li. 11. ca. 5. Tanquam in sede quadam
sublimitur constituta est, cui (...) omnis fidelis and pius intellectus.
, to wit, the holy Ghost speaking in and by the Scriptures, to whom Christians,
desirous of truth, may appeal Aug. in Psalm. 22. Optatus Mileuitanus c.
Parmen. li. 5. De Coelo, quaerendus est Iudex, and qui in tumulo quiescit
tacitis tabulis loquitur viuus, voluntas eius velut in testamento sic
inquiratur.
, and by whose sentence the Doctrine and Traditions of the present Church are
to be judged.

Whosoever admits any error or untruth in the holy Scripture, takes away
all authority from that which is the prime foundation of supernatural verity
Aug. d Trinit. lib. 3. ca. 11. Nec relicto solidameto diuini eloquij etc.
. But he that admits error or fallibilitie of judgment in some Traditions
and Doctrines of the Pastors of the present Church, does only Cameracensis 1.
Sent. q. 1. Art. 1. Principia Theologica sunt ipsae sacri Canonis veritates,
quoniam ad ipsas fit vltimata resolutio (...), and ex eis (...) singulae
propositiones, Theologiae deducuntur.
, and the most exact balance and measure of divine Verity (as S. Chrysostom
speaks Chrysostom. 2. Cor. hom. 13. (...). Aug. c. Don. lib. 2. ca. 6. Afferamus
diuinam stateram de Scripturis sanctis. (...) sermon. d. Bapt. Christiana religio
inuenit ex hac Scriptura, omnium Doctrinarum regulas emanasse, and hic nasci,
and huc (...) quicquid Ecclesiastica continet disciplina.
) must be free from all obliquitie of error, and to admit the least error in
the Scripture overthrows the foundation of Faith. But the Ministry and
Tradition of the Church is like an Artificers hand, which may sometimes lean
and go

Fourthly the Jesuit affirms, That Tradition (to wit, of the Church since the
Apostles) is the prime original ground of Faith, more fundamental than the
Scripture. This assertion is Antichristian and impudent Hieron. sup. Aggeum. c.
1. Quae absque authoritate and testimonio scripturarum quasi Traditione
Apostolica sponte reperiut atque confingunt, percutit gladi Dei.
, for can any thing be more fundamental than the foundation Bassolis, praef.
Prolog. sup. Sent. Quartum principale. De primo nota quod fundamenta eius in
montibus sanctis. Fundamentum enim Scripturae sacrae, Christus est, petra
solidissima supra qua^ fundata est veritas Scripturae.
, or of greater authority than the word of God? S. Peter speaking of the
Prophetical Scriptures, equalleth the same to the sensible voice of God, which
was Math. 3.17. and c. 17.5. saying, (...), We have the most sure word of
Prophecy, etc. upon these words S. Augustine d. verb. Apostoli, sermon. 29.
commenteth as follows: Et cum dixisset hanc vocem audiuimus de Coelo delatam,
subiunxit atque ait, habemus certiorem propheticum sermonem, sonuit illa vox de
Coelo, certior est propheticus sermo, when the Apostle had said, We heard this
voice from heaven; he adds further, and says, We have a more sure word of
prophecy. That voice sounded from heaven; and yet the prophetical word is
more sure: he Certiore sane dixit certiorem no^ meliorem non veriorem. Tam enim
verus ille sermo de Coelo, quam sermo Propheticus, tam bonus tam vtilis. Quid
est ergo certiorem, nisi in quo magis confirmetur Auditor.
.

Our Savior himself in the Gospel examineth the Traditions of the Pharisees,
and of the Jewish Church then being, by the Scriptures, Math. 5.6. and 7. and
Chapter 12.5. and c. 15.4. and Acts 26.22. The ancient Fathers affirm, that the
Scriptures are of most eminent authority Aug. d. (...). Dei, li. 11. c. 3. and
lib. 14. ca. 7.
, and that we are above all things to give credit to them Chrysostom. d. Lazaro
Hom. 4.
, and that they are the mouth of God Rupert in Mat. lib. 4. cap. 5. ver. 2.
Quod est illud os Domini, nisi (...) per quas nobis loquitur (...)
, and the very hand of God Chrysostom. Hom. d. Expuls. ipsius. Lego manum cius,
etc. Aug. (...). 144. Quoddam Chyrographum Dei quod omines transeuntes legerent
and viam promissionis (...) tenerent.
, and Paul, and Peter, and John, and the whole company of the Prophets Chrysostom.
in Romans hom. 30.
, and that Faith it self, by which a just man lives, is conceived by them
Aug. d. Ciuit-Dei li. 19. ca. 18.
, and the Church it tanquam a priori) by them Idem ep. 50. and d. unit. Eccles.
c. 3.
. But on the contrary, Traditions receive their authority from the
Scriptures, and may not be admitted unless they agree with the Scriptures: And
in our Adversaries Tenet, men must first believe the authority of the Church
before they can receive or believe Tradition: from all which it follows, that
Tradition of the present Church is neither the prime original ground of Faith,
nor yet more fundamental, concerning Faith, than the Scripture.

The Trident Council held it sufficient to equal Tradition with the
Scriptures. This new master with Baronius Annal. tom. 1. Anno. 53. n. 11.
and Pighius Pighius concrouers. 3.
prefers them before the Scriptures. These men perceive that the Roman Faith
cannot subsist, unless they depresse the written word of God, and exalt the
profane, bastardly, and Apocriphall Traditions of the Pope. They say the
Scripture is a breathless lump Coster. Enchirid. loc. d. Pontif. pa. 135.
a nose of wax Pigh. controuers. 3. pa. 92. Idem Hierarch. Epistol. Nuncupator.
(...). disp. 2. d. fid. page 21. Ipsae Scripturae quoad bonam partem,
difficiles sunt, obscurae and ambiguae, inflar nasi cerei, and regulae lesbiae,
susque deque trahi possunt ab impijs.
, a leaden rule Andrad. defens. lib. 2. page 257. Neque in libris ipsis quib'
sacra mysteria co^scripta sut, quicquam inest diuinitatis, quae nos ad
credendum quae illis continentur, religiono aliqua constringat, etc. Bannes 22.
q. 1. ar. 10. page 181. Cum sitelinguis and mortua, seipsam (...) non valet.
. Andradius writes, That in the Books of the Scriptures themselves, there is
no divinity or any thing else binding us to believe Stapl. Princip. Doctr.
lib. 12. ca. 2. pa. 444.
. Stapleton says, That being considered as written, it can no way be called
the Temple or Tabernacle Bos. d. Signis Eccles. tom. 2. lib. 16. ca. 10.
. Bosius says, The holy Ghost resideth in the Church more effectually and
nobly than in the Books of the Scripture Maioranus Clyp. lib. 2. cap. 28. Vnus
Ecclesiae consensus qui nunquam caruit spiritu Deipluris apud nos esse debet,
qua^ omnes elingues, and muti codices, and quotquot fuerunt sunt and erunt,
vnquam scripta volumina, quae hominum ingenijs semper materiam contentionis
prebuerunt.
. And Majoranus has these words, The consent of the Church alone which never
wanted the spirit of God, ought to be of greater esteem with us, than all mute
and tonguelesse Books, and than all the written volumes which are or ever
were, and which have in all ages ministered fuel of contention to the wits of
men (...). Def. (...). d. verb. Dei, lib. 4. cap. 4. and cap. 12. Putasne
plures haereses and sectas exorituras fuisse, si nulla penitus Scriptura
extitisset, quam
. And Gretsar the Jesuit, There would have been fewer contentions in the world
(as I supose) if there had been no Scripture at all. Jacob Brower a Reader of
Doway Clauis, Apostolica ar. 8. Nomine Ecclesiae apt intelligi potest, ipse
vniuersalis Ecclesiae pastor, etc. atque adeo dictum Augustini est, Idem ac si
diceret Euangelio non crederem, nisi me (...) quinti aut alterius Pontificis
moueret authoritas.
says, I would not believe the Gospel, did not the authority of Pope Paul
the fifth move me. And lastly it is one of the dictates of Pope Hildebrand,
canonised by Baronius Baron. Annal. tom. 11. Anno 1076. n. 33. Quod (...)
capitulum nullusque liber (...) habeatur, absque illius authoritate.
, That no Chapter or Book of Scripture must be esteemed canonical without
his authority.

I doubt not but that Romists are able with fair glosses and distinctions to
salve these blasphemies (...) Animaduers. c. Par. Disp. 1. c. 2. These. 7. page
12.
, and to reconcile dark Exodus 21.33.

Toward the end of this Section, the Jesuit adds,

First, That the Scripture is not known to be Apostolical but by Tradition.
This is false, for the Scripture is known to come from the Apostles, by inward
grounds and testimonies contained in it self, and by the virtue and effects of
it, as well as by the Tradition of the Church.

Secondly, it is most untrue, that Tradition is known to come from the
Apostles by it own light, but not Scripture: for what internal light has
Tradition more than, or above the Scripture? If it have, then the articles of
Popish Tradition, Purgatory, adoration of Images, etc. are more manifest than
the articles which Scripture teaches concerning the incarnation and
resurrection of Christ, than Heaven and Hell, etc. Also sacred Scripture is
received as divine by all Christians, Popish Tradition only by some. The
Catalogue of Romish Tradition could never to this day be specified, and
distinctly assigned (...). Lo. com. d. Script. n. 66. Nec dum Pontificij
integram farragine^ Traditionum suaru^ enumerare vel potuerunt vel voluerunt
(qua de re Colloq. Ratisbon) verum quasi communem hanc topicam solum servant,
vt quicquid ex Scriptura probare non possunt, ex Traditione ortum esse dicant.
, but the Canon of holy Scripture may. Moreover, Bellarmine confesses Bellarm.
d. verb. Dei, li. 1. ca. 2. At (...) is Scripturis quae Propheticis and (...)
literis continentur, nihil est notius, nihil est certius.
, that nothing is better known, and more certain than holy Scripture: but if
nothing be better known, then nothing has clearer light.

Thirdly, the confirmation of the former (to wit, What more evident, etc.) is
insufficient, because that which is known to come from the Apostles by their
own immediate testimony in writing, is more evidently known to come from
them, than that which is affirmed to come from them, only by the report of men
which are deceivable. Divine testimony makes things more certain and
infallible than humane. The testimony of the Apostles extant in writing is
totally divine, the report of Bishops is in part humane Lombard. sent. lib. 4.
d. 18. F. Non semper Deus sequitur Ecclesiae iudicium, quae per surreptionem
and ignorantiam interdum iudicat, Deus autem semper iudicat secundum veritatem.
Panormitan in Decret. 5. d. sent. Excom. c. 28. Iudicium Ecclesiae aliquando
.

IESVIT.
And this may be clearly proved, to omit other pregnant testimonies, by the
words of our Savior in the last of Matthew: Going into the whole world,
teaching all nations, baptizing them, In the Name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the holy Ghost: teaching them to keep all that I have commanded
you all days, even to the consummation of the world. A promise of wonderful
comfort

ANSWER.
The place of Saint Matthew, chapter 28. 19, 20. proves: In the name of the
Father, Son, and holy Ghost. Mark 16. 15, 16. Luke 24.27. Acts 1.8. Romans
1.14.

Secondly, that our Savior promised his Apostles a perpetual Gratia gratis
data. Gratia gratum faciens. Aquin. 1.2. q. 111. ar. 1. Cum gratia
presence, and assistance of his divine power and grace, both in regard of the
gifts of edification, Acts 2. 4. And in respect of the grace of inward
sanctification, John 17.17.

Thirdly, because the Apostles were mortal, and not to remain always
personally upon earth, and other Pastors Aug. Ep. 80. and in Psalm. 56. (...).
Math. c. 28.
must succeed in the office of Ministry, the promise of Christ touching his
spiritual presence, and assistance of grace, is extended to these successors,
and when they teach and baptize in such manner as Christ commanded, divine
grace is present to their Leo Epist. 69. Ego vobiscum sum vsque ad
consummatione^ seculi: vt si quid perseruitutem, nostram, bono ordine and
gratulanti impletur affectu, non ambigamus per Spiritum sanctum (...) donatum.
, and the holy Ghost co-worketh with them.

Fourthly, But yet succeeding Pastors received not the (...). cp. 19. (...). in
Ps. 86. Fundamenta (...) in montibus fanctis. Quos nos dicere (...) fundamenta?
Apostolos, in (...) erant fundamenta, etc. (...) quia (...), (...) fundamento
alius aurum alius argentum, etc. Diligit Dominus Portas Syon super omnia
Tabernacula, etc.
: neither had they immediate and Prophetical revelation, but only a measure
of Grace, ordinary, mediate, and in some sort conditional. Also, the said
Promise, Matthew. 28. 20. was common and equal to all the Apostles, and to the
successors of one Apostle, as well as of another: to the successors of Saint
James, and Saint John, etc. as well as to the successors of Saint Peter Orig.
in (...).
.

Fifthly, Notwithstanding the said promise, Bishops and Pastors succeeding the
Apostles, were in respect of themselves subject to errors Hieron. in Psalm. 86.
Et principum, hoc est Apostolorum and Euangelistarum horum qui fuerunt, in ea,
videte quid dicat, Qui fuerunt, non qui sunt, vt exceptis Apostolis quodcunque
aliud posteal (...), abscindatur, non habeat postea authoritatem. Quamuis ergo
(...) sit aliquis post Apostolos, quamuis disertus non. (...) authoritatem,
Quoniam Domin' narrat in Scriptura populorum, and Principum qui fuerunt in ca.
, and their judgment in matters of Faith was not absolutely infallible, like
the Apostles; but so far forth only, as they walked in the footsteps, and
followed the Doctrine delivered by the Apostles. Our Savior Cyril. in Esaiam,
lib. 2. c. 12. (...) scripta (...) (Apost.) nos (...), ac (...) and constantia
fidei, and (...), page 103.
, when the same was truly delivered by their successors. And he will be also
with succeeding Pastors all Ages, according to such a measure of Grace and
assistance, as is sufficient for the edifying of the Church, if they for their
own part Cordub. Arm. Fid. Quaest. 2. Prop. 9. Promissiones Dei generales, de
co (...) ipse non solus, sed (...) and cum (...) nostris concurrendo in nobis
facturus est, sub hac condition sunt intelligendae, si videlicet homo faciat
quod in se est, ad talem finem and effectum.
be studious to learn divine Truth from the holy Apostles, and careful to
preach the same to

Sixthly, Many ancient Expositors affirm, That the Promise Matthew. 28.20. is
especially made to the just and faithful Leo. sermon. 2. c. 3. d. Resurrect.
Chrysostom. Matthew. Hom. 91. Hieron. sup. Matthew. 28. Basil. Hom. 29.
; and some of them say, to the Elect Druthmar. Matthew. 28. Est etiam cum Reprob
is (...), etc. Sed aliter est cum (...), etc. Paschas. (...). in Matthew. 28. Se
cum suis elecus in ^.
only. And Occham affirms, That if there should be found in the whole World
(...), Dial. p. 1. lib. 5. c. 31.
, and a small number of Lay people Id. lib. 2. c. 25. and lib. 4. c. 9. and
lib. 5. c. 3. Non est necessarium credere implicit nec explicit, multitudinem
Christianorum non errare nec errasse in fide, nec maiorem partem: pro eo quod,
fides Catholica in (...) potest seruari, page 451. Fides quam B. (...),
praedicauir and docuit, nunquam deficiet, sed in aliquibus Christianis Clericis
vel Laicis, (...) vel mulieribus, vsque ad finem seculi perdurabit. 473.
Quamuis mayor pars, immo tota fere multitudo Cloricorum, possit contra fidem
errare, and fidem Catholicam pertinaciter (...), tamen semper (...) saltim
(...) Episcopus sacerdos Catholicus, qui illa quae ordinis sunt, licite valeat
exercere. 502. Sicut in Idiotis (Sacerdotibus ac Religiosis and Magistratibus
repudiatis) fidem primitus fundauit Catholicam:
, professing right Faith in Articles essential, and willing to embrace all
other Divine Vertie, when the same should be manifested unto them, this were
sufficient to make good, Christ his Promise. Matthew. 28.20.

In the next passage, our Adversary infers and deriueth certain
Propositions from the former Text of Matthew. 28. 20.

First he says, There is still a Christian Church all days, not wanting so
much as one day in the World, till the consummation thereof.

I answer, That there is still in the World a common Christian Kling. Loc. Com.
lib. 3. cap. 32. Apud viros bonos and aequos maioris authoritatis est iudicium
illorum Scripturae qui sanctis illis Apostolis ac Martyribus viciniores (...),
quorum vita and affectio erat purior and multo sanctior, quam huius populi nunc
superstitis, qui certe vix rationem (...) habet ad purum Vinum
, which enjoyed the immediate and actual preaching of the Apostles.

IESVIT.
Secondly, This Church is ever visible and conspicuous: For the Church which
always teaches and christeneth all Nations, to which Christ says, I am
always with you, not with you sitting in corners, or hidden under ground, but
with you, exercising the Office enjoined you in the words precedent, Docete
omnes gentes, baptizantes eos, etc.

ANSWER.
The Church is ever visible, according to some degree of visibilitie: but this
Scripture teaches not, that the true I am always with you, sitting in
corners, so he does not say, I am always with you, when you are carried upon
men's shoulders, and tread upon Emperors necks, and divide and share the
Kingdoms of the World, and gather

But yet of the two, it is far more agreeable to the Divine Goodness (who is
a Father of the poor and oppressed) to be present to his little flock in
persecution, and when it flies as a Lamb from the Wolf, and hides it self
from the Oppressor, Apoc. 12. 14, than that he has entayled his perpetual
presence upon ambitious and oppressing Tyrants, which styled themselves
Pastors, and were ravening Wolves, Scribes and Pharisees, imposing
insupportable burdens upon others, Ioh. Sarisbur. Policrat. lib. 6. ca. 24.
Romana Ecclesia quae matter omnium Ecclesiarum est, se non tam matrem exhibet
quam nouerram. Sedent in ea Scribae and Pharasaei, ponentes onera importabilia,
in humeris hominum: quae digito non contingunt. Dominantur in Clero, nec forma
sunt (...), etc. Concutiunt Jacob. Almain. Quaest. Vesp. Vtinam Zelus Domus
Dei, nostri temporis Praelatos comederet, and Zelarent salutem Christi fidelium
plusquam pecuniam? Ibid. Cum caput ac si esset in destructionem, sibi potestas
data, and non in aedificationem, in eos qui salutem corpotis intendunt saeuire
videatur, and pro eo quod been arguunt plectere paena. Sext. Decretal. c.
Fundamenta. Gloss. Roma fundata a praedonibus, adhuc de primordijs retinet,
dicta Roma quasi rodens manus. Roma manus rodit, quod rodere non valet odit.
Auentin. Annal. Boior. lib. 4. page 322. Faxit Deus Opt. Max. and meliorem
mentem det Pontif. nostris, vti omisso luxu fastuque diuitem Principem (...),
sequi desinant, fallacissimi mundi huius caduca atque fragilia bona fastidiant.
Christum pauperem (...), (...) bibere, and eius crucem humeris portare, tandem
discant. Ita fiet, vt vulgo male vltra non audiant, atque castigentur, quod
gregem Christianum populum Dei peculiarem
fingers. And there is no cause, why the good God, which was present with
Daniel in the Lions Den, and with Jonas in the Whales Belly, and with Joseph
in the Dungeon, and with Job upon the Dunghill, should in the days of the
oppressing Antichrist, withdraw his presence and assistance from his poor
flock, yea, although it were sitting in corners, and hidden under ground.

IESVIT.
Thirdly, This Church is ever Apostolical: for to his Apostles Christ said, I
am always with you until the consummation of the World; not with you in your
own persons, but with you in your successors, in whom you shall continue to
the Worlds end: Ergo, a lawful company of Bishops, Pastors, and Doctors,
succeeding the

ANSWER.
First, The Church may be called Apostolical, because of Faith, Plantation,
and External Ordination of Pastors.

According to Faith and Doctrine, in all the maine and substantial Articles,
the true Church is ever Apostolical.

In regard of Plantation, the Primitive Church was Apostolical, Tertullian
affirms, That many particular Tertullian. d. Praescript. Ca. 32. Ad (...)
prouocabuntur ab illis Ecclesijs, quae licet nullum ex Apostolis, vel
Apostolicis authorem suum proferant, vt multo posteriores, quae denique
quotidie instituuntur: tamen in (...) fide conspirantes, non minus Apostolicae
deputantur pro consanguinitate doctrinae.
Churches were not thus planted by Apostles, or Apostolical persons, and yet
they were truly Apostolical, by reason of consanguinitie of Doctrine with the
holy Apostles.

According to the third manner, to wit, in respect of External Ordination, and
Imposition of Hands, received from Bishops, lineally succeeding the Apostles, a
false and corrupt Church may be Apostolical (as I have formerly proved.) And
it is not impossible for a true Church to succeed or come out of a false, or
for a corrupt Church to reform it self. And if this happen, there is required
no new Ordination of Pastors, (...) any Miracles, to confirm their Vocation;
but they which (...) ordained in a corrupt Church, returning to the right Faith
and worship of God, make their former Ordination more legitimate, holy, and
effectual.

The Jesuit in the words ensuing, collecteth from our Saviors promise, I will
be with you, etc. that there must ever be a company of Bishops and Pastors,
succeeding the Apostles, because Christ said to them and their successors, I
will be with you, etc. But if this collection be good, then every one of the
Peter. Neither yet does our Savior limit his presence and assistance to
general Councels, or definitive sentences of Popes, but he speaks of
Preaching and Baptising: and therefore if his presence with Pastors and
Bishops, do free them from all error, it must free them in Preaching and
writing Books, as well as Cyprian, Saint Augustine, and all the elect of God.

Wherefore this promise, in regard of the perfection thereof, did appertain to
the Apostles themselves: and in regard of the verity of it, and for such a
measure of assistance as is necessary to constitute a number of faithful
people, more or less, in every age to serve Christ truly, in the substance of
faith

But because our Adversaries insist so much upon this Text, to raise their
visible and personal succession; I will reduce the Argument which they draw
out of it, into form, and then accommodate mine Answer.

If Christ will be with his Apostles all days, to the end of the world, then
the Apostles, not continuing alive themselves, they must remain in Bishops,
Pastors, and Doctors, locally and personally But the first is true. Ergo, etc.

First, if the consequence of this Argument were good, then all and every one
of the Apostles must continue always, to the consummation of the world, in
Bishops, Pastors, and Doctors, lineally succeeding them, which Papals
themselves deny (...). d. Ecclesia l. 4. c. 8. Omnes Ecclesiae Patriarchales,
habuerunt per longa tempora Episcopos manifest Haereticos, and proinde
interupta (...). Princip. Doctr. l. 4. c. 18.
.

Secondly, lineall and personal succession, is not the sole means, by which
the Apostles, after their decease, remain in the world; but they remain also
in the world by their Scriptures, and also by the faith of Believers, receiving
and obeying (...). Com. Math. 28.20. Ex hoc intelligitur quod vsque ad finem
seculi, non sunt (...) in mundo qui diuina mansione and in habitatione sunt
digni. Chrysostom. in Math. (...). (...). De functi quoque multum valent prodesse
hijs, qui eorum imperio paruerint. Bell. d. (...). Beat. li. 1. c. 6. B. Paulus
adhuc been operatur, exemplo and Scriptis.
.

Thirdly, that which is promised upon condition, is not absolute, until the
condition be fulfilled. The presence of Christ is promised to the Apostles
successors conditionally, Orig. in Math. Hom. 1. Quoniam qui Episcoporum locum
sibi vendicant vtuntur eo dicto sicut Petrus, and Claues regni caelorum a
saluatore acceperunt, docentque ea, quae ab illis ligata fuerint, hoc est
co^demnata eadem, and in caelis ligata, rurfus ea quae soluta fuerint ab ipsis,
eadem and in caelis esse soluta, dicendum est illos recte loqui, si pariter and
facta habuerint ob quae dictum est illi qui erat Petrus, tu es Petrus: sique
tales fuerint, vt a Christo super eos aedificetur Ecclesia, and ad eos illud
iure referri possit. Nichol. Clemang. Disp. (...). matter. Council. General.
Illis adest spiritus, illos dirigit, atque ad finem ducit salutarem, qui dignum
in se hospitium illi parauerunt, seque eius aspiratione arque visitatione
(quantum in eis erat) per bona opera dignos fecerunt. Illos autem quomodo
audiat, aut vifiter aut illustrer, qui sibi aduersantur, illumque cum in se non
possident, in alijs extinguere
and as they were one with the Apostles by imitation, and subordination: that
is, so far as they walked in their steps, and conformed their Doctrine and
Ministry to the pattern received

Fourthly, Christ's presence always to the consummation of the world, with some
Bishops, Pastors, and Doctors, lineally succeeding the Apostles, proves not
that these Bishops and Pastors, cannot err in any part of their Doctrine; for
then no particular Bishops, having Apostolical ordination, could fall into any
error: but it shows only, that Christ co-operates with them, in such
Ministerial duties and actions as they perform according to his Ordinance:
And when Greg. (...). Catech. cap. 33. In spirituali modo regenerationis
promisit se ad futurum his quae facta sunt, and imprimit operi (...) suam,
voluntate nostra accedente ad id quod intenditur. Atque id quod dixit Christus,
inprimis videtur referendum esse, ad (...) suam in (...) and (...) operibus, in
quibus quod cernitur corruptibile est, quod latet (...).
.

IESVIT.
Fourthly, this Church is universal, (...) in mundum vniuersum, Marc. 16. 15.
where I will be always with you.

ANSWER.
The true Church is universal, according to the manner formerly declared. But
the Argument taken out of Saint Mark 16.15. proves not, that it is ever
actually universal, in respect of place, and multitude of professors. For as
it follows not, that because Christ said he would be with Saint Paul when he
preached at Corinth, ( Act. 18.10.) therefore he will be ever at Corinth: So
likewise it is inconsequent to infer, Christ said he would be present in all
places of the world with the Apostles, when they baptized and preached as he
commanded Ergo, he will always be present in those places, although their
successors neglect his commandment. Is God ever in the dungeon in Egypt,
because he was ever there, whilst Joseph, a just person, continued in prison.
The promise of spiritual presence, is annexed to the work of Preaching and
Baptising, wheresoever it is performed, according to the Divine Ordinance: but
that which in some ages, has been done in many places, may at other times be
performed in few.

IESVIT.
Fifthly, the Church is one, not divided into parts, because it teaches and
believes uniformly, all that Christ delivered and commanded, without
factions, Sects or parts, about matters of faith.

ANSWER.
It is not affirmed, neither can it be concluded out of Mat. 28. that the
visible Church in all ages of the world, teaches and believes, either
uniformly, Cusan. Concord. Cath. l. 1. c. 5. Licet fides vna sit funiculus
(...), tamen aliquando varietas opinionu^ absque pertinacia, stat, cum vnitate.
or expressly and distinctly, all Cor. 1.11.

IESVIT.
Sixthly, this Church is always holy for doctrine, never delivering or teaching
any falsehood: I who am the truth, am always with you, teaching all nations.
Holy also for life, Christ the Holy of Holies, assisting and making her able to

ANSWER.
Although the true Church is always holy for Doctrine, yet it is not perfectly
and in the highest degree ever so (...). Relect. c. 1. quaest. 4. ar. 5. notab.
1. Est quoque and vocatur interdu^ vera Ecclesia propter ipsam doctrinae
perfectissimam puritatem and Sacramentoru^ vsum religiosissimum. Quae sane
perfectio non est omnium temporum and locorum: quia and iuxta Catholicum
intellectu^ de quibusdam doctrinae partibus dubitari interdum potest, and a
magnis viris erratum est, manente etiam penes tales vera Ecclesia.
. And it is most inconsequent to argue, Christ which is the Truth is ever with
the Church, Ergo the Church cannot err or teach any falsehood, for Christ is
always with the faithful, Ephesians. 3. 17. yet just and faithful people may
err. Because Christ was with the Apostles by miraculous inspiration, therefore
they could not err, or deliver any falsehood great or small, but he is present
with the sounder part of the Church militant since Chrysostom. Sermon. 20. sup. Romans
Tametsi enim gratia sit and ipsa, non tamen simpliciter effunditur sed mensuram
a recipientibus se accipiens, (...) quantum inuenerit sibi oblatum fidei
, which are compassed about with ignorance and infirmity, and at some times
better or worse qualified than at other.

Also the true Church, in firmissimis suis, in her firmest members, is (...)
holy for life, because the Holy of Holiest sanctifies and purges the same by
his Word, Sacraments, and Grace, Ephesians. 5.26. Tit. 3.5, 6. But it is not absolute
in holiness, Iam. 3.2. 1. Ioh. 1.8. Bernard. in Psalm. Qui. hab. Sermon. 10.
Nisi esset hic, quaedam vt ita (...) etc.
nor yet in every age so remarkeably holy, that it is thereby able to convert
Infidels ^ sunt Christiani etc. Mayor continentia inuenitur apud illos qui su^t
in Schismate. Id. 1. Cor. ho. 36. Cyprian. d. Laps. n. (...). (...). d. (...).
Dei lib. 3. Ipsa Dei Ecclesia quae in omnibus debet esse placatrix Dei, quid
est aliud, ^ quid est aliud pene omnis coetus (...), quam sentina vitiorum?
. And the true Church has not in all ages the gift of Miracles Chrysostom. Imp.
Math. Hom. 49. Nunc autem Greg. Mor. lib. 34. ca. 3. A sancta Ecclesia ^.
, and the pretext of Miracles is common to deceivers, Math. 24.24, 25. 2.
Thessal. 2.9. Apoc. 13.13. And Suares Suar. Def. Fid. Cath. lib. 1. ca. 7. ^
cap. 44. (...) de authoritate (...) doctoris haeretici, illos ^ etc. quasi nec
hoc scriptum sit, venturos multos, qui (...) virtutes maximas aederent, ad
fallaciam muniendam corruptae praedicationis, etc.
the Jesuit says, Haec adulterari possunt, and ita exterius fingi vt non sint
necessaria signa verae Fidei, Miracles may so be adulterated and externally
feigned, that they may not be necessary signs of Faith. And Canus (...) loc.
lib. 11. ca. 6.
speaking of Popish miracles and legends, says, Nostri plerique de industria,
ita multa (...) vt eorum me pudeat and taedeat, sundry of our men do so
wilfully coin many things (in their report of Miracles) that I am ashamed and
irked of them.

IESVIT.
That the Roman is the One, Holy, Catholic, Apostolical Church, from and by
which we are to receive the Tradition of Christian Doctrine.

These grounds being laid, it is apparent that the Roman Church (that is, the
multitude of Christians spread over the world, cleaving to the Doctrine and
Tradition of

ANSWER.
The former grounds (according to your delivery, and exposition of them) are
partly false, and partly ambiguous and captious, and therefore it cannot be
made apparent from them, That the modern Roman Church, is the One, Holy,
Catholic, and Apostolical Church, from which we are absolutely to receive
the whole Tradition of Christian Doctrine.

IESVITS 1. Argument.
There mnst be always in the world One, Holy, Catholic, and Apostolical
Church, that is, a Church delivering Doctrine uniformly, thereby making them
credible: Universally, thereby making them famously known to mankind: Holily,
so making them certain, and such as on them Apostolically, so making them
perpetually flow without change unto the present Christianity in the Channel
of never interrupted succession of Bishops from the Apostles. And this Church
must either be the Roman, or the Protestants, or some other opposite to both.
Protestants cannot say, a Church opposite to both, for then they should be
condemned in their own judgment, and bound to conform themselves to that
Church; which can be no

ANSWER.
There must be always in the world a Church, One, Holy, Catholic, and
Apostolical, that is, A number of Christians believing and (...), and
professing Christianity; to the sounder part whereof the properties of One,
Holy, Catholic, Apostolical, belong. But there is not always in the world
an Hierarchiall visible Church, consisting of Prelates and people, united in
one external form of Policy, and profession of Religion, under an universal
Pope, Manasses, and other idolatrous kings of Judah Occham. Dial. part. 1. lib.
5. cap. 5. Quod autem Sacerdotes summi veteris legis, and etiam Iudices
principales poterant contra legem iubere, and (...)
, when Idolatry prevailed among the Priests and general multitude, there was
a remnant of holy people, worshipping God according to his word, and not
defiled with the impiety of those times.

Now concerning the disjunctive part of the Jesuits Argument, which is, This
Church must either be the Roman, or the Protestants, or some other opposite to
both. It is answered: The Protestant Church, is that true and Orthodoxall
Church, which is One, Holy, Apostolic, and a sound part of the Catholic.
Luthers age, yet this is untrue, concerning the essence, and kind, and is true
only touching the name, and some things accidental. For in all ages, and
before Luther, some persons held the substantial articles of our Religion,
both in the Roman and Grecian Church. And by name, the Graecians maintained
these articles in common with us, That the Roman Church has not primacie of
Jurisdiction, Authority, and Grace above or over all other Churches: neither
is the same infallible in her definitions of Faith. They deny Purgatory,
private

In this Western part of the world, the Waldenses, Taborites of Bohemia, the
Scholars of Wiclife, called in England Lollards, maintained the same doctrine
in substance, with the Consess. Tabor c. Rokensan, Anno Dom. 1431. Et qui
merindoli, Agriae, Costae, etc. Habitabant ediderunt co^fessionem sua^, etc. in
qua continentur hij articuli: 1. (...) credendum esse in cis quae ad salutem
(...), etc. 2. Sacras literas integre continere omnia, etc. 3. (...) tantum
esse (...) nec invocandos Sanctos, etc. 4. Purgatorium nullum esse, etc. 5.
(...) Missas quae pro mortuis canuntur impias esse, etc. 7. Traditiones humanas
pro necessarijs ad (...) habendas non esse. 8. Ieiunia in ciborum discrimine,
monochatum Papisticum, Benedictiones creaturarum, etc. perigrinationes, etc.
esse humanum inuentum. 9. Primatum Papae super omnes Ecclesias reijciunt. 10.
Romans Ecclesiam esse Babilonem in Apocalipsi. 11. Communionem in (...) specie,
etc. 12. (...) Papales (...). 13. Coniugium Sacerdotum esse sanctum, etc.
, and by the testimony of some learned Pontificians (...) Hist. li. 5. pa.
460. Tamen extitere semper per interualla qui eorum doctrinam intermortuam
renouarent, Ioh. Wiclevus in Anglia, Ioh. Hus and Hier. Pragensis: nostra vero
aetate postquam Lutheri doctrina, obuio tam multorum fauore accepta est,
reliquiae eorum vbique sparsae colligi, and crescente Lutheri nomine vires and
authoritatem sumere caeperunt, etc. (...), Hist. (...). lib. 3. and li. 12.
Guicciard. Hist. (...). lib. 13. Anno Dom. 1520. Ex Martini Lutheri, etc.
maxima ex part veteris Bohemorum sectae, quae, etc. diu intra Bohemiae fines
inclusa fuerat, excitatoris, originem habuit.
. And concerning certain differences objected to have been between them and
us, we shall afterward show, that the same are no greater, than such as have
been anciently among the Fathers, and there are as great differences between
the Elder and modern Romists in many passages of their doctrine.

But now on the contrary, if it were so that we could not (for certain ages
past) nominate or assign out of history any King. 19. 11. and because God
has promised there shall be always in the world a true Church (having either
a larger or smaller number of professors;) if Protestants be able to
demonstrate that they maintain the same Faith (...). d. prescript. c. Haer.
ca. 32. In eadem fide conspirantes, etc. Apostolicae deputantur pro
consanguinitate doctrinae. Jb. ca. 37. Veritas nobis adiudicetur, quicunque in
ea regula
and Religion which the holy Apostles taught, this alone is sufficient to
prove they are the true Church.

IESVIT.
It is also most manifest and undeniable, that Protestants are not such a
Church, nor part of such a Church, since their reuoult and separation from the
Roman; seeing confessedly they changed their Doctrines they once held, forsook
dissonant from it: Ergo, The Roman is the one, holy, Catholic etc.

ANSWER.
Bold words, ( It is most manifest and undeniable) miserable proofs (they
changed their Doctrine they once held, etc.) If the Pharisees had argued in
this manner against Saint Paul, or the Manichees and Pelagians Aug. d. prae
dest. sanctor. c. 3. Quem meum (...) opuscula mea satis indicant scripta ante
(...) meum.
against Saint Augustine, the one would have told them, That it was no fault to
forsake the Apoc. 18.4. and Chap. 11.8. Saint Paul, speaking of such as teach
diverse doctrine from the Apostles, says, (...), Depart from such, from their
assembly and Church: Read Acts 19. 8. 1. Corinthians. 10. 14. 2. Cor. 6. 14, 15,
17. Hos. 10. 17. The Roman Church, in Si Papa, etc 40. Si Papa suae and
fraternae salutis negligens (...), inutilis and remissus in operibus, and
insuper a bono taciturnus, quod magis officit sibi and omnibus, nihilominus
innumerabiles populos cateruatim secum ducit ad Gehennam cum ipso plagis multis
in aeternum vapulatures: huius culpas istic redargurere praesumat mortalium
nullus, quia cunctos (...) iudicaturus, a nemine est iudicandus.
. And none might enjoy life and breath within her Precincts, which would not
obey her Traditions Tho. Doctrinal. Prefat. ad Martin. 5. Statutum publicum
emanauit, quod omnes (...), sicut Dei proditores essent, sic proditores Regis
proscriptis bonis censerentur, and regni, duplici poenae dandi, incendio
propter Deum, suspendio propter regem.
.

These Romuleans (unless they were blinded like Elymas) could not be ignorant,
at least, of some of their errors and corruptions: but they chose rather in
their Tridentine Synod, to proclaim and propugne, apertly or covertly, all
their ancient forgeries, than to compassionate the distressed and (...)
Christian world, by mittigating or condescending, according and understood
Language (...) Syluius Hist. Bohem. c. 13-Quum Episcopus qui Slauos (...) ad
(...) octauo, supplicaret, vt illis sua Lingua in Sacris, vti liceret etc.
Audita est Vox de Coelo, omnis spiritus laudet Dominum and omnis vox
confiteatur ei.
, to have abolished the adoration The Massacre of Paris. (...). Hist. lib. 52.
and lib. 53. Nullum similis (...) exemplum, in tota antiquitate reperiri.
Natal. Comes. Histor. lib. 25. pa. 508. (...) sexaginta millia hominum, varijs
in locis per illud tempus, trucidata fuisse dicta sunt in Gallia, etc.
. Lastly, whereas they expelled us by Excommunication, and chased us away from
them by Augustine long since delivered: The Sacrilege of Schism is then
committed, when there is no just cause of separation August. c. Donat. lib. 5.
cap. 1. Apertissimum
: Or what some of his own part have said Dried. d. Eccles. Dogm. lib. 4. cap.
4. Neque tenentur Oues sub esse Pastori vlli qui iam factus est, aut ex.
Pastore Lupus, aut saluti gregis contrarius. Francisc. Picus, Mirand. Theor.
23. Capitis autem male sani and deliri contagia vitanda sunt, ne and ipsi artus
pestilenti humore tabefierent.
, The Sheep are not bound to be subject to any Shepherd, which is become a
Wolf, or is adverse to the salvation of the Flock.

IESVIT.
Which also plainly will appear to any man of understanding, that casts upon
her an impartial eye: For is she not conspicuously one, the professors thereof
agreeing

ANSWER.
External Unity is found amongst Infidels: and the Turks, being more in
number than Papists, never disagree amongst themselves, touching matters of
their Religion: Shall we then say as the Jesuit does, It will plainly appear

Saint Augustine says, That Jews, Heretics, and Infidels observe Unity
against Unity (...). d. verb. ^ ^ and Pagani, (...) fecerunt, contra (...).
. S. Bernard Bernard. Assump. Mariae, Sermon. 5. Sciendum, quod alia est vnitas
sanctorum, quam ex Scripturis commendauimus: Alia est facinorosorum, quae
nihilominus ex ipsis Scriptui is, (...) and improbatur. Psalm. 2. 2. Matthew. 22.
15.
, Alia est vnitas The Unity of Saints is one thing, and the Unity of wicked
men (Deceivers) another. S. Hilarie Hilar. lib. ad Constant. Per speciosum
nomen pacis, in vnitatem per fidiae subrepimus, etc. page 28.
, Vnitas fidei, and vnitas perfidiae; There is Unity of Faith, and there is
likewise perfidious and faithless Unity. S. Gregory says Gregor. Moral.
lib. 33. cap. 24.
, That the ministers of Antichrist shall cleave together like the skales of
Leuiathan.

Therefore, because external Unity is in it self a thing common, and Jews
and Mahometists enjoy the same more apparently than many Christians; our
Adversary must prove that his Church has Verity, before his argument taken
from external Unity, can be of any force.

Neither is Papisticall Unity so entire and absolute, as this man gloryeth:
for Papalls disagree both in Doctrine and Manners. They differ concerning the
supreme Authority of the Church, Whether it be in the Pope, or in the
General Francisc. Picus. Theorem. 16. Fuere qui dicerent, Concilium in causa
fidei prae esse Pontifici, fuere qui Pontificem Concilio praeponerent: and
circa ipsius Synodi collectionem, alia etiam quaestio, vtrum sine Pontifice,
vtrum eo refragante conuocari colligique possit.
. They differ in the matter of Freewill, and Grace: They differ concerning the
manner of the Conception of the Virgin Marie. There are three Opinions among
them, concerning the Temporal dominion of Popes: Some say, he has direct
Temporal power Aluares Pelag. d. Planct. Eccles. lib. 1. ar. 13. August.
Anchona Summa, d. Eccles. Pot. qu. 36. art. 2. Carerius, Francisc. Bosius, and
alij.
; some say, indirect (...). d. Pontif. Romans lib. 5. cap. 6. and 7. Aquinas 22.
q. 12.
; some say he has none Hugo Victor. d. Sacrament. lib. 2. par. 2. cap. 7.
(...) Patauin. Occham, etc. Ferus, in Matthew. cap. 16. Bernard. d. Consid. ad
Eugen. lib. 1.
, but by the free Donation of Princes; and, that Princes were evil advised, in
yielding him so much Petrus, d. Ferrar.
. And modern Popes disagree with the ancient, concerning the Dignity of
universal Bishop, adoration of Images, Transubstantiation, Communion Ferus,
Postil. Sermon. 3. d. Coen. Domin. In omnibus gentibus mayor nunc est concordia
quam inter Christianos.
. And when they color these palpable Dissentions, pretending, that they are
ready to submit themselves to the judgment of the Pope: First, this Judge and
Vmpire is many times a Peace-breaker Azor. Instit. Mor. tom. 2. lib. 5. cap.
43. Johannes Decimus, Leo Nonus, Innocentius Secundus, Gregorius Sextus, Julius
Secundus, Vrbanus Quartus, ex Sabellic. and Bergom.
, and no Peacemaker Aluar. d. planct. Eccles. Lib. 2. art. 5. Nec sunt hodie
Praelati, Principes pacis, sicut Christus, Esaias 9. sed Guerrae. Sigebert. Anno
1085. Matthew. Paris. Chronic. Greg. Papa, confessus est suadente Diabolo se iram
and odium inter humanum genus concitasse. Otho Frising. Chron. lib. 6. cap. 33.
Quos dum Leo Papa, cum militia ad vrbem rediens Ecclesiae and Imperij finibus
arcere vult, Tanta strages facta fuit, quod acerus ex ossibus mortuorum
compactus hactenus ab indiginis illic monstratur. Ibid. cap. 36. Quanta mala
quot bella, bellorumque discrimina vnde secuta sunt, quoties misera Roma
obsessa, capta vastata, quod Papa super Papam sicut Rex super Regem positus
fuerit tedet memorare. Auentin. Annal. Boiorum, lib. 6. page 480. per triginta
tres annos a Gregorio and Vrbano continenter sanguine, (...) belligeratum est.
Nauclerus ex Hermanno. Guelphorum and Gibellinorum factiones, etc. quae
deinceps a Gregorio 9. nutritae, adeo late serpsere vt nulla ciuitas nullum
oppidum, nullus populus, ea tabe perniciosissima intactus remanserit, vrbs enim
in vibem, Prouincia in Prouinciam, haec populi pars in alteram, nulla
impellente alia quam harum partium causa, vsque ad haec nostra tempora miro
(...) inter se saeuiere. Abbas Vsperg. in Philip. Imper. Tunc coeperunt
multiplicari mala in terris. Ortae sunt siquidem in
, an Ismael in Cadmus; and when Papistrie was most potent, the Christian

IESVIT.
Apparently universal, so spread over the World, with Credit and Authority,
that whole Mankind may take sufficient notice of her, and her Doctrine, for the
embracing

ANSWER.
The Roman is a particular Church, and not universal: it is only an unsound
member of the whole, and not the whole. Romans 1. 6. S. Paul says: (...) Chrysostom.
ad Romans Hom. 1. Romany scribens qui velut in quodam totius Orbis, vertice
constituti erant, nihil prae reliquis gentibus illis praecipui adscribit. Neque
enim ideo quod tum potentes erant and regnabant plus (...) spiritualium eos
habere dicit: sed quemadmodum inquit omnibus gentibus praedicamus ita and
vobis, connumerans (...) and Scythis, ac Thracibus, nisi enim hoc significare
voluisset superfluum erat dicere in quibus estis and vos. Theodoret. sup. Romans
cap. 1. Eos, non Theophilact. ibid. Hic tollit eorum cogitationem de Primatu.
Non enim inquit alias antecellitis gentes, (...) Imperium vobis vsurpetis:
verum enim perinde ac caeteris, sic vobis praedicamus, ne igitur turgeatis
fastu. Oecumen. ibid. (...).
, Among whom, are ye also. But a Church which is but one amongst the rest,
cannot be the

If the universal Church be taken properly, or absolutely, it comprehends
both the Triumphant and Militant Church: Augustine Enchir. cap. 56. and 61.
Couaruuias, Resol. Lib. 4. cap. 14. If it be taken restrictiuely, it is the
whole Church Militant of each Age. If Catholic be taken for that which is
Orthodoxall in Faith, and which holds no division with the common Body of
Christianity (according Cyprian. Epist. 64. and Epist. 69. and Epist. 73.
Constantius, ap. Socrat. Hist. Eccles. Lib. 1. cap. 6. and Lib. 2. cap. 2.
Greg. Naz. in Testam. apud Brisson. d. form. Lib. 7. Vincent. Lyr. contr. Haer.
cap. 25.
) then neither is this Title proper to the Roman Church alone, neither can
Papists justly assume the name of Catholic, until they have proved their
Faith to be Orthodoxall, and justified themselves from being the Authors of
Discord in the Christian World.

And to answer that which follows; although the Roman Church is spread over
sundry parts of the World, The Syrians, or Melchites, Georgians, Russians,
Nestorians, Christians of S. Thomas in India, Iacobites, Copthi, Habassines,
Armenians, Maronites.
, which are no Romists, are largely diffused over the World, and exercise their
Religion in places where they make their abode; and there is nothing more
presumptuous, than to make external Fame and Amplitude Greg. Nazian. Orat. d.
Seipso, c. Arrian. Vbi illi sunt, qui Ecclesiam multitudine definiunt.
Chrysostom. ad Pop. Antioch. Hom. 40. August. sup. Psalm. 39.
(which are things common, and separable) proper notes of a true Church; and
upon this ground, to reject

IESVIT.
Most manifestly Holy, in all kind of high extraordinary Infidels, the sweet
Odor of Christ, and the Christian

ANSWER.
Passing by your boasting of Manifestly Holy, in all kind of high and
extraordinary Holiness, notorious, striking admiration, etc. And putting you
in mind of Solomon's Proverb: There is a man that boasts himself to be rich,
and yet has nothing: Prou. 13. 7.

I answer the matter, first, You must be advertised that Gregory, Moral. l.
33. c. 26. says, Praedicatores Antichristi sanctitatis sibi speciem arrogant,
sed tamen opera iniquitatis exercent: Antichrists Preachers arrogate unto
themselves a show of holiness, and practice the works of iniquity. This will
be verified in such as you are, if your form of external holiness be not
conjoined with holy and Orthodoxall Doctrine. You must therefore first of all
prove your doctrine to be Orthodoxall, in the Articles in question between
the reformed Churches and you, before your miracles and specious holiness can
stand

Secondly, your own friends and followers testify, That your Church has
been for many ages, notoriously defiled with the enormitie of vices: Some of
them say Gerson. to. 4. (...). Brugis scripta. p. 51.
in general terms, that from the crown of the head to the sole of the foot,
the vlcerous matter of enormous sin, has defiled and deformed the whole body
and state of Christianity, living under your profession. Others affirm, that
all Ecclesiastical Council. Basil. Resp. Synodal. p. 139. Surius.
and Christian discipline, was in a manner extinguished in every place. Others
say, that oppression, Council. Lateran. sub Iulio 2. Oration (...). Surius tom.
4. page 520. Ita in sanctam nauiculam impetum facere vt pene (...) fluctibus
illa latus dederit, and prope meria and pessundata (...)
rapine, adultery, incest, and all pestilent vice, did confound all sacred and
profane things, and that the same beat S. Peter's ship so impetuously, that it
began to hull or wallow upon the to-side. Others, (...) in Marcellino primo.
that vices were so exalted and multiplied, that they hardly left any space to
Gods mercy. Others say, (...). disp. d. Repub. lib. 1. cap. 12. page 73.
Espenc. com. T t. cap. 1. page 71. Tot in Ecclesiam abusus, and grauissimos
morbos irrupisse, quibus ad (...), and (...) fama ad in fideles vsque dimanet
Christianismum deridentes, etc.
there is no place wherein is found so little piety and Religion, as in those
people which dwell nearest to Rome. Others say, (...) (...) in adag. Dulce
belium inexpertis.
that you have not only imitated and matched, but surpassed all the avarice,
ambition, lubricitie, and tyranny, that was ever heard of amongst the heathen.
Sundry of your own part Aluar. Pelag. d. planct. Ecclesiae Nichol. Clemang.
Onus (...). Poth. d. stat. Domus Dei.
have written which reigned among (...) They have styled your grand (...) in
Ioh. 13.
, The dregs of vice, Incarnate devils, etc Council. Constant. Seff. 11. ar. 5.
. One says, Auentin Anal. Boiorum l. 3. p. 211.
Nothing was more luxurious, covetous and proud, than Priests; they spent the
Churches patrimony, in gluttony, riot, upon dogs, and queanes, and all their
preaching was to ^. Matthew Paris says, Chron. in Henrico 3. page 535.
The (...) of Rome seek not to make people devout; but to fill their coffers
with treasure; they study not to win souls, but to (...) upon other men's
revenues; they oppress the godly, and impudently usurp other men's right; they
have no care of honesty or right. King John of England, Math. Paris. ib. anno
1213. p. 327
from whom Pope Innocent extorted forty thousand That he had learned by woeful
experience, that the Pope was ambitious, beyond all men living, an insatiable,
gulf, and thirster after money, and ready for hope of gain, like wax, to be
(...) to any kind or degree of (...). Aluares has these words, Aluar. d.
planct. Eccles. lib. 2. art. 5. litera Aleph. Vid. Surium. tom. 4. Council. page
820. 824. 569. 579. 642. Abbas Vsperg. an. 99. Luithprand. vit. Pap. lib. 6. c.
6. Dionys. Carthus. Ep. in fine commentar. Apoc. Naclantus. Medulla script. in
praelud. c. 4. Petrus (...). page 39. and 40. Berchor. Dictionar. v. (...).
The mystical Sion, the Church, which in her primitive state was adorned of
her spouse, with such, and so many royal graces, is now clouded and eclipsed,
with the black mist of ignorance, iniquity, and error, and we behold her
cast down from heaven, and as a desert uninhabited of virtue, and if any godly
people remain, they are esteemed as Arabians and Saracens. And in the same
place Ibid. art. 17. Roderic. spec. page 316. Dies. postil: Ser. 4. d. Not.
Dom. page 363. Thom. Frater lib. d. Condit. Praelat.
The Prelates of the Church are an army of devils: Potius depraedandis and
spoliandis and scandalizandis hominibus quam lucris animarum operam dantes:
They rather labor to rob, spoil, and scandalize men, than to win souls.

Honorius Angustodonensis Honor. Angust. Dial. d. (...). and lib. (...). Verte
te ad Ciues Babyloniae, and vide quales sint and per quas tendant plateas, etc.
Vide veni huc ad supercilium montis, and cuncta possis aedificia cemere
damnatae ciuitatis, Intuere Principes eius and Iudices (nempe Cardinales (...),
etc.) Ecce posita est in eis bestiae seeds. Omni tempore ad malum sunt intenti
semper negotijs iniquitatis inexplebiliter occupati, flagitia non solum
faciunt, sed and alios facere instruunt: sancta vendunt scelera emunt totis
(...) laborant, ne soli ad Tartara veniant. Verte te ad Clerum, and videbis in
eis Bestiae (...), Dei seruitium negligunt, terrenis lucris inseruiunt,
Sacerdotium per immunditiem polluunt, populum per (...) seducunt, Deum per mala
opera ab negant omnes Scripturas ad salutem pertinentes abdicam, omnibus modes
laqueos ad ruinam populo substernunt, quem caecum ipsi caeci ad interitum
praecedunt. Contemplare and Monachorum conciliabula, and videbis in eis Bestiae
Tabernacula per fictam professionem Deum irridentes iram eius prouocant normam
regularem moribus and vita calcant, per habitum seculum fallunt, (...) deceptos
decepti ipsi decipiunt, secularibus negotijs impliciti sunt, (...) seruitio Dei
desides existunt: plerique
, who lived in the year 1120. Turn thee to the citisens of Babylon, and
observe what manner of people they be, and by what streets they walk; come
hither to the top of the mountain, that thou may behold all the habitations

b (...). Annal. Boior. l. 7. p. 530. Quemcun que sceleris obnoxium,
parricidio, incestu, sacrilegio, pollutum, continuo vbi cruciculam vesti
assuisset, solutum esse and crimine and poena declamitabant, quippe his aliter
ab (...). com. Tit. 1. p. 67. Prostat and in quaestu pro meretrice sedet, liber
palam ac public, hic impressus, hodie que vt olim venalis Taxa Camerae, sieve
Cancellariae Apostolicae, in scriptus, in quo plus scelerum discas licet, quam
in omnibus vitiorum (...), and summarijs and plurimis quidem licentia, omnibus
autem absolutio empturientibus, proposita. pa. 68. Habeat iam Roma pudorem, and
(...) nullius frontis criminum, omne genus catalogum, prostituere desinat.
Thirdly, the Roman Church has many passages in the very course of Doctrine,
to destroy or corrupt holiness: for to omit their gross superstitions,
Pharisaicall Traditions, and Ambr. Hexam. l. 1. c. 8. Chrysostom. sup. Ioh. ho. 58.
and ad Pop. Antioch. Ho. 1. and sup. Genes. Ho. 10. and Hom. 35. Ambros. ser.
35. Cyril. clulian. lib. 7. p. 160. Fran. Picus. Theorem. 5.
, Deuteronomy. 31. 21. Secondly, Their doctrine of Pardons ministered daily occasion of
intolerable wickedness. For although their Scholemen plastered the same with
subtle distinctions, yet the people entertained them according to the outward
letter, and practiced accordingly. Thirdly, By some part of their doctrine they
(...) people to commit sin. Equivocation is a doctrine of Walsingham. Edwar.
1. p. 61. Obtinuit rex a Domino Papa absolutionem a iuramento, etc. vsus
consuetudine and caurela paterna qui quoties instabat necessitas, de
faciliiurare voluit se (...) suorum and eadem (...) voluit (...) quoties sibi
tempus commodior accideret,
, is perilous and pernitio us to the safety of mankind, making way to all kind
of fraud and injustice.

If the Roman Church be so apparently and infinitely holy, why does it openly
maintain Stews, and receive yearly tribute Constit. Otho. d. Concub. Cler.
rem. Videtur quod crimen Meretricij Ecclesia sub dissimulatione transire
debeat, nam and Marischallus Papae de facto exigit tributum a meretricib'.
, and part stake with Harlots? and wherefore are Sanctuaries the harbors and
dens of Assisines, and other enormous delinquents, tolerated and supported
by this Church? It is a monstrous doctrine which was hatched by Pope Urban
Inocent. part. 10. c. 34. Great. Cause. 23. q. 5. cap. 47. Excommunicatorum.
, and approved by Baronius Baron. Anno 1089. n. 11. Non eos homicidas
arbitramur, qui aduersus excommunicatos zelo Catholicae matris ardentes, eorum
quosdam trucidare contigerit.
, That they are not to be judged murderers which slay excommunicate persons.
The exemption of (...) from being tried in Causes Criminal, before Christian
Gulielmus Nubrigensis, lib. 2. cap. 16. Roger. Houeden. Annal. part. Poster.
(...) volebat Presbiteros, Diaconos, Subdiaconos, and alios Ecclesiae Rectores,
si comprehensi fuissent in latrocinio, vel murdra, vel felonia, vel iniqua
combustione, vel in hijs similibus, ducere ad Secularia examina, and punire,
sicut and Laicum. Contra quod Archiepiseopus dicebat etc.
The Judges complained that there were many robberies, and rapes, and murders,
to the number of an hundred then presently committed within the realm by
Ecclesiastical persons (upon presumption of exemption from the censure of the
laws.)

We cannot be persuaded that the Roman Church is holy in such high and
extrordinarie manner as our Adversary boasts, because the greatest Clerks
of that society, undertake the defense of such impieties as are detestable in
Nature, and condemned by the light of common Reason. Garnets Powderplot has
many Patrons. Cardinal Baronius commends to Baron. Anno 1106. n. 14. Quis
negare (...) summu^ fuisse hoc pietatis genus in hoc se exhibuisse crudelem?
Immo ex eo quod non (...) vinculis strinxerit etc. nihil habes in quo damnes
(...), magis quam si vehementi faebre phrenetico, deliranti, (...), furentique,
pius filius (...) vincula (...), si vere intuitu pietatis, vt facere prae se
tulit ea omnia prestitit.
the skies, young Henry the Emperors son for rebelling against his natural
father, for deposing, imprisoning, and bringing him with sorrow to the grave:
what Turk or Savage would be the encomiast of such unnatural and enormous
villainy?

IESVIT.
Most (...) Apostolical, (...) a most glorious succession of Bishops and
Pastors from the Apostles, famous in all monuments of History and Antiquity,
who were never noted as delivering (...) doctrines the one to the other. In
which proof that these properties agree to the Roman, and be wanting in the
Protestant Church, J

ANSWER.
First, If the present Roman Church do want the life and soul of Apostolical
Succession, to wit, Apostolical Doctrine, local and titular Succession is
only a Pharisaicall cloak, or a painted wall, Acts 23.3. and common to
Caiaphas, Paul Samosaten, Nestorius, and to many other notorious Heretics
Anton. Perez. Pentateuch. fid. vol. (...). du. 24. c. 14. (...) haeresis, ibi
fides (...), and proinde ratio verae Ecclesiae (...): quia forma constitutiua
Ecclesiae est vera fides. Vnde cum constet Ecclesiam. Graecam carere verae ^
successio, ad tuendam atque arguendam pro ea rationem verae Ecclesiae. Bosius,
d. sig. (...). lib. 17 ca. 5. Qua in re maxim obseruandum, non esse perpetuum
in ijs Ecclesijs ordinem ((...)) (...), qui fuerit interruptus ab Episcopis
Stapl. princip. Doctr. li. 13. ca. 6. Nec vbi adhuc durat talis personalis
successio, Catholicae tamen successioni quicquam habet affine aut simile, quia
propter haereses quas tenent, and scisma quod faciunt, legitima illa successio
non est. Ambros. d. (...). li. 1. ca. 6. Non habent haereditatem Petri, qui
fidem Petri non habent.
.

Secondly, The visible Succession of the Bishops and Pastors of the said Church
from the Apostles, is not most glorious and famous, by the report of all
monuments of History and Antiquity Abbas. Vsperg. Cron. page 307. Vix
remansit aliquis Episcopatus, sieve dignitas Ecclesiastica, quae non (...)
litigiosa, and Romam deduceretur ipsa causa, sed non ^ thesaurorum in terra, vt
ad te
: but the same has been notoriously distained in latter times, by Simoniacall
entrance of Popes and Prelates, by Schysmaticall intrusions, and by commutation
of the form

First, it is inconsequent to inserre negatiuely from humane History, and to
say Histories are silent, and therefore no such matter was. Our Savior
proves the Pharisees and Sadduces Moses and the Prophets taught, because they
had Snccession, and Histories were silent when they changed the ancient Faith;
they had justified themselves upon as good grounds as Papals do.

Secondly, it is false, which this disputer venteth so confidently, That
Histories and ancient Monuments are altogether silent of the Innouations which
were made by latter Popes: and we are able (as in due place it shall appear)
to produce testimonies

IESVITS 2. Argument.
Protestants have the holy Scriptures delivered unto them by and from the One,
Holy, Catholic, and Apostolical Church: but they received them from no other
Church than the Roman, Ergo the Roman is the One, Holy, Catholic, and
Apostolic Church.

ANSWER.
This Sillogisme is peccant in form, and both the propositions are affirmative
in the second figure; which I note the rather, because the Adversary at the
end of his Argument cries Victoria, saying, An Argument conuicting and
unanswerable. I must therefore reduce the same to a lawful form, and then
answer.

That Church by and from which the Protestants receive the

The Protestants receive the Scriptures from the Roman Church, Ergo

The Roman Church to the Only, Holy, Catholic, and Apostolic

First, If this Argument be conuicting and unanswerable, as the Jesuit
boasts, then these which follow are such.

That, from which the Russians received the Scriptures, is the Only, Holy,
Catholic, and Apostolic Church.

The Russians received the Scriptures from the Greek Church, Ergo

The Greek Church is the Only, Holy, Catholic, and Apostolic Church.

Also, that Church from which the Apostles received the Scriptures was the true
Church.

The Apostles received the Scriptures from the Sinagogue of the Jews, governed
by the Pharisees, Ergo

The Synagogue of the Jews governed by the Pharisees was the true Church.

The delivery of the Text of the holy Scriptures is common to the true, and
corrupt Church, and not proper to the Only, Romans 3.2. And S. Agustine Aug sup.
Psalm. 41. Modo nobis seruiunt Iudaei, tanquam Capsarij nostri sunt, studentibus
nobis codices portant. Id. d. Consens.
testifies of the Jews, That they were Library keepers Aug. sup. Psalm. 56.
Codicem portat (...) vnde credat Christianus: Librarij nostri facti sunt etc.
Idem d. Diuinat. Daem. ca. 7.
to Christians, of the Books of the Law and Prophets. And S. Hierom says
Hierom. sup. (...) saiam c. 6. (...) si aliquis dixerit Hebraeos Libros postea
a Iudaeis esse falsatos, audiat Originem quid in octauo volumine explanationum
Esaiae, huic respondeat quaestiunculae, quod nunquam Dominus and Apostoli qui
caetera crimina arguunt in Scribis and Pharisaeis, de hoc crimine quod erar
maximum (...): sin autem dixerint post (...), and praedicationem Apostolorum
Libros (...) falsatos chachinnum tenere non potero, (...) Saluator and
Euangelistae and Apostoli ita testimonia protulerint, vt Iudaei postea
falsaturi erant. Joseph. c. Appion. li. 1. Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. lib. 3. cap. 9.
(...). Id. d. Praep. Euang. li. 8. ca. 2. Ex Philone. (...) annorum millibus,
(...) maiore tempore iam transacto, nec verbum vnum in lege illius esse
immutatum, sed centies vnusquisque (...) morietur potius quam legi Mosaicae
derogabit, pa 141.
, That the Hebrews did not corrupt the Text of the old Testament. Also the
Donatists and Nouatians delivered the incorrupt Text of holy Scripture to their
followers.

Secondly, the proposition of the former Argument has Church, therefore they
received them, to wit, immediately from

The Minor proposition, to wit, the Protestants received the Scriptures, from
no other Church than from the Roman, may be taken in a double sense.

For either it may be understood originally, and by way of authority: that is:
The Protestants received the Scriptures, both originally and deriuatiuely,
from, and by the authority of the Roman Church only; or else it may be
understood indicatiuely:

The Protestants received the Scriptures by the hand of the Aug. c. Faust.
Manich. lib. 11. ca. 2. Palam est quantum in re dubia ad fidem and certitudinem
valeat Catholicae Ecclesiae Authoritas, quae ab ipsis fundatissimis sedibus
Apostolorum vsque in hodiernum diem, succedentibus sibimet Episcopis, secundum
seriem successionis and tot populorum consensione (...). Driedo. d. Eccles.
Dogmat. l. 2. c. 3. Scriptura cognoscebatur esse Sacra and vera, ex ea quae
tunc erat Ecclesia, cui ipse Christus perhibuit testimonium, viua voce Signoru^
and prodigiorum attestatione. Proinde fides tunc ex persona probanda veniebat.
In Ecclesia autem quae (...) est, Christus nec sic praesens propria voce
loquitur, nec se loqui ostendit sub attestatione prodigiorum and signorum, nec
.

And besides the former Tradition, by reading and studying the holy Scriptures,
they learned sufficient matter, out of those heavenly books, to confirm them,
that they were divine, and of God. Philemon received S. Paul's Epistle by the
hand of Onesimus, he did not esteem Onesimus a servant, who had been a
fugitive, an infallible witness in himself: but the argument Paul's Epistle,
persuaded him that S. Paul was the Author. A man may receive the Kings
Proclamation, from off a pillar, or his great Seal by the hand of a mean
clarke: So likewise the books of holy Scriptures are first conveyed unto us by
Ecclesiastical testimony and Tradition: but they contain heavenly verity,
and doctrine within themselves, which persuade the diligent readers and
learners of them, that they are divine.

IESVIT.
The Mayor I prove. If Protestants have not the Text of Scripture, by and
from, the one, holy, Catholic and Apostolic Church, they cannot be certain
they have the true incorrupt Text the Apostles delivered, and recommended Ergo,
they have it upon

ANSWER.
The Argument whereby the Adversary confirms his Mayor, is this:

If the Protestants receive the Scriptures from any other, but the Holy
Catholic Church, they cannot be certain that the same are incorrupt, because
a fallible Witness may deceive.

Answ. They which receive the Scriptures from the hands Gregor. Moral. Lib. 16.
cap. 17. In Scriptura eius quasi os eius intuentur; quia Deus per eam loquitur
omne quod vult.
( Acts 24. 25.) then they which immediately receive the Text of the Scripture
from a fallible Church, may be certain that they are not deceived.

It is not necessary, that the Messenger, by and from whose Greg. Val. to. 3.
Disp. 2. Punct. 2. page 30. Bellarm. d. Council. lib. 2. c. 2.
.

And from hence it will in like sort follow, that for the Bellarm. d. Council.
lib. 1. c. 10. Primis trecentis annis caruit Ecclesia (...) generalibus.
, yea, for certain Ages, after general Councels began, until the Canon of
the Scripture was expressly assigned by some general or particular Council,
confirmed by the Pope, Christians should have remained uncertain, touching the
sacred

The Authority of the holy Scripture depends upon the immediate Messenger
which delivers the Books unto us, no more than the Authority of the Kings
Proclamation depends upon the Sergeant who proclaymes it, or sets it upon a
Pillar, to be read of all men, but upon the first Divine Witnesses, which we
know to be the Authors of the Scripture: not because Pope Paul the fifth, or
Clement the eight say so, but because the Witnesses themselves affirm it in
their Scripture, Read before, page 13. etc.


IESVIT.
Now the Minor, That they have the Scripture from the Roman, is apparent: For
what other Church did deliver unto Luther the Text of the Bible? assuring him,
that they had it by Tradition of Ancestors, time out of Whitaker, and others,
but Whitak. Lib. d. Eccles. page 369. M. Dove in his Persuasion, page 13.
Luther, contra Anabaptist.
particularly, by Luther himself: Ergo, the Roman Church is the one, holy,
Catholic, Apostolic Church, whose Tradition does deliver infallibly unto us
the Text of Scripture.

ANSWER.
The Protestants receiving the Books of holy Scripture by

IESVIT.
And if the true Apostolical Text, then also the true Apostolical Sense.

ANSWER.
The sequel is denied: For it is not necessary, that they which truly deliver
the Text, shall also truly deliver the Apostolical sense: and on the
contrary, a lying sense may be delivered Hilar. ad (...) pa. 281. (...)
Scripturas fine sensu (...). (...) contra (...). page 67. (...). (...) 1. in
(...).
, Donatists, and many other Heretics Greg. Nazianz. c. Apollinar. Tertull. d.
Prescript. cap. (...) Ista Haerefis si (...) integras praestat, etc.
Nihilominus diuersas (...) commentata (...), etc. Ibid. cap. 38. (...): lib. 3.
cap. 12. (...) quidem (...), interpretationes vero conuertunt.
.

IESVIT.
This I prove. If the Apostles did not deliver the bare (...). in Exam. Council.
Trid. part. 1. fol. 74.
Church received from the Apostles and Apostolical men, not only the Text of
Scripture, but also the right Doct. Bancroft Survey, page 379.
and native sense, which is agreeable to the Doctrine of the (...). (...). cap.
2.


ANSWER.
The Assumption of the former Argument, to wit, The Read before, page 45. etc.
Apostles, together with the Text, delivered the true sense of all their
Scriptures to those people to whom they wrote, is uncertain. Chemnitius; and
the discord which is in the Commentaries (...). Val. to. 3. d. Trad. page 377.
Fatendum est raro accidere posse, vt quae sit Doctorum omnium, etc. de
Religione Sententia satis cognoscatur. Machlin. in 1. part. Thom. Quaest. 1.
art. 10. (...) 49. Bellarm. d. bon. operib. in part. lib. 1. cap. 2.
of the Fathers (yea of Romists themselves) upon the Scriptures, argues the
contrary.

IESVIT.
Whereupon S. Augustine argues, That they that Aug. de vtil. Cred. cap. 14.
deliver the Text of Christ's Gospel, must also deliver the Exposition;
affirming, That he would sooner refuse to believe Christ, than admit any
interpretation, contrary to them by whom he was brought to believe in Christ.
For they that can deliver by uniform Tradition a false sense, why may they not
also deliver a false Text, as received

ANSWER.
Saint Augustine in the place objected, Lib. d. vtil. Cred. cap. 14. confuteth
the Manichees, who condemned Faith, and affirmed, That people ought to credit
nothing, but that which is demonstrated by reason Christo credendum esse
negant, nifi indubitata ratio reddita (...), etc.
: And he argues against these Heretics, first, out of some of their own
grounds; for they

Secondly, This Father proves the necessity of Faith, because without giving
credit to some report, it was impossible to receive the knowledge of Christ.

Thirdly, Whereas the Manichees required, that men should learn to know
Christ's word from them: Saint Augustine says, That if he had no better Guides
to follow, than Vos aute^ tam pauci, and tam turbulenti, and tam noui, (...)
dubium est, quin nihil dignum authoritate praeferatis.


But Saint Augustine in this place treats not of the sense of the Scripture,
neither does he say absolutely, that he would sooner refuse to believe Christ,
than to admit any interpretation contrary to them by whom he was brought to
believe in

It is clear, that Saint Augustine did not always tie himself, Pelagius
arose Aug. d. praed. sanct. c. 14.
: and in his work, De Doctrina Christiana Lib. 1. c. 36.
, he makes twofold charity, the model of expounding Scripture, and not the
authority of Ecclesiastical Teachers, whom he oftentimes expounds with
mitigation, or rejects with modesty Epist. 111. and Epist. 112.
, and he is most constant in advancing the authority of Scripture, before any
Aug. c. Cresc. 2. c. 31. etc. Faust. Manich. l. 11. c. 5. and d. Ciu. Dei. l.
11. c. 3. and l. 14. c. 7.
.

IESVIT.
For they that can deliver by uniform Tradition a false sense; Why may they
not also deliver a false Text, as received from the Apostles? An argument
conuincing and unanswerable.

ANSWER.
The Jesuit imagines that this Argument is invincible. But let not him that
girdeth on his harness boast himself, as he that puts it off, 1. Kings
20. 11. And Saul's brags, That God had delivered David into his hand, proved
vain: 1. Sam. 23. 14. and 24. 5. The Argument reduced to form, will discover
its own weakness: If the Text of the Scripture may (...) easily be
corrupted as the sense; then all they which can deliver by uniform Tradition,
a false sense, may also deliver a false Text. But the Text of the Scripture may
as easily be corrupted, as the sense. Ergo: All they which can deliver by
uniform Tradition a false sense, may also deliver a false Text.

The assumption of this Syllogism (which although it were concealed by the
Paralogist, yet it must be added, to make the Argument perfect) is apparently
false, and the contrary is true. The Text of the Scripture cannot so easily be
corrupted Aug. Ep. 48. Salmer. Tom. 1. Proleg. 1.
as the sense; and therefore it is not necessary, that they which following
humane Tradition, or their own invention, may deliver a false sense, shall
likewise deliver a false Text.

First, the Text of the Scripture is contained in Records, and Books, which
are dispersed throughout the whole Christian world, and preserved in all
Churches, and the Coppies and Transcripts of them are innumerable. Tradition is
in the breast of a few, and authentically (as Papals affirm) in the breast of
(...). d. verb. Dei l. 4. c. 9. (...) ^ Apostolicas Traditiones.
.

Secondly, when God Almighty would have the knowledge and memory of things to
be perpetual, he commanded that they should be committed to writing Aug.
sup. Psalm. 144. (...) generatio vadit and generatio manet, and (...) secula
(...) mortalibus Scriptura Dei manner debuit, and quodda Chyrographu^ Dei quod
omnes (...) legerent, and via^ promissionis eius tenerent. Chrysostom. in Mat. Hom.
1. Postquam omnis populus Iudeorum, in (...) ima delapsus est, necessario inde
litetae dantur and tabulae, and ea quae per has administratur admonitio. Et hoc
non tantum veteris Testamenti sanctis sed etiam noui accedisse perspicimus.
: Exodus 17. 14. and 34. 27. Deuteronomy. 31. 19. And although the law of nature was
engraven in man's heart, and might have been preserved for ever, by uniform
succession; yet God himself wrote the Deuteronomy. 10.4. and inspired Moses to write
it in Books: Exodus 20. Deuteronomy. 5. And although the Precepts of the Law of Nature
were more firmly fixed in man's heart, Aug. sup. Psalm. 57. Manu formatoris
nostri, ipsa veritas in cordibus nostris scripsit Tertul. d. cor. (...). c. 6.
Chrysostom. in Ioh. Hom. 13. (...). Epist. 66. Aug. confefl. l. 2. c. 4. Id. sup.
sermon. Dom. in mont. l. 2. c. 9 Hier. ad Algas. q. 8.
and the Tradition thereof was more generally diffused than any positive
Tradition can be: yet in process of time, many parts thereof were corrupted,
both in regard of knowledge and practice.

Thirdly, experience of all ages testifies, that the Text of the Scripture
has been preserved inviolable, even among Jews and Heretics: whereas the
sense of the Scripture, made known by Tradition only, is forgotten in part
(...). d. ver. Relig. l. 1. c. 10. p. 38. Quae (...) voce ab Apostolis
tradeba^tur, eadem si non omnia, saltem nonnulla per maiorum nostrorum, and
superiorum Ecclesiarum manus, and conciliorum approbationes, ad nos (...)
existimandum est.
, and they which disagree about the sense, and some parcels of the Canon of the
Scripture, are at one, concerning the very letter of the Text. For although
there were some, which in ancient time rejected the Epistle of St. James, and
the latter of St. Peter's, etc. yet the literal Text of these Scriptures, was
faithfully preserved

f (...). (...). 73. (...) d. Dogmat.
Fourthly, whereas the Jesuit compares unanimous Tradition of the sense of
Scripture, with the written letter and Text of the Scripture; unless he
equivocate in the name, terming that Tradition which is collected from the
Scripture, (...). Hist. Eccles. l. 2. c. 23. (...), etc.
such uniform Tradition as he boasts of, is very rare: for it must be such,
as in all ages, and in all Orthodoxall Churches, Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. l. 2. c.
23. and l. 3. c. 3. and 22.
, and the later Roman Church, disagreeth with the ancient Greg. Mor. l. 19. c.
17. De qua re non inordinate facimus, si ex libris licer non Canonicis (
Machabeorum) sed tamen ad edificationem plebis editis, testimonium proferamus.
, the one denying Council. (...). sess. 4. Decret. 1. Receptio and numerario
lib. sacr. vet. and No. Test.
, and the other affirmingd, the books of Macchabees to be Canonical.

The Articles also of the late Popish Creed, compiled by Pius the fourth Bulla
Pij. 4. p. 294. (...) vita Pij4 p. 384, etc. Profiteor septem esse vere and
proprie Sacramenta nouae legis, a Jesus Christo Domino nostro instituta, etc.
Omnia and singula quae de peccato originali, and de iustificatione in (...)
synodo Tridentino, etc. Profiteor in missa offerri Deo verum, proprium, and
propitiatoriu^ (...) pro viuis and defunctis, etc. Fieri conuersionem totius
substantiae panis in corpus, and totius substantiae vini in sanguinem, etc.
Fateor etiam sub (...) specie, etc. Sanctos inuocandos esse, eorum reliquias
venerandas, etc. Imagines Christi ac Dei parae, etc. habendas, and debitum
honorem ac venerationem impartiendam, etc. Romans Ecclesiam omnium Ecclesiarum
matrem ac Magistram agnosco. Romanoque pontifici, etc. Hanc Catholicam fidem
extra quam nemo saluus esse (...), etc.
, are not agreeable to the ancient Tradition of the Catholic Church, or to the
Tradition of the elder Roman Church it self: and among sundry other matters
in question betwixt us, this Jesuit is not able to show, by an uniform
Tradition of all ages, that the place of Saint Paul, 1. Cor. 3. 12. is
understood of Popish Purgatory; or Math. 16. 19. John 20.23. of Jubilees and
Indulgences; or the place of Acts 10. 13. Rise Peter, and kill, of murdering
Princes, or of the temporal dominion of the Pope Sentent. Card. Baron. sup.
excom. venetorum.
.

b Gretsar. Def. Bellarm. d. verb. Dei page 1713. Regula non dicit id esse
Traditionem Apostolicam quod vniuersa Ecclesia semper and omni tempore
credidit, sed quod tota Ecclesia (Papa cum Concilio vel sine Concilio. Colloq.
Ratisbon. p. 35.) credit and amplectitur in presenti.
If the Papists would impose no other sense upon the Scripture, than such as is
confirmed by uniform Tradition, the difference between them and us would
easily be composed: but Victoria, Invincible, Unanswerable, before the combat
is finished: but they are compelled to forge Authors, to impose false
expositions upon the Texts of Fathers, sometimes to abridge, sometimes to
enlarge the Tomes of Counsels, and to purge and corrade Ecclesiastical
writers, old and new: Sixth. (...). Biblioth. Ep. Dedicat. ad Piu^. 5. Deinde
expurgari and emaculari curasti omnia Catholicoru^ Scriptorum, ac precipue
veterum patrum, scripta, Haereti little nostrae aetatis foecibus contaminata,
and venenis (...).
and yet being unable to prevail by all the former, they are forced in many
cases, to press the bare authority of the Pope, and his adheres, to warrant
their Tradition.

IESVITS 3d. Argument.
My third proof I ground upon a principle most certain, In the sum of the
Conference before his Majesty. pa. (...).
and set down by your most gracious Majesty, That the Roman Church was once
the Mother Church, and consequently the One, Holy, Catholic, and Apostolic
Church, all other Churches being her daughters: and that she is not to be
forsaken, further than it can be proved that she departed from her self, that
is, from the Mother and original Doctrine delivered by the Apostles.

ANSWER.
This principle whereupon you ground your third Argument, is neither true in it
self, nor yet confessed by his excellent Majesty, in the place whereunto you
refer us Sum Confer. at Hampton Court, Ianuar. 14. 1603. page 75. This
being his constant resolution, That no Church ought further to separate it
self from the Church of Rome, either in Doctrine or Ceremony, than she had
departed from herself when she was in her flourishing and best estate, and
from Christ her Lord and Head.
. His Majesty affirms, That we ought not to depart from the Church of Rome
in Doctrine or Ceremony, further than she had departed from her self, in her
best estate, and from Christ her head. This sentence of our most religious King
is consequent upon S. Paul's Romans 12. 18. and Romans 14. 13. and the same is
consonant to Charity and Reason Aug. d. Bapt. c. Donat. li. 6. ca. 44. Ipsi
Gentiles si quid diuinum and rectum, etc. Orig sup. Exodus Hom. 11. Basil.
Hexam. Hom. 5. Clem. Alexand. Strom. li. 1.
, and argues a mind desirous of Concord and Peace, and averse from
unnecessary Innouations. And as this moderation is commendable in all men, so
it is most agreeable to him that is a Father of peace, whose word is Beati
Pacifici Symb. Othonis Imp. pax cum hominibus cum vitijs bellum.
. But whereas you incroach upon his Majesty's speech, adding a gloss which is
not warranted by the Text, and infer a conclusion which the premises afford
not, you are herein injurious, both to the Author you allege, and to the
Truth.

The Roman was never, by divine institution There is difference between the
Mother Church, which fignifieth a Church, out of whose womb all other Churches
issue. and a Mother Church, which (as Turtullian calls Matrices Ecclesias)
imports not fingularitie of One, Holy, etc. but only Verity and Prioritie
before others, whereof it was a Mother.
, the Mother Church, in regard of all Christians, neither Universal, in
respect of an absolute command and jurisdiction over all particular Churches,
as is challenged by the Canon, Did. 12. c. 1. Non decet, etc. Gratian. Did.
12. ca. 1. Non decet a capite


But it was once a Mother Church, as the Seas of Patriarchs are styled
Mother-Churches, or a Mother Church respectively Theod. Hist. Eccles. lib. 5.
cap. 9. Matris omnium (...) Hierosolomitanae, reuerendistimum, and Dei (...)
Cyrillum Episcopum esse vobis significamus.
Theoderet speaking of the Church of Jerusalem, says, (...). We make known
unto you, that the most reverend and godly Cyrill is made Bishop of Jerusalem,
which is the Mother of all Churches.

The Roman Church, once a Metropolitan, or patriarchall Mother Church, since
the days of Hildebrand, is suspected to be the Mother spoken of, Apoc. 17. 5.
and some of your Sarisbur. Policrat. li. 6. ca. 24.
, Nontam se matrem exhibet quam Noueream, she behaueth her self more like a
stepdame than a natural mother, her breasts have been very dry for sundry
ages past Espenc. Digres. in 1. Timoth. li. 1. ca. 11. Fides ex diuini verbi
auditu. To. 10. Vbi ergo id nec legitur nec auditur, fidem perire, ac
labefactari necesse est, (...) hodie (...) dolor, omnib' fere locis cernimus,
vt ad tempora propinquare videamur de quib' Dominus: putas filius hominis
veniens, fidem inueniet super terram. August. tr. 3. in ep. Ioh. Est matter
Ecclesia and vbera eius duo testamenta Scripturarum diuinarum, etc.
and she deprived her children of a principal portion of the food of life, and
in steed of milk delivered them water mixed with chaulke Iren. li. 3. ca. 19.
(...). d. fid. Orthod. c. Arian. c. 1. Vt Gypsum aqua permixtum lac color
mentitur, ita per verisimilem confessionem Traditio inimica suggeritur.
: Her public readings and service were in an unknown tongue: the holy
Scriptures were closed up, that people might not cast their eyes upon them:
fabulous legends were read and preached Espenceus in 2. Timoth. 4. digr. 21.
pa. 150. 151. and sup. 1. Tim. digress. lib. 1. ca. 11. Maiores nostri, tanta
licet quanta nos erga sanctos deuotione, iustum tamen non putarunt, tot
sanctorum gestarecitari, vt legi non possint sacra vtriusque Testam. volumina.
Facilius Augiae Stabulum quam talibus fabellis, etc. Ludouic. Viues. lib. 2. d.
corrupt. artium. in fine. and Ib. li. 5.
in steed of Gods word: and hereby it came to pass, as some Nauar. Enchir. ca.
11. n. 6. In vniuersa Repub. Christiana, tanta est circa haec (...) dia, vt
multos passim inuenias, nihil magis in particulari, explicit de hijs rebus
credere, quam
say, That the greater number of people understood no more concerning God, and
things divine, than Infidels or Heathen people.

IESVIT.
But she cannot be proved to have changed her Doctrine, since the Apostles, by
any monuments of History or Antiquity: yea the contrary in my judgment may
be most evidently proved, in this sort.

ANSWER.
If by monuments of History and Antiquity, be understood Human or
Ecclesiastical Monuments, it is inconsequent to infer, that the present
Roman Church has not changed her doctrine since the Apostles, although this
could not be demonstrated The rule by which we must try doctrines is the word
of God, and not humane History (...). d. unit. Eccles. cap. 3. Non audiamus
hec dico, haec dicis, sed audiam' haec dicit Domin'. Sunt certi libri dominici
quoru^ authoritati vtrique consentimus, vtrique credimus, vtrique seruimus, ibi
quaeramus Ecclesiam, ibi discutiam' causam nostram. Ibid. Auserantur illa de
medio, quae aduersus nos inuicem, no^ ex diuinis Canonicis libris, sed aliunde
recitam'. Nolo humanis documentis, sed diuinis oraculis, Ecclesiam demonstrari.
Ib. ca. 16. Ecclesiam suam demonstrent, si possunt non in sermonibus and
rumoribus Afrorum, non in concilijs Episcoporum suorum, etc. sed in praescripto
legis, etc. in ipsius Pastoris vocib', etc. hoc est in omnibus Canonicis
sanctorum librorum authoritatibus.
, and the word of God is true, and abides for ever, whereas humane History is
fallible, contingent, and corruptible. 1. It is not absolutely necessary that
humane Histories of all matters should be composed, and the world continued
many Canus. loc. Theolog. li. 11. ca. 4. Praeter Authors sacros, nullus
Historicus certus esse potest, etc. Horant. loc. lib. 5. cap. 3. Gillius d. Deo
and sacr. Doctr. li. 1. tr. 7. ca. 15. August. d. Ciuit. Dei li. 18. ca. 38.
and 40. and li. 21. ca. 6.
Thirdly, they may totally perish, and be suppressed, or corrupted by the
enemies of Truth. Read a late Treatise touching the visibilitie of the (...),
Sect. 15. pa. 68.69. how Papists burned the works of (...) and others which
were opposite to them.
Fourthly, History may be repugnant to History, and that which is affirmed by
some, may be contradicted or contrauerted by others The Story of Pope (...)
affirmed at least by thirty Popish Historians, and other Doctors, and of late
stiffly opposed by other Papals, Vid. Joan. Wolph memorabil. An. Dom. 854.
(...). loc. (...). 5. d. Ecclesia sect. 197. And by the Story, touching Pope
(...), who is affirmed to have been an Heretic by ancient History, and by
many Papals, yet the same is stiffly contradicted by Modernes, Albertus Pighius,
Bellarmine, Baronius, Andradius, etc.
: and the largeness and difficulty of the Monuments of Antiquity may be
such, as that few people can be able to read and examine them: and if they
which read and compare them be opposite in judgment each to other, the greater
part of people shall be perplexed, Bellarm. d. Council. li. 1. ca. 2. Libri ipsi
(...) conseruati Espenc. sup. 1. Timoth. Digress li. 1. ca. 11. page 223.
Argumentum est, conciliorum acta non vbique integra esse.
. Many things supposititious, have been added to the works of the Ancient,
and bastardly Books and Sentences pass under the titles of Fathers. Our
Adversaries being a party whose doctrine is to be examined (according to their
own challenge) by Monuments of Antiquity, have presumed to correct, purge,
and alter such Records. Lastly, when the testimony of Historians repugnant to
their present Tenet, is produced against Papals, Eusebius Paramo. d. Orig.
Inquisit. lib. 3. d. pontif. author. in Temporal. q. 1. Opinio. 1. number. 95.
page 436. Nec curandum est de opinione and historia Eusebij, cum ab Ecclesia
sit reprobara vt inquit Gelasius. d. 15. c. Sancta Romana vel eo quia Arrianus
and Arrianorum protector fuit, etc.
, Socrates, Sozomene, etc. Baronius, a new vpstart, censureth all Historians
(...). Anal. tom. 1. praefat. Idem. Anno 395. n. 41. and anno 400. n. 42. Idem.
Anno 774. n. 10.12.13. (...). Anno 996. n. 54. Idem. An. 1048. number. 1.
. Pighius Bannes. 22. quest. 1. ar. 10. pa. 58. Et certe (...) est quod post
900. (...) Albertus Pighius inuenerit testes illos falsarios (...).
, after one thousand years, controls the testimony of general Councels, and
it is a rule among them, that the ancient Fathers (then much less Histories)
are not to be (...) any (...), than they (...) the keys and (...) of the (...)
Church (...). d. (...). (...) page 273. (...). Resp. (...). (...). 5. page 140.
Neque enim patres censentur, cum (...), quod ab Ecclesia (...) acceperunt, vel
scribunt, vel docent. (...). Mus. Comment. Romans c. 14. Ego. vt (...), plus vni
(...) crederem, in hijs quae (...) tangunt, quam mill (...), (...), Gregorijs,
etc. pa. 606. (...). Prier. li. d. Mod. Inquir. Reg. 6. Dimitte Doctores
doctores esse, Ecclesiam (...) necesse est: illi possunt errare Ecclesia non
potest errare.
.

IESVIT.
The Doctrines that were for diverse ages universally received in the Christian
Church, and no time of their beginning is assigneable, must be Doctrines
unchanged coming from the Apostles.

ANSWER.
This Proposition may hold in prime and essential Articles of Doctrine, but
not generally in all Doctrines: and some learned (...). Dialog. pa. 1. lib. 4.
ca. 9. and lib. 5. cap. 7. (...). Arms. (...). q. 1. p. 9. (...). (...). pent.
fid. vol. 1. dub. 23. c. 2. (...). 4.
.

IESVIT.
But it is most clear, and confessed by the Protestants, Doct. (...), Fulke,
(...), (...), Bale, (...), (...), (...) and others, Whitaker Powell, Bucan.
Field, and others.
whose testimony (plentiful in this behalf, if need require) Boniface the
third.

ANSWER.
It is neither clear in it self, nor yet confessed by Protestants, that the
Doctrines of the Roman Church, which Protestants refuse, have been universally
received for 1000 years the Canon of the holy Scriptures (...) praef. in Math.
q. 19. Nos (...), quare potius (...) effet, Marco and (...); (...) and (...),
quam libro (...) and (...), qui non (...) in Canone, cum non appareat aliqua
ratio mayor de hoc quam de illo: sed solum sequimur Ecclesiam, quia ipsa posuit
libros (...) in Canone: librum aute^ Judith and Tobiae extra Canone^. (and
postea:) Ecclesia vniuersalis, etc. Hoc conformiter and vniformit (...).
and the pre-eminence of (...). Romans l. 2. Printed at (...), 1520. (...) debet
(...) antequam (...) in campanili: paranda sunt ideo vas aquae benedicendae,
aspersorium vas cum sale, lintea munda, oleu^ sanctum, sanctum Chrysma,
Thymiama, thus (...) Thuribulum cum igne: Pontifex and Diaconus, etc. sint in
suis vestimentis, precibus peractis pontifex lauat campanam cum dicta aqua and
cum pollice
, etc. were not generally received in the Church universal, for a thousand
years at least: And a great number of Believers, which in this West part of
the world, have always denied and resisted these Articles; and among other
opponents, there were a people, called Waldenses, Leonistae, pauperes de
Lugduno, etc. many in number, and largely diffused through diverse Countries,
who denied the foresaid Popish Articles, and whose Doctrine, in the most
points, was consonant to that which reformed Churches do now profess.
Reinerius, Reiner. cont. Haeret. c. 4. Inter omnes sectas quae adhuc sunt vel
fuerunt, non fuisse (...). Ecclesiae, quam (...), idque tribus de causis. Prima
est (...) est diuturnior, aliqui enim dicunt quod durauerit a temporibus
Syluestri, aliqui a tempore Apostolorum. Se (...), quia generalior, fere enim
nulla est terra in qua haec secta non sit. Tertia, quia cum omnes aliae sectae
immanitate blasphemiarum in Deum, audientibus horrorem inducant, haec scilicet
Leonistarum, magnam habet speciem pietatis, eo quod coram hominibus just
viuant, and been omnia de Deo (...), and omnes Articulos qui^ in symbolo
continentur, solum modo Romanam Ecclesiam blasphemant, and Clerum, cui
multitudo Laicorum fa cilis est ad credendum. (...). Hist. Franc. l. 1. p. 7.
Edit. an. 1581. A Waldensibus and eorum in Aquitania ac vicina regione
successoribus qui ab Albio, (...) in septimania vrbe primaria Albigenses dicti
sunt. Hi inuitis Principibus Christianis omnibus, Cirea annum 1100. and
temporibus subsequentibus, doctrinam suam ab ea quam hodie protestants
amplectuntur (...) differentem, non per Galliam (...) totam, sed etiam per
omnes (...) Europae (...) diffeminarunt. Nam Galli, (...), Angli, Scoti, Itali,
Germani, Bohemi, Saxones, Poloni, Lithuani, and gentes
an Inquisitour of the Church of Rome, living about the year one thousand two
hundred fifty four, in a Book Printed at Ingolstade, writes in this manner
of the Waldenses, which he calls Leonists: Among all Sects, which are or
have formerly been, none is more pernicious to the Church than that of the
Leonists. First, because it continued longer than any other, for some say it
has lasted ever since Pope Siluester, others say ever since the Apostles.
Secondly, because no Sect is more general than this, for there is scarce any
country, in which it is not found. Thirdly, whereas other Sects deter men
with their horrible blasphemies, this Sect of the Leonists makes a great show
of godliness, because they live righteously before men, and believe all things
rightly touching God, and concerning all other Articles of the Ceed: only they
blaspheme the Roman Church and Clergy, in which thing the Laity is forward
to give credit unto them.

IESVIT.
Secondly, That Protestants cannot tell the time when Ergo, the Roman Church
never changed her Faith.

ANSWER.
If the Antecedent were true, yet it follows not, Ergo the Abraham first
began to change and deuiate from the Doctrine of Noah, and Sem; yet it is
certain, that they had changed their Religion Ambros. lib. 2. cap. 3. and 7.
d. Abraham. (...). d. Ciuit. Dei, lib. 16. c. 12. Cedrenus compend. Histor.
Genebrard. Chronol. lib. 1. An. 1949. Andr. Masius, sup. Ios. 24. (...). li.
(...). (...). Sermon. 2. d. Poenit. Clement. Recognit. lib. 1.
, Josh. 24. 2. And were not the Sodomites transgressors of the Law of Nature,
because the first beginning of their transgression cannot be known? How many
wicked Customs have been common in the World, whose authors and first
beginners were unknown to Posterity? The time is not Matthew. 5. and 6. and 7.
and 15. and 19. and 23.

If a Tenant have by himself and his predecessors long held an House, which is
now in decay, and ready to drop down; the Landlord, by this Law of the
Jesuits, Ergo, shall never compel the Tenant to make reparation, unless he be
able to demonstrate to the Tenant, in what year and month every

IESVIT.
So that her Doctrines are to be received as Apostolical, supposing the Mayor
of this Argument be true, That August. lib. 4. d. Bap. contra Donat. c. 6. and
24. lib. 5. cap. 23. (...). Defense, page 351, 352.
Principle set down by Saint Augustine, allowed by Doctor Whitgift, late
Archbishop of Canturburie, who in his Books written by public authority
against Puritans, citing diverse Protestants, as concurring in opinion with
him, says, Whatsoever Opinions are not known to have begun since the Apostles
times, the same are not new, or secundarie, but received their original from
the Apostles. But because this Principle of Christian Divinity brings in ( as
M. Cartwright speaks) all Popery, The Ward. of M. Cartwright alleged, ibid.
page 352.
in the judgment of all men; I will further demonstrate the same, though of it
self clear enough.

ANSWER.
If the Mayor of this Argument were granted, to wit, Doctrines universally
received, whose beginning is not known, are to be (...) as Apostolical; yet
the inference is false, because the Roman Doctrines opposed by us, were never
universally received, but by many either not heard of, or rejected and
contradicted.

Neither is the former Principle sufficiently proved out Augustine: First,
because he speaks in all the places objected, of Customs August. d. Bapt.
c. Don. lib. 5. cap. 23. Apostoli autem nihil quidem exinde preceperunt, sed
consuetudo illa quae opponebatur Cypriano, ab eorum Traditione exordium
sumpsisse credenda est, sicut multa quae vniuersa tenet Ecclesia, and ob hoc,
ab Apostolis praecepta been creduntur, quanquam scripta non inueniantur. At
enim (...) est de Haereticis, etc.
and matters of Fact and Practice, the right and Doctrine whereof is found in
holy Scripture. Secondly, the Jesuit conueyeth into his Proposition certain
words (to wit, Doctrines universally received, etc.) which are not found in S.
Augustine. And this Father did never allow, that the universal Church should
believe any thing, as Doctrine of Faith, which was not contained expressly, or
deriuatiuely, in holy Scripture August. Epist. 142. Initium obedientiae est
quid praecipiatur velle cognoscere, and pars est obsequij didicisse quid
facias, Scito itaque in Scripturis Diuinis, per quas solas potes plenam
intelligere Dei voluntatem prohiberi quaedam, praecipi quaedam, concedi aliqua,
nonnulla suaderi. Prohibentur mala, (...) bona, conceduntur media, perfecta
suadentur.
: And in the same books, out of which Lib. 4. cap. 24. d. Bapt. c. Donatist.
.

So that his meaning is when matters being in common use, and practice, are
questioned, the right and lawfulness has the Apostles. For example: That the
Apostles baptized Infants, Quod vniuersa tenet Ecclesia, nec (...) institutum,
sed semper retentum est, non nisi Authoritate Apostolica, traditum rectissime
creditur August. d. Bapt. c. Don. lib. 4. cap. 24. Idem, Epist. 118. cap. 1.
Illa autem quae non (...)
; That which the universal Church holds, and which was not appointed by
Councels, but always observed, is most rightly believed to be none other, than
a Tradition of the Apostles.

Lastly, that which is produced out of BB. Whitgift and M. Cartwright,
belongs to the Titles or Names of Ecclesiastical Rulers, and to the matter
of Ceremonies. Cartwright had a sour opinion against these, being never so
ancient and inculpable. The most reverend BB. his Adversary answers out of
S. Augustine, Epist. 118. Those things that be not expressed in the Scriptures,
and yet by Tradition observed of the whole Church, come either from Apostles,
or from general Councels, as the observing of Easter, the celebration of the
day of Ascension, etc. The Bishop disputes of adiaphorous Ceremonies, and
Titles of Ecclesiastical persons, no ways blameable, but because they are not
expressly found in Scripture: and concerning such things, he says, That
because their original cannot be found out, it is to be supposed (it is
probable) they have their beginning from the Apostles. But he speaks not in
this manner, touching dogmaticall points, and Articles of Faith: Therefore our
Adversary peruerteth

IESVIT.
The Spirit of Christ, or Christ by his Spirit, being still with the Church,
cannot permit Errors in Faith so to creep into the Church, as they grow
irreformable even by the Principles of Christianity. But if Errors could so
creep into the Church, as their beginning could not be known since the
Apostles, and never be espied till they be universally by the Principles of
Christianity, when whosoever Augustine says, to dispute against the Matthew.
18. v. 17. August. Epist. 118.
whole Church, is most insolent madness, specially when the Et quis ad haec
Idoneus? Who is able to begin a new course of Christianity, and to overthrow
that Doctrine which is universally received, and cannot be Augustine as most
certain, That Doctrines received universally in the Church, without any known
beginning, are truly and verily Apostolical. And of this kind are the Roman,
from which Protestants are gone.

ANSWER.
The Point which you labor to prove, is, That Doctrines universally received,
whose beginning is not reported by Monuments of History and Antiquity, are
Apostolical. You have taken that as granted, and presupposed, which we deny,
to wit, That your Popish Doctrine was for a thousand years (at least)
universally received. ex abundanti answer that which follows.

Your disputation about this part of the question, being resolved

No errors irreformable can be in the Church.

All errors universally received, without a known beginning, are
irreformeable. Ergo:

No errors universally received, without a known beginning, can be in the
Church.

The Mayor is confirmed by an Argument, taken from the continual presence of
Christ, by his Spirit, to the universal Church, for wheresoever Christ is
perpetually present, and assistant by his holy Spirit, there it is impossible
that irreformeable errors should prevail.

I answer: No errors great or less, absolutely irreformeable, can be in the
Church, as it signifies the sounder and better part thereof: but errors
irreformeable Ex Hypothesi, Ierem. 51. 9. Apoc. 17. 5. Neither does the
presence of Christ and of his Spirit, deliver the malignant part of the Church
from irreformeable errors, but only the living members of his mystical
Body, which are actuated, and moved by influence of saving Grace, John 8. 31,
32. Romans 1. 28. 2. These. 2. 11. John 12. 40.

The Assumption, to wit, All errors universally received,

But the Jesuit proves his Assumption by this reason.

All errors are irreformeable, when they which seek to reform them, are
Heretics by the Principles of Christianity.

But all that seek to reform errors universally received, Ergo:

All errors universally received, without a known beginning, are
irreformeable.

The Minor of this Paralogisme, is denied: and it is false, That all they which
seek to reform errors universally received, are justly condemned as
heretics, by the principles of Christianity. And the Argument produced to
prove this

Whosoever opposes against the whole Church, is by the most received Principle
of Christianity delivered, Matthew. 18. 7. to be accounted as an Heathen or a
Publicane; and Saint Augustine says, That to dispute against the whole Church
is insolent madness.

But whosoever seeks to reform errors universally received, whose beginning
is not known, opposes against the whole Ergo:

All they which seek to reform errors, etc. are Heretics, by the
Principles of Christiantie.

ANSWER.
Whosoever opposes against the whole Church, taken as before, for the Church
Hierarchicall or representative, Occham. Dialog. part. 3. tr. 1. l. 3. c. 9.
Lyra sup. Math. 16. Ecclesia non consistit in hominibus, ratione potestatis,
vel dignitatis Ecclesiasticae, vel secularis, quia multi principes, and summi
pontifices, and alij inferiores inuenti sunt apostatasse a fide: propter quod
Ecclesia consistit in illis personis, in quibus est notitia vera, and confessio
fidei and veritatis.
is not by the doctrine of our Savior, and Saint Augustine, to be accounted

First, there is opposition by way of counsel and advice, and this makes no
man an Heretic, as appears by Paphnutius, opposing the Council of Nice
Tripart. Hist. l. 2. c. 14. Niceph. Hist. Eccl. l. 8. c. 19. Gratian. Did. 31.
ca. Nicen, Synodus.
.

Secondly, there is opposition by way of reprehension, Athanas. d. Syn. Arim.
and Seleuc. pa. 673. Scriptura diuina omnibus Synodis potentior est. Hieron.
sup. Galath, c. 1. spiritus sancti (...) est, quae Canonicis literis est
prodita, contra quam si quid statuant Concilia nefas duco.
: And this also makes no man an Heretic Aquin. 22. q. 38. ar. 1. Chrysoft.
sup. Romans Ho. 22. Quae tui sunt officij, praesta, nemini dans ausam seu belli
seu dissidij, sieve Jude o sieve Graeco, si vero alicubi (...) labefactari
videris, ne praeponas concordiam veritati: sed generose persiste admorte^ vsq,
Cyril. Council. (...). (...). 1. c. 14. Aquin. 22. q. 33. ar. 4. Vbi imminet
periculum fidei etiam public essent (...) a subditis arguendi. Gabr. sup. Can.
Missae. lect. 74. Correctione (...), inferiores, superiores (...) non debent,
nisi manifest errarent in fide. Tunc enim si non adessent superiores
vindicantes, velnollent, tunc per inferiores possunt puniri, quia Haeresis
reddit Hereticum, omni Catholico inferiorem. Francisc. Picus. Mirand. Theorem.
8. (...) Papae ligat omnes fideles ad non dogmatizandum contrarium, nifi per
illos and apud illos qui manifestum contra fidem deprehendunt errorem, and
scandalum grande fidei suo silentio fieri, si se non opponerent agnoscunt, quod
si fieret persecutio sententiatum and paenarum contra eos, sciant (...) esse
qui persecutionem patiuntur propter iustitiam. Idem. Theorem. 16. Si pars mayor
contra diuinas literas contraque ea quae violate nefas est, decernere quicquani
vellet reliquis qui pauciores essent contra (...): numero minori adhaerendu^
esset quemadmodum accidit in Arimensi Concilio and in Ephesino secundo: (...)
simplici potius rustico and infanti and anniculae qua^ and (...) maximo and
mill Episcopis credendum, si contra Euangelium isti, illi pro Euangelio verba
facerent.
: because he that in a lawful manner, propugneth the Tim. 6. 11. 2. Tim. 4. 7.
And also performs a work of charity, in laboring to convert people from
error, Iam. 5. 19, 20. Saint Augustines place, Epist. 118. c. 5. ad Ianuar. is
understood of outward ceremonies, and adiaphorous rites Aug. ibid. c. 1. Quae
nonscripta sed tradita custodimus, quae quidem toto terraru^ or be obseruantur,
dantur intelligi yel ab ipsis Apostolis, vel plenarijs Concilijs, quorum est in
Ecclesia saluberima Authoritas, commendata arque Statuta retineri, sicut quod
passio Domini, etc. (...) solennitate celebrantur,
, in respect of their use unblameable, and not of matters of faith; and
therefore it appertains not to the question in hand.

IESVITS 4th Argument.
That doctrine, which Tradition has delivered, as the doctrine of all
Ancestors, without delivering any Orthodox opposition against it, that is,
opposition made by any confessed Catholic Doctors or Fathers, is doctrine
derived from the Apostles, without change.

ANSWER.
This Proposition is denied: for new Doctrine may be brought in, after the
decease of the ancient Fathers, and because the same was unheard of in their
days, they could make no such plain and direct opposition against it, as that
either Historians might take notice thereof, or the maintainers of such
Doctrine have no evasion, by distinctions and sophistical

IESVIT.
But such is the Doctrine of the Roman Church, which Consent and Tradition of
Ancestors does deliver, and does not together deliver, that any confessed
Orthodox Father opposed against it.

ANSWER.
Some Doctrines of the later Roman Church were opposed by the ancient Roman
Bishops themselves, to wit, Adoration Gregory the Great Greg. (...). 9. Ep. 9.
Eas (...) ^.
: Communion in one kind, by Leo the first ^
: Transubstantiation, by Gelasius the first (...) con. Nestor. and Eurich. No
definit esse substantia vel natura Panis and (...).
: The temporal dominion of Popes and Bishops over Princes, by S. Chrysostom,
Chrysostom. super Romans 13. hom. 23.
, Optatus Mileuitanus Optatus con. Parmen. lib. 3.
, and Gregory the first Greg. lib. 2. ep. 61. Sacerdotes meos tuae manui
commissi, etc. (...) ergo quae debui exolui qui and Imperatori obedientiam
praebui and pro Deo quod sensi minime tacui.
: The dignity and title of universal Bishop, by the same Gregory Idem lib.
6. epist. 30. Ego sidenter dico, quia quisquis se vniuersalem Sacerdotem vocar
vel vocari desiderat, in elatione sua Antechristum praecurrit, quia (...)
biendo se caeteris praeponit.
: And the Doctrine of Papals, preferring the old Translation before the
original Text Hieron. sup. Nah. c. 1. Aduersus conscientiam meam cogor
interdum, vulgatae aeditionis consequentiam texere. Aug. d. Doctr. Christ. li.
2. ca. 11.
; making Apocriphall books Canonical Hieron. Greg. m. and alij. Occham Dial.
pa. 3. li. (...). 16. ^, liber Indith, Tobiae, Machabeorum, Ecclesiastici,
Sapientiae, non sunt recipiendi ad confirmandum aliquid in fide.
; prohibiting lay people to read the Scriptures Chrysostom. sup Genes. hom. 29.
Ambr. sermon. 35 Hieron. epist. ad ^, etc. Cyril. c. (...). li. 7. Theoph. sup.
(...). 6. Primasius sup. Coloss. 3. Chrysostom. in ^, quomodo and vobis potissimum
(...) Scripturas legere, idque non simpliciter neque obiter sed magna
diligentia, etc. Audite obsecro ^ Biblia, animae (...) aliud vultis, vel nouum
Testamentum, acquirite Apostolorum Acta, Euangelia continuos and sedulos
Doctores. Hoc demum malorum omnium
; and exalting the authority of the present Church

IESVIT.
We know indeed by Tradition, that some in former times stood against many
points of the Roman Doctrine, as Arrius, Pelagius, Waldo, the Albigenses,
Wiclife, Husse, and some others; but they are not confessed (...) Fathers, but
were noted for nouelty and singularity, and for such by Tradition described
unto us, which kind

ANSWER.
(...) opposed the Doctrine of the holy (...) and of the (...) Church, and was
(...) by (...), and the Fathers of the (...), and that by the Scriptures
Socrat. Hist. (...). li. 1. ca. 6. Cusan. Concord. Cath. li 2. c. 6. Et secundu
testimonia (...) decreuit Synodus.
: and the Pelagians were (...) convicted by S. Augustine, and his Scholars, out
of the holy Scripture. And although Pope Celestine approved S. Augustines
Faith, and condemned these Heretics Epist. Coelest. 1. ad (...). Galliae, tom.
1. Council.
, yet that was not the principal reason whereupon they were reputed
Heretics, by Aug. epist. 92. (...) sanctitatis (...), de sanctaru^
Scripturaru^ authoritate depromptae, facilius eos qui ta^ peruersa and
perniciosa (...) cessuros.
) made them to be so esteemed. And how many Heretics were discovered and
confuted by the Fathers of the first three hundred years, out of the
Scriptures, before the Roman Church ascended to the height of authority (...).
Mirandul. Theor. 8. Conuentus agebantur, quibus absque Pontifice, in causis
Fidei, quid sanctum, quid prophanum esset decernebatur.
. The Waldenses were no Heretics, as I have formerly proved, but were only
branded with that aspersion, by Papals, whose pride and tyrrannie they did
oppose: and had S. Paul Syluest. Prier. li. d. Mod. Inquir. pa. 24. Ego credo
si S. Hieronimus and Augustinus hodie viuerent, aut etiam ipse Apostol' Paulus,
vix euaderent ignem, tam excellentes sunt Inquisitores in ingenijs.
himself been alive, and reproved the error and wickedness of the
Babilonian Harlot, he must Wicliffe and Husse, were blessed instruments of
Christ, vindicating and defending Gods Truth, withheld in Iniquity; neither
did they hold such blasphemies as the Romists cast upon them. They might have
some opinions in points less material, wherein perhaps they concur not with
our Doctrine, as likewise the Waldenses; but as for those vile reports which
Romists make of their Doctrine, no indifferent person will regard it: for even
at this day, when things are in present view and action, you calumniate the
persons, and falsify the Doctrine Campian. Rat. 8. Norint isti suoru^
axiomata. De' est author peccati. Nullum, nullu^, non duo, non (...)
reliquerunt. Si (...) vxor aut non possit veniat aucilla. Decalogus nihil ad
Christianos. Opera nostra Deus nequaquam curat, etc. Rubenus. li. d.
fals-Proph. ca. 20. Polluunt se vaga libidine, vxore proximi, (...), socrus cum
nuru, pater cum filia. Id. c. 9. Conciona tores and foeminaespoliatis omnibus
vestibus, supra mensas, etc. turpissima (...) in spectantibus.
of all your Opposites, Wicliffe and Husse are extant, wherein are found no
such Doctrines as Papists have charged them with.

IESVIT.
Seeing (as even Doctor Field does confess) when a Field, lib. 4. of the
Church, ca. 14.
Doctrine is in any age constantly delivered, as a matter of Faith, and as
received from Ancestors in such sort as the Contradictors thereof were in the
beginning noted for Novelty,

ANSWER.
You mistake the Doctors meaning, for he speaks of the most famous and
eminent of every age, in sensu composito, that in sensu (...), that whatsoever
the most famous in any one particular age constantly delivered, etc. is
descended from the Apostles. Whiles this reverend Divine was living, such
passages of his book were objected against him, by Papists, which caused him
to explane himself, and among other things, he says D. Field. Appendix. p. 3.
cap. 7. page 42.
, I never make the judgment and opinion of present Bishops of Apostolical
Churches, to be the rule to know Traditions by, but deny it, etc. And make
only the Pastors of Apostolical Churches successively

IESVIT.
Protestants answer, that it is sufficient that the Roman Doctrine was
contradicted by Orthodox Fathers, and that this may be proved by their
writings which they have left unto posterity, though their opposition was not
noted by Antiquity, nor by fame of Tradition delivered unto

But no Tradition or Doctrine is so constantly and clearly delivered by the
Fathers, but diverse obscure and difficill places, out of their works, may be
brought against them, See (...). li. (...). d. Christ. c. 10.
And yet the new reformed Arrians bring very many testimonies of ancient
Fathers to prove, that in this point they did contradict themselves, and were
contrary one to another: which places whosoever shall read, will clearly

ANSWER.
That which was brought in after the days of the Fathers, could not be
confuted by them particularly, and in express terms; neither could
Antiquity, or fame of Tradition, make report to Posterity of those things
which happened afterward. But yet many things uttered upon other occasion, are
found in the writings of the Fathers, which prove, that our present Romists
are degenerated, and entertain a belief repugnant

But it is objected that common people cannot know certainly the perpetual
Tradition of Gods Church by such places of the Fathers, partly because the
exact examining of the works and sayings of the Fathers, requires great labor
and skill, and so it exceeds the ability of these people, partly because
many obscure and difficile passages are found in the writings of the Fathers,
which will rather perplex common people, than resolve them.

whereunto I answer, That the rule whereby common people must examine
Doctrine, is the plain sentence of holy Aug. sup. Psalm. 93. Sicut Stellas in
Coelo non extinguitnox, sic mentes fidelium inhaere^tes (...) Scripturae (...),
non vineit (...).
: and further trial and examination of Controversies by the Fathers, and
Ecclesiastical Writers, belongs to the learned, and principally to the
Pastors and Doctors of the Church, who are to use their gifts, to the
instructing of the common people.

If the Adversary shall object, that Heretics and deceivers Greg. Mor. l.
(...). c. 8. Superbientes Haereticos and sacrae Scripturae sententias
deferentes, quasi elatum Golia^ suo gladio detruncamus.
and God always stirs up some Pastors or other learned persons, to assist
common people, which have received the love of truth, in true understanding of
divine verity necessary to their salvation. Secondly, If the Scripture may
be abused and profaned by heretics, Tradition may with greater color be
pretended or abused by them (as appears by the Pharisees.) Thirdly, Tradition
is founded upon the authority of a present Hierarchicall Occham. Dial. part.
3. tr. 1. l. 3. c. 9. Lyra sup. Math. 16. Cusan. Concord. Cath. li. 2. c. 3.
Multa Concilia etiam rite conuocata, errasse legimus. Gerson. l. d. Appellat. a
Pontif. propos. 4. and citatur a Francise. Pic. Mirandul. Theor. 8. Tam Papa
quam Episcopus sunt deuiabiles a fide. Nichol. Clemangis Disp. sup. materia.
Genesis Concilij.
. But the Scripture is founded only upon the authority of Christ and his
Apostles, and is acknowledged to be sacred and divine, by all Christian
Churches.

IESVIT.
In the same manner, Catholics do sufficiently answer Protestants, that
bring places of Fathers against the received Traditions of the Church: as the
real Presence, Invocation of Saints, and other the like, to wit, that
Tradition, delivered these Doctrines, as the uniform consent of the Fathers,
and never noted such oppositions as Protestants frame out of their writings,
which is a clear sign, that Protestants either mis-alleadge their words, or
mistake Doctor Field also notes, there be few, and Field. of the Church. in
his Epist. Dedicat.


To discredit therefore a constant received Tradition,

ANSWER.
The Doctrine of Real Presence, by way of Transubstantiation, and the Doctrine
of Invocation of Saints, imposed Pammel. (...). Cyprian. sup. Council. Carthag.
nu. 1. Vnde colligimus Cypriani scripta, vt and aliorum veterum, a librarijs,
vary fuisse interpolata.
, and also by report, impose a false Tenet upon them.

Our Adversary therefore beats the air, when he labors to gain the
Fathers unto his part, upon the sole Testimony of latter Tradition, and upon a
Negative Argument Gillius, Com. Theol. d. Sac. Doct. and Deo, lib. 1. tr. 7.
cap. 14. Argumentum (...), non est firmum ad conuellendum Dogma aliquod sieve
(...): Argumentum negatiuum est, cum ex eo quod patres aliquid non dixerint,
aut hoc vel illo loquendi genere non vsi fuerint, concludit aliquis.
, taken from the silence of the Roman Church, omitting (in partiality toward
it self) the Narration of such Collections, and

But when we charge the Papalls with Novelty, we proceed Albert. 1. sent.
did. 11. ar. 7. Regula fidei, est concors, Scripturatum sensus, cum articulis
fidei (in Symbolo Apost.) Quia illis duobus regularibus Praeceptis, regitur
Theologus.
: Thirdly, the said Doctrine is not derived by perpetual and uniform
Tradition, from the Apostles: Fourthly, the primitive Fathers vertually opposed
this Doctrine: For although these Popish Articles, as they are now explicitly
maintained, were not in perfect being in the days of the ancient Fathers, and
therefore they could not so punctually

But our Adversary pleases himself immoderately with his Negative Argument,
concluding, That because no Historical and express opposition was made
against these Doctrines

But if the sequel of this Argument be good, then the Proposition following is
necessary, to wit, Every Doctrine against which the ancient Fathers have not
made express and literal opposition, is Apostolical. But this is false,
because some Heresies sprang up in the Church after the decease of the ancient
Fathers; and against those they could make no such opposition, unless they

But if (as our Adversary obiecteth) every Doctrine is Apostolical, against
which the ancient Fathers made no express and Historical opposition, then the
Articles following (which Protestants maintain) are Apostolical; to wit, The
Roman Bishop and Council may err, The substance of Bread and Wine remain in
the holy Eucharist, after consecration, The common Prayer and Service of the
Church, which the unlearned frequent, ought to be uttered in a known Language.
These (I say) and the like Articles, according to the Jesuits Argument, must be
Apostolical,

But the Jesuit will peradventure except, That every Doctrine delivered by the
Tradition of the Roman Church, against which the Fathers have made no express
opposition, is Apostolical,

This verily, or any thing else as wild and absurd, may be pretended; but it
must be proved; before it can merit any credit August. c. Parmen. Lib. 1. cap.
2. Ipse sine documentis (...) quitur, and vult nihil probans credi sibi. Idem,
c. Donatist. Lib. 7. cap. 48. Hic quia nullam rationem, aut testimonium
Scripturarum attulit, diu nos tenere non debet.
. And if the Roman Church may err, and change her Doctrine, after the decease
of the ancient Fathers, then the Doctrine delivered by the Tradition of the
Roman Church, is of the same quality with the Doctrine delivered by the
Tradition of other Churches.

But the first is true, Romans 11. 22. and there is nothing promised Esa. 2. 3.
Luc. 24. 47. and the first Seat of all the Apostles; Ephesus was the Episcopal
Sea of S. John, and it was once a Ground and Pillar of Truth, 1. Tim. 3. 15.
and Antioch was the Episcopal Sea of S. Peter Martyrolog. Romans Notat. Galesin.
8. Call. Martij, Cathedra. S. Petri Apost. Huius Cathedrae Antiochinae. S.
Ignatius meminit in Epistola ad Magnefianos, Historiamque narrat. S. Clemens,
Lib. 10. Recognitionum. Eam beatus Petrus fundasse and instituisse traditur
anno Christi Dom. 38. vt ab Eusebio Annalium Monimentis proditum est. Septem
autem annis ad illius gubernacula sedit.
, Baron. Annal. to. 1. anno 39. nu. 20. And yet every one of these
Apostolical Churches are departed from their ancient integrity. Wherefore,
except Romists Lorich. Institut. Cath. in Symb. ar. 10. page 49. Non tamen
(...) sedis (Rom.) Rectores, se statim efferant, tanquam illa sola Ecclesia
sit, and vt loquuntur, exclusive Ecclesia Catholica sit, quasi oporteat sine
iudicio, continuo probatum iri, quicquid ex illa sede enatum fuerit, and ad
omnes Doctrinas and Constitutiones Pontificis, nihil sit ad ferendum, nisi ipse
dixit. Hoc si illi sedi tribuerimus, omnibus erroribus Ecclesiam Catholicam
exposuerimus.
.

THE SECOND PART the supposed Errors of the PROTESTANTS.
IESVIT.
THe Conclusion of this Point, showing that Protestants err fundamentally.

ANSWER.
THis Conclusion is inferred upon false Premises, and therefore it is a Lying
Conclusion. And if Protestants err not in all, or any of the Articles
objected, either materially, or pertinaciously, then they err not
fundamentally.

IESVIT.
Out of all this appears, that the Roman is the true Church, and
consequently, that Protestants have fundamental Errors about Faith.

ANSWER.
If the Antecedent were granted, yet the Consequence is Cyprian, was a true
Church; and yet they which believed otherwise, touching rebaptising (...).
Carthag. de Bap. Haeret. apud Cyprian.
, than that Church, erred not either materially, or fundamentally.

IESVIT.
Errors are fundamental, that is, damnable, either in regard of the matter,
because against some substantial Article of Faith, the knowledge whereof is
necessary for the performance of a required Christian duty; or in regard of
the manner, they are held, to wit, so obstinately, as in defense of them, one
denies the Catholic Church.

ANSWER.
The distinction of errors into fundamental, and preterfundamentall, is
collected out of the Scriptures: 1. Cor. 3. 12. Phil. 3. 15, 16. 2. Tim. 2. 18.
Col. 2. 19. Heb. 6. 1. And the same is found in the Fathers Aug. c. Julian.
Pelag. l. 1. c. 6. Alia sunt in quib' inter se aliquando etiam Doctissimi atque
optimi regulae Catholicae Defensores, salua fidei compage non consonant and
alius alio de vna re melius aliquid dicit and verius, hoc autem vnde nunc
agimus, ad ipsa perrinet fidei fundamenta. (...). Ep. 143. Sunt alia in quibus
perniciosissime erratur, etc.
, and in the Schoolmen, in terms aequiualent Aquin. 22. q. 2. ar. 5. Occham.
Dial. p. 1. li. 2. c. 2. Stapl. Rel. c. 1. q. 3. ar. 6. notab. 1.
.

As all verities (according to St. Augustine) are fundamental, without the
knowledge and faith whereof, people cannot attain salvation Aug. Enchir. c.
20. Sunt vera quae nisi credantur ad vitam beatam quae non nisi aeterna est non
potest perueniri, etc. Idem. d. Bon. perseu. cap. 21. Sed interest quantum and
in quibus rebus erretur. etc.
: so likewise all errors, directly opposing, and destroying right Faith,
concerning those necessary and essential verities, are fundamental: 1. Tim.
6. 3. 1. Cor. 15. 4, etc. Gal. 5. 2.

All necessary and essential verity, either concerning Faith, or good
manners (according to St. Augustine Aug. d. Doctr. Christ. l. 2. c. 9. In ijs
enim quae aperte in Scriptura posita sunt inueniuntur illa omnia quae co^tinent
fidem moresque viuendi. Idem. d. Pecc. mer. and Remiss. l. 2. c. 35. Illud
tamen credo, quod etiam hinc diuinorum eloquiorum clarissima authoritas esset,
si homo illud sine dispendio promissae salutis ignorare non posset.
) is delivered in plain places of holy Scriptures: and therefore they which
accuse Id d. unit. Eccles. c. 12. Si non ea de Scripturis sanctis legunt, sed
suis contentionibus persuadere conantur, credo (...) quae in Scripturis sanctis
leguntur, non credo ista quae ab haereticis vanis dicuntur. Ib. c. 3.
Auferantur illa de medio, quae aduersus nos in vicem, non ex diuinis Canonicis
libris, sed aliunde recitamus.
: And if after such ostension, Errants continue obstinate Aug. d. Ciu. Dei. l.
18. c. 51. Qui in Ecclesia Dei morbidum aliquid prauumque sapiunt, si correpti
vtsanum rectumque sapiant, resistunt
, they are guilty both before God and men, of damnable Heresy, and deserve
the title and punishment of Heretics.

These things being premised, concerning the Subject of the Jesuits
Proposition; I deny that errors in secondarie points, defended against the
common tenet of the Catholic Church, Cyprian, with 80. Bishops of Africa
Council. Carthag. apud Cyprian.
, did stiffly defend Rebaptising, against the common judgment of the Catholic
Church, and yet S. August. freeth them from the guiltiness of damnable error.
Secondly, if all such error be damnable, yet the Protestants are innocent,
because they defend no error, great or small, wilfully or obstinately, neither
do they oppose, but humbly submit themselves to the judgment of the true
Catholic Church.

The Pharisees of Rome enroabe themselves with glorious titles; but where does
the word of Christ endow them with Aug. d. unit. Eccles. c. 6. Legite nobis hoc
de lege, de Prophetis de Psalmis de ipso Euangelio, de (...) is, legite and
credimus. Ibid. c. 15. Legant nobis hoc de Scripturis sanctis and credimus.
Hoc, inquam ex Canone diuinorum libroru^ legant, etc. (...) nobis hoc ex
diuinis oraculis.
, that you are the only Catholic Church. All fundamental verity is
delivered in the plain Texts of Scripture Chrysostom. (...) 2. These. Hom. 3. In
diuinis Scripturis quae cunque necessaria sunt manifesta sunt.
, Aug. d. Doct. Christ. l. 2. c. 9. And all fundamental error is condemned by
manifest Scripture, Et Catholica fides in Scripturis manifesta est, The true
Catholic faith is manifest in the Scriptures, Aug. d. Agon. Christ. c. 28.
Ecclesia nonin parietibus consistit, sed in dogmatum veritate, Ecclesia ibi
est, vbi vera fides est: The Church of Christ consists not of outward Titles
and walls, but of the verity of Doctrine. Wheresoever true Faith is, there is
the Church, says S. Hierom. sup. Psalm. 133. Where Faith is, there is the
Church, says Saint Chrysostom: Where right Faith is not, there is not the
true Church. Et Ecclesia est Jerusalem, cuius fundamenta posita sunt super
montes Scripturarum: And the Church is Jerusalem, whose foundations are placed
upon the mountains of the d Chrysostom. Imperf. sup. Mat. Hom. 6.
Scriptures: Eruite igitur aliquid manifestum, quo demonstretis Ecclesiam Aug.
d. unit. Eccles. c. 16.
. If therefore Papals will force us to believe, that they are the only
Catholic Church, and that we must follow their Pope (though he lead us to
hell) Did. 40. c. Si Papa.
bring something evident, and Si diuinarum Scripturarum earum scilicet, quae
canonicae in Ecclesia nominantur, perspicua firmatur Authoritate, sine vlla
dubitatione credendum est. (...) vero testibus vel testimonijs, quibus aliquid
credendum esse suadetur tibi, credere vel non credere liceat, etc. If (says S.
Augustine) Aug. Epist. 112. c. 1. Si diuinarum Scripturarum, earum scilicet
quae Canonicae in Ecclesia nominantur, (...) firmatur authoritate, sine vlla
dubitatione credendum est. Alijs vero testibus veltestimonijs, quibus aliquid
credendum esse suadetur, tibi credere vel non credere liceat quantum meriti ea
admonentem ad faciendum fidem vel habere vel non habere perpenderis.
it be confirmed by the perspicuous authority of those divine Scriptures which
are Canonical, it must, without all question, be believed: but as for other
witnesses and testimonies, by which any thing is persuaded to be believed, it
is lawful for thee to believe or not

IESVIT.
Fundamental errors of the first kind, Protestants have (...), particularly
these Nine.

ANSWER.
Malice always fights against Virtue, and labors to impose and rub off
her own faults upon it, Chrysostom. sup. Genesis Hom. 62. Malitia semper contra
Virtutem pugnat, and ei sua peccata Affricare and (...) vult.
and all they whose breasts and minds are inhabited by Satan, testify their
venomous Cyprian. Epist. 55. Omnes quorum pectora and mentes diabolus obsedit
venenatam rabiem suam furiosa voce testantur.
. If this Traducer be able to convince the Protestants of Nine, or of any one
fundamental error, we must acknowledge, that we are in a perilous state:
but if he only deprave and falsify our doctrine Aug. d. Nupt. and Concupisc.
l. 2. c. 2. Quae verba tam recta and tanta luce fulgentia tenebrosis and
tortuosis expositionibus, etc. deprauare
, or affirm that to be fundamental error, which is divine verity, then he
proves himself to be one of his Ministers, of whom S. Gregory speaks Greg.
sup. Reg. l. 1. c. 2. (...) Antichristi est amor perfidiei, quo fidei (...)
Redemptoris. Idem. Moral. l. 13. c. 6. Sicut incarnata veritas in praedicatione
sua pauperes Idiotas and simplices eligit, sic contrario damnatus ille homo
Antichristus, etc. Ad predicanda^ falsitate suam astutos and duplices (...) est.
, Perfidious dealing is in the Tabernacle of Antichrist, whereby he gainesayeth
the faith of the Redeemer.

IESVIT.
First, their Doctrine against Traditions unwritten, whereby the foundation is
overthrown, on which we believe all other substantial and fundamental
points, as has been showed.

ANSWER.
Either you wilfully falsify, or ignorantly mistake the Protestants Doctrine,
concerning vnwrttten Tradition.

First, we admit in general, all unwritten Traditions, agreeing with the holy
Scripture Chem. Exam. Council. Trid. p. 1. d. Trad. pa. 68. Apostoli multa
tradiderunt viua voce. Apostolici ab Apostolis ex Traditione viuae vocis multa
acceperunt quae suis postea discipulis rursus tradiderunt. Sed Ireneus inquit
, which are derived from the Apostles, and delivered unto us, by the manifest
and perpetual testimony of the Primitive Church Calvin. c. Pighium. d. libero
Arb. Non difficulter posset inter (...) and Pighium conuenire, si modo
Ecclesiae Traditionem ex certo and perpetuo (...) and (...), non ex testimonijs
hinc inde male (...) demonstraret. Gesner. l. sup. loc. Paul. 2. Tim. 3. 16. c.
7. Si (...) Traditiones eadem via per testificationem antiquissimae and
Apostolicae Ecclesiae (...) nostra vsque tempora, deduxerint, (...) eas. Reza
ad. Repet. Saint. Resp. pa. 13.
, and by the uniform consent of succeeding Churches in all ages.

Secondly, we believe in particular, the historical Traditions Chem. ibid. pa.
69. Et hanc Traditionem qua nobis in manum dantur sacrae Scripturae libri
reuerenter accipimus. Aug. d. Ciuit. Dei, li. 15. c. 23. and d. Doctrina
Christ. h. 2. c. 8. etc. Faust. Manich. li. 11. c. 2. D. Fulke c. Rhem. 2 Thessalonians. 2. number. 19. The books of the Scripture are given by Tradition, but the
matter written in the books does justify the Tradition to be true.
, and also the Historical Tradition of the said Church, concerning the
perpetual virginity of the blessed Virgin Marie Aug. d. Dogm. Eccles.
, and concerning the baptism of infants Aug. d. Genesis ad Lit. li. 10. c. 23.
, and all other genuine Traditions, which maintain the Faith and Doctrine,
contained expressly, or by consequent in the Scripture.

Thirdly, we embrace such exposition of holy Scripture Chem. Exam. p. 74.
Quartum genus Traditionu^, est de Expositione, vero sensu, seu natiua sententia
Scriptutae. Tertul. d. praescript. ca. 20. and 21. and 37. etc. Marcion. lib.
4. cap. 5.
, as being consonant to the rule of Faith, and to the text of Scripture, is
affirmed by ancient Tradition, to have descended from the holy Apostles.

Fourthly, we believe the rule of Faith contained in the Apostles Creed Chem.
ibid. pa. 70. etc. Tertium genus Traditionum, etc. pa. 74. Descripsi haec
Symbola vt ostenderem nos non reprobare quas certo constat veras and antiquas
esse Apostolorum Traditiones. Aug. d. Fid. and Smbo. c. 1. and Sermon. 115. de
Temp. Ruff. Expos. Symb. Hier. epist. 61. ad Pammach. c. 9. Cassand. Def. lib.
d. Offic. bon. (...). pa. 820. Intelligentia Scripturae quae ex Traditione
percipitur, non est ab ipsa Scriptura seperanda cum in ea contineatur, vel
tanquam definitio in definito, vel tanquam conclusio in praemissis.
, both upon the authority of Christ's written word, and also upon the voice and
testimony of unwritten

If it shall then be demanded, Wherefore do the Romists and you so eagrely
contend about the question of Traditions? and wherein lies your difference? we
answer as follows.

First, we yield the highest and most sovereign authority to Thom. Wald.
Doctr. fid. li. 2. ar. 2. c. 27. n. 7. Videtis sequendum esse in Ecclesia
Catholica gradatim authoritatem multiplicem Doctorum, scilicet, Cotholicorum
omnium: (...) sanctorum magis, Ecclesiarum Apostolicarum potius and ex eis
amplius Romanae Ecclesiae: and abundantius his omnibus authoritatem Concilij
generalis: nec tamen alicni iam dictae ita obediendum censea and tam prona
fide, ficut primae fidei Scripturae. Ibid. (...). Omnis Ecclesiastica
authoritas cum sit ad testificandum de Christo and (...) eius, vilior est
Christi (...), and Scripturis sanctis necessario post ponenda. Ibid. Long
distat authoritas (...), and eminet (...) cunctorum Doctorum etiam totius
, and make the voice and sentence thereof a supreme rule, and judge of
supernatural Verity; and we make Tradition unwritten, subordinate, and
ministerial to holy Scripture, admitting the same so far forth only, as it
is conformable to the Scripture, and rejecting the contrary.

Secondly, we affirm, that the Canonical Scriprure contains all
supernatural Verity necessary to salvation, and being received and
understood, is a sufficient and perfect rule of Faith Casland. Def. lib. d.
Offic. pij viri. Nemo tam insanus est vt dicat cognitionem salutis non ex
diuinis literis, sed ex Taditione (...) maiorum hauriendam. Idem. pa. 841. Non
quia Canon solus non sibi ad vniuersa sufficiat etc. Jdem pa. 827. Non negamus
ex sola Scriptura peti ceitam definitionem etc. Idem. page 832. Illud inter nos
conuenit nihil esse huiusmodi non Scriptarum Traditionum quae non cum eis quae
scripta sunt conueniunt atque adeo in his quae scripta sunt non comprehen
duntur.
, and the sole doctrine thereof is sufficient to instruct Meisner. Consult. c.
Lesseum. p. 590. Neque tamen Traditiones simpliciter omnes reijcimus, sed si
quae probatae sunt and a pat. ibus constanter traditae illas recipimus, non
vtfidei mensuram sed vt (...) stem temporis and argumentum Historicum.
to deliver, apply, and interpret the doctrine expressly delivered, or intended
by the holy Ghost, in the Scripture.

Thirdly, we receive no Tradition as divine or apostolical, but such as has
the plain, manifest, and uniform testimony and approbation of the Primative
Church Hosiand. c. Val. Analys. fid. pa. 126. Si ea Traditiones (...) quae in
Ecclesia (...) fuerunt quaeque, (...) admittimus.
. But our Adversaries either equal Council. Trid. sess. 4. Sixth. Senens. Bibl.
li. 2. pa. 123.
, or prefer Pigh. contr. Ratisb. lo. 3. Baron. (...). tom. 1. anno 57. n. 11.
Greg. Val. tom. 3. pa. 347.
unwritten Tradition before the Scripture, and they make Tradition a diverse and
larger part of the rule of Faith, containing many Articles which are neither
expressly, nor inuoluedly revealed in the Scripture Bannes sup. Thom. 22. q.
1. ar. 10. Stapl. (...). sup. Ioh. 16. Pigh. contr. Ratisb. lo. 3. d. Ecclesia.
Sed magna pars, etc. Andrad. Def. Trid. fid. li. 2. Ex Traditionibus nos multa
accepisse agnoscimus quae sacris literis non continentur. Greg. Val. Analys.
fid. li. 5. ca. 2. and 3.
, and they make the present Roman Church an infallible witness of such
Tradition, affirming, that we are bound to believe Coster. Enchir. pa. 47.
Petr. Soto. Infallibilis est regula, and certa quaecunque credit tenet and
seruat Romana Ecclesia, and in Scripturis
delivers as a Tradition, with the same assurance of Faith, wherewith we
believe any written testimony of S. Paul, or the holy Evangelists. And many of
them teach, That it is not necessary to derive Tradition by a perpetual
descent, and current through all ages; but the voice of the present Church is
sufficient to make any Article ctedible and authentical to us Gretsar. Def.
Bellarm. d. verb. Dei, li. 4. c. 9. 1713. and 1715.
.

Lastly, many particularopinions of ancient Fathers (which they delivered
coniecturally or probably only, and concerning which they have not affirmed,
that they were divine or apostolical Traditions) are ranked by latter
Pontificians in the number of divine (...), and made parts of the undoubted
word of God.

And thus the present Roman doctrine, concerning Traditions unwritten, is a
Seminary of Error, and by pretext hereof, Pontificians obtrude upon the
Church many profane, fabulous, Traditions Petrus Soto. Instruct. Sacerdot.
part. 1. lect. 6. page 17. Quae ad (...) pertinent, magis ex Traditione and
Spirit' Sancti Illustratione, quam ex Scriptura petenda (...). Hosius. d.
Express. verb. Dei, pa. 50. No^ oportet Legis aut Scripturae esse peritum, sed
a Deo doctum, vanus est labor, qui Scripturae impenditur. Scriptura enim (...)
est, and egenum quoddam elementum. Non conuenit Christiano, (...) creaturae
addictum esse, etc. Pigh. Hieratch. Eccles.
tends not to the corrupting of Christian

IESVIT.
Secondly, their questioning the infallibe authority of lawful general
Councels, thereby casting down the foundation of Unity in Gods Church.

ANSWER.
They which will not permit general Councels to assemble, or to proceed
lawfully, and which oppose the decrees of ancient Councels, are the Romists and
not the Protestants.

First, The modern Popes usurp the whole right and authoritieof calling and
conuocating Counsels Bulla Indict. Council. (...). a Iulio 3. Nos ad quos
summos pro tempore Pontifices spectat generalia concilia indicere and dirigere
Bellarm. d. Council. li. 1. ca. 12.
, contrary to the ancient custom and practice of the Church Cusan. Concord.
Cath. lib. 2. ca. 2. Licet vniuersalia Concilia saepe legamus conuocata per
Imperatores, imo omnia Eusebius. d. vit. Constable. lib. 1. ca. 37. and li. 2. ca. 6.
and lib. 4. ca. 47. Socrat. Hist. Eccles. lib. 2. ca. 16. Sosomen. Hist.
Eccles. lib. 3. ca. 10. Theod. Hist. lib. 2. ca. 8. Euagr. Hist. Eccles. lib.
1. ca. 3. Niceph. (...). Eccles. lib. 14. ca. 34. Athanas. Apolog. 2. (...). c.
Ruffin. lib. 2. Doce qui eo anno Consules fuerunt? Quis Imperator iusserit hanc
Synodum conuocare? Leo Epist. 43. ca. 2. See Nilus, d. Primat. Papae, pa. 277.
Council Chalced. in principio. Haec sancta Synodus, quae secundum gratiam Dei,
decreto pijssimorum Imperatorum congregata est, in Chalcedonensi ciuitate.
Iacobatius. d. Council. lib. 3. ar. 1. n. 19. Leo primus Pontifex, cum lachrimis
Imperatori scripsit and supplicauit, vt congregaret concilium.
.

Secondly, They receive and admit no Assessors and Judges in Councels Didac.
Nugnus in 3. part. Tho. Addit. q. 20. artic. 3. Summus Pontifex (...). d.
Consist. part. 3. q. 1. page 114. Qui vulgo creaturae Papae vocari solent.
but only their fast friends, to wit, men aforehand obliged by solemn oath
(...). Ego (...) Episcopus, etc. (...) ero beato (...) sanctaeque Romans Apostol.
Ecclesiae and Domino nostro Iulio Papae etc. (...) Romanum and Regalia S. (...)
adiutor eis ero ad retinendum and defendendum, etc.
, to proceed according to the will and purpose of the Pope.

Thirdly, The Pope alone is appointed the authentical Bosius. d. Sign. (...)
5. ca. 9. Potest Pontifex Romans qua part voluer it habere Con cilia rata,
eademque vbi voluerit reprobare, and quod ipse (...) cit ab vniuerso Concilio
sancitur. Paleot. d. Consistor. part. 1. q. 3. ar. 4. and 8. Speaking of the
College of (...), which may also be applied to Councels. Sicut manus in (...)
distributio, eius nec robur nec vires imminuir, etc. Cum semper pendet ab eius
imperio, illos huc (...) deflectere: sic Papa auditis Concilijs, (...) ea
tanquam digitos in manu (...), aut si placeat, operi (...) admouere.
Quemadmodum qui in nemoribus ligna caedunt, solam materiam administrant
architecto, ad fabricam struendam, ille (...) ab (...) secernit, and quod
aptius censuerit ad aedificium transfert: sic in rebus difficilibus post
explanata ab (...) Concilia, decernit. Bannes. 22. q. 1. ar. 10. (...). 70.
Omnis qui contradixerit legatis praesentibus suspectus erit de Haeresi.
Bellarm. d. Council. 1. b. 2. c. 11. Idem est sieve Pontifex express Concilium
reprobet, sieve Concilium agat contra Pontisicis sententiam. Ibid. c. 13. Quando
legatus ab eo missus (...) Concilio, sed agit contra voluntatem Pontificis,
(...) non est vere eius Legatus, licet protali se gerat. Greg. Val. tom. 3.
disp. 1. q. 1. punct. 7. d. Council. Si Legati sequuntur instructionem and quasi
conceptam (...) Pontifics sententiam, etc. pa. 365. Binius. tom. 1. not. sup.
Council. Constantinop. pa. 515. Tantum toboris and firmitatis quaelibet Synodus
consequi solet, quantum authoritatis illi Apostolica seeds impertit. Bernard.
(...). d. sacr. Ador. cult. disp. 3. fect. 6. pa. 263. Certum est, quod quando
summus Pontifex, per seipsum non adest in Concilio, sed per Legatos, huiusmodi
Legati prius (...) a summo Pontifice, de hijs quae in (...) Concilio agenda
(...). Bellarm. d. Imag. c. 14. Certum est Synodum cui repugnat Romans Pontifex,
nullius (...) authoritatis. Idem. d. (...). li. 4. c. 1. Illud iudicium tum
demum esse firmum, cum accesserit summi Pontificis confirmatio: proinde (...)
summi Pontificis esse. Ib. c. 2 Ipsa infallibilitas non est in Concilio
Episcopotum, sed in solo Pontifice. Azor. Instit. Mor. tom. 2. lib. 5 ca. 12.
and ca. 14. Anton. Perez. Pentateuch. fid. vol. 2. du. 7. ca. 4. pa. 41. col.
2. (...) Ib. Saepe Romani (...) mittunt per Legatos suos (...) eorum, quae
Concilia decernere and stabilire tenentur, etc. Quod si (...) auderet definire
(...), contra instructionis tenorem, tunc temporis omnino erraret. Hinc (...),
quoties contra instructionem Pontificis, aliquid definit, sieve Legati Pontif.
ascentiant, vt in (...) Constantiensi, sieve dissentiant, vt in Concilio
Ephesino secundo. Ib. conclus. 3. Illa Concilia generalia, quoram decretis
ascentiunt Legati-summi Pontif. (...) instructionem eius, possunt esse
falsitati (...), etc. In Concilio Basileensi, de facto erratum est, Legatis
Pontificis errorem approbantibus, and caeterorum (...) subscribentibus.
.

Fourthly, Whereas in words and terms they seem to advance and magnify the
ancient Oecumeniall Counsels, affirming that they honor them as the holy
Evangelists, yet when they make against them, they regard them no more (...).
d. Romans (...). lib. 2. cap. 17. Resp. decretum illud magni quidem esse
Concilij, sed non (...) factu^, proinde (...) esse roboris vel (...). He (...)
of the Council of Chalcedon.
(as one of (...). Viues. Schel. in Aug. d. Ciuit. Dei, li. 20. c. 26. (...)
illa demum (...) videntur Edicta and Concilia, quae in (...) suam (...),
reliqua non
) than a covent of women prattling and chatting in a common bath, stoue, or
Weauers shop. And this is apparent by their (...) or falsifying the Counsels
of Nice Council. Nicen. 1. Cod. (...). (...).
, Constantinople (...). (...) 2. An. Dom. 381. (...) (...).
, and Chalcedon Synod. (...). Action. 16. and ca. 28.
, when the same equal the Patriarch of Constantinople, or other Patriarchall
Seas, to the Roman, or forbid the imposition of single life upon the Clergy
Hist. Tripart. li 2. ca. 14. Socrat. Hist. Eccles. li. 1. ca. 8. Sosom. Hist.
li. 2. c. 22. Niceph. Hist. li. 8. ca. 19. Gratian. Did. 31. c. Nicen. Synod.
; as also by the Counsels of Basil, and Constance, decreeing, that the Popes
sentence is fallible.

Cardinal Cusanus treating of general Counsels, delivers

First, That a perfect or complete general Council, consists of all the
Patriarckes Cusan. Concord. Cath. l. 2. c. 3. Quod ex quinque Patriarchalibus
sedibus plenum universal Concilium Colligitur, gesta Octaui Concilij clare
docent, etc. Et cap. 5. Plenarium Concilium est totius vniuersae Ecclesiae.
and prime Governors of the Church.

Secondly, That a Council which is celebrated by the Roman Pontife, and those
which are subject to him only, or excluding Ibid. ca. 7. Non equitur vbi
praesidet Papa in Concilio vel eius legatus, ibi esse universal Concilium
vniuersalis Ecclesiae.
.

Thirdly, A general Council may be celebrated, although the Pope refuse to
join and concur, by his presence and consent Id. ca. 2. Si expectatus non
mitteret, vel non veniret vel nollet Concilium congregatum, suae necessitati
and Ecclesiae saluti prouidere debet. Hoc probat been textus Octaui vniuersalis
Concilij, etc. Quoniam dudum expectati fuerunt vicarij Seniorum Romae, and
amplius expectare non sit iustum, incongruum omnino putamus, despicere
fluctuantem Christi and saluatoris nostri Ecclesiam, per dilationem
dispositionum quae illi debetur. Hinc ergo velut ex necessitate denunciamus.
etc. Ac idem legitur in gestis secundae Ephesinae Synodi.
.

Fourthly, All which meet in Counsels, ought to have free audience and
liberty, orderly to debate and determine matters in question Ibid. c. 3.
Libertas talis in eo esse debet, vt quisque liberam loquendi habeat facultatem.
Id. Ecce nunc essentialia ad universal Concilium, vbi vniuersalia tractare
debent, quod non secret sed public, omnibus liberima detur audientia. Id. c.
5. Secunda Ephesina Synodus rite congregata fuit, etc. Tamen defecit libertas,
etc.
.

Fifthly, Whatsoever must oblige as divine, upon the determination of Counsels,
ought to be confirmed by the authority of holy Scripture Idem. cap. 10.
Oportet quod omnia Id. ca. 6. Secundum testimonia Scripturarum decreuit Synodus.
.

Sixthly, No Counsels are legitimate, wherein private respects are maintained,
under pretext of Faith and Religion Id. c. 3. Oportet quod priuatae causae
religionis obtentu non exerceantur. vnde Leo Papa ad Theodosium Imperat. de
errore Synodi Ephesians. dicit Dum priuatae causae religionis exercentur obtentu,
commissum est impietate paucorum, quod vniuersam Ecclesiam vulneraret.
.

Seventhly, The Roman Bishop has not that power which Id. c. 12. Et videmus
quantu^ Romanus Pontifex, vltra sacras antiquas obseruationes, ex vsu and
consuetudine subiectionalis obedientiae hodie acquisiuit, etc. In Concilijs
Romans Pontificem in condendis statutis generalibus, eam non habere potestatem,
quam quidem adulatores eidem contribuunt: scilicet quod ipse tantum statuere
habeat, alijs consulentibus.
.

Eighthly, It is without all question, That a general Council Idem, cap. 17.
An universal (...) proprie captum, scilicet quod vniuersam Catholicam
Ecclesiam representat, sit supra Patriarchas and Romans Pontificem, credo dubium
esse non (...).
.

Ninthly, Experience of things does manifest, That a plenarie universal
Council may be deficient; and we read, that many Councels lawfully
assembled, have erred Idem, cap. 3. Multa Concilia (...) rite conuocata errasse
legimus. Idem, cap. 5. Notandum est experimento retum, universal Concilium
plenarium posse deficere. Idem, cap. 14.
.

Tenthly, Whiles we defend, That the Pope is not universal Bishop Idem, cap.
13. Dum hanc partem defendimus, quod Papa non est vniuersalis Episcopus, sed
super alios primus, and sacrotum Conciliorum, non in Papa, sed in consensu
omnium vigorem fundamus, tunc quia veritatem defendimus, and vnicuique suum
honorem reseruamus, recte Papam honoramus.
, but only the first Bishop over others, and whiles we ground the power of
sacred Councels upon the consent of the whole Assembly, and not upon the Pope,
we maintain Truth, and give to every one his due honor. And then concluding
the former Positions, the Cardinal says Idem, cap. 15. In Concilijs parum de
illis omnibus inuenire potui, quae praedictis positionibus meis ad plenum non
concordarent.
, I observe little or nothing in ancient Monuments, which agrees not to these
my Assertions.

With this Cardinal, agree many other famous Papists; Occham, Panormitan
Panormit 1. Decretal. d. Elect. ca. signif.
, Almaine Almain. Quaest. Vesp.
, Cassander, Ferus, etc. and among the rest, Occham delivers these Positions:

First, That all general Councels are inferior to the holy Scriptures Occham,
Dial. part. 3. tr. 1. lib. 3. cap. 13. Sanctum tamen Euangelium cum maiori
reuerentia and deuotione suscipiendum est, quam Concilium generale quodcunque.
, and that when S. Gregory says, That he honors the four first general
Councels like as the four Evangelists, this must be understood, not of
equality, but of similitude Ibid. Hoc (...) est, de general Concilio rite,
just, and Catholice celebrato, etc. Ita tamen quod hoc vocabulum sicut,
omnimodam similitudinem nequaquam importet, ficut cum dicit Christus Estote
perfecti sicut pater vester, etc.
, Matthew. 5. 48.

Secondly, Councels are not called general, because they are congregated by
the authority of the Roman Pope Idem, par. 1. lib. 6. cap. 85. Non ideo
solummodo, vocatur Concilium generale, quia authoritate summi (...) conuocatur.
; and that if Princes and Laymen please, they may be present, and have to
deal with matters treated of in general Councels Ibid. Reges and Principes
and nonnulli Laici, possunt si voluerint, ad generale Concilium conuenire, and
eiusdem Concilij tractatibus interesse.
.

Thirdly, Ecclesiastical Dignity, as it makes not men holy, Idem, par. 1.
lib. 5. cap. 7. Dignitas Ecclesiastica non attribuit sanctitatem: and per
consequens, non confert impossibilitatem errandi contra fidem.
.

Fourthly, A general Council, or that Congregation which is commonly reputed
a general Council by the World, may err in matters of Faith Idem, par. 1.
lib. 5. cap. 25. Concilium generale licet sit pars Ecclesiae militantis
vniuersalis, tamen non est Ecclesia vniuersalis. Igitur temerarium est dicere,
quod Concilium generale contra fidem errare non potest. Ibid. cap. 28. and p.
3. tr. 1. lib. 3. cap. 9. and cap. 10. Concilium generale seu quod Concilium
generale a maiori part Christianorum putatur, potest errare
.

Ioh. Ferus commenting upon the Acts, chap. 15. compares the Apostles Council
with modern, and says Ferus, sup. Act. 15. page 180. In rebus fidei, and quae
conscientiam tangunt, non satis est dicere, volumus, mandam': vides igitur
quomodo (...) Apostoli. Simpliciter conueniunt, nihil nisi Deum quaerunt, and
aliorum salutem expetunt, denique omnia prudenter perpendunt. Quid igitur
mirum, si in hoc Concilio, fuerit Spiritus Sanctus, iuxta promissum Domini: vbi
duo vel tres congregati fuerint, etc. Nos aliter conuenimus, nempe cum magna
pompa, nosque ipsos querimus, atque nobis pollicemur, nihil nobis non licere de
plenitudine potestatis. Et quomodo Spiritus Sanctus eiusmodi conuentus probare
possit?
: In matters of Faith, and things which concern the Conscience, it is not
sufficient to say, We will and command; but you must consider, in what manner
the Apostles deal in their Assembly: They come together in simplicity of
heart, seeking only Gods glory, and the salvation of others; no marvel
therefore, if the Spirit of God was in this Council. But our meeting is in
another manner, namely, with great pomp, and seeking our selves, and promising
to our selves license (upon

Seeing therefore, by the confession of these learned Papists, latter Councels,
celebrated by the mere and absolute authority of the Pope, are neither
universal Anton. Perer. Pentateuch. Fid. Vol. 2. dub. 4. cap. 2. Ad Concilia
generalia Occidentis, v. gr. Lateranense, sub Innocentio 3. ad Lugdunense sub
Gregorio 11. ad Viennense sub Clemente 5. denique ad Tridentinum, raros, aut
nullos ex toto Orient Episcopos, conuenisse videmus.
, nor of infallible Judgment; Syluest. Prier. lib. d. Mod. Inquir. page 9. Cur
ergo sancti Patres suo tempore Haercticos per Scripturas expugnarunt? Resp. Hic
est alia ratio temporis.
; and that of later years, and especially since Pope Gregory the seventh,
they have wholly intended their own priuacie (...) Syluius, d. gest. Basil.
Council. lib. 1. page 14. Dum vnius hominis (Papae) libidinem sustinere
conantur, dumpque priuatum bonum communi anteuertunt, incredibile est quantas
errorum nebulas excitent.
: it is a malicious Censure which this Lojolist casts upon the Protestants,
in charging them with fundamental Heresy, for opposing the infallible
authority of such Councels, and consequently, with deiecting the foundation of
Unity in Gods

Protestants have always desired a lawful general Council, for the
concluding of differences in Religion Chemnit. Exam. p. 1. d. Trad. page 84.
Clamitanta multis iam annis, totius orbis (...) querelae, regnum Pontificium
multas corruptelas, abusus and superstitiones inuexisse in Ecclesiam: petunt in
legitimo Concilio grauissimas has Controuersias exverbo Dei dijudicari, and
definiri. Sed ecce Pontificij, etc. Phil. Melancth. Resp. ad Artic. Bauar.
Inquisit. q. 7. Hac generali Interrogatione odia contra nos accendere student,
quod videamur omnes Synodos, and omnia acta in Synodis reprehendere. Nos vero
palam fatemur, oportere in Ecclesia iudicia esse, and affirmamus multas pias
Synodos fuisse, and profuisse Ecclesiae, and maxim optamus nunc in his
dissidijs recte constitui iudicium Ecclesiae.
, and they are most ready and resolute to submit themselves to the
determination thereof D. Andr. Episcop. Winton. c. Apolog. Bellarm. cap. 14.
page 333. Date nobis Concilia legitime
; and they yield the same honor and authority to all such Councels, which the
ancient Church in the days of Constantine the Great, Theodosius, and
Martianus, and which S. Augustine did August. c. Donat. post. collat. cap. 15.
Quasi (...) Concilia, Scripturis Canonicis, aliquando fuerint comparata. 739.
; yea, which the more impartial Romans themselves, in precedent Ages, have
done. But the present Papalls will not endure a lawful and impartial
Council; Verger. d. Council. Trid. Papa vult esse Dominus totius Concilij, and
non modo illud indicere quando velit, and eo conuocare quales iudices ipsi
videatur, and eijcere quos ipse velit, sed dirigere illic omnia, and cogere vt
omnes dieant quicquid ipse imperauerit. Protest. Reg. Gal. facta Council. Trid.
Quippe quibus nec liber, nec tutus eo pateret accessus, neue idipsum Concilium,
a quo excluderetur inuitissimus, generale totius Ecclesiae Catholicae, aut
haberetur, aut appellaretur, quin potius priuatum existimaretur Concilium.
, and proceed as their forefathers, the Pharisees, did against the Apostles,
determining all things by the Model of their own Cabala, they will admit no
trial by Councels Paraleip. Ab. Vsperg. in Council. Basil. Eugenium Papam
tantum abesse, vt geueralibus Concilijs debeat obedire, vt tunc se maxim dicat
(...), cum Concilij Decreta contemn at. AEneas Sylu. d. Gest. Basil. Council.
lib. 1. page 14.
, nor any other means of Pacification, for restoring the common Unity of the
Christian Church.

IESVIT.
THirdly, their denying of the Primacie of S. Peter, and Tu es Petrus, and
super hanc Petram, etc.
his Successor; the Foundation which Christ laid of his Church, necessary for
the perpetual government thereof. Matthew. 16. 18.

ANSWER.
PRotestants deny not the Primacie of S. Peter, but they yield unto him, both
as he was an Apostle, Primacie of Spiritual Authority, and Jurisdiction over
the Universal Church, Matthew. 28.20. Ioh. 20.21. And also respectively to the
other (...). d. Unit. Eccles. Hoc erant (...) and caeteri Apostoli quod fuit
Petrus, pari (...) praediti and honoris and potestatis. Chrysostom. sup. Galath.
cap. 2. lamque se caeteris honor, parem ostendit (Paulus) (...) se reliquis
illis, sed i^psi summo comparat, declarans quod horum (...) parem sortitus sit
dignitatem. Barlaam. lib. d. Pap. princip. (...).
, in regard of all Apostolical Authority) Primacie of Calling, Order, Hilar.
sup. Matthew. Canon. 14. Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. lib. 2. cap. 14. August. sup. Ioh.
tr. 124. Read D. Reinolds Confer. Heart. cap. 5. diuis. 3. pa. 178. (...). Sermon.
66. B. Petrus and Paulus eminent inter vniuersos Apostolos and peculiari quadam
(...), vttum inter ipsos quis cui (...) incertum est.
, etc.

And the place of Saint Matthew, chap. 16.18. proves not Saint Peter to have
been a visible Monarch over the whole Church.

First, Our Savior affirms not plainly and literally, that August. sup.
Ioh. tr. 124. Super hanc ergo inquit Petram quam confessus es, aedificabo
Ecclesiam meam, Petra enim erat Christus. Idem, d. Verb. Dom. Sermon. 13. Tu es
ergo, inquit, Petrus, and super hanc Petram, quam confessus es, Super hanc
Petram, quam cognouisti, dicens, Tu es Christus, filius Dei viui, aedificabo,
Ecclesiam meam. Super me aedificabo te, non me super te. Ambros. sup. Ephesians. 2.
ver. 20. Super hanc Petram aedificabo Ecclesiam meam, hoc est in hac Catholicae
fidei confessione statuo fideles ad vitam. Hilar. d. Trinit. lib. 6. Super hanc
igitur confessionis Petram, Ecclesiae Chrysostom. sup. Matthew. Hom. 55. Eusebius
Emissen. Gregor. Beda, (...), Glossa Gratiani, Lyra, Ferus, (...), Stella, and
complures alij.
, verse 16, (...), and not (...); Upon this Rock, and not upon this Peter: Non
dictum est illi, Tu es Petra, sed, Tu es Petrus, Petra autem erat Christus; It
was not said unto him, Thou art the Rock, but, Thou art Peter, for the Rock
was Christ. August. Retract. Lib. 1. cap. 21.

Secondly, If he had affirmed expressly, That he would build his Church upon
him; yet he says not exclusiuely, that he would build the same only upon
him, but in other places he conioyneth the rest of the Apostles Orig. in
Matthew. tr. 1. Si autem super vnum illum Petrum, arbitraris vniuersam Ecclesiam
aedificari a Deo, quid dices de Iacobo, vel Iohanne, etc. Ambros. sup. Psalm.
38. Quod Petro dicitur, Apostolis (...) Hieron. c. Iouinian. lib. 1. At (...)
super Petrum fundatur Ecclesia, licet Idem, sup. Galath. cap. 2. Licet Petrum
and Iohannem secum Apostolos habuerit, etc. Et super ipsos Ecclesiae sit (...)
fundamentum. Cyril. sup. Esa. lib. 4. Orat. 2. Est omnium fundamentum and basis
inconcussa Christus, etc. Fundamenta etiam proxima and viciniora nobis
intelligi possunt, Apostoli and Euangelistae, oculati testes and ministri
Sermonis facti, in confirmationem fidei, etc. Ab ipso enim dictum est Diuino
Petro, etc. Tu es Petrus, and super hanc Petram, etc. Petram opinor vocans,
immotam fidem Discipuli, Dictum est item voce psallentis: Fundamenta eius in
Montibus sanctis. Optime sanctis Montibus comparandi sunt sancti Apostoli and
Euangelistae, quorum cognitio firmata est instar fundamenti posteris, non
sinens eos, qui per ipsos irretiti sunt in reprobam fidem decidere. Cusan.
Concord. Cath. lib. 2. cap. 13. Nihil dictum est ad Petrum, quod etiam alijs
dictum non sit. Sixth. Senens. Biblioth. lib. 6. an. 68. Credimus and certa fide
fatemur, Christum esse primum ac (...) totius Ecclesiastici aedificij
fundamentum; sed super hoc etiam fundamentum, asserimus, alias Petras
superimpositas, nempe Petrum, and caeteros Apostolos, quos Johannes in
Apocalypsi nominat duodecim fundamenta Coelestis Jerusalem. Victoria. Relect.
2. d. Pot. Eccles. Con. 4. Apostoli omnes habuerunt aequalem potestatem cum
Petro and Paulus ad Gal. 1. and 2. Satis defendit, se parem potestatem cum
Petro habere. Haec est aperte sententia Cypriani in Epistola
with him, John. 20. 23. Ephesians. 2.20. Apoc. 21.14. Matthew. 28.19.

Thirdly, To be a Ministerial Rock, and foundation of the Peter might be
such, in regard of his Preaching and Doctrine, as the other Apostles were, and
not in respect of Monarchical dominion. Hereupon Turrecremate in his Sum. d.
Eccles. lib. 2. cap. 11. says, Non argumentati sumus Petrum primatum habuisse
quia dictus fuit fundamentum aut Petra Ecclesiae, sed quia singulariter, etc.
We argue not, Saint Peter had the Primacie, because he was called the
Foundation, or Rock of the Church, but because he was in a singular manner so
called. But Peter's supremacy, the singular applying thereof in one Text of
Scripture, will not do it; both because the speaking to him in particular, is
only a circumstance, and relation of a matter, granted by the words of Rock
and Keys, but no addition of any other essential gift: and also because the
same Title, in terms equivalent, is elsewhere made common to other Apostles
Aug. d. Agon. Christ. ca. 30. Non sine causa inter omnes Apostolos huius
Ecclesiae Catholicae personam sustiner Petrus, huic enim Ecclesiae claues (...)
caelorum datae sunt, cum Petro datae sunt, and cum ei dicitur ad omnes dicitur,
Amas me, pasce oues meas. Beda. Hom. in Euang. Quem me dicunt? Potestas ligandi
and soluendi, quamuis soli Petro a Domino data (...), tamen absque vlla
dubitatione noscendum; quod and caeteris Apostolis data est. AEnaeas Syluius.
d. gest. Basil. Aug. super literam Math. Euang. Tibi dabo claues, etc. Ait, per
verba illa iudiciariam potestatem datam esse, non solum Petro, sed alijs etiam
Apostolis and toti Ecclesiae, in Episcopis and Presbiteris.
.

The Jesuit adds, That we deny the primacie of Peter's Successor: and that
this Successor is the foundation of the Church, laid by Christ, and necessary
for the perpetual government of the same.

I answer, First, St. Peter, in one respect, to wit, in regard of his
Apostolical function, had no successor: for the Office of Apostles was
extraordinary, appointed by Christ, for the Victor. Relect. 2. Con. 4. Prop.
12.
. Immediate calling, Prophetical inspiration, the gifts of Miracles and
Languages, authority over the whole Church, and all the ordinary Pastors
thereof, were proper to the holy Apostles; and if none succeed them in these
gifts and prerogatives, then it is manifest, that in respect of their
Apostleship Bellar. d. Romans Pontif. l. 4. c. 25. Apostoli non suerunt ordinarij
sed extraordinarij and quasi (...) Pastores, quibus non succeditur. Victoria
Relect. 2. d. pot. Eccles. Con. 4. Propos. 12. Nemo (...) alijs Apostolis cum
aequali potestate and authoritate iurisdictionis hoc est vt in toto orb
haberet plenitudineni potestatis, sicut (...) Apostolorum habuisset.
they have no Successors.

Secondly, In respect of ordinary Ministry, and in regard of the power and
order of jurisdiction, St. Peter has successors, in the same manner, as the
rest of the Apostles: to wit, all Bishops and Pastors Hieron. Epist. ad.
Euagr. to. 3. pa. 150. Caeterum omnes (...) successores sunt. Id. ad. Heliodor.
Epist. 1. Absit vt de his quicquam sinistrum loquar qui Apostolico gradui
succedentes, etc. Ambros. Dignit. Sacerd. ca. 1. Claues regni Caelorum quas in
Beato Petro Apostolo (...) suscepimus Sacerdotes. Ibid. cap. 2. Quas oues and
quem Gregem, non solum tune Beatus (...) Petrus, sed and nobiscum eas suscepit,
and cumillo cas nos suscepimus omnes.
, teaching (either where he planted Iren. lib. 4. cap. 43. Eis qui in Ecclesia
sunt Presbyteris obaudire oporter, his qui successionem habent ab Apostolis,
qui cum Episcopatus successione, Charisma veritatis certum, secundum placitum
Patris acceperunt. Ibid. cap. 44. Qui Apostolorum Doctrinam custodiunt. Greg.
Nazian Orat. 21. d. laud. Basil. Qui eandem Fidei doctrinam (...), (...) quoque
throni particeps est, etc.
.

Thirdly, That St. Peter has a special Successor, differing Bellarm. d.
Pontif. Romans praef. Extrauag. com. l. 1. tit. 9. d. Mayor. and obed. ca. vnam
sanctam. Subesse Romans Pontifici omni humanae creaturae, declaramus, dicimus,
definimus, and pronunciam' omnino esse de necessitate salutis. Paul. Cararia.
sum. mor. and Canon. q. 2. ar. 4. p. 4. n. 26. Non solum omnis fidelis populus,
verum etiam infidelis, and omnis rationalis creatura, Papae imperio subiacet.
: but it is neither confirmed by the holy Scripture Canus loc. l. 6. c. 8.
Romanum Pontif. Petrosucoedere, non est perse quidem in Sacris literis
Reuelatum. Dried. d. Ecclesia Dogm. l. 4. c. 3.
, nor by any divine Revelation, neither is the same delivered in the holy
Apostles Creed, or by any ancient general Council, or by the unanimous
consent of the Primative Fathers. And sundry Soto 4. Sent. Did. 24. q. 2. ar.
5. Nulli particulari Ecclesiae addixit, neque aliunde institutio Christi circa
hoc constat, etc. Cusan. Concord. Cath. l. 2. c. 34. pa. 599. Non (...) probari
Romans Pontif. perpetuum Principem (...) esse. Succession in loco non (...) in
(...). AEneus. Sylu. d. gest. Basil. Council. l. 1. Ioannes (...) The (...)
peritissimus, glossam illam singularem, quae Romans Ecclesiam orbi, praeponeret,
, and later Pontificians, do with so many subtle sleights and inventions
propugne it, that all intelligent and impartial men may plainly discern,
That this Doctrine of Papal Supremacy is builded upon the sand.

For if the Roman Bishop had been appointed and established the perpetual
Successor of Saint Peter, in manner before mentioned: either our Savior
himself would immediately, expreslly, and manifestly have revealed the same to
his Church; or the holy Apostles would have taken notice thereof, and declared
the same to others. Also Saint Peter must have carried himself as a Monarch
among the other Apostles, and exercised the actions of Sovereignty in the
visible Church. But we find Chrysostom in Act. Apost. Hom. 3. Petrus egit omnia ex
communi Discipulorum (...), nihil ex (...) nihil cum (...). (...).
, no vassallage and subjection yielded him by the rest of the Apostles. And if
he must have Saint (...) lived 30. years after Saint Peter. Baron. annual.
to. 1. An. 69. n. 1. and to. 2. Anno. 101. n. 2. (...). Haer. 66. Praeterijt
generatio Apostolorum, a Petro inquam vsque ad (...), and Ioannem, qui etiam
(...) in mundo, vsque ad (...) tempora.
should rather have been his Successors, than the ordinary Pastors of one
Diocese. The Spirit of God also, together with so eminent authority, would
have conferred upon (...) Successors, extraordinary graces, of Learning,
Wisdom, Holiness, etc. necessary for so high a calling. Also it is not
probable, that Eusebius, and other ancient Ecclesiastical Historians would
altogether have been silent of this Monarchical authority of the Roman
Bishop, neither would any Orthodoxe Father or general Council have confined
the Roman c Eusebius, in his (...) History speaks no word of it. Bulenger.
c. (...). Si quando apud Eusebium aliosque nonnullos de potestate sedis
Apostolicae, Paulo obscurius agi videris; Sic (...), ante be (...) illud (...)
seculum, etc.
pre-eminence as modern Papals claim; and the Fathers and Counsels contest
the same. Pope Stephan was slighted by St. Cyprian, and the Bishops of Africa
(...). apud. Cypr. Ep. 75. Atque ego in hac part (...) indignor ad hanc tam
apertam and manifestam Stephani stultitiam, quod qui sic de Episcopatus sui
loco gloriatur; and se successionem Petri tenere contendit. Tertul. d. pud. c.
21. De tua nunc sententia quero, vnde hoc (...) Ecclesiae usurps? Si quia
dixerit Petro. Dominus super hanc Petram aedificabo Ecclesiam meam, tibi dedi
claues Regni caelorum: velquaecunque alligaueris, etc. Qualis es euertens,
atque commutans manifestam Domini intenrionem, personaliter hoc Petro
conferentem: super te inquit aedificabo Ecclesiam meam.
, when he enterposed in their affairs: and Pope Victor, by the Bishops of the
East Eusebius. Hist. l. 5. c. 26.
. The Oecumenicall Council of Chalcedon Chalced. Council. Act. 16. ca. 28.
Centum quinquaginta Dei amantiss. Episc. sanctiss. noua Roma throno, (...)
aequalia (...)
, equalleth the Patriarch of Constantinople to the Bishop of Rome. Gregory the
Great Greg. li. 4. Epist. 31. 32. 34. 38. 39. and li. 6. Epist. 24. Cusan.
Concord. Cath. li. 2. c. 34.
himself gives the Papacy a deadly blow. And a Graeci. Asiani, etc. Nilus
Archiepisc. (...). l. c. d. Primat Papae.
has ever to this day opposed the Papal Primacie. Therefore it is most
improbable that this doctrine should be fundamental verity, which having no
(...) or infallible grounds in divine Revelation, wants also the suffrages of
all ancient Ecclesiastical Testimony.

IESVIT.
FOurthly, Their denying the foundation of true (...), which is one true
Catholic Christian faith, about revealed Mysteries; bringing in a
fantastical faith, pretending,

ANSWER.
YOu ought first to have weighed our Doctrine, concerning the definition of
Faith, and have compared the same with the Tenet of sundry of your own
Doctors, before you had accused us of fundamental Error about the same.

First, We maintain, that true Christian Catholic Faith is a (...) and
foundation (to wit on man's part) of Justification (...). d. Spir. sanct. ca.
18. (...). Damas. lib. 4. ca. 12. (...), etc. Cyril, in Johan. li. 4. ca. 9.
Ianua and via in vitamsides est, and recursus quidam atque reductio a
corruptione in immortalitatem. Aug. d. Temp. Sermon. 181. Fides omnium bonorum
est (...), and humanae salutis initium. Sine hac nemo ad numerum (...) Dei
(...), and sine (...) in hoc seculo, nec iustificationis consequitur gratiam,
nec in futuro possidebit vitam (...). Fulgent. d. Incarn. and Great. c. 20. Vita
nostra a fide sumit initium, quia justus ex fide viuit. (...). Sum. li. 3.
(...). 12. q. 2. Nos sequentes authoritatem Apostoli, and expositiones
Sanctorum dicimus, quod fides formata praecedit omnem aliam (...). Origin. sup.
c. 4. ep. ad Romans Aug. sup. Psalm. 31. Et d. Verb. Apost. sermon. 22.
, Heb. 11.6. Romans 1.17. Iud. v. 20.

Secondly, We deny that every man is justified, by only believing himself to
be just; for he must be truly just, before he can, or ought to believe
himself to be so Meisner. Anthrop. Dec. 3. p. 329. Credimus peccata nobis esse
remissa, sed haec fides formaliter non iustificat, verum (...) sequitur.
. The promise of remission of sins is conditional Musculus. loc. com. d.
Remiss. pecc. sect. 6. Discernendum est inter eam gratiam Dei, quae nullas
habet adiectas conditiones, qualis est quod Solemn suum producit super bonos and
(...), etc. Et came quae conditionaliter confertur, ad quem modum remissio
peccatorum nobis contingit.
, Esa. 1.16, 17, 18. Ezec. Pro. 28. 13. Math. 6.14, 15. John 15. 10. and 16,
27. Heb. 5.9. and the same becomes not absolute, until the condition be
fulfilled, either actually, or in desire and preparation of mind: and the full
assurance of remission of sins Beza. Colloq. Mompelgard. pa. 471. Edit.
Tubing. Consolatio quod adoptati sumus, petenda est, ex effectis spiritus
sancti, quando videlicet, sentimus in nobis eiusmodi motus spiritus sancti, qui
testificantur nos
succeeds Repentance, Faith, Obedience, and Mortification, 1. John 3.19, 20,
21, 22.

Thirdly, We deny, that it is an action of Christian Faith, praeuious or
fundamental to Justification, for a man to believe himself to be one of Gods
elect; and admitting that one do not attain the certainetie of Faith, but of
Hope only, that he is elected Aug. d. Cor. and Great. c. 13. Quis ex
multitudine fidelium quamdiu in hac mortalitate viuitur, in numero (...) se
esse praesumat quia id occultari opus est in hoc loco, vbi cauenda
: if there be no other impediment found in him, besides this, we make no
question but such a person may be (...).

Wherein then lies the fundamental error, concerning Faith and
Justification, wherewith we are reproched? If it be answered, That we err
fundamentally, by making saving Faith, not only an intellectual, but also a
fiduciall assent Ioh. Ferus. sup. Math. 8. v. 8. Vera fides fiducialiter
accedit, non dubitat Deu^ posse aut velle. and ca. 9. v. 2. Fides haec nihil
aliud fuit qua^ fiducia in misericordia^ Christi.
to the The manner of this (...) assent is: Being humbled with sense of mine
own injustice, I believe that God will be merciful unto me, and pardon all my
sins for the merits of Christ my Savior: and I depend and rely only upon the
merits of my Rodeemer, as upon the prime cause of my justification.
; the (...) must remember, that many of his own Doctors affirm the same.
Vega. d. Iustiff. lib. 14. Fides in Scripturis (...) idem est quod fidueia, and
(...) idem quod considere, Faith in the Scriptures is many times the same that
Trust; and, to believe, the same that to trust. Iansenius Iansen. Conc. Euang.
c. 32 p. 206. Nomine fidei in Euangelijs cum ei tribuitur salus aut consecutio
omniu^ (...) volumus compleri, vtrumque nempe and assensum illu^ firmum in
credendis de Deo ac Christo, and fiduciam ex illius omnipotente bonitare
conceptam. Bernard. ser. 3. d. Annunciat. Nec oleum misericordiae, nisi in vase
fiduciae ponis.
Concord. Euang. cap. 32. The name of Faith in the Gospel, when Salvation is
ascribed unto it, contains both firm assent, etc. and also considence and
trust conceived upon the apprehension of his (...) and goodness. Adam.
Sasboth. (...). Dicimus Fidem in disputatione Paudi de iustificatione accipi,
vt complectatur non solum (...), verum etiam (...) in Christum propitiatorem.
sup. Romans 1. v. 17. The word Faith in S. Paul's desputation, contains not
only Assent, but also Trust in Christ the Mediator. Ferus Ferus. sup. Math. c.
8. citatur a Sixto Senensi, Biblioth. lib. 6. (...). 48. Non semper Fides est
quod nos Fidem dicimus: Fidem nos dicimus (...) quae diuinis (...) produntur,
and quae Ecclesia credenda proponit. Hanc Scholastici informem, Iacobus (...)
appellat fidem. Qualis (...) est fides quae mortua est, formaque sua caret,
profecto non Fides sed vana opinio est, etc. secundum Scripturam Fides non est
(...) fiducia misericordiae diuinae promissae in Christo.
sup. Math. Non semper Fides est, quod nos Fidem dicimus, etc. That which we
call Faith, to wit, to assent to such things as are reported in divine
Histories, and which the Church propounds to believe, is not always Faith,
etc. for the Scripture speaks of Faith in another manner; for according to
it, Faith is a trust in the divine mercy, promised by Christ: with these also
concur, Guilliaudus Guilliaud. sup. Ioh. c. 3. v. 16. and sup. Ioh. 6.53.
, Fredericus Nausea Nausea. Cath. Chatech. li. 1. ca 12. Fides qua iustificamur
est constans firmaque animi per (...) sanctum de Deimaiestate omnipotentia and
bonitate, de que illius promissis indubitata persuasio: qua vt verbis (...)
certam Fidem habet, ita and de eius ergase bonitate, omnia sibi indubitato
pollicetur.
: and Suares Suar. d. fid. disp. 1. sect. 1. n. 5. Vega. d.
says, Multi Catholici putant saepe accipi in Scriptura Fidem pro fiducia,
Many Catholics think, that Faith is oftentimes taken in holy Scripture, for
Trust.

The Jesuit therefore wanted matter to fraught his papers, when he objected
this Article against us, as a fundamental error. For if his own Doctors,
and the holy Scripture it self Steuart. sup. Jacob. epist. c. 1. v. 6. pa. 29.
Fide i (...) licet in sacris literis pro certa persuasione vsurpetur qua vera
esse credimus, quae nobis a Deo, sieve per S. Scripturam, five per (...) sunt,
(...) fuerint, sieve Historiae Heb. 11. (...) praecepta (...). 20 Act. 15. sieve
promissiones, aut comminationes: Hoc tamen loco Fdes pro fiducia (...). (...)
in Fide sapientiam, Deique caetera dona (...), (...) ex certa minimeque dubia
persuasione and affectus fiducia, de diuina (...), (...), and (...) postulat.
, take the word Faith in this notion, wherein have we merited so grievous a
sentence? But I have produced many famous Doctors of his own part, which say
expressly the same that we do, concerning the signification of the word Texts,
I refer him to the places of Scripture following, Iam. Math. 9. v. 2. 22. and
cap. 14.31. Romans 9.33. (...), etc. Every one that believes upon him, 1. Pet.
2.6. Now in regard of the matter of our Doctrine, the assurance of remission of
sins, which we teach, is no other, than S. Bernard, John Bacon the Carmelite,
Caietan, Catherinus, Ferus, and many other Pontificians have formerly taught.
Caietan sup. Romans 8. Caietan. sup. Romans 8. v. 15. Inspirat nobis confidenter
appellate Deu^ patrem, and geminatur parris nome ad signif. firmitudine and
(...) fiduciae. Testimoniu^ a Spiritu sancto and nostro sufficietissimu^ habem'
ad hoc vt credamus quod sumus filij Dei. Na^ ex hoc testimonio clare videmus,
credendum nobis esse quod sumus filij Dei.
We have from the holy Ghost, and our own, a most sufficient testimony, to
make us believe, that we are the sons of God: for by this testimony, we
clearly discern, that we ought to believe, that we are the sons of God. And
S. Bernard Ber. sermon. 1. d. Annunc. Si credis peccata tua non posse deleri,
nisi ab eo cuisoli peccasti, and in quem peccatum non cadit been facis, sed
add adhuc, vt credas quia per ipsum tibi peccata donantur. Hoc est testimonium
quod perhibetin cord nostro Spiritus sanctus dicens, dimissa sunt tibi peccata
tua. Sic (...) arbitratur Apostolus gratis iustificari hominem per fidem.
, If thou beleeuest that he only can blot out thine offenses, whom thou have
offended, it is well: but join this also to the former, that by him thy sins
are forgiven thee. This is the testimony which the holy Spirit yields in our
hearts, saying, Thy sins are remitted unto thee: and in this sort does the
holy Apostle think, that a man is freely justified by Faith.

Now from the precedent positions, I argue thus:

First, That Doctrine concerning the nature and actions of Faith, which is
taught in holy Scripture 1. Ioh. 2. 5. and ca. 3.14, 19, 24. etc. 5.13. Romans 8.
15. 2. Cor. 1.22. and ca. 5.5. Gal. 4. 6. Ephesians. 1. 13, 14.
, and which has the consent of many ancient Fathers Basil. Aschet. q. 269.
Gre. Naz. or. 15. d. Plaga grandinis. Hilar. sup. Math. Can. 5. Cyril. sup.
Ioh. li. 10. ca. 3. Ambr. sermon. 5. and sup. 2. Cor. 13. Chrysostom. sup. Romans hom.
14. Aug. d. Symb. ad. Chat. c. 10. and tr. 5. sup. ep. Ioh. Constant. ap.
Theod. hist. Eccles. lib. 1. ca. 7. Gregor. Mor. li. 6. c. 8. Bernard. sermon. 1.
Annunciat. Cypr. li. d. Mortal.
, and which was delivered by many learned Doctors of the Roman Church Ioh.
Bacon. sup. sent. refert. Lorin. in. 1. Caietan. sup. Math. 6. and sup. Romans 8.
and sup. ep. Ioh. Catherin. li. d. Cert. Gratiae. Cassand. Consult. d. Iustif.
Marinar. or. in Council. Trid. Dom. 4. Quadrages. an. 1546. Ferus, sup. Ioh. ca.
14. and ca. 17.
, is not fundamental Error. But such is the Doctrine of Protestants
concerning justifying Faith, etc.

Secondly, No Church erreth fundamentally, which teaches such a kind of
justifying Faith as Abraham, Job, S. Paul, and other just persons (commended in
holy Scriptures) had.

But Abraham, Job, S. Paul, and other just persons (commended in holy
Scriptures) had such a justifying Faith, as was both an intellectual and
fiduciall assent to divine Verity and Promises. Ergo,

The Church of the Protestants erreth not fundamentally,

The assumption is proved by Romans 4.18, 19, 20, 21. Job 19. 25. Romans 8.38.
Gal. 2.20. 2. Tim. 4.7. And whereas Pontificians bequarrel us in this argument,
two ways: First, saying That

I answer, First, we have particular promises contained in the general, and
the general promises are particularly applied by the word of Absolution, and
the Sacraments, and by the testimony of the holy Ghost, speaking in the
conscience of true believers by effects of Grace Chrysostom. sup. To. sermon. 14.
Quando Catharin. lib. d. cert. Gratiae Assert. 2. Aut possunt hoc testimonium
sentire in seipsis, and excipere and agnoscere, aut frustra datur. Beda. in
epist. 1. Ioh. ca. 5, 10. Qui ita creditin filium Dei vt exerceat operando quod
credit, habet testimonium Dei in se, illud vtique quia ipse quoque in filiorum
Dei numero iure computetur. (...). Jb. Qui in filium Dei credit, etc. in seipso
habet testimonium, (...) se (...) in filium credat per Iesum, qui adoptatus a
Deo est.
.

Secondly, they which want miraculous Revelation, may understand, by ordinary
Grace, that they have Faith, Hope, and Charity, because the holy Scripture
commands all Christian believers to try and examine themselves concerning
these Cor. 11, 28. 2. Cor. 13.5. And godly persons which lived in former days,
knew they had these virtues, Psalm. 119. 97. Esa. 38.3. Job 27.5, 6. and 29.14.
Luc. 9.24. Ioh. 21.15. And the Apostle speaking of other people, as well as of
himself, says, We know the things which are freely given us of God Caietan.
sup. 1. ep. Ioh. v. 19. Diligendo opere, non solu^ cognoscim' nos esse ex
veritate etc. sed suade bim' cordibus nostris, non ficte, non blandiendo, sed
in conspectu Dei, vnde apparet, quod non de notitia euidentiae, sed de notitia
Fidei, dixit in hoc cognoscim', ex illa enim oritur vt suadeam' intimis (...)
cora^Deo quod sum' ex (...). (...). sup. To. 8. v. 38. Cert' sum, pro persuasus
sum, non de certitudine euidentiae, sed de certitudine persuasionis ((...)
constat esse Fidei) sermo est
, 1. Cor. 2. 12. And S. John says, That he which receives the hidden Manna
knows it, Apoc. 2. 17. The Fathers also, and many Doctors of the Roman Church
affirm the same. S. Augustine Aug. d. Trin. (...). Video me (...) si credo.
, I see that I believe, if I believe: and in another place Jdem. sup. Psalm.
10. Haec duo non mihi incerta sunt bonitas illus, and (...) mea.
, These two things are not uncertain to me, the goodness of God, and mine
own Faith: Idem sup. Ioh. tr. 5. Nemo (...) hominem: redeat vnusquisque in cor
suum, si ibi inuenerit fraternam charitatem, securus sit (...) transijt a morte
ad vitam, (...) in dextera est.
, Let every man enter into his own heart, and if he find there brotherly
Charity, let him be secure, for he is passed from death unto life: and in a
fourth place Id d. Trinit. lib. 8. c. 8. Magis nouit dilectionem qua diligit,
quam fratrem quem (...). (...) sup. 2. Cor. 13. Qui Fidei suae sensum Aug. d.
verb. Apost. sermon. 6. Ecce adiuuante ipsius misericordia spiritum Christi
habemus, ex ipsa (...), integra Fide, Catholica Fide, spiritum Dei nobis inesse
cognoscimus. Cyprian. lib. d. Mortal. Si in Christum credimus (...) and
promissis eius habeamus, and non morituri in (...) Christum, cum quo and
victuri and regnaturi semper sumus, laeta se curitate venismus.
, (...) man knows the Charity wherewith he loves his brother, better than
his brother.

But to the end the difference between our Adversaries and us concerning this
question, may the better appear, I will deliver

First, We maintain, that such persons only can have true assurance and
certainty of their Justification, which believe and repent, and are resolved
to obey Gods commandments Beza Colloq. Momp. p. 471. Consolatio quod adoptati
sumus, petenda est ex effectis Spiritus Sancti, quando videlicet sentimus in
nobis eiusmodi motus Spiritus Sancti, qui testificantur nos vere regeneratos,
and in filios Dei adoptatos esse. Nam Spiritus Sanctus testimonium perhibet
Spiritui nostro quod simus filij Dei, hos motus in nobis si sentiamus minime
dubitemus nos vere esse filios Dei. D. (...). d. Perseu. c. 15. Neque
preterquam in studio bonorum (...) cuiquam certa esse potest. (...). loc. com.
to. 3. d. Iustif. p. 1089. Nequaquam affirmamus, quemlibet hominem sine
discrimine certum esse posse de salute sua, siquidem Epicuraeis contemptoribus
omni paenitentia destitutis, tantum abest vt certitudinem gratiae persuasam
esse velimus, vt potius certam damnationem illis expectandam esse doceamus,
tota Chem. Exam. Council. Trid. p. 1. pa. 185. Muscul. loc. com. d. Remiss.
pecc. Sect. 6. Discernendum est inter eam gratiam Dei, quae nullas habet
adiectas conditiones: qualis est, quod solemn suum producit super bonos and
malos, pluitque super gratos and ingratos, and eam quae conditionaliter
confertur, ad quem modum peccatorum nobis remissio contingit.
.

Secondly, A Christian of a contrite spirit, believing only that his sins are
remissible, and which earnestly desires remission of sins by the merits of
Christ, and ioineth with this desire the exercise of virtue; receives
forgiveness, although he be vexed with scruples and temptations, and want
Chem. Exam. Council. Trid. p. 1. pa. 185. d. Fid. Iustif. Fides nec semper, nec
in omnibus est Iux ardens, sed saepe linum tantu^ fumigans, est enim (...) in
Centurione, and Cananaea, est modica, Math. 14. imbe cillis, Romans 14. and haec
infirmitas vel est in agnitionc, Romans 14. vel in fiducia, Romans 9. iustificat
autem fides, non propterea quod sit virtus, tam firma and (...), sed propter
obiectum, scilicit Mediatorem quod apprehendit, aut apprehendere conatur:
quando igitur fides in obiccto non errat, sed illud inter trepidationes fiducia
quantumuis languida apprehendit, aut apprehendere conatur, est quidem modica
and infirma fides, vera tamen fides, and Paulus, dulcissimas proponit
consolationes in tali (...) infirmitate. Phil. 3. Apprehendo, imo magis
apprehensus sum a Christo. Gal. 4. Cognouistis Deum, imo magis cogniti estis a
Deo, ex sensu etiam consolationis and gaudij spiritualis, non semper iudicari
vel debet vel potest, an fides sit vera. Sensus enim ille non precedit sed
sequitur Fidem, and saepe absconditur, and (...) cruce and tentationibus.
.

Thirdly, The particular certainty of remission of sins which just persons
attain unto upon their Repentance, Obedience, and Faith, is not equal in the
firmitie of assent to that assurance which they have about the common object of
Faith, to wit, concerning the articles of Creation, Trinity, Incarnation,
Resurrection, or the like Bannes. 22. q. 6. ar. 2. Concl. 5. pa. 235. Haec
certitudo quod ego habeam lumen fidei supernaturale, nunquam est tanta licet
sit infallibilis, quanta est (...) fidei circa obiectum direct (...) a Deo,
and (...). Medina. sup. Thom. Aq. 1.2. q. 112. ar. 5. page 628.
, because these articles are immediately and totally revealed in the holy
Scripture; but that his sins in particular are remitted, unto a penitent
person, depends upon an Argument, whereof one part only is immediately Bern.
in (...). 3. (...) crescis in gratiam, tantum (...) in fiduciam.
; according to the condition of the second Proposition.

Fourthly, The certainty and assurance of their own particular Justification,
which just persons attain unto, is reduced by us to certainty and assurance
of Faith, because one ground thereof is a Proposition, or Sentence, mediately
Divine; the other is inferred and concluded from that which is Divine: for the
Rule by which a man discerns himself, to believe

Many Pontificians maintain, That this Proposition, to wit, Pope Gregory the
fifteenth is S. Peter's Successor, is of Faith Did. Nugnus, sup. 3. p. Tho.
Addit. q. 20. ar. 3. Iac. Brower. Clauis, Apost. ar. 4. Franc. Arauxo. Carillo.
Mich. Marcos. Mich. Vasques. Peers.
; and yet the same is not an immediate Divine Revelation, and the collection
thereof from that which is revealed, is less evident and certain, than that
which a just person makes concerning his own particular Faith and Charity.

Fifthly, The difference between some learned Papists (who lived since the
Trident Council) and us, concerning this Andr. (...), d. Iustif. lib. 9. cap.
47. Mature tamen omnibus, hinc inde pensatis, probabilius profecto esse
crediderim, posse aliquos (...), tantopere in exercitijs spiritualibus, and in
familiaritate Diuina proficere, vt absque vlla temeritate, possunt certo and
absque vlla haesitatione credere se inuenisse gratiam and remissionem
peccatorum suorum apud Deum. Ibidem, cap. 20. Possum gloriari and (...), quod
mihi conscius sum, me habere fidem synceram, spem certam, and (...) non fictam,
in Deum and proximos. Ruard. Tapper, (...). 9. page 81. Nam in intellectu ex
consideratione (...) Dei respondet certa, and firma (...), omne dubium de
peccatorum remissione excludens, non tamen infallibilis, quasi de eo haberetur
verbum (...) peculiariter ad aliquem factum, ficut ad Paralyticum factum (...).
(...). d. Cert. Great. cap. 5. (...) remissionem, and gratiam Dei non solum
sperare, (...) credere posse ac debere, quo (...) modo (...) debet? Eo plane
sensu, quo (...) verbum Credo solet (...), page 161. Perer. sup. Romans 8. Disp.
9.
; and that infused Faith enclineth and leads immediately to this certainty
and assurance Ruard. ar. 9. d. Fid. and Spe. page 80. Quae quidem (...); (...)
multo sit inferior certitudine (...), quia tamen a sententijs Scripturae (...),
ideo fides quae est virtus infusa mediate ad illam (...).
. And it is worthy observation which Andreas Vega delivers concerning the
Trident Council, saying, Non negat sciri hoc posse per fidem, sed tantum negat
sciri hoc posse certitudine fidei Vega, d. Iustif. lib 9. cap. 8. page 216.
(...), in 1.2. p. 2. Disp. 201. cap. 2. (...). 11. (...) semel concedamus,
nobis certo constare (...) cui non (...) subesse falsum, nos habere dilectionis
affectum erga Deum, (...) etiam certo nos esse in gratia, (...) aut (...) actu
iustificamur, aut cum (...)
: The Council denies not, that one may be able to know by Faith, that he is
in the state of Grace; but it denies only, that this can be known by
certainty of Faith.

It is also remarkable, That whiles the Romists accuse us about the definition
of justifying Faith, they forget the Beam which is in their own eye: for they
make such a Faith, the August. in Ep-Ioh. tra. 10. Fides sine dilectione fides
Daemonis. Iansen. Conc. Euang. cap. 32. Qualem fidem etiam Daemones habent.
Mich. Palac. sup. 3. Sent. Did. 23. Disp. 7. Daemones credunt omnibus
Articulis Fidei.
, Iam. 2. 19. and which, according to their own Doctrine, is no true Virtue.
It is (says Michael Palacius Ibid. Disp. 5. Disputatio haec sub lite adhuc
agitur. Albert' credit, non esse proprie virtutem sed improprie. (...). Aquin.
in 3. d. 23. q. 3. ar. 2. Informis fides non habet actum perfectum, and ideo
non potest esse virtus. Bonauent. 3. d. 23. q. 2. Durand. 3. d. 23. q. 6. n.
11. Arch. Rubeo 3. d. 23. Non est virtus proprie dicta.
) a great Question, and as yet undecided among us, Whether Faith be a true
Virtue, or not? and Albertus thinks, it is not properly a Virtue, but only
improperly. Aquinas, It has not a perfect Act, and therefore it cannot be a
Virtue. The like is affirmed by Bonauenture, Durand, Archangelus Rubeo, etc.
And the same is manifest by reason: For Virtue is a good quality, making the
person in whom it is seated, and his actions, good August. d. lib. Arbitr. lib.
2. cap. 18, 19. Idem, d. Mor. Eccles. Cath. cap. 6.
; and the Faith which the Idem, sup. Psalm. 32. In ipsa fide Sixtus, Papa, ep.
3. d. Mal. Doct. Vbicunque fidei fructus non est, illic quoque nec ipsa fides
esse credenda est. Hieron. sup. Gal. cap. 5. Cum dilectio procul abfuerit, and
fides pariter abscedit. Saluian. d. Gub. Dei, lib. 3. Quid est credulitas vel
fides? Opinor fideliter hominem credere Christo, id est fidelem Deo esse,
fideliter Dei mandata seruare.
, purifieth the heart, Acts 15.9. and impelleth unto righteousness, Heb. 11.
33. But informed Catholic Faith performs none of these things, Iam. 2. 17.
And therefore the Romists depart from the Scripture, and from Antiquity, when
they appoint a dead and informed Faith, which is no Virtue, to be the
foundation of true Justification.

Lastly, Our Doctrine concerning the form and manner of Justification, is the
same which Peter Lombard Pet. Lomb. sent. lib. 3. d. 19. A. In eo quod sumus
iustificati, id est a peccatis soluti, etc. Dicimur quoque and aliter per
mortem Christi iustificati, quia per fide mortis eius a peccatis mundamur. Vnde
Apostolus iustitia Dei est per fidem Jesus Christi. Et item quem Deus proposuit
propitiatorem per fidem in sanguine ipsius, id est, per fidem Passionis: Vt
olim aspicientes in Serpentem AEneum in ligno erectum, a morsibus Serpentum
sanabantur.
, the Master of the School, affirmed to be Orthodoxall in his days: His
words are these, We are said also to be justified by the death of Christ,
because by the Faith of his Death, we are cleansed from our sins: Whereupon
the Apostle says, The righteousness of God is (Romans 3. 22.) whom God has set
forth, to be a propitiation through Faith in his blood (Verse 25.) that is
through Faith of his Passion; even as in times past, they which were bitten of
fiery Serpents, were made whole by looking upon the Brazen Serpent, which was
raised upon a piece of Wood. If therefore we by the aspect of Faith rightly
behold him, who was hanged upon a Tree for us, we are loosed from the bonds of
Satan, to wit, from our sins.

(...) Vega affirms, That many Roman Doctors in former days, denied that
men were formally justified by any created Andr. Vega, d. Iustif. lib. 7. cap.
24. Magna fuit iam ab aliquibus retro seculis inter nonnullos Doctores
concertatio, quae esset nostrae iustificationis causa formalis: and quibusdam
quidem placuisse videtur, nullam esse iustitiam creatam, a qua formaliter homo
esset iustus, sicut ab albedine est homo albus: sed perinde esse hominem
iustum, and amicum and gratum Deo, ab amore quo Deus illum amat, and ad Gratiam
suam and beatitudinem acceptat, ac Petrus est Iohanni amicus and gratus, ab
amore quo Icannes Petrum prosequitur. Ac (...) in hac sententia crediderunt
Magistrum Sententiarum fuisse. Alij vero, etc. Causam formalem nostrae
Iustificationis asseruere esse aliquam qualitatem creatam, etc. Et haec opinio
acceptata est ab Ecclesia in Concilio Viennensi, vt probabilior.
. And before the said Council, many learned Papists, to wit, Albertus Pighius,
the Council of Colen, set forth by Gropper, Antididagma Coloniense, Conradus
Clingius, etc. maintained our Doctrine concerning the formal cause of
Justification, and were not condemned of Heresy by the Roman Church:
Wherefore the same cannot in these days be a fundamental

IESVIT.
Fifthly, Their extenuating the value of the price of our Redemption, not making
it sufficient to give inward sanctity and purity to men's souls, nor to raise
the good Works of Gods children to a due proportion with their reward.

ANSWER.
NO Christian Church ever prised the oblation and merits Heb. 10. 14. Ephesians. 5.2.
Acts 4. 12. Ioh. 1.29. and we firmly believe the inestimable price and virtue
thereof Bernard. Fer. 4. Heb. Pentacost. Mirabilis passio tua Domine Jesus, quae
Passiones omnium nostrum propulsauit, propitiata est omnibus iniquitatib'
nostris, and nulli vnquam Pesti nostrae inuenitur in efficax. Ambros. lib. d.
Isaach. cap. 8. Ipse Christus est os nostrum, per quod Patri (...), Idem, in
Sermon. Quodam. Omnia habemus in Christo, etc. (...) desideras Medicus est, fi
febribus aestuas fons est, si (...) iniqua sententia, iustitia est, si indiges
auxilio, virtus est, si mortem times, vira est, (...) tenebras fugis lux est:
Si (...) desideras, via est: si alimentum quaeris, cibus est.
, for man's Redemption, Sanctification, Justification, and Glorification, 1.
Cor. 1. 30. And in particular we believe expressly, and contrary to our
Adversaries accusation, That the same is allsufficient to justify a sinner in
the sight of God, and to give true and inhaerent sanctity and purity to men's
souls, and actions: first, in this life, sanctity and purity, secundum
statum viae, according to the condition of man's wayfaring state: secondly, in
Calvin. sup. Romans 6. v. 4. (...) Apostolum non hic simpliciter nos adhortari ad
Christi imitationem, ac si diceret (...) Christi exemplaris vice esse, quod
Christianis omnibus conuenit, imitari: nam certe altius conscendit, etc. Haec
est autem (...), Quod mors Christi efficax est, ad nequitiam Carnis nostrae
extinguendam, etc.
, Romans 6. 3, 4, 5. Ioh. 15. 1. etc.

What then does this Popish Momus accuse in our Doctrine? I suppose, his own
fancy: for it is ordinary with Papals to That we hold Good works to be
mortal sins (...). d. Iustif. lib. 4. c. 1. Bona opera non sunt bona, ex
ipsorum sententia, nisi nomine and secundum quid, reipsa vero and simpliciter
sunt mortalia peccata. Perer. sup. Genes. cap. 6. Disp. 5. nu. 138.
, and that they are Virtues only by extrinsecall denomination: and he is also
offended, that we make not Good works properly and condignely meritorious.

Concerning the first, I refer my Reader to the words of Melancthon Melanct.
Corp. Doctr. tit. d. Bon. oper. page 20.
, and Beza Beza, Quaest. and Resp. in Opusc. to. 2. pa. 676. Bucer. and alij in
colloquio, Ratisbon. page 313. Hoc vero tu pie lector, nos de iustitia inchoata
haec sentire and confiteri: Esse quidem illam iustitiam veram and viuam, Dei
praeclarum and eximium Donum, vitamque nouam in Christo hac iustitia constare,
omnesque sanctos hac ipsa quoque iustitia iustos esse and coram Deo, and coram
hominibus, and propter eam quoque sanctos a Deo iustificari iustificatione
operum, id est comprobari eos a Deo, laudari and remunerari. Attamen quamlibet
haec iustitia vera sit and viua, etc.
, who treating of this Question, speak as follows: Although the works of
regenerate persons are not so perfect and good, as that they are able to merit
eternal life, yet they are truly good, because they proceed from the Holy
Ghost, who purisieth the heart by Faith, and because God is glorified by them,
and we our selves receive excellent fruit August. d. Spir. and Lit. cap. 14.
Praecepta Legis tam sunt salutaria facienti, vt nisi quis ea faecerit vitam
habere non possit.
by them, etc. The same are good, in regard of their object, form, efficient,
and end, Psalm. 119. 167. Galath. 5.22. Phil. 2.13. 1. Cor. 10.31. They are good
fruits, opposed to evil fruits, Matthew. 7.17. works of Light, opposed to
works of Darkness, Ephesians. 5.9. a spiritual Sacrifice, acceptable to God, Phil.
4.18. And the same are truly good Orig. sup. Romans lib. 6. Non (...) in justice
(...) verae virtutes non sint, etc.
, non comparatione scelerum, not comparatively only, but Regula virtutum,
according to the Rule of Virtue. August. c. 2. Ep. Pelag. lib. 4. cap. 10.

The imperfection and sin Greg. Mor. li. 5. cap. 7. Ipsa iustitia nostra ad
examen diuinae iustitia deducta, iniustitia est, and sordet in districtione
Iudicis, quae in aestimatione fulget operantis, vnde Paulus nihil mihi conscius
sum, sed protinus adiunxit, sed non in hoc iustificatus sum. Ibid. cap. 8. and
lib. 8. c. 13. (...). d. verb. Esa. Sermon. 5. Nostra si quae est humilis
iustitia recta forsitan sed non pura, etc. Idem, d. Ded (...) Sermon. 5. and sup.
Cantic. Sermon. 38. and 61. (...). Confess. lib. 9. cap. 13. Vae etiam laudabili
vitae si remota misericordia discutias eam Domine.
which is adjacent and concomitant to the virtuous actions of iustmen, changes
not their kind, because the same is freely remitted: Et quicquid alias in (...)
vitij est, Christi puritate sepultum non imputatur, says (...). Whatsoever
defect or fault is otherwise found in them, being covered with Christ's purity,
is not imputed (...). Instit. l. 3. c. 17. n. 10. (...). Council. Enchir. d.
Sacram. p. 132. (...) illa (...), and opera nostra adiuta per gratiam (...) and
si legem non adimpleant, tamen Deo placent, non quide^ propter dignitatem
voluntatis, seu operis nostri, sed imputative per gratiam.
. And this Doctrine concerning the imperfection of good Works, as they are
considered in themselves (in this life) is delivered, both by the Fathers, and
by many learned Pontificians. Andreas Vega d. Iustif, lib. 11. c. 38 Veg. d.
Just. li. 11. c. 38. Non solum verum est, vitam quorumuis iustorum, multis
maculis venialibus, iugiter sordidari, and deturpari, sed ipsa etiam
perfectorum opera, a bonitate illa long deficeere, qua deceret nos Deum
colere, laudare, and honorare: sunt quippe multis imperfectionibus quoad hic
viuitur coniuncta, neque tam pura, neque tam sancta, and feruentia, quam
magnitudo diuinae bonitatis, and beneficentiae in nos exigeret. Ibid. Multa
nunc fieri a nobis bona opera, and absque vlla macula peccati, quae tamen si
districte vellet Deus nobiscum agere, iniustitiae essent, etc.
. It is not only true, that the life of all just men, is daily spotted with
many venial sins, but the very works of perfect men, are very deficient,
from that goodness whereby it beseemed us, to have served, praised, and
honored God: for they are conjoined with many Imperfections, whiles men live
here; neither are they so pure, holy, and fervent, as the largeness of (...)
goodness and bounty toward us requires, and many good works are now
performed by us, without any blot of sin, which notwithstanding, if God
should deal strictly with us, were unrighteousness. To the like purpose
speaks Cassalius Cassal. d. quadr. Just. l. 3. c. 23. Aliud est loqui de
nostra iustitia prout est sola: and aliud est loqui de nostra iustitia prout
est cum poenitentia and charitate, prout est sola, fortassis manca, est mutila,
and deformis, quia in multis deficimus omnes, (...) autem est cum poenitentia,
and charitate, long alio modo se habet, quia poenitentia nostra (...) nostros
defectus a (...) dissimulari, and charitas facit nostros defectus a lege
operiri: vbi vero defectus a lege dissimulantur and operiuntur, nullus apparet
defectus nullaque deformitas in (...) legis.
d. quadripart. Just. lib. 3. cap. 23. The Council of Colen Conc. Colon
Imperfecta illa obedientia and opera nostra adiuta, per gratiam subsequentem,
etsi legem non adimpleant, tamen Deo placent, non quidem propter dignitatem
voluntatis seu operis nostri, sed imputative per gratiam. Mauburn. Si quaedam
bona ex gratia agit, tanta indeuotione ea permiscet quod omnes iustitiae
nostrae ((...)) sunt Deo quasi pannus menstruatae quo foedius execrabiliusque
nihil. Stella. Non est confidendum in propria iustitia, quia iustitiae nostrae
Gerson. to. 3. d. Consol. lib. 4. pros. 1. Quis gloriabit mundum cor se habere?
Quis dixerit innocens and mundus sum? Quis non constitutus sub iudicijs Dei
terribilis in Consilijs super filios hominum, non trepidauerit? Hinc afflictus
Job verebar omnia opera mea (ait Deo) sciens quod non parceres delinquenti. Et
iterum, si voluerit mecum contendere, non poteto respondere vnum pro mill. Cui
conformis est Oration Prophetica, non intres in iudicium cum (...) tuo Domine,
quia non iustificabitur in conspectu tuo omnis viuens. Et (...) si iniquitates
obseruaueris Domine, quis sustinebit? Porro quid Esaias se cum coeteris
inuoluens sibique vilescens humili confessione protulerit (...). Omnes
iustitiae nostrae tanquam pannus menstruatae. Quis igitur iustitias suas velut
gloriabundus ostentauerir Deo: plusquam pannum confusionis suae mulier viro.
Quem denique non exterruerit Apostoli verbum dicentis. Nihil mihi conscius sum
sed non in hoc iustificatus sum. Caiet. in. 2 Thessalonians. 1. Vt digni habeamini
regno Dei, etc. Non dicit digni sitis (quoniam non sunt condignae passiones
huius temporis, ad futurum regnum) sed vt digni habeamini ab ipso Deo.
d. Sacram. p. 132. Maubnrn. Roset. Exerc. Spirit. tit. 32. part. 2. d. 4. c.
3. m. 2. Didacus. Stella. sup. Luc. ca. 18. And many other, which I have cited
in my Defense of Dr. John White, pa. 20.

Concerning the second branch of the Jesuits accusation, That Protestants
extenuate the price of Christ's redemption, not making it sufficient to raise
the good Works of Gods children, to a due proportion, with the reward. I
answer: That if by due dignity in Good works, (...) to the reward, then he
must condemn Saint Paul himself, for extenuating the price of Christ's
redemption, who says, That the sufferings (Martyrdomes) of this present time,
are not worthy to be compared with the glory that shall be revealed in us,
Romans 8. 18. St. Hierom. sup. Ephesians. 2. Nec affirmare licet, merita nostra, ex
aequo Dei gratiae and misericordiae respondere, alioqui perperam dixisset
Paulus, Romans 8. Non sunt condignae passiones, etc. It is unlawful to affirm,
that our merits are equal to the grace and mercy of God, for then St. Paul
had spoken amiss, saying, The sufferings of this life, are not worthy, etc.
Saint Chrysostom. Imperf. in Math. Hom. 53. What have we wrought in this world,
to merit communion with God in his celestial kingdom, and therefore the
Apostle speaks justly: I do not think the passions of this life
(condignely) worthy of future glory, etc. sup. Romans Hom. 14. The Apostle in
every place labors to show us, that all which God does for us, is not of
debt, but of mere grace: Leo d. Assumpt. sermon. 1. Neque de qualitate operum
pendet coelestium mensura donorum. The measure of celestial gifts, depends not
upon the quality of works. Saint August. sup. Ioh. tr. 3. Non pro merito
accipias vitam aeternam, sed tantum pro gratia: Thou shall not receive eternal
life for thy merit, but only for grace. Origin. sup. Romans 4. I cannot persuade
my self, that any work of man can challenge reward upon debt, because we
receive our power, to think, speak, and do good, by the gift and larges of
God. Saint Basil. sup. Psalm. 114 Basil. Manet requies sempiterna illos, qui in
hac vita legitime certauerunt, non tanquam debitum (...) redditum, sed ob (...)
Dei gratiam, in quo sperauerunt exhibitam. page 137.
. Eternal rest abides for them which have lawfully striuen, not as due debt
to be rendered to their works, but for the grace of the most bountiful God,
in whom they have trusted. Saint Bernard. sermon. 1. Annunc. Mariae. Concerning
life eternal, we know, that the passions of this life are not worthy of
future glory, no not if one man should endure them all. Neither are the merits
of men such, as that therefore eternal life is due to them in right, or that
God should wrong man, if he should not bestow the same upon him, etc.

The arrogant and foolish opinion of modern Papists, concerning the merit of
condignitie, was always opposed by Pontificians Ioh. Ferus. in Math. l. 3. c.
20. Docet (...) haec parabola, primo gratiam
themselves Velosil. Aduert in (...). and alios. in to. 8. August. Quaesit. 13.
pa. 369. Scotus negat meritum de condigno, etc. similiter Durandus and (...).
, Scotus, Durand, Marsilius ab Inguen. Dionisius Cistertiensis, Gregory
Arminine, Thomas Walden. Paulus Burgensis, Ioh. Ferus, Eckius Eckius. in (...).
and d. praedest.
, Pighius Pigh. d. lib. Arb. li. 5. pa. 81.
, etc. And many Scribon. Pantal. in Theandr. d. mer. Christ. Disp. 11. pa. 177.
Cum long praemium excedat meritum, and opus quodcunque hominis sit valoris
finiti, quatenus (...) est Creatura, est finita, nunquam omnibus (...) operibus
ex (...) posset gloriam scmpiternam promereri, and fruitionem infiniti boni,
nisi ex diuina complacentia (...) lib. 2. in sent. q. 18. ar. 4. Opus esse
meritorium vitae aeternae, potest intelligi (...), vno modo quia tale est ex
part sui, vel secundum se, vel ex gratia cooperante. Alio modo (...) quia Dei
(...) liberaliter acceptante, and ex illa dispositione liberali, tantum
praemiare disponente pro opere sic facto. (...) est modus minus proprius.
. Paulus Cararia Theolog. Mor. and Canon. Reg. 1. ar. 3. p. 2. Stricte
loquendo, non (...) meritum condigni, inter nos and Deum: If a man will speak
properly and strictly, there is no merit of Condignitie between God and us.
Baltassar Nauaret. sup. 1. par. Thom. q. 21. ar. 1. ca. 28. pa. 603. God is
said to be a debtour to man, by a certain Hyperbole. Genebrard. sup. Psalm.
19. v. 13. Opera sunt long infra retributiones, Good works are far
inferior to the reward.

And whereas some Pontificians say, Altisiodor. sum. l. 3. tr. 12. q. 2. Mereri
de condigno (...) facere de debito debitum vel de debito magis debitum, ita
quod unjust agitur cum eo nisi reddatur ei quod meruit: Ergo Deus unjust
ageret cum eo nisi reddatur ei quod meruit. Rhem. Hebr. 6. Annot. 10. Good
works are meritorious, etc. so far, that God should be
that God were unjust, if he did not condignely reward good Works: Durand
Durand. 2. Did. 27. q. 2. n. 14. Sentire seu dicere oppositum est temerarium
seu blasphemiu^ propter quod si decedenti in gratia Deus non daret gloriam
nihil iniustum faceret, etc.
affirms that this speech is blasphemous.

They are miserably divided and distracted, about their doctrine of merit of
Condignitie, like the builders of the Tower of Babell.

First, Some of them simply and absolutely deny it Dionis. Cistert. 3. Did.
1. q. 2. ar. 3. and 4. d. 43. q. 3. ar. 1. Marsil. 2. q. 18. ar. 3. and 4.
.

Secondly, Some say good Works are meritorious only, by reason of the promise
and acceptance of God, and these also upon the matter deny it Vasques sup.
1.2. p. 2. Disp. 214. ca. 1. Opera bona perse spectata, etc. Non habere
condignitatem and rationem meriti, etc. Vide etiam pa. 805. (...). d. Tripl.
Hom. Offic. l. 2. c. 28. pa. 366.
.

Thirdly, Others affirm, they merit condignely, by the very nature and
dignity of the work, secluding the divine Promise Vasques ibid. Caietan. Soto,
etc. vt (...). Fran. Petigian. 3. Did. 20. ar. 3.
.

Fourthly, Others affirm, that merit of works, is founded, partly upon the
dignity of the work, and partly upon the promise of God Bellarm. Suares.
Medina. vt refert. Fran. Petigian. 3. Did. 20. ar. 3.
.

Fifthly, Some of them hold, that God rewards according Greg. Val. to. 1. q.
21. Suares. Dispd. just. Dei sect. 2. and 6. and refert Pius d. Ponte. sup.
Tho. 1. q. 21. dub. 1.
; others say, according to distributive Richard. 4. d. 46. ar. 1. q. 1.
Argentina. ib. q. vnic. ar. 1. conclus. 2. Capreol. 1. d. 45. q. un. Hosius
confess. c. 73. Ferrar. c. gent. l. 1. c. 93, etc.
; and others, according to both Bell. d. (...). l. 5. c. 14. Quod si quis hic
explicari cupiat vtru^ Deus secundu^ (...), an secundum commutatiuam, bonis
hominu^ meritis sit praemia (...), breuiter habeat substantiam (...) secundum
distributiuam, iustitiam sore, modu^ autem secundum commutatiuam.
.

Now considering this uncertainty of Popish Faith, in the

But the Protestant Doctrine, concerning good Works, is perspicuous,
orthodoxall, consenting with the holy Scripture, and the ancient Church, and
tends both to the honor of God, and the advancing of the Grace of, Christ
and also to the

First, we believe that good Works are necessary to salvation Apologia
Ecclesie Anglicanae (...) bona opera necessaria esse Christiano ad salutem.
(...). apolog. These. page 263. August. d. Spir. and Lit. c. 14. Praecepta Legis
tam sunt salutaria facienti, vt (...) quis ea fecerit, vitam habere non possit.
, and that all men which will be saved must carefully apply themselves to the
practice and exercise thereof. Tit. 3.8. Ioh. 15. 2.8. Heb. 12.14. Apoc. 22.14.

Secondly, God rewards good Works of his bounty and grace Marsil. 2. q. 18.
ar. 4. Talis est obligatio creaturae ad Deu^ quod quanto plus soluit, tanto
plus tenetur, patet per rationem, (...) quanto plus soluit, tanto plus de
merito habet and bonis operibus, and ergo tanto plus debet.
with benefits spiritual and temporal. Genesis 22.16. (...). John v. 8.

Thirdly, in giving reward, he considers the mind and quality of the doer,
the integrity, measure, and quantity of the work. 2. Cor. 9.6.

Fourthly, the reward is certain Chrysostom. Genesis hom. 55. Non ita fidere debemus,
his quae in manib' habemus and videmns, Idem. tom. 1. hom. d. Nom. Abrahae.
Aug. sup. plal. 109.
and infallible, yea more certain than any temporal benefit which man
presently inioies in the world, Genesis 22.16.

Fifthly, there is in all good Works a dignity, not of desert or equiparance,
either in respect of God, of whom we can deserve nothing Perer. in (...). 6. v.
5. disp. 5. n. 148. Praeter debita gratitudinis, quae nemosatis exoluere Deo
potest, ea quoque debita quae diuino praecepto persoluere tenemur, nemo
perfectae persoluit.
, or in respect of the reward, but only of grace, divine similitude, goodness,
and honor. Phil. 4.8.

Sixthly, the reward of good works is called a crown of righteousness Marsil.
2. q. 18. ar. 4. Iustus est in remunerando, quia iusta dispositione sua,
disposuit ex gratia acceptationis, minus (...) maiori praemio coronare non
iustitia debita, sed gratia and dispositione been placiti diuini. (...).
Council. Colon. d. Sacram. so. 130. Reposita est nobis Corona Iustitiae Dei, qua
iustum est vt reddat, quod (...) promisit, non quidem ex debito sed ex gratia.
, 2. Tim. 4. 8. because it is bestowed on them but merit of condignitie and
righteousness are (...)

Seventhly, the ancient Fathers maintained no merit of condignitie, but by the
word Mereri, they understood either to obtain (...). d. (...). Dei, lib. 5. c.
24. Haec and alia vitae huius munera etc. quida^ cultores Daemonu^ accipere
merueru^t, Idem. d. Temp. Sermon. 49. Paulus meruit Indulgentiam, and Sermon 58.
Man asses (...) inter amicos Dei numerari. Ambros. Sermon. 53. Johannes tantam
gratiam nascendo meruit, Idem. d. Paen. lib. (...). ca. (...). Ecclesia Domini
Jesus meruit Aduentum.
, or to impetrate Aug. Epist. 105. Neque ipsa remissio peccatorum sine merito
est si Fides hanc impetrat. Isiodor. Exhort. ad Paenit. Niniuitae impia
obscoena nefanda (...) flagitia, (...) paenitendo merentur. Vid. Andr. Vegam.
d. Iustif. li. 8. c. 6. and 7.
: and this is manifest, because they apply the word (Merit) not only to just
men, but also to sinners, saying, that they merited Repentance, remission of
Sins, the calling of Grace, etc.

Eithtly, the prime part of man's justice is the remission of his sins Ioh.
Hessel. sup. Math. 6. v. 12. Huius vitae Iustitia praecipue (vt ait August de
Ciuit. Dei, li. 19. c. 27.) in remissione peccatorum (...)
, and the righteousness of Faith; for without these, there can be no true and
living moral righteousness, and where these are found, good Works are never
wanting.

IESVIT.
Sixthly, Their errors against Baptism, the gate and entrance into Christian
life, whereof they deny the virtue to sanctify men, and the (...) thereof for
infants, to whom they grant Salvation without Baptism.

ANSWER.
ALthough some persons have been Christians before their Baptism, as S.
Augustine August. d. Bapt. lib. 4. cap. 24. Sicut in Abraham praecessit fidei
iustitia, and accessit Circumcisio signaculum rustitiae fidei: ita in Cornelio,
(...) sanctificatio Spiritualis in dono Spiritus sancti, and accessit
Sacrameutu^ regenerationis in lauacro Baptismi, etc. Ambr. li 5. epist. in
orat. Funeb. Valentin. Imperat. Tilman. Segeberg. d. 7. Sacram. c. 1. P.
Lombard. li. 4. Sent. Did. 4. E.
says of Cornelius. Even as in Abraham the justice of Faith was precedent, and
the seal of Circumcision followed after: so likewise in Cornelius, spiritual
Sanctification, by the gift of the holy Ghost, went before, and the Sacrament
of regeneration in the lauer of Baptism succeeded, yet notwithstanding, the
ordinary gate and entrance into Christian life, is Baptism. S. Ambrose (sieve
Prosper) d. vocat Gentium, lib. 1. cap. 5 Ambr. Origo verae vitae, veraeque
iustitiae, in regenerationis est posita Sacramento, vt vbi homo (...), ibi
etiam (...) veritas oriatur.
. The beginning of true life and righteousness, is laid in the Sacrament of
Regeneration, that look where man is newborn, there

Neither do Protestants deny the virtue and efficacy of Baptism, Ephesians. 5.26.
Tit. 3.5. Gal. 3.27.1. Pet. 3.21. Acts 22.16. Romans 6.3. and the ancient Church
Aug. ep. 157. Non est salsa etiam in paruuloru^ Baptismate, Remissio
peccatorum, nec (...) dicitur, Ted veraciter agitur. Council. Carthag. Ap. Aug.
epist. 90. Quicunque negat paruulos, per Baptismum Christi, a perditione
liberari, and salutem percipere aeternam Anathema sit. Aug. sup. Ioh. tr. 80.
vnde tanta (...) aquae vt corpus tangat, and cor abluat, etc. Id. Encherid. c.
42. Council. Mileuitan. ca. 2. Propter hanc regulam Fidei, etia^ paruuli qui
nihil peccatorum in semetipsis adhuc co^mittere potueru^t, ideo in peccatorum
remissionem veraciter baptizantur, vt in eis regeneratione mundetur, quod
generatione traxerunt. Chrysostom. sup. psalm. 22. Leo, d. Natiuit. sermon. 4. Greg.
Nissen. in Bapt. Christi. (...).
, they teach and maintain, That this Sacrament is an instrument of
Sanctification, and remission of sins. The Liturgy of the Church of England,
in the form of administration of Baptism, has these words: Seeing now D. B.
that these children be regenerate, etc. We yield thee hearty thanks most
merciful Father, that it has pleased thee to regenerate this infant, with thy
holy Spirit, to receive him for thine own child by adoption, etc. And master
Hooker Hooker. Eccles. pol. li. 5. sect. 59 pa. 132. and sect. 67. pa. 174.
says, Baptism is a Sacrament which God has instituted in his Church, to the
end, that they which receive the same, might thereby be incorporated into
Christ, and so through his most precious merit, obtain as well that saving
Grace of Imputation, which takes away all former guiltiness, and also that
infused divine virtue of the holy Ghost, which gives to the powers of the
soul their first disposition toward future newness of life. Zanchius Zanch
Miscel. li. 3 pa. 134. Cum Minister baptisat,
has these words: When the Minister baptiseth, I believe that Christ with his
hand reached as it were from heaven, besprinkleth the child baptized with
water, with his blood, to remission of sins. And in another place Idem. d.
Trib. Eloh. lib 7. pa. 266. Spiritus sanctus cum incubaret aquis illis primis
(...) mundi, easque (...) and animaret, Symbolo quodam declarauit, quod
facturus erat super aquas Baptismi a Christo instituendi, se nimirum
descensurum super Christum in specie Columbae, and mansurum super eum: and
illum etiam nunc incubare aquis nostri Baptismi easque sanctificare, vt
lauachrum sint regenerationis. Et qui baptizantur electi, illos per hunc
Spiritum sanctificari, regenerari animari ad opera bona.
, The holy Ghost moves upon the water of Baptism, and sanctifies the same,
making it to be a lauer of Regeneration. Calvin Calvin. Instit. lib. 4. ca.
15.. 5.
says, Per Baptismum Christus nos mortis suae fecit participes, vt in eam
inseramur, By Baptism, Christ has made us partakers of his death, that we may
be ingraffed into it. And in another place Calvin. ibid. c. 16.. 17 At quomodo
in quiunt regenerantur In fantes, nec boni, nec mali cognitione praedicti? Nos
autem respondemus, opus Dei, etiamsi captui nostro non subiaceat, non (...)
esse nullum.
, If any man demand, How can infants which want understanding be regenerate? I
answer, Although we are not able to fadome or unfold the manner of this Work
of God, (...) it follows not from thence, that the same is not done.

And the same author, with others of his part, maintain the former Doctrine
concerning the efficacy of the Sacrament of Baptism, and they differ only
from Lutherans and Pontificians. Vide Beza in Act. Colloq. Monsbelgard. Tit. d.
Bap.
. Secondly, In that they deny external Baptism to be always effectual, at
the very instant time when it is administered Beza, ibid.
. But our Adversaries must be over rigid, if they shall censure questions of
this nature, which are touching circumstance, P. (...). Sent. lib. 4. Did. 4.
Quamuis quidam diffiteantur, illis qui perituri sunt paruulis, in Baptismo
dimitti peccata, innitentes illi verbo Aug. Sacramenta in solis electis
efficient quod figurant? Jbid. G. Nec mireris rem aliquando praecedere
Sacramentum, cum aliquando (...) long post sequatur: vt in illis qui ficte
accedunt, quibus cum postea paenituerint incipiet Baptismus prodesse.
) affirm the same.

Thirdly, whereas the Obiector adds, that Protestants deny the necessity of
Baptism for Infants, granting them Salvation without Baptism; he must
understand, that necessity is either absolute, or else of precept and
supposition. We verily maintain the latter necessity of Baptism, for the
salvation of Infants, against the Pelagians and Anabaptists: and the contempt
and wilful neglect of this holy Sacrament is damnable to such as are guilty
of this contempt: and our Church Canon. Eccles. Synod. Anglic. ann. 1603. Can.
69. If any Minister, etc.
provides diligently, that all Infants (if it be possible) may receive
Baptism before they depart this life. But if it fall out inevitable Tilman. d.
7. Sacram. ca. 1. Non allegauit Deus potentiam suam (vt est communis
Theologorum sententia) ita visibilibus Sacramentis, vt sine ipsis (modo absit
coutemptus) saluare nequeat aut nolit, maxim quando impossible est, (...) ea
suscipere possit.
, that newborn babes, descending of Christian parents, cannot receive this
Sacrament, not only Protestants, but the ancient Church it self, and
discreeter Papists, have thought it more Council, Trid. (...). 6. ca. 7.
, and their disciples Bellarm. d. Bapt. li. 1. ca. 4. Cabrer. sup. 3. p. Thom.
quest. 68. ar. 2. n. 7. Henriq. sum. Theolog. li. 2. c. 22. Qui citat alios.
do.

First, the ancient Church allotted only two seasons Tom. 1. Council Ap.
Surium. page 731. Socrat. hist. Eccles. li. 5. ca. 21. Tert. d. Bapt. cap. 19.
and d. Cor. Mil. c. 3. Hieron in 14. ca. Zachar. and Epist. 61. ca. 16. Leo
Epist. 4. Vid. Durant. d. rit. Eccles. Cath. lib. 1. ca. 19. n. 14
in the year for Baptism, which they could not in their charity have thus
restrained to set times, if they had been persuaded

Secondly, Gerson Gerson. p. 3. sermon. in Natiuit. B. Mariae.
, Biel Biel. 4. Sent. Did. 4. q. 2.
, and Caietan Caietan. in 3. Thom. q 68. ar. 1. and 2. (...). venet. Anno 1547.
In late editions the place is castrated.
, with many other famous Pontificians Tilman. Segeberg. d 7. Sacram. c. 1. p.
43. Thom. Elysius Clyp. Pior. Hom. Tit. 11. d. Bapt. ar. 3. Cassand. d. Bapt.
Infant. p. 772. and 777. Eos quoque infantes qui voto patentum, vel
propinquorum Christo (...) sunt, ac iam nunc voto and animi (...) Christo ad
Baptismum oblati, si ante expirent quam externum signum adhiberi possit, non
priuari Baptismi gratia pie credi posse existimo.
, affirm, That Infants departing this life without Baptism, may be saved by
the special Grace of God, and by the prayers and faith of their parents. And
the words of Thomas Elysius Elys. ibid. so. 102. Col. 2.
, a late Pontifician, are very remarkable, saying, Opinio quam tenent Theologi
plurimi, and Ecclesia secundum communem legem, est satis dura and onerosa, and
non conformis preceptis Christi quae sunt suauia and leuia. The opinion of many
Non est haeretica, cum non sit contra Fidem Catholicam, sea ei conformis, and
maxim secundum fidei pietatem. This opinion (which propugneth the salvation of
Infants unbaptized) is not heretical, for it is conformeable, and not
repugnant to Catholic faith, and most conformeable to piety.

To Elysius, I add Cassander, Cass. d. Bapt. Infant. pa. 775. Videntur haec
(quae dicta sunt de Bapt. Flaminis) ad Infantes quoque non incommode transferri
posse. Nihil enim eis ad salutem praeter aquae tinctionem, deesse videtur, ad
quam tinetionem, parentum and Ecclesiae voluntate and fide iam destinati sunt,
cur igitur non hic quoque dicamus, supplere omnipotentis benignitatem, quod
Sacramento desuerit, nisi Deum seueriorem se Infantibus, quam adultis exhibere
putemus?
a moderate and peaceable Roman, d. Baptismo Infantum, which with many
authorities and weighty Arguments, defends the same doctrine concerning
Infants, against the common strain of rigorous Pontificians.

And thus again, our braine-sicke Adversary fights against piety and
humanity, obiecting that against Protestants as a

IESVIT.
SEauenthly, Their error against Real Presence, which they deny, or else the
main Article of the Creed, That Christ is still in heaven, at the right hand
of his

ANSWER.
THe more learned Jesuits themselves, acknowledge Bellarm. d. Euchar. lib. 1.
cap. 1. Greg. Vol. Tom. 4. Disp. 6. q. 3. punct. 1. Suares 3. q. 75. Disp. 46.
Sect. 1. page 518. Caluinus, etc. Cum negaret corpus Christi esse realiter ac
substantialiter praesens, in hoc Sacramento sed solum in coelo: nihilominus
absolute concedebat, substantiam, and corpus Christi sumi and Manducari a
fidelibus, ineffabili quodam (...).
, That Protestants believe the real Presence of Christ's Body and Blood, in
the holy Eucharist; and our Divines deliver their Faith concerning the
Sacrament in this manner D. Bilson. BB. of Winchest. Diff. true Subject. par.
4. page 779. (...), li. d. Spir. mand. omnes vere Christiani, sacrae Coenae
Domini, ex ipsius instituto communicantes, manducant corpus and bibunt
sanguinem Jesus Christi spiritualiter, efficacitate Spiritus sancti. Junius,
Animad. ad. (...). d. Imag. cap. 9. n. 50. Eucharistiae Sacramentum (...)
proprie aut figurate. Proprie Sacramentum capit and panem (...), and corpus
(...) Domini, ex instituto and veritate Christi.
: God forbid we should deny, that the flesh and blood of

The difference then between Papals and us, is not concerning the object, or
matter received in and by the Sacrament, Calvin Calvin. Opusc. lib. Consens.
inter Tigur. and Calu. (...) nobis (in Coena) Christi corpus and sanguinem,
nullus nostrum negat, qualis autem sit corporis and sanguinis Domini
communicatio, queritur.
says thus concerning the difference, That the body and blood of Christ are
communicated to us in the holy Eucharist, none of us deny; the question is,
concerning the manner of this communication.

The sacred Scripture neither expressly, nor yet by any formal consequence,
teaches the Doctrine of Transubstantiation (as some learned Papists Caietan.
in 3. part. Thom. q. 75. ar. 1. Edit. Venet. anno 1547. Petigian. 4. Did. 10.
q. 1. ar. 1 Et in hoc Caietanus (...) defecit, qui eneruauit vim hulus
argumenti (...) Haereticos Sacramentarios. Dixerat enim in Comment. ar. 1. q.
75. 3. p. qui iussu Pij V. in Romana editione merito expunctus est, seclusa
Ecclesiae Authoritate, verba illa ad veritatem hanc confirmandam non sufficere.
themselves confess) neither is Suar. in 3. part. Tho. q. 75. ar. 5. Disp. 50.
Sect 2. says, That Scotus and Biel held so.
.)

The Fathers are against Transubstantiation: The mystical signs ( says
Theodoret Theod. Dial. lib. 2.
) do not, after sanctification, depart from their own nature, but remain in
their former substance, figure, and says Pope Gelasius Gelas. c. Nestor. and
(...). Bibl. Bign. to. 4. fo. 565.
) are a divine thing, and by them we are made partakers of the Divine Nature;
and yet for all that, the nature of Bread and Wine cease not to be. After
consecration ( says S. Chrysostom Chrysostom. ad Caesar. Monach.
) it is delivered from the name of Bread, and reputed worthy to be called the
Lords Body: notwithstanding, the nature of Bread still remains. The signs,
as touching the substance of the creatures, are the same after consecration,
which they were before ( says Bertram. Bertram. li. d. corp. and sang. Dom.
.)

To the other part of the Jesuits speech, Or else the maine Article, testimony
of sacred Scripture, or by the ancient Tradition of (...). d. Sacram. d.
Euchar. Disp. 4. q. 3. punct. 5. Respondeo, Christum existere sub speciebus
Sacramentaliter modo, quodam admirabili and ineffabili, per modum substantiae
spiritualis, secundum totam suam substantiam, quantitatem and membra, (...)
modo quo in coelis existit, ad dexteram Dei Patris omnipotentis, non vero
existere modo quantitatiuo, seu per extensionem (...), in ordine ad locum.
Thom. Aq. p. 3. q. 76. ar. 4. Nugnus, ibid. Coninch. ibid. n. 66. Henriq. Sum.
lib. 8. cap. 25. Reginald. Greg. Val. Tolet. Philiarch. Petigian. Angles.
Barth. ab Angelo, Victoria, Chamerota, Pezantius, Vasques, Viguer. Institut.
Theol. d. Euchar. and alij.
only; we say with Augustine August. ep. 57.
, Spacia locorum toll corporibus and nusquam erunt, and quia nusquam erunt,
nec erunt, Take away their places from bodies, and the bodies shall be no
where; and if they shall be no where, they shall have no being. And in another
place August Sermon in Mont. lib. 2. cap 9. etc. Faust. lib. 20. cap. 11.
Secundum praesentiam corporalem, simul and in Sole, and in Luna, and in Cruce,
esse non possit.
, Corpora non possunt esse, nisi in loco; Bodies cannot be, but in some place.
And again August. sup. Ioh. 31. Vigil. c. Eutych. lib. 4. cap. 4. Fulgent.
Trasimund. (...). 2. cap. 5. Theod. Dial. lib. 2. Arnob. Adu.
, Christus homo secundum corpus, The man Christ is in a place, according to his
Body, and he passes from place to place; and when he comes to another
place, he is not in that place from whence he came.

The Papals paralogize, saying, That because circumscription and localitie are
not of the essence of the body (...). d. Euchar. lib. 3. cap. 3. Non repugnat
essentiae corporis, esse in vno and pluribus locis, cum sint omnia extrinseca,
and posteriora ipsa corporis essentia.
, therefore by the omnipotent power of God, the body may be without them. But
if this illation be good, then we may likewise infer, That because to be
created, made, or begotten, is not of the definition of humane bodies Arist. 1.
d. Coelo. Text. 2. Corpus est quod diuisibile est secundum omnes mensuras.
, therefore humane bodies, by the omnipotency of God, may be increate, and
without beginning. The learned Julius Scaliger Scalig. d. Subtle. Exerc. 5.
Sect. 6.
speaks in this manner: (Tametsi quod non includitur in definitione, abesse
potest, a definito in definitione, non omne tamen abesse potest, a re definita.
Propria enim quae vocantur, in definitione non ponuntur, a re tamen abesse
nequeunt, cuius propria sunt, Etsi namque sunt natura suis subiectis
posteriora, non tamen re, etc. Qua necessitate, coniunctum cum corpore locum,
arbitror.) Although that which is not included in the definition, may be
separated from the thing defined, in the very definition, yet it cannot be
parted from the subject, or thing, which is defined: for the essential
properties of things are not placed in the definition, yet they cannot be
divided from the

Secondly, The body of Christ in the Eucharist, has magnitude, Aquinas Aquin.
3. Quest. 76. ar. 4. substantia corporis Christi, realiter non denudatur a sua
quantitate dimensiua, and ab alijs accidentibus.
and other Schoolmen Nugnus, ibid. Fides est ((...) vt oppositum sit erroneum)
quod tota quantitas corporis Christi Domini, est
commonly teach. But things which have magnitude, and quantity, are diuisible,
and limited and confined to a certain space, and measure, equal to their
bulk and material substance: also they have distance of parts, and are
extended at leastwise in order to themselves, and bounded by their own
termination, compass, or surface, although nothing extrinsecall to them,
should contain them outwardly (as is instanced in the highest Heavens Bellarm.
d. Euchar. lib. 3. cap. 5. Sententia communis Scholarum and Ecclesiae est, etc.
Petigian. 4. d. 10. q. 1. ar. 4. Dub. 2. Est conclusio (...) quod corpus Domini
in Eucharistia, suam habet quantitatem, and est communis opinio omnium
Theologorum. c Scalig. d. Subtle. Exerc. 5. Sect. 3. Primum Coelum est in loco,
and sane in suo spacio quod occupat. Bellarm. d. Euchar. lib. 3. cap. 7.
.)

When Sophisters say, That Christ's body has quantity, and not the manner (or
nature of quantity) they deliver plain Chimaera's, and Fictions: For as a
thing cannot be a substance, and want the proper nature and manner of a
substance, so likewise a body cannot have quantity, and want the proper
manner Durand. 4. Did. 10. q. 2. Vbicunque est substantia in se realiter, ibi
est substantialiter, quia est ab ea, iste modus inseparabilis, ergo (...)
vbicunque est quantitas in se realiter, ibi est (...), quia iste modus est ipsi
essentialis and inseparabilis, sed illud quod est quantitatiue alicubi, non
potest comparari ad totum, vel (...) partem consimiliter.
.

And whereas to elude so manifest Verity, Papists fly to the Omnipotency of
God Bellarm. d. Euchar. lib. 1. cap. 14.
, saying, That although in nature it be impossible for one and the same body
to be in many places at once; yet because God is omnipotent, he is able to
effect it. We answer, first, it implies a contradiction, Tertullian Tertul.
lib. c. Prax. Dei velle posse (...), and non posse nolle.
, The power of God (which we must stand of) is his Will, and that which he Will
not, he cannot. And S. Augustine August. d. Ciuit. Dei, lib. 5. cap. 10.
Dicitur omnipotens, faciendo quod vult, non patiendo quod non vult, vnde
proprerea
, Christ is said to be omnipotent, in doing what he Will. Nothing is impossible
to God, because it exceeds his power (says S. Ambrose Ambros. lib. 6. ep.
37. Quia ergo ei impossible: Non quod virtuti arduum, sed quod naturae (...)
contrarium. Impossible istud, non (...), sed virtutis, and maiestatis, quia
veritas non recipit mendacium, nec Dei virtus, leuitatis errorem.
) but some things are repugnant to his Will, and some things to his verity,
Tit. 1. 2. And the impossibility of these things proceeds not of Infirmity
in God, but of Might and Majesty, because his Truth admits no Lie, nor his
Power any

Because therefore Christ has a true and perfect Body, both in regard of
substance and matter, and also in respect of quantity Occhagania, d. Sacram.
tr. 1. d. Euchar. q. 20. Quantitas debet comitati corpus Christi, vbicunque
sit. Extensio localis est propria passio qua^titatis. Ex vi verborum
constituitur corpus organicum. Quaeret aliquis qui fieri possit, vt modus ille
extensionis localis, quem corpus Christi habet in Coelo, reuera insit in
corpore Christi, and a corpore reipsa, non seperetur (vt certum sane est) and
tamen non sit cum corpore Christi in Eucharistia?
, stature, measure, posture, proportion, etc. and because every true humane
body, by the Ordinance of the Creator, (who has formed and constituted the
several kinds and natures of things after a special manner) is determined to
one individual place at one instant Siluestran. in 4. Sent. Lect. Durand. 4.
Did. 10. q. 2. Si quantitas corporis Christi est in Sacramento per
concomtantiam ad substantiam, non apparet possibile, qualiter ipsa tota possit
esse (...) praesens speciebus, and cuilibet parti specierum. Petigian. in 4.
Did. 10. q. 2. ar. 1. Si corpus Christi potest esse Sacramentaliter praesens
multis locis, ergo omnibus, ergo vbique: si autem de fide est creaturam non
posse esse vbique non solum est secundum praesentiam quantitatiuam, sed etiam
secundum quamcunque praesentiam realem, etiam indiuisibilem and Angelicam, nam
etiam de (...) spirituali creata, erit de fide, non posse esse vbique alioquin
ex illa proprietate, non colligeretur diuinitas filij and Spiritus Sancti.
, and must also have distinction and division of parts, with a length,
latitude, and thickness proportional to the quantity thereof: Therefore,
except

Some learned Papists confess ingeniously, That secluding the Authority of
the Church, there is no written Word of God Scotus, 4. Did. 11. q. 3. Camerac.
4. q. 6. ar. 2. Licet ita esse non sequatur euidenter, ex Scriptura. Caietan.
3. q. 75. ar. 1. Non apparet ex (...) aliquid, etc.
sufficient to enforce a Christian to receive this Doctrine: Bellarm. d.
Euchar. lib. 1. cap. 2. and cap. 14. Non habet Christus in Eucharistia, (...)
existendi corporum, sed potius Spirituum. Ibidem, lib. 3. cap. 4. (...) si quis
contendat esse in loco tam (...) quam (...), id requirere vt res nullo modo sit
alibi, dicere possumus dari tertrum modum existendi in loco, (...) per solam.
(...), quomodo Deus est in loco, and hoc modo in loco (...) ea corpora, quae
per Diuinam potentiam, (...) sunt in (...) locis. Ochagauia, d. Sacram. tr. 1.
d. Euchar. q. 22. Deus est vnus, and tamen est Ibid. 4. 21. Christus existit in
hoc Sacramento, quemadmodum Angelus existit in loco. (...). in 4. d. 10. q. 1.
Disp. 32. Sect. 5. Corpus Christi non est in Eucharistia, per modum
quantitatis, sed potius per modum substantiae, Angelo potius accommodatum quam
quantitati.
, and of the Divine nature it self, without extension of parts, in every
crumme of the Sacramental forms.) This Doctrine (I say) Papals are not (...)
4. Did. 10. q. 1. ar. 5. In illa Angelica enunciatione non erit impossible
apud Deum omne verbum, id duntaxat significari videtur, quod Petig. 4. Did.
10. q. 1. ar. 3. Caietan and Soto dicunt, quod, etc. Non est sermo de
impossibili, secundum diuinam potentiam absolute, sed secundum potentiam
ordinatam, secundum quam attenditur possibile velimpossibile, in Ecclesiasticis
Mysterijs.
, that he is able to make it thus.

But the Jesuits Sophisme, whereby he would entangle us within the snares of
fundamental Error, when we deny Christ's bodily presence in many places at
once, proceeds in this manner: No body can be truly received in many places
at once, unless the same be corporally present in many places at once.

The Body of Christ is truly received in many places at Ergo:

The Body of Christ is present in many places at once.



I answer: The Mayor Proposition is denied; for there is a twofold manner of
true Presence, and consequently of Receiving: one Natural, by the hand and
mouth of the body:

First, The holy Ghost truly and verily reaches and presents the Object,
which is Christ's Body and Blood, crucified, and offered in Sacrifice for man's
Redemption.

d Euseh. Emissen. d. Consecrat. did. 2. ca. Quia corpus. Cum reuerendum (...)
caelestibus cibis (...) ascendis, sacrum Dei tui corpus, and sanguinem fide
respice, honora, mirare, mente continge, cordis manu (...), and maxim haustu
interiore assume.
Secondly, The reasonable soul being elevated by a lively and operative Faith,
apprehends and receives the former object, as really, verily, and truly,
after a spiritual and supernatural manner, as the body receives any
corporeal or sensible object, after a natural manner, John 1. 12. Ephesians. 3.
Fulgentius Fulgent. d. (...). and Great. c. (...).
says, Filium Dei vnicum per fidem recipient: They receive the only Son of
God by Faith. Our Savior says, That holy Believers receive the Flesh, and
drink the Blood of Christ, John 6. 50, 53, 54. Credendo, by (...) August. sup.
Ioh. tr. 25. Vt quid paras dentes and ventrem, creed and manducasti. Ibid. tr.
26. Credere in cum, hoc est manducare panem virium. Qui credit in (...)
manducat, inuisibiliter saginatur. Jb. Qui manducat intus non foris, qui
manducat in cord, non qui premit dente.
, v. 35.47. Paschasius Paschas. d. corp. and sang. Dom. c. 11.12.14.
Spiritualiter sanguis potatur in mysterio. Totum spirituale est quod comedimus.
Virtus fidei and intelligentiae, quae nihil de Christo dubitat, totum illud
spiritualiter sapit and degustat.
has these words, The says, Hold ready the mouth of thy Faith, open the
jaws of Hope, stretchout the bowels of Love, and take the Bread of life, which
is the nourishment of the inward man. Eusebius Emisenus Fulbert. Epist. ad
Adeodat. (...). Colon. to. 11. pa. 4. (...) fidei, dilata fauces spei, viscera
charitatis extend, and sum panem vitae, interioris hominis alimentum, etc.
, When thou go up to the reverend Altar, to be filled with spiritual
meats by Faith, behold, honor, and wonder at the sacred Body and Blood of
thy God, touch it with thy mind, take it with the hand of thy heart: and
chiefly provide, Saint Ambrose Ambros. praec. in praepar. ad Missam.
, Comedat te cor meum panis Sancte, panis viue, panis munde, veni in cor meum,
intra in animam meam: Let mine heart eat thee, oh holy Bread, oh living Bread,
oh pure Bread, come into my heart, enter into my soul. Saint Augustine August.
sup. Psalm. 103. Conc. 3. Est alius panis qui cor confirmat, quia panis est
(...).
, There is another Bread which confirms the heart, because it is the Bread of
the heart. And in another place August. sermon. d. corp. and sang. Dom. citatur a
Beda 1. Cor. 10.16. Vita vnicuique erit corpus and (...) Christi, si quod in
Sacramento visibiliret sumitur, in ipsa veritate spiritualiter manducetur,
spiritualiter bibatur.
, Then is the Body and Blood of the Lord life to each man, when that which is
visibly taken in the Sacrament, is in very truth spiritually eaten, spiritually
drunken.

Now from the former Testimonies, it is manifest, that the Body and Blood of
Christ, may truly and really be

And if it be further objected, That spiritual eating and drinking of the
Body and Blood of Christ, may be without the Sacrament:

I answer, That the same is more effectually and perfectly accomplished in the
Sacrament, than out of the Sacrament: because the holy Ghost, directly, and in
special, when the Sacrament is delivered, exhibiteth the Body and Blood of
Christ, as a pledge and testimony of his particular love toward every worthy
Receiver; and the lively representation and commemoration

Lastly, It is remarkable, that until the thousand years, Petigian. in 4.
Sent. d. 10. q. 1. ar. 1. p. 353. Constat ex Ecclesiasticis Historijs and ex
his quae colliguntur ex sacris Concilijs and Doctrina Patrum per mill annos
and amplius a passione Domini, nulla fuit excitata Haerefis in Ecclesia circa
realem praesentiam, etc.
, Orthodoxall Christians believed, that the Body and Blood of Christ were
truly and really present, and delivered to worthy Receivers, in, and by the
holy Eucharist, according to St. Paul's Doctrine, 1. Cor. 10.16. And that the
same must be spiritually received by Faith, or else they profited nothing
August. sup. Ioh. tr. 27. Hoc est ergo manducare illam escam and illum bibere
potum, in Christo manner and illum manentem in se habere. Ac per hoc qui non
manet in Christo, and in quo non manner Christus procul dubio non manducat
spiritualiter carnem eius, nec bibit eius sanguinem licer carnaliter and
visibiliter premat Dentibus Sacramentum
.

But the manner of Presence (which some Modernes now obtrude) by
Consubstantiation, or by Transubstantiation, was not determined as an Article
of Faith Aug. sent. prospcitatur a Bandino. sent. page 367. Si modum queris quo
id fieri possit breuiter dico mysterium fidei salubriter credi potest,
inuestigari non potest. Cyril. in Ioh. lib. 4. cap. 13. Firmam fidem mysterijs
adhibentes, nunquam in tam sublimibus rebus, illud quomodo aut cogitemus, aut
proferamus. Ibid. c. 24. Quomodo id fiat, nec mente intelligere, nec lingua
dicere possumus, sed silentio and firma fide id suscipimus.
.

And (to say nothing of Consubstantiation, the defense Suar. sup. 3. Tho. d.
Euchar. disp. 50. sect. 2. pa. 602. Corrigendos esse Scholasticos qui hanc
Doctrinam de conuersione hac, seu de Transubstantiatione non admodum antiquam
esse dixerint. Inter quos fuit Scotus. Did. 10. q. 1. Quantum ergo ad istud
Argum. and Did. 11. q. 3. Gabr. lect. 41. in Can.
and prodigious Article, among fundamental Errors.

IESVIT.
Eighthly, Their denying the Sacrament of Penance, and Priestly Absolution, the
necessary means for remission

ANSWER.
THe Obiector, by Penance, understands not Repentance, as it is a virtue (for
Protestants believe true repentance, to be a second Table after spiritual
Ship-wrecke (...). ep. 8. and ep. 47. and sup. Esa. ca. 3. Tertul. d. Poen. c.
4. Ambros. ad virg. Laps. c. 4.
, and a necessary means of remission of sins committed after Baptism
Calvin. Instit. li. 3. c. 3. n. 1. No^ abs re summa Euangelij statuitur in
poenitentia and remissione peccatoru^. (...). (...). Epist. 20. Viam and
antegressionem esse dicimus ad petendum and percipiendum Christi beneficium.
Zanch. d. Relig. c. 18. These. 1. Credimus ad veram Iustitiae Christi
participationem, coque ad (...) cum Christo necessariam esse poenitentiam, qua
a peccatis and mundo muratione animi, ac voluntatis auersi, ad Christum
conuertamur, illi agglutinemur, ecque (...) peccatorum in ipso and ex ipso
consequamur, iusticiaque ipsius and Sanctitate (...). Marc. 1.4, 15. Luc.
13.3.5.
) but he speaks of Auricular Confession, according to the Tenet of the
Trident Council, and priestly Absolution upon the same, affirming (but without
any proof) that this kind of penance, is a Sacrament of the Gospel, and a
necessary

The Protestants, in their Doctrine, acknowledge that private confession of
sins, made by penitent people to the Pastors of their souls, and particular
absolution, or special application

The Augustane confession August. Confess. d. Confess. Nam and nos confessione^
retinem' praecipue propter absolutionem quae est verbu^ Dei, quod de singulis
authoritate diuina, pronunciat po testas clauium, qu are impium esset ex
Ecclesia priuata^ absolutionem tollere, neque quid sit remissio peccatoru^ aut
potestas (...) intelligunt, si qui priuatam absolutionem aspernantur. Harmon.
Confess. sect. 8. Chemnic. Exam. Council. Trid. p. 2. pa. 221. Priuata vero
absolutio annunciat voce^ Euangelij per quam non dubium est Deum efficacem and
peccata (...) illis qui vocem Euangelij in absolutione fide apprehendunt. In
absolutione igitur Deus ipse per Ministerium (...) elij (...) peccata singulis
credentibus atque hoc modo (...), testimonium est diuinae absolutionis, vnde
conscientia testimonium habet sibi vere a Deo (...) esse peccata.
speaks in this manner: We retain confession, especially because of
absolution, which is Gods word, applied to every private person; therefore it
were an ungodly thing to remove private absolution out of the Church: neither
do they duly consider, what is remission of sins, or the force of the keys
of the kingdom of heaven, which contemn or repudiate private absolution. A
reverend Bishop D. (...) BB. of Cou. and Liechf. protest appeal. li. 2. ca. 16.
sect. 1.
of our time, delivers the Doctrine of our Church in this manner: The power
of absolution in general And concerning private confession, Bishop Iuell Iuel.
Def. Apolog. 2. p. c. 7. Diuis. 2. pa. 192. Zanch. d. Oper. Red. p. 757. Petr.
Martyr. loc. (...). Class. 3. c. 8.. 28. Gerhard. loc. com. tom. 3. d. Poen. n.
99. Priuata coram Ecclesiae (...) confessio, quam auricularem vocant, quamuis
non habeat expressum acspeciale mandatum, ac (...) non sit absolutae
necessitatis, tamen cum plurimas praestet vtilitates paulo post enumerandas, ac
disciplinae Ecclesiasticae pars sit non postrema, publico Ecclesiae consensu
recepta, ideo nequaquam temere vel negligenda, vel abroganda, sed pie, ac in
(...) Dei timore, praesertim ab illis qui ad sacram Synaxin. accedunt vsurpanda.
says, Abuses and errors being removed, and the Priest being learned, we
mislike no manner of confession, whether it be public, or private. His most
excellent Majesty, our gracious and religious James, in his Meditation upon
the Lords Prayer, has these words, For my part with Calvin (Institut. lib. 3.
cap. 4. Sect. 12.) I commend Confession, even privately to a Churchman, and I
wish with all my heart it were more in custom among us than it is, as a thing
of excellent use, especially of preparing men to receive the Sacrament.

The difference then between Papals and us, in this question, is not about the
thing it self, considered without abuses Cassand. Consult. ar. 11. Credo de
hac re controuersiam nullam fuisse futuram, si non salutatis haec confitendi
medicina, ab imperitis and importunis medicis, multis inutilibus traditiunculis
infecta, and contaminata fuisset, quibus conscientijs quas extricare and leuare
debebant, laqueos iniecerunt, and tanquam tormentis quibusdam excarnificarunt.
Quapropter (...) rei occuretur, si pij tantum, etc. Beat. Rhenan. sup. Tertul.
d. (...). praef. Thomas ab Aquino, and Scotus homines nimium arguti,
confessionem hodie talem rediderunt, vt Johannes (...) grauis ac sanctus
Theologus, qui (...) annis argentorati concionatus est, apud amicos suos (...)
testatus sit, iuxta illorum deuteroseis, impossible esse confiteri. Council.
Colon. d. Poen. so. 158. Interim tamen non probamus hanc Exomologesim, hominum
spinis and scrupis sic (...), vt vix quisquam a Sacerdote discedat tranquilla
conscientia, quam magis veterum exemplo expediri conuenerat.
, but concerning the manner, and also the obligation and necessity thereof.

First, they require of all persons, being of age, a private and distinct
confession of all and every known mortal sin, open and secret, of outward
deed, and inward consent Council. Trid. Sess. 14. c. 5. Canon. 4. and Can. 7.
Oportere a (...) bus omnia peccara mortalia, quorum post diligentem (...)
discussionem, conscientiam habent in confessione recenseri, etiamsi
occultissima illa sint, and tantum a (...) duo vltima Decalogi praecepta
commissa, etc.
, together Preterea eas circumstantias, etc. quae peccati speciem mutant, etc.
Nauar. Enchir. c. 2.
thereof, though obscene and odious to Christian ears, to be made at the least
annually Ibid. Can. 8. and Extr. d. Poen. and Remiss. c. 12. Omnis (...) sexus.
to some Roman Priest authorized Trid. Council. ibid. ca. 7.
. And they affirm the same to be simply necessary, either in act, or in
desire Ibid. ca. 4. Reconciliationem ipsae contritioni sine Sacramenti voto,
quod in illa includitur, non esse ascribendum.
, by divine precept Ibid. c. 6. Ad salutem necessariam esse iure diuino.
for the obtaining remission of sins committed after Baptism. And they
teach, that this confession, and absolution upon it, is one of the proper
Sacraments Ibid. Can. 1. Si quis dixer it in Catholica Ecclesia, poenitentiam
non esse vere and proprium Sacramentum, etc.
of the New Testament, having an operative virtue, to confer Grace, and to
change Attrition Ibid. ca. 4. Medin. Cod. d. Confess. tr. 2. q. 39. Multorum
sententia est, and probabilis, quod sine contricione, possit quis absolui modo
attritus sit. (...). Addit. ad. 3. par. Tho. q. 6. ar. 1. Dub. 1. Cum
confessione sufficit (...) ad iustificationem. Guil. Rubeo. 4. Did. 18. q. 1.
Confitens de peccatis suis, modicum dolens, per sacramentum poenitentiae sibi
ministratum a Sacerdote eum absoluente, consequitur remissionem culpae.
, or imperfect sorrow for sins past, into contrition.

Secondly, our Tenet is, that auricular confession is not absolutely Vasques.
in. 3. to. 4. q. 90. ar. 1. dub. 1. n. 3. (...) Oxomensis D. Salmant. Docuit
confessionem Sacramentalem, non esse in praecepto ijs qui iam vere contriti a
peccatis suis iustificati sunt.
, commanded or imposed by divine law, and the rigorous urging thereof Cassand.
Consult. d. Confess. ar. 11 At quod, subijciunt enumeratione^ omnium delictoru^
non esse necessariam, quadam ex part recte habet, videlicet, si intelligatur
de ignotis, and non occurrentil us peccatis: item si intelligatur de nimis
anxia inquisitione omnium (...) quae in multis conscieniae carnificinam gignit,
quam nemo moderatus approbat. Council. Colon. d. Poen. 10. 158. Non aliter (...)
hanc confessionem necessariam, quam fecerunt veteres illi patres, hoc est,
necessariam illis qui habent grauatam conscientiam nimirum quibus Concilio,
consolatione and absolutione est opus.
, is not Orthodoxall or Catholic Faith: neither is penance a Sacrament of the
new Testament, like unto Baptism, and the holy Eucharist.

The true ends of private confession are these which follow: First, to inform,
instruct, and council Christian people in their Orig. in Luc. Hom. 17. Vnde
and nos si peccauerim', debem' dicere, peccatum meum notum feci tibi, and
iniquitatem mea^ no^ abscondi, dixi annunciabo iniusticiam meam contra me
Domine: si enim hoc fecerimus, and reuelauerimus peccata nostra, non solum Deo,
sed and his qui possunt mederi vulneribus nostris atque peccatis, delebuntur
peccata nostra ab eo qui dixit. Ecce delebo vt nubem iniquitates tuas, and
sicut caliginem peccata tua. Idem. in Psalm. 31. Fortassis (inquit) sicut hi
qui habent inclusam intus escam indigestam, aut humoris aut flegmatis, stomacho
grauiter and moleste conuenientia, si vomuerint releuantur, ita etiam fi qui
peccauerunt, siquidem retinent in se peccatum, intrinsecus vrgentur, and
propemodum suffocantur a flegmate vel humore peccati, si autem ipse sui
accusator fiat, dum accusat semetipsum, and confitetur, simul euomit and
delicta, atque omnem morbi digerit causam. Hieron. sup. cap. 10 Eccles. Si quem
serpens Diabolus occulte momorderit, and nullo conscio eum peccati, veneno
infecerit, si tacuerit qui percussus est, and non egerit poenitentiam, nec
vulnus suum fratri, and magistro voluerit confiteri, magister qui linguam habet
ad curandum facile ei prodesse non poterit. Si enim erubescat aegrotus vulnus
medico confiteri, quod ignorant medicina non curat. Aug. sup. Psalm. 66. Tuam
iniquitatem confitere, gratiam Dei confitere, te accusa illum glorifica te
reprehende, illum lauda, vt and ipse veniens inueniat te punitorem tui, vt
exhibeat se tibi saluarorem tuum. Quid enim time it is confiteri, qui (...) hane
viam in omnibus gentibus. Quid timetis confiteri, and in confessione vestra
cantare canticum nouum, cum omni terra. In omni (...) in pace Catholica
confiteri times Deo, ne confessum damnet? Si non confessus lates,
. Bishops and Ministers of the Church are Sheepheards, Stewards, and Overseers
of Gods Pet. 5. 1, 2. Acts 20. 28. They have received the keys of the kingdom
of Heaven, and power to loose and bind sinners, Math. 16. 19. Math. 18. 18.
John 20. 23. They have power to direct and govern their whole flock, and
every sheep and member of the same, in things concerning their Salvation. The
people are subject to them, in such offices and actions as concern their
spiritual state, Heb. 13. 17. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 12. And if Christian people must
confess and acknowledge their faults one to another, James 5. 16. then also
when there is cause, why should they not do the same to the Pastors of their
souls Calvin. Instit. lib. 3. c. 4. n. 12. Cum omnes mutuo nos debemus (...),
and in fiducia diuinae misericordiae confirmare, videmus tamen Ministros ipsos,
vt de remissione peccatorum, certas reddant conscientias, testes eius ac
sponsores constitui. Officij sui vnusquisque fidelium esse (...), etc. vt ad se
subleuandum priuata confessione apud Pastorem suum vtatur. Sistant se pastori
oues, quoties sacram coenam participare volunt.
?

But the precise and strict Law of Confession, imposed upon Francis. Siluius.
Com. in 3. par. Tho. d. Confess. q. 6. ar. 1. De necessitate praecepti, non
potest esse dubium. Illo autem supposito, dicendum est quod necessaria (...)
necessitate (...), quia non est aliud remedium, consequendi veniam peccatorum
mortalium a Baptismo commissorum, quam per confessionem Sacramentalem re vel
voto (...). Nugnus. (...) 3. part. Tho d. Poen. q. 6. ar. 1. Dub. 2. Confessio
(...) ad salutem (...) medij, pro his qui (...) post Baptismum.
, is neither commanded in the New Testament, nor has warrant from the
Primitive Church.

First, It was not instituted, or practiced, Matthew. 3. 6 Bellar. d. Poenit. li.
1. ca. 11. Resp. Poenitentiam qua^ Christus and Baptista praedicaru^t, ideo
Sacramentum non fuisse, quia desinit pars Sacramenti potissima, (...) verbum
absolutions, confessioni peceatorum adiunctum. Non habemus exe^plum Sacramenti
poenitentiae, in Actis Baptistae, and ante Christi resurrectionem. Suares. in
3. (...). 4. disp. 35. sect. 1. Sed haec and fimilia (...) se sumpta, solum
probant, generalem necessitarem (...), and indifferentia sunt ad poenitentiam
requisitam, ante vel post Baptismum vt sensit (...) Council. Trid. Sess. 14. c.
1.
: for that Confession was before Baptism, and not at the Sacrament of Penance;
and so great a multitude, as is mentioned in that

Secondly, It cannot be proved from Act. 19. 17. because this Confession was
open, and not secret; the same was voluntary, and not commanded; it was
performed once only, and Caietan Caietan. sup. Act. 19. Quemadmodum ad
Baptismum Iohannis co^currebant confitentes peccata sua (vt dicitur Marci
primo) ita modo describuntur confitentes facta sua, procul dubio in genere aut
public. (...) enim fuit confessio Sacramentalis, sed professio poenitentiae,
vitae praeteritae.
grants, that it was no Sacramental Confession, but only an open
profession of their former wicked life.

Thirdly, It was not appointed, Iam. 5. 16. For our Adversaries acknowledge,
That it is not certain that S. James speaks Caietan. sup. Iam. 5. Non hic
est sermo de Sacrame^tali confessione vt patet ex eo quod dicit, confitemini
inuicem, Sacrame^talis enim confessio non fit inuicem, sed Sacerdotibus tantum,
sed de (...) qua mutuo fatemur, nos peccatores vt oretur pro nobis, and de
confessione hinc inde erratorum pro mutua (...) and reconciliatione. Scot. 4.
Did. 17. q. 1. (...). 1. Gabr. 4. Did. 17. q. 1. Vasques. in 3. tom. 4. q.
90. ar. 1. dub 1. nu. 26. Quamuis Hugo. vict. and (...). d. Confess.
Sacramentali illum locum intelligunt, tamen non est ita concors sententia,
multi enim alij de confessione quae inuicem fieri debet inter fratres vt (...),
(...). Myth. (...) 4. (...). (...). Neque enim consentaneum Yrebarn. 4. did.
17. Dico praeceptum confessionis non haberi ex asserto Iacobi. Aureolus. 4.
did. 17. q. vnic. Ad (...) illam Iacobi dicendum est, quod loquitur de mutua
obligatione, qua (...) est obligatus, ad (...) alteri, de offensa.
, Rhemists, Iam. 5. Annot. 10. And the persons to whom S. James commands
Confession to be made, are not only Priests ((...), Confess, or acknowledge
your faults one to another) but also any other person, whom one has wronged
and offended, or from whom he may receive counsel, or comfort.

Fourthly, Neither was Sacramental Confession instituted, Ioh. 20. 23. because
no mention is made in that Text of auricular Act, 3.19. and 26.18. Matthew.
11.28. without private disclosing and manifesting their secret offenses to man.

If the Adversaries shall object, None can forgive sins by a judicial Act,
until they know them, and have them revealed. But Priests, by commission from
Christ, forgive sins by a judicial Act; and therefore sins must by
confession, be revealed and made known unto them. I answer, That he which
properly and directly pardons sins by a judicial Act, ought to know them;
and thud God himself forgiving sins, knows them, Psalm. 69.6. But they
which forgive sins declaratiuely Lombard. 4. did. 18. (...). Non hoc
Sacerdotibus concessit, quibus tamen tribuit potestatem soluendi and ligandi,
id est oftendendi homines ligatos, vel solutos. In soluendis culpis vel
retinendis ita operatur Sacerdos Euangelicus, and iudicat (...) olim legalis in
illis qui contaminati erant lepra, quae peccatum signat. Ambros. d. spir.
sanct. li. 3. ca. 19. Peccatum nemo condonat, (...) vnus Deus. Homines in
remissione peccatorum Ministerium suum exhibent, non ius alicuius potestatis
exercent. Neque enim in suo, sed in Patris and Filij and Sp. Sancti nomine
peccata dimittuntur; isti rogant, Diuinitas donat. (...). (...). Ioh. 20. Vis
and efficacia Remissionis, non in Discipulis
, and by publishing Gods judicial Act, like as a Crier pronounces the
sentence of a Judge, and by applying the Word and Sacraments to penitent
persons (upon the holy and worthy receiving whereof, the holy Ghost himself
conferreth the grace of Remission) may perform that which belongs to their
office, Medin. Cod. d. poenit. tr. 2. q. 2. Saepissime Deus (...) peccata
antequam a (...) remitrantur. Quamprimus, Quis intus de peccatis propter Deum
conteritur, etiamsi de confessione vocali nil sciat nihilque memoriae eius
occurrat; illico consequitur a Deo, remissionem omnium mortalium. Ochagania. d.
Sacram. poenit. tr. 2. q. 1. Ex praedicto loco Scripturae Ioh. 20 Aliqui sic
colligunt necessitatem confessionis, quia Sacerdotes ibi (...) iudices, and per
consequens debent cognoscere causam, etc. Verum hac ratione non potest colligi
necessitas confessionis, etc. Sacerdotes sunt Iudices Ordinarijrespectu
poccarorum venialium and tamen non est preceptum (...) confitendi.
: as appears in Baptism, and general Confession, joined with Contrition.
And when a Priest applies the word of Absolution, he knows not whether the
person confessing his sins, performs the same truly, and with contrition
of heart, or not.

John Medina Medin. ibid. Esto quod illinc colligeretur necessitas confitendi
Sacerdotibus non tamen ostenditur quod fit necessarium in partitulari singula
confiteri, etiam occulta cordis peccata, quod peccator in genere se peccatorem
coram Sacerdote esse cognoscat
, Cardinal Caietan Caietan. sup. Ioh. 20. Fateor institutionem Sacramenti
poenitentiae, hic non habere praeceptum.
, and Iansenius Iansenius Harm. Euang. cap. 147. Quoniam Remissio peccatorum
impendi potest sine praeuia confessione illa speciali, ex (...) quod
Sacerdotibus hoc (...) potestas est collata remittendi aut retinendi peccata,
non mox consequitur specialem peccatorum confessionem esse necessariam.
, acknowledge the weakness of this Argument, to prove Auricular Confession.
And Vasques says, That a man can hardly find, among those which maintain
Auricular Confession, out of the place of Ioh. 20. 23. which do effectually
conclude the same from thence Vasques, 3. to. 4. q. 90. ar. (...). Dub 2. Inter
alios qui plane fatentur ex illis verbis Ioh. 20. Necessitatem Confessionis,
(...) inuenies qui efficaciter inde deducat.
. Ioh. Medina treating of Auricular Confession, says Medin. Cod. d. Poen.
(...). 2. q. 2. Ad huius (...) probationem (...) Doctores (...) insudarunt.
, The Roman Catholic Doctors have labored till they sweat again, to find
proof for this verity: He might well have said, They labored to as good
purpose, as the man who sought to find Nodum in Scirpo, or, A Needle in a
Bottle of Hay. Mich. Palacius Palacius, 4. Did. 17. page 240. Auxij sunt
admodum Theologi in inuestigandis (...) locis, aut (...) rationibus, qua hoc
esse iuris Diuini euincant. Et miratu dignum, quanta sit de hac re concertatio,
quamque sibi male conueniant.
says, Divines are perplexed in finding places of Scripture, or other
conuincing arguments, to prove Auricular Confession

Our Adversaries labor tooth and nail, to prove from the former Text in S.
John, That Priests exercise a Judicial Chrysostom. in Psalm. 50. (...). 2. Quia
ex animo poenituit, etc. confessus est Deum, esse Christum, meruit Paradisi,
esse Colonus. Ibid. Peccata tua dicito, vt (...) illa. Si confunderis (...)
dicere quia peccasti, dicito ea quotidie in (...) tua, non dico vt confitearis
conseruo tuo vt exprobret, dicito Deo qui curat (...) Ibid. Reminiscons (...)
effunde lachrymas, and poteris in lecto tuo positus, ea delere. Chrysolog.
Sermon. 84. (...) Petrus (Acts 2.) peccata, and toto cum gaudio (...) poenitentes.
, and upon their general Confession before men, without secret Confession;
then it follows not, That because a Priest exercises a Judicial power, when
he absolueth, Ergo, Penitents must confess all their known sins. A
penitent person may have mortal sins, which he remembers not, Psalm. 19.13.
and when upon profession of his repentance Paludan. 4. d. 17. q. 2. n. 8. Culpa
mortalis, non potest remitti sine noua infusione (...): Sed confessio Sacram.
(...) valet ad (...): quia ex quo homo facit quod potest, confitendo (...) in
speciali de (...), and in generali de (...): Absolutio sequens, ab omnibus
(...), (...) Praecessit (...).
, Psalm. 103.3. and the Priest, in giving Absolution, exercises a Judicial Act
(according to the Popish Tenet) and yet those finnes are not disclosed, or
manifested unto him.

Secondly, The present Romish Doctrine, concerning the rejected the same, as
appeared by Nectarius (...). Hist. Eccles. l. 5. c. 19. (...). li. 7. c. 16.
Trip. Hist. li. 9. c. 35. Niceph. li. 12. c. 28. (...). d. Sacram. poenit. tr.
2. q. 1. nu. 12. Res haec multu facessit negotij Theologis nostris. Quidam
fatentur Historiam veram esse. (...). (...). Th. Wald. Much. Palacius. Quida^
negant Latinus Latinius nomine: breuem disputationem edidit Romae, anno 1587.
vt ostenderet hanc Socratis Historiam fabulosam esse, quod meo iudicio nullo
firmo fundamento docet. Refert Vasques 3. to. 4. q. 90. ar. 1. Dub. 3.
, S. Chrysostom Chrysostom. sup. Heb. Hom. 31. and sup. Psalm. 59. and Hom. 5. d.
Incomprehensib. Dei naturae.
, Gratian, says Gloss. d. paenit. Did. 5. c. 1. Necessaria est confessio in
mortalibus apud nos, apud Graecos non, quia non emanauit apud illos Traditio
talis.
, Auricular Confession is not necessary among the Grecians. Greg. Val. Lib. 2.
d. Miss. cap. 4. says, That Panormitan and Gerson maintained, that secret
Confession was not necessary. Andreas Vega Vega. d. Iustif. li. 13. c. 28.
, Very many learned Catholics have doubted of this necessity of Confession,
by Divine Law. Maldenat. Mald. sum. q. 18. ar. 4. Suares. 3. to. 4. Disp. 35.
Sect. 1. De hac confessione est tertia sententia extreme contraria, quae negat
in lege gratiae
sum. q. 18. ar. 4. There be also among Catholics, which think there is no
Divine Precept touching Auricular Confession, to wit, all the Interpreters of
the Decrees, and also Scotus. B. Rhenanus Rhenan. in Tertul. d. paenit. Praefat.
and Petrus Oxomensis Refert Alphons. Castro. v. Confess. Vasques. 3. q. 90.
ar. 1. Dub. 1.
denied the said Confession to be of Divine Institution. And Gratian Great. d.
Poen. d. 1. cap. 89. Quamuis. Quibus Authoritatibus vel quibus rationum
firmamentis vtraque sententia satisfactionis and confessionis innitatur, in
medium breuiter exposuimus. Cui autem harum potius adhaerendum sit. Lectoris
iudieio reseruatur. Vtraque enim, fautores habet sapientes, and Religiosos.
(...). sup. 5. lib. Decretal. d. Poen. and Remiss. cap. 12. Omnis vtriusque, n.
18. Multum mihi placet illa opinio (Gloss. Gratian. d. Poen. did. 5.) Quia non
est aliqua authoritas aperta quae innuat, Deum seu Christum, aperte
instituisse, confessionem fiendam Sacerdoti, page 256.
himself having disputed the Question pro and con, concludes in this manner,
I leave it to the Readers choice, which opinion to follow, because each opinion
(to wit, the one holding Confession to be of Divine Institution, and the other
Ecclesiastical) has fautors, both wise and religious.

Now if Auricular Confession is not certainly and infallibly of Divine
Institution, then it is impossible for the same, If that which Romists term
Sacramental Penance, have no word of Institution, no visible and corporeal
Element August. sup. Ioh. tr. 80. Accedat verbum ad Elementum and fit
Sacramentum. Ibid. Visibile verbum. Idem, c. Faust. lib. 19. cap. 16. Visibilia
inuisibilis Gratiae signa. Idem, Sermon. d. Bapt. ad Neophyt. Sacramentum
dicitur, quia aliud videtur, aliud intelligitur. Quod videtur, habet speciem
corporalem, quod intelligitur habet fructum spiritualem.
, no express form, or word of Consecration, neither any Sacramental effect
appropriated unto it by Christ and his Apostles;

But all and every of these Conditions are wanting in Popish Penance: Ergo,

The same is no Sacrament of the New Testament.



If Penitencie be not affirmed by the Fathers of the Primitive Church to be a
Sacrament properly taken; then, that the same is such in our days, is not
Catholic Doctrine. But

Therefore the present Doctrine of Romists, concerning Penitencie, That the
same is a Sacrament, is neither grounded upon the Scripture, nor the perpetual
Tradition of the Church: And our Romish Adversary is the eight time August.
Confess. lib. 10. cap. 3. Quid mihi est cum hominibus, vt audiant confessiones
meas, quasi ipsi sanaturi sint omnes languores meos? Curiosum genus ad
cognoscendam vitam alienam, desidiosum ad corrigendam suam.
guided by a lying Spirit, when he accuses us of fundamental Error, because
we deny Popish Penance to be a Sacrament.

IESVIT.
NInthly, Their denying the Catholic Church, expressly Field to the
contrary says, That an errant against a fundamental point, is an Heretic,
though he err without pertinacie, whereof he brings not any syllable
Augustine, Aug. d. Bapt. c. Don. lib. 4. ca. 6. [ It should be, ca. 16.]
who says, That a man holding with Photinus, whose errors were most
fundamental, against the Trinity

ANSWER.
We believe steadfastly the Article of the Apostles Creed, concerning the
Catholic Church; and deny Stapl. Relect. contr. 4. d. potest. Eccles. q. 3.
ar. 2. in Symbolo profitemur, Credo Ecclesiam (...). etc. Hoc est credo omnia
quae Deus per Ecclesiam (...) docet. Canus, Loc. (...). lib. 4. cap. 4. Bannes,
2.2. q. 1. ar. 1. page 10. (...), sum. page 237. Omnis Baptisatus sanctam
Ecclesiam explicit tenetur credere, scil. quod sit verax and infallibilis, in
proponendis nobis ea, quae sunt fidei, Rhem. 1. Tim. 3. Sect. 9.
, and the absurd inferences which they draw from this Article.

And whereas the Jesuit affirms, That this Article is with greatest danger
denied, because the standing out against it, makes men Heretics, etc. Both the
Proposition it self, thus

The Article of the Catholic Church, is not the most fundamental and prime
Article of the Creed; for many other Articles are, about a more principal and
excellent Object, to wit, immediately concerning God the Creator, and Christ
Jesus the Savior and Redeemer, and God the Holy Ghost, etc. whereas the Object
of the Article in question, is concerning the Creature.

The prime foundation of Christianity, is Christ himself, Cor. 3. 11. 1. Pet.
2.6. The Church is the servant, and Spouse of Christ, the House of God, whereof
Christ himself is the grand Lord, and Builder. But we have learned in the
Gospel, That the servant is not greater than his Lord, Ioh. 13. 16. Hereupon
S. Augustine, Enchyrid. cap. 56. Good order requires, that the Church be
placed after the Trinity, as an House after the Inhabiter, his Temple after
God, and the City after the Founder August. Enchir. cap. 56. Rectus ordo
poscebat, vt Trinitati subiungeretur Ecclesia, tanquam habitatori (...) sua,
and Deo Templum suum, and
.

And if the Adversary reply, That although it be a less Article, in regard
of the Object; yet the denial thereof is of greater consequence, because it
makes men guilty of Heresy,

I answer, Granting that the denial of the whole Article, being rightly
expounded, makes men Heretics: but I deny, that a Christian which believes
this Article is no Heretic Bellarm. d. Pontif. li. 4.7. Pontifex si posset
esse haereticus, solum erit negando aliquam veritatem antea definitam. Non
potest, autem esse haereticus, dum ipse aliquid noui definit, tunc enim non
(...) contra aliquid definitum ab Ecclesia.
, if he believe and maintain any Error, against the plain Doctrine of the
holy Scripture, which he knows, or which he is bound, Necessitate (...), or
(...), to know, believe, and maintain. Saint Hierom, upon the Galathians,
says Hieron. sup. Gal. c. 5. (...) Scripturas aliter intelligit, quam sensus
spirit' Sancti flagitat quo conscripta est, licet de Ecclesia non recesserit,
tamen Haereticus appellari potest.
, Whosocuer (to wit, in weighty points) understands the Scriptures,
otherwise than the sense of the holy Ghost whereby they were written,
requires, may be called an Heretic, although he depart not out of the
Church. Tertullian says Tertul. d. vel. virg. c. 1. Quodcunque
, Whatsoever (in points Divine and Sacred) is repugnant to Verity, is Heresy.
Albertus says Albert. 4. Sent. Did. 13. ar. 39. Ille est Haereticus, qui
sententiaru suam sequitur and non sententiam Scripturarum.
, He is an Heretic, which follows his own opinion, and not the judgment
of the Scripture. Occham Occham. Dial. p. 1. l. 1. c. 6. Haereticus est, qui
pertinaci auimo tenet aliquam Haeresin, cuius contradictoria in Sacris (...)
continetur.
, He is an Heretic, which with a pertinacious mind imbraceth any Error,
the contradictorie doctrine whereof, is contained in holy Scripture.

Two things, constitute an Heretic: First, Error and false Doctrine, as the
material. Secondly, Malicious and pertinacious adhearing to the same, or
defending the same, as the formal. A man may have both these, without any
explicit denying the Article of the Catholic Church. For the Truth which
he gainesayeth, may be plainly delivered in the holy Act. 7.51.

e Cyprian. Ep. 75. (...) differentia est, inter pseudo propheram, and
haereticum.
Our Savior condemns some for Heretics; calling them false Prophets,
Murderers, and Thieves, Mat. 7.15. Ioh. 10.5. Not because they opposed the
present Church; for some of these were principal Rulers of the Jewish Church,
Mat. 23.1. but because they taught and believed contrary to the Scriptures,
Mat. 22.29.

Saint Augustine Aug. d. Bapt. c. Don. lib. 4. cap. 16. Constituamus ergo duos
aliquos isto modo, vnum eorum verbi gratia, id sentire de Christo quod Photinus
opinatus est, and in eius Haeresi baptizari extra Ecclesiae Catholicae
communionem: alium vero hoc idem sentire, (...) in Catholica Baptizari,
existimantem ipsam esse Catholicam fidem. Istum nondum Haereticum dico, nisi
manifestata sibi Doctrina Catholicae fider (...) maluerit, and illud quod (...)
elegerit, quod antequam fiat, manifestum est illum, qui foris baptizatus est
esse pejorem.
d. Bapt. c. Don. li. 4. c. 16. speaks not altogether as the Jesuit (...)
him: but says only, That he Photinus the heretic did, supposing the same
to be Catholic Faith, that he was an heretic: he absolutely affirms not,
that such a person was no Heretic, but that he would not pronounce him an
Heretic, before he was convicted. And he speaks of Heretics, not as
they were in foro coeli, according to the judgment of God; but in foro
Ecclesiae, according to Ecclesiastical Censure. Neither does he speak of
persons, sufficiently convicted by plain evidence of holy Scripture, and
maliciously Field, (whose learned Treatise of the Church, is D. Field. 3. Book
of the Church. c. 3.
nibbled at by Papists, but yet remains unanswered by them) is censured by
this Obiectour, for saying, without any Proof, that an Errant against a
fundamental point, is an Heretic, though he err without pertinacie.

But the Jesuit reports amiss, when he says Doctor Field delivered this
Assertion without Proof; for in the Margin of his Book he confirms the
same, by the testimonies Gerson Gerson. to. 3. d. Consol. li. 4. pros. 1. pa.
53. Dubious in fide infidelis est? Quod vtique veritatem habet, dum quis illa
dubitat, quae per eruditionem sacrae Scripturae, certa tenetur and explicata
(...) tenere.
and Occham Occham. Dial. p. 1. l. 4. c. 3. Quidam sunt nescientes Haeretici,
qui assertionem nullam pertinentem ad fidem Christianam sub propria forma
Scriptam in Scriptura diuina repertam dubitant esse veram, quia (...)
Scripturam diuinam recipient: Sed tamen (...) assetriones sequentes ex illis,
propter hoc, quod aliter intelligunt Scripturas diuinas, quam sensus Spiritus
Sancti flagitat, a quo Idem. p. 2. tr. 1. ca. 10. Haeretici sunt in duplici
differentia, quidam sunt scientes Haeretici, quidam sunt Haeretici non
scientes, etc. Errantes contra fidem Christianam aberrant, Ipso facto, and hoc
(...) dupliciter: quia aut errant contra (...) quam tenentur explicit tenere
vel credere: sicut si quis assentiret (...) non fuisse (...), putans hoc ad
fidem Christianam minime pertinere. Ibid. Errans contra fidem debit (...) per
regulam fidei Christianae, qui ergo regulam fidei putat falsam, non est paratus
(...), igitur est ^ Secundo ex verbis praedictis concluditur quod errans contra
veritatem Catholicam, quam (...) credere, est Haereticus reputandus: quia talis
non quaerit cauta sollicitudine veritatem.
, two famous Doctors of the Roman Church. And it is remarkable, that the
Jesuit censuring the Doctor, himself produces no Argument out of divine
Authority, to confirm his own Position, but rests only upon the single
testimony of one Father, which (as I have already showed) speaks not to his
purpose.

IESVIT.
Hence Jinferre, that Protestants err fundamentally, according to the second
kind of erring, to wit, in the manner, in all points they hold against the
Roman Church, which I have proved to be the true Catholic Church. For

ANSWER.
The main Proposition of this Section, to wit, Protestants (...)
fundamentally, according to the second kind of erring, etc. is denied: and the
Assumption of the Syllogism, whereby the Obiectour labors to prove the
same, is palpably untrue. For Protestants maintain no private opinion, either
stiffely or remissely, whereby they have denied and abandoned the true
Catholic Church.

First, They maintain no doctrine as matter of Faith, but that which is
delivered in holy Scripture, and which consents

Secondly, The Roman Church is not the Catholic Church, but an unsound part
of the general visible Church, as it is proved by the Learned of our part D.
Rainold. (...). sex. These. Romans Ecclesia nec Catholica est nec sanum membrum
Catholicae
, whereunto the Adversaries have, as yet, made no reply.

IESVIT.
Neither does it import that they retain the word, having rejected the sense,
seeing not the letter of the Creed pronounced, but the matter believed makes
men Christians. Neither is it enough to say, that they believe the Church of
the Elect, seeing the Church of the Creed, is not the Church of the only Elect
(a mere fancy) but the visible and

ANSWER.
d Origin. in Math. tr. 1. Si quis fuerit aduersus Ibidem. Vbi vero
considerauimus, quod vnum quodque peccatorum ob quae Christus iturus erat ad
inferos, portae sunt inferorum, compraehendemus, quod anima quae maculam habet,
aut rugam, aut aliquid huiusmodi, ac propter malitiam nec sancta est, nec
irreprehensibilis, ea neque Petra est, super quam Christus aedificat, neque
Ecclesia, neque Ecclesie pars, quam super Petram Christus aedificat. Ambros. in
Luc. lib. 2. c. 3. Bernard. in Cantic. sermon. 78. D. Rainold. d. Script. and
Eccles. These. 4. confirms the same at large.
We retain both the words, and the sense of the Article, and the Catholic
Church in the Apostles Creed, in respect of the militant part thereof, is a
Church of right believers, and especially of just and holy persons, and
principally and intentionally, and as it comprehends both the militant and
triumphant, the congregation of all the elect; for this Church is the mystical
and living body which Christ saves, Ephesians. 5. 23. It is the Church of the
first borne, which are written in Heb. 12.23. It is the Church builded upon the
Rock, against which the gates of Hell shall not prevail Aug. d. Ciuit. Dei,
li. 20. c. 8. Nunquam ab illo, Ecclesia seducetur, praedestinata and electa
ante constitutionem mundi.
, either by Haeresie, Temptation, or mortal Sin Origin. tr. 1. in Math.
Vnu^quodque peccatoru^, etc. portae sunt inferorum, vna inferoru^ porta,
vocatur scortatio. Cum multae sint, neque recenseri numero possint inferorum
portae, nulla porta inferorum, valet aduersus Petram, aut Ecclesiam quam
Christus super illam aedificat. Hieron. sup. Math. c. 16. Ego portas inferi
reor, vitia atque peccata, vel certe Haereticorum Doctrinas, etc.
, Math. 16. 18. and Math. 7.24. And if it be a mere fancy to hold this, then
Gregory the Great Gre. Mor li. 4. ca. 11. Quid per dies nisi singulae quaeque
Electorum mentes? Quid per menses nisi multiplicatae eoru^ Ecclesiae quae vnam
Catholicam faciunt, designatur. Jd li. 28. c. 6. Sanctam Ecclesiam de sanctis
in aeternum permansuris constructam, nuliis huius vitae persecutionibus
superandam, Ipse super quem aedificata est, euidenter ostendit, cum ait portae
inferi non praeualebunt aduersus eam.
, with many other of the antie^t Fathers were fantasticks for teaching in this
manner. But the Church of the Creed is not always the Church Hierarchicall:
for the Church in the Apostles Creed is that society of Believers, against
which Hell gates prevail not finally, either by Heresy or mortal sin. But
Hell gates prevail against Popes and Popish Prelates by mortal sin, so
far, as that they descend into the infernal Ioh. 10.28. August. d. Doctr.
Christ. li. 3. ca. 32.

IESVIT.
The Church whereof Christ said, Math. 28.20. I am always with you to the
consummation of the world, is the his Spirit, is the body of Christ, whereof he
is head, into August. Epist. 50. d. Unit. Eccles. c. 16.
from a living body, as S. Augustine long ago noted. The Catholic Church is
the body of Christ, whereof he is head, out of this body the holy Ghost
quickens no man. Now the Church whereof Christ said, I am always with Aug.
Com. (...). Concion. de Emerito ad Plebem. Lact. lib. 4. Divine. Institut. ca.
vlt. Cyp. epist. 62. ad Pompon. Field li. 1. of the Church, ca. 23.
behalf are notable, and famously known, whereunto D. Field yields,
acknowledging One, Holy, Catholic Church, in which only the light of heavenly
Truth is to be sought, where only Grace, Mercy, remission of Sins, and hope
of eternal Happiness are found.

ANSWER.
The Church whereof Christ said, Math. 28.20. I am always with you to the
consummation of the world, is the Church of the Abel Aug. Enchir. c. 56. and
(...) 61. Idem. sup. (...). and sup. Psalm 90. Gregor. Moral. li. 4. c. 10.
, etc.) of the Church in the Creed. Secondly, some part of the Catholic
Church of the Creed, is always visible in the world, sometimes in an ampler,
sometimes in a smaller number of Professors. Also the visibilitie thereof, is
at sometimes illustrious and notorious, and at other times it is obscure,
according to the state of Persecution Whitaker. d. Ecclesia cap. 2. q 3. (...).
non omnibus quidem, sed ijs tantum, quibuscum rem habent, and qui recte de
religione iudicare possu^t.
. Thirdly, to forsake the true Church in the maine and primarie Voto, in case
of necessity, conioine themselves to some part of the Orthodoxall Catholic
Church Read before pa. 7.50.61.
.

But our Savior promised to no one visible Sea or Church, upon condition, to
wit, when the said Pastors taught and observed that which he commanded, and
continued in the right use of those means which he had deposed among them,
Ioh. 8.31, 32. Romans 11. 22. Read before in this Treatise, page 94.99.

The Testimonies of S. Augustine Aug. epist. 50. Idem. d. unit. Eccles. ca. 16.
objected by the Adversary, which are, That the Catholic Church, is the body
of Aug. d. Doctr. Christ. li. 3. c. 32.
, Impij non sunt reuera Corpus Christi, wicked persons are not in deed and
verity Christ's body. And in another place, In corpore Christi non sunt quod
est Ecclesia, quoniam non potest Christus habere membra damnata Idem. sup. ep.
Ioh. tr. 3. and in psalm. 131. In hijs est domus Dei, quos praedestinauit, and
praesciuit perseueraturos. Et in Psalm. 47. Proefat. Secundam Sabbathi non
debemus intelligere, nisi Ecciesia^ Christi: sed Ecclesiam Christi in sanctis,
Ecclesiam Christi in hijs qui scripti sunt in Coelo, Ecclesia^ Christi in hijs
qui mundi huius tentationibus non cedunt.
, They are not in Christ's body, which is the Church, because Christ cannot
have damnable members. Bernard Bernard. in (...). 1.
says, Manifestum est, non esse Caput Hypochritae Christum, It is evident,
that Christ is not the head of an Hypochrite. But the visible Rulers of the
Popish Church have many times bin (as our Adversaries themselves report) not
only Hypochrites, but apparently monstrous and damnable sinners Read before pa.
5.57. 111.112.113.
, therefore they are not the Catholic Church, out of which no Salvation can
be had Aug. c. Crescon. lib. 2. c. 21. Omnia ista monstra, absit omnino
, neither is perpetual influence and assistance of Grace absolutely intailed
upon them.

Out of the former premises, I argue thus: Wolves, Hipochrites, and impious
persons are not the holy Catholic Church of the Creed, out of which there is
no Salvation.

Romish Prelates have been Wolves, Hypocrites, and impious men, for they have
maintained false and superstitious Doctrine, repugnant to the holy Scripture,
and adverse to the Faith of the Primitive Church (which Protestants have, and
are again Read before in this (...), page 111. 112.113.
persecuted and oppressed true believers, Ergo,

Romish Prelates are not the holy Catholic Church of the

Argument 2. Out of the holy Catholic Church of the Creed there is no
Salvation. Read before in this Treatise, page 1.2.


Out of the fellowship of the Roman Church there has been, and is Salvation.
Ergo

The present Roman Church is not the holy Catholic Church of the Creed.



And thus the Obiector has gained nothing by accusing our Church of
fundamental error, and his nine Accusations tenebras huius mortalitatis
circumferimus, Aug. d. Tem. sermon. 237.
(as S. Augustine speaks) we carry about us (in regard of our selves) the
darkness of mortality, tamen ad Scripturae lucernam ambulamus, yet we study
carefully to walk according to the true light of holy Scripture, and God has
hitherto so assisted us, that the evil eye of our Adversaries, is not able to
discover in our Doctrine any capital Error: nevertheless, if upon Augustine
says Aug d. Trinit. li. 3. ea. 11.
, Extat authoritas diuinarum Scripturarum, vnde men's nostra deuiare non debet,
nec relicto solidamento diuini eloquij, per suspitionum suarum abrupta
praecipitari, There is extant, the sacred authority of divine Scripture, from
Athanasius, Athan. orat. c. Gent. Greg. Moral. li. 18. c. 14. Si recte loqui
desidera^t, inde sumere debent, quid loqua^tur. Ambros. Hexam. li. 2. c. 2. Nos
(...) Scripturarum coelestium magifterio.
) The sacred Scriptures, given by divine inspiration, are all-sufficient of
themselves, to the demonstration of (sacred) verity. But a thief (says
Chrysostom Chrysostom. in Joan Hom. 58.
) enters not into the sheepfould by the testimony of the Scriptures, which
are called a door, and that most justly, because they lead us to God, and
manifest divine knowledge to us, they make us Christ's sheep, and preserve us,
so as wolves cannot rush

THE THIRD PART OF THIS TREATISE: Wherein the Jesuit disputes Nine Questions,
propounded by his MAJESTY.
IESVIT. AN ANSWER TO THE Nine Points proposed by your most EXCELLENT MAJESTY.
I Have been large in my former Learning. For as some that have been present
at your

Wherefore I most humbly beseech your most excellent Majesty, to honor these
my poor Labors with a gracious perusal of them, accepting of my Answers,
when they may seem reasonable, being in defense of Doctrines received from
Ancestors, which deserve approbation, when there is no euidencie against them:
And out of

ANSWER.
YOu have been large and prolixe ( Nam quid est loquacius vanitate? Aug. d.
Ciuit. Dei, lib. 5. cap. 27. Facile est cuiquam, videri respondisse, qui tacere
noluerit. Aut quid est loquacius vanitate? Quae non ideo potest quod veritas,
quia si voluerit etiam, plus potest clamare qua^ veritas.
for what is more wordie, than Vanity?) in depressing the sacred Scriptures,
which are the Oracles of God himself, and advancing the Customs and usurped
Sed quis tam vanus, vt veritati consuetudinem praeferat? Who will be so mad, as
to prefer Custom before Verity? And whereas you glory of the Pedigree of
Romish Traditions, Quae ista Cyprian. ep. 74.
obstinatio est quae ve praesumptio, humanam traditionem Diuinae dispositioni
anteponere? What presumption and obstinacy is this, August. d. Agon. Christi,
cap. 28.
? Ipsam fidem quae in Scripturis manifesta est, non vultis discere; You will
not learn the right Faith, which is manifest in the Scripture August. sup.
Psalm. 32. Cypr. d. Laps. Alta and erecta Ceruix, nec quia cecidit inflexa est,
tumens animus and superbus, nec quia victus est fractus est, iacens stantibus,
and integris vulneratus minatur. Idem, Epist. 40. Qui mandatum Dei rejiciunt,
and Traditionem suam statuere conantur, fortiter a vobis and firmiter
respuantur.
. Nec remanet vobis, nisi sola infirmitas animositatis, quae tanto est
languidior, quanto se maiores vires habere aestimat; Your only support is, the
infirmity of an high, or ouerweening stomach, which is so much the more
feeble, by how much it ouer-valueth its own strength.

Hence proceeds the assuring your self of success, in persuading no meaner
a Person than his most excellent Majesty, to relish your Superstition. But
Saint Basil says Basil. epist. 107. (...)
, Solo rore aluntur Cicadae, Grassehoppers feed wholly upon deaw, and Ephraim
feeds upon the Wind, Hos. 12. 1. His Majesty is a Cedar Orig. sup. Number. Hom.
17. and sup. Ezech. Hom. 11. Basil. sup. Psa. 28. Ho. 1. Hieron. Trans. orig.
in Cant. Cedrus imputribile Lignum.
of Libanus, grounded on Verity, established in the right Faith, one, which by
reason of habit and long use ((...)) has his senses exercised, to discern
Heb. 5.14. (...) a Captain of the Host of the Lord: Lex Dei in cord eius, The
Law of God is in his heart, his foot can never slide.

It is therefore subtletie, rather than hope, which induces you to vent these
fond surmises, of his propension or inclination toward your part. For although
such fancies are rediculous to prudent men, yet they serve your turn, in being
baits to delude and entrap the credulous, and incautelous, who commonly regard
not what indeed is, but what in their own fancy may be Cicero, pro Roscio. Ex
opinione multa ex veritate pauca iudicant.
.

Lastly, whereas upon fame, or hearesay, (which according to Tertullian Tertul.
Apolog. cap. 7. Report or Fame, is most an end false: and when it delivers
some part of truth, it is not then free from the vice (or tincture) of untruth.
, Plurimum mendax, and ne tunc quidem cum very (...) adfert, sine (...) vicio
est) you report, That his Salomons Ecclesiastes, uttered by way of tentation in
the person of Epicures (...). Com. Eccles. cap. 3. ^, vt quidam interpretantur.
Ibidem, cap. 7. (...) est, ex persona hominis (...), and (...).
, to have been spoken seriously, in favor of that wicked Sect.

THE WORSHIP OF IMAGES.
IESVIT.
(...) Have more hope to give your MAJESTY satisfaction in this Article,
because all kind of Theological Proofs stand for the same, and nothing
against it, as I am persuaded, which I declare by this Discourse.

ANSWER.
YOu were no Loyalist, if you could not promise golden Mountains Cyprian.
Epist. 55. Arrogans and superba iactatio, non de Christi Magisterio sed de
Antichristi spiritu naseitur.
: but the Worship of Images, is a practice, so absurd in reason, and so
repugnant to all divine Authority, that, (to speak in Saint Augustines phrase
Aug. d. ciu. Dei. lib. 17.
) Non solum infideliter, sed etiam infaeliciter and impudenter, etc. The
defense thereof cannot be undertaken, without infidelity, impudency, and
unlucky success.

IESVIT.
If the custom of Worshipping Images, be grounded on the prime Principles of
Nature and Christianity: If the same has been received in the Church,
universally, probability or ingenuitie, they thereupon mislike us. if

ANSWER.
This Advocate of Imagerie, should first of all have declared, what he
understands by Worship of Images: whether Veneration only, largely taken; or
Adoration, properly so called.

Veneration may signify external Regard and Reverence of Pictures, such as is
given to Churches and sacred Vessels, and to ornaments of sacred places; and
according to this notion, many have approved or tolerated worship Nycen.
Synod. 2. Act. 7. Epist. Tharas. Glossa. d. (...). d. 3. c. Venerabiles
Adorare, id est, Reuerentiam exhibere. Peers. Aial. d. Trad. p. 3. d. ven.
Sanct. Distinguendo vocabula Adorationis and venerationis, vt isti Sancti
distinguunt, nemo in Ecclesia dicit, qui (...) sentiat, Sanctos debere adorari,
sed venerari. Junius. Animad. Bellarm. d. Imag. c. 11. n. 1. Bellarm. Non esse
vllo modo colendas Imagines. Resp. Hoc (...) nostrum dicit, non esse colendas,
nec vllo modo: suo modo coli probamus, (...) imagines, at non religioso cultu,
qui aut superstitiosus est, aut impius, nec cum aliorum scandalo, sieve cultus
separatus, (...) coniunctus cum little (...) intelligatur, (...) sunt imagines.
of Images, which deny Adoration.

Adoration properly taken (among Schoolmen (...). (...). (...). 103. (...). 4.
Gabr. (...). miss. lect. 49. (...). 3. to. 1. Disp. 51. sect. 1. Signif. (...),
quo vnus alteri (...), velillum honorat, in recognitionem excellentiae eius.
Petigian. 3. d. 9. q. 1. ar. 2. Adoratio tres actus complectitur. 1. Actum
intellectus, quo apprehendimus excellentiam alicuius. 2. Actum voluntatis, quo
nos illi interius inclinamus, and aliquid volumus facere actu interiore, and
exteriore, quo potestamur eius excellentiam, and nostram subiectionem. 3. Actum
exteriorem, quo caput inclinamus, velgenu flectimus, vel aliquid aliud signum
subiectionis ostendimus, ex quibus actibus secundus, est maxim proprius and
essentialis. (...). in 3. q. 25. (...) 2. (...). q. 5. dub. (...). Cabrera in
3, q. 25. (...). 1. comment. Tapia. in 3. q. 27. ar. 3. Vasques d. Ador. (...).
1. disp. 1. c. 1. and l. 2. disp. 8. c. 8. n. 321. (...). d. Sacr. Ador. cult.
disp. 3. Sect. 7. (...). Quaest. Schol. 7. ar. 1. Palac. (...). (...). (...).
disp. 1.


The worshipping of Images in this manner, by Religious Adoration (...). d.
Sacr. Ador. cult. disp. 3. sect. 6. n. 7. Imagines (...), sunt (...) adoratione
sacra and religiosa, (...). pa. 260. Suares. in 3. to. 1. disp. 52. sect. 3.
Hic cultus, etc. (...) religiosus (...). pa. 588.
, either primarie, or secondarie (...). d. Ador. li. 2. disp. 8. c. 8. n. 331.
, absolute or respective, is neither grounded on the prime Principles of Nature
Cornel. Agrippa. d. vanit. scient. d. Imag. Qui quidem corruptus Gentilium mos,
and falsa religio, cum ipsi ad Christi fidem, conuerti caeperunt, nostram
quoque religionem infecit, and in nostram Ecclesiam simulachra and imagines,
multasque Pomparum steriles ceremonias introduxit, quorum nihil omnino fuit,
apud primos illos Christianos.


First, The Scriptures of the Old Testament, are so apparently against
Adoration of Images, Exodus 20.5. Leuit. 26.1. Deuteronomy. 5. 9. Psalm. 106. 19. Esaias
2. 8. Mich. 5. 13. that the best learned Papists themselves, affirm the same
to have been prohibited unto the Jews. Aquinas Aquin. 3. sent. did. 9. q. 2.
ad. 1. Prohibitum est in veteri lege, ne imagines fierent, ad adorandum.
says, The making of Images to be worshipped, was prohibited in the Old Law.
The same is affirmed by Alexander Hales Al. Hal. p. 3. q. 30. m. 3. ar. 3.
, Albertus Albert. 3. d. 9. ar. 4.
, Bonauenture Bonauent. 3. d. 9.
, Marsilius Marsil. 3. q. 8. ar. 2.
, Rich. Mediauilla Rich. 3. d. 9. q. 2.
, Gerson Gers. compend. tr. 2. d. 10. precept.
, Abulensis Abul. Exodus 20. q. 39.
; and it is also the Tenet of many later Schoolmen Vasq. d. Ador. li. 2. disp.
4. c. 6. n. 98. Respondeo lege veteri non fuisse (...) omnem similitudinem aut
effigiem quomodocunque, sed omnem cultum and adorationem ipsius, atque adeo
omnem quoque imaginem seu effigiem modo accommodato adorationi erectam, aut
constitutam. Soto. d. Just. and iure. l. 2. q. 4. ar. 2. Cordub. li. 1. q. 5.
du. 5. Palacius. 3. d. 9. Oleaster. sup. Exodus 20. Cabrera. 3. q. 25. Disp. 1..
5. Tapia. in 3. q. 27. ar. 8.
, to wit, Soto, Corduba, Cabrera, Palacius, Tapia, Oleaster, etc.

Secondly, The brazen Serpent was a figure of Christ, Ioh. 3.14. The same was
formed by Gods Commandment, Number. 21.9. And yet the worship thereof, being (as
Vasques Vasq. d. Ador. li. 2. disp. 4. c. 5. n. 91. Quando Ezechias ipsum
confregit, quod videret ei incensum adoleri, cum tamen in solam memoriam
preteriti beneficij a Deo accepti, in populo illo, seruaretur: non ideo fecit,
quia existimaret, a populo pro Deo iam coli, and adorari, sed quod aliquem
cultum qualem (...) imaginibus defer nos consueuimus, qui omnino erat populo
illi prohibitus, videret ei adhiberi. Adolebant enim illi incensum: nec aliam
causam ob quam Ezechias ipsum confregit Scriptura nobis exposuit, at incensi
Oblatio non est proprie Sacrificium soli Deo debitum, sed quae etiam rebus
inanimis, aut imaginibus refertur.
says) no other, than such as Romists use toward their Images, was unlawful,
Kings 18.4. Aug. d. Ciuit. Dei. l. 10. c. 8. Did. 63. c. Quia Ezechias, etc.
Fregit serpentem aeneum quem fecit Moses, etc.


Thirdly, The Scriptures of the New Testament, neither expressly, nor by
Consequent, maintain the worship of Images. Neither is there in all the
Apostles Doctrine, any

Fourthly, the worship of Images was not practiced, or held Cassand. Consult.
d. Imag. and Simulachris. Quantu veteres initio Ecclesiae, ab omni veneratione
Imaginum abhorruerut, declarat vnus origines aduersus celsum, etc. has ideo
Imagines no^ honoramus, etc. Aug. d. Consens. Euang. li. 1. ca. 10 Et d. Mor.
Eccles. Cathol. cap. 34. Noui multos esse Sepulchrorum and Picturarum
adoratores. Et epist. 119. Nulla Imago eius coli debet, nisi illa, quae est hoc
quod ipse. Ambros. lib. 5. epist. 31. Non vult se Deus in lapidibus coli. Idem.
d. Obitu Theodosij, Helena, Constantini matter, non adorauit lignum, quia hic
Gentilis est error, and vanitas impiorum. Greg. Nissen. or. Funeb. placillae,
pa. 290. Qui creaturam adorat, etiamsi in nomine Christi id facit,
Simulachrorum cultor est. Clem. Romans Recog. lib. 5. page 71. and 73.
: And Gregory the great Greg. lib. 7. epist. 109. Tua fraternitas, etc. ab
(...) adoratu, populum prehibere debuit, and li. 9. epist. 9. Adorare Imagines
omnibus modis deuita. Cassand. Consult. d. Imag. pa. 977.
, six hundred years after Christ, condemned the same. The Council of Frankford
Roger. Houeden. Annal. part. 1. page 232. Col. 2. Carolus rex Francorum misit
Synodalem librum ad (...), etc. in quo libro multa inconuenientia, and verae
Fidei contraria, etc. maxim quod pene omnium orientalium Doctorum non minus
quam 300, etc. Episcoporum vnanima assertione confirmatum fuerit, Imagines
debere adorati,
, seven hundred ninety and four years after Christ, opposed the definition of
the second Nicen Synod, concerning worship of Images (as besides more ancient
Historians Ado. Cron. aetat. 6. fol. 181. Sed and Pseudo Synodus, quam septimam
Graeci appellant, pro adorandis Imaginibus abdicata penitus. Regino. Cron. lib.
2. fo. 30. Hincmar. li. c. Iandunens. Episc. c. 20. Septima autem apud (...)
vocata vniuersalis, Pseudo Synodus, de Imaginibus quas quidam confringendas,
quidam autem adorandas dicebant, neutra (...) pars intellectu sano definiens,
sine authorite Apostolicae Sedis non long ante nostra tempora Niceae est a
compluribus Episcopis habita, and Romam missa, quam etiam Papa Romanus in
Franciam direxit, vnde tempore Charoli magni Imperatoris, iussione Apostolicae
Sedis, generalis Synodus in Francia conuocante praefato Imperatote celebrata,
and secundum Scripturarum tramitem, traditionemque maiorum, ipsa Grae little
Pseudo Synodus destructa est, and penitus abdicata, de cuius destructione, non
modicum volumen, quod in Palatio adolescentulus legi, ab eodem Imperatore,
Romam est per quosdam Episcopos missum. Amoin. d. Gest. (...). lib. 4. cap. 85.
Abbas. Vesperg. Cron. Ann. 793. In these two latter Authors, Amoinus and
Vspergensis, the name of Constantinople is inserted for Nice, but in the matter
they agree. Read Vasques. d. Ador. lib. 2. disp. 7. cap. 2. n. 213. Vero
similius esteos (Amonium and Vspergens.) errasse in vno verbo, ponendo
Constantinopolitanam, pro Nicena.
, Cassander Cassander. Consult. d. Imag. Cum in Synodo Nicena sub Constantino
and Irene, de Imaginibus adorandis, aliquot decreta edita fuissent, atque
exemplar illius
, and some other Pontificians affirm Genebrard. Cronol. li. 3. an. 794. Addo
patres qui Francofurtum conuenerant, non satis habuisse perspectam Nicenae
sententiam, ac fuisse deceptos falsis rumoribus and scriptis.
.) Agobardus Agobardus. Biblioth. Patr. Edit. Colon. tom. 9. page 598. Nullus
antiquorum Catholicorum, vnquam eas colendas vel adorandas forte existimauit.
Ibid. Nemo se fallat, nemo se seducat, nemo se circumueniat: quicunque aliquam
Picturam vel Fusilem, sieve ductilem adorat statuam, non exhibet cultum Deo, non
honorat Angelos vel homines sanctos, sed simulachra veneratur. Ibid. Habuerunt
namque and antiqui Sanctorum Imagines vel pictas vel sculptas, sed causa
Historiae ad recordandum, non ad colendum.
the BB. of Lions, who lived (as Ado says) about the year 815, in his Book
de Picturis and Imaginibus, says, That none of the ancient Catholics thought
that Images were to be worshipped, or adored: and delivering his own
judgment, he says, Nemo se fallat, etc. Let no man beguile himself,
whosoever worshippeth any Picture, or moulten or carved Statue, neither
honors God himself, nor Angels or Saints, but Idols.

Fifthly, many latter Pontificians have condemned the worshipping of Images
(according as the same was practiced by Aquinas and other principal
Scholemen.) Holcoth says Holcoth. in lib. Sap. cap. 13. page 524. Nulla
adoratio debetur Imagini, nec licet aliquam Imaginem adorare.
, No adoration is due to an Image, neither is it lawful to worship any Image.
Cassander writes in this manner Cassan. Consult. d. Pictur. and Imaginibus
page 977. Sanioribus Scholasticis, displicet sentetia (...), qui ceseat
Imaginem eade adoratione colendam, qua res ipsa colitur, quae (...)
significatur, eamque parum tutam esse aiunt, nisi commoda interpretatione
subleuetur, in quibus est Durandus and Robertus Holcot, Gabriel, quoque Biel,
saniotem sententia^ redfert eorum qui dicunt, quod Imago neque vt consideratur
in se, secundum quod lignum est, lapis, aut Metallum, (...) vt consideratur
secundum rationem Signi and Imaginis, est adoranda. Gerson. Compend. part. 2.
d. decempraecept. Nos non adoramus Imagines, sed refertur honor and adoratio ad
imaginatum. Guliel. Durand. Rational. Diuinor. lib. 1. cap. 3. Ferus. sup.
Iudic. ca. 8.
, The opinion of Thomas Aquinas, who holds, that Images Among these is
Durand, and Holcoth. Gabriell Biel reports the opinion of them which say,
that an Image, neither as it is considered in it self materially, nor yet
according to the nature of a Sign or Image, is to be worshipped. Peresius
Aiala says Peers. d. Trad. pa. 3. d. Imag. Omnes fere Scholastici in hoc sunt,
quod imago Christi, and Sanctorum adorari debent, eadem adoratione qua and res
quae and representantur. Ideo Imagini (...), and signo crucis sanctissimo, in
eo quod Christum representa^t, latriae adorationem illis deberi (...). Cuius
Doctrinae nullum (quod ego viderim) afferrunt validum fundamentum, quod posset
fideles ad id quod docent obligare, nam neque Scripturam, neque Traditionem
Ecclesiae, neque communem sensum Sanctorum, neque Council. Moguntin. cap. 41.
and 42. Imaginum vsum velut pro erudienda plebe, and omnium animis excitandis
vtilem, in Ecclesijs nostris retineri serio mandamus, dummodo Pastores nostri
populum accurate moneant, Imagines non ad id proponi vt adoremus aut colamus
eas: sed vt quid adorare aut colere, aut quarum rerum vtiliter meminisse
debeamus, per Imagines recordemur.
, All Scholemen (in a manner) hold, that the Image of Christ, and the Images of
Saints are to be worshipped with the same adoration, that their Samplers, but
they produce (so far as I have seen) no sound proof of this Doctrine, to
wit, neither

Sixthly, the variety of opinions, and the palpable discord among
Pontificians, concerning the manner of adoring Images, their sandy and
disjointed consequences, their forging and purging Authors, their knottie and
labyrinthian distinctions, wherein they ambush themselves, and out face evident
Truth;

IESVIT..1. Worship of Images, consequent out of the Principles of Nature and
Christianity.
AN Image is a distinct and lively pourtraiture of some

ANSWER.
c Alchasar. Apoc. 12. Bernard. sermon. d. Virg. Maria. Signum magnu^ apparuit in
Coelo, mulier amicta Sole and Luna sub pedibus eius, and in capite eius corona
duodecem Stellarum. Tilman. Bredenbach. Collat. Sacr. lib. 3. cap. 23.
Progressi sunt ad Imaginem B. Virginis (...), (...) Sole, and Lunam Benzon.
sup. Magnif. lib. 1. cap. 18. page 103. Corena. B. Virg. Mariae, in Prolog.
fol. 1. Osorius Conc. tom. 5. Dominic. Aduent. 2. pa. 16.
THis definition may perchance agree to some Images (...). Orig. lib. 8. ca. 8.
Simulachra a similitudine nuncupata, eo quod manu (...) ex lapide aliaue
materia little vultus imitantur, in quorum honorem finguntur. Cabrera. in 3. q.
25. ar. 3. disp. 3.. n. 63. Dicitur Imago ab imitando, quia imitatur and
representar interiora exemplaris, exprimens, illud secuti est.
, to wit, to the pictures of persons, and visible creatures which were taken
from the immediate beholding of the Prototype, but not to such Images as are
made by conjecture Arnob. c. Gent. li. 6. Vnde (...) an (...) haec, quae Dijs
im mortalibus vicaria substitutione formatis, similitudine habea^t, etc. potest
enim fieri, vt barbatus in Coelo sit, qui hic a vobis effingitur len is. Lact.
d. ver. Relig. li. 2.
, or upon fabulous and Apocriphall reports, such as are the Images of Christ,
and of the Prophets, Apostles, and many other Saints, drawn and pourtrayed
many ages since their departure Arnob. Adu. Gent. li. 6. Ludus est simulachra
ista confingere, normina illis tanquam propria dedicare quibus, si habitum
detrahas tollatur cognitio (...). Lactant. Instit. lib. 2. cap. 18. Quicquid
similatur id (...) sit necesse est, nec potest (...) verinomen accipere, quod
veritatem suco and imitatione mentitur.
: for who is able to deliver a distinct and lively Picture, truly resembling
Christ's humane body, or the countenance, feature, Clemens Alexandrinus Clem.
Alexandr. (...). page 25. Agobard. d. Pict. and Imag. Homo facere non potest
quicquam in quo sit similitudo hominis in mente and ratione. Nam si exprimit
vtcunque sculpendo vel pingendo aliquam similitudinem corporis aut membroram,
hoc vtique exprimit quod minimum est in homine non quod maximum. Epiphan. tom.
2. li. 3. Haer. 59. sieve 79. (...), etc.
speaking of a painted Image, does not call it lively, but says that it is
(...), a dead matter formed by a workemans hand: (...). But we (says he) use
no Image made of sensible matter, but such only as is perceived by
understanding.

But if we consider the Pictures and Puppets which now a days in most places,
our Romists make of the blessed Virgin, we may wish that they had made only
dead or confused pourtraitures. immodest fashions of the world? What proportion
or correspondence

IESVIT.
The office of an Jmage is to carry the imagination of the beholders thereof,
directly and immediately to the person imagined therein; Jmagination of parts in
the person represented, answering unto the parts seen in the Image:

ANSWER.
Images of visible persons and creatures, may lead the Agobard. lib. d.
Pictur. and Imagine. tom. 9. Biblioth. col. Quantum autem visibilia noceant ad
inuisibilia capienda, and quantum amor corporearum terum etiam bonarum, ad
spiritualia contemplanda, ipse Dominus demonstrat dicens: Ego (...) dico vobis,
expedit vobis vt ego (...), (...) enim non abiero non mittam
of those Persons, and also hinder the spiritual knowledge and Faith, which
people ought to have of them.

The Spirit of God, which knows best what helps are useful, and necessary,
to eleuate our minds to spiritual Contemplation, has left us his Gospel,
wherein Christ Jesus is depainted before the eyes of our soul, Galathians 3.
1. And also the holy Sacraments, which are visible signs, and Seals of Grace:
but if painted and carved Images Aug. d. Consens. Euang. li. 1. ca. 10. Sic
omnino errare merueru^t, qui Christum and Apostolos eius, non in sanctis
Codicibus, sed in pictis (...) quaesierunt. Clem. Alex. (...) lib. 5. page
(...) (...).
, had been such motives, and effectual means, to infuse godly memory, and
heavenly desires, into our hearts (as (...)

I answer therefore, It may be the Office or use of some Chrysostom. ad pop.
Ancioch. Hom. 60. Discamus Christu^, prout ipse vult venerari. Honorato namque
iueundissimus honor, quem ipse vult, non quem nos putamus. Nam and (...) se
honorare putabat, cum sibi pedes eumlauare prohiberet, sed non erat honor quem
agebat sed contrarium. August. d. consens. Euang. lib. 1. cap. 18. Si alio modo
eum colere vellent, quam se colendum ipse dixisset; non vtique illum colerent,
sed quod ipsi finxissent.
; their own inventions, prove snares, and their Images beget vain
imaginations, to say no worse of them.

IESVIT.
Hence arises the allowed Principle of Nature, received by all Nations, civil
and barbarous, Ita vt in eo, to speak with Saint Augustine, Nulla Doctorum
paucitas, (...) contra Manich.
nulla indoctorum turba dissentiat: That the Image, may, and ought to stand for
the Prototype, and is by imagination to be taken, as if it were the very
person, and what we outwardly do to the Image, is done by imagination unto
the person. As when we kiss the hands and feet of the Jmage, in our
imagination, we kiss the hands and feet of the Person inwardly imagined

ANSWER.
It is no Axiom of Nature, that every Artificial Image devised by man, may,
and ought to stand for the Prototype, and is by imagination to be taken as if
it were the very Person, and what we outwardly do to the Image, is done by
imagination, to the Person, but only of such Images (...). Hal. 3. q. 3. m. 3.
ar. 3. Signum per nstitutionem.
as are lawfully appointed, either by Civil or Divine Ordinance

The brazen Serpent, was a Figure, and Image of Christ, and yet it did not in
such sort stand for the Prototype, as that outward Adoration and burning of
Incense might lawfully be done unto it (...). in 3. p. Thom. q. 25. (...). 104.
cap. 5. Iussit Deus, (...) and stantes, absque vlla (...) nota and (...), in
ipsum aspicere, vt tota (...) and (...), in Deum Auctorem illius (...), nullam
vero corporalem Adorationem aut submissionis notam in eum dirigerent. Quare
quando Ezechias ipsum confregit,
. In like sort, the Paschall Lamb was a Ioh. 1. 29. and cap. 19. 36. and yet
no holy (...) kissed, or saluted, or censed, or bowed down to the Paschall
Lamb. The Cherubins (according to our Adversaries Tenet) were Images, and yet
they were never honored or adored with kissing, kneeling, Incense, or any
other sign, in special directed to them. And if any man (says Vasques
Vasques, d. Ador. lib. 2. Disp. 4. cap. 6. n. 101. Nunquam Cherubinis, aut ex
(...) fusili, aut ex (...), a summo (...) ingrediente semel in anno (...),
honorem aut (...) adhibitam fuisse, aut osculo, aut genuflexione, aut oblatione
thuris, aut alio signo peculiari ad ipsos (...), (...) illius (...) and
venerationem, in (...) ipsam and propitiatorium, tanquam in Thronum and
suppedaneum (...) Dei fuisse relatam: ita vt signa honoris externa, (...) and
(...), animus autem Sacerdotis in Deum, qui ibi sedebat, and responsa dabat,
non in Angelos ipsos, qui erant exemplaria illarum figurarum, esset (...). Nec
quisquam nisi ex (...) cerebro, and absque vllo (...), contrarium poterit
affirmare. Tho-Aquin. 1.2. q. 102. ar. 4. ad. 6. Similitudines Seraphin non
ponebantur ad cultum, quod prohibebatur primo Legis praecepto, sed in signum
ministerij. Tertull. c. Marcion. lib. 2. cap. 22. Sic and Cherubin and
Seraphin, aurea in Vasq. in 3. p. Thom. (...). 1. q. 25. (...) 3. Disp. 104.
cap. 6. Quo loco non docet Tertullianus, vt falso Pamelius putauit in vetere
Lege solum esse prohibitum similitudines and effigies pro Dijs adorari, etc.
page 996.
) hold otherwise, it is a conceit of his own brain, having no foundation.

It is not necessary therefore (according to the Law of Nature) but at the
furthest contingent, to exhibit the same outward Actions of Honor, Love,
Reverence, and Obeisance to Figures, and Images, which belong to the Principal.

In civil Comportment, it is lawful, and in some cases, it is a matter of
duty, to be uncovered, and to use reverence in Orig. sup. Number. Hom. 5.
Tertull. Apol. c. 16. Justin. ad Orthod. q. 118. (...). d. plur. and necess.
Quest. q. 14. Greg. Nissen. li. d. Orat. Basil. d. Spirit. sanct. c. 27.
August. sermon. in Mont. li. 2. c. 19. (...). Orthod. fid. li. 4. c. 13.
) if there be a Crucifix painted in the Window, for Ornament, or Memory, we
direct no part of our Obeisance Luc. 1. 78. And it is so far from being
universally true, that the Image is to be taken for the Prototype, that in some
cases we may adore the one, and deface and abolish the other, as appears in
the Brazen Serpent. If ( says Alphonsus Castro Alphons. Castro. c. Haer. lib.
8. verb. Imago. Si ergo populus Christianus, esset nunc aeque pronus ad (...),
vt tunc fuit populus Israel, nec aliter posset ab errore reuocari, quam
imaginibus confractis, crederem eas merito debere (...). (...), in 3. q. 27.
ar. 8. Quamuis imaginum vsus (...) bonus, and Ecclesiae vulis, si tamen inde
Idololatria ita oriri cognosceretur, vt ei communi pesti aliter occurri non
possit, nisi imaginibus deletis, essent procul dubio illae iudicio and
praecepto Maiorum delendae. Cordub. Questionar. q. 5. dub. 5. p. 84.
) Christian people were in our days as prone to Idolatry, as the people of
Israel then were, and that they could not otherwise be reclaimed, I should
think, that Images were to be broken in pieces. The same is affirmed by
Corduba and Tapia.

IESVIT.
This is the Axiom of Philosophy, gathered out of Aristotle, Idem est motus
in imaginem and exemplar: Aristotl. lib. d. Memor. D. Thom. 3. q. 25. Ar. 4.
For Motion proceeding from the body and from the mind, what the body does
really and externally to the Image, the mind does imaginarily, that is, by
conceit and affection to the person.

ANSWER.
Principles of Nature, containing themselves within their own bounds, are to
be embraced; but sacred and religious Actions are regulated by a Divine and
supernatural Model Ambros. d. Incarn. and Sacrament. c. 9. Verba
Philosophorum excludit simplex veritas piscatorum. August. d. verb. Apost. ser.
29. Non (...) in hac re and in hac controuersia ad literas seculares, nec inter
nos iudicet poeta, sed Propheta. Tertull. d. Resur. Carnis. Est quidem de
communibus sensibus sapere in Dei rebus, sed in testimonium very, non in
adiutorium falsi.
, 1. Cor. 2. 5, 6, 9. etc.

The Word of God has set a black mark upon Images devised by man, when they
are applied to worship. And therefore, although in humane and civil use, the
Image might in some sort stand for the Prototype, and by imagination be taken,
and used, as the person resembled by it, yet in things religious, and sacred,
it is otherwise.

When the Israelites formed and worshipped a Golden Calfe, they might by
conceit and imagination apprehend and that which is the proper object of
Worship; but when they

Aristotle in the place objected (d. Memor. cap. 1. in fine) affirms not,
either verbally, or in sense, that there is the same motion of the Conceit, and
Affection, Medin. Tr. d. Orat. q. 2. Gabr. 3. d. 9. and in Can. Miss. Lect. 50.
Cordub. Quaest. 5. dub. 1. page (...). Adoratio formaliter non est actus
intellectus, etc. Peers. Aiala. d. Trad. p. 3. d. Imag. Aristoteles solum
dicit, duplicem esse cognitionem imaginis, aliud tamen vbi dixerit non vidi. Et
quamuis res ita se haberet, quod eadem cognitione feramur in imaginem, and rem
imaginatam, non inde concluditur, idem fieri posse in adoratione and
veneratione: Est enim maxima dissimilitudo inter hoc and illud.
into the external Image, and the Sampler: for he speaks not of painted or
carved Images, but of the mental Image and impression which remains in the
memory, after the knowledge of things past: And many Schoolmen deny, that
Aristotle's testimony, is Aquinas his manner of worshipping Images; among
which, are Durand Durand. 3. d. 9. q. 2. n. 9.
, Picus Mirandula Pic. Mirand. Apolog. q. 3.
, (...) Tapia, in 3. q. 27. ar. 10. Procul dubio, Scholastici qui eam
propositionem modo exposito explicauerunt, non consuluerunt textum Aristotelis.
, Vasques Vasq. d. Ador. lib. 2. Disp. 8. cap. 7. n. 317. Illa sententia, quam
S. Tho. ex Aristotele desumpsit: Idem est motus in imaginem, and rem cuius est
Imago, alium quidem sensum habet, etc. Quocirca perperam quidam recentiores
putant, eodem modo se habere
, etc.

It is also apparently false, that there is the same motion of the mind and
will into the Image, and the Sampler, for these are every way two distinct
Objects, and the one is a sign, and the other a thing signified; the one is
the cause, the other the thing caused; and in some Images, the Sampler is a
nature increate, the Image considered as an Image, and in relation to the
Prototype, is a thing created: the one is adored, because of it self, the
other respectively, because of Tapia, in 3. Thom. q. 27. (...). 10. Non est
idem actus voluntatis, quo ferimur in finem, and in media ad finem. Vnus enim
est electio, alter simplex voluntatis affectus. Greg. Arim. 1. d. 1. q. 2.
Marsil. 1. q. 4. ar. 1. du. 2. Vasq. 1. 2. q. 8. Disp. 33. cap. 2. August. d.
Trinit.
, and motions, to wit, Election and Intention.

IESVIT.
This Axiom of Philosophy (that no man think it disauowed in Theology) the
ancient Fathers uniformly teach, as a prime truth, evident in reason; S.
Damascen Lib. 4. c. 12.
, S. Augustine De Doctr. Christ. lib. 3. c. 9.
, S. Ambrose Lib. de Dom. Incat. Sacram. c. 7.
, S. Basil De Spiritu Sancto; c. 18.
, S. Athanasius Sermon. 4. contra Atianas.
, who writes, An Image of the King is nothing else but the form and shape of
the King; which (could it speak) would and might say, J and the King are

ANSWER.
You affirm, That the ancient Fathers uniformly teach, and that as a prime
truth, That the Image may and ought to stand for the Prototype, and is by
imagination to be taken as if it were the very Person; and consequently, that
it is jointly to be worshipped. First, you say, the ancient Fathers teach this
Doctrine uniformly: secondly, you add, That they teach this as a prime Truth.
But to prove the first, you produce only five Testimonies of Fathers, of
which, one is not very ancient; and touching the latter, you bring nothing.

The Testimonies of the Fathers examined.

First, Damascene, d. Fid. lib. 4. cap. 12. says, (...), where his sign is,
there is Christ, to wit, by operation and grace. First, this Author lived 740
years after Christ, and is none of the ancient Fathers: Secondly, it is
confessed by your selves, that he was not Orthodoxall in all points: For (as
Cardinal Bellarmine says Bell. d. Script. Eccles. in Ioh. Damasc. page 269.
lib. 1. d. Fid. Orthod. cap. 11. Docet Spiritum sanctum non procedere ex Filio,
sed per Filium. Palacius, (...). Quaest. in 1. Lib. Sent. B. Damascenus
manifestarium habuit lapsum, etc. page 21.
) he denied the procession of the Holy Ghost from the Son; and in the matter
of Images, he differs from the ancient, which were

Secondly, Saint Augustine Aug. sub signo seruit, qui operatur aut veneratur
aliquam rem fignificantem, nesciens quid fignificet. Qui vero aut operatur, aut
veneratur vtile fignum diuinitus institutum, culus vim significationemque
intelligit, non hoc veneratur quod videtur and transit, sed illud potius, quo
talia cuncta reserenda sunt.
d. Doctr. Christ. l. 3. c. 9. says, He which uses or worshippeth any
profitable sign, being of divine Institution, understanding the virtue and
signification thereof, worshippeth not that which is visible and transeunt, but
that rather, whereunto all such things are referred. But Popish Images,
appointed for Worship, are no Sacraments, or Ceremonies, or Signs of Divine
Institution, but humane Traditions, condemned by Saint Augustine Aug. d. Haeres
-- haeres. 7. Id. Epist. 49. and sup. Psalm. 113.


Thirdly, Saint Ambros. Ambros. Nunquid cum and (...) eius adoramus, and
carnem, Christum diuidimus? Nunquid cum in eo imaginem, crucemque veneramur,
diuidimus (...)
d. Dom. Incarn. Sacram. c. 7. says, When we adore his Divinity and his
flesh, do we divide Christ? When we worship in him the Image of God, and the
Cross, do we divide him? This Father speaks not of any Painted Image of
God, but of the invisible Image Caietan. sup. Col. 1. Deitatem inuisibilem
accepit filius a Patre.
, Col. 1.15. Heb. 1.3. And by the Cross, he understands the Passion of
Christ Bellarm. d. imag. c. 24. Dico Ambrosum, per crucem intelligere passionem
Christi, sieve carnem patientem, sicut per imaginem Dei, intelligit dietatem.
Etsi crucifixus est, etc.

Saint Basil and Saint Athanasius, spoke by way of similitude, not of all
Images, but of the Images of Kings Basil. d. spir. sanct. c. 18. (...).
Athanas. c. Arian. Orat. 4. page 254. (...).
, which sometimes, not always, in Civil use and custom, not in Religion, may
be taken, and reverenced for the principal. But from a particular, and from a
similitude, which halteth in many things Ib. page 256. Non aliter quam si quis,
per diurnum tempus,
, you cannot conclude generally and absolutely.

Where is now the uniform consent of Fathers, which the Adversary glories
in? Damascene is not ancient. Saint Augustine speaks of signs which have
divine institution. Saint Ambrose, of Christ his Passion, and not of Statues or
Pictures. Saint Basil and Athanasius, speak by similitude, obiter, and by the
way. But which of these affirms, that Image Worship is

But that the Reader may the better conceive the weight of the Adversaries
Disputation, for Worship of Images, I will exhibit the same in a Logical
Resolution.

The Theme or Question is, Whether artificial Images of Christ,

The first ground and Argument for the Affirmative, is: If the Samplers
themselves are to be worshipped, then the Images being (...) 3. q. 25. (...).
3. Disp. 3. (...). 4.
lively Portraitures, and representations of those Samplers, are to be
worshipped.

The Consequence is denied, for besides that all Images, and among the rest,
the Images of Christ, are not lively Portraitures of Christ, but dead
shadows, and imperfect and confuled delineations of his humanity Eusebius.
Caesar. Epist. ad Constantiam. August. Quoniam de Christi Imagine ad me
scripsisti, vt tibi mitterem; velim mihi significes, quamnam putes Christi
Imaginem, vtrumillam veram and incommutabilem, naturae illius Characterem
ferentem, aut hanc quam propter nos assumpsit, seruilem sormam pro nobis
induens, sed sane de diuina forma, non arbitror etiam ipse ego, te
essesollicitam, cum fueris ab illo edocta, neminem patrem cognouisse, nisi qui
illum genuit patrem, sed (...) serui requiris, Imaginem (...), and carnem quam
propter nos induit. Sed and hanc gloria Dietatis suae commistam esse didicimus,
and passam mortuamque. Quis igitur gloriae eiuscemodi, and dignitatis
splendores lucentes and fulgurantes effigiare mortuis and inanimatis coloribus,
and vmbratili pictura possit, cum neque diuini illius discipuli in monte illum
contemplari quiuerint, qui cadentes in faciem suam non posse se eiuscemodi
spectaculum inspicere confessi sunt. Igitur si carnis illius figura tantam ab
inhabitante in ea diuinitate accepit potentiam, quid oportet
: yet whatsoever they are artificially, and by humane constitution, they are
not to be

OBJECTION II.
If the Image represent the Sampler, and stand for it, and by conceit and
imagination is one with it, then it may, and ought to be worshipped, etc.

But the first is true, etc.

If the Argument be thus resolved, the sequel is false; for that which
represents another, and stands for another, and is by imagination another,
partaketh not all the Rites and duties of that which it represents: but such
only, as by lawful ordination, and by the nature of his kind, it is capable
of: but Painted and Carved Images, neither by the nature of their kind
Cluniaces. d. ven. Crucis pa. 54. Irrationali honorem vel modicum exhibere, and
authoritas prohibet, and ratio disuadet.
, being things senseless, liuelesse, and destitute of Grace, nor yet by any
divine Ordination, are capable of Adoration. The brazen Serpent was a figure
and Image of nor being capable of worship, according to the nature

OBJECTION III.
There is the same motion of the mind, into the Image and the Sampler, as we
may perceive by the Image of the King.

There is not the same motion, etc. but a diverse: for the mind is fixed upon
the Image, as upon a Sign, and as upon Hieron. sup. Daniel. 3. ludices and
Principes seculi, qui Imperatorum statuas adorant, hoc se facere intelligant,
quod hic pueri facere nolentes, placuerunt Deo.
stand for a very King, but for asigne and representation. And if there were
the same motion of the mind, into the Image and the Samplar, yet it is
inconsequent to say, there must be the same Adoration (as Peresius Aiala Peers.
d. Trad. p. 3. d. imag. Quamuis res se ita haberet, quod eadem cognitione
feramur
has observed.)

IESVIT.
With this Principle so received in Nature, we must join another, no less
known and notorious in Christianity, to wit, That God full of all honor and
glory, to whom all Worship and Adoration is due, became truly

ANSWER.
When Christ lived upon the earth, and was conversant with men, John 1. 14. he
might then perhaps (if Divine providence of Moses (...). sup. 1. Timoth. c. 2.
disp. (...). Erat olim periculum Idolola triae: Vnde etiam sublatus fuit
Imaginum vsus, and corpus Mosis ob (...) causam occultatu^ fuit. pa. 473. Aug.
d. Mirab. sacr. Script. lib. 1. c. 35. Duabus de causis vt (...), (...) and
(...) conscius erat, quatenus illam faciem, quae consortio sermonis Domini
rutilauerat, mortis (...), nullus videret. Et ne sepulchrum eius, populus
Israel si cognouisset vbi esset adoraret. Procopius in (...). cap. (...).
Diuina dispositione hoc quoque factum, ne forte eum suspicientes adorarent.
. And because this was not then performed, either

IESVIT.
In which Image, the hands, feet, and other parts shall truly by imagination
correspond unto the feet, bands, and parts of the Prototype, and our
imaginations from (...) pass directly unto Christ and his parts,
proportionable to those we behold in the Image; so that when we adore with an
humble outward kiss, the hands and feet of the Image, by inward imagination,
conceit, and affection, we kiss and Psalm. 41. Bernard Sermon. de quatuor modis
orandi.
prayer, as if they were present: to which kind of imaginations, as pious and
godly, the Scriptures and Fathers exhort us. In this sort, beholding the Image
of Christ, we apprehend him as therein present; not judging the Image to be
Christ, but imagining and taking it as it were Christ, that when we outwardly
honor the Jmage by kissing the

ANSWER.
It is possible for imagination to build castles in the air, and to conceive
the person of Christ, as present to his Image: yet if this imagination be
fantastical, and if in adoration, Christ and Images have no agreement, 2. Cor.
6.16. then worshipping of Images, is not worshipping of Christ; for it is
possible to imagine God to be in the Sun, and to behold the Sun as Gods
Image Aug. sup. Psalm, 103. c. 3.
, yet they which upon such an imagination, should worship the Sun, which God
has not commanded, Deuteronomy. 4.19. and 17.3. Job. 31.26.

And whereas the Obiector adds, that according to Philosophy, no falsehood is
in mere apprehension or imagination Aug. d. Ver. Relig. c. 55. Non sit nobis
(...), in (...)' nostris, etc. (...). Epist. 85. (...) carnalis compositionem,
(...) fermentu, vbi (...) incipit, continuo intus illo adiuuante atque
illuminante, qui cum talibus Idolis in cord nostro habitare non vult, ita ista
confringere and a fide nostra excutere festinemus, and ne (...) quidem (...)
talium phantasmatum illic remanere patiamur.
, without judging the thing to be, as we imagine. I answer, That this being
granted concerning fictions Aug. Quest. sup. Euang. li. 2. c. 51. Non omne quod
fingimus mendatium est, etc. Fictio quae ad aliquam veritatem refertur figura
est, etc. Aquin. p. 3. q. 55. ar. 4. ad. 1.
, yet upon such imagination, there may follow, or be inferred that which is
false, or morally evil: to wit, if one imagine the Sun, or a Lamb to be the
figure of Christ, and, because in holy Scriptures he is compared to these
creatures, Mal. 4.2. John 1.29.

But that the solution of the former Argument may be more perspicuous, I will
present the same in form, and then apply mine answer.

If by imagination we may truly conioine Christ himself Henriquez. Sum.
Theol. Mor. li. 8. ca. 32. Quare ex patribus sumpsit Caietanus, dicens Imago
Christi, est ipse Christus, tum quoad ratione^ formalem terminandi, tu quia
Christus simul est vltimus terminus.
with his Image, then upon that imagination, we may coworship Christ, and his
Image:

But the first may be done, for he being incarnate, may be figured in the Image
of a man, and being thus figured, may be presented to the understanding, and
people may imagine him as present, in, or by his Image. Ergo,

Upon that imagination, we may worship Christ and his Image.

Both the assumpsition, and also the sequel of this Argument, are denied.

First, taking truly, for that which is really true, we cannot by

Secondly, it is inconsequent to argue, that because some people imagine the
Image and the sampler as things conioined, Apud Cabrer. Internae Imagines multo
(...) representa^t ipsum exemplar, qua^ Imagines externae, (...) istae solum
representant corporis lineamenta, conceptus vero naturam specifica^ ipsius rei
viuentis.
, but upon certain kinds of union, to wit: First, Personal, as when the
Humanity of Christ is coupled with the Dietie: Secondly, Substantial, as
where the parts are coupled with the whole: Thirdly, Causall, Relative, or
Accidental, to wit, when by divine ordination, things created are made
instruments, messengers, signs, or receptacles of divine grace, as the holy
Sacraments, and the Word and Gospel, and the Ministers of the Church, etc.
Christ himself is Ambros. Ep. 26. Domino defertur cum seruul' honoratur, etc.
Greg. sup. Reg. lib. 5. ca. 1. Quam reuerendi sunt optimi Pastores sanctae
Ecclesiae liquet. Dum enim Deo fideliter seruiunt tanto ci amoris vinculo
coniunguntur vt quicquid ois ingeritur, diuinae iniuriae ascribatur.
, Math. 10.14.42. 2. Cor. 8.5. Gal. 4.14. Act. 10.34. But Papisticall fancy
and imagination, produces none of these, nor yet any other true kind of union,
neither has God almighty in his word commanded duty, service, or worship to
be given unto them; but on the contrary, by the Doctrine of holy Scripture, he
condemns the same.

IESVIT.
The Histories of Christian Antiquity, are full of holy men, Bishops, Kings,
Queens, and other honorable personages, who have cast themselves down on the
ground before Beggars, Lazars, and Leapers, kissing their feet, and D.
Harpsfield Hist. Eccles. Angl.
their sores, out of venerable affection unto Christ. In Mathildes, daughter of
Malcolme King of Scotland, and wife to Henry the first of England, whose
custom was to wash with her own hands the feet of poor Math. 25. v. 40.
my least ones, you do unto me.

ANSWER.
There is great disparitie between reasonable creatures, the living members of
Christ, the spiritual temples of the holy Ghost, and between dead and
senseless stocks (...). Romans Recog. lib. 5. Si vere vultis honorare Imaginem
Dei, nos vobis quid yerum est aperimus, vt homini qui ad Imaginem Dei factus
est, been saciatis, honorem and reuerentiam deferatis. Quis ergo iste Dei honor
est, per lapideas and ligneas formas (...) and inanes atque exanimes figuras,
ta^quam numina venerari, and hominem in quo vere Imago Dei est spernere.
, which have eyes and see not, ears and hear not, noses and smell not.
Beggars, Lazars, Leapers, etc. are recommended to the world by our Savior,
Ioh. 12.8. Luc. 14.21. and they are said to honor their Maker, which are
charitable to them, Pro. 14.31. and he promises infinite reward to them which
love and honor the Bellarm. d. Imag. li. 2. c. 8. (...) pro eodem habet Idolum
and Imaginem. Tertul. d. Idol. c. 4. Durand. Rational li. 1. c. 3. Vbi (...)
Idolorum (...) vsus reprobatur, moderatus probatur. Caietan. in Exodus c. 20.
Perspicuum est in Tabernaculo fuisse Idola cherubinorum, etc. Id. in Deuteronomy. c.
4. Ex co quod nulla Dei similitudo visa est, quando Deus locutus est, mouet vt
nullum Idolum colatur, nulla similitudo cuiusque rei naturalis, nec vlla res
corporea.
(says S. Augustine Aug. d. ver. Dom. Sermon. 5. Idolum opus est fabri, si faber
Idolo sicut dedit figuram, cor daret, ab ipso Idolo faber Jdem. sup. Psalm.
149. Melior est faber quam quod fabricat faber. Si fabrum adorare (...),
adorando quod faber fecit non erubescis? Idem d. ver Relig. c. 55. and in Psalm.
118.
) is the workmanship of an artificer, and if this maker, as he has bestowed
figure, so he could have given Athanasius (...). Orat. c. gent. (...).
) That which forms another, is better than the thing which is formed.

IESVIT.
Out of this, the common Objection of Protestants, to wit, That the worship of
Christ's Image is no where commanded in Scripture, and therefore is a will
Worship; may be answered. For as themselves confess, many Actions belonging
D. Field, lib. 4. of the Church, cap. 17.
to Religion, whereof there is no express Precept, nor any practice in
Scripture, may be used, when there be Principles in Scripture, which prove the
lawfulness and necessity thereof. There is no express Precept in Scripture
to Christen

ANSWER.
Protestants object against Adoration of Images, not only that the same is no
where commanded in Scripture, but that it is prohibited, and condemned, Leuit.
26.1. Neither by Commandment, understand we express and literal Precept
only, but deriuatiue and vertuall. And could Papists demonstrate the
lawfulness of this Action, by divine or supernatural testimony, immediate or
deriuatiue, in such manner as the Baptism of Infants Bellar. d. Bapt. l. 1. c.
9. Colligitur satis aperte ex Scripturis. Ib. ad. 8. Arg. Deducitur euidenter
ex Scripturis.
is proved to be lawful and necessary, we must

IESVIT.
For Christ being true God full of honor, to whom all supreme adoration is
due, does and must needs make honorable and adorable anything that represents
him, that is which must be taken by imagination as if it were his (...). But
supposing God to be truly man (as Faith teaches) the light of nature shows
that his image truly represents him, that is, makes him present to the
imaginations of the Ergo, Christ Jesus his image is for his sake venerable and
adorable as a thing standing for him in such sort, that the honor done
outwardly to it, is done, and ought to be taken as done, by devout and pious
imagination to his person, whence further is concluded the necessity of this
worship.

ANSWER.
The Mayor Proposition is denied. For although Christ be true God full of
honor, yet he imparteth not his honor in whole or in part to every thing,
which man appoints to be a representation of him, but only to such things as
have some excellency in them, proceeding from his own ordinance, and influence
into them. Neither is it in the power of men (...) their own Imaginations,
either to form representations of Christ, capable of honor; or when they have
formed them, to appoint that they must be honored and adored Tertul. d. Idol
c. 5. Ne facias aduersus legem simulacrhum aliquod nisi and tibi Deus iusserit.
Si nulla lex Dei prohibuisset Idola fieri a nobis, nulla vox spiritus sancti
fabricatoribus Idolorum, non minus quam cultoribus, comminaretur.
. For if the Subjects of secular Princes, cannot without special commission,

IESVIT.
For God incarnate being most venerable and full of glory, requires of a
Christian, that that which stands for

ANSWER.
Not every thing which stands for him, and represents him, according to the
devices and imaginations of men, no nor every thing that represents, and stands
for him, according to his own precept, is to be adored with divine honor, as
it is manifest in the brazen Serpent.

IESVIT.
If the honor due to a King be so great, that the

ANSWER.
This similitude halteth: for the Kings chair of State, and

IESVIT.
But the image of Christ being a true representation of God incarnate, and able
to convey our imaginations directly and truly toward him, (...) very (...)

ANSWER.
Is the painted image a true representation of Christ incarnate, because
Romists say so? and were it a true representation, is it therefore impiety to
refuse to worship it? Many Doctors, both of the Roman, and of other Churches,
have allowed and maintained the Historical use of images, which condemned
adoration (...). (...). Annal. p. 1. Carolusrex Francorum misit Synodalem
librum ad Britanniam, sibi a Constantinopoli directum: in quo proh dolor multa
inconuenientia and verae fidel contraria reperiebantur. Maxim quod pene omnium
orientalium Doctotum, non minus quam trecentorum, vel (...) amplius,
episcoporum vnanimi assertione confirmamatum fuerit, jmagines adorari debere,
quod omnino Ecclesia Dei execratur. Agobard d. pict. and imag Habuerunt antiqui
sanctorum imagines vel pictas vel sculptas, sed ^, non ad colendum. Nullus
Catholicorum antiquorum vnquam eas colendas vel adorandas forte existimauit.
Durand. Rational. Div. li. 4. c. 39. attendant quid agant, qui sub praetextu,
cuiusdam Religionis seu pietatis diuersas adorant imagines, non enim (...)
aliquid manu factum adorare. Andr. Masius. Com. Josh. 22. v. 28. Sacrosancta
Ecclesia nobis ante oculos ponit Crucis Christi figuram, etc. non (...) eam
adoremus, sed vt dum aspicimus in memoriam redeamus verae (...) and (...) arae,
in qua sacerdos sec. ord. Melchizedech, Deique silius seipsum gratissimam patri
pro nobis victinam obtulit.
. And if it be outwardly to be adored for Christ's sake, why is it not inwardly
also to be adored? And if inwardly, then either with the same worship,
wherewith

IESVIT.
And this right is a dignity which an image of Christ has above other
creatures, who though they be referred unto God as to their Author, yet God may
not be honored

ANSWER.
This Idolist, heapeth conclusion upon conclusion, but he groundeth them,
either upon no premises, or upon such as are sandy. How does it appear, that
an image of Christ figured by a Roman Painter, has a dignity above other
creatures? Are Roman Painters more excellent workmen than God himself? (...).
d. pict. ad imag. Si opera (...) Dei non sunt adoranda and colenda, nec in
honor Dei, (...) magis (...) hominum non sunt adoranda, and colenda, nec in
honor (...) quorum similitudines esse dicuntur. page 213.
? How much more worthy to be believed, is the saying of Clement Clem. Romans
Recog. li. 5. p. 73.
? If you desire, truly to honor the image of God, let me open the truth to
you, Rather yield honor and reverence to man, formed after the image of God,
than to empty and breathless figures.

IESVIT.
The reason is, because creatures represent God their Author, so rudely,
remotely, darkely, imperfectly, that only spiritual men, and perfect
Contemplants, can acknowledge God in them: and so, such men only, and that
only privately to themselves, may worship God in and by them, which is all
that Vasq. (so much accused) does teach. But as for public and promiscuous
adoring of creatures, he Gab. Vasquez. de Adoratione. li. 3. cap. 2.
Indiscriminatim creaturas adorandas proponere, esset multis manifesta causa
periculi. In which respect Saint Leo reprehends some Christians at Rome, that
bowed unto the Sun mentally referring that bowing, (...) Sermon. 7. de (...).
Dom.
unto God the Author thereof; because Panyms seeing that outward action of
adoring, might imagine, that Christians adored the sun in their superstitious
manner; the is no sooner in our eyes, than his person by imagination in

ANSWER.
Your reason is no reason, but a mere verbal asseueration:

That which is so representative of Christ, as that the sight thereof, carries
our thoughts presently by imagination to Christ, and yet has nothing in it
worthy of adoration, for it self, has a right, and dignity, to be worshipped
above other creatures which do so rudely, remotely, darkely, and imperfectly
represent God, that none but spiritual men, and perfect contemplants, can
acknowledge and worship God in them.

But artificial images of Christ, etc. are representations of Ergo,

Painted and carved images of Christ, have a right and dignity to be worshipped
above other creatures.

Both Propositions of this Argument are denied.

First, The Mayor is false: for imaginary representation only, without
special Institution, and other grounds, in the thing representing, may be
only a motive, and not a terminatiue

Secondly, The Minor has no pretext or color of Truth: Agobard. d. pict. and
Imag. Si templum Dei sumus and Spiritus Dei habitat in nobis, plus est quod
fidelis quisque habet in suo animo, etc. Si vlla Imago esset adoranda, vel
colenda, Creatoris potius esset quam Creatura, nempe (...) fecit Deus ad
Imaginem and similitudinem suam, homo autem facere non potest (...) in quo sit
similitudo (...) in ratione. Nam si exprimit sculpendo (...) pingendo
similitudinem (...) corporis aut membrorum, hoc vt que exprimit quod minimum
(...) in homine non quod maximum. Lactant. l. 2. c. 2. Simulachrum Dei non
illud est quod digitis hominis and lapide figuratur, sed ipse homo, quoniam and
sentit and (...), and multas magnasque actiones habet, etc.
for some Creatures do so represent Christ, as that they are his lively Image,
by Communion and Participation of Grace, 2. Pet. 1.4. And they carry the
minds of Believers, by their actions, to wit, by their Doctrine and Example,
into the distinct, and saving knowledge of Christ; and they stand here in the
world, in the room and stead of Christ, by his own Ordination, 2. Cor. 5.20.
But Painted and Carved Images, represent only a Body and a thing external.
And without other things concerning his Person and Office, as are necessary to
Basil. Hexam. Ho. 11. Aug. d. ver. Relig. c. 29. Ambros. Ep. 83. In (...) coeli
and terrae, quaedam sunt paginae, ad omnium oculos semper patentes, and suum
Authorem nunquam tacentes, quarum Aug. sup. Psalm. 142. Niceph. Eccl. Hist. l.
11. c. 43. Greg. Naz. Orat. 34. Greg. Mag. sup. Job c. 35. suspice l. 26. c. 8.
Aug. d. verb. Dom. ser. 55. and confess. l. 10. c. 6.
, even of Heathen people, which were not spiritual men, or perfect
Contemplants, Romans 1.19, 20.

The opinion of Gabriel Vasques, mentioned only, and touched aslope by our
Adversary, was this which follows:

First, There is not any thing in the world, which we may not sincerely adore,
and God himself in the same Vasq. d. Ador. li. 2. Disp. 6. c. 3. n. 180. Nulla
est res mundi, etc. (...) sincere adorare non possumus.
.

Secondly, One may, according to right and sincere faith, consider God
internally present in every Creature, and worship God in it, and with it Ib.
li. 3. Disp. 1. c. 2. n. 8. and 9. Si imaginem pictam, quae ratione and anima
caret, rite adoramus, eo quod exemplar Ib. n. 10. Quisque fidelis apud se
considerans terram hanc, quam calcamus esse scabellum pedum Domini, ad terram
se inclinate, and prosternere potest. Ib. n. 14. Concedit Leo potuisse aliquem
inclinata ceruice ipsi soli, etc. Ib. c. 5. n. 33.
.

Thirdly, It is lawful to worship the Earth, as Gods footstool; and the Sun
as his Tabernacle, in the same manner as

Fourthly, He is no Idolater, which according to a good intention, worshippeth
God in a stone, or in the rays of the Sun, although the devil were there
Ib. c. 5. n. 33. Sicut homoper lapide aut in lapide, potest Deum hac syntera
fide colere, sic etiam in radio luminis, quod apparet, poterit ex recta circa
Deum intention and affectu, ipsum venerari, and quamuis ibi esset Demon, ipsi
nullo modo aut affectus seruitutis, aut exterior nota submissionis exhiberetur.
, or which adoreth the Ass Ib. Disp. 2. c. 6. n. 77. Posset asinus, etc.
upon which Christ sat. And if one worship God in a Crucifixe, wherein the
devil lurketh, he need not excuse himself, by saying, he was ignorant of
the devils presence; nor limit his Worship, by using any express condition Ib.
n. 34. Non est necessaria Ignoratio, vt ab Idololatriae crimine ille excusetur,
qui in radio illo luminis, vel specie crucifixi sub qua Demon delitescit, Deum
Adorat. Quare nec conditionem express addere oportet, vt recte and legitime
Adoratio fiat.
.

Fifthly, Although the former practice be lawful, yet the same Ibid. cap. 2.
pa. 397. Tamen non dicimus, (...) posse public adorandam populo proponi, etc.
.

Our Adversary is silent, concerning his own judgment about the former
Doctrine. But if I may speak freely, according to my private opinion, I cannot
perceive why the Sun, and the Moon, and the Earth, and the Ass, etc August.
sup. Psalm. 113. c. 2. Melior est etiam bestia, etc. Quanto magis vel melius
mures atque serpents, and id genus (...) colerent? Clem. Alex. (...). page 25.
(...). (...) quouis animali viliores sunt. Nam si quaedam animalia non habent
omnes sensus, vt vernes and (...), etc. (...). Statuae ociosae, inefficaces,
inutiles, and insensiles, alligantur, and clauis configuntur, and compinguntur
limantur, secantur, eraduntur, caelantur.
. may not be worshipped together with God their maker, upon as good, and better
reason, than Pictures and Statues, which are formed by Craftesmen, and have no
force or operation in them. I am Vasques, that the devil in very substance,
may lurk in Images; and my Adversary cannot prove, that Christ is present or
assistant to them. Now it seems unreasonable to worship that which may
receive the devil: when on the other side, one cannot be certain, that it may
have any fellowship with Christ, 2. Cor. 6.16.

IESVIT.
Nor does it follow, That if we worship the Image of Christ, and the Cross
that he died on, that we should also adore Judas his lips, which touched our
Saviors sacred mouth, when he gave him that traiterous kiss. For it is easy
to show many differences betwixt Judas his lips, and the Cross.

First, Judas his lips were conjoined substantially with

Secondly, the Cross, the Nails, the Lance, and other Judas being most
wicked and detestable, and full of the most horrible treason that ever was, did
so defile and profane his whole person, and all the parts thereof, that the
mere touch of our Saviors most sacred

Finally, the Passion of Christ may be considered two ways: First, as
proceeding from the will of wicked men, Judas betraying Christ, as the hands
also of the wicked Minister, that Caiphas his house, and other like instruments
conioined with wicked persons, were instruments of Christ's passion, as it
proceeded from their wicked hearts, and consequently as it was a detestable
action; but the Cross, the Nails, and the Lance that stayed in, and were
conioined unto the body of Christ, were instruments of Christ's Passion, as
lodged in his sacred person, and as offered to his heavenly Father, and
consequently as of a thing most highly venerable.

ANSWER.
Admitting many differences between Judas his lips, and the material Cross,
it follows not, that the one may be worshipped, although the other may not:
for there are many differences King. 18, 4. Apoc. cap. 19, and cap. 22.9. There
are differences between the Sun, and king Nabuchadonozer, yet neither might
be worshipped religiously.

Neither do the several differences assigned by the Adversary, conclude: Not
the first, because there was something in Judas his lips susceptible of
respect, which was not in the material Cross, to wit, capacity of Grace; for
Judas might have repented, but an inanimate creature is not potentially
susceptible Judas his lips Iunius. Animadu. ad. Bellarm. d. Imag. c. 30. n. 10.
Haec a nobis non afferuntur, etc.
: and some learned Papists affirm, that Judas his lips might be reverently
kissed Vasq. d. Ador. lib. 3. disp. 2. cap. 6. n. 69. Nihil obstat quo minus
aliquis Lud. Paramo. d. Orig. inquis. lib. 2. tit. 3. ca 8. n. 55. Nihil obstat
quo minus labia Iudae and alia, puta manum percutientem Saluatorem, quae
unjust Christum tetigerunt, aliquis sincera fide, and recta intention,
affectum and animum in Christum intendens, reuerenter osculetur.
.

The last words, which are the Cross, the Nails, and the Lance that stayed
in, and were joined unto the body of Christ, were instruments of Christ's
Passion, as lodged in his sacred Person, and as offered to his heavenly Father,
afford this Argument following for the Jesuit: Those things which at the
instant time of Christ's Passion had a residence in Christ's body, and were
joined thereunto as instruments of his Passion, and were offered by Christ to
his heavenly Father, are thereby made most highly venerable.

But the Cross, Nails, and Lance were those things which at the instant time
of Christ's Passion, had a residence in Christ's body, and were joined thereunto
as instruments of his Passion, and were offered by Christ to his heavenly
Father, Ergo

The Cross, Nails, and Lance are thereby made most highly venerable.



Both Propositions are false in whole, or in part. First, those things which at
the instant time of Christ's Passion, had a residence in his body, and were
joined thereunto (per contactum phisicum) as instruments of his Passion,

Secondly, these things were separate instruments, and not perpetually
conioined to his person, and if none did worship them when they were actually
conioined, there is no reason to think that they are to be worshipped being
divided. If apparel when it is joined to an honorable person, may be
coworshipped with the person, yet when it is divided from the Peers. Aiala. d.
Diu. Trad. p. 3. d. Imag. Si purpura ab eo seperetur, quamuis ab aliquo
cognoscatur vt Regis purpura, non opus est vt eade veneratione tunc veneretur,
qua ipse Imperator. Aug. d. verb. Dom. sermon. 58. Si quis nostru^ aut
. Whiles God appeared to Moses in the bramble bush, the ground whereon Moses
stood is called holy, Exodus 3.6. But this holiness being only relative,
transitory, and denominatiue, and not inherent or durable, the former vision
and apparition being finished, the ground whereon Moses stood returned to his
old condition. The like may be said of the water of Jordan, considered when
Christ was baptized with it, and again considered, when his baptism was
finished, and out of the use.

An Ambassador during his embassage, is a public and honorable person; when
his office cease, the honor consectarie and dependant upon his office
cease also.

Secondly, the latter branch of the assumption, to wit, the Cross, Nails, and
Lance were offered by Christ to his heavenly Father at his Passion, is
impiously false, for nothing was offered by Christ to his heavenly Father at
his Passion, but himself, and part of himself, Heb. 7.27. (...), he offered
up himself, Heb. 9. 14. (...), through the eternal Spirit he offered himself
without spot to God, etc. Heb. 10. 10. We are sanctified through the offering
of the body of lesus Christ, once for all, 1. Pet. 2.24. Col. 1.22. Heb. 9.12.
By his own blood he entered once into the holy place, etc. 1. Pet. 1. 19. And
if the Cross, Nails, and Lance were offered by Christ to his Father, then we
were redeemed with corruptible things, contrary to the Apostles doctrine, 1.
Pet. 1. 18, and Wood, Nails, and Iron were a part of the propitiatory
Sacrifice for the sins of the whole world; which is a Jesuitical, or rather
an Antijesuine Judas his lips. But it is fulfilled in these men, which Clement
Alexandrinus

IESVIT.
Out of which J may conclude, that Christ Jesus being a true man, his Image
has a most evident and undeniable right to represent him, and so to be
honored for his sake.

ANSWER.
Conclusions borrow their strength from their premises but the former premises
have no power to enforce this conclusion.

For although Christ is a true man, yet his painted Image wants evident and
undeniable right to represent him; because such right presupposes divine
institution. The same represents him and stands for him, only by humane
imagination (which is all the Adversary is able to prove) but religious
worship must have a more sound and certain foundation, Ioh. 4. 22. ye worship
ye know not what.

If in civil worship, one should frame an Image, or chair of State, in honor
of a king, and command people to kneel and bow to it, none will be so foolish
as to obey, unless such commandment be derived from the kings authority, or
law. But in things religious and heavenly, men have not the same liberty of
devising, and commanding, as appears by Gedeons Ephod, Judge. 8.27 Aug. q. 41.
sup. li. Iud. p. 415. Cum Idolum non fuerit, id est cuiusque Dei falsi and
alieni simulachrum, sed Ephod, id est vnum de Sacramentis Tabernaculi, quod ad
vestem Sacerdotalem pertineret, quomodo fornication em Scriptura dicat populi
ista sectantis atque venerantis? Ideo scilicet, quod praeter Tabernaculum Dei
vbi erantista, quae sibi fieri iusserat Deus Israel, extra simile aliquid fieri
fas non erat.
.

Lastly, if it should be granted that artificial Images did represent, figure,
or teach Christ Jesus by divine institution, as fully as the Books of holy
Scripture, or as the inward conceits and images of the mind Apud. Cabrer, 3. q.
25. ar. 3. n. 28. Si Imagines essent colendae eadem adoratione qua exemplaria,
sequeretur etiam internas Imagines, vt conceptus and phantasmata, esse codem
cultu adorandas Internae enim Imagines, multo perfectius repraesentant ipsum
exemplar, quam Imagines externae. (...) istae solum representant corporis
lineamenra, conceptus vero, naturam specificam ipfius viuentis.
, yet it were inconsequent to infer that the same were therefore to be
worshipped in such manner

IESVIT.. 2.
THis Worship was ever since the Apostles in the Church without beginning.

ANSWER.
IF it had no beginning, how can this man prove, that the

IESVIT.
The disagreeing of Protestants, about the time when Worship of Jmages began,
is a sufficient Argument, That there is no beginning thereof assigneable.

ANSWER.
The Jesuits Proposition is: Worship of Images has been practiced in the true
Church ever since the Apostles, etc. His first Argument to confirm this, is,
If Protestants disagree, in assigning the time, when the worship of Images
first began in the Church: Then the worship of Images was practiced universally
and perpetually from the Apostles days.

But Protestants disagree in assigning the time when the Worship of Images
first began in the Church. Ergo

The worship of Images was practiced universally and perpetually from the
Apostles days: and consequently the same worship, is to be received and
practiced in these days.



First, The consequence of the Mayor Proposition is denied: For is it not
ridiculous to argue in this manner? Learned Papists disagree, in assigning the
time when Heathenish Idolatry first began: Therefore Heathenish Idolatry had
his beginning in Paradise.

But learned Papists, Bellarmine, Pererius, Barradias, etc. disagree, Bellarm.
d. verb. Dei. lib. 1. cap. 13. Barrad. Harmon. Euang. tom. 4. lib. 10. cap. 12.
Perer. in Genes. lib. 15. cap. 10. Disp. 5. n. 80.
.

The time, when people first began to offer their sons and Venus (...). Clio.
li. 1. pa. 81. Vna ijsdem Babilonijs lex est; omnibus modis faeda: nempe
omnibus mulieribus indiginis commune est, semel in vita, ad veneris templum
desidentibus, cum externis viris consuerudinem habere. Ad templum veneris
sedent, etc. Hospitem autem illum, etc. dicere oportet, (...) tibi Deam
milittam imploro. Milittam enim Assirij venerem apellant.
? Is it therefore consequent, that these customs had their beginning from
Noah's days, because their original is not assigneable?

Our adversaries Achilles therefore (Protestants are not able Ergo, the said
custom is originally from the Apostles) rather deserves contempt and
derision, than an accurate solution.

2. The assumption of the former argument is also denied: For Protestants
disagree not in assigning the time when worship of images was first of all
imposed, as an article of faith: for the second Nicene Synod, celebrated after
the year 790. did first decree this practice. And yet, if it be admitted, that
there Horant. loc. li 5. ca. 3. Patres illi sancti, nonnulla in libris suis
(...), and crediderunt, (...) humanum sensum innixi opinionibus hominum,
presertim in describendis historijs, rebusque alijs gestis recensendis, Ireneus
per auditum tantum (...), Christum post (...) aetatis suae annum passum, etc.
. But now let us further examine, in what manner the obiectour proves, that
Protestants disagree about the time when worship of images began.

IESVIT.
But because it were long to set downeall their disagreeing assertions, I will
only declare what Mr. John White, brother to my Adversary, in his book
printed and reprinted many times, says thereabout, that your Majesty may by
this example understand, with how little sincerity the best (...) in his Way.
pa. 151. 152.
either graven or painted (says Erasmus Jn. (...).
) no not the image of Christ himself to be set in Churches, and this appears
by the testimony of the ancients Epiph. Epist. ad Johan. Council. Elibert. c. 36.
. Secondly, when Gregory Epist. 10, 11. lib. 7.
to Serenus; and Polydore De Iuuent. li. 6. ^
a Papist confesses, all Fathers condemned the worship of Images for fear of
Idolatry. Afterward the Council of Nice brought in their worship, decreeing
nevertheless, that no image should be adored with Latria, divine honor. At
the last Thomas Aquinas 3. Pa. q. 25. ar. 3. 4.
, and the Trent Council Sess. 25.
expounded by the Jesuits Vasq. d. Ador. li. 2. c. 4. Suar. in 3. p. to. 1.
disp. 54. sect. 4.
, Vasq. whom he cites as so expounding Vasq. d. Ador. li. 2. Disp. 9 c. 3.
Nullus (...) neque patrum sie loquitur Imagini Christi aut Trinitatis ^ (...)
in 3. pa. to. 1. disp. 54. sect. 3. ad (...) Ille a. ctus (...) prototypi est
(...) latria, etc tespectu vero Imaginisnon est tam perfecta adoratio sed
inferior veneratio.
Suarez the other Jesuit cyted, expound the Council to give divine worship
unto Christ's image; but only says that out of the Council it may be
gathered, that the image of Christ, and Christ, are honored by one and the
same act of worship: which as referred unto Christ (...) divine worship;

ANSWER.
This discourse reduced into form of Argument is: Mr. John White had dealt
unfaithfully in his narration, of the opinions of learned Papists, touching the
coming in, and worship of Images. Ergo,

Protestants disagree about the time, when the worship of



A miserable and most inept consequence, as all men learned and unlearned may
perceive: for if it were true, that (...). John White, or some other Protestant
Minister, had erred in reporting the doctrine of the Trident Synod, and in
relating the opinion of Suares and Vasques; does it follow from hence, that
Protestants disagree, in assigning the time when Image Worship began to be
enjoined, as a necessary duty, and the doctrine thereof determined as an
article of faith? But omitting the sequel

Thomas Aquinas, and the Trident Council (says Mr. John White) as it was
expounded by Jesuits (meaning also other learned Pontificians) taught that
divine worship, or Latria, should be given unto them, etc.

I answer: Aquin. his words are so plain, that an intelligent man cannot
conceive his meaning to be other than as the letter of the wordssoundeth Aquin.
3. q. 25. ar. 3. in c. Cassand. consult. d. Imag. pa. 989. Opinio D. Tho. etc.
Asserentis (...) Christi adorandam latria. Picus Mirand. Apol. q. 3. Grux
Christi and imagines sunt adorandae latria (...) modo quo ponit Thomas, etc.
Cum Christus adoretur adoratione latriae, consequens est quod eius imago sit
adoratione latriae adoranda, Because Christ Latria. 2. The determination of the
Trident Council, in this and in many other articles, is like Apollo his
riddles and responsalls, a nose of wax, and so ambiguous, that not only Mr.
White, but veterane Papists themselves are perplexed in resolving the mysteries
thereof. Now thething which induced Mr. White to conceive that the said
Council approved the opinion of Thomas and other schoolmen, touching
adoration of Images with divine worship, was, not only the silence of these
Trent masters, in condemning Aquinas his Tenet, affirming, that the same is
agreeable to the Counsels definition. Henriquez a Jesuit says: Henriquez.
sum. Theol. mor. li. 8. c. 32. Male quida^ negant praedicandum populo, quod
imago Christi, sit adoranda, latria. Falso, Catherinus, and quidam alias aiunt,
si D. Thomas vidisset synodum septimam, non esset concessurus (...)
Some (of our part) do evil, in denying, that it is not meet to preach to
common people, That the image of Christ is to be adored with divine honor.
Suarez Suar. in 3. to. 1. disp. 54. Sect. 4. Dicendum ergo, primo est, fieri
recte posse, vt Prototypon in imagine, and imago cum prototypo vno actu
adoretur, (...) hoc modo posse imaginem Christi (...) latria. Ib. Posse tamen
coadorari, sicut humanitas Christi coadoratur verbo, purpura Regis adoratur
honor Regio.
has these words, It may rightly be, that the image, and the Prototype, may be
adored with one act, and in this manner the image of Christ may be adored with
Latria. Vasques Vasq. d. Ador. li. 2. disp. 8. c. 14. n. 385. Quod si cum
Caietano aliquis vsurpet Imaginem, vt ille loquitur formaliter, vt exercet
actum Imaginis, hoc est pro exemplari ipso in imagine, vel pro imagine prout
continet exemplar, and (...) ipso quasi animata est: dicendum est sine dubio
(...) veram latria^ in spiritu pro dignitate prototypi exhiberi. Idem in 3. p.
Tho. q 25. ar. 3. disp. 109. ca. 1. Veteres Scholastici absolute dicunt,
Jmagines Christi and Trinitatis esse colendas adoratione (...).
says, if an image be taken formally, as it exercises the act of an image,
that is; for the very sampler in the image, and for the image as it contains
the sampler, and is as it were animated by it; then without doubt we must say,
that true Latria, in spirit, is exhibited unto it. Iacobus de Graphijs Iac. de
Graph. Decis. Aur. p. 1. li. Thyraeus. Append. ad li. d. Spir. Appar. c. 2. n.
10. B. Augustinus humanam Christi naturam quae filio vnita est cultu latriae
adorari posse, docet exemplo purpurae Regiae, quam simul cu^ Rege tuto
adoramus: and non (...) idem (...) deo ipsiusque Imagini exhiberi; quando ipsa
Deum representat, animusque inter deum and ipsam non distinguit? Sed deum and
cum Imagine, and in imagine, and per Imaginem videt?
has these words, We are to worship every image with the same worship
wherewith the Sampler is worshipped, to wit, the image of God, or Christ, or
sign of the Cross (as it brings the Lords Passion into our mind) with the
worship of Latria. The same is affirmed by Ludovicus Paramo Par. d. Orig.
Inquis. li. 2. tit. 3. c. 8. n. 9. Compertum est, ca signum hoc Crucis,
dignitate atque praestantia pollere, vt non alia quam adoratione soli Deo
exhibenda colatur, and adoretur: quae (...) latriae dicitur (...).
, Bernardus Puiol (...). d. Ador. disp. 3. Sect. 6. Imagines rerum sacrarum
sunt adorandae adoratione sacra and religiosa, sicut adoratur prototypus. Jb.
sect. 7. Assert. 7. Dum adoratur Imago Christi, illa imago est adoranda
adoratione latriae. Ib. Latria est duplex absoluta and respectiua, and haec
licet minus perfect, est proprie latria non minus quam illa.
. Franciscus Petigianis Petig. Sum. 3. Sent. did. 9. q 1. ar. 3. Haec est
communis sententia, quae asserit, quod imago Christi, eadem adoratione est
adoranda, qua ipsemet Christus: and idem dicendum est de alijs imaginibus,
quatenus repraesentant prototypum, quod (...) eadem adoratione venerandae sunt,
qua and representata per ipsas.
, Petrus de Cabrera Cabrer. in 3. p. Thom. Azor. Inssit. moral. to. 1. li. 9.
c. 6. Archang. Rubeo in 3. Sent. did. 9. L. Lamas, Sum, eccles. p. 3. c. 3.
pa. 265. (...). Elys. clyp. pa. 242.
, Azorius, L. Lamas, Thom. Elysius. Arch. Rubeo. Tho. Bustus, etc. And whereas
the foresaid Per se and per accidens. Absoluta, Respectiua, propria impropria,
proprie Analogice. Veliosil. Aduert. in 2. Tom. Aug. q. 9. Aduertendum, quod
nobis imagines non tantum seruiunt quasi (...), in memoriam diuos ipsos
reducentes, nam scripturas and sanctorum nomina non adoramus, sed Deum and
sanctos qui per illam representantur De imaginibus vero long aliter sentiendum
est, non enim nos tantum eleuant, vt sanctos adoremus: in hunc enim vsum nullus
Haereticorum imagines (...), sed easdem ipsas debemus adorare. Non enim tantum
ait (...), (...) Christum adoramus, sed tuam crucem, and eidem Cruci ait O Crux
aue spes vnica, non autem adorantur in quantum lapides sunt, aut ligna, aut
quaeuis alia materia, (...) in quantum Dei Sanctorumue formae in illis
existunt, quo fit vt vnaquaeque imago, eodem sit cultu adoranda, quo (...)
ipsa, vt imago Dei and Christi adoratione latriae, etc. Turrecrem. Sup. Decret.
d. Consecr. did 3. ca. Venerabiles.
, wherein they may seem to qualify the hardness of former assertions, yet if
they intend not to give such honor to images, as their general speeches
import, they are rather to be accused, and taken at the worst, which give
occasion, than Protestants blamed as mistaking their meaning: their
distinctions being (as Bellarm. d. Imag. c. 22. Qui defendunt Imagines adorari
latria, coguntur vti (...) distinctionibus, quas vix ipsimet intelligunt, nedum
populus imperitus.
Bellarmine speaks) so subtle and intricate, that not only vulgar persons,
but the Authors themselves scarce understand them.

But the question, whether images be to be adored with divine worship, or not,
and all the rest of this section, concerning Mr. John White, is heterrogeneous
to this disputation, as appears Analysis. It is sufficient for us to show,
that Papists adore and worship Images, with some kind of real worship (...).
d. Adorat. disp. 3. sect. 7. Quarto colligitur contra Durand. ipsas Imagines
proprie adorari, quia verba Concilij absolute prolata, proprie sunt
intelligenda. Cabrer. in 3. p. Tho. q. 25. ar. 3.. 1. n. 14. Oppositam
sententiam tenet D. Thom. hic, and omnes eius discipuli, nempe Imagines vere ac
proprie adorari, saltem vt obiectum materiale Adorationis, vel totale velsaltem
(...).
, to wit, such as the Trident Council expressly defines (...). Trid. Sess. 25.
Eisque debitum (...) and venerationem esse impartiendam.
: for if such adoration of Images be an Article of Faith, and not only a
thing Adiaphorous, but a necessary duty (...). d. Ador. d. 3. sect. 7.
Adoratio Imaginis non est Actus indifferens, sed intrinsece bonus.
, then the same must have apparent ground in Divine Revelation Orig. c. Celsum.
lib. 7. Nemo qui cernit animae oculis, alio modo Deum colit, quam sicut ipse
docuit.
; but if it be never commanded or prescribed in the Old or New Testament, nor
was for sundry ages affirmed by Orthodoxall Fathers, to be an Apostolical
Tradition, and yet the Trent Council presumes to make it divine, obliging all
Sixth. (...). Bibl. li. 5. Annot. 247. Balthazar Hinc marus viennae exustus.
(...). fum. l. 8. c. 32. AEgidius vir doctus, qui combustus eft, etc. Compulsus
est retractare hanc propositionem: Imaginem Christi and eius crucem non adorari
Latria.
They hold it lawful to dethrone Kings and Princes from their royal dignity,
for opposing this practice (...). d. Ador. disp. 3. sect. 6. page 274. Vnde
potius Regno Franciae venisset Charolus priuandus si Ironomachus fuisset, vt
predicti Imperatores imperio (...) priuati, quam occidentis eligendus
Imperator. Platin. in vit. Gregor. 3. Hic statim (...) inijt Cleri Romani
consensu (...) Imperatorem Conftantinopolitanum imperio (...) and communione
fidelium private, quod sanctas Imagines (...) sacris aedibus abrafisset and
statuas demolitus esset. (...). Castr. c. (...). li. 8. ver. Imago. Tapia in 3.
p. Tho. q. 27. ar. 6. page 330.
. It must therefore be necessary for them to demonstrate their Tenet by
manifest Testimonies or Arguments, taken from divine Revelation, and not to
triflle off the time, in bequarrelling John White, concerning Azor. Instit.
Mor. to. 1. li. 9. c. 6. Secunda opinio affirmat (Imagines) coli (...)
adoratione Latriae, etc. (...) communi est. Theologorum consensu recepta. Sic
Thomas, Alexander, Bonauentura, Richardus, (...), Paludanus, Almain, Marsilius,
(...), (...), and (...).
. And it is sufficient for Protestants to manifest thus much.

IESVIT.
Nor is Master Whites Argument good, We worship John White, in his Way. page
400.
Christ and his Image by the same Act: but the worship of Ergo, The worship of
the Image is divine honor: for this proves (...), That the worship of the
Image is divine, as referred to Christ, not as referred unto the Image.
Otherwise if Master White should Ergo, The pulling the horse out of the mire,
is an Act of Christian charity toward the horse. A foolish Argument,

ANSWER.
The Argument which you father upon Master John White, page 400. So far
therefore as I can observe, you fight with your own shadow.

But if the Argument had been propounded in this manner: Many learned Papists
(to wit, Aquinas, and the Mayor part of the School (...). to. 1. Instit.
Moral. l. 9. c. 6. Secunda opinio, etc.
) adore the Artificial Images of Christ, as they are conjoined with the
Samplar, with the Act of Latria; Therefore they adore some Images with Divine
worship: I cannot perceive, that your nice distinctions of Physical and
vertuall acts, divine, as referred to Christ, not divine, as referred to the
Image, would have been sufficient to vindicate your Tenet, from the mud of
superstition: for that which is worshipped with any act (matorially, or
formally) of Latria, is worshipped with divine honor Vasq. in 3. Tho. q. 25.
ar. 3. Disp. 108. n. 97. Licet haec adoratio imaginis secundu^ se, sit (...)
secundarius Latriae, ob id tamen negari non debet, simpliciter and proprie esse
Latriam. Suares 3. Tho. to. 1. Disp. 54. sect. 4. Quamuis creatura, non possit
per se (...) adorari Latria, posset tamen coadorari, sicut humanitas Christi
coadoratur verbo, purpura Regis adoratur honor Regio: Dices hoc habere locum
in ijs, quae aliquo modo vnum constituant cum persona adorata, Imago autem non
facit vnum cum exemplari. Sed hoc nihil obstat, quia Imago and exemplar sunt
vnum habitudine, etc.
, at least, in part, or by accident. But no

IESVIT.
And though the Ignorant understand not the Adoratio relatiua and absoluta, per
Accidens, Analogice improprie.
terms of Theology, by which Divines declare the manner of honoring the
Prototype and the Jmage both by one Act, yet may they honor an Jmage as
securely, and with as little danger and erring, as any that understand them.
For as the Clown, who knows no more of the nature of motion, per vltimum non
esse, and primum non (...): So likewise a Catholic, that understands no more
of honoring Christ his Image, than that he is by beholding the Jmage to
remember Christ, and with pious and affectuous imaginations to adore him, does
honor

ANSWER.
Although this Assertion is false, and the Proof thereof and the exercise of
religious actions:) yet because it serves Protestants cannot assign any time
when Image worship began, etc. I will not insist upon the examination of it.

The latter branch of this Clause, to wit, Adoration is performed to Images, as
being done outwardly, relatiuely, and transitorily unto the Image; inwardly,
affectuously, absolutely, and finally, unto Christ, is boldly affirmed, but not
confirmed by any Argument.

First, how prove you, by divine revelation and testimony, that adoration is
to be performed, according to your distinction of outwardly, relatiuely, and
transitorily to Images? And Chrysostom, Diuinae Scripturae testimonia
sequamur, neque feramus Chrysoft. sup. Genesis hom. 5.
eos qui timere quiduis blaterant, we are to follow (...), testimony of divine
Scripture; and not to regard them, which at rouers, and without ground blatter
out what they please.

Secondly, if you adore Images outwardly, relatiuely, and transitorily, then
you make Images a partial object of adoration: but God himself, who says, I
will not give my glory to another, (to wit, in whole or in part) neither my
praise to graven Images, Esa. 42.8.) has excluded Images from copartnership
with himself in adoration.

IESVIT.
Secondly, whereas he says that the Council of Nice, brought in the worship
of Jmages, yet forbad that any Image should be adored with divine honor; he
both contradicts himself, and utters another manifest falsehood. Defense,
page 453.
and our Savior, and the Cross, must be adored with divine adoration. It is
apparently false, that the said Nicene Council brought in the worship of
Jmages, which might be proved by many testimonies, but this only may suffice,
that Zonaras in Leone Isaurico.
Leo Isauricus before the Council of Nice opposed Image worship, not as then
beginning, but for many years before established in the Church; boasting that
he was the first Christian Emperor, the rest having been Idolaters, because
they worshipped Images: so manifestly did he oppose Antiquity, Whites
Assertion.

ANSWER.
The second Nicene Synod brought in the worship of Images, not simply, but by
defining the same to be necessary, and by appointing the practice thereof to
be received universally: otherwise M. John White was not ignorant, that the
Israelites worshipped molten Images in Dan and Bethell, and the Simonians
worshipped Images, Eusebius Eccles. Hist. lib. 2. ca. 13. and Iren. lib. 2.
cap. 24. And Marcellina worshipped the Images of Iefu and Paul, etc. Aug. d.
Haer. 7. Haeres. The Marsilians also, or people thereabout, worshipped Images,
in the days of Serenus, Greg. li. 7. Epist. 109. and lib. 9. Epist. 9. But all
these were condemned of superstition by the Catholic Church: and the second
Nicene Synod was censured, and the definition thereof resisted by many, as I
have formerly proved, page 210. And because the Jesuit rehearses a story out
of Zonaras (an Author which themselves Posseuin. Apparat. and Biblioth. Select.
lib. 16. ca. 19. Is certe in historia, etc. inepte atque oscitanter pleraque
scripsit, etc.
) I will requite him with a more certain History out of Roger Houeden Roger
Houeden, pars 1. Annal. fol. 272. col. 2. Anno 792. Carolus Rex Francoru^ (...)
Synodalem librum ad (...) sibi a Consta^tinopoli directum, in quo libro (heu
proh dolor) (...) inconuenientia, and verae (...) contraria reperiebantur,
maxim, quod pene omnium orientalium Doctorum, non minus quam trecentorum, vel
eo amplius Episcoporum, vnanima assertione comfirmatum fuerit Imagines adorari
(...), quod (...) Ecclesia Dei execratur. Contra quod scripsit Albinus
Epistolam ex authoritate diuinarum (...) mirabiliter affirmatam, illamque cum
eodem libro, ex persona Episcoporum ac Principum nostrorum Regi (...) attulit.
, a native Historian of the affairs of Britain, his words are these. Charles
the French king sent a Synodal into Britain, directed unto him from
Constantinople, in the which book many things (out alas) inconvenient, and
repugnant to right Faith, were found: especially it was confirmed almost by the
unanimous consent of all the Eastern Doctors, no less than three hundred or
more, That Images ought to be worshipped; which thing the Church of God does
altogether detest. Against which Synodal Book, Albinus wrote an Epistle,
marueilously confirmed by authority of divine Scripture, and carried the same
to the French king, together with the foresaid Book, in the name of our
Bishops and Princes.

IESVIT.
Thirdly, to pass yet up higher, That Images began in Gregory the Great his
time, and that he forbad the

First, Gregory is abused, who only commanded that none should worship Images
as Gods, (...) as Gentiles did, Li. 7. Ep. 53. Non vt eam tanqua^ Deum colas.
Et lib. 7. Ep. 5. Act. Romans Pontif. Printed at Basile, 1558. pa. 45. Symonds on
the Revelations pa. 57. Bale in Pageant of Popes, pa. 24. and 25.
that some Godhead was affixed unto them, as he elsewhere Bale accuses him
thereof. Yea M. Symonds and M. Bale write, that Leo an hundred and forty
years before Gregory decreed the worship of Images.

ANSWER.
Gregory's words are Imagines adorare omnibus modis deuita, By Lib. 9. Epist. 9.
Aliud est Picturam adorare, aliud per Picturae historiam, quid sit adorandum
addiscere, It is one thing to worship a Picture, another by the story of the
Picture, to learn what is to be worshipped. Non ad adorandum in Ecclesijs, sed
ad instruendas solummodo mentes fuit nescientium collocatum, It was placed in
the Church only to instruct the minds of the ignorant, and not to be
worshipped. And in another Epistle, Quatenus literarum nescij, haberent vnde
Lib. 7. Epist. 109.
scientiae historiam colligerent. First, in these passages of S. Gregory, we
find no use of Images allowed, but only historical. Lib. 7. Epist. 53.
place objected, he says, Non vt quasi Deum colas, Not that thou should
worship them as God; yet he does not approve the worshipping of them any other
way, but adds, We do not bow down before them, as before the Dietie; he
says not quasi ad Dietatem, as to the Dietie, sed quasi ante, as before the
Dietie. Thirdly, Cassander Cassand. Consult. d. Imag. De his Picturis quae
fuerit men's, and sententia Romans Ecclesiae adhuc aetate Gregorij satis ex eius
Scriptis manifestum est, videlicet, ideo haberi Picturas, non quidem vt
colantur and adorentur, sed vt imperiti Picturis inspiciendis, haud aliter ac
literis legendis, rerum gestarum admonerentur, and ad pietatem incitarentur.
a learned Papist, confesses ingenuously, That Gregory the Great forbad all
worship of Images. But our latter Idolists use no measure or modesty in
eluding

IESVIT.
Secondly, Polydore in this point is egregiously falsified; for he says not
as the Minister makes him speak, cultum Imaginum test Hieronimo, omnes
veteres Patres damnabant metu Idololatriae, All the old Fathers (as Hierom
witnesses) did condemn worship of Images for fear of idolatry, by the
Moses, David, Jeremy, and other Prophets: and the scope of the whole Chapter
is to declare, that the reason why, in the Old Testament, the Fathers misliked
the worship of the Images of God, was, because they could not paint him aright,
Cum Deum nemo vidisset vnquam, because then no man had seen God. Afterward
God, says Polidore, having taken flesh, and being become visible to mortal
eyes, men Illius faciem diuinae lucis fulgore, nitente^ haud dubie
contemplaba^tur, and (...), and (...) effigiem (...) infixam, aut pingere aut
sculpere tunc primum (...) Polydor. d. Invent. li. 7. ca. 13.
flocked unto him, and did without doubt behold and reverence his face, shining
with the brightness of divine light, and even then they began to paint, or
carue his Image already imprinted in their minds: and those Images (says he)
they received with great worship and veneration, as Basil writes. Which
custom of adoring Images, the Fathers were so far from reproouing, as they
did not only admit thereof, but also decreed and commanded the same by general
Councels, in the time of Justinian the second, and Constantine his son. What
man then is there so dissolute and audatious, as can dream of the contrary,
and doubt of the lawfulness of this worship, established so long ago by the
decree of most holy Fathers? Polidore, and much more to the same purpose, in
the very place where the Minister cites him to the contrary; which shows,
how notoriously his credulous Readers are abused in matters of most moment:
Basil. orat. in S. Barlaam. Paulin. ep. ad (...). Lactan. in carmine de Cruce.
Tertul. de (...).
whence appears the third falsehood, that in Gregory's days Images began to
be set up in Churches; which to have been in Churches long before, the
testimonies of S. Basil, Paulinus, Lactantius, and Tertullian, do sufficiently

ANSWER.
Polydores words are: Touching the beginning of Images, we Polyder. d. Invent.
l. 6. c. 13. De simulachrorum origin, supra in secundo est a nobis libro
proditum: Hic de illorum cultu iam (...), quem non modo nostrae religionis
expertes, sed test Hieronymo, omnes fere veteres Sancti Patres, damnabant ob
metum Idololatriae.
have treated before; now here we will speak of their worship, which not only
men of contrary Religion, but (as Saint Hierom witnesses) almost all the
ancient holy Fathers condemned, for fear of Idolatry, etc.

d Crinitus. d. Hon. Discipline. li. 9. c. 9. Girald. d. Dijs Gent. Syntagm. 1.
Illud non praetermittam nos dico Christianos, vt aliquando Romanos, fuisse sine
imaginibus in primitiua quae vocatur Ecclesia. Origin. li. 8. c. Celsum. pa.
521. Simulachra Deo (...) sunt, non fabrorum opera, sed a verbo Dei dedolata
Clem. Alex. (...).
The Obiectour says, That this place is falsified, and his reason Polydore
speaks of the Fathers of the Old Testament, to wit, of Moses, Daniel,
Jeremy, and the Prophets, and he says, That they condemned worship of Images,
because Christ was not as then incarnate, etc. But this is not all that
Polydore speaks, for among those Fathers, he places Gregory Polyd. ib. D.
quoque Gregorius (...) Episcopu^ (...), etc. reprehendit, quod Imagines
fregisset; and laudat quod coli inhibuisset.
the Great, writing to Serenus. And although Christ was not made man in the
days of the Prophets, yet he had appeared in the similitude of man Dan. 3. 25.
Et quarti species similis filio Dei. Orig. sup. Ioh. Hom. 6. and in 6. cap.
Esa. hom. 1. Tertul. Adu. Iud. Text. 114. (...) Epist. 13. ad Pulcher. Aug. c.
Adimant. c. 9. Eusebius. Hist. li. 1. c. 2. Niceph. Hist. li. 1. c. 2.3.
, and Abraham, Moses, Elias, and the Prophets being men, their Pictures might
have been worshipped, Polydore, Cassander Cassand. Consult. d. Imag. Quantum
veteres initio Ecclesiae ab omni Imaginum Adoratione abhorruerunt declarat vnus
Origenes, etc. page 975.
, and many other Pontificians affirm that the ancient Fathers in the Primative
Church abhorred, or at least abstained from the having and worshipping of
Images, which is also confirmed by their Testimonies.

IESVIT.
Neither can our Adversary bring any clear Testimony of Antiquity against
this custom. For the Decree of the council of Eliberis, that no Picture
should be made in the Church, least that which is worshipped or adored be
painted in walls, (which the Minister much urges) (...) White, in his Way.
page 345.
clearly signifies the contrary. For may not Images painted on Tables, be in
Churches, and yet neither made in the Church, nor painted on walls? which kind
of Images this Council does not forbid. And why does the Council

ANSWER.
No testimonies can be so clear, which Sophisters will not labor to pervert,
and elude. Otherwise what is clearer against Image worship, than the words of
the Council of Elliberis and Epiphanius? It is lost labor to contest with
men, Qui sola pertinacia, pugnaces neruos, contra perspicuam veritatem
intendunt (as Saint Augustine speaks) which upon sole pertinacie, bend their
uttermost force to gainesay perspicous verity. First, the Council Elliberis
is so clear against Image worship, that many Pontificians of great note,
acknowledge the same, and thereupon condemn, or eleuate the authority of that
Council. Canus. loc. li. 5. c. 4. (...) 1. Tom. Council. Annot. in 36. Can.
Council. Elibert. Sixtus Senens. Bibl li. 5. An. 247. Baron. An. 57. n. 120
Andrad. Orthod. Explic. li. 9. Mendoza. Defens. Conc. Elib. li. 3. c. 5. and
alij. Tapia. in (...). Tho. q. 27. ar. (...). pa. 341. Ad haec vero dico quod
Concilium illud Elibertinum fuit prouinciale, and fortase vidit populum suum
decidentem in Bannes. sup. Tho. 22. q. 1. ar. 10. pa. 68. Bosius. li. 15. c.
16. pa. 270. Agobard. li. d. pict. and imag. recte nimirum ob huiusmodi
euacuandam superstitionem ab orthodoxis patribus definitum est, picturas in
Ecclesia fieri non debere, etc.
Secondly; If that Council forbad the being of Images in Churches, then it did
much more hold the worship of them to be unlawful, but the beginning of the
Canon apparently shows that: Placuit in Ecclesijs picturas esse non debere, It
(...) us (of the Council) that Pictures may not be in Churches.

IESVIT.
He does also much insist upon Epiphanius, but relates John White in his Way.
page 245.
(according to his fashion) both his fact and words vnsincerely. Epiphanius
(says he) finding an Image painted on a cloth, hanging in a Church, rent it
do wne, and said, it Epiphanius in pieces: for Epiphanius says: Cum iuuenissem
Imaginem hominis pendentem in Ecclesia tanquam Christi aut alicuius Sancti,
nescio enim cuius erat: When I bad found an Image of a man hanging in the
Church, as of Christ, or of some Saint, for I know not of whom the image was.
Epiphanius does by this relation more than insinuate that this was the Image of
some profane man, hanging in the Church, as if it had been a sacred image of
Christ, or some Saint: which is gathered by Mr. White cites him, (for even by
Gods express command, Images were placed in the Temple) but the image of a
man. Why does Epiphanius so Exodus 25. and 3. 3. Reg. 6.
much urge the impiety of the fact, in regard that it was the image of a man?
but that he understood by the word Man, a mere ordinary profane man, not a
blessed Saint. Epiph. should put so much Emphasis in the word Man, had he not
understood a profane man. For some Christians in those days being newly
converted from Paganism, and so reteyning some relikes thereof, did out of
affection unto their deceased friends and parents, use to S. Augustine
reprehends, and not the worshippers of Saints August. de (...) Ecclesiae. c. 36.
Images, under the title of Sepulchrorum and picturarum Adoratores, who to the
Ghosts of their parents defunct, did (though Christians) offer that heathenish
worship which the Poet exhorts unto: Non pigeat tumulis animas excire
paternis.
Paucaque in extructos mittere thura rogos.
Parua petunt manes --.


ANSWER.
This place of Epiphanius is a thorn in the Papists sides, and they are so
distracted about the clearing of it, that Vasques Vasq. d. Ador. li. 2. disp.
5. c. 3. n. 137. In tanta varietate Catholici constituti sunt, vt molestum
videatur, quid vnusquisque sentiat recensere.
says, It is an irksome thing, to report, what each of them has spoken. Some
of them reject the Epistle, saying, that it was a counterfeit Alan. Copus.
Dial. 5. c. 21. San. d. (...). l. 2. c. 4. Bell. d. Im c. 9. Sua. (...). (...).
1. dis. 54. sect. 1. Canis. d. Deip. vir. li. 5. c. 22.
work. But this opinion is reproved, and confuted, by the learned of their
own part Vasq. ib. n. 40. Mihi vero minus haec responsio placer, arque in
primis (...) Epistolam Epiphanij esse, etiamsi nun cgraecum illius exemplar non
inueniatur, in dubitatum esse debet, Tapia in 3. p. Tho. q. 27. ar. 8. pa. 341.
; and what can be more improbable, than that Saint Hierome would translate a
counterfeit work? Others say that Epiphanius did this in a preposterous zeal
Tho. Waldens. (...). 3. tit. 19. ca. 157. n. 7. Forsan zelo captus erat, non
secundum scientiam, etc. Puiol. d. Ador. disp. 3. sect. 1. pa. 200.
. Ferdinandus Velosillus Velos. Aduert. in 2. (...). Aug. q. 9. Epiphanius
haer. Collirid. Statuas and imagines
or Velosius (as Posseuine calls Epiphanius, against the Colliridian
haeresie, inueigheth bitterly against Statues and Images of men, and against
their worship. And again, in his Epistle to John Bishop of Jerusalem, he
taunteth them currishly or despitefully ( dente canino mordet) perhaps this man
is excuseable, by reason of ignorance, and because he wrote against Idolaters,
wherefore he is not ranked among Haeretikes.

Others affirm Sixtus. Senen. Bibl. li. 5. Annot. 247.
, that Epiphanius did this, because of the abuse of superstitious people,
committed about that Picture. Others say Alphons. Castro. Adu. (...). li. 8.
ver. Imago.
he did thus, because the contrary was not as then defined by the Church. But
Vasques Vasq. d. Ador. li. 2. disp. 5. c. 4.
himself, and before him Marianus Victorius Victor. Schol. sup. Hierom.
insist upon this poor shift, which our Adversary follows in this place, to
wit, that this vale or curtain, Epiphanius defaced, and rent asunder,
contained an Image, or Picture, of some profane man, hanging in the Church, as
if it had been a sacred image of Christ, or of some Saint, and which was
worshipped by some Christians newly converted from Paganism, with heathenish
honors. But if this gloss had been likely, it is very improbable, that
Cardinal Bellarmine Bell. d. Imag. c. 9.
, and some other Puiol d. Ador. disp. 3. sect. 1. Tapia in 3. p. Tho. q. 27.
ar. 8. pa. 341.
also, who have written since Vasques, would have esteemed it so lightly. And
Epiphanius his text Epist. Epiphan. apud Hieron. to. 3. Ib. Et deinceps,
praecipere in Ecclesia Christi, istiusmodi vela quae contra religionem nostram
veniunt, non appendi.
will not bear this exposition: For he says that at the time when he wrote
that Epistle, he did not remember (to wit, Epiphanius himself did not remember
whose image it was, whether of Christ, or of a Saint, or of some other man, how
knows this Jesuit, that it was the image of a profane person? Besides, if it
had been the picture of some profane person or Pagan superstitiously (...)
(...) (...) or (...) translated by (...) ad verbum, quasi, is to be (...), not
by a note of compatison, but of (...), or guessing, in things we (...) not
perfectly remember or know; as, vidi (...) quasi (...): or I saw a troop of
horse, put case 100.
worshipped, wherefore was Epiphanius silent, in relating hereof, considering
that the bare narration of so gross a fact, would most apparently have
justified the whole proceeding? but he affirms only in defense of his action,
That entering into an Oratorie, and there espying a veil or hanging, whereon
was figured

IESVIT.
Wherefore seeing this Minister, so much esteemed in the Church of England,
saying what he can devise in proof of

ANSWER.
The Minister whom you deprave, was no otherwise esteemed in the Church of
England than (...) an ordinary Student, and professor of Theology, neither
was his authority in handling of controversies greater than the weight of his
argument and disputation should deserve. And your Hyperbole, saying, That
(...). (...). li. 2. Ne (...) Stomachi (...) indigesta maledictorum (...).
he brings nothing, but manifest falsehoods, is rather an undigested cruditie
of railing words, than a true censure of him, against whom you are better able
to declame, then dispute.

But your threadbare argument, whereby you labor to

First, The Antecedent is false, for it is evident to judicious Theoph. (...).
lib. 1. ad Autolic. Omnibus quidem sunt oculi, at quotundam adeo sunt
obscurati, vt solis lucem intueri nequeunt, caeterum non propterea solares
radij fulgore carent, quod (...) caeteris non videntur. Imo (...) and suos
oculos potius culpent. (...). Sermon. 2. d. Resur. Quam difficile est accedere ad
cor eius, quod lapidea quaedam obstinatio and impudentia clausit. Seneca Epist.
15. Haupastes vxoris (...) fatua vetula subito desijt videre, incredibilem tibi
narro rem sed veram, nescit se esse caecam, subinde ducem suam rogat, vt for as
exeat, ait (...) tenebrosam esse.
.

Secondly, This Argument presupposes, that Worship of

Thirdly, Ab ignoratione rei ad negationem non sequitur: It is inconsequent to
argue, Protestants cannot out of humane History Ergo, This practice is not an
Innovation. For Papists cannot assign the moment of time when Heathens first
began to worship Baal and Ashtaroth, or when the Progenitors of Abraham began
to serve other Gods, Josh. 24. 2. And yet they will judge the consequence to be
absurd, which should infer, because Papists cannot assign, when and by whom
such Innouations began, therefore they were perpetual. We expect divine
Revelation to warrant Adoration of Images, for unless that appear, the same
cannot be (...). d. (...). l. 2. c. 25. Quod Historici (...) ^, non potest
(...) humana^ cui (...).
, when it is plain and certain, but being also uncertain and not faithfully
kept, it may perplex and deceive, and beget contention, whereas on the
contrary, Divine Revelation settles the conscience, and makes the Truth
manifest.

IESVIT.. 3.
The places of Exodus and Deuteronomie, with no probability urged against the
worship of Images, by Protestants that make them.

Against Image worship, Protestants bring in the place Exodus, Chap. 20. ver.
4. and 5. and of Deuteron. cap. 5. ver. 6. and 7. Thou shall not have false
gods before me, Thou shall not make to thy self a graven Jmage, nor any
likeness, either in the heaven above, or on the earth below, or of things that
are under waters, or under ground: Thou shall not adore, nor worship them.
Which place I wonder they can think strong enough to overthrow a Custom, in
which the rules of Nature, the principles of Christianity, Ergo, They cannot
condemn our Adoration of Jmages, except likewise they condemn their making
them, as against Gods Law.

ANSWER.
The places of Scripture alleged by Protestants, against Adoration Exodus 20.
5. Deuteronomy. 5.8. are a part of the Moral Law (...). li. 4. c. 28. Nam Deus primo
quidem per naturalia (...). quae (...) initio infixa. dedit (...), (...), id
est per Decalogum, (quae si quis non fecerit, non habeat salutem) and nihil
plus ab eis (...) Jbid. c. (...). Decalogi quidem verba, ipse per semetipsum
omnibus fimiliter Dominus (...) est. Et ideo (...) permanent apud nos,
extensionem and augmentum, sed non dissolutionem accipientia, per carnalem eius
aduentum. August. c. Faust. Manich. l. 19. c. 18. and l. 3. c. 2. Epist. Pelag.
ca. 4. Tho. Aquin. 12. q. 100. ar. 1. Scholastici. in 3. sent. Did. 37.
Suarez. d. Relig. li. 2. c. 1. Caetera praecepta Decalogi, pure moralia sunt.
Tertium vero (de Sabbatho) partim morale, partim ceremoniale fuit. (...).
(...). 22, q. 122. (...). 4. ad. 1. Caietan. ibid. Alex. Hal.
: therefore if the worshipping of Images was prohibited unto the Israelites in
the same, it is also forbidden Christians, and to worship Images is unlawful
in the state of the New Testament.

The Adversary wondreth, why Protestants should think, that the (...) places
of Exodus and (...), are strong enough to overthrow Image Worship, being (...)
upon (...) of Nature, Christianity, and Tradition.

First, This latter Clause is only a vain ostentation, and repetition

Secondly, The reason whereupon he groundeth his confident speech, saying,
Which place I wonder they can think strong enough, is wondrous weak, as it
will appear by the Resolution, and Answer of his Objection.

This Argument in form is, If all worship of Images is prohibited, Exodus 20.
etc. then all making them is also prohibited: for the same Precept, which

But all making of Images is not prohibited, Exodus 20. Because Protestants
themselves allow some kind of Image making, Ergo,

All worship of Images is not prohibited or condemned, Exodus 20, etc. but some
kind only.



Passing by the Assumption, Protestants deny the consequence

IESVIT.
If they answer, That we are not absolutely forbidden to make them, but only
not to make them with purpose of explication) as God, or with divine worship,
resting in

ANSWER.
The sum of this disputation reduced to form, is as follows.

If to Gods express word, Thou shall make unto thy self no graven Image, etc.
we may add (by way of explication) Thou shall make no Image, with intention to
worship: Then, to Gods express word, Thou shall not bow down to them, nor
worship them, we may also add (by way of explication)

But Protestants affirm the former, and they expound the first branch of the
Commandment, saying, that the sense of it is, Thou shall make no Image with
intent to worship it, Ergo,

To Gods express word, Thou shall not bow down, etc. we may add (by way of
explication) Thou shall not bow down to worship them, as God, or with divine
honor resting in the thing. And if Protestants deny the latter, they are
partial in affirming the former.

The consequence of the Proposition is again denied: For although we may
expound the former part of the Commandment with this Explication, With intent
to worship; yet we may not expound the latter part by saying, Thou shall not
bow down, etc. that is, although thou may worship some Images, according to
some manner of worship, yet thou may not worship

First, Moses himself repeating the law concerning Images, says, Ye shall
make you no Idol (...) Oleast. sup. Exodus 20. Non facias tibi sculptile, id
est, Imaginem alicuius rei, neque omnem similitudinem, qualiscunque illa sit,
sieve Imago, sieve similitudo imperfecta. (...), sup. Exodus 20. Chaldeus pro
sculptili Imaginem legit (...). Ferus, sup. Exodus 20. Primo tam sculptilia
prohibet, quam similitudines, hoc est tam sculpta, quam picta. Deinde Idola vel
similitudines, quarumcunque rerum prohibet fieri vt colantur. The old Translat.
Deuteronomy. 4. 16. Sculptam similitudinem aut Imaginem. Justin. Mart. in Tryph. page
25. Deus per Mosen sanxit ne qua Imago seu similitudo fiat (...).
, nor (...) Image, etc. 26.1.

Secondly, the brazen Serpent, and the Cherubins, were lawfully made even by
Gods appointment, in the old Testament, and yet their worship was unlawful, 2.
Reg. 18, 4. And some of Vasq. d. Ador. lib. 2. disp. 4. ca. 6. n. 98. Read
before pa. 213. Carol. Mag. c. Imag. lib. 1. ca. 19. Neque tabulae, neque duo
Cherubim, nec caetera (...) ad adorandum in veteri testamento facta fuisse
creduntur: quid (...) aliud faciunt, nisi vt Imagines exaltent, Christianorum
res extenuent? Cum videlicet, Tabulae, and duo Cherubim, exemplaria fuerint
futurorum, and cum duo Iudei habuerint carnaliter, resque typicis opertae
figuris praefigurationes figurarum fuerint futurorum, nos habemus in veritate
spiritualiter.
acknowledge, that the Cherubins might not be worshipped.

Thirdly, Jesuit Vasques Vasq. d. Adorat. lib. 2. disp. 4. c. 6. n. 98. Resp.
Lege veteri non fuisse vetitam omnem similitudinem aut effigiem quomodocunque,
sed omne cultum, and adorationem ipsius, atque adeo omnem quoque Imaginem seu
effigiem modo accommodato adorationi, erectam aut constitutam: quare nec
Cherubinis, nec alijs figuris in Templo factis aliquem cultum fuisse delatum.
says, That in the old Law, every similitude or pourtraiture was not
forbidden to be made, but all worship and adoration of Images, and all making
of an Tertullian Tertul. c. Marc. lib. 2. cap. 22. Proinde and similitudinem
vetans fieri omnium quae in Coelo and in terra and in aquis ostendit, and
causas Idololatriae, (...), substantiam cohibentes subijcit enim non adorabitis
ea neque seruietis illis. Sic and Cherubin and Seraphim aurea in (...)
figuratum exemplum certe simplex ornamentum, accommodata suggestui, long
diuersas habendo causas ab Idololatriae condition, ob quam similitudo
prohibetur, non videntur similitudinum prohibitarum legi refragari non in eo
similitudinis statu deprehensa, ob quem similitudo prohibetur.
and Damascen Damasc. Orat. 1. d. Imag. Vides quomodo vitandi fimulachrorum
cultus gratia Imagines fieri vetat?
, the greatest number of Papals expound the first part of the second
Commandment by the latter branch, to wit, Gerson, Gers. Compend. Theol. d. 10.
praecept. Prohibentur fieri ad hunc, videlicet, finem vt adorentur, and
colantur.
, Ferus Ferus sup. Exodus 20. Quod hic dicitur de non faciendis quibuscunque
Imaginibus intelligi debet ad adorandum ea, vt in Leuitico express ponitur.
, Caietan Caietan. sup. Exodus 20.
, Alphonsus Castro Alphons. Castr. c. Haer. lib. 8. verb. Imago. Non vt non
habeantur, aut fiant absolute, sed vt
, Oleaster Oleast. sup. Exodus 20. Vt non fiat sculptile aut Imago, scilicet, ad
cultum.
, Ystella Ystell. sup. Exodus 20. v. 7.
, Turrecremat Turrecremat. sup. Decret. d. Consecrat. Did. 3. ca. perlatum.
Non prohibetur illo praecepto, facere quamcunque sculpturam, vel similitudinem,
sed facere ad adorandum
, and Aquinas Aquin. 3. p. q. 25. ar. 3. Ad. 1.
himself has these words, Non prohibetur illo praecepto, Exodus 20. facere
quamcunque sculpturam, vel similitudinem, sed facere ad adorandum, It is not
forbidden in that precept, Exodus 20. to make any graven Image, or similitude;

And from the former I infer, That although some Pictures and Images may be
made, yet none of them may be worshipped, and therefore we are compelled to
expound the Thou shall make unto thy self no Image, with an intent to worship
it: but on the contrary, we may not expound the second clause of the
Commandment, by adding the Jesuits Exposition, which is, Thou shall not bow
down to them, or worship them as God, or with divine worship resting in the
Image.

The first clause of the Commandment, Thou shall make no graven Image, admits
an explication and qualification, as it is apparent by the brazen Serpent, and
by the Cherubins Tertul. c. Marc. li. 2. ca. 22. Vasq. d. Ador. li. 2. disp. 4.
c. 6. n. 99. Quo loco non docet Tertullianus, vt falso Pamelius putauit, in
vereri lege solum esse prohibitum similitudines and effigies pro Dijs adorari.
, and by the confession of learned Papists Ferus sup. Exodus 20. Non iustifico
abusus, sed hoc tantum volo, quod Ecclesia filijs suis ob occulos ponens
Imagines Christi, and Sanctorum non facit contra hoc praeceptum: non enim ideo
ea proponit vt colantur, sed vt admoneant and doceant, admoneant doctos,
doceant indoctos.
. If our Adversaries give

First, there is a difference between the Arc and Images, because God was
present by an extraordinary Grace, unto the Arc, according to a covenant made
with the Israelites, Exodus 25. 22. whereas there is no such promise or covenant

Secondly, the Israelites did not adore the material Arc, but they worshipped
God himself before the Arc, and that by a special commandment, 1. Sam.
1.19. Psalm. 99.5. But that the second clause of the Commandment admits a
qualification, cannot be proved by any testimony or example of holy
Scripture: yea the contrary is manifest, and learned Papists Anton. Perez.
Laurea Salmantic. d. Imag. Vsu. Nec iterum valet dicere cum Card. Bellarmino,
praeceptum Exodi non prohibere omnem omnino (...) hoc est Imaginem, sed
duntaxat illam quae pro Deo alieno extruitur, etc. Quoniam vt habet communis
scholasticorum sententia, and antiquorum statutum and (...) verbum, omnium
lmaginum vsus fuit veteri lege sublatus, etc. Respondet. Ib. ca. 6. Omnis
similitudinis species veteri lege fuit sublata, quae adorationi videbatur
accommodata. Vellosil. Aduert. in 2. To. Aug. q. 9.
affirm, That although some kind of Images might be made in the old Testament,
yet no Images formed by humane invention might be adored, as I have formerly
showed out of Aquinas, page 209. And consequently the Jesuits speech is false,
when he affirms, The word of God is as clear and express against making of
Images, as against worshipping them.

IESVIT.
Secondly, their exposition is not only violent against Thou shall not kill,
the intention of murder is sufficiently forbidden; so that he who Thou shall
not kill: wherefore if Gods Precept had been thus, Thou shall not wear about
thee any weapon, Thou shall not kill, the prohibition of wearing weapons should
have been absolute, and not only with purpose of murder. In like manner,
Gods Precept, Thou shall not adore Images, does sufficiently forbid intention
to adore them, and so consequently forbids

ANSWER.
This Argument reduced to form, sounds as follows: If Gods prohibition of
a thing does also forbid the intention thereof, then it had been sufficient
for him to have said, Thou shall not adore Images: and the former clause, Thou
shall make no graven Image, etc. forbidding only the making of Images, with an
intention to worship, had been superfluous, and without any special sense.

But God held it not sufficient to say, Thou shall not adore Images: and the
former clause, Thou shall make no Image, is not superfluous, etc. Ergo

The former clause of the Commandment, which says, Thou forbids not the
making of Images, with an intention to worship. And from hence it appears,
that the Protestants exposition of the second Commandment, is not only
violent but incongruous.



I answer, granting the antecedent part of the first Proposition; (for
whenever God forbids any action, he always prohibiteth, at least
implicitly, and interpretatiuely, the purpose and intention of doing the
same.) But from hence it follows Thou shall not bow down to them, etc.
therefore it was unnecessary and superfluous, to say, Thou shall make no
Images, with intention to worship. First, touching such vices as man by nature
and custom is prone unto, Abundans cautela non nocet, abundant warning and
caution is not superfluous. Secondly, Thou shall not commit adultery, Thou
shall not steal: yet the intention, and sensual motion and desire to do this,
is prohibited also in the tenth Precept August. sup. Exodus q. 71. Quaeritur
quid disterat quod dictum est, non maechaberis, ab eo quod paulo post dictum
est, non concupisces, etc. In eo quippe quod dictum est, non maechaberis
poterat and illud intelligi: nisi sorsan in illis duobus praeceptis, non
maechandi and non furandi, ipsa opera notata sunt: in hijs vero extremis ipsa
concupiscentia, etc.
. Thirdly, we say not in our answer, That the intention of adoring the Image,
being made, is forbidden in these words of the Commandment, Thou shall make
unto thy self no graven Image, etc. as these words are considered apart, that
is, dividing, and parting the Thou shall not (...) down to them, nor worship
them: But we conioyne the former and latter words Aug. sup. Ioh. tr. 111. Nemo
serenissimum sensum, nubi. Iosa contradictione perturbet, consequentia
perhibeant testimonium, precedentibus verbis.
, and make the one material, and the other formal, and expound them in this
sort; Thou shall make unto thy self no graven Image, intending to use the same
contrary to the words of the Law following, which prohibit the Adoration of
all created and artificial forms.

When our Savior in the Gospel, forbids to look on Matthew. 5.28. We may
not divide the first and latter part: for the looking on a woman without lust,
is only material in the Action, and it may be lawful, and in some case
virtuous, Ioh. 19.26. Luke 7.44. But we must conioyne the Intention, which is
formal, to the material aspect, and then the same is vicious, Job 31.1.
Genes. 38.15. And there is nothing more common in the holy Scripture, than for
the former part of a Doctrine, or Commandment, to be expounded, limited, and
receive his kind from the latter part, Mark. Luke 16.18. Psalm. 37.21. Job
31.26, 27. Esaias 5.8, 11. Luke 14.12, 13.

If it be objected, that there is a sof Pasuch, or full point at the end of the
Sentence, which forbids the making of Images: I answer, First, That in the
place of Leuiticus, Cap. 26.1. There is no such period or full point. Secondly,
Because the making of some kind of Images, to wit, visible Images, and
representations of God, according to his Deity Abulens. sup. Deuteronom. ca.
4. q. 5. Quaedam sunt, quae nec in Statua, nec in figura congrue assignari
possunt, sicut Trinitas beata, quae nullis cerporeis (...) circumscripta est.
(...). sup. Deuteronom. q. 1. Haec dicit instruens eos, ne simulachrum (...)
fabricent, neque tentent vnquam diumam Imaginem effingere. Clem. Alex. Strom.
lib. 1. page 165. Origin. c. Celsum. li. 7. Eusebius. d. praepar. Euang. l. 1. c.
6. Vasq. d. Ador. l. 2. Disp. 4. c. 2. Ex Deuteronomij quarto, clare deducitur,
non (...) verum Deum in aliqua imagine venerari.
, Deuteronomy. 4. 16. is unlawful in it self, secluding Adoration, therefore the
Spirit of God forbade both the making of Images, to wit, of false Gods, and of
the true God, in manner aforesaid; and also

IESVIT.
Besides, as to make an Image to adore, is Idolatry; so likewise to take it in
hand, or look on it to that purpose. Why then was not such looking on, or
touching, with purpose of Adoration, expressly forbidden, as well as making?
Or if looking on them, with intention to adore them, be so Thou shall not
adore, as there needs not that expression; What need was there, that making of
Images, with purpose of Adoration, should be so largely and particularly
expressed? Wherefore, whosoever is a Religious follower of Gods pure Word, must
either without explication, condemn the making of Images, together with their
worship, or else allow the worship of the Jmages (if their Prototypes be
adorable) the making

ANSWER.
Although to take in hand, or to behold an Image, or (...) sign, natural or
artificial, with intent to worship it, be (...), Job. 31. 26. yet as God
Almighty in other Commandments does not always literally and expressly set
down every particular action of sin, virtually and (...) condemned in the
same Tortul. d. Idol. c. 9. Cum magia punitur, (...) species est Astrologia,
vtique and species in (...). Cap. 11. (...) interdictio, ostendit mihi,
lanistam quoque ab Ecclesia (...).
, but delivers sufficient grounds, from Matthew. 5. 21, 28. So likewise, in
this Commandment, concerning Images, the unlawfulness of handling, beholding,
and the like, are prohibited virtually and interprevatiuely; (...) in one of
the Clauses of the Commandment, but in both Clauses conjoined, as aforesaid.

As for the Jesuits Interrogations, Why then etc. What need was there etc. we
refer him to the Lawmakers, to challenge Clem. Alexandr. (...). Qui (...)
verbo veritatis, operantur aliquid, vel loquuntur, sunt similes eis, qui
conantur ingredi absque pedious.
, not daring to question or demand reasons of his actions.

IESVIT.
Hence I gather, That the most natural and truest Exposition of that Precept
is, that it forbids not only the worship, but also the making of any graven
Image. But how? To represent God according to his Divine substance. This sense
is gathered out of the words precedent, Thou shall not have strange Gods before
me, which is explicated Thou shall not make to thy self a graven Image: For he
that makes to himself the Jmage of any thing, as apt to represent God
according to his Divine substance, and to convey our imaginations directly to
him, does make and has false Gods; because the true God is not imaginable, nor
is truly apprehended by imagination, conformable unto any Image.

ANSWER.
That is not the most natural and truest Exposition of the Commandment, which
delivers only a part, and not the whole and entire sense. But this
Exposition of the Jesuit delivers only a part, and not the whole sense. For
our Adversaries themselves confess, That the placing of Images of false Gods,
and of profane persons, in Oratories and Temples, or of any other persons
Epiphan. Epist. read before.
, which are not worthy Cabrer. in 3. p. Thom. q. 25. Ar. 2. Disp. 1. ^ aliquid
adoratur cultu religioso Deo vel sanctis (...), quod tali (...) est.
to be worshipped with that honor, is unlawful; and I suppose they Thou shall
have no other Gods but me; yet the forming and erecting Images of any kind to
be the outward means of such Idolatrous worship, is prohibited in this
Commandment, Thou shall not make unto thy self any graven Image, etc. Leuit.
26.1. And thus Tertullian Tertul. d. Idol. c. 5. and 6.
, Clemens Alexandrinus Clem. Alexandrinus, Adm. ad Gent.
, and many other Fathers Procop. (...). Exodus 20. (...). d. Pict. and Imag.
, expound the Commandment.

IESVIT.
Wherefore the pictures of the Holy Ghost, in form of a Dove; and of God the
Father, in form of an old man, be not direct and proper Images of the two
divine persons; but only of the Dove that descended on Christ, and of the old
man seen in a vision by Daniell, in which the perfections of these persons are
not lively represented, but a far off, and imperfectly shadowed, nor do
Catholics use

ANSWER.
You slubber over the matter of Images, of the persons of the Trinity, which
are used in the Roman Church (as experience witnesses, and your own Doctors
Sua. in 3. p. Th. to. 1. dis. 54. sect. 2. Nunquam Romana Eccles. etc. Cab. in
3. q. 25. dis. 1. n. 80. Puiol. d. Ado. Disp. 3. Sec. 4. Constat quod haec
consuetudo depingedi Angelos and Deum, modo sub specie Columbae, modo sub
figura Trinitatis sit vbique inter Catholicos recepta imo 7. Synod. Act. 5.
Spiritus Sancti Imaginem sub specie columbae, (...) sub figura Trinitatis
approbat, and Concilium Tridentinum. Sess. 25. admittit Imagines Dei in
picturis, precipue Historiarum.
acknowledge) and you conceal part of your Popish doctrine. For although you
affirm, that these Images are not proper, but metaphorical representations of
the divine persons: yet you hold, that these represent, not only the effects
and operations of the said persons, but also God himself; and you teach also,
that they are to be Gandau. Quodl. 10. q. 6. Tertio modo adorari potuit latria
Columba, in qua (...) Spiritus Sanctus. Puiol. d. Adoratione. Disp. 3. Sect. 4.
Quamuis verum sit, (...) figuras corporales, sub quibus Deus apparebat, (...)
illi Hypostatice vnitas, tamen reuera Deus, sub illis figuris apparuit, and sub
illis operatus est aliqua beneficia: vnde Imago representans
worshipped as sacred signs; metaphorically shadowing Durand. 3. d. 9. q. 2.
n. 15. Nihil factum per modum Imaginis ad representandum Diu. personas non
incarnatas, est adorandum. Fatuum est (tales) Imagines facere vel eas venerari.
Durand and Abulensis Abul. Deuteronomy 4. q. 5. Quaedam sunt quae nec in statua nec
in figura congrue assignari (...), sicut Trinitas beata, etc.
holding the contrary, is condemned by the common sentence of later
Pontificians, among which Caietan (...). in 3. p. Tho. q. 25. ar. 3. Haec
nonsolum pinguntur vt ostendantur, sicut Cherubin olim in templo, sed vt
adorentur.
says, Images of the Trinity are painted (in the Roman Church, not only that
they may be showed, or looked on) as the Cherubins of old time were in the
temple, but that they may be adored. Therefore if Romish Catholics do not
kiss them, or lie prostrate before them (as our Jesuit affirms) they
Cardinal Caietan,

IESVIT.
Wherefore this Text being thus clearly explicable, and being not explicated at
all, does make no less against Protestants than us: I see no reason why they
should be so much out of love with the worship of the image of Christ Jesus
their Lord, to which Nature and Christianity binds

ANSWER.
The sum of this part of your disputation is, That in the text of Exodus, To
fall down and worship images, is no more forbidden than to make: but making of
images is not simply and absolutely unlawful; and consequently their worship
is not simply and absolutely unlawful.

The first ground and proposition of this argument is false: Kings 18.4.
Wherefore, considering that the holy Scripture approoueth the difference which
Protestants assign, between making and worshipping of images, I see no reason
why Papists should not rest upon the sentence of holy Scripture, always
condemning, but never maintaining Image worship; rather than to persist in a
palpable superstition, to the offense of God, and scandal of his people.

IESVIT.. 4.
ANother Argument against Images, Protestants much urge, That they be stumbling
blocks for simple people, Augustine. August. Ep. 49. and in Psalm. 113.


ANSWER.
THis is not the Protestants Objection, but the Jesuits fiction, We say that
Image worship is a stumbling block, both to the learned and the simple, for it
is in it self a superstition,

Secondly, The manner of worshipping Images, according to the Popish tenet, is
so subtle and intricate, even to the learned themselves, that it must of
necessity be difficile for the unlearned to conceive the same, and
consequently, not to err in the performance of it.

Thirdly, When it is performed with greatest intelligence, what fruit and
reward can be reaped, other than such as our Savior In vain do you worship
me, teaching for Doctrines the Precepts of men.

And although Saint Augustine, Epist. 49. and again, sup. Psalm. 113. speaks
literally of Pagan Images, yet he declares in general, the peril which all
Images (being adored) may bring unto weaker minds, and condemns the use of
them, even when they are not adored for themselves, but made instruments to
worship God; saying in one place, August. d. Consens. Euang. lib. 1. cap. 10.
Sic omnino errare (...) qui Christum and Apostolos eius non in sanctis
codicibus, sed in pictis parietibus quaesierunt.
Thus have they deserved to err, which sought Christ in painted Images, and
not in written Books.

IESVIT.
To this I answer, First, that this may seem a great wrong, not only to the
Christian Church, but also to Christ himself, to think that men endued with
his knowledge and Faith, and made partakers of the light, whereby they believe
the most high, divine, and incomprehensible mysteries which he revealed to the
world, should so easily be Augustine speaks; for they did not only want this
light of Christian instruction, but also were taught by their Ancestors, that
in their Jdoles a kind of divine virtue or Godhead was lodged, in and Council.
Trid. Sess. 25. Non quod credatur aliqua in eis inesse diuinitas vel virt'
propter quam sint colendae.
affiged unto them: Whereas Catholic Doctrine teaches

ANSWER.
Image worship may be a scandal to Christian people, although they offend not
so rudely and grossly in their worship,

Ludouicus Viues, an eye witness of that he spoke, says Ludouic. Vin. in Aug.
d. Ciu. Dei. l. 8. c. 27.
, Non video in multis quod sit discrimen inter eorum opinionem de Sanctis, and
id quod Gentiles putabant de dijs suis: I cannot perceive, touching many
things, what difference there is between their opinion of Saints, and that
which the Gentiles had concerning their gods. And if Christians were in no
peril of Idolatry by worshipping Images, why does Gerson complain Gers. to.
1. d. prob. Spirit. number. 17. lit. 10. (...) superstitiones in populis, quae
Religionem inficiunt Christianam, dum sicut olim Iudaei sola signa quaerunt,
dum Imaginibus exhibent (...) cultum: dum insuper hominibus nedum canonizatis,
Scripturis quoque non authenticis plusquam Sanctis in Euangelio praestant fidem.
, that superstition like Jews, did only seek after fignes, and yield divine
honor Id. to. 3. d. Exerc. Deuot. simpl. Poterit contingere, dum homo nimis
cogirat cum Imaginibus, and de rerum corporaliu^ circustantijs, vt propter
phantasiae fluxibilitatem, and inuisibili host illudente and cooperante,
deueniat a deuotis and pijs cogitationibus ad cogitatus turpes and impios, a
puris affectionibus ad immundas, a Spiritualibus ad carnales, and nonnunquam a
Sanctis cogitationibus ad execrandae blasphemiae cogitationes, prout in
nonnullis deuotis personis in his incautis, compertum quandoque est. In ipsa
etiam veneranda. Imagine crucifixi, ex nimia fixa consideratione circa corporis
Dominici nuditatem eiusque foemoralium. Qui casus sicut mulierculis est valde
possibilis, sic vice versa poterit casus iste and viris esse non impossibilis,
si nimis figantur eorum cogitatus erga sanctarum virginum Imagines corporeas,
prout etiam experientia nonnullos docuit.
, that some devout people, by aspect of Images, were diuerted from holy
cogitations and pure affections, to carnal, execrable, and blasphemous
thoughts. And Cornelius Agrippa Cornel. Agrip. d. van. scient. d. Imag. fol.
73. col. 2.
says, Dici non potest guanta superstitione ne dicam Idololatria, penes rudem
and indoctam plebem alatur in Imaginibus, conniuentibus ad haec Sacerdotibus,
hinc non paruum lucri questum percipientibus: It is not to be spoken, how
great Idolatry is fostered among rude people by Image worship, while the
Priests conniue at these things, and make no small gain thereby.

Durandus Mimatensis says Durand. Rational. Diu. l. 1. c. 3. n. 4. Possunt
simplices and infirmi (per nimium and indiscritum imaginum vsum) facile ad
Idololatriam trahi.
, That weak and simple people, by indiscreet, and too much using of Images,
may be drawn to Idolatry. And Gabriel Biel Biel. Can. Miss. lect. 49. lit. v.
Ex illis patet, quorundam hominum stolidus error, qui adeo ad Imagines
afficiuntur, vt in ipsis credant esse aliquid Numinis, gratiae, vel
sanctitatis, quib' potentes fint facere miracula, praestare sanitates, eripere
a periculis, and a nocumentis ac insidijs praeseruare. Ib. Arguitur ex eodem:
nonnullorum indocta simplicitas and indiscretio qua reuerentius adorant
Imagines pulchras, quam turpes nouas quam vetustas, aut e contra ornatas
venustiori auro and purpura quam nudas: credentes eos eo Sanctiores quo
pretiosiores.
says, That some people are so foolish, as that they think some deity or
sanctity to be in Images, whereby they are says Cass. Consult. d. Imag.
manifestius est, quam vt multis verbis explicari debeat, imaginum and
simulachrorum cultum nimium in valuisse, and affectioni seu (...) superstitioni
populi, plus satis indultum esse, ita vt ad summam adorationem, quae vel a
Paganis, suis simulachris exhiberi consueuit, and ad extremam vanitatem quam
Ethnici in suis simulachris
, It is more manifest, than that it can be denied, That the worship of Images
and Idols has too much prevailed, and the superstitious humor of people has
been so cockered, that nothing has been omitted among us, either of the
highest Adoration or vanity of Panims, in worshipping and adoring Images.
Polydore Polyd. Virg. d. Invent. lib. 6. cap. 13. Caeterum illud atque adeo
desiderari possit vt Sacerdotes frequentius populum docerent, quonam pacto
deberent and venerari eiusmodi Imagines and apud eas sua offerre donaria, quam
quia illi tacent, and vulgo ex suo vsu tacere putantur, id circo eo insaniae
deuentum est, vt haec pietatis pars parum differat ab impietate: sunt enim been
multi (...), stupidioresque qui Saxeas vel ligneas (...), aeneas, seu in
parietibus pictas, varijsque coloribus litas Imagines colant non vt (...), sed
perinde quasi ipsae sensum aliquem habeant, and ijs magis fidant quam Christo,
vel alijs diuis quibus dicatae sint.
also says, People are grown to such madness, that this piety (of Image
worship) differs little from impiety, for there are many rude and stupid
persons, which adore Images of wood, stone, marble, and brass, or painted in
windows, not as signs, but as though they had sense, and they repose more
trust in them, than in Christ or the Saints, to which they are dedicated. And
Simon Maiolus Maiolus, Def. Imag. Cent. 9. c. 19. Agrestes quidam Imagines
ipsas Dei loco habet. L. (...) Sum. Eccles. p. 3. c. 3. In Asturijs, Cantabria,
and Galetia nostrae Hispaniae, etc. adeo gens affecta est truncis corrosis, and
deformibus Imaginibus, vt me test, quoties Episcopi illas renouant, and
decentiores loco illarum ponere iubent in suis paraeciarum visitationibus,
veteres suas (...) plorantes, and nouas neque aspicere velint, quasi non idem
Prototypum, etc.
, a most eagre

Therefore, seeing such abuses and Idolatries are committed among Christians,
in the worship of Images, as the former Authors report, we have no reason to
believe the Jesuits bare

IESVIT.
Secondly such Idols as Panims adored, many of them did by the Devils means
ordinarily speak, give answers, move, and exercise other actions of life, so
that their speaking

ANSWER.
The Jesuit confesses, that Popish Images did sometimes speak Simon (...),
Def. sacr. Imag. Centur. 7. c. 4. Imago Christi Basilium Praesbyterum
alloquitur.
, move Vincent. spec. hist. Quem a piscatoribus inuentum, and in Basilica
Apostolorum principis loculo deportatum, quaedam Sanctorum Imagines adorasse,
and venerabiliter salutasse visae sunt, palam omnibus. Math. Paris. Chron. pa.
360. Quotiescunque miles genua flexit, vt Imaginem adoraret, Imago Crucifixi ad
genu flexiones eius, caput and collum humiliter inclinauit. Catherin. d. sanct.
glor. lib. 2. page 71. De Crucifixi Imagine Neapoli, illud Christi oraculum
Thomas noster audiuit: been de me scripsisti Thoma. B. quoque Brigitta, etc.
, etc. but then he affirms, that this happened by miracle, and by the
infinite power of God: but he must remember, that other learned Pontificians
say, That this latter happened sometimes by the fraud of the Devil, and
cheating of Priests, as well as the fotmer, which he reports of Panims.
Gabriell Biel says Biel. Can. miss. lect. 49. lit. X. Quod si aliquando
miracula fiunt, homini bus etiam ad ea co^fluentibus, adiutoria, aut sanitates
praestantur, non baec (...) tute Imaginu^ sed virtute Dei, ministerio bonoru^
Angelorum, ad intercessiones Sanctorum contingunt vel etiam nonnunquam
operatione Doemonum, ad fallendum (...) cultores, Deo permittente, exigente
talium infidelitate.
, That by the permission of God, punishing infidelity, miracles are sometimes
wrought by the Devil, working by Images. And Espencoeus Espenc. Com. 2.
Timoth. c. 4. nu. 21. page 151.
has these words, That some in the second Nicene Synod propugned Images,
Doemonum spectris, by Apparitions, which proceeded of the Devil. William
Malmesburie Malmsb. d. gest. Reg. Ang. lib. 2. cap. 9.
reports how the Crucifix uttered a speech concerning S. Dunstan. But
Polidore Virgill Polider. Hist. (...). lib. 6.
in his Chronicle, speaking of the credit of this miracle, says, It was
thought by many, that this was rather an Oracle of Apollo, than of God, and
that it proceeded from the fraud of men, and not from divine power.

IESVIT.
Finally, I dare say, That vulgar and ordinary Protestants in England, by
reading of the Bible in their mother tongue, are in greater danger to believe,
that God is a body, and has all the parts thereof, even as has a man, than
Cicero de Natura Deorum.
to think our shape the fairest, and so the fittest for God: Wherefore it is
easy for men to assent to this error, unto which the best and greatest wits
that ever were, Tertullian, Tertul. apud Aug. d. Haeres Haer. 86. August. lib.
3. Confess. c. 7.
and S. Augustine, whilst he was a Manichee did assent:

ANSWER.
I perceive whereat you aim, in this odious comparison: you would have Gods
book buried in darkness, and compel Christians to seek Christ and his
Apostles in painted walls, and dead statues Aug. d. Consens. Euang. li. 1. ca.
10. Sic omnino errare meruerunt, qui Christum and Apostolos eius, non in
sanctis codicib', sed in pictis parietibus quesierunt.
. And whereas you say, vulgar and ordinary Protestants in England, (not in
Scotland, France, Denmark, etc.) by reading of the Bible in their mother
tongue: (and yet Tertullian and S. Augustine, in whom you give instance, read
the Bible in a Latin Translation) are in greater danger to believe that God is
a body, etc. than any the simplest Catholic is to think an Image to be God:
It is answered, That notwithstanding your I dare say: you are not able to
prove, that any person, civil or rude, has (at any time, among us) been
infected with the Humaniformian error, by hearing or reading the Bible. I
marvel also why you rank not the Apostles Creed among prohibited Books, as
well as vulgar translations of the Bible; for ignorant people, rehearsing the
article, He sits at the right hand of God, might more easily imagine God to
be corporeal, than by reading Scripture; because herein, that which in one
Text is delivered Origin. c. Cells. lib. 7. Celsus haudquaquam pro Dijs (...) se
habere affirmat, sed Dijs dicata. Clem. To. Recog. li. 5. p. 73. Per alios
Serpens ille proferre verba huiusmodi solet: nos ad honorem inuisibilis Dei,
Imagines (...) adoramus. Arnob. c. Gent. lib. 6. Deos inquitis per simulachra
adoramus. Aug. in Psalm. 113. Non hoc visibile colo, sed numen quod illis
inuisibiliter (...), (dixerunt Pagani.) Chrysostom. Orat. 12. d. Prima Dei noticia.
Maximus Tyreus. sermon. 38. (asseuerant Gentiles) summum, primum maximum Deum
creatorem omnium and (...) a se in simulachris, etc. coli. Iulianus. ap.
Surium. to. 5. fol. 881. Non tanquam Deos colunt eorum Imagines, etc. Ferus.
sup. Act. Apost. ca. 17. Tam etsi Gentiles, Idola sibi praestituebant, tamen
eorum animus erat, vero Deo cultum exhibere.
) yet they may believe they are the seat of God, and that some divine majesty
and power is inhabiting in them; or that they are divine instruments to convey
graces and benefits to people

Now as for the letter of sacred Scripture, if any rude person should suck
error from thence, the offense is taken, and but always censured by holy
writ) which being omitted

Lastly, you censure Tertullian for holding the Deity to be corporeal: but S.
Augustine August. Quod vult. De: Haeres. 86. Nec tame^ hinc Haereticus creditur
esse factus. Posset enim quoquam modo putari, ipsam naturam, substantiamque
diuinam corpus vocare, non tale corpus cuius parts aliae maiores, aliae
minores valiant vel debea^t cogitari, etc. sed quia non est nihil, non est
inanitas, no^ est corporis (...) animae qualitas, sed vbique totus, and per
(...) spacia nulla partitus: In sua tamen natura and substantia (...) permanet.
Idem d. Genes. ad Lit. li. 10. cap. vltimo. Vide Tertul. c. Marcion. li. 2. Nam
and dextram and occulos, and pedes Dei legimus, nec ideo tamen humanis (...),
quia de appellatione sociantur. Jd. c. Hermog. Cum ipsa substantia corpus sit
rei cuiusque. Id. d. Anima. c. 7. si non corpus.
, to whom you refer us, expounds his Tenet more favorably, affirming, that
he was no Heriticke in this point, because he may be expounded, as speaking
figuratively; and by Corpus, a body, he might understand a thing substantial,
real, immutable, quia non est nihil, non est inanitas, non est qualitas, etc.
he is not nothing, an inanitie, a quality, or accident, but abides firm and
inuariable in his nature. Neither yet affirms S. Augustine, either of
himself Tertullian, that they were lead into their error by reading the
Scripture. And it is more probable, that the Manichees sucked their false
opinion from the Gentiles, rather than from the letter of the Scriptures,
because they wholly rejected the old Testament, in which principally is found
the description of the Deity, by figures of things corporeal: neither regarded
they Apostolical Scriptures, but coined a Gospel according to their own
fancy Prateol. Elench. Haer. li. 11. d. Manich. n. 15. Totum vetus Testamentum
reijciebant. Neque (...) recipiebant Apostolorum libros, sed sua (...)
singularia comminiscebantur, quae Christi Euangelium vocabant.
.

IESVIT.
More, our Children, and ignorant people, are in the Catholic Church often
and plentifully instructed against such errors, as by our Catechismes may
appear; and particularly say nothing, but only that the time they spend in the
praises of

ANSWER.
How plentiful your instruction of ignorant people at this present time is, I
will not examine; but it is not long since some of the best learned of your
part affirmed, That throughout the whole Christian state, there was so extreme
sloth, concerning these things, that one should find many in all places,
expressly knowing no more, concerning God and things Divine, than Pagans Nauar.
Manual. Confess. c. 11. n. 6. pa. 165. In vniuersa Repub. Christiana tanta est
circa haec socordia, vt mulcos passim inuenias, nihil magis in particulari, and
explicit de rebus hisce credere, quam Ethnicum quendam Philosophum, sola vnius
very Dei naturali cognitione praeditum.
. And Espenceus, upon the 2. Tim. 3. n. 17. page 118. says An vero been ac
diuinitus educati edoctiue pueri, hodie iuxta scomma Propheticum, Esa. 65.
Prope centenarij, hoc est Christiani vetuli and seniculi, qui non minus fidunt
aut tribuunt Diuis quam Deo: qui hunc quam illos minus placabilem, aut
exorabilem putant? Vtinam mentiar, and nulli sunt huiusmodi. Noui certe
veteranum and generosum equitem, qui de Spiritu Sancto quid (...), ingenue
confitebatur, vt apud lucam Act. 19. Ephesij, id quod erat, nec vnquam se, si
vllus esset Spiritus Sanctus, audiuisse.
, Are children well and religiously educated? yea according to that
Prophetical derision, Esaias 65. Children of an hundred years, that is, aged
and decrepite Christians, trust as much, and yield as much to Saints as to God,
and think that God is less merciful, and harder to be entreated than
Saints. I knew (says this Author) an ancient and noble Knight, who being
demanded, What he believed concerning the holy Ghost, confessed freely, like
(...) Ephesians, Acts 19. That he (...) not whether there was any holy Ghost.
Also the Catechismes of Ledesma, Bellarmine, etc. are extant, wherein few
instructions are found, sufficient to prevent the former error, whereinto
ignorant people may easily fall.

You descend in the next place, to depresse the English Church, accusing the
Pastors thereof, of negligence, in teaching the Principles of Christian Faith,
and spending their time in the praises of sole Faith, and about the secrets of
Predestination,

But you look upon us with an evil eye, and your Aspersions are envious.

First, the Canons of our Church Constit. and (...). Eccles. can. 59. Every
Parson, Vicar, or Curate upon cuery Sunday and Holy day, before Evening prayer,
shall for half an hour, or more, examine and (...) the youth and ignorant
persons of his Parish in the (...) Commandementi, the Articles of the Beleese,
and in the Lords prayer, etc.
impose catechizing, no

Secondly, the faith which our Ministers are to preach, according to the
doctrine of the Church of England, is a lively and operative Faith, and this
Faith alone, and no other, can justify and save the soul.

Thirdly, it is not lawful for Preachers to spend their time in confuting
Papists, unless they understand their Tenet, and are able to prove the same
to be wicked and false. And although our Tenet concerning Predestination, be no
other than what Saint Augustine and his scholars maintained against the
Pelagians, and which has been holden Orthodoxall by the best learned in the
Church of Rome it self, yet our Church is most cautelous in preventing
offenses, which may ariseby indiscreet handling of this doctrine; and a most
provident restraint is made among us in this behalf, by superior authority.

I might here retort upon the Adversary, the abuses of his own Church, in all
or some of these kinds; but this were to wander from the disputation, and to
give occasion of further excursion, to one, Cui verbosa lingua est, cor vero
obtenebratum, as S. Cyril Cyril. c. Iul. li. (...).
anciently spoke.

IESVIT.
Besides, it is easy for the Roman Church, to keep her children from
believing that Images be Gods, or true living but the true body of our Savior,
under the forms and accidents Cone. Trid. Sess. 25. Cone. Nic. 2. Act. 7.
sense can dislike? or shall the sole similitude of members correspondent

ANSWER.
This passage is wasted in magnifying the power which the Roman Church has in
preserving her adheres from the infection of superstition, in worshipping
Images. The argument used by the Idolist to this purpose, is: The Roman Church,
performs that which is more difficile; to wit, it persuadeth people,
contrary to the experience of all their

Therefore it is able to persuade people, that the Images which they adore, are
not very God, or that any divinity or divine virtue resides in them.



I answer, that it is not more difficile, to persuade some people, to believe
transubstantiation, than to rectify their judgment, in adoration of Images:
for man's nature being of it self These. 2. 10, 11. no marvel if they credit
false doctrine, although it be most absurd. But they which believe and obey
their Masters, when they teach lies, do not always follow their directions,
if they instruct them in truth. Neither are Aug. d. Doctr. Christ. li. 3. c. 9.
Qui operatur aut veneratur, vtile fignum diuinitus institutum.
, but always condemned by the Holy Ghost. And this alone without further
abuses, is sufficient to condeme the doctrine and practice of the Roman Church.

IESVIT.
The Protestant Church on the other side, may seem to have no great vigor, by
preachings to persuade common people against the error of the
Anthropomorphits, seeing their principle is, That a world of Preachers is not
to be believed against the evident Scripture. Yea that a common D. John White
in his Way, pa. 59.
ordinary man, by Scripture may oppose as great, and a greater Church, than is
the whole Protestant. Which principle being laid, how will they convince
people, that

ANSWER.
The Jesuit is fallen upon a Paradoxe, affirming that there is Humaniformians,
than the Papists to be seduced by images. And his reason is, because Protestant
Ministers cannot by preaching the contrary doctrine, persuade people to desist
from any error, which seems to them agreeable to any literal text of holy
Scripture: for one of their own principles is, That a world of Preachers, is
not to be believed against evident Scripture, etc. and he cites Mr. John White
in his Way, page 59. I perceive, it is impossible John White affirms not,
that every private person, or that any company of people whatsoever, are to be
credited upon the sole allegation of a text of Scripture, expounded as the
outward letter sounds: for we know, that sometimes the letter kills, and
Saint Augustines rule Aug. d. Doctr. Christ. li. 3. c. 10. Et iste omnino modus
est, vt quicquid in sermon diuino, neque ad morum (...), neque ad fidei
veritatem proprie referri potest, figuratum esse cognoscas. Ibid. c. 16. Si
flagitium aut facinus iubere, aut vtilitatem aut beneficentiam vetare, figurata
est. Nisi manducaueritis inquit, carnem filij hominis and sanguinem biberitis,
non habebitis vitam in vobis, facinus vel flagitium videtur iubere. Figura est
ergo, praecipiens passioni Domini esse, communicandum, and suauiter atque
vtiliter recondendum in memoria, quod pro nobis caro eius crucifixa, and
vulnerata sit. Id. d. (...). ad lit. li. 8. c. 2.
, concerning Scriptures exposition, is neither strange, nor unpracticed by us:
but Mr. John Whites doctrine is, That if four hundred Baalites, or a whole
Council of Pharisees, or Errants, deliver untruths, one Micajah, one Stephen,
one Athanasius, in whose mouth is fouud the word of Truth, although the persons
seem never so private, must be preferred before them, which teach lies, or
doctrine repugnant to holy Scripture Chrysostom. d. Lazar. Hom. 4. Etiamsi mortuus
reuiuiscat etiamsi Angelus de coelo descendat maxim omnium credendum eft
Scripturis. Et. Hom. d. expulsipsius. tom. 5. Habeo Scripturam Domini mei,
manum (...) teneo, illa (...) cautio fatis tuta est, illa me securum reddit and
intrepidum etiamsi orbis teriae commoueatur ego cautionem Domini mei teneo,
lego manum eius ipsa mihi murus est inexpugnabilis.
, truly expounded.

IESVIT.
But they will say the translation of Scripture into vulgar languages, is
commanded in the Scripture, and the Apostles and Apostolical Church practiced
it. Whereas we Ioh. 5. v. 39. Colloss. 3. v. 16.
to prove a direct and express precept or practice, of translating Scriptures
into the vulgar tongue.

ANSWER.
We affirm with great confidence, both that the reading of holy Scripture by
Lay people (which must needs imply Translation of them) is a Divine Ordinance,
and that Image worship was neither warranted by the Apostles, nor practiced by
the Primative Church succeeding the Apostles.

Neither do we allege only those Sentences of holy Scripture, John 5. 39.
Collos. 3. 16. which the Jesuit thinks himself able to elude by subtle
distinctions, as the Arrians John, Cap. 10.30. But we cite also the Precept of
God given to the Church, before Christ his coming, and the perpetual practice
of the godly, in the Old and New Testament, and the vehement exhortations of
the Primative Fathers, exhorting Lay people to the Acts 8. 28. The Baereans are
called Noble, by the holy Ghost, for searching the holy Scriptures, Acts 17.
11. He is called Blessed which reads and hears, Apoc. 1. 3. The Galathians
read the Scripture, Gal. 4.21. The Ephesians, Cap. 3.4. The Collossians, Cap.
4. 16. The Thessalonians, 1. These. 5.27. The Fathers are so plentiful in this
Argument, as I have elsewhere showed Def. of my Brother. page 42, etc.
, that it would astonish any man who has read them Clem. Alex. Strom. lib. 7.
page 245. Orig. in Esa. Hom. 2. Chrysostom. d. Paradis. and Proem. ad Romans and sup.
Genesis Hom. 6. 8. 10. 12. 14. 21. 29. 35. 59. and d. verb. Esa. Hom. 2. and sup.
Romans Hom. 30. and sup. Matthew. Hom. 2. and 48. and d. Lazaro. Hom. 3. and 4,
etc. Hieron. Epist. 7. and 9. and 10. and 14. and 29. and 30. and sup. Ezech.
45. Ambros. Sermon. 35. August. Epist. 120. c. 37. and d. Temp. Sermon. 55. and 56.
Cyril. c. Julian. lib. 7. Theoderit. d. cur. Graec. Affect. (...). 5. and 8.
Jsiodor. Pelusiot. lib. 1. Epist. 24. Isiodor. Hispal. d. sum. bon. lib. 1.
cap. 18. Gregor. Mag. sup. Euang. Hom. 15. and sup. Ezech. li. 2. Hom. 15. and
Dial. lib. 4. c. 14. and lib. 4. Epist. 40. Ephrem. d. pat. and consum. secul.
Damasc. Orthod. fid. lib. 4. cap. 18. Beda lib. 3. in Esdr. cap. 18. Theophil.
in Ephesians. 6. Bernard. Sermon. 55. tract. Modus been viuendi adsorores.


IESVIT.
Catholics on the contrary side, though they boast not of Scriptures, (as
knowing that nothing is so clearly set down in it, but malapert error may
contend against it with some show of probability) yet have Scriptures much
more clear and express than any that Protestants can Paul to the Galathians
says, O ye foolish Galathians, who has Galath. 3. (...). 1.
bewitched you, that you should not obey the truth, before whose eyes Christ
Jesus is lively set forth crucified among you. The Greek word corresponding
to the English, lively set forth, is (...), which signifies, to paint forth a
thing; insomuch as even Beza, Jesus Christus depictus crucifixus, Jesus Christ
painted, crucified before your eyes: so that we have in plain and express
terms, that Christ was Painted crucified, in the Apostolical Churches, which
the Apostle does allow; thence drawing an Argument to prove the Galathians
were senseless and sottish, that

ANSWER.
There is reason, why Romists (which style themselves Catholics, Chrysostom. ex.
var. in Math. Hom. 11. Nomen tuum christianum sonat sed facta Antichristum
monstrant. August. sup. Math. q. 11. Boni Catholici sunt qui fidem integram
sequuntur and bonos mores. Id. d. ver. Relig. c. 5. Catholici vel Orthodoxi
nominantur, id est integritatis custodes and recta sectantes.
) should be sparing in boasting of Scripture: but the reason assigned by the
Adversary, which is, that Scriptures may be perverted by Errants, is
insufficient; for it is common to Tradition, and to Histories, and monuments of
antiquity, to be perverted and abused, and the same happens not by the kind
and nature of the Scripture Aug. d. Trin. l. 1. c. 3. Nec ipsis Sanctis
diuinorum librorum, authoritatibus vllo modo quisquam recte tribuerit, tam
multos and varios errores haereticorum, cum omnes ex eisdem Scripturis falsas
atque fallaces opiniones suas conentur defendere.
, but accidentally, through the malice and subtlety of man, perverting the
right ways of the Lord. And there is sufficient matter in the sacred
Scripture, to demonstrate verity, and to convince Errants, when they pervert
the right sense Gregor. Mor. l. 18. c. 8. Cum superbientes haereticos, and
Sacrae Scripturae sententias deferentes, eisdem verbis atque sententijs quas
proferunt vincimus, quasi (...) Goliam, suo gladio detruncamus.
.

And whereas you affirm in the next place, that Romists have Scriptures more
clear and express, than any that Protestants can bring for themselves, even
about the use of the Image of Christ.

First, If this were true, it proves not the question, That Images ought to
be worshipped, but only that they may be used, for History, Ornament, and
Signification, as the Cherubins, and other Pictures of the Temple, in the old
Law; for Use being a general, and Worship a special, you cannot conclude
affirmatively from the former to the latter A genere ad speciem non sequitur
affirmative.
.

Secondly, You depart from your own received Principles, when you endeavor to
prove Image worship by Scripture: for the same (according to your doctrine) is
a divine Tradition Azor. Instit. Mor. p. 1. li. 8. c. 4.
, and such a Tradition (according to learned Bannes) as is neither expressly nor
infoldedly taught in holy Scripture Bannes in Tho. 22. q. 1. ar. 10. pa. 170.
Orationes esse ad Sanctos faciendas, venerandas esse eorum Imagines, etc. Neque
etiam impresse, neque inuolute, sacrae literae docent.
. Wherefore then do you attempt to prove Iconolatrie out of Doctrina tantum
non Scripta Bellarm. d. verb. Dei l. 4. c. 2.
: a Doctrine altogether unwritten. It is a vain thing to promise to fetch
Treasure out of a Chest, or water out of a flint stone, in which a man himself
confesses there is none.

Thirdly, St. Paul his Text, Galath. 3.1. Nullis machinis, can by no ingens or
devices be wrested to your Tenet. All Expositors ancient and modern, which
have Commented upon this Text, are against you, and you have neither the letter
nor matter Rhem. Gal. 3. 1. vet. Transl.
Proscribed, and (...), Iud. v. 4. Prescribed; and (...), Romans 15.4. Have been
written; and (...), Ephesians. 3. 3. I have written before. And whereas you fly to
Beza, translating (...), Depictus, Painted before, he tells you in his
Annotation Bez. (...). Gal. 3.1. (...), id est, quibus ita perspicue fuit
exhibitus Christus vt quasi oculis vestris representata fuerit viua ipsius
Imago, ac si apud vos ipsos esset crucifixus.
, that he understands not artificial, but Theological depainting, not
external but spiritual; to wit, by the evident and powerful Preaching, and
Doctrine of Saint Paul, Christ Jesus was so lively revealed and set forth to
the understanding of the Galathians, as if they had indeed beheld Chrysostom
Chrysostom. sup. 3. ca. Gal. Atqui non apud Gallatas sed Hierosolymis crucifixus
fuerit, quomodo igitur dicit in vobis? vt fidei vim ostenderet, quae possit and
procul dissita cernere. Nec dixit crucifixus est sed prescriptus est
crucifixus, indicans quod oculis fidei quidem exactius perspicerent, quam
nonnulli qui presents ad fuerant (...) quae gerebantur conspexerant. Illorum
enim qui spectarant complures nullum inde fructum retulerunt, hij vero quae
oculis ipsis non viderant, tamen per fidem euidentius viderant.
, Theophilact (...). ib. prescriptus est igitur exact, hoc est viua veluti
Imagine expressa depictus est per predicationem, vos vero credentes
predicationi, (...) presentem ipsum conspexistis.
, and Oecumenius Oecumen. ib. (...).
expound Saint Paul, and with them agree your own Doctors, Aquinas Aquin. ib.
proscriptio Christi qui damnatus est in mortem, adeo vobis manifesta (...), ac
si ante oculos vestros fuisset. Vasq. Paraph. in Gal. 3. O stulti Galatae, quis
vos aspectu malefico tanquam pueros in fide recens natos laesit, and veluti
incantationibus delusit, vt vos (quibus per meam predicationem Euangelij ita
expositum est Christi Euangelium and ipsius Christi. Passio vt certius sitis
eum contemplat, quam quiipsum oculis tantum corporis viderunt) veritatem quam
semel estis edocti non retineatis.
, Adam Sasbot Adam. Sasb.
, Estius, Cornelius, Iustinianus, Vasques, Salmeron, etc. There is no small
difference between vocal and spiritual depainting; and between material or
artificial, between painting upon minds, and painting upon material Tables,
between intellectual beholding Christ Jesus crucified, in the Story of the
Gospel, or in the Sacrament; and in a visible Statue, or painted Table. And
therefore from St. Paul's affirming the former,

IESVIT.
I know that some Catholics expound this place, That Christ was painted out
unto the Galathians Metaphorically by preaching, which I do not deny, but
this does not repugne with the other sense, that he was also materially painted
as crucified, the which being more conform to the native and proper
signification of the words, is not to be forsaken but upon evident absurdity,
especially, Praedicamus Iesum Christu^ Iudeis sca^dalu^ gentibus stultitiam, 1.
Cor. 1.30.
folly unto the Gentiles. But to have Christ painted as crucified before men's
eyes, honoring him by Christian devotion, Athanasius expounds this Athanas.
ser. de. sanctis Patriarch. and Prophet. apud Turrian. lib. 4. de Dogmat.
Charact. verbi Dei.
place, whom Turrianus cites: wherefore I may justly say, that we have more
clear and express Scripture, for the use of Images, than have Protestants for
their vulgar Translations.

ANSWER.
First, yield us but one Father, or learned Papist, who in their Commentaries
Harding, Gretsar. Cabrera. etc. In disputation press this place, but no
learned Papist that I have seen in their Commentary
expound this place literally, according to your sense. Secondly, It is neither
comformable to the signification of the words, for (...) signifies, to be
written before, and not to be pictured before; neither has it any necessary
connection with the drift of the Apostles discourse, etc. For the Galathians
being Christians converted from infidelity, and not Heathens or Jews (to whom
the Cross, or death of Christ upon the Cross, seemed foolishness, 1. Cor.
1.18.) for, to forsake a thing written in the heart, and believed Athanasius is
a child of darkness, not placed at all in the works of Athanasius by your
selves: read the several impressions of this Author, at Rome, Paris, Basil,
etc. Anno 1520, 1555, 1564, 1572, 1581, 1582, 1598, 1608, and there is no such
work of his to be found: and therefore Harding, Turrian, Gretsar, and your
self abuse the world in alleading such bastardly stuff.

IESVIT.
And therefore the danger of ignorant peoples erring by Jmages, is without
reason so much insisted upon by Protestants, their English Translation being
(as I have showed) a more dangerous block for fools to stumble at, and so
fall into damnable errors. If they presume that Council. Trid. Sess. 25.
Diligenter doceant Episcopi, etc.
in this point, that ignorant people fall not into error by any Image, which
otherwise have many profits and

ANSWER.
It is possible for ignorant people, notwithstanding admonitions, to worship
Images, not thinking actually of the Prototype Petigian Sum. Theol. d. 9. q. 1.
ar. 3. Possumus siftere in adoratione Imaginis solius, absque hoc, quod
adoremus rem representatam.
: and in this case their worship is terminate in the very Image. But it is
needless for us to insist upon the matter of abuse, for if the thing it self,
to wit, adoration of Images, be Vasq. d. Ador. li. 2. disp. 4. c. 2. n. 66.
, and of the Primitive Church for certain ages, which neither worshipped
Images, and which rejected Clem. Alex. (...). Nobis est aperte vetitum artem
fallacem exercere. Non facies enim inquit Propheta, Exodus 20. (...) rei
similitudinem, etc. Iuslin. Mart. Dial. cum. Tryph. Annon Deus is erat, qui per
Mosen sanxit, ne qua omnino (...), vel Imago vel similitudo, etc. Vide Eusebius.
Eccles. Hist. li. 7. ca. 17.
.

IESVIT.
About which, J will not enlarge my self, but only mention some of them. The
first is an easy and compendious way of instruction, in which respect they are
termed by S. Gregory, The Books of the unlearned: and (as another Greg. li.
7. Ep. 109. Nissen. Orat. in Theod.
Gregory says) The silent Pictures speaks in the wall, and profits very
much.

ANSWER.
This reason, whether it be true or false, serves only to commend the
Historical use of Images; and yet some learned Papists reject this kind of
teaching, by Images and Pictures: Among which, Durand Dur. Rational. Diu. lib.
1. ca. 3. n. 4.
says, Ei autem quod dictum est, quod Imagines sunt Laicorum literae, obuiat
illud Euangelij, habent Mosen and Prophetas, The sentence of the Gospel (They
have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them) is repugnant to that which is
spoken by some, Images are laymens Books.

IESVIT.
The second, is to increase in men (that keep and honor them) the love of God,
and his Saints; which effect S. Chrysostom experienced, as he testifies,
saying, J loloued a Picture of melted wax full of Piety. And S. Chryso. Orat.
Quod noui and veteris Testamenti vnus sit Mediator. Greg. li. 7. Ep. 53.
Gregory the Great says, They inflame men that behold them in the love of
their Lord and Savior. The third is, to move and incite men to the imitation
of the virtues of Christ, and his Saints: which utility S. Basil does
declare, and highly esteem in his Sermon of the forty Martyrs. Basil. Sermon.
in 40 Martyr.
And examples might be brought of men reclaimed by sight experience. Finally,
that in his Jmage we may honor Ambrose. In which kind Ambros. Sermon. 10. in
Psalm. 119.
memorable is the devotion of our victorious and religious King Canutus, who
took the Diadem that he used to wear on his own head, and there with
crowned an Image of Christ crucified, which in his days was devoutly reserved
in the Church of S. Peter and S. Paul in Winchester;

ANSWER.
It is again to little purpose, to examine the places of the Fathers, here
produced, concerning the utility which may follow upon the visible aspect of
Pictures and Images, for all these testimonies serve only to commend
Historical use, but they prove not Adoration. Also the utility of Images,
mentioned by them,

S. Ambrose Sermon. 10. in Psalm. 118. Ambr. (...). 10. Psalm. 118. Preuosum est
(...) viru^ (...), and (...) eum secundum (...) Dei. Si vide imus in paupere
illum ad cuius (...) est, etc. Qui (...) Imperatoris, vtique illum honorat
cuius Imaginem coronat, etc.
treats of the lively Images of God, to wit, just persons, poor afflicted
people, the members of Christ; these Images he exhorts us to honor,
illustrating his Doctrine by an humane similitude, which is, He that crowns
the Image of the Emperor, honors him whose Image he crowns, etc. Then he
applies the former similitude, saying Vides quia inter multas Christi Imagines
ambulamus? Caueamus ne coronam Imagini detrahere videamur, quam (...) que
Christus imposuit.
, By honoring the lively Images of Christ, we worship Christ himself. But
speaking of dead Statues and Pictures, he adds, Gentiles lignum adorant, quia
Dei Imaginem putant, sed inuisibilis Dei Imago, non in (...) est quod videtur,
Gentiles adore wood, thinking it the Image of God, but the Image of the
invisible God, is in that which is invisible, and not in it which is seen.

As for your story of Canutus (the first Danish king reigning in England)
wherewith you close up your question of Images, you name no Author, that so we
might have examined the quality Canutus his action; and if the same happened
according to your report, yet it is not ancient, because it was a thousand
years and more after Christ Anno Dom. 1017. he began to reign.
: Neither is the consequence necessary, that because he placed his Crown upon
an Image of the Crucifixe, therefore he worshipped the Image Ambros. Orat.
Funebr. d. obit. Theodos. Inuenit ergo titulu^, regem adorauit, non lignum
vtique, quia hic gentilis est error, and vanitas impiorum: sed adorauit illum,
qui pependit in ligno, Scriptus in ligno.
: Jacob powered oil upon the top of a Pillar, Genesis 28.18. yet his Oblation was
made only to the Deity, and not to the Pillar.

Lastly, Let it be observed, that our Adversary has manifested wondrous
weakness, in this Romish Article concerning worship of Images; for he has
not throughout his whole disputation, produced one plain Text of holy
Scripture, or one clear sentence of Antiquity, proouing the necessity or
lawfulness of Iconolatrie. Wherefore I conclude, that this doctrine is
destitute of all divine authority, written or unwritten; and consequently,
that they are impostors, which impose the same as a necessary duty upon the
Church of Christ.

The Second and Third Point.
WORSHIPPING, AND Invocation of Saints, and Angels.
IESVIT.
I Have joined these two Controversies together, hoping I might do it with
your Majesty's good Opera Regia Respons. ad Ep. Card. Peron. page 402.
Saint, you would never deny that Devotion unto the Blessed Virgin, Mother of
God, whom you honor and reverence above the rest; though perchance you may
dislike

ANSWER.
ALthough it were granted, that some kind or manner of Petition, or
Compellation, made by the Church Militant to the blessed Saints, and Angels,
were lawful; and that we might request them to be Comprecants Alex. Hal. 4. q.
26. m. 2. Ar. 3. Solus Deus est simpliciter (...), etc. Sancti non simpliciter,
etc. Magis tenent se ex part Orantium, quasi adiuuantes, quam illius qui
oratur. Estius, sup. Ephesians. 3. v. 12. Cath. sanctos inuocando, tantum eos
adhibent vt comprecatores. Bucer. sup. Romans 8. Intercessio quam pridem Diuis
tribuunt Ecclesiae, non potest ex (...) statui aliud esse, quam perpetua
illorum vota, de nostra Redemptione consummanda. Quibus fidere ex se impium:
quaerere ea in certum est: affectus tamen salutis qui eo (...) sese attollit,
vt Diuorum quoque intercessionem in Christo, non prae Christo quaerit, non
excutiens quam certum sit quo feratur, damnari non debet. Et hoc reuerentiae
detulisse veterum obseruationi hac in re, quae scilicet vsu, nullo autem
Oraculo Scripturae inoleuit satis fuerit.
, and to make intercession to God in our behalf: Bellarm. d. Indulg. lib. 1.
c. 4. Non erit absurdum si sancti viri Redemptores nostri, aliquo modo, id est,
secundum aliquid non simpliciter and largo modo, and non in rigore verborum
esse dicantur. Biel, in Can. Miss. Lect. 30. K. Non frustra imploramus Sanctos
quos non vt Creatores gratiae sieve Beatificatores inuocamus: sed vt mediatores,
, and confidence in their merits, and adoring their Images, cannot be
justified: for this manner of Devotion has no foundation express or infolded
in Divine Revelation, and the Primitive Church did not appoint or practice the
same: And it encroacheth so nearly upon the Office of Christ, our sole
Redcemer, Epiphan. Haeres. 59. Graece Latinae, 79. Etenim qua nam in Scripturae
part continetur? Quis vnquam Prophetarum, etc. Ambros. d. Sacram. Incarn. c.
9. Quod Legi non nego imo libenter vsurpo, quod non Legi vsurpare non debeo.
Athanas. d. Incarn. Christi. Neque loqui neque audire sustinemus, quod
extraneum sit ab istis (Scripturis.) Cyril. Hierosol. Chat. 4. Mihi ne credas
loquenti, nisi eorum quae praedicantur demonstrationes e Diuinis (...)
acceperis.
, we may not esteem it lawful.

The Doctrine of our Church, concerning Invocation and Adoration of the blessed
Trinity; our access to God, by Supplications and Prayers, in the name of
Jesus Christ; our dependence upon the sole Merits and Satisfactions of our
allsufficient Redeemer, and Savior, have Precept, Example, Ioh. 14. 13, 14.
and cap. 16.24. 1. Ioh. 2.1. Heb. 4. 15, 16. 1. Pet. 2.5. Heb. 13.15. Also we
have certainetie of Faith, That Christ Jesus, our Intercessor and Advocate,
has distinct and perfect knowledge, particular and general of our quality,
state and actions. Heb. Romans 8.34. Heb. 7. 25. He inuiteth us most lovingly to
come unto him, Math. 11.28. Our heavenly Father always hears him, John 11.
42. His compassion toward us exceeds the piety of any creature, Ioh. 10.
11. and 15. 13. Heb. 4, 15. August. Confess. lib. 10. ca. 43. Quomodo nos
amasti pater bone, qui (...) tuo vnico non pepercisti, sed pro nobis impijs
tradidisti (...)? quomodo nos amasti, pro quibus ille (...) non rapinam
arbitratus est esse equalis tibi, factus est subditus, vsque ad mortem crucis:
vnus ille in mortuis liber, potestatem habens ponendi animam suam, and
potestatem habens iterum sumendi (...) pro nobis tibi victor and victima, and
ideo victor quia victima: pro nobis tibi sacerdos and (...), and ideo sacerdos
quia sacrificium, faciens tibi nos de seruis filios, de te nascendo, nobis
seruiendo, merito mihi spcs valida in illo est, quod sanabis omnes languores
meos, per eum qui scdet ad dexteram tuam, and te interpellat pro nobis alioquin
desperarem.
We may more safely, and with greater comfort, speak to our Savior, than to
any Saint or Angel Aug. li. 2. d. visit. Infir. Tutius and iucundius loquor ad
meum Iesum, quam ad aliquem sanctorum Spirituum.
; the holy Spirit helps our infirmities, and teaches us to make intercession
according to the will of God Aug. epist. 105. and sup. Psalm. 118. Conc. 14.
Greg. Mor. lib. 2. c. 30.
. Romans 8.26, 27. Therefore our praying to God in the name of Christ only, our
supplication to the Father, to accept us for Tim. 2.13. Tit. 1. 2.

But on the contrary, Romish invocation, directed to Saints, Angels, and the
blessed Virgin; their oblation of the merits and satisfaction of creatures,
with many other branches of their holy seeming devotion, have neither precept,
example, or promise in the large book of God, (notwithstanding the same book
is most abundant in teaching the duty and form of prayer.) And some of our
best learned Adversaries confess, that the doctrine of invocation of Saints,
is neither expressly, nor infoldedly taught in holy Scripture Dom. Bannes. 22.
q. 1. ar. 10. page
.

Therefore his most excellent Majesty, our Sovereign Lord and King, to whose
sacred person the Jesuit directs his former speech, may with unspeakable joy
and comfort, glory that he is in this article, a defender and propugner of
that faith which is taught from heaven by the holy Ghost: and Papisticall
invocation is no plant growing in the Paradise (...). c. Haer. li. 5. c. 20. Ab
omni ligno paradisi escas manducabis (...), id est ab (...) Dominica manducate.
of holy Scripture, by their own confession, neither have they any means
infallible, to ascertaine themselves and others, that the same is a plant which
the heavenly Father has planted, or that Hilar. d. Trin. li. 8. Quae dicimus
nisi ab (...) discimus stulte dicimus.
.

IESVIT.
In which question I will suppose without large and particular proof (being
able to prove it by testimonies undeniable, if need be) That worship and
invocation of Saints, has been generally received in the whole Christian
Church, at least ever since the days of Constantine. A thing so clear, that
Chemnitius does write in this sort; Chemnitius Exam. Conc. Trid. part. 2. pa.
10 1. Nazian. Or. 18. in S. Cypr. Nissen. Or in S. Theodor. Basil. (...). 20.
in 40. Mart. Theod. de Graecorum. Affect. l. 8. Ambr. li. de viduis. Hierom. in
vit. Hilar. and aduet. Vigilant. c. 3. Aug. li. 6. (...). Donat. c. 1. Serauia
in Defenstract. de Diverse. pa. 389. Fulke in his Answ. to a counterfeit. pa.
46. Magdeburg. Centur. 3. c. 4. Col. 83. Iren. li. 5. aduers. Haer.
Most of the Fathers, as Nazianzen, Nissen, Basil, Theodoret, Ambrose,
Hierome, Austin, etc. did not dispute, Aerius and Vigilantius, as is confessed:
I may further conclude, that that custom did not Non obscura vestigia
Inuocationis Sanctorum, as appears by the testimony of Saint Ireneus,
tearming the (...) Virgin the advocate of Eve, that is of her children.

ANSWER.
Fisher. Being able to prove it by testimonies, undeniable.
You presuppose that, which (notwithstanding your facing) you will never be
able to prove, to wit, That innocation of Saints, (according to the doctrine
and practice of the late Roman Church) has been generally, and universally
received as an article of faith or necessary duty, ever since the days of
Constantine: neither has Chemnitius whom you allege, affirmed this, but
rather said the contrary. First, he says Chemitius Exam. Trid. Conc pa. 3.
pa. 195. In primitiua Ecclesia, (...) ad annos (...) post Christum natum, (...)
de (...) patrocinijs, (...), meritis open, auxilio, and inuocatione Sanctorum in
coelis, (...) fuit: and (...) fuit sicut oftendimus, ratio venerationis
Sanctorum, quam quae postea inuecta est.
, That in the Primitive Church, until two hundred years after Christ, this
doctrine and practice was utterly unknown. Secondly, he affirms, that about
the year 240. some seeds Origin Idem. Illis (...), and ab illo authore circa
annum Domini 240. Spargi caeperunt, Seminaria inuocationis Sanctorum.
.

Thirdly, He says expressly Jbid. per annos a nato Christo 350. and amplius,
Ecclesia Inuocationem Sanctorum in publica praxi Ignorauit.
, that for three hundred and fifty years and upward, the public practice of
Invocation was unknown in the Church: And then about the year 370, it began
to be spoken of in public assemblies, by Basil, Nyssen, and Nazianzen, upon
occasion of their Panegyricall Orations Ibid. Tandem circa annum Domini 370.
per Basilium, (...), and Nazianzenum, in publicos Ecclesiae conuentus occasion
Orationum Panegyricarum inuehi caepit eodem tempore cum ab ijsdem authoribus
Monachatus ex AEgypto and Syria in Graeciam introduceretur.
.

h Ibid. Atque hactenus Inuocatio Sanctorum, in priuatis preculis regnauit,
(...) vero hic Gregorius apud Latinos in public as Ecclesiae supplicationes
quas Graeco vocabulo (...) vocant, primus intrusisse scribitur. Apud Graecos
enim Petrus Gnapheus idem antea tentauit sicut supra notauimus.
Fourthly, He adds, Ibid. Considerandum autem est in Historia illorum
temporu^ quod non vbique and ab omnibus, pro certis, veris, and Catholicis
dogmatibus receptae fuerint Panegyricae illo declamationes.
That notwithstanding these Orations, it was not generally and universally
received in those Ibid. Quia vero Catholicum hoc est sicut Lyrinensis non male
definit quod semper, quod vbique and ab omnibus fidelibus, ex Scriptura
constanter receptum fuit, addenda est and haec obseruatio, quod non dubitatu^
tantum de Inuocatione Sanctorum fuit istis temporibus, cum ex priuatis vulgi
and muliercularum deuotionibus in Ecclesiam inciperet introduci: sed diserte
and quidem magno zelo reprehensa, and in Catalogum haereseon relata fuit ab
Epiphanio, quiijsdem firm temporibus vixit.
: and about the 400. year, Saint Chrysostom interposed, and labored to
reduce people to the ancient form of Invocation Ibid. Cumque illis temporibus,
(...) Sanctorum quidam assererent, quidam reprehenderent, quidam vero de ea
dubitarent, non inutilis erit obseruatio quomodo Chrysostomus suam sententiam
inter posuerit.
. And proceeding in his Historical Narration, he shows out of Nicephorus,
lib. 15. cap. 28. that Petrus Gnapheus Ibid. Et memorabile est, ac ad perpetuam
rei memoriam dignu^ obseruatione, quod Petrus (...), qui in quinta universally
Synodo, vt Haereticus damnatus fuit, primus Author and inuentor fuit miscendae
Inuocationis Sanctorum, inter publicas Ecclesiae preces. Nicephorus l. 15.
, Anno 470 (condemned by the first universal Synod, of Heresy) was the first
Author among the Grecians, of mixing intercessions to the Virgin Marie with
divine Prayers. He affirms also, that in Saint Augustines days Ibid. pa.
212.
, Invocation of Saints was not used in the common Service of the West Gregory
the first.

Lastly, the form and manner of Saintly Invocation, in the 600 year, differed
extremely from that which was used by Papals in latter times: and this is
confirmed by Chemnitius Ib. From the page 145. unto page 173. O Francisce lux
solaris, (...) singularis iam cum Christo gloriaris, in choro caelestium. Tu
sis nobis vitae via, tu pro nobis semper pia. Prode Christo stygmata, etc.
Item. Salve imperatrix gloriosissima peccatricis animae meae spes tutissima
Deigenetrix Virgo Maria. Tu post Deu^ praecipuu^ and maximum es refugium and
gaudium. Item. O Sancta Maria, and omnes sancti and electi Dei, nunc and in
hora mortis meae, mihi misero succurite, and Dominum Deum nostrum, vestris
meritis and precibus mihi propicium facite. Item. Sancta Maria, perpetua Virgo
virginum, matter misericordiae, matter gratiae, spes omniu^ desolatoru^,
consolatrix omnium desperantium: O miseratrix miserorum, dulcis consolatio
afflictorum, ac matter misericordiarum, desolatoru^ pijssima consolatrix, and in
omni necessitate pupilloru^ promota nutrix: Exaudi praeces meas, and quia in
diuersis malis and angustijs, propter peccata mea positus sum, (...) ad quem
fugiam, nisi ad te Dominam meam, etc.
, setting down verbatim, many Collects and forms of devotion, used in latter
days, which were anciently unheard of.

Secondly, The Fathers which you cite in your Margin, to Constantine, are
Gregory Nyssen, St. Basil, Theodorit, St. Ambrose, St. Hierom, and St.
Augustine: but having perused the places, I find not that these Fathers either
delivered this Doctrine, as matter of Catholic Faith, or affirm the Practice
thereof to have been necessary and universal; or that they spoke of such
Worship and Invocation of Saints, as is practiced in the service of your
Church. But as places may be noted in some Fathers, touching invocation of
Saints deceased; or which argue, that Theoderit upon the Colossians Theod. sup.
Col. 2. Synodus quae conuenit Laodiceae, quae est Phrygiae metropolis, lege
prohibuit, ne precarentur Angelos: and in hodiernum vsque diem, licet videre
apud illos, and eorum finitimos, oratoria sancti Michaelis. Illi ergo hoc
consulebant vtique humilitate vtentes, dicentes, vniuersoru^ Deum, nec cerni,
nec comprehendi, nec ad (...) posse perueniri and oportere per Angelos diuinam
sibi beneuolentiam conciliare.
, cap. 2. condemns worshipping and Invocation of Angels. St. Ambrose says,
Ambr. d. obit. Theodos. Id. d. Interpellat. l. 3. c. 12. Tu portio mea es,
abundas mihi ad omnia, nihil quaesiui aliunde, nisi vt te partem haberem nulli
me caelesti vt Gentiles, subdidi Creaturae. Hieron. in. Proverb. cap. 2.
Tu solus Dominus inuocandus es, etc. Thou Lord only art to be inuocated. St.
Hierom, Nullum inuocare, id est, in nos orando vocare nisi Deum debemus: Hier.
ad Heliodor. Ep. 3. c. 1. Quicquid dixero quia ille non audit mutum videtur.
Ib. c. 10. Foelix Nepotianus qui haec non videt haec non audit.
Whatsoever I shall utter seems dumb, because he (Nepotian) being defunct,
hears me not. St. Augustine, Non sit nobis Religio cultus hominum mortuorum:
Let not the worship of persons defunct be our Religion. Saint Athanasius,
Athanas. c. Arrian. Orat. 4. Origin. c. Celsum. l. 8. p. 523. Solus adorandus
est Deus optimus maximus: Soli praeces offerendae vnigenito Dei verbo,
primogenito craturae totius: Qui vt Pontifex eas ad Deum suum, and nostrum
perferat, and Patrem suum, atque omnium iuxta verbum eius viuentium.
Nunguam quispiam precaretur aliquid accipere a Patre and Angelis, vel ab vllis
rebus creatis: No man would ever pray to receive any (...) from the Father, and
from the Angels, or from any other creature.

Thirdly, That which the Jesuit affirms concerning Aerius and Vigilantius, is
false: for neither of these is ranked among Heretics, by Philastrius,
Epiphanius, St. Augustine, or by any of the ancient Fathers, because they
denied Invocation of Prateolus himself, makes not this doctrine any of Aerius
his errors; and treating of Vigilantius, he produces only Lindanus and
Hosius (two most partial Pontificians) affirming him to have been condemned
of heresy for Epiphan. Haeres. 77. Aug. d. Haer. haeres. 53.
this cause. Wherefore our Adversary proves himself a weak Antiquarie,
when he affirms that Aerius and Vigilantius,

Fourthly, The Magdeburgians, which in the third Centurie observe, Non obscura
vestigia, etc, some not very obscure traces, or footsteps, in the writings of
the Doctors of this age, concerning Invocation of Saints, speak of the least
degree and kind of Invocation, to wit, Compellation; and besides, they probably
suspect, that suppositious Sentences have been inserted into the Books of
ancient Fathers Cent. 4. c. 4. 297. Hinc apparet, malignum spiritum tantorum
virorum Scriptis plurima inseruisse, etc. Sicut autem supra monuimus, apparet
.

Lastly, Ireneus Iren. li. 5. c. 19. Manifest itaque in sua propria veniente
Domino, and sua propria cum baiulante condition, quae baiulatur ab ipso, and
recapitulationem eius quae in ligno fuit inobedientiae, per eam quae in ligno
est inobedientiam faciente, and seductione illa (...), qua seducta est male
illa quae iam viro destinata erat: virgo Eua per veritatem Euangelizata est
been ab Angelo iam sub viro virgo Maria. Quemadmodum enim illa per Angelicum
Sermonem seducta est, vt effugeret Deum praeuaricata verbum eius, ita and haec
per Angelicum (...) Euangelizata est, vt portaret Deum, obediens eius verbo. Et
sicut illa seducta est vt effugeret Doum, fic haec suasa est obedire Deo, vti
virginis Euae, (...) Maria, fieret Aduocata.
styles the Virgin Marie, The Advocate of Euah, not in regard of her
Intercession for Euah and her children, after her decease and departure out of
the world; but because of that which she performed, in believing and obeying
the heavenly message which the Angel Gabriel brought unto her, Luke 1.38. for
hereby she became a blessed Instrument of conceiving and bearing Christ Jesus,
and by this obedience the blessed seed was brought into the world, by her,
whereby the fall of Euah and her children was repaired. And thus she was In
Graeco textu proculdubio, fuit nomen (...), quod and Aduocatam and consolatorem
significat, vt sit sensus. Quemad. Eua generi humano fuit in exitium, ita B.
Virginem eidem fuisse in solatium, quatenus Christum omnis solatij (...)
Virginali suo vtero concepit. Vide Gallas. Not. in Iren. pa. 399.
Euah and her children, by bearing Christ; and not because she was inuocated,
as a Mediator, after her death by Euahs children.

IESVIT.
Neither can Protestants deny this to have been the Doctrine of the Fathers,
but seek to discredit them, as if they had been various, uncertain,
contradictorious in this point. Magdeburg. Cent. 4. cap. 4.
But seeing Antiquity, that has perused their works now more than 1300
years, never noted such contradictions in them, Christian wisdom and
charity will never be so persuaded

ANSWER.
Protestants maintain, that invocation of Saints can be no Article of Faith,
although it were manifest, that some Fathers living since, or before the days
of Constantine, had believed or practiced the same; for every Article of
Christian Faith must be grounded upon divine Revelation Aquin. Com. sup. Ioh.
21. Lect. 6. Notandum autem quod cum multi scriberent de Canonica veritate,
haec est differentia, quod illi qui scripserunt canonicam Scripturam sicut
Euangelistae and Apostoli and alij huiusmodi, ita constanter eam asserunt quod
nihil dubitandum Aug. ep. 48. Audi dicit Dominus, non dicit Rogatus, aut
Donatus, aut Vincentius, aut Hilar. aut Ambros. aut August. sed dicit Dominus.
Id. d. unit. Eccles. cap. 5. Sunt certilibri Dominici, quorum authoritati
vtrique consentimus, vtrique credimus, vtrique seruimus, ibi quaeramus
Ecclesiam, ibi discutiamus causam nostram. Id. contr. Max. Arian. lib 3. cap.
13. Nec ego Nicaenum, nec tu debes Arimense tanquam praeiudicaturus proferre
Concilium, nec ego huius authoritate, nec tu illius detineris. Scripturarum
authoritatious non quorumcunque proprijs, sed vtrisque communibus testibus, res
cum re, causa cum causa, ratio cum ratione concertet, vtrique tanti ponderis
molibus cedamus.
.

But all opinions of the Fathers, are not divine Revelation, and the holy
Fathers do not challenge to themselves infallibility of judgment, neither do
our Adversaries yield the same unto them Canis. d. Maria. Deip. lib. 1. cap. 5.
Maldon. in Ioh. ca. 2. v. 4. Inter veteres Auctores paucos admodum inuenio qui
non aut aperte dieunt, aut obscure significent, aliquam culpam aut errorem
certe fuisse quod filium ad faciendum miraculum in citauerit, si non ob aliud,
certe quia (...) and ante tempus id fecit. Can. loc. lib. 7. cap. 3. Alia
claritas Mathei, alia Hieronimi, alia Esaiae, alia Ambrosij, atque auctores
Canonici vt superni coelestes (...) perpetuam stabilemque constantiam servant,
reliqui vero Scriptores sancti inferiores and humani sunt, deficiuntque
interdum, ac monstrum quandoque pariunt praeter conuenientem ordinem
institutumque naturae.
.

Therefore a surer foundation must be laid to prove Adoration, and Invocation
of Saints to be a necessary duty, than a

Nevertheless, Protestants are able to give satisfaction concerning the
judgment of Antiquity in this point. And we have proved that the eldest
Fathers for those ages, in which Egesippus says, The Church continued a Virgin
Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. li. 3. ca. 28.
, taught no such Doctrine.

Secondly, no general Council, nor yet any particular Council confirmed by a
general, did ever authorize or decree invocation of Saints, as it is now
maintained by Papals, to have been a necessary duty or practice.

Thirdly, there be sundry Principles and other passages in the Books of the
Fathers, by which this doctrine may be confuted.

IESVIT.
For all they say in this kind is reduced to these five heads: First, That
Saints are not inuocated Romans 10. cap. 14. Ambros. d. Obitu. Theodos.
by Faith, as authors of the benefits we crave.

ANSWER.
Our Adversary has collected five Expositions to elude such testimonies as we
produce out of antiquity. First, whereas Tertul. d. Trin. ca. 14. Si homo
tantummodo (...), quomodo adest vbique inuocatus, cu haec hominis natura non
sit, sed Dei, vt adesse omni loco possit? Si homo tantummodo (...), cur homo in
orationibus Mediator inuocatur? cum inuocatio hominis ad praestandum salutem
inefficax iudicetur. Si homo tantummodo Chtistus, cur spes in illum ponitur?
cum spes in homine maledicta referatur. Basil. d. Spir. Sanct. c. 22. Spiritum
sanctum esse (...) Deum probat ex eo, quia piorum praeces vbique locorum
exaudit. Orig. in Epist. ad Romans ca. 10. Si inuocare Domini nomen, and adorare
Deum, vnum atque idem est, sicut inuocatur Christus and adorandus est Christus,
and sicut (...) Deo patri primo omnium orationes, ita and Domino Jesus Christo:
and sicut offerrimus postulationes Patri, ita offerrimus postulationes and
Filio. Et sicut offerrimus (...) actiones Deo, ita gratias offerrimus Saluatori.
. The Jesuit tells us, that the Fathers intend only, that we may not invoke
creatures by faith, as authors of the benefits we crave. But if this gloss or
solution be sufficient, then the Argument of the Fathers concludes not against
the Arians, that Christ is God, because he is inuocated Athanas. c. Arian.
Orat. 2. in fine. Sanctos non a Creato postulare, vt auxiliator sit, etc.
, for

IESVIT.
Seconly, that Angels are not to be honored Origin. li. 5. contr. Celsum. and
li. 8. circa finem.
as Gods, nor by sacrifices in the Heathenish manner.

ANSWER.
This answer is insufficient; for the Fathers, not only when

IESVIT.
Thirdly, the Priest does not invoke Saints by direct prayer in the Liturgy
of the Mass, which being a Sacrifice, the devotion thereof is to be directed
Aug. lib. 22. d. Ciuit. c. 10. Conc. Carthag. 3. cap. 23.
to God only.

ANSWER.
Papists invoke Saints in the Liturgy of their Mass, which the Ancients did
not Aug. d. Ciuit. Dei, li. 22. ca. 10. Ad quod Sacrificium, sicut homines Dei,
qui mundum in eius confessione vicerunt, suo loco and ordine nomina^tur, non
tame a Sacerdote qui sacrificat inuocantur.
: and the Jesuit perceiving this, endeauoreth Augustines words exclude all
invocation of Saints, both direct and indirect in the administration of the
Eucharist, saying, At which sacrifice the Martyrs are named in their place and
order, as men of God, which have overcome the world in the confession of him:
but yet notwithstanding, they are not inuocated by the Priest which
sacrifices. S. Augustine in these words, says expressly, That Martyrs were
named at the Communion Table, but not inuocated.

IESVIT.
Fourthly, that the deceased do not know what is done in this world, to wit, by
their natural August. li. d. Cura pro mortuis, ca. 16.
forces.

ANSWER.
Neither did they hold as an infallible truth, that the Saints deceased, do
understand by revelation, the affairs and qualities of the living, but say
only that the same is possible Aug. de Cur. pro Mort. c. 15. Possunt etiam
spiritus mortuorum aliqua quae hic aguntur, quae (...) est cos nosse, and quae
necessariu^ non est cos non nosse, non solum (...) vel praesentia, verum (...)
futura spiritu Dei reuelante cognoscere.
. And S. Augustine dares not define, whether the Martyrs hear our Ib. c. 16.
Quanquam ista question vires intelligentiae meae vincat, etc. Res haec est
altior quam vt a me possit attingi, etc. Definere non audio. Ib. An ipsi in
locis suo merito (...) ab omni mortalium conuersatione remotis, and tamen
generalister orantibus, sicut nos oramus pro mortuis, quibus vtique non
praesentamur, nec vbi sint, vel quid agant scimus.
. And S. Hieroms place, alleged formerly, is general.

IESVIT.
Fifthly, speaking unto some deceased persons, they make an If Naz. Or. 3. in
Julian.
, whether they hear them, because they speak unto such as they know not
certainly to be Saints, as may

ANSWER.
They knew they were Saints upon better grounds than Papists know Thomas
Becket, Dominicke, Francis, Ignatius Loiola, Christopher, George, Catherine,
etc. to be Saints. And did they not reckon Constantine to be in joy and glory
with Christ? yet Greg. Naz. Or. 1. (...) Julian.
Greg. Nazianzene using an Apostrophe to him, says: (...), Constantine, if
thou have any sense or notion of these things. And if holy persons deceased,
are not known to be Saints, until they be canonized by Popes, the ancient
Fathers could not invoke Saints by Faith, because the canonizing of Saints by
Popes is of a latter hatch Bellar. d. sanct. Beatit. li. 1. ca. 8. Primus
Pontifex qui Sanctos legatur canonizasse videtur fuisse, Leo Papa, 3.
, and being a matter of fact, some Papists Glossa. c. 1. d. Reliq. and ven.
Sanctorum in Sexto. In verb. sedis Apostolicae. Aug. Triumph. d. Pot. Eccles.
q. 14. ar. 4. Canus. loc. li. 5. cap. 5. In canonizatione Sactorum, fidem
Ecclesiae detrahere, sine
question the Popes Judgment, whether it be infallible or not, in canonizing
of Saints.

IESVIT.
This Truth supposed, I cannot but conceive Hope, that your Majesty professing
so much love of the first Primitive ages, may receive satisfaction about this
custom, the causes of Protestants dislike being weak, and not to be opposed

ANSWER.
The foundation of your structure is dubious, and in it self over weak, to
carry your heavy vast roof. For custom and long continued practice of men,
in civil affairs, may be of force Tertul. d. Cor. Mil. c. 4. Consuctudo in
ciuilibus (...) pro lege suscipitur.
; but in matters of Faith, although it may sometimes It is not just, says S.
Basil Basil. cp. 80. Non, est iustum consuetudinem legem ac regulam sacere
rectae Doctrinae. Scriptura (...) inspirata Iudex (...).
, to make custom a law, and rule of right Doctrine, the holy Scripture given
by divine inspiration, must be And Saint Cyprian Cyprian. Epist. 63. Neque
hominis consuetudinem sequi oportet, sed Dei veritatem: cum per Isaiam Deus
loquatur and dicat, sine causa autem colunt me, mandata and doctrinas hominum
docentes. Hier. in Ierem. ca. 9. Nec parentum nec Maiorum sequendus est error,
sed authoritas Seripturarum ac Dei docentis imperium. Clem. Alex. (...). At
inquitis, non est fas nobis euertere consuetudinem traditam a patribus, etc.
Mala consuetudo post excessum ex hac vita, vanam poenitentiam affert cum
supplicio. Ib. Fugiamus ergo consuetudinem, fugiamus tanquam scopulum
difficilem, aut charibdis minas: suffocat homines a veritate auertit, abducit a
vita, est barathrum, est malum ventilabrum consuetudo.


IESVIT.. 4. Invocation of Saints not to be disliked, because not expressed in
Scripture.
ANd first J must satisfy the transcendentall cause of Luther. Sermon. d. Cruce:
sine expresso Dei mandato.
any learned Protestant: for howsoever in the beginning of their separation,
they did cry for express Scripture, express Wotton, in his Trial. D. John
White in his Defense. p. 288.
time broachers of such an absurdity; wherefore in their written Books (what
they teach in Pulpits I know not) they disclaim from express Scripture, and
think it a sufficient D. Field of the Church. lib. 4.
warrant of a Christan Custom, that the same be grounded on Scripture, that
is, may be deduced by good Custom that has not warrant in Gods word, as we
are

ANSWER.
One principal argument which Protestants make against invocation of Saints,
is, that this service and devotion, has no foundation in the holy Scripture
Chrysostom. in Genesis Hom. 13. Non credere hijs, quae in Diuina scriptura continentur,
sed alia quaedam ex propria sententia in far, (...) periculi (...) qui talia
audiunt. Gregor. mor. li. 18. c. 14. Si vere loqui desiderant inde sumere
debent Aug. d. Trinit. li. 3. c. 11. Extat authoritas diuinatum scripturarum
vnde men's nostra deuiare non debet. Cyril. chat. 4. mihi ne credas loquenti,
nisi (...) quae praedicantur demonstrationes e diuinis scripturis accepetis.
.

To this the Jesuit an swereth. First, It is unworthy the erudition of any
learned Protestant, etc. But that which was worthy in the Fathers, cannot be
unworthy in us. Epiphanius argues in this manner Epiph. c. Collirid Haer. 59.
sieve 79.
. (...), What Scripture did ever require this? Which of the Prophets did ever
permit a man, much less any woman to be adored. S. Hierome Hier. c. Heluid.
vt haec quae scripta sunt non negamus, ita (...) quae no^ sunt scripta
renuimus: Natum Deum esse de virgin credemus, quia legimus, Mariam nupsisse
post partum non credimus, quia non legimus.
, As we deny nothing that is written, so we refuse things which are unwritten:
we believe God to have been borne of a Virgin, because we read it: we believe
not Mary, to have lived a wedded woman after her childbirth, because we do not
read this. S. Ambrose, How can we use those things which we find not in holy
Scripture Ambros. quae in Scripturis sanctis non reperimus ea
? A learned Papist says Discip. d. Temp. Sermon. 23. c Bernhard. (...) Christum
mendicasse.
: Because it is not read in Scripture, That Christ during the time of his
preaching, was a Mendicant, therefore it follows, that he did not beg. The
sequel (says the Author) is good: Quia in sacra Scriptura, tenet locus ab
authoritate negative, because in holy Scripiure, the argument which concludes
negatiuely from authority, is of force.

Secondly, the Jesuit adds, that Protestants are varied from their first
doctrine concerning express Scripture, etc. But he must not rank men
exorbitant, such as are headie opposers, and rigide exceptors against
Ecclesiastical government and ceremonies, in the number of well advised
Protestants. Those men indeed have forged in their own brains an axiom to
serve their own turn, to wit, That Christians must duty immediately
commanded by God, which is expressly or

Secondly, outward ceremonies and things adiaphorous have general warrant in
the Scripture in the doctrine of Christian liberty, and in the doctrine of the
authority of the Church. And concerning things adiaphorous, it is sufficient
to make them lawful, that they are consonant unto the general rules and
principles of Scripture Aug. Ep. 118. Quod neque contra fidem, neque contra
bonos mores iniungitur, indifferenter est habendum, and pro (...) inter quos
viuitur societate seruandum est.
. But the Romish doctrine of invocation of Saints, and offering their merits
unto God, Gabriel. in Can. Miss. lect. 30. Non frustra imploramus sanctos, quos
non vt Creatores gratiae, sieve beatificatores inuocamus: sed vt mediatores,
quorum meritis and intuitu, nobis Deus confert, quae ex nostris accipere minus
digni sumus.
etc. are imposed by them as matters of faith, and as a service immediately
appointed by Christ and his Apostles; and they which Salmeron. Sup. 1. Tim. 2.
Disp. 7. Ex quo videtur, quod oration fusa per Sanctos, melior sit, quia secum
continet duplicem actum. Ecclesia quae Christi spiritum habet, frequentissime
per sanctos recurrit ad Deum, rarius per se ad Deum accedit. Biel. in. Can.
Miss. lect. 30. Peccatoribus singularis est consolatio, quod ad sanctorum
inuocationem, quandoque magis animantur quam iudicis.


IESVIT.
This only we require, that ignorant people be not Judges of such inferences;
an office so far above their capacities, as I am persuaded no unlearned man
that has in him any spark of humility, or any mediocritie of Judgment, will
undertake it: for no man is competent to judge assuredly of arguments by
deduction from Scripture, (...) omnes ge^tes, etc. and ecce ego vobiscum sum,
etc. Math. 28.20. Ioh. 14. 16. c. 16.13.
the same to definitions of authority: which besides skill

ANSWER.
We are far from appointing ignorant persons to be Judges of that, which
exceeds their model and skill Greg. Naz. orat. 1. Non cuiusuis est doctrinam
de Deo (...), etc. Sicutd ebiles oculos in solis radios conuerti peticulo non
(...), etc.
, 1. Cor. 12. 29. and the tractation of matters, obscure and difficile, must be
referred to the iuditious and learned Aug. sup. Psalm. 103. Quicunque infirmi
non possunt ascendere in hoc coelum, id est ad intellectu^ scripturarum per
nubes ascendunt. Greg. mor. li. 16. c. 24. Quasi quidam in Ecclesia Senatores
sunt viri doctiores.
. But the promise of Christ to assist his Ministers, in teaching and governing
their flock, belongs to other Pastors, as well as to the Roman Bishop and
his associates; to whom we may say as S. Hierome Hier. ad Pammach. An tu solus
Ecclesia es, and qui te (...) a Christo excluditur, tibi soli licet Ecclesiae
iura calcare, tu quicquid feceris norma doctrinae est?
Are you alone the Church, and is every one excluded from Christ, which
offends you? may you betrample the right of the Church, and yet whatsoever
you do, it must be a rule of Doctrine?

IESVIT.
Wherefore if Protestants will bind us to bring express Chemnitius vbi supra.
Fathers of the fourth age confessedly consenting with us) we bring more clear
warrant from scripture, than they can bring for the before mentioned
observation, of them religiously

ANSWER.
If you will maintain Invocation of Saints, as a matter of faith, or
necessary duty, appointed immediately by God, you must confirm the same,
either by express Scripture, or by arguments out of the Scripture, orby some
other revelation which is infallibly divine, besides the Scripture Aquin. p. 1.
q. 1. ar. 8. Innititur fides nostra, Reuelationi Apostolis and Prophetis
factae, qui canonicos libros scripserunt, non aute^ Reuelationi si qua fuit
aliis doctoribus facta.
. But if you urge the same, only as a thing adiaphorous, it is sufficient to
make the practice lawful, if it be not repugnant

The instances which you present unto us, of infants Baptism, keeping Sunday
in liew of the legal Sabboath, and the figne of the Cross in Baptism,
arguing from them, that some things are of necessary observation, and
practiced by our selves without express Scripture to warrant them, are
answered as before.

First, baptinng of infants is deduced evidently from the Bellarmin. d. Bapt.
li. 1. c. 9. Colligitur satis aperte ex scriptura. Ibid. Deducitur euidenter ex
Scripturis.
.

Secondly, there is express mention of the Lords day, and of the religious
observing thereof in the text of the new Testament, Act. 20.7. 1. Cor. 16.2.
And the Primitive Church Ignat. Epist. ad Magnes. Just. Mart. Apolog. 2. Orig.
in Exodus Hom. 7. (...). Sermon. 61
immediately succeeding the Apostles, testifies expressly, the observation of
this day, to have been grounded upon Apostolical institution. But Romish
invocation of Saints, wants the former of these, totally, and Papists can
hardly name

Thirdly, the sign of the Cross in Baptism, is an ancient ceremony, but yet
adiaphorous, and therefore express Scripture is not necessary to warrant the
use of it. But your invocation of Saints and Image worship, are made matters of
faith, and for the practice, so inviolable, that the living Saints and Images
of God, must be destroyed and consumed in the topheth of your inquisition, if
they will not bend and bow the knee according

IESVIT. 2.
THe second cause why Protestants dislike praying to

Therefore we cannot teach that they hear our Petitions, without attributing to
them knowledge proper to God. To this exception, answer is made, That
knowledge proper to God is of two kinds, the one so proper, as it is altogether
incommnnicable with any creature; and such is the comprehension of his divine
essence. The second is proper so, that naturally creatures are not capeable
thereof, yet the same may be imparted unto them by supernatural light,
Prosper, Nothing is so secret, De vita contemplat. l. 5. c. 4.
as the knowledge thereof may be denied unto the perfectly Blessed, their
seeing God with pure understanding, Prosper, whose Argument does convince, That
Saints may know what is done in the world, and also the secrets of hearts. For
to see the whole world, and Momentum staterae and guttaroris antelucani: but
the Saints of God (according Sap. 11.23.
to Christian Faith) have an elevated understanding, able to behold clearly
and distinctly the Divine essence, with the infinite beauties and perfections
thereof: How

ANSWER.
If it be not certain, either by Divine Revelation, or by other infallible
demonstration, That the blessed Saints deceased, Hug. Vict. in Epist. ad Romans
q. 228. Queritur an sancti, quorum patrocinia postulamus, pro nobis
interpellent? Resp. Sanctos pro nobis interpellare, non est aliud quam Deum pro
meritis eorum bonos affectus quos habemus in eos propter Deum remunerare: and
ideo nihil interest, sieve nos audiant, five non. Ibid. lib. 2. d. Sacram. p.
16. c. vltimo.
, then it is a vain thing to pray unto them, by the confession of many of our
Adversaries Suar. d. Relig. to. 2. li. 1. c. 10. d. Orat. Si non cognoscunt
nostras Orationes, videtur (...) and superuacaneum, orare ad ipsas Molina. in
1. p. Tho. q. 12. ar. 8. disp. 6. Quod si Ecclesia non supponeret, nostras
Orationes ab eis videri atque audiri, prius oraret Deum, vteas illis reuelaret,
deinde suas ad Beatos preces funderet. Lorca. d. Beatitud. Disp. 25. Perfectio
Beatitudinis non attenditur ex cognitione existentium quae Beatus in verbo
videt, quae non videntur ex vi visionis, neque ex maiori penetratione
essentiae, sed ostendente Deo pro suo been placito.
: but it is not certain, either by Divine Revelation, or by any other
infallible demonstration, That the souls of the blessed Saints deceased, hear
and understand our Prayers, and behold the secret thoughts and intention of the
heart.

First, This degree of knowledge is appropriated to God himself Hieron. sup.
Math. c. 9. Chrysostom. in Matthew. Hom. 30. and sup. John. Hom. 23. Cyril. in Ioh.
lib. 2. cap. 19. August. in Psalm. 7. and in Psalm. 33.
, 1. Kings 8.39. 2. Chro. 6.30. Romans 8.27. Ier. 17.10. Heb. 4.13. 1. Cor.
14.25. Job 34.21, 22. Psalm. 11.4. Pro. 15.3. 1. Cor. 1. 11.

Secondly, That he communicates the same (at leastwise

Thirdly, The Jesuits Argument, to wit, The glorious Saints behold the Divine
essence, immense and incomprehensible, with the infinite beauty and
perfections thereof, face to face, 1. Cor. 13. 12. 1. John 3.2. Ergo, They
behold the secrets of men's hearts living on earth, is denied; for glorious
Saints behold the Divine essence in a finite manner Aquin. 1.2. q. 3. ar. 1.
Montesin. ib. disp. 3. n. 3. Beati non vident Deum visione increata, etc. Sed
creata visione, and fruitione Dei funt Beati. Martinez. ib. dub. 4. ad 1. Visio
beatifica est infinita secundum quid ex part obiecti, absolute tamen est
finita. Gandau. Quodlib. 7. q. 4. Dico quod tum propter limitationem
intellectus creatisic eleuati, tum propter ipsum obiectum, voluntary se
demonstrans, and alia quae in se videntur, tum propter ipsum cognitum, potest
ipsa diuina essentia videri sieve cognosci ab intellectu creato, absque omni
cognitione seu visione alicuius creaturae in illa aut per illam.
, and according to the measure and capacity of creatures, and so far forth
only as it pleases God, and is sufficient for their beatitude. But no divine
Revelation affirms, that it pleases God Aquin. in 4. Sent. d. 49. q. 2. ar.
5. ad. 6. Sicut se ostendit cui vult, ita in se ostendit quae vult. Velosillo.
Aduert. in 9. To. Aug. q. 16. Omnis (...) and perfectio visionum beatificarum,
prouenit a lumine gloriae, hoc est a (...) diuina, and bonitate Dei, qui
disponere potest
, or is necessary to their beatitude, that they should understand the secrets
of men's hearts here upon earth: and accordingly Saint Augustine says Aug.
lib. d. cur. pro. mort. c. 13. Ibi sunt spiritus defunctorum, vbi non vident
quaecunque aguntur, aut eueniunt hominibus in hac vita.
, The souls of the defunct are there, where they see not all things which are
done, or which happen to people in this life. And concerning the sequel of the
former Argument, Aquinas himself says Aquin. p. 1. q. 12. ar. 8. Angeli
nesciunt futura contingentia, and cogitationes cordium, hoc enim solius Deiest.
, The blessed Angels behold the Divine Essence, and yet they know not all
things, but they are ignorant of future things, being contingent, and of the
cogitations of the heart Vid. Aquin. 1. p. q. 57. ar. 4. Malon. in 2. Sent. d.
Angel. Disp. 16.
.

And whereas the Argument is further pressed, They which know or see the
greater, understand and behold the less: But the Saints behold the Essence of
God, which is the greater, and therefore they understand the secrets of men's
hearts. The Answer is Aquin. p. 1. q. 12. ar. 8. ad 2. Ad secundum dicendum
quod videns speculum, non est necessarium, quod omnia in speculo videat, nisi
speculum visu suo comprehendat. Bannes. ibid. page 179. Nulla est implicatio,
quod aliqua cognitio attingat obiectum primarium sui, and non attingat obiectum
secundarium-Poterit esse tam remissum lumen gloriae, vt tantum ostendat diuinam
essentiam, quae est obiectum primarium, and non aliquam creaturam.
, That if the greater and the less be of the same kind, and if the greater
do necessarily represent the less, ad extra, or Durand. 3. Did. 14. q. 2. n.
4. Intellectus creatus videns clare Martinez. 1.2. q. 5. ar. 2. dub. 1.
Conclus. 4. Creaturae sunt in Deo, vt in causa and Principio: sed non oportet
vt cognito Principio vel causa, cognoscantur omnes effectus vel conclusiones:
Ergo, been potest videns Deum, non videre omnes creaturas in illo, and sic vnus
alio plures vel (...) videre.
. First, Every one which beholds the Sun, does not behold every thing
which the Sun effects or inlightneth Velosillo. Aduert. in. 9. to. Aug. ad
Quaesit. 16. Dato quod quis Solemn, ita perfect cognosceret, sicut beatus Deu
cognoscit, non oporteret vt cognosceret distinct and singulariter omnes
effectus Solis, ergo neque oportet quod beatus in Deo cognoscat omnes effectus
Dei.
. Secondly, Angels behold the face Math. 18. 10. and yet they may be ignorant
of some inferior things Malon. 2. (...). Angel. Disp. 7. Aquin. 1. pa. q. 58.
ar. 5. Cognoscunt mysteria gratiae, non quidem omnia, nec equaliter omnes, sed
secundum quod Deus voluerit eis reuelare.
, to wit, of some supernatural mysteries Bannes. in 1. p. Tho. q. 12. ar. 8.
Nullus beatus cognoscit necessario, and ex natura visionis beatificae, aliquam
creaturam, quantum ad eius actualem existentiam, sed cognitio actualis
existentiae cuiuscunque creaturae, pendet ex dispositione diuinae voluntatis.
, Ephesians. 3.10. and of the hour when the day of judgment shall be, Math. 24.36.
And Bannes says, No blessed Saint beholds all indiuiduals, or their
cogitations in the divine Essence Ibidem. Sum. Text. Nullus beatus videt in
diuina Essentia omnia indiuidua, omnes cogitationes
.

IESVIT.
Secondly, As for the secrets of hearts, God is without comparison, more
spiritual, more secret, more invisible, and out of the sight of natural
understanding, than is any the most secret thought of man or Angel: and yet
the Saints have so clear penetrating and all discovering light, as they do
most perspicuously discern the divine, most hidden, Hier. 17. 9. Colloss.
1.15. 1. Tim. 1.17.
and unsearchable unto them? If we look into Scripture, as the heart of man is
said to be unsearchable, but to God only: so likewise God is said to be
invisible but only to himself; so that to Saints, together with the sight of
hearts, we must deny the fight of God, or else interpret the Psalm. 35. 10.


ANSWER.
The inconsequence of this Argument is palpable: for there is the same reason
of Angels, and of glorified Saints, in respect Aquinas Aquin. 1. p. quaest.
57. ar. 4. Cognoscere cogitationes cordis est proprium Dei, Ierem. 17. Ergo
Angeli no cognoscunt secreta cordis.
himself. And if the Adversary fly to divine Revelation, and will affirm,
that Angels

First, he must remember that his bare word, or (...) is no proof, for he was
never in heaven to bring us news from thence Aug. d. Ciuit. Dei, lib. 22. c.
29. Et illa quidem actio, vel potius quies atque otium, quale suturum sit si
verum velim dicere nescio. Non enim hoc vnquam per corporis sensum vidi. Si
autem hoc mente and intelligentia vidisse me dicam, quantum est aut quid est
nostra intelligentia ad illam excellentiam?
, and the word of God is silent in teaching this Doctrine.

Secondly, if God reucale, and report the prayers of the living

Thirdly, Cardinal Bellarmine himself shows the weakness of the former
assertion of our Adversary, saying Bellar. d. sanct. beatitud. lib. 1. cap.
20. Si indigerent Sancti noua Reuelatione Ecclesia no^ diceret ita audacter
omnibus Sanctis orate pro nobis: Sed peteret aliquando a Deo vt reuelaret eis
praeces nostras. Deinde non possit ratio reddi tam facile, cur Sancti nunc
inuocantur, and ante aduentum Christi non inuocarentur.
, If the Saints needed a new Revelation, the Church could not with such
boldness say to all the Saints, Pray for us, but it should rather beseech

IESVIT.
If there were a glass of Diamond so clear and excellent, that whatsoever is
done in London in secret corners, Gregory Greg. Homil. 40. Qui Creatoris sui
claritatem vident nihil in creatura agitur quod videre non possunt, lib. 12,
Moral. c. 13.
: Nothing is done about any creature which they cannot see, who see the
claritie of the Creator. And again we must believe, that they who see the
claritie of the omnipotent God within themselves, are

ANSWER.
The Popish speculation of the speculatiue glass of the Trinity, is not
Catholic Doctrine in their own Schole AEstius. in 4. Sent. d. 46.. 19. Non
est necesse affirmare, quod semper omnes Sancti cum Christo regnantes,
cognoscant particulariter, omnium and singuloru^ praeces quomodocunque
generaliter, ad se directas, and forte ob huiusmodi dubitatiunculam non fuit
visum patribus, Trid. Concilij, quaestionem hanc an Sa^cti, praeces viuentium
cognosca^t absolute definire.
, and therefore the Jesuit is ouerseene in obtruding the same upon us. Pius a
Ponte Pius a Pont. in 1. p. Tho. qu. 12. ar. 8. dub. 5. Dicendum igitur diuinam
essentiam non dici proprie speculum, neque per Metaphoram ei proprie accomodari
conditionem speculi. Bannes. in 1. p. Tho. q. 12. ar. 8. Resp. Cum. Caiet. in
hoc art. and colligitur ex D. Tho. q. 8. d. Verit. ar. 4. and q. 12. ar. 6.
Diuina Essentia, proprie loquendo, non est speculum creaturarum, nec creaturae
continentur in ipsa tanquam in speculo. Quoniam de ratione speculi est, quod
representet per distinctas species acceptas ab ipsis rebus representatis.
Continentur ergo creaturae in diuina Essentia proprie loquendo, tanquam in
causa effectiua and exemplari and ita continentur per modum vnius, and eodom
modo representantur, and ex consequenti non est necesse, quod visa diuina
Essentia, distinct cognoscantur in ipsa, omnes creaturae.
a modern Scholeman, has these words: The divine Essence cannot be termed a
Glass properly, neither by Metaphor does the condition (or likeness) of a
Glass properly agree unto it: and he cites for his Tenet, Thomas, Caietan,
Capreolus, Durand, Ferrariensis, and Bannes, and the greater part of
Pontificians hold, that it does not represent things, according to the manner
of a natural Glass, but only according to the good will and pleasure of God,
and thereupon they say, that it is Speculatum voluntarium Bannes. in 1. p. Tho.
Gabriel. Biel. 3. d. 14. q. vnic. Deus est speculum voluntarium ostendens in se
quae vult, caetera occultans, nec in eo relucent, nisi quae vult a vidente se
cognosci, quia Deus in intellectu se videntis causat cognitionem voluntary,
and contingenter illarum creaturarum quas vult (...), and quarum cognitionem
non causat, occultare dicitur. Velosillo. Aduert. in Aug. tom. 9. ad. q. 16.
Ita intelligendum est quod inquit Augustinus lib. de vid. Deo. Deum esse
speculum voluntarium, quia, scilicet plus velminus ostendit se, and ea quae in
se lucent, prout ipse vult.
, such a glass as (according to our manner of apprehension) makes reflection
of such notices as God is pleased to manifest, more or less Bannes, in 1. p.
Tho. q. 12. ar. 8. B. Dominicus, B. Franciscus forte sunt aequales in
beatitudine, and tamen B. Dominicus alia videt in verbo, and alia B.
Franciscus. AEstius. 4. sent. d. 46.. 19. Est speculum illud voluntarium,
repraesentans in se, ipsum aspicientibus, ea quae vult, and quando vult.
, when, in what manner, Idem. Diuina Essentia necessario and naturaliter
repraesentat diuino intellectui omnes cogitationes and volitiones ipsius Dei,
intellectui vero creato nullam repraesentat necessario, sed prorsus voluntate
libera repraesentat quas vult cogitationes. Occham. in sent. lib. 4. q. 13.
Deus est speculum voluntarium, and aliquae creaturae possunt videri in eo sine
alijs, ita quod beatus non
.

Gregory, in the places objected, according to Aquinas Aquim. p. 1. q. 12. ar.
8. Ad. 1. Gregorius loquitur, quantum ad sufficientiam obiecti, scilicet, Dei,
quod quantum in se est, sufficienter continet omnia, and demonstrat. Non tamen
sequitur quod vnusquisque videns Deum, omnia cognoscar, quia non perfect
comprehendit ipsum.
, speaks of the sufficiency of the object in it self, and not of the Occham
and Lombard take it Occham. Dial. pa. 2. tr. 1. cap. 3. Dicedum est quod dicit
magister. sent. lib. 2. d. 11. Gregorius haec dicit loquens de Angelis, etc.
videtur dicere quod omnia sciant Angeli, and nihil sit quod nesciant: sed hoc
accipiendu^ est de hijs, quorum cognitio beatum facit cognitorem, vt sunt ea
quae ad
. And if his words be taken generally, then it will follow, that the blessed
Saints are ignorant of nothing that is done without them, and that they behold
intuitiuely every particular and special action and motion, both of superior
and of inferior creatures: but our Adversaries themselves deny this Nauarret.
in 1. p. Tho. q. 12. ar. 8. contr. 44. Non enim beatus, eo ipso quo aliquis
viator fuit commissus eius regimini, (...) cogitationis (...), etc. 282. Ad. b.
Virginem non (...) cognoscete omnes cogitationes Christi Domini.
, as it has formerly been showed.

IESVIT.
First, if Saints by reason of their blisfull estate do so participate of
divine nature and wisdom, as they communicate with him in the power of
governing the nations of To him that Apoc. 2. 26.
conquereth, I will give power over Nations, and he shall rule them with a rod
of Iron, that is, with power of inflexible equity. I will make him a pillar in
the Apoc. 3. v. 12.
Temple of my God. And the blessed Saints say of themselves, Apoc. 5. v. 10.
to be the Priests of God, and that they should rule with him upon the earth:
Therefore they know what is done upon earth, so far forth at least, as the
affairs of earth do specially appertain unto them, and such, without doubt,
are our deutionos toward them.

ANSWER.
The places of Scripture which you produce to prove your Assumption etc.
speak not in plain and express terms of Saints deceased, but of the Saints
living in this present world Viegas in Apoc. cap. 2. Comment. 4. Sect. 6.
Itaque illud existimamus, duos esse sensus literales huius loci. Vnum vt
promittatur Eccleliae vniuersae, etiam in rebus temporalibus faelicitas, quod
nimirum gentes multas sibi subijciat, imperium in subditos secure exerceat,
tantaque sit potentia, vt rebels possit facile coercere, haereticorum impetus
comprimere, denique aduersariorum vires frangere, nulliusque potentiam
formidare. Alterum vt ijs qui vicerit, id est, Iezabeli eiusque Sectatoribus,
videlicet tum prauis hominibus, tum Haereticis, sese strenue and animose
opposuerint, promittatur fore, vt ob (...) probitatem, Ribera. Apoc. 2. v. 26.
Omnino loquitur de potestate quam sancti exercebunt in die iudicij, in omnes
Gentes qui Christo non paruerint iudicantes eas cum Christo and aeternae morti
tradentes.
. And if they be expounded of Saints deceased, the iudiciarie Mat. 19, 28.1.
Cor. 6, 2. And in this manner the ancient Expositors, Victorinus, Arethas,
Beda, Rupertus, Ansbertus, and also Hugo Carensis, Albertus, Lira, Viegas,
Alchasar, etc, expound the first place, Revel. 2.26 Rupert. in (...). lib. 2.
In isto gradu vincere, est omnes quae infirmum faciunt hominem passiones
superare, gaudium, timorem, spem, atque dolorem, de animo propellere atque
sugare, id est seculo non gaudere, seculum non timere, secularia non sperare,
pro secularibus non dolere. Ansbert. in Apoc. 2. Si quod membrorum digne capiti
in haeserit, veraciter habere dicitur quod ipsum caput hereditario iure
possidere probatur. An non Ecclesia in capite suo potestatem super Gentes
accepit, quae in Sanctis praedicatoribus ipsas Gentes ex quibus constat,
authoritate capitis sui, vigore capitis sui, scientia capitis sui, docet and
regit atque ab illicitis operibus censura districtionis coercet? Sed nec mirum
si super Gentes potestatem habet Ecclesia in terris, quae ligandi atque
soluendi potestatem accepit in coelis pariter and in terris. Albert. sup. Apoc.
2. Dabo illi potestatem super Gentes. Glossa in hocseculo: and ad literam
creuit Ecclesia Hugo. Card. ib. Et reget illas in verga ferrea: ad literam,
been tenent hoc hodie praelati Ecclesiarum quorum multi durius vexant subditos
suos quam Laici. Alchasar. ibid. Res ipsa postulat, vt virgam hanc ferream
viris Euangelicis in hac vita dari credamus. Ribera. ibid. Omnino loquitur, de
potestate quam Sancti exercebunt in die iudicij.
.

The second place, Revel. 3.12. is expounded of such as are Pillars in the
Church militant, by Gregory, Ticonius, Primasius, Haimo, Beda, Andreas,
Aretas, Anselmus, Richardus, Ioachimus, Albertus, Lira, Thomas, Zegerus, and
Suares, (as Alchasar Alchas. in 3. cap. Apoc. v. 12. Gregorius. 17. Moral. cap.
14. Nomen columnae accipit de ijs, qui in Eccles. militanti officium columnatum
egregie praestant: atque eam expositionem sequuntur hoc loco, Ticonius,
Primasius, Haimo, Beda, Andreas, Aretas, Anselmus, Richardus, Ioachimus,
Albertus, Lyra, Thomas, Zegerus, Suarez, and caeteri fine omnes. Haec omnino
mihi videtur sequenda expositio.
the Jesuit cites them, in his Commentary upon that Text, who also confuteth
Ribera Ad Argumenta Riberae, etc.
expounding the same of the Church triumphant.)

The third place Apocal. 5. 10. is expounded of the Church Militant by
Rupertus, Hugo Carensis, Gagneus, Albertus, Alchasar, etc. And if it be
understood of the blessed Saints, they reign upon earth, by their Doctrine and
Ambrosius Ansbertus Ansb. in Apoc. li. 2. pa. 346. (...) potestatem, quam in
tempore homo factus a patre accepit vnigenitus Dei, electis suis se dare
repromittit, sed in se a quo totum regitur corpus, and cui totum Ecclesiae
inhaeret corpus, ipse enim secundum Apostolum, caput est omnium Electorum. Si
quod ergo membrorum digne capiti inhaeserit, veraciter habere dicitur, quod
ipsum caput hereditario iure possidere probatur, an non Ecclesia in capite suo
potestatem supet gentes accepit, quae in Sanctis praedicatoribus, ipsas gentes
ex quibus constat,
who lived in the year 890, has these words: The like is said by Haimo Haimo.
in Apoc. 2. 26. Illam potestatem, quam Christus homo factus accepit a patre,
electis suis se dare promittit, sed nisi quo totum corpus regitur, and cui
totum Ecclesiae corpus (...), cum enim ipse sit caput Electorum, electi vero
membra illius, quod ipsum caput habet, hoc electi possidere videntur,
haereditario iure.
.

And from hence it appears, that the Jesuits exposition of the places in the
Revelations, is voluntary, novel, never heard off in the ancient Church, nor
delivered by elder Pontificians, neither is the same followed at this day, by
the learned Expositours of the Church of Rome it self: and therefore his
Gillius. Com. Th. d. sacr. doc. and Deo. l. 1. tr. 7. c. 7. in dogmarum
defensione aut confirmatione vtendum semper vero atque indubitato sensu
scripturae. Namque si sensus certo non constet, neutiqua^ potest concludere rem
tanquam de fide certum. 329.
, is of no force. For when he argues in this manner: Saints partake with
Christ in the rule and government of the World; Ergo, they hear, and
understand the prayers and devotions of the living, which are made unto them:
Our answer is, that the blessed Saints do not partake with Christ, as his
Ministers, Vicegerents, or Coadiutors in the actual rule and government of the
inferior world, but they only partake with him in his government, as the
friends of the Bridechamber partake with AEstius. in 4. sen. d. 46.. 19. Non
est necesse (...), quod semper omnes Sancti, cum Christo regnantes cognoscant
particulariter omnium and (...) preces, etc.
For it is possible for one to be of Council, and to be assistant in
government to a King, and yet not to be

IESVIT.
Secondly, S. Paul says, Now we know but in part, 1. Cor. 13. v. 9.
we prophecy but in part, but when that of perfection shall come, that of
part shall be euacuated; I now know but in part, then I shall know as I am
known. By which words the Apostle signifies, that all Knowledge, both Humane
and Divine, particularly the gift of Prophecy, is contained eminently in the
Beatificall Light: So that the blessed Saints have the gift of Prophecy in a
more excellent degree, than had the Prophets in this world. But by the light of
Prophecy, holy men united with God, could see the secrets of hearts, as S.
Paul says, By the gift of Prophecy the 1. Cor. 14.
secrets of hearts are manifested; and also see things absent, being present,
by Light of Understanding, from whence they were absent according to their
substance. The Prophet Elizeus saw in absence what passed betwixt his servant
and Naaman, to whom he said, My heart was 4. Kings 5.24.
there present with thee. With far greater reason, says S. Augustine, the
Saints of God, even with eyes of body Aug. lib. 22. d. Ciuit. Dei, c. 29.
Videbunt Sancti omnia clausis occulis etiam, vnde sunt corpore absentes.
Hierom. aduers. Vigilant.
closed up, shall see all things, not only present, but also from which they
are corporally absent. This is that which Saint Hierome does so earnestly
defend against Vigilantius, That the souls of the Martyrs are present where
their Shrines and Relics are, and never absent, but still ready to hear the
prayers of their suppliants: not thinking (as Dr Field imposes upon him) that
they are present in so Field, of the Church, lib. 3. cap. 20.
many places substantially, according to their souls, but that they are
present as Elizeus was present unto Gehezi, in spirit, beholding what passed as
clearly, as if they were corporally present.

ANSWER.
That the blessed Saints in Heaven have the gift of Prophecy formally,
eminently, or in actu exercito, in respect of all individual Objects, is
neither expressly affirmed by S. Paul, neither can it be collected from his
Doctrine; for the use and end of this gift, was the edification of the Church
Militant, 1. Cor. 12. Ephesians. 4. 11, 12. And because this end cease, in regard
of the blessed Saints, Apoc. 14. 13, therefore we have no certainty Salas, in
1. 2. q. 3. tr. 2. disp. 6. Sect. 3. AEgid. d. Praesent. to. 2. d. Beatitud.
lib. 11. q. 8. ar. 13.. 2. AEstius, in 4. Sent. d. 45.. 2. Prophetiae
cuacuabuntur, Linguae cessabunt, etc. Quae tria tantum ad vsum praesentis
seculi pertinent.
, that they ordinarily and perpetually enjoy the same.

And if it were granted, that they had this gift eminently; yet it follows
not, that they have the exercise of it, according to every material Object it
had in this life: for some Objects of Prophecy are contingent, and
accidentally Nauarret. in 1. p. Tho. q. 12. ar. 8. Mysteria quae per accidens
pertinent ad fidem, licet reuelentur aliquibus Beatis secundum voluntatem Dei:
tamen non habent talem connexionem necessariam, cum ijs, quae in via homo ex
fide desiderat cognoscere, vt in illa cognitione per fidem, inueniamus
sufficiens principium, ad dicendum quod in patria cognoscuntur.
belonging to Prophetical Grace; and every act of knowledge belongs not to
the perfection of the glorified state.

Imperfection of knowledge, to wit, in respect of the manner of knowing, and
the Object known, and the Subject understanding, shall be removed in the
blissful state. But where does S. Paul affirm, That the blessed, by Divine
Vision, or Revelation, Aquinas himself Aquin. 1. p. q. 12. ar. 8. ad. 4.
Cognoscere singularia, and cogitata and facta eorum, non est de perfectione
intellectus creati, nec ad hoc eius natural desiderium tendit.
has these words: To know all particular, or individual things, and the
cogitations and actions of the same, belongs not to the perfection of a
created understanding, neither does his natural desire affect this. Also the
same Author Aquin. sup. 1. Cor. 13. Lect. 4. Cognoscam ficut cognitus sum, id
est, sicut Deus cognouit essentiam meam, ita Deum cognoscam per essentiam. Hug.
Carensis, ibid. Lyra, and Dionys. Carth. ibid.
, with Hugo, Lyra, and others, commenting upon S. Paul's words, 1. Cor. 13. 12.
(Then shall I know, even as also I am known) expounds them of the intuitiue
knowledge which B. Saints in Heaven shall have of God himself, and not of all
other created

S. Augustine, d. Ciuit. Dei, Lib. 22. cap. 29 Nunc quid Acturi sunt in
corporibus immortalibus atque spiritalibus sancti, etc.
, Prosper. d. Vit. Cont. Lib. 1. cap. 4. Receptis cum incorruptione, (...);
immortalitate corporibus, etc.
speak of the knowledge of blessed men after their resurrection, affirming,
That when they shall be all of them together in Heaven, their hearts shall be
open each of

S. Hierome against Vigilantius, speaks in heat of Disputation: but he
affirms in another place, Hieron. Matthew. 9. Sed Dominus videns cogitationes
eorum, ostendit se Deum qui posset cordis occulta noscere.
That because Jesus knew the thoughts of some of the Scribes, he did thereby
show himself to be God.

IESVIT.
Thirdly, It is clearly to be proved by Scripture, That holy Angels see the
Prayers, and Actions, and Affections of men. In the Apocalypse, an Angel
offered unto God the Apocalypse. 8. 4.
Prayers of men; which he could not have done, had he not known them.

ANSWER.
First, The place of S. John, Apocal. 8.4. proves not, either clearly, or
obscurely, that holy Angels hear the Prayers, or see the Actions and
Affections of men. For the Angel mentioned, is expounded by the ancient
Expositors, and by the Romists themselves, not of an Angel by Nature, but of
an Angel by Office; and by some of them, of an Angel by Type. Albertus
Albert. sup. Apoc. 8. Dicit ergo, and alius Angelus, id est, Christus, qui est
Angelus magni Concilij.
in his Commentary: S. John says, Another Angel, that is, Christ, who is the
Angel of the Covenant, Esaias 9. Dionifius Carthusian Dionis. Carthus. in Apoc.
8. Dicunt Doctores Catholici hoc loco statum and cursu Ecclesiae before quasi
a principio demonstrari atque conscribi. Vnde per Angelum istum intelligunt
Christu^, qui est magni Concilij Angelus, and per Incarnationis Mysterium venit
in mundum, stetitque ante Altar, id est, in conspectu Ecclesiae, quae secundum
Berengandum and Bedam Altar vocatur.
, Catholic Doctors, etc. by this Angel understand Christ, who is the Angel
of the great Council, and which by the Mystery of his Incarnation came into
the world, and stood upon the Altar of the Cross. Blasius Viegas Vieg. in
Apoc. 8. Sect. 2. Nec vero recte, quidam erecentioribus argumentatur Angelum
istum Christum esse non posse, quod Christus nunquam Angelus absolute dicitur:
satis enim est vt ex consequentibus facile intelligi possit Christum esse, quae
nisi Christo, alteri apt accommodari non possunt. Cuius enim alterius est
vniuersae Ecclesiae incensa, hoc est orationes in Thuribulo aureo tanta
maiestatis specie, Patri offerre? Cuius praeterquam Christi fuit de igne quo
Thuribulum aureum erat impletum, partem in terras misisse, easque diuiniamoris
igne inflammasse, etc. Apparet autem Christus Sacerdotis personam gerens, vt
eius pro nobis apud Patrem intercessio atque interpellatio monstretur.
a Jesuit, We may easily perceive, that this Angel is Christ, because the
things here spoken of him, can agree to no other but Christ: for who but he,
can with so great Majesty offer up to God the Incense, that is, the Prayers of
the universal Church? Who besides him, is able out of the Perfuming Pan, to
send down into the Earth the fiery Coals of Divine Charity, and to inflame
people with the burning Graces of the holy Spirit? With these, agree Ambrose
Ambros. sup. Apoc. vis. 3. c. 8. Iste Angelus, Christum significat.
, Primasius Primas in Apoc. 8. Biblioth. Sanct. Colon. to. 6. pa. 2.
, Ansbertus Ansbert. in Apoc. 8. Bibl. Sanct. Col. to. 9. p. 2. pa. 393.
, Beda Bed. to. 5. sup. Apoc. li. 2.
, Haimo Haimo, in Apoc. 8.
, Hugo Cardinalis, and the Glosses Hugo Card. Glossae totum
.

But if it were granted, that this Angel were a created or ministering Spirit,
it cannot be proved, that Angels understand the secret cogitations of man's
heart, any further than the same are manifested by signs, neither is it
consequent, that people Aug. c. Epist. Parm. lib. 2. Sicut Parmenianus quodam
loco Mediatorem posuit Episcopum, inter populum and Deum, quis eum ferret
bonorum arque fidelium Christianorum.
.

IESVIT.
Our Savior witnesses, That the Angels rejoice at Luke 15.10.
the conversion of a sinner: so they must needs know it,

ANSWER.
Not only the Angels of God, but holy men on earth, rejoice at the conversion
of a sinner, Luke 15.24. 2. Cor. 7.9. Likewise Parents, Ministers, and (...)
rejoice, etc. and yet it follows not from hence, That holy men on earth,
which rejoice Cor. 2.11. So likewise Angels which are ministering Spirits, Heb.
1.14. may understand by the signs and fruits of true repentance, the
conversion of diverse sinners, and consequently, they may rejoice, without
intuitiue knowledge of the heart.

Secondly, Our Saviors words, Luke 15.10. are (...), the conclusion of a
Parable, which must not be strained beyond the true scope Chrysostom. in Math. Hom.
48. (...). Origin. in Mat. c. 13. Salmeron. Tom 7. Tract. 3. In Parabola
Haedorum and ouium iusti inducuntur dicentes, Domine quando te vidimus
esurientem, etc. Non propteria haec dicuntur, quodiusti haecillo tempore verba
dicturi sunt, etc.
. But according to the exposition of sundry Fathers Ambros. l. 7. in Luc.
(...). in Math. Can. 18. Ouis vna, homo intelligendus est: and sub vno homine
vniuersitas sentienda est, sed in vnius Adae errore, omne genus humanum
aberrauit: Ergo, nonaginta nouem non errantes, multitudo Angelorum caelestium
opinanda est, etc. Isiodor. li. Allegor. Homo habens centum (...), and relictis
illis, (...) perditam quaerit, ac repertam humeris reuehit, figuram Christi
expressit, qui relictis millibus Angeloru^ in coelo, ouem quae perierat in
Adam, vt bonus pastor, quaesitam in gentilcus reperit: atque crucis suae
humeris ad Paradisum reportauit. Chrysolog. Ser. 168.
, and some learned Papists Caietan. sup. Luc. ca. 15. Parobola, etc.
Significat, ipsum Iesum filium Dei, habentem centum oues (hoc est vniuersos
Electos) quarum vna perdita natura humana est: Nonaginta vero nouem dimissae in
deserto, omnes sunt Electi Angeli, quibus deest ad perficiendum electorum
numetum genus humanum. Desertum autem caelum est seperatu^ omnimo a nobis.
Aduentus ad quaerendum ouem (...), incarnatio est (...) Dei. Impositio ouis in
humero Redemptio est generis humani, in proprio corpore. Et quia sponte hoc
fecit ideo gaudens describitur. Reditus domum Resurrectio and Assensio in
caelum. Conuocatio amicorum and vicinorum, associatio est Angelica gaudens de
reperatione humana. Titus Bostrens. in Luc. 15. Christus Deus noster accendit
lucernam, hoc est suam ipsius carnem, mundumque quae domus illius est euertit,
hoc est a peccatis expiauit, id est drachmam, quae Regiae quidem imagine
insignita erat, veru^ perturbationum caeno poenitus obruta, quaesiuit. Dram
autem inuenta, gaudio plenus, conuocauit caelestes virtutes, amat enim illas,
conceptaeque laetitiae easdem participes, mysteriorumque oeconumiae suae
participes (...).
: The hundred sheep, Verse. 4. represent the whole Body of the Elect,
consisting of men and The ninety and nine sheep not lost, were the Angels,
persisting in their prime integrity: The stray sheep, all mankind, sinning
in Adam. To recover this lost sheep, the Son of God (that good Shepherd,
John 10. 11.) was incarnate, and by the gracious work of Redemption, he laid
the same on his shoulder. Now there is great joy in heaven before the
celestial Angels, for this recovery and salvation of mankind. But if this
exposition be admitted, no more can be inferred, but that the Court of heaven,
and in the same, the holy Angels rejoice, because of man's Redemption. Neither
is it consequent, Ergo, They know distinctly and perpetually the particular
quality of every individual sinners repentance.

Lastly, If the said words, Luke 15. 10. be understood of sinners in
particular, this Text yet falls short to prove, that all the caelestiall
Angels, perpetually, and at the very instant, know the particular true
repentance of every sinner, indiuidually: for the same may be understood
according to this supposition or reflection, to wit, There is joy before the
Angels of heaven, over one sinner which repents, when the repentance of this
one sinner, is made known unto them: but it is not said, neither can it be
inferred, That celestial Angels know constantly, and at all times, when each
individual person repents truly.

Our Adversaries therefore cannot ground an infallible Doctrine, touching
Angelical science, upon a branch of a Parable (which according to themselves)
admits diverse expositions, and the consequence whereof is not necessary,
but contingent, and upon supposition.

IESVIT.
Saint Paul says, We are made a spectacle unto God 1. Cor. 4. 9.
and Angels, and he adiureth Timothy, by God and his Angels, which show that
we live in the sight of Angels, and that they behold what we do, and hear
what we say, even in our hearts.

ANSWER.
Saint Paul's words are, 1. Corinthians. 4. 9. We are made a spectacle to the
world, and to Angels, and men: Angelis laudantibus, and vituperantibus,
hominibus laudantibus, and vituperantibus Aug. sup. Psalm. 38.
, (says Saint Augustine) To good Angels praising us, to evil Angels
dispraysing us, to good men commending us, and to wicked men condemning and
deriding us.

The Consequence of this Argument, We are a spectacle to Angels, therefore
Angels understand and see our thoughts, is childish: for as Saint Paul was a
spectacle to Angels, so he was a spectacle to good men, and bad men: and yet
the Jesuit will blush, to argue hence, Ergo, Good men and bad men behold the
heart.

Secondly, As Saint Paul says, I testify before God and the Elect Angels: so
Moses says, I call this day, Heaven and Earth witnesses, Deuteron. 4. 26. and
32. 1. And Esaias says, Hear oh Heavens, and hearken oh Earth, Chap. 1. v. 2.
Every creature therefore which God calls to witness, or adiureth man by, is
not a fearcher and beholder of the thoughts and affections of the heart.

IESVIT.
But as the same Scripture auerreth, The Saints are like 1. Tim. 5. 21. Luke
20. 36. Matthew. 22. 30. Apoc. 21. 17. Aug. Ep. 112.
unto the Angels, and equal unto the Angels, and in heaven the same is the
measure of a man and of an Angel: Ergo, Knowledge of our Prayers is not to be
denied unto glorious Saints, the fellows of Angels.

ANSWER.
Matthew. 22. 30. Our Savior says, That in the Resurrection, Luke 20. 36. They
which shall be counted worthy of that world, and the resurrection from the
dead, neither marry nor take wives, neither can they die any more, for they
are equal to Angels, and are the children of God, seeing they are the sons
of the Resurrection.

In these words, First, The subject is, Just people, at the Resurrection.
Secondly, Concerning these, our Savior affirms, That they shall not marry,
etc. Thirdly, They shall be as Angels, and equal to Angels. Fourthly, He
expresses,

Now I admire, what Papists can extort from hence Jansen. Harm. (...). ca. 117.
Sunt sicut Angeli Dei, etc. immortales scilicet, alimento and generatione non
egentes, and ab omnibus hijs passionib' liberi, atque beata vita fruentes, non
autem in omnib' sunt sicut Angeli Dei. Alph. Castro. lib. 3. c. Haer. V.
Beatitudo. Verum haec authoritas (vt ingenue fatear) solum aequat homines
Angelis in hoc, quod nullum matrimonij vsum habebunt, sicut nec Angeli: non
tamen ibidem facit pares, quantum ad facialem visionem Dei. Respectu quarundam
proprietatum beati, erunt Angelis aequales, non autem respecta officij
Angelici. Iansen. Ib.
Just men at the resurrection, shall live as Angels, remote from all the
necessities of a worldly life, and they shall be as the Angels of God, free
from material and corporeal passions, and equal to the Angels in fruition of
blessedness. Ergo, the knowledge of our prayers which we make in this life, is
not to be denied unto glorious Saints, the fellows of Angels.

The place of the Revelations, chap. 21.17. is expounded by learned Papists
three ways Vieg. in Apoc. 21. Sect. 2. Duae sunt communiores expositiones vna
est, significari eade^ mensura metienda^ esse ta^ (...) qua^ hominis
beatitudinem, hoc est tam Angelo quam homini iuxta magnitudinem (...) and
charitatis gloriam (...) homines (...) gloriae (...), siquidem succedunt in
locum eorum qui cediderunt.
. First, the beatitude of men and Angels shall be measured with the same
model, to wit, according to the proportion of their grace and charity.
Secondly, men shall attain the measure of Angelical glory, by succeeding
into the place of them that fell. Thirdly, the hundred forty four cubits,
mentioned in that place, were meated by a measure containing the length of a
man, which was the meat-wand, or measure which the Angel held in his hand. And
this latter Alchasar Alchasar. in Apoc. 21. v. 17. Hi centum (...) quatuor
cubiti, dimensi sunt humana mensura, quam Angelus, manu habebat. Ex quo
elicitur, primo calamum illum quo Angelus hoc aedificium metiebatur, fuisse
iustam humanae staturae mensuram.
, Ribera Ribera. in Apoc. 21. v. 17. Cubitus quo murum Angelus dimensus est,
non alia mensura est, quam hominis, id est, quam ea qua homines vti solent
metiendo, hac mensura humana vsus Angelus nunc est, acsi dicat, mensura quae
est Angeli, id est, qua vsus est Angelus, est mensura hominis.
, etc.

But from none of these expositions, does the Jesuits Argugument Stella. in
Luc. 20. Nec omnes Angeli sunt eiusdem meriti, nec eiusdem gradus and gloriae,
sed quida^ maioris gloriae, and alij minoris.
(according to the Tenet of the Schole Aquin. p. 1. q. 106. ar. 2. ad. 1.
) then much more men and Angels, although they

IESVIT.
Neither could Saints without knowledge of humane affairs be perfectly blessed,
blessedness being a state wherein all just and reasonable desires of nature
are satisfied with uttermost content. And who can think, that Saints full
Psalm. 16.15. Satiabor cum apparet gloria tua.
both of glory and charity, do not earnestly desire to know such things as
may concern their honor done upon earth, and the state of their friends and
lovers, living in danger, Cyprian. Sermon. d. Mortal.
Cyprian writes.

ANSWER.
The blessed Saints in Heaven, can desire that only, which is according to the
will of God, Math. 6. 10. But that it pleases God, they shall desire to know
and understand, all the particular actions and occurrents of people on earth,
or that they Cyprian, blessed Saints are sollicitous Cyprian. d. Mortal. n. 18.
Magnus illic nos charorum numerus expectat, parentum, fratrum, filiorum,
frequens nos and copiosa turba desidereat, iam de sua immortalitate secura, and
adhuc de nostra salute sollicita.
of the Salvation of the Chucrh militant, yet it follows not, Ergo they hear
the petitions of the living: for a father dwelling in London, which has his
son at Constantinople, is sollicitous of his sons safety, and yet he
understands not all the particulars about him.

IESVIT.
Wherefore our Doctrine, that Saints see our prayers, being delivered so
constantly by the ancient Fathers, so conformable to the principles of
Christian belief, about the blessedness of Saints, so consonant unto express
passages of Scripture; we may easily expect, that unto Protestants

ANSWER.
Your insinuations are coniecturall, and at the best, seemingly plausible, but
your disputation is weak: wherefore we admire your confidence in a case so
groundless, and entreat you either to argue more soundly, or else to be less
vaineglorious in your conclusions.

IESVIT.
The place continually objected out of the Prophet Esaias: knew us not, Israel
was ignorant of us, thou Isa. 63.16.
O Lord art our Father, thou our Redeemer, has this sense, that Abraham and
Jacob when they did live upon earth, and carnally beget children, did not know
particularly their posterities, and so could not bear them such particular
affection; whereas God can and does distinctly see, and know their necessities,
and prouides against them, delivering his children out of them: And therefore
he is Abraham and Jacob not deserving the name of Father, in comparison with
God: What makes this against the Saints hearing our prayers?

ANSWER.
We received our exposition of this place of Esaias cap. 63.16. out of S.
Augustine Aug. li. d. cur. pro mort. ca. 13. Tu es pater noster, quia Abraham
nos nesciuit, and Israel non cognouit nos. Si tanti Patriarchae quid erga
populum ex his procreatum ageretur, ignorauerunt, etc. Dionys. Carthus. sup.
Esa. 63. ar. 92. Aug. in lib. d. Cura pro mort. dicit, Quod nesciant quid in
isto seculo fiat, vel quid filij agant.
: and I marvel, why the Jesuit rejects the same, and chooses a worse,
because his own party Adam Sasboth. Com. Esa. 63. In tota Scriptura veteri
nusquam inuenimus, eorum a quoquam implorata suffragia: causa est quia ab
humana (...), and in tenebris sedentes, non percipiebant orationes and vota
viuentium, etc. Cornel. d. Lapid. Quinto Adamus apposite, Abraham inquit and
Jacob nesciunt nos, resque nostras quia sunt in obscuro limbo patrum, vbi (...)
luce and open Dei, quam nos, non ergo eos imploramus qui nostras res and
aerumnas (...), atque (...) habent vt sibi consulant, sibique liberationem ex
inferno procurent, sed te Domine, qui solus potes juuare and liberare tam
Abraham Bellarm. d. sanct. beat. lib. 1. c. 20. Quia tamen B. Aug. lib. d. Cur.
pro mort c. 13. Exponit de cognitione proprie dicta, ideo responderi etiam
(...) Abrahamum and (...) and alios (...) Testamenti non cognouisse posteros
suos viuentes, quia nondum beati erant, and naturaliter mortui non sciunt quid
viuentes agunt.
confesses, Abraham and the Patriarchs living in the dark lake of Limbus, did
not hear the prayers of their posterity, nor behold and understand the
affairs of their children, living upon earth.

IESVIT.. 3.
THe third cause of their dislike is, That we give the honor of the Creator,
unto the creature, honoring Saints with religious worship, with worship of
Spirit and Faustus the Manichee, S. Austine answers in Aug. contra Faustu^
li. 20. ca. 21.
these words, The Christian people does celebrate with religious solemnity,
the memories of Martyrs, to the end to stir up themselves to their imitation,
and that they may be assisted with their prayers, and associated unto their
Augustine show the worship of Saints, to be on the one side more than civil,
and on the other side less than divine: more than civil, as proceeding
Austine with good reason, terms it religious, Less than divine, as
proceeding from persuasion of excellency, though superhumane; yet infinitely
inferior unto the increate and immence excellency of God, yea depending
essentially thereof. So that

ANSWER.
Our Argument is, All religious worship is due to God only: Papists yield to
Saints some religious worship: Ergo, Papists yield to Saints some worship due
to God only.

The Jesuit pretends to answer by distinction, out of St. Augustine Aug. c.
Faust. Manich. lib. 20. cap. 21. Populus Christianus memorias Martyrum
Religiosa solennitate concelebrat and ad excitandam imitationem and vt meritis
eorum consocietur, atque orationibus (...), ita tamen vt nulli Martyrum, sed
ipsi Deo Martyrum, (...) in memorias Martyrum constituamus Altaria.
, saying, That religious worship, is either simply Divine, and founded upon
infinite and increate excellency, called Latria; or else superhumane, founded
upon Grace and Glory, which is an excellency finite and created.

Papists yield the latter kind of religious worship to blessed Saints and
Angels, but not the former.

To this Answer, Protestants reply, saying, That there are no other kinds of
worship, than there be Tables of the Moral Law. But there are only two Tables
of the Moral Law, the former whereof teaches Divine Worship, and the second
humane, civil, or of special observance Aquin. 22. q. 102 ar. 1.2.3. Dulia
est quaedam species obseruantiae. q. 103. ar. 3.
. And if there be a Esaias 42.8.

But against this, they object, That to every kind and degree of excellency,
there is a worship due, proportional to that excellency. But blessed Saints
and Angels, have a special kind and degree of excellency, superior to
theirs which live upon earth: Therefore a special honor, proportioned to
their excellency, and superior to humane, is due unto them.

It is answered, That granting in blessed Saints and Angels, Latria, and
Religion, are all one Vasq. d. Ador. l. 1. Disp. 6. c. 1. n. 168 Cum Religio
circa cultum Dei solum versetur, cultus and honor, qui proxime Sanctis
defertur, adipsam non poterit referri, alioquin si esset Actus Religionis, Ib.
c. 4. n. 180. Religio quae est peculiaris virtus, non potest ipsis honorem
(...), quae solum increatam Dei excellentiam, non autem creatam proxime
respicit. Ibid. Disp. 8. c. 2. n. 200. Cum proximus terminus cui exhibetur
adoratio, sit excellentia, quam in se res habet, quamuis ad aliam referatur
superiorem (...) ex ea tamen cultus, and adorationis natura pensanda est,
etiamsi propter (...) tanquam remotum terminum exhibeatur.
: and if Saints and Angels may be worshipped with religious worship, they may
be served with the worship of Latria. And if they answer that worship of
Saints Bonav. 3. ar. 2 q. 4. Alius est modus adorandi creatorem, and alius
adorandi creaturam, and alia ratio motiua, and ideo alia virtus directiua in
hac and in illa. Aquin. 22. q. 103. ar. 3. (...) est quaedam species
obseruantiae, quia per obseruantiam honoramos quascunque personas, dignitate
prae cellentes. Albert 3. Did. 9. ar. 6. Richard. ib. ar. 3. q. 1. Palud. ib.
q. 2. Suares. d. (...), li. 2. c. 10. n. 8. Orationem quam ad sanctos (...),
non esse actum a virtute Religionis (...) per se loquendo, sed a virtute
Duliae, quam esse, distinctam a Religione, supra ostensum est.
, and not of Religion or Latria.

The place objected out of S. Augustine. c. Faust. Manich. li. 20. c. 2 1, is
made to speak that (by the Adversary) which the Populus Christianus, memorias
martyrum religiosa solemnitate concelebrat, Christian people celebrate the
memorials of Martyrs, with religious solemnity. And then expounding himself
in the progress of the chapter, he delivers two things:

First, that Christians honor Martyrs, with the honor of love and society,
as holy men of God are honored in this life Colimus Martyrs (...) cultu
dilectionis and societatis, quo and in (...) vita, (...) Dei homines.
: But Saints in this life are not worshipped with vows, fastings, and
religious

Secondly, he distinguishes between the solemnities or festiualls of Martyrs,
and the persons of Martyrs: upon the festiualls Sacrificare (...) sacrificare
Deo, in memorijs Martyrum.
of Martyrs religious service was performed to God, the Lord of Martyrs, but
not to the persons of Martyrs: S. Augustine affirms not this latter.

The total honor which the sacred Scripture, and after it, S. Augustine
requires to be yielded to holy Saints, Martyrs, and Angels, respectively, may
be reduced to four heads: First, the Aug. c. Faust. Man. l. 20. c. 21. Colimus
ergo Martyrs, eo cultu dilectionis and societatis, quo and in hac vita
coluntur sancti homines Dei, quorum cor ad talem pro Euangelica veritate
passionem, paratum esse ^, post incerta omnia superata, quanto etiam fidentiore
laud praedicamus, iam in vita foeliciore (...) mista (...) pugnantes.
, and desire of society. Secondly, recognition and praises of their virtues
and excellency: Thirdly, imitation of their virtues, and godly examples:
Fourthly, reverent comportment to Angels, when they appeared, and were present
as Gods messengers. But none of these actions are the formal or elicitiue
actions of Religion: therefore the honor of Saints and Angels, (according to
propriety of speech) is (...) religious worship. Now then I subsume, no
religious worship (properly taken) is due to Saints, by the confession of
learned Papists (...). 22. q. 83. ar. ^, a quo quaerimus obtinere quod (...),
quia in hoc ^ autem (...) quos requirimus (...), inter pellatores nostros (...)
Deum.
. Invocation of Saints is religious worship properly taken. Romans 10.14. Ergo,
Invocation is not due to Saints.

IESVIT.
Now that men may worship Angels and Saints in this sort, with true affection
of spirit, even to the prostration of their bodies, may be proved out of holy
Scripture, supposing what is already showed, that they see our actions; for if
Saints see our actions, we may as lawfully and as profitably bow, kneel, and
prostrate our bodies unto them, as unto Saints living on earth. But it is
lawful to honor living Saints with bowing, and kneeling, and prostration of
Abdias an holy man adored Helias prostrate on the ground, not for (...). Reg.
18.
any humane excellency or respect, but because he was a Prophet, and a
singular Saint of God. The children of the (...). Reg. 2.
Prophets, seeing signs of supernatural and divine power in Elizeus, coming
unto him, adored him prostrate on the ground. The Shunamite woman her son
being dead, went presently unto Elize us, fell down at his feet, suing 4. Reg.
4.
Abraham, Lot, Balaam, Joshua. So that this adoration of Saints and Angels,
with more than humane and natural Genesis 18. Genesis 19. Number. 22. Joshua. 5.
respect, and with acknowledgement of more than humane and natural perfections
in them, is clearly deduceable

ANSWER.
First, your supposall that Saints deceased, see and behold all our particular
and singular actions, is in my praecedent answer refuted.

Secondly, if they did understand our actions, it were not nenecessarie for us
to worship them after your manner, because neither God himself, nor the
blessed Saints require any such Athan. d. (...). Christ. page 547. Si Discipuli
(...) Euangeliorum, (...) loquamini contra Deum iniquitatem, sed per Scripturas
incedite. Quod si diuersa a Scripturis fabulati vultis, (...) nobiscum
concertatis, qui neque loqui neque audire (...) quod (...) sit ab istis,
Dicente domino. Quod si vos manseritis in sermon meo (...) liberi (...), Quae
igitur est ista vestrae immodestiae vaerecordia, vt loquamini quae scripta non
sunt.
.

Thirdly, your examples of Abdias and the Shunamite, prostrating Elyas and
Elizeus, are not ad idem: for these Prophets were visibly and sensibly present
to those persons; and on the contrary, the blessed Saints are absent from
those which worship them upon earth; children kneel to their parents, and
speak to them when they are present, but when they are absent, such actions
cease.

Fourthly, your examples of Abraham, Lot, Balaam, and Joshua, conclude not your
Angell-worship: for it is the common Tenet of the most learned Fathers, yea of
many Pontificians Thyreus. d. Apparit. visib. lib. 1. c 23 Nec paucorum, nec
obscurorum, nec nouorum hominum opinio est, etc. Eusebius. Hist. li. 1. c. 2.
Idem. d. Euan. demonstr. li. 1. cap. 5. Non is qui Abrahae innotuit Angelus,
etc. Ambr. d. Abrah. li. 1. c. 5. Et. in Psalm. 39. Orig. Sup. losh. ho. 6. Et.
Hom. 1. Sup. Esa. 6. Tertul. c. lud. Leo. Ep. 13. Council. Sirmiens. apud Niceph
li. 9. c. 31. Socrat. li. 1. c. 39. Sosomen. li. 4. c. 6. August. c. Adaman.
Manic. Discip. c. 9. and in Conc. ad Catechum. aduers. Paganos, etc. (...). 15.
Rupert. d. vict. verb. Dei. li. 6. ca. 21. Chrysostom. in (...). Hom.: 6. Theoph. in
Act. 7. Cyril. Thesaur. li. 3. (...). 1. Spiritu ergo ille Sancto ad veritatem
Dogmatum ductus primo, Deum orat, vt pueros benedicat and simul etiam Angelu^
qui liberabat eum ex omnibus malis, vt per Deum patrem ipsum significaret, per
(...) autem verbum patris, non enim ignorabat quia nomen (...) magni concilij
Angelus est. (...). d. vision. vet. Testam. vis. 6. Exodus ca. 3. con 2. (...).
1. Athanas. orat. 2. c. Arrian. page 165. Christus fuit quem Abraham in
Tabernaculo, and Moses in Rubo adorauit.
, Abraham and Joshua worshipped, was the second person of the Trinity. And the
other Angels, Genesis 18. 2. and 19.1. Number. 22.31. were present in place, and did
visibly and sensibly appear to Abraham and the rest; and upon that vision,
they made outward obeisance to them, perceiving they were divine messengers.
But did these or any other holy men, whose example is commended in holy
Scripture, make outward obeisance, or offer prayers to Angels, when they were
absent from them in heaven, or when they did not behold signs and evidences of
their sensible apparition?

IESVIT.
Neither have Protestants reason to stand against so many pregnant examples of
Scriptures, upon the one example Apocalypse, refusing to be adored of S. John,
saying, See thou do it not, I am one of Apoc. 19. 10.
thy fellow servants, adore God: specially this place being explicated long
ago by the Fathers, as not against the custom of Christian Saint-worship; for
either the Angel so appeared, as S. John took him to be God, and would have
adored him as God, whereof the adored was to be warned, as S. Augustine
expounds; or rather the Angel Corrigendus erat adorator. Aug. q. 91. in Genesis
excellent sermon he has made, and the Preacher out of modesty S. (...) after
this prohibition, did the second time offer the like honor Apoc. 22.8.
and religious on their parts, howsoever the Angels sometimes for just
respects may in modesty refuse it.

ANSWER.
It is said untruly, and without any color, that Protestants Justin. Martyr.
Dialog. cum Tryp. (Christus) Angelus sieve nuntius vocatur, (...) quod annuntiet
mortalibus, quaecunque annuntiari eis vult vniuersitatis fabricator, etc. Deum
ipsum esse propheticus ibi sermo declarat. Ib. page 278. Magni Concilij
Angelus, Ib. pa. 280. Christus, qui Dominus and Deus! Dei filius est, qui
virtute prius apparuerat vt vir, and Angelus. Idem. Apol. 2. pa. (...).
Epiphan. Haeres. 5. n. 5. (...) Agust. (...) Trin. li. 3. c. 9. propter
annunciationem, paternae ac suae voluntatis a Proph. dictus est Angelus.
(as has been formerly showed,) and the worship given to other Angels, and
to the holy Prophets, was only reverence and outward obeisance Palud. 3. d. 9.
, when they were present in place and person; and we deny not reverent
comportment to holy Prophets and Angels, when they are personally and visibly
present.

But did the Church of the Jews invoke Elias or Elizeus, in their public
service, or did they offer any oblations to Angels when they were absent, or to
their Images? or to any of Neither have Protestants reason, etc. But you are,
and will be as mute as a fish, in producing any one example to this purpose.

From the example of the Angel refusing to be worshipped, Apoc. 19.10. and
22.8, 9. we argue in this manner: That which the Angel refused to admit when
he was present,

But the Angel refused a lesser degree of adoration, when he was present, and
came as an Ambassador of Christ, than Papists yield to Angels and to blessed
Saints being absent: Ergo, etc.



The Jesuit imagines (but he proves nothing) either that Saint John would
have exhibited divine Adoration to the Angel, rebus sic stantibus, and in
regard of the extraordinary dignity of Saint John, who was so great and
glorious a friend of God.

The first solution is rejected by learned Papists themselves, Ribera Ribera.
in Apoc. 19. v. 10. De adorationis genere (...) dubium esse debet quin ita
adorare Johannes voluerit vt Angelum adoraripar (...), id est non vt creatorem,
sed vt creaturam. Non enim ignorabat, aut soli Deo dandam esse adorationem
Latriae, aut Angelum eum esse qui loquebatur, vt initio libri, and sae pe
postea dixit.
, Alchasar Alchasar. ibid. (...) capite saltem 22. Ioannes (...) non (...),
Angelum non esse Christum: (...) ipsemet Angelus ille antea (...), (...) tuus
sum, and fratrum tuorum. Cum igitur tunc Ioannes, rursus ad eum adorandum
aggrediatur, argumento est, principio non eum adorare voluisse, quod Christum
reputaret. Nec est cur Iohannem deceptum fuisse (...), cum potius ex textu
(...) Ioannem agnouisse quisuam esset ille Angelus, ad cuius pedes procubuit:
quippe de (...) ficut sibi (...) fuerat locutus dicens esse Angelum magnae
potestatis. c. 18. 1.
, Salmeron Salmeron. in Apoc. praelud. 7. page 367.
, Viegas Viegas. ibid. sect. 3.
, Mendoza Mendoza in li. 1. Reg. c. 2. number. 17. (...). 19. Sect. 2. Ea adoratio
non fuit ex (...) genere quae soli Deo debetur.
, etc. and it is apparent by the Text of the Revelation, that St. John knew it
was an Angel which spoke to him, Apoc. 1.1. and Christ had many times revealed
so much to him.

The second Answer, The Angel in modesty, etc. has nothing actions of a
diverse kind; the one may be refufed in modesty

The third answer, The Angel refused adoration from St. John, because of the
dignity of this great Apostle, is confuted by the Text, Apoc. 22.9. For the
Angel yielding a reason of his refusal, assigns a cause, which argues, that
such adoration was not due to him, from any other servant of Jesus Christ,
saying, (...), etc. See thou do it not, for I am thy fellow servant, and of
thy brethren the Prophets, and of them which keep the sayings of this Book:
worship God.

Hence it is manifest, that if the Angel refused religious worship, because God
alone is to be worshipped in this manner, and because he was the fellow
servant Franc. Sonnius. Demonstr. Relig. tr. 11. cap. 12. Apoc. 22. Cum
Johannes Apost. Vellet adorare Angelum, reuelantem, sibi mysteria respondit
Angelus, vide ne faeceris. Conferuus enim (...) sum, etc. Ecce recusat Angelus
adorationem Iohannis, co quod conseruus noster sit, habens eundem Deum,
eundemque Christum communem
of all just persons: then John, but he would have refused the like worship
from any other Christian, as well as he did from him. Saint Ambrose Ambros. in
Apoc. vis. 5. c. 19. Redemptio sanguinis Christi hoc (...) contulit, vt filij
Dei socijque Angelorum efficerentur, ideoque pertimescit Angelus adorari ab
homine, qui super se adorabat hominem Deum. Quapropter conseruum se Iohannis,
caeterorumque fidelium vocat. Greg. in (...). ho. 8. Rupert. sup. Apoc. 19.
Glossa. Haimo. ibid. Pannonius. Hugo Card.
upon the Revelation, Chap. 19. says, The Redemption of Christ's Blood, brought
this to the faithful, that they should be made the sons of God, and
companions of Angels: Therefore the Angel feared to be worshipped of a man, who
worshipped one above him, which was God and man. To the like purpose also
speaks Ansbertus Ansbert. sup. (...). I. 8. Hinc certe agendae sunt gratiae
Redemptori omnium, quia natura illa quae dudum Angelos adorabat, nec
prohibetur, iam per eius aduentum ab eis and adorari renuitur, and in nullo
inferior iudicatur: and ne hanc (...) lohanni crederemus, cum ei idem Angelus
dixisset vide ne feceris conseruus tuus sum, statim (...) ait, and fratrum
tuorum habentium testimonium Jesus.
.

The Spirit of God (no doubt) foresaw the errors which would spring up in
future times Epiph. haer. 59. and Graec. 79. (...), etc.
, and therefore he left upon draws man to the immediate worshipping of
Christ Cyprian. l. d. Bono. patient. reads, Iesum Dominum adora.
, He Latria; but simply and without all distinction, he protests against
this religious and sacred reverence, saying, (...), Yield thy worship to God:
As for me, (...), I am thy fellow servant, and a fellow servant, etc. (...),
See thou do it not, let no other do it.

Lastly, If our Adversaries will have us regard their distinctions, let them
not (like spiders) spinne them out of their own brains, but let them yield us
any Text or example in the new Salineron. praelud. 7. in Apoc. Cum Angeli olim
eiusmodi honorem sibi ab hominibus exhibeti solitum acceptare consueuissent,
etc. ex quo natura humana, per Christum Dei filium (...) exaltara and consors
Diuinae naturae facta, caeperunt abstinere ab isto honor recipiendo.
, or blessed Saints, or the blessed Virgin, living or defunct, did ever require
or receive, or our Savior, or any of his Apostles in their behalf, did ever
appoint such religious worship to be yielded unto them, as Papists require.

IESVIT. 4.
THe fourth cause why Protestants out of their zeal unto God, refuse to
invoke Saints, is, the high conceit of Gods mercy: for seeing he calls all
men immediately Come unto me all you that labor, Matthew. 11. 18.
and I will refresh you, We wrong his infinite goodness, in not approaching
unto him by Prayer, without the intercession of Saints.

This their zeal is not joined with science of the course of Gods merciful
providence, whose Divine wisdom prescribes certain bounds, and as it were
laws to the infinity of his mercies; which orders and prescripts whosoever
Come to me all that labor; yet the man that should seek to him for the
remission of Come to me all: wherefore it imports us very much to know, and to
use those means of approaching unto God, that he has appointed. Now, that the
intercession of Saints is one means, without which God will not bestow many
graces and favors (as well spiritual as temporal) Christian Tradition does
deliver 1. Reg. 2. 30. Psalm. 138.17.
and noble disposition of God, which is not only to honor and glorify those
that have been zealous of his honor, to the effusion of their blood, but also
to make the world know and understand, that he does honor them: for this
knowledge, is both for his glory, and also for the good of men; that seeing
how highly God honors his constant friends, they be provoked to endeavor by
pure life to gain his favors.

ANSWER.
First, our doctrine and zeal are grounded upon divine revelation, for we are
commanded to invoke God in the name of Christ, John 16.24. and our Savior
himself inuiteth us, to approach with confidence, to the throne of his grace,
Ioh. 14.13. and cap. 15.16. and cap. 16.23.24.26. Ephesians. 3.12. Heb. 4.16. He is
rich in mercy, to such as call upon him, Ephesians. 2.4. and more Romans 8.34. Heb.
7.25. We read in the new Testament many examples of people which made
supplication immediately unto Christ, but not of one which made intercession to
the Virgin Marie, or to the blessed Saints or Angels. And the Fathers teach
Chrysostom. Hom. d. profect. Euang. Vis dicere, quod etiam per nos ipsos orantes,
apud Deu^ plus efficimus, qua^ dum alij pro nobis orant: (...) Cananaea, and vt
accesserunt Discipuli dicunt dimitte eam, quia clamat post nos: and ad illos
quidem dixit, Non sum missus nisi ad oues domus Israel, quando ipsamet
accessit, and perseuerauit clamans, Domini etiam catelli edunt de mensa
Dominorum, (...) beneficium dedit, and ait fiat sicut tibi vis. Vides quomodo
repulit quando alij (...) vbi veto (...) pro dono clamauit, annuit. Id. sup.
Math. Hom. 53.
, that we shall assuredly be heard, although no other pray for us, but our
selves, if we be devout, faithful, fervent, and perseurant, and conioine good
Works with our Prayers Aug. in Psalm. 43. Quam caeleriter accipiuntur orationes
been operantium. Idem d. Temp. ser. 226.
.

Secondly, But the Jesuit adds, That by refusing to make

I answer, Invocation of Saints is not grounded upon Apostolical Tradition.
For the Jesuit cannot prove (by the unanimous consent of the Fathers, abutting
upon the Apostles age, or by any other sufficient testimony) that the Apostles
preached or practiced this Doctrine. And if he were able to produce Paulus
Nazarius in 1. p. Tho. q. 113. ar. 2. Consensus Patrum in aliquam veritate, non
conuincit eam esse Apostolicam Traditione^, nisi in eam ita consentiant, vt
asserant eam esse Apostolicam Traditionem.
: The consent of Fathers in any point (which they hold to be a verity)
proves not the same to be an Apostolical Tradition, unless they consent in
such sort, that they affirm the same to be a Tradition. But our Adversaries
are unable to produce the ancient Fathers, maintaining by unanimous consent,
this Doctrine, as matter of Catholic Faith, or of necessary practice: and
they are far more unable to make ostension Peresius, d. Trad. p. 3. d. Cult.
Sanct. Ante Cornelium martirem, nulla extat mentio (quod ego viderim)
inuocationis and intercessionis Sa^ctorum. In causa forte fuit modestia and
humilitas Apostolica.
, that Ignatius, Justin Martyr, Ireneus, Tertullian, Clemens Alexandrinus, S.
Cyprian, Tradition beginning in the holy Apostles, must descend by a perpetual
current of all ages Aug. c. Don li. 5. ca. 26. Quod nos admonet, vt ad fontem
recurramus, id est, ad Apostolicam Traditionem, and inde canalem in nostra
tempora (...), optimum est, and sine dubitatione faciendum, etc. Basil. Hom.
28. c. Sabel. and Arian. Tho. Wald. Doctr. fid. lib. 2. ca. 19. Cassand. d.
Offic. boni viri. Andrad.
. Invocation of Saints began not in the holy Apostles, neither is the same
derived to our days, by a perpetual current, and unanimous consent, Ergo, The
same is not grounded upon Apostolical Tradition.

IESVIT.
Jf revealed Doctrine, coming by succession of Bishops from the Apostles to
us, will not alone win belief, even the Scriptures afford us sufficient
testimony hereof. When Abimelech king of Gezara had offended God, by taking
away from Abraham his wife Sara, and penitent of the Abraham, saying, Cen. 20.
v. 8.
Restore his wife unto the man, for he is a Prophet, and he will pray for thee,
and thou shall live. Eliphaz and his companions, did he not send them unto his
fingularly beloved servant Job, that he might be a Mediator for them? Ite ad
seruum meum Job 42. v. 8.
Job, and offerte holocaustu^ pro vobis, Job autem seruus meus orabit pro
vobis, faciem eius suscipiam, vt non vobis imputetur stultitia. Out of which
place, two things are clearly gathered: First, that though Gods mercy be
infinite, yet many times he will not grant our prayers, but in such manner as
he will make us beholding to his Saints: Secondly, that we ought to prostrate
our prayers unto him, as with great confidence in his goodness, so likewise
with a most feeling humble distrust of our own Friend I do thee not wrong; May
Math. 20.15.
I not dispense my mercies as I please? if I will bestow them in such sort, as
to join together with thy good, the honor of my friends, Is thine eye evil
because I am good, and courteous to them that have loved me more than their
own life?

ANSWER.
First, If you had reueiled Doctrine coming from the Apostles by succession,
the same would merit belief: but your present Doctrine of invocation of
Saints, etc. is not reueiled Peers. Ayala. d. Trad. p. 3. d. Cult. Sanct. pa.
140. Ante Cornelium Martirem, nulla extat mentio (quod ego viderim)
inuocationis, and intercessionis Sanctorum. Horant. lo. Cath. lib 3. ca. 21.
Sub Euangelio inuocatio Sanctorum explicit praecepta non est.
.

Secondly, Examples of Scripture, Genesis 20.17. Job. 42.8. prove indeed, that
when God himself by a precept appoints a means whereby sinners must seek his
favor, the same means is necessary, or else the end cannot be obtained. But
where has God appointed invocation of Saints deceased to

Thirdly, Abimelech and Jobs friends did not invoke Abraham or Job, but at
the most (which notwithstanding is not expressed in the Text, Genesis 20.7.17. Job
42.8.9.) requested their prayers, and sacrifice to God for them, whiles these
Prophets were conversant in the world, and were Gods Ministers and Priests,
appointed by him to make intercession for themselves and others, Heb. 6.1. It
may be also, that herein they were figures of Christ Glossa. Interlinear. sup.
Genesis 12. (...). sup. Genesis 18. Lauret. Sylu Allegor. ver. Abraham.
.

Whiles Priests and Prophets were living, and conversant Malach. 2.8. and to
entreat their prayers. But when Moses and Aron were deceased, did he then
appoint his people to do the like, or did any man set up Altars or Temples, in
honor of them, and repair unto the same, entreating to be taught by them, or
to be helped by their merits or prayers? The Argument therefore which the
Adversary makes, from the living to the dead Bellar. d. sanct. Beat. li. 1.
c. 19. Atque hoc Argumentu Aduersarij nunquam soluere potuerunt.
, is of no greater force than these which follow. Children may lawfully, and
with success, crave food and raiment of their parents, Ergo, Children may do
the like, when their parents are defunct. A parishioner may request his Pastor,
whiles he is living, to instruct him, or to absolve him. Ergo, he may pray to
him, to instruct and absolve him when he is dead. When a man's office cease,
the actions of his office surcease: but when men depart this life, their office
which they exercised in the world cease, their actions therefore depending
upon their office, do also cease. Now I subsume, to pray for people distinctly,
and in particular, depends Abraham and Job prayed for Abimelech, and Eliphas,
etc. whilst Abraham and Job lived, and although Abimelech and the rest must by
Gods

Verily he that reads this Section of the Jesuit, may well wonder and ask,
Whether such discoursors ever believed or heard, that the Son of God was
incarnate, that he is our Advocate, and that by him we have access to the
Throne of grace, (...) Or that the holy Ghost has left a manifest and certain
rule of Prayer in the Church; considering, that these men are so presumptuous,
upon their own frivolous surmises, to prescribe a form of religious
Invocation?

IESVIT. 5. Invocation to Saints, not an injury, but an honor to Christ the
only Mediator.
ANother show of piety pretended against Prayer unto Saints, is, that it
seems to overthrow the Mediatorship of Christ, which S. Paul commends, as
only, vnus Mediator Dei and hominum Christus Jesus. But 1. Tim. 2.3.
in showing the inanitie of this shadow, I shall not need to be long, seeing
this respect would make us also neglect, and not use the mediation of living
Saints, out of fear of disanulling the only Mediatorship of Christ. It is no
more Romans 15. 30. Job 42.8.
unto living Saints, and consequently, praying unto them is not injurious unto
the only Mediator Christ: Therefore the praying unto Saints deceased, that
are in glory with God, is not injurious unto the only Mediatourship of

ANSWER.
Our argument which you term an empty shadow, will not so lightly be shaken
as you imagine: for if Christ Jesus alone, in the state of the new Testament,
is the Mediator, both of redemption and intercession, then no Saint living or
deceased is a Mediator, etc. But the first is true, because God has
constituted Christ to be a Mediator, and he has appointed no other Ergo

Christ Jesus alone in the state of the new Testament, is the Mediator of
Redemption and Intercession.

Then I subsume Papists make Saints deceased partial: Mediators, to wit, of
Intercession Bellar. d. Sane. Beat. (...). c. 20. Postremo modo, etiam (...)
mediatores, inter Deum and eos pro quibus orant. Neque est curtimeamus, nomen
mediatoris transfer ad Sanctos, (...) ad eos transferrimus nomen Aduocati and
intercessoris, quae Christo (...) Romans (...). and 1. Ioh. 2. Biel. in Can.
(...). lect. 30. K. Non ergo frustra imploramus Sanctos quos non vt Creatores
gratiae sieve Beatificatoresinuocamus, sed vt Mediatores, quorum meritis and
intuitu nobis Deus (...) quam ex Jdem. Ex quibus patit preces nostras spem que
consequendae (...) per mediatores Sanctos in coelo, inanes non esse: sed ordine
a Deo instituto, nos ad eorum auxilia (...) debere, (...) debita veneratione
eos semper implorare, vt saluemur (...) meritis, atque votis.
. Therefore they yield some part of Christ (the sole Mediator) his office unto
Saints.

The Jesuit answers, by distinction of Mediator, principal, and
subordinate, or dependent, saying: That they appoint no Saints Medtatours of
the first kind, but only of the second: And that this is no injury to Christ,
or encroachment on his office, but an honor to him, and a means to apply, or
make his Mediation effectual to us; and he uses certain Paralogismes to
conclude this.

First, the Scripture (says he) allows, and commands prayer

It is answered, That unless the Jesuit aequiuocate, the Scripture commands
not invocation of living Saints, but only the requesting of their charity and
prayers to God for men, Romans 15.30. Ephesians. 6.19. Col. 4.3. 1. These. 5.25. Heb.
13.18. But the living are present and conversant with the living, they conioyne
their common prayers, Vt deum quasi manufacta, praecationibus ambiant (says
Tertul. Apol. c. 39.) That going to God hand in hand they may entreat him.
Besides, invocation and prayer properly taken, hearts: Therefore, speaking
properly, no man prays to living Chrysostom. d. Orat. li. 1. Vere cum Dco
co^fabulamur, quoties vacamus deprecationi. Si qui cum Caesare miscent
sermones, etc. Multo minus fieri potest vtqui Deum deprecantur, cum co
familiariter colloquetes, etc. Aug. Psalm. 85. Oration tua locutio est ad Deum,
etc. Chrysostom. in Genes. Ho. 30. Oration Colloquium est cum Deo.
, and a proper worship of God, and an action of Latria Palud. 4. d. 15. q. 5.
n. 4. Gabr. Can. Miss. lect. 61. I. Antonin. Sum. Mor. p. 4. Tit. 5. c. 8.. 2.
. Lastly, no precept, or example is extant in holy Scripture, proouing that
just persons did at any time pray to living Saints being absent, or to living
Saints, by Collets, or set forms of public devotion, in such manner as
Romists do to Saints deceased. As for petition or request (which is all the
Scripture mentions) the same is only general and material in prayer: and
therefore we cannot conclude affirmatively, saying, They made request to the
Saints living, to assist them with their prayers. Ergo, Ergo, it is a man; It
has one act of prayer, Ergo, it is Prayer; It is a promise, therefore it is a
vow, etc.

If it be replied, The requesting of the living to pray for us, and their
supplication according to this request, is not injurious to Christ's office,
etc. Ergo, Our Invocation of Saints deceased, is no injury, etc.

We answer: That as in humane and civil affairs, it is an injury
all-sufficient Advocate, and withal has prescribed the means, by which we
must have access unto this Mediator: is it not wicked presumption in man, to
cancel this sacred ordinance, and to appoint other means Cyprian says Cypr.
d. orat. Dom n. 1. Aliter orare quam docuit, non ignoratio sola sit, sed and
culpa: quando ipse posuerit and dixerit, reijcitis mandatum Dei, vt traditionem
vestram statuatis.
: For men to pray otherwise than the Lord has taught, is not only ignorance,
but iniquity: for he has said, Ye reject the Commandment of God, that you
may establish your own tradition. And Tertullian Tertul. d. orat. c. 12. quibus
merito vanitas exprobranda est, siquidem sine vllius aut Dominici, aut
Apostolici praecepti authoritate fiunt.
, They are justly reproached with vanity, because (in prayer) they do this
without any warrant from Christ or his Apostles.

In the Court of heaven, he which appoints the supreme, into supreme and
secondarie, founded upon man's own Invention, One God, one Mediator, etc. 1.
Timoth. 2. 4, 5.

IESVIT.
I add, That to make Saints Mediators subordinate unto, and dependent of
Christ, is to increase his glory. Heb. 7.25.
as have no access unto God, but through Christ Jesus, by mediation of his
Merit, Passion, and Death; Act. 4.12.
we are to be saved. Ergo, etc.

ANSWER.
In words, and outward pretext, you allow unto Saints subordinate Mediation
only; but your practice shows, that you make them principal Cassand.
Consult. d. Inuoc. Sanct. Sedul. (...). (...). Traject. cap. 1. Casta Virgo
Dei, Genitrix Maria, etc. vnica spes Patrum, (...) Prophetarum, Praeconium
Apostolorum, etc. Sub tua tutela and protectione toti sumus. Da verbum cordi
quae mundo dedisti (...), da quod pie institui foeliciter exequi. Idem, cap.
18. (...) Virgo in te Angeli (...), iusti gratiam, peccatores veniam inuenerunt
in aeternum Mento in te (...) totius (...), etc. Idem, cap. 21. Tu vnica apud
Deum Christianorum, spes nostra es (...) and sanctissima; cui gloria and honor,
decus atque imperium in sempiterna
Mediators (at least) to Christ Corona. B. Virg. Mariae, c. 2. Sicut ergo
Christus, est Mediator inter Deum and hominem, sic beata Virgo inter filium
suum and hominem. Vnde in persona ipsius Solomon dixit Matri, 3. Reg. 2. Pete
matter (...) quod vis, neque enim fas est, etc. Item in Deuteronomio dicit
Dominus, Ego percutiam and B. Virgo tanquam Mediatrix respondet, and ego sanabo.
: and in your prayers to them, you say to them, Let etc.

And yet if your practice were according to your distinction, you were
transgressors: for that which is given to another, without commission from
Christ, is taken from him. And Matthew. 15.9. Lastly, when the holy Scripture
teaches us, that there is one Creator, and one Redeemer; it is impiety for
man to honor any other, under the name of a subordinate Creator and Redeemer.
So likewise, when the

IESVIT.
Whence I infer, That Protestants mistake our Doctrine, when they say we
teach, That Saints are fellow Mediators with Christ, and that we bring them to
supply the defect of his intercession, that otherwise would not be sufficient.
This we do neither teach, nor believe, but that the merits of Christ are
infinite, every drop of his precious Blood, able to pay the full ransom of a
million of

ANSWER.
If the Intercession of Christ, according to Divine Ordinance,

But the first is true: First, None of the faithful in the whole History of
the New Testament, did invoke Saint Stephan or Saint James, or any other
Saint deceased, that they might

Secondly, Our Savior himself, or his Apostles, ordained not any such means,
either for procuring and applying of Christ's Intercession, or for the honoring
of his Saints. And this argues, both that the Invocation of Saints is a
voluntary devotion, and also a vertuall or interpretatiue derogation, from the
Intercession of Christ, and from the other means, which he has sanctified,
and an undue means of honoring the Saints

IESVIT.
Jf it be a glory to a root of a tree, to have many boughs and branches
laden with excellent fruit, the Saints being but branches of Christ Jesus, the
true Vinetree, surely the John 15.1, 5.
honor of all their merits springs originally, and is referred finally unto
him: and as it is impossible to honor and praise the boughs, without
honoring and praising of the root: so likewise it is not possible that
Catholics who acknowledge

ANSWER.
It is an honor to Christ the true Vine, to have many fruitful Branches, Ioh.
15.8. And when we honor the branches, in

IESVIT.
Wherefore Saints pray for us, that God would forgive us our sins, grant us
favors that help us toward eternal life, not for their merits, but for the
merits of Christ. And when the Fathers in their Prayers allege unto benefit of
that ransom should be extended to some one

ANSWER.
First, You are ignorant of the manner, and particular matter, of Saintly
Intercession; and it is more than you can prove, that blessed Saints pray
expressly and distinctly for the remission of men's particular sins.

Secondly, Blessed Saints by their Intercession in heaven can merit nothing for
themselves or others, for they are not in the

Your similitude of a King, is nothing to the purpose, because the ground
whereupon you build it is false: Kings grant favors and pardons, for the
merits and entreaty of such as are gracious in their sight, but God bestows
his graces and pardons, for

IESVIT.. 6. of Graces and Cures unto Saints.
Our Adversaries finding our invocation of Saints, for substance practiced in
Gods Church, ever since the primative times, take exceptions at some
circumstances

ANSWER.
IF invocation of Saints has not been practiced universally in Gods Church,
ever since the Apostles times, then the same is not Catholic Vinc. Lir. c.
Haer. c. 4. Quicquid non vnus aut duo tantum, sed omnes (...) vno (...)
consensu, aperte, frequenter, perseueranter, tenuisse, scripsisse, docuisse
cognouerit.
, or originally divine Tertul. d. praescript. c. 21. Quod ecclesia ab Apostolis
Apostoli a Christo, Christus a Deo suscepit.
: therefore you trifle, Arist. Topic. lib. 8. ca. 13. (...).
, when you declame, saying, Our Adversaries finding our invocation of Saints
for substance practiced in Gods Church ever since the Primative times. First,
you dare not say ever since the Apostles times, but you equivocate in the
term of Primative. Secondly, you leave out Universally, for you cannot
demonstrate, that the same was practiced in all Churches, or maintained
generally by the Fathers. Thirdly, you seek an evasion by a distinction of
Substance, and Circumstance, and acquaint us not, what shall be of the one, and
what of the other: public and private, freely, and of necessity, may be

IESVIT.
The first of these circumstances whereupon they there is no example in
Antiquity, yea it seems to resemble Austines time, which he himself Aug.
Epist. 137.
did practice upon this occasion. In the town of Hippo, one of the family of
S. Augustine, accused a Priest of an heinous crime, making his accusation good
by oath, which the Augustine sent them both into Jtalie to the Shrine of S.
Foelix at Nola, at whose relics perjured persons were usually discovered:

In defense of which fact, he writes an Epistle to his people of Hippo,
allowing of this proceeding to seek recourse rather to one Saint than another,
wondering at the secret providence of God therein: Although says he, men by
experience

ANSWER.
To impose offices upon Saints deceased, and to attribute cures, deliverances,
opitulations, power, and actions to them, upon man's own imagination, and to
persuade people which Psalm. 121.2. Esa. 8.17. 1. Sam. 17.37. to depend upon
creatures in their perils and adversity (changing the names only) is
Heathenish superstition. And what do Papists else in substance, when they make
Saints (yea some perhaps, which are in Hell) particular regents Biel. in Can.
Miss. Lect. 32. Etiam in Sanctis veru^ est illud Virgilianum, Non omnia
possumus omnes. Non enim omnia omnibus data sunt, sed diuersi diuersa
receperunt: vt quod scribit Gerson. d. Orat. and valor. eius. n. 77. lit. Y. Ad
alique Sanctorum te convertas, pro necessitatibus quibuslibet subleua^dis, vel
pro impetranda speciali quadam gratia, qua sanct' vel sancta (...) quoddam
donu^ recepisse memoratur diuisiones enim gratiarum sunt, sicut tradit
Apostolus, quod verum est, nedum de viatoribus; sed etiam de beatis, sub quo
(...) canit Ecclesia de quolibet Sanctorum, non est inuentus Salmeron. tom. 15.
disp. 7. in 1. (...). 2. Sancti non opitulantur omnibus aequaliter. Nam sunt
aliqui, qui in (...), peculiariter opem ferunt, and (...) etiam quibus in hac
vita ob accepta benificia, particulari ratione tenebantur. Hinc Hispani
peculiariter colunt B. Iacobum; Sebastianum, Lucitani; Romani, (...) and
Paulum; Florentini, Iohannem (...), (...), Marcum; Senenses, B. (...); Galli,
Dionisium; Germani, Barbaram; (...), (...) and (...), etc. Ib. Haec multiformis
munerum distributio, partim a Deo inspirata, partim (...) est per (...), partim
pijs coniecturis deprehensa, and praecipue in illis rebus (...), quas ipsi
(...) sunt. Ita inuocamus Petrum in vinculis, Paulum in conuersione, vtrunque
in periculis maris; Iohannem Bapt in natiuitate; Euangelistam, in colenda
Virginitate; Sebastianum and (...), in peste depelienda; Antonium, in igne
abercendo, and rebus amissis inueniendis, and similibus alijs plerisque.
of countries, cities, Apollonia, is for the tooth ach; Otilia, for bleared
eyes; S. Rochus, for the pox; Erasmus, for the iliake passion; Blasius, for
the quinsie; Petronella, for feauers; S. Wendeline, is for sheep and oxen; S.
Antonie, for hogs; S. Gertrudis, for mice and rats; S. Nicholas, is the patron
of sailers; S. Clement, of bakers; S. George, of horsemen; S. Eulogius, of
smiths; S. Luke, of painters; S. Cosmas, of physicians, etc. There is no doubt
but that this base superstition was derived Augustine d. Ciuit. Dei, lib. 4.
cap. 22. says, That Varro maintained, it was profitable to know the power, and
working of every god in particular, that men might be able to sue unto them,
according to their several offices, for every distinct or particular benefit,
least otherwise they might ask water of Bacchus the god of wine, or wine of
the Nymphs, goddesses of water.

But our Adversary blusheth not to say, That the former doctrine and practice,
is suitable to the judgment of the Fathers, and that S. Augustine maintained
the same.

First, I conceive, that by Fathers he understands the Trident Fathers; for
could he have named ancient Fathers, no doubt we should have had them.

As for the narration out of S. Augustine, Epist. 137. it falls short of
proving the question in hand. For no mention is made concerning invocation of
S. Foelix the Martyr, nor of any vows or oblations presented to him. Neither
was the discovery of the fact (mentioned in that Epistle) required to be made
by the Martyr, but it was intended to be sought from Aug. Ep. 137. (...)
Presbiteri, propterea non ausus sum de numero collegarum eius vel deprimere,
vel delere, ne diuinae potestati, sub cui' examine causa adhuc pendet, facere
viderer iniuriam, si illius iudicium, (...) vellem iudicio praeuenire.
. But if any special miracle had been wrought in those days, at the Martyrs
tomb, the same is to be ranked among things extraordinary, from which a
Catholic, and Ioh. 5.4. and the river of Jordan, Kings vlt. cap. 5.14.

IESVIT.
This being a Doctrine taught by the learnedest Father Christianity bred, by
him grounded on Scripture, and on

ANSWER.
S. Augustine has nothing in the former place which maintains the seeking of
special benefits and favors, by the peculiar Gerhard. loc. to. 8. d. Mort. n.
353. Germania venerabatur Martinum, and Georgium Cataphractu^, Hispania,
Iacobum; Gallia, Michaelem and Dionysium; Vngaria, Ludouicum; Polonia,
Stanislaam; Moscouia, Nicholaum; Heluetia, Virginem Mariam in Nigricante Silua
Eremitarum locum habentem; Anglia, Thomam and Gregorium; Scocia, Andream;
Bohemia, Wenceslaum; Suecia, Brigittam, etc. Franci colebant Cilianum;
Thuringi, Bonifacium; Hassi, Elizabetham; Misnici, Donatum, Bauari,
Wolffgangum; Austriaci, Florianum; Carinthij,
(to which purpose you allege him;) and therefore the Jesuit ouer-reacheth
lowdly, when he says, This being a Doctrine taught by the learnedest Father
which Christianity bred, being by him grounded on Scripture.

IESVIT.
Specially, seeing this was usual in the Church, in her most flourishing age.
S. Lucie went on Pilgrimage unto the body of S. Agatha for help of her mother,
putting peculiar confidence in her intercession, as being a Christian Virgin of
her Country and profession. S. Iustina, a virgin, being by the devil tempted
against virginal purity, fled to Virginem Mariam rogauit, Greg. Naz. in S.
Sipr. Paulinus Epist. ad Cytherium.
vt periclitanti virgini opem feret, as S. Nazianzen writes. S. Martinian (as
Paulinus records) having suffered shipwreck, called with peculiar devotion and
trust upon Saint Paul, whose Epistles he did highly honor, remembering that the
same Saint yet living, delivered threescore souls from the like peril,
neither was his Petition frustrate.

ANSWER.
Your Argument, to wit, Saint Lucie, Saint Iustina, Saint Martinian, sought
deliverance by Intercession of Saints, Ergo, This was Catholic Doctrine in
the more flourishing age of the Church, has two lame joints.

First, The sequel is false, for neither was this age the most flourishing age
Chrysoft. in 1. Cor. Hom. 36. Coelum Ecclesia tunc fuit, spiritu cuncta
administrante, cuncta Ecclesiae capita moderante, afflatu suo vnumquenque
corripiente. Nunc vero vestigia tantum rerum illarum tenemus, etc. Videtur
Ecclesia hodie, mulieri quae veteri foelicitate exciderit similis. Quaeque
symbola tantum foelicitatis illius referat, quaedam arcus and scriuia rerum
praetiosissimarum adhuc seruans, thesauro destituto.
, but far inferior to ages precedent: neither does the particular practice
of certain persons, make this devotion Catholic; because to the being of
Catholic it is required, Vincent. Lir. c. Haer. cap. 39. Quicquid vel omnes
vel plures, vno eodemque (...) manifest, frequenter, perseueranter, etc.
.

Secondly, The Antecedent is not sufficiently proved, for no ancient Author is
produced concerning Saint Lucie. And Iustina Gregory Nazianzen, being in
distress (as Susanna sometimes was) (...), etc. despairing of all other
remedies she slieth to God, and then assumeth for her Patron and Protector,
Christ Jesus her spouse, Marie to succor her, being a distressed Virgin,
First, she slieth to God. Secondly, she makes Christ her Patron. Thirdly, she
requesteth the Virgin Marie, (in zeal, rather than upon knowledge.) Fourthly,
she is delivered, not by Pilgrimage to Saints, but by prayer and fasting, to
God. And although Gregory Nazianzen (speaking only by hearesay) reports
that she supplicated (not by any Collect, or set form of devotion, but by a
short eiaculation) to the Virgin Marie, yet this was done by her in the last
place, and Nazianzen (...).
to Christ, and in no sort to the Virgin Marie.

Martinian being in danger of shipwreck, amassed and affrighted at the present
peril, he took up Saint Paul's Epistles, and laid them to his breast, and
Paulinus says Paul. in Carm ad Cither. to. 5. Biblioth. Col. page 225.
Aiacentes pectori tanget suo Epistolas Apostoli. Hunc in pauore codicem, sed
nesciens rebus relictis sumpserat.
, That God by his grace did give this man to Saint Paul, whose Epistles and
Doctrine he esteemed so highly, as that neglecting all other goods and stuff
which were in the ship, he gathered up only Paul's Epistles. I find in this
Poem Paulinus his Epistles to Cythereus) no pilgrimage or supplication made by
Martinian to S. Paul, but a singular devotion to S. Paul's Epistles, and Gods
protection and favor toward him, for the love he bare the Apostle and his
Doctrine, upon which, it pleased the Divine Majesty to bestow life and safety
upon him, and to deliver him from peril, as he did those for whom Saint Paul
prayed, Acts 27.24. But note here, Saint Paul's Epistles save a man from
shirwracke, and yet in the Ocean of the Papacy, they Martinian in Paulinus)
that it confiscateth the whole fraught to the Holy house.

IESVIT.
Notwithstanding we confess, That herein a discreet expect that simple people
in matter of Religion will not Aug. li. de Moribus Eccles. c. 10.
it happens, we must (as S. Augustine says) Ignorantiam instruere pertinaciam
deridere.

ANSWER.
Shameful and intolerable abuses are committed by Romists in this kind, and
some learned Papists themselves Cassand. Consult. (...) mer. and Intercess.
Sanct. pa. 970. Alter error est quod homines etiam non malicertos fibi Sanctos
tanquam patronos, and tutores deligerunt, in eorum meritis atque intercessione,
plus quam in Christi merito fidutiam posuerunt, atque adeo vnico illo
aduocationis Christi officio obscurato, Sanctos (...) inprimis virginem matrem,
in illius locum substituerunt. Council. Colon. Expl. Decal. (...) fatemur
pastorum dormitantium (...), error in Ecclesiam, quo vulgus verae pietatis non
satis intelligens, singulorum morborum curam singulis Sanctis assignauit.
have desired reformation. But one may as soon make the Morions

IESVIT.. 7. Saints.
ANother circumstance whereupon Protestants ground the seventh cause of their
dislike, is, our offering oblations unto Saints; which your Majesty does
object peculiarly as done to the blessed Virgin Mary.

ANSWER.
IN the old law as Sacrifices were offered to God only, Exodus 22.20. Iud.
13.16.2. Chron. 34.25. so likewise oblations and vows, Deuteronomy. 23.21. Leuit.
24.5.6. and as the Lord condemned people of Idolatry, for sacrificing to
creatures, so the Israelites are reproved for burning incense to the brazen
Serpent. 2. Kings 18.4. and to the queen of heaven. Ierem. 44.25. This law in
respect of the substance, is moral: and consequently common to God and Saints,
our adversaries have not as S. Augustine, and (...), who report certain
miracles wrought by God Almighty at the Sepulchers of Martyrs.

IESVIT.
I answer, if any Catholic should offer to the blessed mother of God by way of
sacrifice, any the least thing, he were severely to be rebuked and better
instructed: for sacrifice is Nulli Martyru^ sed ipsi deo Martyrum quamuis in
memorias Martyrum constituimus altaria. Aug. c. Faust. li. 20. c. 21.
sacrifice of the holy Eucharist is never offered unto any but unto God, in
memory and honor of Saints: herein the Collyridians women Priests did err,
who did sacrifice a wafer cake unto the blessed Virgin: which kind of worship
under the title of adoration, S. Epiphanius reprooues, Epiph. haer. 78.
allowing the Catholic worship, as thereby tearming her honorable, not for
humane or civil, but for divine and supernatural

True it is, that in Catholic countries people offer unto Saints, lights,
flowers, and cheynes, not as sacrifices, but as ornaments, to set forth their
tombs and shrines, wherein they do not dissent from antiquity, nor from Gods
holy will, who has confirmed such devotions by miracle, as diverse Authors
worthy of all credit relate, particularly S. Augustine, by Protestants allowed
as the most faithful Aug. d. Ciuit. Dei. li. 22. c. 8.
recovered her sight by laying to her eyes flowers, which had touched the
shrine wherein were carried about the Relikes of the most glorious Martyr S.
Stephan. A more wonderful Aug. ibid.
example in the same kind he relates done upon an old man of good note, who
being sick and ready to die, did yet very obstinately refuse to believe in
Christ, and leave his Idolatry, although he was very earnestly moved
thereunto Stephan, and having performed his devotions, with burning affection,
with many groans and (...), being to depart, took with him some flowers that
were on the shrine, and laid them secretly under his Stephan, when he was
stoned to death by the Jews, which also were the last words

Other oblations also Catholics use to offer unto Saints, not as sacrifices,
but as memories and monuments of benefits received, as pictures of limbs, by
Saints prayers miraculously cured, that therein they do not deflect from
ancient Christian devotion; and that the Christian Church in her best times,
used universally to make such oblations, Theodoret is a sufficient witness,
who writing against the Gentiles, alleges as a manifest sign of Christ's
Godhead Theodor. d. Cur. Graecorum Affect. lib. 8.
and omnipotency, that Idols being excluded, he brought in Martyrs to be
honored in their room, not superstitiously as Gods, but Religiously as divine
men, inuocating and beseeching them to be Intercessours for them unto God. And
those that piously and faithfully pray, obtain what they desire, as testify
the oblations which they (being thereunto

ANSWER.
Touching the Collyridians, I answer, that notwithstanding there is some
difference in the material act, between Romists and them, yet because
Epiphanius condemns not only external Epiphan. Haer. 59. Sieve 79. Honoretur
sane Maria, pater vero filius, and (...) Sanctus adorentur. Mariam adorare nemo
velit, etc. Quamuis Maria vel optima fuerit ac Sancta, and honor dignissima;
non idcirco tamen adoratio ne prosequenda.
, shall be yielded unto her; therefore Prayers, incense-offerings, and presents
to Saints deceased, were held unlawful in this Fathers days.

Secondly, Saint Augustine de Ciuit. Dei, l. 22. c. 8. does not a Aug. Ib.
visum est genero eius, vt (...) ad memoriam Sancti Stephani, and illic pro ea
quantum posset oraret, vt Deus illi daret mentem bonam, etc.
to Saints and Martyrs; but he reports what miraculous cures were performed
at the toombes of some Martyrs: now, because these things were extraordinary,
and the credit of diverse of them depends upon fame (which is many times
uncertain Tertul. Apol. c. 7. Cur malum fama? Quia velox an quia plurimum
, and St. Augustine himself says, They are not commended unto us by such
weighty authority, as that without all doubt, they must needs be credited
Aug. d. Ciu. Dei. lib. 22. cap. 8. Non tanta ea commendat (...) vt sine
difficultate vel dubitatione credantur.
) they cannot be sufficient grounds or foundations of Catholic Doctrine or
Practice.

Thirdly, Theoderit. d. cur. Graec. Affect. lib. 8. says, We (Oh Atqui nos, O
Graeci homines nec hostias Martiribus nec libamina vlla deferimus sed vt
Sanctos homines deique amicissimos honoramus.
Grecians) neither offer sacrifice to Martirs, nor drink offerings, but honor
them as holy men, and as the friends of God. And whereas he further says, That
some hang up the shapes of eyes, others of ears, etc. he means that these
were monuments of miraculous cures, wrought in those days extraordinarily by
God at the Sepulchers of Martyrs: but he affirms not, that they Gratissime
accipit eorum Dominus, qualiacunque sunt dona, etc.


IESVIT. 8. The Roman Church set forms of Prayer, without cause misliked.
FInally, Protestants dislike the circumstance of praying in a set form unto
Saints, and that we appoint a particular office to the blessed Virgin Mary,
which cannot be proved to have been used in the Primative Church.

ANSWER.
THe Romish set forms of Prayers to the Virgin Marie and other Saints
deceased, are justly condemned by us, not merely because they are exercised in
a set form (which is accidental) but in respect of the matter and substance
of them, neither can our Adversaries demonstrate, that such Prayers, either in
a set form, or by sudden inspiration, were used in From the beginning it was
not so: and we say with Saint Cyprian Cypr. Epist. 74. Si ad diuinae
Traditionis caput and originem reuertamur cessat error humanus, etc. Si canalis
aquam ducens qui copiose prius and largiter profluebat subito deficiat nonne ad
fontem pergitur vt illic defectionis ratio noscatur, etc. Quod and nunc facere
oportet Dei Sacerdotes praecepta diuina servants, vt si in aliquo nutauerit
and vaccillauerit veritas ad originem dominicam and Euangelicam and Apostolicam
Traditionem (...) and inde surgat actus nostri ratio vnde and ordo and origo
surrexit.
, to all latter examples: If verity be changed, or lean a toside, we must
look back, and return to Divine, Evangelical, and Apostolic Tradition; and
derive the order of our Action, from the original ground where it first began.
And Tertullian says Tertul. d. virg. vel. c. 1. Hoc exigere veritatem cui nemo
prescribere
, If a custom, proceeding from ignorance or simplicity, be confirmed by use
of succession, and opposed against verity, we must observe, that neither space
of time, nor privilege of persons, may prescribe against truth; for Christ is
eternal, and before all, and in like sort, verity is most ancient.

IESVIT.
I answer, That the Primmar or Office (so termed) of our Lady, is not an
Office properly and principally directed unto her, but an Office containing
praises of God, taken out of holy Scripture, wherein commemoration of her is
made,

But further we can prove, That the Church in her Magdeburgians, Mag. cent.
4. cap. 4
to have been in use even in the fourth age after Christ. Jn which age the
four first general Counsels were held.

ANSWER.
You deny, that the Primar, or Office of our Lady, is an office, properly and
principally directed to her, etc. But the reason whereupon you ground this
denial, is slight; for although there is a mixture of Prayers and Praises to
God, contained in this Office, yet the Virgin Marie is as directly and properly
inuocated therein, as God himself, or Jesus Christ: besides, you have many
Psalters and Primers of our Lady, and in some of them, the Virgin Marie is the
most special Object and matter of the service.

The Roman Breuiarie says In Octau. Assumpt. Lect. Ecce quibus.
, In this day of solemnity and gladness, we call upon the sweet name of
Marie. And to the Apostles Breu. Romans Hymno exultet Iaud.
, O ye, to whose command the health and infirmity of all is subject, heal
all those that be sick in manners, restoring us to virtues. To Thomas Didimus
Portif. Sar. in Tho. Did.
, O Thomas Didimus, by Christ, whom thou deseruedst to touch, we beseech thee,
with our loud sounding Prayers, to succor us wretches, that we be not damned
with the wicked, in the coming of the Great Judge. To the blessed Virgin Lect.
s. (...). in seruit. B. Virg. Mar.
, Wash away our offenses, that we being redeemed by thee, may be able to
obtain the seat of everlasting glory. Also Romans Breu. 3. Die infra octau.
Assumpt. Virg. Mar. Lect. 4. Iubilemus in arca Dom.
, All hail The Roman Breuiarie teaches us to pray Breu. Romans in Abdon and
Senon. Iulij 30.
, That the merits of the Saints, Abdon and Senon interceding, we may deserve to
be delivered from all our necessities. And Romans Miss. in Leone.
for Leo his merits interceding, absolve us from all sins. Also, By the sword
of sorrow Aur. Litan.
which went through the Virgins heart, and the compassion of tears which she
shed under the Cross, have mercy on us. Also Miss. sar. in memor. Prim. and
Faelic. in. fest. Iunij.
, Let the Host to be consecrate, be pleasing unto thee, by the celebritie of
the Martirs, Primus and Faelicianus, that by

The like superlatiue boldness was, in the enditing and publishing
Bonauentures Psalter, wherein God and Christ are sacrilegiously robbed, yea,
blasphemously dishonored, to embelish the Virgin Marie; yet all this the
Church of Rome digesteth,

In that Psalter, these and the like forms of Prayer are extant Posseu.
Apparat. verb. Bonauentura. Bulla. Sixti. 4. to. 2. Opusc. Bonau. Psalt.
Bonauent. Miserere mei Domina, quae matter misericordiae numcuparis, and
secundum viscera misericordiarum tuarum, munda me ab omnibus iniquitatibus
meis. Essunde gratiam tuam super me, and solitam clementiam tuam ne subtrahas a
me, quoniam peccata mea confitebor tibi, and coram te me accuso de sceleribus
meis, fructui ventris tui me reconcilia, and pacifica me ei qui me creauit.
Domina in nomine tuo saluum me fac, and ab iniustitijs meis libera me, etc.
Miserere mei Domina, miserere mei, quia paratum est cor meum, exquirere
voluntatem tuam, etc. Eripe me de inimicis meis Domina mundi, exurge in
occursum meum, Regina pietatis, etc. Deus misereatur nostri, and benedicat
nobis per illam quae eum genuit, etc. Domina in adiutorium meum intend, and
luce misericordiae tuae illustra mentem meam, etc. In te Domina speraui,
.

Oh blessed Lady, my Savior, I will put my confidence in thee, and I shall not
need to fear. Oh blessed Lady, our Salvation is placed in thy hands, who thou
please shall be saved, and they shall perish eternally, from whom thou
turnest away thy face. Blessed art thou my Lady, the mother of the God of
Israel, who by thee has visited, and sent redemption unto his people, and
has raised up the horn of Salvation, David thy servant, etc. Thou o Marie
shall be called the Prophet of God, by thee has he given the knowledge of
Salvation for the remission of sins, by the bowels of the multitude of thy
mercies, Visit us o thou day star arising from an high, Thou art the gate of
Paradise, the ladder of Heaven, the Arc of Piety and Grace, the spring of
Mercy, the Mediatrix of God and men. And in the same Psalter these words are
found, Whosouer will be saved, above all things, he must have steadfast Faith of
the Virgin Marie, and the right Faith is (among other Articles) God assumed her
(bodily)

Secondly, the Jesuit proves, that set forms of prayers to Saints are
lawful by this Argument: If it be lawful to make intercessions to Saints,
then it is lawful to perform this in a set form; But the first is true, for
the Primitive Church did this, and the Magdeburgians confess, That a kind of
Letanie Ergo, etc. I answer, That if by Primitive Church, be understood the
Church Primitive, comprehending the Apostles, and their immediate successors,
then the proof of the assumption is false; for that Primitive Church used no
such devotion. And if by Primitive Church, be understood (extensiue and
exclusive) the Church after the three hundred years, invocation of Saints was
not used by the whole Church for three hundred years more: neither can the
practice of any Church (excluding the Apostles) produce doctrine of Faith, or
of necessary duty.

The Magdeburgians rehearse out of a counterfeit work, fathered upon
Athanasius Baron. Anno Christi 49. n. 19. Bellar. d. Scriptor. Eccles. in
Athanasio. Magdeb. Centur. 4. cap. 4. pa. 396. and 397.
, a set prayer used to the Virgin Marie; but they add, apparet multa esse
deprauata and supposita in istorum doctorum scriptis, It is apparent that many
things depraved and supposititious are found among the writings of these
Doctors.

IESVIT.
But they will perchance say, that they do not so much Lady protect us from
the Devil, receive us in the hour of death, give light to the blind, pardon
the guilty, remove from us all evil, etc. A answer, These speeches cannot
justly be disliked, because they are understood in a begging his life of them
that have power to take it away,

ANSWER.
We condemn the very substance of your prayers, in this kind, and not only
some phrases, etc. For what Prophet, or what Apostle, or Evangelist, did ever
teach Gods people to pray in this manner?

And whereas some forms of your prayers to Saints, being understood according
to the sound of words, are blasphemous Read sundry forms of such prayers in
Chemn. Exam. Council. Trid. p. 3. pa. 145. Herbra^d. c. Greg. Val. d. multipl.
Papat. Idolom. Gerhard. loc. com. to. 8. d. Inuoc. Sanct.
, you labor to qualify this by a favorable exposition, pretending that you
say one thing, and mean another, and that herein you vary not from the
Scripture. You call the blessed Virgin, Mother of Grace, Mother of Mercy,
Queen of Heaven, etc. you say, that all power is given her in heaven and in
earth Bernerdin. d. Senis. apud Benzon. in magnif. li. 1. cap. 18. Data est
tibi o Domina, omnis potestas in (...) and in terra, vt quicquid volueris,
valeas efficere.
, and because she outliued her son, she was by natural right heir of all
the world Benzon. in Cant. Magnif. lib. 1. cap. 18. Sed iure haereditario mundi
Monarchiam acquisiuisse, tempore mortis Christi filij eius iam demonstrandum
est, etc. Nullus alius in terris fuit, qui de iure in (...) haereditate
succederet Christo. Ius natural postulat, dictanteratione, vt matter, sicut
(...) in filium habet, ita quoque habeat in (...) quae sunt filij.
. Yea some of you go further, teaching that as Christ redeemed mankind by his
flesh and blood, so she redeemed the same with her soul Coron. Mar. 7. Stel.
2. Coronae. lustus quiliber tradere cor suum ad vigilandum (...) ad Dominam
mundi, per quam redemptus est and reconciliatus. Stellar. Coron. B. Mar. lib.
12. pa. 1. ar. 2. Christus carnem pro nobis and sanguinem, Maria imolabat
animam.
, and that all grace and glory coming from Marie, as by the neck Benzon. in
Cant. Magnif. lib. 1. ca. 18. Christus cum sit caput, per collum, id est,
Mariam effundit in fideles benignitatem suam, Maria vero recipiens a Christo
gratias, nobis liberahter, and benign communicate.
, and she as his mother, has all right, authority, and dispensation of his
mercy Ib. Ipsa tanquam eius matter, ius, authoritatem, and dispensationem
illius (...), constituit enim illam Dominus Dominam domus suae, and principem
omnis possessionis suae. Bernerdin. d. Bust. Mar. p. 1. Sermon. 5. d. concep.
Mar. B. Virgo est Domina, and Imperatrix totius or bis, and omnium creaturarum.
Primo namque est Regina Coeli and Angelorum, etc. Dominatur quoque inferno,
dominatur etiam mundo, and hominibus habitantibus in eo. Jbid. p. 3. d. Nom.
Mar. 4. Excel. Si ergo imperat filio, ratione maternalis iurisdictionis,
.

This lying doctrine is colored with certain distinctions, and forced
instances of holy Scripture, which notwithstanding agree to the present
question like Harp and Harrow.

Men indeed which are instruments of preserving life, and saving others, may be
said in largeness of speech, to give life, or to be saviors, Iud. 3. v. 9.
and 15. But the blessed Virgin, and Saints deceased, since their departure, are
not by any new actions, instruments of spiritual life, nor bestowers of grace
and salvation upon the living. And when the Prophets and Apostles Marie was
never styled a Redeemer, Mediator, or Savior, by the holy Ghost, but she
says in her thanksgiving, My spirit reioiceth in God my Savior. Some names
are common, and sometimes that which was common or typically given to certain
persons in the old Testament, is appropriated in the new, as we observe in the
names of Savior, Jesus, Redeemer, Regulam habemus praeter quam loqui fas non
est, We have a rule beside which we may not speak. And we are not so
straighted for words, that we must of necessity apply or communicate the
titles of Christ unto the creatures.

Now to that which you add by way of excuse, for your improper or abusiue
speaking, (saying, in verse impossible, the meeter not permitting.) I answer,
What an impudent and ridiculous plaster is this? will not verse permit us to
implore benefits, only Nay, who so reads the Papisticall poetical Church
hymns, Arnobius said of the Gentiles L. 6. c. Gent. pa. 193.
, Quod semel sine ratione fecistis, ne videamini aliquando nescisse,
defenditis, meliusque putatis non vinci, quam confessae cedere atque annuere
veritati, That which you have once done unreasonably, you will still persist in
defending,

IESVIT.
Saint Gregory Nazianzen (for his excellent learning, Nazian. Or. 18. d.
laudib. Cypr.
termed by the Grecians, The Divine) thus prays unto Saint Cyprian: Look
down on us from heaven

ANSWER.
That Gregory Nazianzen prayed unto Saint Cyprian, is more than you can
prove; he uses indeed an Oratoriall Apostrophe, but your selves make a
difference between a Prosopopeia or Apostrophe, and Prayer: you say, you make
an Apostrophe to the Cross, when you use this Hymn, All hail oh Cross, etc.
And I think, you will not grant that the wodden Cross hears you: So by your
own Gloss, (...). d. Imag. ca. 24. Suar. in 3. Tho. tom. 1. Disp. 54. Sect.
4. Si interdum oration videtur fundi ad imaginem, vt (...) dicit O crux, aue
spes vnica, ange pijs iustitiam, etc. per Tropum and Prosopopeiam explicanda
est. Sixth. Senens. Biblioth. lib. 6. annot. 151. (...) monuimus non esse (...)
verba semper (...) accipienda quo primum ad aures auditorum perueniunt, multa
enim (...) per hyperbolem (...) enunciant and inculcant, vel occasion locorum
temporum ac personarum adducti velaffectuum impetu and orationis cursu rapti.
, Nazianzen, might by an Apostrophe speak to Cyprian, not thinking, or at
least, not being assured that he heard him.

Sixtus Senensis delivers this observation concerning the Hyperboles, and
other figurative speeches. We find in Lipoman, one speaking to the girdle of
the blessed Virgin in this manner: O veneranda zona, fac nos haeredes aeternae
and Beatae vitae, and hanc nostram vitam ab interitu conserua. Tuam
haereditatem, tuum populum, O intemerata zona intemeratum conserua, o venerable
girdle, make us heirs of eternal and blessed life, and preserve this our
present life, from perdition; o undefiled girdle preserve thy Nazianzene, of
whom it is certain, that he doubted Greg. Naz. orat. (...). in Laud. Gorgon.
Si hoc praemij sanctis animis diuinitus contingit, vt ista sentiant, nostram
quoque orationem, etc. Idem. orat. 1. c. Julian. Audi haec etiam Constantij
(...), si quis (...) sensus est, etc. Ib. (...) provehor, vt tecum (...) cum
present atque audiente expostulem, etc.
whether the B. Saints hear all our prayers or not.

IESVIT.
And not only Fathers, but also Scriptures speak of Saints in the same sort,
our Savior saying, Make to your selves friends of the riches of iniquity,
that when you dye, (...). 16.9.
they may receive you into the eternal Tabernacles. If then the Saints of God,
by the mouth of verity it self, be said to receive their friends when they
die, into the eternal Tabernacles, because God moved by their prayers, admits
them into the blissful vision of his essence, Why may not the Psalm. 58. 18.
Mercy, Why should not she be styled Mother of Mercy, that is undoubtedly
Mother of God, especially seeing, that in, and of her, the Author of mercy and
grace was conceived and borne, and she filled with grace and charity above all
other Creatures?

ANSWER.
Our Savior speaks not of blessed Saints, but of indigent people, to whom
men distribute their alms, and these are said to receive their benefactours
into heaven, because they are the Iansen. Harm. Euang. ca. (...). Dicuntur
autem illi recepturi Benefactores in coelum, simpliciterquidem quia propter
illos Christus (...) benefactores recepturus est, quia sibi imputat factu^,
quod illis impenditur. Qualescu^que (...) and quanquam non ipsimet ingrediantur
aeternas mansiones, dicuntur recte benefactores suos recipere in coelum, ob
rationem prius dictam, quia propter beneficia eis impensa, Christus illos
recipit in coelum.
. Math. 25.35. But was any man's understanding so poor and beggarly, as
therefore at any time to invoke beggars? Hugo. Card. in Luc. 16.9. Recipiant
vos pauperes, id est, sint causa vel occasio, quare recipiamini.
and in giving alms to use this form of prayer, Oh blessed Mendicants receive
our alms, and receive us your benefactours into heaven Dyonis. Carthus. sup.
Luc. 16. Recipiant vos praefati amici, scilicet Deus and angli ac pauperes
sancti.
. Also some expositours refer the former saying, to God and the Angels, which
receive charitable persons when they decease into the state of blessedness.
Neither do Romists when they style the blessed Virgin, Mother of mercy, and
pray unto her to receive them at the hour of Mother of mercy Benzon. com. and
disp in Magnis. li. 1. c. 18. Ipsa tanquam eius matter, ius, authoritatem, and
(...) illius obtinet: constituit enim illam Dominus, Dominam, domus suae, and
principem omnis possessionis suae. Bernardin. Marial. d Nominat. Mar. Ser. 5.
Praerog. 1. B. Virgo proprie misericordiae est Regina.
, not only by way of Intercession, but of distribution and dispensation: and
she receives souls into heaven by her office and authority. This is affirmed
by Rutilius Benzonius, a modern Roman in his Commentary upon the Magnificat.
And Stellarium, Coronae Mariae says Stel. Cor. B. Virg Mar. li. 12. ar. 3.
Beata virgo emit nos, and possedit, dando pretiosissimum Thesaurum pro nobis
scilicet corpus sanguinem and animas filij sui.
, She has this right, because she has bought us with a Price. And Viegas the
Jesuit cites Arnoldus Carnotensis Arnold. Carno. to. 6. Biblioth. Vieg. in
Apoc. 12. Com. 2. Sect. 2. Constituta est super omnem creaturam, and quicunque
Jesus curuat genu, matri quoque pronus supplicat: and filij gloriam, cum matre,
non tam communem iudico, quam eandem. (...) Deo remanente, cessit quodammodo
misericordiam Dei matri, Sponsaeque regnanti. Itaque virginemdiuisum habere cum
Deo imperium.
, saying, She is placed over all creatures, and her glory is not only common,
but the very same with her sons. And Viegas applies the words of
Ecclesiasticus to her, In me is the grace of all life and verity, in me is all
hope of life and virtue. Paulus Cararia Carar. Sum. Canon. and Moral. Reg. 1.
n. 3. punct. 5. n. 32. Quae haec quaeso preparatio? certe nulla alia, nisi quod
transeant per manus illius, nam qui (...) nobis dedit per virginem, nostra vult
illa mediatrice acciperc. Brigit. Reu. li. 1. ca. 50. Sicut calor procedit a
sole, sic per (...) omnis misericordia dabitur. Tu enim es quasi fons
largissimus, de quo misericordia de miseris fluit. Biel. in Can. (...). lect.
32. Nihil nos Deus habere voluit, quod per manus Mariae non transiret. Osor.
Conc. to. (...). in visit Mariae. Maria ex quo Dei matter effecta est, vniuersi
curam suscepit, tanquam omnium matter, tanquam membra (...) filij sui homines
curat, tanquam haereditatem filij and illius domum. Foelix profecto hominum
sors, quibus Christus pater, and Maria matter est, tanquam Aquila super pullos
suos, tanquam pastor super gregem suam. Gregem patris pascebat Rachel, and eius
causa Jacob amouit lapidem, quo puteus claudebatur, and adaquauit gregem.
Gregem Dei Maria pascit ac propter ipsam Christus Dominus, gratiae aquam
fidelibus tribuit. Idem. to. 4. d. Sing. Deuo. B. Virg. Sicut hanc habet in
(...) eminentiam coeleste corpus, qood omnis generatio, (...), and motus
inferiorum ab co Omnis Gratia quae est in Christo, est in Maria, in Christo
tanquam in capite influente, in Maria tanquam in collo transfundente: in
Christo tanquam in font, in Maria tanquam in Canali.
says, Whatsoever Christ gives, must pass unto us by the hands of Mary, as
by a Mediatrix. Osorius the Jesuit says, Even as the heavens have that
eminency, that all generation, perfection, and motion of things inferior
depends upon them; so likewise God bestows all spiritual gifts to men, by
Mary.

IESVIT.
That other phrase, much disliked by your Majesty, That God reserving Justice
to himself, has given away his Opera Regia, Resp. ad Card. Peron.
Mercy to his Mother; is not used by the Church in any of her Prayers, nor
allowed of by Catholic Divines: nor will we justify it, being an harsh and
unfitting Metaphor, though thereby the Authors thereof meant to express a
Truth, to wit, that the blessed Virgin is exceeding gracious with her Son,
and her intercession very potent, alluding Hester, cap. 5. 3, 6. cap. 7. 2.
Mar. 6. 23.) whereby such as are gracious with a Prince, are said, that they
may have any thing of him, though half of his Kingdom: So dividing Gods
Kingdom into Justice and Mercy, to show how gracious the blessed Virgin is
with her Son, they say, God has given her one half of his Kingdom, to wit,
his Mercy: which is a Metaphor farre-fetcht, not to be used, howsoever in
Charity it may

ANSWER.
It is not a Phrase only, but a blasphemous Doctrine, which his Majesty
misliked: For what can be more impious, than to maintain, That Christ
reserving the Kingdom of Justice to himself, has granted the Kingdom of
Mercy to his Mother?

To veyle this Sacrilege, the Jesuit affirms two things: First, That this
form of speaking is not used by the Roman

But these excuses are Figge-leaues, and painted Sepulchers: for learned
Papists, both of elder and modern times, maintain the same, to wit, Thomas
Thom. Praefat. in Epist. Canon. Gorrhan. ibid. Gerson. Magnificata est ita
hodie B. Virgo, vt Regina Coeli, imo and mundi jure vocetur, habens
praeeminentiam, and virtutem influxiuam, super omnes, principatum habet dimidij
Regni Dei, si sic dici potest, sub Typo Esther and Assueri Regnum quippe Dei
consistit in Potestate and Misericordia, semel locutus est Deus duo haec
audiui, quia potestas Dei est, and (...) Domine Misericordia. Potestate Domino
remanente, cessit quodammodo Misericordiae pars Christi Matti Sponsaeque
regnanti. Hinc ab Ecclesia tota Regina Misericordiae salutatur. Cassand. d.
Offic. Bon. viri. An non aperte scribit Gabriel Biel, vir alioqui non indoctus
nec ineptus, Patrem Coelestem dimidium Regni sui de (...) beatissimae Virgini
Coelorum Reginae, idque in Esther significatum fuisse, cui dictum sit ab
Assuero, etiam si dimidium Regni (...) petieris dabitur tibi: ita Patrem
Coelestem cum habet Iustitiam and Misericordiam, tanquam potiora Regni sui
bona, Iustitia sibi retenta, Misericordiam (...) Matri consesisse. (...).
Psalt. B. Virg. Deus luditium tuum Regi da, and Misericordiam tuam Reginae
(...) eius.
, Bonauenture, Gerson, Gabriel Biel, Antoninus, Bernardinus, Gorrhan, Holcoth,
Rutilius Benzonius,

Bonauenture says, O God, give thy Judgment to the King (thy Son) and thy
Mercy to the Queen, his Mother. Gerson, Gorrhan, etc. say, The B. Virgin is
so magnified at this day, that she may rightly be called the Queen of Heaven,
yea, and of Earth; for she has pre-eminence and iufluxiue virtue over all.
She has the moitie of Gods Kingdom (if one may presume to say so) under the
Type of Hester and Assuerus: For the (whole) Kingdom of God consists of
Power and Mercy; and Power being reserved to God himself, the moitie of the
Kingdom, to wit, Mercy, is shared (after a (together with her Son.)

Benzonius says, Benzo. in Cant. Magnif. lib. 1. c. 18. Regnum Dei vniuersum
Iustitia and Misericordia duab' quasi partibus constituitur, and ordinatur,
iuxta illud Psalm. 84. Misericordia and Veritas obuiauerunt fibi, Iustitia and
Pax osculata sunt. Deus igitur vt honoraret Matrem sui Filij, quasi diuidens
huiusmodi Regnum Iustitiam, sibi and Filio reseruauit, constituens illum
Iudicem vniuersorum, arguentemque mundum, de Peccato, de Iustitia, and de
Iuditio, etc. Alteram Regni partem, quae Misericordia Esther 5. Quod si Raguel
dimidiam partem de omnibus quae (...), concessit Tobiae, faciens hanc
Scripturam, vt pars dimidia quae supererat post obitum eius, Tobiae (...)
deueniret, Tab. 8. Cur non Christus, Mariae? Moses, Exodus 24. Dimidiam partem
sanguinis victimarum, quas Filij Israel imolauerant, accepit and misit in
Crateras: partem autem residuam fudit super Altar: Sic Deus quasi dimidiam
Regni, hoc est sanguinis Christi partem illam, nempe ex qua Misericordia
emanat, in cratere and vase admirabili Mariae posuit, and conclusit: residuam
partem, Iustitiae nempe, essusam super Altar, id est, Christum relinquens.
The whole Kingdom of God consists of Justice and Mercy, as it were of two
Moities, Psalm. 84. Now, to the end that God might honor his Mother, dividing
as it were his Kingdom, he has reserved Justice to himself and his Son,
etc. and the other part of his Kingdom, which is governed and compassed with
Mercy, he has granted to the Queen his Mother. Even as King Assuerus
offered half of his Kingdom to Queen Esther, and as Raguel granted half of
his goods to Tobia, etc. as Moses, Exodus 24.6. took half of the blood and put
in Basins, and half of the blood he sprinkled on the Altar: so Cod put (as it
were) half of his Kingdom, that is, that part of the blood of Christ from
which Mercy flows, into the admirable Vessel and Basin, the Virgin Marie;
and the other part, to wit, of Justice, which was poured upon the Altar, he
has left unto Christ. Thus writes Benzonius, a famous Roman, both by birth
and Religion, in our days.

Blasius Viegas Vieg. in Apoc. cap. 12. Com. 2. Sect. 2. Illud quod Rex
Assuerus obtulit Esther, Quid vis Esther Regina, quae est petitio tua? Etiamsi
dimidiam partem Regni petieris, dabitur tibi, Esther 5. Id completum fuit in
Virgin. Cui nimirum Deus dedit dimidium Regni sui. Regnum quippe Dei, duobus
ait contineri Potentia and Misericordia iuxta illud, Psalm. 61. Duo haec audiui,
quia potestas Dei est, and (...) Domine Misericordia: Potestate igitur Deo
remanente, cessir (...) Misericordiam Dei (...), Sponsaeque regnanti. Itaque
Virginem diuisum habere cum Deo imperium, and (...) Ecclesiam appellare (...)
Matrem, ac Reginam Misericordiae.
, a modern Jesuit, applies also this absurd comparison of Assuerus and
Esther, to Christ and the Virgin Marie. And these Authors, with the rest whom
they follow, do not intend only to teach, That the blessed Virgin is very
gracious with Christ, in respect of her intercession, but that she has a
right and authority, as a Queen Regent Bernardin. Marial. p. 3. d. Nom. Mar.
Ser. 2. Excel. 3. Beata virgo est Imperatrix coeli and terrae, etc. Imperat
filio ratione maternalis iurisdictionis.
, to distribute mercy and benefits, where she pleases, and to dispense with
the Laws of Justice, when there is cause: as appears by the words of Ozorius
the Osorius tom. 4. Conc. d. sing. Deuot. B. (...). Matter mea in regno meo
principatur, non vt alij electi, sed tanquam matter and (...), ac Domina, and
proinde potest dispensare in legibus a me latis, cum iusta intercesserit causa.
Briget. Revel. lib. 7. cap. 13.
Jesuit, citing out of Nun Bridgets Revelations, Christ's words following: My
mother in my Kingdom, rules as a Queen, etc. and therefore she may dispense
with Laws made by me, when there is just cause: And by this speech, Nun
Bridget intends to show, that Christ did use the help of his mother Marie,
in ruling his Kingdom; now this Osorius was a Iate Preacher in

Our English Jesuits, when they return to us, dissemble and cloak this
Superstition, not because they dislike it (for they and the rest are all Birds
of a feather, and feed their silly chicks with the same carraine,) but they
prudently consider, that such notorious blasphemies, being published, would
appear odious, and hinder their success in beguiling unstable souls, Steward
in the Gospel (commended for his craft, but not for his honesty) when their
Tenet is an hundred, they write down fifty, and when their Doctrine is
blasphemous, they confess a petty oversight, or unfitness in the phrase and
manner of speaking. But if in good earnest they disliked the former assertions,
why has not the grand Senior of Rome, (sieve cum Concilio, sieve sine Concilio)
condemned, rased, and purged out these sacrilegious blasphemies? especially,
because in expurgatorius Index has Eagles eyes, and a line or sentence cannot
escape these Critickes, if there appear obloquitie, or antipathie to their
inueterate forgeries.

Now for a Conclusion of the former Question, let it be observed, That the
Adversary is deficient in the demonstration of his Popish Tenet, concerning
Invocation of blessed Saints and Angels, for he has produced no Divine
Testimony from sacred Scripture, no Tradition from the Apostles, no plain and
resolute definition of approved Councels, or Primative Fathers, no sufficient
argument of natural reason: yea, the main Principles of his Doctrine, are
litigious and dubious, his own. St. Augustine Aug. d. Bapt. c. Don. l. 2. c. 3.
says, That in things (divine or) which Qui certis incerta preponunt, which
prefer uncertainties, before that which is indubitate. Nostra fides certa
est, ex Doctrina Apostolica, and nouo and veteri Testamento confirmata Athanas.
: Our faith, concerning the direct invocation of the deity, by Christ our
Mediator of intercession, is right, and a certain Apostolical Doctrine,
confirmed by the Old and New Testament. The Popish Appendix, concerning
Invocation of Saints, wants all Scripture Clem. Alex. Strom. lib. 7. Non
expextamus testimonium quod datur ab hominibus, sed voce Domini probamus quod
quaeritur, quae est magis fide digna, quam quaeuis demonstrationes, vel potius
quae est sola demonstratio: per quam scientiam, qui solum quidem gustauere
Scripturas sunt fideles.
proof; and whatsoever else may be pretended for it, is dubious and litigious:
therefore our Doctrine is of faith, and the Popish Tenet,

THE FOVRTH POINT. unknown Tongue.
IESVIT.
THe Custom of the Roman

ANSWER.
YOu lay your foundation of this Article, upon two apparent untruths: for the
Doctrine and custom of the present

First, It is the common voice of the Fathers, That the Liturgy and Service of
the Church, was in their days, and ought to be used in a known tongue. Origin
says Orig. c. (...) lib. 8. Germane Christiani, ne vsitatis quidem in sacra
Scriptura Dei nominib' vtuntur inter praecandum, sed Graeci Graecis, Romani
Romany, singulique praecentur propria lingua, Deumque celebrent pro viribus,
and omnium linguaru^ Dominus, omnib' linguis praecantes exaudit, tam vary
loquentes, haud secus quam consonos (vt ita dicam) and vnius vocis homines
intelligens.
, That in his days, every nation prayed to God in their own Language, the
Grecians in Greek, the Romans in Latin, and all other people in their proper
tongue. Justin Martyr Justin. Apol. 2. (...), etc.
, Tertullian Tertul. Apol. c. 39. Coimus (...) coetum and cogregationem, vt ad
Deum quasi manufacta, praecationibus ambiamus orantes.
, Clemens Alexandrinus Clem. Alex. Strom. li. 7.
, affirm, That the Priest and the people prayed jointly, and in common in the
public Service, which argues that the people understood the Prayers. And St.
Cyprian Cyp. d. Orat. Dom. n. 22. Quando stamus ad orationem fratres
dilectissimi vigilare and incumbere ad praeces toto cord debemus, etc. Ib.
Quomodo te audiri a Deo postulas cum te ipse non audias? etc.
requires, That peoples hearts and words agree, and that they hear and
understand themselves, when they pray to God. Saint Basil says Basil. li.
Quest. ex Var. Script. loc. q. 278. Cum ignota fuerint praesentibus verba
orationis, in fructuosa est men's orantis cum nemo vtilitatem capiat.
, When the St. Chrysostom Chrysostom. 1. Cor. Hom. 35.
, St. Ambrose Ambros. sup. 1. Cor. c. 14. Quem potest habere (...) qui ignorant
quae loquatur etc. Imperitus audiens quod non intelligit, nescit finem
orationis. Quid prodest vt quis lingua loquatur, quam solus scit, vt qui audit
nihil proficiat.
, affirm the like. And St. Augustine Aug. sup. Psalm. 18. conc. 2.
requires people to understand what they pray and sing, for if there be only
sound of voice without sense, they may be compared to Parrats, Owsells, or
Popiniayes. And some of the best learned Papists, to wit, Thomas Aquinas Aquin.
sup. 1 Cor. 14. sect. 5.
, Lyra Lira. in 1. Cor. c. 14. Caeteru^ hic consequenter idem ostendit in
oratione publica. Quia si (...) intelligat oratione^seu benedictione
Sacerdotis; melius reducitur in Deum, and deuoti' respondet amen, etc. Propter
quod in Primitiua Ecclesia benedictiones and caetera communia (...) in vulgari.
, Cassander (...). (...). ca. 28. Canonicampraecem and imprimis Dominici
corporis and sanguinis consecrationem ita veteres legebant, vt a populo
intelligi, and Amen acclamari posset.
, acknowledge, That in the Primative Church, the common Service was used in the
vulgar tongue.

Secondly, it is false, according to the Tenet of Bellarmine Bellarm. Recog.
li. d. Verb. Dei, 2. ca. 16. Sunt inter Ruthenos and Armenos Catholici, vt
etiam inter (...) sunt Maronitae Catholoci, qui tamen diuina officia, non
celebrant Graece, vel Hebraice, vel Latin.
, that all other Churches, which differ from the Protestants, have their
public service in Hebrew, Greek, or Latin. Bellonius and Aluares affirm
the contrary of the Armenians Petrus. Bellon.
, and Abissines (...). (...). Hist. AEthiop.
; and Eckius, of the Indians Eckius. Enchir.
; and Sigismundus Baro Sigism. Baro. hist. Moscou.
, and Hosius Hosius. d. Sacr. Vernac. Apud Russos neque Graecae, neque Latinae
linguae in sactis vsus est,
, of the Russians; and Ledesma Ledesm. d. script. ling. vulg. ca. 33.
, of the Egyptians and Armenians. And AEneus Syluius reports, That when
Cyrillus AEneas, Syluius Hist. Bohem. ca. 13. (...) Cyrillum, cum Romae ageret,
Romano pontifici supplicasse, vt Sclauorum lingua eius gentis hominibus, quam
(...), rem diuinam faciens vti possit. De qua re dum in sacro Senatu
disceptaretur, essentque non patici contradictores, auditam vocem tanquam de
Coelo in haec verba missam. Omnis Spiritus laudet Dominum, and omnis lingua
confiteatur ei. (...) datum Cyrillo indultum.
and Methodius had converted the Saluons unto Christ, and were suitors that
they might administer the common. Prayers and Service among them in their
vulgar tongue. The Pope in the and hereupon they were permitted to use their
own tongue. And it appears by the Decretals, that the Roman Church in former
times did ordinarily appoint this; for the words of the Canon are Decret. Gre.
tit. 31. d. Offic. Iud. Ord. c. 14. Quonia^ in plerisque partibus intra eande^
ciuitatem atque Diocesim, permixti sunt, populi diuersarum linguarum, habentes
sub vna side, varios ritus and mores, districte praecipimus, vt Pontifices
huiusmodi (...) sieve diocesium prouideant viros Idoneos, qui secundum
diuersitates rituum and linguarum, diuina illis officia celebrent, and
Ecclesiastica Sacramenta ministrent.
, For as much as in many places within one City and one Diocese, there be
nations mingled together, speaking diverse tongues, etc. We therefore command
that the Bishops of such Cities and Diocesses provide meet men to minister the
holy Service, according to the diversity of their manners and tongues.

Thirdly, it is repugnant to the nature and end of vocal Prayer Gabriel. in
Can. Miss. lect. 62. B. Oporter quod vocalis oration, innotes cat populo, pro
quo offertur. Quod (...) non potest, nisi sit vocalis. Debet na^que se populus
in hac Ministris Ecclesiae conformari. Ipsum Deu^secundu^ modum sibi possibilem
deprecando. Et ideo rationabiliter statuit Ecclesia, vt Ministri Ecclesiae
(...) orationes etiam alta voce pronuncient, vt ad notitiam omnium poterint
peruenire. The ends of vocal prayer set down by Biel. 1. Excitatio interioris
Deuotionis, 2. Mentis illuminatio. 3. Facilior recordatio rerum tempore orandi.
4. Mentis ab euagatione custodia. 5. Plenior debiti redditio, hoc est mente and
corpore. 6. Redundantia quaeda^ ab anima in corpus, ex vehementi affectione,
and deuotione. 7. Iustructio proximoru^. Aquin. sup. 1. Cor. 14. Ille qui
intelligit, reficitur and quantum ad intellectum, and quantum ad affectum: sed
(...) eius qui non intelligit, est sine fructu refectionis. Ib. Quantum ad
fructum deuotionis spiritualis, priuatur qui non attendit ad ea, quae orat seu
non intelligit.
, that the same should be exercised in a form of words, which people that pray
together understand not; for prayer is an ascending of the mind to God Damasc.
d. fid. lib. 3. cap. 24. Clem. Alex. (...) lib. 7.
: and according to Aquinas Aquin. 22. q. 83. ar. 1.
and other Schole-men Caiet. Ib. ar. 1. Richard. 4. d. 15. art. 4. q. 1. Gabr.
in Can. Miss. Lect. 61. Nauar. Enchir. c. 1. n. 8.13. Azor. Moral. Instit. 1.
li. 9. ca. 29. q. 3. Suar. d. Orat. c. 3. Nugnus. in 3. q. 85. ar. 4. Dub. 1.
ad. 6.
, it is an action of the understanding faculty; and in the same, people
confess their sins, and request of God such things as they have need of
Alex. (...). 4. q. 25. m. 1. ar. 1. Oration est expressio desiderij, propter
bonum adipiseendum vel malum remouendum, Ib. Resol. Duo sunt necessaria oranti,
consideratio propriae miseriae, and (...) misericordiae, propria miseria
consideranda est, ne pigritet implorare defectuum suorum supplementum. (...)
misericordia consideranda est, ne de obtinendo quod sibi necessarium est, (...).
. Chro. 34.27. Psalm. 51.19. and upon their special faith Aug. Epist. 121.
Fides, Spes, and Charitas ad Deum perducunt orantem, hoc est credentem,
sperantem, (...), and quae petat a Domino in Dominica oratione considerantem.
in the divine promises, Math. 9.28. Marc. 9.23. and Marc. 11.29. And
Tertullian says Tert. lib. d. Orat. c. 13. Deus (...) non vocis sed cordis
(...), est, sicut conspector.
, God is not so much an hearer of the voice, as of the heart: But these things
cannot be performed, where people understand not what they confess, request,
or praise God for. And words are appointed to instruct, excite, Aug Ep. 121. c.
11. Nobis ergo verba necessaria sunt, quibus (...), and inspiciamus quid
petamus, non quibus Dominum seu docendum, seu flectendum esse credamus.
? for we use not words to teach God, but to instruct and excite our selves. And
hereby the Popish evasion is answered, wherein they affirm, that even as When
a Supplication is preferred to a King or Judge, which the Suppliant
understands not, it is all one in what language soever the same be, preferred
the Judge understand it Ledesm. d. Scrip. Vern. ling. c. 13. Sicut enim qui
aliquid a principibus petunt, nihil ad eos attinet, qua lingua mediatores ab
eis constituti apud ipsum Principem negotium tractent, etc. Neque etia^ refert,
qua lingua patronus, apud Iudicem causam clientis (...), etc.
: So likewise because God understands all languages, it mattereth not though
people pray to him in a strange tongue; for our words in vocal prayer concern
our selves mutually and principally: but God himself requires the
understanding and affection of our heart. Read S. Augustines words Aug. Epist.
121. ca. 11. Nobis ergo verba necessaria sunt quibus commoneamur, and
inspiciamus quid petamus, non quibus Idem. d. Magist. c. 1. Non opus est
locutione cum oramus, id est sonantibus verbis, nisi forte sicut Sacerdotes
faciunt, significandae mentis suae causa, non vt Deus exaudiat, sed vt homines
audiant, and consensione quadam per commemorationem, suspendantur in (...).
Idem. d. Doctr. Chr. lib. 4. cap. 10. Quid prodest locutionis integritas, quam
non sequitur intellectus audientis, cum loquendi nulla sit causa, si quod
loquimur non intelligunt, propter quos vt intelligant loquimur.
cited in the margent.

Also the Jews under the Law and the Prophets, prayed in a language which they
understood: our Savior and his Apostles, and the Primitive Church did the
like, and the gift of languages was bestowed upon Pastors and people, in
common, Act. 2.3.

Also the former Doctrine is so apparent, that some of the best Caietan says
Caiet. in 1. Cor. 14. v. 17. Ex hac Pauli Doctrina habetur, quodmelius ad
aedificatione Ecclesiae est, Orationes (...) quae audiete populo dicuntur dici
lingua communi Clericis and populo quam dici Latin.
, It appears by S. Paul's Doctrine, that it is better for the edification of
the Church, that common Prayers which are made in the hearing of the people, be
said in a vulgar tongue, understood indifferently by Priest and people, than in
Latin. Lira says Lira. in 1. Cor. 14. Si populus intelligat orationem
Sacerdotis, melius reducitur in Deum, and deuotius respondet, Amen.
, If the people understand the prayer of the Priest, they are better brought to
God, and they answer Amen with greater devotion. And the reason hereof is
manifest, for devotion, compunction, desire, and affection, depend upon
understanding, and follow the same Azor. Instit. Moral. tom. 1. lib. 9. c. 34.
q. 8. Affectus (...) intellectum, vbi autem nullus earum (...) quae petuntur
vel dicuntur, habetur intellectus, aut general ter tantum, ibi exiguus assurgit
affectus.
, and the more distinct and

IESVIT.
For we may imagine a triple state of Liturgy, in an question it is
inconvenient that public prayer should be 1. Cor. 14.
by the reasons the Apostle brings against an unknown tongue in the Church.

ANSWER.
This first imagination, is a Chimera, or (...); for there was never in the
world any such kind of common or ordinary Service or Liturgy. And S. Paul 1.
Cor. 14. condemns in general, the use of unknown tongues in the
congregation, unless they

IESVIT.
Secondly, in a language unknown to most, even of the Paul reprehends in the
public 1. Cor. 14.16.
Liturgy, a language unknown, as the Minister of the Church, that supplies
the place of the Idiot and ignorant,

ANSWER.
That is forbidden by the Apostle to be used in prayer, (and consequently it
is unlawful) whereby all states and sorts of people being of ripe years, may
not be edified in their understanding; and to which, being read pronounced or
heard, they are not able to say Amen, having some distinct understanding Cor.
14.16, 17. 19, 20. but all states and sorts of people being of riper years,
cannot be edified in their understanding, neither are they able to say Amen,
etc. to prayers which are heard by them, being read or pronounced in a strange
language: Ergo, Common prayer read and pronounced in the Church in a strange
tongue, is prohibited by the Apostle, and consequently such form of ordinary
prayer is unlawful. The Jesuit restrains the words of S. Paul, either to the
Minister supplying the place of the Idiot, or to the Clerk of the
congregation. But the Apostle requires, that Suar. 3. Disp. 83. Sect. 1.
mentioned by him, v. 16. is not the Priest, or the Clarke alone, but the
vulgar sort of people, ignorant of the language and words which are used in
preaching, reading, or praying, as all the Fathers Chrysostom. Sup. 1. Cor. 14. Hom.
35. (...). Oecumen. (...). Theod. 1. Cor. 14. Ambros. ibid. Primasius. ib.
Sedulius. ib. Anselm. idiota est ineruditus, qui nihil scit, nisi quod
proprietas naturae dat. Haimo. ib. Dicitur idiota, proptiam liuguam
, Aquin. in 1. Cor. 14. Ledesm. d. script. c. (...). idiotae graece dicuntur
plebei and ignari homines.
deliver, which comment upon this text. As for the Latin, the same is as
uncouth to a great part of the congregation, as to the Chinese: they can only
gape at it, and return home from Mass and Mattens, as wise as they went, for
ought they learn by the language. The old rule was, Barbarus hic ego sum, quia
non intelligor vlli, and accordingly, your Mass Priests are mere barbarians,
to the ordinary sort of people.

IESVIT.
Notwithstanding, the Roman Church does not approve the usage of a language in
this sort unknown, as appears by the late dispensation of Paulus the fifth
unto Jesuits, to turn the Liturgy of the Mass into the vulgar language
cannot be proved unlawful, yet it is indecent to use a

ANSWER.
In the Roman Church until Lutber began more freely to manifest your abuses
to the world, palpable ignorance was so predominant in many places, that most
Priests Explic. Cath. loc. Script. part. 3. Explic. 48. pa. 1155. Si peccatum
est ab Ecclesia, potius peccatum est quia plcrique accersiti sunt qui neque
intelligunt (...) quae orant and fantur, neque hi quid respondent vel ad quid
respo^dent. Biel. Can. Mis. lect. 62. Ios. Angles in 4. Sent. Append. ad
poenit. d. Attent. q. 5. Diff. 2. Concl. 2 Multi elerici and Religiosi: and
moniales Graece vel latin orantes, nec sensum verborum intelligunt,
, and other religious persons were ignorant of the latin tongue, and
understood Matthew Paris Math. Paris. Cronic. in Will. Conquest. pa. 7. Clerici
quoque and ordinati adeo literatura carebant, vt caeteris esset stupori, qui
Grammaticam didicisset.
speaking of England says, Clerks and men in Orders were so illiterate, that
he was a mirhor among his fellows which had learned Grammar. Catherinus says
Catherin. Annot. Caietan. sup. 1. Cor. 14. Qui supplent locum Idiotae,
plerumque non intelligunr quid oretur, verum etiam saepenumero nec (...)
praesbyteri, aut Diaconi, qui orant, aut legunt.
: Not only they which supply the place of the Idiot do many times
notvnderstand what is prayed, but also Priests and Deacons themselves are
ignorant of what they pray or read. Joseph Angles says: Many Clerks and
religious persons, and Nuns, pray in Greek and Latin, which neither do,
nor can understand the meaning of the words.

Neither is it held necessary in our Adversaries Tenet, that either Priest or
people should understand the service of the Church. For Suares says Suares. 3.
disp. 83. Sect. 1. Etiam nunc non est necesse, vt minister linguam intelligat,
in qua Missa dici, tur, etc.
, It is not necessary at this day, for the Minister to understand the language
wherein the Mass is said, but it is sufficient that it be uttered in the faith
of the Church. And Ledesma Ledesm. d. Scrip. Qua vis ling. legend. ca. 13.
, Prayers and praises, performed by them which understand them not, are
pleasing to God, and Christ: for if (says he) Prayers profit such as are
absent, and hear them not, much more shall they profit them which are present,
though they understood them not. This reason concludes as well, that it is not
necessary for the people to be present at common service, nor yet that it is
requisite they should so much as desire the prayers of the Church; for Infidels
and Infants are many times benefitted by the Churches prayers, when they in
their own persons, by reason of tender Ledesma the Jesuit does, Prayers
profit such as understand nothing of prayer, and which desire not the Church
to pray for them: Therefore it is not necessary that common people shall know
any thing in general or particular, touching the nature of prayer, or that
they should desire to reap benefit by common prayer, he concludes as firmly

IESVIT.
Thirdly, a language may be termed unknown, because it is not the vulgar,
though most men of better sort understand it. Such was anciently the Latin
language in the whole Roman Empire, and now in the Latin Church; for not only
Priests understand the same (or if some few Paul speaks of, were extempor
all, made in public meetings, according to the devotion of the speaker:
therefore it was necessary that he should pray in a known language, that
those which heard him, might know when to say Amen; and whether the prayer for
matter was such as they might lawfully say Amen thereunto. But now theSeruice
and Liturgy of the Church has set offices for every Festival day approved
by the Church, which by continual

ANSWER.
The sum of this argument is; It is lawful to make common prayer in a
language which most people understand, but such is the Latin tongue: for
(besides Women) Priests and Lay men, both Gentlemen and Plebeians, partly by
education, and partly by help of Sermons, Catechismes, and private
instructions, etc. understand Latin prayers.

Neither part ofthis argument is true.

First, although the Moietie or Mayor part of people in some congregarions, did
understand Latin Service, yet because a great part understands it not, there
is no reason (especially the thing required being good in it self) to respect
one part with neglect and detriment of the other. For if many (...) in the
congregation understand Greek, Latin, or French, shall it therefore be
lawful in an ordinary course, to read the holy Scriptures, or to make
Sermons in these tongues, when as many or very many people are ignorant in
these languages? The Papalls in their service, not only read their common
Prayet,

Secondly, it is false, considering the state of the Church in general, that
the Mayor part of people vnderstandthe Latin service, or that by Sermons, or
Catechizing, etc. they are (...) hereunto. Of the ignorance of Priests I have
formerly spoken, and many learned Papists which maintain Latin Service: hold
it not generally necessary for Priest or people to understand the words of the
Service. Suares the (...) says Suar. in 3. (...) 3. Dis. 83. Sec. 1. Etiam
nunc non est necesse vt minister linguam intelligat in qua Missa dicitur.
, It is not at this day necessary for the Priest or Minister to understand the
language in which the Mass is said. And Ledesma says Ledesm. d. Diu. Script.
ca. 13. nu. 1. 10, 11, 12.
, Although the ancient Church required that the Clergy should understand that
which they read andprayed, yet they sought not this in the people, neither is
it behoouefull for the people in what language the Priest says Mass or
prays for them; and even as the children crying (...) in the Gospel, without
knowledge of what they said, pleased our Savior, Matthew. 21, so likewise God
accepts the prayers of people, although they understand not what they ask or
speak.

Thirdly, if according to your own concession, it be expedient edification of
all persons present at divine service: and the

IESVIT.
Now, that S. Paul did command that Service should be in such a language, as
every woman in the Church might be able to understand it word by word, is
incredible,

ANSWER.
A most ridiculous Paralogisme, for admitting, that S. Paul descended not
precisely to every single word, explained in such manner, that every particular
woman might at the first hearing understand the same, yet the conclusion
follows not, That he commanded not the common Service should be in a known
language.

First, your selves acknowledge that Preaching and Prophesying

Secondly, the ignorance of the distinct notion of every word, hinders not
sufficient edification, when the ordinary, necessary, and common passages of
the public Service are intelligible.

IESVIT.
Neither can they show by any records of Antiquity, that such a Custom was in
the Primative Church; yea the contrary may more than probably be showed,
because the drift of the Church, in appointing Liturgies, or set forms of
public Prayer, at the Oblation of the Eucharisticall Sacrifice, was not the
peoples instruction, but for other reasons.

First, That by this public Service, a continual daily tribute of homage, of
Prayer, of Thanksgiving, might be publicly offered, and paid unto God.

Secondly, That Christians by their personal assistance

Finally, To the end that every Christian by his presence, yielding consent
unto the public Prayers, Praises,! and Thankesgiuings of the Church, and as
it were, subscribing and setting his Seal unto them, by this assisting

ANSWER.
We can prove by Records of Antiquity, that the public Just. Mart. Apol. 2.
(...). 2. Cor. Hom. 18. Basil. Hexam. Hom. 4. August. in Psalm. 54. Ambros.
Hexam. lib. 3. cap. 5. Leo de ieiun. 7. men's. Sermon. 3. (...). (...) Eccles.
Offic. lib. 1. cap. 10. Justinian. Nouel. Constable. de Eccles. diverse. cap.
Constit. 123.
John 4. 24. But God in the state of the Gospel, is not honored with dumb
shows, and with lip labor, nor with Prayers and Praises which the Offerers
understand not.

The reasons which you produce to prove, That it is not necessary for
unlearned people to understand the Common Service or Liturgy, are lame and
disjointed.

First, Although the sole or principal end of appointing set forms of
public Prayer, was not to teach or instruct people Psalm. 50. 15. yet our
Adversaries themselves hold it requisite Azor. Instit. Mor. tom. 1. lib. 9. c.
34. q. 8. Qui priuatim ac libere orant, consultius facerent illi quidem, si ea
lingua and sermon, mentem suam coram Deo effunderent, quam rectius callent.
Affectus enim consequitur intellectum: vbi autem nullus rerum earum, quae
petuntur, vel dicuntur, habetur intellectus, aut generalis tantum, ibi exiguus
assurgit affectus. 795. August. Epist. 121. Qui (...) orare cupit, verba quae
intelligit conuenienter adhibet, vt seipsum ad Orationem internam excitet.
Citat, Ledesma. de Sacr. vernac. cap. 14. page 102.
, that such Prayer be made in a known Language. Also, one end of celebrating
and receiving the holy Eucharist, is, to commemorate and show forth the Lords
death, until his coming again, 1. Cor. 11. 25, 26: but without understanding
the Language wherein the Lords Supper is administered, people cannot call to
remembrance, or show forth the Lords death, at least wise so clearly and
distinctly, as is fit for them to do.

Secondly, A distinct and explicit inward devotion, joined Amen, is more
effectual and pleasing to God, than a confused and general. But when people
understand the public Prayers and Service of the Church, in a familiar
Language, they are enabled to conioyne distinctly and explicitly, inward and
outward devotion, mental and vocal saying Amen. Therefore it is most
expedient and necessary for the Church, to celebrate Divine Mysteries, and
offer public Prayers, in a Language which the people understand.

IESVIT.
Moreover the Churches anciently, even in the purest Vid. Liturg. impress.
Antuerp. an. 1560. Basil. in Liturg. fol. 34. Chrysostom. in Liturg. fol. 53. Basil.
ibid. fol. 34.38.39.41.43. 46. Chrysostom. Hom. 61. ad Sop.
times of Christianity, had Chancells, into which, Laymen might not enter, and
so could not particularly, and distinctly understand the Prayers said by the
public Minister of the Church: within the said Chancels, they did also use to
say a good part of the Liturgy secretly, so which are manifest signs, that
the Church did never

ANSWER.
It is not certain at what time Chancells began, neither were all Lay Persons
prohibited to enter: for the Emperor had his seat within the Chancell, until
the days of Theodosius Theoderit Theod. Hist. Eccl. l. 5. c. 17.
and Sozomene Sosom. Hist. Eccles. lib. 7. cap. 24. (...), etc. Council. 6.
General. Can. 69. apud Caranz. Nulli omnium qui sit in Laicorum numero liceat
intra sacrum Altar ingredi. Ab (...) tamen nequaquam prohibita potestate and
authoritate Regia, quandoquidem voluerit, etc.
report.

And although Lay persons were not seated in the Quire or Chancell, yet the
Service was pronounced by the Ministers in that place, with an audible voice,
so as the people in the body of the Church heard the same. Justinian Justin.
Imp. (...) No. Constit. 123. Iubemus vt omnes Episcopi pariter and Presbyteri,
non tacito modo sed clara voce, quae a populo exaudiatur, (...) oblationem, and
praeces in Sancto Baptismate adhibitas celebrent, quo maiore exinde deuotione
in depromendis Domini Dei laudibus, audientium animi efferantur. Ita enim and
D. Apostolus docet dicens in 1. ad Cor. Epist.
the Emperor made this Decree following: We command that all Bishops and 1.
Cor. 14. Honorius Honor. in Gem. Animae. lib. 1. cap. 103. d. Canon. Fertur dum
Canon primitus public quotidie recitaretur, ab omnibus per vsum sciretur, and
cum eum Pastoresin in agro super panem, and (...) dicerent, repent carnem and
sanguinem ante se inuenirent, atque inde diuinitus percussi interirent, vnde
Synodali Decreto sub Anathemate praeceptum est, vt nullus Canonem dicat, nisi
in libro, and in Sacris vestibus, and nisi super altar and super sacrificium.
in gemma Animae, lib. 1. cap. 103. It is reported, that in ancient time, when
the Canon of the Mass was openly recited, etc. John Billet John Billet. d.
divine. Offic. Secreta dicitur, quia secreto pronunciatur, cum olim tamen alta
voce diceretur, vnde and ab (...) bus Laicis sciebatur. Contigit igitur vt
quadam die Pastores super lapidem quendam ponerent panem, qui ad horum verborum
prolationem, in carnem conuersus est, forsan transubstantiatus est panis in
corpus Christi, in quos diuinitus facta est (...) vindicta. Nam percussi sunt
diuino iuditio caelitus misso, vnde statutum fuit, vt de caetero sub silentio
diceretur, velideo ne vileseat,
, cited by Cassander, says, In times past, the Mass was pronounced with a
loud voice: whereupon Lay people knew the same, etc. And mumbling and
whispering Innocent the third.

The Liturgies also fathered upon S. Basil, and S. Chrysostom, have a known
Mother (to wit, the late Roman Church:) but there is (besides many other just
exceptions) so great dissimilitude between the supposed Fathers and the
Children, that they rather argue the dishonest dealing of their Mother, than
Read Phil. Morn. d. Miss. and part. lib. 1. cap. 6. page 88. tit. Liturgiae
huius Saeculi. Claud. Espenc. d. Miss. Private. page 220.
.

The Veil in the Greek Church, of which S. Chrysostom speaks, Hom. 61. ad
Pop. Antioch. was not used to deprive the people of hearing, but it was a
ceremony, admonishing, and signifying, that profane and unclean persons were
unworthy to behold or partake the sacred mysteries Chrysostom. Hom. 61. ad pop.
Antioch. Cum audieris oremus omnes communiter, cum vela videris retrahi, tu^c
superne Coelum aperiri cogita, and Angelos descendere. Sicut itaque prophanorum
fas est adesse neminem, ita nec vllum quidem Sacratorum and Sordidorum, etc.
Indigni sunt and oculi (...) hisce spectaculis, indignae sunt and aures, si
bestia inquit tangat montem lapidabitur.
. And as this Father shows, Hom. 3. in Ephesians. Idem. sup. Ephesians. Ho. 3. (...).
, the drawing open of the

Metrophanes a Monk of Greece (...).
, (which is uttered with a loud voice, even as all other parts of the Liturgy
are, that all people may hear.) Now this action signifies (according to
Dionisius) that God reuealeth these mysteries, to those only which are
Orthodoxall in Faith, and he communicates his divine grace to none but those
which are sound in the divine worship, and to such all things are manifested,
whether men or women, poor or rich, etc. The Jesuit therefore is ignorant of
the reason, wherefore the Greek Church uses a Canopie, and shuts

IESVIT.
Besides it is certain, that the Scripture was not read in any language but
Greek, over all the Church of the East, Hieron. praefat. in Paralip. Basil. d.
Spir. sanct. cap. 29. Hieron. in proem. 2. li. com. ad Galat. Act. Apost. cap.
2. and 10. and 11. and 14. Hiero. (...) viris (...). in Anton. Theoderit. in
Histor. SS. Patr. Hist. 13. Aug. Epist. 57. and d. Doctr. Christ. lib. 2. cap.
13. Aug. in Psalm. 123. and in Exposit. Epist. ad Romans and li. 2. contra (...).
li. 83.
as S. Hierom witnesses. Also the Greek Liturgy of S. Basil was used in all
the Church of the East, and yet the Grecian was not the vulgar language of all
the Countries of the East, as is apparent by manifest testimonies of the
Cappadocians, Mesopotamians, Galatians, Lycaonions, Augustine: but it is
manifest, that the Latin was not the vulgar language for all nations of the
West. And though the better sort understood Augustine, who writes that he
pleading in Latin against Cryspinus a Bishop of the Donats, for possession of
a village in Afric, whereunto the consent of the villagers was required, they
did not understand his speech, till the same was interpreted to them in the
vulgar African language. So that the Christian Church did never judge it
requisite,

ANSWER.
Omitting things doubtful, this is apparent, that common Chrysostom, S.
Hierome, and in other Fathers, Read before, page 279.

And that the people of Asia understood Greek, and the Read Doct. Bilson of
Christ, subject. pa. 647. etc. Morn. d. Miss. lib. 2. cap. 6.
; and where this was wanting, people had Translations and Service in their
native tongue Orig. c. Cells. (...). 8. Theod. Hist. Eccles. lib. 4. cap. 27.
(...). lib. 3. cap. 15. Basil. Epist. ad Neocaes. 63. Hier. ad Heliod. Epitaph.
Nepotian. and Epist. ad Eustoch. Epitaph. Paul. Aug. Confess. lib. 1. cap. 14.
Orig. in Leuit. Hom. 5. Basil. praef. in Psalm (...). Epist. 18. Chrysostom. in
Epist. ad Coloss. Hom. 9.
. Also such people as were converted to Christianity, if they wanted
Translations in their Mother tongue, were careful to learn the ordinary
language, in which divine Service was used, and wherein the holy Scriptures
were commonly read. But what proof can the Adversary make, that Christian
people (altogether ignorant of the language used in the public Service) came
into those congregations, and were pertakers of the holy

IESVIT.
As for the comfort that some few want, in that they do not so perfectly
understand the particulars of divine Service, it may by other means be
abundantly supplied,

First, the whole Church should not be able to judge of the Liturgy of every
country, when differences arise about the Translation thereof, so diverse
errors and heresies may creep into particular countries, and the whole Church
never able to take notice of them.

Secondly, particular countries could not be certain that they have the
Scripture truly translated; for thereof they can have no other assured proof,
but only the Churches approbation, nor can she approve what she does not
understand.

Thirdly, were vulgar Translations, so many as there be languages in the world,
it could not be otherwise but that some would be in many places ridiculous,
incongruous,

Fourthly, the Liturgies would be often changed together with the language,
which does much alter in every

Fifthly, in the same country, by reason of different dialects, some provinces
understand not one another. And in the island of Iaponia, as some write, there
is one language Turselin. in vita Zauerij.
for noble men, another for rustickes, another for men, another for women. Into
what language then should the Iaponian Liturgy be turned?

Finally, by this vulgar use of Liturgy, the study of

ANSWER.
They cannot be some few only in this case, but the mayor part, yea an hundred
to one, which want the benefit and comfort of the holy Scriptures, and public
Service of the Church. And to supply this want, by preaching or private
instruction, it is (morally speaking) impossible, and it may be performed more
compendiously and easily, if Papists would choose Paul's doctrine, 1. Cor. 14.
than stiffly to adhere to the late custom of the Roman Church.

Now the reasons which the Adversary and his consorts use, to prove the
inconvenience of Translations, etc. are no other than such as will make against
Preaching and Catechizing in a known tongue, as well as using public Service
in the same. For are Romists able to translate Catechismes, Homilies,
Meditations, and private Prayers into a vulgar tongue, and to accommodate all
sorts of people according to the diversity of their languages, without
detriment to the common Faith,

First, the whole Church, whenever it is requisite, may judge of translated
or peculiar Liturgies, by the helps of the learned and iuditious, who
understand both the vulgar language of the place, and also Latin or other
Language, fit for

Secondly, It may take notice of heresies, and judge of Translations, by the
same means. And in the third, fourth, fifth, and sixth place, as the objected
inconveniences are prevented in Preaching, Catechizing, and private Prayers, so
they may be prevented in public Liturgies, yea, God Almighty will give a
blessing, and be assistant to such as observe his own Ordinance. The same
also would be so far from causing Ignorance and barbarism in the world, that
nothing could more increase good literature, and polish barbarous Languages,
than

IESVIT.
Private Prayer for ignorant people in their vulgar Languages, Pater noster and
the Creed, are to be known of all in their mother Tongues, which two forms
contain the whole substance of Prayer: For the end of Prayer being threefold,
to praise God for his infinite perfections, to give him thanks for his
benefits bestowed upon us, to demand of him such necessaries as we want, as
well for the maintaining of this present, as for the attaining unto eternal
life: The Creed being a sum of the Pater noster being an abridgement of all
those things which we need, contains a full instruction for the third. Other
Prayers do but more plainly express things contained in the Pater noster and
the Creed, and our many Books do show, that these kind of Prayers in vulgar
Languages, are by us written, esteemed, and practiced. We Notwithstanding, some
Prayers, though translated into David: and these Prayers (as we think) may
more profitably be said in Latin. So that I see no great difference either in
practice, or in Doctrine, between Protestants and the Romance Church,
concerning private Prayers in a Language unknown.

ANSWER.
The Opposition of Protestants has brought you to this Antonin. sum. mor. Tit.
23. c. 9.. 5. Praeces in ore Laicorum, qui ignorant sensum, tantu^ valent
quantum in ore sacerdotum intelligentium: sicut Lapis praetiosus aeque valet in
manu eius, qui ignorant virtutem.
, and yet you enterfere in your Tenet: for many of your fellows teach, That it
is not necessary to make private Prayer in a known Language. And as you
permit vulgar Translations of holy Scripture, rather to satisfy the
importunity of people, than for any good will you bear the Scripture: so
likewise, if your Kingdom were as absolute in the World, as sometimes it was,
we may justly suspect, that you would recall your later

But taking you at the best, it (...) strange to us, that you should approve a
known Tongue as most fit for private Prayer, and account the same a Canker in
the public Liturgy. One of your Order is not ashamed to traduce our Service,
because it is used in a common Language, as pernicious, profane, sacrilegious,
detestable, and opposite to all Religion, and Apostolical Tradition Ledesm.
Iesuita. d. Diu. Script. and Miss. Quauis Lingua, c. 1. Eorum temerariam, and
impiam, tantoque ipsorum (...) cosensu receptam cosuetudinem. Quoties execranda
illa sua sacra peragunt. Cultum tam perniciosum, etc. De hac iam execranda,
Sacrilega, and Apostolorum Traditioni contraria, vulgari Missae and Officiorum
diuinorum celebratione, ac publicae Ecclesiae Orationis vernaculae Linguae,
prophana recitatione.
. But having examined whatsoever this Author, or your self can say, I observe
in neither of you so much as one probable Argument, to support the high conceit
you have of Sapientiam sibi adimunt, qui sine iudicio inuenta maiorum probant,
and ab alijs more pecudum ducuntur (says Lactantius (...). d. Orig. Error.
lib. 2. cap. 8.
:) They remove wisdom from themselves, which without judgment maintain the
inventions of their Elders, and which like Animals are led by other men's
Devices.

THE FIFTH POINT. number of them.
IESVIT.
I Am persuaded, that your Majesty does not intend to dislike Repetition of
Prayers, so the same be done with renewed Devotion, and Affection. For this
Repetition is justified, not only by the example Jesus fili David, miserere
mei, by which Repetition he obtained Luc. 18. v. 29.
his sight: Nor only of the Princely Prophet, who in his 135. Psalm repeats
27 times, Quoniam in aeternum Isa. 6.
misericordia eius: Nor only of the Seraphins, who in praising their Creator,
repeat three times over the same Holy, Holy, Holy: But also by the example of
Matthew. 26. v. 4. Mar. 14.39. eundem Sermonem dicens. Luc. 22. 42.
our most blessed Savior himself, who thrice at the least in the Garden
repeated the same Prayer, Pater si fieri potest transeat a me Calix iste,
veruntamen non mea voluntas sed tua fiat. Wherefore to repeat the same Prayers,
Pater noster, Aue, and Creed, a special Meditation that may stir up new
devotion, at every repeated prayer; and seeing we cannot pray long, but we must
needs repeat over the Pater noster in sense: for what can we demand of God,
that is not there contained? Why may we not also repeat the same in words?

ANSWER.
TWo points are controuerted in this Article: First, Whether the repetitions of
Creedes, Aues, and Paternosters, according Sundry examples are extant in holy
Scripture, of repetitions used in prayers and thanksgiving, to wit, Luc. 18,
38, 39. Esa. 6. 3. Psalm. 136. Math. 26. 39. to 45. Marc. 14.39. Luc. 22. 42.
Ergo, Repetition of Paternosters, Creedes, and Aues, according to the forms
prescribed in the Romish Primers and Rosaries, are pious and lawful.

I answer: Granting that repetitions in prayer, and thanksgiving which agree
with the examples of sacred Scripture, are pious and lawful: but the Illation
from these to the Roman Battalogees is inconsequent, because the repetitions in
question, differ from the pattern expressed in holy Scripture. First, in the
kind and object, for this latter are in part directed to creatures, and not
only to the Creator, and of this devotion there is no example in Scripture.
Secondly, they are multiplied to an excessive Suar. d. Orat. li. 3. ca. 9.
Integrum Rosarium centum quinquaginta salutationibus virginis constat,
interpositis pro quindecim denarijs, quindecem orationibus Dominicis: corona
vero constat septuaginta (...) Aue, and septem paternoster, quae a pijs
hominibus inuenta (...) in memoriam, and honorem totidem annorum, quos in hac
vita virginem (...) probabile est, and ideo (...) est corona haec oration, quia
perfectum circulum vitae virginis representat. (...). d. Deipar. virg. lib. 3.
c. 10. Quibusdam placit quinquagies duntaxat, alijs frequentius, virginem ex
more (...), intermixta (...) pecatione.
, and doubtless the Romists exceed and transcend their Suar. d. Orat. li. 3.
ca. 9. In rudimentis fidei, solet poni Symbolum Apostolorum sed illud non
continet formam orandi, sed confitendi fidem.
brethren the Pharisees, in the Canis. d. Deip. virg. li. 3. c. 10. Fatemur in
hac salutatione vt ab Angelo recitata est, precationis formulam non extare.
Censur. Colon. Dial 6. Orationem Dominicam illis fundimus, non tam ipsos tunc
alloquentes, quam Deum ad quem ipsorum manibus eam cupimus deferri, tanquam qui
cum gratiores deo sint, facile quod cupimus impetrabunt. Iosep. Ang. Appen. in
4. q. 7. diff. 7. Hinc sequitur, orantes and offerentes eis
no prayers or thanksuings, either formally or vertually. Fourthly, our A
duersaries maintain, That if these repetitions be used, without understanding
of the words Suar. d. Orat. li. 3. c. 5. n. 3. Ios. Angles. 4. Append. d. Orat.
q. 5. Attendere est ad id quod dicitur, mentem habere praesentem, nempe vt hoc
versetur in cord quod profertur in ore.
, and consequently without present actual attention Iac. d. Graph. Decis. Aur.
p. 1. li. 2. c. 52. etc. 53. Suar. d. Orat. li. 3. c. 4. n. 7. 8. 17. Non est
de ratione orationis vt cogiter orans, de ipsa loqutione, sed satis est si
cogitet de Deo, cum quo loquitur. Item non est necessarium, cogitare de re
significata (...) verba.
, they are pious and effectual.

But the Romists cannot produce approved examples out of holy Scripture, of
such repetitions, and therefore their argument from example concludes not. It
is also apparent that the repetitions which are practiced among Papals in
manner Math. 6.7. Ferus. Com. Matthew. 6. Signanter dicit, nolite multum loqui,
vt faciunt qui cum praeculas plures, aut Psalmos legerint, etiam sine assectu,
putant sibi omnia salua, Deumque ipsis plurimum debere, cum tamen nihil minus
faciant, quam orent.
than the devout prayers and thanksgiuings, recorded for our instruction in
holy Scripture.

IESVIT.
Jf any think to merit by reason of the number of his 33, in remembrance of
the 33 years our Savior wrought our salvation upon earth, giving him thanks
for his labors, desiring the application of his merits, stirring up our selves

And because the opinion that she lived seventy two years, now begins to be
much followed, many Catholics thereupon (particularly in Spain) have
thereupon increased the Corone of our Lady, to seventy two Aue-Marias; a
Aue-Marias, the other of Jesus, Jesus, Jesus, in imitation of the devout Royal
Prophet,

ANSWER.
The true Catholic Church (which the Roman is not) makes no Prayer
meritorious in condignitie: for what can be imagined more absurd, than to
maintain that beggars do merit, by craving, and receiving alms? And the
number of Pater Nosters, Aues, and Creeds, which modern Romists prescribe, is
a novel Invention, and was of small esteem until the days of Friar
Dominicus Suar. d. Orat. lib. 3. cap. 9. n. 12. Mulci credunt incaepisse a B.
Dominico, per diuinam Reuelationem (quod est pium and probabile, and non parum
antiquum, etc.
.

It was expected, that the Jesuit would have confirmed his Romish devotion, by
the Testimony of antiquity, and by the practice of Apostolical Churches, in
the best ages thereof: But in place hereof he recites only, what the
practice of the modern Romists is, in repeating Pater Nosters, Aues, and
(...), to the number of three, five, and thirty three, sixty three, seventy
two, etc. But these devices are voluntary, and grounded upon uncertain
causes: for what connection is there between the Antecedent, to wit, the five
wounds of Christ, and sixty three, or seventy two years of the blessed
Virgins Marie lived seventy two years in the world, therefore it is a service
pleasing God, and such a means to honor the blessed Virgin, as God accepts
for satisfaction, merit, and impetration.

There appears small difference between the former practice, and that which
some Roman Casuists censure as superstitious, to wit, to place virtue, and to
ascribe effects, to the precise number of words (...). Enchir. cap. 11. n. 24.
Superfluus cultus est, etc. audiendi sacrum a Presbytero qui vocatur Johannes,
vel dicendi bis Halleluja, vel Pater noster, etc. quando semel tantum dicendum
est.
and syllables, when the same is not appointed by God.

IESVIT.
Neither are we in this point of repeating Prayers upon Beads or little
stones, in a certain number, for the causes before mentioned, destitute of the
example of Saints that lived in the best ages of the Church. Palladius in his
History, Pallad. Hist. Laufiac. c. 24. 25.
sets down some examples of Saints praying in this kind: yea, the Centurie
Writers and Osiander acknowledge Cent. 4. Col. 1329. Osiand. in Epitom. Cent.
4. p. 454. Sosomen Hist. lib. 6. cap. 29.
the example of Saint Paul, a most holy Monk, living in the fourth age after
Christ, that In dies singulos trecentas orationes Deo velut tributum reddidit,
(...) ne per imprudentiam in numero erraret trecentis lapillis in sinum
coniectis, ad singulas preces singulos eijcit lapillos, consumptis igitur
lapillis constabat sibi orationes lapillis numero pares abs se expletas esse:
Which example of so great a Saint, so known, and notorious, and never censured
by any Father, may more than abundantly suffice for satisfaction in a matter of
no more moment than this: for we are not curious in this point, nor do
require of any man that he say his Prayers in a certain number, so as that he
may not say more or less, as his devotion serves him.

ANSWER.
Palladius his writings are of small credit, and this Author was long ago
censured by the Ancient Hieron. Epist. ad Ctesiphon. c. Pelag. Idem. Epist. 60.
Posseuin. Appar. Sac. verb. Palladius.
. Paulus the Monk in Sosomene made three hundred Prayers to God Sosom. Hist.
Eccles. lib. 6. c. 29. In precibus ad solum se defixit, and in dies singulos
trecentas orationes Deo velut Tributum quoddam reddidit.
, but not any Batheus Ibid. c. 34. Bathaeus tanta vsus est co^tinentia tantaque
inaedia, vt vermes ex eius dentibus serperent.
a Monk, in the same History, used such abstinence, that worms bred in his
teeth. Pior Ibid. c. 29. Pior cum statuisset ab ineunte adolescentia, vitae
monasticae se consecrare eo ipso temporis vestigio, quo ea de causa paternis
aedibus egressus sit, spopondit Deo se de (...) neminem ex suis aliquando
oculis aspecturum. Post annos 50. soror, etc. Vbi vero fores crepare sensit,
oculis occlusis, etc.
another Monk refused, after fifty years absence, to look upon his natural
sister. Ammonius Ibid. c. 30. Cum a quibusdam comprehensus, Episcopus
crearetur, quoniam illis qui ad se ea de re venerant precibus persuadere non
poterat vt abirent, praecisa auricula dixit, etc. Se obstrinxit iureiurando si
vim ei afferre (...), linguam quoque excisurum.
being solicited to be a Bishop, cut off his own ear, to make himself
incapable. These and the like examples, are not censured by the Historian
Paulus his beads are a matter of singularity, rehearsed by Sozomene, rather
for novelty than for imitation.

Romists also, have yet a farther slight in their Checkstone tricks of beads,
forsooth, to bless and sanctify them, by the

THE SIXTH POINT. THE DOCTRINE OF TRANSVBSTANTIATION.
IESVIT.
YOur Excellent Majesty submitting your Judgment unto Gods

ANSWER.
HIs Sacred Majesty (a true defendour of the ancient Catholic, and
Apostolic Faith, to his immortal praise) submits his judgment in this,
and in all other articles, to the express word of God, revealed from Heaven by
the holy Ghost, and externally preached and penned by the Prophets and Apostles
Hilar. ad Constant. Aug. Fidem Imperator quaeris, audi eam non de nouis
Chartulis, sed de Dei (...).
. And concerning

But that the Romish Doctrine of Transubstantiation, to wit, Aug. d. Ciuit.
Dei, lib. 21. cap. 25. Qui mancucat carnem meam, and bibet sanguinem meum in me
manet, and Prosp. sent. Aug. 339. Escam vitae accipit, and aeternitatis poculum
bibit, qui in Christo manet, and cuius Christus habitator est. Nam qui
discordat a Christo, nec carnem eius manducat, nec sanguinem bibit: etiam si
tantae rei Sacramentum, ad iudicium suae prae (...) quotidie indifferenter
accipiat. Origin. in Math. cap. 15. Si fieri possit vt qui malus adhuc
perseueret (...) verbum factum carnem, cum sit verbum and panis viuus,
nequaquam scriptum fuisset, Quisquis ederit panem hunc, viuet in aeternum.
Hilarious, d. Trinit. lib. 8. Haec accepta atque hausta, id efficient, vt and
nos in Christo, and Christus in nobis sit.
, he cannot believe until demonstration be made, that this Faith is taught by
Gods express word, and was anciently believed by the true Catholic Church.

IESVIT.
To declare this, and together answer an objection much

ANSWER.
When the substance of a point is revealed, and the distinct and particular
manner concealed, it is sufficient to believe the former, without searching
into the latter. And not only some Protestants, but the Fathers also, and some
learned Pontificians,

Bandinus Bandinus, sentd. Sacr. pa. 367. Sed sieve sic, sieve aliter sit,
tenendum est quod Aug. ait. Si quaerismodum quo id fieri possit, (...) dico:
Mysterium Fidei salubriter credi potest, (...) potest.
, and the master of the Sentences Lombard. Sent. 4. Did. 11. Si autem
quaeritur qualis sit illa conuersio, an (...), an substantialis, vel alterius
generis? definite non sufficio. Tonstal. d. Euchar. lib. 1. page 46. De modo
quo id fieret, satius
, say, Touching the manner of conversion (in the Sacrament) some affirm one
way, and some another, etc. We say with S. Augustine, This mystery is safely
believed, but not with safety searched into. Cyrill Cyril. in Johan. li. 4.
ca. (...) Firmam fidem mysterijs adhibentes, nunquam in tam sublimibus rebus,
illud quomodo aut (...), aut proferamus. Ibid. ca. 24. Quomodo id fiat, nec
mente intelligere, nec lingua dicere possumus, sed silentio and firma fide id
suscipimus. Bernard. Epist. 77. Sacramentum Dei altissimi suscipiendum est, non
ratione discutiendum, venerandum and admirandum non dijudicandum, aut ad
rationis vel sapientiae humanae calculum reuocandum, etc.
of Alexandria, We ought firmly to believe the holy mystery, but let us never
in matters thus sublime, so much as imagine, to utter the manner how. And
again, The manner how this is done, can neither be conceived by the mind, nor
expressed by the tongue. Theophilact. Theoph. in Ioh. 6. Quando cogitationes
incredulitatis ingrediuntur in animam, ingreditur simul quo modo, etc. Oportet
igitur nos quum audiuerimus, nisi ederitis carnem filij, non habebitis vitam,
in sumptionibus diuinorum mysteriorum, indubitatam retinere fidem, and non
quaerere quo pacto. (...). Papa. Mist. (...). li. 4. c. 16. Si queratur vtrum
Christus localiter (...) de Coelo, (...) in Coelum, quum (...) aut subtrahit
praesentiam corporalem, an aliter incipiat, vel desinat esse sub specie (...).
(...). non (...) nos in talibus curiosos existere, ne plus quam possumus,
praesumamus, and non comprehendamus. Salubre (...) Apostolus, Noli plus sapere
quam oportet sapere, sed sapere ad sobrietate. Ego nescio quomodo Christus
accedit, sed and quomodo recedit ignoro, nouit ille qui nihil ignorant.
When we And with these agrees Calvin Call. Com. Ephesians. 5. v. 32. Cum nobis in
sacra Caena carne and fanguine Christi exhiberi negant, modum inquiunt definias
aut non persuadebis. At qui ego (...) altitudine in stupore abripeor: neque
vero me pudet, admiratione mea igncrantia (...) Paulo fateri. Quanto enim
sup. Ephesians. 5.32.

IESVIT.
We must note that men are bound firmly to believe the manner of a mystery
revealed, when the same belongs to the substance thereof, so that rejecting the
manner, we reject the belief of the substance of the mystery. This is Non
affectualis vnitas sed secundu^ subsistentiam Synodus 5. general. Can. 4.
also true and real. Secondly, this real union of Natures is substantial Qui
non cofitetur Dei verbum substantialiter vniri carni Anathema sit. Synod.
Chalced. Act. 5. Synod. 5. general. Can. 5.
, and not accidental, so that thereby the nature of man is not only
accidentally perfected, by receiving excellent participations of the divine
nature, power, wisdom, and majesty, but also substantially the very fullness
of the Godhead, dwelling corporally and substantially in him. Thirdly, this
substantial Con. Lateranense sub Martino. 1. Can. 6.
union Eutiches taught) but hypostaticall, whereby God and man became one and
the same person. These particulars

ANSWER.
When the distinct and special manner is revealed, and belongs to the form
and being of an Article, we are obliged to inquire, and firmly to believe the
same, according to the instance given about the personal union: But when the
same is not distinctly and plainly revealed, nor of the substance of the
mystery, it is more safe, according to the holy Scripture, and Fathers Ambr.
(...) li. 6. c. 2. Origin. Leuit. hom. 5. Chrysostom. 1. Cor. hom. 17. Greg. Mor.
li. 20. c. 8. Tertul. d. Anima, ca. 1. Hefich. in Leuit. 6.
, to be ignorant of that which is abstruse and hidden, than to be curious
beyond our model, Exodus 19. 17. Pro. 25.27. Act. 1.7. Romans 12.3. 1. Cor. 4.6.
Col. 2.18. Touching things inscrutable, S. Chrysostom says Chrysostom. in Math.
Hom. 76.
, (...), Hierom Hier. ad Eustoch.
, Melius est aliquid nescire secure, quam cum periculo discere, it is better to
be ignorant of some things with safety (...) to seek to learn them with
peril. S. Augustine Aug. d. ver. Ap. ser. 7.
, Melior est fidelis ignorantia, quam temeraria scientia: and Iustine Martyr
Just. Expos. fid.
, It is the part of every prudent and pious man, in matters divine, sometimes
to give the wall (to that which exceeds his model.) S. Athanasius Athan. ad
Serap.
, (...). The very Cherubims veil their faces when it is come thus far.
Saluianus li. 3. d. Prouid.
in like manner says, Sacriligae temeritatis quoddam genus est, si plus scire
cupias quam sinaris, It is sacrilegious temeritie to covet to know that which
thou art not permitted.

But the questions of Theology, which are de modo, concerning the distinct
manner, in many cases want sufficient grounds in divine Revelation, to unfold
them; and therefore in things of this nature, humble scilence is more safe than
temerarious definition.

IESVIT.
Jn this sort we say, That the manner how our Saviors body is in the
Sacrament of his last supper, must be believed, and may not be denied as far
as it concerns the very life, being, and substance of the mystery revealed:
which mystery in substance is, That the Body of Christ is

ANSWER.
Whatsoever is certainly revealed in holy Scripture, concerning the manner of
Christ's Presence in the Sacrament, must be believed, and not denied: and so
much is revealed, as is sufficient to enable the Minister and people to
understand by Faith, that Christ's word and promise, saying, This is my body,
are infalliblie

IESVIT.. 1. of Christ, under the forms of Bread, belongs to the substance of
the Mystery.
TO prove this, I suppose as certain, that the Body Praesentiam credimus non
minus quam vos veram haec fides Regis opera regia. Resp. ad Card. Peron. p.
399.400.
of Christ is truly and really in the Sacrament of his Supper. This I may
justly suppose, seeing your Majesty does profess to hold a presence of the
Body of Christ in present in the Eucharisticall Bread, but as in a figure,
holding

ANSWER.
Real presence is taken two ways. First, for a true and effectual presence,
of the body and blood of Christ, so as man, receiving the external signs by
his natural parts, receives also the thing signified and presented, by the
action of his spiritual Aug. in Ioh. tr. 26. Hoc est manducare illam escam,
and illum bibere potum, in Christo manner, and illum manentem in se habere: Ac
per hoc qui non manet in Christo, and in quo non manet Christus, procul dubio
nec manducat spiritualiter carnem eius, nec bibit eius fanguinem, licet
carnaliter, and visibiliter premat dentibus Sacramentum corporis and sanguinis
Christi: sed magis tantae (...) Sacramentum ad iuditium fibi manducat and
bibit, quia immundus presumpsit ad Christi accedere Sacramenta, quae aliquis
non digne sumit nisi qui mundus est. Caietan. Opusc. to. 2. tr. 2. d. Euchar.
ca. 5. Manducatur verum Christi corpus in Sacramento, sed non corporaliter sed
spiritualiter, Spiritualis manducatio, quae per animam fit ad Christi carnem in
Sacramento existentem pertingit.
, Ioh. 6.51.53, 54, 55, 56, 57.

Secondly, for a corporal presence, when the thing signified Idem. Opuse.
(...). 2. tr. 2. d. Encharist. cap. 3. (...). Cath. (...) carnem Christi, non
solum significari, sed contineri in hoc Sacramento.
, and together with them conveyed into the mouth, stomach, and bodily parts.

His most excellent Majesty and all his Orthodoxall people, believe real
presence according to the first acceptance, but the fame is denied according
to the latter acceptance.

The Jesuit being ignorant of this distinction, or else dissembling

They which hold a real presence of Christ's body no less true than Papists
themselves hold, cannot understand the words of Christ, This is my body, etc.
figuratively.

But his Majesty holds a real presence of Christ's body, no less true than
Papists themselves hold, Ergo

His Majesty cannot understand the words of Christ, This is my body
figuratively.

I answer. The Mayor of the former argument is denied: for a true real and
effectual presence of Christ's body and blood, may be taught and delivered by
a figurative Vasques. in 3. p. Tho. to. (...). disp. 180. cap. 5. n. 51.
Supponendu^ imprimis est, in Scriptura non solum inueniri verb a vera in
proprio sensu, and non figurato veram etiam non raro in solo figurato and
metaphorico, etc. Rupert. in Ioh. li. 6. page 131. figuratio locutionis,
veritatem rei non perimit, quemadmodum in parabola seminantis, verba
parabolica, rem non (...), vere seminantis.
speech: for, Psalm. 45. Salomons song. Ephesians. 5. Ioh. 15.

Secondly, one part of our Saviors words about the Sacrament (to wit, This cup
is the new Testament in my blood, Luc. 22.20.) Bellar. d. Eucharistia li. 1.
cap. 11. Non negamus. In verbo Calix tropum esse. Tho. Aqui. pa. 3. q. 78. ar.
3. ad 1. Cum dicitur hic est Calix sanguinis mei est locutio figurata. Alex.
Hal. 4. q. 10. nu. 4. ar. 2.. 4. Nugnus. Sup. 3. Tho. q. 78. ar. 3. Coninck. d.
Sacram. q. 75. ar. 1. nu. 38. pa. 194. Petigian. 4. d. 10. q. 1. ar. 1. ad 2.
arg. Non excludimus omnes figuratas and improprias locutiones, a forma huius
Sacramenti, nam aliquot, sunt fine dubio admittendae. Ruard. ar. 13. Non
oportet hic excludere quemlibet tropum, nam consecratio Calicis necessario
aliquem requirit.
, and yet they hold the thing expressed and meant by those words, to be really
given. It is false therefore, which the Jesuit and his consorts affirm, That
Protestants expounding the words of Christ ( This is my body) figuratively, do
by this sense overthrow the true presence of Christ's body and blood in the holy
Eucharist, and bring in only a fantastical and imaginary presence: for a
mystical Presence, wrought by the power of the holy Ghost, is as real, and
true a presence Theod. Beza. c. Claud. d. Xaints. Apol. (...). Scito a nobis
spiritualem preceptionem dici, non quae sit imaginaria, non quae cogitatione
tantum fiat, cui veritas non subsit: sed cuius sit organon, Dei quidem
respectu, vis illa diuini spiritus nobis plane inenarrabilis: nostra vero ex
part, animus noster, vera fide in oblatum fibi obiectum, Christum (...)
nostrum intueus, vt eum multo verius, certius, efficacius comprehendant, quam
vel ipsa Symbola cernant oculi, tangant manus, lingua degustet, vel
promissionis verba aures exaudiant. Itaque prorsus ridiculum te probas, qui
haec duo, vere, and spiritualiter, inter se opponis, cum in rem minime fictam
fides nostra feratur, and spiritu sancto duce praeeunte, falli spiritus noster
non potest.
in one kind, as a corporal and carnal presence is in another kind.

But the Romists themselves are the men, which contending

IESVIT.
Wherein, as your Majesty knows, they contradict the Euthim. Panop. p. 2.
Tit. 22. Theop. in Marc. c. 14. (...). Orthod. Fid. li. 4. ca. 14. Anastasius
Sanaita. Gaudent. Tract. 2. in Exodus Chrysostom. in ca. 26. Math Hom. 83. De ijs qui
mist. initiant. ca. 9. Epiphan. in Anchorat. Hilar. li. 8. d. Trinit. Cyril.
Hierosol. Catechis. 4.
ancient Church, which teaches expressly, That Christ did exhorts us to believe
Christ on his word, he said, This is my

ANSWER.
The question is not, Whether Christ uttered these words or This is my body,
This cup is the new Testament in my blood. Neither is there any doubt of the
verity of our Saviors speech, or whether we must believe his word or not (to
which purpose Gaudentius Gaudent. Trac. 2. Sup. Exodus Credamus cui credimus,
nescit mendacium veritas.
speaks;) but the question is, concerning the sense of the words, to wit,
whether, This is my body, This cup is the new Testament in my blood, are to be
expounded literally? Arguments for the negative part, are these which follow:

First, if the substance of Bread and Wine be delivered in the Eucharist, our
Adversary will grant Read. the next Section, without granting
Transubstantiation the words of Christ cannot be true, taken in the literal
sense, etc. Richard. 4. d. 11. in fine ar. 4. q. 6. Explic. Substantia panis
nunquam est corpus Christi, quamuis conuertatur in ipsum.
, that the words are figurative, because one individual substance, cannot be
predicated

Secondly, the words whereby the wine is consecrated, Luc. 22.20. are
tropicall, by the confession of our Adversaries. Read. before page 396.
Turrecremat. Sup. Decret. 3. pars. d. consecrat. Did. 2. c. Panis in altari.
Cum dicitur hic est Calix sanguinis mei est locutio figuratiua, and potest
dupliciter intelligi, vno modo secundum Metonymian, quia ponitur continens pro
contento, vt sit sensus, Hic sanguis meus


Thirdly, if the words be taken properly, then the body of Christ, and the
blood of Christ, are delivered, and received, without the soul and deity of
Christ, for in propriety of speech, the body is a distinct, and diverse thing,
from the soul, and likewise the blood.

Fourthly, that which Christ delivered to be eaten and drunk, by his
Disciples, he did sacramentally eat and drink Luc. 22.15. as S. Hierome
Hieron. ad Hedib q. 2. Euthym. in Mat. 26. cap. 64. Chrysostom. in Mat. Hom. 83.
, S. Chrysostom, Euthymius, with many Schoolmen Aquin. 3. q. (...) ar. 1.
Suar. in 3. Th. q. 81 ar. 1. Com. Nugnus. ibid. Potrecta. Sup. Math. 26.
Conclus. 3. Corrolar. 3. Vasques in 3, Disp. 216. n. 81. Conclusio est
affirmans, in qua omnes Catholici quos ego legerim plane conueniunt.
affirm. But if the words be literally understood, then he did eat his own
body, and drink his

Fifthly, if the words be understood literally, then Christ gave his passible
and mortal body Aquin. 3. q. 81. ar. 3. Nec ipsu corpus Christi quod in specie
Sacramenti dabatur, impassibile erat. Nugnus in 3. p Th. ibid. Corpus exhibitum
Apostolis, and sumptum ab ipso Christo Domino, vere erat passibile. Bellarm. d.
Euchar. li. 1. ca. 14.
to the Disciples: but I trow, no Jesuit will maintain that a body mortal and
passible can be in many Hosts, or mouths at once; neither can the same be
corporally eaten, without sensible touching and feeling thereof, or dividing
one part thereof from another.

Sixthly, if our Saviors words be literally expounded; then Turrecremat. Sup.
Decre. d. Consecrat. did. 2. ca. Qui been. Verum corpus Christi, manet adhuc
sub speciebus, a brutis seu brutorum ore acceptis, and in ventrem traiectis,
quamdiu species illae manent, hoc est quamdiu substantia panis maneret ficut
etiam si proijccretur in Lutum.
eat the flesh, and drink the blood of the Son of man: but all that eat
the flesh, and drink the blood of the Son of man, have everlasting life,
Ioh. 6.49.50, 51.54.56.

Seauenthly, if our Saviors words were literal, regular, and Justinian. Com.
1. Cor. 11. v. 24. Ingens est, non solum inter Haereticos, sed etiam
Catholicos, de horum verborum sensu, controuersia. Vasques in 3. Tho. to. 3.
disp. 101. n. 1. Circa pro nomina, non solum Haeretici, vary dogmatizant,
verum etiam (...), in tanta opinionum vary tate sunt constituti, vt singulatim
eas recensere nimis molestum esset Suares. in 3. p. Tho. q. 77. ar. 2. disp.
58. Sect. 8. Vasq. ibid. to. 3. disp. 181. ca. 1. nu. 1.
.

First, Some of them say, that the Pronoune (This) signifies nothing (...).
Sup. Decret. d. Consecr. Did. 2. ca panis in Altari. Resp. quod circa hoc
multiplex fuit opinio, Quidam n. dixerunt, quod in hac locutione, hoc est
corpus meum haec dictio (hoc) nullam demonstrationem facit. Fauent. in 4. Sent.
Did. 8. q. 2. Disp. 34. Citat pro hac opinione Jnnocent. d. Myster. Miss. li.
4. cap. 17. Durand. in 4. D. 8. q. 2. Ad. 1. Gabr. in Can. Miss. lect. 48.
. Others say it signifies the Bread Godfied. Alex. Hal. 4. q. 10. m. 4. ar. 2..
3. Bonavent.
. Alex. Hales. Hocest corpus meum: sensus est, signatum hoc signo, quod est
panis transubstantiandus in corpus meum, est corpus meum, that is, The sense of
these words, This is my body, is, the Bread presently to be transubstantiate,
into my body, is my body. Some say it signifies the Accidents, and forms of
Bread: others, it signifies the body of Christ. Some say, it signifies
confusedly, that which is contained under the forms. And every of these
opinions, has sundry crookes, windings, and limitations Read. Suares in 3. p.
Tho. Disp. 58. Sect. 6. Henriq. Sum. d. Euchar. li. 8. ca. 19. Coninck. d.
Saeram. q. 78. ar. 5. number 41. Ruard. ar. 13. Caietan. Opuse. to 2. tr. 2. d.
Euchar. c. 7. Indiuiduum substantiae absque determinatione naturae tam panis
quam Corporis Christi.
.

Secondly, Touching the Verb substantive, est (is) some expound continetur
Aquin. 3. q. 75. ar. 8. and q. 78. ar. 2. and 5. Bellarm. refert d. Euchar.
lib. 1. cap. 11. and Argentin. 4. d. 8. ar. 2.
, under these forms, my body is contained. Others expound it by Erit Ibid. 4.
d. 8. ar. 2.
, This shall be my body, when the sentence is ended. Some say it signifies
Transmutatur Richard. 4. d. 8. ar. 3. ad. 7. Marsilius 4. q. 6. ar. 1.
Bonauent. 4. d. 8. ar. 1. q. 1. Gabr. in Can. Miss. Lect. 48.
, It is changed and converted.

Thirdly, Touching the words Corpus meum (my Body) Some say it is Materia
prima, The first matter of Christ's Body. Others, Durand, 4. Did. 10. q. 2.
. Others, A Body, having quantity, without extension, figure, and order of
parts Occham. 4. Did. 10. q. 4.
. Others, A body having quantity, without extrinsecall reference to place
Bellarm. d. Euchar. lib. 3. cap. 4. and l. 1. c. 2. and 14.
, an immateriall Body, like unto Angels and Spirits Ibid. lib. 1. ca. 2. and
cap. 14. (...). Opusc. to. 2. tr. 2. c. 5.
, Image of man's face reflecting in a glass Thyreus d. Appar. Sacram. Petigian.
4. d. 10. ar. 4. Viguerius. Instit. c. 16. v. 7.
: A Body having the stature of a man, and yet contained in every crumme of
bread Suar. in. 3. p. Tho. Disp. 52. Sect. 3. Capreolus 4. Did. 10. q. 4. ar.
3. Petig. 4. d. 10. q. 1. (...). 4. dub. 1. Aquin. 3. q. 76. ar. 2.3. Soto 4.
d. 10. q. 1. ar. 2.3. (...). Ab (...). Dial. 4.. 244. Victoria d. (...). n. 64.
Viuald. d. Euchar. c. 7. n. 15. Vasques 3. disp. 88. c. 3. Greg. Val. to 4.
disp. 6. q. 4. punct. 2. Bonacin. d. Sacram. d. Euchar. disp. 4. q. 3. punct.
5. prop. 3. Christus quoad substantiam and accidentia, non solum existit sub
qualibet specie, verum etiam sub qualibet part specierum.
.

Thus whiles Romists deny, that there is a figure in our Saviors words, they
fall into innumerable absurdities, and in stead of the true and perfect body
of Christ, crucified for us, and communicated in the holy Eucharist, they reach
us a fantastical body, and a very vain shadow, and Image of Christ's real

But the Adversary, to make the contrary Tenet appear Catholic, affirms,
That the ancient Church expressly denied our Saviors words to be figurative,
and in his Margen he points out certain Authors, Euthymius, Theophilact,
Damascene, etc. I answer, although these Authors (being none of them ancient,
but post nati) affirm, that Christ in the holy Eucharist delivers, not only
a figure of his body, but his true body, (which is also our Tenet) yet they
say not, that there is no Theophylacts Theoph. sup. Marc. c. 14.
words are, Non tantum figura and exemplar est corporis Christi, etc. It is not
only a figure or similitude of Christ's body. Euthymius Euthim. sup. Math. 26.
cap. 64. (...) vidit Iesaias: carbo autem non simpliciter lignum, sed lignum
ignitum.
, Esaias beheld a fiery coal, the coal was not simply or only wood, but
fiery wood, such is this fiery coal in this great Mystery.

Secondly, It is to be observed, that these Authors, teaching that bread and
wine are Sacramentally or mystically converted, do also maintain, that the
said Elements remain in their material substance Chrysostom. ad Caesar. Monach.
Antequam sanctificetur panis, panem nominamus, diuina autem illum sanctificante
gratia, mediante (...) liberatus est, ab appellatione panis, dignus autem
habitus est, dominici corporis appellatione, Etsi Natura panis in ipso
permansit. Euthim. in Math. 26. c. 64. Non corrum puntur (...), neque in
secessum abscedunt, (...) in substantiam coassumuntur spiritualem eius qui
(...). Naturalis cibus est and potus (...). Tract. 2. in Exodus cum panem
consecrarum and vinum discipulis suis porrigeret sic ait hoc est corpus meum,
etc.
, and that Christ's body and blood are received into the spiritual powers of
the soul; and they say Chrysostom. in Math. ho. 83. Reipsa nos corpus suum efficit.
Theoph. in Ioh. c. 6. Qui manducat me viuit propter me, dum quodammodo miscetur
mihi, and (...) in me, etc. Cyprian. d. caena. Dom. n. 18. Greg. (...). Orat.
Chat. 37. (...) (...).
farther, That Christ changes the worthy Receivers into his Body.

IESVIT.
As for some places of Fathers brought to the contrary, how they are to be
understood your Majesty is not ignorant: Aug. in Psalm. 3. Aug. contra Adamant.
cap. 12.
Saint Augustine saying, That Christ gave to his (Argumento ad hominem) that
Christ said, This is my Body, when he gave but a figure of his Body, to wit,
as you think. Tertullian has this speech, Christ taking bread into his hands,
and distributing it to his Disciples, made the same his Body, saying, Hoc est
corpus meum, id est, figura corporis mei; where, figura corporis mei, is
referred, not unto corpus meum, as an explication thereof, but hoc, in this
manner, hoc id est figura corporis mei, est corpus meum. This to be Tertullians
meaning, appears Tertul. l. 4. Contra Marcionem.
by the drift of his discourse in that place; for Tertullian is to show, that
whereas in the Old Testament Mittamus lignum in panem eius, id est crucem in
corpus eius: Christ in the New Testament, made this figure to be truly and
really his Body, taking Bread into his hands, saying this, that is, This
figure of my Body is my Body, as if he said, Bread (which anciently was a
figure of my Body) I do now make to be truly and really my Body; and this
is an usual phrase in Tertullian, Tertull. Contra Prax. c. 29.
who not to interrupt the sentence of holy Scripture, adds his explication of
the subject (not presently, but) after the Attribute, as when he said, Christus
mortuus est, id est, vnctus, the sense whereof is, Christus, id est, vnctus
mortuus est.

ANSWER.
Many of the Fathers Chrysostom. in Math. Hom. 83. and in Epist. Heb. Hom. 17.
Gelasius c. Eutich. Theod. Dial. 2. Dionis. Hierarch. cap. 3. Gregor. Nazian.
Apolog. Macar. Hom. 27. Ambros. Offic. lib. 1. cap. 48. Hieron. sup. Math. 26.
de Consecrat. Did. 2. c. Accipite. Dionis. Hierarch. c. 2. and 3. Aug. lib.
83. q. 61.
, treating of the Sacramental signs, call them Figures, Representations,
Similitudes, Memorials, Antitipes, etc. of the Body and Blood of Christ. But
that which is a figure, similitude, and representation of a thing, is not
properly the same. Saint Augustine August. de Doctr. Christ. lib. 3. cap. 16.
Figura est precipiens passioni Domini esse communicandum, and suauiter atque
vtiliter recondendum in memoria quod caro eius pro nobis crucifixa and
vulnerata sit.
, It is a figurative speech, commanding us to be partakers of the Lords
Passion, and sweetly and profitably to keep in mind, that his flesh was
crucified, and wounded for us. The Lord did not stick to say, This is my
body, when he gave the sign of his body August. in Psalm. 98.
. Origin Orig. in cap. 15. Math.
, This I speak of the typical, and figurative body. Saint Ambrose Ambros. d.
Sacram. lib. 4. cap. 5.
, Which is the figure of the body and blood of the Lord Jesus. Saint
Chrysostom (...). Imperf. Math. Hom. 11.
, Gratians Gloss Gratian. d. Consecrat. Did. 2.. Hoc est Prosper.
, The Divine bread, which represents the flesh of Christ, is called, The
body of Christ, but improperly. Beda Beda in (...). 22.
, Substituting his flesh and blood, in the figure of bread and wine. Druthmarus
Druthmar. sup. Math. c. 26.
, The blood of Christ is aptly figured thereby. Bertram Bertram. l. d. corp.
and sang. Dom. Paschas. (...). Sacram. Corp. Dom. cap. 12.
, Bread and Wine, is figuratively the Body and Blood of Christ. And Tertullian
more ancient than any of these, says, That Bread represents the Body of
Christ Tertul. c. Marc, l. 1. c. 14.
: And he says in two places Ibid. l. 3. c. 19. and l. 4. c. 40.
, That it is a figure

The Jesuit in his answer to these plain testimonies, takes Augustine, and
Tertullian: and concerning the first, he says, that S. Augustine spoke not of
a bare and empty figure, but of the figure of a thing really present: but this
answer is deceitful, for the Sacramental elements are a true and lively
figure, and not a bare and empty sign of the Body and Blood of Christ. And
although the Body and Blood of Christ are not essentially contained and
enclosed in the shapes, or material substance of the elements, yet they are
really communicated by the holy Ghost, at and by the faithful and worthy
receiving of these divine mysteries. The second place of Augustine admits
not the Jesuits solution: for one difference between the Manichee, and this
Father, was, concerning Moses his words, Deuteronomy. 12.23. Thou shall not eat the
Blood, for the Blood is the Soul. S. Augustine says Aug. c. Adimant. c. 12.
, Possum interpretari praeceptum illud in signo esse positum, I may expound
that commandment, by saying, it was set down in a sign for Christ doubted
not to affirm Non enim Dominus dubitauit dicere, Hoc est corpus meum cum
signum daret corporis sui.
, This is my body, when he gave a sign of his Body. In these words S.
Augustine teaches, that as the Blood is called the Soul, after the manner of
a sign, so likewise, the Bread in the holy Eucharist is called the body of
Christ, because it is Augustine held our Saviors words, This is my Body, to
be a siguratiue enunciation, which is the thing affirmed by us. Tertullian
Tertul. c. Marc. li. 4. c. 40. Acceptum pane^ and distributu^ Discipulis,
corpus suum illu^ fecit, hoc est corpus meu^ dicendo, id est figura corporis
mei, pane^ corpus suum appellat.
affirms expressly of Bread, which he received into his hand, and
distributed to his disciples, that it is a figure of Christ's Body. And the
Adversaries (...), expounding his words in this manner, The figure of my body
is my body, is voluntary, or rather sophistical, for the words immediately
following are, he called bread his Body, and in other places, he makes bread
the subject of the proposition Idem. c. Marc. li. 1. c. 14. Nec pane^ quo ipsum
corpus suum representat, li. 3. ca. 19. Deus in Euangelio reuelauit panem
corpus suum appellans. Jdem. c. Iud. c. 10.
, This is my Body. But the accidents This is my Body, demonstrate the form
only of Bread, or command the forms only of Bread and Wine to be corporally
received; for he did demonstrate that which was sacramentally changed, but the
accidents of Bread and Wine are not changed into Christ's Body and Blood, by
the confession of Papists themselves.

IESVIT.
This supposed, I infer that the body of Christ is present of Bread in the
very same place therewith. This manner of This is my Body, except his body
be veiled and covered with the sensible Cyrill of Jerusalem in his Book
(highly commended by Dr. Whitaker, Whitaker de sacris Scriptur. Cyril.
Hierosol. Catech. Mysta. 4. Calvin. in Ep. 1. ad Cor. c. 11. Institut. li. 4.
ca. 17.. 32.
says.) Let us therefore with all certitude receive the Calvin says, In the
supper, Christ Jesus, to wit, his Body and Blood, is truly given under the
signs of Bread and Wine.

ANSWER.
Although the mystical words be not understood properly and rigorously, yet we
may truly and really (though spiritually) Ioh. 6.54. Aug. d. Doctr. Christ. li
3. c. 16. Figura est, praecipiens passioni Domini esse communicandu^, and
suauiter (...) vtiliter recondendum in memoria, quod pro nobis caro eius (...)
and vulnerata sit. Id. d. verb. Dom. Ser. 33. Nolite (...) fauces sed (...).
Id. in Ioh. (...). 25. Vt quid (...) dentem and ventrem, creed and manducasti.
. 1. Cor. 10.16. The food which enters into the body must be locally present,
but this food enters not into the body, but it is the bread of life which
nourishes the substance of the soul, says S. Ambrose Ambros. d. Sacram. li.
5. ca. 4. Non iste panis est qui vadit in corpus, sed ille panis vitae aeternae
qui animae nostrae substantia^ fulcit. Id. in Lu. l. 6. c. 8. Fide tangirur,
fide videtur, no^ ta^gitur corpore no^ occulis comprehenditur. d. Consecrat.
Did. 2. c. Quia corpus, Sacru^ Dei tui, corpus and sanguinem fide respice,
honora, mirare, mente continge, cordis manu suscipe, and maxim haustu
interiore assume.
. But the Obiector demands, Why consecrated bread should be termed truly
and substantially the body of Christ, if his body be not so much as in the
same place with it? Our answer is, because of the Sacramental union between
the signs, and the body of Christ represented Aug. Ep. 23. Si Sacramenta
quandam similitudinem (...) rerum quarum Sacramenta sunt, non haberent, omnino
Sacramenta non essent. Ex hac autem similitudine plerumque etiam ipsarum rerum
nomina accipiunt. Sicut ergo secundum quendam modum, Sacrametum corporis
Christi, corpus Christi est Sacramentum sanguinis Christi, sanguis Christi est:
Ita Sacramentum fidei fides est. Bernard. Sermon. d. Coena Dom. Sacramentum
dicitur sacrum signum, sieve sacrum secretum. Multa quidem fiunt propter se
tantum, alia vero propter alia designanda, and ipsa dicuntur and sunt signa, vt
enim de vsualibus sumamus exemplum, datur annulus propter annulum absolute, and
nulla est significatio; datur etiam ad inuestiendum aliquem de hereditate and
signum est. Ita vt iam dicere possit qui accepit annulum, annulus non valet
quicquam, sed haereditas est quam quaerebam, in hunc itaque modum appropinquans
passioni Dominus, de gratia sua inuestiri curauit suos vt inuisibilis gratia,
signo aliquo visibili praestaretur. Ad hoc instituta sunt omnia Sacramenta, ad
hoc Eucharistiae participatio, and Chrysma, ad hoc denique ipse Baptismus,
initium omnium Sacramentorum, in quo complantamur mortis eius similitudini.
Sicut enim in exterioribus diuersa sunt signa, vt que in coepto immoremur
exemplo, multa Ambros. d. eis qui initiantur, c. 9. Post consecrationem sanguis
nuncupatur, etc.
, and spiritually communicated to the worthy receiuor, by that sign. As a
Kings crown may be called a kingdom, because it is a sign thereof, and the
placing thereof upon the head may be a means of conferring a kingdom. So Cor.
10.16. And by the same reason, Christ's Body may be said to be in the bread,
and his Blood in the Cup, not by local presence, or as wine is contained in a
vessel (which S. Cyrill affirms not) but vertually, and by relation and
spiritual donation, because when the Minister delivers the outward sign,
and the Communicant receives the same, The holy Ghost Turrecrem. sup. Decret.
3. pars d. consecrat. Did. 2. cap. Corpus. Attribuitur Spiritu sancto, etc.
est enim amor patris and filij. Aug. d. Trin. li. 3. ca. 4.
delivers and communicates the thing

IESVIT.
Whence it is also consequent, that the whole body of Christ is contained
under a consecrated Host, be the same never so little; for by this mystery,
the body of Christ is of bread, consecrated bread could not truly and
properly be Aug. c. Aduers. legis and Prop. ca. 9. Fideli cord and ore
suscipim' Christum Iesum. Cypr. d. Lapfis. (...). li. d. Resurr. carnis, caro
corpore Christi vescitur. Iren. li. 5. ca. 2. Nyss. cat. Chrysostom. ho. 83. irr
Math. Theod. in ca. 11. 1. ad Cor. Leo, ser. 6. de Ieiunio septimi mensis. Quod
side creditur ore sumitur.
his body being ordained unto the manducation thereof; for

ANSWER.
That body which is neither circumscriptiuely, nor definitiuely present in the
outward signs, is not substantially contained in the same. The body of Christ
is neither of these ways present in the outward signs Turrecrem. sup. Decret.
3. pars d. Consecrat. did. 2. ca. Quid sit. Corpus Christi, non est in
Sacramento circu^scriptiue, quia non est ibi secundum comme^surationem propriae
quantitatis ad locum, nec est ibi definitive cu^ non sit ibi ita quod non alibi
est.
: not the first way, for in circumscription, the continent must be as large or
ample as the thing contained: not the second way, for that which is
definitiuely in one place, cannot at the same time be substantially in another.
And yet, although the body of Christ is not according Estius 4. d. 1.. 5.
Virtus atque efficientia qua^ patres sacrame^tis tribuunt, intelligi potest
efficax ordinatio alicuius ad aliquid, vt videlicet illo posito, hoc quoque ad
quod ordinatumest, certo ponatur. Fauent. 4. d. 1. q. 4. disp. 2. c. 5. etc. 6.
Exhibita illa exteriori ceremonia and signo externo, recordatur Deus pacti sui,
and sua^ promissionem implet.
, and Sacramental Union, and Donation of the things signified, together with
the signs worthily received: For God Almighty has made a Covenant with his
Church, and faithful people, to nourish their Souls with the lively food of
the Body and Blood of Christ, Ioh. 6.32. He has also appointed a Sacrament,
in which there shall be made a representation Cor. 11.26, and he has annexed a
promise thereunto, which is, that as often as the same is lawfully administered,
he will communicate to all worthy receivers, the Body and Blood of Christ, 1.
Cor. 10.16. Now then, when the outward Sacrament is administered and received,
as is aforesaid,

The Object, or thing carnally and bodily received, is the Elementall Creature.
The Object and thing received spiritually and internally, is the body and
blood of Christ, crucified upon the Cross. The Donour and distributer of this
inward gift, is the blessed Trinity, the Son of God himself, and Caietan.
Opusc. (...). 2. (...). 2. d. Euchar. cap. 1. Manducare (...) Sacramentum, est
per fidem formatam in charitate, in Christo manner, and e conuerso Christum in
ipso (...). Jbid. c. 2. Caro Christi vera spiritualiter concludenda est in hoc
Sacramento, and comesta (...) in hoc Sacramento, dat vitam aeternam. Et vsque
adeo spirituali (...), hoc (...), vt (...), quod quantum (...) Christi (...) in
Sacramento, nisi spiritualiter manducetur non prodest (...).
, John 6. 29. 35.40.47.

And thus if it be demanded, What kind and manner of Presence we maintain? It
is answered: First, a mental and intellectual presence, by way of
representation. Secondly, an exhibitiue

Now to the effecting hereof, local and corporeal presence is not necessary.
A father and his son may be absent by distance of place, one from the other,
yet the son is truly and really united with his father, so as his fathers
nature is in him, and he has right in his fathers person and estate. A man's
Tertull. d. Resur. Carn. cap. 8. and cap. 48.
we are washed Gal. 3.27: Now that which is absent, cannot wash, or be put on,
in a natural manner, but a spiritual union and application is necessary:
Even so, in the holy Eucharist, we are nourished with the body and blood of
our Savior; but to the performance hereof, local presence, or presence by
indistance of place,

These things premised, the Jesuits Argument is answered as follows:

First, The body and blood of Christ are in such sort truly and really
presented in the holy Eucharist, as that they are truly and really eaten, not
bodily, but spiritually, by Faith.

Secondly, Although they be received by Faith only, yet they are truly and
really communicated, by the powerful operation of the Holy Ghost.

Thirdly, Christ's body is not brought locally from Heaven

Fourthly, The Sacrament is not instituted in vain, although Christ's body and
blood are not locally present in the outward Elements: For if upon the worthy
receiving of the Sacrament, the Holy Ghost truly and effectually communicates
unto us Christ's body and blood, to be the food and life of our

Fifthly, The Fathers teach not, that Infidels and wicked persons receive in,
at their bodily mouth, the natural body and blood of Christ.

First, The Fathers cited in the Margin of the Jesuits book, speak not of
wicked and unworthy persons.

Secondly, They affirm expressly, That Infidels and wicked persons receive
the body of Christ only Sacramento tenus Aug. d. Ciu. Dei l. 21. c. 25. and
in (...). tr. 27. Huius rei Sacramentum etc. Sumitur a quibusdam ad vita^ a
quibusda^ ad exitiu^. Res vero ipsa cuius and Sacramentum est, omni homini ad
vita^ nulli ad exitium, quicu^que ei' particeps fuerit.
, that is, according to the visible sign; and not reuera, in truth, and in
deed; Panem Domini, non Panem Dominum Id. in Ioh. tr. 59.
, The Bread of the Lord, and not the Bread which is the Lord (or the Lords
Body.) The Author bearing the name of S. Cyprian Cypr. d. Coena Dom. n. 22.
, says, Lambunt Petram, Wicked men (like AEsops Fox) lick the outside of the
Rock, but suck not out the Honey. They receive (says Bernard Bern. in Cant.
Ser. 33.
) Corticem Sacramenti and furfur Carnis, the outward Bark of the Sacrament,
and the Branne of Christ's flesh. Beda Beda, sup. Exo. d. Agno Paschali.
, Omnis Infidelis non vescitur carne Christi, No unbeliever eats the flesh of
Christ. Hilarious Hilar. d. (...). l. 8.
, Panis qui descendit de Coelo, non nisi ab eo accipitur qui Dominum habet and
Christi membrum est, The Bread which came down from Heaven, is received of him
only, which has the Lord, and is a member of Christ. of Alexandria Cyril. in
Ioh. lib. 4. cap. 14. Impij cum non viuant, nec reformentur ad immortalitatem,
non manducant illam carnem.
, For as much as wicked men do not live, nor are reformed to immortality,
they eat not that flesh. Origin Orig. in Matthew. cap. 15. page 17. Ambros. d.
Sacram. lib. 5. cap. 1. Bibit populus Dei, qui gratiam Dei consecutus est. Et
cap. 5. Qui manducauerit hoc corpus fiet ei remissio peccatorum.
, If it were possible for one, perseuering a wicked man, to eat the Word, which
became Flesh, being living Bread, it would not have been written, Whosoever
eats this Bread, shall live for ever. S. Chrysostom Chrysostom. ex var. in
Matthew. Hom. 9.
, This Bread fills the mind, and not the belly; this is our Bread, and the
Bread of Angels.

Thirdly, Whereas some of the Fathers say, That the body August. contra
Adimant. c. 12. Non dubitauit Dominus dicere, Hoc est corpus meum, cum signum
daret corporis (...). Tertull. c. Marc. lib. 4. c. 40. August. in Leuit. q. 57.
Solet res quae significat eius rei nomine quam significat nuncupari. Idem,
epist. 23. Exhac similitudine
; but also because they say, the body of Christ is visibly eaten, and his
blood is visibly drunk Idem, d. verb. Apost. Sermon. 2. Ambros. d. Sacram. li.
4. ca. 4. Similitudinem praetiosi sanguinis bibis.
. Also they affirm, That the body of Christ is spiritual food, and passes
not into the body August. in Psa. 98. Ambros. d. Sacram. li. 5. c. 4. Non iste
Panis est qui vadit in corpus, sed ille Panis vitae aeternae, qui animae
nostrae substantiam fulcit.
, but into the soul.

IESVIT.
Wherefore, seeing we must of necessity grant, as I have proved, That some
part of the Body of Christ is under consecrated Bread, penetrating the same,
and occupying

ANSWER.
The Question is, Whether the whole Body of Christ is entirely and totally in
every consecrated Host? that is, Whether the true and substantial Body of
Christ, which is an humane body, essentially and in kind differing from a
Spirit, and having

IESVIT.
For if we can believe that two bodies be in the same place at once, we may as
easily believe the same of twenty. And if we grant that one part of Christ's
body does penetrate, that is, occupy the same room, with the quantity of
Bread, Why should we not think, that the rest of his parts may also do the
like? Our Savior says, That it is as easy Mat. 19. v. 24. and 26.
for a Cammell to pass through a needles eye, as adding, Though these things
be impossible to men, yet all is possible unto God. If then God can put a whole
Cammell in the eye of a needle, is he not able to put the whole body of Christ
within the bigness of a consecrated Host? The body being mortal and passible
could penetrate the body of his Mother, and come out of her womb through the
same still remaining entyre, as we profess in the Creed to believe, Natum de
Maria Virgin, Why then may not the same body, being now glorious, immortal,
and (as the Apostle 1 Cor. 15. 44.
speaks) spiritual, penetrate the quantity of the Bread, and enclose it
self wholly and entirely within the small compass thereof: and Christ that
made heavy things not to weigh, as the body of Peter walking on the water;
colored things Math. 15. 26.
not to be seen, as his own person, which he so often made invisible Luc. 4. 30.
to the Jews; bright things not to shine, as his body Ioh. 20.
after his Resurrection, more bright than the Sun, did not shine in so many
apparitions to his Disciples; finally, a flaming furnance not to burn the
bodies of the three children, Dan. 3. 30.
cast into the midst thereof, Why may not he keep a body from occupying a
place, or from extruding another body from the place where it is? for to
occupy a place or to extrude thence another body, is but an effect consequent
and flowing from the nature of a quantitatiue substance, as to

ANSWER.
We must believe whatsoever God has revealed. But God has revealed that
Christ has a true body, and all proprieties and attributes essential to a
true body, Heb. 2.16. Luc. 24. 39. And therefore the Romish doctrine, which
conuerteth the individual, and finite body of Christ, into a Spirit, and
fancy, and destroys the true properties of the same, affirming that is not
circumscript, palpable, or situated in one particular place at once, is
erroneous Aug. Sermon. d. Mont. c. 9. Corpora quae non possunt esse nisi in loco
in Ioh. (...). 31. Christus homo secundum Corpus in loco est and de loco
migrat, and cum ad alium locum venerit in eo loco vnde venit non est. Epist.
57. Spatia locoru^ toll corporibus and nusquam erunt and quia nusquam erunt
nec erunt. Sup. Psalm. 86. Angustias omnipotentiae corpora patiuntur, nec vbique
possunt esse nec semper: Diuinitas autem vbique presto est.
; neither can that be one and the same individual body, between which, are
interposed many bodies:

But it is objected, a whole Cammell may be in the eye of a needle, Math. 19.
24. 26. The passible body of Christ, passed Peter's heavy body walked above the
waters; the bodies of the three young men continued in the fiery oven,
unconsumed, or scorched; Christ's body was diverse times invisible, and once it
was resplendent as the Sun, etc. Therefore the now glorified body of Christ,
by the omnipotent power of God, may be separate from circumscription, length,
and thickness, and other effects and properties of individual humane bodies.

It is answered, the examples mentioned in the Antecedent, Hier. Mat. 19. Hoc
dicto oftenditur non disficile esse, sed impossible. Si enim quomodo Camelus
non potest intrare per foramen acus, sic dives non potest intrare in regna
coelorum nullus Diuitum saluus erit. Sed etsi legamus Esaiam, quomodo Cameli
Madian and Cepha veniant Jerusalem cum donis (...) muneribus; and qui prius
curui (...) and vitiorum prauitate distorti, ingrediantur (...) Jerusalem;
videbimus quo modo and isti Cameli, quibus Diuites comparantur, cum deposuerint
grauem Sarcinam peccatorum, and (...) corporis (...), intrare possunt per
angustam portam and arctam viam quae ducit ad vitam. Aug. q. Euang. li. 2. ca.
(...).
(which makes Mammon his God) may enter into the kingdom of heaven.
Prouerbiall speeches, Parables Athanas. c. Arian. orat. 3. (...).
and suppositions, are not according to every passage in them, to be strayned
or expounded literally Luc. 17.6. Math. 7.3. If it be further said, it
follows in the Text, All things are possible with God. Math. 19. 26. Marc.
10. 27. Luc. 18.27.

Our Answer is, First, these words are referred to the latter Ambros. Ser. 4.
Caiet. in Math. cap. 19.
. Secondly, all things agreeable to truth Theoph. Marc. 10. Dicimus Deus verax
est, facere autem id quod factum est, quod non sit factum est mendacium, quo
pacto faciet verax mendacium? Prius (...) perderet naturam suam: and ita qui
sic loquuntur (...) loquuntur: ac si (...). Number potest Deus non esse Deus.
, and which God will have done, are possible: but that it is agreeable with
Truth, for a Cammell retaining his quantity, with the whole body, to pass
through the eye of a needle; or that God will have this to be, or that it is
his will, that the body of Christ shall be separated from circumscription,
and continency of place, deserves to be credited when the Adversaries prove

Secondly, The Scripture affirms not, nor yet the Apostles Creed, that the
blessed Virgin in (...) travel, in Puerperio, bare Christ in a different
manner from other women, Luke 2.23. and what a sophistical inference is this,
the Creed has, Borne of the Virgin Marie, meaning according to conception,
generation, and clearenesse from the company of man, Ergo, the body of
Tertul. d. car. Chri. c. 23. Etsi virgo concepit, in partu suo nupsit, ipsa
patefacti corporis lege in quo nihil interfuit de vi masculi admissi, an
emissi, id est, illud sexus resignauit. Haec denique vulua est propter quam and
de alijs Scriptum omne masculinum adaperiens vuluam Sanctum vocabitur Domino.
Orig. Hom. 14. in Luc. Ambros. in Luc. lib. 2. cap. 2. Vid. Suar. in 3. to. 2.
Disp. 5. Sect. 2. and Ib. Disp. 16. Sect. 1. Chrysostom. Ambros. Origin. Greg. Niss.
etc. Sentiunt (...) singulari modo (...) vuluam matris.
, and some Schoolmen Durand. 4. d. 44. q. 6. Palud. 4. d. 44. q. 3. ar. 3.
deny this, and therefore from an Antecedent, doubtful and in question, a
consequent or conclusion of Faith cannot be inferred.

Thidly, The example of Peter, Math. 14. 29. and the three Daniel 3. prove not
the question; for the miracle might be in the water, and in the fire (...).
Com. Dan. 3. Potuit Deus, etc. pa. 178. Cornel. d. Lap. in Daniel. 3. v. 49.
Hij pueri abigne seruati sunt. 1. Quia Angelus excussit ignem, eumque ab eis
abegit, etc. 2. Quia auram quasi ventum (...) loco and vice ignis
supernaturaliter induxit, etc. 3. Deus huius venti actionem scilicet
refrigerationem continuauit, ac consequenter ignis vicini si quis erat actionem
in eam partem vbi tres pueri erant, vel habetauit vel (...), vel omnino
suspendit, concursum suum ei subtrahendo.
, and not in the bodies of St. Peter, and the three young men. St. Luke c. 4.30.
affirms not, that our Saviors body was invisible, but that he passed through
the midst of the people: and yet admitting, that he was then invisible, the
cause might be in the peoples eyes, Luke 24. 16. or in the Air, and not in his
body, Genes. 19. 11. Neither is actual gravity, or actual combustibilitie,
or visibilitie so inseparable from a body, as circumscription and distinction

Lastly, For a body to be resplendent, and to shine as the Sun in glory,
is not repugnant to the nature of the body, Matthew. 13. 43. But that an
individual body may be in many places at once, and in diverse forms, and
according to diverse actions Petig. 4. d. 10. q. 2. ar. 2. Occhagauia. d.
Sacramentis d. Euchar. tr. 1. q. 22. n. 6. Tribarn. 4. d. 10. q. 2. Disp. 33.
, and have no reference to place, nor any properties, inward or outward of a
true body, is not Divine verity, but an audacious fiction, or rather an
incongruous dream, and contradictorie Chymera. But that is verified in this
Question of the Romists, which Ireneus says Iren. c. Haer. lib. 5.
, Multa male oportet interpretari eos, qui vnum non volunt recte intelligere:
They are compelled to expound many things amiss, which will not understand

IESVIT. 2. Transubstantiation belongs to the substance of the Real Presence.
THis J prove: That belongs to the substance of this This is my Body, cannot
be true, taken in the literal sense, in which sense they are to be taken, as
has been showed. But without granting Transubstantiation, the words of Christ
cannot be true, taken in the literal sense, Ergo, Transubstantiation belongs
to the substance of this Mystery of the real

Because these words, This is my Body, signify that the thing the Priest
holds in his hand, is truly, really, and substantially the body of Christ;
for in this Proposition, This is my Body, the Verb, est, signifies a
conjunction between this in the Priests hand, and the body of Christ; and
being a Verb substantive, taken in his proper signification, it signifies a
substantial Identitie between this in as the Fathers teach it is, without
some substantial Amb. l. 4. d. Sacr. c. 4. Vbi accesserit consecratio de pane
fit Caro Christi. Aug. Ser. Qui citatur a Beda in c. 10. 1. ad Cor. Nyssen. Or.
Catechetica.
alteration, or change: and what other substantial change can make bread to
become truly the body of Christ, beside substantial conversion of the same
into his Body.

ANSWER.
You cannot demonstrate, that our Saviors words must be Luke 22.20. (besides
other Arguments) choakes you; and therefore the main ground of your Doctrine
being sandy, the Arguments inferred upon the same are infirm.

The weight of the first Argument lies in this Proposition: Our Saviors words
cannot be expounded literally, unless the Romish Doctrine of
Transubstantiation be granted.

I answer: First, if Transubstantiation were admitted, the words of Christ,
This is my body, This Cup is the New Testament in my blood, cannot be
litterall; for where there is any figure Read before, page 396.
.

Secondly, If the said words be understood literally, then the body of Christ
is properly broken, and his blood properly shed in the Eucharist: for Saint
Paul says, This is my body which is broken for you, 1. Cor. 11.24. Saint
Luke, This cup is the New Testament in my blood which is shed for you. But the
body of Christ is not properly broken Bellarm. d. Euchar. lib. 1. cap. 12. In
Mysterio Eucharistiae, fractio idem est quod immolatio sieve Oblatio. Aquin.
Com. 1. Cor. 11. Lect. 5. Corpus Christi non attingitur ab huiusmodi fractione.
, nor his blood properly shed in the holy Eucharist.

Thirdly, It is an improper speech to say, This is my body, that is, the thing
contained under these forms Bellarm. d. Euchar. lib. 1. cap. 11. Aquin. sup.
1. Cor. 11. Lect. 5.
, is by conversion and substantial Transmutation, my body: but Papists
maintaining Transubstantiation, expound Christ's words in this, or in some other
manner Read before, page 398.
, whereby they depart from the propriety of the letter: therefore in the
Doctrine of Transubstantiation, they depart from the letter of the words, and
consequently,

IESVIT.
But some may object, That as a man showing a leather purse full of gold, may
truly say, this is gold; or a paper wrapped up full of silver, may say, this is
silver: so the body of Christ being under consecrated bread, we may truly
say, This is the body of Christ, though the substance of bread remain.

ANSWER.
Many famous scholemen Scotus, 4. d. 11. q. 3. lit. B. Circa hoc erant tres
opiniones: vna quod panis (...), and tame^ cum ipso vere est corpus Christi:
alia, quod panis non manet, and tamen no^ conuertitur sed desinit esse, (...)
per annihilationem, vel per resolutionem in materiam, vel per corruptionem in
(...) tertia, quod Panis transubstantiatur in corpus, and Vinum in sanguinem
Christi. At (inquit) 1. Veritas Eucharistiae saluari potest sine ista
Transubstantiatione. 2. Substantia Panis sub speciebus (...) est nutrimentum,
quam accidentia, ergo magis representat Christi corpus in ration e nutrimenti
spiritualis. 3. Iste intellectus, quod non sit (...) substantia Panis, videtur
difficilior ad sustinendum, and ad ipsum sequuntur plura inconuenientia, quam
ponendo ibi esse substantiam Panis. 4. Mirum videtur, quare in vno articulo,
qui non est principalis articulus fidei, debeat talis intellectus asseri,
propter quam, fides pateat contemptui omnium sequentium rationem. Et postea,
nihil est tenendum tanquam de substantia fidei, nisi quod potest express
haberi de Scriptura, vel express declaratum est per Ecclesiam, vel euidenter
sequitur ex aliquo plane contento in Scriptura, velplane determinato ab
Ecclesia, etc. Nunc autem non videtur express haberi non esse ibi substantiam
Panis. Nam Ioh. 6. Vbi multum probatur veritas Durand. 4. d. 11. q. 1. Occham.
Centilog. Theol. Con. lib. 4. q. 6. and 4. Sent. d. 11. q. 6. Camerac. 4. d.
11. q. 6. ar. 1. Biel. Can. Miss. lect. 40. H.
. teach, that the doctrine of Consubstantiation, to wit, such a presence as
maintains the substance of Bread and Wine to remain together with the Body
and Blood of Christ, is in it self more probable, and were rather to be
followed than the doctrine of Transubstantiation, but only because of the
contrary definition of the Roman Church: and some of these Doctors hold, that
the opinion of Transubstantiation is not very ancient Suares. refert. in 3.
tom. 3. disp. 50. sect. 1.
. And Card. Caietan affirms Caietan. 3. q. 75. ar. 1. Impress. anno 1528.
Dico autem ab Ecclesia, quoniam non apparet ex Euangelio, coactiuum aliquod, ad
intelligendum haec verba proprie. Ex subiunctis siquidem verbis a Domino,
scilicet quod pro vobis tradetur in Remiss. peccatorum, non potest concludi
euidenter, praemissa verba esse intelligenda proprie, quia litera quod, non
refert coniunctionem praedicati cum subiecto, licet refert praedicatum,
scilicet corpus meum. Cum cuius relationis veritate stat praeiacentem esse
veram solum in sensu Metaphorico, vt patet in (...), Petra autem erat Christus,
etc. Jbid. Quod Euangelium non explicauit express, ab Ecclesia accepimus,
(...) Panis in corpus Christi, etc. Alph. (...). c. Haeres. li. 8. v.
Indulgentia. De Transubstantiatione Panis in corpus Christi, rara est in
antiquis scriptoribus mentio.
, that secluding the authority of the Roman Church, there is nothing in the
Scripture which may compel one to understand the words properly.

IESVIT.
I answer, that when substances are apt of their nature, and ordained by use to
contain other substances, then showing the substance that contains, we may
signify the This is my Body, being spoken of a thing be believed in truth by
them that deny Transubstantiation, This is my Body, which imports, that not
only his Body is truly and substantially present, but also that it is the
substance contained immediately under the accidents of Bread,

ANSWER.
First, if a substance be either by nature, humane Custom, or divine
Ordination, appointed to contain another substance, then demonstrating the
external substance which contains, we may signify the hidden substance
contained Fauentin. in 4. Sent. Disp. 45. ca. 4. Signato Marsupio vere dicitur
hoc est aurum, licet aliquid argenti sit admixtu^: Et hoc (...) est, seruata
omni proprietate verborum.
. But according to that Tenet, which maintains Consubstantiation, the
substance of bread is by divine Ordination appointed to contain the substance
of Christ's body; therefore demonstrating by words the substance of bread, one
may signify the hidden substance, which is Christ's body.

Secondly, Scotus Scot. 4. d. 11. q. 3.
, Durand Durand. ib. q. 1. n. 14.
, and Paludanus Palud. ib. q. 2. n. 24. Petig. 4. d. 11. q. 3. ar. 2. Doctores
ramen hic and Durand. q. 1. huius d. and Paludanus q. 2. and Occham. quod. 4.
q. 29.30. and Thom. ab Arg. in 4. d. 11. q. 1. ar. 2. and Gab. in Can. lect.
41. Dicunt ex his verbis non concludi necessario, conuersionem seu
Transubstantiationem Panis in corpus Christi, quamuis enim sub speciebus
maneret substantia Panis, dummodo cum illa simul adesset substantia corporis
Christi, vere and proprie potuisset a Christo dici. Fauentin. 4. disp. 45. ca.
4.
affirm, that although This is my Body. Now if such profound Scholemen have
weighed the Jesuits objection, and do find the same light, the propugnors of
Consubstantiation have small reason to regard it.

Thirdly, the former objection is nothing to us, which maintain Cyprian. d.
vnct. Chrysostom. n. 7. Dedit itaque Dominus noster in mensa in qua vltimum cum
Apostolis participauit conuiuium, proprijs manibus Panem and Vinum, in Cruce
vero manibus militum corpus tradidit vulnerandum, vt in Apostolis secretius
impressa sincera veritas and vera sinceritas, exponeret gentibus quomodo Vinum
and Panis Caro esset and sanguis, and quibus rationibus causae effectibus
conuenirent, and diuersa nomina vel species ad vnam reducerentur essentiam, and
significantia and significata
of Christ in the holy Eucharist, and refuse both Transubstantiation and
Consubstantiation; for we believe, and are able to demonstrate, that our
Saviors words are figurative in part, and yet the true Body and Blood of
Christ are really and verily communicated Bertram d. corp. and sang. Dom. Nec
ideo quoniamista dicimus putetur in mysterio Sacramenti corpus Domini vel
sanguinem ipsius non a fidelibus sumi, quando fides non quod occulis videt, sed
quod credit accipit.
, according to the manner formerly declared, page 405.

IESVIT.
Jf any man say that by this Argument it appears, that the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation is not expressed in Scripture, but from the words of the
Jnstitution subtly deduced, and so may perchance be numbered inter scita
Scholae, not inter dogmata Fidei: I answer, That the consequence of this
Argument is not good, as is evident in the example of the Incarnation. The
Doctrine that the union Council. Romans sub. Nicolao 2. Lateranens. sub Inocentio
3.
the proper sense of Christ his words, and substance of the mystery.

ANSWER.
I know at whom you glance D. Andr. BB. of Winchester, c. Apolog. Bellarm. c.
1. page 11. De hoc est, firma fide renemus, quod sit. De hoc modo est (nempe
Transubstantiato in corpus Panc) de modo quo fiat vt sit, per sieve in, sieve
con, sieve sub, sieve trans, nullum inibi verbum est. Et quia verbum nullu, (...)
a fide ablegamus procul: Inter scita Scholae fortasse, inter fidei articulos
non ponimus.
, when you say, inter scita Scholae, but your solution, from the Doctrine of
Incarnation, is not level to the scope: for illations are of two sorts; some
are immediate, formal, necessary, evident, and illustrious, to wit, Christ
Jesus is a true and perfect man, therefore he has an humane will: some are
obscure, contingent, remote, and sophistical, to wit, Christ said, This is my
body, Ergo, the consecrate host is Christ's substantial body by
Transubstantiation. Christ said, Do this in remembrance of me, Ergo, he made
his Disciples

That which is derived from Scripture the first way, is Doctrine of Faith: that
which is inferred the other way, may be loose, uncertain, infirm, and many
times ridiculous, and apparently

Now let me entreat you, (until you prove your deduction necessary) to
rank your Popish Mass and Transubstantiation among this latter kind of
deriuatiue Articles. Neither can the swelling usurpation of Romish Prelates
(which you style the Church) make every subtle speculation of Schoolmen
Suares. in 3. p. Tho. to. 3. Disp. 50. Sect. 2. Hoc totum pendet ex Principijs
Metaphysicis and Philosophicis and ad fidei Doctrina^ non est simpliciter
necessarium.
, and nice figment of humane wisdom Tertul. c. Marc. l. 5. c. 19. Omnes
Haereses subtiloquentiae viribus and Philosophiae regulis constant.
, an Article of Christian Faith, any more than a bragging (...), can by
outfacing, convert copper into gold: for Articles of Faith come down from
heaven by the holy Ghost, and are such Nicholas, and your Laterane, under
Innocent the third, These were your own Idols, the definitions that passed in
them, were the breath of the Popes nostrils, and therefore why are you so
fantastical, as to enammell them, with the title and authority of the
Catholic Church? And in one of these conuenticles, your Pope has so rudely
and grossly De Consecrat. Did. 2. ca. Ego Berengarius, verum corp' and
sanguinem Domini nostri, etc. Sensualiter, non solum Sacramento, sed in
veritate manibus Sacerdotum tractari frangi and fidelium dentibus atteri.
determined the Question of Real presence, that Romists Gloss. ibid. Nisi sane
intelligas verba Berengarij, in maiorem incides Haeresin, quam ipse habuit.
Tartaret. 4. d. 10. q. 1. Non (...) corpus, Christi, neque dentibus atteritur.
Cassand. Consult. d. Transubst. Prudenter vidit and admonuit Author Glossae
super Decret. Haec verba nisi sane intelligas, in maiorem incides haeresin quam
ipse Berengarius habuit, 941. Caietan. Opusc. to. 2. d. Euchar. c. 3.
themselves are now ashamed, and forced to Glosses and strained Expositions, to
metamorphise and new mould

IESVIT.. 3. the Fathers.
IT is certain, the Fathers acknowledge a Transmutation of bread into the
Body of Christ, and that they meant Transubstantiation, that is, not only a
mystical and significatiue, but also a real and substantial change, appears
by these five Circumstances of their Doctrine in this point.

ANSWER.
THat we may rightly understand the testimonies of Fathers, alleged in this
question, we are in the first place to examine, what transubstantiation is,
according to Papalls. The Trident Council says Conc. Trid. Ses. 13. Persuasum
se^per in Ecclesia Dei fuit, idque nunc denuo sancta haec Synodus declarat, per
consecrationem panis and vini, conuersionem fieri totius Substantiae panis, in
substantiam corporis Christi Domini nostri, and totius substantiae vini, in
substantiam sanguinis eius. Quae (...) conuenienter and proprie a Sancta
Catholica Ecclesia Transubstantiatio est appellata. Catech. Trid. d. Euchar. vt
tota panis substantia diuina virtute, in totam Corporis Christi substantiam,
totaque vini substantia, in totam sanguinis Christi substantiam, sine vlla
Domini nostri mutatione conuertatur. Bonacin. d. Sacram. d. Euchar. Disp. 4. q.
3. p. 6. prop. 1. Transubstantiatio est conuersio, (...) transitus, totius
substantiae in aliam. Dicitur conuersio totius substantiae, ad distinctionem
conuersionis partialis, per quam non tota substantia, sed sola forma (...), ad
positionem alterius formae, quae dicitur generario, (...) transformatio.
Dicitur Rubeo. 4. d. 11. q. 1. Conuersio vt hic accipitur, non est aliud, quam
rei totalis transitio in rem totalem: sic intelligendo, quia nihil eius quod
transire seu conuerti dicitur maneat post conuersionem, nec aliquid eius in
quod conuertitur praefuerit ante ipsam, nisi conuersio ipsa esset in rem
aliquam praeexistentem.
, It is a conversion of the whole substance of Bread and Wine into the
substance of Christ's body and blood, wrought by the words of consecration.

First, by the whole substance, they understand the whole substantial matter
and form Henriq. Summae li. 8. ca. 23. Coninch. d. Sacram. part. 3. q. 75.
Nugnus. in 3. q. 77. ar. 1. Bellar. d. Euchar. Greg. Val. to. 4. Suar. to. 3.
Vasques. Tapia. in. 3. Th. d. Euchar. q. 3. ar. 10.
.

Secondly, they affirm, that the whole substance of Bread Occhagau. d. Sacram.
tr. 1. q. 17. n. 6. Haec desitio non est dicenda annihilatio, sed pleno ore
dicenda est corruption.
, or cease to be.

Thirdly, the substance of Christ's body and blood, are placed under the
accidental shapes of Bread and Wine.

Fourthly, by the force of the words of consecration, the substance of Bread
and Wine ceasing, the body and blood of Christ, acquire a new manner of being
Bonacin. d. Sacram. d. Euchar. disp. 4. q. 3. punct. 6.. Secundum. Cum autem
per conuersionem, non solum constituatur Christus praesens sub speciebus, verum
etiam producatur aliquis modus accidentalis', quo Christus habens iam suum esse
substantiale, vnitur per modum contenti cum speciebus, sicut antea substantia
panis sub illis continebatur, sequitur actionem conuersionis non modo dici
adductiuam, verum etiam productiuam.


Fifthly, the shapes and accidents of Bread and Wine subsist, Aquin. 3. q. 76.
ar. 1. Facta conuersione panis in corpus Christi, vel vini in sanguinem,
accidentia vtriusque manent. Council. Bitur. cap. 6. negantes accidentia panis
and vini in sacramento Eucharistiae sine substantia panis and vini manner,
anathemate feriantur, and haeretici censeantur.
without any material subject of inherencie, and affect the senses, and
nourish Bell. d. Euchar. li. 3. c. 23. sicut diuino miraculo, manent sine
subiecto, ita etiam nutriunt vt Theologi docent.
, in like manner as formerly they did.

This doctrine of Popish Transubstantiation, is new, according to the judgment
of many learned Schoolmen Suar. in 3. Th. Disp. 50. Sect. 1. Tartaret. in 4.
d. 10. q. 1. Non est necesse ad saluandum hoc, videlicet praesentiam corporis
Christi in Sacramento, fugere ad conuersionem panis in corpus Christi, quia a
principio institutionis huius Sacramenti, fuit necessarium (...) corpus Christi
esse sub illis speciebus, quia in hoc consistit veritas, and tamen non fuit in
principio ita manifest dictum, quod panis conuertatur in corpus Christi. Ioh.
Yribarn. in 4. l. 11. q. 3. Disp. 42. Sect. 1. Jn primitiua Ecclesia, de
substantia fidei erat, corpus Christi sub speciebus contineri: tamen non erat
de fide, substantiam panis in corpus Christi conuerti and facta consecratione
illinc recedere.
: and the Primitive Fathers never taught the same; for many of them Lots wife,
changed into a pillar of salt, Genesis 19. Ioh. 2.9. for in these transmutations,
the common material substance remaining, the forms and accidents were only
changed.

IESVIT.
First by the expressenesse of their words: for there can be no words more
significant and expressiue of a substantial change between Bread and our
Saviors body, than those the Fathers use.

ANSWER.
Express words if they be figurative, prove not a substantial change Chrysostom.
in Mat. Hom. 83. Ipsum vides, ipsum tangis, ipsum comedes. Cyprian. d. Coena,
Dom. n. 10. (...) haeremus, sanguinem sugimus, and intra ipsa redemptioris
nostri vulnera, figimus linguam.
: for the Fathers use words, which according to the letter, import a
substantial change, when they treat of regeneration, and the Sacrament of
Baptism. Also treating of the holy Eucharist, they affirm, that faithful
Communicants are changed into the body and flesh of Christ Chrysostom. in Math. Hom.
83. Nos se cum in vnam massam reducit, and reipsa nos corpus suum efficit. Leo.
Ep. ad Cler. Constable. in mystica distributione spiritualis alimoniae, hoc
impartitur and sumitur, vt accipientes virtutem coelestis cibi in carnem ipsius
qui caro nostra factus (...), transeamus. Rabanus. d. Instit. Cler. li. 1. c
31. Sicut illudin nos conuertitur dum id manducamus and bibimus, fic and nos in
corpus Christi conuertimur, dum obedienter and pie viuimus.
, which our Adversaries

IESVIT.
S. Nyssen, That the word made flesh, is inserted within Orat. Cateche. ca. 37
(...).
every faithful man, by his flesh taking his consistence of

ANSWER.
If the words of this Father be understood of Transubstantiation, then the
bodies of faithful receivers are converted into the substance of Christ's
flesh: for he says, When the immortal body of Christ is within him which has
received it, it transmuteth him wholly into his own nature Greg. (...) Orat.
Catech. 37-Corpus a Deo morte affectu^, cum fuerit intra nostrum, totum ad se
transmutat, and transfert, (...), Corpus immortale cum fuerit intra eum qui
sumpsit, vnluersum quoque transmutat in suam naturam.
. Also the humane nature of Christ should be converted into the divine nature
(...).
, and Christ should be commixed, and contempered with the bodies of believers;
and bread should be changed into Christ's body, as Gregory Nyssen says Ib.
Per suae gratiae dispensationem, se per carnem inserit omnibus credentibus,
commistus and contemperatus corporibus credentium, etc. Nisi per cibum and
potum visceribus inseratur (...).
, That Christ's body is inserted into believers only. Lastly, the word (...),
Transelementation Theophylact. in Ioh. 6. 56. Qui manducat me viuit propter me,
dum
, proves not Transubstantiation: for in Transubstantiation, the matter is
destroyed, and the quantity and accidents remain; and in Transelementation,
the matter remains, and the essential and accidental forms are altered.

IESVIT.
S. Cyril says (That we might not feel horror, seeing flesh and blood on the
sacred Altars) the Son of God condescending to our infirmities, does
penetrate with the power of life, into the things offered (to wit Bread and
Wine) converting them into the verity of his own flesh,

ANSWER.
This Tract of S. Cyril (according to Vasques Vasq. in 3. Tho. (...). 3. Disp.
180. ca. 3. n. (...) Cyrillus Alexandrinus in Epistola ad Calosyrium,
the Jesuit) is not found among his ancient works, but cyted out of him by
Thomas Aquinas, and therefore the authority thereof, may be suspected;
notwithstanding I answer as follows.

First, S. Cyrill, by the words, Converting them into the verity of his flesh,
understands not Popish Transubst. but mystical and Sacramental Conversion,
to wit, conversion of signification, use, and operation; for he speaks of
Bread and Wine, (...). li. 4. ca. 32. Aug d. fid. ad Petrum. ca. 19.
Sacrificium panis and vini, in fide and charitate, sancta Ecclesia Catholica,
per (...) orbem terrae, offerre non cessat.
to God, in the holy Eucharist, are the whole creatures of Bread and Wine, and
the same are converted into Christ's flesh; then the accidents and quantity are
converted into Christ's body, as well as the matter and form, which Romists
deny.

Secondly, from the word Conversion, Romists cannot prove Transubstantiation:
for if the conversion, be only of use, relation, Cyrill taught conversion,
Ergo, he taught Transubstantiation. And if it be a substantial conversion,
then also there cannot be Popish Transubstantiation, for in this form and
substance perish, and the accidents remain: in the other, the common matter
remains, and the form and accidents perish (...) non (...), sieve (...), sed
mutat (...).
.

In all substantial conuersions, natural or miraculous, there is a new thing
produced, out of that which is converted, as appears in the conversion of
Water into Wine, and Lots wife Aureol. 4. d. 11. q 1. ar. 1. virtute
transubstantiationis, no^ accipit corpus Domini esse post non esse, quoniam
prius erat.
: for it is praeexistent, and receives no substantial change, by the
confession of (...) themselves Scot. 4. d. 11. q. 3. Fauentin. in 4. Disp. 35.
ca. 6. Quaero quis sit terminus formalis huius actionis (Transub.) and
conuersionis? non est corpus Christi. quia illud est terminus materialis, ergo
terminus erit Christi ^ panis. Hoc autem totum est accidentale, and nihil addit
in re nisi (...) realem sub (...).
: neither is it substantially united unto the accidents of Bread and Wine, for
it gives no subsistence to them, and it sustaineth them not, but it is united
accidentally (...). Corpus Christi in Eucharistia respicit accidentia omnino
(...), ergo non potest (...) illorum (...) aliquem modum essendi substantialem,
(...) ab (...), quem habebat antequam fieret ^ 8. (...) conuertitur in corpus
Christi, quod nulla sit mutatio in ipso, nec habet aliquid ^ ad species quae
est accidens. Petigian. (...). Theol. in 4. d. 11.
only, by being made present where the substance of the Elements formerly
were. Now if water should be poured upon the ground, or otherwise consumed, and
wine be brought from (...), as hail and snow (...). in 4. d. 11. q. 4. Disp.
44. Sect. 2. Grando and (...) adducuntur e coelo in terram, and secuudum quid
(...), (...) in esse presentis in terra. Ibid. Tota ipsa Trausubst. est (...).
Ioh. d. colon ex Scoto q. 11. (...) corporis Christi in Eucharistia, est tantum
respectus extrinsece adueniens.
are, and be placed where water formerly (...). 4. d. 11. q. 1. ar. 3. Vbiatio
est quando aliquid de vbi non, transit ad aliud vbi.
.

It is in vain therefore for Romists to object the Fathers Aureol. 4. d. 11.
q. 1. ar. 1. Praecise vnum succedit alteri, non est verum dicere quod illud,
cui succeditur, accedat and conuertatur in (...) quod succedit, imo e conuerso
(...) accedit ad illud cui succedit. Idem. ar. 2. Illud non transit in aliud,
quod desinit, antequam perueniat ad illud, sicut non transit (...) qui desinit
esse antequam perueniat illuc.
.

Thirdly, In all substantial conuersions, either a new thing is Ergo,
Transubstantiation is no conversion. If they answer, That some new thing is
produced, to wit, an union of Christ's body with the Sacramental signs
Bonacin. d. Sacram. d. (...). Disp. 4. q. 3. p. 6.. 2. Greg. Val. (...). 4.
Disp. 6. q. 3. punct. 2. and 3. (...) mutationis illius non est simpliciter non
esse, sed esse substantiale corporis Christi, non quasi de nouo productum, sed
(...) succedens substantiae panis, (...) substantialem intimae cuiusdam
coniunctionis substantiae suae, cum
. I answer, That when a garment and a body are united, here is no
substantial conversion, or when a Diamond and gold Ring are united, or when
the humanity or Deity are united in the person of Christ.

If they say, That the body of Christ (...) is preserved, as when nourishment
Bellarm. d. Euchar. lib. 3. cap. 18. Conuersio panis in corp' Domini, non est
productiua nec conseruatiua, sed adductiua. Nam corp' Domini preexistit ante
conuersionem, sed non sub speciebus panis, conuersio (...) non facit vt corpus
Christi simpliciter esse incipiat, sed vt incipiat esse sub speciebus panis.
Greg. Val. to. 4. Disp. 6. q. 3. punct. 2. and 3.
is received into the body, it preserves the same; then I demand, Whether
Christ's body is preserved in regard of the being? and if they affirm, then it
is also produced according to the being Fauentin. 4. Did. 11. q. 3. Disp. 45.
ca. 7. Scotus 2. d. 2. q. 1. ad 1. Conseruatio est continuatio esse prehabiti,
non tamen est (...) causationes and actiones, sed est actio vna and eadem, qua
Deus primo creauit creaturam, quae respectu (...) temporis, quo creatura
ponitur in esse dicitur creatio: respectu vero aliorum sequentium dicitur
(...). Vasques 3. Tho. to. 3. Disp. 181. cap. 5. Si ali qua actio fuerit, vel,
res aliqua cuius ipsa (...) non (...) causa, ca non potest esse
Transubstantiatio aut terminus illius: atqui conseruatio Christi, non est actio
proceedens a verbis (...), neque esse Christi permanens est (...) ipsorum. Ergo
talis actio non potest esse Transubstantiatio, neque esse Christus terminus
illius. Porro autem talem actionem and terminum, non posse a verbis (...) ab
(...) patet, quia Deus etiam sine illis verbis, (...) prorsus modo Christum
(...) in suo esse: (...), cum conseruat illis prolatis, (...) non (...)
, because the same thing which produced the body of Christ, does at this
present only preserve it, and no new thing super-added; but it is not produced
anew, Ergo, It is not preserved or continued in the

If they answer, It is preserved according to the Sacramental being: I reply,
That this Sacramental being, must be either the being of Christ's body,
according to matter and form; but then Christ's body receives no such being,
for it was preexistent. Vasques in 3. Tho. to. 3. Disp. 181. cap. 3. Vnio cum
illis, quocunque modo fiat non potest non esse accidentaria.
, and in regard of presentialitie and vbitie, and consequently it is no
conversion of bread into Christ's body, but a translation and adduction of
Christ's body from heaven, unto the place of the substance of bread: but
translation and adduction of one substance, into the room or seat of another,
is not substantial conversion Suar. to. 3. in 3. part. Tho. Disp. 50. Sect. 4.
Per solam actionem adductiuam, reuera non explicatur vera conuerfio
substantialis and Transubstantiatio, sed solum translocatio
, but alteration of place.

IESVIT.
Saint Chrysostom, When wax is put into fire, nothing Nihil substantiae
remanet nihil superfluit, Chrysostom. Ho. d. Euch. in Encaen.
of the substance thereof is left, nothing remains unconsumed: so likewise do
thou think that the Mysteries are consumed by the substance of the body of
Christ.

ANSWER.
This Father Chrysostom. tom. 3. Hom. d. Euchar. in Encaen. Quemadmodum si cera
igni adhibita illi assimilatur nihil substantiae remanet nihil superfluit: sic
and hic puta mysteria consumi corporis substantia.
says not, That nothing of the substance of bread and wine is left, but clean
contrary, (...), Nothing of the substance goes away: And the words which
follow, (...), are falsely translated: for they are not, Is consumed by the
substance, but, Is coabsumed with the substance. Also the substance of bread is
not consumed (...) 4. d. 11. q. 4. Mayor. ib. q. 1. Gabr. ib. q. vnic. and in
Can. Lect. 40. and 41. Occham. 4. q. 6. dub. 7. Dicunt panis substantia^ non
desinere esse per illam actionem qua efficitur corpus Christi. Vasq. in 3. Tho.
to. 3. Disp. 181. cap. 6. Fatentur and substantiam corporis and sanguinis
suapte natura cum (...) panis and vini non pugnare vt eam destruat.
. The substance of the external elements, passes into the body of the
Receiver, and is consumed, or united to the flesh of the Receiver. The body
and blood of Christ represented by the same, and received by Faith, nourish the
soul to life eternal, John 6. 54. And if our Adversaries, following their
own translation, will expound Saint Chrysostom literally, then Communicants
receive Christ's body by the hands of the Seraphim Ne putetis quod accipitis
Diuinum corpus non ab hoc, (...).
, and not by the Priests hands.

IESVIT.
S. Ambrose, What arguments shall we bring to prove, Ambr. de initian.
Mysterijs, c. 9.
That in the Sacrament is not the thing which nature has Non hoc quod natura
formauit, sed quod benedictio consecrauit. Benedictione enim ipsa natura
mutatur.
framed, but that thing which benediction has consecrated; and that greater is
the force of benediction, than of nature, seeing by the benediction even nature
is changed.

ANSWER.
The quantity and accidents of the outward signs, are framed by nature, as
well as the substance; and the force of consecration, and benediction passes
upon the one, as well as upon the other: and therefore the change of nature,
which Saint Ambrose intends, is not the destruction of the elements Amb. d.
Sacr. l. 4. c. 4. Vt sint quae erant and in aliud commutentur.
, and the conversion thereof into another substance, but the eleuating of these
earthly creatures, to be mysteries of grace, and holy instruments, to apply and
communicate that which is represented by them.

a Ambros. d. Sacram. lib. 4. cap. 4. Tu ipse eras sed eras vetus creatura,
postea quam consecratus (...), noua creatura esse coepisti: vis scire quam noua
creatura? Omnis is inquit in Christo noua creatura. Accipe ergo quemadmodum
sermo Christi, (...) omnem mutare consueuerit and mutat quando vult instituta
naturae.
It is inconsequent to argue, They are changed in their nature, Ergo, Their
natural substance is destroyed: for nature implies qualities Duraeus c.
Whitaker. (...). pa. 59. Col. 2. Aquarius Formal. verb. Natura.
and properties, as well as substance, and it is taken Theologice, as well as
Physice; for S. Peter speaking of regenerate persons, 2. Pet. 1. v. 4. says,
They are made partakers of the Divine nature, (...): and yet his meaning is
not, that their former substance is abolished. The nature of glorified bodies
is changed, and they are made spiritual, 1. Cor. 15. 44. and yet they retain
the same substance. Man's nature was changed after his fall, Ephesians. 2. 3. yet
the substance of his nature remained. Saint Ambrose himself says, That in
Baptism Learn how the word of Christ is accustomed to change every creature,
and when he will he alters the course of nature.

IESVIT.
Secondly, They require, that the Author that changes bread into Christ his
Body, be omnipotent; and consequently, the change not merely significatiue,
but substantial. S. Cyprian, This Bread changed not in shape Cyprian. d. Coena
Domini. Panis non effigy, sed natura mutatus omnipotentia verbi factus est
Caro. Cyril. Orat. 4. Mystagog.
but in nature, by the omnipotency of the word is made flesh. S. Cyrill, He
that in the marriage of Cana changed Water into Wine, by his only will, is not
he worthy that we believe him that he has changed Wine into his Blood? S.
Gaudentius, The Lord and Creator Gaud. Tract. 2. in Exodus
of Natures, that of Earth made Bread, again (because he can do it, and has
promised to do it) makes of Bread his own Body; and he that of Water made
Wine, now of Wine has made his Blood.

ANSWER.
S. Cyprian was not the author of the Book de Coena Domini, so Bellarmine
Bell. d. Script. Eccles. Et li. 6. ca. 2. d. Amiss. gratiae. Et d. Sacr.
Confirm. li. 2. ca. 6.
confesses, and before him Johannes Hessels Hessel. d. Com. sub vna specie, p.
62
, but in some copies it passes under the name of Arnoldus, who lived many
ages after Cyprian. And yet in one part of that work, d. unction Chrysmatis
Lib. d. Card. Oper. d. Unction. Chrysostom. n. 7. Dedit Dominusnoster in mensa, in
qua vltimum cum Apostolis participauit conuiuium, proprijs manibus pane^ and
vinu^: In cruce vero ma. nibus militum corpus tradidit vulnerandu^, vt in
Apostolis secretius impressa veritas, and vera sinceritas, exponeret gentibus,
quomodo Vinum and Panis Caro esset and Sanguis, and quibus rationibus causae
effectibus (...): (...) nomina vel species, ad vnam reducerentur essentiam, and
significantia and significata, eisdem vocabulis (...).
, there is a manifest place against Transubstantiation: Our Lord (says he) in
the table wherein he

Secondly, to a mystical change, the omnipotent power of God is necessary, as
appears in the water of Baptism Leo sermon. 4. d. (...). Christus dedit aquae,
quod dedit (...). Virtus enim altissimi, and obumbratio Spiritus Sancti, quae
facit vt Maria pareret saluatorem, eade^ fecit, vt vnda regeneret credentem.
Cyprian. d. Chrysm. Sanctificatis elementis iam non propria natura praebet
effectum, sed virtus diuina potentius operatur effectum.
, and Reg. 5. and in the poole of Bethesda, Ioh. 5. Therefore although some do
require an omnipotent power to eleuate and change the creatures of Bread and
Wine, yet it follows not that they maintained Transubstantiation.

Thirdly, the author Cyprian. d. Coen. Dom. n. 6. Panis iste quem Dominus (...)
porrigebat, non effigy sed natura mutatus, omnipotentia verbi factus est caro:
Et sicut in persona (...), humanitas videbatur and (...) diuinitas, ita
Sacramento visibili, (...) diuina se infudit essentia.
by the words, Natura mutatus, changed in nature, understood not a corporal
change, for in the Ib. n. 2. Sed immortalitatis alimonia datur, a co^munib'
cibis differens, corporalis substantiae retinens speciem. Sed virtutis diuinae
inuisibili essentia proba^s adesse praesentiam.
, That although the immortal food (delivered in the Eucharist) differ from
common meat, yet it retains in the kind of corporal substance. He says not,
Species in the plural number, meaning according to the new Popish sense, the
external shapes and accidents, (for let the Adversary prove out of
antiquity, that Cyprian, or the Primative Church maintained the late Romish
Doctrine concerning shapes of Bread and Wine, without the material substance,
and we will freely grant that the Doctrine of Transubstantiation is ancient)
but he says, Speciem, the kind, in the singular number, that is, the corporal
substance and form, in the same sense in which S. Ambrose Ambros. d. eis Qui.
Mist. initiant. cap. 9.
uses the word, saying, Ante benedictionem verborum Coelestium alia species
nominatur, Before the benediction of words (applied) it is called another kind
of thing.

S. Cyrills place maintains not Popish Transubstantiation, for in this, the
shapes and accidents remain, and the material Ioh. 2. the shapes, accidents,
and form were changed, and the material substance remained.

Gaudentius says Gaud. Brix. to. 4. Biblioth. Col. tr. 2. Exodus
Satis declarat Sanguinem suum esse omne Vinum quod in figura passionis sua
offertur. Bonauent. d. 11. q. 6. in 4. sent. Omnia verba significantia
innouatione^ circa corp' Christi sunt false dicta. Haec est simpliciter
impropria Corpus Christi fit. Ne (...) putes quod Coeleste effectum est per eu^
qui transit in (...). Nam cum panem consecratum, and vinum Discipulis suis
porrigerat, etc., The Lord makes Bread of his own Body, and he makes Wine of
his Blood: and then he says further, of Bread he makes his own Body, and of
Wine his own Blood; but he says not that this is done by Transubstantiation
(for Christ's Body and Blood are not transubstantiate) but calling the same
celestial food, he declares his meaning to be, that the change is spiritual
and mystical. And speaking Gaudentius, the consecrated signs which Christ
delivered his Disciples, were Bread and Wine, they were not abstracted shapes
and figures of Bread and Wine: for where the matter and essence is abolished,
and the accidents only remain, there is not the very thing, but a shadow and
image Gaud. ib. Figura non est veritas, sed imitatio veritatis.
thereof only.

IESVIT.
Thirdly, the Instrument by which God works this Transubstantiation, is by
them acknowledged the most efficacious that may be, to wit, the word not of man
but of Ambrose: Moses his word changed the water of Ambrosius de ijs qui
Mysterijs conuertuntur. c. 9.
Egypt into blood, and again turned them from blood into water. If so great
was the benediction of man, what may we think of divine Consecration, where
the very words of our Savior work? The words of Elias had power to bring
down fire from Heaven, and shall not the words of Ambros. lib. 4. d. Sacram.
ca. 4.
Christ have force to change the kinds of the Elements? Again, thou see how
working and efficatious is the word

ANSWER.
Among the six or seven examples brought by S. Ambrose, of Leo d. Natiu.
Christi, Sermon. 4. Ambros. d. eis qui Myster. initiantur, ca. 3. Hier sup. Eia.
li. 17. Prooem. Vox Domini super aquas, etc. Aug. sup. (...). Tract. 8. Cyril.
sup. Ioh. lib. 2. ca. 42. Chry. in Mat. ho. 83.
. Also the holy Scripture affirms concerning Evangelical Doctrine, That it
is the immortal Seed of God, the Word of eternal life, the Power of God to
salvation, etc. 1. Pet. 1.29. Act. 5.20. and 14.3. Romans 1.16. and the same
conuerteth Act, 2.37. and makes them new creatures Chrysostom. to. 3. d. Fid. and
Leg. Naturae. Lanae cum tinguntur naturae suae nomen amittunt, and tincturae
nomen accipiunt, etc. Si igitur tinctio naturae nomen transformat, cur Dei
natura non transformat hominem, (...) vt is qui ante pulueris gerebat imaginem,
post tincturam imaginem gerat fulgidam and plusquam coelestem?
, 2. Cor. 5.17. and 1. Cor. 4.15. But yet from hence we cannot infer, that
either the water of Baptism, or regenerate persons are changed by
Transubstantiation.

IESVIT.
Fourthly, The effect of this Transmutation taught by the Fathers, is the
presence of the substance of Christ's body, and the absence of the substance of
Bread, binding us to abnegate our senses, and not to believe what we seem
Theophylact, Bread is transelemented (...). in. c. 4. 26. Math.
or transformed by an ineffable creation, although to us it seem Bread,
because we are weak, and have horror to eat raw flesh, specially the flesh of
man: for this reason Bread appears, but in essence and substance it is not
Bread. S. Cyril, Come not therefore as unto simple Bread Cyril. Hierosol.
Catech. Mystag. 4.
and Wine, for it is the Body and Blood of Christ, according to the
affirmation of our Lord: for although sense suggest

ANSWER.
First, the Fathers teach, and we with them acknowledge, that Christ's body is
mystically present to faithful communicants, 1. Cor. 10.16. But corporal
presence (by indistance of place, and absence of the material substance of the
elements) was not taught by the antie^t Church; for they teach, That the
creatures Iren. li. 4. cap. 32. Eum quiex creatura Panis est accepit, and
gratias egit, dicens hoc est corpus meum. Et calice^ similiter, qui est ex
creatura. Ib. li. 4. ca. 34. Quemadmodum qui est e terra panis percipiens
vocatione^ Dei, iam non communis panis est, sed Eucharistia ex duabus rebus
constans terrena and coelesti, etc. li. 5. ca. 1. Eum Calicem qui est creatura,
etc.
of Bread and Wine are present in the Eucharist, and that after they be changed
Justin. Martyr. Apol. 2. Quae mutata nutrit carnes nostras. Cyril. in Ioh. li.
3. c. 34. Vt panis hic terrestris facit, imbecilitatem carnis nostrae sustinens
atque conseruans: ita and ipse per spiritum sanctum, spiritum nostrum
viuificat, and corpus ipsum a coruptione liberat.
, they nourish the body: but the Iren. li. 5. ca. 1. Et per creaturam
, and to resemble the mystical union between Christ and Christian people, to
wit, Bread confected of many corns of grain, Wine of many grapes Cyprian.
Epist. 63. Quemadmodum grana multa in vnum collecta, etc. Idem. Epist. 76.
Quando Dominus corpus suum panem vocat, de multorum granorum adunatione
congestum populum nostrum quem portabat indicat adunatum: Et quando sanguinem
suum vinum appellat, de botris atque acinis plurimis expressum, atque in vnum
coactum, gregem item nostrum significat commixtione adunatae multitudinis
copulatum. Chrysostom. in 1. Cor. hom. 24. Quemadmodum panis ex multis granis
vnitur, etc. Aug. in Ioh. tr. 26. Dominus noster Jesus Christus corpus and
sanguinem suum in (...) rebus commendauit, quae ad vnum aliquid rediguntur ex
multis. Namque aliud in vnum ex multis granis conficitur and constat, (...) in
vnum ex multis (...) confluit.
: but mathematical Bread and wine, have neither power to nourish, neither do
they resemble

Secondly, Cyrill shows in other passages of that work, what he intends
and means, namely, That the consecrate bread, is not (...), common, profane,
and mere natural bread, which the sight and taste judge so to be; but
sanctified, elevated, and changed to supernatural use

Thirdly, If Theophylact, a late Writer Bellarm. de (...). Theophilactus (...)
tempore Alexandri Papae 2. etc. Circa annum Dom. 1071.
, and some one or two besides, speak obscurely, and improperly Chrysostom. in
Ioh. Hom. 45. Non se tantum videri permittit desiderantibus, sed and tangi, and
(...), and dentes carni suae infigi. Id. Ad Pop. Antioch. Hom. 61. Lingua (...).
in this Argument, what is this to the grounding and raising of an Article of
Faith, or to the proouing a matter in question, by a common and evident consent
of Fathers?

Fourthly, The Fathers exhort people to abnegate their Credendo Chrysostom. 1.
Cor. Hom. 24. August. d. verb. Dom. Sermon. 33. and sup. Ioh. Tract. 25. Ib. tr.
50. Tertul. d. Resur. Car. cap. 37.
, by believing, John 6. 35. and not by sensible or corporal eating.

IESVIT.
Finally, That the Fathers held Transubstantiation, is proved by the
continuancie which they taught of Christ's body in the Sacrament, so long as
the accidents of bread last, as appears by their reserving of the same. For
Reservation to have been the custom of the Primative Church, Protestants
grant. That the Sacrament was of some reserved in the elder days of the
Church, is not (says Master Habent veteris Ecclesiae exemplum (...). Calvin.
Instit. lib. 9. c. 17. Sect. 39. Fulke against Heskins Saunders, and p. 77.
Chemnit. in Exam. Council. Trid. pa. 2. p. 102. Justin. Apolog. 2. fine Dionys.
Alexand. Ep. ad Fab. apud Eusebius. Ep. 6. ca. 36. Chrysostom. Ep. 1. ad Innocent.
Tertullian. li. 2. ad vxorem Greg. Nazian. Orat. in Gorgon.
Fulke) so great a question, as whether it ought to be reserved. And Chemnicius
grants, that in (...) consuetudinis late patentis and diu propagatae. And
whereas (...) adds, Haec tamen veritati praescribere non debet, he accuses
the Primitive Church, and opposes no less against them than us; and I am sure
your Majesty knows, that the Primitive Fathers did use to send the Sacrament
unto them that were lawfully absent from Church, as does witness S. Justin; and
unto the sick, as Dyonisius Alex. Serapion, That Christians carried the same
to their private houses to take in the morning before other meat, as
testifies Tertullian, That many times they did wear the same about them for
protection, as Satyrus brother to S. Ambr. going to sea, carried it in a
Ambros. Orat. in Obitu. Fratris Satyri.
stole, by virtue whereof he was saved in shipwreck: That Martyrs had the same
frequently with them, to receive Symeon. Metaphr. vitae Sancti Steph. Pap. and
Martyr. c. 17. Vsu Ord. in Martyrol. Guismundus de corpore and sanguine li. 2.
Cyprian. Sermon. de lapsis.
it for their Viaticum, as Tharsilius a most glorious Cyprian records diverse
miracles done in confirmation of this our Saviors permanent presence in Tanta
est Domini potentia, says S. Cyprian, Tanta Maiestas. And so fully were they
persuaded in this opinion, That Christ's body is permanently in the Sacrament,
that Cyril Cyril. Alexand. Epist. ad Calosyr.
dares say, Insaniant qui dicunt benedictionem a Sanctificatione cessare, Si
quae reliquiae remanserunt eius in sequentem diem, non enim mutabitur
sacrosanctum corpus Christi, sed virtus benedictionis and viuificatiua gratia
iugis in eo est Now what reason could the Fathers have, thus constantly to
defend this continuancy of our Savior in the Sacrament, but that

ANSWER.
Your objection reduced to form of argument is:

All they which used reservation of the Sacrament, and

The ancient Fathers used reservation of the Sacrament, and maintained
continuancie of Christ's body therein, Ergo

The ancient Fathers believed Transubstantiation.

If the argument be thus formed, First, the Mayor Proposition

Secondly, the Primitive Church, and ancient Fathers, generally or universally,
used not reservation of the Sacramental signs Origin. vel Cyril. in Leuit.
Hom. 5. Dominus panem quem discipulis dabat, non distulit nec seruauit in
crastinum, etc. Hesich. in Leuit. li. 2. c. 8. Quicquid reliquum fuerit de
carne and panibus, ignis absumet, etc. quod nunc videmus (...) in Ecclesia
sensibiliter fieri, ignique tradi quaecunque remanere contingerit inconsumpta.
Niceph. Eccles. Hist. li. 17. ca. 25. (...). Eccles. Hist. li. 4. c. 35.
Council. Matiscon. 2. can. Humbert. c. lib. Nicetae apud Cassand. Liturg. c 30.
pa. 69.
; and Justin Martyr Justin. Apol. 2.
, and Ireneus Iren. ap. Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. li. 5. c. 24.
, speak only of the sending of the Sacrament from the Church, where it was
administered to sick persons and strangers. Some examples of reservation
proceeded upon the ignorance, and superstition of Vide Cyprian. li. d. lapsis.
, in which case although some Fathers used conniuence, yet these abuses were
afterward reformed Toletan. Council. 1. ca. 14. Caesar (...). Council. 1. cap. 3.
. The Minor therefore if it be general, is denied: and if it be particular,
then the Mayor and Minor infer not the conclusion; because that which was
done by some, upon private opinion, and in another kind or manner than Romists
do at this day, and was also opposed and corrected by others, cannot be a
matter of Catholic doctrine, or practice.

But this question of Reservation has been largely handled by many of our
part, and whatsoever Romists have objected Read Chemnitius, Exam. Council. Trid.
p. 2. page 97. Doct. Fulk. ag. Heskins Parliam. p. 78. Gerhard. loc. Com. to.
5. d. Sacra. Coen. ca. 17. Politian. Sophist. Bellarm. d. permanentia Corp.
Christi, page 44. etc. Froeresen. Scrutin. Panopliae. Bellarm. d. Euchar. Disp.
9. Herbrand. Disp. 32. d. Fest. Corp. Christi, page 550.
: and therefore, because this Jesuit produces no new matter, but only
repeateth what we have formerly confuted, and especially because Reservation
concludes not Transubstantiation, which is the matter now in question, I
forbear further examination of the particular Testimonies produced by him.

IESVIT.
Against this consent of Fathers, Protestants object the Testimony of
Theodoret and Gelasius, who in plain terms affirm, That the substance of
Bread and Wine remains in this holy Eucharist, bringing this as an example of
the Incarnation, where the Natures of God and man remain in Christ: Signa
mystica (says Theodoret) Theodoret. Dial. Inconfusus.
post sanctificationem non recedunt a sua natura. And Gelasius, Non esse
desinit substantia vel natura Panis Gelasius, d. duabus naturis aduers.
Eutichet.
and Vini: I answer, That these Fathers, by the substance of Bread and Wine,
understand the natural qualities that flow from the nature and essence of
Bread and Wine; for ordinarily, and in common speech, the natural accidents
and proprieties of a thing are termed the nature of the thing. Thus we say,
That to be heavy, and to fall downward, is the nature of the Stone; to be
hot, and to burn, Theodote, Bishop Hom. d. Natiu. Saiuatoris, in Concil-Eph.
pa. 3. c. 9.
of Ancyra, to explicate against Nestorius and Eutyches the conjunction of two
Natures in one Person, by the example of the Water that Moses converted into
Blood, says, That the Water was not changed in nature, nor did cease to be
Water; which in rigor of speech, taking the nature of Water for the substance
thereof, as condistinct from the Liquidnesse, and the like; he the better to
sit and accommodate Eutyches, who denied the natural qualities and properties
of the two Natures of God and man to remain distinct in the Person of Christ:
which Error they rejected, by the example of the Eucharist, where the natural
qualities of Theodoret, because he does profess in that place, not to speak
plainly, as fearing that some Infidels or Catechumes were present, to whom the
Mystery of Transubstantiation was not to be revealed Non oportet (says he)
aperte dicere est, enim veresimile adesse aliquos non initiatos.

Much less cause have they to stand upon the words of S. Augustine, Quod
videtur in Altari panis est, quod etiam occuli renunciant. Quod autem fides
postulat panis est corpus Christi: For the sense is, That consecrated Bread is
Bread in outward appearance, and the natural Accidences of Bread truly remain,
as the eye does witness; but inwardly, and according to the substance, it is
not Bread, but the Body of Christ, as Faith requires we believe. And it is to
be noted, that these words are not extant in the works of S. Augustine, but
alleged by Bid, a follower of S. Augustines Doctrine; and so it is not likely
they are to be understood, but as Bede understood them, who sets down his mind
in these words: The form of Bread is seen, but the substance Beda de Mysterio
Missae, apud Thom. Waldens. to. 2. c. 8. 2.
of Bread is not there, nor any other Bread, but only that Bread which came
down from Heaven.

ANSWER.
Demonstration has largely been made by our part, that none of the ancient
Fathers maintained Romish Transubstantiation: and I have not observed one
express Testimony, produced by Romists, wherein the Primative Fathers, nay,
where Damascene (...). d. fid. lib. 4. ca. 14. Quemad. naturaliter panis per
comestionem, and vinum per potum transmutatur in (...) and (...) comedentis:
ita per inuocationem and aduentum Sp. Sancti, substantia panis, and vini
supernaturaliter transit in corpus and sanguinem Christi. Now from hence Durand
(...), Est autem manifestum, panis materiam manner in (...) per mutationem
naturalem, Theoph. sup. (...). 6.
or Theophilact affirm, That the whole material substance, and form
essential of bread and wine being destroyed, the bare accidents and quantity
of bread and wine remain; or that the abstracted figures and qualities of
those creatures, are received into the mouth and stomach, and are tasted,
felt, and confer nourishment, without any earthly matter conjoined to them.

But on the contrary, many Fathers affirm, That after consecration, bread and
wine remain. Theoderet Theod. Dial. 2. cap. 24. Nequaquam enim post (...)
mystica symbola (...) figuram, (...). Manent (...) in priore substantia and
(...) and specie: (...), etc.
says, That they lose not their proper nature, but remain after they are
sanctified, in their former essence, figure, and kind. Gelasius Gelas. c.
Eutich. and (...). Biblioth. (...) to. 4. pa. 565.
says, Esse non desinit substantia, vel natura panis and vini, The substance
or nature of bread and wine cease not to be. Bertram Bertram. d. corp. and
sang. Dom. pa. 38.
says, Secundam creaturarum substantiam, quod fuerunt ante consecrationem hoc
and postea consistunt? According to the substance of creatures, they persist
the same before and after consecration. Ireneus Iren. lib. 4. cap. 34.
teaches, That bread which is from the earth, receiving divine calling or
sanctification, is not common bread, but the Eucharist, consisting of two
several things, or matters, one earthly, and the other celestial. Saint
Chrysostom Chrysostom. ad Ca (...). (...). Sicut ante quam (...), panem (...)
autem illum (...) gratia mediante Sacerdote, liberatus (...) ab appellatione
panis, dignus autem habitus est dominici corporis appellatione, (...) panis in
ipso permansit, etc.
, Before Sanctification we call it bread only, but when divine Grace has
sanctified it, it is delivered from the name of bread, and is counted worthy
of the Appellation of the Lords body, although the nature of bread remain in
it still. Damascene (...). Orth. Fid. lib. 4. cap. 14.
says, As a fiery coal, is wood and fire, so the but bread united to the
Divinity, (...). But it is apparent,

The Adversary, in answer to Theoderit and Gelasius, pretends that these
Fathers, by the words, Substance, Nature, and Kind, understand only the
natural qualities and accidents which flow from the Nature and Essence of
Bread and Wine, and he yields a reason, saying, That in ordinary speech, the
natural properties and qualities of things, are termed, the nature of the
thing, etc.

But this Answer is insufficient, because it might perhaps Theod. Dial. 2.
cap. 24. (...).
, and have force of nourishing the body, and that they are compounded of many
corns, and of many grapes Jren. lib. 5. c. 1. Justin. Apol. 2. Cyprian. Epist.
63. and 76. Chrysostom. 1. Cor. Hom. 24. Cyril. in Ioh. lib. 3. cap. 34. Aug. in
Ioh. tr. 26.
, which make one substantial body of bread and wine. Now these things cannot
truly be said of the naked shapes and accidents of bread and wine, suspended
and divided from their material substance. Besides, the Fathers Theod. Dial.
1. cap. 8. and 2. cap. 24. Gelasius li. c. Nestor. and Eutich.
deliver the foresaid Doctrine, to prove

First, That as in the Eucharist there is only the outward Theod. Dialogo 2.
(...).
shape and form of bread, and not the real substance: even so in Christ,
there was the shape and form of flesh, but not the very nature.

Secondly, Even as in the Eucharist, the essential form and material
substance of bread and wine are swallowed up and converted into the body and
blood of Christ; so likewise after Christ's Ascension, the humane nature is
absorpt, and converted into the Deity.

IESVIT. 4. has with sense, should incline Christians the sooner to believe it.
THe former proof of Transubstantiation might satisfy, were this Mystery
easy, and not accompanied with many seeming absurdities and repugnances

First, That a body as big as our Saviors, remaining still truly corpulent
in it self, should be contained within the compass of a round Host, scarce
an inch long and broad.

Secondly, That a body so glorious should be combined unto corruptible
elements, and so made subject unto the indignities and obscenities that may
befall unto them.

Thirdly, That the same body may be in heaven, and on earth in innumerable
places at once.

Fourthly, That the substance of bread being converted into Christ's body, the
sole accidents remain by themselves, performing the whole office of substance,
no less than if it were present, even to the nutrition of man's body.

These difficulties so scandalize Protestants, that some condemn
Transubstantiation, as impossible: yea, as absurd, Field, of the Church, lib. 3.
their understandings to believe it as a (...) of Faith.

To give full satisfaction in this point, I set down this Proposition; That
these seeming absurdities should not auert, but rather incline a true Christian
mind to believe this Mystery. In proof whereof, I present unto your Majesty
these three Considerations.

ANSWER.
We measure not supernatural Doctrine, by humane sense or reason; neither can
any seeming repugnances of reputed Philosophy, to Divine Revelation hinder our
Faith, where the holy Ghost commands us Chrysostom. in 2. Tim. ca. 1. ho. 2. (...)
August. d. Temp. ser. 147. Si argumenta (...) difficile soluimus, illud quod
demonstratu^ est in Domino sine difficultate fidei teneamus, illi garriant, nos
credamus. Idem. d. Ciuit Dei, lib. 12. ca. 17.
, as appears in the articles of the sacred Trinity, Incarnation,
Resurrection, etc. Est quidem de communibus sensibus sapere in Dei rebus, sed
in testimonium very, non in adiutorium falsi, quod sit secundum diuinam, non
contra diuinam dispositionem, says Tertullian Tertull. d. Resur. car. cap. 3.
Hieron. Proaem. in Dan. Hilar. d. Trinit. lib. 1. Respuit captiosas and
inutiles Philosophiae quaestiones fides constans, neque humanarum ineptiarum
fallacijs succumbens, spolium se praebet veritas falsitati. Aug. d. Trinit.
lib. 1. cap. 1. Fidei contemnentes initium, immaturo and peruerso rationis
amore falluntur. Idem. d. Ciuit. Dei, lib. 18. cap. 40. Aug. d. Doctrine. Chrst.
lib. 2. cap. 18.
, We must have understanding in the things of God out of common sense, but this
must serve to testify truth, and not to patronise error, according to divine
disposition (Revelation) not against it. So far as sense and reason are not
repugnant to divine verity, but subseruient, we may give credit to them, and
every good Christian (says S. Augustine) Vbicunque inuenerit veritatem,
Domini sui intelligat esse, Wheresoever he finds verity (taught either by
nature or grace) must understand, that it is his masters.

The question between the Romists and us is not, Whether if Transubstantiation
be revealed by God, we may notwithstanding

First, the holy Scripture calls consecrated Wine, the fruit of the Vine; and
consecrated Bread, by the name of very Luc. 22.18.1. Cor. 10.16. and
11.26.27.28.

Secondly, the same affirms not that the substance of Bread and Wine is
abolished.

Thirdly, natural reason shows, that accidents must have a subject of
inhaerencie, and that bare forms and shadows of things cannot nourish without
corporal substance.

Fourthly, the senses of Taste and Feeling discern apparently a corporietie in
the elements received. In this case there is no reason to imagine that our
senses are deluded, or that God almighty by miracle works in a contrary
manner, to the

It is not sufficient for Romists to affirm, That God uses a miraculous
course in these things; and to palliate absurdities, repugnant to sense,
reason, and scripture, under pretext of Gods This is my Body, This cup is
the new Testament in my Blood, etc. there is not a syllable concerning
accidents without a subject, or concerning any miracle wrought in the Sacrament
by omnipotency, neither is there any such doctrine elsewhere revealed. And if
Christ's words be expounded figuratively according to S. Augustine Aug. in Psa.
3. Idem. d. Doctr. Chr. lib. 3. cap. 16. Idem. in Leuit. q. 57. Idem c.
Adimant. cap. 12.
, Tertullian Tertull. cont. Marc.
, Theoderit Theod. (...). 1.
, Origin Orig. c. (...). Dial. 3. d. (...), hom. pa. 552.
, Bertram Bertram. d. Corp. and San. Dom. (...). sup. Mat. 26. ca. 65. pa. 305.
, etc. they make nothing for corporal Busherus. Exercit. d. Eucha. pars 2.
Sect. 2. Inusitata praedicatio est in qua duae res disparatae vocibus proprijs
affirmate (...) vnumque dicitur (...), propter arctissimam co^iunctionem and
realem, (...) ad (...) praesentia^.
, which according to the Tenet of some learned Divines Melanchton. Chemnicius.
is no trope or figure. And if neither of these expositions content our
Adversaries, they might have believed the words of the holy Text as they sound
literally, and a real presence of Christ's Body and Blood wrought by the power
of the holy Ghost, without defining and determining the express manner how.
For if they believe that accidents subsist Innocent. 3. Mist. Miss. lib. 4.
cap. 9. Post consecrationem accidens est sine subiecto, quia existit (...) per
se. Transit enim substantia, sed remanent accidentia: nec dicitur accidens in
(...) participij, sed accipiendum est in vi nominis. Non solum accidientales
verum etiam naturales proprietates remanere videntur vt paneitas quae saturando
famem expellit, and vinitas quae satiando sitim extinguit.
, and yet are not able to express the distinct manner how: and if they believe
a substantial presence of Christ's individual humane body in many hosts, and
yet are unable to declare the manner how Ibid. ca. 8. Verum an parts in parts,
and (...) transeat in totale, nouit ille qui facit. Ego quod (...) est, igni
comburo: nam credere iubemur discutere prohibemur. Ibid. Licet corpus Dominicum
sit in loco locale, quaeritur tamen vtrum in Sacramento sit locatum localiter,
id est vtrum faciat localem distantiam, and an habeat localem situm, vt dici
debeat quia sedet, iacet, aut (...), sed and (...) multa circa praesentem
articulum possunt inquiri, quae melius est intacta relinquere, quam temere
definite, nam bestia qua tetigerit montem lapidabitur. Ibid. cap. 12. Ego,
diuina Sacramenta magis veneranda quam discutienda profiteor. Ibid. cap. 16. Si
quaeratur vtrum (...) localiter (...) de Coelo, vel ascendat in Coelum, cum
exhibet (...) praesentiam corporalem an aliter incipiat vel (...) esse (...)
specie (...). Respondeo non oportere nos in talibus curiosos existere, ne plus
quam possumus praesumamus, and non (...), salubre concilium dedit Apostolus,
Noli plus sapere quam (...), etc. Ego nescio quomodo Christus accedit, sed and
quomodo recedit ignoro, nouit ille qui nihil ignorant.
; Why might they not have suspended other questions concerning the distinct
manner of presence, and maintained only a true and mystical presence, the
distinct manner whereof is incomprehensible in this life, and not have
disturbed the peace of the Church by defining as an article of Faith, such a
doctrine as has no foundation in

IESVITS 1. Consideration.
The first is grounded upon the supposall of two things most certain. First,
that the Primitive Church preaching unto Pagans, Jews, and other Infidels, the
rest of Christian mysteries, as the Trinity, the Incarnation, the Resurrection
of the body, did most carefully keep as much as might be from their
knowledge, the mysteries of the Eucharist; yea Catechumens and Nouices were
not, before Council. Alexan. apud Athanasium, Apolog. 2.
relating the crimes of Arians, number this as one of the greatest, They were
not ashamed in public, and as it were upon a scaffold, to treat of the
mysteries before Catechumens, and which is worse, before Pagans. And a little
after, It is not lawful to publish the Mysteries before them that are not
initiated, for fear least Pagans out of ignorance mock, and Catechumens
entering into curiosities, be scandalized. And again, Before Catechumens,
Epist. Iulij apud Athanas. Apol 2.
Body and Blood of our Savior. S. Ambrose says, To declare the mysteries
unto them that be Catechumens, is not Tradition but Prodition: seeing by such
declarations danger is incurred, least they be diuulged unto Jnfidels that will
scoff at them. This supposed, I infer that the seeming absur dities of the
Catholic real presence should seemingly gross) absurdities, that the Church
had no hope

ANSWER.
In the days of the Fathers, Heathens, Jews, and Heretics might enter into
the Church, and hear the public Sermons, and preaching, as appears by the
fourth council of Carthage Council. Carth. 4. cap. 84. Episcopus nullum
prohibeat ingredi in Ecclesia^, and audire verbum Dei sieve Gentilem, sieve
Iudaeum, sieve Haereticum, vsque ad Missam Catechuminotum, d. Consecrat. Did.
1. ca. 67. Durant. d. Rit. Eccl. Cath. li. 2. ca. 1. n. 2.
, and Infidels might read the books and tractates of the Fathers: But the
Fathers in their sermons to the people, and also in their written books,
delivered the Doctrine of the holy mysteries, as appears by Ireneus, Justin
Martyr, S. Cyprian, Gregory Nissen, Cyrill of Jerusalem, S. Chrysostom, S.
Augustine, S. Ambrose, etc. Neither is it apparent that the said Fathers taught
any other secret Doctrine, touching the holy mysteries, than such as they
preached in their Homilies, and penned in their Books: and therefore these
Homilies and Books being public, it appears not, that the Primitive Church
was more careful to conceal the Doctrine of the Eucharist than of Baptism,
or of the Trinity.

The Objections out of Athanasius and S. Ambrose, show that it was held
unlawful in those ages to treat or dispute of the intempestiue, that is,
before Heathens which were not at all instructed in the first Principles of
Religion; or to treat of this Doctrine in profane places or auditories. But
what is this to Transubstantiation? For it was held unlawful in the Primitive
Church, in manner aforesaid, that is, in an undue time, order, and place, to
treat or dispute of the mysteries of Baptism, or of other profound mysteries
belonging to Christian faith Dionis. Hierarch. ca. 1. Obserua diligentius, ne
sancta sanctorum esseras, nec prophanis luminibus violanda (...), verum
reuereber is magis. (...), etc. (...); Dei mysteria, mysteria spiritatibus, Ib.
lpsi quoque sanctissimi principes nostridum sacra public agenda (...), non
(...) and patulis (...) sed (...) augustioribus tradiderunt. Ib. ca. 2. d.
Baptismo. Nullus qui rudimentis (...) careat, pergat ad videndum: Nam neque
infirmis pupillis, aduersam solaribus (...) intendere tutum est.
. Also if it were granted that some ancient Fathers believing a real Presence,
did therefore conceal the doctrine of Ratione scandali, because of offense of
Infidels, arising upon many difficulties and seeming contradictions to sense
and common reason, it follows not from hence, that those Fathers believed
Popish Transubstantiation, for many difficulties and repugnances to sense and
common reason, are found in Consubstantiation, as well as in
Transubstantiation, and sundry places of the Fathers, may with more
probability be alleged in favor of real Presence by Consubstantiation,
than for Transubstantiation.

Lastly, The mystical union between Christ and his members,

IESVIT.
Yea, the Fathers did not fear to declare unto Catechumens this Sacrament, so
far as it was commemoratiue of Christ and his Passion, as appears by the
Treatises of Saint Augustine upon Saint John, made before Catechumens; out of
which Treatises, Protestants, for their Catechumens, he speaks not so clearly
thereof. Wherefore the doctrine of Transubstantiation, many seeming
absurdities,

ANSWER.
You object, that the Fathers declared to Catechumens, that is, to Nouices in
Christianity, a commemoratiue presence in the holy Eucharist, but not a
corporal presence by Transubstantiation: and from hence you would infer,
that the Fathers held two kinds of Presences of Christ's body and blood in the
Augustine was of this judgment.

But you must remember, that you are not now to deal with Adversaries which
will credit your bare words, and proofs you have none. Therefore I answer,
First, that the Fathers taught no other kind of Presence, to them which were
baptized, and received the holy Eucharist, than to Catechumens or unbaptized
Christians, although they instructed the one sort Augustine teaches not, that
Christ's body is received inuisibly, insensibly, and according to the nature of
a spirit, by the mouth and stomach of each Communicant: but he teaches only
two kinds of manducation in the Sacrament; one, both corporal and spiritual,
wherein the body of man receives the external elements of Bread and Wine, and
the soul receives the true body and blood of Christ by faith Aug. in Ioh. tr.
26. Visibilem cibum spiritualiter intellexerunt, spiritualiter esurierunt,
spiritualiter gustauerunt, vt spiritualiter (...): Nam and nos hodie (...)
visibilem cibum, sed aliud est Sacramentum, aliud est virtus Sacramenti.
; the other corporeal only, wherein the receiver partaketh the outward sign,
and not the thing signified, Panem Domini, non panem Dominum Ib. tr. 27. Res
ipsa (...) est Sacramentum, omni (...) ad vitam, nulli ad exitium, quicunque
eius particeps fuerit.
, the visible Sacrament of Christ's body Aug Sup. Ioh. tr. 26. Hoc est manducare
illam esca^, and illum bibere (...), in Christo manner and illum manentem in se
habere. Ac per hoc qui non manet in Christo, and in quo non manet Christus,
procul dubio nec manducat spiritualiter carnem (...), nec bibit eius sanguinem,
licet carnaliter and visibiliter premat de^tibus Sacramentum corporis and
sanguinis Christi, sed magis tantae rei Sacramentum ad (...) sibi manducat and
bibit. Ibid. (...). 27. Non ita est in hac esca, quam sustentandae huius
corporis vitae causa sumimus, nam qui eam non sumpserit non viuet. Nec tamen
qui eam sumpserit (...). Fieri enim potest vt senio vel morbo, vel aliquo casu
plurimi and qui eam sumpserint moriantur: in hoc vero cibo and potu, id est
corpore and sanguine Domini, non ita est. Nam and qui eam non sumit, non habet
vitam, and qui eam sumit, habet vitam and hanc (...). Ibid. Vt quisquam viuat
propter me, participatio facit, qua manducatum, etc.
, but not his very body: and he affirms John, That a malicious sinner,
continuing such, receives the very body and blood of Christ. Thirdly,
Protestants believe not only a commemoratiue, but also an exhibitiue presence
of the thing signified, together with the outward sign, according to the
manner formerly declared, page 405. and this Presence is mystical, and such as
may seem incredible to vnbelceuers, because of sundry difficulties, repugnant
to common sense, to wit, That Christ's flesh, by the unspeakable power of the
holy Ghost, should be after a sort incorporated into the soul, and that
corruptible

IESVITS 2. Consideration.
This consideration is drawn from the quality of the difficulties objected
against this Mystery, which be such, as a Christian in honor should neglect
them. For if it be the part of a prudent and intelligent man, not to permit
Imagination to prevail against his Reason; What a disgrace is it for a
Christian, that his faith should be conquered by these kind of difficulties?
For, that the seeming absurdities

ANSWER.
When difficulties objected arise from experience of sense, and principles of
nature, and there is no express or manifest word of God sufficient to move us
to believe the contrary, it is the part of each intelligent and prudent man,
rather to credit that which is apparent to sense, and common reason Aug. d.
Trin. li. 4. ca. 6. Contra rationem nemo sobrius, etc. Ibid. li. 3. ca. 11.
Extat authoritas diuinarum Scriprurarum, vnde men's nostra deuiare non debet,
nec relicto solidamento diuini (...), per suspicionum suarum abrupta
precipitari, vbi nec sensus corporis regit, nec perspicua ratio veritatis
elucet.
,

IESVIT.
First, we cannot imagine, that the whole body of Christ can be contained in
the compass of a small Host.

ANSWER.
You are not able to demonstrate, that God will have us believe that the whole
Organicall body of Christ, having the stature, quantity, and magnitude of a
perfect man's body, is contained in the compass of a small Host, or in a crum
of Bread: for that Christ Jesus has a true and perfect body, differing in kind
from a Spirit, from an Angel, and from an immateriall substance, divine
revelation teaches: but that the same individual and corporeal substance,
partaketh the spiritual manner Bellarmine Bell. d. Euchar. li. 1. ca. 2. and
ca. 14. and li. 3. ca. 4.
affirms, is not reueiled unto us by the holy Ghost, neither can the same be
inferred ex Reuelatis, from any plain and evident truth which God has
revealed Scotus. 4. did. 11. q. 3. Fauentin. 4. d. 11. Disp. 45. ca. 3. Neque
enim plura credita ponidebent, quam conuinci possit ex veritate creditorum.
. Neither is it revealed that the Abstracted forms, and accidents of Bread and
Wine subsist, or are tasted, and felt, or nourish the body, and are afterward
corrupted, according to the manner of corporeal food, having no substantial,
or material nature in them. Therefore this large tract, wherein the Aug. c.
Faust. li. 26.
and Schoolmen very well AEgid. Romans in 1. Sent. d. 42. q. 4. Cum quaeritur,
vtru^ aliquid sit deo possibile, quod naturae fit impossible, distinguendum
est de impossibili, quia si huiusmodi impossible dicitur, quia repugnat ipsi
esse, prout est verificatio contradictoriorum, Ibid. Secundum quod aliqua
implicanit contradictonem, sic effugiunt rationem Potentiae.
teach us, That such things as implie a contradiction, and falsitie, are not
the object of divine power; and they teach us further, that there is a twofold
power in God, Ordinata, and Absoluta Greg. Armin. in 1. Sent. d. 42. q. Aquin.
1. q. 25. art. 5. Suar. d. Attrib. Dei. li. 3. ca. 9 n. 18. Caietan. 1. q. 52.
ar. 2. Non quaerimus in hac re quid potentia Dei possit absolute, sed quid
(...) ordo habet.
, one according to the order which himself has fixed by his word and will,
the other, according to the infiniteness

But on the contrary, we dispute not, what God is able to

The sole pretext which Papals have, to palliate the absurdities pursuing
Transubstantiation at the heels, are the words of Institution: But there is
nothing coactiue in the said words to prove this Romish Article, by the
confession of the best learned page 414.

And besides many other Reasons, This Argument out of our Saviors words is
most strong against Transubstantiation:

If nothing be found in our Saviors words, This is my Body, which proves
the conversion of the substance of bread into Christ's body, more than which is
likewise found, to change the quantity and accidents, then Popish
Transubstantiation, being only a conversion of substance, and not of quantity
and accidents,

But nothing is found in our Saviors words, This is my Body, etc. proouing
any more the conversion of substance, than of quantity and accidents: for our
Savior took the whole bread, both according to the substance, and also
according to the quantity and accidents thereof, into his hands, and blessed
and consecrated the same entirely, with the like thanksgiving and
pronuntiation of words, and performed all things to the one as well as to the
other.

Therefore if our Saviors words prove Transubstantiation of

But by the confession of Papals, they do not the latter: for the quantity
and accidents are not converted into Christ's body and blood; and consequently,
they do not the former.

Now this being apparent, the Popish Doctrine of Transubstantiation This is my
body, etc.

I supersede therefore, to examine the Obiectors particular Arguments, among
which, one is learnedly borrowed from

Every punie in our Universities can distinguish between Mathematical or
Potentiall division of a body, and Physical or Actual: Aristotle himself
teaching us, that there is Minima caro, though there be not Corpus minimum.

But this fictious Cosmotecture and case, may well be paraled to the Doctrine
of Transubstantiation, and they are twins, the one as credible and infallible
in Theology as the

IESVIT.
Secondly, We cannot imagine the body of Christ to be really combined unto
the consecrated forms, and not to but is present unto them, as an Angel
assistant is to the

What dishonor can it be to attribute to Christ's most venerable body, this
spiritual manner of Angelical presence, yea, rather a participation of the
Divine Immensitie? for as God by his incomprehensible Immensitie exists every
where, no less pure in the sincke than in the Sun, no less sweet in the
dunghill, than in a Garden of odoriferous flowers: So the body of Christ, Aug.
tract. 26. (...) 10. and 59. Caeteri Apostoli ma^ducauerunt panem Dominum Judas
autem panem Domini.
that receive unworthily, are sometimes said by the Fathers, to receive the
Sacrament, without the body of Christ; because, though the body of Christ be
really in the Sacrament they receive, yet he is there in a dead manner in
regard of them, as if he were not there at all,

ANSWER.
The glorified body of Christ, being impassible, cannot be polluted or
corrupted: because, although it retains the same essential form, figure,
and substance August. de Genes. ad lit. lib. 12. cap. 7. Resurget corpus
spiritale, eo quod miris modis, ad omnem facilitatem and incorruptionem,
spiritui subdatur, and sine (...) indigentia corporalium alimentorum, solo
viuificetur spiritu, non quod incorpoream substantiam sit habiturum. Id. Epist.
111. Ita futurum sit spirituale corpus, vt propter ineffabilem quandam
facilitatem, spirituale dicatur, seruet tamen substantiam corporalem. Id.
Enchir. c. 91. Id. Ep. 56.
, yet it is delivered from all terrene stains and frailty, and converted into
caelestiall purity and stabilitie Aug. d. Fid. and Simb. ca. 6. Non ita dictum
est, quasi corpus vertatur in spiritum, and spiritus fiat: quia and nunc corpus
nostrum quod animale dicitur, non in animam versum est, and anima factum, sed
spirituale corpus intelligitur, quia ita coaptandum est, vt coelesti
habitationi conueniat, omni fragilitate ac labe terrena in coelestem puritatem
and stabilitatem mutata and conuersa.
. And as this body cannot be polluted, so Nicholas compelled Berengarius to
confess d. Consecrat. Did. 2. c. Ego Berengarius. Panem and Vinum quae in
altari ponuntur, post consecrationem non solum Sacramentum, sed etiam verum
corpus and sanguinem Domini nostri Jesus Christi esse, and sensualiter non solum
Sacramento, sed in veritate manibus Sacerdotum, tractari, frangi, and fidelium
dentibus atteri.
.

But from impassibilitie to omnipresence and immensitie, it

And although in an ecstasy there is alienation and independencie of the spirit
upon the senses Aquin. 22. q. 173. ar. 3. August. d. Genesis ad lit. li. 12. ca.
26. and ad Simplician. q. 1. Greg. Mor. li. 5. ca. 22. and li. 32. c. 7.
, yet this argues not that Christ's humane body is substantially and
insensibly in the consecrated creatures of Bread and Wine, or according to the
manner of Angelical presence, or rather a participation of divine immensitie
(as the Jesuit, compelled to turn vbiquitarie, speaks) or without bodily
stature, posture, and dimensions.

Lastly, the Obiector says, that wicked persons receive into their bodily
mouths and stomach the substance of Christ's flesh. He proves not this
assertion, but brings only a similitude taken from the spirit of man in an
ecstasy, and pretends that the Fathers did therefore affirm wicked persons
to receive the outward Sacrament without the body of Christ, because Christ in
regard of them, is in the Sacrament after a dead manner. But S. Augustine, and
other Fathers speak not figuratively, or by similitude, but literally and
expressly, saying, Non manducant illam carnem Cyril. in Ioh. li. 4. ca. 14.
, wicked persons do not eat that flesh. The thing it self Aug. in Ioh. (...).
27.
, to wit, the body of Christ, whereof this Bread is a Sacrament, is received
of every man which eats it, to life, and by no man, to death Read before
page 407.
.

IESVIT.
Thirdly, We cannot imagine the same body can be in many places together at
the same time: It is true, but as hardly can we imagine the soul to be in the
head and in York and London. Also who can conceive God, who is infinitely Aug.
Epist. 3. ad Volutian.
apprehend the multiplied presence of Christ's body in the Sacrament, which is
Spiritual, Angelical, Supernatural, comparable with the divine, that S.
Gregory Nissen Gre. Nissen. in orat, d. Pasch.
sticks not to say, Sicut Diuinitas replet mundum, and tamen vna est, ita
innumerabilibus locis offertur, and tamen vnum corpus est, The body of Christ
being glorious, Caiet. 1. p. q. 52. ar. 2. Ferrar. 3. c. Gent. (...). 65.
Marcil. in 2. q. 2. ar. 2. Dion. Cysters. in 2. did. 6. q. 1. ar. 1. conclus.
6.
their substances are so independent of corporal space, that they can be
naturally in two distinct places without being

ANSWER.
This discourse being reduced to argumentation, is as follows.

If a soul may be in every part of the body, the thought of man in many
places, an Angel in many distinct vbities, and if God is in heaven and earth;
then the body of Christ may be in many places. But the first is true, Ergo,
etc.

It is answered, First, one part of the antecedent is false: for an Angel
being a finite creature, is at one instant difinitiuely in one vbitie only
Hugo Victor. d. Sacram. li. 1. pa. 3. ca. 18. Omne quod definitu^ est, secundum
aliquid locale est, (...) in eo ipso quod finem and terminu^ habet locum habet,
and determinatlocu^, sicut determinatum est in loco. (...) corpus dimensione^
habens, loco circumscribitur: quonia^ ei secundum locum, principiu^, medium,
and finis (...). Spiritus vero quonia^ demensionem non capit, sed definitione
sola terminatur, circumscriptione^ quide^ Aquin. p. 1. q. 52. ar. 2. Ib. Caiet.
Marsil. 2. q. 2. ar. 1. Angeli sunt in loco definitive, quia sunt sic in vno
situ, quod non sunt in alio quolibet. (...). in li. 3. c. Gent. ca. 68. Dicitur
de mente sancti Thomae, quod vnus Angel' non potest esse simul in pluribus
locis, vt plura sunt, id est, in quantu^ accipiuntur, vt duo loca, totaliter
distincta, quia ab vna (...) finita, non potest nisi vna operatio (...) simul,
and consequenter nisi vnus effectus, sed been potest esse in pluribus locis,
per modum vnius loci vt (...). vnum totalem locum constituant. Bannes. in 1. p.
Tho. q. 52. ar. 2. (...). 3.
; for that which moves and passes from one vbitie to another, is not in both
the places at once; but Genes. 28. 12. Math. 4.11. and cap. 12.43. Marc. 5.12.
Ioh. 5.4. Genes. 19.1. and 32.1. Apoc. 14.6. and ca. 18.1. and 20.1. Damasc.
li. 2. ca. 3. Angeli dum sunt in terra non sunt in coelo, Whiles Angels are on
earth they are not in heaven. And the opinion of some Schoolmen, alleged to
the contrary, is not to be regarded, because their own fellows Malon. in
(...). sent. lib. 2. d. Angelis disp. 9. sect. 2.
teach, that there is no certainetie of these and the like assertions.

Secondly, the consequence is infirm, because of the difference which is
between a body, and the things compared Speculando phantasmata, it may
conceive and apprehend diverse distant objects Per modum vnius Bannes. in 1. p.
Tho. q. 52. ar. 2. conclus. (...). Aristoteles dixit, quod non possum' simul
pluta intelligere per modum plurium.
at one instant. Fourthly, Angels are immateriall substances, and therefore
their motion and action is sudden, yet determined to one place, at one
instant: but an humane body is material, finite, Read before page 180.) Ergo
haec nihil ad Rhombum. Therefore all these instances, to this purpose and
question of bodies, are no better than shadows without bodies.

IESVIT.
Fourthly, We find difficulty to conceive that accidents accidents of Bread,
separated from their substance to nourish Materiam primam that was of the
Bread, and combine the same with the prepared quantity, and the substantial
form of Flesh: What reason is there why God may not do this, yea do it
sooner than we speak it?

Wherefore the seeming absurdities of this mystery being

ANSWER.
That Accidents may subsist, and have their natural force and operation,
without a subject of support or inhaerencie, implies a contradiction; for it is
of the being and definition of Accidents to be in another Porphyr. Isagog. cap.
5. (...). Accidentis esse est inesse.
, or to be in their subject: And none of the Examples taken from a Kernel,
Ashes, Iron in the belly of an Ostridge, the bark of a tree, etc. are ad idem,
for these are not Accidents without a substance, but real bodies, having by
nature a proportion and propension to produce generatio ex putri, as are Mice,
Frogs, and Serpents: but what is this to accidents nourishing without matter
and substance.

Now for all the former, we know the truth and certainty by natural reason,
and by experience of our senses: but there is no natural or supernatural rule
or Law, no manifest demonstration either to sense or reason, no revelation of
Faith, that the abstracted forms of bread and wine subsist without a subject,
Plin. Not. Hist. lib. 35. cap. 10. Cum ille (Xeuxis) detulisset vuas pictas
tanto successu, vt in scenam aues aduolarent, etc.
) which think to feed any intelligent Reader with such improper and
extrauagant accidents.

IESVITS 3. Consideration.
Thirdly, to make Christians incline to (...) this Mystery, so difficile to
carnal imagination, this Consideration may be very potent, to wit, that in
believing the same,

Quae nouit men's est, pani nil vouimus illa.

Neither did we believe that the Bread was changed into Christ's body upon
slight reasons, or moved by the fancies of our own head, but contrary to our
fancies out of Reverence to the express words of Christ, This is my body. A
sense declared by most ancient Fathers, defined by many general Counsels,
delivered by full consent of our Ancestors, what to them seems his Word? Js
it an injury to

On the other side, it imports them that think Transubstantiation impossible,
or that God cannot put the same body in different places at once, to consider,
if they err (easy it is for men to err, that with the compass of their
understandings measure the power of God) how dangerous and inexcusable their
error will prove, when they shall Chrysostom. gives: Let us believe Chrysostom. Hom.
83. in Math.
God (says he) let us not reject his Word, though the same seem secret, and
absurd unto our cogitation and sense, for his speech does surpass our reason
and sense, his words Cyril makes unto such misbeleeuers; If Li. 12. in Ioh. ca.
52.
thou could not comprehend the divine operation of God, Augustine, Aug. li.
22. d. Ciuit. Dei. ca. 11.
Ecce quibus argumentis diuinae omnipotentiae, humana contradicit infirmitas?

ANSWER.
This third and last consideration is a mere declamation; grounded upon a
vain supposition; for it presumes as granted, the opinion of
Transubstantiation, to be most probable, and reasonable, as being declared by
many ancient Fathers, defined by general Counsels, etc. But this supposition
is a begging of the question, for not so much as one ancient Father, or
general Council, did ever declare or define the same, as it will plainly
appear to all judicious Persons, which shall compare and apply the sentences
of Fathers and ancient Counsels, to the (...). Walsingha^. Hist. Anglor. in
Rich. 2. page 281. In diebus istis in ore cuiuslibet bonum fuit argumentum
tenens tam de forma quam de materia. Hic est frater ergo est mendax, sicut est
illud. Hoc est album ergo est coloratum. Roiard. prefat. Hom. d. Fest. Sanct.
Insertis passim fabulis, ac meris nugamentis, ipsam labefactarunt veritatem.
, or reports misapplyed, and wrested to a contrary end.

And that there should be merit, or at leastwise, less peril in Durand. 4 d.
11. q. 1. Temerarium est dicere, quod corpus Christi, diuina virtute non possit
esse in hoc Sacramento, nisi per (...) panis in ipsum. Posset Deus facere quod
corpus Christi esset de nouo in Sacramento Altaris, absque mutatione sui, and
absque mutatione alterius in ipsum, facta tamen aliqua mutatione circa panem
vel aliquid aliud.
, may be proclaimed over and over again by Romists Aug. c. Faust. Man. li. 2.
(...). 49. Vbi hoc legerit nescio, nisi forte in cord suo, tanquam in libro
nefariarum fallatiarum.
,

To the words following in the Jesuit (That he might also be continually with
his Church secretly) it is answered, That excluding Transubstantiation, Christ
Jesus is continually with his Church secretly, by his grace, spirit, and
mystical union; and he dwells in the hearts of justified persons by faith,
Epkes. v. 17.

S. Chrysostom, S. Cyril, and S. Augustine, in the places objected, affirm,
that we are not to believe our dull and carnal sense, when it suggesteth unto
us that which is repugnant to faith; and when it acknowledges no other force
and operation in the holy Sacraments, but that which is sensible and natural;
But embracing this doctrine of the holy Fathers, we cannot from thence extract
the fancy of Transubstantiation.

Learned Papists themselves acknowledge the intricacies and difficulties of
this Article Aquin. 3. q. 75. ar. 2. ad 3. In hac conuersione sunt plura,
difficiliora quam in creatione. Durand. 4. d. 11. q. 1. nu. 15. Scot. 4. d. 11.
q. 3. Vasq. 2 in 3. Tho. to 3. disp. 183. ca. 1. n. 1. Audito nomine
Transubstantiationis, tanta inter recentiores aliquos scholasticos, de natura
illius exorta fuit controuersia, vt quo magis se ab ea extricare conati sunt,
eo maioribus difficultatibus seipsos
, many of them affirm, that secluding Read before page (...).
. The doctrine is not Catholic or Ancient Henriq. Sum. li. 8. c. 23. Scotus
negat Dectrinam de conuersione and Transubstantiatione esle antiquam. Idem.
Gabriel in Can. Miss. lect. 41.
: The Propugners of it until the late Trident Council, disagree in that which
is maine and substantial Bellarm. d. Euchar. li. 3. ca. 1. Durandus docuit
partem vnam essentialem id est formam panis conuerti, partem alteram id est
materiam non conuerti. ca. 13. Sententia Durandi est haeretica etsi ipse non
sit dicendus Haereticus, quia paratus fuerit iuditio Ecclesia acqui; escere.
in it; and for avoiding one figure, they make many Read. B B. Morton. Appeal.
li. 2. ca. 2. Sect. 24. n. 81. pa. 124.
. Therefore it stands not with Christian Wisdom, to embrace or maintain
this doctrine, and Romists are more confident than prudent in imposing the same
as an Article of the Creed, censuring the Noncredents as heinous Heretics.

My final conclusion about this Article is:

That doctrine, which is not expressly taught, or formally deduced from holy
Soripture Vasq. in 3. Th. to. 3. disp. 181. c. 1. n. 7. Cum ex sola veritate
verborum, conuer (...) quae fit in hoc Sacramento colligenda sit; neque aliunde
Ecclesia illam deducere potuerit (hoc enim vnicum fuit Ecclesiasticae
Traditionis fundamentu^, etc.)
: which no ancient Council or Church for the first 600 years, plainly
taught; and unto which, many adverse passages are extant in the monuments of
antiquity: also, (...). d. Colonia. ex (...). Deus potest corpus suam praesens
cum pane facere, manente substantia panis, and non per aliquam mutationem quae
sit ad (...) vt per se terminum: and tamen per illam acquiritur presentia
eiusdem rationis, cum illa quae nunc habetur.


But such is the doctrine of Romish Transubstantiation:

Therefore it ought not to be imposed as an article of divine faith, and the
Roman Church should either cancel this part of their new Creed, or be less
censorious in obtruding of it.

THE SEVENTH POINT. THE ABBETTING OF IT BY CONCOMITANCIE.
IESVIT.
YOur most Excellent Majesty, in the Proposition of this Controversy, shows
your deep insight into Theological difficulties, perceiving a maine ground
whereon the Catholic opinion of the lawfulness of Communion under

ANSWER.
IF his Sacred MAJESTY should

IESVIT. 1.
THe Doctrine of Concomitancie is, that under the form of bread, not only the
body of Christ, but also his precious blood and blessed soul, are truly and
really contained; the body directly, and by virtue of

ANSWER.
THe body of Christ is considered two ways: First, According to the nature of
a perfect living body; secondly, As it is represented and exhibited in the
Sacrament. If we consider it the first way, the blood of Christ cannot properly
be said to be in his body, by Concomitancie, (for then it were accidentally
therein) but as a part in the whole; for as the bones, sinews, and veins, are
integrall parts of anaturall humane body, so likewise is the blood Yrebarn. 4.
d. 8. Disp. 28. Sect. 3. Corpus, etc. est substantia includens omnes parts,
quae corpus organicum quoquo modo integrant, sieve sint animabiles sieve non, and
hoc sensu sanguis ingreditur integritatem corporis.
: and natural

If we consider the body of Christ, taken for the more solid parts thereof, as
it is represented and exhibited in the Sacrament, to wit, as it was fixed to
the cross, and divided from the blood; then, according to this Sacramental
representation and exhibition, the same alone neither contains nor
represents Ruard. Tapper. ar. 15. Species panis solum significant corpus pro
nobis in cruce oblatum, cum iam esset exangue, and species vini, sanguinem
effusum, and quasi a corpore separatum. Yrebarn. in 4. d. 8. q. 1. Disp. 28.
Sect. 3. Corpus stricte sumptum, signatum per se, a speciebus panis nihil
sanguinis fignati includit. Tartaret. 4. d. 8. q. 1. Bassolis. 4. d. 8. q. 1.
ar. 1.
.

The sacred Eucharist is one entire Sacrament Fauentin. 4. d. 8. Disp. 29. Non
est vnum vnitate Indiuisibilitatis, quia sunt plura signa, etc. tamen est vnum
vnitate integritatis, quia ambae species integrant vnu^ perfectum and totale
sacramentum.
, (totum compositum) having two external Elements, to wit, Bread and Wine, and
these two signs or elements, represent the material Sacrifice of Christ upon
the Cross Greg. Dial. li. 4. cap. 58. Ambros. d. poenit. lib. 2. cap. 3.
Chrysostom. tom. 1. in Psalm. 22. Quotidie in similitudinem corporis and sanguinis
Christi, panem and vinum secundum ordinem Melchisedech, nobis ostendit in
Sacramento. Aug l. 83. q. 61. Ipse est sacerdos noster in aeternum, secundum
ordinem Melchisedech, qui semetipsum obtulit, Holocaustum pro peccatis nostris,
and eius sacrificij similitudinem celebranda^ in suae passionis memoriam
commendauit. Holocausti cius imaginem ad memoriam passionis suae in Ecclesia
celebrandam (...). Id. d. fid. ad Petrum. c. 19. In isto sacrificio, (...)
Actio atq, commemoratio est carnis Christi, quam (...) obtulit, and quam pro
nobis idem Deus effudit. Justin. Martyr. Colloq. cum Tryph. in hac Prophetia,
and de pane quem nobis noster Christus tradidit, ad commemorationem corporis
assumpti, propter credentes in eum, propter quos and passibilis natus est: and
de poculo quod in memoriam sanguinis sui, cum gratiarum action sumendum dedit,
fit manifesta mentio.
, which consisted, at the time of the Oblation thereof, of a body fixed on a
tree, and the same dying by effusion of blood, Luke 22.21. And in the holy
Eucharist, Christ is as it were crucified before our eyes, and his body and
blood, by representation, are divided: and God Almighty uses these mystical
creatures, as instruments, to communicate unto every worthy Receiver, the
Sacrifice of Christ his Son, 1. Cor. 10.16. But as the Sacrifice upon the
Ambros. in 1. Cor. 11. Testamentum in sanguine constitutum est, quia (...)
Diuinisanguis testis est. In cuius typum nos (...) misticum sanguinis ad
tuitionem corporis and animae nostrae percipimus, quia sanguis Domini,
sanguinem nostrum redemit, id est totum hominem saluum fecit. Caro (...)
saiuatoris prosalute corporis, sanguis (...) anima nostra effusus est.
, Heb. 9.22: So likewise in the holy Eucharist the body of Christ is
represented, as it was divided from the blood; and again the blood, as severed
from the body: and God concurreth with both the Elements, delivered and
received; with the one, as it were by inception, and with the other by
consummation: and Communicants partake not the whole Sacrifice of Christ,
until they have received both the material parts of the Sacrament.

Here then is no Popish Concomitancie, either of the blood

Neither again is the Deity united to the body or blood of Christ by
Concomitancie, but by personal union.

Thus then I argue:

Whatsoever is received in the Sacrament by us, was before offered to God upon
the Cross.

But the body of Christ having blood in it by concomitance, Ergo,

At this day the body and deity of Christ are not in the blood of Christ by
concomitancie, etc.

IESVIT.
First, he that acknowledges the real presence of Christ's sacred body under
the form of bread, and denies concomitancie, does in his belief separate the
blood and soul of Christ from his body: but to separate either Christ's
divinity from his humanity, or soul from his body, or his blood from his
flesh, is unlawful; for such a believer does dissolve and destroy Christ
Jesus, and so is John condemns, Omnis 1. Ioh. 4.3.
Spiritus qui soluit Iesum, non est ex Deo, and hic est Antichristus.

ANSWER.
The sum of this objection is,

Whosoever dissolueth Christ Jesus, is an Antichrist.

Every one who admits real presence, and yet denies concomitancie,
dissolueth Christ Jesus, for he seperateth the blood and soul of Christ from
his body, and his divinity from his humanity: Ergo,

Whosoever in the real presence denies concomitancie, is an Antichrist.

Our answer is, Whosoever dissolueth Christ Jesus, according to S. John's
meaning, 1. Ioh. 4.3. by denying his deity, humanity, or personal union
Aquin. in 1. Ioh. 4. Qui soluit, id est, diuidit Iesum, velseperans diuinitatem
ab eo, vt Arius, vt Appollinaris, qui (...) diuinitatem pro anima, vel carnem,
vt Manicheus, qui ponit quod Christus assumpsit phantasiam, and non veram, vel
(...) vnitatem, vt Nestorius, etc. B. Justinian. Ib. ^ ratione dissuere, aut
dissoluere conatur, etc.
, is Antichrist. But the denying of

For although we affirm, that in the holy Eucharist the body Ambros. in 1.
Cor. 11. Quia morte Domini liberati sumus, hui' rei memoriam in edendo and
potando carnem and sanguinem, quae pro nobis oblata sunt, significamus nouum
testamentu^ in hijs consecuti.
. And we believe that the holy Ghost, according to the distinct signification
Vasq. in 3. Tho. tom. 3. disp. 215. cap. 2. nu. 13. Diuinitas quae est (...)
causa, ita assumpsit vt (...), ad producendam gratiam, (...) Sacramenta, vt
suam efficacitatem significationi eorum accommodaret, sicut reuera accommodare
potuit.
of the sacramental elements, reaches in a spiritual manner, the body and
blood of Christ crucified, to all faithful communicants, and adds a several
effect and virtue of spiritual refection to each distinct part received Ibid.
nu. 9. Vnaquaeque species huius Sacramenti, quatenus Sacramenti pars est, suam
habet signisicationem diuersam. Cumque significationem in Sacramentis nouae
legis, consequatur efficacia, quia id (...) quod significant, sequitur
vnamquamque speciem in hoc Sacramento, suum effectum per se operari, sicut
etiam suum refectionis modum per se significat. Ruard. Tapper. ar. 15. Quia per
diuersa hic operatur instrumenta vary significantia, (...), videlicet, and
corpus suum, quae sunt causae immediatae effectus Sacramentalis, ipse etiam
diuersos operatur effectus, donaque sua diuidit, idem ipse (...).
according to the signification; and this is confessed by Vasques, Ruard
Tapper, Alexander Halles.

IESVIT.
And this argument has greatest force in their opinion, who shall think that
Christ leaves heaven for the time, to come down really according to his Body
and Blood: for how can the bodic of Christ come down from heaven without blood
and soul, unless he come down dead? and so Christ should be not only
mystically and figuratively, but truly and really massacred in the Sacrament,
and the Eucharist

ANSWER.
None of our part think that Christ leaves heaven, to come down really
according to his body and blood, Act. 3.21. Donec seculum finiatur, (...) est
Dominus (Augustine in Ioh. tract. and applied. Read the sentences of Fathers
Cyprian. Ep. 63. Quotiescunque ergo Calicem in commemorationem Domini, and
passionis eius offerrimus. Aug. c. Faust. lib. 20. cap. 18. Christiani peracti
huius sacrificij memoriam celebrant, sacrosancta oblatione, and participatione
corporis and sanguinis Domini, Ep. 23. ad Bonifac. Nonne semel immolatus est
Christus in semetipso? and tamen in Sacramento non tantum per omnes Paschae
solennitates, sed etiam omni die, populis immolatur, nec vtique mentitur, qui
interrogatus, eum responderet immolari: si enim Sacramenta quandam
similitudinem earum rerum quarum Sacramentasunt, non haberent omnino Sacramenta
non essent. contr. Faust. lib. 20. cap. 21. Huius sacrificij caro and sanguis,
ante aduentum Christi per victimas similitudinum promittebatur, in passione
Christi per ipsam veritatem reddebatur, post ascensum Christi per Sacramentum
memoriae celebratur. Quest. 83. cap. 61. Christus qui semetipsum obtulit
holocaustum pro peccatis nostris, huius sacrificij similitudinem, and
holocausti eius imaginem in passionis suae memoriam celebrandam dedit, and
commendauit. In lib. Sent. prosper. Sicut coelestis Chrysostom. in Heb. 10. Hom.
Quid ergo nos, nonne per singulos dies offerrimus, etc. offerrimus quidem sed
recordationem facientes mortis eius, etc. Hoc quod facimus in commemorationem
fit eius quod factum est. Hocenim facite inquit in mei commemorationem. Non
aliud Sacrificium sicut Pontifex sed id ipsum semper facimus, magis autem
recordationem Sacrificij operamur. Theoderet. in cap. 8. Hebr. Cur noui
Testamenci Sacerdotes my sticam Liturgiam seu Sacrificium peragunt, Cum
Christus qui est Sacerdos secundum ordinem Melchisedech, offerens Sacrificium,
efficit vt alia Sacrificia non essent necessaria? Resp. clarum est ijs qui sunt
eruditi in rebus diuinis, nos non aliud offerre, sed illius vnius and salutaris
memoriam peragere. Hocenim nobis praecipit ipse Dominus, hoc facite in meam
recordationem: vt per figurarum contemplationem, earum quae pro nobis susceptae
sunt perpessionum recordaremur, and in benefactorem beneuolentiam conseruemus,
and futurorum beneficiorum perceptionem expectemus. Theophilact. in Heb. 10.
Ipsum quidem semper offerrimus, imo vero potius memoriam illius oblationis
facimus, qua seipse obtulit.
Peter Lombard Lombard. Sent. lib. 4. Did. 12. Quaeritur si quod gerit
Sacerdos proprie dicatur Sacrificium, vel immolatio, and si Christus quotidie
immoletur, vel semel tantum imniolatus sit? ad hoc breuiter dici potest, Illud
quod offertur and consecratur a Sacerdote, vocari Sacrificium and oblationem,
quia memoria est, and representatio very Sacrificij, and sanctae immolationis
factae in ara crucis. Idem. Semel Christus mortuus est in cruce, ibique
immolatus est in semetipso. Quotidie autem immolaturin Sacramento, quia in
Sacramento recordatio fit illius, quod factum est semel.
, and the Enchiridion of Colen Enchir. Coloniens. d. Euchar. Patres non
dubitarunt hoc Christi corpus in altari, Sacrificium and salutarem victimam
appellare, non ratione Sacrificij, quod est situm in action Sacerdotis, etc.
sed ratione Sacrificij quod in cruce oblatum est semel.
.

IESVIT.
Secondly, The Priest in the person of Christ, who is This is my body: but a
body deuoid of blood without soul, and consequently dead and senseless, is
not the body of Christ, as he is now glorious in heaven, which has blood in
the veins, and is informed and glorified by a most excellent soul. Therefore
Christ glorious in heaven, cannot say truly, that a body void of blood,
sense, and soul is his body; but soul,

ANSWER.
First, The new Testament acknowledges no proper sacrificing Priests, but
Christ Jesus only, Heb. 7.23.27.28. and ca. 10. 21. Neither is there any word
or sentence in our Saviors Doctrine, concerning any real sacrifice, but only
of himself upon the Cross: neither was any altar Lesseus, d. just. and iure
li. 2. c. 38. n. 11. Quinque ad perfectum and proprie dictum sacrificium
requiru^tur. 1. Ex part ministri vt sit Sacerdos. 2 Ex part materiae res
aliqua sensibilis externa, etc. 3. Ex part formae, illius rei peremptio, vel
aliqua alia conueniens mutatio, hoc enim potissimum differt sacrificium ab
oblationibus. 4. Ex part finis vt (...) ad honorem Dei. 5. Ex part loci,
Altar, etc.
used and ordained by Christ and his Apostles. And if in all real sacrifices,
the matter of the oblation must be really destroyed and changed, and no
physical destruction or change is made in the body Soto. d. just. and iur.
lib. 9. q. 2. ar. 1. Hac negata veritate Catholica, palam (...) consequens,
mysterium altaris non esse sacrificium.
; then Romists have devised a real sacrifice in the new Testament, which has
no divine Institution.

Secondly, There is no created virtue inhaerent in the Sacramental words
Nugnus. in 3. Tho. q. 78. ar. 4. In verbis nihil producitur supernaturale, nisi
sola eleuatio and motio diuina.
, as they are pronounced by a Priest, to

IESVIT.
Thirdly, If under the form of bread were only the body of Christ, and his
soul and blood were not by concomitancie there, the communicants should
receive the body of Christ, but not truly Christ, as our Adversaries grant.
Calvin. li. 4. (...). ca. 7. nu. 35. Ibid. nu. 74.
Calvin specially saying, Quis sanus and sobrius Christi And again, Ne fando
quidem auditum est corpus Christi, aut sanguinem Deum and hominem appellari.
But Fathers affirm most constantly, that not only the body of Christ, Ambr.
l. (...) qui init. In illo Sacramento Christus est. Hilar. l. 8. d. Trinit. Nos
vere verbum carnem cibo Dominico sumimus. Cyrill. Alexand. l. 4. in Ioh. c. 15.
Per hanc benedictione^ Mysterij ipsum filium Dei suscipimus. Cyrill. Hierosol.
Catech. Mist. 5. Chrysostom. Hom. 83. in cap. 26. Math. and Hom. 24. in 1. ad Cor.
Christ himself is in the Sacrament; that we take in the Dominicall refection,
The word made flesh; that by the consecration of the Mysteries, we receive the
very Son of God; that under the form of Bread, we lodge within us the
Sovereign King; and that we see Christ, feel Christ, eat Christ, Non regium
puerum, sed ipsum vnigenitum Dei filium. An hundred other places might be
brought, where the Fathers call the consecrated Calvin does confess, It is an
absurd manner of speech, to term Christ the mere body of Christ; and such a
form of speech was never heard of hitherto in the world: Ergo, Concomitancie,
that is, Christ's real and entire Body, Soul, Flesh, Blood, to be under the
form of Bread, was acknowledged by the Fathers.

ANSWER.
It is granted, that worthy Communicants in the holy Eucharist, receive
Christ, Ioh. 6. 33, 35, 48. but Sacramental eating his flesh, and drinking his
blood, is the means, by which they are united and incorporated with Christ
himself: therefore the Objection, to wit, if the soul and blood were not in
Christ's body by Concomitancie, Communicants should receive the body of
Christ, but not truly Christ, is inconsequent: Calvin, nor we, nor you, need
be at any difference.

IESVIT.
This Principle, which is no less certain than the true real Presence
supposed, I infer the lawfulness of Communion or of his Sacrament, or his
Precept, or of the

This Proposition is true, because there neither are other causes of dislike,
that may not be reduced to these four; neither do Christ's Institution, or
Sacrament, or Precept, or the Primitive practice, bind us to keep them
further, than in substance, the accidental Circumstances of Institutions,

ANSWER.
If Concomitancie (which is styled in this place by the name of a Principle)
were granted, yet Communion in one kind is Arist. d. part. Animal. lib. 2.
cap. 2. Partium simularium aliae molles and humidae, etc. sanguis, sanies,
adeps.
contained in the veins, yet it depriueth them of the Blood of Christ, as it
was shed, and poured out, and offered in Sacrifice for them.

To the maine Argument I answer, denying the Assumption. For Communion in one
kind is repugnant to the first Institution of the Eucharist by Christ, who
hallowed two material Elements, Bread and Wine; appointed them a distinct
signification, delivered them indifferently to all the Communicants, and
annexed a Promise to the reception of the one, as well as

Secondly, It is repugnant to the express Precept of Christ, saying, Drink
ye all of this; and to S. Paul's Precept Cyprian. d. Coen. (...). Lex esum
(...) vt (...).
, 1. Cor. 11. 28.

Thirdly, The practice of the holy Apostles 1. Cor. 10.21. cap. 11.23.26.
, and of the (...). Hierarch. cap. 3. (...) Calicem omnibus impartiens. Justin.
Martyr. A polog. 2. Distribuunt vnicuique praesentium vt participet eum in quo
gratiae actae sunt (...) panem vinum and aquam. (...) Epist. ad Philadelph,
vnus panis omnibus confractus, (...) and vnum poculum omnibus distributum.
Tertul. d. Cor. mil. cap. 3. (...). Epist. 54. and 56. and 63. in Calice
Dominico sanctificando and populo ministrando, etc. Aug. in (...) 57. -- a
cuius Sacrisicij sa nguine in alimentum sumendo, non solum nemo prohibetur sed
ad bibendum omnes exhortantur qui volunt habere vitam. (...). 1. Cor. hom. 11.
and sup. 2. Cor. hom. 18. (...) sup. soph. cap. 3. Sacerdotes qui Eucharistiae
seruiunt, and sanguinem Domini populis diuidunt. Hist. Trip. lib. 9. cap. 30.
(...). d. Octau. Pasch. Quid sit sanguis agni noniam audiendo sed bibendo
didicistis.
, is against it.

Fourthly, The people which receive in one kind, receive

IESVIT. 2. Communion under one kind, not against the substance of the
Institution of Christ.
Divine Institution, is an Action of God, whereby he

That a man be bound to use the Jnstitution of God, two things are required:
First, that the end thereof be necessary, and he bound to endeavor the
attaining thereof. Hence it is, that though marriage be the Jnstitution of
God, appointed to propagate mankind, yet every man is multiplicamini Genesis 1.
28.
and replete terram. Secondly, when the end of tion is such, as every man must
endeavor the attayning

Applying this to our purpose, it is apparent, that by force of divine
institution, no man is bound to use Communion under both kinds. For though the
end why Christ did institute the Sacrament in both kinds be necessary, and all
must endeavor the attaining thereof, to wit, maintenance and increase of
grace, the life of the soul; yet there be other means by which we may attain
to this end. Whence it is Theologi omnes communiter cum D. Tho. 3. p. quaest.
3. art. 3.
is not Necessarium necessitate Medij, as they speak, that is the use thereof
is not a necessary means for the maintenance of spiritual life, but a man
wanting means of Sacred Communion, may by other means preserve himself in
the state of grace. And though we should suppose that actual Communion were a
necessary means to preserve spiritual life, yet Communion under one kind is
Qui manducat me and ipse viuit propter me, and unto the sole reception of his
Body under the form of Bread, Panis quem ego Ioh. 6. v. 58. (...) v. 55. and
59.
dabo caro mea est pro mundi vita and qui manducat hunc panem viuet in
aeternum: If the Tree of life in the Genesis 2.9.
midst of Paradise, if the Manna of the Jews (the Bread of Angels) did
suffice to nourish the body without Drink, Exodus 16.15.
Why should we deny this soule-nourishing sufficiency unto the sole body of
Christ, were the same alone in the Bread: but specially being there conjoined
with his soul and his most precious blood?

ANSWER.
FIrst, the ground of the objection laid by the Jesuit in certain Necessitate
Medij, and Necessitate praecepti, that the generation of man may be morally
lawful, Heb. 13.4. so likewise presupposing, that Christians do receive the
holy Eucharist, it is necessary Necessitate finis, or Medij, and necessitate
praecepti, That they receive the same, as the Author appointed it to be
received; which was not in one kind, but in both. And as touching Food, it is
necessary, that man receive it in some kind or other, for the sustenance

But I wonder that the Jesuit in this discursiue preamble, would use an
instance from our natural food, than which nothing by wayof inference does
more expressly refute him. Can he in the Sacrament make mention of Food, and not
consider that our Saviors intent in the institution was, to proportion our
Spiritual food to our Corporal? In our bodily nourishment, have we not need
of drink as well as meat? Did Secondly, If the matter or material part of
compounded Aquin. p. 1. q. 75 ar. 4. Scheibler. Metaphys. l. 1. c. 6. p. 2. in
habentibus materiam, materia est pars essentiae. Suar. Metaph. disp. 36. sect.
2. Pererius lib. 6. not. Phil. cap. 6. 7. 8. Iandun. Metaph. 7. q. 12.
, then the defalcation of one kind is against the integrity of the substance
of the Eucharist. For the Element of Wine, unto which answers the
distribution and reception thereof, is a medietie or half part of the matter
of the holy Communion; and if the taking away thereof, is not against the
substance of Christ's Institution, then likewise the taking away of Bread, which
is the other part, and the retaining of Wine only, is not against the same:
for the blood of Christ is as noble a part of Christ, and has as great virtue,
necessity, and commendation in holy Scripture, as his body

But against this, the Jesuit argues as follows.

If Lay people may attain the end for which Christ ordained the Eucharist,
without receiving in both kinds, then Communion under one kind is not against
the substance of Christ's Institution.

But Lay people may attain the end, etc. to wit, maintenance, and increase of
grace, by Communion in one kind, because one kind contains in it nothing
less than what is contained in both, Ioh. 6. v. 55, 58, 59. Ergo,

Communion under one kind is not against the substance of Christ's Institution.

ANSWER.
The sequel and assumption of this Argument are denied. First, Communion under
one kind, may be of the substance of Christ's Institution, although the end and
fruit of the holy Eucharist might be received by other means: for as in the
Sacrament of Baptism, the end is regeneration and remission of sins Aug. Ep.
90. and Epist. 157. Greg. Nyssen. Orat. d. Bapt. Chrysoft. in Genesis Hom. 40.
Ambros. Apol. David. cap. 13.
, Acts 22. 16. Tit. 3. 5. and this end, in some cafe, may be obtained without
aspersion of water, as appears in Baptismo sanguinis August. d. Ciuit. Dei.
lib. 13. cap. 7. Quicunque non recepto regenerationis Lembard 4 d. 4. D. Aquin.
3. q. 68. ar. 2. and q. 87. ar. 1. Bellarm. d. Bap. lib. 1. cap. 6. Greg. Val.
Suares, Nugnus, Henriques, lib 2. cap. 34. Petigian. in. 4. d. 4. q. 3. ar. 1.
(...). d Sacrament. d. Bapt. Disp. 2. punct. 2. Yrebarn. Cabrer. Fauentin. and
aiij.
, when Martyrs decease, without Sacramental Baptism: and yet to be washed or
sprinkled with water,

If the former illation of Romists were good, it will follow likewise from
thence, that receiving of Bread in the Eucharist, is not of the substance of
Christ's Institution: for whole and entire Christ, according to body, and
soul, and infinite person, is in the blood alone, if the Popish Doctrine of
Concomitancie

Secondly, The end and fruit of the Sacrament is either common to the holy
Eucharist, with other means of Grace Aug. Epist. ad Bonifac. citatur a (...)
in 3. p. Tho. d. Euchar. q. 27. ar. 5. pa. 371. Nulliest aliquatenus
ambigendum, tunc vnumquenque fidelium corporis sanguinisque Domini participem
fieri, quando in Baptismate membrum Christi corporis efficitur, nec alienari ab
illius panis calicisque consortio, etiamsi antequam panem illum comedat, and
calicem bibat, de hoc saeculo, in vnitate corporis Christi constitutus abscedat.
, or else proper to it only.

To eat the flesh and drink the blood of the Son of God, Ioh. 6. 54. But to
eat the same flesh and blood, communicated more distinctly and effectually by
visible seals, of the covenant of the new Testament, is an end and fruit
peculiar and proper to the holy Eucharist, 1. Cor. 10. 16. A man may have the
same inheritance bestowed on him, by the word and writing of the Donor, yet
when the same is confirmed by the seal of the Donor, the donation is of
greater validity; and if by Law or Drink ye all of this: and also annexed a
special promise and blessing to both these outward signs, jointly used:
therefore the use and sumption of one of these without the other, cannot have
so great force Alex. Hal. 4. q. 10. m. 4. ar. 1.. 1. In quantum efficacia
respicit signatum, and non contentum vtraque (species) est de integritate: quia
sumpto hoc Sacramento digne, in vtraque specie, (...) est effectus, vnionis
corporis mystici cum capite quam sumptio sub altera.
, to apply the effect and fruit of the Sacrament, as the use and reception the
one, cannot produce the effect without the other; and as

IESVIT.
Hence it is apparent, that without any just cause, some Protestants inueigh
against the Council of Constance, as Council. Constant. sess. 13.
professing to contradict the Precept of Christ, because it decreed, That the
Sacrament may be lawfully given under one kind, Non obstante quod Christus in
vtraque specie illud instituerit, and Apostolis administrauerit:
Notwithstanding Christ's Institution and Administration non obstante, that God
did institute both eating and drinking for the preservation of life in every
man.

ANSWER.
The Council of Constance is justly censured, for presuming to alter and
disanull the ordinance of Christ Ambros. in 1. Cor. 11. Indignu^ dicit esse
Domino, qui aliter mysterium celebrat, quam ab eo traditum est. Non enim potest
deuotus esse, qui aliter praesumit, quam datum est ab Authore.
; for if it be flagitious amongst men to alter and contradict the lawful Will
of a Testator, Galat. 3.15. shall it not be much more vnlawfall to alter the
Testament of the Son of God, who disposed to the common people his Blood, as
well as his Body, saying, Drink ye all of this, Math. 26, 27. and except ye
eat the flesh, and drink the blood of the man, etc. Ioh. 6.53.

And the words of the said Synod are most presumptious, Council. Constant. Can.
13. page 349. col. 2. Licet Christus post coena^ instituerit, and suis
Discipulis administrauerit sub vtraque specie panis and vini hoc venerabile
Sacramentu^: tamen hoc no^ obstante, etc. Licet in Primitiua Ecclesia huiusmodi
Sacramentu^ reciperetur, a fidelibus sub vtraque specie, tamen haec consuetudo,
etc. Dicere quod hanc consuetudine^ and lege^ obseruare sit sacrilegu^, aut
illicitu^ censeri debet, erroneu^, and pertinaciter asserentes opositu^
praemissoru^, tanqua^ Haeretici arcendi sunt, and grauiter puniendi, etc.
for this they pronounce, Although Christ, after supper, instituted and
administered to his Disciples under both kinds, etc. And although in the
Primitive Chruch, this Sacrament was received of Believers in both kinds, yet
notwithstanding, the contrary custom for Laics to receive in one kind, is
with good reason brought in, and they are Heretics which hold this,
sacrilegious or unlawful.

But what are these men in comparison of Christ and his Cassand. Consult. 22.
In Ecclesia Latina, mill amplius annis tenuit, vt tam populo quam clero, in
celebratione missarum post mysteriorum consecratione^ seorsum corpus and
seorsum sanguis Domini preberetur. Gerard. Lorich. d. public. miss. prorog.
Ruard Tapper, ar 15. page 218. Aquinas. Com. Ioh. 6. Secundum antiquam Ecclesiae
Arboreus. Com. in Ioh. 6. Nec addubito, quin in Primitiua Ecclesia
communicarent omnes tum Laici tum Sacerdotes sub vtraque specie.
.) If therefore Christ Jesus and his Apostles, and after these, the Primitive
Church administered the Communion Gerson d. com. sub vtraque. Denar. 2. Primum,
periculum in effusione. Secundum, in deportatione de loco ad locum. Tertium, in
vasorum sordidatione, etc. Quartum, in longis barbis laicorum. Item, quod tanta
esset dignitas laicorum circa sumptionem corporis Christi, sicut and
Sacerdotum. to. 1. page 528. vid. plura.
reasons, to cancel Christ's last Will and Testament, and to violate the sacred
precept and ordinance of the Son of God?

But our Adversary labors by a distinction of Institution Drink ye all of
this, whereas he said not so literally and expressly, eat ye all of this.
Besides, his institution is a vertuall and interpretatiue Paul 1. Cor. 11.23.
And Christ did institute the Eucharist in two kinds, that people might receive
and vfe it in two kinds.

Also, if the manner of the institution proves not the manner of the use,
then the Eucharist may be used in another manner (I mean in things
substantial) than as it was instituted: and if this, then it may be used in
wine only without bread, or in broth, or in flesh, for we have no direction or
rule for the manner, of greater authority than the institution.

Lastly, divine institution does not only signify an action of God, whereby he
gives being unto things, with reference to Accursius. praef. sup. Instit.
Instinian. Institutiones sunt praeceptiones quibus instituuntur, and docentur
homines, etc.
) but it signifies also a decree, rule, precept, and information, concerning
the use and practice of that which God has ordained. Now our Savior, when he
ordained the holy Eucharist, in regard of the being and entitie thereof, he
withal conjoined the use of the same as a necessary condition, to make it
operative and effectual to his people. For even as in Baptism, although the
Word and Element constitute the Sacrament, in regard of the definition Aug sup.
Ioh. tr. 80. Accedit verbu^ ad elementum, and fit sacramentu^.
, yet the same is no Baptism Aquinas. 3. q. 66. ar. 1. Sacrame^tum no (...) in
ipsa a qua, sed in applicatione a quae ad hominem, quae est ablutio.
to Inchoatiue vel inceptiue Sacramentum ante vsum. Consummatiue and perfectiue
non est Sacramentum ante vsum.
.

IESVIT.. 3.
A Sacrament of the new Testament, being a visible efficatious sign of
invisible grace, four things are necessary to concur to the substantial
constitution

First, there is required some element, that is a visible and sensible thing or
action, without which, no Sacrament can subsist, termed by Divines Materia
Sacramenti. This substantial part is not wanting in the Sacrament given in one
kind, in which kind there is consecrated bread, visible and sensible in the
accidents thereof, and manducation also,

ANSWER.
THis quadripartite argument (at least in the three foremost branches) is merely
sophistical, and indeed against common sense: as if one should question,
whether a man without legs or arms were a perfect entire man, according to the
first creation of mankind, and the perpetual succeeding law of nature, Aug. ad
Maximin. lib. 3. cap. 22. Lombar. 4. d. 1. Sacramentum est inuisibilis gratiae
visibilis forma. Hugo. lit. F.
, and therefore (to speak by the way) some of the seven which Romists number
in their List or Calendar, are no Sacraments. But in the holy Eucharist there
is a double visible element, and material visible sign Idem. did. 4. lit. F.
Iren. lib. 4. ca. 32. Tertull. d. Resur. carn. ca. 8. Justin. Mart. colloq. cum
Tryph: and Apol. 2. Aug. in psalm. 3. Cypr. Ep 63.
, to wit, Bread and Math. 26.26, 27. Luc. 22. 19, 20. 1. Cor. 11.23.25. and
these outward elements being two in number, and divided the one from the other,
were distinctly and severally distributed by our Savior, and were received by
the communicants apart, the one of them after the other: and although they make
but one Sacrament in regard of the definition, as similarie and dissimilarie
parts make but one body, yet there is a diversity and plurality both in
their matter and form Bonacin. d. Sacra. d. Euchar. disp. 4. p. 4. propos. 1.
In Sacramento Eucharistiae Alex. Hall. 4. q. 10. m. 3. ar. 2.
, and a reason why they must be two, and not one individual sign.

IESVIT.
The second thing required to the substance of the Sacrament, is, Verbum, the
Word; that is, a form of speech, showing the divine and supernatural purpose,
unto which the element is consecrated. Neither is that part wanting in the
Sacrament given under one kind, which is consecrated by the words of Christ,
This is my body: and the Theological Augustine verified, Aug. Tract. 18. in
Joan.
Accedit verbum ad elementum and fit Sacramentum.

ANSWER.
As the outward elements are two in number, so likewise a double act of
blessing and consecration must pass upon them Palud. 4. d. 9. q. 1. ar. 1.
Caiet. 3. q. 80 ar. 12. Suares. to. 3. disp. 43. sect. 3. Reginald. d. poen.
li. 29. nu. 13. Chamerot. d. Euchar. cap. 6. Dub. 1. Nugnus. in 3. q. 74. ar.
1. Conclus. 2.
; for otherwise, that part which wants benediction, is not a sacramental
sign, but a common creature: and if any sign be omitted, then the Sacrament
wants integrity of parts.

IESVIT.
The third thing is signification, every Sacrament signifying some divine
effect of grace, which God works by the application thereof; and the sensible
sign, even by nature has as S. Augustine notes, some proportion and Aug.
Epist. 23. ad Bonifac.
analagie to signify that divine effect, which to produce it Aug. Epist. 23.
sacred signification which the holy Eucharist has, is of three kinds, and all
three are found in the Sacrament given under one kind. First, this Sacrament is
a sign of spiritual food, for the nourishment and refection of the soul,
which signification is manifestly found in Communion under one kind, for the
Eucharist does signify this effect of spiritual nutrition, because it is a
sign of Christ the Bread sufficient to feed and refresh the Soul. Another
signification Paul declares: which conjunction, the Sacrament in Romans 12. 4.
and 5. 1. Cor. 12. 12.
the form of Bread, does signify. For Bread being a compound of many grains
of Wheat, massed together in one Loaf, and also made of Flower and Water
mingled one with another, signifies the perfect union, both of the Paul
testifies, Vnum corpus 1. Cor. 10. v. 17.
sumus quotquot de vno Pane participamus; where he makes no mention of Wine,
the Sacrament in the form of Bread being alone able to show and work this
signification.

This Sacrament does also signify the Passion and Death of our Savior, which
Death and Passion is showed and represented by Communion under one kind. For
Paul testifies) did 1. Cor. 11. v. 14, 15.
after the consecration of each kind, particularly recommend

ANSWER.
Significations may be found in Types and figures, being no Sacraments; as in a
Vine and Branches, a natural Humane Body, a material House, or Temple, a
Lamb led before the shearer, not to other signs and figures, therefore it is
inconsequent, Ergo, the use of one Element, is as profitable and effectual, as
the use and reception of both.

But if the objection be reduced to form, the defect will be more apparent.

If there is the same signification, of one single Element, which there is of
both, then there is the same benefit obtained by receiving one, which is
obtained by receiving both.

But there is the same signification of one single Element, which Ergo,

There is the same benefit obtained, by receiving in one kind, as in both.

I answer: First, denying the consequence of the Mayor Proposition. For
although there were the same signification in one Element, which is of both,
yet there is not equal benefit reaped by receiving one, as is reaped by
receiving both; because the promise of Grace is annexed to the receiving both,
and Ferus. in Ioh. 6. In institutione huius Sacramenti Christus imperative
loquitur, accipite commedite, hoc facite.
the Church cannot expect that Christ should fulfill his promise, in giving his
flesh and blood by the Sacrament, unless the Church observe his ordinance, and
do that which he appointed. Also, obedience is better Sam. 15. 22. but when we
administer and receive in both kinds, we obey Christ, saying, Drink ye all of
this; and we disobey, when we do otherwise. Therefore although there were the
same signification of one Element, which is of both, yet the same benefit is
not reaped by receiving one, which is obtained by receiving both.

Secondly, to the assumption I answer, that there is a more perfect and lively
representation Alex. Hal. 4. q. 10. m. 3. ar. 2. Etsi Christus homo naturali
quadam similitudine representatur vtraque specie: non tame ex institutione,
signatur vtraque: sed secundum carnem specie panis, secundum sanguinem specie
vini.
of spiritual feeding and refection, and of conjunction of the faithful, and
of Christ's Greg. Dial. li. 4. ca. 58. Eius sanguis in ora fidelium funditur.
, does in a cleerer manner represent and signify the effusion of Christ's
blood, and also the separation of his body and soul; and there is a more
perfect c Cyprian. ep. 63. in Calice Dominico and plebi ministrando, non hoc
faciunt, quod Jesus Christus Dominus and Deus noster huiua Sacrificij Atuhor
and Doctor, fecit and docuit.
similitude of nourishment in Bread and Wine Cyprian. li. 2. ep. 3. sieve epist.
63. Calix Dominicus sic bibentes inebriat, vt sobrios faciat, vt mentes ad
spiritalem sapientiam redigat, vt a sapore isto saeculari, ad intellectum Dei
vnusquisque resipiscat. Chrysostom. in Ioh. Hom 45. Hic sanguis facit, vt imago in
nobis regia (...): Hic sanguis pulchritudinem atque nobilitatem animae quam
semper irregat and notrit, languescere non sinit, etc. Hic mysticus sanguis
Daemones procul pellit, Angelos and Angelorum Dominum ad nos allicit Daemones
enim cum Dominicum sanguinem Iren. li. 5. ca. 1. Ruits. Contr. Theol. 32. pa.
152. Species panis sola non significat gratiam vt reficientem animam, (...),
sed partialiter. Alex. Hell. 4. q. 10. m. 4. ar. 1.. 1 Read (...),
together, than Eccles. 4. 9. so likewise two Elements represent more than one,
and nourish more than one, and unite more than one. Otherwise, if the
representation of one Element, were equal to the representation of both, to
what purpose should our Savior institute a Sacrament in two kinds, which
(according to Papists, who will seem wiser than God) Arboreus Sap Ioh. 6. Caro
Christi (...) animam, sed sanguis viuisicat animam, and emundat conscientiam
nostram ab operibus mortuis.
is as sufficient in one kind, as in both?

IESVIT.
The fourth thing required to the substance of a Sacrament, is Causalitie, to
wit, to work in the soul the Spiritual effects it signifies. This Causalitie
cannot be wanting Joan. 6.55.
of Bread, Qui manducat hunc panem viuet in aeternum. Not any doubt then may be
made but the Sacrament in one kind is full, entire, complete in substance; and
by participation thereof, prepared consciences do receive the benefit of
celestial favor, that conserueth the life of the soul, with daily increase
in perfection.

ANSWER.
The sum of this objection is:

There is the same power of causing Grace, in one sign received alone, as in
both; because Christ, the Fountain of Grace, is received Ioh. 6. 51.

Therefore the receiving of one sign alone, is as sufficient, and profitable,
as the sumption of both.

The Antecedent of this Argument is denied. And the Scripture, Ioh. 6. 51.
says not, Whosoever eats Sacramental Bread, without Wine, shall live for
ever; but if any eat this Bread which came down from Heaven, to wit, Christ
Jesus incarnate Hilar. d. Trin. lib. 10. se panem hic dicit, etc. Chrysostom. in
Ioh. Ho. 45. Panem vitae seipsum appellat, etc. Ferus in Ioh. 6. Hic panis de
quo Christus hic loquitur, nihil aliud est qua^ Incarnatio, Passio, and Meritu^
Christi, atque adeo Christus ipse, cum omnibus quae habet quae fecit and passus
est. Caietan. Ioh. 6. Primo tractat de seipso vt est panis vitae: Deinde de
Passione sua futura, secundum quam est cibus and potus vitae. Ibid. Sermo
formalis non est de Sacramento, sed de re Sacramenti, Ibid. Non est ad literam
sermo de manducare and bibere Sacramentum Eucharistiae, sed de manducare and
bibere Mortem Christi.
, shall live for ever. And then it follows, Unless you eat the flesh of the
Son of man, and drink his blood, you shall not have life in you, Ioh. 6.53.
Now let the Romist choose which Exposition he pleases. If our Savior, in
these last words, speaks of Sacramental and Spiritual eating jointly, then
Communion in both kinds is necessary to life eternal; and if he speak of
Spiritual eating only, by Faith, then this Scripture proves not the
necessity of receiving either Bread or Wine Ferus, in Ioh. 6. Dicere quod sine
corporali perceptione Sacramenti, nulli possit contingere vita, admodum durum,
imo temerarium, and falsum est. Ibid. Manducatur corpus Christi in Sacramento:
and haec quidem manducatio non simpliciter necessaria est vt prior, plures enim
etiam sine hac saluati sunt, and saluantur: sed tamen ita necessaria est, vt
non contemnatur vel negligatur suo tempore.
, and much less proves it, that there is the power of causing Grace, in
receiving Bread alone.

IESVIT.. 4. Communion under one kind, not
ALthough Communion under both kinds pertain not to the substance of the
Sacrament; yet if Christ did specially command the same, we are bound to that
observance, and should by Communion under one kind, sin not against his
Sacrament and Institution, but against a special Divine Precept.

ANSWER.
WHen Christ instituted the Sacrament, he provided and prescribed two material
Elements, and not one only, or none; and he sanctified and distributed both,
and with his Institution and Practice, he conjoined a Precept; Do this in
remembrance of me: Drink ye all of this. Saint Paul likewise says, Let a man
prove himself, and so let him eat of this Bread, and drink of this Cup: and
the practice of the holy Apostles in their days, and of the successors of the
Apostles; and Saint Paul's own practice appears, 1. Cor. 10.16. and cap.
11.26. and he describes Communicating, by taking the Cup, as a most noble
part, saying, Ye cannot drink the cup of the Lord and the cup of devils, 1.
Cor. 10.21. Justin Martyr, who borders Justin. Apol. 2. pa. 76. and 77.
upon the Apostles, says, That Christians in his age, distributed the
sanctified Bread and Wine, (...), to every one present: and That Jesus
commanded (...).
them to do thus. Saint Chrysostom says Chrysostom. sup. 1. Cor. 11. and sup. 2.
Cor. Hom. 18.
, That whereas in the old Law there was a difference between Priests and
Laics in communicating of Victimes; in the New Testament it is otherwise, for
one Body and one Cup is ministered to all. This practice continued as a Law,
more than a thousand years after Christ. And Haimo Haimo. sup. 1. Cor. 10. pa.
109.
(who lived in the year 850.) says, That in his days, all the people
received out of the Cup, the Blood of Christ. And Paschasius Paschas. Ratbert.
d. corp. and sang. Dom. ca. 19. Nec caro sine sanguine vtique, nec sanguis sine
carne iure communicatur, etc. Non recte caro sine sanguine communicatur, etc.
Ibid. cap. 15. Quapropter (...) homo quotiescunque bibis hunc calicem, etc.
after him, says, That the Flesh, or Bread, is not lawfully received, without
the Cup or Blood.

But whatsoever our Savior himself, and his Apostles, and their successors,
and the ancient Church, by perpetual succession, taught and practiced a
thousand years and upward, yea, even the Latin Church it self, and the
Eastern Churches Ochagauia. d. Sacram. tr. 2. d. Euch. q. 18. Graeci suis
Laicis distribuunt vtranque speciem panis and vini.
to this day; the Romish generation exalting it self above God, not only
presumes to commit Sacrilege at home, but it censureth Gerson. d. com. sub
vtraque. page 526. Sumptio talis est temeraria, presumptuosa, scandalosa,
seditiosa, and Ecclesiastici ritus turbatiua, and ex consequenti aeternae
damnationis inductiua, page 529. Aduersus haeresin nouam de necessaria
communicatione Laicorum, sub vtraque specie, page 528. Rex Romans acciperet
potestatem, a sacro Concilio (Constantiensi) factum illud (...), sicut alias
haereses in Bohemia, cum potentia brachij secularis.
.

Now, that they may with some color advance their own Tradition against the
Ordinance of Christ, they pry into every corner, and invent frivolous Glosses
and Pretexts, as

IESVIT.
Hence we may probably infer, That Christ gave no special Precept thereof,
because Christ has commanded no more concerning the use of the Eucharist, than
what by the substance of the Institution and nature of the Sacrament we are
bound unto; leaving accidental circumstances belonging thereunto, to be
ordained by the Apostles and Pastors of the Church, as S. Augustine notes,
saying, August. Ep. 118.
Our Lord did not appoint in what order the Sacrament of Augustine speak, that
Christ gave no commandment to his Church concerning the use of the Sacrament,
besides such as are contained in the substance of the Institution of the
Sacrament, of which kind, Communion under both

ANSWER.
Ecclesiastical power, to add, detract, or alter any thing about Sacraments,
is confined to things adiaphorous: and Saint Augustine Aug. Ep. 118. ca. 2.
Totum hoc genus rerum, liberas habet obseruationis, etc.
, in the place objected, speaks expressly of these: but the material parts of
Sacraments, belong to their substance,

And if in the holy Eucharist the Element of Wine is not of the substance
thereof, then the Eucharist may be administered without wine; also the kind of
the Element may be changed, and milk or broth, substituted in the place of
wine; and the Communion may be celebrated in wine without bread. In all
compounded things, the moitie of the matter, is the moitie of the substance:
and whatsoever Iesuited Romists teach, I see

If they except, That they receive the Blood of Christ Consecutiue, or by
Concomitancie: I reply, This Answer solueth not the difficulty, for I dispute
of the material Element, and the direct receiving thereof, and not of
receiving the blood of Christ spiritually, or any other way. Now the wine is a
moitie of the substantial outward matter of the Eucharist, and therefore if
they receive not the wine, they receive not the one half of the substantial
outward matter of the Eucharist; and consequently, they receive no Eucharist:
for as the poope of a ship, the prowe being broken away, is no ship; and as
half a cloak is not a garment to keep a man warm: so likewise,

And concerning the being of Christ's Blood in the bread by Concomitancie: I
answer, If this were granted, they receive not Christ's blood Sacramentally,
but some other way: for nothing is received Sacramentally, but that which is
caused by the words of consecration: Ergo, It is not there Sacramentally, and
consequently it is not received Sacramentally.

IESVIT.
The words of Christ, Do this in remembrance of me, do no ways infer a
Precept of both kinds. First, 1. Cor. 11.
because he said, Do this in remembrance of me, only of the Sacrament in
form of bread; of the form of wine, not absolutely, but conditionally, Do
this as often as you drink, in memory of me, that the Adversaries of the
Church, might not have any the least plausible show, to complain of her
neglecting Gods Precept. For this Precept, Do this, being the only Precept
given by Christ to

ANSWER.
The first reason upon which you presume, that our Saviors words, Do this in
remembrance of me, are not Preceptiue, in regard then do it in remembrance of
me. But if this be the whole sense, then Christ's words must

As often as you Lay people drink, which needs never to be done by you,
(according to Romish Divinity) Do this nothing, in remembrance of me.
Secondly, Quotiescunque biberitis, as often as you drink, makes not the
Precept conditional, in respect of the cup, more than of the bread: for in the
very next verse it follows, Quotiescunque ederitis panem hunc, as often as
you shall eat this bread: and therefore, if as often as you shall drink,
restrains the speech in regard of the cup, then as often as you shall eat,
restrains the Precept in regard Haimo says, Idem sensus est, etc. There is
the same sense of, Do this, being referred to the cup, as of Do this, being
referred to the bread. But Do this, referred to the bread, is a Precept: Ergo,
Do this, referred to the cup, is also a Precept. But the Romanist, infatuated
with this conceit, croweth as follows, That the Adversaries of the Church
might not have the least plausible show, etc. The Vermin is deceived, in
calling us, Adversaries of the Church; for we are fast friends to the true
Catholic Church, and we are Adversaries to Romists, an unsound Church, no
otherwise than Saint Paul was to the Am I therefore become your enemy, because
I tell you the truth, Gallat. 4. 16. And touching the fancy of this Obiectour,
I add, That even as when Saint Paul said, 1. Cor. 10. 31. Whether ye eat or
drink, or whatsoever thing else ye doc, do all to the glory of God: If these
words should be resolved in this manner, As often as ye eat and drink, do
this to the glory of God; the placing of this word, As often, restrains not
the speech from being a Precept: so likewise, when Saint Paul says, As often
as ye shall drink, do this in remembrance of me; this manner of speaking,
alters not his words from being a

IESVIT.
Secondly, suppose Christ spoke these imperative words, Do this, after the
giving of the Cup, yet are they to be understood with this restriction, Do
this, that is, all things that belong to the essence and substance of this
Action, in Do this, further than the substance of the Action, unto the
Accidentarie circumstances thereof, in which, Christ did then institute and
gave the Sacrament, many absurdities will follow. By this rule, we must
always celebrate and receive Eleuatio manuum mearum Sacrificium vespertinum,
The Sacrifice instituted in the Evening of the in Azime, that is, unleavened
Bread, in which Christ did celebrate and give the Sacrament, saying, Do this:
which circumstance was also mystical, signifying the purity of our Saviors
virginal body and person, which was without any leaven of finne. And befides,
the Priest might not give the Sacrament unto any but such whose feet he had
washedafore, seeing Do this, to the Circumstances of Christ's Action; but
acknowledge that the Precept, Do this, only

ANSWER.
This precept is not extended to things adiaphorous, and accidental
circumstances, such as was the time, after supper; the And the sacramental
signs of Bread and Wine, or such as page 482. etc.

IESVIT.
The second Text, much urged for the giving of the Cup unto all men, is the
words of our Savior, Bibite ex hoc omnes, wherein some note our Saviors
providence, saying, That he foreseeing that some would take the Cup from the
Laity, granting them the consecrated Bread, said Bibite ex hoc omnes; but not
of the Bread, Manducate ex hoc omnes. I answer, The words of our Savior be
plain, Drink ye all of this; but the difficulty is, to whom they are spoken,
and who are these all? Luther would have, all men for whom the blood of Christ
was shed; whence is follows, that as the Blood of Christ was shed for all men,
even Infidels, Jews, Turks, Infants, the Cup also should be given unto all
these, which to abstemij, who cannot endure the taste of any wine, yet are not
to be excluded from the Sacrament?

Wherefore the truth is, that these words were spoken unto all the Apostles,
and to them All only. And though exabu^danti, we can very probably show out of
the sacred Text, that the particle All, concerns all the Apostles only. First,
Math. 26.
what one Evangelist says was commanded unto all, Bibite ex hoc omnes, Drink
ye all of this; another relates to biberunt ^.
ex eo omnes, all drank thereof. But the second All, is restrained to all the
Apostles, and to them all only: What reason then is there to extend the words,
Drink ye all of

ANSWER.
That which S. Stephen spoke to the unfaithful Jews, Ye do always resist
the holy Ghost, Act. 7. 51. is verified in the Pharisees of Rome, for no light
of heavenly verity is so illustrious, which this generation, in favor of
their own impiety, will not endeavor to cloud.

Is it possible for any thing to be more evident for Communion Drink ye all
of this Gerard. Lorich. in 7. par. Can. Sunt Pseudocatholici qui reformationem
Ecclesiae quoquo modo remorari non verentur. Hij ne Laicis altera species
restituatur, nullis parcunt blasphemijs. Dicunt enim Christum solis Apostolis
dixisse bibite exhoc omnes. A (...) verba Canonis habent, accipite and
manducate ex hoc omnes. Hic dicant oro, nu^ and hoc ad solos dictum sit
Apostolos. Ergo Laicis and a specie panis est abstinendum; quod dicere est
haeresis and blasphemia pestilens and execrabilis. Co^sequitur ergo, vtrumque
verbum dictum esse ad omnem Ecclesiam.
? especially when the same is expounded by the immediate practice of our
Savior, and by the practice of the holy Apostles, and of the Primitive Church?
But the sons of darkness, having renounced verity, and chosen the way of
error, blunder and grope in the clear light, and verba recta ac veritatis
luce fulgentia, tortuosis interpretationibus obscurare and deprauare moliuntur
(as S. Augustine Aug. tom. 7. d. nupt. and concupis. lib. 2. cap. 2.
long since spoke of the Pelagians.) The Jesuits evasion or starting hole is,
the words of Christ, Math. 26.27. Drink ye all of this, contain a precept
Cor. 11.28. etc. cap. 10.17.21. and Cardinal Caietan Caietan. in Math. 26.
Hinc habetur Eucharistiam non esse tribuendam insfantibus, quibus non (...)
dici accipite comedite, sicut enim quia Dominus dixit nisi quis natus fuerit
denuo ex a qua and spiritu, negatur Baptismus infantibus in materno vtero, quia
non potest denuo nasci qui non est natus, ita dicente Domino in Communione
Eucharistiae, accipite commedite, negatur Eucharistia illis, qui adhuc non
possunt accipere, qui adhuc non possunt commedere.
concludes the same out of our Sauiors precept, Math. 26.26.

The consequence of this Objection, to wit, the Precept of said, Watch and pray
least ye fall into temptation, Math. 26.41. Ergo, Math. 18.3. Unless ye be
converted, and become as little children, ye shall not enter into the kingdom
of God, the Apostles only were present, and the Doctrine was personally
pronounced to them alone. Also, Math. 18.9. 15.22. the like is found concerning
other doctrines and precepts, and yet these doctrines and precepts are common
to all Christians. The Romists (if they were not partial) could distinguish
between personal precepts delivered to the Apostles only (as they were by
office Pastors of

But the Obiectour adds, That we are not able to demonstrate, that this
Precept Drink ye all of this, was common. I answer, First, if that which
Christ said to the Apostles, S. Paul spoke to the whole multitude of Believers,
then Christ's words uttered to the Apostles were common: But the first is true,
1. Cor. 11. 28. And S. Hierome Hierom. com. sup. 1. Corin. 11. Chrysostom. in 1.
Cor. 11. Hom. 24. Quod dominicu^ est priuatum fecerant, Coena enim Domini debet
esse communis, nam quae Domini sunt, non huius sunt serui, non alterius, sed
omnibus communia. Quod enim dominicum est idem and commune est. Nam si Domini
est, non debes tanquam proprium tibi assumere, sed tanquam res Domini
communiter omnibus proponere Siquidem hoc est Dominicum. Nunc autem non sinis
esse commune sed tibi comedis. Durand Rational. Diu lib. 4 cap. 1. In Primitiua
Ecclesia singulis diebus omnes qui celebrationi missarum intererant communicare
solebant, eo quod Apostoli omnes, de Calice biberunt, Domino dicente bibite ex
co omnes.
infers upon the same, Oportet Coenam dominicam esse communem, quia ille
omnibus Discipulis suis qui aderant, equaliter tradidit Sacramenta, The Lords
Supper ought to be common, because Christ delivered the Sacraments of his Body
and Blood equally to all the Disciples that were present.

Secondly, If Communion in both kinds has not foundation Paul grounds his
whole Doctrine, touching the holy Eucharist, upon our Saviors words and
institution, 1. Cor. 11.23.

Thirdly, If the reason why the Apostles received the Cup, was, because they
were Priests, then all Priests being present at the communion, ought to receive
in both kinds, although they

Fourthly, It is not certain that the Apostles were Priests when Christ
ordained and administered the Eucharist, for that they were not Priests, Math.
18. is affirmed by our Adversaries Henriq. sum. (...). 5. c. 1. nu. 2.
, and that they were made Priests, Luke 22. by the words Hoc facite, as
Bellarmine, Suares, Henriques, Hosius, Canisius, etc. say, can never be
proved: for what force is there in Hoc facite, to conclude Priestly
Ordination: and if Hoc facite proves Priesthood, then Lay men are made
Priests, when the words, Do this in remembrance of me, are spoken to them
Aquin. 3. q. 80. ar. 11. Homo tenetur hoc Sacramentum sumere, non solum ex
statuto Ecclesiae, sed ex mandato Domini, dicentis, Luc. 22. Hoc facite.
, in part, or respectively. Hitherto we have found nothing in our Adversaries,
but Sophistry of words, and Theomachie against Divine Institution and
Apostolical Tradition. But to hold correspondence with the rest, the Jesuit
adds:

IESVIT.
Secondly, These words, Accipite, manducate, bibite, Take, eat, drink, were
certainly spoken unto the same persons, and they run so together in rank,
that no man can with probability make the one outrunne the other: But the
command, Accipite, which signifies, Take with your hands, (for it is a Precept
distinct from Manducate, which is, take with your mouth) was given to the

ANSWER.
This Argument truly propounded, is,

All persons commanded to eat, were commanded to take.

None but the Apostles were commanded to take: for if Lay men were commanded to
take, they must always receive the Eucharist in their hands, Ergo,

None but the Apostles were commanded to eat.

This Objection, fights against Lay men's receiving in one kind, which until
(...) we supposed Papists had permitted, but it seems that they will have the
whole use of the Sacrament depend upon the Popes devotion and pleasure.

But touching the Argument, I deny the Assumption: for Lay men were commanded
to take, that is, to receive, at least into their mouths, and then to
manducate, that is, to chew or swallow, and to let the Element received, pass
into their stomach Bellarm. d. Euchar. li. 1. ca. 11. (...) ab (...) stomachum,
per instrumenta humana and naturalia, id est linguam and palatum.
. To take with the hand is agreeable to Christ's manner Caietan in Mat. 26.
(...) ego, quod sicut vnum Calicem co^munem omnibus tradidit, ita in vna (...)
panem in duodecim (...) fractum, manibus (...) tradiderit (...). (...). li. 9.
ca. 30. Quomodo manus extendes de quibus adhuc sanguis stillat iniustus?
Quomodo huiusmodi manibus accipres sanctum Domini corpus? Qua temeritate ore
tuo (...) sanguinis pretiofi percipies, etc. Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. (...). 7. ca.
9. cum and gratiarum actionem in Ecclesia audisset, and ad illam vna cum alijs
Amen accinuisset, (...), manum ad suscipiendum Sanctum cibum extendisset.
Chrysostom. in Ephesians. Hom. 3. Quomodo comparebis ante Tribunal Christi, qui manibus
and labijs immundis, ipsius audes contingere corpus, etc. Niceph. li. 13.
(...). 7. (...). li. 8. ca. 5. Aug. Cont Petil. li. 2. ca. 23. (...) illum
commemoro, etc. Cui pacis osculum inter Sacramenta (...), in cuius manibus
(...). Rhenanus Annot. in (...). d. Cor. (...). Satis liquet ex Antiquorum
lectione, Eucharistiam olim manibus (...) attactum fuisse. Synod. 6. can.
(...). Et (...). ibid. Cyprian. d. Laps. n 64. Plus modo in Dominum manibus
atque ore delinquunt, etc. Ib. n. (...). Et quod non statim Domini corpus (...)
accipiat, aut ore polluto (...). etc.
, and it was used in the Primitive Church, but the same is not of absolute
necessity, for some Communicants may want hands, or the natural use thereof:
but to receive into the mouth, and then to manducate or drink, is commanded.
The Jesuit imagines, that all taking, is by the hand, and thus he proves
himself to be neither good Grammarian, nor Divine. Virgill says, Illos
porticibus rex accipiebat in amplis: where, accipio is to entertain. S. Paul
says, Per quem accepimus gratiam, Romans 1. 5. By whom we have received grace
and Apostleship, ca. 8.15. Ye have received ((...)) the spirit Joseph thou
son of David, fear not to take Mary thy wife. Math. 1. 20. His Bishopric,
let another man take. Act. 1.20.

IESVIT.
The third reason is, because there was a peculiar and personal cause, Why
Christ should give that particular Councellor Admonition (for the imperative
word does not ever signify a precept, but often an advise, or a permission, as
your Majesty well knows) to his Apostles, at that time, to wit, because he
would have them all, not only drink of Matthew, Bibite ex hoc omnes, Math.
26.27.
to be the same whereof he said in S. Luke, Accipite, diuidite Luke 22. v. 18.
inter vos, non enim bibam amplius de hoc genimine vitis: For this being
supposed, the words Drink ye all of this, imports the same, as Divide this Cup
amongst you. as the Cup, without new filling and consecration, might Drink ye
all of this, was but personal, confined unto the number of

ANSWER.
The Precept, Drink ye all of this (says the Jesuit) was personal, and
concerned the Apostles only, because our Savior commanded them All to drink
of the same Cup without filling and consecrating it anew. But, if Drink ye all
of this, had imported a general duty, then Christ could not have stinted them
to one single Cup.

This objection is grounded upon a false Principle, which is, Exodus 20.2.
Likewise in many general or common Preepts of the old and new Testament, some
personal circumstances may be noted, and yet the substance of the Commandment
is general. 1. Cro. 28.9. Pro. 30.1.3. Math. 18.2.3. Ioh. 13.13, 14.

Also we may consider a twofold unity of the Cup: Specifical,

IESVIT.
Another text of Scripture some urge to prove, That Communion under one kind
is commanded, to wit, the famous place out of the sixth chapter of S. John,
Except ye Ioh. 6.54.
eat the flesh and drink the blood of the Son of man, you shall not have
life in you. Where our Savior under the penalty of loosing eternal life,
commands John to concern the Sacramental sumption of our Saviors Flesh, as
also some learned Catholics hold. Not withstanding, though we grant that
Chapter to concern the eating and drinking in the Sacrament, as most of the
Fathers teach, yet this objection may be easily satisfied by the former
Principles: for as we distinguish in the Baptize all nations in the name of the
Father, Math. 28.23.
and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost: To baptize, signifies the same that
the Greek word (...), that is, not to wet or sprinkle with water, but to put
and plunge into the Water by immersion, bathing them in water; in Ad Tit. 3. c.
54.
because the Church teaches Baptism by (...) or sprinkling to be sufficient
and substantial Baptism, no Unless you eat the flesh of the Son of man,
and drink of his blood, you shall not have life in you, be preceptiue no
further than they signify real receiving of his body and blood; not the
manner of both kinds, as may appear by the intention of the Commandment. For
as Christ gave this Precept of Eating and Drinking, only to the end that we
might have life in us; so likewise he meant to command the same no further than
it was necessary to this end. But eating formally the body of Christ He that
eats this Bread shall live for Ibidem v. 59.
ever: What necessity then is there to understand this Precept of formal
receiving in both kinds?

But further I add the coniunctiue particle (and, and) signifies disjunctiuely
the same that (vel, or) as Argentum Act. 3. 6.
and aurum non est mihi, and particularly of this Sacrament, He that eats and
drinks unworthily, eats 1. Cor. 11.29.
and drinks damnation: the sense is disjunctiue, eats or drinks
unworthily. In this sort the words of Christ, Except you eat and drink, is to
be understood disjunctiuely, Except you eat the flesh or drink the blood
Joan. 3.5.
of the Son of man, you shall not have life in you. Which disjunctiue sense
to be the sense intended in this place, may be proved, because else Christ
should be contrary ver. 59. of this Chapter, He promises life eternal to
eating only, Qui manducat panem viuit in aeternum, If in the four and fifty
verse of the same Chapter, he require unto himself life everlasting,

ANSWER.
Cardinal Bellarmine Bellarm. d. Euchar. l. 1. c. 5. (...) tholici fere (...)
volunt, huius capitis verba de Sacramento ipso Eucharistiae, sieve de
Sacramentali manducatione corporis Domini in Eucharistia.
affirms, that the Text of Saint John cap. 6. is to be expounded of the holy
Eucharist; and not only Gabriel Biel Biel. Can. Miss. lect. 48.
, Cusanus Cusau. Epist. 7. ad Bohem.
, Caietan Caietan. in 3. q. 80. ar. vlt. and sup. Ioh. 6.
, Ruard Tapper Ruard. Art. 15.
, Hesselius Hessel. lib. d. Com. sub vna specie.
, and (...) Iansen. Concord. cap. 59.
, expound this Chapter of spiritual Receiving, yet other Pontificians hold, as
himself does Bellarm. ib. Caeteri Scriptores
: with Bellarmine also agree Suares Suares. in 3. to. 3. Disp. 46. Sect. 2.
, Vasques Vasq. in 3. Disp. 179. cap. 5.
, Gregory Valence Greg. Val. to. 4. Disp. 6. q. 1. punct. 5.
, Salmeron, Barradius, etc.

From this Exposition, it follows, That Communicants when they partake the
holy Eucharist, ought to receive in both kinds; for our Savior says, John
6.54. He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, etc. 55. My flesh is
meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed, 56. He that eats my flesh and
drinks my blood, dwells in me, and I in him. 53. Except ye eat the flesh,
and drink the blood of the Son of man, etc.

Our Adversary, after some staggering about the place, Ioh. 6. condescendeth
at last to Bellarmines Tenet, and admitting that John treats of Sacramental
Receiving, answers the former places, by a distinction of substance and
manner, saying, That howsoever Christ's words may sound of the manner of
Receiving in both kinds; yet his intention is, to command no more than the
substance; and he proves this by the example of Baptism, wherein, although
according to the letter, dipping and plunging into the water is required, yet
according to the Intention, sprinckling is sufficient.

But here I demand of the Romist, Whether any thing touching about the manner,
then the Blood of Christ must be Sacramentally Innocent. Papa. d. Offic. Miss.
l. 4. c. 21. Nec sanguis sub specie panis, nec corpus sub specie vini bibitur,
and comeditur, quia sicut nec sanguis comeditur, nec corpus bibitur, ita (...)
specie panis bibitur, aut sub species vini comeditur. Alex. Hal. 4. q. 10. m.
4. ar. 1.. 1. Christus quantum ad corpus non signatur (...) in specie vini
(...) quantum (...) sanguinem (...), in specie panis, praeterea in hoc
Sacramento signatur Christus, (...) cibus
under bread alone, because to receive Sacramentally, is to receive under the
proper and individual sign, representing the Blood received, which is Wine.
And implicit and vertuall receiving of Christ's Blood, is spiritual drinking,
and this is performed out of the Sacrament, and not only in the same.

The last evasion is, That in the words of Christ, Et, is taken for Aut, that
is, unless you eat the flesh, or drink the blood of the Son of man, ye
have no life, etc. This poor Cavil, borrowed from Claudius de Saints Claud.
Saint. d. Euchar. Repet. 10. cap. 1.
, is against the letter of the Text: and if it be admitted, then it will
follow, That it is not necessary to drink the blood of the Son of man,
implicitly and vertually: and the reason why Christ names bread alone, verse.
51. is, in opposition to Manna: for the Son of Innocent. Papa. d. Offic.
Miss. li. 4. ca. 21. Est modus sumendi corpus and sanguinem, quo neutrum
manducatur and bibitur.
, and because he was the spiritual Life, and food of man's soul, by donation
of his Word and Grace; and herein excelled Manna, which was only corporal
bread. But in the sacred Eucharist Christ is represented, as having perfected
man's salvation, and this representation is made by two sensible signs, wherein
his suffering of death, by separation of body and soul, and of body and
blood, is visibly proposed: and whosoever receives him Sacramentally, as he
was sacrificed on the Cross, must receive him by

As for the Jesuits instance in the manner of Baptising, whether by plunging
or by sprinckling, the same is not to purpose: For in our Question, the Dispute
is, about taking away one of the Elements and material parts of a Sacrament:
in Baptism only a circumstance, in the manner of applying and using the
Element, was altered by the Church. But from alteration of a thing accidental,
or of circumstance, to infer a liberty to

IESVIT.. 5. against the Practice of the Primitive CHVRCH.
Certain it is, that the Primitive Church did very often and frequently use
Communion under both kinds, so that Lay men had by prescription a right Ad
bibendum poculu^ Domini iure communicationis admittimus Cypr. l. Ep. 2.
to receive in both kinds, yea, they were bound thereunto

ANSWER.
f Cyprian. Ep. 54. Quomodo docemus aut prouocamus eos, in confessione nominis
Id. Epist. 63. Quomodo possumus propter Christum sanguinem sundere, qui
sanguinem Christi (...) scimus bibere.
THe Primitive Church, in all her public Assemblies and congregations,
administered the holy Eucharist to the people in both kinds perpetually, and not
frequently only, or often (as the Iesait minseth.) And Justin Martyr says
Read before, page 482.
, That the Apostles prescribed this, as commanded by Christ: Cyprian Cyprian.
sermon. d. Caena. Dom. and Epist. 63. A Domino praecipitur, and ab Apostolis eius
idem confirmatur, and ab Euangelicis praeceptis omnino recedendu^ non esse, and
eadem quae magister docuit and fecit, Discipulos quoque obseruare and facere
debere, cum in claritate sua, and Maiestate coelesti, venire caeperit, inueniat
nos, tenere quod monuit, obseruare quod docuit, facere quod fecit.
has these words, Lex esum sanguinis prohibet, Euangelium precipit vt bibatur;
Whereas the old Law forbade the eating of blood, the Gospel commands to
drink the blood: and in his 63 Epistle, Many Bishops, etc. depart not from
that which our Master Christ commanded and performed ( Praecepit and iussit)
but others of ignorance and simplicity, In Calice Dominico sanctificando, and
(...) ministrando, In consecrating and ministering the Cup to the people, do
not that which Christ our Lord and God performed and taught. Petrus de
Occhagauia says Occhagauia. d. Sacram. d. Euch. vsu and effect. tr. 2. nu. 14.
Cyprianus vt legenti (...) non habet verba illa, and plebi ministrando.
, that the words, Et plebi ministrando, Cyprians. But this man went by
hearsay, as appears both by the elder and later Edition Cyprian. ll. 2. Ep.
3. In the beginning of the Epistle Printed at (...) (...) 542.
of Cyprian: And that this was the constant Doctrine of this Father, is
manifest by other places cited in the Margen Pammel. Cypr. Epist. 63.
. Therefore it is palpably untrue which the Jesuit venteth, They were bound
thereunto by Obligation of Custom, and not by Divine Precept.

IESVIT.
Also because the Manichees, being impiously per suaded (...). de Here Is. 46.
that wine was the gall of the prince of darkness, did superstitiously
abstain from the Chalice. The Church in detestation (...). Ser. 4. d.
Quadrages.
of this error, commanded, for a time, Communion under both kinds: Upon which
ocasion Gelasius Pope made Gelas. apud Gratian. d. Consecrat. Cap. (...).
the decree recorded by Gratian, aut integra Sacramenta suscipiant, aut ab
integris arceantur. And why, because (...) qua superstitione docentur astringi,
that is were superstitious, not abstaining out of any devotion, but out of
impious persuasion of the impuritie of Gods creature. Wherefore the crime with
which some Protestants charge us, That our receiving under the sole form of
Bread, is to iumpe in opinion with the Manichees, we may (as Doctor Morton
confesses) reject as injurious, (...). (...) appeal, li. 2. ca. 4. 140.
saying, That it was not the Manichees (...) Cyprian (...). de Coena Domini.
says, That the Law (...) the eating of blood, but the (...) commands the
same should be drunk, not only because some Christians, to wit, Priests are
bound to (...) the Blood of Christ, but also because Christ in his (...) did
(...) the Sacrament of his Body and Blood in both kinds. Whence grew the
custom of the Primitive Church, to receive in both kinds, and by custom there
grew further,

ANSWER.
One error begets another. It was formerly said, that Communion in both kinds
was used by the Fathers, as a matter of custom only, and not because of
precept: now it is added, Prateol. d. Haer. li. 11. Manichaei a manete quodam,
etc. dicti sunt qui circa annum 273, etc.
, Communion in both kinds was in practice, as appears by the Apostles, and by
Ignatius, Dionysius, Justin Martyr, Ireneus, Tertullian, (...), and Saint
Cyprian Floruit (Cyprianus) an. 250. Bell. d. Scriptor.
.

Secondly, although Pope (...) Lev, Sermon. 4. d. Quadrag. Cum ad tegendum
infidelitatem sua^ nostris audent interesse mysterijs, ita in Sacramentoru^
Communione se tempera^t, vt interdum tutius latea^t, ore indigno Christi corpus
accipiunt,
in his Sermon speaks of the Manichees, yet Vasques Vasques. in 3. disp. 216.
cap. 4. nu. 42. Ego existimo neque propter Manicheorum, Haeresin, commendatum
fuisse ab Apostolis, aut a Leone primo vsum Calicis, etc. Leo non commendauit
vsum Calicis contra Manichaeos, fed admonuit vt diligenter obseruarent quosdam
Manichaeos, qui vt se Catholicos simularent, ita sumebant Calicem, vt sanguinem
non haurirent in altera specie.
the Jesuit says, That he commanded not the use of the Cup; because of them,
but required that these Heretics which feigned themselves Catholics, and
came to the holy Communion, receiving the Bread, and taking the Cup into their
hands, pretending that they drunk the Wine, and yet did not, should carefully
be observed.

Thirdly, touching the place of Pope Gelasius Gratian. d. Consecrat. Did. 2.
cap. Comperimus autem, quod quidem sumpta tantummodo corporis sacri portione a
Calice sacti cruoris abstineant. Qui proculdubio (nescio qua superstitione
dicuntur astringi) aut integra Sacramenta percipiant aut ab integris arceantur,
quia diuisio vnius, eiusdemque mysterij sine grandi sacrilegio, non potest
prouenire.
, the same Author says Vasques Disp. 216. cap. 6. nu. 76. Quidam probabiliter
explicant de Laicis Manichaeis, qui communicabant sub altera specie tantum,
etc. Verum haec explicatio, licet reliquis verbis (...) accommodari possit,
extremis tamen quibus causam reddit, non potest conuenire. Ill is enim denotat,
tale esse my sterium secundum
, That whereas some of his part apply the same to the Manichees, yet this
exposition agrees not with the last branch of the Canon; for therein Gelasius
teaches that the Leo and Gelasius, by a most intelligent and learned Doctor
of his own society.

IESVIT.
And as this is certain and granted on our part, so it is no less certain
that the Primitive Church did never practice the use of the Cup, as pertaining
to the essential integrity of the Sacrament, or as commanded by divine
precept, but thought the recoiuing under one and both

First, is the confession of our Adversaries, amongst (...). (...). Confess.
fid. Cath. ca. 19. Hospin. Hist. sacra. pa. 2. fo. 112.
the fear of God before his eyes, be dares not censure the Roman Church of
Heresy in this point. Hospinian writes that some Protestants confessed that
whole christ was really present, exhibited, and received under every kind, and
therefore under the only form of Bread: and that they did not judge those to
do evil that communicated under one kind. Melancthon, As to eat, or not to
eat Swines flesh, (...). in 2. Edit. loc. com. Impress. Argent. ann. 1525.
fol. 78.
is placed in our power, and athing indifferent, so (says Luther, They finne
not against Christ, who use (...). de Captiu. Babylon. ca. d. Euchar.
one kind, seeing Christ does not command to use it, but has left it to the
will of every one. And Hospinian alleges Hospin. Histor. sacr. 1. 2. fo. 12.
Luther, affirming, It is not needful to give both kinds, but the one alone
suffices: the Church has power of ordaining only one, and the people ought
to be content therewith,

But these testimonies though they may serve to stop the mouth of a clamorous
Adversary, yet are they not sufficient to satisfy any iuditious man, in
regard their Authors were men most uncertain and various in their Doctrines
about Religion, now auerring as Orthodox and divine Truth, what soon after
they fell to abhor as heretical and impious.

ANSWER.
Concerning Luther, Melancthon, Johannes Perzibram, etc. I answer, that your
benefactor Coccius (to whom you are perpetually indebted for your readings)
alleges some such sayings out of these Authors, but how truly it is
uncertain; for in the ordinary editions, I find the contrary delivered by
them Luther. Edit. Wittenberg. anno 1546. d. Captiuit. Babil. d. Euchar. pa.
95. col. 2. Sivtra species potest negari Laicis poterit and eis pars Baptismi
and poenitentiae tolli. Sivini speciem potest Ecclesia tollere Laicis, potest
and panis speciem tollere, etc. Melancth. Loc. Edit. 1561. Lipsiae pa. 188.
Iuel. Reply. ar. 2. These godly learned men, when they saw that through the
malice of their (...), they could not obtain, that Christ's Institution might
universally
. ^

IESVIT.
I add therefore, secondly, the definitions of the three general Councels
celebrated before the breach of Luther from the Roman Church. The Council of
Florence, wherein Council. Floren. in decreto Eugenij. 41.
were present the Grecian and Armenian Bishops, where (...) is defined, that
Christ is whole under each (...). The Council of (...), though they allowed
the use Council. Basilien. sess. 30.
of the Cup (...) the (...), defined the lawfulness of Council. Constantiens.
sess. 13.
example unto both these former Councels, being the first that defined this
truth.

ANSWER.
You add nothing of any worth, for the Councels of Constance and Basil were in
your own eyes vncanonical and he adlesse, and are rejected by your selves in
diverse articles Constable. Council. sess. 4. Basil. sess. 33. decree, That the Pope
is inferior to the Council, and fallible in his iudgeme nt.
: and Ad Calendas Graecas) that the three Synods, named by you, were general
Counsels, it shall be granted that Communion in one kind is not destitute of
general Synodicall late Testimony.

IESVIT.
The third argument, is the received and allowed general custom of the
Church, which spontaneously even before the Council of Constance, did abstain
from the Cup, Alexander Halensis (who lived two Halens. 4. p. q. 11. (...). 2.
a. 4. 55: 3.
hundred years before the (...) of Constance) says, That almost every
where, Lay men received under the Bid does signify, Beda, Hist. Gent. Anglic.
lib. 2. c. 5. and lib. 4. c. 14.
That in the Church of England, ever since the first (...) of her under S.
Gregory, was used (...) under one kind for the Laity: which could never have
entered into the Church, without being (...) and marked as an Heresy, had not
the Church ever held Communion under one or both kinds, as a thing of
indifferency.

ANSWER.
The Greek Church always received in both kinds (as your selves acknowledge)
(...) before, page 482.
therefore Communion in one kind was at no time an universal Custom. Also
Vasques Vasq. disp. 216. cap. 3. nu. 38. Negare no^ possumus (...) in Ecclesia
Latina fuissevsum vtriusque speciei, and vsque ad tempora Sancti Thomae durasse.
the Jesuit says, We cannot deny, but that even in the Latin Church,
Communion in both kinds was used, and had continuance until the age of Thomas
Aquinas. Alexander de Hales affirms Alex. Hal. 4. q. 10. m. 4.. 1. Sumpto hoc
Sacramento digne in (...) specie, mayor est effectus vnionis corporis Mystici
cum capite quam sumpto sub altera. Ibid. q. 11. m. 2. ar. 4.. 3. Sumptio sub
vtraque specie; quem modum fumendi tradidit Dominus, est maioris efficaciae,
and complementi. Item, Licet illa sumptio quae est in accipiendo sub vna specie
sufficiat, illa tamen quae est sub duabus, est maioris meriti, tum ratione
augumentationis deuotioris, tum ratione fidei dilatationis actualis.
, There is more Merit and power of Grace in Communion in both kinds, than in
one.

Lastly, you were guided with that Spirit which is mentioned 3. Kings 22. v.
21. when you affirm, That venerable Bede says, in the Church of England, ever
since her first Conversion under S. Gregory, Communion under one kind was in
use for Beda, Hist. Anglorum, lib. 4. c. 14. pa. 132. Expectare habes, donec
Missae celebrantur, ac viatico Dominici corporis and sanguinis, accepto sic
infirmitate simul and morte absolutus, ad aeterna in coelis gaudia subleueris.


IESVIT.
The fourth Argument is drawn from many signs and tokens, that the Primitive
Church did sometimes use Communion under one kind. First, the (...) received
under Serapion, related by Eusebius, and the Graecians Eusebius. li. 6. Histor.
ca. 36. ex Epist. Dionis. Alex. ad Fabium. Genebrardus. Paulinus in vita
Ambrosij.
at this day though they give the Cup to the Communicants in the Church, yet to
the sick they send the Sacrament under one kind. Yea S. Ambrose, as Paulinus
relates in his life, at his death received the Sacrament under the sole form
of Bread, and straight after the receiving thereof gave up his soul.

ANSWER.
First, touching Serapion, related by Eusebius, he received both Eus. Hist li.
6. c. 36.
Bread and Wine: for the ladde which brought the Portion of the Eucharist, was
commanded by the Priest, which sent him (...), to sop the Bread into Wine, and
being moistened, to put it into the old man's mouth; and this was performed
accordingly, (...), Particula^ puer quam apportarat (...) sieve intinctam in
(...) senis (...).
the ladde wetted, or moistened the Portion of Serapion the old man's mouth; and
the Council of Towers, alleged by Burchardus and Iuo Burchard. and Iuo.
(...) vt Eucharistia quae in viaticum ex (...) reseruatur, (...) sit in
sanguinem Domini, vt veraciter presbyter (...) possit, corpus and sanguis
Domini Jesus Christi, prosit tibi in vitam aeternam.
, reports the manner and reason of dipping the Bread in this sort: We
command, That the Eucharist which is (...) to be given sick Persons, shall be
dipped into the blood of our Lord, that the Priest may say in truth, The body
and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ profit thee to life eternal. Which dipping
shows that they thought it not sufficient to give the sick only the Bread.

Secondly, if Paulinus (of whom Erasmus Erasm. Censura ante opera Ambr. Ide^
est Artifex qui tam multa contaminauit in scriptis Hieronimianis and
Augustinianis natus ad hunc ludum.
says, it is the same Hierome and S. Augustine) report truly touching S.
Ambrose, this proves not, That Communion in one kind was in ordinary vfe, but
that S. Ambrose being speechless, and without understanding, and deceasing
instantly after the Bread was put into his mouth Paulin. (...) Ambr. Qui
desce^dens (...) Sancti Domini corp' quo accepto vbi glutiuit emisit spiritu^.
, and consequently being prevented by death, received (by reason of this
accident) one material part of the Sacrament only.

IESVIT.
Secondly, it was an ancient custom in the Church to Tertul. li. 2. ad (...).
ca. 5. Basil. Epist. ad Caesar. (...). Pratum (...). ca. (...).
give the Sacrament unto Lay men, especially unto Eremites, to be carried in
most pure linen corporalls home to their houses, to be taken in the morning
before all other meats,

ANSWER.
It was an ancient custom to send the Communion to Persons absent, in both
kinds, as appears by the History of Exuperius, in S. Hierome Hier. tom. 1.
Ep. 4. Nihil Exuperio ditius, qui corpus Domini canistro vimineo, saguinem
portat in vitro. Chrysostom. to. 6. Ep. ad Innocent. Etia^ sanguis Domini in
Sacrario seruatur. Niceph. Hist. Ecclesiast. lib. 13. cap. 19.
. And Gregory Nazianzen Greg. Naz. Or. 11. in Laud. Gorgon. page 187. (...).
says of his sister Gorgonia, if her hand had laid up any Portion of the types
or tokens of the precious body, and of the blood, etc. And as touching sick
persons, Why should we not judge, that the same order and proportion was kept
in sending the Sacrament to them at their houses, as was observed when sick
persons came to the Communion Table or Altar in the Church.

IESVIT.
Thirdly, it was an ancient custom in the Grecian Church, to consecrate the
holy Eucharist on Saturdayes and Conc. Laodicen. Conc. 49. and Trullan. Can. 52.
Sundays; and on the other days of the week to communicate Ex
praesanctificatis, of the praesanctified form st hat

ANSWER.
The Office of the Greek Church, making mention of the (...). Graec. Biblioth.
sanct. Patr. Sacerdotem postqua^ sanctificauerit Pane^, infundere Vinu^ in
(...), and A quam, and (...), etc.
, names Bread and Wine: For thus we read in the same, That after the Priest
has sanctified the Bread, he powers Wine and Water into the sacred Cup, and
rehearses the accustomed words, etc. And the Liturgy Praesanctificatorum, of
the Presanctified signs, according to Genebrards Genebrard. Liturg. Mist.
(...) consecrat. ex Cretensi codice. Ecce immaculatum corpus ipsius, and (...).
Sanguis hac nunc hora ingredientia in hac me^sa mystica sunt, qua multitudine
celestis exercitus inuisibiliter (...), quorum communionem innocuam tribue
nobis.
(...), Balsamon Balsam. Synod. 6. can. 52. (...).
, upon the 52 Canon of the Synod in Trullo, that both the Elements were
consecrated at least upon two several days in the week; and Baronius Baron.
Anno. 404. Haeretici negant asseruandam (...) Sacratissimam Eucharistiam, quam
videmus non sub specie panis tantum, sed etiam sub specie vini olim recondi
consueuisse. Habes id quoque probatum authoritate B. Gregorij, dum ait, in naui
portasse nauigantes corpus and sanguinem Christi. Dialog. li. 3. ca. 36.
acknowledges, That in ancient times the Eucharist was reserved in both the
kinds: now if it was consecrated and reserved in both kinds, Why should we
imagine, that it was not delivered and received in both kinds?

IESVIT.
Fourthly, the Manichees lived in Rome, and other places, Leo. Sermon. 4. d.
Quadrag.
shrouding themselves among Catholics, went to their Churches, received the
Sacrament publicly with them, under the sole form of Bread: and yet they were
not noted,

ANSWER.
The holy Eucharist in the days of Pope Leo the first was administered in both
kinds, and Romists could never as yet produce any one sufficient testimony or
example, that so much as any one congregation of Christians in ancient times
received in the open Church under one kind. And although the place objected Leo
Leo. d. Quadrages. sermon. 4. pa. 173. ore (...) Christi corpus (...), sanguinem
autem Redemptor is nostri haurire, omnino (...).
does in special concern the Manichees, yet it shows plainly that the
present doctrine and practice of the Roman Church, is not consonant to the
ancient practice of the same Church. Nevertheless, our perverse Adversary
argues against us out of this place of Leo, saying, That if the Communion

I answer: First, The Manichees were espied, and discovered; otherwise, how
could the Pope reprove their practice.

Secondly, Vasques Vasq. in 3. Disp. 216. c. 4. n. 42. vt se Catholicos
simulare^t, ita sumebant Calice^, vt sanguinem non (...) in altera specie.
the Jesuit says, That these Heretics received the Cup into their hand, but
drank no Wine; and among a multitude of Communicants, some few might hold the
Cup to their mouth, and make show of drinking, and yet receive no Wine.

IESVIT.
The last Argument, is practice of the Apostles, that is, of the first
Christians under them, of whom we read in the Acts of the Apostles, Erant
perseuerantes in Doctrina Acts 2. 42.
Apostolorum, and communicatione, fractionis Panis, and Orationibus, speaking
of sucred Eucharisticall Bread, the taking whereof was joined with Prayer,
which Luc. 24.
Bread. That the Bread Christ gave, was Eucharisticall, Accepit Panem and
benedixit and fregit. August. lib. 3. d. Consensu Euangel. cap. 25. Bid and
Theoph. in Luc. Hieron. in Epitaph. Paulae Isych. lib. 2. in Leuit. cap. 9.
and consecrated, the words of the Text insinuate, some learned Fathers
affirm, and the miraculous effect of opening their eyes to know Christ, and
their return to Jerusalem and the Church of the Apostles in all have,
confirms it. That they received at the hands of Christ the Sacrament under one
only kind of Bread, is evident by the context of the Holy Narration, which
says, That in their Expositions, supply (...) want thereof in Scripture; yea,
the Scripture

ANSWER.
Your last Argument is poor and drowsy, and perhaps you (...), sine Calice)
we have drunk well before, and therefore in the conclusion, you give us that
which is worst, John 2. 8.

The Antecedent, or leading part of your Argument, is dubious, and the
Consequence also is infirm. First, you are not able to prove out of the
Texts, Act. 2.42. or Luke 24.30. that Christ and his Apostles in those places,
administered the holy Communion: for there may be Prayer and breaking of Bread,
and yet no Sacrament, 1. Tim. 4. v. 3.4.5. Also the place, Act. 2. Greg. Euang.
Hom. 23. (...). in Act. 2. 42. Eusebius Emissen. ho. 2. Feria. 2. Pasch.
, yea many Pontificians Lyra. in Luc. 24. Accepit panem, benedixit ac fregit,
and porrigebat illis. Sicut consueuerat facere ante passionem: sic enim
frangebat panem, ac si scinderetur cum cultello. Dionis. Carth. in Luc. 24.
Accepit panem and benedixit, non tamen in suum corpus conuertit, sicut in
(...), sed vt moris est benedicere cibum, in quo instruxit nos, vt ante
refectionem benedicatur cibus and potus. Caietan. sup. Luc. 24. Gagneus. sup.
Luc. 24. Cum viderunt assuetam panis (...), agnouerunt eum. (...). Harm. cap.
146. (...). (...). to. 4. lib. 8. cap. 12. Respondet Iansenius and alij,
Christum non prebuisse his duobus Discipulis (...), erantenim imparati, neque
tunc nouerant quid esset Eucharistia, non enim (...) extremae interfuerant.
Willielm. Wids. c. Wiclif. Hie dico quod non habetur ex textu, vel exglossa,
Luc. 24. vel per antiquos doctores, quod ille panis quem Christus fregit post
resurrectionem, fuit consecratus vel Sacramentalis. (...). d. Sacram. d.
Euchar. Disp. 4. q. 2. p. 3. Ad factum Christi in castello Emaus responderi
potest, primo, non constare, Christum confecisse corpus suum, cum Discipuli non
essent dispositi, (...) in fide.
expound these Texts, of common food or bread, and not of the Eucharist.

But if the first Exposition were true, yet Communion in Luc. 24. or by the
Apostles, Act. 2. and consequently, it follows, ^, (...) (...). 2.10, we
understand by a part of the (...), the whole; not (...) wine, or other ^ in the
(...) Texts, making literal mention of bread only, must be understood, as
mentioning a part of the spiritual Feast for the whole.

Neither is there any force in the Argument ensuing, which Ergo; They (...)
bread; for the eyes may be opened by Miracle, Grace, and by Donation of Faith,
Act. 10. 14. without receiving Eucharisticall Bread. The holy Eucharist, is not
a sole or (...) cause of grace, (...) there are other caufes and means
besides: and therefore the Illation is inconsequent, (...) an effect which may
proceed from diverse and fundrie (...) to one special and determinate efficient
cause.

But the Adversary proceeds, saying, That after breaking of bread, Christ
straight way vanished out of their sight, and

The Reader may perceive by these, and other such like writhings of the Text,
upon what foundation Popish Faith is builded. First, The word, Straight ways,
is not in the Narration, Luke 24. Secondly, The receiving a small quantity of
Wine, could neither hinder our Saviors expedition, nor the Apostles journey to
Jerusalem. Thirdly, How appears it, that receiving Eucharisticall Bread, made
the Disciples more agile in (...). 20. 4, and yet they had at that present time
received no Eucharisticall Bread. Yea, on the contrary, the Apostles of
Christ, after the receiving of the holy Eucharist, do all of them fly away
and forsake their Master, Math. 26.58. This collection therefore, The Disciples
hasted to Jerusalem, Ergo, They received the Eucharist, is dissolute, and not
much unlike that of Pope Boniface the eight, God said, Let us make two great
lights, Ergo, The Pope is greater than the

IESVIT.
These be the Warrants that Communion under one kind has, being the greatest
that may be: whereby appears, that the Roman Church is furnished with all
kind of proof in this point, in which she does seem to her Adversaries to be
most forsaken of Antiquity. Now supposing Communion under one kind to be good
and lawful, That the Church could preseribe it, and, That she had just

ANSWER.
All your warrants for half Communions, are mere Impostures, and audacious
words and figments, Commota semel, and excussa men's, ei seruit a quo impellitur
(says Seneca,) The mind which is disordered and put out of frame, becomes a
slave to that which impells it. This is verified in you, you want all kinds of
just defense for your Sacrilege in mangling and dismembring Litigare magis
quam sanari vultis, you choose rather to make war with heaven, than to retract
your error; for they war with heaven, which oppose the Testament of the
Son of God, the Tradition of the holy Apostles, and the practice of the
Primitive Church: and this is your case, although you list not to see it, or
rather seeing, to acknowledge it.

THE EIGHT POINT.
IESVIT.
IT is hard, if not impossible, to

ANSWER.
THe word or name of merit is taken To. 4.4. Deu. 7.10. Secondly, improperly,
largely, and equiuocally, Eccle. 16.15. The first is termed by Schoolmen,
Merit of Condignitie Fauent. 3. sent. d. 18. Disp. 42. ca. 2. Meritu^. d.
Condigno est aliquid, cui ex rigore iustitiae, debetur merces and praemium,
(...) quod si illi non reddatur fit iniuria. Scot. 1. Did. 17. q. 1. ar. 1.
Caiet. 1.2. q. 114. ar. 4. Andrad. Orth. Explicat. lib. 6. page 599. Ipsum
congrui nomen indicat, (...) a (...) meritum esse, cui (...) iure debeatur, sed
quod Dei misericordia, Bellarm. d. Just. li. 1. cap. 21. Fatemur omni merito
respondere mercedem, sed sicut meritum quoddam esse dicimus ex congruo, ita
mercedem quandam esse dicimus ex congruo, quae magis debeatur ex gratia quam ex
iustitia. Vega. d. Iustif. lib. 8. cap. 10. Quandoque stricte and in rigore hoc
verbum capitur, and meritum appellatur actio libera, cui debetur ex iustitia
praemium aliquod, seu merces. A lias vero meritum, large dicitur, actio libera
acceptata ad aliquod praemium, vel ex debito, vel ex pacto, seu condition vel
conuentione, aut simpliciter ex gratia, and generaliter quodcunque opus, quod
impetrat apud aliquem mercedem aliquam, vel praemium, and causa est collationis
ipsius.
; and the latter Merit of Impetration or of Congruitie.

If the Jesuit maintain Merit, according to the first acceptance, Read
before page 172. Durand. 2. d. 27. q. 2. nu. 12. Quod redditur potius ex
liberalitate dantis, quam ex debito operis, non cadit sub merito de condigno
stricte and proprie accepto, vt expositum est. Sed quicquid a Deo accipimus,
sieve sit gratia sieve (...) gloria, sieve bonum temporale, vel spirituale
(praecedente in nobis propter hoc quocunque bono opere) potius and principalius
accipimus ex liberalitate Dei, quam reddatur ex debito operis, ergo nihil
penitus cadit sub merito de condigno sic accepto.
.

If he maintain Merit, according to the second notion, then Popes pardons, and
works of Supererogation cannot be inferred or concluded from the doctrine of
Merit; for how

IESVITS. 1. The Doctrine of Merit declared.
THis Doctrine is much misliked by Protestants as

ANSWER.
CAn any thing be more arrogant and foolish, than for a miserable beggar and
sinner Aug Ep. 106. Pauperego and dolens, qui adhuc terrenae imaginis squalore
concretus sum, and plus de primo quam de secu^do Adam carnis sensibus and
terrenis actibus refero, etc. Jdem. d. Ciuit. Dei, lib. 19. ca. 27. Ipsa quoque
nostra iustitia quamuis vera sit propter very boni finem ad quem refertur,
tamen tanta est in hac vita, vt potius peccatorum
, whose justice is rather in remission of sins, than in perfection of virtues
Rhem. Annot Heb. 6. n. 4. These words make it most clear to all not blinded in
pride and contention, that good works be meritorious, and the very cause of
salvation, so far that God should be unjust if he rendered not heaven for the
same. Altisiod. sum. li. 3. tr. 12. q. 2. Mereri de condigno est facere de
debito debitum, vel de debito magis debitum, ita quod unjust agitur cum eo
nisi reddatur ei quod meruit, Ergo, Deus unjust ageret cu^ eo, nisi reddatur
ei quod meruit. Bell. d. Just. li. 5. c. 16. Res. Non esse temerarium nec
blasphemu^ sed pium and sanctum dicere, Deum fore iniustum si non seruaret
promissa.
, to maintain that God should be unjust, if he rendered not heaven to man's good
works? And yet this proud Doctrine is delivered by the Rhemists, and by some
other Romists.

But our Adversary labors by distinction, to salve this

I answer, If he should maintain, that Good works merit justification or
perseverance, not by their Nature, but by Grace, this distinction would not
free his Tenet from error Ibid. cap. 12. 21.22.
: so likewise it is erroneus to maintain that Good works merit glory by
Grace; for that which is of Merit, is not of Grace Andrad. Orthod. Explic. lib.
6. page 518. Paulus cum demonstrare statuit Abraham fide fuisse instificatum,
and non ex operibus, hac vna potissimum id ratione efficit, ei qui operatur
merces non imputatur secundum gratia^, sed secundum debitum, Ergo si iustitia
Abrahae esset operum, illius merces, debitum sane potius, quam gratia dici
debuisset.
but of debt. And divine grace does not eleuate virtuous actions, by adding
unto them a force of meriting Gregor. Arimin. 2. Sent. d. 17. q. 1. ar. 2.
, but only by making them susceptible of a free and liberal reward, and by
placing Paul says, Romans 8.18 Durand. 2. d. 27. q. 2. nu. 3. Inter opera
meritoria maxim videntur esse meritoriae Sanctoru^ passiones, and tamen illae
non sunt meritoriae de condigno. Dicitenim Apostolus ad Romanos. 8. Non sunt
condignae passiones huius temporis ad futuram gloriam.
. I think that the Passions of this time are not condign to the glory to
come, that shall be revealed in us.

First, the passions here expressed, were Martyredomes sanctified Phil. 1.29.
and spiritual sacrifices of a sweet smelling savor, 2. Tim. 4. 6. most
precious in Gods sight, Psalm. 116.15.

Secondly, Condignitie or Worthiness, equal in desert or value to the reward
of glory, is denied unto them: but where there is inequality between the
work and the reward, and where the reward is of Grace, and the work of debt,
there is found no proportion of Condignitie. Origin Origin. Sup. Romans 4. Vix
mihi suadeovllum opus esse posse, quod ex debito remunerationem Dei deposcat.
Chrysostom. in 2. Cor. Hom. 23. Deus hoc in mercedem imputat; non quod justice nobis
debeat, sed quod misericors est, and pius.
says, I can hardly persuade my self, that there can be any good work
Augustine August. tr. 3. in Ioh. Non pro merito quidem accipies vitam aeternam,
sed tantum pro gratia.
, Thou shall not receive eternal life for thy Merit, but only for Grace.
Andreas Vega Vega. Opusc. quest. 4.
says, That many Schoolmen, to wit, Gregory Arimine Gregor. (...). 1. d.
17. q. 1. ar. 2.
, Durand Durand. 1. d. 17. q. 2. and lib. 2. d. 27. q. 2. and lib. 3. d. 18. q.
2.
, Marsilius Marsil. 2. q. 18. ar. 3.
, Waldensis Waldensis. d. Sacram. tit. 1. cap. 7. nu. 5. Pelagiana Haeresis
quod Deus secundum mensuram operum meritoriorum praemiabit hominem sic
merentem, etc. Reputo igitur saniorem Theologum,
, Burgensis (...) sup. Psalm. 35.
, Eckius Eckius. Centur. d. Praedest.
, etc. reject the Romish doctrine of merit of Condignitie, Dionisius
Cistertiensis does the like Dionis. Cistert. lib. 3. Sent. Dift. 1. q. 2. ar.
3. and li. 4. d. 43. q. 3. ar. 1. Cum dicitur iste puta Socrates (...) vitam
aeternam, duplex potest esse Sensus, primus. Illi ex valor operis sui debetur
illud praemium vltimum, scz. vita (...). Secundus, Socrates meretur vitam
aeternam, id est, Socrati gratiose praeparauit Deus, non solu^ opus quod
vocatur meritum, sed etiam pro illo opere praeparauit (...) (licet mere (...))
aliud (...) long melius, (...) vitam aeternam, sicut dicit Apostolus ad Romans
6. Gratia Dei vita aeterna, Quia non solum secundum opera sed secundu^
propositum, and gratiam quae est data nobis in Christo (...) nos (...). 2. Tim.
1.
. Brulifer says Brulif. 2. d. 27. q. 6. (...) purus viator ^ mereri coelestem
gloriam de condigno, (...) meretur tantum meretur illam de congruo. Et ista
opinio est valde deuota and fulcitur multis authoritatibus.
, It is a very devout (...). d. lib. Arbit. lib. 5. page (...). (...).
^ (...). in Math. 20 voca (...), etc.
(...) of ^ (...). Aduert in 8. to. Aug. (...). 13. Scotus negat meritum de
condigno, and tenet quod vltra gratiam tale opus acceptaturad gloriam.
(...). And (...) (...). in 1. 2. (...). 213. cap. 6. nu. 31. Qui (...) equum
pro obsequio, (...) pecunia (...) valoris, (...) praetium and valorem (...),
aut (...), pro quo illum esset pollicitus, sed eodem modo (...) quod daretur ex
promissione illud minimum praetium and ^, and (...) non intercessissent.
the Jesuit (...). That the Roman Church has not hitherto determined
expressly the question of (...) of condignitie: and the same author, with
others (...). in 1. 2. q. 114. ar. 10. Meritum de congruo, non est meritum
simpliciter sed improprie and secundum (...) Orth. Explic. lib. 6. page 509.
Vasques. 1. 2 disp. 214. ca. 5. h. 26. (...). d Praedest. and Reprob. 3. page
299. Sicut si magnus Monarcha alicui propter (...) promitteret and daret statum
Regium, quis non dixerit hoc totum esse gratiam Principis?
(...); That Merit of congruitie is not truly, properly, and simply Merit, but
(...) quid and nomine tenus, comparatively, and in appellation only. (...). 1.
d. 17. ar. 1. Posito tali habitu (Charitatis) adhuc meritum est multo infirmius
and minus (...) quam (...), nulla autem iustitia nec commutatiua, nec
distributiua exigunt, vt pro minori bono reddatur magis bonum.
, for a small and imperfect service, and for that which is due unto himself in
right, by many other titles; this reward is not a wages of debt, neither is God
obliged in justice Durand. 2. d. 27. q. 2. n. 18. Qui totum habet ab alio,
totum ei debet, nec potest eum debitorem constituere quod requiritur ad meritum
de condigno.
to bestow it, but it is a reward of Grace and bounty,

Now from hence it is apparent that the doctrine of Merit (taken properly
Durand. ibid. Meritum hominis apud Deum non potest esse meritu^ simpliciter, de
co^digno sed (...) secundu^ (...) diuinae ordinationis: (...) scilicet, vt homo
id consequatur a Deo per suam operationem quasi praemium vel (...).
) is not Catholic or infallible, and therefore if Popes pardons depend upon
the same, a worme-eaten post is made the pillar and supporter of this
moath-eaten rag

IESVIT
The first grace is (...), because God out of his own (...) and his actions
(...) a ^ ^ without which Ordination, no (...) or correspondencie with (...).

ANSWER.
By Divine preordination, virtuous actions have reference (not of desert, but
of disposition, and isntrumental efficiencie or manuduction) to beatitude, or
the last supernatural (...) and according to Saint Bernard (...). d. lib.
(...). Si (...) appellentur ca quae (...) nostra merita, ^ ^.
, they are Via regni, non causa regnandi, The way to the heavenly Kingdom, but
not the (meritorious) cause of reigning.

IESVIT.
The second, is the Grace of Redemption by Christ Jesus, without whom, we and
our works are defiled, we being by nature the children of wrath, and should
be so still, had not he by his Passion and Death appeased God, (...) us the
inestimable treasure of his merits: so that, In illo, benedixit nos Deus omni
benedictione spirituali Ephesians. 1. 3. and 7.
in caelestibus, in quo habemus redemptionem per sanguinem eius, secundum
diuitias gratiae suae quae superabundauit in nobis.

ANSWER.
The grace of Redemption appeaseth God, and purchased for us the fruit and
inestimable benefit of Christ's Merits, both for remission of our sins, and
for our Sanctification. But (...). d. Colonia. Quest. Magistral. q. 363.
Satisfactio est redditio eius quod debetur secundum iustitia^.
, is all one, as if one would infer, saying, Christ Jesus has redeemed us by
his Passion, and he communicates to us the grace of Redemption, Ergo, Christ
Jesus has made us Redeemers.

IESVIT.
The third is grace of Adoption in Baptism, whereby souls are supernaturally
beautified by participation of the divine nature; whence a triple dignity
redounds unto Works, one by the grace of Adoption from God the Father, who in
respect of this Adoption regards good works as the works of his children;
Another is from God the holy Ghost Romans 8. 26.
unspeakable groans: The last dignity is from God the Son, Christ Iefus,
whose members we are made by Grace; so that the works we do, be reputed not so
much ours as his, as the work of the particular members is attributed
principally unto the head.

ANSWER.
By the grace of Regeneration and Adoption, the divine Image is imprinted in
the soul, 2. Pet. 1. 4. Ephesians. 4.24. and a dignity of goodness Bellar. d.
Iustif. li. 1. ca. 21. Speaking of the merit of congruitie or impetration.
(...) meritum inchoatum and imperfectum, and habet aliquam dignitatem and
proportionem ad suum finem, sed non tantam quantam requirit meritum de condigno.
redounds to virtuous actions from the three persons of the Trinity. But hence
it follows not, Ergo, Good works merit in condignitie: for although Christ
Jesus and the holy Ghost work in righteous People, and the virtuous deeds of
these Persons are in some sort reputed the works of Christ; yet because the
divine Persons work in them according to a certain degree, and measure of
grace, and not according Vasq. 1. 2. Disp. 214. ca. 7. (...). 44. Cum opera
nostra non alia ratione tribuantur Christo, tanquam capiti mystico, nisi quia
ab eo accipimus gratiam, iustitiam and auxilia omnia, nequaquam autem sicut
elicienti illa, fit vt minime accipiant dignitatem, neque dignitatis
incrementum a Christo, sed solum a persona ipsa eliciente suam (...) iustitiae
and Sanctitatis. Alioquin (...) nostra opera esse infiniti valoris, etc. Tapia.
d. Incarnat. Christ. q. 21. ar. 10. Vt recte docet Caietanus quamuis ea
satisfactio capiti Christo innitatur; non tamen recipit eandem cum
satisfactione Christi aequalitatem, sicut imperfecta participant quidem a
perfectis esse, and posse, non tamen illis aequantur Nec veto digitus, quamuis
(...) influxum a (...), plenam eius vim and perfectionem recipit, and quidem si
satisfactio hominis iusti vt est membrum Christi, est perfecta simpliciter, and
, or as immediately producing them, it is inconsequent to say: Good works are
produced originally by the holy Ghost, and they Ergo, they have the total
Perfection (to wit, of meriting and satisfying) which Christ's own Personal
works had. The foot of man is united to the head, and the head makes
influence into it: nevertheless the whole perfection of the head, is not in
the foot, and the foot does not understand, because the head understands; nor
sees, hears, or smells, although these senses are (...) in the head. So
likewise every just person is united to Christ, and is spiritually sanctified
by the Grace of the holy Ghost: but this motion and

IESVIT.
The fourth is Grace praeuenient, whereby God stirs up in us thoughts and
affections to good and pious works: and grace adiuuant to help us in the
performance of these desires, making our free will produce works that are
supernatural in their very substance, and above the capacity of man.

ANSWER.
The free will of man, by the power of praeuenient, adiuuant, and subsequent
Grace, produces works which are supernatural in their kind: but yet this free
will being Principium vulneratum Bonauentur. 3. d. 20. q. 4. Vicium humanae
originis nunquam seperatur a carne peccati.
, an original root, or beginning of Action, which was wounded with sin, and
is in this life cured only in part, it always retayneth some remainders of
inborne infirmity, and consequently the good Actions produced by it, attain
not the fulness of Perfection, but there is found in them some haereditary
stain or limping Greg. in 2. Psa. Poenitential. Sancti viri licet magnis iam
virtutibus polleant habent tamen adhuc de culpae obscuritate quod (...), and
licet iam magna vitae claritate luceant, aliquas tamen peccati nebulas velut
quasdam noctis reliquias trahunt. Hieron. in (...). 13. Aug. Enchir. ca. 64.
Bernard. in (...). Omnium (...). Ser. 1. Vega. d. (...). li. 11. ca. (...).
Cassal. d. Quadrup. Just. li. 3. ca. 23 Read before Page 171. 172. Tertul. d.
Anima. ca. 23. In optimis nonnihil est pessimi, solus enim Deus sine peccato.
. Romans 7. 18, 19, 20.23. Gal. 5. 17. Heb. 12. 1. Hence it follows, that just
men cannot challenge Chrysostom. in Genes. ho. 22. Talis est spiritualis debiti
natura, quod quanto magis (...), tanto (...) debetur.
: for it is his due to (...) without any sin adherent, but righteous Persons
(...). Iam. 3.2. Therefore they can challenge nothing of Debt, or as (...) of
God, but only (...) with humility upon his bounty and (...) Greg. in 1.
(...). Poenit. Non de meis meritis confidens, vt me saluum ^ non de meis
meritis spero.
.

IESVIT.
The fifth, is the Grace of merciful indulgence, in not

ANSWER.
The Lord is content that we make use of our good works for the attaining and
increase of glory. Mat. 25.16.2. Cor. 9. 6. Gal. 6.8. And he requires them
also for many other good ends, Ioh. 15.8. 2. Pet. 1.10. But they may be used
and referred to life eternal, as dispositions and causes impetrant, and not as
causes properly or condignely meritorious. Also it is remarkable, how the
Jesuit in this section, has set fire on his own house: for if we we owe good
works unto God by the titles of Justice, Religion, and Gratitude, What peeping
hole I pray you is left for aspiring Merit to creep in at? The true
application whereof is, That if God exact according to his due, then (upon the
Adversaries own ground) there is no Merit. But if he

IESVIT.
The sixth, is the grace of liberal promise, by which he obliges (...)
himself to reward the good Works of his children according

ANSWER.
First, the promise of God whereby he obliges himself to (...) a benefit to
his People upon their obedience, infers not desert Durand. 2. d. 27. q. 2.
n. 15. Promissio diuina in Scripturis sanctis, non (...) in aliquam
obligationem, sed (...) meram dispositionem (...) diuinae. (...) est (...) quod
(...) non ex debito precedentis operis, sed (...) promissione pre cedente non
quidem (...) ex merito operis de (...) sed solum (...) principaliter ex
promisso. Bassol. 2. d. 27. ar. 4. Sicut si alicuj promitteretur (...). (...)
d. 20. q. 1. Quilibet obligatur ex promisso, Deus autem promisserat, etc. (...)
quod verba Scripturae, etc. non insinuant promissionem ex part Dei, sed
simplicem eius (...) and (...) ^ and sic non est ibi aliquod (...).
or merit on their part, as appears in repentance, whereunto the Lord
promises mercy, remission of sins, and salvation, and obliges himself by
oath, Ezech. 18.31, 32. and ca. 33.11. and yet the benefit conferred is not of
Merit, but of Grace.

d Greg. Papa Moral. li. 9. ca. 27. Si remota pietate discutimur, opus nostrum
poena dignum est, quod remunerari praemijs postulamus.
God Almighty promised to bestow the land of Canaan upon the Israelites, and he
bound himself thereto by oath, Exodus 13. 5. Nevertheless, he gave this good
land to them, not for their own merits, but of his free bounty. Deuteronomy. 7. v.
7, 8, and chap. 9. 5. Secondly, it is false, that God has obliged himself by
promise to reward the good Works of his children according to the desert (...).
Quod. lib. 17. (...). 2. Talis dignitas in Actu nihil est nisi acceptatio
passiua, voluntatis diuinae.
, but not according to their own defert, yea he rewards above desert Greg.
Arimin. 1. d. 17. q. 1. ar. 2. Huic etiam concordat commune dictum Doctorum
dicentiu^ quod Deus praemiat (...) condignum.
, and in part contrary to desert, Ps. 103.10.

Thirdly, the disputation of Schoolmen, whether Gods liberal promise
supposed, the goodness of the work concur partially with the divine promise
to oblige God, is of so great moment, that Vasques the Jesuit says Vasques 1.
2. Disp. 214. c. 5. n. 23. Doctores, etc. bonis operibus secu^dum se dignitatem
negantes, totam dignitarem nostrorum operum referunt in Dei (...) and
acceptationem per Christi merita, quod quidem nihil aliud est, quam veram and
perfectam rationem meriti, solis Christi operibus ascribere.
, They which hold the

IESVIT.
Finally, That Merit attain reward, is required the grace of perseverance:
without which, no man is crowned. And though Good works, strengthened with so
many supernatur all Excellencies, be good stays of confidence, in themselves
considered; yet because we are not sure of our perseverance, no nor altogether
certain that we have good Works, adorned with the former perfections; the
Catholic In sanctorum nos consortium non aestimator meriti sed veniae
quaesumus largitor admit.

ANSWER.
Without perseverance, no man can attain the Crown of Glory, Apoc. 2.10. and
yet, as perseverance it self is the free gift of God, Ierem. 32.40. 1. Cor.
1.8. Phil. 1. 6. so likewise the Crown of Glory, following perseverance, is
of Grace, and not of Merit, Romans 6.23.

Secondly, Good works are stays and supporters of confidence Cyprian. d.
oper. and Eleemos. n. 24. Praeclara and diuina res est salutaris operatio,
solatium grande credentiu^, securitatis nostrae salubre praesidiu^, munimentu^
spei, tutela fidei, medela peccati. Chrysostom. (...). Math. (...). 15. Sicut oleum
accendit Iumen Eucernae: ita and bona opera excitant fidem cordis and dant
confidentiam animae: Idem. in. 2, Cor. Hom. 2. At nos optamus (...) benefactis
habeas fiduciam. Bernard. in Cant. ser. 3. Quantum crescis in gratiam, tanto
dilataris in fiduciam. Greg. Mor. l. 10. c. (...). (...) minus iudicem
formidat, quanto in bonis actibus solidius stat.
, Heb. 3.6. 1. Ioh. 3.21. Psalm. 119. 166. And just men may know that they have
Faith and Good works, Esa. 38.3. Ioh. 29.14. Psalm. 119.22, 67, 100, 110, 112,
157, 166. Also they are regenerate, of immortal seed, 1. Pet. 1. 23. And he
that is begotten of God, overcomes the world, and keeps Ioh. 5. v. 4. 18.
And so by Grace, they are enabled to persevere to the end, Phil. 4.13. Ioh.
4.14. and 6.37. 2. These. 3.3.

Thirdly, Although all good Christians are studious of Good works, 1. Ioh.
3.7. Mat. 7.17. John 15.5. yet no true Catholic Christian glories or
confideth in his own Merits Bern. sermon. 1. fest. om. sanctor. Quid potest esse
omnis iustitia (...) coram ^ velut pannus (...) districte iudicetur, iniusta
inuenietur omnis iustitia nostra and minus habens. (...) ergo de peccatis erit,
quando ne ipsa quidem per se poterit respondere iustitia? Proprerea (...) cum
Propheta clamantes, ne intres in (...) cum seruo tuo Domine, tota humilitate ad
(...) quae sola potest saluare animae nostras.
, or expects salvation for his own deserts. And the reason hereof, Aug.
Psalm. 149. Est quidam modus in conscientia gloriandi, vt noueris fide^ tuam
esse sinceram, noueris spem tuam esse certain noueris charitatem tuam esse sine
simulatione.
, but a true understanding of his own (...), to Merit condignely at Gods hand,
and of his own unworthiness (even supposing the state of Grace, etc.) to
receive the Crown of Glory, by any other purchase, than by the free donation
and Merit of Christ Aug. (...): lib. 9. cap. 13. Vae etiam (...) vitae, si
remota misericordia discutias eam, etc. ^ Psalm. 142. Noli mecum (...) iudicium
Domine Deus mi. (...) rectus mihi videar, producis tu de thesauro tuo regulam,
^.
, Luke 17.10. Romans 6.23. Psalm. 143.2.

IESVIT.
Did Protestants know that we require all these divine (...) to make any work
meritorious, did they well also (...) how singular and excellent these favors
are, they (...) not perchance wonder, that Works graced with so many
supernatural excellencies, should have some proportion with the heavenly
reward. And so dealing with your

ANSWER.
Protestants are not ignorant what Romists require, to make Works meritorious;
but withal, they understand that the seven Graces rehearsed by you in this
place, are not sufficient to infuse a (...) causalitie or efficiencie intothem.

c (...). 2. d. 27. q. 2. n. 10. Et (...). (...). 1. 2. Disp. 214. c. 1. n.
(...). Eo quod merita and opera (...) dicantur semen vitae aeternae ac proinde
metaphorice solum dicenda sint (...) non (...) ratione nisi (...) Deus (...) vt
(...) vitam (...). (...) 3. d. 20. q. 1. Nulla (...) obligationis, tenetur Deus
cuicunq, (...) Ib. q. 2. Hoc est (...) sibi debitum and debitorem.
And some proportion with the heavenly reward, makes not virtuous actions to
be condignely meritorious: for there is proportion of Order, yea, of
isntrumental causalitie, and of means to the end, and there is proportion of
Equality, or (...). The first kind of proportion makes not the cause or
means meritorious, as appears in Faith and contrition, in respect of
remission of sins; and of Regeneration, (...) respect of the heavenly
inheritance; and there was some (...) between the (...) through the
Wilderness

His (...) therefore, being of a (...) judgment,

And to conclude this Paragraph, I desire ingenious Readers, not to be abused
by the equivocations of Romists, who wilfully pervert the Testimonies of
Counsels, and Fathers, to establish the erroneous Doctrine of Merit of
condignitie: for Andreas Vega Read Vega d. Iustif. l. 8. c. 6.7.8. And my
Defense of my Brother D. John White, pa. 40. and 41.
observes, they often apply the word Merit, to Actions, in which there is
neither Merit of condignitie nor congruitie.

IESVIT. 2.
WHerefore to come to works of Supererogation; These works, besides the seven
aforenamed graces, suppose another singular favor, and stand grounded thereon.
This (...) is, That God, though (...) might, yet he does not (...) require of
his Saints and

This Divine (...) is noted by Saint Chrysostom (Homil. 21. in priorem ad
Cor,) and excellently declared in these words, Etenim cum benignus sit Dominus
^ (...) words are these only: (...). Verum (...) non (...), (...), si (...)
indulgere.
supplicium, Sednon (...) fecit concedens nobis vt (...) solum ex iussu sed
(...) ex libero faciamus arbitrio.

ANSWER.
God in his bounty and (...) mercy, is pleased to accept of his children,
true and entire obedience, although the same be less in measure and quantity
than his law requires, Chrysostom upon 1. Cor. Hom. 21. affirms, That God
might have imposed upon man a stricter law, to wit, of perpetual fasting,
(...), (...), etc. But now, (...), etc. He has (...) his precepts with
mansuetude, (...), that we might do many things not only by precept, but also
of our own accord.

Now from hence you cannot conclude the Romish doctrine (...). 3.4. And
although God almighty does not (...) (oras simply necessary to August. d.
Fid. and Oper. cap. 7. and 14. and contra Julian. lib. 4. cap. 3. etc. 2.
Epist. Pelag. lib. 3. cap. 5. and d. perf. Just. Resp. ad Rat. 16.
, consisting of Faith and Charity, Gal. 5.6. yet this (...) not the highest
degree of obedience a thing adiaphorous, and of right not due, but serves,
both to declare the riches of Gods mercy, in pardoning our offenses, and also
to humble us before him in the recognition of our unworthiness. S. Bernard
(...). sermon. 2. Vigil. Natiu. Propterea mandata sua mandauit custodire (...),
vt videntes imperfectionem nostram deficere, and non posse impleri quod debet,
fugiamus ad (...) est (...) super (...), and qui non possumus in vestitu
Innocentiae seu (...), apareamus vestiti confessione.
has these words: He has therefore (...) his (...) to be observed (...), or
to the full, that we (...), and falling short, and finding that we (...) to
(...) that which we (...), may (...) to his mercy, and

IESVIT.
Wherefore the Precept, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart,
with all thy soul, with all thy strength, does not command an entire
employment

The first Integrity is in respect of our selves, that we

The second Jntegritie is in respect of God, that we love God according to all
his Commandments, not leaving any unkept; and so to love God entirely, or with
all the heart, is the same as to walk in all his Commaundents.

The third Jntegritie, is in regard of the effect of Love,

The fourth Jntegritie is, in respect of time, that we love him entirely, not
only for this present life, but also desiring and hoping to see and love him
for eternity.

ANSWER.
We maintain not that the Precept Math. 22.37. Luc. 10.27. obliges man at all
times to an actual imploiment of all his powers and the forces thereof on God,
without conversion to Aquin. 22. q. 44. ar. 4. ad. 2. Dupliciter contingit ex
toto cord Deum deligere, vno quidem modo in actu, id est, vt totum cor hominis
semper actualiter in Deum feratur, and ista est perfectio patriae: Alio modo,
vt habitualiter totum cor hominis in Deum feratum, etc.
: But we (...) with S. Augustine Aug. d. Doctr. Christi, lib. 1. cap. 22. Haec
regula dilectionis constituta est, Diliges inquit proximum tuum sicut teipsum:
Deum vero ex toto cord, and ex tota mente, vt omnes cogitationes tuas, and
(...) vitam and intellectum in illum conferas, a quo habes ea ipsa quae
confers. Cum autem ait toto cord, tota anima, tota mente, nullam, vitae
nostrae (...), quae recare debiat, and quasi locum dare vt alia re velit frui,
sed quicquid aliud (...) venerit in animum, illuc rapiatur quo totius
dilectionis impetus currit. Nullum extra se riuulum duci patiatur, cuius
deriuatione minuatur. (...). lib. d. Praef. lust. Resp. ad Rat. 16. Cum est
adhuc aliquid carnalis concupiscentiae, quod vel continendo frenetur, non
omnimodo ex tota anima deligitur Deus. (...). in Cant. Sermon. 20. Greg. sup.
Reg. lib. 3. cap. 1. Bernard.
, and other of the Fathers, three things concerning this Precept.

First, That it commands to esteem, desire, delight in, and to honor God
almighty above all things created, and to subject all our faculties, and the
forces and operations of the same, to his obedience and service.

Secondly, That we ought not to entertain any cogitation, or inordinate motion
in our hearts, repugnant to his Law, or to commit any thing contrary to his
Commandment.

Thirdly, That this Precept obliges all people to the obedience thereof in
this life, for it is the first and greatest moral Math. 22.38. And Christ our
Savior came not to destroy, but to continue and ratify the Moral law, Math.
5.17.

Secondly, Whereas the Jesuit says, God does not require of us things
impossible. I answer, That if he speak of actions and duties simply necessary
to salvation, God (as looking on us in Christ, and through the glass of
Evangelical mercy) requires not of his children things impossible Romans 6.
17. Heb. 11. 33. Genesis 6. 9. Luc. 1. 67. Council. Arausic. cap. 25. Hocetiam
secundum fidem Catholicam credimus, quod accepta per baptismum gratiae omnes
baptisati, Christo (...) and cooperante, quae ad salutem pertinent, possint ac
debeant (si fideliter laborare voluerint) adimplere. Hieron. Expos. Fid. Cath.
and ad. Celant. Epist. 14. Aug. d. Natura and Great. ca. 68.
. But if his meaning be either of unregenerate persons, while they are in that
state, or of things virtuous and holy, according to their highest perfection,
then both Scriptures and Fathers are against him Romans 7.18. Phil. 3.12. (...).
Ioh. 1. 9. Chrysostom. d. Paenit. Sermon. 8. Hieron. c. Pelag. lib. 2. page 130. and
sup. Ierem cap. 17. Aug. d. Great. and lib. Arb. ca. 16. and d. pecc. mer. and
remiss. li. 2. cap. 16. Bernard. Sermon. 2. vigil. Notal. Dom. and in Cant. Sermon.
50. Ergo mandando impossibilia, etc.
.

IESVIT.
And in this sense S. Augustine, S. Bernard, and other Fathers are to be
understood, that say in the Precept, Diliges Aug. d. Spiritu and Litera, ca.
vlt. Bernard. Sermon. 50. in Cantica.
Deum tuum ex toto cord tuo, is contained the perfection of the life to come,
and a perfection impossible to be attained to in this life, to wit, it is
contained in the Precept, not as perfection commanded to be practiced in this

ANSWER.
First, If the Precept, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thine heart,
etc. bind men no further than to an unfeigned or sinceere love of God, and the
observing of his Commandments without breach of friendship, then it binds
them not to the shunning of venial sins. But according to S. Augustine Aug.
d. Spir. and Lit. ca. 36. Veru^ etiam in istis leuioribus, etc.
, and S. Bernard Bernard. in Cant. Sermon. 50.
, it binds man to the avoiding of all sin, both venial and mortal.

Secondly, These Fathers August. ibid. Sed ideo nobis hoc etiam nunc praeceptum
est. Idem. Epist. 200. Bernard. Ibidem. Nec laterit praeceptorem praecepti
pondus, hominum excedere vires, etc. Ergo mandando impossibilia, non
praeuaricatores homines constituit, sed humiles, etc. Accipientes quippe
mandatum, and sentientes defectum, clamabimus in. (...), and miserabitur (...)
Deus, and sciemus in illa die, quia non ex (...) quae (...), sed secundum suam
misericordiam, saluos nos fecit.
teach expressly, that the Commandment, Math. 22. 37. binds men in this
life, as a means to humble them, and to provoke them to sue for Gods mercy.
And if the Adversary reply, That these Fathers say it is a Precept
indicative, or significatiue, what is (...) to be done, but not obligant
Stapleton. d. (...). lib. 6. ca. 10. pa. 190. (...). d. Monach. li. 2. ca. 13.
.

I answer, First, it is the first and greatest Commandment of Math. 22.38. but
the Moral law, and all the Precepts thereof are perpetually obligant.

Secondly, If it bind not, then no temporal pain can succeed the breach
thereof Vasques. d. paenit. disp 94. ar. 1. du. 2. n. 3. Deus (...) punit, qui
iam dignus non est poena: Ergo dicendum est illum manner dignum ex se etiam
post iustificationem.
; but just persons which observe other Commandments, undergo temporal
pain, Heb. 11. 36.37.

Thirdly, S. Augustine affirms Aug. Ep. 29. Quamdiucharitas augeri potest,
profecto illud quod minus est qua^ debet, ex vitio est: ex quo vitio non est
iustus in terra, qui Id. d. verb. (...). Ser. 2. Id. Ep. 26. ad. Hieron.
Propter (...) imperfectionis vitiu^ si dixenmus (...) non habemus, nos ipsos
fallimus, and veritas in nobis non est, ^ profecerimus necessarium est nobis
dicere, dimitte nobis debita nostra, cu^ (...) omnia in Baptismo dimissa sunt:
ex quo vitio non (...) in conspectu (...) omnis viuens.
, That it is sin in man to (...) a less degree of Charity than this law
requires: and Forgive us our Trespasses. But if it were indicative, or
directive only, and not obligatorie, this were not true.

IESVITS. 3. The Fathers taught Works of Supererogation, and proved them by
Scripture.
But they that love God so perfectly, as they love not only his Commandments,
but also his Counsels; not only shun such sins as separate from God, but
also such as binder the perpetual actual love of God. These be they that do
more than they are commanded, that is, do works of Supererogation. And if
your Majesty call to mind upon how manifold graces this Merit is grounded,
you will not, J hope, condemn the same of arrogance, but rather

ANSWER.
THey which do more than God has commanded by his Law, as simply necessarle
to salvation, to wit, they which give all their goods to the poor, etc. exceed
not herein Math. 5.48. by approaching as near toward this Pattern as our
humane frailty will permit, and to love, as Christ loved us, Luke 6.35. Romans
5.7, 8. And there is a threefold kind of Obligation to God: First, of strict
and express Law, common to all persons. Secondly, of particular Precept by
extraordinary Revelation, Genesis 22. 2. Thirdly, of Gratitude, whereby
(according to Saint Bernard Bern. Sermon. d. Quadrupl. debito. Cum ei donauero,
quicquid sum, quicquid possum, nonneistud est sicut stella adsolem, gutta ad
fluuium, lapis ad montem, granum ad aceruum.
) we are indebted, and owe to the Almighty. Omne quod sumus, and omne quod
possumus, Whatsoever we are, and whatsoever we are able to do: Etsi
cognouisses tu quam multa, and quam multis, debeas, videres, quam nihil sit
quod facis; If man did consider how much he owes, and to how many, and by how
many Titles, he would perceive, all that he does (or can do) to be ^ And when

Touching the distinction of Precepts, and Councels BE. Moreton Appeal. lib. 5.
c. 4. Sect. 3. n. 11. Not but that we allow the distinction of Precept, and
Counsel. M. Hooker, Eccles. Policy, lib. 2. n. 8. p. 122. BB. Andrews, c.
Apol. Bellar. ca. 8. p. 196. Muscul. in 1. Cor. 7. Hiperius, in 1. Cor. 7.25.
(...). ibid.
, I answer, That if according to the Tenet of Fathers August. Enchirid. ca.
121. Greg. Nazianz contr. Julian. Orat. 1. Chrysostom. in Math. Hom. 2. and in Romans
Hom. 14. and in 1. Cor. Hom. 22.
, we Aug. in Psalm. 140. Cu^ in Scripturis sanctis contemplatus fueris normam
iustitiae, quantu^cunq, profeceris (...) te peccatorem.
, and presupposing all men to be sinners in part, the former is impossible. And
if our Adversaries will be so graceless, as to make any man in this life
(except the Holiest of Holyes, 1. Pet. 2.22.) free from sin August. sup.
Psalm. 137. timeo ne cum inspexeris, inuenies plura peccata, quam merita. Idem,
d. Cinit. Dei, lib 14. cap. 9. Sine (...) qui viuere se existimat, non id agit
vt peccatum non habeat, sed vt veniam non accipiat. Council. (...). ca. 6. and 7.
, the Apostle enrolleth them in the black Book of Damnable Liars, 1. Ioh. 1.
10. and they may borrow a Ladder with Acesius Constantin. apud Socrat. Hist.
Eccles. lib. 1. cap. 7. (...). Cyprian d. Oper. and Eleemos. n. 3. Quisquis se
inculpatum dixerit, aut superbus, aut stultus est.
, the Nouatian Heretic, and so climb alone up to Heaven, or indeed rather
fall with a breake-necke, down to Hell, Matthew. 9. 13. For who are more
desperately sick, Quam qui mentem febribus perdiderunt, than they, which by
the Fever of Pride have lost the understanding of their own sinful Condition.

IESVIT.
Haymo, a learned Expositor of Scripture, living in the (...) in Euang. Dom.
14. post (...).
year 800, thus writes, Supererogat Stabularius, quando hoc agit Doctor ex
voto, quod non accepit ex Praecepto, quod secit Paulus Apostolus, quando ^
(...), in cap. (...). Luc.
^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^

ANSWER.
You cannot produce one Father, or ancient Doctor, which maintains works of
Supererogation, to your purpose.

Haimo and venerable Bede affirm, That some men do that by Vow, or voluntary
choice (to wit, in some particular Actions) which they are not obliged unto by
strict Precept; and that at the day of Judgment, they themselves (not Souls
in Purgatory) shall reap the benefit hereof (to wit, an accessorie
augmentation of Bliss:) But from a partial Supererogation, to a Ambros. Apol.
David. ca. 2. Vnusquisque nostrum per singulas horas, quam multa delinquit?
(...). (...) Sermon. 7. Quis (...) ita immunis a culpa, vt in co non (...), vel.
(...) quod arguat, vel (...) quod remittat. Basil. li. d. Poenit. Non Angeli
sumus, sed homines, et cadimus and resurgimus, idque saepius cadem hora.
August. in Psalm. 137. Timeo ne cum (...), (...) peccata quam merita. Chrysostom.
in Galath. ca. 6. sicut aurum, etc.
Iam. 3.2.) it cannot be truly said, that he has works of Supererogation, to
be laid up in a

IESVIT.
S. Gregory the Great, in the year 590. alluding to this Greg. 1. 26. Mor. c.
20.
term of Supererogating, more than is received, says: Multi Virginitatis
virtute pollent, vt videlicet plus impendant obsequio quam acceperunt
praecepto. S. Fulgentius in the year 500. Quid est si quid supererogaueris,
Fulgent. Prolog. in lib. contra Monimum.
nisi si quid a me magis acceperis? Nam and ipse qui supererogabat, in eo quod
non acceperat Paulin. Ep. 2. ad Seuerum.
se profitetur vtique consecutum. S. Paulinus in the year 400. Hic Samarites
Christus red diturus est Beatae Virginitati de innumeris huius boni fructibus,
vberes gratias, and immortales Coronas, quia hoc Concilium Praecepto adjiciens,
de suo supererogauit. S. Augustine in the same Age, In illis August. lib. 2. 4.
Euang. c. 30.
(Praeceptis) Dominicis imperat vobis in hijs (Concilijs) And again,
Stabularius autem Apostolus Idem, ibid. cap. 19.
est, duo Denarij duo Praecepta Charitatis, quam per Spiritum secum acceperant
Apostoli, ad Euangelizandum caeteris: Quod supererogat autem illud est quod
ait. De Virginibus autem Praeceptum (...) non habeo, Concilium autem do. And in
another August. d. Adulterin. Coniug. lib. 1. cap. 14.
Book, Quae licita sunt, nec vllo Praecepto Domini prohibentur, sed sicut
expedit potius tractanda in the year 370. Optat. li. 6. c. Parmen.
Sed qui saucium commen dauerat, se promiserat redditurum quicquid in curam
amplius erogasset post impensos duos Denarios, non Praecepta sed Concilium
erogat Paulus. Nec impedimentum est voluntati, Praecepta coniuncta. S. Hierome,
Plus amat Christus Hieron. aduers. Iouin. ca. 7. li. 1.
Virgins, quia sponte tribuunt quod sibi non fuerat impetratum, maiorisque
gratiae est offerre quod non debeas, quam reddere quod exigaris. S.
Chrysostom; Chrysoft. Hom. 8. d. Poenit.
Nequaquam Dominum incuses haud mandat impossibilia, multi rpsa superant
mandata. S. Gregory Nazianzen; Greg. Nazianzen. Orat. 3.
In legibus noftris alia parendi necessitatem imponunt, nec sine periculo
praetermitti possunt, alia non necessitate constringunt, sed in arbitrio and
voluntate S. Cyprian; Non iubet virginitatem Dominus Cyprian. de habitu
Virginum, prope finem.
sed Hortatur, nec iugum necessitatis imponit quando maneat voluntatis
arbitrium liberum. Origin, Origin. in ca. 15. ad Romans
Ea quae supra debitum facimus, non facimus ex Praecepto, verbi causa,
Virginitas non ex debito soluitur,

I will not bring more proof of this Doctrine out of Scripture, which the
Fathers I cited, proved by the words 1. Cor. 7. 25.
of S. Paul, in express terms, affirming, That there are besides Precepts,
works of Supererogation, or Counsels, De Virginibus Praeceptum Domini non
habeo, sed Consilium do. Nor will I allege more Testimonies of Fathers, which
might be produced in great number, most Ambrose, who delivering this Doctrine,
does together Ambros. d. viduis vltra medium.
answer a Protestants vulgar Objection against it. Itaque qui Praeceptum
impleuerint, possunt dicere serui inutiles sumus, quod debuimus facere fecimus.
Hoc Virgo non dicit, non dicit qui bona sua vendidit, sed Luc. 17. verse. 10.
quasi repofita expectat praemia, sicut sanctus Apostolus ait: Ecce nos
reliquimus omnia, and secuti sumus Matthew. 19. verse. 17.
te, quid ergo erit nobis? Sunt enim Spadones quise Ibid. verse. 12.
castrauerunt propter regnum coelorum, sed hoc non omnibus imperatur, sed ab
omnibus flaguatur, Virgo prouocatur (...), non vinculis alligatur, sed nec
vidua Praeceptum accipit, sed Consilium. What can be more clearly spoken for
works of Supererogation, or Councels?

ANSWER.
If you had examined the place of Gregory Greg. Mor. li. 26. ca. 21. Aliud est
quod per Sacram Scripturam omnibus generaliter precipitur, aliud quod
specialiter perfectioribus Imperatur.
, you might have perceived, that he divides Divine Precepts, into general or
common Precepts, and into personal and special: and the words which you
allege (paring off the rest, because they make against you) wherein he says,
That they which are not judged and reign (Math. 19.27, 28.) do transcend the
Precepts of the Law, by the perfection of their virtues, etc. are understood by
him of general Plus exhibere appetunt, quam preceptis generalibus audire
potuerunt.
of special Commandments: but where a man is obliged by any Commandment,
general or special, there is no Supererogation. And that Saint Gregory was
far from maintaining works of Supererogation, appears by his perpetual
and constant Doctrine, concerning the defect and imperfection of man's
righteousness Greg. Mor. lib. 5. cap. 7.8. and lib. 8. cap. 13. 20. 21. 23.
and lib. 9. cap. 14.27.28. Quantumlibet rectis operibus insudemus, veram
munditiam nunquam apprehendimus, sed imitamur. Et lib. 24. cap. 18. and lib.
29. cap. 9. and lib. 32. cap. 1. and lib. 35. cap. 3.26. and sup. Ezech.
, and his renouncing all confidence in his own worthiness and deserts Idem.
in 1. Psalm. poen. Non de meis meritis confidens, vt me saluum facias supplico,
sed de sola misericordia tua presumens impetrare, quod non de meis meritis
spero.
.

The rest of the Fathers, to wit, Fulgentius, Paulinus, St. Augustine, Optatus,
St. Hierom, St. Chrysostom, Gregory Nazianzen, St. Cyprian, Origin, and St.
Ambrose, mention works of Counsel, and one of them says, It is possible to
do more than is commanded. But this Father speaks not thus, in respect of
all the Commandments of God, for then he must free just persons from all
sin; but in respect of some particular Actions,

The Jesuit concludes the place of Saint Ambrose, Lib. de viduis, with an
Exclamation, saying, What can be more clearly spoken for Works of Counsel
and Supererogation? But before his boasting, he should have advised better
touching these Fathers meaning. First, Ambrose teaches, that there is a
difference Duplex forma mandati, vna praeceptiua, alia voluntaria. Hoc non
omnibus Imperatur.
of Counsels is not required of all, but of some. Thirdly, They which besides
Precepts, observe Counsels, are more profitable servants, and shall receive a
greater reward.

Now the Argument for Works of Supererogation, from Ambrose, must be as
follows.

If they are more profitable servants, and receive a greater reward, which
perform some virtuous and laudable Actions, not enjoined by common Precept,
but by Council; then Works of Supererogation must be granted.

But they are more profitable servants, and receive a greater reward, which
perform some virtuous Actions, not enjoined by common Precept, but by
Council, Ergo,

Works of Supererogation must be granted.

I answer, denying the Consequence: for to the being and the Law of gratitude;
for when the Fathers oppose Precepts and Councels, they understand Precepts
strictly, and not the Law of Gratitude. Secondly, They which supererogate, must
do the same universally, and transcend the common rule in every Precept

IESVIT.
Neither is there any arrogancy, as J said before, in this Doctrine: for
neither the Fathers nor we attribute more unto man than Protestants do; but
only acknowledge of man, that ever, and in all (...), he work according

ANSWER.
First, You couple your selves with Fathers, like as the Pharisees did
themselves with Abraham; Sed quid Simiae prodest, si videatur esse Leo, says
Gregory Nazianzen, An Ape is but an Ape, Greg. Naz. in Sent.
although he will seem a Lion.

Secondly, A man may offer unto God a free will offering, and yet herein he
performs no more than he is obliged unto by the Law of gratitude.

Thirdly, It is no part of our Creed, that God in the Evangelical Covenant
severely exacteth of man any thing, as necessary P. Martyr. sup. Romans 8. Si
quis recte intelligat nostram assertionem, facile videbit, nos non docere
mandata Dei prorsus esse impossibilia, nisi tantum quod ad eos (...), qui a
Christo sunt alieni, pa. 457.
, and yet we say again, That God by the rule of his Law commands a greater
perfection of righteousness than man is able to perform in this life August.
d. pecc. mer. and remiss. lib. 2. cap. 16. Iubet Deus, omnibus hominibus vt
, that all flesh may be humbled by the sight of infirmity, and consider the
gracious indulgence of God, in remitting sin, and his free bounty, in
conferring so great and so many undeserved benefits.

Fourthly, We praise God as much as any Romists can do, for his merciful
indulgence, in remitting, and not exacting so ^ but with all we believe Romans 6.
18. And although he imputes not (...) defects, when we obey him in the maine,
yet this indulgence (...) power to man to merit his own salvation, much less
to supererogate, or to communicate his virtuous actions by way of satisfaction,
unto others.

IESVIT.. 4.
THe other part of this Controversy proposed by your Majesty, about Works
referred unto the Treasure of the Church, concerns good Works, not as they
are meritorious of reward, but as they are satisfactorie for sin: for the
works of Saints, as they are Merits,

ANSWER.
TO the constitution of Popes Pardons, three things are required by the Papals,
and rejected by us. First, Superfluous and redundant satisfactions of Saints
Nugnus. Addit. in. 3. pa. Tho. q. 25. ar. 1. dif. 2. Fides est ita vt (...) sit
haeresis (...), esse thesaurum In Ecclesia, constans ex satisfactiomb
superabundantibus Christi Domini, and fides est ita vt oppofitum sit erroneum,
hunc thesaurum etiam co^stare ex satisfactionibus Sanctorum.
. Secondly, A vast Treasury in the Church militant, to receive and contain
Id. Ibid. Thesaurum dici metaphorice, etc. ad Sgnificandum
. Thirdly, An eminent authority and power in the Popes Antonin. sum. Mor. p.
1. tit. 10. cap. 1. Claues istius thesauri, ad ipsum erogandum (...) habet Papa.
and Prelates of the Roman Church, to communicate and apply the same to the
living and defunct Ibid. Possunt autem valere indulgentiae, secundum Thomam and
Richardum in 4. nen solum viuis, sed etiam existentibus in purgatorio.
. Protestants deny that any member of this Doctrine is Catholic and
Orthodoxall; or that the holy Apostles, or Primitive Church maintained the
same, by teaching, or practice. We affirm also, That the said Doctrine is
novel, and devised by Roman Prelates for filthy lucre (...). (...) in 3. Tho.
q. 25. (...). 1. dif. 1. (...) mihi videtur melius esse ex genere secundum se,
illas (pecunias) confer ad lucrandas indulgentias, etc. pa. 447.
.

The Adversary notwithstanding, labors to underprop

His first Proposition is, The merits of Saints are reserved and laid up in the
memory of God, and not in the Treasury of the Church (...). sum. lib. 4. d.
Relax. per Claues. Ecclesia non solum meretur remissione^ culpae alicui, sed
etia^ remissione^ poenae.
. And on the contrary, the redundant satisfactions of Saints are laid up in
the Treasury of the Church.

But this assertion is voluntary, delivered only, and not (...). Annal. tom.
14. anno 1300. n. 4. Dictoru^ (...) (Petri and Pauli) meritis, omnes animae in
purgatorio, non (...) a poenis fuissent liberatae, sed aeternam quoque gloria^
consecutae.
, as appears in Christ, who is their samplar: and if their Satisfactions are
communicable, why shall not their merits be communicated to other persons
Zerula. d. Indulg li. 1. ca. 18. q. 6. An viuus satisfaciat, vel impetret, vel
meretur per viam iustitiae, etc. Resp. Dico secundo quod etiam per viam
iustitiae 2. Tim. 4. Et sicut viuus pro viuo potest mereri and satisfacere per
viam iustitiae, sic etiam pro defunctis, etc.
? and if this, why may not the Church apply and communicate the one as well as
the other? Popery is a mystery, Apoc. 17.5. And the Canonists say of the
Pope, Stat pro ratione voluntas Vid. Jacob. d. Graph. Decis. Aur. p. 1. li. 1.
ca. 31. nu. 3.
, his absolute will stands for a reason: Et potest aliquid de nihilo facere, he
is able to make something of nothing: otherwise, there is the same reason for
communication

IESVIT.
The Doctrine of Satisfaction, is like the former of Merit,

ANSWER.
We grant the paritie of both Doctrines, in regard of falsehood: and as there is
no Merit of Condignitie, but in Christ

But whereas you say, that many dislike the same without understanding, what
they impugn: this insolent censure is frequent with you; yet we freely grant,
that by mixing Theology, Cornel. (...). sup. Romans 6. page 279. Vigebat spinosa
and molesta nescio quae Theologia, de instantibus, relationibus, de
quidditatibus, de formalitatibus, itemque baec omnia Sillogismis art
contortis, and humanis duntaxtat argutijs, quae proculdubio, qua authoritate
recipiuntur, refelli possunt
, and you are oftentimes so obscure and uncertain in this and many (...)
points, that you understand not your selves. And of our selves we may affirm
without arrogancy, that for ought you are able to demonstrate to the
contrary, God almighty, both by Nature, Art, and Grace, has affoorded us no
less sufficient means to understand truth than your selves.

IESVIT.
First, we do not think that any sinner can make satisfaction

ANSWER.
As you think not the one, touching sinners, so you cannot prove the other,
concerning justified persons; as appears by that which has formerly
beendeliuered in confutation of your error.

IESVIT.
Secondly, we do not teach that any Saint or Angel can make satisfaction unto
God for the mortal sin of any man, no not all Saints and Angels, putting
together all their good Works and Satisfactions. The reason is, because an
injury is so much the greater, by how much the person that offers it is base,
and the person to whom it is offered is noble, as the light of reason and the
estimation of mankind

Thirdly, the Roman Church teaches, That those that have been made the
children of God by Baptism, if they sin mortally afterward, when they
repent, God forgiues hope, by contrition, by purposes of amendment, prepare and

ANSWER.
The Son of God alone is the propitiation for our sins, 1. John 2.2. and
the fault and guilt of sin was purged by the same Oblation. By him, all that
believe, are justified or absolved, (...), from all, Act. 13. 39. Neither are
there two distinct Sacrifices and Ransomes, to wit, the Blood of Christ, Extra.
d. poen. and Remiss. Clemens 6. ca. Vnigenitus. Ad cuius quidem thesauri
cumulu^ beatae Dei genitricis, omniumque Electorum a primo iusto vsque ad
vltimum merita, adminiculum praestare noscuntur, etc. (...). 4. d. 20. q. 4. n.
10. In hoc conueniunt Sancti cum Christo, in his quae fuerunt Supererogationis,
quod aliquid ponunt in thesauro Ecclesiae sicut Christus. Al. Hal. 4. q. 23.
ar. 2. n. 3. Capreol. 4. d. 20. q. 1. ar. 3. Aureol. 4. d. 20. pa. 148. Salmer.
in Coloss. cap. 1. disp. 3. pa. 351. Panormit. 5. Decretal. d. poen. and
Remiss. ca. Quod autem. n. 8. Scire
, together with Christ his sufferings for smaller sins, and for the temporal
pain of mortal. But the Lamb of God bare all our sins in his Body upon
the Tree, John 1.29. 1. Pet. 2.24. and his Blood alone cleanses from all
sin, 1. John 1.9.

Smaller sins and offenses, are a parcel of man's debt to God, and we pray
to God, in the Name, and for the Merits and satisfaction of his beloved Son,
to forgive us our whole debt. Our Savior taught not his Church to pray to his
Father, for a free remission of lesser sins Antonin. Sum. Moral. p. 1. Tit.
10. cap. 3. Palud. 4. d. 20. q. 4. n. 51. Potest, vt videtur per indulgentiam,
in quantum habetrationem cuiusdam absolutionis, remitti veniale quoad culpam.
Viguer. Instit. cap. 16.. 6. verse. 22. Plenissima (Indulgentia) quia non solum
remittuntur poenae mortalium and venialium, sed etiam ipsa culpa venialis
remittitur.
, for our own satisfaction, Psalm. 103.3.) as we forgive our debtours, Math.
6.12.

If therefore our Adversaries teach no more concerning this than what is
contained in this Section, to wit, that no Saint or Angel can make
satisfaction to God for mortal sin: This God, who trod the Wine Press
alone; and of the people, Esa. 63. 3. Ioh. 1.29. 1. Ioh. 2.2.

Secondly, It is a Verity, That regenerate persons (...) sin after Baptism,
are renewed by the virtue of Repentance Chrysostom. in Matthew. Hom. 10. Non est
aliquod omnino peccatu^ quod non cedat poenitentiae virtuti imo gratiae Dei,
cum ad (...) ora conuertimur.
, Luc. 22. 62. But it is erroneous, that there are two distinct kinds of
Repentance, one before, and the other after Baptism; the one a Virtue only,
the other both a Sacrament and a Virtue. For where there is the same
definition, there is also the same thing in kind. But Repentance before, and
after Baptism, has the same definition, and integrall parts, to wit, Matthew.
3.6. Luc. 3.10. Act. 3. 19. and cap. 8.22. and cap. 26.20. Also the Grace, and
promise of Remission, is made to Repentance, before and after Baptism, Act. 3.
19. and 5.31. and 8.22. Apoc. 2. 5. 16. And if Repentance before Baptism, is
no Sacrament, What causes it to be such after Baptism? For no visible
Element, or sign is added, neither is any promise Cor. 5.3. and 2. Cor. 2, 3.
etc. and cap. 7.8. and also the Primitive Church Tertull. lib d. Poenit. cap. 9
Cyprian. d. Lapsis.
, urged a stricter manner and degree of Humiliation upon notorious Delinquents,
after Baptism, than before; yet this Discipline changed not the kind or
substance of Repentance, but increased only the quantity and measure thereof.

IESVIT.
Fourthly, the Roman Church holds, That God by Penance deserve of God the
necessity we have of suffering these voluntary afflictions

ANSWER.
When God pardons a sinner, he does it not by way of Exchange, or Parcelling,
but remitteth all punishment of Malediction, Prosp. Sent. 5. Misericorditer
te^porale^ adhibet seueritatem. Id. Sent. 231. Cum facit vt aliqua tribulatione
vexemur, etia^ tunc misericors est.
: For that which is so forgiven, as that after pardon it is not mentioned, or
remembered, and which is cast behind Gods back, and thrown into the bottom of
the Sea, and which can no where be found, and is blotted out of the Debt-Booke
of the Almighty, is not taken away by commutation of a greater punishment into
a less, but by a free and full condonation of all vindictiue punishment. But
the holy Scripture, and the Primitive Fathers, teach such a remission of sins
on Gods part, to the Penitent, Ezech. 18.22. Esa. 38. 17. and ca. 43. 25. and
44. 22. Mich. 7.19. Ier. 50.20. Heb. 8. Col. 2. 14. Matthew. 18.32. S. Augustine
Aug. sup. Psalm. 31. Sitexit peccata Deus, noluit aduertere noluit
animaduertere, si noluit animaduertere, noluit punire, noluit agnoscere, maluit
ignoscere.
, If God has covered sins, he will not observe, he will not think upon
them, to punish them; he will not take knowledge, but rather pardon. Gregory
Greg. Mor. li. 4. ca. 18.
the Great; Ignoscendo impunita relinquit, By pardoning, he leaves them
unpunished. Cassiodorus Cassiodor. sup. Psalm. 84.
; Remittere est debitum relaxare, non causae alicuius interuentu sed pietatis
intuitu, To remit, is to release the Debt; not by intercourse of any cause (on
man's part) but by aspect of Piety. Nevertheless, after great and enormious
offenses committed by his people, God does chastise them August. sup. Psalm. 50.
Aliquando Deus cui ignoscit in futuro seculo, corripit eum de peccato in isto
seculo. Nam and ipsi David cui dictum iam fuerat per Prophetam, dimissum est
peccatum tuum, euenerunt quidam quae minatus (...), Deus propter ipsum
peccatum. Nam filius eius Absolon (...) eum cruentum Bellum gessit, and in
multis humiliauit patrem suum. Ambulabat ille in dolor, in tribulatione
humiliationis suae: ita subditus Deo, vt omnia iusta ei tribuens, confiteretur,
quod (...) pateretur indigne, habens iam rectum cor, cui non displicebat Deus.
with the Rod of Correction, Psalm. Cor. 11. 31, 32. And this Correction, is a
pain of Castigation, Lament. Ierem. 3.39. but not a punishment of Malediction
Vasq. 1. 2. Disp. 208. ca. 5. nu. 25. Si Deus vellet aliquem torquere, non
(...) macula, nec (...), malum quod ei infligeret, non haberet rationem poenae.
Nam poena est malum (...) propter (...), sed Deus tanquam Author (...), and
mortis posset ipsum affligere, Bernard. in Cant. Sermon. 16. Etsi quandoque
feriat vt emendet, nunquam tamen vt (...).
, Galath. 3. 13. a work of Gods Mercy, rather than of his Justice.

The difference between Pontificians and us in this Doctrine, is, That we
believe a remainder of Temporal affliction, after remission of the guilt of
sin in this life only, and that for Aug. in Psa. 98. Illi Deus irascitur,
quem peccantem non flagellat. Nam cui vere propicius est, non solum donat
peccata ne (...) ad futurum seculum, sed etiam chastigat ne semper peccare
delectet. Orig. sup. Genes. Hom. 16. Quod justice exercitium virtutis est, hoc
iniustis poena peccati est. August. Epist. 87. Quid non misericorditer.
praestaretur hominibus a Deo, a quo etiam tribulatio beneficium est. Res
prosperae, donum sunt consolantis: res aduersae, donum admonentis Dei. Idem, c.
Faust. Manich. lib. 22. ca. 67. Read the Margen, pa. 547. c. August. c. Faust.
li. 22. ca. 20. Nullus hominum est, tanta iustitia praeditus, cui non sit
necessaria tentatio tribulationis, vel ad perficiendam, vel ad confirmandam,
vel ad probandam virtutem.
, erudition, and probation. They maintain a remainder of temporal punishment,
after sin remitted, not only in this present life, but after the same, in
Purgatory.

Further we believe, That the affliction or pain of Chastisement,

And whereas the Jesuit affirms, That he can produce Testimonies of the
ancient Fathers, in great number, both for our necessity of suffering
voluntary afflictions, and also for the efficacitie thereof, to expiate sin,
and to satisfy: I answer,

First, That the Fathers, and holy Scriptures, require works of Humiliation
and Mortification, not as meritorious, but only as means and causes
impetrant, or deprecant, to appease Gods wrath for sin.

Secondly, The Fathers understand not the word Satisfaction strictly, and in
rigor, for satisfaction of condignitie, as Romists do Suar. (...). 4. in 3. p.
Tho. Disp. 48. Sect. 3. qui citat. Gabriel. Adrian. Nauar. (...). Soto. (...),
Addit. ad. 3. p. Tho. q. 20. Difficult. 2. Conclus. 2. Si satisfactio
consideretur secundu^ omnia quae habet, quia scilicet, simul est ab homine and
a Deo, simpliciter est satisfactio condigna. Vasq. tom. 4. in 3. p. Tho. q. 94.
Dub. 3. Omnes Doctores antiqui supponere videntur, esse nostra opera
satisfactoria de condigno pro poena, etc. Ibid. Dub. 5. Si in operibus
meritorijs concedimus condignitatem ad vitam aeternam, and ad augmentum
sanctitatis, cur non etiam ad poenae remissionem?,
but improperly and largely, to wit, for satisfaction of deprecation,

But to the end the Reader may evidently perceive the Popish fraud, in
perverting the Sentences of the Fathers, concerning Satisfaction; I will in
this place distinctly compare their Doctrine with the present Romish Tenet.

First, It is consessed, That many Fathers use the word Satisfaction (...). d.
poen. ca. (...). (...) per (...) instituer at Deo satisfacere. ca. 7. Habes
(...) satisfacias. Cyprian. Epist. 10. Deo patri misericordi, praecibus and
(...) suis satisfacere. Epist. 27. Deo satisfacere debent. Epist. 40. Dominus
(...), and continua satisfactione (...) est. Idem. Epist. 55. and epist. 64.
Et. (...). Et Eleemos. (...) li. d. lapsis. (...). (...). (...). Aug. li. 50.
Hom. vit. ca. 4. Leo. Epist. 79. ad Nicet. ca. 5. Et epist. (...). ca. (...).
and 92. ca. 2.
, and require penitent Persons to perform the same to God and men.

Secondly, Within the name of Satisfaction, they include and comprehend
contrition to God, confession, and amendment of life Cypra. Epi. 26. Eluendae
sunt impio Sacrificio manus inquinatae, operibus bonis, and nesario cibo or a
misera polluta, poenite^tiae sunt verae sermonibus expianda, and (...). li. a.
Lapsis. Qui sic Deo (...), qui poenitentia facti sui, qui pudore delicti plus
virtutis and sidei, etc. Ambros. ad Virg. Laps. ca. 8. Chrysostom. d. Lazaro. Hom.
4. Aug. li. 50 Hom. 5. Non sufficit mores in melius commutare, and a factis
malis recedere, nisi etiam de his, quae sacta sunt, satisfiat Deo, per
poenitentiae (...), per humilitatis (...), per contriti cordis Sacrificium,
cooperantibus Eleemosynis.
.

Thirdly, they require satisfaction for the fault and eternal guilt of sin
Ambr. ad Virg. corrupt. Si futuras poenas (...) perpetuas, in hoc (...) vitae
spacio compensauerit, etc. Tertul. d. poen. ca. 9. Temporali (...) aeterna
supplicia non dicam frustretur, sed expungat. Cyprian. Epist. 52. Pro (...) and
purgando delicto tuo, etc. Ep. 55. Datur (...). in Psalm. 118. (exitus Aquarum,
etc.) Nunc quoque non desinit verae poenit entiae (...), veteris facti crimen
abluere. Pacian. Paroen. ad Poen. Hieron. Epist. 30. ca. 2. Cassian. collat.
23. ca. (...). Quisquis post Baptismum, and scientiam Dei, in illud mortis
corpus (...), hoc est in aliquod capitale (...), (...) se non quotidiana gratia
Dei, id est facili remissione, etc. sed (...) afflictione (...). ac poenali
dolor purgandum, aut certe pro his (...) futuro aeterni ignis supplicijs
addicendum. Eucherius. Hom. 5. ad Monach. Non leui agendum est contritione, vt
debita illa re dimantur, quibus (...) aeterna debetur. Nec transitoria opus est
satisfactione pro malis (...), (...) quae paratus est ignis aeternus.
and not only for remoouall of temporal punishment.

Fourthly, the word Satisfaction is taken in two notions: First, strictly for a
just and equal compensation of the injury committed against God, which
Schoolmen term, Satisfaction Vasques in 3. part. Tho. to. 4. d. poen. q. 94.
ar. 1. dub. 3. Si (...) opera iustoru^ esse de condigno satisfactoria, illud
asserere debemus ex (...) ipsorum (...), quae in homine iusto ex auxilio dei
facta sunt (...), atque adeo non ex Dei benigna acceptatione, qua (...) ipsis
operibus contentus esse, etiamsi illa minus condigna sunt: hoc vero dixerim de
latisfactione extra (...), illa enim debet esse condigna absque condonatione
(...), alias non (...) latisfactio, nec debet concedi in (...) applicationem
meritorum Christi, additam ipsi (...) satisfactorio. Cornel. d. lap. in Daniel
4. v. 24. (...) culpa, meretur ex condigno remissionem poenae reliquae. (...).
Harmon. Euang. li. 2. ca. 1. Theoria. 10. (...) satisfactionem esse de condigno
and iustitia.
. Secondly, for an interpretatiue compensation (as Durand Dur and. 4. d. 15 q.
1. nu. 6. arqualitas proprie dicta, etc. vel secundum acceptationem eius (...)
sit emenda, and haec est aequalitas interpretatius solum. (...) in 3. did.
19.. 1. Sciendum satisfactionem non aliud esse, quam debiti (...), (...)
satisfactionis nomen Coenick. d. (...). (...). Disp. 10. dub. 3. no. 19.
Satisfactio decongruo non potest absolute dici satisfactio, sed tantum secundum
quid. (...). 3. d. 20. q. 2. (...) est secundum acceptationem (...) cui fit,
vocatur satisfactio de congruo.
) terms it, grounded upon Divine favor and acceptance, and not upon the
complete dignity of the action. The Schoolmen term this latter, satisfaction
of (...) Cassand. Consult. d. (...). De hac satisfactione non (...) erit
conquet endilocus, si ex Ecclesiae sententia, hunc in modum doceatur, quod sola
passie and mors vnigeniti filij Dei, sit satisfactio and (...) pro peccatis
nostris, sieve eo quod ex Origin contraximus, five ijs quae ante, vel post
regenerationem, ex carnis
, both for fault and guilt of sin. The latter (according to the speaking of
sundry Fathers) is performed by penitent Persons Cypr. Epist. 40. Quibus
Dominus longa and continua (...) placandus est. Tertul. d. poenit. ca. 5. Qui
per delictorum poenitentiam instituerat Domino (...).
, by their contrition, (...), confession, and other penitential actions.

Fifthly, repentance may be exercised privately only before God, or else openly
and before men. The ancient Church observed a severe discipline, and imposed
upon notorious and enormious sinners open penance Eusebius. hist. Eccles. li. 3.
ca. 17. Et. li. 5. ca. 27. Et. li. 6. ca. 35. Iren. li. 1. ca. 9. Ambros. d
poen. li. 1. ca. 16 Sosomen. hist. Eccl. li. 7. c. 16.
, causing them to make satisfaction to the Church, and to testify their
unfeigned repentance to God by external signs, and by actions of humiliation
and mortification. Also in the days of the Fathers, sinners which had
voluntarily confessed their offenses to the Pastors of the Cassan. Consult. d.
(...). In veteri Ecclesia, vt segniores excitarentur. poenitentibus ob grauiora
(...) certa tempora and officia definita fuerunt, quibus non solum coram Deo
interiorem animi (...) excitarent, and exercerent, sed etiam Ecclesiae vere se
atque ex animo peccati^ poenitere, declarare^t, atque ita manus impositione
Episcopi and cleri, Ecclesiae reconciliarentur, and ius communicationis
acciperent, atque (...) prescripta officia, (...) satisfactiones feu poenae
vocabantur, quae vt (...) Episcoporum and Pastorum in abusu^, ita quoque
negligentia and signitia (...) pastorum (...) populi (...) in (...) venerunt.
B. Rhenanus. Annot. in Terr. d. poenit.
. And the fathers styled these Penitential actions by the name of
Satisfaction, partly in respect of men offended August. (...). ca. 65. Recte
constituuntur ab eis qui praesunt Ecclesiae tempora poenitentiae, vt fiat etiam
satis Ecclesiae, in qu^a remittuntur peccata.
, partly in the regard of Offenders themselves, who because they did that which
was enjoined them by their spiritual guides, to appease the indignation of
God, were said to make satisfaction. But the Fathers did not hereby exalt
Poenitentiall deeds to a sufficiency or equality of satisfying Gods justice
(for this effect is proper only to the actions and passions of the Son of
God) but they

Sixthly and lastly, Marsilius ab Inguen Marsi. 4. quae. (...) ar. 2.
Satisfactio sacramentalis
a famous Schoolman, observes (...), That Satisfaction sometimes imports all
the actions (...) Con. (...) d. (...). ar. (...). (...) etia ex ordine (...),
non familiarem sieve priuatam poenitentiam, neque quamuis publicam, sed solennem
tantu^ Sacramentu^ dici affirmant.
, but only of Discipline, or private humiliation.

Now the Romists in their course of Doctrine, have miserably

First, That which the Fathers speak of the fault and guilt of sin, they
wrest to the temporal pain of mortal sin, remaining after the remission of
the everlasting guilt Greg. Val. l. d. Satisfact. cap. 1. (...). d. Instruct.
(...). lib. 3. cap. 11. Victoria. sum. d. Sacram. d. poenit. nu. 109. (...). 4.
d. 15. q. 1. (...). tom. 4. disp. 49. sect. 1. Cardub. lib. 5. d. Indulg. q. 2.
Medina. d. (...). per quinque prima capita.
.

Secondly, That which the Fathers styled Satisfaction improperly, and by way of
deprecation Cassand. Consultd. Confess. ar. 12. Si ex motu and afflatu Spiritus
Sancti (...) ad (...) remissionem peccati faciunt. Cyprian. d. Laps. Sect. 24.
(...) fletibus, planctibus Dominum (...). (...). ex var. in Math. Hom. 16. Pro
omnibusillis accepit poenitentiam comitem, quae Aduocati locum (...).
, they make Satisfaction of Condignitie, yea, in rigor of Justice Nazarius. in
3. p. Thom. q. 1. ar. 2. contr. 7. pa. 113. Si tamen accipiatur, vt
satisfactioni Christi (...), vnum babebit cum ea vaiorem, ac proinde (...),
(...) satisfactionis Christi, esse de rigore iustitiae.
; and for venial sins, Ibid. Contr. 6. Satisfactio Christi licet sit (...),
and ex hac part vberior and abundantior quam satisfactio hominisiusti pro suo
(...) veniali, tamen cum istius satisfactio ex auxilio gratiae efficacior sit
ad (...) maculam (...) venialis, sequitur non esse perfectiorem satisfactionem
Christi, quam sit satisfactio hominisiusti, pro suo (...) veniali, in genere
satisfactionis ad effectum delendi peccatum, and extinguendum debitum illius,
licet satisfactio Christi in ratione operationis and meriti (...) sit. Suares.
tom. 4. disp. 48. sect. 3.
.

Thirdly, That which in the ancient Church was a work Cassand. ibid. vt hac
disciplina (...) homines ad (...) dignos fructus faciendos (...).
, or Christian mortification, they make Sacramental.

Fourthly, Whereas the Fathers placed Satisfaction in all (...) actions,
inward, and outward Aug. Ap. Great. d. poen. did. 1. c. 63. Non sufficit mores
in melius commutare and a preteritis malis (...), nisi etiam de his quae facta
(...), (...) fiat Deo per (...) dolorem, per humilitatis (...), per contriti
cordis Sacrificium, cooperantibus (...) and ieiunijs.
; and especially in such actions as were commanded by God, as necessary to
obtain remission of sins: The Romists restrain the same to external
actions, succeeding Contrition and Confession, and principally to electious,
and voluntary actions Bellarm. d. poen. l. 4. c. 13. Lioet sententia sit (...)
probabilis, (...), Durandi; Paludani, etc. Non (...) satisfieri per opera alias
debita. (...). in Confess. ca. 48. Dare operam (...) placatum tibi reddas, non
(...) a (...), verum etiam in debita quaedam opera faciendo, etc. Palud. 4. d.
15. q. 1. (...). 2. (...). v. satisfactio q. 8. (...). 4. d. 15. q. 2. du. 1.
(...). ib. d. 15. q. 1. ar. 7. not. 1.
.

Fifthly, The Fathers gave not absolution to (...), until such Cassand.
Consult. d. Confess. Hoc autem interest inter Actionem poenitentiae seu
exomologesin veteribus vsitatam, and came quae nunc vsu recepta est, quod olim
nisi his operibus ab Ecclesiae praefecto iniunctis rite peractis, absolutio,
and reconciliatio, and communionis ius, per manus impositionem non
concedebatur, vt ex multis Tertulliani and Cypriani locis constat, etc. Hodie
vero statim a facta consessione, manus poenitenti imponitur, and ad communionis
ius admittitur.
. Romists set the Cart before the Horse, and absolve, before satisfaction is
made; which is, as one says, To set Easter before Lent.

IESVIT.
But J suppose they are to your Majesty well known, and therefore in the
proposed difficulty, supposing the satisfaction for sin to be possible, you
move this doubt, Whether the penitents can so fully satisfy for themselves,
as their satisfactions may superabound, and be referred unto the treasure of
the Church? to satisfy this doubt, three Propositions are to be proved.

ANSWER.
It is well known to his gracious Majesty, that you pervert the meaning of
the Fathers, and from the word Satisfaction, used by them in one Notion, you
argue to another, that is, from Satisfaction impetrant, which is an action, or
fruit of the virtue of Repentance, you conclude your Romish Sacramental
Satisfaction of Condignitie.

IESVIT.
The first, That Good works of Saints that are poenall and afflictiue, do not
only merit heaven, but also satisfy for sin, this is proved; giving of
Alms for the love of Christ is meritorious, witness our Savior himself, who
to the just (in reward of their Alms) will give, The Kingdom prepared from
the beginning Math. 25. 34.
of the world.

ANSWER.
First, You argue out of Saint Matthew 25. 34. from reward of Works, to merit
of Works. But you must observe, that there is a reward of mere bounty, as
well as of desert, (...). 127.2 Vet. (...). Fihj merces fructus ventris.
. Ezech. 29.18 (...). Cod. d. poen. tr. 3. d. Satisfact. q. 2. pa. 292. (...)
nomine mercedis Scriptura vtatur, non tamen inde fit vt debito, and ex iustitia
proprie sumpta Regnum AEgipti illi Regi fuerit traditum, sed (...), illic large
accipitur, and ad omnem remunerationem etiam gratiosam se extendit.
. Genesis 30.18. Also, (...)

IESVIT.
And it is also satisfactorie for sin, witness Daniel, Daniel. 4.24.
who gave this council unto the Babylonian King: Redeem thy sins with
Almsdeeds, and thine iniquities with mercies unto the poor.

ANSWER.
The place of Daniell 4.24. (according to the vulgar Translation Peccata tua
Eleemosinis redime, etc.
) speaks of redeeming sins in regard of the fault and eternal guilt, and
not only of temporal punishment. Also of redeeming sins in this life, and
not of redeming them in Nabuchadonosor were an unjust person Hieron. sup. Esa.
14. Omnes animae apud Inferos, aliquam requiem accipient, tu solus in extremas
tenebras religaberis, omnium enim operieris sa^guine and vniuersoru^ cruor te
premet velut obuolutum sanie mortuorum.
, Esa. 14.15. then according to your own position, he could not make
satisfaction for sin. Lastly, the punishment threatened and foretold in that
Scripture, is such, as Bellarmine Bellarm. d. Indulg. lib. 2. cap. 1. Poena
quarum fit mentio, Psalm. 88. Heb. 11. etc. Ad forum externum pertinent, (...)
enim a Deo tanquam Iudice in externo and criminali (...), nam si non potest
ldulgentia tollere poenam qua Praetor aliquem mulctauit ob furtum vel
homicidium, quanto minus (...) poterit came quam Deus ipse alicui decreuit.
himself confesses, belongs not to the Court of Penance, and Papal
Indulgences. And if Popes Pardons, and Romish Satisfactions could deliver
sinners from frenzy, and loss of outward goods, and temporal dominion, the
madmen in Bedlam, and decayed merchants, and other afflicted persons
throughout the Christian world, would become suitors to his Holiness, to

Also the place of Daniell is understood literally of breaking of sins by
almsdeeds: as if one preaching to an extortioner, should say, Break off thy
sinful courses, by imitating Zacheus, etc. Now what merit is there in this, or
what immediate

Lastly, there is no ground either in Scripture, or in Tradition, for this
Romish doctrine, to wit, the temporal pain of personal sin remaining after
this life, may be removed or Bellar. in Simbol. A post. ar. 9 pa. 123.
Ecclesia quae est in terris communicate suffragia Ecclesiae quae est in
Purgatorio: Et Ecclesia quae est in Coelis communicate orationes, and merita sua
cum Ecclesia quae est in terris.
, and after the said satisfactions are applied by Papal Indulgences, no
temporal pain cease infallibly, no not so much as the pain of one tooth,
but the same continues as before: It is altogether David Aug. contra Faust.
lib. 22. cap. 67. Neque praetermissa est in illo, secundum Dei comminationem
flagelli paterni Disciplina, vt and confessus in aeternum liberaretur, and
, 2. Sam. 12.) and not of the invisible torments of Purgatory.

IESVIT.
And S. Chrysostom, who says, There is no sin Chrysostom. Hom. 25. in Act.
Apost. Cyprian. Sermon. d. Eleemosyna.
which giving of Alms cannot cancel: and S. Cyprian, Eleemosynis atque
operibus justice delictorum flamma sopitur.

ANSWER.
S. Chrysostom, and S. Cyprian, in the places objected, speak of the effect
of Alms to please God, being an acceptable sacrifice to him, by way of
deprecation or impetration Cyprian. d. Opere. and Eleemos. nu. 5. Neque
promereri misericordiam Domini poterit, qui misericors ipse non fuerit, aut
impetrabit de diuina misericordia aliquid in praecibus, qui ad praecem pauperis
non fuerit humanus. Ibid. Nec pro defuncto suis vocibus, sed ipsius operibus
(...), etc.
, and not by Delictorum flamma Aug. in Psalm. 143. Tanquam vnda misericordiae,
peccati ignis extinguitur.
in S. Cyprian, is not only the temporal punishment of sins, but the
guiltiness of eternal punishment ( Job. 31.12.) and the lust and
concupiscence concomitant to foul sins, which by repentance, and the fruits
thereof, is abated and mortified.

IESVIT.
Prayer is likewise meritorious with God. Our Savior Math. 6.6.7.
exhorts every man to pray secretly in his Closet, promising, that Thy Father
who sees what is done in secret will reward thee. It is also satisfactorie for
sin, Aug. Enchir. ca. 71.
as S. Augustine says: The daily prayer of the faithful does satisfy for
their quotidian, and light offenses, without which none can lead this life.

ANSWER.
If beggars, or other suitors, by craving Alms, or by making supplication, do
not merit from men (which are in most things their equals) it is incredible,
that man by Prayer is able to merit, according to justice, with God. And the
word Reward, Math. 6. proves not Merit, because there is reward of grace, and
bounty, as well as of desert, Romans 4.4. S. Augustine Aug. Enchir. ca. 71.
Delet and illa, a quibus vita fidelium scelerate etiam gesta, sed paenitendo in
melius mutata discedit.
in the place objected, speaks of Satisfaction by way of deprecation: and he
also says, That the Lords Prayer joined Multa sunt genera Eleemosinarum, quae
cum facimus, adiuuamur vt dimitta^tur nobis peccata nostra. There are many
sorts of Alms, (among which Prayer for others is one) by bestowing whereof we
are helped, that our sins may be remitted. And he teaches in another place
Aug. e. duas Epist. Pelag. lib. 4. cap. 7.
, in what manner Prayer and Almsdeeds are referred to remission of sins,
saying, Eleemosynis and orationibus impetrantibus,

IESVIT.
To fast is meritorious, when it proceeds from a pure heart, to which our
Savior in the sixth of S. Matthew, promised recompense: and that it is penal
and satisfactory Ionae cap. vlt.
for corporal penalties, the fact of the (...) shows (...), so that the same
works of the just (as pious) merit, and shall have in heaven a plentifall
reward; Cyprian, Cyprian. Sermon. d. Laps.
of fervent penance and punition of body, Qui sic Deo satisfacerit, etc. Non
solam Deiveniam merebitur sed coronam.

ANSWER.
First, every thing is not meritorious to which a recompense

Secondly, the example of the Ninevites proves not, that Fasting is
satisfactorie for corporal punishments; but only, that it being iomed with
true repentance, is a means to impetrate of God (when this stands with his
purpose) prevention, release, or mitigation of temporal calamities. Besides,
this action of the Ninevites appertains not to sacramental Satisfaction: And
that Fasting is not condignly satisfactorie (...) in Addit. 3. p. Tho. q. 20.
ar. 3. dif. 2. Simpliciter est dicendu^, quod ista satisfactio est condigna and
infallibilis. Suar. in 3. p. Tho. to. 4. disp. 48. sect. 3. Bell. d. Indulg.
li. 2. c. 9.
, appears, because no fasting is able infallibly to prevent or remove
temporal plagues, 2. Sam. 12.22. But if Fasting were satisfactorie in
condignitie, then it were iniust with God to inflict or continue temporal
plagues, after Satisfaction made by Fasting.

S. Cyprian in the place objected, speaks of satisfaction for sin it self
Cyprian. d. Laps. sect. 28. Justice operibus incumbere, quibus peccata
purga^tur. Eleemosynis frequenter insistere, quibus a morte (...).
, and not for the temporal pain. And by Satisfaction, he understands
deprecant Satisfaction, not compensant (...). (...). Nec Dominum grauiter
offensum, longa and (...) paenitentia deprecetur. Ib. sect. 24. Iejunijs,
fletibus, planctibus, Dominum deprecari, (...) ad Dominum (...), and (...)
criminis, (...) doloribus exprimentes; (...) deprecemur.
. But to argue from appeasing Gods anger, by way of deprecation, to condign
Satisfaction, is most rude and inconsequent.

IESVIT.
The second Proposition: Many Saints endured more penalties and afflictions in
this life, than were necessary for the recompensing of the temporal: pains
due to their sins: The blessed Virgin never committed actual sin, witness
Ambros. Sermon. vlt. in Psalm. 118. Aug. d. Not. and Great. c. 36.
Saint Ambrose, terming her, ab omni (...) labe peccati. And Saint Augustine,
saying, Plus gratiae ei collatum est ad vincendum ex omni part peccatum: John
the Luc. 1. v. 8. Greg. in ca. 2. Job.
Baptist, what a pure and immaeulate course of life held he from his infancy,
in the wilderness? Never committed Paulinus writes, Vestis erat curui setis
compacta Cameli,
Contra luxuriam molles duraret vt artus,
Arceretque graves compuncto corpore somnos.


What a mighty Mass of super-abounding Satisfactions, were gathered from the
life of this Saint alone?

The Prophets of the Old Testament, What afflictions did they endure? (which
Saint Paul gathers together in Ad Hebr. 11.38.
the eleventh Chapter of his Epistle to the Hebrews) being nevertheless, men
of most holy life, innocent, and without any grievous sins, that the world
was unworthy of Paul records, endured by himself; 1. Cor. 4. 2. Cor. 18.
who yet after Baptism (in which, his sins were fully and
certainely-remitted) never did grievously offend Cypr. li. 4. Epist. 2.
and yet any the least Martyrdom is sufficient to satisfy for any great
multitude of offenses, Quoad Reatum Aug. tract. 84. in Johan.
culpae and poenae, of whose merits, the Church (in the Primitive times) did
make most account; to whom afterward succeeded another kind of Martyrdom,
Horrore quidem mitius, sed diuturnitate molestius, Of holy Bernard. Sermon. 4. in
Cantica.
Confessors, specially of many most holy Eremites.

These manifold afflictions endured by Saints (far above the measure of the
temporal penalty, which after the eternal, was graciously remitted, did
remain due to their offenses) did not perish, nor were forgotten, but were
laid up in the memory of God.

ANSWER.
In this Section, two things are affirmed by the Adversary: First, That many
Saints, to wit, the B. Virgin, S. John Baptist, the Prophets, the holy
Apostles, the Martyrs, Confessors, and Eremites, endured many more penalties in
this world, than were necessary, for the expiating and recompensing the
temporal pain due to their sins: And the reason or proof hereof is, Some
of these were free from Actual sin, Venial, and Mortal; others were
guilty of no mortal sin. Secondly, The superabundant Passions of these
Saints perished not, but was laid up in the memory of God.

I answer: It is a manifest untruth, that any of these Saints were free from
all sin: For S. John speaking in the person of all the Elect, says, 1. Ioh.
1. 8. If we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and there is no
truth in us: verse. 10. If we say we have not sinned, we make him a liar, and
his Word is not in us August. Enchir. ca. 64. Quamuis de illis sit vera citer
dictum, Quotquot Spiritu Dei aguntur, hi filij sunt Dei: sic tamen Spiritu Dei
excitantur, (...) tanquam filij Dei proficiunt ad Deum, vt etiam (...) suo,
maxim Idem, d. Ciuit. Dei, li. 14. ca. 9. Tunc (...) ista erit, quando
peecatum nullum in (...). Nunc vero satis been viuitur, si sine crimine, sine
peccato autem qui viuere se existimat, non id agit vt peccatum non habeat, sed
vt veniam non accipiat. Idem, sup. Psalm. 44. c. 2. Maria ex Adam mortua est
propter peccatum, etc. Idem, d. Pecc. Merit. li. 2. ca. 30. (...)
indeclinabilem fidei sententiam, solus vnus est, qui sine peccato mortuus est,
etc.
. Also the B. Virgin rejoiced in God her Savior: and he is Jesus, a Savior,
to save his people from their sins. She used the Lords Prayer, together with
other Believers, Act. 1.14. But one Petition of this Prayer is, Forgive us our
Trespasses, Matthew. 6. 12. Lastly, the sacred Scripture teaches not, that any
of these Saints were free from all sin, neither is there any other sufficient
Argument to confirm this Assertion. And S. Augustine Idem, c. duas Epist.
Pelag. lib. 4. cap. 4. Pati mortem sine meritis mortis de vno solo Mediatore
Catholica fides est.
says, It is against the Catholic Faith, that any besides Christ suffered
Death, without the merit of Death.

But if it were yielded, that these Saints were free from all sin; and that
they endured more Pressures and Calamities in the World, than themselves
deserved; and that their superabundant Matthew.

IESVIT.
The third Proposition, the Treasure of the Church consists principally of
the superabundant Satisfaction of Christ, who did endure much more than was
necessary, for the Redemption of man; wherewith are joined the Satisfaction
Nisi velut arescentis and exhausti defectus aliunde suppleatur and sufficiatur
(as mistakingly, not to say calumniously, Calvin reports of Calu Institut.
li. 3. ca. 5.
us.) For Pope Clement the sixth (whom Protestants accuse Clemens Sextus in
Constit. vnigenit.
as the first Author of this Treasure) affirms even in

ANSWER.
First, If the Blood of Christ is of infinite price, To what purpose do you
conioyne the blood of (...). Sum. li. 5. d. Remiss. and Disp. Filius Dei non
solum gutta^, sed totum sanguinem fudit pro peccatoribus, and praeterea
Martyrs pro fide and Ecclesia sanguinem suum fuderunt, and vltra quod
peccassent puniti fuerunt, restat quod in dicta effusione, omne peccatu^
punitum est, and (...) sanguinis effusio, est Thesaurus, in (...) Ecclesiae
repositus, cuius claues Ecclesia inde, quando vult potest scrinium aperire and
(...) cui voluerit communicare remissiones and indulgentias fidelibus faciendo,
and sic peccatum non remanet impunitum, quia punitum fuit in Filio Dei, and
Martyribus sanctis suis.
Martyrs, and the voluntary Passions of Creatures, to the same? For is any man
so foolish, as to add the Light of a Candle to the clear Light of the Sun?
If you answer, They are conjoined, not in equality, but by Subordination; I
demand, Where has the Son of God appointed this? And if you couple humane
Antouin. Sum. p. 1. Tit. 10. ca. 3. Potest vt videtur per Indulgentiam in
quantum habet rationem cuiusdam absolutionis, remitti culpa Palud. 4. d. 20. q.
4. Viguer. Instit. c. (...). verse. 22.
, and the temporal pain of mortal; you may upon as good warrant do it, for
the atonement of the eternal punishment: because (according to your former
Tenet) by mystical Union, the Actions and Passions of the Members, are the
Actions and Passions of the Head Nazarius, in 3. p. Tho. q. 1. ar. 2. contr. 7.
Praemittendum est, Christum esseveluti Hypostasin (...) corporis mystici, quod
est Ecclesia, etc. Constat autem, Actiones and Passiones, tam capitis quam
membrorum, eidem Hypostasi tribui, cuius sunt caput and membra. Ibid. Quia per
gratiam ex Christi capitis influxu receptam, constituimur illius viua membra,
quorum membrorum, Christus non solum est Caput: sed etiam suppositum, vt ante
diximus: ideo hoc ipso, quod nos meremur, and satisfacimus, vt membra Christo
Capiti vnita, and vt existentia in Christo, tanquam in communi supposito,
dicimur mereri, and satisfacere de toto rigore iustitiae; quia secundum (...)
considerationem non tam nos meremur and satisfacimus in Christo, quam Christus
vt Caput, and vt mysticum suppositum, meretur and satisfacit in nobis. Ibid. Si
mystici corporis Ecclesiae membra considerentur, quatenus simul cum Christo
capite, vnum integrum and perfectum Ecclesiae corpus constituunt, dici vere and
absolute potest, corpus hoc mysticum per suum caput satisfecisse, de toto
rigore justitiae, and superabundasse: non ob eam tantum causam, quod Christus
qui Caput est mystici corporis, sufficienter and de toto rigore (...) pro
membris satisfecerit, fed ea etiam ratione, quod membrorum satisfactiones
Christi Capitis satisfactioni conjunctae, and vt vna completa satisfactio, cum
ea consideratae perfectionem accipiunt, ita vt
; and consequently, they may partake virtue of satisfying, with the Passions of
Christ.

Secondly, Although one drop of Christ's Blood, even when he was Circumcised,
and whipped, might have been sufficient for man's Redemption, if God had so
ordained; yet presupposing the Divine Decree, and Ordinance, to the appointed,
and decreed should be; and neither more, nor Durand. 3. Did. 20. q. 2.
Potuisset si voluisset reparare humanam naturam, (...) and reparando per
satisfactionem potuisset pro satisfa (...), puri hommis, etc. (...). 3. d. 20.
q. 2. (...), quod non est (...) Deo (...). (...), 3. d. 19. (...) 20. (...). 4.
Conclus. 2. (...) Redemptione, quod bonitas illius (...) cuius (...) detinetur:
Sed (...) homo (...), a Diabolo potuit acceptare pro offensa illata per
hominem, (...) modi (...): Et (...) intelligenda (...) cum (...), (...) Christi
sufficere potuit pro (...) totius humani generis.
.

It is remarkable, how these Roman Higlars, with one (...), both magnify and
debase the price of Christ's Blood. Extra. d. Poen. and Remiss. (...) 6. Non
guttam sanguinismodicam quae tamen propter vnionem ad verbum, pro Redemptione
totius humani generis (...). Angelus, (...). Sum. v. Indulgentia, n. 9. Cuius
minima gutta (...), vel sudoris, sufficeret ad Expiationem omnium peccatorum,
quae vnquam fuerunt perpetrata, vel perpetrabuntur, quia eius (...) nihil sunt
omnia.
; and then again they infer, That it is fit it should be eeked out with an
addition of Saintly Satisfactions Nugnus, in Addit. 3. part. Tho. q. 20. ar. 3.
dif. 1.
, to raise a Stock, to redeem Souls out of Purgatory. Else why stint they
not this Treasure upon the maine Revenue of Christ's Passions only? Their
detected meaning is; Christ's Blood alone, yea, one drop thereof, is
all-sufficient to save Souls; but the same is insufficient to impregnate his
Holiness his Coffers (...). Paris, in Henrico 3. Romanorum loculos impregnare.
Ibid. page 316. Magister Otto Papae Nuntius, Literas recitauit, in quibus Papa
allegauit Scandalum Sanctae Romanae Ecclesiae, and opprobrium vetustissimum,
notam scilicet Concupiscentiae, quae radix dicitur omnium malorum, etc. Sed
quoniam Scandali huius and infamiae, Romana paupertas causa est, debent boni
filij matris inopiam subleuare, etc.
: The Angelus (...). Sum. (...). Indulg. nu. 2. Qui plus dat and magis laborat,
caeteris paribus, plus habebit. Illi qui plus dat, and plus laborat,
correspondet annus efficacieoris Poenitentiae. (...), Bologninus, tr. d.
Indulg. n. 85. Sanctissimus Dominus Innocentius, concessit Indulgentiam, quod
quicunque (...), d. Indulg. lib. 1. cap. 16. Si quis visitat Ecclesiam, tamen
ob paupertatem non facit Eleemosynam, an lucretur? Resp. Quod non lucratur, and
ista (Opinio) est communis. Lucratur augmentum gratiae vel gloriae, sed non
remissionem Poenae, seu adeptionem Indulgentiae. (...). v. Indulg. n. 19.
Nauar. (...). Hist. Italiae, lib. 13. page 489. Leo. Laurentij Puccij quatuor
Sanctorum Cardinalis, secutus Concilium, nullo temporum and locorum habito
delectu, per vniuersum Orbem amplissima priuilegia, quibus non modo viuis
delictorum veniam consequendi, sed and defunctorum animas eius ignis in quo
delicta expiari dicuntur, poenis eximendi facultatem pollicebatur, promulgarat:
quae quia pecunia tantum a mortalibus extorquendi gratia concedi notum erat,
and a quaestoribus huic negotio praefectis impudenter administrabantur, magnam
plerisque in locis indignationem, offensionemque concitarant, and (...) in
Germania vbi a multis ex eius ministris huiusmodi mortuos poenis liberandi
facultas, paruo praetio vendi, vel in Cauponum Tabernis aliae subijci
cernebantur.
.

Therefore good cause had Calvin, and so have we, to vindicate the honor of
our Savior, and to protest against your derogating from the merit of his
Blood: which impiety, although you endeavor to color your Doctrine, yet the

IESVIT.
The Reasons of this Conjunction, are these three: First, That Poenall works
of Saints, as they are satisfactorie,

ANSWER.
First, It cannot be proved by Divine Revelation, that Saints have
super-aboundant Satisfactions: for whatsoever affliction and pressure they
endured in this life, was necessary or expedient to set forth Gods glory, to
confirm and consummate their own virtue August. c. Faust. lib. 22. cap. 20.
Nullus hominum est tanta (...) preditus, cui non (...) necessaria tentatio
tribulationis, vel ad perficiendam vel ad confirmandam vel ad probandam
virtutem
, to edify the Church of God, and to make themselves the better capable of
that extraordinary glory and bliss, which was prepared as a Crown, for such
as transcend others in virtue Greg. Mor. lib. 3. cap. 1. Ex dolor verberis
aucta est gloria remunerationis.


Secondly, If they had superaboundant Satisfactions, that is, If they endured
Afflictions and Trials, more than were necessary to satisfy for the
Temporary pain of their personal sins; these superabundant Passions should
not want a sufficient fruit, and effect, 2. Cor. 4. 17. 2. Tim. 4. 8. And the
want of the proper fruit of Satisfaction, (being Cor. 12. a just man's Prayer,
considered as it is Prayer, wants not Bernard. Quadrag. Sermon. 5. Nemo vestrum
fratres parui pendeat Orationem suam, dico enim quod ipse ad quem oramus, non
paruipendet eam, and vnum e duobus sperare possumus, quoniam aut dabit quod
petimus, aut quod nobis viderit esse vtilius.
. So likewise if a man could super-abound in satisfying for his own sin, his
Satisfaction were not fruitless, if God make requital by any other kind of
benefit, equal or transcending the proper fruit and effect thereof.

IESVIT.
The second, is the glory of Christ, whose merits were so powerful, as to
purchase to the Church of God, such excellent and admirable Saints, so pure of
life, so perfect in Penance, as their satisfactions might suffice to pay the
debt of temporal pain due unto others.

ANSWER.
If one should affirm, It is more for the glory of Christ to Ioh. 1. 8, 10. So
likewise to affirm, That it is a greater honor to Christ, to have his merits
advanced so far, as that by the virtue thereof, men are made satisfiers of
Divine Justice, together with Christ, carries a show of honoring Christ, but
it is in truth, a sacrilegious error. And Papists may as well affirm,

IESVIT.
The third reason is, To make men love the Church and society of Saints;
whereby they come to be partakers of the aboundancie of her treasures, to pay
their grievous The Communion of Saints: This is that, which made King David
exult, saying, I am partaker with all them Psalm. 118. v. 63.
And in this respect the Apostle exhorts us, Gratias agamus Col. 1.12.
Deo Patri, qui dignos nos fecit in partem sortis Sanctorum in lumine. This is
that which the same Apostle writes to the Corinthians, exhorting them to be
liber all toward Titus and Luke; For the present, 1. Cor. 8.14.
let your abundance (in temporal goods) supply their want, that (...) their
abundance (in pious This hope to supply in this kind the spiritual needs of
Christians, by the abundance of his sufferings, made Saint Paul so much rejoice
in them; I joy ( says he) in my Collos. 1.24. 2. Cor. 12.15.
sufferings for you, and I make full the things that want of the sufferings of
Christ in my flesh, for his Body, which is the Church. And again, Cupio
impendi, and super impendi pro vobis: Out of which words, Origin gathers, that
Saint Paul ( as a kind of Origin. Hom. 10. in Number.
Victime or Sacrifice) did expiate the sins of others, not satisfying for the
injury against God, nor for the eternal punishment due, but for one outward
and transitory effect of sin, to wit, the debt of temporal pain. In this
sense also Saint Augustine interprets the former Aug. in Psalm. 61.
words of the Apostle, Of suffering in his body the things wanting of the
sufferings of Christ: Patitur Christus

ANSWER.
The true love of the Church, and of the Saints, is grounded upon verity, and
not upon Romish Fables, 2. Epist. John verse. 1. And Communion of Saints, in the
Apostles Aug. d. Temp. Sermon. 181. cap. 13.
.

But neither Scripture, nor Fathers teach, That the living Ephesians. 4. 15, etc. 1.
Ioh. 1.3. Romans 12.4.

The saying of David, Psalm. 119.63. I am partaker with all them that fear thee
and keep thy Commandments (...). in Com. AEqu^e ego inquit, atque illi te
timeo, (...) etiam mandata tua obseruo. Vnus e. nim ex illorum numero egosum,
qui te maxim venerantur atque obseruant.
, proves, That this holy man made righteous Persons his Friends and
Associates, and that he shunned the fellowship of the wicked, Psalm. 101.6. But
of Communion of Satisfactions, he speaks not a word. Also what a miserable
inference is this, David was partaker of all them which feared God, and kept
his Commandments: Ergo, He was Partaker of their Satisfactions, and those to
Godward. Is there no other bond, or Act of Fellowship but this only? Have all
they which fear God and keep his Commandments, according to the state of
this life, superabundant Satisfactions? Yea, How appears it that David had
need of other men's Satisfactorie deeds? For he was a man after Gods own
heart, full of Grace, and abounding in works of mortification, Psalm. 6.6. and
102.9. and Psalm. 35. 13, yea of that rank, to wit, a great Prophet Read
before the Jesuits words, Page 505.
, which our Adversary himself says, Receive not, but Communicate
superabundant Satisfactions to

S. Paul's text, Col. 1.12. speaks of Partnership of heavenly inheritance
Caietan. in Com. Sors Sanctorum, haereditas est Sanctorum, and est sensus ad
habendam partem Haereditatis Sahctorum, hoc est ad participandum haereditatem
Sanctorum, quae appellatur sors, quia non ex proprio consilio, non ex proprijs
meritis, sed velut sort, hoc est diuino munere obtigit ita illis, quod non
alijs. Dyonis. Carthus. ib. Sortis Sanctorum id est haereditatis Electorum,
etc. Lyra, (...) Card. etc.
, and not of Satisfactions.

The next place, 2. Cor. 8. 14. is expounded by Pontificians themselves, of
Almesdeedes in this life; and the sense (according Caietan Caietan. Sup. 2.
Cor. 8.14. Ecce aequalitas, vos abundatis temporalibus facultatibus, Sancti in
Jerusalem indigent, ad aequalitate^ res reducitur, si vestra abundantia
sucurrit illorum indigentiae Dioni. Carthus. ibid.
) is, You Corinthians abound with temporal goods, the Saints of Jerusalem are
in want: the matter will be reduced to an equality, if your plenty supply
their indigencie. But if with Hugo Carensis and Lyra, the latter part of the
words should be expounded of Spiritualls, it belongs to such spiritual gifts
as are communicable from one member of the Church Militant in this life, to
another, as instruction, exhortation, special prayer, etc. and not to
Satisfactions to be made to God by one for another, much less of applying such
satisfactions of the deceased to the living, or to others deceased. The places,
Col. 1. 24. 2. Cor. 12. 15. are forced by Romists to speak to purpose Paul
says, Col. 1. 24. Ireioyce in my sufferings for you, and fill up or
accomplish, (...), those things which are behind or wanting, (...), AEstius. in
Com. Ea quae reliqua sunt passionum, id est quae posterius adhuc restant
persoluenda.
of the afflictions (...), of Christ, in my flesh, (...) his body, which is the
Church.

The first part of these words proves that S. Paul suffered for the
Collossians: But because he might suffer for the confirmation of their faith,
or as an example of patience (...). (...). Col. 1. Pro vobis id est pro
confirmatione vestri. Aug. d. Genesis ad. lit. li. 3. ca. 15. Et exempla
Demonstranda sunt patientiae ad exempla aliorum.
, or by way of persecution, because he preached the Gospel to them Lira. Col.
1. Licet non predicauerit cis (...), predicauit tamen eis per suos Discipulos.
, and other Churches, it cannot be concluded, that he suffered to make
satisfaction for their sins.

Secondly, The next words conclude not Satisfaction: for Some Personal, and in
his own flesh; Some, By Sympathy and compassion in his members Lira. ib.
Passiones Christi dupliciter dicuntur, vno modo in corpore proprio, in quo
suftinuit famem, sitim, and mortem, and fic accipiendo, nihil erat ibi ad
implendum: alio modo prout patitur in membris suis, qui sunt fideles, secundum
quod dicit Act. 9. Saul, Saul, quid me persequeris. Leo. sermon. vlt. d. Pass.
Domini. Passio Domini inquit vsque ad finem perducitur mundi, and sicut in
Sanctis suis ipse honoratur, ipse diligitur, and in pauperibus ipse pascitur,
ipse vestitur: ita in omnibus qui pro iustitia aduersa tollerant, ipse
compatitur, etc. Aug. d. Agon. Christi. ca. 7. Cruciatus corporis, malas animas
miserabiliter affligit, bonos autem fortiter purgat. Anselm. in Coloss. 1.29.
In carne Christi quam virgo peperit, nihil passionum deest, sed omnes in illa
passiones sunt impletae: sed adhuc restat pars passionum eius in mea carne,
quas quotidie tollero pro universally corpore eius quod est Ecclesia. Si enim ab
eruditione fidelium cessarem, has passiones ab infidelibus non sustinerem.
. The first are satisfactorie, the second are exemplarie, purgative, probatiue,
or for the edifying of the Church Theodor Sup. Colos. ca. 1. Diuinus quoque
Apostolus varias perpessiones pro ipso tollerauit, and lubenter sustinuit
Gaudio enim inquit in passionibus pro vobis, sciebat enim vitam ex ijs
procurari. Dixit autem se adimplere ea quae desunt afflictionum Christi, vt qui
quod restat impleat and pro ijs perpessiones sustineat. Restabat autem vt
predicaret gentibus and munificum solutis suppeditatorem ostenderet.
. S. Paul supplied not, or perfected not the first, Esa. 63.3. for then Christ's
sufferings upon the Cross, were imperfect: but both S. Paul, and all other
just persons which patiently bear affliction, and endure the Cross, supply
and accomplish that which is yet wanting in Christ, as he is considered in a
mystical Saul, Act. 9.4. Saul, Saul, Why persecutest thou me: and v. 5. I am
Jesus whom thou persecutest. S. Augustine Aug. in Psalm. 30. Conc. 1. Totus
Christus, caput and corpus, caputille saluator corporis, qui iam a scendit in
coelum, corpus autem Ecclesia quae laborat in terra. Hoc autem corpus nisi
connexione Charitatis adhaereret capiti suo, vt vnus fieret ex capite and
corpore, non de Coelo quendam persecutorem corripiens diceret: Saul, Saul,
quid me persequeris? Idem. Psalm. 140. Vos inquit Apostolus estis corpus Christi
and membra. Si ergo illi caput, nos corpus, vnus homo loquitur, sieve caput
loquatur, sieve membra, vnus Christus loquitur, and capitis est proprium loqui
etiam in persona membrorum.
and S. Gregory Greg. Praef. Moral. ca. 11. Redemptor noster vnam se personam
cum sancta Ecclesia quam assumpsit exhibuit. Theophil. Com. Coloss. 1. 24. Adeo
diligit vos, vt tanquam non sufficiant priores passiones and afflictiones, post
mortem etiam patiatur in meo corpore, nondum enim contentus est morte, sed
adhuc inmumera facit. Non igitur seipsum (...) Paulus (...) dicit, sed
monstrare volens quod Christus etiamnum pro ipsis curam gerat.
say, That Christ and the Church are one mystical Body. Therefore when the
members suffer, the head suffers, and the afflictions of the members, are the
afflictions of Christ, 2. Cor. 1. 5. 1. Cor. 12. 12.

It is also remarkable, that not only the Fathers, but the Aquin. 3. q. 48.
Art. 5. ad. 2. Dicendum quod (...) Sanctorum proficiunt Ecclesiae, non quidem
per modum rede^ptionis, sed per modum exempli, and (...) secundum illud, 2.
Cor. Sieve tribulamur pro vestra exhortatione and salute. Lira. in Colos. 1.24.
(...). ib. Adam Sasbot. in Epist. Paul ad Col. cap. 1. Christus non omnia
perfecit in corpore suo: non enim sufficit passio ipsius ad co^uersionem
gentium, si non praedicetur Euangelium: Quod ergo hic deest passionu^ Christi,
ego adimpleo monendo scilicet, doce^do, praedicando, quod du^ sedulo studeo
facere, multa patior dura and grauia, imo vincula and carceres. Illud (pro
corpore eius) hunc habet sensum, vt corpus ipsius quod est Ecclesia
perficiatur: hic videtur germanus esse sensus huius loci. B Justinian. ibid.
Paulutius. ibid. Guilliand. sup. Hebr cap. 10.
, expound this Scripture in such sort, that it serves not at all to maintain
Papal Indulgences. And Estius Estius. in Com. ibid. Hinc Theologi quidam
putant, ostendi Sanctorum passiones fidelibus prodesse ad remissionem paenarum,
quae vocatur indulgentia. Quae quidem Doctrina, Etsi Catholica and Apostolica
sit, atque aliunde satis probetur: Ex hoc tamen Apostoli loco, nobis non
videtur admodum solid statui posse.
a modern Pontifician says, That whereas (...) of his part strain the Text
of S. Paul, to prove Satisfactions and Indulgences, himself is of mind, that
the said Doctrine cannot effectually be proved by this place. The other place,
2. Cor. 12. 15. (I will very gladly spend and be spent for you:) or as the
Rhemists translate, (I most gladly will bestow, and will my self moreover be
bestowed for your souls,) affoordeth no argument for Satisfactions and
Pardons. Caietan, Estius, Justinian, Estius. Com. 2. Cor. 12.15. Equidem
inquit, lubentissime non solum, vt pater quaecunque habeo vobis impendam, id
est impendere paratus sum, tantum abest vt quae vestra sunt quaeram: verum
etiam si sit opus, pro vita, and salute vestra, ipse expendar, hoc est, meipsum
in
. S. Paul manifests his paternall affection to the Corinthians, saying, I am
ready not only as a Father, to bestow all that I have upon you (so far am I
from seeking any thing of yours) but also to spend my life for you. Now by what
Art or Engine can Papists extort Pardons or Satisfactions out of this Text?
does it follow, that if Saint Paul be ready to spend himself, life, and
state, for the good of his flock: therefore there is a rich stock, and
treasure of superabundant Passions and Satisfactions laid up by S. Paul, to be

But the Jesuit secondeth his former inference by a testimony of Origin. I
answer: Origin Origin. sup. Number. Hom. 10. Quomodo autem and filij eius auferunt
peccata Sanctorum, id est Apostoli and Martyrs, si poterimus ex Scripturis
diuinis probare tentabimus. Audi primo Paulum dicentem, libenter enim (inquit)
expendam and expendar pro animabus vestris. Pro ijs ergo quibus scribebat
expendi se, and immolari dicit Apostolus. Hostia autem cum immolatur ad hoc
immolatur, vt little pro
in the place objected, speaks of purging sin it self, by the passions of
Martyrs, and not of the temporal mulct, or pain of sin only. But the
blood of Martyrs purges not sin it self by way of condign Satisfaction
(our Adversaries being witnesses Zerula. d. Indulg. lib. 1. cap. 11. Per
Indulgentiam no^ remittitur culpa peccati, nec (...) in temporalem, sed sola
temporalis remittitur, tota vel pars. Aquin. Quodlib. 2. ar. 66. and 1.2. q.
87. ar. 3.4. and 4. sent. d. 46. q. 1. ar. 3. Caietan. Opusc. to. 2. q. 4.
) but at

The place of S. Augustine Aug. super Psalm. 61 Sed debemus intelligere
personam nostra^, persona^ Ecclesiae nostr^ae, personam corporis Christi.
Vnusenim homo cum capite and corpore suo Jesus Christus saluator corporis and
membrorum corporis, duo in carne vna, and in voce vna, and in passione vna, and
cum transierit iniquitas in requie vna, passiones itaque Christi non in solo
Christo, imo passiones Christi non nisi in Christo. Si enim Christum intelligas
caput and corpus passiones Christi non nisi in Christo. Si autem Christum
intelligas solum
is strained against his meaning, for this Father speaks of all the members
of Christ which suffer for their Masters cause: But in our Adversaries Tenet,
all that suffer for Christ have not superabundant Satisfactions, but only
some. And this Father is so far from maintaining Pro modulo nostro exoluimus
quod debemus, and pro posse virium nostrarum, quasi canonem passionum
inferimus, etc. According to our small measure we pay that which we are obliged
unto, and according to our power we cast in, as it were, the stint of our
passions: but they which pay a stint, and render that whereunto of right they
are obliged, have not superaboundant Passions, or works of Supererogation.

IESVIT.
This was the practice of the Primitive Church, which at the petition of
constant confessors in prison, did release Cyprian. And that this relaxation
of temporal Cypr. li. 3. ep. 15.
pain was done by applying the abundant satisfaction of holy Confessors, and
designed Martyrs, unto the poenitents that received indulgence, at their
intercessions, Tertullian: For he falling from the Church into the errors of
Montanus, whereof one was, That for Christians sinning after Baptism, there
was no remission of sin, refutes the Catholic custom of remitting (...).
lib. d. pudicitia cap. 22.
cancelled and satisfied their own sins. It is ingratitude or pride for one
prodigally to cast abroad upon others that, which as a great benefit was
bestowed upon him. And speaking unto the Martyr, says, Jf thou be a sinner,
how can the oil of thy lamp suffice both for thee and me? By which
haereticall impugnation appears, that the Catholic Doctrine then was, that
men

ANSWER.
You are an unfaithful Relatour of the practice of the Primitive

After foul and enormous known offenses, committed by Christians, and
especially, after denying the Faith, or Sacrificing to Idols, offenders were
put to a grievous and long Penance Council. Ancyran. Council. 1. Nicen. Burchard.
lib. 19. Gratian. d. 28. c. Presbiter. and 35. q. vlt. and 24. q. 1. and 16. q.
5. etc.
. It fell out sometimes, that there was just reason, why the rigor of Penance
should be mittigated, either in respect of the kind of duresse imposed, or in
regard of the length and continuance. Which favor, the Bishops and Pastors of
each Church (not the Roman only) had authority Council. Ancyran. can. 5.
Council. Nicen. 1. Can. 11.
. This mitigation and relaxation of Penance, was called by the name of Pardon,
and Indulgence Cassand. Consult. ar. 12. d. Indulg. (...) paenarum Canonicarum
imminutio and relaxatio, indulgentia dicebatur.
, and in the same, there was no buying or selling, no reference to Purgatory.

Secondly, Whereas you pretend, that Popes Pardons were in use in the Primitive
Church, many of your own part, control your impudency, to wit, Durand
Durand. 4. d. 20. q 3. De indulgentijs pauca dici possunt per certitudinem,
quia nec Seriptura express de (...) loquitur, etc. Sancti etiam, Ambrosius,
Hilarious, Augustinus, Hieronymus, minime de eis loquuntur.
, Antonine Antonin. Sum. Moral. p. 1. tit. 10. cap. 3. De indulgentijs nil
express habemus in Sacra Scriptura, etc. Nec etiam ex dictis Anti quorum
Doctorum seu modernorum.
, Mayor Mayor 4. d. 20. q. 2. Difficile est modum indulgentiaru^ fundare
authentice (...) Scriptura Sacra. In signum cuius, tres primi Doctores
Ecclesiae, parum de isto modo Indulgentiarum loquuti sunt.
, Roffensis Roffens. c. Luther. ar. 18. Nemo iam dubitat Orthodoxus an
purgatorium sit, de quo tamen apud priscos, nulla vel quam rarissima (...)
mentio. Sed and Graecis, ad hunc vsque diem, non est creditum purgatorium esse,
legate qui velit Graecorum veterum Commentarios, and nullum quantum opinor vel
quam (...) de purgatorio sermonem inueniet; sed neque (...) omnes ac censim
huius rei veritatem conceperunt. Cum ita que purgatorium tam (...) receptum
vniuersae Ecclesiae fuerit, quisiam de Indulgentijs mirari potest quia in
principio nascentis Ecclesiae nullus fuerit earum vsus.
. Angelus (...) v. Indulg. n. 18.
de Clauasio, Cassander Cassand. Consult. ar. 12. d. Indulg.
. And (...) Maire. 4. Did. 19. Alph. Castro. c. (...). li 8. v. Indulg. Inter
omnes res de quibus in hoc opere (...) est, quam minus aperte (...) literae
prodiderunt, and de qua minus vetusti scriptores dixerint. Apud (...) nulla
mentio Indulgentiarum.
denies, That the Church has any Treasury (...) of the merits of Christ, and
of the Saints. The (...) is maintained by Angelus de Clauasio Sum. Angel. v.
Indulg. n. 9. Ego teneo cum Franci. d. Mairo in tractatu de Indulgent.
. Cardinal (...) says, That indulgences are granted only for penance
imposed by the Church, and so according to this opinion, they release people,
only of saying a certain number of (...), or from fasting certain hours, or
from bestowing a few pence on the poor (...). Medin. d. Indulg. ca. 14.
Caietanus dixit Indulgentias dari tantam de impositis poenitentijs Caiet.
Opusc. to. 1. tr. 8. q. 1. Ex hac opinione sequitur quod qui ab Hispania imo ab
altero orb Romam aut Hierosolymam indulgentiae plenariae lucrandae gratia
profisiscatur non aliud habebit quam non dicendi tricies (...) Angelicam, aut
nummum tribuendi pauperibus libertatem, ita vt iam priori illi obligationi non
astringatur, videmus hac illius opinione non minus Sacras indulgentias quibus
nunc Ecclesia vtitur, risui Haereticorum exponi, quam si omnino earum
conferendarum potestas aperte negaretur.
. And it was a common opinion in the days of Albertus Albert. 4. d. 20. Ar. 17.
, and Henricus de (...) Gand. Quodlibet. 15. Altisiodor. Sum. li. 4. d. Relap
dicunt quidam quod relaxatio non valet quantum Ecclesia promittit: sed facit vt
excitentur fideles ad dandum, and decipit eos Ecclesia.
, that Popes pious Frauds. What indulgence is it then for (...) Pontificians
to Father this Popish Cosenage upon the holy Apostles and Primitive Church?

Thirdly, I have perused the place of S. Cyprian Cypr. Epist. 15. li. 3.
, objected by the Adversary, and two other Epistles Li. 3. 16. and 18. Epist.
of the like argument, Cyprian, grant any other indulgence, than from the
paenance enjoined by the Canons of the Church, in manner before rehearsed.

But if the Jesuit will obtain his purpose, he must prove out of Antiquity,
that the Church in those days maintained a (...). in 4. d. 21. q. 1. ar. 3.
(...). Duran. Caietan, etc. Fatentur indulgentiarum vsum esse rem nouam quae
(...), Augustini, (...), etc. aut id genus diuorum patrum connitatur, sed solum
pontificum 400. retroannis.
, and that the Roman Pope was the only or principal Keybearer,

I read (...). (...). Eccles. (...). Sequuntur (...) orationes, and primo
oration Sancti (...) de singulis articulis passionis Domini, quam Anastasius
(...), dans (...) dicentibus (...) dies indulgentiarum. Jbid. Innocentius Papa
(...), concessit (...) hanc orationem sequentem denote (...) milia dienum
(...). Auevulnus lateris nostri (...), etc. Ibid. (...) orationem sequentem
deuote dixcrit (...) vndecima milia annorum Indulgentiarum. Et per tot dies
videbit beatam virginem Mariam, ante diem exitus sui, per quot annos (...). Aue
Domina Sancta Maria matter Dei Regina coeli, porta Paradisi, Domina (...) Lux
sempiterna imperatrix inferni: singularis and pura tu es virgo tu concepisti
Iesum Christum sine (...): tu peperisti Creatorem Redemptorem ac Saluatorem
mundi in quo non dubito, libera meab omnibus malis: and ora pro peccatis meis.
Gerson. to. 2. d. Indulg. Consid. 10. Indulgentiarum concessio per tot milia
(...) dierum sed and annorum videtur difficulter sanabilis post remissionem
aeternae poenae and commutationem in temporalem. Constat (...) quod nec homo
singularis in hac vita potest, aut debet ad tot annos (...) poenitentiam agere
cum non victurus sit per millessimam partem tot annorum and nemo ad impossible
obligatur: constat (...) quod dum mundus finem habebit cessabit purgatorium and
ex consequenti dies poenarum suarum.
of certain Popes, that they granted pardons of (...) hundred days, and of
four thousand days, and of eleven thousand years, to all people which should
rehearse S. (...) his prayer, and the (...) Maria, and one other Prayer to the
blessed Virgin. Our Adversary is reputed learned by his own part, and perhaps
he has the gift of working wonders: I entreat him out of his own vast
reading, or else from Father (...) his storehouse, to parallel this Romish
liberal practice with some history out of Antiquity (...). 4. d. 21. q. 2.
ar. 1. (...) verum habet quod indulgentiae valiant Fateor (...) cum vary de
hoc (...) Doctores nullibi quod plenesatisfaciat me legisse.
. And if he please further to demonstrate Taxa. Sacrae poenitentiariae. (...).
Sarisbur. Hanc orationem edidit Sixtus. pa. 4. and Concessit (...) dicentibus
coram imagine B. Mariae Virginis in sole 40000. annoru^ Indulgentiarum.
and (...) for sums of money upon particular crimes, to be solued to the
Publicans of the Ecclesiastical Roman Tribute, in lieu of Pardons, or for
absolution, he shall by disclosing to the world in what old Wall or Vault such
uncouth Jewels are to be found, highly advance the reputation of his Roman
penance and pardons; and for my part he shall have leave to squeese from his
spiritual children what money he can, under that title: whereas in the mean
time he and his fellows by false pretense of Antiquity, do but cheat their
simple Lay-Catholikes of their coin, whereof no

Fourthly, for want of better testimony, the Obiector would prove the ancient
use of Pardons, out of lapsed Tertullian: for if this man being fallen from the
Church, opposed them, then they were in use in that age. I answer, the
Adversary might have learned of Pamelius Pammel. Annot. in Tertull. d.
pudicitia. ca. 22. nu. 192,
, That the Indulgences which Tertullian oposed, were the same whereof Cyprian
speaks, Epist. 10, 11, 12. to wit, relaxation of Canonical censures, and
paenance Tertul. ib. Cum (...) and fornicatoribus a Martyr expostulas veniam.
, and other notorious sins, upon the request of Martyrs being in prison, and
yet alive. Now it seemed to this Father to be unlawful, both that the Martyrs
should be Intreatours, and that the Church should grant Absolution Delicti,
culpae, Of the sin, crime, and fault it self, and not only of the temporal
punishment.
tosuch persons, or use relaxation of censures, imposed by the Tertullians
days, that he cannot prove the same to have had any being in the days of
Peter Lombard, or Hugo Victor Vide Soto 4. d. 21. q. 1. ar. 3. Magister autem
sententiarum, etc. Neque Hugo eius coaetaneus qui de Sacramentis scripsit de
illis meminit. Sunt qui arbitrentur indulgentiarum concessiones caepisse a
tempore Gregorij. m. de hoc autem nulla extat historia, etc. Sub (...) ergo
innocentij. 3. (...), Alexandri, Alberti, and S. Thomae, de indulgentijs
scribere orsi sunt. (...). to. 4. disp. 53. sect. 1. n. 5.
.

IESVIT.
I shall not need particularly to refell the vulgar objections against this
Doctrine: which all proceed upon mistaking, and impugn what we never dreamed
of. They prove that Christ only dyed for the world, and redeemed Mankind, and
not any Saint; who doubts thereof? That we are sanctified and washed from the
stain of sin by the Leo, and of S. Augustine, That the Saints received
Crowns of God, gave not Crowns unto others, but only Christ; we never did
nor will deny it. That only in Christ we dye to sin, and are raised again
soul and body unto eternal life; we never taught the contrary: for the
Satisfactions of Saints have not virtue to redeem the world, nor to satisfy
for the guilt assistance by good works redeem themselves, or by Satisfactions

ANSWER.
It is an error to ascribe any effect to the operations of men, which is
proper to the death of Christ: But to make Satisfaction to divine Justice for
any punishment of sin, eternal or temporal, Heb. 1. 3. When he had by
himself, (...), purged our sins, Col. 2. 15. triumphing over them in
himself, (...). And whereas our Adversaries restrain these and the like
places to the stain and eternal guilt of sin, the Apostle, Col. 2. 14.
affirms, That Christ blotted out ((...)) the hand writing of decrees
(contained in the law (...). Sup. Coloss. 2. De legc siquidem Moy si loquitur,
quae lex mandatorum, decretorum, and factorum appellatur. Adam. Sasbot. ibid.
Legemaute^ Moysi sieve Decalogum, Chirographu^ appellauit, quod accusaret and
contestaretur aduersus nos. Ephesians. 2.15. Lex enim iudicabat nosreos, dum non
praestabamus quod precipiebatur, vnde etiam dicit Chirographum ipsum fuisse
contrarium nobis. Hoc Chirographum deleuit Christus, quia ipsius beneficio iam
amplius non tenemur lege. AEstius. ibid. vult enim docere Apostolus, legem
veterem per Christum abolitam esse, totamque eius obligationem cessare,
introducta lege Christi.
) that was against us, and took it out of the way, nailing it to his Cross
(and that by himself, Heb. 1.3. Col. 2.15.) but the temporary punishment of
sin, is contained Leuit. 26.14. Deuteronomy. 28.15, etc. Therefore Christ Jesus our
Savior, immediately and by himself, and not mediately by the passions of
Saints, wiped out, and removed out of the way the malediction of temporary
punishment, as well as the guilt of eternal.

When Daniel himself, one of the most holy Prophets, prayed Dan. 9.7. Oh Lord,
righteousness belongs unto thee, but unto us confusion of face. v. 9. To the
Lord our God belongs mercy and forgiveness, though we have rebelled against
thee: and v. 18. O my God, incline thine ear and hear, open thine eyes and
behold our desolations, etc. for we do not present our Three things are
remarkable in this Scripture.

First, Daniell was a sanctified person, and a Prophet, one of those which,
according to our Adversaries Tenet, communicates Satisfactions to fill up the
Churches Treasury.

Secondly, he prays to God, not only for the remission

Thirdly, he presents not his own Satisfactions, neither yet the
superabundant Passions of any other of the Patriarchs or Prophets, but he
rests wholly upon the free mercy of God, and the future satisfaction of the
Messiah to come. Therefore I conclude, that they which conioyne the passions of
Saints with the sufferings of Christ to make condign Satisfaction for the
temporary punishment of sin, are injurious to the All-sufficient

Now if the Adversary in his answer rely upon the distinction of eternal and
temporal pain, affirming that Christ alone, and by himself has fully
satisfied the justice of God for the first, but not for the latter Greg. Val.
Opusc. li. d. Satisfac. ca. 3. Cogitandum est Christum non solum suam, sed
etiam nostram simul satisfactione^ aeterno patri acceptandam obtulisse, vt ex
vi etiam satisfactionis noftrae, debitum illud, quod ad poenam quide^temporalem
attinet solueretur.
: he must remember, That it is not sufficient in a matter of such consequence,
to affirm Nugnus. Addit. in 3. p. Th. q. 20. ar. 3. dif. 1. Quod autem fuerit
diuina institutio, licet non possit, manifest probari, quia non constat ex
sacris literis, neque ex concilijs, tamen loca supra adducta, precipue Pij
quinti, sufficienter illud probant.
, but he must confirm, by divine Testimony, the verity of his answer. And if
the former Principles and the arguments deduced from them, when they are
propounded in a due form, conclude

Lastly, if the Jesuit will be so rigide, as to admit no argument on our part
which may receive any colorable answer, I must require him (likewise) to
confirm his own positions, at leastwise with probable reasons, and not pester
his papers with Illations ridiculous to children. But among other things, I
entreat Bzouius. Annal. Tom. 14. Anno. 1300. n. 4. Insuper public clamabant,
quia dictorum Apostolorum (Petri and Pauli) meritis, Omnes animae in
Purgatorio, non solum a poenis suissent liberatae, sed etiam aeternam quoque
: for if his Monarchy be only over the Church Militant Onus. Eccles. ca. 15.
Papa non mortuorum sed viuentium terrestris est Deus. Gabriel. in Can. Miss.
lect. 57. Dicit Sanctus Bonauentura, si quis contendat vicarium Jesus Christi,
habere iudiciariam potestatem super eos qui sunt in Purgatorio, non est ei
multum resistendum, dummodo hoc dictet ratio vel authoritas manifesta. Rubeo. 4
d. 19. q. 2. Indulgentiae non proficiunt nec dari possunt existentibus in
Purgatorio, etc. quia existentes in Purgatorio, non sunt de foro Papae. Gerson.
to. 4. ser. 2. d. Defunct. q. 9.
, and the Church Militant is only upon earth, by what authoriy does the Roman
Bishop intermeddle with souls in Purgatory? Also how does his holiness, or
his Emissaries, the Jesuits and Friars, know which souls are in Purgatory
gatorie, and how long they continue in the same, and the time,

d Viguer. instit. cap. 16.. 6. verse. 22. Videtur dicendum quod valet ad
totannos, ad quot secundum diuinam ordinationem, pro peccatis preteritis,
haberet sustinere in Purgatorio, si ante Indulgentiae consecutionem, in gratia
decessisset. Petud. 4. d. 20. q. 4. n. 18. Negas. (...). to. 4. disp. 50. sect.
5. n. 11. 12. Saepe conceduntur mill vel december mill anni Indulgentiae cum
tamen poenae Purgatorij ordinary non sint tanto tempore duraturae. Est igitur
communis sententia, diem vel annum in huiusmodi Indulgentijs proxime
significare, durationem poenitentialis satisfactionis in hac vita exhibitae pro
peccatis, per Indulgentiam autem remitti non solum satisfactionem
poenitentialem, sed tantam poenam Purgatorij, quanta per poenitentiam vnius
diei vel anni remitteretur. (...) 4. d. 21. q. 2. ar. 1. Cordube d. Indulg. q.
11. (...). d. Sacram. Disp. 6. q. 1. punct. 2. pa. 661. (...). sup. Decret.
did. 1. d. poenit. in Leuitico. q. 24. n. 25. 26. 27. etc.
Dominicus Soto, and Thomas Zerula say, That souls continue not in Purgatory,
ten or twenty years, and yet the Pope grants Pardons for many thousands of
years Zerula. d. Indulg. l. 1. c. 21. q. 8. Octauo quaeritur quanto tempore
anima potest stare in Purgatorio? Resp. breuiter ex Sot. loc. cit. did. 21. q.
2. ar. 1. col. 4. and did. 19. q. 2. ar. 2. In fine: vbi ait animam non
detineri in Purgatorio spatio viginti imo nec december annorum. Aureol. 4. d. 20.
ar. 1
. Also, by what experience or testimony do Papists understand the state of
souls in Purgatory, the quality of their pain Read before in the Margen,
page 564. Rubeo 4. d. 19. q. 1. Aliquando pro vno denario vel obolo,
quinquaginta vel centum anni de Indulgentia conceduntur.
, their ingresse and egresse from that place of torment, or the means to apply
remedy to them? Now let them answer what they please touching the difference
of the years of Penance in this life, Jac. d. Graph. Append. d. Indulg. cap.
1. n. 24. Poeua Purgatorij etsi aeterna non sit, miro tamen modo est grauis,
excedit enim omnem poenam quam vnusquisque vnquam passus est in hac vita: vnde
nunquam in carne inuenta est tanta poena licet mirabilia pasci sint Martyrs
, or concerning any of the former assertions, and withal, let them be
entreated to confirm their Tenet with any probable Argument, and we shall
think they are less partial, when they admit no proof as sufficient on our
part, which can be euaded by any strain of wit.

THE NINTH POINT. Papal power, whether directly or indirectly.
IESVIT.
THe Question proposed in the ninth place, being a Controversy between two
powers, both (each in his kind) Sovereign and Supreme; both instituted and
appointed of God; both necessary for the preservation of Religion, and
government of the Christian world; both Sacred, Venerable, Honored, and
reverenced of me, in the inmost

ANSWER.
IN your entrance into this ninth

Thirdly, You profess your own unwillingness to discuss

To the first I answer, That Papal jurisdiction is not supreme in Spirituals,
by Divine institution; whereas regal is by divine, natural, and civil, in
things civil and temporal. Gregory Greg. li. 4. ep. 60. Nullus
praedecessorum meorum Pontificu^ Romanorum vniuersalis Episcopi nomen sibi
assu^psit, quod si assump erit Typhum esse dico arrogantiae, vocabulum superbum
nouum, pompaticu^, peruersum, stultu^, temerarium, superstitiosum, prophanum,
impium, sceleratum, nome^ singularitatis, nomen erroris, nomen Hypocriseos,
nomen vanitatis, nomen blasphemiae, eumque qui se appellauerit, aut appellari
desiderauerit illo arrogantissimo vocabulo, in elatione sua Antichristum
praecurrere, illiusque quietam and gratam vsurpationem, fidei vniuersalis
Ecclesiae calamitatem esse. Read also lib. 4. ep. 32.36. 37. 38. 39. and lib. 6
ep. 24.30. 37. and li. 7. ep. 3. Paul. Cararia. sum. Canon and Mor. q. 3. ar.
7. p. 2. n. 40. Ex nimia humilitate se vniuersalem Papam negat (Gregorius.)
the Great (a Roman Pope) says as follows: None of the Roman Bishops my
predecessors assumed to himself the name of Universal Bishop: and if any man
else assume the same, I say, It is a swelling of arrogancy, a proud, novel,
pompous, perverse, temerarious, superstitious, profane, and impious title, A
name of Singularity, a title of Error, a word of Vanity, and Blasphemy: and
whosoever takes upon him, or desires this arrogant title, by this exalting
himself, he is a forerunner of Antichrist; and if he be permitted to usurp
the same, it will prove the bane of the Faith of the universal Church. Also
if the Roman Monarchy were of Divine institution, how could an Oecumenicall
Council Council. Chalced. Act. 16.
(one of those four which Pope Gregory himself honored as the four
Evangelists Greg. lib. 1. ep. 24. Sicut sancta Euangelij quatuor Libros, sic
quatuor (...) suscipere, and venerari me fateor.
) appoint equal dignity, jurisdiction, and privileges to the Episcopal See
of Constantinople, and to the Sea of Rome? Again, other Bishops in ancient
time, style the Roman by the name of Brother, Colleague, fellow Priest, fellow
Bishop Council. to. 1 Surij, pa. 601.603.604. Cyprian. ep. 67. and 72. Greg. in
(...). saepissime.
, Eusebius. Hist. lib. 5. cap. 23. Socrat. li. 5. ca. 21. (...). ap. Cyprian. ep.
75. Onus Ecclesiae, cap. 19. n. 3. Si Christus super alios Apostolos Petrum,
and forte eiusdem Petri successores super alios Sacerdotes praeposuerit
quemadmodum proditur in Dialogo Catha Senen. Tamen hoc fecit ob Petri
Praecipuam (...) humilitatem, and charitatem, Ideo successoribus Pontificibus
nisi essent eiusmodi, talen Praeeminentiam non praesumitur attribuisse, neque
super eos aedificasse suam Ecclesiam vniuersalem, quae simpliciter pendet a
Christo, qui est angularis lapis, and fundamentum ipsius Ecclesiae.
. And that which is principally to be considered: It appears not by divine
Revelation, that our Savior, or his Apostles, granted any Monarchy to the
Roman Pope, or that he is the only Successor of S. Peter, or that S. Peter's
authority and privileges are deuolued upon the Roman Bishops only. Yea it
is not infallible, that S. Peter himself was a Monarch, Luc. 22.24. for in the
whole divine History, no Monarchical actions of his are reported: He is sent
upon a message by other Apostles Gerson. d. potest. Eccles. Lect. 11. Apostoli
miserunt in Samariam Petrum and Iohannem, tanquam subditos Ecclesiae.
, Acts 8.14: he gives the right hand of fellowship to S. Paul and Barnabas,
Gal. 2. 9: and many of the Fathers say, the rest of the Apostles were his
Compeeres Cypr. d. unit Eccles. Chrysostom. sup. Gal. 1. (Paulus) honor par illi
erat. Hieron. epist. ad Euagrium.
.

Secondly, Your protestation, that you honor Papal and regal dignity, must
be understood Iesuitically, with mental limitation, to wit, that you hononr
the Pope as an earthly God, Did. 40. ca. Si Papa.
. But you honor Kings as the Popes vassals Math. Paris. Chron. in Henrico 3. pa
844. Nonne Rex Angloru^ noster est vassallus.
, or in a subordination to the Pope, and so far only as the Pope Aug.
Triump. Sum. d. Eccles. p. 1. q. 1. ar. 1. Omnis potestas Imperatorum and Regum
est subdelegata respectu potestatis Papae. Naucler. Generat. 37. Consurgit ex
aduerso blandiens adulatio susurrans o quanta est sublimitas Ecclesiasticae
potestatis. Nam sicut Christo collata est omnis potestas in coelo and in terra,
ita Christus omnem potestatem dedit successoribus suis. Vnde nec Constantinus
quicquam dedit Syluestro Papae quod non esset prius suum, sed reddidit unjust
detentum Porro sicut non est potestas nisi a Deo, sic nee aliqua potestas
Imperialis aut Regalis haberi potest, nisi a Dei Vicario, in cuius femore
scriptum est, Rex Regum, Dominus Dominantium. Ipse est Monarcha supremus nedum
in spiritualibus sed in temporalibus, a quo alij Reges and Principes immediate
suam accipiunt Dominationem, and solum mediate a Deo.
will license you. And if you speak plainly, and from your heart, concerning
your loyalty and dutiful respect toward the King, how comes it to pass
that Roman Priests and Jesuits have had their singer in every treason intended
against his Majesty, yea formerly against Queen Elizabeth, and the state? and
wherefore do you your self decline the Oath of Allegiance, and persecute some
of your own part, because

Thirdly, If you be unwilling (for fear of afterclaps) to dispute, or deliver
your judgment concerning this question, this Bernard. ep. 34.
S. Bernards rule is, Melius est vt scandalum oriatur, quam vt veritas
relinquatur, It is better that scandal happen, than that Verity be forsaken,
which is most to be observed in matter of Faith: such as this is made by your
faction, and tending (by the denying thereof) to the ruin of souls, as ye
pretend.

IESVIT.
But seeing that those of our Society are odiously traduced,

ANSWER.
There be three opinions maintained respectively by Roman Divines, concerning
the present question.

1. The first is negative, to wit, the Pope (by virtue of his Read the B. of
Rochester, d. potest. Papae, ca. 8. Qui multos citat Authors.
.

2. The second is affirmative Marta d. Iurisdict part 1. cap. 19. n. 7. (...).
d. Cath. Iustit. tit. 46. n. 73. 74. 75. (...). d. Sig. Eccle. lib. 17. ca. 4.
Baron. Annal. to. 11. Anno 1026. n. 26. and Anno 1027. n. 51. Sander. d.
Monarch. lib. 2. ca. 4. (...). Pontif. Romans ca. 46 pa. 621. Carerius. d. Romans
Pontif. li. 2 ca. 17. Paulus Cararia. Sum. Mor. and Can. q. 3. ar. 7. p. 2. n.
10.


3. The third is pendulous, with show of Limitation, and Mitigation, to wit,
The Pope has an indirect Bellar. d. Pontif. li. 5. ca. 1678. Gretsar. def.
Bellar. d. Pontif. Driedo. d. li. Christ li. 2. ca. 2. Victoria. d. potest.
Eccle. q. 2. Caietan. Apol. ca. 13. ad. 6. Soto. 4. did. 25. q. 2. ar. 1.
Turrecrem. sum. li. 2. cap. 113. Pighius Apol. cap. 13.
Power, limited and circumscribed by many Cautions, and Prouisoes, in deposing
Princes, etc.

The first Tenet is Orthodoxall, grounded upon holy Scripture, and the
Testimony of the Primitive Fathers Policarp. ap. Eusebius. Hist. lib. 4. cap. 15.
Tertull. c. Scap. cap. 2. and d. Idol. cap. 15. and Apol. cap. 30. etc. Marc.
lib. 1. Orig. lib. 9. Ep. ad Romans cap. 13. Chrysostom. in Ep. ad Romans Ser. 23.
Optat. Mileuit. c. Parmen. lib. 3. Ambros. Apol. David. cap. 10. and 16. Aug.
Ep. 166. and sup. Psalm. 124. and Expos. Ep. ad Romans Greg. Romans lib. 3. Ep. 61.
and 64. (...). Expof Pelus. lib. 1. Ep. 48. Damian. lib. 4. ep. 9. Council.
Toletan. 4. Otho Frising. Chron. lib. 6. c. 35. Gerson. d. Potest. Eccles.
Lect. 11. Occham, Aliaco, (...). Maier. Waldensis, Doctores Parisienses.
, and the consent of many famous Doctors in all Ages, whose mouths

The second Opinion is falsely fathered upon Pope Zachary the first Carerius.
d. Pot Romans pont. li. 2. ca. 3. Boskier. Legate. Apostol Con 14. pa. 35.
Grtaian. Cause. 15. q. 6. cap. Arius. Zacharius Regem Francorum non tam pro suis
iniquitatibus quam pro (...) quod (...) potestati erat inutilis a regno
deposuit.
, but indeed no elder than Pope Gregory the seventh, a Brand of Hell; and it
was ripened by many of his Marta. Simancha. Baronius. Tho. Bosius. Fanc.
Bosius. Carerius. Paulus Cararia.
.

The third Opinion, maintained by Bellarmine, may seem (for manner of
speaking) to be more moderate than the former, but in weight and consequence,
it is equally false, and pernicious; for it has the same effects, yielding
Authority Bellarm. ibid. cap. 6. Dummodo non obsint fini spirituali, aut non
sint necessaria ad eum consequendum, si autem tale quid accidat, spiritualis
potestas potest aut dobet coercere temporalem omni ratione ac via quae ad id
necessaria videbitur. Idem, lib. contra Barclaium, page 37.40.48.49.149.177.
; it armeth subjects to Rebellion, and enemies to mischief; and Bellar. d.
Romans Pontif. lib. 5. ca. 6. Quantum ad personas non potest Papa, vt Papa
ordinary temporales Principes deponere, etiam iusta de causa, eo modo quo
deponit Episcopos, id est tanquam ordinarius Iudex, tamen potest mutare regna
and vni auferre, atque alteri confer tanquam summus Princeps Spiritualis, si
id necessarium sit ad animarum salutem. Idem, cap. 7. Quod si Christiani olim
non deposuerunt Neronem, and Dioclesianum and Iulianum Apostatum, ac (...)
Arianum, and similes, id fuit quie de erant vires temporales Christianis. Nam
quod alioqui jure potuissent id facere patet ex Apostolo, 1. Cor. 6.
.

But the Jesuit, our Adversary, washes his hands (like Pilate, Matthew. 27.
24.) pretending, That he and his fellows (good men) are clear from shedding
Royal Blood, or treading Scepters in the mire; he never knew any Jesuit, who
was permitted either by word or writing, to hold any singular Opinion in this
Point. approve and receive the Oath of Allegiance, and we shall be

IESVIT.
For my own particular, as I reverence the Pope as Christ his Vicar on earth,
yet I do utterly disclaim from enlarging his power over the temporalties of
Princes, by any singular opinions of mine, or more than definitions

Bellar. c. Barclaium, enumerat Synodos, Beneuentanum sub Victore 3.
Placentinum sub Vrbano 2. Romanum sub Paschali 2. Coloniense sub Gelasio 2.
Rhemense sub Calixto 2. Lateranense sub Innocentio 3. etc.
, and Popish Divines, are not far to seek, which Extra. d. Major. and Obed.
ca. vnam Sanctam.
. And therefore saying, That you hold no singular Opinions, more than
Definitions, and consent of Divines, you leave a liberty to your self, to
close in your Opinion, with Pope Hildebrand Greg. 7. lib. 1. Ep. 63. Ap. Baron.
Annal. to. 11. Idem, lib. 2. Ep. 13. Quod si verum est, qualiter gratiam Beati
Petri, aut nostram Beneuolentiam sperare debeas, tu ipse, si justitiam vis
attendere non ignoras, videlicet, te non aliter eam habiturum, nec sine
Apostolica animaduersione diu regnaturum, nisi Sceptrum Regni quod tenes,
correcto errore tuo, Apostolicae, non Regiae Majestatis beneficium recognoscas.
Idem, lib. 4. Ep 23. Alteri autem, qui nostrae jussioni humiliter paruerit, and
Obedientiam universally Matri, sicut decet Christianum Regem exhibuerit,
Conuocato Concilio omnium Clericorum and Laicorum, quos aduocare poteritis,
Concilium and Adjutorium in omnibus Praebete, and in Regia Dignitate per
Authoritatem Beatorum Apostolorum Petri and Pauli nostra vice confirmate,
omnibusque Episcopis, Abbatibus, Clericis, and Laicis, in omni regno
habitantibus, vt sibi fideliter and sicut oportet Regi obediant and deserunant,
ex part Omnipotentis (...).
, Pope Boniface Bonifac. Ap. Platinam, in vita eius.
the eight, and with Baronius Baron. Annal. to. 11 anno 1075. n. 2. In quos
rursus audiat ipse vocem Clamantis, Surge and occide and manduca, Act. 10.
Ibidem, anno 1089. n. 11. ex Iuo. part. 10. cap. 54. Non eos Homicidas
arbitramur, qui aduersus excommunicatos Zelo Catholicae Matris ardentes, eorum
quoslibet trucidasse contigerit.
, and Bosius Bosius, d. Sig. Ecclesiae, lib. 17. cap. 4. In quo elucescit
Authoritas Papae, qui
, Aluares Pelagius Aluares, Pelag. d. Planct. Eccles. lib. 1. ar. 37. Apud
illum residet Regalis sieve Imperialis Dignitatis plenitudo, cui de jure
competit Imperium transfer. Ibid. Vnde vere and proprie Papa Monarcha est
Occidentis. Jbid Sicut (...) fidelis dubitat quando Christus suerit Rex and
Sacerdos, and Rex Coeli and Terrae, etc. Sic nullus Catholicus dubitare debet,
quin summus Vicarius Generalis in Terris, pariter vtramque habeat potestatem:
imo non long esset ab Haeresi, contrarium pertinaciter affirmare.
, Augustinus ab Anchona August. ab Anchona. Sum. d. Eccles. q. 1. ar. 1.
Immediata potestas Iurisdictionis omnium Spiritualium and Temporalium est Solum
in Papa.
, Panormitan Panormitan. Cap. Sicut de jure. Idem, ca. per Venerab. Ext. Qui
sint filij Legitimi. (...). Terran. lib. d. Monarchia. Et ego si exaltatus
fuero omnia traham ad (...) id. est (...) regna and Imperia Mundi recuperabo,
and Principibus auferam. Boter.
, yea, and with the Devil himself.

IESVIT.
In Points where there is liberty of Opinion, I shall reverent silence,
springing as well from respect unto your Praecipitur in virtute Sanctae
Obedientiae, sub poena Excommunicationis and inhabilitatis, ad quaeuis officia,
suspensionis a Diuinis, and alijs Praepositi Generalis arbitrio reseruatis, ne
quis nostrae Societatis public,

Pub. Claudius Epist. Dat. 1614. 1. Augusti.

In virtute Obedientiae commendatur Prouincialibus, ne in sua Prouincia
quidquam quacunque occasion aut lingua euulgari patiantur a nostris, in quo de
potestate summi Pontificis supra Reges Principesque, Ex Epist. P. Claudij, Dat.
1614. 2. August.

ANSWER.
There is (touching the maine) no liberty of Opinion in this case. Your Great
Master must be aut Caesar, aut nullus, either all or nothing Auentin. Annal.
lib. 6. pa. 446. Romani sibi Diuinu^ vsurpant honorem, rationem Actorum reddere
nolunt, nec sibi dici (...) animo ferunt cur ita agis? Illud Satyricum
inculcant, Sic volo sic jubeo sit proratione voluntas. Idem, lib. 7. Dictum
Eberhardi. Flamines illi Babylomiae, soli (...) cupiunt, far parem non
possunt.
. And that which you add concerning the General of your Order, is a mere
Illusion: For may not, yea, it, untie this fast knot of Jesuitical fidelity,
to the temporal Abbas. Vsperg. Chronic. Anno Dom. 1171. Et vt creditur, de
Authoritate Alexandri Papae, spretis iuramentis, coeperunt rebellare.
? and what safety can Princes enjoy, by relying upon those servants which
stand Centinell at an hours warning, to follow their greater Master? And what
if the next month after, the General of your Order will send to you and your
fellows, the like Mandatorie Letters to the contrary? To say the truth, your
answer has made the whole matter more suspicious. For what need you and your
brood be thus curbed by a voluntatrie and prouisionall Mandate, touching
Recicide, unless you were otherwise proni ad rem, bent to mischief: Et luxato
hoc freno, and this Paper bridle being, broken to broach and inculcate Quibus
ludus sunt capita and diademata Regum?

IESVIT.
This only I hope J may with your Majesty's good liking affirm, That our
Catholic Doctrine in this Point, is nothing so preiuditiall to Princes, as
are the Opinions of most Caluinists and Lutherans, expressed in their Writings,
whereof we have in this age but ouer-euident and lamentable

ANSWER.
By a draught of Sea water one may judge of the brackishnesse

IESVIT.
As for the other Question which your Majesty proposes particularly to my
self, viz. What I think Subjects ought to do, in the case of Papal
deposition of their Prince? I can give no better Council unto others than what
J am resolved to take my self. First, to pray for peace and tranquillity, and
true concord between both parties. Secondly, to exhort all, to do all other
good offices tending To us particularly our General in a Letter (...) thus,
Prae omnibus (...) sibi habeant vt rebus politicis and a nostra professione
alienis (alioqui licitis) ne se immisceant. Nam ab (...) quae Principem
offendere possunt vel Reipublicae statum perturbare certum est non modo ipsis
abstinendum sed vbi commode possunt and etiam alij id praestant curandum. Ita
Claudius Aquauiua in literis datis 9. Ian. 1607.
do bear so unfeigned affection, that we should think our selves happy, if
your Majesty would vouchsafe but to make trial thereof; not doubting but your
Excellent Judgment would soon discover us, to be not only as loyal as any
other of your Subjects, but more willing to employ our wits, pens, and
labors,

ANSWER.
It is needless to make many words, for if your heart and pen accord, testify
the same by taking the Oath of Allegiance, and by renouncing the pestilent
opinion of Equivocation. therwise your Insinuations and Blandishments, are but
Maskes

Astutam vapido gestans sub pectore vulpem,
Ore aliud retinens, aliud sub pectore Condens.
Now concerning this precedent passage, let it be observed, how the Jesuit
has not answered, but declined his Majesty's Question. And we must hold him to
stand mute, as one not daring to put himself to his Country, lest he be found
guilty. For the question is, What ought the subject to do, in case a Pope
depose the King? The Jesuits answer is, I pray for peace, I exhort others, I
would rather die, etc. Hansome complements, but no security. If his Holiness
send another wind, you which have vowed strict obedience to the Pope, must
turn your sails, your Votes and Prayers must bound another way, you must
exhort others to execute the Popes pleasure, and if they and you perish in the
Popes quarrel, you die Martirs, and go to heaven in a string.

The IESVITS Conclusion.
Having performed your Majesty's will and pleasure, in seeking to give
satisfaction about the Nine principal points that withhold your Royal assent
from joining unto the Roman Church; my poor endeavors prostrate at your
Majesty's feet to receive their doom, humbly beseech this favor, That your
charity, and desire of the unity of the Church, may join together with your
excellent Wisdom and Learning, to pronounce the sentence. Although I be
confident,

ANSWER.
You deceive your self, touching his Majesty: for not only these Nine
points, but many other, detain his royal assent from joining with the Roman
Faith.

Secondly, Your ostentation of proouing these Articles, by the mere rigout of
sole Scripture, is, Vanitas Vanitatum, A vanity beyond vanity: for the
learned of your own part acknowledge, that many of your Romish Articles, are
neither expressly nor inuoluedly contained in holy Scripture Bannes. in 22. q.
1. ar. 10. p. 169. Non omnia quae ad Catholicam fidem pertinent in libris
Canonicis continentur neque aperte neque obscure. Ibid. pa. 170. Orationes esse
ad Sanctos faciendas, venerandas esse eorum Imagines, memoriasque eorundem in
Ecclesia celebrandas solenniter, Sacramenta Ordinis and Confirmationis non esse
iteranda, neque etiam im press and inuolute sacrae literae docent. Canus. loc.
li 3. ca. 3. fundam. 3. Sanctorum Martyrum auxilium precibus implorandum,
eorumque memorias celebrandas, imagines venerandus esse, In sacrificio
Eucharistiae simul cum corpore sanguinem sacerdotibus esse conficiendum and
sumendum: Sacramenta confirmationis and ordinis non iteranda, Sacrae literae
nusquam forte tradiderunt.
. Neither again can your Faith subsist, if it be tried by Genuine and Ireneus
lib. 3. cap. 2. Euenit itaque, neque Scripturisiam, neque traditioni consentire
eos.
: for your self in this Treatise, wherein you perform as much in substance as
your cause will bear, have made no demonstration of any one Article, by the
Testimony of perpetual Tradition: and it seems to me, that you are
conscious hereof, because in your Conclusion you fall upon a new Disputation,
and seek to infer a necessity of reducing all Controversies, to the mere
and absolute determination of the Roman Church and Pope, who will not fail to
be fast friends to themselves Lancellet. Conrad. Temp. om. Iudic. lib. 2. cap.
1. d. Pontif.. 3. n. 5. Sacrosancta Romans Ecclesia fas de omnibus habet
iudicandi, neque cuiquam licet, de (...) iudicare iudicio. Cap. Cuncta per
mundum. and ca. fi. 9. q. 3. cum fini.
.

IESVIT.
For suppose, that praeconceit (instilled into tender

ANSWER.
First, Protestants do not only bring Arguments and Testimonies of Scripture
against the Roman faith, but also the testimony of Antiquity, and all other
grounds of verity.

Secondly, their arguments from Scripture, are such as cannot be avoided, but
only by Sophistry; Ireneus. li. 3. ca. 2. More serpentum lubrici vndique, etc.
and in this manner, the very arguments of Christ for the resurrection, Matthew.
22. 32. and the testimonies which Counsels and Fathers use (...) Arrians,
Pelagians, and sundry other Heretics, may receive

Thirdly, if the Scripture it self, and the doctrine of the Primitive Church,
with other grounds of learning, cannot (as our Adversary obiecteth) de facto,
or presupposing the malice of some persons, (...) all discord, and inconstancy
of Religion; much less can the determination of the Roman Church effect this.
For if men will not regard Moses, and the Prophets, etc. If an Angel come from
heaven, or if one rise from the dead, they may still cavil and refuse to
believe. But for the external repressing of petulant Spirits, a free and
lawful Council Gerson. tom. 1. potest. Eccles. Leet. 11. Cum su^mus pontifex
sit peccabilis, and possit potestatem in destructione^ conuertere: similiter
Sacrum Collegium quod eidatum est and (...), non est in gratia confirmatum:
superest vt aliqua sitrelicta nobis inobliquabilis and indeuiabilis regula a
Christo, secundum quam possit abusus huiusmodi, reprimi, dirigi, ac moderari.
Haecautem regula, vel est Ecclesia, vel Concilium generale. Idem. d. Exam.
Doctr. Consid. 1. Finalis judex doctrinarum fidem tangentium est
were to

IESVIT.
For if you cast away the Roman Church and her authority, no Church is left in
the World that can with reason, or dares for shame, challenge to be infallible
in her definitions: and if such a Church be wanting, What means is

ANSWER.
You do well to name Daring and (...): for if the Papal faction had not
passed all shame, they had not to their usurpations of jurisdiction, added the
forgerie and vaunt of absolute intallibilitie; a privilege, which (I make no
doubt) no Pope (without or with his Papal Counsels) ever in his inward
conscience thought himself to have. But as for Ecclesiasticke decisions and
determinations, we say, that although the absolute authority of the Roman
Church be refused, and although

First, The Holy Ghost has already determined all questions of faith
(necessary for the Church to understand) by his own immediate decisiue voice,
delivered in Sacred Scripture, expressly or deriuatiuely (...). li. d. Exam.
doctr. p. 2. Consid. 1. Attendendum est in examinatione doctrinarum primo and
principaliter, si doctrina sit conformis
.

Secondly, if any other question arise touching History, matter of Fact,
natural or moral Verity, Ceremonies, and external Policy, etc. the same
may be sufficiently decided by Christian prudence working upon the principles
of Reason, humane History, rules of Art, and by the examples of former Chrysostom.
in Mat. Hom. 7. Prestat proba ignoratione detineri, quam falsa opinione (...).
Aug. in 6. Psalm. Nos quod nescire nos Dominus voluit, libenter nesciamus.
Tertul. d. Anima. ca. t. Quis reuelabit, quod Deus texit? vnde sciscitandum
est? Vnde and ignorare tutissimum est. (...) per Deum ignorare quia non
reuetauerit, quam per hominem feire, quia iple presumpserit. Aug. d. ver. Ap.
ser. 7. Mehor est fidelis fidelisignorantia, quam temeraria Scientia. Idem. d.
Genes. ad lit. li. 8. ca. 5. Melius est dubitare de occultis quam litigare de
incertis. Idem. Enchir. ca. 59. Cum ista queruntur and ea sicut potest quisque
(...), non inutihter exercentur ingenia, si adhibeatur disoeptatio moderata,
and absit error opinantium se scire quod nesciunt. Quid enim opus est, vt haec
atque alia
, and unresolved, there ensues no prejudice in respect of faith.

Thirdly, if contentious persons lust to continue such, the determination of
the Roman Church, or Council, cannot quell or stifle contention, but only as
an humane Judge, and by the Defacto, leave matter of strife among those persons
which submit themselves to the resolution thereof. The Dominicans and Jesuits
contend egerly at this day, concerning the sense and Exposition ofthe Trent
Council Council. Trid. Sess. 6. ca. 6. Neque homo ille nihil omnino agit,
inspirationem illa^ recipiens quippe qui illam abijcere potest. Ib. Can. 4. Nec
posse dissentire si velit. Aluares. d. Auxil. li. 3. disp. 18. Suares. Opuse.
(...). Auxil. li. 3. ca. 9.
, in the question of Grace and Free Will. Suares and Vasques, two prime
Jesuits, are divided about the sense of that Council, in the matter of Merit
and Satisfaction Trid. Council. ca. 8. Omnis gloriatio nostra in Christo est, in
quo viuimus, in quo maeremur, in quo satisfactionis, etc. Suares. d. great.
part. 3. li. 12. ca. 19. In quo modernus quidam grauis. Vasq. 1.2. Disp. 204.
n. 68. Quod aiunt Trid. Concilium,
: the like differences are found among many modern Bellarmine holds the
first, and Suares the latter opinion. And if our Adversary eleuate these
dissentions, pretending them to be small; surely they are as weighty as the
differences amongst Protestants.

And lastly, whatsoever Romists pretend to the contrary, the transcendent
Authority of Popes, is no sufficient or Sovereign means to preserve unity,
either of faith or charity in the Christian world: for when the Papacy was
most predominant, the Christian world was distracted with contentions about
Religion; to wit, between the Romans, Graecians, and other Churches; and it was
imbroyled with bloody wars between Popes and other Princes and Emperors Otho
Frising. Chron. li. 6. ca. 36. Qua^ta mala, quot Ibid. ca. 33. Quos dum Leo
papa, cum militia ad vrbem rediens Ecclesiae and imperij finibus coercere vult
commissio praelio caesis multis fugere Beneuentum compellitur. Tanta vero
strages vtrorumque ibi facta fuit, quod a ceruus ex ossibus mortuorum
compactus, hactenus ab Indigenis illic monstratur. Auentin. Annal. li. 6. pa.
480. Per triginta tres annos a Gregorio and vrbano continenter sanguine ouium
belligeratum est. Ibid. li. 7. pa. 547. Confunditur omne ius, and leges
pereunt. Non fides in hominibus, non pax, non humanitas, non pudor, non
veritas, atque ita neque securitas, neque regimen, nequerequies a malis vlla
est. Omnis terra tumultuatur, fremunt vndique bella, omnes gentes in armis
sunt, and se inuicem oppugnant Civitates finitimae inter se praeliantur,
euertuntur Regna Civitates funditus intereunt ferro atque igne. Lambert. (...).
Hist. Germanorum Anno. 1064. Parmensis Episcopus armata multitudine non modica
Luccensem Episcopum, Tho. Walsing. Hist. Anglor. in Henric. 4. pa. 420. Ducenta
millia occisa in bellis quae paparum schysma sequuta, etc.
, and the Roman See it self was rant into Factions, by occasion of Antipopes.
Neither was

IESVIT.
A Church fallible in her teaching, is by the learned to be trusted no further
than they do see her Doctrine consonant unto Scripture, and so they may
neglect her Judgment, when they seem to have evidences of Scripture against
her; and if this liberty of Contradiction be granted,

ANSWER.
A Church fallible in Judgment, is to be trusted, when it confirms her
doctrine by the word of God, which is an infallible Cyril. Chat. 4. d. Spir.
Sanct. (...), etc. N mihi quidem ea tibi proferenti simpliciter fidem adhibeas
nisi de Diuinis Scripturis eorum quae dicam demonstrationem accipias. Nam fidei
nostrae salus and conseruatio, non orationis facundia nititur, sed Scripturarum
diuinarum comprobatione. Aug. c. Don. li. 7. c. 48. Quia nullam rationem vel
authoritatem Scripturarum attulit, diu nos tenere non debet.
, yet no liberty of contesting the lawful authority of the same when it
(confirms her sayings by Gods word) is hereby permitted to contentious
Spirits: and it is more probable, That Pastors of the Church, assembled in Gods
fear and not factiously for their own ends, shall judge aright, than Popes,
which refer all things to their own worldly ends. Christ. Now whenever the
preaching of the Church is

IESVIT.
If wetake out of the world a Church infallible, whence shall ignorant men
learn which is the Doctrine of salvation the Apostles delivered? It is as
evident as the Sun Field of the Church, in the Preface.
of Religion in our time, are grown in number so many, and in nature so
intricate, that few have time and leisure, fewer strength of understanding to
examine them: so that nothing remains for men desirous of satisfaction in
things of such consequence, but diligently to search out, which amongst all the
societies of men in the

ANSWER.
If the rule be infallible, and the Preaching of Pastors according to that
rule; ignorant persons, by the assistance of Grace, may learn the doctrine of
salvation from their teaching, Augustine and Saint Cyprian were subject to
error, yet the unlearned people of Hippo and Carthage received right Faith by
their Ministry, with assurance, that the same descended from the Apostles.

And it is as evident as the Sun shining, that the Word of Christ is the sole
authentical ground of Faith Gerson. part. 1. d. potest. Eccles. Consid. 13.
Considerari debet Ecclesia prout instituta est a Christo, supra (...) Petram
fidei ad finem supernaturalem, secundum legem Euangelicam and Sacrae Scripturae
diuinitus reuelatae, secundum quam regulati Idem. d. Exam. Doctr. part. 1.
Consid. 2. Determinatio solius Papae in hijs quae sunt fidei non obligat
praecise vt (...) ad credendum. Idem. d. pot. Eccles. Lect 11. Cum summus
Pontifex sit peccabilis, etc. Similiter Sacrum Concilium quod ei datum est and
coasistit, non est in gratia confirmatum, etc.
, and the only infallible rule to decide Controversies; and the Pastors of

And although unlearned people depend upon their Pastors like sick men upon
their Physicians, yet where they enjoy the free use of the holy Scripture, as
in ancient times all people did: and if they be careful of their own
salvation, and desire to know the truth, God blesses his own ordinance, and
ordinarily assisteth them by his grace, in such sort, as that they shall not be
seduced to damnation. Math. 24.24. And if they be distracted Binnes. 22. q. 1.
ar. 10. pa. 135. Quod si inter eos sit dissensio simplices fideles excusabuntur
iuxta communes regulas sequendo sententia^ cuiuslibet partis: non tamen inde
sequitur, quod vel fides deficiat nam aliqui eorum veram fidem tenebunt.
. But howsoever, the Roman Church can be no greater stay to them than other
Churches, but only by leading them to a blind obedience Cusan. Exercit. li. 6.
Obedientia irrationalis, est consummata obedientia and perfectissima, scilicet
quando obeditur sine inquisitione rationis, sicut iumentum obedit Domino suo.
, like as Pagans are led in another kind.

Dr. Fields testimony concerning the necessity of learning,

IESVIT.
Jf there be no Church besides the Roman in the world, that can with any color
pretend infallibility of Judgment; Jf the most part of men cannot by their
examining accept of any probable answer unto Protestants Objections

ANSWER.
Unlearned people must rely upon the Ministry of some modern Church, not as
a ground and rule of their faith, but Hippo, Carthage, Lions, etc. in the days
of S. Augustine, S. Cyprian, S. Ireneus) shall at all times actually err, or
grievously err at any time: and when it delivers the doctrine of holy
Scripture, it is herein free from error; and Christian people, by Chrysostom.
Praefat. in Epist. ad Romans and vos si lectioni cum omni alacritate volueritis
attendere, nullo alio praeterea opus habebitis. Verusenim est sermo Christi cum
dicit querite and inuenietis, pulsate and aperictur vobis.
: may certainly know that it erreth not, Act. 17. 11. And touching the Roman
Church, Upon what grounds are Christian people able to know by assurance of
faith, That the doctrine thereof is more infallible than the doctrine of other
Churches? But if Rome is Babylon, described Reuelat. ca. 14. 8. and 17, 5. and
18. 2. as weighty motives induce some men to think Orat. P. Corbarij. apud
Auentin. Annal. li. 7. pa. 616. Sicuti pastor est personatus, ita mysticus est
Antichristus: canis pellicula tectus, in gregem Christi lupina rabie grassatur.
Vendit scelera, in feros, superos, beneficia caelestia cauponatur, etc.
Monstrum biceps, mundanus and spiritualis esse contendit.
) then it is most safe for people to renounce the Communion of this Church, as
it now believes, and to live in the fellowship Gerson. d sig. Ruinae. Eccl.
signo. 8. Fabulae and non sanae doctrinae sunt, etc. Quae non in Reuelatione
Spiritus Sancti, sed secundum traditionem hominum consistant.
, Apoc. 18.4.

IESVIT.
What amiserie will it be if it fall out (as it is most out of their own
certain skill in Scripture, as they should

ANSWER.
What a misery will it be, if it fall out (as it is certain it will) That at
the day of Judgment, the greatest part of English Romists be found, to have
renounced the express and manifest word of Christ, and the sincere faith of
the Primitive Church, and in stead thereof, to have embraced lying vanities,
and the deceivable Traditions Cypr. Ep. 74. Quae ista obstinatio quaeue
praesumptio humana^ Traditionem diuinae dispositioni anteponere.
of the man of finne, These. 2, 3, 4. For out of all doubt, men cannot be saved
which have forsaken the fountain of living Waters, and hewed them out
Cisternes, even broken Cisternes that can hold no Waters, Ier. 2. 13. And if
any man worship the beast, and his Image, and receive his mark in his
forehead, or in his hand, the same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of
God, etc. and he shall be tormented with fire and brimstone, Apoc. 14. 9, 10.
And on the contrary, they which hear the Chrysostom. Sup. Genesis Hom. 5. Diuinae
Scripturae testimonia sequamur, neque feramus eos qui temere quiduis blatcrant.
Ibid. Nos quibus donatu^ est, solis justi tiae radiis illustrari, diuinarum
Scripturarum doctrinis auscultemus, and hunc canonem sequentes, salubres
doctrinas in mentis nostrae promptuaria reponamus.
, and build their faith upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Jesus
Christ himself being the head corner stone, Ephesians. 2. 20. Ioh. 10. 27: all they
which keep the commuandements of God, and the faith of Jesus, Apoc. 14. 12.
refusing to worship Angels, Col. 2. 18. or dead Images, 1. Ioh. 5. 20; which
call upon God in the name of Jesus only; which receive the holy Eucharist in
both kinds, according to our Saviors Precept, and the constant practice of the
Primitive Church; which believe free remission of sins, and justification
honor the King as Gods Supreme Vicegerent, which

IESVIT.
How dreadful then must the danger be of living out of the lap of the Roman
Church, that is, of a Church of infallible authority.

This Church having a most glorious succession of Bishops from the Apostles,
deserves above all other, the protection of your Majesty, (that by a long line
of religious

Your title to the Crown of England, springs from the peaceful conjunction of
the two renowned Roses, which before were mortal enemies, and fought so many
cruel fields, that if we consider the great effusion of blood wherein each of
them were bathed, we shall

Your Majesty's person is the root of a more happy Union of two most glorious
Kingdoms, by your Sacred

Nothing remains to be added for the full consummation of this Islands
happiness, and your Majesty's immortal glory, but the quenching of discord
about Religion, by bringing them back again to the Root and Matrice of the
Catholic Church, to the principal See, Cyril. lib. Ep. 45.
your Majesty shall extend the blessings of Peace from this Island, to the rest
of Europe, from the body unto the soul, and Crown your temporal Peace and
felicity, with eternal. For both which, not only I, but all of my
Profession, yea all Catholics, will offer unto Almighty God our daily
Prayers.

ANSWER.
Sir Declamator, you usurp Radamanthus his office over his head, and being a
delinquent, make your self a Judge. We understand your uttermost strength, in
propugning the absolute Soueraignitie of the Roman Church. The essence of your
Creed, in this and other points, consists in supposall and conceit. For our
selves, we are assured, by that which cannot deceive us (The undoubted Word of
the eternal God) that our Faith and Religion is according to Verity; and we
shall be judged at the latter Day, not by Romans 2. 16. Now the lap of your
Roman Church, since the days of Hildebrand and his faction, is enlarged to a
vast sise (...). (...). d. Gestis Council. Basil. lib. 1. Nec considerant
miseri, quia quae praedicant tantopere verba, aut ipsorum summorum Pontificum
sunt, suas fimbrias extendentium, aut illorum qui eis adulantur.
, and we are departed from the filthiness, which is the skirts of that lap,
but not from any branch of the Catholic Faith. Disprooue us if you be able,
by Divine authority, and then make ostentation at your pleasure. But in the
mean time, judge charitably of us, who are more ready to entertain Truth,
than you to persuade us.

As for glorious fuccession, about which your triumph, if you want the life and
soul thereof, to wit, Apostolical Platina. in Syluest. 2. Gilbertus ambitione
Diabolica dominandi cupiditate impulsus largitione, etc. Idem. in Syluest. 3.
Eo tum Pontificatus deuenerat, vt qui plus largitione and ambitione valeret, is
tantummodo dignitatis gradum bonis oppressis and reiectis obtineret, quem morem
vtinam aliquando non retinuissent nostra tempora. Idem. in Benedict. 4. Peperit
nobis tanta licentia peccandi nullo Principe flagitia hominum tum coercente
haec monstra, haec portenta, a quibus ambitione and largitione sanctissima
Petri seeds occupata est, potius quam posessa. Sabellic. AEnead. 9. lib. 2. Mos
inoleuerat Apostolicae sedis, per vim and Dolum occupand. etc. Boter. Comment.
lib. 12. pa. 407. Math. Paris. Chron. in Henr. 3. pa. 702. Cum Papa qui forma
and exemplum totius tenetur esse Religionis, vsurarius sit manifestus, fomes
Symoniae, pecuniae sititor acraptor, ipsiusque curia forum institorum, imo
potius meretricale prostibulum.
, pardon us, if we make not our final and absolute dependence upon it.

And to proceed to the last part of your Declamation, wherein you solicit
his Majesty to advance your Superstition, putting him in remembrance of his
preservation in his Mothers womb, and of the uniting of the two renowned
Roses: You must understand, that his Majesty's royal Person was preserved in
his Mothers womb (and at the Powder

But I wonder upon what surmise Romists can build their vain hope, of
surprising his Majesty by plausible Blandishments and Insinuations Russin.
Hist. Eccles. lib. 1. cap. 11. (...) Dolis apud ignorantes iocus est,
scientibus vero dolum intendere, non aliud est quam risum mouere.
. These Enchantments are fit for lapsing Ladies, and other mutable Camelions.
But our Lord the King Cyprian. d. Discipline. Flos ille Ecclesiastici germinis,
decus atque ornamentum gratiae spiritualis, Illustrior portio Dominicigregis.
, is as an Angel of God, discerning Good and Evil. The Adversary himself
has felt the force of the Wisdom of this Solomon, and one may sooner with a
twined thread pluck up a tall Cedar by the root, or with a Fishers transplant
this great and religious Constantine Cyprian. Ep. 52. Graves viros and semel
super Petram solida stabilitate fundatos non dico aura leui sed nec vento aut
turbine commoueri. Idem. d. unit. Eccles. Triticum non rapit ventus nec arborem
solida radice fundatam procella subuertit. Inanes paleae tempestate iactantur,
inualidae arbores turbinis incursione euertuntur.
, out of the Paradise Ireneus lib. 5. cap. 20. Ab omni ligno Paradisi escas
manducabis ait spiritus Dei, id est, ab omni Scriptura Dominica manducate.
of Sacred Scripture, into the dark Thicket of humane Traditions Cyprian. Ep.
40. Qui mandatum Idem. Sermon. d. lapsis, Nec Ecclesiae iungitur qui ab Euangelio
seperatur.
, and night-sprung weeds. Nec dicere aliquid, nec facere contra Christum
potest, cuius and spes, and fides, and virtus, and gloria omnis, in Christo est
(Cyprian. lib. d. Lapsis) It is impossible, that (our most gracious King)
should speak, or do any thing for Antichrist, against Christ, whose Hope, and
Virtue, and Honor, is all in Christ.

(...).

A TABLE OF THE PRINCIPAL MATTERS CONTAINED in this Book.
A
ACcidents of Bread and Wine without substance. Fol. 430, 439 Acts of the
Apost. chap. 2. v. 42. 507 Adoration and Veneration. 208 S. Ambrose receiving
the Sacrament in one kind. 503 Angels rejoicing at a sinners repentance. 515
Angels whether adored? 327. 525 527 Antecedent will of God. 78 Apostolical
Church. 64, 98 Assurance of faith. 165 S. Augustine. 21, 68, 122, 132, 200,
219, 273, 296, 323, 443 Authority of the Church. 10, 133, 300
B
Baptism. 175, 177 Beginning of error, not always assigneable out of
history. 131 A Body in many places. 180, 182, 183 The Brazen Serpent. 209
Bread called Christ's body. 397. a figure, 401. This is my body. 398, 416.
Christ's body no fancy, 410, 448. not in many places at once, 450. Truly
received in the Sacrament by faith. 184
C
Caietan and others of Transubstantiation. 414, 182 A Cammell through the eye
of a needle. 411. Canonising of Saints. 297 The Canopie in the Greek Church
378 Chastity of votaries: 83 Certainetie of faith, not from the Romans Chapter only
or principally. 5 Catholic Church. 194 Church taken in diverse notions. 49 It
consists principally of just persons. 51. 53. Observations concerning the
acceptance of the name Church. 51. the authority thereof in things
adiaphorous. 133, 300. How the ground and pillar of truth. 3.53. The true
Church perpetual. 58. It may err in delivery of Tradition. 88. it may be in
few. 59, 67, 76, 104 A corrupt Church may teach some verity, and preserve the
text of Scripture. 59, 117 The present Church not equal to the Apostolical.
118 Counsels and Praecepts. 527.531 Coloss. cha. 1. v. 24. 559 Communion of
Saints. 557 Communion in one kind. 459.470 Concomitance. 460 The Council of
Constance. 474.501 The Council of Elliberis. 251 No general Council for the
first 300 years. 119 Counsels of the late Romans Chapter neither general nor
lawful, 159. Papal Usurpation and Tyranny in them. 153 A lawful general
Council desired by Protestants. 157. Acts of Councels not preserved
faithfully. 128 Corruptions in the Hierarch. Romans Chapter 55.57.97 Conversion of
bread into Christ Body. 399.400.421 The new Creed of Rome. 125 Curiosity to
be avoided. 582
D
Daniel, chap. 2. verse. 35. 4 Daniel, chap. 4. verse. 24. Redeem thy sins.
546 Discord among Teachers. 71.73 Discord of Romists. 108.583.585
E
Epiphanius of Images. 252 Errors in the Church. 135. fundamental and
preterfundamentall. 147.197 Esaias, chap. 2. verse. 1. 4 Esaias, chap. 63. 16. 320
The Eucharist received by the hand, 491. sent to private houses in both kinds,
504. no real Sacrifice. 464 Exposition of Scripture by Fathers. 45
F
Faciall vision. 35 Divine Faith not grounded upon Eccles. History. 128.
History not always assigneable for change of Faith. 131 Fasting not
satisfactorie to God for sin. 549 Fathers authority, 68.87.129. their
consent. 121 Doctor Field. 73.140.196.586 A Figure in the words, This is my
body, 396.397
G
Galath. chap. 3. (...). makes not for Images. 281 Gelasius against Transubst.
436. and against Communion in one kind. 499 Glass of the Trinity. 308
General Councels. 152, 156 Good Works strengthen Faith. 519 The Greek
Church. 115
H
Half Communion no Sacrament. 484 An Heretic defined. 195 Hierarchiall
Church. 55.57 Honorius Angustudonensis, of the iniquity of Romists. 112 Humane
History no rule of Faith. 128, 131
I
Idololatrie. 269 Indulgences and Popes Pardons a late devise, 562. granted for
many thousand years. 564 Images and their Worship. 206.212 Images of the
Trinity. 265 Images a snare to the simple. 267 Influence of Christ into
Works, makes them not meritorious. 515.516 Invocation of Saints. 288 S. John
chap. 20. verse. 23. Whose sins you remit, etc. 191 Justifying Faith. 162
K
The Kingdom of Christ divided with the Virgin Marie. 362 Kings may be
deposed by Popes and Bishops, is the Doctrine of many Pontificians. 575
L
Latria or divine Worship. 241 Liturgy in a strange tongue. 365 Living Saints,
and Prayers to them. 333
M
Manner of Presence in the Eucharist. 391.406 Math. 16.18. Upon this Rock,
etc. 3 Math. 22.37. Love the Lord with all thy heart. 523 Math. 26. Drink ye
all of this. 488.492 Math. 28.20. I will be with you always, etc. 94.99 Merit
of Works. 172.511 Merits of Saints deceased. 240 Mediator supreme and
subordinate. 336 Miracles. 85.102 Mother Church. 126 Mother of mercy. 361
N
Nicene second Council. 247
O
Omnipotency. 181.446 Oblations to Saints. 348 Opposition to the Romans Chapter 136
Ordination and Vocation of Pastors. 98
P
Penance no Sacrament. stricter in the Primitive Church. 192. 539. 543
Penitentiarie tax. 113 Popes no Lords of Purgatory. 567 Popish Faith novel.
129 Polidor Virgil of Images. 249 Prayer to Saints in set forms, etc. 352
Prayers in a known tongue, 366.373. on beads, 388. not meritorious. 548
Private Prayer in a known tongue. 383 Primacie of Peter. 157.570 Promise
makes not Works meritorious. 518 Punishment of chastisement. 540 Purging
Authors. 125
Q
The Queen of Heaven. 363
R
Reading Scripture. 35.271.272.277.279 Real presence. 178.395 Reason when to
be believed. 438 Receiving Scripture from the Church. 118 Religious honoring
of Saints. 322 Repetitions of Creeds and Auees. 784 Reservation of the
Eucharist, 432. in both kinds. 505 Resolution of Faith. 13, 15, 20, 25, 31, 38,
47 Roman Church, 1, 2, 103, 145. a particular Church, 109. not universal,
111. not Catholic, 201. a stepmother, 126. equal to other Churches. 109.145
Romists want Apost. Traditions. 125 586 Romists causers of discord. 109 Rule of
Faith. (...)
S
Sacramental union. 405 Saints not omniscient, 304. no Prophets, 312. in what
manner like Angels, 317. no Patrons. 344 Sanctity of the Church, 81, 101, 102.
and want hereof in the Romans Chapter 5, 57 Satisfaction, 534, 541, 544, 555, 575
Separation from the Romans Chapter 106 Serapions History, about one kind. 503
Schism. 107 Silence of History, no proof of Faith unchanged, 116, 131, 143,
144, 255 Spiritual presence. 396 Spiritual eating and drinking. 184 Scripture
how proved Divine. 24, 30: the Mouth and Hand of God. 91. Sufficiency thereof,
37, 43, 147. preserved incorrupt in all ages, 23, 117, 124. wherein obscure,
35, 45. the translation thereof, 29. the exposition and sense, 45, 121, 123.
more fundamental than Tradition unwritten, 49, 90. Papists depresse Scripture.
92 Succession of Pastors, 65. of Romists, 115 Successor of Peter. 160
Supererogation. 522, 528 Supremacy Papal has no ground in Scripture. 570
T
Tertullian of the Scripture. 9. of Indulgences. 2. Timoth. 3. 15. etc. 39
Theoderit of Transubstantiation. 436 Titles of Canonical Books. 19 Tradition.
45, 91, 93, 150, 151, 580 Transubstantiation, 390. not grounded on Scripture,
182, 447. the same defined, 419. Caietan, Scotus, etc. touching it. 182, 414
Transelementation. 421 Transmutation. 420 The Treasure of the Church. 552
V
Vasques about Adoration. 232 Virtues of just persons. 170 The B. Virgin no
dispencer of Grace, 357, 360. Half Christ's Kingdom. 361, 362 Visibilitie of
the Church. 7, 50, 60, 96 Universality. 74, 101
W
The Waldenses and Leonists, 105, 130, 139 Wicked persons no true Members of
the Catholic Church. 53, 200 The wicked eat not Christ's flesh. 407 Wine as
necessary as Bread in the Eucharist. 471 Worship of Images. 209, 228, 241
FINIS.
Escapes in Printing.
FOl. 3. D. for (...), read (...). fol. 31. E. for immediately, read mediately.
fol. 50. D. for (...), read (...). fol. 49. C. for Pastres, read Pastors. fol
50. for (...), read (...). ibid. D. after (...), insert (...). fol 62 A. for
Damascen, read (...). fol. 62. B. for canta, read cauta. fol. 63. E. for
innisible, read invisible. fol. 70. for desensoris, read Aug. c. Petil. d.
(...). fol. 106 B. for redargurere, read redarguere. fol. 109 for vnde, read
Otho Frising b. inde. fol. 117. C: for Agustine, read Augustine. fol. 127.
Theoderit. A. for (...), read (...). fol. 132 E. to lawfulness, add whereof.
fol. 138. Gregory. F. for commissi, read commisi. fol. 150. Tho. Wald. F. for
centia, read sentio. fol. 281. Vasq F. for contemplat, read contemplati. fol.
291. B. for first, read fifth universal Council. fol. 300. A. for is
expressly, read is not expressly. fol. 327. B. Alchasar, for ille, read illi.
fol. 360. E. Stel. Cor. Mar. for animas, read animam. fol. 524. August. B. for
prefect, read de perfectione. Ibid. Arausican. Council. C. for gratiae, read
gratia. Ibid. Bernard. d. for Notal. read Natal. Dom. fol. 527. August. C. for
inuenire, read inuenies. fol. 557. F. for owards, read toward. fol. 559.
Theoderit. D. for solutis, read salutis. fol. 560. A. for Guilliandus, read
Guilliaudus. fol. 563. for Scoto, read Soto, m. fol. 564. A. Enchir. Sarisb.
for vndecima, read vndecem.

AN ANSWER TO Mr FISHERS Relation of a Third Conference between a certain
B. (as he styles him) and himself.

The Conference was very private, till Mr FISHER spread certain Papers of it,
which in many respects deserved an Answer.

Which is here given by R. B. Chapleine to the B. that was employed in the
Conference.

LONDON, Printed by ADAM ISLIP.

1624.

TO THE READER.
THis which follows, though it needs Patronage, as great as may be had; yet
it is such, as may not presume to ask it: therefore it thrusts it self to the
End of these Labors, that it may seem to have the same Patron. I would have
put nothing before it, were it not necessary you should know the Cause why the
following Discourse was written; why it stayed so long, before it looked upon
the Light; and why it is not able yet to go alone, but is led abroad by this
former Work. The Cause why it was written, was this. A certain B. (in the
Iesuit's style) was called and required to a May 24. 1622.
Conference by Them that might command him. The Jesuit with whom he had to
deal, was Mr Fisher. He began with great Protestations of seeking the Truth
only, and for it self. I would the B. could have found it so. After the
Conference ended (a great part of which time he spent, in reading a passage out
of a Book which himself had printed) the B. not suspecting any such thing,
he spread abroad Papers of the Conference, which were full of partialicie to
his Cause, and more full of Calumny against the B. Hereupon the B. delivered
me the Papers that were spread, and a Note what was mis-spread in them, to the
uttermost of his Memory, and other helps. And I not departing from that, have
here entirely delivered it to the use of the Church.

There was a Cause also why it stayed so long, before it could endure to be
pressed, and you must know that too. It was not my idleness, nor my
unwillingness, to right both the B. and his Cause against the Paper that was
scattered: For I have most Honorable Witnesses, that this Thing (such as it is)
was finished long since: for the Papers came to my hand after Michaelmasse
1622. and J finished this Relation to them that Term. But the cause was
partly mine own backwardness to deal with these men: For they pretend only
for Truth and Unity, but will (...) neither, unless they and their Faction
may prevail in all. Whereas it is a thing impossible, so many devout and
learned men, in diverse Ages and Parts of the Church, should still pray, and
sometimes call for a Reformation, if the Church had not warped at all, or if no
And the Romans Court, the great misleader in all this. For in Iul. 3. time, the
(...) of Trent not dissolved. Ru. Tapper in the presence of Lindan with
griefeacknowledges, Abusus To. Curiae enexcusabiles, Inexcusable abuses of the
Court of Rome. Orat. 10.
Reformation were necessary. And partly because there were about that time,
three Conferences with Mr. Fisher, Two, at which the worthy Author of this
foregoing Discourse was present. This was the Third, and therefore could not
well and conveniently come into the world, till the two former (upon which it
somewhat depended) had showed themselves.

And the Cause why it cannot yet go alone, but is led into public by this
former Work, is, because before those Nine Articles there goes a Preface,
which together with some of the Articles themselves are the main and substance
of all that passed in the Two former Conferences; and so they are fittest to
take this Third by the hand, and lead it forth.

J have thus far acquainted you with the Occasion of the ensuing discourse. J
have been a faithful Relator of all passages, and the B, protests he has
been faithful in relating to me. But J cannot but (...) (and he has And he
that has hard Bowels is a stranger to God, who in other things, (and so in
the distractions and sufferings of his Church, much more) is (...) Bonorum
visceru^ Deus. S. Iaco. 5. 11 Et Hypol. Orat de co^summat. Mund. Pia Mosis
viscera. S. Aug. ser. 18. de verb. Dom. c. 21. d. Phil. 2.21.
hard Bowels that grieves not) to see Christendom bleeding in dissension:
Nay, which is far worse, triumphing in her own blood, and most angry with
them that study her Peace. Jn the mean time there are Sua, their own things,
which S. Paul tells us, All men seek, and not the things that are Jesus
Christ's. And Religion, so much pretended and called upon; and the Church, the
Church, so much honored in name; are but the stalking horse, other Foul are
shot at Complaint is but a seeming ease of weaker spirits: it can help
nothing; And since it cannot, use these Papers for a little support: It may be
these may give some stay till God give stronger. So I leave you to be
indifferent between the B. and M. Fisher: and for my self, I shall have reward
enough, if you pray for Peace and Truth in the Church, and so for me.

Yours in Christ, whom I labor to serve, R. B.

A These are M. Fishers own words, in the Paper by him spread; as also all
that follow the Letter F.
BRIEF RELATION OF WHAT PASSED in a third private CONFERENCE, between a
certain B. and me, BEFORE etc.
ANSVVERED BY R. B. Chaplain to the B.
I hope you will pardon the B. if just occasion has spunne my Answer for him
to Longiore mora opus est, vt soluas quaestionem, quam vt proponas. Sen. Ep. 48.
length.

F. The Occasion of this Conference, was.


B. THE Occasion of this third Conference you should know sufficiently; you
were an Actor in it, as well as the rest. Whether you have related the two
former truly, appears by Dr Whites Relation, or Exposition of them. The B. was
present at none, but this third, of which he is ready by me to give the Church
an account. But of this third, whether that were the cause which


F. (It was) observed, That in the second Conference, all the speech was about
particular matters; little, or none, about a continual, infallible, visible
Church, which was the chief and only Point (in which the person doubting)
required satisfaction: as having formerly settled their mind, That it was not
for them or any other unlearned


B. The opinion of that person in this, was never opened to the B. And it is
very fit the people should look to the Judgment of the Church, before they be
too busy with particulars. But yet neither 1. Cor. 10. 15. Quis non sine vllo
Magistro aut interpret, ex se facile cognoscat, etc. Nouat. de Trin. c. 23.
(and loquitur de mysterio Passionis Christi.)
Scripture, nor any good Authority, denies them some moderate use of their
own understanding and judgment, especially in things familiar and evident,
which even ordinary Capacities may as easily understand, as read:


F. (That person) therefore having heard it granted in the first Conference,
That there must be a continual visible Company ever since Christ, teaching
unchanged Doctrine in all fundamental Points, that is, Points necessary to
Salvation; desired to hear this confirmed, and proof brought, which was that
continual, infallible, visible (the doubting persons) came first to the room
where I was, and debated before me the aforesaid Question; and not doubting of
the first part, to wit, That there must be a continual visible Church, as they
had heard granted by Dr White and L. K. etc.


B. What Dr White and L. K. granted, neither the B. nor I heard. But I think,
both granted a continual and a visible Church; neither of them an infallible,
at least in your sense. And your self, in this Relation, speak distractedly:
For in infallible between continual and visible, and twice you leave it out.
But this concerns Dr W. and he has answered it.


F. The Question was, Which was that Church? (One) would needs defend, That not
only the Roman, but also the Greek Church was right.


B. When that Honorable Personage answered, I was not by to hear. But I
presume he was so far from granting, only the Roman Church was right, as
that he did not grant it right: and that he took on him no other defense of
the poor Greek Church, than was according to Truth.


F. I told him, That the Greek Church had plainly changed and taught false,
in a Point of Doctrine concerning the Holy Ghost; and that I had heard say,
that even his Majesty should say, That the Greek Church having erred against
the Holy Ghost, had lost the Holy Ghost.


B. You are very bold with his Majesty, to relate him upon hearesay. My
intelligence serves me not, to tell you what his Majesty said: but if he said
it not, you have been too credulous to believe, and too sudden to report it.
Princes deserve, and were wont to have more respect than so. If his Majesty
did say it, there is truth in the speech; the error is yours only, by
mistaking what is meant by loosing the Holy Ghost. For a particular Church may
be said to loose the Holy Ghost two ways, or in two degrees: The one, when it
looses such special Greek Church lost the Holy Ghost; for they erred against
him, they sinned against God: and for this, or other sins, they were
delivered into another Babylonish Captivity under the Turk; in which they yet
are, and from which God in his mercy deliver them. The other is, when it
looses not only this assistance, but all assistance ad hoc; to this, that they
may remain any longer a true Church. And so Corinth, and Ephesus, and diverse
others, lost the Holy Ghost. But in this sense, the whole Greek Church lost
not the Holy Ghost; for they continue a true Church in substance, to and at
this day, though erroneous in the point which you mention.


F. (The said person) not knowing what to answer, called


B. The B. indeed excused himself, and he had great reason so to do. But his
Reason being grounded upon his Modesty for the most part, he is willing I
should let you insult at your Augustine De (...) Cred. cap. 2.
said once, Scio me inualidum esse, I know I am weak; and yet he made good his
Cause. And the B. preferring the Cause before his Credit, was modest and
reasonable:


F. It having a hundred better Scholars to maintain it, than he. To which I
said, There were a thousand better Scholars than I, to maintain the Catholic
Cause.


B. The B. in this had never so poor a conceit of the Protestants Cause, as to
think they had but a hundred better than he, to maintain it. That which has
a hundred, may have as many more, as it pleases God to give, and more than you.
And the B. shall ever be glad, that the Church of England (which at this time,
if his memory reflect not amiss, he named) may have far more able
defendants than himself: he shall never envy them, but rejoice for her. And
he makes no question, but that if he had named a thousand, you would have
multiplied yours into ten thousand, for the Catholic Cause, as you call it.
And this confidence of yours has ever been fuller of noise,


F. Then the Question about the Greek Church being proposed, I said as before,
that it had erred.


B. Then I think the Question about the Greek Church was Christ, the
Foundation; or makes Christ deny, it, or thrust it from the Foundation.


F. The B. said, That the Error was not in Point fundamental.


B. The B. was not so peremptory. His speech was, That (as the Greeks
expressed themselves) it was a Question not simply Fundamental. The B. knows
and acknowledges that Error, of denying the Procession of the Holy Ghost from
the Son, to be a grievous Error in Divinity. And sure it would have grated
the Foundation, if they had so denied the Procession of the Holy Ghost from the
Son, as that they had made an inequality between the Persons. But since
their form of speech is, Non ex (...) sed Spiritum (...) esse dicimus.
Damascen. Lib. 1. Fid. Orth. c. 11. Et Patris per Filium. Ib.
That the Holy Ghost proceeds from the Father by the Son, and is the Spirit
of the Son, without making any difference in the consubstantialitie of the
Persons; the B. dares not deny them to be a true Church for this, though he
confesses them an erroneous Church in this particular.

Now that diverse learned men were of opinion, That a Filio, and per Filium, in
the sense of the Greek Church, was but a Question, in modo loquendi, in manner
of speech Pluralitas in voce saluatae vnitate in re, non repugnat vnitati
fidei. Durand. lib. 3. d. 25. q. 2.
, and therefore not fundamental, Magist. 1. Sent. D. 11. d. Sane sciendum est,
quod licet in praesenti articulo a nobis Graeci verbo discordent, tamen sensu
non differunt, etc. Bandinus, l. 1. de Trin. d. 11. and Bonauent. in 1. Sent.
d. 11. A. 1. q. 1.. 12. Licet Graecis (...), quum dixit Graecos obijcere (...)
Romany addendo (Filioque) quia sine huius Articuli professione salus erat, non
respondet negando salutem esse, sed dicit tantum, opportunam fuisse
determinationem propter periculum. Et postea,. 15. Sunt qui volunt sustinere
opinionem Graecorum and Latinorum, distinguendo duplicem modum procedendi. Sed
forte si duo sapientes, vnus Graecus, alter Latinus, vterque verus amator
veritatis, and non propriae dictionis etc. de hac visa contrarietate
disquirerent, pateret vtique tandem ipsam contrarietatem non esse veraciter
realem, sicut est vocalis. Scotus, in 1. Sen. d. 11. q. 1. Antiquorum Graecorum
a Latinis discrepantia in voce potius est, and modo explicandi Emanationem Sp.
S. quam in ipsae re etc. Iodocus Clichtouaeus in Damasc. L. 1. Fid. Orth. c.
11. Et quidam ex Graecis concedunt, quod sit a Filio, vel ab eo profluat. Thom.
p. 1. q. 36. A. 2. C. Et Thomas ipse dicit Sp. S. procedere mediate a Filio.
Ib. A 3. ad 1. saltem ratione personarum spirantium. Respondeo cum Bessarione
and Gennadio Damascenum non negasse Sp. S. procedere ex Filio quod ad rem
attinet, quum dixerit (...) esse imaginem Filij and per Filium, sed existimasse
(...) dici per Filium, quam ex Filio, quantum ad (...) Ioquendi, etc. Bellarm.
lib. 2. (...) Christo, c. 27.. Respondeo igitur, and Tollet. in S. Ioh. 15. Ar.
25. and Lutheran. Resp. ad Resp. 2. Ieremiae Patriarchae.
The Master and his Scholars agree upon it. The Greeks (says he) confess
the holy Ghost to be the Spirit of the Son, with the Apostle, Galat. 4. and
the Spirit of Truth, And since, Non est aliud, It is not another thing to say,
The Holy Ghost is the Spirit of the Father and the Son, then that he is or
proceeds from the Father and the Son; in this they seem to agree with us in
eandem Fidei Sententiam, upon the same Sentence of Faith, though they differ in
words. Now in this cause, where the words differ, but the sentence of Faith is
the same, Eadem penitus Sententia, vbi supra Clichtou.
(...) eadem, even altogether the same, Can the Point be fundamental? You may
make them no Church (as Bellaram. 4. de Notis Eccl. cap. 8.
Bellarmine does) and so deny them salvation, which cannot be had out of the
true Church; but the B. dares not.

It ought to be no easy thing, to condemn a man of Heresy, in foundation of
Faith; much less, a Church; least of all, so ample and large a Church as the
Greek, especially so, as to Peter wore the Keys at his own Girdle: And it is
good counsel which Alphonsus a Castro Lib. 3. contra Haeres. fol. 93. A.
, one of your own, gives; Let them consider, that pronounce easily of Heresy,
how easy it is for themselves to err. Or if you will pronounce, consider what
it is that seperates from the Church simply, and not in part only. I must
needs profess Iunius Animadin Bellarm. Cont. 2. l. 3. c. 23.
, that I wish heartily, as well as others, that those distressed men, whose
Cross is heavy already, had been more plainly and moderately dealt
withal, Church of Rome. But hereupon you say you were forced.


F. Whereupon I was forced to repeat what I had formerly brought against Dr.
White, concerning Points Fundamental.


B. Hereupon it is true, that you read a large discourse out of a Book
printed, which you said was yours. The particulars White, they are by him
formerly answered. The first thing you did, was the righting of S. Augustine F.
First righting the Sentence of S. Austine, Ferendus est disputator errans, etc.
: Which Sentence the B. does not at all remember was so much as named in the
third Conference, much less was it stood upon, and then righted by you.
Another place of S. Augustine indeed was (which you omit) but the place of it
comes after, about Tradition, to which I remit it. But you tell us of a great
proof made out of this place F. By which is proved, That all Points defined
by the Church, are fundamental.
.

These words contain two Propositions: One, That all Points defined by the
Church, are Fundamental; The other, That this is proved out of this place of
S. Augustine.

1. For the first, That all Points defined by the Church, are Fundamental. It
was not the least means by which Rome grew to Heretic, or Schismatike; for
this served to shriuell the credit of the persons: and the persons once brought
into contempt, and ignominy, all the good they desired in the Church, fell to
dust, for want of creditable persons to back and support it. To make this
proceeding good in these later years, this course (it seems) was taken. The
School, that must maintain (and so they do) That all Points defined by the
Church, are thereby Your own word.
Fundamental, Inconcussa fide ab omnibus. Thom 2.2. q. 1. Art. 10. C.
necessary to be believed, Scotus, 1. sent. d. 11. q. 1.
of the substance of the Faith, and that, though it be determined quite
Ecclesiae voces etiam extra Scripturam. Stap. Relect. Con. 4. q. 1. Ar. 3. Quae
maturo iudicio definiuit, etc. solidum est, and etiamsi nullo scripturarum aut
euidenti, aut probabili testimonio co^firmaretur. Ibid.
Extra Scripturam. Et penes Cercopes victoria sit. Greg. Naz. de differen.
vitae. Cercopes 1. Astutos and veteratoriae improbitatis Episcopos, qui artibus
suis ac dolis omnia Concilia perturbabant. Schol. ib.
leave the wise and active heads to take order, that there be strength enough
ready to determine what is fittest for them.

But since these men distinguish not, nor you, between the Church in general,
and a General Council, which is but her Representation, for determinations of
the Faith; the B. though he be very slow in sifting or opposing what is
concluded by lawful, general, and consenting Authority; though he give as
much as can be given to the definitions of Councels, truly general: nay,
suppose he should grant (which he does not) Deductions are not prime and
Native Principles, nor are Superstructures, Foundations. That which is a
Foundation for all, cannot be one, and another, in different Christians; for
then it could be no constant Rule for any, nor could the souls of men rest
upon a shaking Foundation. No: If it be a true Foundation, it must be common to
all, and firm under all; in which sense, the Articles of Christian Faith are
Fundamental. And Quum enim vna and eadem fides sit, neque is qui multum de
ipsa dicere potest plusqua^ oportet dicit; neque qui parum, ipsam imminuit.
Iren. li. 1. aduers. Haer. c. 3.
Irenaeus lays this for a ground, That the whole Church (howsoever is a
common, is a constant Foundation: and an Explicit Faith must be of this, in
them which have the use of Reason; for both Guides and simple people, all the
Church, utter this.

Now many things are defined by the Church, which are but Deductions out of
this: which, suppose them deduced right, move far from the Foundation;
without which Deductions, be Fundamental in the Faith. True Deductions from
the Article, may require necessary belief in them which are able, and do go
along with them, from the Principle to the Conclusion: but I do not see either
that the all, or any reason why they should: Therefore they cannot be
Fundamental.

Besides, that which is Fundamental in the Faith of Christ, is a Rock
immooueable, and can never be varied: Never Resolutio Occham est, quod nec
(...), nec (...) Generale, nec summus Pontifex potest facere Articulum, quod
non suit Articulus. Sed in dubijs propositionibus potest Ecclesia (...) an sint
Catholicae, etc. (...) sic determinando non (...), quod sint Catholicae quum
prius essent ante Ecclesiae determinationem, etc. Almain. in 3. D. 25. q. 1.
. Therefore, if it be Fundamental after the Church has defined it, it was
Fundamental before the definition; else it is mooueable, and then no Christian
has where to rest. And if it be immooueable, as Regula fidei vna (...) est,
sola illa immobilis and irreformabilis. Tertull. de (...). vel. cap. 1. In hac
fide, etc. nihil tran. mutare, etc. Athan. epist. ad Iouin. de fide.
indeed it is, no Decree of a Council, be it never so general, can alter
immooueable Verities, no more immooueable Natures. Therefore, if the Church in
a Council define any thing, the thing defined is not Fundamental, because the
Church has defined it; nor can be made so by the definition of the Church, if
it be not so in it self. For if the Church had this power, she might make a
new Article of the Faith, Occham, Almain. 3. sent. D. 25. q. 1.
which the Learned among your selves deny: For the Articles of the Faith
cannot increase in substance, but only in explication Thom. 2.2. q. 1. Ar. 7.
C.
.

Nor is this hard to be proved out of your own School; Scotus, in 1. Sent.
d. 11. q. 1.
Scotus professes it in this very particular of the Greek Church: If there
be (says he) a true real difference between the Greeks and the Latins
about the Point of the Procession of the Holy Ghost, then either they or we be
vere Haeretici, truly and indeed Heretics. And he speaks this of the old
Greeks, long before any decision of the Church in this Controversy: For his
instance, is in S. Basil, and Greg. Nazianz. on the one side, and S. Jerome,
Augustine, and Ambrose, on the other. And who dares call any of these
Heretics? is his challenge. I deny not, but that Scotus adds there, That
howsoever this was before, yet ex quo, from the time that the Catholic Church
declared it, it is to be held as of the substance of Faith. But this cannot
stand with his former Principle, if he intend by it, That whatsoever the
Church defines, shall be ipso facto, and for that determinations sake
Fundamental. For if before the determination (supposing the difference real)
some of those Worthies were truly Heretics (as he confesses) then somewhat
made them so; and that could not be the Decree of the Church, which then was
not: Therefore it must be somewhat really false, that made them so; and
fundamentally false, Heretics against the Foundation. But Scotus was wiser,
than to intend this. It may be he saw the stream too strong for him to swim
against, therefore he went on with the Doctrine of the time, That the Churches
Sentence is of the substance of Faith, but meant not to betray the Ecclesia
declarauit, since the Church has declared it, which is the word that is used
by diverse Bellarm. l. 2. de Conc. Auth. cap. 12. Concilia quum definiunt, non
faciunt aliquid esse infallibilis veritatis, sed declarant. Explicare,
Bonauent. in 1. D. 11. A. 1. q. 1. ad finem. Explanare, declarare, Th. 1. q.
36. A. 2. ad 2. and 2. 2. q. 1. A. 10. ad 1.
.

Now the Sent. 1. D. 11.
Master teaches, and the Aib. Mag. in (...) Sent. D. 11. Art. 7.
Scholars too, That every thing which belongs to the exposition or
declaration of another, intus est, is not another contrary thing, but is
contained within the bowels and nature of that which is interpreted: from
which, if the declaration depart, it is faulty and erroneous, Nos semper nec
quicquam praeterea. Vin. Lir. c. 32.
sense. Therefore, when the Church declares any thing in a Council, either
that which she declares, was Intus, or Extra, in the nature and verity of the
thing, or out of it. If it were Extra, without the nature of the thing
declared; then the declaration of the thing is false, and so, far from being
fundamental in the Faith In noua haeresi veritas prius erat de fide etsi non
ita declarata. Scotus, in 1. D. 11. q. 1. in fine. Haeretici multa quae erant
implicita fidei nostrae compulerunt explicare. Bonauent. in 1. D. 11. A. 1. q.
1. ad fine^. Thom. 1. q. 36. A. 2. ad 2.
. If it were Intus, within the compass and nature of the thing, though not
expert and apparent to every Eye; then the declaration is true, but not
otherwise fundamental, than the thing is which is declared: For Intus Intus.
Therefore nothing is simply fundamental, because the Church declares it, but
because it is so in the nature of the thing which the Church declares.

And it is a slight and poor evasion that is commonly used, That the
declaration of the Church makes it fundamental, quoad nos, in respect of us;
for it does not that neither: for no respect to us, can vary the Foundation.
The Churches declaration can bind us to peace, and external obedience, where
there is not express letter of Scripture and sense agreed on; make any thing
fundamental to us, that is not so in the nature of it. For if the Church can
so add, that it can by a Declaration make a thing to be fundamental in the
Faith, that was not, then it can take a thing from the foundation, and make it
by declaring, not to be fundamental; which all men grant, no power of the
Church can do: For the power of adding any thing contrary, and of detracting
any thing necessary, are alike Deuteronomy. 4.2. Tho. Suppl. q. 6. A. 6. C.
forbidden. Now nothing is more apparent than this to the eye of all men, That
the Church of Rome has determined, or declared, or defined (call it what you
will) very in their own nature fundamental, and therefore neither are, not
can be made so, by her adiudging them.

2. For the second, That it is proved by this place of S. Augustine, That all
Points defined by the Church, are fundamental. right this place, that you were
loath (I think) any (...) should see how you wrong it. The place of S.
Augustine is this, against the Pelagians, about Remission of Original sin in
Infants: August. Sermon. 14. de verb. Apost. c. 12. Fundata res est. In alijs
quaestionib' non diligenter digestis, nondum plenae Ecclesiae authoritate (...)
ferendus est disputator errans: ibi ferendu; est Error, non tantum progredi
debet, vt etiam fundamentum ipsum Ecclesiae quatere moliatur.
This is a thing founded; An erring Disputor is to be borne with in other
Questions not diligently digested, not yet made firm by (...) Authority of
the Church, their Error is to be borne with: but it ought not to go so far,
that it should labor to shake the Foundation it self of the Church. This is
the place: but it can never follow out of this place (I think) That every
thing defined by the Church, is Fundamental.

For first, he speaks of a Foundation of Doctrine in Scripture, not a Church
definition. This appears: for few Lines before he tells us, Ibid. cap. 20.
There was a Question moved to S. Cyprian, Whether Baptism was concluded to
the eight day, as well as Circumcision? And no doubt was made then of the
Origin (...).
beginning of Sin, and that Ex eae re vnde nulla erat quaestio, (...) est
exorta quaestio.
out of this thing about which no Question was moved, that Question that was
made, was answered. And Hoc de Fundamento Ecclesiae sumpfit ad confirmandum
Lapidem nutantem.
again, That S. Cyprian took that which he gave in answer, from the
Foundation of the Church, to confirm a Stone that was shaking. Now S. Cyprian,
in all the Answer that he gives, has not one word of any definition of the
Church: therefore Ea Res, That thing by which he answered, was a Foundation of
prime and settled Scripture Doctrine, not any definition of the Church:
Therefore, that which he took from the Foundation of the Church, to fasten the
Stone that shook, was not a definition of the Church, but the Foundation of
the Church it self, the Scripture, upon which it builded: as appears in the
Council. Mileuit. c. 2.
Mileuitan Council; the Rule by which Pelagius was condemned, is the Rule of
Romans 5.15.
Scripture, Romans 5.12. Therefore S. Augustine goes on in the same sense, That
the Disputor is not to be borne any longer, that shall Vt Fundamentum ipsum
Ecclesiae quatere moliatur.
endeavor to shake the Foundation it self, upon which the whole Church is
grounded.

Secondly, If S. Augustine did mean by Founded and Foundation, the definition
of the Church, because of these words, This thing is founded, This is made
firm by full authority of the Church, and the words following these, To shake
the foundation of the Church; yet it can never follow out of any, or all these
That all Points defined by the Church, are Fundamental in the Faith. For
first, no man denies, but the Church is a 1. Tim. 3.15.
Foundation; That things defined by it, are founded upon it: And yet hence it
cannot follow, That the thing that is so founded, is Fundamental in the Faith;
for Mos fundatissimus. S. Aug. ep. 28.
founded upon humane Authority, and be very certain, yet not Fundamental in
the Faith: Nor yet can it follow, This thing is founded, therefore every thing
determined by the Church, is founded. Again, that which follows, That those
things are not to be opposed which are made firm by full Authority of the
Church, cannot conclude they are therefore fundamental in the Faith: For full
Church Authority, is but Church Authority; and Church Authority, when it is
at full Sea (the time that included the Apostles, being past, and not
comprehended in it) is not simply Divine Stapl. Relect. Cont. 4. q. 3. A. 1.
: therefore the Sentence Articles of the Faith may easily prove it is not
fundamental, if in deed and verity it be not so.

And the B. has read some body, that says (Is it not you?) That things are
fundamental in the Faith two ways: One, in their Matter, such as are all
things as be so in themselves; the other, in the Manner, such as are all things
that the Church has defined, and determined to be of Faith: And that so, some
things that are de modo, of the manner of being, are of Faith. But in plain
truth, this is no more, than if you should say, Some things are fundamental in
the Faith, and some are not. For wrangle while you will, you shall never be
able to prove, That any thing which is but de modo, a consideration of the
manner of being only, can possibly be fundamental in the Faith.

And since you make such a Foundation of this place, I will a little view the
Mortar with which it is laid by you; it is a venture but I shall find it Ezech.
13.11.
untempered. Your assertion is, All Points defined by the Church, are
fundamental: your proof, this place, Because that is not to be shaken, which
is settled Plenae (...) Authoritate.
by full authority of the Church. Then it seems your meaning is, that this
Point there spoken of, The remission of (...) sin in Baptism of Infants, was
defined, when S. Augustine wrote this, by a full Sentence of a General
Council. First, If you say it was, Lib. 2. de Aut. Conc. c. 5. A solis
particularibus.
Bellarmine will tell you it is false; and that the Pelagian Heresy was never
condemned in an Bellarmine is deceived: for while they stood out impudently
against National Councels, some of them defended Nestorius; which gave
occasion to the first Can. 1. and (...).
Ephesine Council to excommunicate and depose them. And yet this will not
serve your turn Augustine was then dead, and therefore could not mean the
Sentence of that Council in this place. Secondly, And if you say it was not
then defined in an Oecumenicall Synod, plena Authoritas Ecclesiae, the full
Authority of the Church, there mentioned, does not stand properly for the
Decree of an Oecumenicall Council, but for some National; as this was
condemned in a Council. Mileuit. Can. 2.
National Council: and then the full Authority of the Church here, is no
more than the full Authority of this Church of Nay, if your own Capellus be
true, De Apell. Eccl. Afric. c. 2. n. 5. It was but a Provincial of Numidia,
not a Plenarie of Afric.
Afric. And I hope that Authority Fundamental: You will say, Yes, if that
Council be confirmed by the Pope. And I must ever wonder why S. Augustine
should say, The full Authority of the Church, and not bestow one word upon the
Pope, by whose Authority only that Council, as all other, have their
fullness of Authority, in your judgment. An inexpiable omission, if this
Doctrine concerning the Pope were true.


F. Secondly, J required to know what Points the B. would account Fundamental.
He said, All the


B. Against this, I hope you except not. For since the Tertull. Apol. contra
gentes, c. 47. de (...). Virg. cap. 1. S. August. Sermon. 15. de Temp. cap. 2.
(...) in (...). apud Cyprianum, p. 357.
Fathers make the Creed the Rule of Faith, Alb. Mag. in 1. Sent. D. 11. A. 7.
since the agreeing sense of Scripture with those Articles, are the two Regular
Precepts by which a Divine is governed, about the Faith; since your own
Council. Trid. Sess. 3.
Council of Trent decrees, That it is that Principle of Faith, in which all
that profess Christ do necessarily agree, Et Fundamentum firmum and vnicum,
not the firm alone, but the only Foundation; since it is Excommunication
(...). ibid. Dub. 2. and 3. in Literam.
ipso iure, for Thom. 2. 2. q. 1. A. 7. C.
substance of it was believed even before the coming of Christ, though not so
expressly, as since in the number of the Articles; since Bellarmine 4. de
verb. Dei, non Scrip. cap. 11.
confesses, That all things simply necessary for all men's salvation, are in
the Creed and the Decalogue: What reason can you have to except? And yet for
all this, every thing Fundamental is not of a like neerenesse to the
Foundation, nor of equal Primenesse in the Faith. And the B. granting the
Creed to be Fundamental, does not Ibid. Thom.
Quaedam prima Credibilia, Certain prime Principles of Faith, in the bosom
whereof all other Articles lay wrapped and folded up: One of which, since
Christ, is that of S. John 1. Ioh. 4. 2.
, Every Spirit that confesses Jesus Christ come in the flesh, is of God: And
one, both before the coming since, is that of S. Paul Heb. 11.6.
, He that comes to God, must believe that God is, and that he is a rewarder of
them that seek him.


F. I asked, How then it happened, as Mr Rogers says, that the English Church
is not yet resolved, what is the right sense of the Article of Christ's
descending into Hell.


B. The English Church never made doubt (that I know) what was the sense of
that Article. The words are so plain, they Art. 3.
among those, to which she requires subscription, not as doubting of the sense,
but to prevent the Cauills of some, who had been too busy in crucifying that
Article, and in making it all one with the Article of the Cross, or but an
Exposition of it.

And sure the B. thinks, and so do I, That the Church of England is better
resolved of the right sense of this Article, than the Church of Rome;
especially if she must be tried by her Writers, as you try the Church of
England by Mr Rogers. mere Tradition, or whether it has any place of
Scripture to warrant it. In 1. D. 11. q. (...).
Scotus and Rel. Con. 5. q. 5. A. 1.
Stapleton allow it no footing in Scripture; but 4. de Christo, c. 6. and 12.
Scripturae passim hoc docent.
Bellarmine is resolute, that this Article is every where in Scripture; and
2.2. q. 1. A. 9. ad 1.
Thomas grants as much for the whole Creed. The Church of England never doubted
it, and S. Augustine Epist. 99.
proves it.

And yet again you are different for the sense: For you agree not, whether the
Soul of Christ, in triduo mortis, in the time of his death, did go down into
Hell really, and was present virtually, and by effects only: For Th. p. 3. q.
52. A. 2. C. per (...) essentiam.
Thomas holds the first, and Dur. in 3. d. 22. q. 3.
Durand holds the latter. Then you agree not, whether the Soul of Christ did
descend really, and in essence, into the lowest Pit of Hell, and place of the
Damned, as L. 4. de Christo, c. 16.
Bellarmine once held probable, and proved it; or really only into that place
or Region of Hell, which you call Limbum Patrum, and then but virtually from
thence into the Lower Hell: to which Recogn. p. 11.
Bellarmine reduces himself, and gives his reason, because it is the Sequuntur
(...) Tho. p. 3. q 52. A. 2.
common opinion of the School. Now the Church of England takes the words as
they are in the lawful for them to say, (I conceive thus, or thus, of it; yet
if any other way of his Descent be found truer than this, I deny it not, but
as yet I know no other) as it was for In 3. D. 22. q. 3. n. 9.
Durand to say it, and yet not impeach the Foundation of the Faith?


F. The B. said, That Mr Rogers was but a private man. But (said I) if Mr
Rogers (writing as he did by public Authority) be accounted only a private
man, etc.


B. The B. said truth, when he said Mr Rogers was a private man. And I take it,
you will not allow every speech of every The imposing particular men's
Assertions upon the Church: yet I see, you mean not to leave it. And surely,
as Controversies are now handled (by some of your party) at this day, I may
not say it is the sense of the Article in hand, but I have long thought it a
kind of descent into Hell, to be conversant in them. I would the Authors would
take heed in time, and not seek to blind the people, or cast a mist before
evident Truth, least it cause a final descent to that place Stapleton was of
greater note with you, than Rogers is with us; and as he, so his Relection: And
is it the Doctrine of the Church of Rome which he affirms, Cont. 5. q. 5. A. 1.
The Scripture is silent that Christ descended into Hell, and that there is a
Catholic and an Apostolic Church? If it be, then what will become of the
Pope's Supremacy over the whole Church? Shall he have his power over the
Catholic Church given him expressly in Scripture, in Matthew. 16.19.
the Keys to enter, and in Ioh. 21.15.
Pasce, to feed when he is in; and when he has fed, to Luc. 22.32.
confirm; and in all these, not to err and fail in his ministration:
Catholic Church, in and over which he is to do all these great things, quite
left out? Belike, the Holy Ghost was careful to give him his power; Yes, in
any case; but left the assigning of his great Cure, the Catholic Church, to
Tradition: And it were well for him, if he could so prescribe for what he now
claymes.

But what if after all this, Mr Rogers there says no such thing? as in truth
he does not. His words are: Rogers, in Art. Eccl. Angl. Art. 3.
All Christians acknowledge he descended; but in the interpretation of the
Article, there is not that consent that were to be wished. What is this Ibid.
Till we know the native and undoubted sense of this Article, is Mr Rogers
(We) the Church of England? or rather, his and some others Judgment of the
Church of England?


F. But if Mr Rogers be only a private man; In what


B. What, was the B. so ignorant, to say, The Articles of the Church of England
were the public Doctrine of all the Protestants? or, That all Protestants were
sworn to the Articles of England, as this speech seems to implie? Sure he was
not. Was not the immediate speech before, of the Church of England? And
Protestants did not agree with the Church of England in the chiefest Doctrines
against which they jointly take exceptions against the Roman Church, as
appears by their several Confessions. Nor did the B. say, That the Book of
Articles only was the Continent of the Church of Englands public Doctrine:
She is not so narrow, nor has she purpose to exclude any thing which she
acknowledges hers; nor does she wittingly permit any crossing of her public
declarations: Yet she is not such a Shrew Blessing, or denounce an Anathema
against them, if some peaceably dissent in some particulars, remoter from the
Foundation, as your own Schoolmen differ. And if the Church of Rome, since
she grew to her greatness, had not been so fierce in this course,
Christendom (I persuade my self) had been in happier peace at this day.


F. And that the Scriptures only, not any unwritten Tradition, was the
Foundation of their Faith.


B. The Church of England grounded her Positive Articles Negative Refute, where
the thing affirmed by you, is not affirmed in Scripture, nor directly to be
concluded out of it. And since you are pleased before to pass from the Church
of England to all Protestants, you may know for your comfort, that all
Protestants agree most strongly in this, That the Scripture is sufficient to
salvation, and contains in it all things necessary to it. The Fathers S. Bas.
l. de vera and pia fide. Manifesta defectio fidei est importare quicquam eorum
quae scripta non sunt. S. Hilar. l. 2. ad Constable. Aug. Fidem tantum secundum ea,
quae scripta sunt desiderantem, and hoc qui repudiat, Antichristus est, and qui
simulat Anathema est. S. Aug. lib. 2. de Doctr. Christian. c. 9. In ijs quae
aperte in Scripturae posita sunt, inueniuntur illa omnia quae continent fidem
moresque viuendi. And to this place, Bellarm. l. 4. de verbo Dei non scripto,
c. 11. says, That S. Augustine speaks de illis dogmatibus quae necessaria
sunt omnibus simpliciter; of those points of Faith which are necessary simply
for all men. So far then he grants the Question. And that you may know it
fell not from him on the sudden, he had said as much before in the beginning
of the same Chapter, and here he confirms it again.
are plain; the Scotus. Proleg. in Sent. q. 2. Scriptura sufficienter continet
Doctrinam necessatiam viatori. Thom. 2. 2. q. 1. A. 10. ad 1. In Doctrina
Christi and Apostolorum veritas fidei est sufficienter explicata: and loquitur
ibi de verbo scripto V. and N. Testamenti.
Schoolmen not strangers in it. The Foundation of our Faith? And Scripturam
Fundamentum esse and Columnam fidei fatemur in suo genere, i. in genere
testimoniorum, and in materia credendorum. Relect. Con. 4. q. 1. Ar. 3. in fine.
Stapleton himself, though an angry Opposite, confesses, That the Scripture
is in some sort the Foundation of Faith, that is in the nature of Testimony,
and in the matter or thing to be believed. And if the Scripture be the
Foundation to which we are to go for Witness, if there be doubt about the
Faith, and in which we are to find the thing that is to be believed, as
necessary in the Faith; we never did nor never will refute any Tradition
Universal and Apostolic, for the better exposition of the Scripture; nor any
definition of the Church, in which she goes to the Scripture for what she
teaches, and thrusts nothing as fundamental in the Faith upon the world, but
in what the Scripture is Materia Credendorum, the substance of that which is to
be believed, whether immediately and expressly in words, or more remotely,
till a clear and full deduction draw it out.


F. I asked, How he knew Scripture to be Scripture; and in particular, Genesis,
Exodus, etc. These are believed


B. I did never love too curious a search into that which might put a man into
a Wheel, and circle him so long between proouing Scripture by Tradition, and
Tradition by Scripture, till the Devil find a means to dispute him into
Infidelity, and make him believe neither. I hope this is no part How do you
know Scripture to be Scripture? has done more harm, than you will be ever
able to help by Tradition. But I must follow that way which you draw me. And
because it is so much insisted upon by you, and is it self a matter of such
consequence, I will sift it a little further.

Many men laboring to settle this great Principle in Divinity, have used
diverse means to prove it. All have not gone the same way, nor all the right
way. You cannot be right, that resolve Faith of the Scriptures, being the Word
of God, into only Tradition; for only and no other proof, are equal. To
prove the Scripture therefore (so called by way of Excellence) to be the Word
of God; first, some fly to the Testimony and Witness of the Church, and her
Tradition, which constantly believes, and unanimously delivers it: secondly,
Light and the Testimony which the Scripture gives to it self, with other
internal proofs which are observed in it, and to be found in no other Writing
whatsoever: thirdly, some to the Testimony of the Holy Ghost, which cleares up
the Light that is in Scripture, and seals this Faith to the souls of men,
that it is Gods Word: fourthly, All that have not imbrutished themselves, and
sunk below their Species and order of Nature, give even Natural Reason leave
to come in, and make some proof, and give some approbation, upon the weighing
and the consideration of other Arguments.

1. For the first: The Tradition of the Church taken and only, that it cannot
be a sufficient proof to believe, by Divine Faith, That Scripture is the Word
of God: for that which is a full and sufficient proof, is able of it self to
settle the soul of man, concerning it. Now the Tradition of the Church is not
able to do this: for it may be further asked, Why he should believe the
Churches Tradition? And if it be answered, Because the Church is infallibly
governed by the Holy Ghost, it may yet be demanded, How that may appear? And
if this be demanded, special Revelation, which is the private Spirit, you
object to other men; or else you must attempt to prove it by Scripture, as all
of you do. And that very offer is sufficient acknowledgement, that the
Scripture is a higher proof than the Churches Tradition; which in your own
grounds, is or may be questionable, till you come thither.

Again, if the Voice of the Church (saying, The Books of Scripture, commonly
received, are the Word of God) be the formal Object of Faith, upon which
alone, and absolutely and lastly, I proper and formal Object of the Faith. But
nothing can be more evident than this, That a man ought not to resolve his
Faith of this Principle into the Testimony of the Church: therefore neither is
that Testimony, or Tradition, Vox Ecclesiae non est formale obiectum fidei.
Stapl. Relect. Contr. 4. q. 3. A. 2. Licet in Articulo Fidei (Credo Ecclesiam)
forte contineatur hoc totum, Credo ea quae docet Ecclesia, tamen non
intelligitur necessario, quod Credo docenti (...) tanquam testi infallibili.
Ibid. (...) reijcit (...) Durandi and Gabr. Et Waldens. lib. 2. Doctr. Fid.
Art. 2. c. 21. Testimonium Ecclesiae Catholicae est obiectum Fidei Christianae,
and Legislatio Scripturae Canonicae, subijcitur tamen ipsi sicut (...) Iudici,
and Testimonium veritati, etc. Canus, Loc. lib. 2. c. 8. Nec si Ecclesia aditum
nobis praebet ad huiusmodi (...) sacros cogn oscendos, protinus ibi
acquiescendum est, sed vltra oportet progredi, and solida Dei veritate niti,
etc. Et Scolus, in 3. Did. 23. q. 1.
Learned of your own part grant this: Although in the Article of the Creed (I
believe the Catholic Church) peradventure all this be contained yet this is
not necessarily understood, That I believe the Church, teaching as an
infallible Witness. And if they did not confess this, it were no hard thing
to prove.

It seems to me very necessary, that we be able to prove the Books of
Scripture to be the Word of God, by some Authority that is absolutely Divine:
for if they be warranted unto us by any Authority less than Divine, then all
things contained in them (which have no greater assurance than the Scripture,
in which they are read) are not Objects of Divine Belief. Humane or Moral
Faith or Credulity can afford. An Authority then simply Divine, must make
good Scripture's Infallibility. This Authority cannot be any Testimony
orVoice of the present Church: for our Hook. l. 3.. 9.
Worthies prove, That all the Churches Constitutions are of the nature of
humane Law: Stapl. Relect. Contr. 4. q. 3. A. 1. and 2.
And some among you, not unworthy for their Learning, prove it at large, That
all the Churches Testimony, or Voice, or Sentence, (call it what you will) is
but suo modo, or aliquo modo, not simply, but in a manner Divine. Now that
which is Divine but in a manner, be it the Churches manner, is suo modo non
Diuina, in a sort not Divine. But this great Principle of Faith (the ground and
proof of whatsoever else is of Faith) cannot stand firm upon a proof that
is, and is not, in a manner, and not in a manner, Divine; as it must, if we
have no other Anchor than the external Tradition of the Church.

2. For the second: That Scripture should be fully and sufficiently known, as
by Divine and infallible Testimony, Lumine proprio, by the resplendencie of
that Light which it has in it Hook. l. 2.. 4.
For as there is no place in Scripture that tells us, such Books, containing
such and such particulars, are the Canon and the infallible Will and Word of
God; so if there were any such place, that were no sufficient proof: for a man
might justly ask another Book, to bear witness of that; and again of that,
another; and where ever it were written in Scripture, that must be a part of
the whole. And no created thing can alone give witness to it self, and (...)
and in given Light, What should hinder, but that all which hear it, and do
but understand the Terms, should presently assent unto it, as men use to do
to Principles evident in themselves? which daily experience teaches us, they
do not. Romanist will deny, but that there is as much Light in Scripture, to
manifest and make ostension of it self to be infallibly the written Word of
God, as there is in any Tradition of the Church, that it is Divine, and
infallibly the unwritten Word of God. And the Scriptures saying from the mouths
of the Prophets, Isai. 44. and passim.
Thus says the Lord, and from the mouths of the Act. 28.25.
Apostles, That the Holy Ghost spoke by them, are at least as able and as fit
to bear witness to their own Verity, as the Church is to bear witness
Traditions, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 15. Iud. verse. 3.
as you do, if you did not think the Scripture as easy to be discovered by
inbred Light in it self, as Traditions by their Light. And if this be so, then
it is as probable at the least (which some of ours affirm) That Scripture may
be known to be the Word of God by the Light and Luster which it has in it
self, as it is (which In your Articles delivered to D. W. to be answered.
you affirm) That a Tradition may be known to be such, by the Light which it
has in it self. If this Argument were in jest, this were

3. For the third: Either some think, that there is no sufficient warrant for
this, unless they fetch it from the Testimony of the Holy Ghost, and so look
in vain after special Revelations, and make themselves by thisvery conceit
obnoxious, and easy to be led by all the whisperings of a seducing private
Spirit; or else you would feign have them think so: For your side, both upon
this and other occasions, do often challenge, that we resolve all our Faith
into the Dictats of a private Spirit; from which we shall ever prove our
selves as free, if not Vt testimonia Scripturae certam and indubitatam fide^
praestent, necessarium videtur oftendere, quod ipsae diuinae Scripturae sint
Dei Spiritu inspiratae. Orig. 4. (...).
a Divine Faith, Cui subesse non potest falsum, under which can rest no
possible error, That the Books of Scripture are the written Word of God: If
they which go to the Testimony of the Holy Ghost for proof of this, do
mean by Faith, Obiectum Fidei, The Object of Faith, that is to be believed;
then no question they are out of the ordinary way: for God never sent us, by
any word or warrant of his, to look for any such special and private
Testimony, to prove which that Book is that we must believe. But if by
Habit or Act of Divine infused Faith, by which virtue they do believe the
Credible Object, and thing to be believed; then their speech is true, and
confessed by all Divines of all sorts. For Faith is the 1. Cor. 12.3, 4. S.
Aug. in Psalm. 87.
gift of God, of God alone, and an infased Habit, in respect whereof, the
Soul is merely recipient: And therefore the sole Infuser, the Holy Ghost,
must not be excluded from that work, which none can do but he. For the Holy
Ghost, as he first dictated the Scripture to the Apostles Nec eum Ecclesiae
testimonium aut (...) praed. (...) Dei Spiritum, vel ab (...) docente, vel a
(...) bis audientious excludimus, sed vtro. iq diserte in ludimus, etc. (...).
Tript. (...). Whitak. c. 3.
, so did he not leave the Church in general, nor the true members of it in
particular, without grace to believe what himself had revealed, and made
credible. So that Faith, as it is taken for the virtue of Faith, whether it be
of this or any other Article, Fides quae caepit ab Ecclesiae Testimonio (...)
proponit and (...) ad (...), (...) in Deo intus (...), and intus (...) quod
(...) Stapl. (...). Contr. 4. q 3. a. 2. When grave and learned men do
sometimes hold, that of this Principle there is no proof, but by the
Testimony of the Spirit, etc. I think it is not their meaning, to exclude all
outward (...), etc. but rather this, That all other means are ineffectual of
(...) to work Faith, without the special grace of God, etc. Hock. lib. 3.. 8.
though it receive a kind of preparation, or occasion of beginning, from the
Testimony of the Church, as it proposes and induces to the Faith, yet it ends
in God, revealing within, and teaching within, that which the Church preached
without. For till the Spirit of God move the heart of man, he cannot believe,
be the Object never so eredible. The speech is true then, but De habitu Fidei
quoad fieri (...) and generationem quum a Deo immediate solo Dono gratuito
infusus est, (...) ad quaestionem, nisi quoad hoc quod per (...). (...), etc.
Henr. a (...). Sum. a. 10. q. 1. D.
quite out of the state of this Question, which enquires only after a
sufficient means to make this Object credible, and fit to be believed, against
all impeachment of follic and temeritie in belief, whether men do actually
believe Stapl. Rel. Cont. 4. q. 3. a. 2. does not only affirm it, but (...)
too, a paritate (...), (...), case of necessity, where there is no contempt of
the external means.
case of necessity be excepted, when a man lives in such a Time, and Place, as
excludes him from all ordinary means, in which, I dare not offer to shut up
God from the souls of men, nor to tie him to those ordinary ways, and
means, to which yet in great wisdom and providence he has tied and bound
all mankind.

Private Revelation then has nothing ordinarily to do, to Object credible in
this, That Scripture is the Word of God, or in any other Article. For the
Question is of such outward and evident means, as other men may take notice
of, as well as our selves. By which, if there arise any doubting, or infirmity
in the Faith, others may strengthen us, or we afford means to support them:
whereas the Quid cum singulis agitur Deus, scit qui agit, and ipsi cum quibus
(...) sciunt. Quid autem agatur cum genere humano, per historiam commendari
voluit, and per (...). S. Aug. L. de Vera Relig. c. 25.
Testimony of the Spirit, and all private Revelation, is within, nor felt nor
seen of any, but him that has it; so that hence can be drawn no proof to
others. Miracles are not sufficient alone to prove it, (...) both Revelation
too, agree with the Rule of Scripture, which is now an unalterable Rule by Gal.
1. 8.
Man, or Angel.

4. The last, which gives Reason leave to come in, and prove what it can, may
not justly be denied by any reasonable man. For though Reason, without Grace,
cannot see the way to Heaven, nor believe this Book, in which God has written
Grace is never placed but in a reasonable creature, and proves by the very
seat which it has taken up, that the end it has, is to be spiritual
eye-water, to make Reason see what by Animalis homo non percipit. 1. Cor. 2. 14.
Nature only it cannot, but never to blemish Reason in that which it can
comprehend. Now the use of Reason is very general; and man, do what he can,
is still apt to search and seek for a Reason why he will believe, though after
he once believes, his Faith grows stronger than either his Reason or his
Knowledge: and great reason for this, because it goes higher than either of the
other can in this life.

In this particular, the Books called the Scripture, are commonly and
constantly reputed to be the Word of God, and so infallible Verity to the
least Point of them. Does any man doubt this? The World cannot keep him from
going to weigh it at the Balance of Reason, whether it be the Word of God, or
not. To the same Weights, he brings the Tradition of the Church, the inward
motives in Scripture it self, all Testimonies within, which seem to bear
witness to it; and in all this, there is no harm: the danger is, when a man
will use no other Scale but Reason; for the Word of God, and the Book
containing it, refuse not to be weighed by Si (...) Rationi and veritat. (...)
videntur, in precio habete, etc. de Mysterijs Religionis (...). Martyr. Apol.
2. (...) si (...) Rationis, etc. Tertull. li de (...), c. 18. Rationabile est
(...) Deum esse Autore^ Scripturae. Henr. a Gand. Sum. q 9. q. 3.
Reason: But the Scale is not large enough to contain, nor the Weights to
measure out the true virtue and (...) force of either. Reason then can give no
supernatural ground, into which a man may resolve his Faith, That Scripture is
the Word of God infallibly; yet Reason can go so high, as it can prove that
Christian Religion, which rests upon the Authority of this Book, stands upon
surer grounds of Nature, Reason, common Equity, and Justice, than any thing in
the World, which any Infidel, or mere Naturallist, has done, does, or can
adhere unto, against it, in that which he makes, accounts, or assumes, as
Religion to himself. The ancient Fathers relied upon the Scriptures, no
Christians more; and having to do with Philosophers (men very well seen in
all the subtleties which natural Reason could teach, or learn) they were
often put to it, and did as often make it good, That they had sufficient
warrant to rely as much as they did upon Scripture. In all which Disputes,
because they were to deal with Infidels, they did labor to make good the
Authority of the Book of God by such arguments, as unbelievers themselves
could not but think reasonable, if they (...) them with indifferency. Hook.
lib 3.. 8. Si Plato ipse (...), and me (...) non (...), etc. S. Aug. de vera
(...). c. 3. (...) Ratio potest progredi a (...) ad inuisibilia, etc. Ibid. c.
29.
And it is not altogether impossible to prove it, even by Reason, a Truth
infallible, or else to make them deny some apparent Principle of their own.
For example: It is an apparent Principle, and with them, That God, or the
absolute prime Agent, cannot be forced out of any possession: for if he could
be forced by another greater, Prince, nor Absolute, nor Si vim spectes, Deus
valentissimus est. Aristot. de Mundo, c. 7. Don. ini and moderatores omnium.
Cic. 2. de Leg.
God, in their own Theology. Now they must grant, That that God, and Christ,
which the Scripture teaches, and we believe, is the only true God, and no
other with him, and so deny the Deity which they worshipped, or else deny
their own Principle about the Deity, That God cannot be commanded, and forced
out of possession: Ipse Saturnus, and (...), and Jupiter, and quicquid (...)
colitis, victi dolor quod sunt (...). Nec vtique in turpitudine^ sui nonnullis
praesertim vestroru^ assistentib' meant untur. Ipsis testib' esse eos Daemones
de se verum confitentib' credit. (...) enim per (...) verum and solum inuiti
etc. Arnob. 8. contra Gent.
For their Gods, Saturn, and Serapis, and Jupiter himself, have been adjured
by the name of the true and only God, and have been forced out of the bodies
they possessed, and confessed themselves to be foul and seducing Devils. And
their confession was to be supposed This, many of the unbelievers saw;
therefore they could not (in very force of Reason) but they must either deny
their God, or deny their Principle in Nature. Their long Custom would not
forsake their God, and their Reason could not forget their Principle. If Reason
therefore might judge among them, they could not worship any thing that was
under command. And if it be reasonable to do and believe this, then why not
reasonable also himself and Christ, since there they find Christ S. Matthew.
12.22.
doing that, and S. Matthew. 16.17.
giving power to do it after, which themselves saw executed upon their
DeuillGods?

Besides, whereas all other written Laws have scarce had the honor to be duly
observed, or constantly allowed worthy approbation in the particular places
where they have been established for Laws; this Law of Christ, and this Canon
of Scripture, the container of it, is or has been received in almost Si Libri
quoquo modo se habent, sancti tamen Diuinarum rerum pleni prope totius generis
humani confessione diffamantur, etc. S. Aug. de Vtil. Cred. c. 7. Scriptura
summa dispositione prouidentiae super omnes omnium gentium literas, omnia sibi
genera ingeniorum humanorum Diuina Excellens authoritate subiecit. S. Aug. 11.
de Ciuit. Dei, c. 1. At in omni Orb terrarum in omni Graecia and vniuersis
Nationibus, innumeri sunt, and immensi qui relictis Patrijs, Legibus, etc. ad
obseruantiam Mosis and Christi, etc. Origin. 4. (...), cap. 1.
all Nations under Heaven: And wheresoever unchangeable Good, and believed for
infallible Verity. This persuasion could not have been wrought in men of all
sorts, but by working upon their Reason, unless we shall think all the World
unreasonable, that received it. And certainly, God did not give this admirable
faculty of Reasoning to the Soul of man, for any cause more prime than this,
to discover, or at least to judge and allow of the

One great thing that troubled Rational men, was that which stumbled the
Manichee (an Heresy it was, but more than half Pagan) namely, That somewhat
must be believed, before much could be known. Wise men use not to believe, but
what they know: And the Manichee Irridere in Catholicae fidei disciplina, quod
iuberetur homines credere non autem, etc. S. Aug. 1. (...). c. 14.
scorned the Orthodox Christian, as light of belief, promising to lead no
Disciple after him, but upon evident knowledge. This stumbles many; but yet the
Principle, That somewhat must be believed, before much can be known, stands
firm in Reason still: For if in all Sciences there be some Principles which
cannot be proved; if Reason be able to see this, and confess it, if almost
all Artists have granted it, Who can justly deny that to Divinity, A Science
of the highest Object, God himself; which he easily and reasonably grants to
inferior Sciences suppose some Principles, without proouing; so have they
almost all, some Text, some Authority, upon which they rely in some measure:
and it is Reason they should. For though these make not their Texts infallible,
as Divinity does; yet full consent, and prudent examination, and long
continuance, have won reputation to them, and settled reputation upon them,
very deservedly. For were these Texts more void of Truth than they are, yet it
were fit to uphold their credit, that Nouices and young beginners in a Science,
which are not yet able to Reason, nor Reason upon them, may have Authority to
believe, till they can learn to conclude from Principles, and so to know. Is
this also reasonable in other Sciences, and shall it not be so in Theology, to
have a Text, a Scripture, a Rule, which Nouices may be taught first to believe,
that so they may after come to the knowledge of those things, which out of this
rich Principle and And therefore S. Aug. 2. de Doctr. Christ. c. 8. would have
men make themselves persect in reading the letter of the Scripture, (...)
before they understood it. Eas notas habeat, etsi nondum intellectu, tame (...)
duntaxat; No question, but to make the^ ready, against they understood it.
Treasure are deduceable? I yet see not, how right Reason can deny these
grounds; and if it cannot, then a mere natural man may be thus far
convinced, That the Text of God is a very credible Text.

Well, these are the four, by most of which, men offer to prove the Scripture
to be the Word of God, as by a Divine and infallible warrant; and it seems no
one of these does it. The Tradition of the present Church is too weak, because
that is not absolutely Divine: The Light which is in Scripture it self, is not
bright enough, it cannot bear sufficient witness to it self. The Testimony
of the Holy Ghost, that is most infallible, but ordinarily it is not so much as
considerable in this Question, which is not, how, or by what means we believe,
but how the Scripture may be proposed as a credible Object, (...) for (...).
Reason, no man expects, that that should (...) it; it does service enough, if
it enable us to disprooue that which misguided men conceive against it. If none
of these then be an absolute and sufficient means to prove it, either we
must find out another, or see what can be more wrought out

For the Tradition of the Church then, certain it is, we must distinguish the
Church, before we can judge right of the validity of the Tradition. For if
the speech be of the Prime Christian Church, the Apostles, Disciples, and such
as had immediate Revelation from Heaven; no question, but the Voice and
Tradition of this Church is Divine, not aliquo modo, in a sort, but simply; and
the Word of God from them, is of like validity, written or delivered. And
against this Tradition (of which kind this, That the Books of Scripture are
the Word of God, is the Augustine L. 1. contr. Epis. Fund. c. 5. Ego vero non
credere^ Euangelio, nisi me Catholicae Ecclesiae co^moueret autoritas.
said, I would not believe the Gospel, unless the Authority of the Catholic
Church moved me (whichplace you urged at the Conference, though you are now
content to slide by it) some of your ownewill not endure, should be understood,
save (...), Dial. p. 1. l. 1. c. 4. (...) solum de Ecclesia quae fuit tempore
Apostolorum.
of the Church in the time of the Apostles Biel, Lect. 22. in C. Missae. A
tempore Christi and Apostolorum, etc. And so does S. Aug. take, Eccles cont.
Fund.
some, of the Church in general, not (...) but sure to include Christ and his
Apostles, the (...) is there.

But this will not serve your turn. The Tradition of the present Church must
be as infallible as that of the Primitive. But the contrary to this is proved
before, because this Voice of the present Church is not simply Divine. To what
end then serves any Tradition of the present Church? To what? Why to a very
good end. For (...) it serves by a full consent to work upon the minds of
unbelievers; to move them to read and to (...) of God. It (...) among
Nouices, Weakelings, and Doubters in the Faith, to instruct and confirm them,
till they may acquaint themselves with, and understand the Scripture, which the
Church delivers as the Word of God. And thus again some of your own
understand the fore cited place of S. Augustine, (...) the Gospel, etc. Sieve
Infideles, sieve in fide Nouitij. Can. loc. lib. 2. cap. 8. (...) omnino
nescienti Scripturam. Stap. Relect. cont. 4. q. 1. A. 3.
For he speaks it either of (...), or (...) in the Faith, or else of such as
were in (...) (...). You (as the B. tells me) at the Conference Augustine (...)
of the Faithful, which I cannot yet think: For he speaks to the (...), and
they had a great part of the (...) in them. And the words immediately before
those, are, If thou should find one, Qui Euangelio nondum credit, which did
not yet believe the Gospel, what would thou do to make him believe? Et
ibid. Quibus obtemperaui dice^tibus Credit Euangelio. Therefore he speaks of
himself when he did not believe.
Ego vero non, Truly I would not, etc. So to these two ends it serves, and
there need be no question between us. But then every thing that is the first
Inducer to believe, is not by and by either the principal Motive, or the
chief and last Object of Belief, upon which a man may rest his Faith. The
first knowledge that helps to open a man's understanding, and prepares him to
be able to demonstrate a truth, and make it evident, is his Grammar: but when
he has made a Demonstration, he resolves the knowledge of his Conclusion, not
into his Grammar Rules, but Principles out of which it is deduced. So in this
particular, a man is probably led by the Authority of the present Church, as
by the first informing, inducing, persuading means, to believe the Scripture
to be the Wordof God: but when he has studied, considered, and compared this
Word with it self, and with other Writings, with the help of ordinary Grace,
and a mind morally induced, and reasonably persuaded by the voice of the
Church; the Scripture then gives greater and higher reasons of credibilitie to
it self, than Tradition alone could give. And then he that believes, resolves
his That Scripture is Divine Authority, into internal Arguments, found in the
Letter of it self, though found by the help and direction of Tradition
without, and Grace within. And the Resolution that is rightly grounded, may not
endure to pitch and rest it self upon the helps, but upon that Divine Light,
which the Scripture no question has in it self, but is not kindled, till
these helps come: Thy Word is a Light Psalm. 119.105. Sanctarum Scripturarum
Lumen. S. Aug. L. de Vera Relig. c. 7. Quid Lucem Scripturarum vanis vmbris?
etc. S. Aug. L. de Mor. Eccl. Cathol. c. 35.
; so David. A Light? therefore it is as much, manifestatiuum sui as alterius, a
manifestation to it self, as to other things which it shows: but still, not
till the Candle be lighted; not till there what Light it is. Children call the
Sun and Moon, Candles; Gods Candles: They see the Light as well as men, but
cannot distinguish between them, till some Tradition, and Education, has
informed their Reason. And 1. Cor. 2.14.
animalis homo, the natural man sees some Light of Moral counsel and
instruction in Scripture, as well as Believers; but he takes all that glorious
Luster for Candlelight, and cannot distinguish between the Suune, and twelve
to the pound, till Tradition of the Church, and Gods Grace put to it, have
cleared his understanding. So Tradition of That the Scripture is the Word of
God, rests Orig. 4. (...), c. 1. went this way, yet was he a great deal nearer
the prime Tradition, than we are: for being to prove, that the Scriptures
were inspired from God, be says, De hoc assignabimus ex ipsis diuinis
Scripturis, quae nos co^petenter mouerint, etc.
upon the Scripture, when a man finds it to answer and exceed all that which
the Church gave in Testimony. And as in the voice of Principaliter tamen
(etiam and hic) credimus propter Deum non Apostolos, etc. (...). a Gand. Sum.
A. 9. q. 3. Now, if where the Apostles themselves spoke, vltimata resolutio
fidei, was in Deum, not in ipsos per (...), much more shall it be in (...),
than in praesentem Ecclesiam; and into the writings of the Apostles, than into
the words of their Successors, made up into a Tradition.
simply Divine Authority, delivering the Scripture as Gods Word; so, after
Tradition of the present Church has taught and informed the Soul, the voice
of God is plainly heard in Scripture it self. And then here is double
Authority, and both Divine, that confirms Scripture to be the Word of God,
Tradition of the Apostles delivering it, and the internal worth and argument
in the Scripture, obuious to a soul prepared by the present Churches
Tradition, and Gods grace.

The Difficulties which are pretended against this, are not many, and they will
easily vanish.

1. First, you pretend we go to private Revelations for Light, to know
Scripture: No, we do not; you see it is excluded out of the very state of the
Question: and we go to the Tradition of the present Church, and by it as well
as you. Here we differ; we use this as the first Motive, not as the last
Resolution of our Faith; we resolve only into Calu. Instit. 1. c. 5.. 2.
Christiana Ecclesia Prophetarum, Scriptis, and Apostolorum praedicatione initio
fundata fuit, vbicunque reperietur ea Doctrina, etc.
prime Tradition Apostolical, and Scripture it self.

2. Secondly, you pretend we do not, nor cannot know the unwritten Word, and
Divine, we cannot yet know Scripture to be Scripture, by a Divine Authority.
First, suppose I could not know the prime Tradition to be Divine, but by the
present, yet it does not follow, that then I cannot know Scripture to be
Scripture by a Divine Authority, because Divine Tradition is not the sole and
only means to prove it. For suppose I had not, nor could have full assurance
of Apostolical Tradition Divine, yet the moral persuasion, In, and Home
Arguments enough to put a soul, that has but ordinary Grace, out of doubt,
That Scripture is the Word of God, infallible and Divine. Secondly, Next, the
present Tradition, though not absolutely Divine, yet by the help of Divine
Arguments, internal to the Scripture, is able to prove the very prime
Tradition: for so long as the present agrees both with the prime because not
simply Divine, but by the prime Tradition and

3. Thirdly, you pretend, that we make the Scripture absolutely and fully to
be known Lumine suo, by the Light and Testimony which it has in, and gives
to it self. Against this, you give reason and proof from our selves. Your
reason is, If there be sufficient Light in Scripture to show it self, then
every man that can and does but read it, may know it presently to be the
Divine Word of God; which we see by daily experience, men neither do nor can.
First, it is not absolutely, nor universally sufficient Light; therefore every
man may see it. Blind men are men, and cannot see it; and 1. Cor. 2.14.
sensual men, in the Apostles judgment, are such: Nor may we deny and put
out this Light, as insufficient, because blind Eyes cannot, and perverse Eyes
will not see it, no more than we may deny meat to be sufficient for
nourishment, though men that are heart-sicke, cannot eat it. Next, we do not
say, That there is such a full Light in Scripture, as that every man upon the
first sight must yield to it; such Light as is found in prime Principles,
Every whole is greater than a part of the same, and The same thing cannot be,
and not be, at the same time, and in the same respect. These carry a natural
Light with them, and evident: for they are no sooner understood, than fully
known, to the conuincing of man's understanding, and so they are the beginning
of knowledge; which, where it is perfect, dwells in full Light: but such a full
Light we do neither say is, nor require to be in Scripture; and if any
particular man do, let him answer for himself. The Question is, only of
such a Light in Scripture, as is of force to breed Faith, that it is the Word
of God; not to make a perfect Knowledge. Now Evidence (...). Heb. 11. 1.
, as well as a Knowledge, and a Henr. a Gand. sum. A. 10. q. 2.
firmer and surer Evidence than any Knowledge can have, because it rests upon
Divine Authority, which cannot deceive; whereas Knowledge, or at least he that
thinks he knows, is not ever certain, in deductions from Principles. I say
firmer Evidence, but not so clear: For it is of Heb. 11.1.
things not seen, in regard of the Object; and in regard of the Subject that
sees, it is in 1. Cor. 13.12.
aenigmate, in a Glass, or dark speaking. Now God demonstratiue Knowledge in
us, that the Scripture is his Word, and therefore in his providence kindled in
it no Light for that; but he requires our Faith of it, and such a certain
Demonstration, as may fit that. And for that, he has left Reason and Grace
meeting, where the soul is morally prepared by the Tradition of the Church;
unless you be of Bellarmine's opinion Lib. 3 de Eccl. c. 14. Credere (...)
esse Diuinas Scripturas non est omnino necessarium ad salutem. I will not
break my discourse, to (...) this speech of Bellarmine; it is bad enough in
the best sense that favor it self can (...) it. For if he (...) by omnino,
that it is not altogether, or simply necessary to believe there is Divine
Scripture, and a written Word of God; that is false, that being granted which is
among all Christians, That there is a Scripture: And God would (...) have given
a supernatural unnecessary thing. And if he means by omnino, that it is not
in any wise necessary, then it is sensibly false: For the greatest vpholders
of Tradition that ever were, made the Scripture very necessary in all the
(...) of the Church. So it was necessary, because it was given; and given,
because God thought it necessary. Besides, upon Roman Grounds (if I have skill
enough to stand firm upon them) this I think will follow: That which the
Tradition of the present Church delivers, as necessary to (...), (...) omnino,
necessary to salvation: But that there are Divine Scriptures, the Tradition of
the present Church delivers as necessary to believe: therefore, to believe
there are Divine Scriptures, is omnino (be the (...) of the word what it can)
necessary to salvation. So Bellarmine is foul, and unable to stand upon his
own ground.
, That to believe there are any Divine Scriptures, is not omnino, necessary to
salvation.

The Authority which you pretend, is out of Lib. 1.. 14.
Hooker: Of things necessary, the very chiefest is to know, what Books we
are bound to esteem holy; which Point is confessed impossible for the
Scripture it self to teach. Of this, Protest. Apol. Tract. 1.. 10. n. 3.
Brierly (the Storehouse for all Priests that will be idle, and yet seem well
read) tells us, That Lib. 2.. 4.
Hooker gives a very sensible Demonstration: It is not the Word of God, which
does or possibly can assure us, that we do well to think it is his Word: for
if any one Book of Scripture did give testimony to all, yet still that
Scripture which gives credit to the rest, would require another to give credit
unto it. Nor could we ever come to any pause, to rest our assurance this way:
so that unless, beside Scripture, there were something that might assure, etc.
And Lib. 2.. 7. and lib. 3. 8.
this he acknowledges (says Brierly) is the Authority of Gods Church.
Certainly, Hooker gives a true and a sensible Demonstration; but Brierly wants
fidelity and integrity, in citing him: For in the first place, Hookers speech
is, Scripture it self cannot teach this; nor can the Truth say, that Scripture
it self can. It must ordinarily have Tradition, to prepare the mind of a man
to receive it. And in the next, where he speaks so sensibly, That Scripture
cannot bear witness to it self, nor one part of it to another; that is
grounded upon Nature, which admits no created thing to be witness to it self;
and is acknowledged by our Savior, S. Ioh. 5. 31. De seipso homine loquitur,
nam aliter S. Ioh. 8.13.
If I bear witness to my self, my witness is not true, i. not of force to
be reasonably accepted for Truth. But then it is more than manifest, that
Hooker delivers his Demonstration of Scripture alone. For if Scripture has
another proof So that unless, besides Scripture, there be etc. Besides
Scripture; therefore he excludes not Scripture, but calls for another proof to
lead it in, namely, Tradition, which no man that has brains about him,
denies. Brierly falsifies shamefully: for folding up all that Hooker says, in
these words, This (other means to assure us, besides Scripture) is the
Authority of Gods Church, he wrinkles that worthy Author desperately, and
shrinkes up his meaning. In the former place abused by Brierly, no man can set
a better state of the question between Scripture and Tradition, than Hooker
does: Lib. 2.. 7.
His words are these, The Scripture is the ground of our Belief; The
Authority of man (that is the name he gives to Tradition) is the Key which
opens the door of entrance into the knowledge of the Scripture. I ask now,
when a Scripture, as the Ground, and we will never deny, that Tradition is
the Key that lets us in. In the latter place, Hooker is as plain, as constant
to himself, and Truth: Lib. 3.. 8.
His words are, The first outward motive, leading men so to esteem of the
Scripture, is the Authority of Gods Church, etc. But afterward, the more we
bestow our labor in reading or learning the Mysteries thereof, the more we
find, that the thing it self does answer our received opinion concerning it:
so that the former inducement prevailing somewhat with us before, does now much
more prevail, when the very thing has ministered further reason. Here then
again, in his judgment, is Tradition the first inducement; but the farther
Reason and Ground, is the Scripture: and resolution of Faith ever settles upon
the farthest Reason it can, not upon the first inducement. So that the

The last thing I shall trouble you with, is, That this method and manner of
proouing Scripture to be the Word of God, is the same which the ancient Church
ever held, namely, Tradition, or Ecclesiastical Authority first, and then,
internal Arguments from the Scripture it self. The first Church of Christ,
the Apostles themselves, had their warrant from Nec ijs principaliter credendum
(...) propter authoritatem Christi, and Dei in Christo. Heur. (...) Gand. sum.
a. 9. q. 3.
Christ; their Tradition was every way Divine, both in the thing they
delivered, Scripture to be the Word of God by internal Arguments, as the
chief thing upon which they resolve, though Tradition be the first that mooues
them to it. This way the Church went in S. Augustine's Lib. 13. contr. Faust.
c. 5. Probat per internum argumentum impletionem Prophetarum. Scriptura quae
fide^ sua^ rebus ipsis probat, quae per temporum successiones haec impleri,
etc. Et Hen. a Gand. sum. a. 9. q. 3. citat S. Aug. L. de Vera Relig. in quo L.
haec quatuor simul posita non leguntur, sed adimplent scopum (...).
time: Deus in Christo, God in Christ, he takes this as the all-sufficient way,
and gives four proofs, all internal to the Scripture: first, The Miracles;
secondly, That there is nothing carnal in the Doctrine; thirdly, That there
has been such performance of it; fourthly, That by such a Doctrine of
Humility, the whole World almost has been converted. And whereas ad
muniendam fidem, for the defending of the Faith, and keeping it entire, there
are two things requisite, Scripture, and Church-Tradition; Duplici modo munire
fidem, etc. primo diuinae Legis (...), tum deinde Ecclesiae Catholicae
traditione, contr. Haer. cap. 1.
Vincent. Lirinensis places Authority of Scriptures first, and then Tradition.
And since it is apparent, that Tradition is first in order of Time, it must
necessarily follow, that Scripture is first, in order of Nature; that is the
chief, upon which Faith rests and resolves it self: And your own School
confesses, this was the way ever. The woman of S. Ioh. 4.
Samaria is a known resemblance, but allowed by your selves: For Henr. a Gand.
sum. a. 10. q. 1. Sic quotidie apud illos qui foris sunt intrat Christus per
(...), i. Ecclesiam and eredunt per istam fama^ etc. in Glos. in S. Ioh. cap. 4.
quotidie, daily with them that are without, Christ enters by the Woman, that
is, the Church, and they believe by that fame which she gives, etc. But when
they come to hear Christ himself, Jbid. Plus vebis Chrsti in Scriptura
credit, quam Ecclesiae testificanti. Quia propter illam iam credit Ecclesiae,
and si ipsa quidem (...) Scripturae diceret, ipsi non crederet, etc.
they do more believe his words in Scripture, than they do the Church which
testifies of him, because then propterillam, for the Scripture they believe the
Church: and if the Church should speak contrary to the Scripture, they would
not believe it. Thus the School taught then, and thus the Gloss commented
then. And when men have tired themselves, hither they must come. The Key that
lets men in to the Scriptures, even to this knowledge of them, that they are
the Word of God, is Tradition of the Church: but when they are in, In sacra
Scriptura ipse immediate loquitur fidelib'. Ibid.
they hear Christ himself immediately speaking in Scripture to the Faithful:
S. Ioh. 10.4.
And his Sheep do not only hear, but know his voice.

To conclude then, we have a double Divine Testimony, altogether infallible,
to confirm unto us, that Scripture is the Word of God: The first, is the
Tradition of the Church of the Apostles themselves, who delivered immediately
to the World, the Word of Christ: the other, the Scripture it self; but after
it has received this Testimony. And Quod autem (...) posterioribus circa quos
non apparent (...) est, ^ quae illi in ^ Quae (...) medios (...) nullo fuisse
(...) ex consensione concordi (...) succedentium vsque ad tempora (...). Henr.
a Gand. (...). A. (...). q. 3. Et ^ argumenta, quae (...) ex antedicto (...) S.
Aug. (...) Dei (...), sufficientia debent esse indicia, non solum pro tempore
Ecclesiae (...), sed etiam pro (...) Ecclesiae decursu vsque in (...), (...) de
caetero non (...), etc. (...). and Calu. Lib. 1. Instit. cap. 5.. 2. (...)
As for the Tradition of after ages, in and about whom Miracles and Divine
power were not so (the Apostles) left in scriptis certissimis, in most certain
Scripture. And it appears by men in the middle ages, that these Writings were
vitiated in nothing, by the concordant consent in them of all succeedors, to
our own time.

And now, by this time, it will be no hard thing to reconcile the Fathers,
which seem to speak differently in no few places, both one from another, and
the same from themselves, touching Scripture, and Tradition; and that as well
in this Point, to prove Scripture to be the Word of God, as for concordant
Scripturas habemus ex Traditione. S. Cyril. Hier. Catech. 4. Multa quae non
inueniuntur in Literis Apostolorum etc. non nisi ab illis tradita and
comme^data creduntur. S. Aug. 2. (...) Baptis. contr. Donat. c. 7.
We have the Scripture by Tradition, or the like, either they mean the
Tradition of the Apostles themselves delivering it; and there, when it is
known, we may resolve our Faith: or if they speak of the present Church, then
they mean, that the Tradition of it is that by which we first receive the
Scripture, as by an according means to the prime Tradition: But because it is
not simply Divine, we resolve not our Faith into it, nor settle our Faith upon
it, till it resolve it self into the prime Tradition of the Apostles, or the
Scripture, or both, and We are to resolve our Faith, that Scripture is the
Word of God, into the Tradition of the present Church? And again, when they
say we are to rely upon Scripture Non aliunde Scientia Coelestium. S. Hilar.
lib. 4. de Trin. Si Angelus de Coelo annunciauerit praeterquam quod in
Scripturis, etc. S. Aug. l. 3. contr. (...). c. 6.
only, they are never to be understood with exclusion of Tradition, in what
causes soever it may be had, Quum sit perfectus Scripturarum Canon sibique ad
omnia satis (...) sufficiat, etc. Vinc. Lir. cont. Haer. c. 2. And if it be
sibi ad omnia, then to this, To prove it self, at least aster Tradition has
prepared us to receive it.
Not but that the Scripture is abundantly sufficient to it self for all
things, but because it is deep, and may be drawn into different senses.

I have said thus much upon this great occasion, because this Argument is so
much pressed, without due respect to Scripture, I will not say, to the
weakening our belief of it. Now out of this, I will weigh the B. his Answer,
and your Exception taken against it.


F. The B. said, That the Books of Scripture are Principles


B. Why, but did the B. say, That this Principle (The Books of Scripture are
the Word of God) is to be supposed, as needing no proof at all to a natural
man? or to a man newly entering deny and deride the Scripture, and men that are
borne in the Church:The first have a farther way about, to this Principle; the
other, in their very Christian education suck in this Principle, and are
taught so soon as they are apt to learn it, That the Books commonly called
the Bible, or Scripture, are the Word of God Dixi sicut ei congruebat ad que
Scribebam, etc. S. Aug. 1. Retrac. c. 13.
. The B. dealt with you as with a Christian, though in Error while you call
Catholic. The That the Scripture only, not any unwritten Tradition, was the
Foundation of Faith. The Question between us and you is, Whether the Scripture
do contain all such necessary things of Faith? Now in this Question, as in
all Nature and Art, the Subject, the Scripture is and must be supposed; the
Quaere between the Roman Catholics and the Church of England being only of
the Predicate, the thing uttered of it, namely, Whether it contain all
Fundamentalls of Faith, all necessaries for Salvation, within it? Now since the
Question proposed, in very form of Art proves not, but supposes the subject,
I think the B. gave a satisfying answer, That to you and him, and in this
Question, Scripture was a supposed Principle, and needed no proof. And I must
tell you, that in this Question of the Scriptures perfect continent, it is
against all Art, yea and Equity too, in reasoning, to call for a proof of
that here, which must go unavoidably supposed in this Question. De subiecto
enim quaeritur semper, non subiectum ipsum quam (...) in propositione.
And if any man will (...) familiar with Impiety, to question it, it must be
tried in a preceding Question and Dispute by it self. Yet here not you only,
but Lib 4. de verb. Dei, cap. 4.
Bellarmine, and others, run quite out of the way, to snatch at advantage.


F. Against this, I read what I had formerly written in my Reply against Mr
John White: wherein I plainly showed, that this answer was not good, and that
no other answer could be made, but by admitting some Word of God unwritten, to
assure us of this Point.


B. Indeed here you read out of a Book (which you called your own) a large
discourse upon this Argument: but some Hooker Lib. 3.. 8.
and the B. that because they call it a supposed or presumed Principle among
Christians, you should fall by and by into such a Metaphysicall discourse as
the B. that which is praecognitum, foreknowne in Science, must be of such
Light, that it must be known of and by it self alone; and that the Scripture
cannot be so known to be the Word of God.

Well, I will not now enter into that discourse more than I have, how far the
Beam, which is very glorious (especially in some parts of Scripture) gives
Light to prove it self. You see neither Hooker, nor the B. nor the Church of
England (for ought I know) leave the Scripture alone, to manifest it self by
the Light which it has in it self, but when the present like a preparing
Morning-Light to Sunshine; and then indeed we settle not, but in that
Light. Nor will I make needless inquiry, how far, or in what manner a
praecognitum, or supposed Principle in any Science, may be proved in a higher,
to which that is subordinate; or accepted in a Prime: nor how it may in
Divinity, where prae as well as post cognita; things fore as after-knowne, are
matters and under the manner of Faith, and not of Science strictly: nor whether
a praecognitum, a presupposed Principle in Faith, which rests upon Divine
Authority, must needs have as much Light to Natural Reason, which prime
Principles have in Nature, while thy rest upon Reason: Nor whether it may
justly be denied to have sufficient Light, be cause not equal. Your own
(...). p. 1. q. 1. A. 5. 1. colligitur inde.
School grants, That in us, which are the subjects both of Faith and
Knowledge, and in regard of the Evidence given in unto us, there is less
Light, less Evidence in the Principles of Faith, than in the Principles of
Knowledge, upon which there can be no doubt. But I think the School will
never grant, that the Principles of Faith (even this in question) have not
sufficient evidence. And you ought not to do as you did, without any
Praecognitum, or prime Principle in the Faith, because it answers not in all
things to the prime Principles in Science, in their Light and Evidence; a thing
in it self directly against Reason.

Well, though I do none of this, yet I must follow you a little; for I would
feign make it appear as plainly as such a difficulty can, what wrong you do
Truth and your self in this case. When the Protestants therefore answer to
this Argument (which, as I have showed, can properly have no place in the
Question between us about Tradition) Hook. l. 3.. 8.
they which Praecognitum, and thing fore-knowne, as the B. did, were neither
ignorant nor forgetful, That things presupposed, as already known in a
Science, are of two sorts; Either they are plain and fully manifest intheir
own Light, or they are proved and granted already, some former knowledge
having made them evident. This Principle then, The Scriptures are the Oracles
of God, we cannot say is clear and fully manifest to all men simply, and in
selfe-Light. For as is formerly said, if it were so evident, then all that
hear it, read it, and do but understand (...) terms, could not but
presently assent unto it, as they do to Principles evident in themselves,
which hourly experience tells us is not so: Yet we say, after Tradition has
been our Introduction, the Soul that has but ordinary Grace added to
Reason, may discern Light sufficient to resolve our Faith, that the Sun is
there. This Principle then being not absolutely Divinity can have no Science
above it; but your own School teaches me that it has. Hoc modo sacra
Doctrina est Scientia, quia procedit ex principijs notis lumine superioris
Scientiae, quae scilicet est Scientia Dei and Beatorum. Th. p. 1. q. 1. a. 2.
The sacred Doctrine of Divinity in this sort is a Science, because it
proceeds out of Principles that are known by the Light of a superior
Knowledge, which is the Knowledge of God and the blessed in Heaven. In this
superior Science, this Principle, The Scriptures are the Oracles of God, is
more than evident in full Non creditur Deus esse Author huius (...), quia
homines hoc testati sunt in quantum homines nudo Testimonio humano, sed in
quantum (...) Diuina, and ita Deus ijs and sibi ipsi in eis Testimonium
perhibuit. Hen. a Gand. sum. A. 9. q. 3.
The infallible Light of this Principle made their Authority Divine; by the
same Divine Authority they wrote, and delivered the Scripture to the Church.
Therefore from them immediately the Church received the Scripture, and that
vncorrupt: And since no sufficient reason has or can be given, that in any
substantial thing it has been corrupted, it remains firm to us at this
day, proved in the most supreme Science; and therefore now to be supposed (at
least by all Christians) That the Scripture is the That this Principle is to be
supposed.

Besides, the Jews never had nor can have any other proof, that the Old
Testament is the Word of God, than we have of the New: For theirs was
delivered by Moses, and the Prophets; and ours was delivered by the Apostles,
which were Prophets too. The Jews did believe their Scripture by a Divine
Authority; for so the Jews argue themselves: S. Ioh. 9.29.
We know that God spaeke with Moses; Maldon. in S. Ioh. 9. Itaque non magis
errare posse eum sequentes, qua^ si Deum ipsum sequerentur.
And that therefore they could no more err in following Moses, than they could
in following God himself. Now, how did the Jews know that God spoke to Moses?
How? Why apparently, the same way that is before set down: first, by
Tradition. So S. Chrysostom: Hom. 57. in S. Ioh. 9. (...).
We know: Why, by whose witness, do you know? By the Testimony of our
Ancestors. But he speaks not of their immediate Ancestors, but 2. Pet. 1.19.
Light, and a shining Light too: and therefore could not but be sufficient,
when Tradition had gone before. And therefore, though the Jews entered this way
to their belief of the Scripture, yet they do not say, S. Chrysostom. vbi supra.
(...), etc. (...).
Audiuimus, We have heard that God spoke to Moses, but, We know it. So they
resolved their Faith higher, and into a more inward Principle, than an Ear to
their immediate Ancestors, and their Tradition.


F. And that no other answer could be made, but by admitting some Word of God
unwritten, to assure us of this Point.


B. I think I have showed, that the B. his answer is good, and that so no
other answer need be made. If there were need, I make no question but another
answer might be made, to assure us of this Point, though we did not admit of
any Word of God unwritten. I say, to assure us; and you express no more. If
you had said, to assure us by Divine Faith, your Argument had been the
stronger. But if you speak of assurance only in the general, I must then
tell you (and it is the great advantage which the Church of Christ has against
Infidels) a man may be assured, nay infallibly assured by Ecclesiastical and
humane proof. Men that never saw Rome, may be sure, and infallibly believe,
that such a City there is, by Historical and acquired Faith. And if consent
of humane story can assure me this, Why should not consent of Church-storie
assure me the this Body of Scripture as the Oracles of God? For Jews, enemies
to Christ, they bear witness to the Old Testament; and Christians, through
almost all Nations Tanta hominu^ and temporum consensione firmatum. S. Aug. L.
de Mor. Eccl. Cath. c. 29. Ij Libri quoquo modo se habent, sancti tamen
Diuinaru^ reru^ pleni prope totius generis humani (...) diffama^tur, etc. S.
Aug. de vtil. Cred. c. 7. and lib. 13. cont. Faust. c. 15.
, give in evidence to both Old and New. And no Pagan, or other enemies of
Christianity, can give such a worthy and consenting Testimony for any
Authority upon which they rely, or almost for any Principle which they have,
as the Scripture has gained to it self. And as is the Testimony which it
receives, above Super omnes omniu^ gentiu^ Literas. S. Aug. 11. de Ciuit. Dei,
c. 1.
all Writings of all Nations; so here is assurance in a great measure, without
any infallibility. For first, a thing may be presented as an infallible Object
of Belief, when it is true, and remains so: For Truth, (...) tale, as it is
Truth, cannot deceive. Secondly, a thing is Authority, Consent, and Proof, a
man may be assured infallibly, that the Scripture is the Word of God, by an
acquired habit of Faith, Cui non (...) falsum, under which nor error nor
falsehood is: But he cannot be assured infallibly by Divine Faith, Incertum
esse non potest hos esse libros Canonicos Wald. Doct. fid. l. 2. a. 2. c. 20.
Cui subesse non potest falsum, into which no falsehood can come, but by a
Divine Testimony. This Testimony is absolute Canus, Loc. l. 2. c. 8. Facit
Ecclesiam causam sine qua non.
an Introduction and outward motive, is the Tradition of the present Church;
but that neither simply Divine, nor sufficient alone, into which we may resolve
our Faith.

And now to come close to the particular. The time was, before this miserable
rent in the Church of Christ (which I think no true Christian can look upon,
but with a bleeding heart) that you and we were all of one belief: That
belief was tainted, in tract and corruption of time, very deeply. Creed, and
other common Principles of Belief: of these, this was one of the greatest,
Inter omnes pene constat, aut certe id quod satis est, inter me and illos cum
quibus nunc agitur conuenit hoc etc. Sic in alia causa cont. Manichaeos. S.
Aug. l. de Mor. Eccl. Cathol. cap. 4.
That the Scripture is the Word of God; for our belief of all things contained
in it, depends upon it. Since this division, there has been nothing done by
us to discredit this Principle: nay, we have given it all honor, and ascribed
unto it more sufficiency, even to the containing of all things necessary to
salvation, with Vin. Lir. cont. Haer. c. 2.
satis superque, enough, and more than enough; which your selves have not done,
do not. And for begetting and settling a belief of this Principle, we go
The same way with you: because we allow the Tradition of the present Church to
be the first inducing motive to embrace this Principle; only we cannot go so
far in this way as you, to make the present Tradition always an infallible
Word of God: for this is to go so far in, till you be out of the way. For
Tradition is but a Lane in the Church; it has an end not only to receive us
in, but another after to let us out into more open and richer ground. And a
better way than you: Because after we are moved, and prepared, and induced by
Tradition, we resolve our done, you can never settle the Faith of man about
this great Augustine Contr. Epist. Fund. c. 5.
. The words of the Father are Nisi commoueret, Unless the Authority of the
Church moved me: but not alone, but with other motives; else it were not
commouere, to move together. And the other motives are Resoluers, though this
be Leader. Now since we go the same way with you, so far as you go right,
and a better way than you, where you go wrong; we need not admit any other
Word of God, than we do. And this ought to remain as a presupposed


F. From this (the Person doubting) called us, and desiring to hear, Whether
the B. would grant the Roman Church to be the Right Church? The B. granted,
that it was.


B. One occasion which moved Tertullian to write his Book de Praescrip.
aduersus Haereticos, was, That he Pamel. in Summar. Lib. Videns disputationibus
nihil aut parum profici.
saw little or no profit come by Disputations. Sure the ground was the same
then, and now. It was not to deny, that Disputation is an opening of the
Understanding, a sifting out of Truth; it was not to affirm, that any such
Disquisition is in and of it self unprofitable: If it had, S. Stephen Act. 6.
9.
would not have disputed with the Cyrenians, nor S. Paul with the Act. 9. 29.
Grecians first, and then with the Jews Act. 17. 17.
, and all Comers. No sure: it was some abuse in the Disputants, that
frustrated the good of the Disputation. a Resolution to hold their own, though
it be by unworthy means, and disparagement Debilitatur generosa indoles
coniecta in argutias. Sen. Ep. 48.
of Truth. The B. finds it here. For as it is true, that this Question was
asked; so it is altogether false, that it was asked in this form, or so
answered. There is a great deal of difference (especially as Romanists handle
the Question of the Church) between The Church, and A Church; and there is
some, between a True Church, and a Right Church: which is the word you use,
but no man else that I know; I am sure, not the B.

The Church may import in our Language, The only true Church; and perhaps (as
some of you seem to make it) the Root and the Ground of the Catholic. This
the B. never did, never means to grant. A Church can imply no more, than that
it is a member of the whole. This the B. never did, nor True Church, he
granted also; but not a Right (as you impose upon him:) For Ens and Verum,
Being and True, are conuertible one with another; and every thing which has a
Being, is truly that Being which it is, in truth of substance. But this word
Right is not so used, but is referred more properly to perfection in
Conditions: And in this sense, every thing that has a true and real being,
is not by and by right in the Conditions of it. A man that is most dishonest,
and unworthy the name, a very Thief (if you will) is a True man, in the
right or an upright man. And a Church that is exceeding corrupt, both in
Manners and Doctrine, and so a dishonor to the name, is yet a True Church in
the verity of essence, as a Church is a company of men, which profess the
Faith of Christ, and are baptized into his Name: but yet it is not therefore a
Right Church, either in Doctrine, or Manners. It may be, by this word Right,
you meant cunningly to slip it in, that the B. should grant it Orthodoxe.
Orthodoxe Christians are keepers of integrity, and followers of right things
(so Saint Augustine Integritatis custodes and Recta sectantes. De vera Relig.
c. 5.
) of which, the Church of Rome is neither. In this sense then no Right, that
is, Orthodoxe Church at Rome.

And yet no news, that the B. granted the Roman Church to be a True Church:
For so much, very learned Protestants Hook. lib. 3.. 1. Iunius, lib. de
Eccles. cap. 17. Fallantur qui Ecclesiam negant quia Papatus in ea est.
Reynold. These. 5. Negat tantum esse Catholicam, vel sanum eius membrum. Nay,
the very Anabaptists grant it. Fr. Johnson in his Treatise called, A
Christian Plea, printed 1617. page 123. etc.
have acknowledged, before him; and the Truth cannot deny it. For that Church
which receives the Scripture as a Rule of Faith, True Church in essence. How it
is in Manners and Doctrine, I would you would look to it with a single eye: Si
tamen bono ingenio Pietas and Pax quaedam mentis accedat, fine qua de sanctis
rebus nihil prorsus intelligi potest. S. August. de vtil. Cred. cap. 18.
For if Piety and a peaceable mind be not joined to a good understanding,
nothing can be known in these great things.


F. Further he confessed, That Protestants had made a Rent and Division from it.


B. The B. (I know from himself) could here be heartily Grave omnino crimen,
sed defensionem longinqua^ non (...), satis est enim negare, sicut pro Ecclesia
olim. S. Aug. de vtil. Cred. c. 5.
angry, but that he has resolved, in handling matters of Hanc quae respectu
hominu^ Ecclesia dicitur obseruare eiusq, communionem (...) debemus. Calu. 4.
Inst. c. 1.. 7.
: Nor is he a Christian, that would not have unity, might he have it with
Truth. But the B. never said; nor thought, that the Protestants made this Rent.
The cause of the Schism, is yours; for you thrust us from you, because we
called for Truth, and redress of Abuses: For a Schism must needs be theirs,
whose the cause of it is. The Woe runs full out of the mouth of S. (...). 18. 7.
Christ, ever against him that gives the offense;


F. Moreover, he said, he would ingenuously acknowledge, That the Corruption
of Manners in the Romish Church, was not a sufficient cause to justify their
departing from it.


B. I would the B. could say, you did as ingenuously repeat, as he did
confess. He never said, That Corruption of Manners was not a sufficient cause
to justify their departure. How could he say this, since he did not grant
that they did depart? There is difference between departure, and causeless
thrusting from you; for out of the Church, is not in your power to thrust us:
Think on that. And so much the B. said expressly then. That which the B. did
ingenuously confess, was this, That Corruption in Manners only, is no
sufficient cause to Modo ea quae ad Cathedram pertinent recta praecipiant.
Hier. ep. 236.
make a separation in the Church: Nor is it. It is a truth agreed Cathari, to
whom came the Donatist, and the Anabaptist; against which, Lib. 4. c. 1.. 13.
etc.
Calvin disputes it strongly. And Saint Augustine Ep. 48. A malis piscib' cord
semper and moribus seperantur, etc. Corporalem separationem in litore Maris,
hoc est, in fine seculi expectat.
is plain: There are bad Fish in the Net of the Lord, from which there must be
ever a separation in heart, and in manners; but a corporal separation must be
expected at the Sea shore, that is, the end of the World. And the best Fish
that are, must not tear and break the Net, because the bad are with them. And
this is as ingenuously confessed for you, as by the B. For if Corruption in
Manners were a just cause of actual separation of one Church Vix vllu^
peccatu^ (sola Haeresi excepta) cogitari potest, quo illa seeds turpiter
maculata non fuerit, maxim ab an. 800. Relect. Cont. 1. q. 5. A. 3.
Stapleton graunts) there is scarce any sin that can be thought by man
(Heresy only excepted) with which that Sea has not been foulely stained,
especially from eight hundred years after Christ. And he need not In Can.
Miss. Lect. 23.
Biel grants it possible the Bishops of that Sea may fall. And In S. Luc. c.
22. L. 3. D. 24. q. 1.
Stella and Almain grants it freely, that some of them did fall, and so ceased
to be Heads of the Church; and left Christ (God be thanked) at that time of his
Vicars Defection, to look to his Cure himself.


F. But (says he) beside Corruption of Manners, there were also Errors in
Doctrine.


B. This the B. spoke indeed: And can you prove that he Errors were dangerous
to salvation. For it is not every light Error, in disputable Doctrine, and
Points of curious Speculation, that can be a just cause of separation, in that
admirable Body of Christ, which is his Ephesians. 1.23.
Church; for which he gave his Natural Body to be rent and torn upon the
Cross, that this Mystical Body of his might be One. And S. Augustine Ep. 50.
inferres upon it, That he is no way partaker of Divine Charity, that is an
enemy to this Unity. Now what Errors in Doctrine may give just cause Schism;
which I will never do, unless it be to let it out. But that there are Errors
in Doctrine, and some of them such as endanger salvation, in the Church of
Rome, is evident to them that will not shut their eyes: The proof whereof,
runs through the particular Points that are between us; and so it is too long
for this discourse, which is grown too big already.


F. Which when the general Church would not reform, it was lawful for
particular Churches to reform themselves. I asked Quo Iudice, Did this appear
to be so?


B. Is it then such a strange thing, that a particular Church may reform it
self, if the general will not? I had thought, and do so still, That in point
of Reformation of either Manners or Doctrine, it is lawful for the Church
since Christ, to Jews and Proselytes: this Church came to have a separation,
upon a most ungodly Policy of 3. Reg. 12.27.
(...), so that it never pieced together again. To a Common Council, to
reform all, they would not Judah to reform her self, when Israel would not
join? Sure it was, or else the Prophet deceiues me, that says exactly, Hos.
4. 15.
Though Israel transgress, yet letnot Judah sin. And S. Hierome Super
Haereticis prona intelligentia est. S. Hier. ibid.
expresses it in this very patticular sin of Heresy and Error in Religion.
Nor can you say, that Israel, from the time of the separation, was not a
Church, for there were true Prophets in it, 3. Reg. 17. sub Achabo.
Elias, and 4. Reg. 3. sub lehoram, filio Achabi.
Elizaeus, and others, and 3. Reg. 19.18.
thousands that had not bowed knees to Baal. And there was salvation for these;
which cannot be, where there is no Church. And God threatens to Hos. 9. 17.
cast them away, to wander among the Nations, and be no Congregation, no
Church: therefore he had not yet cast them away into Non Ecclesiam, into no
Church. And they are expressly called the people of the Lord in 4. Reg. 9.6.
Iehu's time, and so continued long after. Nor can you plead, that Judah is
your part, and the Ten Tribes ours (as some of you do:) for if that be true,
you must grant, that the Multitude and greater number is ours: And where then
is Multitude, your numerous Note of the Church? But you cannot plead it: For
certainly, if any Calves be set up, they are in Dan and Bethel, they are not
ours.

Besides, to reform what is amiss in Doctrine or Manners, is as lawful for a
particular Church, as it is to publish and promulgate any thing that is
Catholic in either. And your Question, Quo iudice? lies alike against both.
And yet I think it may be proved, that the Church of Rome, and that as a
particular Church, did promulgate an Orthodoxe Truth, which was not then
Catholikely admitted in the Church; namely, The Procession of the Holy Ghost
from the Son. If she erred in this Fact, confess her Error; if she erred
not, Why may not another Church do as she did? A learned Schooleman of yours
Non oportuit ad hoc eos vocare quum authoritas fuerit publicandi apud Ecclesiam
Romanam, praecipue quum vnicuique etia^ particulari Ecclesiae liceat, id quod
Catholicum est promulgare. Alb. Mag. in 1. D. 11. A. 9.
The Church of Rome needed not to call the Grecians to agree upon this Truth,
since the Authority of publishing it was in the Church of Rome, especially
since it is lawful for every particular Church to promulgate that which is
Catholic. Nor can you say he means Catholic, as fore-determined by the
Church in general; for so this Point, when Rome added Filioque to the Creed of
a General Council, was nor. And how the Grecians were used in the after
Council (such as it was) of Florence, is not to trouble this Dispute; but
Catholic stands there for that which is so in the (...) of it, and
fundamentally. Popes Authority (...) the Church. For suppose he have that, and
that his Sentence be infallible (I say suppose both, but I give neither) yet
neither his Authority nor his (...) can belong unto him, as the particular
Bishop of Non errare conuenit Papae vt est caput. Bell. 4. de Romans Pont. c. 3.
(...) Head of the whole Church. And you are all so lodged in this, that Li. 2.
de Christo, c. 21. So you cannot find (...) of your (...) Truths, which are
far more likely to be kept: but when Errors are crept in, we must be bound to
tell the (...), and the Time, and I know not what, of their Beginnings, or else
they are not Errors. As if some Errors might not want a Record, as well as some
Truth.
Bellarmine professes he can neither tell the year when, nor the Pope under
whom this Addition was made. A particular Church then, if you judge it by the
School of Rome, or the Practice of Rome, may publish any thing that is
Catholic, where the whole Church is silent; and may therefore reform any
thing that is not Catholic, where the whole Church is negligent, or will not.
But you are as jealous of the honor of Rome, as De Appel. Eccl. (...). cap. 2.
number. 12.
Capellus is, who is angry with Baronius about certain Canons in the second
Mileuitan and says, That he considered not of what consequence it was, to
grant to particular Churches the power of making Canons of Faith, without
consulting the Roman See, which (as he says, and you with him) was never
lawful, nor ever done. But suppose this were so, the B. his speech was not,
Not consulting, but in case of neglecting, or refusing.

Besides, you must be put in remembrance too, that the B. spoke at that time
(and so must all that will speak of that Exigent) of the General Church, as
it was for the most part forced under the Government of the Roman See: and
this you understand Roman Church. Now I make no doubt, but that as the
universal Catholic Church would have reformed her self, had she been freed
of the (...) yoke; so while she was under that yoke, the Church of Rome was,
if (...) the only, yet the chief hinderance of Reformation. And then in this
sense it is more than clear, That if the Roman Church will neither reform,
nor suffer Reformation, it is lawful for any particular Church to reform it
self, so long as it does it peaceably, and keeps it self to the Foundation.


F. Which Question I asked, as not thinking it equity, that Protestants in
their own Cause should be Accusers, Witnesses, and Judges of the Roman Church.


B. You do well to tell the reason now, why you asked this Question; the B.
says you did not (...) it (...) Conference: if you had, you (...) received
your Answer. It is most true: No man in common (...) ought to Accuser,
Witness, and (...) in his (...). But is there not (...) little (...), and
(...) too, that any man that is accused, should be the Accused, and yet
Witness and Judge in his own Cause (...) If the first may hold, no man shall
be Innocent; and if the last, none will be Nocent. And what (in their own
Cause, against the Roman Church?) Why, is it not your own too against the
Protestant Church? And if it be a cause common to both, as certain it is, then
neither part alone may be Judge: If neither alone may judge, then either they
must be judged by a Third, which stands indifferent to both; and that is the
Scripture. Or if there be a jealousy or doubt of the sense of Scripture, they
must either both repair to the Exposition of the Primitive Church, and submit
to that, or both call and submit to a General Council, which fhall be
lawfully called, and fairly and freely held, to judge the Scripture; which
must be their Rule, as well as private men's.


F. I also asked, Who ought to judge in this case? The B. said, a General
Council.


B. And surely, What greater or surer Judgment you can have, where sense of
Scripture is doubted, than a General Council, I do not see? Nor do you
doubt: for you add,


F. I told him, That a General Council, to wit, of Trent, had already
judged, not the Roman Church, but the Protestants, to hold Errors. That (says
the B.) was not a lawful Council.


B. It is true, that you replied for the Council of Trent. And the B. his
answer was, not only, That that Council was not Legal, in the necessary
conditions to be observed in a General Council, but that it was no General
Council, which again Legal, the Abettors whereof maintain publicly, That
it is lawful for them to conclude any Controversy, and make it be de Fide,
and so in your judgment Fundamental; though it have not, I do not say now
the written Word of God for warrant, either in express Letter, or necessary
sense and deduction (as all unerring Councels have had, and as all must have,
that will not err) but not so much as Etiamsi (...) co^firmetur ne probabili
Testimonio Scripturaru^. Stapl. Relect. Cont. 4. q. 1. Ar. 3.
probable Testimony from it; nay, quite Extra, without the Scripture? Nay
more, Is that Council Legal, where the Pope, the chief person Divine,
Natural, and Humane? In a place not free, but in or too near his own
Dominion? To which all were not called, that had deliberatiue or (...) voice?
In which, none had Suffrage, but such as Leo 10. Bull. Iun. 8. 1520.
they were condemned by the Council. I hope, an Assembly of Enemies are no
lawful Council: And I think, the Decrees of such a One, are omni iure nulla,
and carry their nullitie with them through all Law.

And again, Is that Council General, that has none of the Eastern Churches
consent, nor presence there? Are all the Greeks so become non Ecclesia, no
Church, that they have no interest in General Councels? It numbers indeed
among the Subscribers, six Greeks; they might be so by Nation, or by Title
purposely given them: but dare you say they were actually Bishops of, and sent
from the Greek Church to the Council? Or is it to be accounted a General
Council, that in many Sessions had scarce ten Archbishops, or forty, or
fifty Bishops present? And for the West of Christendom, nearer home, it
reckons one English, S. Asaph: but Cardinal Poole was there too. English
indeed he was by birth, but not sent to that Council King and Church of
England, but as one of the Popes Legates: for at the beginning of the Council,
he was not Bishop in the Church of England; and after he was Archbishop of
Canterbury, he never went over to the Council. And can you prove, that S.
Asaph went thither by Authority? There were but few of other Nations, and it
may be, some of them reckoned with no more truth than the Greeks. In all the
Sessions under Paul the third, but two Frenchmen, and sometimes none; as in the
Sixth under Julius the third, when Henry the second, of France, protested
against that Council. And in the


F. So (said I) would Arrians say of the Council of Nice. The B. would not
admit the case to be like:


B. So indeed you said. And not you alone: It is the common Objection made
against all that admit not every later Ariminum; and the second, of Ephesus,
as well as Nice? If you That the Scripture must not be departed from in Letter
or necessary Sense, or, the Councell's not lawful. And the consent and
confirmation of Scripture is of far greater Authority to make the Council
Authentical, and de Fide, than any confirmation of the Popes. The Council of
Nice had the first, you say: We are sure it had the second. The Council of
Trent we are able to prove had not the second, and so we have no reason to
respect the first. And to what end do your learned men maintain, That a
Council may make a Conclusion de Fide, though it be simply Stapl. passim. sed
aliter patres. Quae extra Euangelium sunt non defendam? Hilar. lib. 2. ad Constable.
Extra, out of all bound of Scripture; but out of a jealousy at least, that
this of Trent, and some others, have in their determinations left both Letter
and Sense of Scripture? Show this of Nice, and the B. will grant so much of
the case

But what will you say, if Literaru^ diuinit' inspirataru^ testimonijs, L. 2.
in Syn. Nic. To. 1. per Nicolinum. Ib. in Osij sententia, p. 517. Parati ex S.
Spiritus arbitrio per plutima Diuinaru^ Scripturarum testimonia demonstrare
haec ita se habere.
Constantine required, That things brought into question, should be answered
and solued by Testimony out of Scripture? And the Bishops of the Nicene
Council never refused that Rule. And what will you say, if they profess they
depart not from it, but are ready by many Testimonies of Divine Scripture to
demonstrate their Faith? Is the case then alike betwixt it and Trent? But you
say, the B. pretended somewhat else for his not admitting the case to be like.


F. Pretending, that the Pope made Bishops of purpose, for his side. But this
the Bishop proved not.


B. No: nor had he reason to take on him to prove what he said not. He knows
it will be expected he should prove what he says; and it is hard to prove
the purpose of the Popes heart. For if it be proved, that he made Bishops at
that time; that some of them were titular only, and had no liuelyhood to
subsist, but out of his Purse (and so must hang at Errand: yet if the Pope will
say, he neither made nor sent them to overrule the Holy Ghost at that meeting,
or of purpose for his side (as no question but it will be said) Who can prove
it, that is not a Trent was too corrupt and factious a meeting for the Holy
Ghost to be at. And sure the case in this, not alike at Nice.

That which (...) B. said, was, That Trent could be no indifferent Council to
the Church, the Pope having made himself a strong party in it. And this the
B. proved, though you be here not only content to omit, but plainly to deny
the proof. For did not the B. prove it thus? and you answered Decimo Sexto,
but had no great heart to look it. For where the number of Prelates are
expressed that had Suffrage and Vote in that Council, the Italians are set
down to be 187, and all the rest make but 83. So there were more Italian
Bishops by 104, than of all the rest of Christendom. Sure the Pope did not
mean to be ouer-reached in this Council: And whatsoever became of his
infallibility otherwise, infallible in whatsoever he would have determined.
So the B. proved this sufficiently. For if it were not to be sure of a side,
give any satisfying reason, Why such a potent party of Italians, more than
double to the whole Christian World, should be there? Show me the like for
Nice, and I will give it, that the case is alike between these two Councels.
But you have not yet done with the B. You add:


F. In fine, the B. wished, That a lawful General Council (The persons
present) said, That the King was inclined thereunto, and that therefore we
Catholics might do well to concur.


B. And what say you to the Bishops wish? You pretend great love to the Truth,
would you not have it found? Can you, or any Christian, be offended, that there
should be a good end of Controversies? Can you think of a better end, than
General Council? And if you have a most gracious King inclined unto it (as
you say it was offered) how can you (...) your selves, if you do not consent?
Yes, it seems you can: for you say again,


F. I asked the B. Whether he thought a General Council


B. I presume, you do not look the B. or I for him, should enter into a
proof of this Controversy, Whether a General Council may err in
determination, or not? Your self brought no proof, that it cannot; and till
that be brought, the Bishop his speech is good, that it can: And yet he hopes
to be found no infringer of any power given by Christ to his Church. But it
seems by that which follows, you did by this Question (Can a General
Council err?) but seek to win ground for your other, which follows:


F. If a General Council may err, What nearer are we then (said I) to
unity, after a Council determined? Yes (said he) although it may err, yet we
should be bound to hold with it, till another come to reuerse it.


B. Whether a General Council may err, or not, is a Question To say it
cannot err, leaves the Church not only without remedy against an Error, but
also without sense that it may need a remedy, and so without care to seek it;
which is the misery of the Church of Rome at this day. To say it can err,
seems to expose the members of the Church to an uncertainty and wavering in
the Faith, makes unquiet spirits not only disrespect former Councels of the
Church, but also slight and contemn whatsoever it may now determine; into
which Error, some opposers of the Church of Rome have fallen. And upon this is
grounded Wherein are we nearer to unity, if a Council may err?

In relating the B. his Answer to this, you are not so candide, as you confess
him ingenuous before. For his words did not sound as yours seem to do, That
we should hold with the Council, err or not err, till another came to
reuerse it: As if grounds of Faith might vary at the Racket, and be cast of
each side, as a cunning hand might lay them. You forget again, omit at least,
(and with what mind, you best know) the B. his Caution: For he said, The
determination of a General Council erring, was evidence of Scripture, or a
demonstration to the contrary, made the Error appear, and until thereupon
another Council, of equal Authority, did reuerse it. Thus then the B.

But indeed he might have returned upon you again: If a General Council? And
you may answer, Yes: for although a General Council may err, yet the Pope,
as Head of the Church, cannot. An excellent means of unity, to have all in
the Church as the Pope will have it, what ever Scripture say, or the Church
think. And then I pray, to what end a General Council? Will his Holiness be
so holy, as to confirm a General Council, if it determine against him?

I, for my part, am willing a little to consider hereupon the General
Councels, How they may, or may not err; and a little to look into the Roman
and Protestant opinion concerning them; which is more agreeable to the Power
and Rule which Christ has left in his Church, and which is most preservative
of Peace established, or ablest to reduce unity into the Church of Christ,
when that poor Ship has her Ribs dashed in (...) by the Waves of Contention.
And this Consideration I will venture to the World, but only in the Nature of
a (...), and with submission to my Mother, the Church of England, and the
Mother of us all, the Universal Catholic Church of Christ.

1. First then I consider, Whether all the Power that an Oecumenicall Council
has to determine, and all the Assistance it has, not to err in that
determination; it has it not all from the Catholic universal Body of the
Church, or Clergy in the Church, if you will, whose Representative it is? It
seems it has. For the government of the Church being not Monarchical, but as
Christ is Head, this Principle is (...) in nature, Every Body collectiue,
that represents, receives Power and Privileges from that Body which is
represented; else a Representation Power in the Council, no Assistance, but
what is in and to the Church. But yet then it may be questioned, Whether the
Representing Body has all the power, strength, and privilege, which the
Represented has? And suppose it has all the Legal power, yet it has not all
the Natural, either of strength or wisdom, that the whole has. Now because
tho Representative has power from the whole, and the maine (...) can meet no
other way; therefore the Acts, (...), or (...) of the Representative, be it
Ecclesiastical or Civil, are binding in Assemblies merely Civil, or
Ecclesiastical, all (...) men cannot be in the Body that represents. And it
is possible so many able and sufficient men (for some particular business) may
Representative Body erres; whereas the Represented, by virtue of these
Members, may hold the Principle unviolated.

2. Secondly, I consider, That since it is thus in Nature, and in Civil
Bodies, if it be not so in Ecclesiastical too, some reason must be given why,
Ecclesia est vnum corpus mysticum per similitudinem ad Natural. Durand. 3. D.
14. q. 2. n. 5. Biel, Lect. 23. in Can. Miss.
For that Body also consists of men: Those men neither all equal in their
perfections of Knowledge and Judgment, whether acquired by Industry, or
rooted in nature, or infused by God: Not all equal, nor any one of them
perfect and absolute, or freed from passion and humane infirmities: Nor does
their meeting together, make them infallible in all things, though the Act
which is hammered out by many together, must in reason be perfecter than that
which is but the Child of one man's sufficiency. If then a General Council
have no ground of not erring from the men, or the meeting, either it must not
be at all, or be by some assistance and power upon them, when they are so met
together: And this, if it be less assistance of the Holy Ghost, it cannot make
them secure against Error.

3. Thirdly, I consider, That the assistance of the Holy Ghost is without
Error, that is no question; and as little there is, that a Council has it. But
the doubt that troubles, is, Whether all assistance of the Holy Ghost be
affoorded in such a high manner, as to cause all the Definitions of a Council,
in matters fundamental in the Faith, and in remote Deductions from it, to be
alike infallible?

The Romanists, to prove there is Omnem veritatem infallibiliter docendi, etc.
Stapl. Relect. praef. ad Lector.
infallible assistance, infallibility. The places which Stapleton there rests
upon, are these: S. Ioh. 16.13.
I will send you the Spirit of Truth, which will lead you into all Truth: And,
S. Ioh. 14.16.
This Spirit shall abide with you for ever: And, S. Matthew. 28.20.
Behold, I am with you unto the end of the World. To these, others add, S.
Matthew. 16.18.
The founding of the Church upon the Rock, against which the Gates of Hell
shall not prevail: And, Christ's prayer for S. Peter, S. Luc. 22.32.
That his Faith fail not.

1. For the first, which is, Leading into all Truth, and that for ever: Prosp.
de vocat. Gent. lib. 1. c. 10.
All, is not always universally taken in Scripture; nor is it here simply for
All Truth: for then a General Council could no more err in matter of Fact,
than in matter of Faith; in which yet your Bellarm. 2. de Conc. c. 8..
Respondeo quidam.
selves grant it may err. But into All Dubium est an (...) docebit (...), S.
Ioh. 14. 26. referendum sit ad (...) dixi (...) quasi non aliud docturum (...).
Sanct. dicat, quam quod ipse antea docuisset, non repugnabo si quis ita velit
interpretare, etc. (...). in S. Ioh. 14.
Truth, is a limited All; into All Truth absolutely necessary to salvation:
And this, when they suffer themselves to be led by the blessed Spirit, by the
Word of God. And all Truth which Christ had before (at least fundamentally)
delivered unto them, S. Ioh. 16.14.
He shall receive of mine, and show it unto you: And again, S. Ioh. 14.26.
He shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your remembrance,
which I have told you. And for this necessary Truth too, the Apostles received
this promise not for themselves, and a Council, but for themselves, and the
Bellarm. 2. de Conc. c. 9.. alteram. (...) Sp. Sancti, non est propter Council.
sed vniuersam Ecclesiam.
whole Catholic

2. As for Christ's being with them unto the end of the World, the Fathers are
so various, that in the sense of the ancient Church, we may understand him
present in S. August. Tr. 50. in S. Ioh. Isidor. 1. Senten. cap. 14.
Majesty, in S. Hilar. in Psalm. 124. Iustine Martyr. Dial. cum Triphone.
Prosp. Epist. ad Demetriadem.
Power, in Aid S. Hilar. in Psalm. 124. Prosper, lib. 2. de vocat. Gent. cap.
2. (...). Sermon. 2. de Resurrect. Dom. cap. 3. Isidor. in Ios. cap. 12.
and Assistance, against in teaching by the Holy Ghost, S. Cyril, lib. 7. Dial.
de Trin. Prosp. Epist. ad (...).
few mention it; and no one of them which does, speaks of any infallible
Assistance, further than the succeeding Church keeps to the Word of the
Apostles, as the Apostles kept to the guidance of the Spirit. Besides, the S.
Hilar. in Psalm. 124. S. Cyril, lib. 7. Dial. de Trin. S. August. 6. de Genesis ad
Lit. c. 8. S. Leo. Sermon. 10. de Natiu. Dom. c. 5. Isid. in Ios. c. 12. In all
which places, Vobiscum is either interpreted cum suis, or fidelibus, or
vniuersa Ecclesia.
Fathers refer their speech to Church universal, not to any Council, or
Representative Body. And Hoc colligitur, sed quaeritur non quid colligitur,
sed quid dicere voluit. (...). in S. Matthew. 28.
Maldonate adds, That this his presence by teaching, is or may be a Collection
from the place, but is not the intention of Christ.

3. For the Rock upon which the Church is founded, which is the next place,
we dare not lay any other Foundation than 1. Cor. 3. 11.
Christ: Christ laid his Ephesians. 2.20.
Apostles; no question, but upon himself. With these, S. Peter was laid, no
man questions: And in prime place of Order, (would his clayming Successors Tu
es Petrus. But yet the Rock even there spoken of, is not S. Peter's person,
either only or properly, but the Faith which he professed. And to this,
beside the Evidence which is in Text and Truth, the S. (...). (...) ad (...).
Qui (...) Ecclesiam super Petram aedificatione spirituali. S. Hilar. l. 6. de
(...). Super hanc (...) Confessionis Petram Ecclesiae aedificatio est. Et (...)
post, Hec Fides (...) fundamentum est. S. Greg. Nyss. de Trin. aduers. (...).
Super (...) Petram (...) Ecclesiam meam, super (...), videlicet, Christi. S.
Isid. Pelus. Epist. lib. 1. Ep. 235. Vt hac ratione (...) omnibus Confessionem
traderer, quam ab (...) inspiratus Petrus tanqua^ basin ac fundamentum iecit,
super quod (...) Ecclesiam suam exstruxit. S. Cyril. Alex. de Trin. lib. 4.
Petram opinor per agnominationem, (...) quam inconcussam and firmissimam
Discipuli Fidem vocauit, in qua Ecclesia Christi ita fundata, and firmata
esset, vt non laberetur, etc. B. Theodor. in Cant. Petram appellat Fidei
pietatem, veritatis professionem, etc. Et super hanc Petram aedificabo
Ecclesiam meam. S. Greg. Ep. (...). 3. Ep. 33. In vera fide persistite, and
vitam vestram in Petram Ecclesiae, hoc est in Confessione (...) Petri
Apostolorum Principis solidate. Theophilact. in Matthew. 16. Super eum
aedificauit Ecclesiam; quia enim confessus (...), etc. quod haec confessio
fundamentum erit, etc. S. Aug. in 1. Ep. S. Ioh. tract. 10. Quid est super hanc
Petram? Super hanc Fidem, super id quod dictum est, Tu es etc. S. (...). Orat.
25. Hanc confessionem cum nominasset Christus Petram, Petrum nuncupat eum, qui
primum illam est confessus, donans illi hanc appellationem (...) insigne and
monumentum huius confessionis. Haec enim est reuera pietatis Petra, haec
salutis basis, etc. S. Jacob. Liturgia, (...); p. 26. etc. And some which (...)
the person of S. Peter, profess it is propter robur Confessionis. Justin
Martyr, Dial. cum Triph. S. Chrysostom. Hom. 2. in Psalm. 50. S. Amb. lib. 10. in S.
Luc. c. 24. And S. Greg. gives it for a Rule, when Petra is read in the
singular number (and so it is here) Christus est, Christ is signified.
Fathers come in with very full consent. And this, That the Gates of Hell shall
not prevail against it, is not spoken of the not (...) of the Church
principally, but of the not Non deficit. S. Bern. Ser. 79. in Cant. And
Bellarmine himself going to prove Ecclesiam non posse deficere, begins with
this very place of Scripture. Lib. 3. de Eccl. c. 13.
falling away of it from the Foundation. Now a Church may err, and
daungerously too, and yet not fall from the Foundation, especially if that of
Lib. 3. de Ecclesia, cap. 14.
Bellarmine be true, That there are many things, even de Fide, of the Faith,
which yet are not necessary to salvation. Besides, even here again the
promise of this stable edification, is to the whole Church, not to a Council;
at the least, no further than a Council builds as a Church is built, that is,
upon Christ.

4. The last place, is Christ's Prayer for S. Peter's Faith. The (...) sense of
which place is, That Christ prayed and obtained for S. Peter perseverance in
the grace of God, against the strong temptation which was to winnow him above
the rest. But to conclude an infallibility from hence in the Pope, or in his
Chair, or in the Roman See, or in a General Council, though the Pope be
Lib. 4. (...) Pontif. Romans cap. 3.
Bellarmine himself, besides some Popes, in their own Cause (and that in
Epistles counterfeit, or falsely alleged) has not a Father to name for this
sense of the place, till he come downeto Chrysologus, Theophylact, and S.
Bernard: of which, Chrysologus his speech is but a flash of Rhetorike; and the
other two are men of Yesterday, compared with Antiquity, and lived when (it
was Gods great grace, and our wonder) the corruption of the time had not made
them corrupter than they are. And Thomas is resolute, that what is meant here
beyond S. Peter's person, is 2 2. q. 2. A 6. ad 3.
referred to the whole Church. And the Glass upon the Canon Law is more
peremptory than he, even to the denial, that it is Causa. 24. q. 1. C. A
Recta.
meant of the Pope. And if this place warrant not the Popes Faith, Where is the
infallibility of the Council that depends upon it?

And for all the places together, weigh them with indifferency, Enthusiasts:
or else they are limited, not simply into All Truth, but, All necessary to
Salvation; in which I shall easily grant a General Council cannot err, if
it suffer it self to be led by this (...) of Truth in the Scripture, and take
not upon it to lead both the Scripture and the Spirit. For suppose Assistance
even to Infallibility, yet they granted it not to every General Council,
but to the Catholic Body of the Church it self. And if it be in the whole
Church principally, then is it in a General Council but by Consequent, as the
Council represents the whole. And that which belongs to a thing by consequent,
does not otherwise, nor longer, belong unto it, than it consents and cleaues to
that upon which it is a Consequent. And therefore a General Council has not
this Assistance, but as it keeps to the whole Church and Spouse of Christ,
whose it is Churches Way, it may easily go without the Churches Truth.

4. Fourthly I consider, That All agree, That the Church in general can never
err from the Faith necessary to salvation: No Persecution, no Temptation, and
no (...). 16.18.
Gates of Hell, whatsoever is meant by them, can ever so prevail against it.
For all the members of the Militant Church cannot err, either in the whole
Faith, or in any Article of it; it is impossible. For if all might so err,
there could be no union between them as Ecclesia (...) fidem habet (...), etc.
non quidem in Generali Synodo congregata, quam aliquoties errasse (...), etc.
Wald. lib. 2. Doct. Fid. Ar. 2. c. 19.. 1.
General Councels cannot err. And it seems strange to me, that the Fathers
having to do with so many Heretics, and so many of them opposing Church.
Authority in their condemnation, this Proposition, even in terms (A General
Council cannot err) should be found in none of them, that I can yet see.
Suppose it were true, That no General Council had erred in any matter of
moment to this day, which will not be found true; infallible, and cannot err.
I have not time to descend into particulars; therefore to the General still.
S. Augustine 2. Bapt. contr. Donat. cap. 3.
puts a difference between the Rules of Scripture, and the definitions of men.
This difference is, Praeponitur Scriptura, That the Scripture That Prerogative
is, That whatsoever is found written in Scripture, may neither be doubted, nor
disputed, whether it be true, or right: But the Letters of Bishops may not
only be disputed, but corrected by Bishops that are more learned and wise than
they, or by National Councels; and National Councels, by (...), or General:
And even Ipsaque plenaria (...) priora a posteriorib' emendari.
Plenarie Councels themselves may be amended, the former by the latter. It
seems it was no news with S. Augustine, that a General Council might err,
and therefore inferior to the Scripture, which may neither be doubted, nor
disputed, where it affirms. And if it be so with Vox Ecclesiae talis (...), vt
non de ea iudicemus (...) ne an secus docuerit. So Stapl. Rel. Cont. 4. q. 1.
Ar. 1.
Stapleton would have it) That that may neither be doubted, nor disputed, Where
is then the Scriptures Prerogative?

I know there is much shifting about this place, but it cannot be wrastled off.
Stapleton De Regulis Morum and Disciplina. (...). Con. 6. q. 3. A. 4.
says first, That S. Augustine speaks of the Rules of Manners, and
Discipline: And this is Bellarmines last shift. Both are out, and Bellarmine in
a Contradiction. Bellarmine in a Contradiction: For first he tells us,
General Councels cannot err in Lib. 2. de Council. (...). 2. Princip.
Precepts of Manners; and then, to turn off S. Augustine in this place, he
tells us, That if S. Augustine Ib. cap. 7.. Potest etiam.
Precepts of Manners, not of Points of Faith. Where he has first run
himself upon a Contradiction; and then we have gained this ground upon him,
That either his Answer is nothing, or else against his own state of the
Question. A General Council can err in Precepts of Manners; and both are
out: For the whole dispute of S. Augustine, is against the Error of Cyprian,
followed by the (...), That true Baptism could not be given by Heretics, and
such as were out of the Stapleton and Bellarmine draw out of the subsequent
words, ( Quando aliquo rerum experimento quod clausam erat aperitur.
When by any experiment of things, that which was shut, is opened) is too
weak: For experiment there is not of Fact; nor are the words conclusum est, as
if it were of a Rule of Discipline concluded, as Stapleton cites them; but a
further experiment or proof of the Question in hand, and pertaining to Faith,
which was then shut up, and as S. Augustine after speaks, Ib. c. 4. Nebulis
inuoluta.
wrapped up in cloudie darkness.

Next, Stapleton Sensus est quod Concilia posteriora eme^dant, id est,
perfectius explicant fidem in semine antiquae Doctrinae latentem, etc.
will have it, That if S. Augustine do speak of a Cause of Faith, then his
meaning is, that latter General mend, that is, explicate more perfectly that
Faith which lay hid in the Seed of ancient Doctrine. He makes instance, That
about the Divinity of Christ, the Council of Ephesus explicated the first of
Nice; Chalcedon, both of them; Constance, Chalcedon: And then concludes, Qua in
re nihil erroneum vllum Council. docuit, etc.
In all which things, none of (these) Councels taught that which was erroneous.
An excellent Conclusion: These Councels, and These, in this thing, taught no
Error, and were only explained: Therefore no Council can err in any matter
of Faith; or therefore S. Augustine speaks not of an emendation of Error, but
of an explanation of Sense: whereas every Eye sees neither of these can follow.

Now that S. Augustine meant plainly, That even a Plenarie Council might
err, and that Saepe.
often, (for that is his word) and that in matter of Faith, and might and ought
so to be amended Emendari, amend, which properly supposes for Error and
faultiness, not explanation: And S. Augustine needed not go to a word of such
a Not used, but either for conigere, or auferre. And so S. Augustine uses the
word, l. 20. cont. Faust. c. 21. and Bellarmine, though he interpret it in
matter of fact, yet equals the word with correxit. 2. de Conc. ca. 8.. Respond.
Quaest.
forced sense, nor sure would, especially in a Disputation against Adversaries.
Next, S. Augustines Dispute is against S. Cyprian, and the Council held at
Carthage, about Baptism by Heretics; in which point, that National Council
erred (as all now agree.) And S. Augustines deduction goes on: Scripture cannot
be other than right; that is the prerogative of it: but Bishops may, and be
Reprehendi.
Reprehended for it, if peradventure they err from the Truth; and that either
by more learned Bishops, or by Provincial Councels. Here Reprehension, and
that for deuiation from the Truth, is (I hope) Emendation properly, and not
Explanation only. e Si quid in ijs forte a veritate deuiatum est.
Then Provincial Councels, they must Cedere.
yield to General; and to yield, is not in case of Explanation only. Then it
follows, that even Plenarie Councels themselves may be amended, the former by
the latter; still retayning that which went before, If peradventure they erred,
or made deuiation from the Truth. And if this be not so, I would feign know,
why in one and the Augustine, Reprehendi should be in proper sense, and a
veritate deuiatum in proper sense, and Cedere in proper sense; and only
Emendari should not be proper, but stand for an Explanation? If you say the
reason is, because the former words are applied to men, and National Councels,
both which may err, but this last to General Councels, which cannot err;
this is most miserable begging of the Principle, and thing in question.

Again, S. Augustine concludes there, That the General Quum cognoscitur quod
latebat.
When that is known, which lay hid before. Not as Stapleton would have it, lay
hid as in the Seed of ancient Doctrine only, and so needed nothing but
explanation; but hid in some darkness, or ambiguitie, which led the former
into Augustine would have this amendment made, without sacrilegious Pride,
(doubtless of insulting upon the former Council, that was to be amended) and
without swelling Arrogancy (sure against the weakness in the former
Council) and without contention of Envy (which uses to accompany man's
frailetie, where his or his friends error is to be amended by the latter
Council) and in holy Humility, in Catholic Peace, in Christian Charity, (no
question, that a Schism be not made to tear the Church, as here the Donatists
did, while one Council goes to reform the Lapse of another, (Reuiewing and
surueying General Councels) to keep off Pride, and Arrogancy, and Envy, and
to keep all in Humility, Peace, and Charity; if after all this noise, he
thought latter Councels might do nothing but amend, that is, explain the
former?

That shift which Bellarmine adds to these two of Stapleton, is poorest of
all, namely, That S. Augustine speaks of unlawful Councels; and it is no
question but they may be amended, as Ephesine was at Calcedon: for this Answer
gives up the case. For it graunts, That a Council may err, and be amended in
Doctrine of Faith; and in case it be not amended, condemned and rejected by the
Church, as this of Ephesus and diverse others were. And as for that mere
Trick, of the Popes Instruction, Approbation, or Confirmation, to preserve it
from Error, or ratify it, that it has not erred; the most ancient Church knew
it not. He had his Suffrage, as other great Patriarchs had; and his Vote was
highly esteemed, not only for his place, but for worth too, as Popes were
then: But that the

5. Fifthly, it must be considered, If a General Council may err, Who shall
judge it? S. Augustine is at Ibid.
priora a posterioribus, Nothing sure, that is less than a General Council.
Why, but this yet lays all open to uncertainties, and makes way for a
Whirlewind of a private spirit, to ruffle the Church. No, neither of these.
First, all is not open to Uncertainties: For General Councels, lawfully called
and ordered, and lawfully if they keep themselves to Gods Rule, and attempt
not to make a new of their own; and are with all submission to be observed by
every Christian, where Scripture or evident Demonstration come not against it.
Nor does it Whirlewind of a private spirit: For private spirits are too giddie
to rest upon Scripture, and too headie and shallow to be acquainted with
demonstratiue Arguments. And it were happy for the Church, if she might never
be troubled with private spirits, till they brought such Arguments. I know this
is hotely objected against Praefat. p. 29.
Hooker: The Dialogus dict' Deus and Rex.
Author calls him a Cordatus Protestans.
wise Protestant, yet turns thus upon him: If a Council must yield to a
demonstratiue proof, Who shall judge whether the Argument that is brought, be
a Demonstration, or not? For every man that will kick against the Church,
will say the Scripture he vrges is evident, and his Reason a Demonstration. And
what is this, but to leave all to the wildness of a private spirit?

Can any ingenuous man read this passage in Hooker, and dream of a private
spirit? For to the Question, Who shall judge? Hooker answers, as if it had
been then made, Praef. p. 29.
An Argument necessary and demonstratiue, is such (says he) as being
proposed to any man, and understood, the mind cannot choose but inwardly assent
unto it. So, it is not enough to think or say it is demonstratiue. The light
then of a Demonstratiue Argument, is the evidence which it self has in it
self to all that understand Hooker in all that discourse makes the Sentence of
the Council Praef. p. 28.
binding: and therefore that is made Judge, not a private spirit. And then for
the Judge of the Argument, it is as plain: For if it be evident to any man,
then to so many learned men as are in a Council doubtless: And if they cannot
but assent, it is hard to think them so impious, that they will define against
it. And if that which is evident to any man, is not evident

Nor is this Hookers alone, nor is it newly thought on by us: It is a ground in
Nature, which Grace does ever set right, never undermine. And S. Augustine 2.
De Bapt. cont. Don. cap. 4.
has it twice in one Chapter, That S. Cyprian and that Council at Carthage
would have presently yielded to any one that would Vni veru^ dicenti, and
demonstranti.
demonstrate Truth. Nay, it is a Rule with Cont. Fund. c. 4.
him, Consent of Nations, Authority confirmed by Miracles and Antiquity, S.
Peter's Chair, and Succession from it, Motives to keep him in the Catholic
Church, must not hold him against Demonstration of Truth; Quae quidem si tam
manifesta mo^stratur, vt in dubiu^ venire non potest, praepone^da est omnib'
illis reb' quib' in Catholica teneor: Ita si aliquid apertissimu^ in Euangelio.
Ib. c. 5.
which if it be so clearly monstrated, that it cannot come into doubt, it is
to be preferred before all those things, by which a man is held in the
Catholic Church. Therefore an evident Scripture, or Demonstration of Truth,
must take place every where; but where these cannot be had, there

And does not Bellarmine himself grant this? For speaking of Councels, he
delivers this Proposition, That Inferiors may not judge whether their Superiors
(and that in a Council) do proceed lawfully, or not. But then having
bethought himself, that Inferiors at all times, and in all causes, are not so
to be cast off, he adds this Exception, Lib. 2. de Council. c. 8. nisi
manifestissime conster intcllerabilem Errorem committi.
Unless it manifestly appear, that an intolerable Error be committed. So
then, if such an Error be, and be manifest, Inferiors may do their duty, and
a Council must yield; unless you will accuse Bellarmine too of leaning to a
Error be intolerable.

This will not down with you, but the Definition of a General Council is and
must be infallible. Your fellows tell us (and you can affirm no more) That
the voice of the Church determining in Council, is not Stapl. Relect. Cont. 4.
q. 3. Ar. 1.
Humane, but Divine: That is well; Divine, then sure infallible. Yea, but the
Proposition sticks in the throat of them that would utter it. It is not Divine
simply, but in a Diuina suo modo. Ibid.
manner Divine. Why but then sure not infallible, because it may speak loudest
in that manner in which The Church (forsooth) is an infallible Foundation of
Faith, In altiori genere, viz. in genere causae efficientis, atque adeo aliqua
ex part formalis. Ib. q. 4. Ar. 3.
in a higher kind than the Scripture: For the Scripture is but a Foundation in
testimony, and matter to be believed; but the Church as the efficient cause of
Faith, and in some sort the very formal. Is not this Blasphemy? Does not
this knock against all evidence of Truth, and his own grounds, that says it?
Against all evidence of Truth: For in all ages, all men that once admitted the
Scripture to be the Word of God (as all Christians do) do with the same
breath grant it most undoubted and infallible. But all men have not so judged
absolutely and every way Divine; the Churches Definition is but suo modo, in a
sort or manner Divine. But that which is but in a sort, can never be a
Foundation in a higher degree, than that which is absolute, and every way
such: Therefore neither can the Definition of the Church be so infallible as
the Scripture; much less in altiori genere, in a higher kind than the
Scripture.

But because, when all other things fail, you fly to this, That Inspiration,
and so Divine and infallible; my have shall not carry me from a little
Consideration of that too.

6. Sixthly then, If the Definition of a General Council be infallible, then
the infallibility of it is either in the Conclusion, and in the Means that
prove it; or in the Conclusion, not the Means; or in the Means, not the
Conclusion. But it is infallible in none of these. Not in the first, The
Conclusion, and the Means: For there are diverse deliberations in General
Councels, where the Conclusion is Catholic, but the Means by which they
prove it, not firm; therefore not infallible. Not in the second, The
Conclusion, and not the Means: For the Conclusion must follow the nature of
the premises, or Principles out of which it is deduced; therefore if they be
sometimes uncertain, as is proved before, the Conclusion cannot be
infallible. The Means, and not the Conclusion: For that cannot but be true and
necessary, if the Means be so. And this I am sure you will never grant;
because if you should, you must deny the infallibility which you seek to
establish.

To this (for I confess the Argument is old, but can never be worn out, nor
shifted off) your great Master Relect. Cont. 4. q. 2.
Stapleton (who is miserably hampered in it, and indeed so are ye all)
answers, That the infallibility of a Council is in the second course; that
is, It is infallible in the Conclusion, though it be uncertain and How comes
this to pass? It is a thing altogether unknown in Nature, and Art too, That
fallible Principles can either father or mother, beget or bring forth an
infallible Conclusion. Well, that is granted in Nature, and in all
Argumentation, that causes knowledge. But we shall have Reasons for it: Ib.
Not. 4.
First, because the Church is discursiue, and uses the weights and moments of
Reason in the Means; but is Prophetical, and depends upon immediate
Revelation from the Spirit of God, in delivering the Conclusion. It is but the
making of this appear, and all Controversy is at an end. Well, I will not
Prophetical, which yet is justly urged; for no good cause can be assigned of
it. If it be Prophetical in the Conclusion (I speak still of the present
Church; for that which included the Apostles, which had the Spirit of
Prophecy, and immediate Revelation, was ever propheticke in the Definition)
Then since it delivers the Conclusion not according to Nature and Art, that is,
out of Principles which can bear it, there must be some supernatural
Authority which must deliver this Truth: That (say I) must be the Scripture:
For if you fly Enthusiasme must be yours. But the Scriptures which are
brought, in the very Exposition of all the Primitive Church, neither say it,
nor enforce it: Therefore Scripture warrants not your Prophecy in the
Conclusion. I know no other thing can warrant it. If you think Father of the
Church, that says, this is an universal Tradition of the Church, That her
Definitions in a General Council are Prophetical, and by immediate
Revelation. Produce any one Father, that says it of his own authority, That
he thinks so: Nay, make it appear, that ever any Prophet, in that which he
delivered from God as infallible Truth, was ever discursiue at all in the
Means: Nay, make it but probable in the ordinary course of Prophecy (and I
hope you go no higher, nor will I offer, at Gods absolute Power) That that
great Apollo for ever. In the mean time, I have learned this from Propherae
audiebant a Deo interius inspirante. Thom. 2. 2. q. 5. A. 1. ad 3.
yours, That all Prophecy is by Vision, Inspiration, etc. and that no Vision
admits discourse: That all Prophecy is an Illumination, not always present,
but when the Word of the Venit ad me Verbum Domini.
Lord came to them, and that was not by discourse. And yet you Stapl. Rel.
Cont. 4. q. 2. p. 473.
say again, That this Propheticke infallibility of the Church is not gotten
without study and Industry. You should do well to tell us too, why God would
put his Church to study for the Spirit of Prophecy, Propheticam reuelationem
nullo pacto haberi (...), vel open naturae, vel studio, Contra Auicennam,
Algazale^, Aueroem, etc. Fran. Picus, 2. Prenot. c. 4.
And whosoever shall study for it, shall do itin vain, since Prophecy is 1.
Cor. 12.10.
a Gift, and can never be an acquired Habit. And there is somewhat in it, that
Bellarmine, in all his Dispute for the Authority of General Councels, dares
not come at this Rock. L. 2. de Conc. c. 12.
He preferres the Conclusion, and the Canon, before the Acts and the
deliberations of Councels, and so do we: but I do not remember, that ever he
speaks out, That the Conclusion is delivered by Prophecy, or Revelation. Sure
he sounded the Shore, and found danger here. He did Concilia non habent, neque
scribunt immediatas reuelationes etc. sed deducunt, etc.
Councels do deduce their Conclusions. What? from Inspiration? No: But out of
the Word of God, and that per ratiocinationem, by Argumentation: Neither have
they, nor do they write any immediate Revelations.

The second Reason why he will have it propheticke in the Conclusion, is,
Stapl. ib. p 474.
Because that which is determined by the Church, is matter of Faith, not of
Knowledge: And that therefore the Church proposing it to be believed, though it
use Means, yet it stands This for the first part (That the Church uses the
Means, but follows them not) is all one in substance with the former Reason.
And for Augustine Cont. Fund. c. 4.
, I am sure in regard of one and the same thing, even this the very Wisdom
of the Church, in her Doctrine, ascribes Understanding to one sort of men, and
Belief to another weaker sort. And Th. p. 1. q. 2. a. 2. ad 1. Nihil prohibet
illud quod secundu^ se demonstrabile est and scibile, (...) aliquo accipi vt
Credibile qui (...) non capit.
Thomas goes with him.

And for further satisfaction, if not of you, of others, this may be considered
too: Man lost by sin the Integrity of his Nature, and cannot have Light
enough to see the way to Heaven, but by Grace. This Grace was first merited,
after given by Christ. This Grace is first kindled in Faith; by which, if we
agree not to some supernatural Principles, which no Reason can demonstrate
simply, we can never see our way. But this Light, when it has made Reason
submit it self, cleares the Eye of Reason, it never puts it out. In which
sense it may be is that of Lib. 3. (...) and vbique diffusa.
Optatus, That the very Catholic Church it self is reasonable, as well as
diffused every where. By which Reason enlightened (which is stronger than
Reason) the Church in all Ages has been able either to convert, or convince,
or Omnia genera ingeniorum subdita Scripturae. S. Aug. lib. 22. cont. Faust.
(...). 96.
stop the mouths at least of Philosophers, and the great men of Reason, in the
very point of Faith, where it is at highest. To the present occasion then. The
first, immediate, Fundamental Points of Faith, without which there is no
salvation; they, as they cannot be proved by Reason, so neither need they be
determined by any Council, nor ever were they attempted, they are so plain
set down in the Scripture. If about the sense and prime Articles of Faith,
General Councels determine any thing, as they have done in Nice, and the rest;
there is no inconueuience, that one and the same Canon of the Council should
be believed, as it reflects upon the Articles and Grounds indemonstrable;
Almain. 3. D. 24. q. 1.
and yet known to the Learned, by the Means and Proof by which that
deduction is vouched and made good. And again, the Conclusion of a Council;
suppose that in Nice, about the Consubstantialitie of Christ with the Father,
in it self considered, is or may be indemonstrable by Reason; Concilium
Nicaenu^ (...) Conclusionem ex Scripturis. Bellar. 2. (...) Conc. c. 12.
, if you give me the ground of Scripture, and the Creed, (and somewhat must be
supposed in all, whether Faith, or Knowledge) is demonstrable by natural
Reason against any Arrian in the World. And if it be demonstrable, I may 1. S.
Pet. 3.15.
Apostle would never have required a man to be able to give a reason and an
account of the Hope that is in him, if he might not be able to know his
account; or have lawful interest to give it, when he knew it, without
preiudicing his Faith by his Knowledge. And suppose exact Knowledge and mere
Belief cannot stand together in the same person, in regard of the same thing,
by the same means, yet that does not make void this Truth. For where is that
exact Knowledge, or in whom, that must not merely, in points of Faith, believe
the Article or Ground upon which they rest? But when that is once believed, it
can demonstrate many things from it. And Definitions of Councels Principia
Fidei, Principles of Faith, but Deductions from them.

7. And now because you ask, Wherein we are nearer to Unity by a Council,
if a Council may err? Besides the Answer given, I promised to consider which
Opinion was most agreeable with the Church, which most able to preserve or
reduce Christian Peace; the Roman, That a Council cannot err; orthe
Protestants, That it can. And this I propose, not as a Rule, but leave the
Christian World to consider of it, as I do.

1. First then I consider, Whether in those places of Scripture absolute
infallibility? or whether such an infallibility will notserue the turn, as
Rel. Cont. 4. q. 2. p. 468.
Stapleton, after much wriggling, is forced to acknowledge? One not euerieway
exact: because it is enough, if the Church do diligently insist upon that
which was once received: and there is not need of so great certainty, to open
and explicate that which lies hid in the Seed of Faith sown, and deduce from
it, as to seek out and teach that which was altogether unknown. And if this
be so, then sure the Church of the Apostles required guidance by a greater
degree of infallibility, Apostles had, and the Scripture has. Nor can I tell
what to make of Bellarmine, that in a whole Chapter disputes (...)
Prerogatives, in certainty of Truth L. 2. (...) Conc. c. 12.
, that the Scripture has above a Council; and at last concludes, That they
may be said to be equally certain in infallible Truth.

2. The next thing I consider, is: Suppose this not Exact, but congruous
infallibility in the Church; Is it not residing according to power and right
of Authority in the whole Church, and in a General Council, only by power
Sub autoritate Generalis Co^cilij. (...). Doct. Fid. lib. 2. A. 2. c. 20.
deputed, with Mandate to determine? The places of Scripture, with Expositions
of the Fathers upon them, make me apt to believe this. S. Peter (says S.
Augustine Petrus personam (...) Catholicae sustinet, and huic datae sunt claues
quum Petro datae. De Agon. Chr. c. 30.
) did not receive the Keys of the Church, but in the person of the Church. Now
suppose Peter received the Keys.

Here Stapleton lays cross my way again. He would thrust me out of this
Consideration. (...). Cont. 6. q. 3 A. 5. Sed propter Primatum que^ gerebat
Ecclesiae: ideoque etsi finaliter Ecclesia accepit, tamen formaliter Petrus
accepit.
He graunts, that S. Peter received these Keys indeed, and in the person of
the Church; but that was because he was Primate of the Church: (...) therefore
the Church received the Keys finally, but S. Peter formally: that is (if I
mistake him not) S. Peter for himself and Right; but to this end, to benefit
the Church, of which he was made Pastor. But I am in a Consideration, and I
would have this considered, where it is ever read, That to receive a thing in
the person of another, is only meant finally to receive it, that is, to his
good, and not in his right. I should think, he that receives any thing in the
person of another, receives it indeed to his good, and to his use, but in his
right too: And that the primarie and formal right is not in the receiver, but
in him whose person he sustaines, while he receives it. This stumbling-blocke
then is Consideration it stands still, That the Church in general received the
Keys, and all Power signified by them, and by the assistance of Gods Spirit
may be able to use them, and perhaps to open and shut in some things
infallibly, when the Pope and a General Council too (forgetting both her and
her Rule, the Scripture) are to seek how to turn these Keys in their Wards.

3. The third thing I consider, is: Suppose in the whole Catholic Church
Militant, an absolute infallibility in the prime Foundations of Faith,
absolutely necessary to salvation; Infallibility; but it meets with all
inconveniences, which usually have done, and private respects, if Many of these
were potent at Ariminum, and Seleucia.
Bandies in a Faction, if power and favor of some parties, if weakness of
them which have the managing, if any mixture of State-Councels, if any
departure from the Rule of the Word of God, if any thing else sway and wrinch
the Council; Determinationibus quae a Concilio, vel Pontifice summo fiu^t,
super ijs (...) quae substantia^ fidei concernunt, necessario credendum est,
quod dum vniuersalis Ecclesia non reclamet. Fr. Pic. Mirand. Theor. 8.
the whole Church, upon evidence found in express Scripture, or demonstration
of this miscarriage, has power to represent her self in another Body, or
Council, and to take order for what was amiss, either practiced or concluded.
So here is a means, without infringing any lawful Authority Artic. 21.
Church of England does, That a General Council may err. And this course the
Church took, did call and represent her self in a new Council, and define
against the Heretical Conclusions of the former: as in the case at Ariminum,
and the second of Ephesus, is evident.

4. The next thing I consider, is: Suppose a General Council infallible in
all things which are of Faith: If it prove not so, but that an Error in the
Faith be concluded; the same erring Opinion that makes it think it self
infallible, makes the Error of it seem irreuocable. And when Truth (which lay
hid) shall be brought to light, the Church (who was lulled asleep by the
Opinion of Infallibility, is left open to all manner of Distractions, as it
appears at this day. And that a Council may err (besides all other
instances, which are not few) appears by that Error of the Council of Sess.
13.
Constance. And one instance is enough to overthrow a General, be it a
Council. S. Matthew. 26. 1. Cor. 11. 23.
Christ instituted the Sacrament of his Body and Blood in both kinds. To
break Christ's Institution, is a damnable Return of untruths upon M. Jewel,
Ar. 2.
Stapleton. The Council is bold, and defines peremptorily, That to communicate
in both kinds, is not necessary, with a Non obstante to the Institution of
Christ. Consider with me, Is this an Error, or not? 4. de Eucharist. c. 26.
Bellarmine, and Stapleton, and you too, say it is not; because to receive
under both kinds, is not by Divine Right. No? no sure. For it was not Christ's
Bell. (...).
Precept, but his Example. Why, but I had thought, Christ's Institution of a
Sacrament had been more than his Example only, and as binding for the
Necessaries of a Sacrament, the Matter and Form, as a Precept: Therefore
Stapleton, It is a damnable Error to go against it. If you can prove, that
Christ's Institution is not as binding to us as a Precept (which you shall never
be able) take the Precept with it, S. Matthew. 26. 1. Cor. 11. (...), in Liturg.
S. Chrysoft.
Drink ye All of this: which though you shift as you can, yet you can never
make it other than it is, A Binding Precept. But Bellarmine has yet one better
Device than this, to save the Council. He says it is a mere Calumny, and
that the Council has no such thing; That the Non obstante has no reference
to Receiving under both kinds, but to the time of Receiving it, after Supper;
in which the Council says, the Custom of the Church is to be observed Non
obstante, notwithstanding Christ's Example. How foul Bellarmine is in this,
must appear by the words of the Council, which are these: Licet Christus post
Coenam instituerit, and suis Discipulis administrauerit sub vtraque specie
Panis and Vini hoc venerabile Sacramentum, tamen hoc Non obstante, non debet
confici post Coenam, nec recipi nisi a ieiunis. (Here Bellarmine (...), and
goes no further, but the Council goes on.) Et similiter quod licet in
Primitiua Ecclesia Sacramenta reciperentur sub vtra que specie a Fidelibus,
tamen haec Consuetudo, vt a Laicis sub specie Panis tantum suscipiatur, habenda
est pro Lege, quam non licet reprobare: Et asserere hanc illicitam esse, est
Erroneum. Et pertinaciter asserentes sunt (...) tanquam Haeretici. Sess. 13.
Though Christ instituted this venerable Non obstante, notwithstanding this, it
ought not to be consecrated after Supper; nor received, but fasting. And
likewise, that though in the Primitive Church this Sacrament was received by
the faithful under both kinds; yet this Custom, that it should be received by
Laymen only under the kind of Bread, is to be held for a Law, which may

Now, where is here any slander of the Council? The words are plain, and the
Non obstante must necessarily (for ought I can yet see) be referred to both
Clauses in the words following, because both Clauses went before it, and has
as much force against Receiving under both kinds, as against Receiving after
Supper. Yea, and the after-words of the Council couple both together, in this
reference: for it follows, Et similiter, And so likewise, that though in the
Primitive Church, etc. And a man, by the Definition of this Council, may be an
Heretic, for standing to Christ's Institution, in the very matter of the
Sacrament: And the Churches Law for One kind may not be refused, but Christ's
Institution under Both kinds may. And yet this Council did not err: No; take
heed of it.

But your Opinion is yet more unreasonable than this: For consider any Body
Collectiue, be it more or less universal, whenever it assembles it self,
Did it ever give more power Representing Body of it, than binding power upon
all particulars, and it self too? And did it ever give this power any
otherwise, than with this Reservation in Nature, That it would call again, and
reform, yea, and if need were, abrogate any Law, or Ordinance, upon just cause
made evident to it. Body Collectiue, Ecclesiastical, or Civil, can put out
of it self, or give away to a Parliament, or Council, or call it what you
will, that represents it: And in my Consideration, it holds strongest in the
Church. For a Council has power to order, settle, and define Differences
arisen concerning the Faith. This Power the Council has not by any immediate
Institution from Christ, but it was prudently taken up in the Church, from the
Act. 15. In Nouo Testamento exemplum celebrationis Conciliorum ab Apostolis
habemus, etc. Job. de (...), sum. de Ecclesia, l. 3. c. 2.
Apostles Example. So that to hold Councels to this end, is apparent
Apostolical Tradition written: but the Power which Councels so held, have, is
from And This is more reasonable a great deal than that of Bell. (...). de Con.
cap. 18. Pontifice^ non posse se subijcere sententiae coactiuae Conciliorum.
this Power the Church cannot further give away to a General Council, than
that the Decrees of it shall bind all particulars, and it self; but not bind
the Church from calling again, and in the after calls upon just cause to
order, yea, and if need be, to abrogate former Acts; I say, upon just cause.
For if the Council be lawfully called, and proceed orderly, and conclude
according to the Rule, the Scripture; the whole Church cannot but approve the
Council, and then the Definitions of it can never be questioned after. a
lawful General Council. And certain it is, no Power but her own may do
this. Nor does this open any gappe to private spirits. For all Decisions in
such a Council, are binding: And because the whole Church can meet no other
way, the Council shall remain the Supreme, External, Living, Temporary,
Ecclesiastical Judge of all Controversies. Only the whole Church, and she
alone, has power, when Scripture Demonstration is found, and peaceably
tendered to her, to represent her self again in a new Council, and in it to
order what was amiss.

Nay, your Opinion is yet more unreasonable. For you do not only make the
Definition of a General Council, but the Sentence of the Pope, infallible;
nay, more infallible than it. For any General Council may err with you, if
the Pope confirm it not. So belike, this Infallibility rests not in the
Representative Body, the Council, nor in the whole Body, the Church; but in
your Head of the Church, the Pope of Rome. especially (...) Sentence in a
General Council. And why especially? Prophetical, the means fallible; and
fallible Deliberations cannot advance to a Propheticke Conclusion. And just as
the Council is in Stapletons judgment, for the Definition and the Proofs; so
is the Pope in the judgment of (...), lib. 6. de Locis, cap. 8.. and quidem in.
Melch Canus, and them which followed him, Prophetical in the Conclusion. The
Council then is called but only in effect, to hear the Pope give his
Sentence in more State. Else what means this of Rel. Cont. 6. q. 3. A. 5. and
ibid. Quia ad compesce^dos importunos Haereticos, Concilij Generalis Definitio
illustrior est, etc. and vulgo hominum magis satisfacit.
Stapleton: The Pope, by a Council joined unto him, acquires no new Power, or
Authority, or certainty in judging, no more than a Head is the wiser, by
joining the offices of the rest of the members to it, than it is without them?
Or this of 4. de Romans Pont. c. 3.
Bellarmine: That all the firmness and infallibility of a General Council
is only from the Pope, not partly from the Pope, and partly from the Council?
So belike the Presence is necessary, not the Assistance: Which Opinion is the
most groundless, and worthless, that ever offered to take possession of the
Christian Church. And I am persuaded many learned men among your selves, scorn
it at the very heart.

You profess after, That you hold nothing against your Conscience. I must ever
wonder much, how that can be true, since you hold this of the Popes
Infallibility, especially by being Prophetical in the Conclusion. If this be
true, Why do you not lay all your strength together, all of your whole
Society, and make this one Proposition evident? All Controversies about matter
of Faith are ended, and without any great trouble to the Christian World, if
you can make this good. Till then, this shame will follow you infallibly, and
eternally, That you should make the Pope, a mere man, Principium Fidei, a
Principle of Faith; and make the mouth of Christ's Vicar, sole Judge both of his
Word, be it never so manifest, and of his Church, be she never so learned, and
careful of his Truth.

The Conference grows to an end, and I must meet it again, ere we part: For
you say,


F. After this, we all rising (the doubting Person) asked the B. Whether she
might be saved in the Roman Faith?


B. What? Not one Answer perfectly related? The Bishops Answer to this was
general, for the ignorant, that could not discern the Errors of that Church;
so they held That it must needs go harder with the doubting party, even in
point of Salvation; because the said party had been brought to understand
very much in these controuerted Causes of Religion. And a man that comes to
know much, had need carefully bethink himself, that he oppose not known
Truth, against the Church that made him a Christian. For Salvation may be in
the Church of Rome, and yet they not find it, that make sure of it.


F. I bad (the Person doubting) mark that.


B. This Answer I am sure troubles not you. But it seems you would feign have
it lay a Load of Envy upon the B. that you profess you bad the doubting
party so carefully Mark that.

Well, you bad the said person Mark that. For what? For some great matter? or
for some new? Not for some new, sure. For the Protestants have ever been
ready for Truth, Charity, to grant as much as might be: And therefore from
the beginning, Luther. lib. de (...) arbitr. Mornay. Tract. de Ecclesia, c. 9.
G. Abbot. nunc Archiepiscopus (...). Answ. to Hill. ad Rat. 1.. 30. and ad Rat.
3.. 5. Hooker, lib. 3.. 1. and Conc. in Abac. 1. 4. Field, l. 3. c. 47. etc. 6.
Though some of these put in some Exceptions.
many learned men granted this. So that you need not have put such a serious
Mark that, upon the speech of the B. as if none before him had, or none but
he would speak it. And if your Mark that, were not for some new matter, was
it for some great? Yes sure, it was. For what greater than Salvation? But then
I pray Mark this too, That Might be saved, graunts but a Possibility, no sure
or safe way to Salvation. The Possibility I think cannot be denied the
Ignorants especially, because they hold the Foundation, Foundation can deceive
no man that rests upon it. But a secure way they cannot go, that hold with
such corruptions, when they know them. Now whether it be wisdom in such a
point as Salvation is, to forsake a Church, in the which the ground of
Salvation is firm, to follow a Church in which it is possible one may be
saved, but very probable one may do worse, if he look not well to the
Foundation; judge ye: I am sure S. Augustine 1 de Bap. cont. Don. c. 3.
Grauiter peccarent in rebus ad salutem animae pertinentibus, etc. (...) solo
quod certis incerta praeponerent.
thought it was not, and judged it a great sin, in point of Salvation, for a
man to prefer incerta certis, incertainties and naked possibilitiesbefore an
evident and certain course. And you your selves, in the point of condignitie
of Merit, write it and preach it boysterously to the people; but are content to
die, renouncing the condignitie of all your

And one thing more, because you bid Mark this, let me remember to tell, for
the benefit of others. Upon this very Point (That we acknowledge an honest
ignorant Papist may be saved) you, and your like, work upon the advantage of
our Charity, and your own want of it, to abuse the weak.

For thus (I am told) you work upon them: You see the Protestants (at least
many of them) confess there may be Salvation in

This Argument is very preuayling with men that cannot weigh it; and with
women especially, that are put in fear by violent (though causeless) denying
Heaven unto them. But it is stronger in the cunning, than the true force of it.
For all Arguments are very moving, that lay their ground upon the Adversaries
Confession; especially, if it be confessed and avouched to be true. But if you
Protestants indeed confess, there is Salvation possible to be attained in the
Roman Church, but yet the Errors of that Church are so many (and some, such
as weaken the Foundation) that it is very hard to go that way to Heaven,
especially to them that have had the Truth manifested; the heart of this
Argument were broken.

Besides, the force of this Argument lies upon two things, one expressed, the
other upon the By.

First, That which is expressed, is, We and our Adversaries Roman Church.
What? would you have us as malicious (at least as rash) as your selves are to
us, and deny you so much as possibility of salvation? If we should, we
might make you in some things strain for a Proof. But we have not so learned
Christ, as either to return evil for evil in this headie course, or to deny
Salvation to some ignorant silly Souls, whose humble, peaceable obedience,
makes them safe among any part of men, that profess the Foundation, Christ.
And therefore seek not to help our cause, by denying this comfort Donatists:
For in the Point of Baptism (Whether that ^ Church, or in the part of Donatus)
because both parts (...), that (...) was true (...) the (...); which that
peevish Sect most unjustly denied the sound part, as S. Augustine Esse vero
apud Donatistas Baptismum, and illi asserunt, and nos concedimus, etc. Lib. 1.
de Bap. cont. Don. c. 3.
delivers it. I would ask now, Had not they Orthodoxe Baptism among them,
because the Donatists denied it injuriously? Or should the Orthodoxe, against
Truth, have denied Baptism among the Donatists, to cry (...) with them? Or
that their Argument might not be the stronger, because both parts granted? But
mark this; how far you run from all common Principles of Spiritualis
ma^ducatio quod per animam fit, ad Christi carnem in Sacramento pertingit.
Caiet. To. 2. Opusc. de Euchar. Tr. 2. c. 5.
Faith made spiritually partaker of the true and Real Body and Blood of
Christ, truly and really, and of all the benefits of his Passion. Your (...)
add a manner of this his presence, Transubstantiation, Lutherans a manner of
this presence, Consubstantiation, which more deny. If this Argument be good,
then even for this consent, it is safer communicating with the Church of
England, than with the Roman or Lutheran, because all agree in this Truth, not
in any other Opinion. And therefore, if you will force the Argument, to make
that the safest way of Salvation, which differing parts agree on; Why do you
not yield to the force of the same Argument, in the (...) of the Sacrament, one
of the most immediate means of Salvation, where not only the most, but all
agree?

Secondly, The other upon the By, which helpesthis Argument, is your continual
poor Out-crie against us, That we cannot be saved, because we are (...) of
the Church. Sure if I thoughtI were out, I would get in as fast as I could. But
what do you mean by Out of the Church? Sure, out of the Roman Church. Why,
but the Roman Church and the Church of England are but two distinct members of
that Catholic Church, which is spread over the face of the Earth. Therefore
Rome is not the House where the Church dwells, Rome it self, as well as other
particular Churches, dwells in this great Universal House; unless you will
shut up the Church in Rome, as the Donatists did in Afric. I come a little
lower. Rome, and other (...) (...), are in this And Daughter Sion was Gods own
(...) of old, of the Church. Isai. 1. 8. (...), Hyppol. Orat. de Consum. Mundi.
Et omnis Ecclesia Virgo appellata est. S. Aug. Tr. 13. in S. Ioh.
(...), to whom ((...) Christ) the care of the Household is committed by God
the Father, and the Catholic Church, the Mother, of (...) Christians. Rome, as
an elder Sister, had a great (...) committed unto her in and from the prime
times of the Church, and to her Bishop in her: but at this time (to (...) pass
many (...) that (...) formerly been in the House) England, and some other
Sisters of hers, are fallen out in the House. What then? Will the Father and
the Mother, God and the Church, (...) one Child out, because another is angry
with it? Or when Elder Sister, (...) and her (...), the Bishop there, should
thrust out what Child (...) pleased? Especially when she her self is (...)
accused to have given the offense, that is taken in the House? Or will not both
Father and Mother be sharper to her for this unjust and unnatural usage of her
younger Sisters, but their (...) Children? Nay, is it not the next way to make
them (...) her out of doors, that is so (...) to the rest? It is well for all
Christian men, and Churches, that the Father and Mother of them are (...) so
(...), as some would have them. outing from the Church; because this Elder
(...) are discovered in the House, and (...) grown (...) for it to them that
complained. But as Children cry when they are awaked, so do you, and (...)
with all that come (...) you. And Return of untruths upon M. Jewel, Ar. 4.
fol. 67.
(...) confesses, That ye were in (...) dead sleep, (...) much (...), when
the (...) you. Now if you can prove, that Rome is (...) the Catholic Church
it self (as you commonly call it) speak out and (...) it. In the mean time
you may (...) too, if you will; and


(...). The doubting Person (said the B. to me) may be better saved in it, than
you.


B. ^ Romans 14.4.
(...) (that is, easier) than you; than (...) man, that knows so Foundation is
but held, there for Caeteram turbam non intellige^di viuacitas sed credendi
simplicitas tutissimam facit. S. August. cont. Fund. c. 4.
ordinary men, it is not the (...) of understanding, but the simplicity of
believing, that makes them safe. For Saint Augustiue speaks there of men in
the Church; and no man can be simply said to be out of the visible Church, that
is baptized, and holds the Foundation. quickness of understanding; that loving
it self and some by respects too well, makes men take up an unsafe way about
the Faith. So that there is no question, but many were saved in corrupted
times of the Church, when their Ipsis Magistris pereuntibus: nisi forte ante
mortem resipuerint. Luth. de Seru. Arb.
Leaders, unless they repented before death, were lost. And Saint Augustines
De vtil. Cred. c. 1. Si mihi videretur vnus and idem Haereticus and Haereticis
credens homo, etc.
Rule will be true, That in all Corruptions of the Church, there will ever be a
difference between an Heretic and a plain wellmeaning man, that is misled,
and believes an Heretic. I pray you Mark this, and so by Gods grace will I.
For our Reckoning will be heavier, if we mis-lead on eytherside, than theirs
(...) us. But I see I must look to my self, for you are secure: For,


F. Dr White (said I) has secured me, that none of our Errors be damnable, so
long as we hold them not against our Conscience. And I hold none against my
Conscience.


B. It seems then you have two Securities, Dr Whites Assertion, and your
Conscience. What Assurance Dr White (...) you, I cannot tell of my self; nor
as things stand, may I rest upon your Relation: It may be you use him no better
than you do the Bishop. And sure it is so: For I have since spoken with Dr
White, and he auowes this, and no other Answer.

He was asked in the conferense between you, Whether Popish Errors were
Fundamental? To (...) he gave (...), by distinction of the persons which held
and professed the nay further, that they were materially, and in the very kind
and nature 1. Cor. 3.12.
withal, that such as were misled by Education, or long Custom, or
over-valuing the (...) of the (...) Church, and did in (...) of heart embrace
them, might by their general (...), and Faith in the Merit of Christ, attended
with Charity (...) other Virtues, find mercy at Gods hands. But that he
should say Signanter, and expressly, That none either of yours, or your
fellows (...), were damnable, so long as you hold them not against Conscience;
that he utterly disauowes. You delivered nothing, to (...) such a Confession
from him. And for your self, he could observe S. Ioh. 12.48.
latter Day.

For your Conscience, you are the happier in your Error, that you hold nothing
against it; especially, if you speak not against it, while you say so. But
this no man can know, but your Conscience: For no man knows the thoughts of a
man, 1. Cor. 2. 11.
but the spirit of a man that is within him; to which I leave you. But yet you
leave not: For you tell me,


F. The (doubting party) asked, Whether she might be saved in the Protestants
Faith? Upon (...) Soul (said the B.) you may. Upon my Soul (said I) there is
but one saving Faith, and that is the Roman.


B. So (it seems) the B. was confident for the Faith professed in the Church
of England; else he would not have taken Scripture, and the Creeds; to believe
these in the sense of the ancient Primitive Church; to receive the four great
General Councels, so much magnified by Antiquity; to believe all Points of
Doctrine, generally received as Fundamental, in the Church of Christ; is a
Faith, in which to live and die, cannot but give Salvation. And therefore the
B. went upon a sure ground, in the adventure of his Soul upon that Faith.
Besides, in all the Points of Doctrine that are controuerted between us.
Church of England, that can be proved to depart from the Foundation. You have
many dangerous Errors about it, in that which you call the Roman Faith. But
there I leave you, to one saving Faith. But then every thing which you call De
Fide, Of the Faith, because some Council or other has defined it, is not such
a breach from that one saving Faith, as that he which expressly believes it
not, nay, as that he which believes the contrary, is excluded from Salvation.
And 3. De Eccl. Mil. c. 14.
Bellarmine is forced to grant this, There are many things, de Fide, which
are not absolutely necessary to Salvation. Waldens. Doct. Fid. l. 2. A. 2.. 23.
Therefore there is a Latitude in Faith, especially in reference to Salvation.
To set a Bound Foundation, has with other Errors, lost the Peace and Unity of
the Church; for which you will one day answer. And the other, That you are
gone further from the Foundation of this one saving Faith, than can ever be
proved we have done. But to conclude, you tell us,


F. Upon this and the precedent Conferences, the Lady rested in judgment
fully satisfied (as she told a confident friend) of the Truth of the Roman
Churches Faith. Yet upon frailetie, and fear to offend the King, she yielded
to go to Church: For which, she was after very sorry, as some of her
friends can testify.


B. This is all personal. And how that Honorable Lady is settled in
Conscience, how in Judgment, I know not. This (I think) is made clear
enough, That that which you said in this and the precedent Conferences, could
settle neither, unless in some that were settled, or setting before. As little
do I know, what she told any Friend of the Roman Cause: No more, whether it
were frailetie, or fear, that made her yield to go to Church; nor how sorry
she was for it; nor who can testify that sorrow. This I am sure of; If she
repent, and God forgive her other sins, she will Church of England, and
following the Superstitions and Errors which the Roman Church has added in
point of Faith, and worship of

I pray God give her Mercy, and all of you a Light of his Truth, and a Love to
it first; that you may no longer be made Instruments of the Popes boundless
Ambition, and this most unchristian braine-sicke Device, That in all
Controversies of the Faith he is infallible, and that by way of Inspiration
and Prophecy, in the Conclusion which he gives. To due consideration of this,
and Gods Mercy in Christ, I leave


FINIS.

