A REMEMBRAVNCE of the well employed life, and godly end, of George Gaskoigne
Esquire, who deceassed at Stalmford in Lincoln Shire the 7. of October. 1577.

The report of Geor. Whetstons Gent. an eye witness of his Godly and charitable
end in this world.

Forma nulla Fides.



IMPRINTED AT LONdon for Edward Aggas, dwelling in Paul's Churchyard and are
there to be sold.

The well employed life, and godly end of G. Gascoigne Esquire.
ANd is there none, will help to tell my tales
who (ah) in health / a thousand plaints have sho^e?
feels all me^ joy? ca^ no man skill of bale?
o yes I see / a comfort in my moan.
Help me good George, my life and death to touch
some man for thee, may one day do as much.
Thou see my death, and long my life did know,
my life: nay death, to live I now begin:
But some will say. Durus est hic sermo,
It Is hard indeed, for such as feed on sin.
Yet trust me friends (though flesh does hardly bow)
I am resolved, I never lived til now.
And on what cause, in order shall ensue,
My worldly life (is first) must play his part:
Whose tale attend, for once the same is true,
Yea VVhetston thou, have known my hidden heart
And therefore I conjure thee to defend:
(when I am dead) my life and godly end.
First of my life, which some (amiss) did know,
I leave mine arms, my acts shall blase the same He was Sir John G. son and
Heir, Disinherited.

Yet on a thorn / a Grape will neuen grow,
no more a Churl, does breed a child of fame.
but (for my birth) my birth right was not great
my father did, his forward son defeat,
This froward deed, could scarce my heart dismay,
Virtue (quod I) will see I shall not lack:
And well I wot Domini est terra,
Besides my wit can guide me from a wrack.
Thus finding cause, to foster hye desire:
I clapped on cost (a help) for to aspire.
But foolish man dect in my Pecocks plumes,
my wanton will commanded strait my wit:
Yea, brainsick I, was, drunk with fancies fumes,
But, Nemo sine crimine viuit.
For he that finds, himself from vices free
I give him leave, to throw a stone at me.
It helps my praise, that I my fault recite,
The lost sheep found, the feast was made for joy:
Evil sets out good, as far as black does white.
The pure delight, is drayned from anoy.
But (that in cheef* which writers should respect)
truth is the guard, that keeps men vnchect.
And for a truth, begilde with self conceit,
I thought yt men would throw rewards on me
But as a fish, seld bites with out a baight,
So none vnforst, men's needs will hear or see.
and begging suits, from du^ghil thoughts proceed:
the mounting mind, had rather sterue in need.
Well leave I hear, of thriftles will to write,
wit found my rents, agreed not with my charge:
^he sweet of war, sung by the carpet knight,
I^ post haste then shipped me in Ventures Barge.
These lusty lims, Saunce use (quod, I) will rust:
That pity were, for I to them must trust.
Well plaste at length, among the drunken Dutch,
(though rumors lewd, impaired my desert) He served in Holla^d,

I boldly vaunt, the blast of Fame is such,
As proves I had, a froward sowrs heart.
My slender gain a further witness is:
For woorthiest men, the spoils of war do mis.
Even there the man, that went to fight for pence,
Cacht by sly hap, in prison vile was popt: Prisone^ in Hol.

Yea had not words, fought for my lives defense,
For all my hands, my breath had the^e been stopped
But I in fine, did so persuade my foe: He had the Latin, Italian, French, and
Dutch la^guages.

as (scot free) I, was homewards set to go.
Thus wore I time the welthier not a whit,
Yet awckward chance, lackt force, to beard my hope
In peace (quod I) i will trust unto my wit,
the windows of my muse, then str^ight I open His books publ.

And first I show, the trauail of such time:
as I in youth, imployd in loouing rhyme.
Some straight way said (their tungs with envy fret) Poyse^

those wanton lays, inductions ^ers to vice:
Such did me wrong, for (quod nocet, docet)
our neighbors harms, are Items to the wise.
And sure these toys, d^ show for your behoof:
The woes of love, and not the ways to love.
And that the world might read them as I meant,
I left this vain, to path the virtuous ways: Glass of gouer me^

The lewd I checked, in Glass of government,
And (laboring still, by pains, to purchase praise,
I wrought a Glass, wherein each man may see: (...) ^asse.

Within his mind, what canckred vices be.
The drunken soul, transformed to a beast, Diet for drunkers.

my diet helps, a man, again to make*
But (that which should, be praisd abooue the rest)
My Doomes day Drum, from sin does you awake Drum of doo^sday.

For honest sport, which does refresh the wit:
I have for you, a book of hunting writ. Hunting.

These few books, are daily in your eyes,
Parhaps of worth; my fame alive to keep: He has books to publish,

Yet other woorks. (I think) of more em^e,
Coucht close as yet, within my cofers sleep.
yea til I ^y, none shall the ^ame reuele:
So men will say, that Gas^ign wrote of Zeal.
O En^y ^ile, foul fall thee wretched sot,
Thou mortal foe, unto the forward mind:
I curse thee wretch, the only cause godwot. Envy.

That my good will, no more account did find.
And not content, thy self to do me scar:
Thou ni^st my heart, with Spite, Suspect and Care.
And fiest of Spite foul Enuies poisoned pie, Spite,

To Midas ears, this As has Lyntius, eyes:
With painted she was, he heaues him self on hie,
Full often this Dolte, in learned authors pries,
But as the Drone, the honey hiue, does rob:
with worthy books, so deals this idle lob.
He filcheth terms, to paint a prattling tung,
when (God he knows) he knows not what he says
And lest the wise should ^nde his wit but yung,
He woorks all means, their woorks for to dispraise.
To smooth his speech, yt beast this patch does crop
He shows the bad, the writers mouths to stop.
Ye worse then this, he deals in offense,
(Ten good turns, he with silence strikes dead)
A slender fault, ten times beyond pretense,
This wretched Spite in every place does spread.
And with his breath, the Viper does infect:
The hearers heads, and hearts with false suspect.
Now of Suspect: the property to show, Suspect

He hides his dought, yet still mistrusteth more:
The man suspect, is so debard to know,
The cause and cure of this his ranckling sore.
And so in vain, he good account does seek,
Who by this Feende, is brought into mislike.
Now hear my tale, or cause which killed my heart,
These privy foes, to tread me under foot:
My true int^nt, with forged faults did thwart:
so that I found, for me it was no boot.
to woork as Bees, from weeds, with honey dranes
when Spiders turned, my flowers unto banes.
When my plain words, by fools misconst^ed were
by whose fond tales-reward hild his hands back
To quite my worth, a cause to settle care:
within my breast, who well deseru^d, did lack.
for who can brook, to see a painted crow:
Singing a loft, when Turtles mourn below.
What man can yield, to ^arue among his books. Care.

and see pied Doultes, upon a booty feed?
What honest mind, can live by fau'ring looks,
and see the lewd, to rech a freendly deed?
What heart can bide, in bloody wars to toil:
when carpet swads, devour yt Soldiers spoil?
I am the wretch, whom Fortune ^irted so,
These men, were bribed, ere I had breath to speak:
Muse then no whit, with this huge overthrow,
though crusshig care, my giltles heart does break
But you will say, that in delight do dwell:
my outward show, no inward greef did tell.
I grant it true, but hark unto the rest,
The Swa^ in songs, does knolle her passing be^:
The Nightingale, with thorns against her breast
when she might mourn, her sweetest lays does yel
The valiant man, so plays a pleasant part:
When mothes of moan, do gnaw upon his heart.
For proof, my self, with care not so a feared,
But as hurt Dear wail, (though their wounds alone
When stoutly they do stand among yt heard.
So I that saw, but few hark to my moan.
made choice to tell deaf walls, my wretched plaint:
in sight of men, who nothing seemd to faint.
But as often use, does wear an iron cote,
as missing drops, hard flints in time does pearse
By piece meals, care so wrought me under foot No Phisicio^ could find out his
grief.

but more then strange is that I now rehearse,
Three months I lived, and did digest no food
when none by art my sickness understood.
What helps then? to death I needs must pine,
yet as the horse, the use of ^arre which knows:
If he be hurt, will neither winch nor whine,
but til he dye, post with his Rider goes.
Eue^ so my heart, whilst lu^gs may lend me breath:
Bares up my limbs, who liuing^ go like death.
But what auailes, Achilles heart, to have,
King Cressus wealth, the sway of all the world:
The Prince, the Peer, so to the wretched slave,
when death assaults, from earthly holds are whorld.
Yea often he strikes ere one can stir his eye:
Then good you live, as you would daily dye.
You see the plight, I wretched now am in,
I look much like a threshed ear of torn:
I hold a form, within a wrimpled skin,
but from my bones, the fat and flesh is worn
See, see the man, late plesures Miniou:
^inde to the bones, with care and wretched moan
See gallants see, a picture worth the sight,
(as you are now, my self was heertofore)
My body late, stute full of manly might,
As bare as Job, is brought to Death his door.
My hand of late, which tought to win me fame:
Stif clung with cold, wants forse to write my name
My legs which bare, my body full of flesh,
Unable are* to stay my bones upright:
My tu^g (God wot) which talked as one would wish
In broken words, can scarce my mind recite.
My head late stuffed, with wit and learned skill
may now conceive, but not convey my will.
What say you friends, this sudain change to see?
You rue my greef, you do like flesh and blood:
But moan your sins, and never morn for me,
And to be plain, I would you understood.
My hatt does swim, in seas of more delight:
Then your who seems, to rue my wretched plight.
What is this world? a net to snare the soul,
A mas of sin, a desert of decert:
A moments joy, an age of wretched dole,
A lure from grace, for flesh a toothsome baight.
Unto the mind, a cankerworm of care:
Unsure, unjust, in rendering man his share.
A place where pride, oreruns the honest mind,
Wheer richmen ioynes, to rob the shiftles wretch:
where bribing mists, the judges eyes do blind,
Where Parasites, the fattest crummes do catch.
where good deserts (which challenge like reward)
Are over blown, with blasts of light regard.
And what is man? Dust, Slime, a puf of wind,
Conceiu^d in sin, plaste in the woorld with greef,
Brought up with care, til care has caught his mind,
And then (til death, vouchsafe him some releef)
Day yea nor night, his care does take an end:
To gather goods, for other men to spend.
O foolish man, that art in office plaste,
Think whence thou came, and whether you shall go:
The huge hie Oaks, small winds have over cast,
when slender reeds, in roughest wethers grow.
Even so pale death, often spares the wretched wight,
And wounds you, who wallow in delight.
You lusty youths, that nurish high desire,
Abase your plumes, which makes you look so big,
The Colliers cut, the Courtiars Steed will tire,
Even so the Clark, the Parsones grave does dig.
Whose hap is yet, here longer life to win:
Does heap (God wot) but sorrow unto sin.
And to be short, all sorts of men take heed,
the thunder boltes, the loftye Towers tear:
The lightning flash, consumes the house of reed,
y^a more in time, all earthly things will wear,
Save only man, who as his earthly living is:
Shall live in woe, orels in endless blis.
More would I say, if life could lend me space,
but all in vain, death waits of no man's will:
The tired Jade, does trip at every pace,
when pa^pered horse, will praunce against the hill.
So helthfull men, at long discourses sport
When few words, the sick, would fain report.
The best is this, my will is quickly made,
my wealth is small, the more my conscience ease:
This short account (which makes me ill apaid)
my loving wife and son, will hardly please.
But in this case, to please them as I may:
These folowi^g words, my testament do wray.
My soul I first, bequeath Almighty God, The effect of his will.

and though my sins are grievous in his sight:
I firmly trust, to escape his fiery rod,
when as my faith his deer Son shall recite.
Whose precious blood (to quench his Fathers ire)
Is sole the cause, that saues me from hell fire.
My Body now which once I decked brave
(from whence it came) unto the earth I give:
I wish no pomp, the same for to ingraue,
once buried corn, does rot before it live.
And flesh and blood in this self sort is tried:
Thus burial cost, is (with out proffit) pride.
I humbly give, my gracious soueraign Queen
(by service bound) my true and loyal heart:
And truth to say, (...) ^ight but rarely scene,
as Iron greues from the adamant to part.
Her highness so, has ^each^ the Grace alone:
To gain all hearts, yet gives her heart to none.
My loving wife, whose face I fain would see,
my love I give, with all the wealth I have:
But sense my goods (God knows) but sle^der be
most gracious Queen, for Christ his sake I crave
(not for any service that I have done)
you will vouchsafe, to aid her and my Son.
Come, come deer Son, my blessing take in part,
and therwithall I give thee this in charge:
First serve thou God, then use both wit and art,
thy Fathers det, of service to discharge.
which (forste by death) her Majesty he owes:
beyond deserts, who still rewards bestows.
I freely now all sorts of Men forgive,
Their wrongs to me, and wish them to amend:
And as good men, in charity should live,
I crave my faults may no man's mind offend,
Lo here is all, I have for to bequest:
And this is all, I of the world request.
Now farewell Wife, my Son, and Friends farwell.
Farewell O world, the baight of all abuse:
Death where is thy sti^g? O Devil where is thy hell?
I little forse, the for^es you can use.
Yea to your teeth. I do you both defye:
Vt essem Christo, cupio dissolui.
In this good mood, an end worthy the show,
Bereft of speech, his hands to God he heau'd:
And sweetly thus, good Gaskaigne went a Dio,
Yea with such ease, as no man there preceiu'd,
By struggling sign, or striving for his breath:
That he abode, the pains and pangs of Death.
Exhortatio.
His Sean is played, you follow on the act,
Life is but death, til flesh, and blood be stain:
God grant his words, within your hearts be pact Good me^,

As good men do, hold earthly pleasures bain.
The good for there needs, Vtuntur mundo:
And use good deeds, Vt fruantur De^.
Contemn the change, (use nay abuse) not God,
Through holy shows, this worldly muck to scratch:
To deal with men and Saints is very od.
Hypocrisy, a man may over catch. ^ocrites.

But Hypocrite, thy heart the Lord does see:
Who by thy thoughts (not thy words) will judge thee.
Thou jesting fool, which make at sin a face,
Beware that God, in earnest plague thee not: Careless ^uers.

For where as he, is coldest in his grace,
^uen there he is, in vengeance very hot.
Tempt not to far, the lathest man to fight:
When he is forste, the lustiest blows does smight.
You Courtiers, check not, Mercha^ts for their gain, Courtiers

(...) by your loss, do match with them in blame:
The Lawyers life, you Merchants do not stain, Mercha^

The blind for sloth, may hardly check the lame,
I mean that you, in Balance of deceit:
Will Lawyers payze, I fear with over weight.
You Lawyers now who earthly Judges are,
you shall be judged, and therefore judge aright: Lawye^.

you count Ignorantia Iuris no bar,
Then ignorance, your sins will not acquit.
Read, read Gods law, with which yours should agree:
That you may judge, as you would judged be.
You Prelates now, whose words are perfect good, Prelates,

Make show in woorks* yt you your words ensue:
A Diamond, holds his virtue set in wood,
but yet in Gold, it has a fresher ^ue,
Even so Gods word, told by the Devil is pure:
Preached yet by Saints, it does more heed procure.
And Reader now, what office to thou have,
to whose behoof, this breef discourse is told:
Prepare thy self, each hour for the grave, Readers ingenerall

the market eats as well young sheep as old.
Even so, the Child, who fears the smarting rod:
The Father often does lead the way to God.
And both in time, this worldly life shall leave,
thus sure thou art, but know not when to dye:
Then good thou live, least death do the deceive,
as through good life, thou may his force defye.
For trust me man, no better match can make:
Then leave unsure, for certain things to take.
Viuit post funera Virtus.
An Epitaph, written by G. W. of the death, of M. G. Gaskoygne.
For Gaskoygnes death, leave of to moan, or morn
You are deceived, alive the man is still:
A live? O yea, and laugheth death to scorn,
In that, that he, his fleshly life did kill.
For by such death, two lives he gains for one,
His Soul in heaven does live in endless joy
His worthy vvoorks, such fame in earth have sovvne,
As sack nor vvrack, his name can there destroy.
But you will say, by death he only gains.
And how his life, would many stand in stead:
O dain not Friend (to counterchaunge his pains)
If now in heaven, he have his earned meade,
For once in earth, his toil was passing great:
And we deuourd the svveet of all his sweat.
FINIS.
Nemo ante obitum beatus.

