THE CENSVRE of a loyal Subject:

UPON CERTAIN noted Speech and behauiours of those fourteen notable Traitors,
at the place of their executions, the xx. and xxi. of September, last past.

As also, of the Scottish Queen, now (thanks be to God) cut off by justice, as
the principal Root of al their treasons. On Wednesday the 8. of February 1586.

Wherein is handled matter of necessary instruction and comfort for all
duetiful Subjects: especially, the multitude of ignorant people.

Fear GOD: be true to thy Prince: and obey the Laws.

At LONDON Printed by Richard Jones, dwelling at the sign of the Rose and the
Crown, near Holborne bridge.

CVrteous Reader: my good friend M. G. W. at his departure into the Country,
left this most honest work to be censured by me: being right well assured, by
the continuance of our true friendshippes that I would not deceive him with a
flattering judgment, and (trust me) upon a considerate reading, I found it a
little book, containing a large testimony of his loyalty to his Prince and
country, a sweet comfort, and most sound counsel for good subjects:
concludi^g by many fair examples of Traitors ^oule ends, that the reward of
treason is destruction, and after death, (...) infamy. The matter agreeing
with the condition of this troublesome time, I have adventured to possess thee
with the benefit thereof, before I made account unto him of my liking: which
is, that no good subject can mislike the same, and I made the more have herein:
because some wicked persons that will not be admonished, have now by new
conspiracy desired our public sorrow* and by their discovery have brought an
universal joy into the church of God. Give God thanks* for his wonderful
presentation of her Majesty, and the confusion of her enemies, serve him, and
read this book, which truly promises thee, that (...) miscreate persons
shall never prosper in their devices. No r^ote but fear God, and thou shall
fare well.

Thy loving friend, T C.
To the right honorable, Sir William Cicill, Knight, Baron of Burleigh, Lord
high Treasurer of England, and one of the Queens Majesty's most honora^able
and prudent privy counsel a long continuance of honor and prosperous estate.
RIght honorable and prudent Lord, the ungracious Emperor Commodus, upon the
accusation of a guilty conscience, caused fourteen or fifteen discreet Roman
Gentlemen, to be thrown into the river of Tyber, for no other offense, but
because they soberly talked, of the the virtues of the good Emperor Marcus
Aurelius, his father: alleging that they could not praise his father without
the reproving of himself: and certainly, although Commodus did evil, he spoke
the truth: for the commendation of virtue, is evermore a reproach to vice:
which principal (right honorable) considered of the one part, by your
manifold, services done unto the Queens most excellent majesty, to her
blessed realm, and generally to the true church of God: and of the other side,
weyed by the most odious treasons, conspired by many rotten subjects, whereof
justice lately has cut off certain of the principal, whose vile purpose
reached to the life of her sacred Majesty, the subversion of their country,
and general callamity in the church of God: no other conclusion can follow,
but that the reverence of your public service, will always revive the hatred
of their treasons, and that the reproach of their treasons, will never suffer
the reverence of your fidelity to die. Therefore (most grave Lord) desirous to
honor (withal duetifull affection) your godly virtues, as the comfort of all
good men: and also to acknowledge some especial favors shown unto my self,
under your sound protection, I present (for the general instruction of my
countrymen, the subjects of England) my obseruances of certain noted speech
and behauiours, of those fourteen notable Traitors* which lately suffered for
their treasons: trusting that this censure, by the sentence of all good
Subjects, will merit the acceptance of my former books, which hitherto have
escaped the disgrace of public reproof. Protesting, in the behalf of my
writing, that my desire has evermore been, to instruct all men, and not to
iniure the worst of the wicked. And now to conclude, that virtue may have her
sample by your Lordship, and vice her shame by these traitors, in the name of
experience, I advise all men, who^e heads clime above the height of their
present conditions, to make loyal and honest actions, the ladders of their
advancement: which will commend them with a beloved life, or an honorable
death: when treason is the hatchet that seuereth life, and joins infamy unto
death. The Lord be with your Lordshippe in all your affairs: for whose health
and honorable prosperity, the good subjects of England continually pray.

Humbly at your Lordships commandment. G. W.

A Censure, in form of a Dialogue, of certain noted speech and behauiours, of
fourteen notable Traitors, at the place of their executions. etc, The speakers,
Walker, a godly divine, Weston, a discreet Gentleman. Wilcocks, a
substantial Clothier

West. Neighbor Wilkcocks, you are well welcome home.


Wilk. I humbly thank your worship.


West. What is the best news at London?


Wilk. The best news, are, fourteen of those rank traitors that sought to
bereave the Queens most excellent Majesty of her life, (which God long
preserve) have made their confession at the gallowee* for my eyes saw their
traitorous hearts burned, and bodilesse heads advanced to the view and comfort
of many thousands of people.


Walk. You saw a happy sight, for the quietness and safety of the Queens
most excellent majesty, and general comfort for all good subjects, and a
fearful example to al traitors: but for as much as they offended in the
highest degree of treason, as traitors resolved to kill the Queens Ma. (whose
life, almighty God long preserve*) to spoil he^ navy, to cloy the ordinance,
to kill some of her majesty's honorable privy counsel, to move a general
rebellion, and what in them lay, to procure a foreign invasion: all which,
being treasons of such danger, as the least of them closed up the doors of
mercy: it seems conueniente, that their executions should be with more
severity then the common judgment of Traitors.


Wilk. Their judgments and executions were alike, save that the first seven
were executed with less favor, then the latter seven.


Walk. What difference was there in their executions?


VVilk Their judgments were to be drawn to the place of execution, there to be
hanged until they were half dead, their bowels to be burnt before their
faces, etc. And truly the first seven, as the most malicious (if there be
any difference in treason) were executed somewhat near the severity of their
judgment: the other seven were so fauouraby used, as they hung until they
were even altogether dead, before y^ rest of their judgment was executed.


Walk. Their treasons were so odious as Perillus Bull or the extremest
cruelty that policy may invent, would be too mild to punish them: so that the
least favor that might be showen unto them, was a token of exceeding mercy in
her Majesty, and mildenes in the justice of England.


West. There were never people governed with more mercy, then the people of
England under the reign of our most gracious Queen Elizabeth, (whose
prosperity the Lord long continue: and truly I heard many wise men say,
Comparisons by her majesty's mercy.
that the greatness of her majesty's mercy (applied to an old proverb Over
much pity spoileth a City) is very dangerous to the peace of England: and
some have taken example, by a fable of a frozen serpent, that a pitiful
husbandman found, which he revived at his sire: but as soon as the Serpent had
gotten strength, it stong the husbandmans children: even so these hollow
subjects (I pray God I may not safelye name most Papists) which run into many
dangers of the law: yet her Majesty's mercy so favors them, as it is to be
feared they live, but to recover strength to persecute her majesty's subjects.


Walk. In very deed, mercy breeds presumption in the wicked: but no doubt
almighty God (that for the cruelty, which reigned upon the earth, drowned all
the world, save only Noah and his famelye) is so well pleased with mercy, as
he seldom suffers it to be the cause of inconuenienre, especially, where
temperate justice is joined with mercy: and although the example of he pitiful
husbandman and the frozen serpent, may be well applied unto her Majesty's
mercy, and the papists malice: yet when the serpent stong his children, The
beginning of presumption is mercy and the end is destruction.
the husbandman grieuouslye beat him: even so, when these kind of people,
turn her Majesty's mercy to public disturbance, Justice will do her
office, so that they shall hardly escape the censure of her majesty's laws.


West. God bring them to shame and confusion but Neighbor Wilcocks, I pray you
show us the^ names of the Traitors, and manner of their executions.


Wilk. Upon the twentieth day of September, being tuesday, John Ballard a
Priest, and first perswader of Babington to these odious treasons, was laid
alone upon a hurdell and six others, two, and two upon a hurdell, were drawn
from Tower hill, The place of their execution was sometime the meting place to
co^sult of there treasons.
through the city of London, unto a field at the upper end of Holborne,
hard by the high way side to S. Giles: where was erected a scaffolde
convenient for the execution, and there upon a pair of gallows so high, and
withal, the place was so rayled to keep off horsemen, as the people might
plainly see the execution.


West, I am much deceived if there were not a great multitude of people
assembled to see the execution.


Wilk. I cannot number the thousands, but by computation, there were able men
enough, to give battle to a strong enemy: but one thing I especially
regarded, that although the assemblye were wonderful great, The multitude
showed no motion of pity at the execution of the Traitors.
and the traitors all goodly personages, clothed in silks: and every way
furnished to move pity: and that the order of their execution, was a fearful
spectakle: yet y^ odiousnes of their treaso^s was so settled in every man's
heart, as there appeared no sadness or alteration among the people, at the
mangling and quartering of their bodies: yea, the whole multitude, without any
sign of lamentation greedylye beheld the spectacle from the first to the last.


Walk. Truly, they that bear dutiful hearts toward the safety of the Queens
Majesty, and peace of their country, would not but greatly rejoice in their
destruction, which sought the general subversion of the estate, beside the kind
affection and motherly love yt her Majesty published by her gracious letters,
unto the L. Mayor and state of London: Her Maiestis loving affection, toward
her good subjects.
wherein her Majesty protests (and sundry of her gracious proceedinges
fully witnesses,) that she desired no longer to live, then while in the whole
course of her Majesty's government she carried her self in such sort, as might
not only continue their love and goodwill, but also increase the same, are
causes strong enough to command the multitude to rejoice in nothing more,
then in the destruction of those that pretend any hurt unto her Majesty's
person. But good neighbor Wilcocks continue your purpose concerning their
execution.


Wilk. The first day the Traitors were all placed upon the scaffolde, The order
of the Traitors executions.
that the one might behold the reward of his fellows treason. Ballard the
Priest, John Ballard, the Priest, executed.
who was the first broacher of this treason: was the first that was executed,
and after that his bowels and traitorous heart were thrown into the fire, (his
head severed from his shoulders,) was set upon the top of the Gallows.


West. By the way I pray you what confession made this traiterons Priest, at
the time of his death.


Wilk. He denied not his treason, died an obstinate papist, and in his
protestation, he doubtfullie said, if he had offended y^ Q. Majesty, or any
man else he was sorry, and so co^ditionally desired forgiveness: and to declare
(at full) his traitorous mind, he said, I am sorry I have bin so ^^a^dalous, but
most sorry I have bin so remis in my delings


Walk. The malicious affection of his heart toward the Q. majesty, appeared
eue^ in the tre^bling passage of death: yt whereas his treasons were so
impious, Balla^ds sophistical asking of the Q Majesty forgiveness.
odious, and damnable, as the most wicked, (I mean his confederates for the
most part) confessed as the common fame goes, yt they exceeded the greatness
of her Majesty's mercy which may not be measured, where there is any measure
in offe^ding, and yet in his desire of remission at her Majesty's hands, he
added this co^ditio^, (if) as one that doubted if he had offended her
highness: well, leave we this dissembling traitor a pray to the crows, and his
soul to Gods judgment: good neighbor on with your tale to y^ next.


Wilk. Next unto this priest, Anthony Babingto^, Esquire. executed.
Anthony Babington was made ready to the Gallows, and in every point was
handled like unto Ballard.


West. Little may be the moon, bad was the best: but what observed you in his
end?


Wilk. A sign of his former pride, for whereas the rest, A note of Babingtons
pride.
through the cogitation of death were exercised in prayer upon their knees, and
bare headed, he whose turn was next, stood on his feet with his hat on his
head, as if he had been but a beholder of the execution, concerning his
religion he died a papist, his treasons were so odious, as the sting of
conscience persuaded him to acknowledge himself to be a most grievous
trespasser against God and the Queens majesty.


West. I wonder that men are so bewitched with the inticements of these
Jesuits, Note this controversy.
as they hold it a holly matter to lay violent hands upon the Lords
anointed: and at their death their own consciences persuade the^, that the
immaginations of such wickedness is damnable.


Wilk. Pride, Causes of rebellion.
envy, and ambition are the roots of treason, the body of treason is murder
and all that mischief may devise, the fruits of treasons are ruins of
kingdoms and common wealths: the general reward of treason is the
destruction of traitors: and for that, shame and perpetual infamy lead the^ to
the Gallows: to collor if it were possible their treason they make religion
their ground of rebellion: and with this holly show strengthen themselves, but
when Justice has delivered them to the Hangman, death sommo^neth their
wickedness before their consciences, and then the fear of Hell makes the^
openly to confess the matter to be damnable, which they took to be a holly
ground of rebellion.


West. I am well satisfied, now good neighbor, forward with the rest.


Wilk. Next unto Babington, John Sauadge, Gent. executed.
Sauadge was made ready for the execution.


west. This notable traitor (as ye same goes, was y^ man yt co^ferred with D.
Gifford at Paris, and by the co^firmatio^ of y^ english fugitives at Rhemes,
was resolved to kill y^ Queens Majesty, whose defense the God of hoastes
evermore be.

It is likewise said that upon the apprehension of Ballard the priest,
Babington hastened this Sauadge to dispatch his resolution: and that he only
deferred the matter, but for making of a court like suit of apparel.


Walk. God by sundry examples, Gods providence in frustrating of Sauadge his
resolution.
preserves the innocent from the violent hands of the wicked, even in the
pride and greatest hope of their purposes. Ha^mon erected a Gallows for
Mardocheus the Jew, and he and his ten sons suffered thereupon, the false
Judges had got sentence of death against chaste Susanna, but by divine
providence the stones dashed out their own brains: The odiousnes of treson in
Gods sight
but where the practice tends to the murder of anointed Princes, the
odiousness of the matter, so highly offends the Majesty of God, as he
miraculously has defended notable Tyrants, from the murdering swords of
traitors. Comodus was a wicked Emperor, and to kill him the traitor Quintianus
waighted at the entering of the Amphiatre: Tirants miraculouslye preserved from
Traitors hands.
his daggar was ready drawn, his heart was resolute, and his hand was striking
the stroke, the Traitor cried, This the Senate sends thee: by which
fore-warning, Quintianus was stayed, and the Emperor escaped unhurt. The day
before Scevinius determined to kill the Archtyrant Nero he put an old rustie
Daggar to grinding, he made his testament, he franchised his bond men, and got
rowlets in a readiness to wrappe wounds in: by which tokens Milcheu: his
seruante, gathered, he went about some weighty purpose, and so accused him to
the Emperor: Sceuinnius straightwaies confessed that his intent was to have
slain the Emperor. If God plucketh wit and prudence from Traitors, that
purposed to kill such notable Tyrants, it is constantlye to be believed, that
with the shield of his strength he will defend righteous princes: among whom our
most gracious Elizabeth is crowned with the sovereign renown of virtue, in
which dignity the king of kings long continue her Majesty. The murder of a
prince is so odious, as nature cries out against it. Mute persons and young
babes cry out against the murder of Princes.
King Craessus had a young son that from his birth was mute, and yet when one
of king Cyrus Soldiers taking him for a common person, was ready to kill him:
the infant cried out O kill him not, for he is the king my father. Peter
Messire in his Cron. of memorable things. Lib. 1, Cap. (...)
A^iben Ragel in his Judicials, reports a stranger matter of a kings son
of his Country, that brake forth of his mothers intrals to give his father
warning of his enemies and presently after his birth cried out. I am born in
an unfortunate hour, to be the messenger of no better tidings, then that my
father the king is in present danger, to loose both his life and Kingdom.
Eccle. 10,
Which notice signified, the infant presently died: we hereby perceive how
the person of an anointed Prince, is so sacred as nature makes a passage for
suckling babes and domb persons to deliver the same from danger, and withal
the traito^ is ^o open to destruction* Number. 16.
as the preacher faith to the traitor, a bird of the air shall bewray t^y
vo^ce, and with her feathers she shall bewray thy words. Dathan, Corath, and
Abiran, they and all that they had, went down quick into hell because of their
rebellion, which is a great witness of the saying of S. Paul, who forbids to
resist against the Magistrate. Ro^. 1^.
For he that resists receives unto himself damnation. And certainly
whosoever marketh the sequel of treason, shall find an hundredth examples to
one, to proves end of Traitors to be miserable.


West. Upon Gods providence in^rustrating the mischievous purpose of Sauadge
the Traitor, M. Walker you have delivered matter of necessary instruction for
all subjects, especially the common multitude to learn, who are many times
tempted to rebellion with allurementes of godly and honest appearance when it
plainly appears that there is no warrant (yea that destruction follows) to
rebel against tiranous Princes.


Walk. The serpent enticed Eve, and Eve Adam to disobey Gods commandment, in
eating the forbidden fruit: with this subtle persuasion, If you eat of this
fruit, you shall not die the death but your eyes shall be open, and ye shall be
as Gods, knowing both good and evil: even so, with subtle persuasions, The
Popes practices to move rebellion.
are the simple multitude ever more drawn unto rebellion. When the noble king
Henry the eight, banished the Popes imperial authority out of England, the
Popes instrument Cardinal Poole thought civil co^motio^ to be the rediest way
to bring y^ same in again: and to bring his purpose to the better effect, he
persuaded the Northre^ men, that no man should eat any dainty meat in his house,
neither should any one be married but he should pay a tribute for the same unto
the king. In king Edward the sixth his days there was almost a general rebellion
throughout England: the papists tempted the commons to rebellion, with
persuasions to throw down enclosure, and for them selves foysted in, to have
their old religion, and act of six articles restored, the banishment of
strangers has been the cause of many co^motions: but my counsel is that my
loving brethren the subjects of england, Counsel against rebellion*
open not their ears to such pleasing perswasio^s, lest rebellion enter into
their hearts, and so vengance light upon their whole bodies: upon the holliest
ground of rebellion, destruction of traitors have evermore grown. The Northren
men had but a bad proof of two rebellions, when they had the cross and banner
of five wounds borne before them. God places kings in their kingdoms, and he
alone will have the dissoluing of them: If Princes be good, let us be thankful
to God for them, if they be tirannous, let us look into our sins for God
sends Tyrants to punish the sins of the wicked, Tirantes are the scurges of
Gods ^engennce.
who says, I will do vengeance on my enemies by my enemies. God (says Job)
makes the H^pocrite to reign for the sins of the people. In Osea (God
speaks thus.) I will give thee a King in my surye. And in Esaye. Assure is
the rod and staff of my fury. Be Princes good or bad, let subjects be
obedient, least (for their disobedience) God take away the good, and double the
tyranny of the bad.


West. I would this sound counsel were grafted in all men's hearts: then no
doubt the rotten branches of rebellion, would soon be cut off: now good
neighbor on with your matter. Robert Barnwell, Gent. executed.



VVilk. When Sauadge was executed, Barnwell was made ready to die.


West. And what of him?


Wilk. He died an obstinate Papist and for his treason he made conscience his
best excuse.


Walk. He had had but a rotten conscience that was infected with the murder
of a virtuous Queen: and since his conscience was so bad, I hope but a few
that heard him, but forbad their conscience to pity him, other then charitably
to be sorrowful for his error, which was damnable.


Wilk. After Barnewel, Chediock Tichburn Esquire, executed.
Tichburnes turn was next, he was a goodly young Gentleman, and certainly his
humility and move, moved much compassion, he was not settled so much in
papistrie as the other: but he was so much settled to the proud humor of
Babington. as his head could no longer settle upon his shoulders. In his moan
(which I very well marked) he compared his state to Adam, who said he was
placed in Paradise, Tichburnes lamentaion moved many ^o pity.
and there inioyed all the pleasures of the earth, he was only forbidden to
eat of the fruit of one tree: but for his trasgression, he not only procured
wretchedness and misery upon his own head, but upon the heads of all his
posterity. So (quod he) I that wanted nothing, but had health, wealth, and
friends, and so might long have lived, if I could have forborne to have bin
untrue to my prince. But alas for my offense I have brought my self unto this
misery, by which my good mother, my loving wife, my four brethren, and six
sisters, yea our whole house, never before attainted, is infamed, and our
posterity for ever like to be undone.


Walk. His lack of grace is to be lamented and by his overthrow al men are
warned to make choice of good company: for the old proverb is beri^ied. Evil
company corrupt good manners. And truly the injury that he has done unto his
wife, A good example to forbid us the fellowship of the wicked.
his mother, and to so many brethren and sistirs: and to conclude to his whole
posterity, is a fearful example to fear men from treason, especially the
Nobility and better sort of Gentlemen: for they thereby not only lose their
life, and living, but the honor of their house is corrupted: neither seems it
an injury against reason, that in punishment of treason, a number bear the
burden, and blot of one man's fault: when for the virtue, and dutiful service
of one man, a number in his posterity receive both honor, and many other
temporal blessings: further in his confession, or comparing his offense to
Adams, ^t concluded, he likened her Majesty to the pleasant and glorious
fruit, so pretions in Gods eyes, as he forbad Adam and all other to lay
violent hands upon, and thus by the mouth of her enemies, God causes her
sacred excellency to be blazed.


West. You put me in remembrance of a tale that a Gentleman, a trau^lor once
told me, who being at Rome when Pope Gregory there lived, and finding at the
English College, over the arms of England, a Phoenix drawn, which the Pope did
appropiate unto himself: the Gentleman dutifully reuerensing her majesty as
his sovereign, and Phoenix of the world: in scorn of the Pope wrote these
verses.

And reason good the Lion should,
the Phoenix stand below:
For though the leaves bewray the tree,
the fruit the goodness show.
Applying in secreat zeal, the construction thereto, of this se^ce. The arms
of England to leaves as but the general badge of her kingdom, and the Phoenix
he did propriat to the virtues of her majesty, as her excellent beauty, and
glory of the world. And of the contrary part, the matter was well taken, I
know not by what mistaking.


Walk. It is like enough that the meaning was perceived, for the policy of
the Pope and his favorers is to turn all to their honors, that in the market
place blazeth not their dishonor: as for example: A pleasant Friar being
appointed to preach before the Pope and his Cardinals, who marking, with what
majesty and pomp, they entered into S. Peter's church* as one ravished with their
brightness, he scoffingly cried out:^y of S. Peter, A pleasant sermon before the
Pope.
fie of S. Paul, sy, fie upon their beggerlye Apostels: what reckoning is to be
made of their religion, when the honor thereof co^sited in casting forth of
devils, clensing of Lepors, raising the dead, in making the blind to see, the
deaf to hear, y^ domb to speak, and the lame to go: the good they did was to
beggars, and their living was as beggarly, bareleg, and barefoot, they wa^dred
from country to cuntry, their raiment was simple, their diet thin, and their
deaths violent. But honor and reverence be to the Popes holiness, the glory of
his religion is visibly seen: he is able to make kings, and to dispose
kindomes: his raime^t is of gold, and his victuals the ple^tie of the earth,
he dwells and dies in palaces, and is buried like a God. etc. This sermon
was so well liked as the Friar was invited to dine with the Pope, who to relish
his good sermon, excused himself by y^ weakness of his brain, yt could endure
no strong savor: when his meaning was de^aunded, he answered, since Emperors
and kings kissed his holiness feet, he thought his lot would be but to kiss
the homeliest part of his holiness, al which was well taken: and yet perceived to
be vnhapelie me^t. For if ye Pope should revenge every dry bloe, he and his
Cardinals would soon set Rome in an uproar: but if you make no public
profession of y^ gospel, for all other offenses Rome will beat with you, and for a
few peterpe^ce ye pope will pardon you


West. God bless me from such pardons that bring many men to the gallows.


Will. Tilney, one of y^ Q, majesty's pensioners, Charles Tilney a pensioner
executed.
next unto Tichburne made work for the Hangman.


West. By statute law, it is petty treason, for a servant to murder his
master or maistris, being but a subject: how detestable a treason is it then,
for a sworn servant to lay violent hands on his anointed Prince? The offense
being in the extremest degree of sins, the punishment ought to be according
to the seuerest censure of Justice.


Walk. Every man's household well governed, resembles a common wealth, wherein
servants ought to live in the awe and subjection of Subjects: The antien^
serui^ude of ser^^n^^.
and among the Romans there was an ancient law, that aucthorised the master
to punish the offenses of their servants with death: but the wicked policy of
men has always bin such, as where open power was to weak, ambition, envy,
and money allured the familliar servants, and meaner persons to Emperors,
Kings, and men of al estates, to lay violent hands of their masters and to
betraye them to death. Judas one of the Apostels, betrayed our savior Jesus
into the hands of the Jews. King Alexander, was poisoned by his physician
Thessalus: the death of the Emperor Commodus was compassed by the practice of
his sister Lucilla. Many have had their banes by their wives, as King
Candaulus: some by their sons, as the great Turk Bajazet the nienth. etc.
but innumerable that have been destroyed, by the treason of their servants.


West. I hope these odious attempts will discover them: and for that they are
crept into services of account, by subtilty, it shall be the part of every good
subject to certify their Lords (who are perhaps unacquainted with their
religion,) of such dangerous servants.


Wilk. The last of these seven that suffered was Abingto^, Edward Abington
Esquire, exxcuted.
his father was an officer of good credit in her majesty's house, and for many
aduauncements was bound to say, God save good Queen Elizabeth: but his son
was a notable Papist, an Archtraitor, and at his death did all that in him lay
to settle a fear in the hearts of the ignorant multitude, Abingtons
threatenings.
with a speech, that there could not choose but be a great effution of blood in
England very shortly.


Walk. Gods providence makes it apparent that y^ prophises of traitors prove
not evermore scripture: Throgmorton the traitor said, before one year were
expired the prosperity and peace of England should be turned into general
callamitie, Examples of great comfort to the godly, and of no les terror to
the wicked.
but the date thereof is out, and I hope the destiny past. No doubt he knew of
a number of malicious enemies unto the state, and with the spirit of their
wickedness, he blundered forth his prognostication, but let all good subjects
to their comfort, and Traitors to their confusion, know that the wicked
diggeth a pit, and falls therein himself, and who treads down the hedge a
serpent shall bite him, Proverb. (...),
there is no wisdom, there is no understanding, there is no counsel against
the Lord, The horse is prepared the day of battle, but the Lord gives the
victory. The Jews had S. Paul in prison; yea forty of the^ vowed that they
would nether eat; nor drink, until they had flaine him: but God (according to
the Psalmist,) in a due time defended him, yea in that distress, he came and
stood by Paul, and thus comforted him, Be of good cheer Paul, for as thou
have testified of me at Jerusalem, so must thou bear witness also at Rome.
The Angel of the Lord led Peter forth of prison, the Angel of the Lord
defended Sidrack, Mi^aack, and Abednago, in the burning fire: the Angel of the
Lord stopped the Lions mouths that should have devoured Daniell: the Angel
of the Lord with a drawn sword, told Io^ua, that he was the chief of the
Lords hand: A comfortable saying, and a true experiment: that this holy
Angel of the Lord, with a drawn sword (although not visibly seen) stands
between the godly and their enemies and then though the wicked come armed, The
digraces of the Pope, since K. Henry the 8. first unmasked his abomination.
with horses, chariots, and an host of men, they shall be overcome with their
subtle devices, and their toward shall go through their own hearts. The lord will
have the p^ide of y^ unclean Pope abased, and all the world strive in vain to
set him up again, if his friends look into his disgraces, since victorious King
Henrye the eight, first unmasked his abhominatio^: Cardinal Poole moved the
french K. against K. Henry the 8.
they shall find no comfort to take his part: he was the^ in his strength and
the greatest princes of christendom, his friend, yea for the Popes cause they
were K. Henry's greatest enemies: the Pope sent Cardinal Poole ambassadors to
move the French K, against the K. of England: the French made many braggs but
bit little the mighty Emperor Charles the 5. prepared a great Navy, at the
Popes request, The pope stirred the Emeror Char, the 5. against K. Henry 8.
to trouble the peace of england: the favoring of whose invasion cost the
Marquis of Exe^ers head but this attempt prospered not, but which had
likelihood to do more hurt, then all the boast of foreign power: by the
practice of Cardinal Poole 20000 rebels in Lincoln shire, Co^motion in
Lincolnshire, by Cardinals Poles means dismayed by the kings power.
for religions sake had put themselus in arms, but when they understood of the
K. power coming against the^ they cried for pardon, and least their chieftaine
D. Mackerel monk, called captain cobbler, to the censure of justice. In february
following the Pope by his instrument, compassed a mere co^motion in Yorkshire,
Rebellion in the North by Gods providence quieted.
of 40000. rebels, but by the providence of God, the night before the armies
should join they were severed, by a mighty fall of water, in so much as upon a
part by the captains of both sides, the rebels were appeased; and departed
without blodshed: in the 3. year of K. Eward the 6. the Pope to set up his
authority in Eng. General rebellion in K. Ed. the sixth his days punished and
pacified.
by his seditious instruments moved general rebellions through Eng. but they
were ended with the destruction of the kings rebellious subjects. Q, Marie though
unsound in religion, had the better hand against her rebels: whom no doubt; God
therein favored, for her godly father K. Henry the 8. as he did the Idolater
Abdias for his great grandfather David's sake: But the manifold disgraces which
our soueraign lady Q. Elizabeth has given unto this bloody pope, (out of whose
tirany, eue^ from her very cradle, the Angel of ye lord has miraculously
delivered her majesty) open the incomparable strength of Gods providence, and
offer cause of admiration to the whole world: when (for our sins) Queen Mary
committed both the word and fworde, to the hypocrisy and tyranny of the
Clergy, good lady, her life was assailed with a thousand public and private
practices, but the Angel of the Lord, still stood between her and her harms,
and from the fetters of adversity, loosed, and crowned her Majesty, with the
supreme dignity of this Realm, and as a prognosticatio^ of his ruin by her
renown: the year that God placed her royal throne, he displaced these
christian Princes, The Popes friends dropped away, when Queen Elizabeth was
crowned.
the Popes great friends. The Emperor Charles the sift, the Queen of
Hungary, Queen Mary of England, two kings of De^marke, Bona, Sferza Queen of
Polonia,, Henry the third, the French king, Ierolme Pruoli Duke of Vennice,
Hercules Daeste, Duke of Ferrara, A figure of the popes fall.
and Paul the fourth, Pope of Rome, that these settled friends of the Pope
being removed, other princes better affected, or at lest not so hurtful, to
the passage of the gospel, might occupy their places, the Pope and all his
favorers, while their strength yet lasted, shot to deprive her majesty of her
crown and dignity, God so strengthened her majesty, as by her power the
French were dishonorably driven out of Scotland, and by her wisdom, Victory
against the French.
both Realms were delivered from foreign bondage, yea the King of Scotts is
bound to confess, that from God, and her Majesty's goodness, he and his
posterity possess a kingdom: this peaceable victory against the french,
discomforted the Pope a few years: Victory against the northren Rebel.
in fine, Pius Quintus set D. Morton, an english fugitive, a work, to raise a
commotion in the north parts: the Earl of Northumberland, the Earl of
Westmerland, and others entered into open rebellilion: the very sound of her
Majesty's power dismaed them, and happy was he, that could run fastest away:
the principals fled, but escaped not the justice due unto traitors: The Earl of
North^^^derland beheded
the Earl of Northumberland was soon brought under the censure of her
majesty's laws, and according to his deserte, was beheaded at York: Misery of
the Earl of westmerland.
the Earl of Westmerland, ever after for a bare allowance, was subject to the
proud controlement, of every raskal Spaniard: Felton, to draw her Majesty's
subjects from dutiful obedience, set up the Popes Bull upon the Bishop of
Londons gates, Felton ex^cuted.
but (God be praised) the horns that should have gored the innocent, turned
into a halter to hang master Felton: the Pope expected no good success by
open force, and therefore he now armed his practices with Machiuels pollices.
Madder and Barlowe executed.
Madder and Barlowe were made instruments, to murder some principal
Maiestrates, but their confusion was speedy, and their purpose frustrate. This
wily Pope, with an ambicious humor, The Duke of Norfolk, beheaded.
then infected the principal Pear and most popular subject of England: his
treason was so dangerous, as the person of the Queens majesty, and the peace of
England, could not be in safety until the Duke was set lower by the head: in
whose confusion by Gods providence the peace of England was no way troubled:
the conspiracy of Throgmorton, Apleyard, Q. Elizabeth's death practiced by
nigro^^^^^.
Brook, and others, had no better success, then in helping some of those
wicked members to the gallows The Pope and his instruments seeing the policy
of man, prevailed not against the Lords anointed, they set the devil a work
to destroy her sacred majesty. The notable traitor Doctor Story (whom God
would have cut off, D Story ex^^^^ed.
by the censure of her Majesty's laws) confessed that certain persons (of
whom there is yet, that lives by virtue of her princely word and mercy)
undertook to destroy her excellency by Nigromancie: but the devil had no
power, where the Angel of the Lord was the shield of his anointed: Stukelevs
treaton frustrate.
by the soliciting of the Athiest Stukeley, the pope took heart of grace, by
open force to alter the godly government of England, and for his better
strength, Stukeley thought to have compassed the K. of Portingals army, after
an end of his battle with Mulei Maluco, King of Feze, and Marocoes, Stukeley
slain.
but Gods providence turned his hope, to an idle fancy, for in that battle,
the K. of Portingale was slain, his army was discomforted, and Stukeley was
cut off, from disturbing of the peace of England. But yet of keep the Popes
purpose a foot, James fitz Morris an Irish Traitor, took upon him to be the
Popes captain: a man both for courage, judgment, and experience, better
armed to do mischief then Stukeley: and to make passage for foreign power,
he conuayed himself into Ireland, where he soon allured the Earl of
Deasmonde, sir John his brother, and others unto rebellion: but such was Gods
justice (when the Traitor Fitzmorrice least thought to be surprised) he was
casuallie slain, before he saw any success of his treason. The traitor
Fitzmorrice slain.
D. Saunders supplied his place, and after him followed the Italian and Spanish
forces: The Popes forces in Ireland put to sword.
it was Gods good pleasure, to give her majesty sohonorable a victory, as not
one man escaped to carry news, save a very few that were spared toreporte the
mercy and power of her Majesty: D. Saunders died of a fre^^zie in the
mountains.
Doctor Saunders wandered up and down in the Mountains like a rogue, and died
of frenzy: the Earl of Deasmonde was driven to live like a beggar in the
Mountains, and to finish his miserable life, The Earl of Deasmond beheaded.
after his accustomed and savage manner, had by an Irish man his head stroke^
off in his Caben: sir John his brother like a Wolf in the wooddes wandering to
seek some pray, Sir John of Deasmond beheaded.
was taken and headed after his own usage: when the practice of the Pope
concerning open rebellion was thus rent in pieces, necessity drove him, by his
vagrant Jesuits in every corner to sound sedicious Schimeons proclamation,
which was to entertain murtheres, thieves, A thiests, and all manner of
discontented persons, into the service of the pope, to the intent that they
should murder the Q. majesty, and alter the state of this government, both in
matters of religion and policy: these Jesuits in disguised habits, some like
ruffia^s, some like seruingme^, and ye most like courtiers transformed
themselves at pleasure like unto Protew, Campion and diverse seditious Jesuits
executed.
and made their night walks like owls, not wtsta^ding Gods providence has
delivered their Champion Campion, and diverse others of the^, into the hands of
Justice, and Justice by orderly trial after ward condemned Campion, and some of
the most malicious of the Jesuits to the Gallows, whereof a number of good
subjects wondered at their deformities, and plainly saw that the Lord of
hoasts, heaped the devices of the wicked upon their own heads, and showed
forth the uncomely priuities of Bebilon, according to promise.


West. With your favor sir, original of the Jesuits.
I the less marvel yt these Jesuits, sow their seditio^s in such disguised,
warlike, and ruffianly order, and entice men to violent murder, without
difference of persons, when their first founder Ignatius Layola was a spanish
soldier, who decreeped with wounds, to keep himself from begging in age,
disguised himself with the habit of holiness, and with counterfeit miracles
began this holy order, not unlike to the curtisanes of Rome, who when the sale
of their beauty is past, profess themselves Nuns to get them a living by
cloister brokadge in their age.


Walk. in very truth since the time that it pleased God, Rebellion coulored by
relig^on.
to make the glory of himself, and the passion of his son Jesus to be
known and reverenced among the Gentiles: the godly embraced religion to
nourish their souls: and the wicked dissembled religion, to pamper their
carnal bodies, and when that experience discovered, that the multitude were
like unto a barrel that is ready to receive every liquor, and that with hasty
running they followed every new doctrine, the ambitious Athiests straight
devised some new form of deuinity, to rob God of his glory, many men of their
lives and liuelyhode, (but which is most to be lamented) huge millio^ns, of
their salvation: in the primitive church there were such a huge sight of
heretics, as christendom resembled a mighty army, Ambition and envy is the
cause of alheretiques.
where the soldiers under a number of several Ensigns followed several
Captains, for after every heretic followed a multitude of people. The
envious Monk Sergius, through envy that his heresy in Constantinople was put
to silence, devised the damnable sect of Mahomet, and to strengthen his
purpose, he picked forth Mahomet, the most proud, arrogant, and insolent
person of Arrabia to take upon him to be a prophet, and by magic wroght such
counterfeit miracles, as to this day a great part of the world are led (...)
his error. One Ismael seeing what force followed the banner of new religion,
devised a religion different from Mahomets, and by the strength of his
followers, grew in fine to be the great Sophie of Persia, the unnatural enemy
to the great Turk. The number of orders of Friars, had their beginning for the
most part from ambition, or envy, and to this day there is a malicious hatred
among them, as whosoever will read Erasmus dialogue, called Funus, shall well
perceive, and seeing the knaueries of the old orders of the friars waxed so
public as the date of their credit weared out: your reason is probable that
the wounded soldier Layola devised this new order of Jesuits, under the
habit of holiness, to sustain his age in the reputation of his youth, and at
this day there is in Italy a new order, called the fellowship of the Trinity,
wherein are Tinkers, Tailers, Tilers; and al mecanicall crafts men: and
questionles, if some notable Nigromancer to work some false miracles, would
enter into their ^raternitye, the dignity of their order, would soon out way
the ^redite of the Jesuits: but to our former pupose, if the Devil and al his
furies joined with the pope and his disciples, their pollices should take no
effect against Gods providence. The murdering Jesuits thought y^ they had sped
of their purpose, when they had overcome the hairebraine Gentleman Sommeruile,
Sommeruile hanged himself.
to murder her Majesty (whom the Lord always keep out of the violent
hands of traitors) indeed they had picked forth a dangerous instrument, as a
man so graceles, as he was fearles, to lay violent hands upon him self: but
in his confusion was seen the Prophecy of the Psalmist: His own tongue made
him to fall, and all that heard him laughed him to scorn, he was first
discovered by the suspicion of his own speech and by his overthrow it was
perceived, that God shot at him with a swift arrowe which wounded him, he
made such haste to his deserved death: as this Traitor hanged himself the
night before the appointed day of his execution. Arden executed,
The close Traitor Arden, was by Sommeruils discovery brought to confusion.
Throgmorto^ executed.
The dangerous traitor Throgmorton as cunningly as he disguised his odious
treaso^s was intrapped in the snares which he set for his Countries
destruction: and worthelie died with the sword which he had whetted for the
innocent. The odious Athiest Par^ie had the reward of his fellow Traitors: he
had the place and opportunity (which prudence I hope will keep al other
suspicious persons from) and yet as graceles as he was the very majesty of her
Majesty's countenance made him loose his resolution, Parry ezeeu^ed.
with the self same virtue that appeared in the faces of the two magnanimous
Romans: Marius and Crassus, where of the one with the motion of his eyes, and
the other with the stoutnesse of his speech, redeemed themselves from death:
The providence of God in bereauing the traitors of so valiant a Captain, as
the Earl of Northumberland, every good subject to his comfort perceaueth,
Henry Percie Earl of Northumberland slew himself with a dag.
who had so deeply entered into disloyalty as his own conscience condemned
him, and therefore to save the honor of his house, slew himself. If the popes
instruments had judgment to way, that no one that actually practiced her
Majesty's death, or depriuement, hitherto escaped the visible vengeance of God:
if her Majesty's goodness, and their duty could not move them to love, yet the
assurance of punishment, and the continuance of shame, might fear them to be
disloyal: but alas, those whose hearts are hardened, have their judgments
blind, When it pleseth God to harden the hearts of the wicked, he likewise
blinds their judgments.
and their affections swift to run upon destruction. Pharao was warned with
diverse plagues: that he should not hinder the departure of the children of
Israel forth of Egypt: yet he would needs follow them to his utter destruction.
The report of the Soldiers concerning the glory of Christ's resurrection,
suffised to have converted the Jews, Visable warnins of God turned to
strengthen the errors of wicked.
but to their condemnation, the Devil and money sealed this error in their
hearts, that his disciples stole him away by night. Gods justice struck Mahomet
with the falling licknesse to make him know, and repent his blasphemy, but
to strengthen the peoples misbeleefe, the devil taught him to say, that his
passion proceeded of the conference with an angel whose divine presence, his
earthly shape could not endure upon the principal day of the savage murder in
Paris, as a token that Gods word should flourish in dispite of their cruelty: A
dead tree bore green leaves, when the savage murder at Paris was in execution.
a withered tree bare green leaves in the churchyard, that received many a
murdered carcass, and yet the papists on the contrary part, applied this
prophising example, to the second flourishing of their Romish church: thus
blind they are, in the success of their errors and wickedness, as evermore
they turn the presage of their ruins, to the appearance of their prosperity,
and with these vain hopes, Babington, and his fellow traitors, were led
unto the follies and falls of the above named vnloyall subjects: and therefore
howsoever they persuade themselves, and threaten the multitude with a change of
their prosperity: so long as we fear God, and be true to her Majesty, our
peace will undoubtedly last, and the disturbers thereof, are like to taste their
fortunes, that bought the horse Seian, whose masters had evermore miserable
ends.


West. You have answered a matter which raised much fear, and a great deal of
speech amongst the common people, so comfortably and truly, as cannot but be
the cause of great joy and contentme^t unto the ignorant multitude, and no
doubt a spectakle of great terror unto Traitors, to punish whose offenses, no
torture can be to violent: This Abington, was the last of the first seven that
were executed: but forasmuch as the common brute was, that the other seven
condemned and judged, should be executed the day following, I would gladly know
if you saw their executio^s? what speeches they uttered, and what behavior
they used at their death?


W^lk. I stayed to hear, Thomas Salsburie Esquier executed.
and see the order of their deaths, and according to the general expectation
of the whole multitude, the day following being the 21 of September, Salsburie
was laid alone upon a hurdel, and other six, two, and two upon a hurdel, were
drawn from Tower hill, through the city of London unto the former place of
execution. The latter traitors executed with ez^eeding favor.
Salsburie was the first man that suffered, and in all points was handled as
the seven that suffered the day before, save that he and the latter sir, were
executed with this favor, that they were suffered to hang until they were
fully dead, before the rest of their execution was performed.


West. It seems by their sauourable handling that although the greatness of
their offenses, egged the sword, to take away their lives, yet the outward
sign of their repentance obtained some compassion at their deaths.


W^lk. In very deed, albeit that Salsburie was blinded with the superstition
of papistrie, even at y^ point of death, yet he mildly acknowledged his
grievous offense, toward the Queens majesty, and in his last commendation,
charged all Catholics, (for so he only accounted the Papists) that they
should leave to attempt to set up their religion by violent hand: and by double
and treble repeticion, Violence (...) bidden by Salsburie,
he counseled them to patience, and earnestly forbed them all manner of
violence.


Walk. This gentleman by his execution, showed all traitorous papists, the
assured reward of treason: and by his profitable admonition, a more necessary
doctrine for them to follow, then the seditious persuasions of all the Jesuits
in the world: he was a Papist at point to die, so that it stands with reason,
that through the only working of his censcience, he published to the world,
that the violent courses of Subjects were odious, when we doubt not but
Ballard and other Jesuits, had once blown into his ears, that the same was
meritorious: all manner of violence by which the life of man is taken away, is
murder, except the execution by the sword of justice, which belongs to the
King, and his ministers, only where the gouernemente is Monarchia: except
also the violence done in righteous wars, and other slaughters by causualtie.
And whosoever loses his life by any other violence, the same man is
murdered: whose blood, GOD will severely punish. GOD punished the murder
committed by Caine with a most bitter curse: and yet, that there might be no
protection in murder, The odiousness of murder.
GOD said himself, That whoesoeuer slew the reprobate Caine, it should be
avenged seven fold. GOD requires the blood of innocents, at the hands of
Kings and anointed Princes. To punish the fault of King David in seeking the
death of Vrias, GOD took away the life of the child which David had by Vrias
wife: furthermore, in the time of King David, there was three years famine,
and David, demanded the cause why? and the Lord said, it was for Saul, and
the house of blood, because he slew the Gybonites. According to the opynion
of Erasmus, the consenter in murder is as guilty as the dooer, Judas that
betrayed Christ, and Pilate that adjudged him death only to please the Jews,
carried the burden of murder in their consciences, Judas and Pilate died by
the r^own violent hands.
and by the horror thereof, wrought their own destructions, that either might
die by the violent hand of the most wicked person alive. The heathen men at
Milite, when they saw the viper to hang upon Paul's finger, even from the
very hatred of nature, they murmured and said: This man must needs be a
murderer, whom, though he have escaped the danger of the ^ea, yet vengeance
suffers not to live. Nature taught the Infidels to believe that vengeance
follows murder. And then reason may persuade Christians to assure
themselves, that the blood thristie are worse then Infidels, and cannot escape
the sword of vengeance: seeing then that Kings, if they shead any blood
otherwise then by the sword of justice, and Judges, if they adiudge death for
hatred, fear, or gain, by Gods righteousness are punished as murtheres: What
may they expecte, that in corners lay violent hands of anointed Kings, or
without color of authority, murder the innocente, If the eyes of their
understanding were not blind, they might see a doubtefull success in their
purpose, and the open consution of themselves. I have read of a number both of
good and ^adde Princes and also of other, which have been bereaved of their
lives by the violent hands of secreat traitors: but among a hundred, you shall
hardly read of one murderer, that has escaped the torture of Gods vengeance.
Brutus and his partakers, murdered Julius Caesar, but not one of them escaped
a violent death: yea, the common people so loved Caesar, as to be revenged,
they violently ran upon all the friends of Caesar's enemies, and by way of
instruction the opinion is general, that if for our sins, it had pleased
God, to have suffered our most excellent queen to have sallen into the violent
hands of these vilde Traitors, her majesty's loving subjects being the most of
the better sort, and the whole sway of the commons, would without respect of
persons, have violently entreated every known Papist, as the Roman multitude
did the friends of Caesar's enemies: and to continue this terror to murdering
Traitors, with latter examples: the Archbishop of Pisa, together with the
kindred of the Saluiatij, the famely of Pazzie and other the ancient houses of
Florence, Conspiracy of Florence murder pretended against the Medeci punished.
envying the popular favor of Segnior Julian and Lawrence de Medeces, who the^
principally governed the state of Florence, conspired to murder the two
Medeces. To prevent suspicion, and to bereave the brethren of public succor,
which in the streets they were like to find, the conspirators made choice of
the church for their slaughter house: and upon a Sunday at mid mas, one of the
conspirators slew Signior Julian, and Laurence de Medeces by Gods providence
escaped into the Saccristiar^y^ sudden brute of this assault, set all the
city in an uproar, the conspirators cried, liberti^: and the multitude life
to the Medeci, and vengeance upon the conspirators: to be brief, with in the
space of three hours the Archbishop of Pisa was hanged, Ieames Saluiatij,
Ieames de Pazzi, Anthony de Volterro and diverse others of the co^spirators were
slain in the fury of the people: Barnard Bandyn was led naked into the market
place and there hanged: the rest of the conspirators, their servants, and
favorers, were in this sort overthrown, and which is most grievous: their
posteritye have ever since been subjects to the Monarcall gouernmente of the
house of Medeces. Galeas the son of Frauncis Forze, and Duke of Millen, for
his odious vices and extreme tirranny, was generally hated of all the people
of the city, he slew his mother, and by fear of force, abused the greatest
part or the virgins and fair women of Millen, so that to redeem the City
from this servitude, and tyranny, three young Gentlemen of anchient howses in
Millen, conspired the Dukes death, their names were Charles viscounte, John
Andrea, and Ierolme Olgiat: these gentlemen kept their resolucion, and as the
Duke was attentively hearing of mas, said by the Bishop of Coma, they so
violently assailed Galeas, The murder of the tyrant Galeas Duke of Millen
pun^shed.
as they left him dead in the church, God suffered this vengeance to light upon
the tyrant, yet in his justice would not suffer the co^spirators to escape
unpunished, Andrea and Viscounte were both slain in the hurley burley of the
people: Olgiat was afterward apprehended by the ministers of justice, and
albeit he redeemed the City from a great bondage, yet for that the good that
they received, proceeded from an evil action in Olgiat, they executed him as a
common traitor. The late King of Scotts, Murder of the late K of Scots
punished.
was villanously murdered: the greatest favorers and (according to published
records) the greatest procurers of the said murder, were by common justice
drawn to commit, almost all the murderers into the hands of the hangman, and
such as escaped, or were not bound unto the censure of law, could by no means
shift themselves from the vengeance of God. John Iarugo that first assailed the
godly prince of Orrenge, had the common reward of traitors, and the most odious
Athiest Balthazar Serack that slew him: notwithstanding ye blessing of the
pope, Murder of the godly prince of Orange punished.
the co^me^dation and threatening of the king of Spain, exchanged the pistol
where with he slew the prince, for tortures to execute himself. I could
aleadge infinite examples to dissuade men from violent murder, which Gods
providence many ways preuenteth, when his justice never leaves ye murderer
unpunished. It is a special policy that the Jesuits use, to draw young
gentlemen to these desperate treasons: for if they had judgments to observe ye
infortunes of such practisers, or experience to look into the currants of
time: they should see the attempt as vain a matter, as to throw stones
against the Stars, or with a knock of their head, to leauell a mountain,
that seek to displace a beloved Prince.


West. I pray God the good counsel of this traitor Salsburie may settle
obedience in all men's hearts, and the better to bridle the malicious affections
of the disloyal, they assure themselves by their outward appearance, that the
multitude will entreat them, (and all their partakers) as the Romans did the
quellers of Caesar, or as the Florentines did the conspirators against the
Medeces.


Wilk. After Salsburie was with all possible favor executed, Dun was stripped
into his shirt, Henry Dun gent executed.
who seemed very penitent for his grievous offense, and after yt with very
earnest persuasion, he had likewise dissuaded the Romish catholics from
attempting any matter of violence, was executed with exceeding much favor.


West. This Dun, as the report goes, lived (reasonably) wealthely: but it
seems, the humor of the man, was not contented with a reasonable vocation,
Ambitious humor of Dun.
as appeared by his vain imagination, who in Trinity term last, coming into
the kings bench office, among other pleasant speech to one of his familiars:
you will marueil (quod he) to see me within one quarter of a year to walk up
and down with twenty men after me: where upon an acquaintance of his plesantly
answered, ye he feared he should first see him followed to the Gallows with a
thousand me^.


Walk. Dun showed his desire, The root of rebellion.
and the other red his destiny, and in this observance, you have showen the
working cause of most treasons: for though to draw ye affections of the
multitude, religion or some other public benefit be the pretense: Admonit^on
for the ambitious.
Ambition, and desire of dignity is y^ welspring of rebellion: but these yt will
fly without wings, are like to fall before they be wise, he yt is born to be a
servant ought in no wise to look for double and treble attendants: dignity is
like a Phane on a high tower, which is subject to the chance of Fortune, as
the other to the change of the wind: and who so will sit thereupon sure,
he must like the (...), get experience with slow climing, least in taking a
swifter course, like unto a bird, he be removed with the least stone that is
thrown: I mean with the least disgrace of fortune: if men's minds grow bigger,
then their natural conditions, there are many examples of virtue to imitate,
which have raised sundry men from the carte to the hiest degree of honor,
when in climing by treason, many millions of honorable estates, die
dishonorably, and to their posterity leave no better inheritance then infamy,
let the end of this traitor be a warning example to all ambitious humored men,
that destruction follows presumption, and that the climing of pride will have
a fall.


Wilk. When the execution of Dunne was finished, Edward Jones Esquire executed.
the next that played his part was Jones: this Traitor by that which was easy
to be gathered of his behavior at the Gallows, was a close papist of a shroud
reach, and a very dangerous member in this common wealth: for notwithstanding
he protested, he dissuaded Salsburie from this odious enterprise, his own tale
showed that his counsel proceeded of a fear that he had, that the proud
humor of Babington threatened an overthrow of their purpose, rather then of
any dutieful zeal that he bare toward the safety of the Queens majesty: for
he neither would himself discover his treason of the highest degree of
treasons, neither did he council his friend Salsburie to preuente his own
danger in discovering the conspiracy of his companions: yea, when the
odiousness thereof broke out into public knowledge, contrary to the general
duty of a good subject, and in contempt of a special warrant derected unto
him, he not only refused (as he himself confessed) to apprehe^d Salsburie
being in his house, but so far as he might, succored him, after that he was
published to be of the most wicked conspiracy, one especial thing that,
nevertheless, moved a number to pity him above the rest: with beheme^t words
he protested, that though he was a Catholic in religion, yet he so deeply
weyed the liberty of his country, as that he would and ever was ready to spend
his life in withstanding any foreign Foreign i^uasion reproved by Jones.
enemy: French, Italian, Spanish, or whatsoever. The tollerating of muasio^,
by whose opinion was so far from nature, and christian duty, as no excuse nor
punishment might satisfy the crime.


West. It is a wonder that papists, who hold it damnable to harken to the
counsels of Protestants are not admonished by the censures, and warnings of
papists themselves, at the point to die: but contrary to the judgment of
their fellows consciences in that fearful passage, they follow the seditious
persuasions of Jesuits, that they shall greatly work the liberty of their
country, in delivering the same into the hands of foreign governors,
otherwise, they would never have given succor and aid, to the Italian forces
in Ireland, or (as it is one especial point of their treasons) in all their
conspiracies to practice a foreign invasion.


Walk. Those whose hearts it pleases God to harden, have neither eyes to look
into their own danger, nor judgment to consider of their own benefit, and no
doubt this traitor, having his conscience prepared to die, saw the odiousnes,
and unnaturalness of this kind of treason, which the corruption of his life
little respected, or rather favored, for as the case stands with the Papists
(God be praised for blessing her Majesty and the Maiestrates with such prudent
foresight) he that sets his heart to treason, Foreign invasion unnatural.
inclines his affection to foreign invasion, as otherwise out of hope to see
the wished success of his desire: but since it pleased God to commend by this
public enemy, the natural liberty of a man's country: and by conclusion, to
discommend his ^ellowe traitors who continually labor the bondage thereof. It
shall not be amiss for our instructions to enlarge our conference with the
odiousness and and vnnaturallnesse, and the Papists own dangers contained in
this Archtreason: we see that if two Mastiues egerly fight, nevertheless, at the
sight of a Bear, they part themselves and fly upon their natural enemy:
foreign servitude is as unnatural, and odious, to every Nation, as the Bear
to the Mastiue. To be rid of which servile yooke, at Example by the Jews.
such time as Titus Vespatian belieged Jerusalem: notwithstanding there were
thousands of the Citizens dailye slain with civil traies, yet at every
assault of the Romans, the Jews joined so assuredly together, as if the
multitude had been but one hand: we read in Chronicles of a number of good
men that have been ingratefully and unkindly entreated of their own country: and
of a very few so badde (until this wicked age) that preferred a stranger to
Examples of lovers of their country
the government of their native country: Themistocles the good Athenian, was
unjustly banished Athens and for succor was driven to go to K. Artaxexces, the
Athenians sworn enmy: Artaxerxes glad of this advantage, labored to guide his
army against Athens: and when the Captain could no longer wtstand the kings
importunitie^, he drunk bulls blood and died, rather then he would revenge the
ingratitude of his country with foreign bondage: there was mortal hatred
between two worthy Captains, Cretinus Magnetius, and one Hermias, so y^ the
whole country was occupied with their discord, but when the K Mithridates
assailed their country, Cretinus Magnetius volu^tarily banished him self,
that y^ ielosie of their hatred might not hinder y^ public service of his
valiant enemy Hermias: y^ traitor that for his private advancement laboreth to
betray his country, would if his countries danger so required be loath to follow
y^ example of K. Codrus, who understanding that y^ liberty of his country stood
upon the loss of his life, he presently in the habit of a slave entered the
camp of the Peloponians, and Dorians, his enemies and there quarelled until he
was slain: to do their country service, Ane^rus, K Midas son, and Curtius,
voluntarily leaped into a devouring gulf of y^ earth: Caius Graccus sacrifized
his own daughter, and y^ noble Roman Seuola adue^tured alone to kill Poisinus in
his camp. In aucie^t time me^ bore this zeal toward their country y^ a number
in de^ence thero^, ran upon violent death. If these general traitors had but
experience, to consider of there own thra^dom, they could not be so ready to
welcome y^ foreign enemy with one hand, as they would, be forward to throw
him forth with all their force, the Popish Clergy who^ with Cardinal Poole
say, Roma mihi patri^ est, helpte the Spaniarde into England, the king of
Spain and his counselors, labored for the Monarcal Diadem, and as the time
then served, they thought, and it is very like, they had wrought diverse of the
Nobility to favor their purpose: The purpose of the King of Spain in Queen
Mary's days.
it is easy to be judged, the evil that they meant unto their enemies, when
they purposed to deal thus with their friends: they determined first by their
help to cut short such of the nobility as they found contrary to their desire,
and then they meant to make their friends safe with honorable dignities abroad
whereof, they should take such sound possession, as they should never see
England again: as whosoever has seen a letter in form of an admonition
written by the godly martyr M. John Bradford to the nobilittie of England, may
more largely perceive: Bernardin de Mendoza, y^ late ambassador for Spain, (who
trained Throgmorton a principal traitor, A policy of Barnardin de Mendoza.
and many others no doubt undiscovered, to make a passage for a foreign
invasion,) after his forced departure out of England, diverse times has said,
that if he had continued still in England he wo^d not have left a Papists head
of any account standing upon their shoulders: meaning, that before the coming
of the Spanish power, to leave no man of estate or reckoning, that might
lawefullye look to strike a stroke in their government, for the Spaniard will
be Domine, fac ^otum, wheresoever he rules: and where is then the reckoning of
those traitors, that look for dignity by this unnatural treason.


West. You have already red their fortunes, and I pray God both by the falls
and follies of these traitors, that all English men may have their hearts (to
withstand the foreign enemy) strengthened with the protestation of Jones his
tongue, at the hour of his death. Amen.


Wilk. After Jones had paid the price of his treason with all possible favor,
John Trauis and John Charnok Gent. executed.
Charnock was excecuted, and after him Trauis, both men as it seemed bewitched
with an ignorant devotion, for that in their ends there was nothing to be
observed, but their praying to our Lady, calling upon Saints, joined with a
number of ceremonies, crossings and blessings, so that it appeared, Their
ignorant devotion dangerous.
that in their prayers they were bound to a form more then unto faith.


Walk. The Pope can find out no instrument so constant for his purpose, as the
ignorant person bewi^ched with his superstitious devotion, for he resolutely
follows whatsoever is given him in charge: such a one was hairbraine
Somme^^ile, that intended to kill her majesty, whose life (as the life of
Englands happiness) God long continue: and such an other was young Iarugo, that
first wounded the godly Prince of Ora^ge, who was so simple, as he persuaded
himself that the Pope had the power, and would cause him to do the deed
invisible, and therefore the Pope was wont to practice most rebellions by the
ignorant multitude, who so long as they were blinded with his errors, were ever
constant in the execution of his pollices, and certainlye although the simple
ignorance and error of these two traitors, were to be bemoned, yet the danger
of their treasons considered, their executions were very necessary both for
example, and her majesty's safety.


West. You say very truly.


Wilk. When the Hangman had given these two senseless papists his heavy
blessing, Robert Gage G^^t. executed.
Gage prepared himself to die: he began his protestation, that there was never
a subject more bound to a Prince, then his Father was to her Majesty: and from
that true acknowledgement of her majesty's gratiousnes, Her M^gratiousnes
commended by this traitor.
^ell to excuse himself of the odious trealons for which he died: but upon so
weak a ground, as the simplest indgement then present, found by the order of
his own confession, that he was a dangerous instrument for the Pope: he
confessed that he accompanied Balla^d the Seminary Priest into Yorkshire,
Gages hypocrisy.
and that he wrote a letter for the said Priest, to a French man or a
Spaniard of account beyond the seas, and in all the course of his confession in
indifferent judgments he accused him self to be a hollow subject and a sound
Papist.


West. This cunning traitor Gage, could never have made a confession of more
infamye unto himself, then in acknowledging y^ Queens most excellent favor,
showed unto his father, which a dutiful son ought to esteem a benefit unto
himself: and so to dauble reproach his treasons, he condemned himself of
ingratitude: which unnatural fault, Per^ander, evermore sentenced with death: but
in my opinion, if y^ Queen were les merciful, her majesty's mercy renow^^^
(...) Rome
the papists would be more faithful: for truly their punishment is so mi^de as
by the faith o^ an honest man I heard in Rome, a Popish Priest in the presence
of other ^ugitiues, wish to be her majesty's p^soner in the (...) rather then
to enjoy his liberty o^ con^cience in R^me.


VVilk. It is very likely, that the (...) Priest, The alms of Rome.
was regarded in Rome as old dogs are with their masters, when the date of
their hunting is out, the sentence of their hanging is at hand, for I have
heard, how those marked people (that holy scripture wills us to beware of) are
welcome to Rome, and no less rewarded of the Pope, when those y^ by their
outward countenance promise not a rebellious spirit, are enter^ained neither
with the one nor the other.


West. You put me in remembrance of a special difference, that I observed in
Rome, which well confirms your opinion, and is not impertinent to our
conference: being in Rome, Anno dommini 1580, there was presented unto the Pope
a notale English shifter, who named himself Seamer, a one eyed person, and
such a one as had abused sundry great estates in Germany: this man being in
want, and withal unlearned as he could hardly read English was a suter to the
Pope to be entertained into the English Seminary, The disposition of the
discribed by these examples
and there to be instructed in the profession of the Jesuits, he soon obtained
his purpose, and with a blessing of crowns was shortly after commended to
Rheames, and what there became of him I have not heard: at the same time, there
came to Rome an English Gentleman, wonderfullye dronken with the zeal of the
Romish religion, he had sometimes a proper living, and good store of money
left him by his father, which for the most part he consumed in the fellowship
of the Papists: in fine, he was enjoined by his confessor, (I think upon
pollicye because he had little left to maynetaine him) to resrayne from the
drinking of wine and from the eating of all manner of flesh: in the execution
of which penance, (for that in Italy there was small store of fish, and no
beer or Ale, he was for the most part, driven to live with bread and water:
this Gentleman was so strickt in obeying penance, and so devout in the Popes
holiness, as of a number of Papists he was derided: and of some other tickled,
that he was a very Saint upon earth: but what would Rome and all the
Seminaries of Italy do for this ignorant and devout Gentleman? Unto the shame
of all Papists, I truly certify, that with many a weary step, in the deep of
winter he arrived at Rome: he was (not without some repining) entertained with
eight days allowance in the English College: but one days succor above, he
could not compass: he labored to be admitted into the fellowshippe of the
Jesuits, he was flatly denied, and in recompense of al his toil, charge, and
zeal, he was constrained to leave Rome with a bare purse, to seek some new
blind adventure, his usage made me to abhor the hypocrisy of Papists, and
inwardly to lament the blindness of my poor countryman: we departed from Rome
together, my self minding to go unto Vennis, and he to Madona Deloreta. To
show all the follies of the man in our journey were tedious, A blind devotion.
and more ridiculous: at every two miles end, there was (lightly) a Chapel,
and where he found our Lady, or any other Saint fair painted, he would there
kneel down and pray, but if the Images were in bad attire, he evermore past
them over with the salutation of his cap: many a mile he stepped forth of his
way, to reverence some old friars relick: at Loreto he turned their lewd lie of
our ladies house into English, and to purchase the Jesuits favor, The Papists
feign our Ladies house was by miracle brought from Jerusalem into Italy.
he did all the duties of a Romish Catholic: but for all his sure, they
would not admit him into their society: thus wandered he all the dead winter,
from religious house, to religious house in Italy, and yet for all his penance,
and straitnes of life, the poor Gent. could not get a resting place, the
reason was as you have said, and I well observed, he showed an appearance of an
ignorant^ zeal, and no sign of a dissentious spirit.


Walk. Well, leave we these dissembling Jesuits to the justice of God, who
visibly punishes them with shame, and the most of their instruments with
destruction, and now neighbor Wilk. I pray you show us what observed you in y^
end of y^ last of these traitors


Wilk. The last that suffered, was one of the Bellamies, Jeremy Bel^amy Gent.
executed.
his countenance discovered him to be a settled papist: and as he could say
little to save his life, so at y^ gallows he said nothing to dese^d his death.


West. Although this traitor had but a dull spirit, yet it seems he had a
malicious heart: he and his friends succored Babington, and some of his
coemates, when fear of the law, and shame of their odious treasons, made them
to shrowde themselves like a Fox in the covert: One of the Bellamies hanged
himself in the Tower.
and it seems that they were as resolute to follow the treasons of
Babington, as they were ready to relieve him from the danger of the law:
otherwise if this Bellamies brother had had an innocent conscience, he would
never with violente hands have hanged himself.


Wilk. God be praised that these rotten branches are thus cut off: but if his
providence prevent not the mischiefs, it is to be feared that of the root
there will grow many other, apt to bring forth the fruit of public
disturbance.


Walk. In very truth, necessity has made the bloody devices of the Scottish
Q. so common, as no good subject may justly be forbidden, to derive the cause,
both of foreign, and domestike conspiracies from her unprincely heart: our
sacred Q. Elizabeth's mercy has many years conte^ded with a number of fearful
admonitions, to preserve both the life and honor of this most unkind queen:
when the Scotts her own people pursued her life, Books written against the
Scottish Q. forbidden in England.
and printed her defame, the Queens Majesty entertained her, as Augustus did
his enemy Cinna: she gave her her life, that many ways sought her own life:
and was so careful of her honor: that she forbad the books of her faults, to
be conversant among her english subjects: which almost in every other nation
were made vulgar: but Cinna after three times forgiveness, became (none so)
faithful to Augustus: when this Scottish Queen, being three times thrice
forgiven, remains (none more) bloodily infected to Queen Elizabeth: her own
hand writings be witnesses. During the whole course of her abode in Eng. which
may be properly called a protection, and no imprisonment: there is nothing more
manifest, then that her malice thirsted the death of her own life. The
currantes of her practices were so general: as every good christian prince know
as much, and certified her Majesty no less: in fine, seeing y^ her
prete^dings were not only against the person of her Majesty, but that they
also reached to the change of christian religion: some zealous members of the
Church of God, A book long since written in french to sentence the bloody
Proceedings of the Scottish Q with death
in public writing did set down, the danger of her Majesty's mercy: and in
christian policy showed by many weighty reasons, that God delivered the
Scottish Queen unto the sword of her justice, as he did many Idolatrous
Princes, into the hands of the Kings of Israel: but our most gracious queen
notwithstanding these continual aduertismentes, with a magnanimous heart
digested all this danger: yea, she was so far from revenge, as she yielded
not to make her subjects partakers of the^e foreign counsels* whom next under
her, they principally concerned: Lastly, when the continual importunities of
her loving Subjects, by all the Estates of Parliament, tired her Majesty with
petitions to proceed to the sentence of her own laws, her clemency found out
delay, when Justice would admit no excuse: The Scottish Q. executed on
wednesday, the 8. of Feb. 1586.
but the delay of execution proved so dangerous, as the safety of y^ Queens
Majesty (was in judgment of the wisest) held desperate, so long as the
Scottish Queen lived: and (therefore) to the unspeakable grief of y^ Queens
Majesty: though (otherwise) to the universal joy and desire of her subjects,
Justice was executed upon this ungodly Queen, upon Wednesday, the 8. of
February 1586.

The Lord be praised: who is the protector of our gracious Queen and al her
good subjects, and who (hitherto) with his holy hand has given her these
peaceable victories, so wonderfully, as al y^ world is occupied with the
admiration thereof, and that the same God may bless her highness, with a long
and peaceable life. I beseech you accompany me to the Church, where with
thankeful hearts, we may praise him for many received benefits, and with
zealous spirits, humbly pray for the continuance of the same.


West, With right good will we are ready to accompany you, and God for his
sons sake either turn the minds of those that miswish her Majesty* or
speedely bring them to the shame and confusion of these Traitors before named,
that have worthily suffered for their most odious treasons. Amen.


FINIS.

