THE HONORABLE REPVTATION of a Soldier: With a Moral Report, of the Virtues,
Offices, and (by abuse) the Disgrace of his profession.



Drawn out of the lives, documents, and disciplines, of the most renowned
Roman, Grecian, and other famous Martialistes.

By George Whetstone, Gent. Malgre de Fortune.

Imprinted at London, by Richard Jones: dwelling near unto Holburne Bridge.
1585.

To the most worthy Gent. Sir William Russell, Knight, accomplishment of his
honorable desire.
SIR, having (I may truly say) with much labor compiled a book, Entitled.
The English Mirour: the first part setting ^orth, The Conquests of Envy:
co^taining, ruin and subuertion of the ancient M^narchies and commonweals,
etc. The second part, showing Envy to be conquered by Virtue: publishing the
peaceable victories of her Majesty, to Gods ^ye glory and universal wonder.
The third part, entitled, A Fortress against Envy: wherein every good common
wealthsman, may see the true offices, virtues, and (by abuse) the disgrace of
his profession: But because, the book is of some volume, I cannot have it
speedily printed: and for that occasion now (at this present) makes passadge
for this Subiet, being a member or si^all parcel of the fore-recited book:
Therefore, as a testimony of the zeal which I bear to your worship, and
every worthy person, whose profession is Martial, I reverently submit my
travel, to be censured by your able judgment, which medleth no whit with
Millitarie execution, but altogether with Moral goue^nme^t, necessary for a
perfect Soldier. For, if I my self, which have been brought up among the
Muses, in our English (only) peaceable and happy government, should take upon
me to set forth the order of battles, th'aduantages of places, the benifits
of stratagems, with many other Millitary regards, both offenciue and defenciue,
I might for my hyre justly receive, the scoff that Hamball gave unto the
Philosopher Phormio: who (upon such an indiscrete discriptio^) ^ould him that,
The Art millitarie was sooner learned of Soldiers in the broad fields, the^ of
Philosophers in close scoles. And certainly, Haniball answered more like*
Philosopher, then Phormio reasoned like a Soldier: for, Experience is ye true
Teacher of all Arts: and therefore (that honorable part of a Soldier, which
contains Martial execution) I leave to the report of the well experie^ced
Captain: and no doubt, among the worthy English Capt^^nes, there are some,
that can use both Caesar's pen and sword. My travel (which works between
fire and frost (as I have said) only contains: The Moral virtues and
honorable Reputation of a Soldier. And certainly, two of the greatest parts
thereof, Caesar sets forth, i^ that which be calls his chiefest glory,
which was: Mamillus, upon occasion asked Caesar, what thing he had done,
wherein he held him self most honored? I swear unto thee MAMILLVS, by the
immortal Gods (said CAESAR) that I have done nothing whereof I hold my self
so much honored and happy: as, for that I have liberally rewarded those which
have served me, and mercifully have forgiven such as have offended me. Words
and virtues, beseeming Caesar, and without which, Caesar could never have been
Monarcke of the whole world: for the Captain that lib^rally rewards his
Soldiers, shall have his soldiers resolute in execution, and who shows
mercy to his Enemy, shall conquer millions with love.

The Spainiard is so insolent, and outrageous where he overcomes, as he is
hated to death of those which ^baye him for f^are: I have seen ample
experience thereof, both in the Duchy of Millaine, and kingdom of Naples. And
(your god favor and patience desired) I shall show no impertinent example. In
the year 1580. in which year the Pope and his confederates, hoped to have had
a great day in England, whose expectation God always frustrate, my self with
one other English Gentleman (who in this commendation will have his name
concealed) were at Thurin entertained into the company of a worthy Gentleman
of Picardie, named Monseur Dobart, who was then ready to travel into Italy:
and being all lodged one night in a Garrison town, in the Duchy of Millain,
near unto the River of Poo, at the midst of supper, a haughty proud
Spaniard, came and sat him down by us. Monseur Dobart (bearing an affectionate
zeal unto her Majesty, and the state of England, as well for that he was an
earnest protestant, as for that his sister and other friends, were honorably
used in the Court of England, in the former troubles of France) demanded of
the Spaniard, what might be the cause, that the King of Spain had that year
raised so great an Army? The Spaniard forthwith made this proud and insolent
answer: Ah Sir, the time now draws near, that we shall have the spoil of
rich England* that we shall embrace their fair wives, and make havoc of
their long gathered riches: And disco^ering that there was an Englishman in
company, that tolierated these hie words, he began spitefully to bra^e
him: But on ^he soden, the spaniard sound the temper of the English-mans
fingers: so that shame, to repair his disgrace, compelled the Spaniard to
offer combat: Monseur Dobart very honorably undertook that the
English-Gentleman, should the next morning by six of the clock, be ready to
cross the River of Poo, with the spaniard, to commit eithers cause to God, and
their swords This was mutually agreed upon, but by break of the day, the
spaniards brags vanished like bubbles, and be himself slipped away without
giving any bon-giorno, so that the English Gentleman could have no further
revenge, saving that in the place of this controversy, finding this Italian
sentence to be written: Le parole son femine, and i fatti son maschi. (...) in
dispight, wrote underneath: Donques gli spanioli son femine, et gli Inglese son
maschi: and truly the h^aste of the house, with many dispightful words of the
spaniards proud and naughty behavior, to his perpetual blame, has faithfully
promised, that the subscription should not be rased out, without being secretly
new written again: But the spaniard had revenge enough by the Gentleman's own
contrymen: for Monseur Dobart (as he thought to honor him) imparted this
accident to certain Englishmen at Bologna: among whom, there were that so
posted the matter to Rome: as when the poor Gent. arri^es there, he was
stayed at the gate, now called Porto del populi, and there was kept eight
days, having no other bed but the bare ground, and well near starued for want
of food: In fine, all his other Bollitines and Warrants to travel being taken
away. On the s^daine the Stappado was hanged forth, and the Gentleman upon
pain thereof* commanded presently to depart: to whom was delivered a
Vollitine for Naples. What violence he further sustained, his humor will not
agree to open it: for I am sure, he has been seldom hard to pursue any ma^s
disgrace, and never known publicly to bem^ne his own hard fortunes, which
have been many, and violent: And albeit, his name be here concealed, yet if
any exception be taken against this report) let me be in all places reproved,
if he every way approve not the same. And albeit Sir, the matter be in some
sort particular: yet (as I have said) it shows what hatred the insolency of
the Spaniard eng^ndreth where he rules, which can establish no government:
Besides, by his lavish words, it may be seen what hauock he would make: if he
could execute his proud desires: But if the Englishman far from succor,
fears him not in his own doors, I hope (I truly prophecy his discomfiture,
upon an even hand: I leave the rest to the vewe of your best leisure: and if
according to the greatness of your honorable desire, you may have liberty to
adventure your person, in this honorable service, I beseech God to bless all
your attempts, ioyn^tly with all those that shall undertake the same.

Your Worships by bounden duty. George Whetstone.

TO THE RIGHT Valiant Gentlemen and Soldiers, that are, or shall be Armed under
the Ensign of Saint GEORGE: In recompense of their worthy adventures,
Heaven, and everlasting honor.
GOD with S. George, Allon, brave Gentlemen,
Set Spears in rest, renew your ancient fame:
Rush on the Pikes, the Cannon do not shen,
Your Ancestors, with passage through the same,
This Proverb raisde, among the French, their Foes,
Vous es fi fire, que un Anglois.
The^ art as fierce, as is an Englishman,
The French still say, and proof the same did teach:
Turn you the french into Castillian,
it has a grace in such a lofty speech:
Your cause is good, and Englishmen you are,
Your foes be men, even as the french men wear.
The force of death, that raises many fears,
In crauin hearts, which courage do despise:
Long lives the man, that dies in lusty years,
In actions where honor may arise.
And wherein may you honor more expect,
Then wronged men, to succor and protect.
The Lion prays, upon the stoutest beast,
yet lickes the sheep, the which the wolf has wou^d:
So worthy minds, proud looks, that fears least,
does help to raise, the wounded from the ground.
Like Lions then, the Arms of England shield,
Pray on your foes, and pity those that yield.
I say no more, but God be your good speed,
And send you (hap) which I did never taste:
And if this Book, you do witsafe to read,
You cannot think, your labor spent in waste,
Which does contain, the Moral rules of those,
That followed Mars, in thickest preace of foes.
George Whetstone.
Of the honorable Reputation of a Soldier, with a Moral Report of the
Virtues, Offices, and (by abuse) the disgrace of his profession.
AT what time, Reputation of a Soldier.
Ambition, the Impe of miscreate Envy, upon desire of Sovereignty, begat
War: Necessity, Inuentresse of all Policies, Arts, and Mecanicall Crafts,
devised many Engines for War: the use whereof, gave first reputation unto the
Soldier, who ever since has been honorably esteemed. And although, for
difference of Aucthorities and Offices, requi^it in Martial government: There
is General, Lieutenant, Coronell, Captain, Ensign, Corporal, etc. Yet the
highest to the lowest, only glories in the name of a Soldier. Alexander,
Caesar, and the greatest Monarques, usually cal'de the meanest Soldiers,
Companions, Fellows, and always greeted them by such like familiar
salutations: Caesar, would thus usually incouradge his Soldiers: Companions,
and Friends, save that (by your Election) I command, there is no difference
between you, and me, and therefore the meanest, that best deserves, may one
day step into my place. A high encouragement, to be valiant, when valor,
by government, is able to raise a man from the Carte, to be a Sovereign
Captain: And certainly, Millitarie Justice Millitarie Justice.
in Martial Government, is more indifferent then Civil Justice: For, the one
takes knowledge of every man that is valiant: and the other will scarre look
on a number that are virtuous.

And by this Justice Millitarie, Viriat, Viriat.
the renowned Portugal, that in many victories sheathed his sword in the
Romans Entrails, was in his youth a sheepharde, and the son of a sheepharde.

Arsases, Arsases.
king of the Parthians, was a common beggars son: yet in remembrance of his
great valor and worthiness, after his decease, they called the kings his
successors, Arsasides.

Agatocles, Agatocles*
the mangnanimous king of Cicile, was the son of a Potter: and in
remembrance thereof, among other vessels of gold, he was always served with
some of earth.

Prolomie, Ptolomie.
king of Aegipt, of whom the succeeding Kings were called Ptolomie, was of
base parentage.

The Athenian, Isicrates, Isicrates.
the most illustrous in the Art Millitarie, whom Artaxerses king of Persia,
oftentimes made Lieutenant of his Army, against the AEgiptians, was a Cobblers
son.

Eumenes, Eumenes.
one of the most valiant of Alexanders Captains, was a poor Carters son.

And albeit, among human kingdoms, none might be compared to the Empire of
Rome, yet, by Martial Justice, men of most mean rep^^ation, became Emperors.

Elius Pertinax, Elius Pertinax.
Emperor of Rome, was an Artificers son.

The Emperor Dioclesian Dioclesian.
that illustred Rome, with so many triumphant victories, was a Scriueners son.

Valentian, Valentian.
was a Shoomakers son.

The Emperor Probus, Probus.
was a Gardeners son.

The renowned Emperor Aurelius, Aurelius.
was of an unknown parentage.

Marcus Julius, Licinius, Marcus Julius, Licinius, Bonosus.
and Bonosus, which occupied both the Empire, the one came from the Carte, and
the other from keeping of a school.

Many other were Emperous of Rome, whose Ancestors were of no account, which
(for brevity) I omit: so that, descending to kings, and meaner Princes whom
this Justice advanced.

Tarquinius Priscus, Tarquinius priscus.
king of Rome, was a Merchants son of CORINTHE, and banished his Country.

Servius Tullius, the most renowned king of the Romans, who for his worthy
victories triumphed three times, was the son of a poor servant: and
therefore was always called, Servius.

Lamutius* Lamutius:
king of the Lombards, was the son of a mean Harlot.

The mighty King Tamberlaine, Tamberlaine.
was in the beginning, a poor sheephard.

The right noble Roman, Caius Marius, Caius Marius
who for his invincible courage and virtues, was seven times Consul of Room,
came of a base parentage.

The most virtuous and valiant Captain, the father of Frauncis Sforce,
Frauncis Sforce.
whose children and issue were of long time Dukes of Millan, was a poor
laborers son.

Many other by Martial profession (in which time Justice was truly
administered) were in this manner, from the lowest degree advanced to the highest
honor. And that the baseness of parentage might be no blemish, to those that
deserved well: nor noble blood, A straight law.
a preuiledge for those that did amiss: the Gretians, by a law, sorbadde him
the Tomb of his Ancestors, that added not some glory to their Monuments.

Alexander the Great, Alexanders Justice.
lying upon his deathbed, being demanded, who should be his heir?
magnanimously answered: Justin. Lib. 3
the worthiest: so great was the Justice of his mind, as he preuiledged not
his son Hercules, his brother Arideus, nor the Infant in his wife Roxanaes
womb, before a stranger of better desert. This regard and reward of good
deseruinges were the causes of so many Illustruous Captains in the ancient
common Wealths.

The prudent Romans found out the bene^ite that proceeded of the rewarding
of Soldiers, and therefore they devised many honors and rewards to recompense
their good services. When any Captain had any notable victory, he (after
thanks given to the Gods) presently mounted upon a Theater, and generally
praised the whole Army: the^ calling the Bands and Squadrons that fought most
valiantly, he praised every Soldier by his proper name, calling him Companion
and friend of his Country, and withal gave to every one as he deserved, as
to some, Crowns: to others gauntlets, and to many Harness, with such devises
as no man might wear, but such as had deserved the like.

The Consul Papirius, Tie^s (...) lib^o and 30
with such like ornaments proper to every man's desarte, for one victory,
rewarded fourteen Centurions, and one whole Squadron of Soldiers.

Scipio, did the like in Spain, wherein every ma^s merit was written: There
were many Crowns or Garlandes proper for special services: as, Crowns or
garlandes, given for proper services.
whosoever delivered the City of Rome, or Camp of the Romanies, from any
sharp or dangerous siege, he was reco^penced with the Crown Obsidionale:
Obsidionale.
and he and his company that did this service, were honored, as men that had
delivered the City or Pli. lib. 16 and Aul. Gel. Lib. 5.
Army from death.

Quintus Fabius, for delivering Room from the dangerous assault of Haniball,
had this Crown.

AEmilius Scipio, was in this manner Crowned in Africa: And for the like
service, Calfurnius and the valiant Lutius Cincinius were crowned. Then,
whosoever delivered any Citizen of Rome, and slu^ one enemy without shrinking
from the place of this service, he was rewarded with the crown Civique. Civique.
This was a recompense of great honor: for the meanest Soldier that obtained
this Crown, in the open feasts and Theaters, was placed next to the Senators,
who upon his entrance, rose from their places to do him honor. Many Romans
obtained this Crown, especially the most valiant Cineinius before named, won
it fourteen times. These Crowns were of flowers or such like, but yet of more
reputation then the other of gold. The Crown Murale was of gold, Murale.
and was given unto him that first scaled the wall.

Manlius Capitolin, Quintus Trebelius, and diverse others, gained this Crown.
The Crowns Castreuse and Nauale Castreuse ^auale.
were likewise of Gold: the one was due unto him that in fight first entered
the barriers of his enemies: the other, at Sea, that first entered the enemies
ship And of this Crown, Marcus Varro, Marcus Agrippus, and many other noble
Romans, thought no scorn. There were other Crowns, and special honnours
given unto the Romans, which (for brevity sake) I omit: and which is worthy
of regard. In distrubutio^ of these honnours, the noble and the innoble
Soldier, by birth was regarded alike. Besides, the Romans Captains,
Honorable names, given unto the Roman Captains.
in honor of their victories, had their surnames after the Countries, which
they conquered: the one Metellus, for the subduing of Iugurthe: of Numidie, was
called Numidique: the other Metellus, for subduing ye king of Macedone, was
surnamed Macedonique. Lucius Mummius, was named Aca^que, for the ^ubduing of
Acaye, and Corinthe.

Brutus, for ye subiecting of Gaul, was named Galloys. The two noble Scipioes,
the one was called Afriq^^ (...) Carthagique, for his victories in Africa and
at Carthage. The other was surnamed Asiatique, for the co^quering of Antioche:
and for being the first that displaied the Roman Ensigns in Asia: many other
Romans had such like honorable surnames, in triumph of their victories: but
these may suffice to show the honorable reputation of a soldier, how he was
in the ancient and flourishing commonweals reverenced of the grave Senators,
and generally honored of the public weal, where the government Is Monarchy,
Monarchy.
the sovereign and sole Commander, is girded with a sword, and glories in the
name of a Soldier: where it is Oligarchie, Oligarchie.
where a few of the best govern, the chiefest person has a charge of the
Martial affairs. The Romans when they changed their government, by
banishing of their tyrannous kings, employed their chief Co^mander (the
Consul) abroad in the wars: In the like reputation, were the Captains in the
famous commonweals of Athens and Lacidemonia.

When Cyrus delivered the jews out of the great captivity of Babylon, he
sent them home under the conduct of their Captain Zorobabel: and their chief
sacrificator Iosue, by which estates they were governed, until Aristobulus
usurped both the title of king and chief sacrificator.

The base segniorie of ye Mecanicall people, called Democratia, wherein the
baser sort, as handy craftsmen govern in time of war, are gladly ruled by
the worthy Captain.

The most magnificent Triumphs, first devised by Dionisius or Dennis, Diodi.
Lib. 6. Pli Llib. 2.
surnamed the free Father, and imitated by the Carthagenians, by the testimony
of Justin, only were dedicared to the honor of the victorious Captain:
Justin. Lib. 1^
But as the Romans exceeded all nations of the world in power, so in this
glorious pomp, they took away all possibility, for men to be more honored:
the circumstances, how every estate of the Common wealth did service and
reverence unto the victorious Captain, how crowned kings were lead up and
down, as his Captives, how that no magnificence that art or man's wit could
devise, was wanting the hundred part of the glory whereof sufficed to glut the
beholder: All which particularly to report, would co^^aine a greater volume,
then is appointed for my (...) purpose: In reformed gouerme^ts, where excess
of Apparel was defended: as in that of King Ferdina^does, who erected the
Knights of the band, and in the straight Commandment of King Phillip le Bell:
and (with your favor) in the straight laws and Proclamations of England,
Gold, silver, and al manner of bravery is dispensed within Martial shows: by
reason of which appara^ce of honor and reputation due, and given unto the
Soldier, a number of yongelings advance their thoughts, and thirst after the
like glory: Of which allureme^t grew the old saying: Dulce bellum in expertis*
But if all his dangers, distresses, wounds, and many times, prodigal loss
of life, be balanced with his glory: The honorable reputation of a Soldier
dearily bought.
the grauer sort will judge his honorable reputation to be deserved, or at ye
least dearily bought: how that he is bound to march in the depth of winter, and
the heat of Summer, to lie upon the bare ground: and which is worst, to fetch
his meat out of the Canons mouth, or to sterue in the besieged town: with
many deadly dangers, which the tou^g of him that has felt them, can deliver
better, then my pen that have but heard them. The consideration of all these
peri^s, justly moved the grave Senators, with these magnificent Triumphs and
honorable rewards, to arm their Soldiers) with an invincible courage: and
yet (with your patience) they durst not put their honor simply upon their
Soldiers valia^cy: how resolute soever they were in execution, the wise
Senators were fearful to direct.

And certainly, the religious Ceremonies that the Romans used before they
attempted any war, The religious Ceremonies that the Romans used before the
attempted war.
reproves the inco^siderate wars of many Christian Princes, that neither
ask advise of God, nor seek satisfaction with quietness.

If any man brought the Romans tydinges of some Province revolted, or of any
other just cause of war: the Senate first sent to the Offenders, friendly
requiring them to return to their obedience: and if they continued their
contempt, they the^ created their Captains for this expedition: But before any
prosecution, they caused their Sacrificators to make prayers unto the gods:
after this, the Senate assembled themselves, and went unto the Temple of
Jupiter, and there solemply swore, that so often as the enemy (against whom
they moved war) would seek new conditions, or crave pardon for their offenses
committed, that their cleme^cy should at no time be denied. This done, the
Consul elect for the enterprise, went unto the Capitol, and there made a
solemn vow, that if he returned with victory, he would offer unto the Gods
some special precious thing. After this, the Banner of the Eagle (which was the
ancient Ensign of Rome) was displayed in the field called Mars, by which the
people were warned, that, during the time that the Citizens, and their parents
were in the wars, that they should neither celebrate feasts, or public
spectacles: finally, a Priest mounted upon the gate, called Salarie, caused a
Trumpet to be sou^ded, to sommon the men of war, and there every particular
Captain received his ensign: by this it was publikly known, that they set not
forward their Armies, before they had appeased and honored their Gods.

The Athenians, never moved war before the Philosophers and the grave
Common-wealthesmen, had advisedly considered, whether the same were righteous
or no.

The Israelites, prosecuted the war, by derectio^ of the Prophets, as
appears by m^nyexa^ples of the old Testament: when the Captains and
Soldiers, were thus sacisfied by the Prophets, and grave common wealthes-men,
that they should in the extremest degree, but sacrifice their bloods, in the
service of God, the safety of their Country, and their own immortal
honnour: Small is the wounder if they lightly regarded of life, and proudely
encountered death: Spes famae, Solet ad virtutem impellere multos.
Sole desire of fame, and zeal to do their Country service, moved many (that
had no thought of the immortality of the soul) to be wilful executioners of
their own lives.

Plutarke, The working of fame.
writes, that in Phrigia, there was a great gaping of ye earth, out of which
swelled great waters, that ouerthrewe many houses.

Ancurus, king Midas son, hearing that Gods Ire would not be appeased, until
some one man leaped into the Gulf: Desire of fame (which those heathen men
reputed an immortal life) hastened Ancurus, to leap into that Gulf (as he
thought) with the loss of his life, to rid his country from this outrageous
water. Curtius, the noble Roman did the like upon the like occasion.

The two worthy Lacedimonians, Spartius and Bulides, voluntarily bowed their
necks to the gallows, to make satisfaction for the offense of the
Lacedemonia^s, who contrary to the law of all nations (which protecteth every
Ambassador, both in time of peace and war) slew king Xerxes Ambassador.

Themistocles, Mutius Scevola, and many others might be joined with these
examples: but especially the act of Codrus, the last king of Athens, is worthy
remembrance: Justin. Lib ^.
it was foretold by the Oracle at Delphos, that if the Athenians would be
victors, their king must needs be slain.

When Codrus understood that the liberty of his country, stood upon the
loss of his life, he pre^e^tly in the habit of a slave, entered the camp of
the Pelloponians and Dorians, his enemies, and quarelled until he was slain.
Behold the noble resolution of the ancient Captains, a number feared not
death, and almost every one hated a dishonorable life.

The Soldiers of Caesar, many times died desperately, rather then they would
be the servile prisoners of their enemies. Among many, ye most hardy attemps
that the Jews made upon Vespasian, Joseph Bell. Jude.
and his son Titus, to be delinered of the Roman servitude: this one
example of their proud disdain of life, showed their little fear of death.
When God, to chasten the grievous sins of the Jews, suffered them
(notwithstanding their invincible courage) to be slain by the Romans, and of
a number that were slain there, being but forty and one left alive: which
few, rather the^ the Romans should have any glory of their captivity, by the
drawing of lottes, they appoincted one to be the executioner of an other.

The Earl of Shreusbury, who in Henry the sixte his time, Hawles Cro.
was so feared in France, as the frenchmen to scarre their Children, as we do
by Robyn good fellow, have to this day a byword, Guard le taulbot, being (by
the envious contentions in England) left almost succourlesse in France: In
fine, was beset with a great power of french men, beyond all possibility, for
his strength to overcome: and albeit, he had good mean to escape by flight,
yet, he courageously abode their encounter, and upon this resolution, he thus
said unto his son: Son (quoth he) thou art young, and may with thy honor
fly: But I am old, and have had my life honored with many victories, all which
I should loose, if I should defer my death (which by course of nature, cannot
be far of) by a tymerous flight: Therefore, I am bound to stay: What should
his son do, but even which he did? follow the fortune of his father: and so
like as they lived, Needelesse desperatnesse not allowed
they dyed valiant men. This presice preservation of honor, neither the
deuines, nor many polliticke Martialistes, do allow: the one absolutely
reproving desperate end: the other, forbidding a man wilfully to dye, when by
his death, he neither benefiteth his friend, nor hurts his enemy: And yet,
the greatness of these men's courages, are to be honored, although not necessary
to be followed. But necessity many times approves resolute boldness, to be
honorable, profitable, and necessary.

As, at the Mountain Antilliban, in Arabia, Alexander being a foot, Plut.
devit. Alex.
far off his Army, through care that he had of his Tutor Lysimacus, who in a
manner was tired with travel: and being bee-nighted, and out of his way, he
perceived that his barborous enemies had made diverse fires in the Mountain, by
whom he must pass: and therefore, as his best remedy in that extremity, he
suddenly set upon one of the companies, slew two of the saluadges, and like a
Fury with a firebrand in his hand, he made a passage until he came unto his
Camp: And by this hazard, he both preserved him self, and those that were
with him: The dangerous adventure of Alexder.
But his hardiest adventure was among the Malians, the stoutest people of ye
Indians, who having scaled the walls of their City, his scaling ladder
broke: and seeing that his Enemies assaulted him, sharply with thieir Darts, he
suddenly leaped among the thickest of them, who with the noise and shining of
his Armor, so feared his enemies (supposing that a light or sprite, went
before him) they fled on every side: and when in the end they assailed him, he
set his back to the wall, and fought against the Malians, until his Army had
broke into the city, and both rescued him, and subdued the Malians.

The like adventure of Caesar, running desperately upon the fierce Neruij, The
success of Caesar's dangerous adventure*
saved the remnant of the Romans, who had that day been all slain, if
Caesar had not encouraged them with this little care of life. The Senate so
honored Caesar for this victory, because the danger was great: as they
ordained, that the Sacrificators should do sacrifice unto the Gods, and that
there should be solemn procession fifteen days together, without
intermission, having before never made the like ordinance at Rome, for any
victory that ever was obtained. The dangers of war are oftentimes such, as
necessity spurreth the valiant Gentleman, to run upon the like perils: and
therein is true valiancy seen: For, many will be ^orwarde, where the hazard is
indifferent, that have no legs to follow such exploits: And ^or y^ this service
is many times required of the worthy Soldier, without execution whereof he
can never be famous.

The Soldier of all men ought to set the fear of God before his eyes, The
fear of god most necessary for Soldiers.
to have a pure conscience, and to be of good conversation, least in running
upon the pikes, he falls into hell fire. His state is like unto a man that is
^icke (for death wayteth upon Mars, as duly as upon Surfeit:) And surely, he
that retourneth safe out of the ^ield, escapes as great a danger as he that is
recovered of a mortal infirmity: and as men commonly see nothing but holy and
good matters among men that are sick, so, the conversation of the ancient
Roman Soldiers, was purged from dissolute, and ungodly behavior.

The faith of a Soldier, is at this day a common pr^testatio^, but in those
days, was never violated.

Alexander, surnamed Seuerus, had so well a governed Army, as his companies
were reputed to be rather Philosophers the^ Soldiers. The Soldier was in that
government pryuiledged as a sick man: The T^staement Millitarie, Testament
Millitarie. Joseph de Bell. lude.
was allowed.

The Bequeast that Artorius made to his friend Lucius, and his heirs (at the
stege of Jerusalem) for the inheriting of his lands, Titus commanded to be
executed: and as men that are sick (dispose their goods to their children and
friends, so the Romans by a public law, enacted, that the son of every
Soldier that was slain (how young soever he were) should inherit the Pay
of his father: Pet. Mesi.
That this provision being made for their posterity, their soldiers might be
the less afraid of death, into whose power, continual danger subjected them.
The case so standing, that the Soldiers glory is wrought out of hazard, and
the benefit of his service, proceeds from the peril of his life: It is (as
I have said) requisite, that his conscience and conversation be always holy:
and then every day he may boldly say as Cra^inius, said to Caesar: Plut devit.
Caesar.
I will before night be praised, either alive or dead. For, in both estates,
the virtues and valiant are, and shall be always commended: and as it is the
principal duty of a Soldier to be hardy and resolute in execution:
Clemency, a worthy virtue in a Soldier.
so, it a hye virtue in him to be merciful, after victory obtained. For as
the Judge deserves more commendation, that wins men from stealing, then he
that pardons no offense: even so the Captain is far more worthy praise,
that with wisdom and linitie, brings the enemy to a peace-able obedience,
then he that hardens their hearts with cruelties and oppressions. For as the
Athenians wrote unto the Lacedaemonians: There be the fruits of war, the loss
of the vanquished is certain, and the Vanquishor gains nothing by his loss.
Theaft, murder, etc. are foul vices, yet is the Judge honorable, that
chastises the^, and he more honorable y^ banisheth the^: even so, war which is
composed of these and many other mischiefs, co^me^deth ye worthy Soldier, that
with his sword dryueth this monster (War) forth of the City gates, and by
clemency, out of the Citizens hearts.

What greater victory had ever Augustus Caesar, then in pardoning of Lutius
Cinna.

This Cinna conspired against Caesar, Clemency of Augustus.
and was found in his Enemies tents, whom Caesar (not only pardoned) but also
highly advanced: notwithstanding all this, Cinna practiced Caesar's death: for,
the roots of Malice, ar seldom plucked up with kindness: Nevertheless, the
Emperor sent again for Cinna: When Cinna was come, he caused a chair to be
set him which done, The Emperor opened all his benefits toward Cinna, and of
Cinnaes ingratitude, in seeking of his life: These circumstaunces abashed
Cinna: But Caesar ending his expostulation, thus comforted Cinna. Cinna (quoth
he) I once gave thee thy life being my enemy, and now I give it thee being a
traitor, and a paracide.

Cinna (being vanquished with this clemency) became so faithful and assured a
friend to Caesar, A difference between Tyranny and Clemency.
as Caesar made him his heir: See here what love, the obedience that
proceeds of Clemency, breadeth: when the fearful obedience that is forced
by tyranny, awaighteth but a passage for treason.

Augustus, might have executed Cinna, and so have been rid of a dangerous
enemy: But in pardoning of him, Caesar's Clemency.
he purchased a faithful friend.

Julius Caesar, had never been so great a Monarke, if he had not gloried in
the forgiving of his enemies: Yea, having overcome Pompey the great, he
entertained all Pompeys friends, with such clemencye and courtesy, as many of
them honored him with faithful service. When he had ended the Civil wars, he
showed such clemency to his enemies, that bore arms against him, A Temple
erected in honor of Caesar's clemency.
as there was a temple erected in honor of his Clemency. In so much, as when
Cicero saw, that Caesar set up Pompeys Images, he said: Behold, Caesar sets
up Pompeys Images, that his own may stand the surer.

And certainly (though Caesar set the^ up of a magnanimous disposition) Cicero
spoke the truth in derision: for Clemency setleth love and good-wil in
subjects, The clemency of Alexander the great.
which is the best guard and safety for princes.

Alexander the great, was highly renowned for the Clemency that he used
toward his enemies: Especially, when the stout messadge of Iadus the chief
Sacrificator, moved him so purpose the destruction of Jerusalem: Nevertheless,
when Iadus putting on his Garments of preesthood, and accompanied with the
people, clothed all in white, humbled himself before this great King,
Alexander, graciously received him: and entering peaceably into the city, he
not only gave rich gifts to the Sacrificatour, but showed great liberality
toward all the people.

The courage of these great Monarkes, conquered kingdoms by force: and their
clemency, millions of people with love. The death of Caesar revenged by the
common p^^tplc


It is a wonder what a tumult the people made in Rome, when Caesar was
treacherously slain, they so honored him for this virtue, none of the Senators
durst stir forth of their doors, nor none of the Conspirators abide the
Town: they slew all Caesar's suspected enemies, and fyred many of their houses.

On the contrary part, Tamberlaine, and other cruel Tyrants, were neither
beloved a live, nor moned after death. The vice of incontinency
The dissolute and wanto^ behauior of our modernt Soldiers, which have ye
courage, but not the government of the ancient, greatly slaundreth their
profession, and displeases God.

When God delivers any City or town into their hands, they (especially)
the Spaniard and the Italian) take small compassion of the Inhabitants
afflictions: but to injury them in the highest extreamitie, as the sweetest part
of their spoil, they most impiously, and barbarously abuse honest matrones and
deflower their daughters: Which unpardonable and insufferable offenses, the
vengeance of God still follows: and therefore this Turkish wickedness, that
stinketh before god and man, is to be banished or rather to be punished in
every Christian Army.

The Continency of Alexander, Scipio, and many other most illustrious
Captains, Continency a special virtue in a Soldier.
at worthy presidents, to bridle the intemperate affections of the multitude of
Soldiers.

Alexander, used the wife, The Continency of Alexander.
daughters, and mother of the mighty Darius, and other most beautiful Ladies
of Persia, with so honorable and chaste a regard; as he took away all
suspicion, that should make them fear to be dishonored or deflowred. He would
oftentimes say, that the Ladies of Persia, made men's eyes sore to behold them:
but notwithstanding, preferring the beauty of his contine^cie, before their
sweet faces, he did never suffer himself to be alured, yea, he so much hated
unchaste affectio^ns, as hearing that Damon and Timotheus under Parmenioes
charge, had forced two of their fellow Soldiers wives: He wrote unto
Parmenio, if they were found guilty, to put them to death, as brute beasts,
and destroyers of mankind: yea, so unspotted was Alexanders fame in this
virtue, that Darius Darius prayer.
his enemy prayed to the gods, that if the time were come that the kingdom of
Persia must needs have an end, either by divine revenge, or by natural change
of earthly things. Then grant (good Gods, quoth he) that none but Alexander
may sit in Cyrus Throane, to recompense the great honor, that in my misery,
he showed to those I loved best in the world.

Aulus, Gellius, The Continency of Scipio.
equalleth the continency of the most noble Roman Captain Scipio, with the
chastity of ALEXANDER. Scipio, entering by force of Arms into the new City
of Carthage (among other captives) he was presented with a most fair
Damsel, young, and of a most excellent proportion: who, notwithstanding, he
was in the flower of his youth, so vanquished his affections, as he did no
dishonest act with the maid. And afterward understanding that she was of a
noble house, and betroathed to a great Lord of Spain, he sent to seek him
forth, and delivered the Damsel unto him, in no point dishonored: Pet. Mes.
de Cho. mem. lib. 2
and withal augmented her dower, with the money that was paid for her fathers
ransom: An act of great continency and honor, in a victorious Captain,
toward his captive.

This Scippio was the most illustrious captain that ever Room fostered: He,
Commendation of Scipio
for his glorius victories, was surnamed African and Carthage: he was called
Prince of the Senate: which dignity, was given unto none but such as had
obtained the Type of all honor: he used such discipline in his Army, as his
meanest Soldiers seemed, to be grave Senators: and as Plutarke says, De*
vitae Scip.
among all his other charges, he specially commanded, that the women which were
taken in the wars, should be kept from being defiled: Worthy examples for
Generals and other Officers of charge, in Martial government to imitate, that
their wisdoms and examples may bridle the inordinate affections of inferior
Soldiers.

And as companio^s with this beastly sin, Temperance in diet, requi^^^ in a
Soldier.
the well governed Soldier is forbidden Gluttonnie and drunkenesse, as two
mortal enemies of his profession: For the Soldier must many times endure
hunger, thirste, cold, travel, and other sharp miseries, which pampered and
delicate bodies cannot endure: Besides, when the body is stuffed with
delicates, Ease the spoil of a Soldier.
the mind is dull, and desirous of ease, which is the vndoer of a Soldier,
who ought to have his hands or his mind always occupied: The one, wounding
his enemy in the field: the other, working out policies to intrappe him as
he lies in camp. Alexander the great, to keep his men in breath, Alexander
enemy to Idleness.
when there was intermission from war, accustomed himself, and his people to
take great pains in hunting of wild beasts: especially, those that were of
most fearce natures: and every man, to show his agillitie and strength, was
enjoined to va^quish (or to be vanquished by) the beast which he undertook:
In so much as Alexander himself fighting one day very dangerously, hand to hand
with a Lion, after the victory hardly obtained, an Ambassador of La^idemon
told him, that it seemed by the egernesse of their fight, He must not be idle
that works for a Kingdom.
that his grace and the Lion striued, which of both them should be king: Yea
(quoth Alexander) and he that will be the king of kings must always be thus
occupied.

He was so temperate of his diet, as when the Princes Ada, of mere goodwill,
sent him many dilicate dishes of meat: He sent her word, he knew not what to
do with them: For his governor Lyonides, appointed him for his dinner, to rise
before day, and to march in the night: and for his supper, to eat but a little
at dinner: A spare diet for a Prince, yet necessary for him that wrought for
the whole world to have his body hardened and prepared for all dangers.

Haniball and Iugurthe, could never have punished the Romans so often, if that
with wonderful pains, they had not placed their aduauntages, neither could
they have taken half the pains, if their bodies had not been prepared with a
temperate and thin diet.

The temperaunce of Julius Caesar, in eating and drinking, is upon many
occasions commended, and it well appeared by the ablenes and exercise of his
body, he undertook great matter, and therefore, it behooved him to bestur
himself: And (sure) diligence (which overcomes the mightiest things)
dwelled in him: when his Soldiers were at rest, he devised his worthiest
Stratagemes, and yet he so tired them with such daily travels that they cried
out, Plut. devit. Ces.
To what end does this man hale us after him, up and down the world? Should
not Caesar think when he sees our blood and wounds, that we are mortal men,
and feel the mise^ie and pain that other men do? But nevertheless, Caesar
marched: and they for shame could not tarry behind.

The Soldiers that carries, subduing minds, by regard of these worthy
examples, will (no doubt) diet their bodies for to endure, pain, as faulkeners
do their flying Hawks: and he that wayeth, what dangers, dishonors, and
overthrows, have followed feastings, drunkenness, and Idle dalliaunce, will
(if he regard his honor) be more affrayd of a wa^ton banquet* then a bloody
battle.

Wine, and delicate cheer, were the baytes that Cyrus laid to kill Queen
Tomyris son, and a great part of her Army: That day that Alexander first
delighted in the drunkenness and effeminate delicasie of the Parsians, he
overthrew his own life and glory: For in his drunkenness, he put his best
Captains to death: and in revenge was poisoned himself.

The Romans so hated this drunken and voluptuous exercise, as when Lucius
Pius, had brought the Sarmates unto a voluntary obedience by his often
banqueting, and making of them good cheer, and at his return to Rome,
demanded to triumph: The Senate not only denied him this honor, but in
disdain of his drunken victory, they put him openly to death, and for his
further reproach, they wrote this Epitaphe upon his Tomb: Here Lucius Pius,
Consul lies,
Who not with Arms in Field:
But with Wine, mirth and Table-cheare,
Did make the Sarmates yield.


THe Senate not yet content, adnulled all that Lucius had done, and by their
letters remitted the Sarmates into their ancient liberty. And certainly, The
Romans punished and hated dishonorable Conquestes.
this worthy virtue shined in the Romans, they refused to make a benefit of
any thing that was dishonorable: and for that the president is necessary for
all Soldiers to follow, this one other short example, shall not be
impertinent to the purpose.

Fabritius, being encamped before the City of Fidena, a Schoolemaister of the
Town, in hope of some great preferment, stole forth and presented Fabritius
with the children of the most worthy Citizens: The Co^sull saw, that this was a
good mean to become Lord of the City. Nevertheless, he refused the advantage:
and for his hyre, he bound the Scoolemaister, and caused the boys with rods to
whippe him into the town: to recompense which honorable favor, the Citizens
willingly paid tribute unto the Romans.

What would y^ heathen Romans (who were thus precise in matters of honor)
judge of many christians, damnable pollicie^.
who seldom refuse offered aduau^tages against the enemies? yea (which is
damnable) very oftentimes, hire Athiests, and such earthly Furies, to poison,
murder, and betraye anointed Princes and their sovereigns. Their Censure
could be no other, but that they them selves feared God: and that such
Christians and their instruments followed the Devil.

But to continue further with Millitarie documents: it is not enough that the
Soldier be valiant in execution, merciful after victory, chaste of body,
temperate in eating and drinking, and a hater of Plenes: Obedience especially
required of a Soldier*
But obedience, is also specially required of a well governed Soldier: A
mutinous and disobedient person, is in a camp like a scabbed and rotten sheep
in a fould, an instrument of his own, and a number of his fellows
destructions.

The Romans had a special regard, in the chastising and purging of this
fault, as worse then a plague in an Army: they, without respect of persons,
punished disobedience, as appears by the severe lentence, that the Consul
Titus Manlius gave upon his own only son, whose disobedience was both
honorable and bene^itiall to the Romans: but they esteemed not of that
benefit which nourrished a mischief.

The Consul, commanded that no man should fight, without his direction. ^
severe example.


Genutins Metius, one of the enemies pricked forth and challenged Manlius
son. Young Manlius thought it a foul shame and dishonor to refuse Genutius:
and therefore, courageously set upon the challenger, overcame and slew him,
and was of all his fathers Soldiers, highly commended But the Consul
understanding of this matter, called for his Son: and told him, that he
commanded that no man should fight, without his derection: and for as much as
he had broke the order which is to be kept in war: by which thitherto Rome had
been advanced to great honor: and therefore, son (quoth he) since the
choice is so hard, that I must either forget the common weal, or else deprive
my self of thee, in whom I took (privately) most delight in, I will that the
common weal take no hurt: and therevpo^ he willed the hangman to take his
son, and to execute on him the punishments, due unto those that by evil
example, hurt the discipline and obedience of soldiers: which was to bind him
to a stake, to whipe him, and afterward to behead him.

The like sentence, Brutus gave of his Sons, for that contrary to a general
Commandment, shey wrote but letters to call Tarquinius in again.

If there worthy Captains, ^or light Trespasses thus sharply punished their
Sons, what hope of favor may the private Soldier expect, that rashly and
disobediently breaks the orders of the Leaders? even the favor that a Rebel
deserves in a peaceable government.

For, The difference between rash and necessary boldness.
as bold and careless running upon death, is honorable and meritorious, when
in Martial judgment such resolutenesse in a few, may be the safety of a
number, according to the Italian saying: Beato colui, chi puo far beato altrui:
Happy is he, that can make another man happy: Even so, needelesse and
vnprolitable rashness, by wilful falling upon the enemies Sword, is reducul^us,
dangerous, and very dishonorable: for as there is a saying in Martial
policy: He that flies the field, may return again, and annoy his
Adversary: when he that is unprofitably and rashly slain, possesses his
enemy with the glory of his death, without fear of revenge.

As did the intemperate Capadocians, An intemperat^ part.
who envying the victory of Perdicas, enclosed them selves within their City,
and with fire consumed the same, jointly with them selves, wi^es, children, and
goods: And by this unnatural hardiness, made Perdicas spoil (in truth) to
be small, and their own after fortune to be nothing: But in the reprehension
of rashness and disobedience, in a Soldier, there is no intent, Cowardlynes
reprehended.
any way to favor cowardlines: but rather to reprove the same, as a fault as
dangerous, as indis^rete boldness.

For the Coward does not only hurt with his own ^eare, but by his running
away, a number are discomforted, and follow for company, A pollycie to harden
a Cowarde
many times to the peril of the whole Army: And therefore, Astiadges to make
his Cowardes hardy, thrust them in the face of the enemy, and placed approved
Soldiers at their barks, with charge to kill them if they turned their heads.

Titus Liuius and Julius Frontinus, writes, that Appius Claudius, and Marcus
Anthonius, punished the Cowardly Romans (which were very few) in this manner:
The squadrons and bands, by whom the enemy had passadge, drew cuts, and of
whom soever the lot fell, he presently was put to death.

Damatria, A sharp example.
a woman of Lacedemon, hearing that her son had not fought, as became a
Lacedemonian, presently at his return, she slew him with her own hands, as
one that was sorry she had borne so cowardly a son. And surely, he, that
comes into the field, and is a^earde to fight, must the rest of his life,
look to live like an Owl: but small circumstances suffice in this point: For
Englishmen, to whom I direct this Treatise, as the learned Sir Thomas Smith
writes, De Rep. Ang.
are a people naturally that fears not death, and by consequence, careless
of their enemy: But on the contrary part, Englishmen are men of much desert,
Envy a dangerous passion in a Soldier
and therefore, Envy and Emulation reigns mightily among them: For Envy,
always assaileth worthy men, and these foul passions have been the scourges
(or more properly, the overthrows) of the most worthy men and Governments. The
Athenians, had no other remedy against this poison, b^^ to devise a law,
called Ostraci^me: The Athenians remedy for Envy.
by which as the lottes fell out, some of their principal men were yearly
banished, and many times the lots fell of the best benefactors of the common
weal, who were banished by the ingratitude of the common people. Envy, reigned
strongly among the Romans, but there were to many occasions of aduaunceme^t,
as their Envy brought forth honorable effects: for that virtue, being there
the ladder of advancement, every one sought by worthiness to clyme the ^yest
degree.

When Porsinaes hoaste, An honorable kind of Envy.
dangerously besieged Room, Cocleus was highly honored for a piece of Service
about a wooden bridge, which the noble Mutius Sceuola so enuyed, as to do his
country a greater service, he in the habit of a peddler, entered into the
Hetruian camp, even unto the kings tent, and there slew the Kings Secretary
in steed of the king: Sceuola was taken upon the fact, and boldly confessed
his determination: The king to increase his torment, commanded that he should
be burned to death with a torch: by peace-meales, in his own presence: Sceuola
(constantly) without change of countenance, endured the burning of his hand,
which so abashed the king, as he delivered Sceuola, and made peace with the
Romans, for fear they would have many Sceuolaes to endanger him, when he
should lack Secretaries to do him the former service: This was the Envy that
rained among the Romans, while virtue judged men's demerites: but the common
Envy, where she has passadge, is like a swine in a garden, a destroyer without
regard, and in a Camp, a very subuertion.

And for that this is a common fault among the greatest, (...), a fault among
the gre^^est.
the Generals of Armies, ought to have a special care thereof, least the
misery be general before the mischief be suspected.

Moreover, because it is a passion incurable. I would to God, the Envious would
Counsel themselves, as the two worthy Enemies. Cretinus Magnesius, and Hermias
did.

King Mithridates, being at war with theie Country, A worthy example.
Cretinus Magnetius, gave his consent that his great enemy HERMIAS, should be
captain against Mithrida^es: and in the mean season, he solemply protested,
to banish himself his Country, least there might some tumult or business
arise by their factions: But Hermias knowing Cretinus to be the better Captain
of both, for the love he bare to his Country gave that honor to his enemy,
and banished himself until the wars were at an end: If every man would
follow this worthy example, that Monster Envy, might very well take private
revenge, but should never work public destruction, as she does (for the
most) where she co^quereth. A great many duties bind a man to prefer the
love of his Con^trey before an envious desire of revenge: but I pray god a
little grace bridle y^ envious ma^s affections: for it is to be ^eared, if
prayer prevent not, Disdain a foul fault (...) a Soldier.
counsel will do little good against this mischief*

There is another foul common fault, to be hated of a Soldier: which is, in
thinking over well of himself, to di^daine another that carries not so proud
a countenance: For Contenaunce is so great a deceiuer, as it brought forth
this Adage, Fronti nulla fides: but as the slender Grayhound, byteth as sore as
the strong Mastife, and ouertaketh sooner: even so, a weak man may have more
strength in his head, then a mighty in his body.

The prudent Sertorius, made proof of Catoes grave, saying: ( Ingen^o pollit,
(...) vim natura negauit) by a pretty example. A pro^itable example.
He had in his camp: A little, weak, but yet a pollitick man, and among oher
Soldiers a great, big, boned, braineles Lubber: he had also two horses, the
one fat, lusty, and with a thick tail the other a little lean horse, and almost
without a tail: Sertorius, appointed the little ^eeble man to pluck of the
great horse tail: and y^ big and sturdy Soldier, to pluck of the few ha^res,
yt were of the lean horse tail: The weak man, whom good education, had
given wit and policy in the place of strength, pulled by three or iiij.
hairs at once, and so quickly of a long tail, left no tail: The other a good
strong yeoma^s body, tugged at the whole tail, and wrought until he sweat:
but sty^red not a hair: An example of double pro^it and instruction: The ackt
of the weak man shows that a handful of wit, is worth a horse load of
strength: and the bootles, tugging of the strong man, witnesses the mighty
force of a ^ewe, that are firmly united together: and the division of the
great tail, the confusion of a multitude, that are among themselves divided.

It is then a principal virtue in a Soldier, to intertaine his companion with
mild conversation, and a great part of his safety, to be united unto him, in
assured friendship.

This disdain and proud vpbraiding of men, Original of disdain.
proceeded first from the Dunghill: And therefore, unmeet to have place, in
Court or camp, where Gentlemen, and only men of reputation, should live.

Disdain (as I have said) came from the Dunghill: And of such a Gentleman,
Claudian thus writes: Asperius nihil est humili cum surgit in Altum: Then let
disdain be proper to a Dunghill mind, who having no Ornaments of virtue,
holds his placeby proud and disdainful behauiors.

But the Soldier and every man that thir^teth for true honor, must hold this
for a principal, that Reputation consists in a man's own well doing, and not
in an-other man's disgrace.

It is a good course then for every man, to honor himself with good
indeu^urs: and a great blame to dishonor another with infamous words: For art
has made no man so perfect, but that he may daily learn: nor nature no man
so imperfect, but he may be an instrument of some good purpose.

Asinius, Caesar's Barbor, the fearefullest wretch alive, whose mind was given
only to fear and mistrust, by his tymerous suspect, saved Caesar's life, in
discovering the Treason of Pothinus and Achillas.

Caesar, The seru^ce of Caesar's ^arber.
had not a veryer wretch, then the Barbor Asinius in his whole Army: nor never
a Captain that did him greater service.

Every man is not mad for all purposes: but his service that is any way
profitable, is no way to be disdained.

Alexander the great, wrote a book, which he called Remembraunces for every
day, Alexanders Boo^e of daily rememberaunces.
which contained neither scoffing nor disdainefull vsadge of the simpler sort:
but contrary wise, how he helped their Ignoraunces, with good counsels:
Instructed them in policies, and appeased every small contention, before it
grew to a quarrel.

He that will be worthy, let him look into worthy men's doings, and follow the
examples of the worthiest.

No man can have a greater light, then of the Sun, nor better instruction,
then from the wisest.

To conclude, it is a most honorable virtue, and a necessary duty in a
Soldier, A good Soldier ought to be studious in matters of Pollycie.
at leasurable times to be studious in matters of policy, and always when
his hands are idle to have a working mind.

Caesar the best Captain that ever lived, was so addicted to study, as there
was a question: whether he were more inclined to the Lance, or to his book?
who being one day in a mortal danger, at Alexandria, to save himself, he
leaped into the water, and uing a Book in his hand, he had such care thereof,
as he held that hand upon his head, Pet. Mes. ^e (...) ^end.
and wrought for his life with the other.

Alexander the great, Plo^ devit. Cae^ar.
was so addicted to Homers ^^iades, as he appointed the most magnifice^t Jewel
box of Darius to keep the same. In the time and under the reigns of the
famous Monarks and Captains, learning, and learned men most flourished.

The reason was, the Leaders of Armies, were great lovers of learning.

Antigonus, king of Macedone, to be instructed in knowledge, by his Letter,
thus saluted the Philosopher Zenon.

The king Antigonus, wishes health to the Philosopher Zenon: I know well that
I pass thee in riches and favors of fortune: But I must confess that thou
far passest me, in the true felicity, which consists in the knowleadge,
discipline, and study of the liberal Sciences: and therefore, I desire the
accord, that I may have thy company, etc.

Alexander, hearing that Aristotle had written certain books of natural
Philosophy, wrote unto Aristotle in this manner: Truly, Aristotle, thou
dec^auest my desire, in publishing of this speculatiue Philophie: which (I
thought) should properly, have honored myself: For, know thou, I rather desire
to exceed all men in knowledge and learning, then in richesse and dominions.

Caesar wrote his own Comentaries, and diverse other books.

Pirrhus, the most worthy Captain, king of the Epyro^es, (that many times
punished the Romans) wrote diverse books: Especially, one of the precepts of
war.

There were diverse worthy books, found in the Tents of Haniball, which he
earnestly studied.

I might add many other examples, of right famous Captains, that were
specially well learned: and to say truth, learning is the most precious
Ornament of a Soldier, and the necessariest virtue.

Couradge, Prince Edwardes vict^rie.
has obtained great victories: But policy has gotten wonderful and (almost)
incredible.

Prince Edward, king Edward the thirds son, by policy joined with manhood,
only with 8000. men, overcame king John of France, and his Army of threescore
thousand men: In which overthrow, king John, was taken prisoner and sent into
England, who seeing the grave Consellers that were attendant of the king:
Shook his head, and said These fellows (quoth he) were they that brought me
into England: attributing his overthrow to the grave directions of the kings
Counsel.

The victorious king Henry the fifth, with less then fifteen thousand men,
whereof many were sick and diseased, The Battle of Agincourt is France.
with a policy of Iron piked stakes, overthrew the whole power and flower of
the Nobility of France.

The wonderful overthrows, that have been given by politic stratagemes:
which were evermore the directions of the learned and well studied Captains,
do in a manner command Martial Professors, to hunt after new Stratagemes,
and devises to annoy the Enemy.

He that is studious, and occupies his leasurable times, in working out of
aduauntages, is likely to hurt ye enemy more by his devises in y^ camp, then
by fighting in the field.

Cicero, was not naturally given to follow Arms, as appeared by his saying:
Cedant Arma toge^ yea^ for that by his policy and wisdom, he delivered Rome
from the dangerous conspiracy of Cattiline: He (by dispensation) was
recompensed with the Crown Ciuique.

The dangerous and mortal engines of war, were the ingenious devises of ye
learned Captains.

The Po^t Lucretius says* that in the beginning, men only reuen^ed their
cholor, with scratching and biting: afterward they fell to throwing of s^ones,
and to sight with truncheons of woo).

It was long before the hatred and malice of man found out this pearceing
Iron, hid of the intrailes of the earth.

The AEtolians, were the first that brought the Lance into the ^ie^de.

The Lacedimonians devised the Sword and the Hachet.

The AEgiptians, Pli^. lib. 7. cho* 16.
the Healmet and the shield. Sci^us, the son of Jupiter, devised Darts and
Arrows.

Eusebius writes that Moses devised many engines of war. Lib. de
prep^ratio^ Euanget lique.


The Athenians invented the Scorpion or Arbaliste: but all these were light in
respect of Gu^pouder, and other Artillery: Which (some say) were invented by
an Alman, whose name is not known: and certainly worthyly, as one unworthy
of memory.

These, being the engenious Inue^tions of men, there are (no doubt) more
(...)idden secrets to annoye the enemy, which the study of the careful
Martialistes, no doubt, may work out.

And considering, that policy never so much abounded, and mischief and
iniquity exceeds the same: So that, to overthrow and confound the enemy,
all fear of God and human charity is banished. Therefore, to incou^ter such
furies, the Soldier that fights in a just quarrel (in my opinion) in the
fear of God, and Christian allowance, may do as the wise Physicians do,
expel one poison with an other: and yet, with this Judgment, that milder
courses be first attempted.

As before this most Christian and charitable succor, which her sacred
Majesty (anointed by gods providence) to be the comfort of all Christian
afflictions, sends to relieve the oppressions, of the long aflicted
Inhabitants of the Low Countries, has been effectually desired, and lightly
regaded.

And therefore, you worthy Gentlemen, which are armed in Gods and her Majesty's
service: for that your quarrel is grounded upon compassion and Justice, and
polliticke judgment, for the safety of your own Country, I hope (which
thousands desire) you shall return attired, with your enemies overthrow:
Which God grant, to his glory, and your everlasting honor. Amen.

FINIS.

