(...) 4
My Muse is bound, by service, zeal, and love,
The spite of death, and fortune here to show:
The Sire, and Son, whose souls are crowned above,
With ethers corse, posses the earth below,
Until the day of Christ his glorious show.
By natures corse the one bereft of breath,
By fortunes spite, the other brought to death.
5
First of the first, that Earl of Bedford hight.
A gracious Lord, as ever lui'd on earth.
A Counselor, and of the Garter knight.
Right honorable, in virtue, lore, and birth.
Image of Grace, and goodness here on earth,
Whose life may be a Mirror for the best,
Whose death (nay life) proclaims his soul at rest.
6
The Order of the Roman funerals, to be attired* withal his honors.
His purple rohe does show his honor sound,
His armed sword, the metle of his heart:
His forward leg, in S. Georges Garter bound.
A token is of courage and desert.
His Counselers place, to valor joins Art.
His loyal truth, above the rest does shine,
His Godly zeal, may well be called divine.
7
Ill men are not lamented being dead.
His mourners clothd, in hearts as sad as weeds,
His virtues blasd, for few bad men bemone.
Among the rest, his charitable deeds,
with his sweet soul, to Abrahms breast are flone.
He was a liberal Comforter of the poor.
The poor dismayed cry out that he is gone,
Whose sights and tears, their eyes do scald or blind,
as men past hope, his like again to find.
8
But to discribe, this gracious Lord at large,
His birth, life, death, his gifts and godly fear:
For Homers pen, or Virgils ware a charge,
Whose virtues firm, beseemes the noble peer,
(As Honors Grace) within his breast to bear.
His perfect life, the best devines might teach,
What works become, the holy words they preach.
9
First, His Ancestors were Lords of the manner of Barwick in Dorcetshire
of his birth (which in his acts appear)
By often decents, a Gentleman he was:
Ten worthy Squiers, the Russels Arms did bear.
To Knights likewise, decended of the race.
And through desert (which has the highest place)
His noble Sire, H. ^.
(in Henry's eye a pearl)
Clim'de by degrees, until he was an Earl.
10
Eight Cotes he bare, which hereditare were,
The Russels first, of all men known his own.
Delatowres the next, a Western heir,
Muschamp the third, Dorcetsh.
a Northern Baron known.
Herringham the fourth, a neighbor of his own.
Frewxmer the fifth, from Worcetshire, which came.
Wise was the sixth, in Devonshire long of name.
11
Derived from Truth, and lawful Pedigrewe,
These former six, his noble Father bare.
The other too, were to his Mother dew.
Sabcote she hight, Inheritrix and heir.
With Saint Mark ioynde, both in Northampton shire.
Long thus he was (as I have said before)
A Gentleman, and Caesar was no more.
12
And since his house is built of Honer now,
You well shall see, the ground work to be found:
Advance (I grant, to weak desert may bow,
And weaker Grace, the building may confound.
But this strong forte, is raisde on noe, such ground,
The noble Lord, first Earl of all his race,
The groundwork laid, by Valor, lore, and Grace.
13
His noble fathers virtues and dignities By H. 8.
He did not mount, as some men with a starte:
Valor him proud, a Scevola to be,
Baronde he was, on trial for desarte.
Through wisdom then, he climed by degree.
King Henry's eyes, did judge, as well as see,
Who with these rooms, and Garter did him staule
Lord Preauy zeal, and eke Lord Admiral.
14
He was created Earl of Bedford by E. 6. His saying: Sans ^ayde de Dieu, le ne
puis.
Edward the sixth, of Christ endeme the pearl,
For service great, and loyalty vnstainde:
Created him, of Bedford then the Earl.
Who still confessed, these guts, by God he gainde,
And blessed of God, his virtues all remainde.
(as ioynde unto, the honor he begone)
Unto this Lord, the noble Earl his son.
15
Gods wisdom often, even from the Jaws of death.
Saues those whom he, to worthy charges caul.
Thrown in the deep, he gave to Moses breath.
He was in mortal peril of drowning, and yet preserved.
At Lycaonia Stand, he did revive S. Paul.
That there escapes, might comfort thraules, in thraule,
To show his strength, and for a thousands good,
The Lord (this Lord) preserved in the stood.
16
In tender years, where one Instruction might,
Grafte lore and grace, which make the noble shine:
His virtues blasde, so clear in all men's sight.
As by the same, His service in King Henry 8. days. His Father being a
general, he had chardge at Muttrill, when he was but 18 years of age. His
most valiant service in suppressing the Western Rebels, in King Edward the* 6
days.
a number did divine.
What fruits would grow upon those bloomes in fine?
At eighteen years, when youth would wa^der far,
This Lord was stayed, and took a chardge in war.
17
The West does know, the valor of his heart,
The Rebels strong, he nobly did dismaye.
The people since, have honored his desert.
His Sire (and he) did bring them to obaye.
And ever since, have kept them at that stay.
His deeds were known, by Justice, Truth, and zeal,
To God, his Prince, and to the Common Weal*
18
His holy zeal, he builded on Gods word,
In all his pomp the Pope he did defy. He was always a most godly
Protestant. The bishops in Queen Mary's days narrowly searched him, Vide acts
and monum.

When Mary rain'de, and bishops rul'de the sword.
To cut him short, who all his Acts did eye.
A godly fear, his loyal truth did try.
His service then, and hye regard therefore,
Does Papists teach, their Princes to adore.
19
Yet, ear I show his service vnconstrain'de,
I need must show how hardly he was vide.
A Prisoner with the Lord Rich he remainde.
Till papists had, He was Prisoner with the old ^. Rich (...) Queen M^^nes
days.
his actions all pervide.
Which fauteles were, but he revenge resusde.
He laid his wrong, not to his Countries chardge
But heaping truth, did shield her with his tearge.
20
His service in Queen Mary's days at S. Quintes, at his own charge. Queen
Mary made him Lieutenant of the West Countries.
Well armed with a stout and loyal heart,
At S. Quintins, he served with proper charg^:
There needs no trompe, to sound his hye desert.
Truth bydes the push, unarmed, with shield or targe
Malgre his foes, his merits were so large,
As that the Queen esteemde him with the best,
And made him then, lieutenant of the Went.
21
The trust was great, but far more great his truth,
Yet he professed the faith he did before:
When as he saw, the Clergy void of ruth:
The tyranny of the papists in Queen Mary's days.
Wherein their rage, they seamde a Forest Bore.
And Christians blood, they drunk up more and more.
He grieved to live, where as such Tyrants rainde:
Yet loyally this bitter Cross sustainde.
22
To travel then his noble mind was set.
He was most honorably ^ntertained ^y foreign Princes.
(Which knowledge sought, to do his Country good)
Abroad his port, such noble praise did get,
As Princes when his fame they understood.
They honored him by all the means they could,
God did him shield, in spite of all his foes,
And yet he liu'de, under the Pope his nose.
23
Disposition of english fugitives.
Abroad he did not as our papists do,
In practice join, their Country to confownde:
Although his Queen, were to gods word a foe.
He never wrought, that she should be vncrownd,
Tyranny, no warrant to rebolt.
No, no, his faith, and honor both were sound.
Who often had read, and did regard it well,
That Tyrants were, no warrants to rebel.
24
No: Tyrants are the scourges of Gods Ire
Sent from above, to chasten sin below:
But as the Rod, the father throws in fire.
If in his son, he sees that grace does grow,
The sovereign God, The short reigns of Tyrants.
with Tyrants deals so:
Their rules are short, and long his mercies reign,
When as he sees that we our sins refrain.
25
England does know, my censure to be just,
When God from heaven, Example by England.
our patient bondage eide:
The Papists hope, he soon consumde to dust:
Queen Mary died even in their whottest pride,
Then down did fall their pomp of evry side. Queen Elizabeth.

The Image then of Plenty, Power, and Peace,
His mercy sent, whose reign, the same increase.
26
This noble Lord, He was the first that was sworn of Queen Elizabethes
Counsel.
upon this blessed chance,
In Counsel sat among the grauest Wights.
His care was set the Gospel to advance,
His zeal out shinde, the Papists taper lights.
To do good deeds, were set his whole delights.
His noble house of Conscience seemd a Court,
Such heaps of men for succor did resort.
27
While fortune smilde, Her great zeal to advaunce the Gospel.
he did not like the world.
Bye, vild, serach, crave, and gape are gain could fall.
Behind his back, these worldly Joys he whurld.
He fixed his eyes upon Gods Church in thrall.
Which he too free, He made high accou^^ of good preachers.
set hand heart, purse and all.
His bordes were spread, his gates wide open stood,
For Pastors pure, which ministered heavenly foodee.
28
He little passed of dum Preachers.
The Idle Dronne, the form that only had,
He thought unmeet, to take a holy charge:
But some say, though the minister be bad,
Gods word is pure: which we must make our targe.
I say no les, and yet they roue at large.
A Diamond keeps his virtue set in bras,
But set in Gold, it has a perfect grace,
29
Gods word is pure, though preached by the Devil.
The holy Ghost, yet seldom comes in hell:
Without whose gift, man's nature is most evil.
Much like a fool, that bytes the bitter shell,
And leaves the nut, the bark, not tasting well.
The multitude, of perfect judgment barde.
The Preachers words, so by his life regard.
30
This noble Lord, this grocenes did perceive,
That simple men Judge by the outward face:
And therefore did his benefices give
To such as had, both learning, gift and grace.
Would God the like, ware seen in eury place.
The God of Heaven should be glorified then,
Even, by the works, the lives, and lights of men.
31
^
Although this Lord, was honored by the sword.
His wisdom judge, d that learning was divine.
Which to advance, his bounty did afford.
Allowance great, as if he had a mine.
(...) Scholars poor, in whom good gifts did shine.
In mournful Cries, he both his ears bestowde.
His purse wide open, a fruitful pity showde.
32
To show he bilt his acttions of the Lord, Hes poesy applied to Gods power
over all actions.

Not as the most, on fortunes smiling cheer:
He chose Che sera, sera, for his word.
Gods will shall be, in heaven above and hear.
The Thunder bolte, the strongest towers tear.
The lightning flash consumes the house of reed,
And plagues do reign, upon the wicked seed.
33
What did become, Antipater was driven by a subtle policy to get Alexanders
body buried.
of Caesar's clyming head?
Of Pompeis rule, and Alexanders reign?
A light account, so soon as they were dead,
Yea they whose minds, a world could not co^taine,
With much a do: a seemly Tomb did gain.
Their conquestes great, returnde and waxed less,
For naught may stand, but what gods hand does bles.
34
The Plow in vain, is set into the ground,
Unless the seed, God blesses with increase:
The bilding of the wicked is unsound:
Although of bras he frames every peace.
Yea sinketh often, before his own disseace.
This Proverb old, does profecie his fall.
Though man propose, yet God disposes all.
35
This noble Lord, that has both seen and read,
The Rules and Reigns, yt Time, did sink and shake.
That even those men, that fortune most had fead.
That liu'de like Gods, their leaves as me^ did take.
And have no name, of whom ten thousands spoke.
By his Poesy, in true construction then:
Gods power shows, ore all the works of men.
36
And that the Lord, might all his labors bless,
His chiefest works, his temple was to bilde,
To comfort those, that languisht in distress,
Such to receive, as Tyranny exilde.
To cloth, and feade, the widow and her child.
On these good deeds, which holy men may name.
This Godly Lord, did build his forte of fame.
37
the glory that Caesar esteemed.
Caesar often said, he gloried most in this,
Unto his friend, he never was unkind:
And often forgave, his foe that did amiss,
Two worthy gi^ts beseeming Caesar's mind,
Which in this lord, his virtues brightly shinde:
His bounty and mercy very great.
For to his friend, none could more favor show.
Nor none that lived that more forgave his foe.
38
This grateful part, though many I could show,
Among the rest, a good remembrance:
Gods will this Lord into the Theames did throw,
A waterman did rush among the waves,
And by Gods aid, his dangered life he saues.
Whose aid this Lord, did nobly then reward,
And afterward to multiply regard.
39
A grateful part.
The thriftles man, by some unhappy corse,
Offended in, a venial cause of death.
The law did pas: This Lord then took remorse
On him that once, his life did help to save.
In lewe whereof his perdon he did crave.
And afterward, that he might truly live.
This man he did, a yearly pension give.
40
Ambition, wrath, envy, and disdain,
Haunt Princes Courts, Passions which follows Princes Courts.
and do the most enthrall:
But none of these his honor once could stain.
Like to the snaile, he never clymde to fall.
No, wrathful mood his wisdom could appaule:
On worldly pride, he fixed no envious eye,
Nor scornde the poor, where he good gifts did spy.
41
Although he lived in favor of his prince,
He never rose, An honorable disposition.
by any man's disgrace:
His acts so just, as Envy did convince,
To noble to crave, for to enrich his race:
Ready to give, and gave in evry place.
On Honor he, and Virtue made his stay,
And never faund, where fortune bare the sway.
42
His wisdom known, in many a cause before,
Right meet, his prince, and Commonweal to serve:
Her majesty by him did set much store.
And to say truth, Her Majesty sent him Ambassador into France.
no man could more deserve.
Who with a charge, from which he did not swerue.
In noble sort, as seemde so sad a chance,
Went to Condole, the King his death of France.
43
His honor thus by noble actions grew,
And all was grace, in which he was attired:
At home, abroad, in peace, and war most true,
Above his heart, his virtues far aspir'de.
And crownde him with more praise then he desir'de
The Scottish trains, did axe a trusty eye,
Then through the North with speed this lord did hie.
44
He was Governor of Barwicke in her May. Time.
Of Barwicke he, the Governor was made.
In which hye charge, he ruld without suspect.
The Soldiers old, he did re^resh and aid.
Who well deseru'de, he nobly did respect.
Who did offend, he mildely, did correct:
With Justice he, did ever measure Grace,
Which made him feared* through love in evry place.
45
A revenge contrary to Martial or politic Justice.
The deadly food, that thirsts after blood.
His wisdom in those parts appeased much.
The hollow Scots (that seldom wished us good)
Would often say, there never gouernd such.
Tried by his foes, his virtues bid the tuch.
And truth to say, general was the song:
The Earl of Bedford, did never Person wrong.
46
He was her Majesty's deputy to christian the scottish king.
In Scotland, when that in our sovereigns place,
He Cristened the seemly Scottish King.
He did the Rytes, with such a royal Grace.
As that his ^ame, the Scottish writers ring.
Enuyed there, Renown, he home did bring.
Lord Darley, her May* subject.
The Scottish Prince, our Sovereigns subject was,
And so (this Lord, even there, by him did pas.
47
Returned home, where Laurel rules the lance:
Where Peace does shine, which plenty does afford
Where laws do Truth, and Equity advance.
^e was Warden of the stanerie in the West.
In Justice seat, though Girt with Mars his sword:
Nothing but right was censurd by this Lord:
Of many he: was Judge, and wrongs redrest.
As Warden of the stanerie in the West.
48
An office great, which some would wrest to gain.
Yet through his gain, The true co^mendatio^ of the Justice which he
administered.
there was not one that lost:
A multitude belong unto the train.
In ruling (whom of this) he chief may boast.
His Justice gaind, the favor of the most.
And for the rest, upon a true account,
His charge did near unto his gain amount.
49
Lieutenant he was of the Western Coast, He was Lieutenant of the Counties of
Dorcet, Deuo^ of Cornwaule at the time of his death, and oftentimes before.

The Lawiers in the Western Circuts murmured that he ended so many matters

Unkind suits unnatural in this peaceable Government.



Where as he found, a number loved strife:
What means he wrought (the Lawiers do not boast)
For to appease, the discords that ware rife.
He moved strong foes, to love like man and wife.
That lack of work, made Lawiers to exclame,
But what of that? it was a godly blame.
50
And truth to say, where peace and plenty reigns.
It is a fault, to see our papar war:
They know God wet, that tasted have the pains.
Where books do wound, as deep remains ye scar.
As brown bill strokes, which nothing reach so far.
The reason is, the beast do not accord,
Their neighbors Iars, by sample of this Lord.
51
Though wholesome laws, do stre^gthe^ Commonweals,
Law is to strong for evry trifleling cause:
The fogging mate, The Petifogger, a dangerous neighbor.
is worse, then he that steals.
Where suit is raisde, for wind and wagging strawes
A fox is found, among a sort of dawes.
For you that sewe, The best end of law.
put this in your belief,
Law measures right, with toil, expense and grief*
52
To appease small discords a special duty of Justices of peace.
If like this Lord (whose fame cannot disseace,
Make friends of Foes, the meaner Justice would:
To Justices, might well be joined peace.
This quit^ reign, does challenge that they should:
Their blame, nay shame that will not if they could.
If not be sure each wheare will light the lote,
Which once upon a worldlings house was wrote.
53
Written upon a cruel worldlings house.
Thy Grownd work bilt, on discord and debate,
Thy front of brick, Temperd with widows tears,
The Orphants spoil, Thy windows and thy state.
Good yeomens falls, the beams that thee up bears.
A wonder if, thou, stand in this repair,
When built of wrongs, thy fairest beauties are.
54
Now to the Lord, of whom I lately spoke,
The Proverb goes (although more true then just)
The way is safe, A most honorable virtue in this Lord.
the strongest part to take:
But sure ^^e weak, that to the wall was thrust:
His noble mind, did aid in causes just.
Which made mensing, in open streets this song.
There rydes the Lord, their strength that suffer wrong.
56
The Thralls which ^led for persecutions fear:
When as they saw the Pope, He was a great comforter of persecuted strangers. He
was highly regarded of foreign princes*
and Papists frown.
His purse and tongue, in banishment did ch^ere
All foreign states, yea persons of renown.
Whom Tyrants sought, to tumble hedlong down.
Upon his zeal: In England greatly stayde,
Which Realm, they saw, god blessed for their aid.
57
Whose grieves he did, in all he might releaue.
His care for them, which profes the ^ospell. He greatly and in what he might,
^urthered the succor of Flaunders.
he showed to the end:
The Holland States, his love did soundly preaue.
Flaunders may say, that she has lost a friend;
To mende her state, much travel he did spend,
His helping hand, her suitors did not lack,
Which still appeard, till sickness kept him back.
57
The very bad, did reverence his name,
And all the good, He was highly honored of strangers.
with grief his lose deplore.
The strangers praise, does blow abroad his fame,
Loud of his prince, for Valor, Truth, and Lore.
A happy man, whom all men did Adore,
Happy and blessed, of God even in his birth.
Who here possessed, the blessing of the earth.
58
Blessed he was, His wives were most gracious Ladies.
of God in marriage twice,
His noble wives the samples were of Grace:
His Children such, as that in all men's eyes,
Their actions did, Daughters of his, were al married to Earls.

His sons were all Lords or Knights in his life time. Pharos, a wonderful
light made by Ptholomie Philodelphus for the derectio^ of seafaring men.


their fathers virtues blaze,
His Daughters macht, with Earls of noble raze.
His sons, himself, all Lords, or Knights did see,
By virtue raysd, as much as by degree.
59
What would you more, he was a Pharoes blase,
To prye into whose gilts, does dim my eyes:
Like him that long against the Son does gase.
Of honor sound, in Judgment grave and wise.
In all good deeds, he ever was precyse.
Alive refuge* to those whom wrong did pain.
Alive and dead, vnbleamisht with a stain.
60
He was afflicted with a most violent sickness, one year and more past.
Long thus he lived, even blessed from above.
And tried in fine, as gold is in the fire.
God chastises (quoth he) whom he does love,
And truth to say, his torment might attaint
The strongest heart, yet, he did never faint:
Yea martred long, with furious grief and pain.
No one can say, they hard him to complain.
61
The grief of heart, showde in the watery eyes,
Of friends that saw, He was wonderfully martered by the Physicians and
Surgieons. The gretnesse of his patience.
the mangling of his flesh.
But he that felt, what grief man may devise,
With comfort, did his Comforters re^resh.
His patience then, my pen cannot expres.
His sickness strange, as straungely was he used.
More strangely calde, when Art had him refusde.
62
What should I say? that Science is divine:
Yet knowledge fails, The Doctors and Surgions gave him over.
unless God blesses skill.
The master Docters, gave him ore in fine.
And left his Cure, unto the Lord his will.
The mournful cries, the house with sorrows fill.
The Lord then had, M. Marrad and Fow^er western men, Surgion^. Description of
the world, and of all estates.
compassion of our moan,
And blessed the works, of men that ware unknown.
63
But o their Cure, did but prolong his pain,
Even from this Cross, he longed Christ to see.
He heald this world, and all her beauties vain.
The prowdest pomp, a short felicity.
The regal care, a Golden misery,
The Maiestrate, an honorable thrawle.
The poor man blessed, whose conscience has no gawle.
64
But ware mishap from worldly pleasure free,
So short a use may not be counted Joy.
Man's life is like, a bloome upon a tree, The uncertainty of Life.

The certainty of death.



Which evry storm, is ready to destroy.
No threatening can the Monster death annoy.
From all his pomp, he takes the Prince away.
Even as the night, does cloud the brightest day.
65
A sorry tale, The worldly man's felicity Nemo ante obitum ^eatus.
unto the worldly thrawle,
Which has health, wealth, and in his bowels peace:
But foolish man, that these thy pleasures cawle*
Thy lasting Joy, is after thy decease.
A grain of wheat does rot ere it increase.
Even so the flesh, a lasting Joy to give,
Must turn to dust, and then the soul does live.
66
And from this ground, this Lord did never sma^ue
he likened life to voyages at Sea: Life like, voyages at Sea.

Some short, some long, as wind and wether ^a^ue,
And as men Joy, their ships return to see,
Because their wealth, within their bowels be.
The godly so, in death their comfort eye,
Which made him live, as he would daily dye.
67
Return of health* which visibly was seen, He never had great care of
worldly causes, since his former sickness. Her Majesty oftentime most
graciously visited him, in his former sickness.

To tempt this Lord, was but an idle train:
The visiting of our most gracious Queen,
Did glad his heart, but with no clyming vain:
Which swells still, where princes favors reign.
She loved him as her strength in time of need,
He honored her, with duty, zeal, and dread.
68
He straind him self, far more then was his case*
To serve her highness, in his latter health:
In Parliament, he did himself dissease,
About sound laws, to arm the Common wealth:
But private gain, he grounded on a shelfe,
Came the Brydegrome by day or else by night.
In his clear lamp, he ever more had light.
69
Not like his worth, his life before is shown,
The more our loss his death does now draw near: His most godly and blessed
end.

What was his life, his godly death made known,
His sharp assault, his faith did nothing scare:
His care was past, One of his godly sayings, in his last end.
he found his Conscience clear,
He saw by faith, the perfect life in dead,
The VVomans seed, trod on the Serpents head.
70
The senses of a number, fail before they deseace.
In those fearce panges, man's senses often quail
Their feeble heads, are full of Idle thought:
Their hollow eyes, of worldly sight do fail.
Their foltring tongues, do wag and utter naught:
Their hearts do pant, as they with death had fought.
But he whose life, by none of these did wro^ng,
In death had use of eye, heart, head, and tongue.
71
He had parfect use of his senses unto his latter gasp.

He lively confessed his faith, in the tremblyng passage of death.


His head was free, from worldly thought and care,
His heart did still contemplate of gods book:
His tongue, his faith, did in his end declare:
His eyes abroad, did toward heaven look.
His hands he heau'd, when strength the rest for sooke,
His chamber seemed, a heavenly preaching place,
Him self even then, the soundest teacher was.
72
Among the rest, his sayings full of Grace,
For our regard, this one would here remain.
I do thank God, that I shall dye in peace,
And do not live, A fruitful admonition upon hi^ last saying.
for to behold the pain,
Which for our sins, on earth is like to reign.
Regard it well, and each man one amend,
What good men dreed, God forth most does send.
73
S. Austine says, that God is all in all,
And with his Grace* is ever with the good:
It follows then, the wicked to appaule.
His vengeance is, even mixed with their blood.
His mercy long, his Justice has forestood:
But tempt not far, the lothest man to fight,
When he is would, the soundest blows does smight.
74
England beware, bewarnd if thou be wise,
Thy ^ecret sins, ^or open vengeance cry:
The words are mine, but his the sound advise.
What men forshaue, that ready are to dye.
The sage do hold, even for a prophecy.
His eyes (no dobut) the highest heavens did peace,
And saw even that, his tongue did then rehearce.
7^
For to conclude, the word, the devil, and death,
He vanquished, in all his households sight.
From Gaspes, His departure most quiet.
or Groans, ware free his latter breath,
His life did wear, even like, a Taper light:
O happy soul, that made so strong a fight,
And thus in fine, he mildly did disseace,
Even in the place, where long he lived in peace.
76
A happy end, that Plato calls blessed:
The end that he most gladly did embrace.
The end, his, end that many since have mist.
The end that fails, his memory to deface,
Whose virtues live, and shines in his race.
The end that soon, had raisd this heavy moan:
Alas the Earl of Bedford now is gone.
77
Yea, he forth of this sinful world is gone,
Gone from the trains, of Envy and disdain:
Gone, gone, before the knowledge of this moan,
Which would have grieu'de him more then all his pain:
His noble son, treacherously is slain,
Of the valiant Lord Russell.
His son, his heir, of honor, Grace, and all.
Stout Lord Russell, whom Mars we well might call.
78
A passion hear so dul^ my heavy muse,
As that I faint, to sound his high renown,
My hand, and judgment have forgot their use,
To stain my work, the tears do trickle down.
O dismal tune, where in the heavens should frown
To reaue at once, two Stars of Russels Fame,
The Sire, and So^^e, to all this Realm amame.
79
Frauncis the Sire, derrast by natures Corse:
Frauncis the Son, was slain by Fortunes spite.
By Fortunes spite, armed with treacherous force.
But yet in spite, of all the spights their might,
His fame shall shine, when shame shall reign and light,
Upon his foes, and all the cursed seed,
That gilty are, of this most impious deed.
80
God will be just: you Murthrers then unjust,
Your judgment hear (although pronounst by me)
The God that said, God pun^^^eth murder, for the most pai^e with visible
vengeance.
to Cain most accuest.
Who Caine does kill, shall scanenfolde punished be.
Your Murder hear, even in the worst degree,
Where law of Arms, and martial faith was broke
Of God and man, will feel the wrathful stroke.
81
I judge not who are gilty of this deed:
God will reveal, the deepth of all this reach:
But this I say: At the spu^. In the last siege of Edenbrough Vide Holengh, Cre.
his valor they did dread,
Experience erst, before their eyes did teach,
Where danger stood, his courage made a breach,
Which made them seek, by Cowardice his breath.
Who would himself have else revenged his death.
82
A shameful part, upon a day of Truse,
Where mortal foes, He was treache^ously slain, upon a day of Truse.
no sharp reuengement try,
But once again: who set this foul abuse?
T'ware good that he, the (...) ^ye,
And deserts haunt, till vengeance (...) dye:
Yea there to dreede, until his (...),
Each bush that strrres a RVSS (...) friend.
83
But leave we here, Ever (...) last rebellion in the (...). He followed all
o^ters of service, in Scotland and the Norther^ parts.
his foes unto their fall,
And see how hye ^^^^^e virtue ^a^^d this Lord,
When Treason armed the Northern parts with thrall,
In tender years, with noble courage sturde*
He left the Court, and took him to the sword:
But did not with the multitude retower,
When Rebels fled, before their Princes Power.
84
He married the daughter and heir of S. John Foster Knight. L. Warden of the
middle marcher.
To stay him there, he married in those parts,
A loving wife: and S John Fosters heir,
Who dyed soon, yet for her sweet deserts,
And for the zeal, he to that service bare.
To leave those parts, he never since had care:
Whose government, and hazard often of blood,
Approved him armed, to do his Country good.
85
The Roman wars, record a noble fight,
By Mantius son: in Combat with his foe:
TITUS MANLIVS being Consul, commanded that none of his Soldiers should
fight, but when he commanded them Ge^^iu^ Metius one of his Enimyes pricked
forth of his Campanie, and challenge Ma^^ius Son. The commandment of his
father was that h^^ should not fight. But he being the Consul Son, rather
then the Ehim (...) him with Cowa^dise, preferred a certain death, by breac^
(...) Commandment, before a dishonorable life in refusing (...): He slew his
enemy and was himself put to death, (...) justice. Even so this noble Lord,
although not so (...) because he valiauntly adventured his person in a (...),
at the assaults of Edinbrough Castle, which Sir W Drurie, ^^^^^enant, had
appointed for men of meaner reputation, was by the said Lieutenant Committed
toward. But albeit, discipline in martial policy it to be reuere^sed. The
noble courage of this Lord, answered (...) saying: (...) matters of honorable
danger, there ought to be no difference between a king and a mean Soldier:
and through that thought upon a mortal drought, he powered a present of (...)
the (...) because it sufficed not to releaue his whole Army, Vid^ ^^oling Cro.
His father yet, in all his Soldiers sight,
Put him to death, because he did undo,
His Order made, that none should hazard so.
This Lord likewise, commanded was to ward,
For valiantues, beyond his life's regard.
86
Knighted he was (and worthy in the field)
Who never yet did faint, He was Knighted by the Earl of Sussex, general of
the field.

His stont answer to his treacherous enemies. He lived, until the day,
after that he was wounded.


to see his foe:
Yea thus betrayde, when he was wild to yield,
He answered thus: That will I never do,
Add drew his sword, but o they shot him through:
Yet home he went, and carried death alive,
So long as strength, with mortal wounds might strive.
87
What should I say? In field a Mars he was,
In time of peace, a stayde and noble Knight:
In pride of years: to be cut up like gras,
Gives cause of moan, to many a worthy wight
Of Chivalry, who held him for the light:
But all in vain, To market to be sold,
The young sheape comes, as well as does the old.
88
To ward Deaths Dart, Honnour is no shield,
Young years, Spes famae solet ad virtutom impellere multos. Johannes de
Temporib^s, lived in Charles the 5. time.
fair looks, nor prayer may entreat.
The Prince, the Peer, and evry estate must yield,
Of fame yeat Death, the (...) not get
Desire whereof men's minds (...) set
And sure this Lord, by Fame (...) here,
Old John of Times, that saw (...) ^^^dred year.
89
He lived so, as he shall never dye.
In Heaven nor earth, while any earth remain:
His godly life, is crownde above the sky:
His noble deeds, which no foul deed does stain
(Though venial sin, in evry flesh does reign)
Does make his life, his mortal life I say,
In fame to live, till Mor^all Time decay.
90
I say no more, that can not praise too much,
This Lord, that lived well and dyed blessed:
Fame spreades abroad, reports I dare not tuch,
Ti^l leave do join, in knowledge with the rest,
Truth shields from shame, and Truth is yet expressed,
And I in time, God willing will expose,
With leave obtainde, the practice of his foes.
Viuit post funera virtu^s.
AN EPITAPHE UPON THE DEATH of the right honorable Frauncis, Earl of Bedford,
Baron Russell etc. And of his most valiant Son, and heir S. Frauncis, Lord
Russell, treacherously slain by a Stratageme of the Scotes, and dyed the day
before his noble father.
Hear underneath the Earl of Bedford lies,
Whose head was fraught, with Grace, and godly care.
Who ears were open, to hear the poor ma^s cries.
Whose eyes to wi^h, his neighbors goods forbear:
Whose tongue pronounst, but good and godly speech.
Whose hands (...) and seldom did receive,
Whose holy (...) ^^rts of men might teach.
This painted wo^^d, did nothing but deceive.
He lived and died, as he with God should reign:
But O his loss ioynes with an other rod.
His noble Son slain by a Scottish train.
His father lead, the happy way to God,
Upon a day of trute, they did him wound,
Whom shame (no doubt) by vengeance will confound.
Nemo ante obitum beatus.

