PROTOTYPES, OR, THE PRIMARIE PRECEDENT PRESIDENTS OVT OF THE BOOK OF GENESIS.

Showing, The Good and Bad things They did and Had

Practically applied to our Jnformation and Reformation.

By that faithful and painful Preacher of Gods Word, William Whately late
Pastor of Banbury.

Together with Mr. WHATELYES Life and Death.

Published by Mr. Edward Leigh and Mr. Henry Scudder, who were appointed by the
Author to peruse his manuscripts, and printed by his own Copy.

Vivitur Exemplis. Praecepta ducunt, Exempla trahunt.

1 COR. 11.1. Be ye followers of me, even as I also am of Christ.

EXODUS 23.2. Thou shall not follow a multitude to do evil.

1 COR. 10.11. Now all these things happened unto them for Ensamples: And they
are written for our admonition.

LONDON. Printed by G. M. for EDWARD LANGHAM Booke-seller in Banbury, MDCXL.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL THE MAYOR, THE WORSHIPFUL THE ALDERMEN AND
BVRGESSES, AND THE REST OF THE INHABITANTS OF THE TOWN AND PARISH OF BANBVRY.
Right Worshipful, etc.
AS I could not but congratulate my own and your happiness in the enjoyment
of your worthy Pastors labors, so both I and many other Christians do now
condole your misery in the loss of the good Author. The greater your
happiness was, the greater now is your misery, and I fear many of you prized
not the blessing so much as you should have done, and that you knew not the
greatness of the benefit so well by the fruition as now by the want of it. At
Banbury even amongst you was your Pastor borne and bred, and there he lived
and died. Ministers are called Incumbents, so was he being diligently resident
in his place, they are styled Lights, so was he, like a candle or lamp which
spent himself to give light to others. He spent his means and strength amongst
you, and as himself in his sickness said, He sought not yours but you. Of all
the Ministers that ever I knew so experimentally, he was the most unblameable
in his conversation. I had the happiness to live almost a year with him in
his house, near four years under his Ministry, and to be esteemed by him one
of his faithfullest friends, I have cause to bless GOD for him whilst I live,
since it pleased him by his means, not only to reveal many saving truths
unto me, but also to set them on with such power, as I hope I shall never
forget them. Oh, with what life and zeal would he both preach and pray! and
how strict and watchful was he in his whole life! being (as every good
Minister should be) Blameless, Sober, Just, Holy, Temperate, 1 Timothy 3.2. Tit.
1.8.
of good Behavior, given to Hospitality, apt to teach, a lover (...). will
bear both readings.

2 Timothy 2.15.


of good things and good men. He studied to approove himself unto GOD, a
workman that needed not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the word of Truth. 1 Timothy 4.12 1 Pet. 5.3. Tit. 2.7. There are two singular virtues in a good
Example.
He propounded to you the Examples of holy Writ, and was himself whilst he
lived, an Example and Pattern of all good works, If that saying therefore of
Austins be true, So many as a man shall edify by a good Example, 1 It may
profit a world of people. 1 These. 1.7, 8

2 It is lasting and may do good for a long time after.

1 Pet. 3.5, 6. M. Harris at Hanwell.


for so many he shall receive a reward of a blessed life, than surely he has
now received a full reward for all the good he did by his holy life, unto
those with whom he conversed. In a word, he was a most pious and accomplished
Divine for his ministerial parts and pains (as one of his near Friends said
truly) he might sooner be envied than matched and equalled; being in this
like Saul, higher than his brethren by the head. He was well skilled in both
the Original tongues, being able to render the Text out of his Hebrew Bible or
Greek Testament to another in our mother tongue, as familiarly almost, as if
it had bin English. For the Arts, he was a good Logician, as his exact Analysis
of the ten Commandments shows, a good Philosopher, as his Sermons in
manuscript on the 104. Psalm do witness, a good Rhetorician or Orator, as
his printed Treatises abundantly testify. He had words at will and could
readily and aptly express himself in his Sermons, which gift of Elocution is
requisite if not necessary for a complete Divine.

He had by long He was a Preacher at Banbury above thirty years.
Experience gotten the art of preaching, and he wrote a tract concerning that
subject; he had an excellent faculty in characterizing or fitly describing a
virtue or vice, or any other thing, and though he had no common-place-booke of
his own, yet he could treat of any subject, I might also extol his other
indowments, and without danger of exceeding magnify him for his strong
natural parts, his solid judgment and tenacious memory, and commend some
virtues wherein he excelled to your imitation, as his Humility,
Mercifullnesse, Beneficence, Laboriousnesse and Diligence He went over in his
preaching the whole Book of Judges, both the Samuels, the 1 Kings to the 11.
C. or therabout, all the Psalm. to the 106. and the whole Gospel of Job. besides
all the principles of Religion often.
in his Calling, and then also show how comfortably he died, being full of
heavenly speeches and godly Exhortations.

Therefore I pass from himself to this Opus posthumum, this first work of
his which since his death came to light, viz. Sermons on all the Examples or
Historical part of Genesis, which Book contains a brief and short Story of
the things done from the beginning of the world to the death of Joseph, for the
space as it is thought by some of 2309. years, by Doctor Willet of 2368.
years. Examples are not unfitly compared unto looking-Glasses, wherein one may
behold as well what to eschew, as what to follow: So you should follow the
Faith of Abraham and Obedience of Isaac, but shun their lying and dissembling;
follow Noah and Lot in their Righteousness and Zeal, but shun their
drunkenness and incest.

And because an Example of a Person living amongst you may be more prevalent
with some then the Examples of others though singularly holy whose virtues they
only read of (as a Sermon delivered, Viva voce, does more affect then the same
read out of a Book) So walk therefore as you had him for an Example, and be
you followers of him, as he was of CHRIST, in the Graces before mentioned and
all holy conversation. Remember him who had the rule over you, Heb. 13.7.
who has spoken unto you the Word of GOD, whose Faith follow and Charity too;
for Master Whately was the most bountiful Minister to the poor I think in
England of his means, your Consciences will witness that he has often
pressed and urged this Duty upon you, and as he was earnest in persuading his
Hearers to beneficence, so he practiced the same Himself, entertaining some
poor widows or necessitous Persons weekly at the least at his Table, and
giving the tenth of all his Estate that way, and see how GOD blessed him for
the same, his Estate (as himself told me) prospered the better after he
took that course, and in his sickness he comforted himself with that
Promise, Psalm 41.1, 3. Blessed is he that considers the poor, the LORD
will deliver him in time of trouble. The LORD will strengthen him upon the bed
of languishing. O follow him therefore who by Faith and Patience inherits the
Promises, let his good Example and wholesome Instructions provoke you to all
holiness, that you also may partake with him in that happiness of which he
is now fully possessed,

Your true Christian Friend, Edward Leigh.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
Reader,
AMidst the numberless number of Books wherewith in this scribbling age the
presses are oppressed, there is scarcity enough of such as are useful and
profitable. As therefore the Art of Printing was a happy invention for the
propagating of learning, so surely we are beholding to those who write such
things as are worthy to be published: Since (as one says) He that speaks
profits for an hour, but he that writes profits for ever. This subject
thus handled by this worthy deceased Author is an unbeaten tract, few (if any)
having gone over the Exsamples of Scripture in such a doctrinall and practical
way both. It seemed to me in the preaching both pleasant and profitable; Own
tulit punctum qui miscuit utile dulci.
pleasant in regard of the explaining of diverse stories; profitable in respect
of the particular application of all, He being (according to his manner) large
and lively therein. Had it pleased God to have continued him in life, until
he had finished all the Examples of either Testament, such a work from so
able a Divine would have been of singular use. But he was Frumentum Dei, as
Ignatius said, by Mortification and Selfe-denyall, He was made clean bread
for Christ who was the bread of life for him; God therefore has gathered this
wheat into his garner, Mat. 3.12.
and he now rests from this and all other labors. We think fitting also to
give others to understand, which be M. Wheatelyes own works done by himself,
and such as they may account genuine, viz. those only which come forth either
in our names, viz. EDWARD LEIGH, HENRY SCUDDER, or with an Epistle at least
from one of us. You may observe in the beginning of this Treatise, what was M.
Wheatlies constant method in handling the Examples. In each person he
considered three things, His Birth, Life and Death. In his Life he observed his
carriage and behavior in respect both of the deeds he did, good, bad,
indifferent and doubtful, and the things which befell him, either prosperously
or adversly, in benefits or afflictions. This shall suffice in brief to
premise concerning this Work, and so wishing thee much benefit by the same, I
rest

Thy hearty Well-wisher, EDWARD LEIGH.

THE LIFE AND DEATH OF Mr. WILLIAM WHATELY, LATE Minister of the Word at
Banbury in the County of Oxford, written by Henry Scudder Minister of the Word
at Collingborne-ducis, in the County of Wilts.
IT has been a commendable use in the Church of God from the Primitive times
down to us; that the lives of some or other (especially of the more famous
Ministers and lights therein) have been written by men who best knew, and had
learned what their lives and conversation was. This they did not only to
vindicate their names from the slanders of the wicked, who will speak evil of
all that oppose their evil ways, and also that the dead might be duly
honored; but chiefly that the living by their good Examples might glorify God
for them and be edified.

This writing and printing the lives of worthy men, is like the engravings with
the point of a diamond, raising up for them an everlasting monument; upon which
the light of their Faith and good works is made to shine before men, that
seeing their Faith and holiness they may follow them; and may also praise God
for his graces in them, and for the good which has bin done by them, and so
glorify their Father which is in Heaven.

I have been earnestly entreated to write the Life and Death of M. William
Whately, late Pastor of the Church of Banbury, I was made choice of the
rather, because of that intimatenesse of Friendship which was betweeene us, and
because of our long acquaintance, being of the same time in the famous
University of Cambridge and of the same College and Chamber and having the
same Tutor; and afterward when we were both placed in the Ministry we lived
sometime together in one house, By marriage of sisters.
and a great while near one another, and were also nearly allied

I know none that had like means to know him more thoroughly then I. I have
therefore not unwillingly set pen to paper, and do here in all plainness and
sobriety of truth reckon up and report his life and death in a short sum,
that those who will may read and make their use of it. For in many things he
may be a lively pattern to us his Brethren in the Ministry of the Gospel
of Christ; and the like in many things for the imitation of all that desire to
live godly in Christ Jesus.

This M William Whately was borne at Banbury a borough Town very well known in
Oxfordsbure.

M. Thomas and Mistres Joyce Whately.
His Parents were both of them forward professors of the Gospel of Christ, and
of the power of Godliness and Religion, according as it is now mainetained in
the Church of England. They were both of chief note and place in the Town,
his Father being often Major, and a long time a standing Justice of Peace in that
Borough. His Mother was a rare woman for natural parts; but chiefly for
Piety, Diligence in her Calling, Frugality and Mercifullnesse to the poor. She
was a right Lois or Eunice in breeding up this her Son (as she did her other
Children) in the Knowledge of the holy Scriptures from a child.

His Parents trained him up in his younger days to learning, setti^g him to the
best Schools that were in those parts, where he profited in learning (as also
he did in the University) above most of his equals in years. This he did
by reason of the Excellency of the natural parts which God had given him,
namely, a quick apprehension, a clear judgment and a most happy memory.

His ripeness in Grammar learning in Latin, Greek and Hebrew was so early
that about the fourteenth year of his age, he was sent to Christ's College in
Cambridge; where God provided him and me a M Thomas Pot
Tutor, one of a thousand for Piety, Learning, Diligence in reading unto, and
in a most loving and wise care of governing and godly instructing of his pupils.

In the University he was an hard Student and quickly became a good Logician
and Philosopher, a strong disputant, and an excellent Orator. He delighted much
in the study of Poetry and the Mathematiks.

He was a constant hearer of M. Doctor Chaderton and of Mr. Perkins who at
that time were famous Preachers in Cambridge. And it was our Tutors manner to
cause all his Pupills to come to Prayers into his Chamber every evening, and
he called all the under graduates to give account of what they had heard upon
the Lords day, and when any of us were at a stand and nonplus, he would say
Whately, what say you? then he would seldom fail, but repeat as readily, as
if he had preached the Sermon himself. By this he did win our Tutors love, and
our wonder at him; but (such was our pride) he gained our envy of him

His Father (whether because he was not resolved what calling to breed him to,
or for what other cause I know not) after that he had with credit proceeded
Bachelour of Arts, he took him home, where he abode some good time, yet
applying himself unto his studies.

While he remained at home with his Father he married the Daughter of one
Master George Hunt, the son of that tried and prepared Martyr John Hunt
mentioned in the Book of Martyrs, who was condemned to be burnt for Religion,
but was saved from the execution thereof by the death of Queen Mary. This
Master George Hunt was bred up in the Famous f^ee School of the
Marchant-Taylers in London, and afterward by the encouragement of Master D.
Humfry (by occasion of a visit of that School) and by the furtherance of M
George and Mr. John Kingsmells, and by the exhibitions of Bishop Pilkinton (all
which for their honor sake I name) he was called unto, and mainetained in that
worthy Foundation of good Learning, Magdalen College in Oxford, till he was
Fellow of that House, where he continued till he had borne the offices of
Deane of Arts and Deane of Divinity. Afterward by the means of those worthy
Master Kingsmells, he was preferred to the Church of Collingborn-ducis in the
County of Wiles. where for the space of fifty and one years and five months
he lived a sound and constant Preacher of the Word, and was of an unblameable
and holy life, even until the oil of his radical moisture was spent, and the
candle of his life of it self went out, in a full and good old age, after a
long and joyous expectation, and longing for his blessed change, which was in
the eighty and third year and fifth month of his age.

This Master George Hunt (after that by importunity he had got this his son
in law to make trial of his ability to preach) he overperswaded him to intend
the ministry. And thereupon he entered himself into Edmund Hall in the famous
University of Oxford, and took his Degree of Master of Arts.

Not long after he entered into the Ministry, and he was presently called to
be a Lecturer at Banbury which he commendably performed above the space of
four years, and then was called to be Vicar of the same Church, which office
he faithfully discharged near thirty years till he died.

The abilities wherewith God had endued him for his work of the Ministry were
more then ordinary. For he was of a quick understanding, of a clear and
deep Judgment, of a most firm memory, and of a lively spirit. He was
naturally eloquent, a master of his words, having words at will. He had a most
able body and sound lunges, and till some years before his death, he had a
most strong and audible voice. And according as his matter in hand, and his
auditory needed, he was both a terrible Boanerges, a son of Thunder, and also
a Barnabas, a son of sweet consolation. And which was the crown of all, God
gave him an heart to seek him and to aim at the saving of the souls of all
that heard him. His speech and preaching was not with entising words of man's
wisdom, but in demonstration of the spirit and of power. He was an Apollos
not only eloquent, but withal mighty in the Scriptures. He like some of the
Ancient Fathers was as occasions fell out sometimes an every days Preacher. He
preached ordinarily in his own Church twice each Lord's Day, and catechized for
above half an hour before evening Prayer, examining and instructing the
youth, and once a week he preached the ordinary Lecture.

He was much against all such preaching as was light, vain, scenicall,
impertinent, raw and indigested.

His preaching was plain, but as much according to the Scripture and also to
the rules of Art, and of right Reason, as any that ever I heard or have heard
of. In conference he has told me what he aimed at, and what use he made of
the Arts, and what rules he set to himself in the studying of his Sermons,
which was as follows,

That he might better understand his Text, he made use of his Grammar learning
in Greek and Hebrew, in which tongues the Scripture is written. Also he would
use the help of Rhetoric to discover to him what forms of speech in his
Text was to be taken in their primary and proper signification, and what was
elegantly clothed and wrapped up in tropes and figures that he might unfold
them, and see their naked meaning: Then well weighing and considering the
context, he would by the help of Logic find out the scope of the Holy
Ghost in that Scripture. He would endeavor when he began to enter upon the
preaching of any Chapter, to Analise and take the Chapter into its several
branches and parts. Then he would if it were a doctrinall Text, note the
Doctrine as it lay in the Text and so prosecute it. Or if the Text consisted of
illustrations or circumstances of some principal truth there prosecuted; he
would then gather from some notable part or branch of his Text, an apt
Doctrine, or Divine Truth which should so immediately follow, that the Truth
observed in the Text should be the argument or middle term, whereby in a simple
Sillogisme, he could conclude his Doctrine. Next, he would seek for apt
proofs out of Scripture to confirm it. Fewer or more as he thought best,
which done, because other arguments according to Scripture and right Reason are
forcible to convince and confirm reasonable men in any truth, he would find
out Reasons of his Doctrine, but he aimed that they should be strong
Arguments, or middle terms by which he might likewise Sillogistially conclude
his said Doctrine.

Then according to the nature of the Doctrine, and the need and aptness of his
Auditory; he would as from an infallible consequent of his Doctrine by way of
Application, confirm some profitable Truth, which yet by some might happily
be questioned, or else convince men of some error, or reproove some vice, or
exhort to some Duty, or resolve some doubt, or case of conscience, or comfort
such as needed Consolation. In all which sorts of Applications he did make use
of more or fewer of them as there might be cause, and he would be careful
that his Doctrine should be the Argument or middle term whereby he might
sillogistically conclude the maine Proposition of any of his said uses: And if
the reproof or exhortation did need pressing home upon the conscience, then
he would study to enlarge his Speech, showing motives to induce to such a
duty; and also disswasives from such a vice, taking his Arguments from duty
to God, decency or shamefullnesse, pleasure or pain, gain or loss.

And here again he would use the help of Rhetoric, but all for the most part
in a concealed way, without all affectation. And sometimes he would show the
effectual means of attaining of the Grace and power to perform the duty to
which he exhorted. And sometimes likewise he would show the remedies against
such or such a vice from which he dissuaded, as may be seen by his Sermons
already extant. Also when he thought it was needful to discuss and handle
any common place or head of Divinity, he would do it very judiciously, fully
and most profitably.

Though he had but an ordinary study of books for such an accomplished Divine,
yet he was one who had read very much. For he would read most swiftly, yet
not cursorily, for he could give an account of the substance and most
remarkable particulars of what he had so read.

He had also always when he pleased the benefit of a Booke-sellers shop,
which caused him to forbear to buy many Books.

Though he preached so often, yet what he preached was before well studied
and premeditated. He usually did pen his Sermons at large; and if before he
preached, he had but so much time as to read over what he had written, and to
gather it up into short heads, he was able if he thought it fit to deliver
it in public well near in the same words.

It pleased God to put a seal to his Ministry in the conversion, confirming
and building up of many thousand souls by his means in the whole course of
his Ministry.

He was a most diligent visitor of the sick people that were under his charge
without respect of Persons, after that it came to his knowledge that they were
sick.

He was a ready Peacemaker amongst his flock that should happen to be at
variance.

He abounded in works of Mercy, he was a truly liberal man, one that
studied liberal things; for he would seek out to find objects of his mercy,
rather then to stay till they were offered. He did set apart and expended for
the space of many years for good uses the tenth part of his yearly commings
in, both out of his temporal and ecclesiastical means of maintenance.

He had an heavenly gift in Prayer, both for aptness and Fulness of
Confessions, Petitions, Supplications, Intercessions and Praises, as also for
readiness and copiousnesse of apt words, together with Fervency of Spirit to
pour them out unto God in the name of Christ in the behalf of himself, and
of all those who in Prayer joined with him.

He had this singular ability that in his Prayer after Sermon, he could
collect into a short Sum all which he had delivered to his Hearers and make it
the matter of his Prayer to God, to the end they might be inwardly taught of
God, and become Believers and doers of what was taught them.

Likewise when he had read a Psalm or Chapter in his Family, he was so well
seen in the Text, and of so good a Judgment, and of so choice a memory that
though the Chapter was part of the Ceremonial Law, or in the books of
Numbers, Chronicles, and hardest Prophecies, he in his Prayer would discover
the scope and meaning and chief notes of Observation, and their use, in such
sort, that oft-times when I have heard him, I have much longed that I could
call them all to mind; For I found the matter of his Prayer to be a better
Commentary of that Chapter, with apt observations and applications for use,
then I could find in any Author that I had read, who had written thereupon.

His manner was daily Morning and Evening to call his Family together, and to
read a Psalm or Chapter in the Scriptures, and to pray with them and often to
catechize them; besides his constant Prayer Morning and Evening with his wife
and also constantly alone by himself.

He did set a part private days of Humiliation for his Family upon special
occasions, and often times before their preparation for their due receiving of
the Lord's Supper. At which times he did exceed himself in pouring out his
soul to GOD in most abundant and most free Confessions of sin, and
expressions of Sorrow for sin, with tears and with earnestness of Petition
for pardon and grace, and for the good of the Churches of God, but for our
whole State and Church of England more specially and particularly.

He was much in days of private Fasting and humbling himself before God
alone, that he might make and keep his peace with God, and obtain more Grace
to keep more close to him, and to walk more evenly with him, and that he
might the better keep under his body, and bring it into subjection (following
the Example of the Apostle) least having preached to others he himself should
not live answerable to his Doctrine without reproof, knowing that Ministers
ought to be unreproveable. He was so much in this that it is thought by such as
knew him best that it impaired the health of his body, though it made much for
the good of his soul.

He was very able and very ready to confer with, and to resolve the doubts of
those many who in love and desire of information came unto him.

He bare a tender love unto, and had a conscionable care of that great people
over which God had made him over-seer. For, although his mainetenance from them
was but small in comparison, and unkindnesses and discouragements many and his
offers of greater preferment in the Church in respect of outward mainetenance
were often and importunate; yet he would not be persuaded to leave them. Yea
though once for reasons which suddenly took him, he did promise to accept of
another charge, yet within a while he entreated me to tell that Person to
whom he had promised, that he had better thought of it, and did desire to be
released of his Promise, and that out of Consideration of that great people
which he should leave, saying, that if he should accept of that lesser charge,
when he should come into the Church amongst them his heart would in yerning
toward his other people, ask him what he did there.

He was duly inquisitive after the affairs of Gods Church and people, and
according as he received true intelligence of their weal or woe, so he had
his sympathies and Fellow-feelings with them in either of their conditions

He was much grieved and troubled when he saw that difference of opinions,
and thereupon strangeness, distractions and rends to arise and be made in the
Church amongst Brethren professing for the maine, and in fundamentalls the
same Truths. He signified so much to me with bewayling many times.

He was judiciously charitable to any that should differ in some opinions from
him, so long as he saw that they agreed with him in the maine and Fundamental
Points of Religion, and were diligent to enquire after the Truth, and saw also
that they did indeed show the Power of Godliness in their lives. He could and
did highly esteem them, love them, and converse Christianly and familiarly
with them, and that because (although he thought they were in an error, and
he would in private and public endeavor to reclaim them) yet he was
persuaded that their desire was to seek Christ, and that they had an aim to
know God aright, and to serve him in sincerity.

Notwithstanding all this good which according to the truth has been said of
him; it must be remembered that he was a man and not without his imperfections
and frailties. For what man is he that lives and sins not. And as it is
also said, In many things we sin all.

It is usual with God that men of the greatest parts and gifts should be
exercised with some or other inordinate affection to be mortified, and some
strong temptations, to have some thorn in the flesh, or some or other
messenger of Satan (as the Apostle had) to buffet them: Else they would be
exalted above measure to the sleighting, contemning, and condemning of their
Brethren, and other men would have too high an opinion of them, half deifying
them, despising those who are no less holy, but not so excellently gifted as
they.

There was nothing which did more evidently discover truth of Gods grace in
this man, then that which was occasioned by his slips and strong temptations;
For these made him more watchful over himself, then otherwise he would have
bin; It made him more humble and more to loath his original corruption and
sinful nature, and bewailingly to cry out with the Apostle, O miserable man
that I am who shall deliver me from the body of this Death. And that because
he was (as other the dear servants of God are) most sensible of the
captivity and bondage which sin would strive to hold him under, since that when
he would do well, evil was present with him, and made him sometimes to do
some things which in the bent of his soul he would not have done. This served
to make him more humble in himself, more earnest in prayer to God and more
pitiful toward others in whom this sin remains and dwells (even after
conversion) which (as the Apostle says) is a weight and does easily beset
them, to hinder them in their Christian race. And this I am assured off, that
he would be the first espier of those faults of his when the world could not
nor did take notice of them, having no peace in himself until he had with all
speed and earnestness, sought and regained pardon and peace with God.

He may be a pattern to all in receiving admonition from any that should in
love mind him of his fault. He was glad when any of the righteous smote him
and would take it well, not from his Superiors only, but from his equals and
far inferiors. He had learned with David to bless God that sent them, and
to bless the advice, to follow it, and to bless the party and thank him that
gave it. He would entreat such, as he has done me in particular, not to be
wanting to him in this Christian office of Love; and he would really show more
testimonies of his love to such afterward then ever formerly; which is a sure
argument of uprightness. A most reverend Divine who had known him from his
infancy, and had often conversed with him, gave testimony of him to this effect
unto me and others when lately he spoke of him by occasion of the mentioning of
his sickness.

His latter days were his best days; for in the judgment of those who could
judge spiritually, he grew exceedingly in humility and in spiritual and
heavenly mindedness, his last works were his best works, arguing him to be of
Gods grafting, and planted in the house of the Lord.

Lastly, he had a most happy and comfortable success of his conflicts against
sin* For a good while before his sickness and death he did with Comfort and
Joy make known to his dearest friend that God had given him victory against
his greatest corruptions which had for a long time kept him in continual
exercise.

About eight weeks before his death a great fit of inward and short coughing
and extreme shortness of breath did cease upon him, in so much that those who
came about him feared that he would presently have departed. This fit being
over, much weakness continued, yet he preached diverse times, until that his
increasing weakness did disable him.

In the time of his sickness and weakness he gave heavenly and wholesome
counsel to his people, neighbors and friends that came to visit him: giving
particular advise to his wife, children and servants respectively according to
their place and condition as they often came about him, thus he did often so long
as he was able to speak unto them.

His Christian speeches that concerned all, tended to this, that they would be
careful to redeem the time, and to be much in reading, hearing and
meditating of the Word of God. That they would be much in Prayer, much in
brotherly love and communion of the Saints. And that they would be careful to
hold fast that which he had taught them out of the Word of Truth. And that
while the light and means of Salvation was to be had, they should not spare
pains nor cost to enjoy them. He was often in his sickness upon the painful
rack or torture of inward snatchings and convulsions, which sometimes left
him, but (three or four days before his death) they returned and increased
upon him; all which he bare exceeding patiently. He was much in ejaculations
and short prayers and lifting up his heart to God in the behalf of the Church
and State, and for himself also, which he was most frequent and earnest in,
a little before his death. In the time when a brother of his (not only in the
common bonds of Christianity, but also by alliance, and a brother in the
Ministry) was praying with him and for him to this effect, that if his time
was not determined or expired that God would be pleased to restore him for the
good of his Church, or if otherwise that he would put an end to his pain if
he saw good; at the hearing thereof he lift up his eyes steadfastly toward
Heaven and also one of his hands (he being not able to lift up the other) and
in the close of that prayer gave up the ghost, shutting down his eyes
himself, as if he were fallen into a sweet sleep. He lived much desired and
died much lamented.

Thus a great, a good and merciful man, a chariot and horseman of Israel is
by Gods own hand fallen and taken away from the evil to come, and is entered
into peace, and rest in his bed of everlasting pleasures and joys, enjoying
the fruit of his Faith in Christ, and of his walking with God in uprightness.
Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of the Saints though the wicked
regard it not, but are glad of their absence. But the living indeed they must,
and they will lay it to heart, and will prepare and long for their own
dissolution, that they maybe more immediately gathered to Christ the Judge of
all, and to the spirits of just men made perfect, expecting and waiting for a
blessed Resurrection of themselves and of all that die in the Faith of our Lord
Jesus, to whom be ascribed all Might, Majesty, Dominion and Glory, both now
and for ever more, Amen.

This Man of God and faithful Minister of Christ, departed this life upon
Friday the 10. of May, Anno Domini, 1639. near the end of the six and fiftieth
year of his age.

Feb. 25. 1639.

Imprimatur, THOMAS WYKES.

Banburies Funeral tears powered forth upon the Death of her late pious and
painful Pastor Mr. William Whately deciphered in this Sympathizing Elogy.
I am that Orbin which of late did shine
An heaven enlightened star with rays divine,
Which did arise within me and dispense
Light, life, heat, Heav'n-infusing influence,
And went before me, steering right mine Eye
Unto the very place where CHRIST did lie.
He was a Cynosura in my motion
To Heaven's bright haven on this worlds vast Ocean;
Or as the Egyptian Pharos to descrie
The rocks of sin and error to mine Eye.
He was my Glory, Beauty, Consolation,
My very soul, I but the Corporation.
I would go on with bleedings to recite,
His and mine own sad fall, but I cannot write,
Throbs shake mine hand, and grief my sight destroys,
And when I speak, ah! tears do drown my voice:
Yet will I sigh, and give my sorrows pent
Within my breast, by mournful breathings vent.
Come then speak sighs, write tears, and sadly story,
The dark Eclipse that has befell my glory.
My Star is fallen, and Heavens did so dispose,
That there he fell, where he at first arose:
The Stars above us thus their races run
Returning thither whence they first begun.
But did I say he is fallen? Stay me there,
He is translated to an higher sphere,
Where (though to the world he is obscured) he may
Shine forth unvailed in a purer ray,
Fixed to an endless rest in heavens bright throne,
Above all starry Constellation.
But ah, alas Death has disposed it so
That his rise prooves my fall, his weal my woe:
His weal my woe? strange! what a change is this?
My welfare was but now in wrapped in his:
But thus Death innovates; and did he not
Tell me that he Commission has got,
And warrant for his fact from heavens great King
I would have brought him into questioning;
Ah death what have thou done? Do thou not care
To make a breach which ages cannot repair?
So rare a Frame in pieces for to take
Which Heaven and nature did combine to make
A Masterpiece? For who did ere behold
So sound a spirit in so strong a mold?
Heaven's treasure which within his breast abode
Was by his liberal tongue dispersed abroad.
All Graces gave a meeting in him, even,
To make his breast a little map of Heaven.
His lips distilled Manna; and he stood
Not so for Church-goods as the Churches good.
His voice it was a trump, whose sound was made
With breath divine which it from Heaven had.
His life a daily Sermon, which alas,
Methinkes was measured by too short a glass.
Ah Death though Painters give thee holes for eyes
Yet thou can see to take the richest prize,
To hit the fairest mark; yet I suspect
It was my sin which did thine hand direct:
My light had I improov'd it well for gain
Would have remaind, else lights shall not burn in vain.
Yet sure he is not dead, for why? I find
Him still surviving, in my breast enshrined;
And who can say that he is of life bereaven
That lives in's works, inpious hearts in Heaven?
He Is but a sleep, by death undrest, not dead,
Or has but changd his dress; for he in stead
Of these sin-staind rags of mortality
Wears a pure robe whose length's eternity.
M. B.

EXAMPLE.
I.
OF Adam and Eve.
AS all other knowledges are conveniently taught by Precepts and Examples; The
Preface to the ensuing Treatise.
so is that best of knowledges, the art of living holily. Hence it is that as I
have instructed you to my poor ability in the Law and the precepts of good
life, so I do now intend to set before your eyes the Examples recorded in
Scripture of Men, both good and bad, that by observing the swervings of the
one, and the right walking of others, you may better keep your own feet in
the streightest paths. Only concerning Examples, you must know this thing in
general; that no Example at all has the force of a precept either to bind
the consciences of men to any thing as a duty, or to restrain from any thing
as a sin: Bare Examples bind not.
because the knowledge of sin is from the Law, and where there is no Law
there is no transgression, and our care must be to walk in Gods ways, not in
the ways of any man whatsoever. But Example prevails alone to persuade the
will as a fit argument of Exhortation or Dehortation, not as an argument to
prove a thing needful or sinful. Seeing then my duty is to persuade you to
all goodness, and to dissuade you from all evil, and the Examples of
Scripture are undoubted and certain, and they offer themselves as it were unto
the senses, and so more work on the will to allure or deter: I think it a
convenient means of helping you in all righteousness and against the
contrary, to make a collection of those Examples of good or bad things which
are left us upon record by a divine pen, and I will range these Examples
according to the order of time wherein they lived, so far as I can inform my
self thereof by the Word of God. And I will begin with Adam and Eve, and put
them both together, because their good and evil was put togeher in practice
thereof.

The Method observed in handling all the Examples.
The Method I intend to take in each person is this, I will consider his Birth,
Life and Death, and in his Life I will look to his carriage and behavior in
respect of the deeds he did, good, bad, indifferent and doubtful, and the
things that befell him, either prosperously or adversely, in benefits or
afflictions.

Now for Adam and Eve because they were the first fountains of mankind, and
therefore could not be borne in the same manner as others be (for he that is
borne must have a Parent, and he that has a Parent was not the first man or
woman, because his Parent was before him) therefore I cannot tell you any thing
of their Birth, Nothing can be said of Adam and Eves Birth, but of their
entering into the world.
but of their entering into the world by another way, which was to them the same
in effect, that our begetting and birth is to us. I will inform you according
to the Scriptures, for it much concerns us to understand our original and to
know certainly how mankind came into the world. Know then in sum, That God
made Man of the dust of the earth, Genesis 2.7.
and breathed into him the breath of life and man became a living soul. Here
is in brief the Creation of Adam (now Adam signifies red Earth, Adam what it
signifies.
because his body was made of such kind of Earth) and concerning Woman it is
noted that God caused a deep sleep to fall upon Adam, 21, 22. verses of the
same Chapter.
and then took one of his ribs, closing the flesh in steed of it, and framed
it into the body of a Woman, in which also he placed a reasonable soul.

Concerning this Creation of Man, you must first inform your selves of the
necessity of it. The Creation of Man was necessary.
It must needs be granted by force of reason, that there must be some first
man, seeing otherwise there must be infinite men, There must be first Man, and
why?
because a number without beginning must be also without end, in as much as
there is the same reason of both, that which caused men without beginning, did
cause them necessarily, and therefore it must cause them for ever; now all
reason agrees to this truth, Non datur infinitum actu.
that there cannot be an infinite number, seeing to a number still one at least
may be added. I mean it of actual numbers and actual infiniteness, so we
reason thus, either an infinite number of men, or some first man and woman, not
the former, therefore the latter. And if there must be a first man and woman,
either they came by chance and without any maker, which is so absurd, that no
man can choose but hiss it out, or else they were made by some agent or matter
that had a being before them; and if so, then either as Heathen Theology tells,
they grew out of the mudde as frogs do in some Countries, or else were
formed by God as our Theology teaches, and let every man that has his right
wits about him, judge in himself whether of these twain is more agreeable to
reason, and more likely to be true. So man was created by God, The time and
matter of man's Creation.
now about his Creation, the time and matter of it is to be noted. For first
man was not created till the sixth day when a fit place for him to dwell in,
and all necessary furniture for the place, and all needful servants and
attendants were before provided for his use. God saw it not fit to bring man
into the world, before it was garnished and stored with all contents useful
for him. And then man was made in the first place and woman after him, to show
that man is the superior in nature, woman was made for man and not man for
woman, therefore was man made first and woman after, and so does the Apostle
reason in two places where he handles the difference of Sexes, 1 Cor. 11.8, 9.
1 Timothy 2.13. So you have this cleared, how man came into the world, and how
woman; but you must observe more particularly the different matter of which
they were made, and the parts of which they consist.

Man had a body and that was made of the dust of the earth, Why Man was made of
the dust. Genesis 2.7.
to teach him Humility, but he had also a soul and that was breathed into his
nostrils, that is, infused by God, wonderfully and immediately put into man's
body, it is called a breath of life, and after a soul of life, that is, a
soul which procured breathing and living, nothing is harder for a man to
conceive of then the nature of his own soul next the nature of God and
Angels, for the former is much more hard to comprehend, the latter equally
difficult at least, and it should be unto us a matter of great abasement that
we cannot tell what to make of our selves that is, of our souls, that it is
we know by the effects it works in the body and the absence of these effects,
and the following of contrary effects when it is departed from the body, and
this is all we know in a manner, only we may gather by discourse that it is a
substance incorporeall, because it self does inform the body, and one body
cannot in reason be fit to inform another.

The Scripture also tells us certainly that it is an immortal substance which
must return to God that gave it, It is hard to understand the nature of the
soul.
and reason subscribes to this truth, because finding the soul a thing simple,
it cannot conceive how it should be corrupted; O how ignorant are we and what
cause have we to be puffed up with conceit of our knowledge, seeing so much
blindness does now possess our minds, that in a manner all we have to say of
our own souls and spirits, the best part of us, is this, that we cannot tell
what to say.

As for Evah she also consisted of a body, Eves body was made of a rib, and
why?
and that was made not of earth, but of a bone of her husband, to instruct her
and him both of their duty, that she should acknowledge her subjection unto
him as being taken out of him, and helpefull to him as being made of a rib an
helpful bone in his side, and to instruct him that he should account her dear
unto him and make precious reckoning of her, using her as in a manner his
equal, as being a piece of himself and extracted from his own side. Now a
woman also has a soul, an immortal spirit to make her a living and a
reasonable creature; for where sin is found there is a reasonable soul,
because none other is capable of knowing and consequently transgressing a law
made by God, but woman was in the Transgression, that is, she sinned, and
sinned first before Adam, A fond conceit that women have no souls and the
original of it
therefore she had a soul and a reasonable soul, and they seem to have
been wilfully blind, that whether out of the silence of God in not mentioning
the breathing of a soul into Evah, or upon what other mad conceit would needs
make themselves and others believe that women had no souls. I conceive it was
the device of some brutish and sensual man, that by instilling this most
absurd conceit into that Sex, would feign draw them to commit all
licentiousness with boldness, for if they have no souls it could be no fault
in them more then in the bruit creatures to give over themselves to all
sensuality and libidinousnesse. You have heard Man's beginning know now his
life, and herein consider his behavior and the things that befell him; Their
life.
his behavior bad, good, indifferent, doubtful.

Their bad carriage. The first sin of our first Parents. Genesis 2.16.17.
Their bad carriage stands in two things. Their first sin whereby they fell,
and their following sins which they added after their fall. The first sin
was the eating of the forbidden fruit; for you shall have it recorded that the
Lord having placed Adam in a garden to dress and keep it, spoke to him in
this wise. Of all the trees of the garden thou may eating eat, that is, thou
may lawfully and with mine allowance eat, it was at his choice to eat of
what kind he pleased, and if it seemed good unto him to forbear eating of any
he might forbear, then follows a prohibition of one kind of fruit, viz. of
the tree of knowledge of good and evil which is in the midst of the garden
thou may not eat, that is, you shall not lawfully do it, in regard of
natural power he had ability to eat and not eat of that as of any other, but
God did take away from him the moral liberty of eating of it, and by his
authority saw good to abridge his liberty, and this alone to make it appear to
Adam, that he was an absolute and a sovereign Lord over him, and had full
power and authority to forbid him what he saw good to forbid, and to command
what he saw good to command. So the Lord did here call Adam to a profession of
his absolute subjection to God his Maker, and of Gods absolute right to
himself and all other creatures: and to this prohibition he subjoynes a threat
of death, In the day that thou eatest it thou shall certainly die, in dying
thou shall die. Doubtless the Lord meant this of both deaths natural and
spiritual, and it is to be interpreted, thou shall become subject to a
natural and to an eternal death, thy body and soul both shall be made in
their kind mortal. Thy body subject to such putrefaction and distemper as
shall cause it to be an unfit receptacle for the soul, and thy soul subject
to such sinfullnesse and distemper in its kind, as shall make it unfit to hold
any fellowship with God, and so thy soul shall be separated from thy body, and
both from God the life of thy life; in this same phrase is the wicked man
threatened by the Prophet at Gods appointment. O wicked man thou shall die the
death, that is, most surely die and be damned. The Lord did not mean that
natural and eternal death should instantly follow upon their eating, but
obnoxiousnesse to both, and some degrees of both should follow instantly, and
at last the consummation of both, with an implicit exception of his grace in
Christ in pardoning him. Lo now Adam had from Gods own mouth an express and
plain Commandment, wherein he was directly forbidden one and but one tree,
with warrant for the use of all the rest, and a plain and express threat of
death to begin to ensue immediately upon his eating. And this Commandment,
either God himself, or else Adam had made known to Evah, for you hear that
she does both allege it and oppose it to the Serpents temptation at the
first. Now this Commandment so plain, so easy, so equal, that he could not
be ignorant of it, nor incur any inconvenience by yielding to it, nor pick
any exception against it. This Commandment which both of them knew full well
did they transgress, and that very speedily. How long Adam continued before he
sinned is not revealed.
How long they continued free from the sin, I know not, because I find it not
revealed and will not conjecture; because the not revealing it by God makes me
think it is not to much purpose to know. If the first act of eating were that
of the forbidden fruit, it is a great aggravation of their sin, that they
transgressed Gods Law in a manner before they did any other thing, if they stood
any while it is a great aggravation, that after much experience of Gods bounty
they would be bold to offend him, and taste of the forbidden fruit after the
feeling of the sweetness and goodness of other fruits: but it was not long
before they did eat, and it was likewise done upon a poor motive, the
temptation of a base Worm, and it was yielded unto without much resistance,
for not many words passed them before Eve had condescended. You have the Story
of this sin in Genesis 3.1, etc. where is first the Tempter, a Serpent, the most
The Hebrew word is ambiguous.

The fall of our first Parents described


naked or subtilest of all beasts; then the temptation in the matter of it and
the success. The matter, The Serpent said to the Woman, has God indeed said,
you shall not eat of every tree of the garden, in which he would make Eve
either doubt of Gods Commandment, or else be discontent with it, as if he had
dealt niggardly with them in not permitting them to eat of every tree, or as
if the forbidding of this were as much as if he had prohibited them all the
trees, intimating that this was as good as all the rest, and the not giving
them this as much as the denial of all the rest. Then the Woman's answer,
telling him that he had allowed them all the rest and forbidden this alone, and
that on pain of death; then the Serpents reply, in which he contradicts Gods
threat, that the Woman might not give credit unto it, for he tells Evah, that
they should nor certainly die, yea not only so, but that God knew well enough
how eating of that tree would procure to them an increase of knowledge, then
the success of the Temptation is, that she believing the Serpent and
conceiving that she should gain knowledge by the eating and considering the
beauty and pleasantness of the fruit, did not alone eat of it her self, but
also gave her husband, persuading him also to feed of it, which he at her
persuasion did.

Thus was the first Commandment utterly transgressed, which so soon as it was
done they began to have sense of their nakedness, and sewed figleaves together
to make them aprons for the covering of their nakedness, which now began to
appear shameful unto them.

Diverse sins followed the first sin.
This was their first sin, upon this followed diverse other sins, viz. their
running away from God, and hiding themselves among the trees, as if it had
been possible for them so to have escaped his sight, and then excusing their
fault, he by laying the fault partly on Eve which gave him, and partly upon God
which gave her to him, and she upon the Serpent which had seduced and beguiled
her. So they had done evil and sought to hide their sin instead of
confessing it and humbling themselves, for so sin blindes the mind, hardens
the heart, drives a man from God and sets all the mind out of frame,
estranging the soul from God and causing a man to be filled with slavish fear
that makes him fly from his presence. This sin brought terror of
conscience, from whence of necessity followed sinfullnesse and mortality. This
is their bad carriage.

Their doubtful and indifferent behavior.
Doubtful and indifferent may seem to have been their making of them aprons
of leaves, for that showed some shame and desire to hide their shame.

Their good carriage.

Evah why so called.


Now follow the things that were good in them, viz. their embracing of Gods
goodness, and turning to him by Faith and Repentance after the promise,
intimated in the giving Eve the name of Evah or Mother of all living, as much
as if he had said, though we be all dead by this sin, yet we shall live by
the promised seed which Evah shall bring forth, and then Evah gives the name
of Caine to her first son, saying, I have obtained a son the Lord, or of
the Lord, perhaps expressing her hope that Caine was that son the Lord which
should bruise the Serpents head, and after calling the second son by the name
of Abel, to signify their submitting themselves to the crosses and miseries
which they felt, and after bringing up their sons in a calling, the one a
Shepherd, the other a Husbandman, and in teaching them to worship God and to
bring gifts and sacrifices to him, the one of his sheep, the other of the
fruits which the land did afford. Their benefits 1. Before their fall.


Now consider we the benefits God had bestowed upon them before their fall, the
making of them after his own Image, in knowledge, righteousness and true
holiness, with a most beautiful, strong, swift, healthie and comely body,
free from all danger of sickness, death, or other misery; giving them dominion
over all creatures, planting so excellent a place for them as Paradise, and
granting them the use of all the trees, and that of life, and putting on them
so pleasant a service as that of dressing and keeping the Garden, besides the
hope and assurance of Eternal life upon condition of their obedience, of which
Paradise it self and the tree of life were signs unto them. For if we should
live the life of glory by obeying the Law, so should they have done seeing they
also were under the same Covenant of works that we be under.

Now after their sin God bestowed diverse benefits on them. 2. After their
fall.
The chief was the promise of a Savior, viz. The seed of the Woman to tread
on the Serpents head, that is, to destroy the Devil, and the works of the
Devil, and to deliver them from the mischief which Satan sought to bring upon
them. By which words he did make the Covenant of grace with them and their
Posterity, providing a remedy equal to the disease, and the means of
revealing it to all, in that be manifested it to them that they might teach it
to their children, and so one to another till all knew it, and then making them
Breeches and continuing their life, and granting them children. These be the
benefits.

The miseries they felt were pronouncing a curse upon them, Their Crosses.
adjudging them to an inavoidable necessity of natural death, to much sorrow
in their life, he by tilling the ground (which should bring forth ill things to
him) and that with sweat and labor, and she by bearing children in sorrow,
and by being compelled by subjection to her husband; then by casting them out
of Paradise, debarring them the tree of life, and giving Caine over to kill his
Brother better then himself, which must needs be an heavy cross to them,
which God did somewhat mitigate by giving them another godly son, even Seth.
This is their life, their death follows.

Adam lived 900. years, and for Eves death, Their Death.
it is not mentioned how long she lived, Why the length of any Woman's life
except Sarahs is not mentioned in Scripture.
for God has not thought it fit to tell us the length of the life of any woman
except Sarah in Scripture: upon what consideration it is hard to guess, but
sure it is to humble womankinde, that because they were first in bringing in
death, deserved not to have the continuance of their lives, recorded by Gods
pen. So have I briefly run over the first man and the first woman. And now I
will make use of all.

First from their Creation, The uses of the whole.
and the benefits bestowed upon them in and after their Creation; let us learn
to acknowledge God to be our Creator, the Fountain of our being, and to submit
our selves wholly to him in all things, seeing we have received our being from
him; for in making them he made us in them, and whatsoever benefits he gave him
in Creation, he gave them to us in him, Omnes nos eramus, ille unus.
seeing if he had not cast them away we should not have wanted them. We must
not less praise God and be less thankful for that happy estate, because
Adam forfeited it; for his naughtiness in sinning cannot diminish the
goodness of God in granting to him and his so great a heap of pleasures here
with certainty of Eternal life after. Do you not see that God made us all to
happiness and life in our first Parents, fitting all things, so that he might
have stood and delivered over all those benefits unto us. Let us not murmr
against God for the punishment justly inflicted upon us in them and on them for
the sin committed by them; especially we must praise God for the promise of
the seed of the Woman which now God has performed to us, by whom salvation and
life was offered and tendered to all, so that by the second Adam all might have
received happiness as they lost it by the first, if the fault had not been
and were not merely in themselves, that have been and are careless of Gods
goodness neglecting to consider of his mercy, to believe in him and to turn
to him.

Secondly, in Adams sin let us all see our own sinfullnesse, and our
mortality and misery in his misery, Romans 5.12.
For by one man sin came into the world, and by sin death, and so death
passed over all. This sin is our sin after a sort, we must lament it and
bewail it, and be humbled for it, and in the sense of our wretchedness run
to the promised seed to deliver us from sin and death, and to repair the
Image of God in us by the mighty work of his Spirit, which is as easy for him
to do as to create us just at the first, and which he will as certainly
perform for us if we seek it as he did then in our first making.

Again, let us learn to hate and loath sin and Satan, not to hearken to his
suggestions, but to believe Gods threats and submit to his Commandments, let
the husband resolve not to obey the voice of his wife against God, let the wife
take heed of drawing her husband to sin, let the husband rather reform her
then be corrupted by her. O beware of thinking to get any thing by doing
wickedness, disobedience will bring nothing in conclusion but misery and
unhappiness.

Let us take heed of flying from God and of excusing our faults and casting the
blame upon others, chiefly upon God himself, as Adam did, but let us rather
confess, lament, and trust in his mercy, and implore it, then dawbe and
dissemble, and think to escape by frivolous shifts and extenuations; We should
not be proud of apparel.
and especially learn not to be proud of apparel which is no better then a
badge of our wicked rebellion and of our shameful nakedness. Let us be the
better for the things we know concerning Adam and Eve our first Parents.

Again, let us be careful to follow them in all good deeds which they did; O
let us repent and believe in Christ hoping for life by him according to the
Covenant of grace, as they did when they had broken the Covenant of Works. For
by trusting in Christ we shall go to Heaven in the way of Evangelicall
obedience, standing in a resolution and endeavor not to sin, and a careful
humbling our selves and seeking pardon when we fail, as sure as they or we
should have done in the way of Legal obedience, if they and we had remained
innocent; and God will as surely enable us to this Evangelicall obedience, if
we seek to him for grace and the renewing of his Image in us, as he had
enabled him to Legal and exact obedience. In truth Christ has made the way to
life eternal as easy to us in the path of the Gospel, as it was to him in
the path of the Law, for we have grace to keep us from loving and servnig
sin as sure as he had power to abstain from committing sin. Say to your
selves, Adams sin shall not damn me, if in sense of the misery which it
brought upon me I can fully seek to Christ the promised seed.

Further, let us follow him and her in that was good in both. How did Adam
accept his wife, saying, This is flesh of my flesh, and she shall be called
Evah, and a man shall forsake Father and Mother and cleave to his wife; O you
husbands love your wives as your own flesh, cleave to them above all, and
forsaking all other, keep you only to them. You wives be content to be
subject to your husbands, as it is sure Evah was before her fall at least, and
probable after too, for we read of no braules betwixt them. O join together
to bring up your children well, first in some honest calling, then in the
knowledge of the true God and care of worshipping him. I say teach your sons
and daughters things necessary for their profitable and holy living in the
world; bring them not up in idleness and ignorance, but so carry your selves
to them, that it may not be imputed to you if they prove wicked, and be
thankful to God for your children, and learn to rejoice, especially in their
goodness, as Adam and Evah did in Seths. Learn of your first Parents to be
good Parents, and follow all the things that were good and commendable in them.

Again, from their afflictions, learn to prepare for afflictions, and to make
a good use of them when they come, if you think to live in this world without
briers and thorns, without sweat and labor you are much deceived. Crosses are
assigned to us as just chastisements for our sin; we must to dust, let us
expect misery and death, and labor to make our selves fit for crosses. It was
Gods great goodness that he would not suffer Adam to remain in Paradise and
to joy the tree of life. For had he lived in so much pleasure as that place
would have affoorded, and had he found all the creatures as good and
comfortable to him now after his fall when his nature was made sinful, as when
it was sinlesse, O how greatly would his sin have grown through the fatness
of that over delightful estate, even as weeds do in a rich and unmanured
soil. Sure had not God sent a curse on the earth, and inflicted grief and
misery upon man, he would never have repented, never have conceived of his
spiritual misery, never have turned to God and sought God; so that as it is a
mercy in the Physician to make the patient sick with a medicine, so it was in
God to send these afflictions on us. Let us not therefore flatter our selves in
vain conceits of living merrily, but let us prepare for afflictions, which all
must in some degree meet withal in their several callings. It was the voice
of an Epicure in the rich man, that said, eat and drink and take thine ease;
Ede, bide, lude, etc.
we should say to our selves rather, sin has made me subject to diverse
crosses, and I will labor to receive them patiently from Gods Almighty hand,
if he think it fit to exercise me with them.

Especially you that are Parents of children, look for crosses in your
children; think this boy may prove not an Abel, not a Seth, but a Caine, a
wicked and a sinful Caine, a hater of goodness, and fugitive from God. Let
me take heed therefore that I do not over-love him, that I do not cocker
him, and as it were mar and kill his soul by over-cherishing his body. If
we find our selves apt to over-prize and over-love our children, we must
moderate those passions by such meditations, and if we find our selves apt to
over-grieve for their death, we must tell our selves, Ah might not their lives
have prooved much more bitter to me then their death can; who would not rather
bury a son young then live to see him prove a Cain, and who can tell but his
son for whose death he takes on with so much excessive sorrow, may not fall
out to be as wicked as Caine. If any say I hope not so, I answer him, where be
the grounds of his hope? did not our first Parents hope as much think you?
Sure Evah giving Caine a name showed that she had good hopes of him when he
was borne, yea those that have good and godly children must prepare to be
crossed in their afflictions. Have thou an Abel, a godly child, O make thine
heart ready to hear that some wicked hand has knocked him on the head, perhaps
his own Brother, that some violent death has seized upon him and taken him
away before his time, and labor to be willing to yield to Gods hand if he will
so cross thee, for why should not thou stoop to as heavy a burden as that
which Adam and Eve did bear in the beginning of the world. For the death of
good children, yea their miserable and untimely death, and for the wickedness,
yea the notorious and unnatural wickedness of other children, let every man
prepare himself, by looking upon the example of Adam and Eve, that suffered
these crosses, yea let every godly man learn to prepare for persecution from
all Caines, but that we shall treat on when we come to Abels example.

But Brethren we must not only prepare for crosses of this kind, but we must
also make a good use of them when they come, that is, we must turn them into
medicines as Physicians do some poisons, causing the sorrow which they will
work in us to become a medicine against our sins of which they be the proper
and natural effects. When you meet with crosses and calamities, say, now I
see Gods Justice and Gods Truth, now I see the hatefullnesse and hurtfullnesse
of sin, and therefore now I will mourn, not because I am crossed, but
because I have deserved this cross, and a worse too, and so frame to confess
and bemoane the sin, and to supplicate for pardon and help at the hand of
God in the name of Christ, especially look to those sins to which your
crosses have some reference and respect. Are you crossed in your goods, think
if you did not over-love them and get them unjustly, or if in your children,
see if you did not over-love them and cocker them, and so in all things of like
kind. In what God smites you, see if you have not in that sinned against him,
and so frame to lament your sins and to seek help against them. This will
help to make your cross easy and quickly to remove it, this will cause that
you shall be gainers even by crosses. When we see the ill deservings of sin
and the perfect righteousness, yea the goodness of God in calling thus to
repentance; happy are they that be so afflicted and so taught in Gods ways.

And Brethren let me yet make one use of Adam and Eves great sin, to warn
you, that you take heed of presuming of your own strength, and of boasting
that you will never commit such and such a sin, for if these two in their
innocence could not escape when they neglected to sue to God for strength, O
how much more shall not we stand if we adventure to bragg and boast, and
promise much of our selves, but when sin begins to gather upon you, and Satan
to tempt, then fly to prayers and to requests, and to the threats and
Commandments, and apply those threats, and pray God to enable you to keep the
Commandments, then shall you do so well as you can wish, else large promises
will bring forth nothing but sorry performances. Thus should Eve have done, and
then she should have had her prayers granted, and her faith stablished, and
escaped the fault. And as I think the first of all the faults of Evah was,
Eves first fault.
that she was led away by the wary speeches of the Serpent (by which he sought
by step and step to descend to this solicitation,) that then she did not
revive in her mind the consideration of Gods presence, and of her dependence
upon him, and of his readiness to give her help on her seeking it, and of her
own imbecility as being a creature, to stand without continual support from
him. For sure the Morrall Law lay upon Adam and Evah as well as upon us, and
they ought thus to have behaved themselves in temptation; here therefore I say
was her first failing. For we must not think that there was no sin precedent
to the actual eating of the forbidden fruit, yea her being enticed and drawn
away to distrust Gods Truth, to deny his threats, to affect knowledge against
Gods allowance, and to be bold to sin, when she conceived that no danger
would grow from it but much benefit: all these were faults and preparations to
the great actual fault. Indeed it is probable, that if she had taken her
self in these slips, and set her self and graces on work to have resisted
them before they had come to such an head, that then she should not have been
corrupted by them, so as to fall into sinfullnesse and mortality, because the
Lord had limited the threat of death to actual eating: but howsoever these
things were faults in Eve, and now we must learn therefore not to presume any
thing of our selves, but to confess that if we do not seek to God for his
sustentation and so obtain the same from him, we shall surely be overcome to
commit any sin though never so grievous.

But again, we must be encouraged to repent of sin and to crave pardon of
it, any greatness of it notwithstanding, for even this sin of our first
Parents is to them pardoned. This first and grand sin, The greatness of our
first Parents sin.
the sin of sins, that did inwrap in it all the blasphemies and Idolatries,
etc. of all aftertimes, and was as I may so speak in power all sin, even
this sin is forgiven; Adam which cast all into sin, out of Paradise, and
out of Heaven what in him lay, even this Adam is in Heaven himself, yea Eve
that drew Adam to it, and persuaded her husband to the committing of so
monstrous a Trespass, to the poisoning of him and all his; she is pardoned,
she is in Heaven. As God set forth the riches of his Mercy in pardoning so
vile and capital a sinner as Paul was, that in him he might show an example of
all long-suffering; so has he set forth the abundance of his Grace in Christ
by remitting the fault, and saving the souls of these and these sinners, which
did not what they did in false zeal as Paul, but in wilful unbeleefe and
rebellion. Wherefore let no man doubt of obtaining pardon by the grace of God
in Christ, because of the greatness of his sin. For if by the offense of one
many be dead, much more shall the grace of gift, and the gift by grace abound
unto mercy; and if in Adam all die, that is, be made subject to death, so in
Christ much more shall all be made alive, if they trust in him and turn, if
death reigned by the first Adam, much more shall grace reign by the second
Adam; If, by one man's disobedience many were made sinners, much more by one
man's obedience shall many be made righteous. It is an extreme dis-valuing of
Christ's righteousness, and under-prizing of Gods mercies in Christ, if any
greatness of sin hinder us from seeking to God for pardon and trusting to
find it. If we should be appointed to deserve remission of our own sins
every man for himself, then a man might hope to get out of little sins but
not out of great, and so greatness of sin might dishearten him: but seeing
it is Christ the Son of God as well as Man, that has satisfied at once for
the sins of all, by being a Propitiation for the sins of the whole world,
now it is too too great a weakness, and too too palpable an ignorance of
Christ and disparagement to him, to doubt of pardon, because of the greatness
of sin, and that we may assure our selves, lo Adam and Eve saved, a couple
that let in the floud-gares to all sin, and that in committing so great a
disobedience, did commit at once all the sins of all the world. There cannot
be thought any offense greater, for the time, place, persons sinning, occasions
of sinning, helps against sin, Commandment transgressed, no nor the matter
of the sin neither. For though the thing materially considered were but
eating an apple, a plum, or whatsoever fruit it might be, yet that apple was as
it were a Sacrament, a visible profession of their care to forbear all sin
by forbearing it, and so the taking of that was a worse sin then if it had
been very actual adultery or murder, as if a man should take the Sacramental
bread and give it to a dog, or cast it into the fire, or trample it under feet
knowing it to be the Sacrament, sure he were as vile and far more vile an
offender, then if he should lie in wait at his neighbors door to defloure
his wife, or to murder himself or any of his household. Now therefore take
heart to run to God penitently for pardon in Christ, and be sure of success.
And if greatness and multitude of sin offer it self to discourage you and to
dampe your hopes, refer your selves to Adam and Eve, and say, their one sin
was more in badnesse then all my sins, and yet they were pardoned upon their
repentance, and so shall I, and then even violently breaking thorough all
objections, give over thy self to sorrowful confessions and supplications and
thou shall be pardoned.

If any say my sin was worse then Adams, for I have sinned against the Holy
Ghost; I answer, if thou have sinned against the Holy Ghost, repent and thou
shall be pardoned, for the cause why that sin cannot be forgiven, is not want
of mercy in God or merits in Christ, but such abundance of hardness in them,
that they will not seek to God for pardon or for grace to repent. Wherefore I
say again look on thy first Parents, that how bad soever thou be were
causes of thy being so bad, and promise thy self pardon upon repentance,
because they are pardoned, and hope to be penitent if thou endeavor and seek
it, because they were helped which were as vile sinners as thy self.

THE SECOND EXAMPLE.
OF Caine.
NExt after Adam and Evah, the Scriptures propound unto us the Examples of
Caine and Abel, two sons of those Parents. First, we must speak of Caine,
who being the elder Brother was yet the worser man, for the Lord has never
accustomed to give his graces according to the privileges of age, that the
gift may appear to be free and gratuitous, not at all deserved by any thing
that the man may find in himself.

Now speaking of Caine, we must handle his Birth and Life, for it has not
seemed good to God to tell us any thing of his death. His Birth we have, Genesis
4.1. Caines Birth.
Adam knew Evah his wife and she conceived and bare a son, and called his
name Caine, or a possession: saying, I have obtained a man of the Lord, or, as
it may be translated, a man the Lord, perhaps expressing her conceit to be,
that this son of hers must be that man who was also to be God, that should
redeem her self and all men from the mischief which the Serpent had brought
upon them, but if she had any such hopes she had much deceived her self, for
God does seldom make such have in granting so great things immediately after
the promise, he chooses rather to exercise the faith and patience of his
people in waiting some good and large space of time for the performance of the
promise.

Caines carriage 1. Good. 1. He had a calling. The commendation of husbandry.
Now concerning this man we will note first his carriage and behavior, then the
things that befell him. In his carriage some things are for mattrer good, some
things altogether evil. That which is good is, that at his Fathers appointment
and education he betook himself to a needful trade of life, for so it is
said, Caine was a tiller of the ground, that is, he gave himself to Husbandry.
This calling as it is very useful, for even the King is served by the land
that is tilled, so it is you see a very ancient calling, it is full of pains
and full of profit, much increase (says Solomon) does come by the labor of
the Ox, but where no Ox is the crib is empty. You see it has the precedencie
of the Shepherd, for the elder son was assigned to this trade as the most
necessary. Wherefore me thinks they do not show themselves to be of the same
mind with Adam, that are still ready to pull down tillage and set up
pastorage, as I may call it. Indeed pastorage gives most private gain to one
or two men, and therefore they that are led more by self love then by charity
or the love of mankind, are more affected to it; but surely Gods pleasure was
in making the World to make provision for a multitude to live in convenient
abundance, rather then for a few to live in excessive riches. Howsoever you see
this is good in Caine, he embraced a calling and lived painefully therein, for
he was tilling the ground, he did not alone take upon him the name of a
Husbandman, but did exercise himself in the works of that calling.

2. Was outwardly religious.
Secondly, Caine was religious too, at least in respect of the outward acts, for
in process of time he brought a gift to the Lord of the fruit of the ground,
he worshipped God by offering something to him of that which by his goodness
and blessing the earth did bring forth unto him. The Lord will be served even
with our costs, with gifts, with rendering him back again something of that
which himself has given us. He commanded Israel not to appear before him
empty, but to bring free-will-offerings and heave offerings of their hands.
God loves not an empty worshipper, he is liberal to us, he would have us also
liberal to him, we receive much from him, he looks to receive something of
us, that so we may actually acknowledge him to be the giver of all. He is not
contented that the mouth worship him in prayers and praises, nor the ear in
hearing and attending to him, nor the body in bowing it self to him, nor the
hands in lifting up themselves, but he will be honored with our goods, as
Solomon says, Prove. 3.9. even with our substance. For though he has not now
commanded any thing to be burnt upon the Altar, having abolished all Sacrifices
by sending his Son, to offer up himself in Sacrifice for our sins, that he
might take away our sins by that one offering once for all; yet now he has
appointed such a worship as cannot be maintained without cost, in regard of the
persons attending it and the instruments of it, and he has now appointed them
to reap our earthly things in his steed, which in his steed do sow unto us
spiritual things. Mark this then as a thing in it self good, to worship God
and to worship him with giving a gift unto him, as also in the Psalm he
says, bring presents to him that ought to be feared.

Further, 3. Built a City
it was a lawful and good thing in Caine even after his great sin committed,
that he built a City, for surely to take order for the replenishing of men with
people, and the commodious habitation of men borne into the world, is a good
and commendable thing in it self, though men may easily and often do
transgress much in the manner of doing it. Therefore the Lord says, Esaias 58.
12. in commendation of his people and in way of promising a great benefit and
honor. There shall be of thee that shall build the old waste places. Thou
shall raise up the foundations of many generations, and thou shall be called
the Repairer of the breach, the restorer of paths to dwell in. Surely, if to
build old wastes and repair decayed places that they may stand to many
generations be a praise, as you hear from the Prophet, then to build new that
were not built before, that also is a good thing and laudable. This therefore
must be noted as a good thing in Caine, that he gave himself to build a City.

Lastly, 4. Had but one wife.
that is good in him, that he was the husband of one wife and did content
himself with the first institution of marriage, not corrupting it with taking
variety of women to one and the same man at the same time, as God had made but
one Eve for Adam, and said, a man shall cleave to his wife, not to his wives,
and they shall be one flesh, meaning, the^ two, not three or four. Some are of
opinion that in the beginning Evah at every burden bare twins, Some think
Eve still bare twins.
and so there came into the world together a man and a woman, whether this was
so or not I cannot affirm, but it may seem probable, because the Holy Ghost
makes not much mention of the bringing forth of any woman before the flood,
therefore it may be thought that their birth is comprehended in the narration
of the birth of the more worthy Sex, and that together with man they were
conceived and and borne; but whatsoever became of this conceit, it is evident
Caine had but one wife, and that is commendable in him. And this is all that I
can pick out of the Story that is good in this bad man, for even in a bad man
also may be found many things that for the matter of them are very good.

I proceed now to set forth the evil of Caine, 2. Caines bad carriage.

1. In general, He was a wicked man.


who was an unsanctified man, as witnesses S. John, 1 Epist. 1.3. He was of
that evil one, that is the Devil, a child of Satan he was notwithstanding
all that good that he did. A man unsanctified therefore may be painful in his
calling; a man unsanctified may worship God and bring him gifts; a man
unsanctified may build Cities; a man unsanctified may live honestly with his
wife. Neither must any man conceit himself a child of God because he can
truly affirm of himself that he does these and many other good and
commendable things. This is no more then may be found in a Caine who was of
that evil one.

Caines faults in particular: 1. He was an Hypocrite.
But let us look into his vices and faults. The first and worst fault is, he
was an Hypocrite, one in whom hypocrisy ruled, for had he not been such a
one, the Lord would not have forborne to show the same respect to him and to
his gift that he showed to his Brother Abel and his gift. God is not an
accepter of persons, he does not regard one sincere man and neglect another
that has the same sincerity, but he hears all that call upon him in truth,
as says the Psalmist: and in every nation those that fear him and work
righteousness are acceptable to him, seeing then God did not testify of his
gifts, What an Hypocrite is.
they were but the gifts of an hypocrite. For an hypocrite is he which
contenteth himself with a form of religion, in performing the external acts
of it and is not sanctified by it, has not the dominion of sin broken, has
not the image of God renewed in him, has not the divine nature bestowed upon
him, nor cares nor seeks to have it, but contents and satisfies himself in
these external devotions. Whosoever is careful to come to Gods Ordinances, to
pray, hear, read, receive the Sacraments, and the like acts of religion, and
does so carelessly, overly, and negligently perform them, as not in them to
seek and attain true sanctity and recovering out of the snare of the Devil
and power of sin, (for these effects of true religion are not denied to any
in and by those ordinances but to those which neglect to serve for them in and
by these Ordinances) he is a very Caine that is, an Hypocrite. Hypocrisy is a
fearful sin, and this was Cain^^ first and worst sin, that he was an
Hypocrite, he performed indeed ^^e outward work of religion, but performed it
not out of faith and with a desire thereby to do true honor to God, and to give
himself unto God, and ^o get grace from God to make him his, but barely out of
custom o^ respect to his Fathers authority who had so trained him up, or out
of a kind of imperfect natural devotion, that he might seem to himself
good, and nourish in himself good hopes of escaping Hell and getting Heaven:
Notwithstanding his taking leave to himself to commit other sins which liked
him, or such other like corrupt and mere self respecting ends, as credit with
his Father and Mother and the rest of his Brethren and Sisters; the Lord that
saw deeply into Caines heart and found it filled with guile, that it did not
draw near to him when his body did, would at first make it appear, that it
was not possible to deceive him by disguises, and therefore by not showing any
note of respect, did plainly discover his utter dislike of such mere outside
service as he has also done at other times, saying, that those which draw
near to him with their lips and have their hearts far from him, do worship
him in vain, and that if any man seem to be religious alone, his religion is
in vain, and that he is not a Jew which is one outwardly.

The second sin of Caine follows, 2. Was vexed at his punishment.
that when he perceived that God had not respect to him and his sacrifice, he
was wrath and his countenance fell, he had a furious inside and a dogged
outside, whereas he should have looked into the cause, he only chased at the
thing. This is a fearful sin, when a man is punished, to be vexed at the
punishment, and not take care to see and reform the sin which causes the
punishment. This is to accuse God as the Author of the evil, and not himself,
and so to justify himself above God; this is to show a predominancy of pride
and blindness, that out of an high opinion of himself has his mind mufled
as it were from seeing his own faults, it is to show that he serves that
sin which punishments cannot make him humbly to confess; and this wrath and
fallen countenance was procured through envy against his Brother; for he did
not only vex himself because his one Sacrifice found no approbation, but
also hated his Brother, because his was accepted, as appears, because God in
reprooving his sullen and dogged looks, does tell him instantly, that unto
thee shall be his desire, that is, I know Caine what aileth thee, thou art
wrath against thy Brother, and hate him, because he is more regarded by me
then thy self, but know that I intend not to take away the superiority which
thine age gives thee, he shall be thine inferior in respect of government,
though he be better then thy self in virtues. Thou shall be the ruler of the
Family after Adam and not he. The government of the World domestical.
For at that time the government of the world was only domestical, and the
elder Brother was the chief Magistrate under and after the Father. So envy
ruled in Caine, discontent festred to an hatred of his Brother, because he
thought his Brother had more respect then himself, and so that his Brother
hindered him from being accepted. Envy a great evil.
This envy is much condemned. It is said, Envy not sinners, much less the
righteous, and S. Paul says, Gal. 5 26.
Let us not be covetous of vainglory, provoking one another, envying one
another, noting vainglory to be the root on the which envy grows; and
Solomon says, Who can stand against envy, noting it to be one of the most
unreasonable faults that is, as hating a man because he is not as miserable as
himself, or at least because he is more happy than himself. This is a second
fault of Caine.

A third is, 3. Did not mend his fault though he was gently admonished by God
himself.
that when God himself did gently and duly admonish him of his fault, and
sought to assuage his hatred and his wrath, yet he did nothing at all reform
it, but rather grew worse, showing that envy carried him away still, and he
did nourish and foster, not oppose and resist it. For God came and showed him
good reason, both that he should not be angry at his not being accepted, and
also that he should not have a grudge against his Brother because he was
accepted, for if thou do well, says the Lord, shall thou not be accepted,
that is, not thy Brother is an impediment to any respecting of thy self and
thy Sacrifice, but thine ill doing. Thou servest me with outward service, but
thou art a bad man and live not well, therefore must not I regard thy
service, for I tell thee, my pure nature is such, that if men be of sinful
lives and wicked, their prayers and oblations are so far from pleasing me,
that they be abomination to me: therefore do I not care for thee nor thy
religion, so long as thou continuest impenitent, and a wicked liver, but if
thou frame thy self to do well, to repent and amend thy life, and live
holily, then also shall thou be accepted, as if he had told him, that he
ought to amend his life, and might so set himself about it, as to obtain help
and power to do it. For even to any reprobate may any man say as much as God to
Caine here, there is no necessity of thy being cast off by God, set to amend
thy life, and he will take thee into favor, and then should he also be taken
into favor, and his gifts regarded. For though the Sacrifice of sinners be
odious to God, yet the prayer of the upright is his delight. So no cause of
Caines wrath and envy, seeing the cause of his Brothers being preferred before
him is his own naughtiness, not any partiality in God nor tricks that his
Brother had used. Again, there is no cause he should hate his Brother, who
should still continue an inferior in subjection to him. All this
notwithstanding uttered by God himself, yet Caine continued his sower looks
and bitter thoughts against his Brother, only because his Brother was better
than himself, and had received more approbation and acceptance from God then
himself. Note this fault, he would not be amended by words, he hardened
himself against an admonition.

4. Murdered his Brother.
A fourth and a worse fault was, he spoke to his Brother and gat him into the
field out of company (for no doubt there were more men and women in the world
though we do not read of any more) and there he knocks him on the head (with
what weapon it is folly for us to enquire) but sure his tools of husbandry
yielded him fitter help to do it then the jaw bone of an Ass, But with what
weapon is uncertain.
which some will needs think to have been used. So his envy and hatred
boiled so long, and prevailed so much in him, that it makes him dip his finger
in blood and in the blood of his own Brother; notwithstanding the greatness of
the sin in it self and great torment that would ensue thence unto his
Parents. Moreover, Murder that is Caines sin, and with this sin of murder
is joined fraud and guile, and fearing man more then God: for he spoke to him
and gat him out, and then rose up against him, when they were together alone in
the field, so it was a pretended and premeditated murder, he used words of
kindness, at least which did not show forth any ill intention, for then would
not Abel have gone with him, and having him in a solitary place where no man
could see him to discover or hinder him, there not regarding Gods presence, he
took away his life and spilt his blood on the ground. You see Caines fourth
sin. 5. Did not repent of his murder.


The fifth was he did not repent of the sin when he had done it, nor of
himself ran to God with humble confession, nay when God came to bring him to
repentance, then he stood in denial of his fault, and was angry with God for
going about to charge him with his Brother; for when the Lord came and asked
him where his Brother was, he made answer that he could not tell, lying to God
himself you see, and showing himself to be altogether ignorant, or at least
heedlesse of his All-seeing eye, and in a kind of discontent asking the Lord,
why he should ask of him, where Abel was, seeing no man had ever appointed him
to be Abels keeper.

Here is a fearful sin not to confess a sin committed, but to lie and
seek if he could to hide it from God by denial. So that Caine was grown
worse then Adam, he only excused the fault, he denies, saying, he could not
tell what was become of him whom himself had murdered, so denying in his heart
that God was present in all places and saw all things. So his heart was hardened
in wickedness, and he was grown a despiser of God, a denier of his
Omniscience, and he had made himself quite impenitent.

Impenitencie in his sins, that was another of Caines faults. Instead of
falling down and saying, I have sinned, he says, I have not done it, thou
do unjustly in asking me such a question, like the Pharisees, that after they
had killed Christ, were so far from repenting, that they seemed to take it in
high disdain, that the Apostles would seem to bring that man's blood upon
them. Mark this sin, I say mark it, he hides his sin, denies it, will not
go to God with humble confessions and supplications. This is to be a Caine, to
commit great sins, and continue remorselesse and unrepentant, not regarding
to confess no not to God himself, though God use means to make him see and
confess.

Now another fault is, 6. He muttered and despaired
that after God had censured him for his offense, he grumbled and despaired,
for his speeches carry an impression of both these vices, and are uttered, so
that they will bear both renderings, My sin is greater then can be pardonad,
or, My punishment is greater then I can bear. So Caine was possessed with a
mixture of desperateness and murmuring, he denies God the honor of his mercy
in not conceiving him able to forgive that sin, therefore he thought it in vain
to confess and ask pardon and so forbear to do it, and he thought the
punishment unjust and too severe, as being more then he could bear, as if God
in punishing an unpenitent sinner should look not what the sin did deserve,
but what the sinner could undergo. Whereas punishment must be proportioned to
the greatness of the fault, not the strength of the offender. He should have
cried out of the greatness of the sin, not of the punishment, he should
have confessed the greatness of Gods mercy, but he mutters against him as both
unjust and unmercifull, and so repents not but repines, complaining that God
had laid him open to all men's injuries now, so that every one might kill him.
This is a Caine, a man so hardened with sin that he can neither submit to Gods
justice nor implore his mercy, but denies the one, and calumniates the other,
and so persists impenitently.

7. Persists impenitently in his sins.
For that is the last of all his sins, he goes away quite from God and his
Father, cease to continue a member of that family, and of that Church, gives
over all outward shows of religion, turns mere worldly and earthly, and
seeks to ease the smart of his conscience by building and busling in the
world, declaring a piece of vain glory too, by calling his City after the name
of his firstborn, as it were boasting of it, that he should have his son
the Lord of a City of his own name, Henoch of Henoch. A fearful offense to
persist still in impenitencie, to cast of all show of religion, to
excommunicate himself out of the Church, and bury himself in vanity and
worldliness, so to stifle his own conscience and deaden his own heart more
and more.

3. His prosperity and adversity.
Now I have done with Caines carriage good and bad. I come to the things that
befell him, good and bad.

1. His benefits, had posterity and lived a long life, and was preserved from
the violence of all men.
First good, you see God gave him a son and sons son, and continued his
life along time to give him space of repentance, and set a mark upon him to
save him from the violence of all men, threatening to punish him sevenfold,
that is, seven times as much as he had hurt Caine if any should kill him.
Seeing it pleased not God to tell us what this mark was with which he noted
this prime murderer; it is fondness in us to weary our selves with
conjectures; some think it was visible to all men, but what I know not, nor I
am sure can any man else tell, but it was the goodness of God to secure him of
life who had deserved death, for the Law of putting the murderer to death was
not yet, and God would not put Adam to so hard a task as killing his own
son, but would show himself to be above Law, in forbearing to do that which
he will not suffer a Magistrate to forbear, even putting to death of a wilful
murderer; yea, it was the great goodness of God to give him health and many
children, and childrens children, and to grant him riches and prosperity in the
world abundantly if it had been possible to have drawn him to repentance, 2.
God vouchsafed him means to keep him from sin and to draw him out of sin.
yea it was a great benefit that God came gently to admonish him of his inward
malice, if it might have been to have hindered the breaking of it out into
murder, and after it was done to come again with this gentle second
admonition, if it had been possible to have melted him and have drawn him to
submissive humiliation. So God vouchsafed him means to keep him from sin
and to draw him out of sin, and time long enough to make use of those means,
and many benefits to allure him to make use of them, thus good is God even to
sinners, and impenitent sinners, to offer them means of repentance and
acceptance upon their repentance, and vouchsafe them store of good things for
a long time, notwithstanding their obstinatenesse in refusing to repent.

2. His crosses.
Now lastly, let us consider Gods punishments, viz. the evil things he met
withal.

The first is sentencing him for his fault, 1. God aggravates his fault and
sentenceth him for it.
and laying open the greatness of it in saying, What have thou done, thy
Brothers blood cries to me from the earth which has drunk it in at thine
hand.

Secondly, he curses him from the earth, that is, 2. Curses the earth to him.
in respect of the earth which shall not be half so fruitful to him as
before, nor yield its increase as it had done, for he does not mean simply it
shall yield no fruit, but nothing so much nor so easily.

Lastly, thou shall be a fugitive, a runnagate, that is, 3. He was full of
terror.
a man full of unquietness and terrors, that can have no rest nor peace in
thine heart, nor any content any where; yea, it signifies a giving him over to
cast off all goodness, and leave him to himself to forsake his Fathers house,
and so a selling him over to profaneness and utter impenitency.

Thus we have done with Caines life, Caines death not mentioned
and for his death the Scripture vouchsafes not to mention it, nor how long he
lived, but he lived a long time even to see the sons of Lamech, who was the
sixth generation from him, and vaunted that if God would so avenge Caine, he
would be avenged more, by which speech it is very probable that Caine was then
alive.

So we have spoken all we have to speak of Caine. Now I will make some use of
all.

First, from that that was good in Caine, The use of all.
I pray you learn at least to be as good as so bad a man was, and therefore
may sure be attained by natural endeavors. You see Caine did not give
himself to run idling about the world, but submitted to his Fathers
government, so far as to give himself to Husbandry. O let no man turn
himself into a cipher, nay into an excrement that lives in the world to no
purpose, yea to bad purpose; for he shall not but do naughtily that will do
nothing, set your selves therefore to have and to follow some calling and
employment. Live not like those playfull creatures, imperfect pictures of men,
but of such men the fitrest emblemes, like apes and monkeys only to skip up
and down and to make sport, but live to bestow your selves in some profitable
vocation for your own and the common good.

If any say Caine was necessitated to it, because there were no other to till
the ground for them he being Adams firstborn.

I answer, first, I desire you should live somewhat better then Caine and do
good out of choice, which perhaps he might do out of necessity.

Secondly, I answer, that though you be not necessitated to any calling by
want, yet wisdom and a good conscience bind you, for must you not submit to
that of God, In the sweat of thy brows shall thou eat, and to that of the
Psalmist, he shall eat the labor of his hands, and to that of Paul, which
condemns the inordinate walkers which wrought not at all, and is it not
wisdom to forbear walking on a thorn hedge, which Solomon says the idle man
does? and to prevent many occasions, as the having no calling, and being
careless of it will surely bring. I say again then, be as good as Caine, have
and follow some calling.

Again, look that there be some at least outside of religion in you, worship
God and be not so much lovers of money as not to give him something, even to be
at cost for his worship in such kind as cost is now needful, as they were to
perform a worship then required the cost notwithstanding. Be not profane to
neglect Gods Worship out of sleighting it, be not niggards to put of God with
as little as you can, but give him of the fruits of your ground; and now know
that that is given to God which is given to the maintenance of his Ministers
which perform his Worship, and other instruments necessary to the performance
of it, as a fit place and the like: O be as good as a Caine, nay willing to be
at cost in Gods Worship and for it.

Also satisfy your selves with one wife, for Caine did so, he knew his wife,
wives he had not.

Yea, be builders up of your families by thrift and husbandry, for so could
Caine, not pullers of them down by riot and unthriftinesse: say to thyselfe,
How shall this first of all bad men rise up in judgment against me, if I
cannot frame my self at least to be as good as he was? A man should even blush
to think what is the eldest son of the Devil more virtuous then I am, O how
bad a man am I then.

Secondly, we must make some good use of that was bad in Caine, which is
double. First, to take great heed to our selves to mortify those vices, and
shun those sins which we find related of him. Caine was a very Hypocrite, a
man that contented himself with the outward acts of Gods Worship, but was not
Sanctified, did not frame his heart to please God and set himself to do well.
O take heed to your selves that you be not such, but labor to present your
hearts to God, and in all his services to offer your souls and bodies to him,
and not alone the external service, seek in and by the duties of religion to
be made new creatures. Join care of a good life in your whole conversation
with your outward devotion, then you shall not be Hypocrites, but uprright.
Beware of Hypocrisy, find out it self and its ill effects, lament them,
confess them, pray against them. Be afraid least you should prove Hypocrites,
cry to God to keep you from being such, and to make you sincere. An Hypocrite
is apt to run into all sin, nothing is accepted from him, he is apt to fall
away into open profaneness, and to be quite cast of by God for his sins.

The signs of an Hypocrite.
And you may see in Caine what be the signs of an Hypocrite. 1. Envy at those
that be better then himself, and even hating them because they have better
esteem then himself. 2. Not striving to reform his sins when he is
admonished, nor confess them to God, and craving help against them, but
rather persisting in them and denying them. 3. Chasing at admonitions. 4.
Casting of at last all care of religion. 5. Murmuring against God for the
greatness of his punishment and so despairing of his mercy as to run away from
him. O beware of all these signs of prevailing Hypocrisy, and do as Caine
should have don. Strive against guile, set against envy, labor to profit by
Gods admonitions in his Word, though he come not now in person to admonish
you. If you have sinned confess it to God, stoop to his Justice, confess him
righteous if he destroy you. Hold fast a persuasion of the possibility of
having your sins pardoned how great soever, and a hope of finding pardon at
least in such a degree as may make you run penitently to God and boldly to
crave pardon. And most of all, take heed of growing utterly impenitent out of
despair, and go not about to bury your selves in the world and so to ease
the torments of your consciences, but by humble falling down before God, seek
for mercy which will indeed refresh you. Profit your selves by the lamentable
and tragical story of Caine. And above all, take heed of letting envy proceed
to that height as to carry you into actual murder, but resist and oppose it,
and cast it out of your hearts, that it may not bring you to be spillers of
innocent blood, that is a crying sin, and you see what torment and hardness
it is apt to bring upon the committer, chiefly if the cause of hatred and
envy be goodness.

Again, bless God heartily for preserving you from envy, from murder, from
hypocrisy, from muttering, from despair, from open profaneness, from mere
and prevailing worldliness. For we have the same nature that Caine, the same
corruptions, full of pride, full of hypocrisy, full of ignorance of God, and
apt to be bold to any evil if we may conceal it from men. We who have the
selfsame bad nature, if God have preserved us from so mighty prevailing and
breaking forth of corruption, let us not lift up our selves above others, but
give the glory to God, and be satisfied with the comfort, not daring to take
the praise unto our selves, each one of us in his kind would be as bad as
Caine, if God had in like manner left us unto our corruptions and the
temptations. O that we could be humbly thankful for our preservation from
such soul sins and crimes.

Now let us remember Caines miseries and crosses, and let us affright our
selves from sins by them. Think, would I have God make me a fugitive and a
runnagate, fill mine ears with the voice of terror, and make a dreadful
sound possess mine heart always, curse the things I take in hand for my sake,
as he did the earth for Caines sake, deliver me up to gross sins, to
hardness and utter profaneness, to impenitencie and despair, and a mere
forsaking of God and Apostacy; then let me not be an Hypocrite, let me not
mock God with shows, let me not slight reproves not caring to amend. Let
me not hide my sins and allow my self to do evil in secret, fearing man's
eyes more then Gods. Let me not mutter against his Justice, let me not deny
his Mercy. Let me not run into the sins of Caine, which by degrees
procured to him this mischief. Hypocrisy brought forth rejecting his service,
not profiting by that chastisement brought forth discontent and envy against
his Brother, not hearkening to reproof to resist envy, brought forth murder,
not confessing and lamenting that, but hiding it, brought forth Gods judgment
to make him a fugitive, not stooping to that, but murmuring, brought forth
despair, and that utter Apostacy and profaneness. Beware of these sins
which you see so fearfully punished, and affright your selves from these
faults by the miserable effects of them in Caine. Take great care that sin
make not such a progress in your souls, till it utterly separate you from
God, as it did Caine. We have more and clearer means then Caine, besides his
evil to be our warning; if we prove as bad as he, we shall fare much worse,
because of that aggravation of sin which it will receive from this
consideration. Tremble to think of yielding to Hypocrisy, envy, murder,
muttering, despair, etc. fly from those ways which brought Caine to ruin.
Yea learn thankefullnesse to God, that he has not laid such miseries upon
you as upon Caine, viz. a terrified conscience and a curse upon your estates
that can afford you no comfort, and an heart possessed with desperate fancies
and impatient risings against God. These be fearful evils, we also have
deserved them, but God has not inflicted them upon many of us. O let our
hearts rejoice in his goodness that has delivered us, and let us make use of
his patience to draw us to repentance, that we do not pull the same upon our
selves hereafter.

Lastly, from Caines benefits, I pray you learn to see the bounty of God which
gives great outward benefits to the worst men, thereby assuring your selves
that he will provide well enough for you that are his own people. Will he
preserve Caine from being slain and not me that desire to fear him? Did he
offer mercy to Caine if he would do well, will he not accept me that desire
to do well and to turn to him? Did he give Caine a City and children, will
he not give to me things needful for me and mine? Gods mercy to the worst
must make his people certain, that no good thing shall be wanting to them.

Again, you must learn not highly to esteem these earthly things. Did not
Caine even after his cursing and casting off yet flourish in worldly things,
beget children, build a City, see his childrens children gallantly maintained
in the world, growing in arts and riches? Surely there is no cause of being
good in our own eyes, because we have gotten that which a Caine may get. We
must not be so foolish as to flatter our selves in a conceit that God is our
God, because we meet with such drossie benefits and mean favors as a very
reprobate, and a fugitive may have in abundance. Indeed if God give these
things with an heart to make use of them, to do good to others, to be
thankful to God, to be moved to repentance, and to grow better, and be
drawn nearer to God, and more careful of obeying and worshipping him, this is
a sign of his special favor, otherwise to have such things as these and
still continue in impenitencie and to grow worse by them rather then better, is
a proof that a man is fatted to destruction, rather then God the giver of
these things does favor him. *

THE THIRD EXAMPLE.
OF ABEL.
I Have done with Caine the elder Brother, I come to Abel the younger Brother,
and as it is likely the next after him. Abel what it signifies.
His name signifies vanity, which is all one with unprofitablenesse, or
inability to make happy. It is the same that Salomons long experience made him
to impose on all earthly things, which he calls vanity of vanities, as well he
might, because in seeking to find felicity in them, he was utterly
disappointed and after a long inquisition met with nothing but vexation of
spirit. By this time like enough Eve had learned the vanity of all earthly
things, and by name of a son which before she called a possession, but now
calls vanity, for that children also be but a possession of vanity as well as
other things.

Of Abel let us consider his birth, life and death.

His Birth is plainly set down by the authors of it, His Birth.
Eve and Adam, for she conceived again and bare a son and called his name,
etc. but the time of it as also of the elder Brothers is uncertain. We know
not how long they lived without children, whether she began to be fruitful
instantly upon the fall, or that God held them a little under barrenness, to
make them beget a child by their prayers to God for that blessing, as well as
by the faculty of generation planted in nature, I cannot affirm: but such a
son she had. Concerning whose life observe we, 1. His virtues and good
deeds. 2. His faults. 3. His benefits and afflictions.

His virtues. 1. Was painful in his calling.
His good deeds are here set down, he was painful in the calling of a
Shepherd, for so it is said, He was feeding a flock, meaning not alone that
he had undertaken this vocation, but that he did also painefully discharge it.
The Shepherds calling is now a necessary calling as well as the Husbandmans,
though not equally necessary: but we find in experience, that it is a calling
subordinate to Husbandry, for that the profitable sheep is not alone
beneficial for her flesh and skin, but also for her soil, and that in such
degree profitable, as in many places they could scarce have any corn growing
by their art and pains in Husbandry, if the sheep dung did not fat the
ground. And this is I conceive one of the best uses of the sheep when she
becomes attendant to the place. O that this simple and harmless creature
might not be changed into a most ravenous and devouring creature, thorough the
rapine and avarice of those men which think all too little for themselves, and
had rather dwell alone or amongst beasts then amongst a number of Tenants, and
as the members of a Towne-ship or a Church. Now the world is turned quite
upside down, in this time Caine killed Abel, spoke to him, and having him in
the field rose up against him and slew him; but now Abel kills Caine, speaks
to him roughly or fairly, I cannot tell, but drives him quite out of the
places where he did once inhabit. I mean the Shepherd does eat out the
Husbandman. But you see that as well Abel as Caine was painful in his
calling, and was brought up in some external and worldly business, wherein he
might serve God, advantage the world, and exercise and profit himself.

Surely true piety and godliness will very well accord with diligence in a
calling, and it is but men's mistake if they think that their vocations hinder
them from the true Worshipping of God; Abel as well as Caine had his trade of
life. The miserable corruption of our nature will turn all things into
occasions of hurt and mischief, and make them means of interrupting us in
good ways, but else a calling duly followed by exercising the graces of Gods
Spirit, and humbling and taming the flesh, and well employing the thoughts, and
preventing many temptations and opportunities of sinning, does greatly further
our growth in piety, and is far from being any just hinderance unto it: we
must therefore mark this in Abel as well as Caine, and be careful to imitate
it.

All you that have children to educate, bring them up to some calling. Let them
be as members not excrements in the body of humane societies. It is good to
have a calling and be faithful in it.
All you that are already come to such a state as you can discern between
good and evil, apply your selves to some calling, some work of body or mind,
some constant and settled employment in some lawful actions, tending to the
common good and your own, that you may be sure as S. Paul says, to labor if
not with your hands, yet with your heads the thing that is good, that you may
have to give, and that you may not be counted inordinate and unruly walkers,
not working at all but being busy bodies, workers round about as the word
signifies, do nothing but fetch friskes and vagaries through the world. O
expose not your selves and yours to so much misery as to have nothing to do. An
empty vessel is fit to receive any liquor that is powered into it; the Devil
will put you on evil employments, if you do not bestow your selves on good: A
bird that sits still on a tree is easily hit with a piece or crosse-bow, but
it is hard to take the flying bird. It is easy for Satan to entangle with his
temptations the Idlesbee, but hard to fasten on the man of employments. The
Lord commends and rewards diligence in a calling, and bids know the state of
thy flock, and bids men go and learn of the Pismire, and discommends
idleness and sluggishnesse, and threatens him that follows the idle. Let good
Abel teach you faithfulness in your calling. Cast away sluggishnesse and
unthriftinesse, wearing out your bodies in vanities and worse then vanities,
and set your selves to some such work as may make you able to answer the
question of God and your Master when he shall call you to account for the
laying out of so precious a thing as time.

But secondly, he was religious and devout, 2. Was religious.
he brought of the fruit of his flocks, yea of the firstlings and of the fat
thereof. He did bring to God one of the best and fattest of his Rams, or
Ewes, for Weathers were not for Sacrifice, and no maimed thing was to be
offered on Gods Altar. It is not observed of Caine, that he brought of the
first fruits and best of his corn or other grain: It is likely that the Holy
Ghost would have done this office of a faithful Historian, and have given
Caine his due by telling the quality as well as the matter of his offering, if
it had been as well qualified in this respect as his Brothers. Wherefore when
he commends Abels offering, because it was of the choice and fattest of his
flock, it may be well thought in forbearing to say any thing in like
commendation of Caines, that he took no great care, whether it were of the
best or not, and therefore we may well conceive that one cause of Gods
rejecting Caines Sacrifice was, because he did not bring of the best of his
fruits, as one cause of his accepting Abels was because he did bring of the
choicest of his flock, not that God looks to these outward things, but to the
mind of the doer, which for the most part (if necessity hinder not) does show
it self in the value and worth of the gift. He that loves God will bring him
as full a Sacrifice as he can, he that loves him not will give him as lean a
Sacrifice as it may stand with his credit to give. A man whose heart is not
upright with God will be at as little cost with him as is possible. A man that
is upright with him will enlarge his bounty toward him, you shall see in Mal.
1.13. that God refuses the Sacrifices, because they were halt and blind, the
worst and refuge of all, and he curses the deceiver that has in his flock a
male, and voweth and sacrifices to the Lord a corrupt thing, and verse 8. he
says, Offer it now to thy governor will he be pleased with thee and accept
thy person says the Lord? The Lord knows that niggardliness toward him
shows want of love and faith, but freeness and bounty shows truth of love
and of faith, and because he looks to the heart, therefore he likes that
gift which comes from a loving and faithful heart, and hates that which comes
from a contrary heart.

Learn therein to imitate Abel, bring to God the best things you have, he must
have the fat, the fat I say of your herds or flocks. The chiefest of your
affections must be his, and your affections must show themselves in action. You
must be willing to serve him with a costly service, and be ever of David's mind
that said, I will not serve God without charge.

Now these two things you have in the Text of Abel, two other things you have
in another place, Heb. 11. He offered a better Sacrifice then Caine by faith.
3. He offered in faith.
He offered in faith, and that caused him to bring a better, that is, I
suppose he means there, a more costly Sacrifice of better worth and value, of
more price and cost, not the cost but the faith that made him willing to be at
the cost, and the cost alone as it was a fruit and sign of the faith did
content God, and made the Sacrifice acceptable.

Let us learn therefore to do all we do in faith. The faith that good Abel
had was the same that after is commended in Henoch, he was persuaded that God
was and was a rewarder of them that diligently seek him, it was such as that
which the Apostle there describes, it was the evidence of things not seen and
the substance of things hoped for. It was such an apprehension of Gods being
and goodness to true Converts, and such a persuasion of his will to give him
the future invisible things hoped for, as made Abel serve God in the course of
his life in righteousness, and not alone for a time to come to the Altar and
offer Sacrifice.

Sacrificing was a profession of their own guiltiness, submitting themselves
to the Justice of God, as men worthy to die and be burnt, as that beast or
other thing to be burnt, but withal of their hope that God would pardon them
for his goodness sake through that true Sacrifice which was to come. And he
that offered Sacrifice without this faith of Gods accepting him for his mercy
sake, and without acknowledgement of his worthiness to perish, did not please
God, and all our Sacrifices must be done in faith, now more distinct, because
we have a fuller revelation, we must do all we do in faith, not alone a
persuasion of the lawfullnesse of what we do, but also an endeavor to trust
particularly for our acceptance both of persons and Sacrifices in Christ, not
in the worthiness of our selves or of our works. He that has this faith, he
and his services shall please God, he that has it not cannot please God
whatsoever he does. Let me therefore commend unto you the care of searching
into your hearts, whether you have this faith or no, viz. that you believe your
selves in your selves to be miserable sinners, but confess that Christ Jesus
is a perfect Savior, and therefore even trust upon Gods mercy in him for
grace and salvation.

But the Scripture says, that Abel was righteous, and says, 4. Was righteous.
that he obtained witness that he was righteous. Where has he that
witness? Partly in that God testified of his gifts by accepting them (for he
accepts nothing but that which comes from a righteous man, he hears no
sinners,) or more fully from the mouth of our blessed Savior, who calls him
righteous Abel. Note therefore that Abel was a righteous man. The Scriptures
give infinite comfort and commendation to the righteous man.

Now there is a righteousness of the Law and of the Gospel. A twofold
righteousness of the Law and Gospel. Gal. 2.16. Romans 3 10. Job 9 31.
A righteous man by the Law we shall find none in all the world, for S. Paul
tells us, that by the works of the Law no flesh shall be justified before
God, and that there is none righteous, no not one, and Job says of himself in
this sense, that if he went to justify himself, his own clothes would
defile him. This righteousness stands in an exact conformity to the Law of
God in that a man has not committed, neither is prone and inclined to commit
any of the things which the Law does forbid, nor has not omitted nor is not
prone to omit any of the things which the Law does command, but is utterly free
from all sin of omission and commission, and has perfectly fulfilled the Law
in all points and degrees. Such a righteousness since Adams fall was never
found, but in our blessed Lord Jesus Christ. Gal. 2.21.
Therefore the Apostle says, If righteousness were by the Law Christ were dead
in vain, he means, that if God appointed us now to come to Heaven for
Christ's sake, upon condition of our perfect fulfilling the Law, it would be to
no purpose, for we should not be saved by his death; and after he says, that
the Law concludes all under sin, Gal. 3.22.
that the promise through the faith of Jesus Christ may be given to them that
believe; and before he had said, Gal. 3.21.
If there had been a Law given which could have given life, righteousness had
been by the Law, so that there was not a Law given that could give life, and
therefore the Psalmist confesses, that in Gods sight there is no flesh
righteous, Psalm. 143.2.
and S. Paul durst not stand to this righteousness which was his own by the
Law. This Legal righteousness it would justify if we had it, but we have it
not, for we lost it in our first Parents, in whom all sinned and all died, all
were made sinful and mortal creatures, and a sinful mortal creature cannot
possibly perform such a Law, as was given to a sinnelesse and immortal
creature. Therefore we must find out another righteousness by which some men
may be called righteous, and by which Abel was righteous, seeing that by this
righteousness the Scripture testifies, that neither he nor any other can be
made righteous. This is the righteousness of faith, the righteousness of the
Gospel, the righteousness of God, the righteousness which is by the faith of
Jesus Christ, even the righteousness of God without the Law, and the
righteousness which is by the faith of Jesus Christ.

A double righteousness in the Gospel. 1. Imputed.
Now there is a double righteousness taught in the Gospel. The one is made
ours by imputation and is not ours by inherencie; we never performed it our
selves, but another performed it for us and we have it imputed to us: It is by
S. Paul described thus. A righteousness without works imputed to the happy
man, not simply without works, for that is impossible, because the Law cannot
be fulfilled but by working according to its direction, and unless the law be
fulfilled there is no perfect righteousness, but a righteousness without any
works of ours, and therefore without the Law too, for the Law accepts of no
righteousness but that which is wrought by our selves, Romans 4.3.
as it is said of Abraham, that he wrought not but did trust in him that
justifies the ungodly. Abraham wrought diligently and plentifully, how then can
it be said that he wrought not? he means that he did not work that by his
own works he might attain this righteousness. By this righteousness alone
we are justified. It is the perfect and exact righteousness of our Lord Jesus
Christ accepted for us and put to our reckoning. For he was our surety, he
took our nature, he bare our sins, he fulfilled our duty and bare our
punishment, and so satisfied Gods justice in our room, and is become The Lord
our righteousness. This is the one righteousness commended to us by the
Gospel. To this and this alone we must cleave for the obtaining of remission
of sins and life eternal at the hands of God. By merit of this are we
pronounced just by God at his heavenly Tribunal, and in the judgment of our
own consciences, and hereafter shall be so pronounced openly at the last day,
to this S. Paul cleaved. This the Gospel taught, for therein is declared the
righteousness of God from faith to faith.

2. Inherent.
But the Gospel tells of another righteousness that is a companion of this,
always at the same time and by the same means given that this is given, and
it is a quality inherent in us and wrought in us by the Spirit of God, and
flows immediately from our faith. The Apostle S. Paul does describe it
plainly, saying, that We must count our selves dead unto sin but alive unto
God, Romans 6.11.
and then says. We must not yield our members as weapons of unrighteousness
unto sin, but as weapons of righteousness to God, Verse 13.
and says, We are become servants to righteousness, Verse 19.
and that we must yield our members servants unto righteousness, and again,
must reign by righteousness unto life eternal. It is not the cause of our
life but the way to it. Via ad regnum, non causa regnandi. Bernard.
It is a virtue wrought in us, by which we are made able to strive and
endeavor, and desire to keep the Law. A man till he be justified by faith and
reconciled to God, is estranged from the Lord and from the life of God and is
an enemy in his mind, and is dead in sins, and loves sin and will not
leave it, and out of a stiff and strong bent of will to sin cannot but serve
sin, and will and resolve to continue serving it in one kind or other.

Now this is also a righteousness of the Gospel, and it differs from that of
the Law in two things, 1. In regard of the degree, it is imperfect and
defective, failing in many things, but it is upright and sincere, allows not
its failings, but with an upright desire striveth to perfection, and is still
laboring against its imperfections.

2. It differs from the righteousness of the Law in use; for the Law does
require this righteousness as an accomplishment of the Covenant of works, to
justify us before God by the merit and worth of it; but the Gospel requires
this as an act of obedience alone to show our thankfulness, and to prove us
truly justified before God, because as it is said, Gal. 3.21.
There is not a Law given which could give life, seeing that all have sinned
and come short of the glory of God, Romans 3.23.
and whosoever goes about to put this righteousness into the use of justifying
him before God, I mean of attaining eternal life and remission of sins from
God by virtue and worth of it, that man cannot but be damned, because he cannot
have the imputed righteousness and the inherent both for that purpose. If he
trust to Christ's righteousness he cannot trust to his own, if to his own he
cannot trust to Christ's, seeing S. Paul opposes them as things contrary,
saying, not having mine own but Christ's, Phil. 3.9.
which were weakly spoken, if a man could have both to the use of justifying:
yea he says, He that will be justified by the Law is fallen from grace, Gal.
5.4.
and Christ is become of none effect unto him; and by the Law he seeks to be
justified that seeks to be justified before God by doing this and by his own
working.

Now of a man that is thus righteous, Three signs of a righteous man. Psalm.
119.48. Psalm. 119 5, 6.
there are three sure plain and evident signs. 1. He desires to know and
do all that God reveals to him out of his Word. I have lifted up mine hands
unto thy testimonies which I have loved, and O that my heart were directed to
keep thy righteous judgments, then shall I not be confounded when I have
respect to all thy Commandments. 2. He confesses and bewaileth before God
his failings and errors, that break forth in him quite contrary to his
purpose and desire. Psalm. 51.4. Prove. 28.13. Zach. 1 3.
Against thee have I sinned, and He that confesses his sins, etc. And if you
turn to me I will turn to you, for If we say we have no sin we deceive
our selves, 1 John 1.8, 9.
But if we confess our sins he is faithful, etc. 3. He rests wholly upon
the mercy of God in Christ for pardon of his failings and acceptance of his
endeavors: So says John, If any man sin, 1 John 2.1.
we have an Advocate with God Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the
Propitiation for sin, and Abraham believed in God that justifies the
ungodly. S. Paul would have the righteousness which is by the faith of Jesus
Christ, I beseech you look that you be so righteous men as Abel was, else you
shall never be saved. For even Balaam saw, that only the righteous should be
saved, and therefore he wishes, Numb. 23.10.
Let me die the death of the righteous and let my last end be like his. No
sins of Abel mentioned in Scripture, and why?


Now we have the good of Abel, we should speak of his evil, but we have none
to speak of. For the Holy Ghost has not told us of any evil that he
committed, not because he had none, but because his life was so short, and
withal so good, that the Lord saw it not fit to make mention of any, and
surely though the Scripture do report the faults of other godly men, yet it
seems here to set forth Caine and Abel as the two seeds, the one of the Woman,
the other of the Serpent, and therefore of the good seed mentions no faults,
because in him God saw none, that is, would not impute any.

Now let us consider the things that befell him, 1. Good, 2. Bad.

3. His prosperity.

1. God had respect unto his gifts.


The good are two, first God had respect unto his gifts. Secondly, God gave
witness and testimony of his gifts.

He had respect unto them for the present, he gave testimony to them both at
that time and also after by the pen of Moses and by the tongue of our Lord
Jesus, calling him righteous Abel.

2. Gave witness and testimony of his gifts.
We cannot affirm any thing concerning the means by which the Lord did
express the liking of Abel and his Sacrifice, but that it was by some sensible
and evident sign discoverable by Caine as well as by himself, Caines
doggednesse stirred up by it does clearly evince. The Lord has respect unto
his true hearted servants, that worship him in truth and in faith, and are
truly righteous, he has respect unto them and to their Services; he likes
their persons, loves their works. Pro. 15.8. Psalm. 11.7.
The prayer of the upright is his delight, says Solomon, The righteous Lord
loves righteousness. God does to his faithful children sooner or later
evidently discover his approbation and liking of them and their works, as
David prays, Accept the words of my mouth and the meditations of my heart,
Psalm. 19.14.
yea he does make known this his favorable acceptance, by which as it is in
the Psalm, he accepts their burnt Sacrifices, that is, all their holy
services, he makes it known by the comfortable testimony of the Holy Ghost, 2
Cor. 1.12.
as Paul says, This is my glorying, the testimony of my conscience that in
simplicity, etc. When Gods people walk in Gods ways, he causes his Spirit to
witness with their spirits, and their spirits to witness to them, that
themselves and their ways please God, by which their spirits are refreshed and
comforted against all the taunts and opprobries of sinners and scoffers. And
this is a sufficient recompense to all our labors and for all our sufferings
that God accepts us. If he accept us, what need we care though the world
deride and scorn and hate us. O let those that have seen God thus vouchsafing
to respect them, comfort themselves in that, yea I shall not need to give them
such advice, this apprehension of Gods gracious accepting us is a thing so
sweet and delightful, that the people of God which have enjoyed it, will
prefer it before the approbation of all men. For whom he thus respects,
them will he likewise approve in the face of all the world, and therefore
bear testimony to their works, even at the last day; yea the light to which
he that does well delights to come, that will make it known that his works
be wrought of God, John 3.11. If Gods Spirit within, if Gods Word without do
testify of your deeds, that they be wrought in God, how easy a thing is it
to slight and despise the false and foolish censures of the world?

But now come we to the evils that he suffered; 4. His adversity, was hated
and killed by his Brother.
for Gods people must suffer evil for well-doing, his Brother hated him, laid
a train for him, slew him. Abel was the first Martyr, the first man that died
for goodness; he was Gods first; Witness, as Steven was Christ's. Those that
will live godly in Christ must suffer persecution, 2 Timothy 3.12.
and of whom, even of the dearest friends they have in the flesh, and how far
even to the lying in wait for their lives and taking the same away. The Lord
would have the first blood that was spilt, spilt in his quarrel, in his holy
quarrel, in standing for righteousness sake, that we which follow after might
learn to stick close to this cause, and not to fear to lay down our lives
for it. S. John tells us, no wonder if the world hate us. The world is the
number of unsanctified men in the world, these will hate such as Abel the
righteous, yea if Father be unrighteous and Son righteous. Brother righteous
and Brother unrighteous, Husband righteous and Wife unrighteous, the Father,
Brother, Wife, will hate and malign the child, the Brother and the Husband.
God has put enmity betwixt the seed of the Woman and of the Serpent; good and
bad are of two contrary natures, what the one loves the other hates, and
contrarily, this contrariety in disposition will breed contrariety in
affection. He that is Caine, a formal Hypocrite and satisfies himself with
a bare outside service, will hate him that worshippeth in spirit and in truth,
Gal. 4.29.
They that are after the flesh will persecute them that are after the spirit,
and all that will live godly must suffer for it. Prepare your selves to meet
with the same measure that Abel met withal; you had need of patience says our
Savior. Be not discouraged at the hatred and ill usage of wicked men, but have
respect to the recompense of reward, look to the end of your faith, set the
joy before your eyes and fear not any of these things that you may suffer. An
over-tender spirit is not fit to be Christ's Soldier, if you will reign with
him you must be crucified with him. Arm, arm my Brethren, arm, you are in
the battle, you must expect knocks, but be not dismayed, the victory shall be
yours. God will so stablish you that you shall not be driven out of the way of
righteousness, by any thing that Satan can do by the world: and he conquers
that keeps close to the ways of righteousness what ever he suffer.

We have done with Abels life, we bring him to his death, His death.
at what age we cannot show you, but in what manner and by whose hand we can
tell you. Here is a tragical narration, the murderer a bad man and a Brother,
the murdered a good man and a Brother, and the quarrel goodness, and the
manner sudden and unexpected and violent. Flesh and blood perhaps would find
fault with God, why did not God protect Abel when the world had so few
Inhabitants? was it not pity that one should be taken out of it so untimely
and in such a manner? and much more was it not pity that the more godly and
the more useful should be so soon bereft of life? It is a thing that a
shallow wit is ready to impleade God for. But God is such a ruler that will
order things according to his own perfect wisdom. It shall be worse in
outward respects with the good then with the bad, the sinner shall outlive the
Saint, and flourish in the world when the other is rotting in the grave, and
why so? that God may teach them hereby to look for happiness in another world
that is to come, that they may expect a better and enduring substance in
Heaven. 1 Cor. 15.19.
If in this life only we had hope, we were of all men the most miserable:
but, We are dead with Christ and our life is hid with God in Christ. Col. 3.3,
4.
When Christ shall appear then shall we also appear with him in glory. We
must not therefore be offended at the miseries which befall the godly in this
life, but cause our minds to look beyond the world unto the future recompense.
God were not just toward his people, if there were not another world where
they shall have their portion, as the worldly minded have their portion in this
life.

Abels death was violent and sudden.
Now concerning Abels death, consider we that it was violent and sudden,
whereby we must be taught to walk always ready for death, and to look for it
in every place by such violent means as our selves cannot foresee in
particular. Who knows when or where he shall die, how soon, and by what
means he must leave this world before he be aware. Labor therefore to prepare
for death every day, get faith, get repentance, get new obedience, get your
sins pardoned, and your selves sanctified, that if death come suddenly, yet
it may not be sudden to you, because you have made your selves ready for it,
if we be thus fitted for death happy are we though it come without giving
warning, but if we have not so fitted our selves, we shall be most miserable
though our death be long and lingering, and come not with any violence.

Yea we must learn to be thankful to God for his goodness in protecting us
against the rage of evil men, that they be not able to cut us off in the midst
of our days, as they would do if God did permit us to fall into their hands.
No good man that lives but some Caine or other would soon dispatch them out
of the world, and do the same thing for them that Caine here did for Abel, for
the sinner hates the righteous and gnasheth against him with his teeth, but
the Lord will not give him into his hands. It is a divine providence that
makes the godly dwell in safety in the midst of their enemies, and walk in a
fiery furnace and yet not be burned, and lie in the den of Lions and yet not be
touched by them. Now therefore let Abels example put you in mind to be ready
always for death, and to observe the goodness of God in saving you from the
hands of sinful men and spirits, that they cannot destroy and devour as their
malice and might would cause them to do, if God did not incompasse you with
his favor as with a shield.

We have done with Abel, Caines posterity.
the next to be spoken of are Caines posterity, of whom little is spoken,
because the Lord intended a very short story, Caine begat a Son and called
his name Henoch, at the same time he was building a City and called it Henoch.
The word signifies to initiate, dedicate or teach, perhaps because he left
the City to his Son to finish and to dedicate, himself not being able to do
it, because of his distempered conscience which made him wander as a fugitive.

This Son begat a Son also and called him Irad, Irad what it signifies.
the word signifies (I think) a City of one that rules, of the Hebrew words
Gnir that signifies a City, and Rad that signifies to bear rule, because
belike he had finished that City, and hoped to leave it to his Son to rule in
it.

And this Irad begat a Son and called him Mehuiael which signifies one that
is destroyed or blotted out by the Lord God, perhaps because God had laid sore
punishments upon them at that time, their sin increasing against him.

This Mehuiael begat Methusael, which signifies, one that asks after, or
requested his death: it may be, because then men were so afflicted that they
grew weary of life. (*.)

THE FOVRTH EXAMPLE.
OF LAMECH, etc.
THE root of Woman-kinde were Adam and Eve. The branches were, 1. Bad, Caine
and Caines posterity. 2. Good. The first stock, Abel, the second Caine and his
posterity. Now the lineage of Caine is set down in the sixth generation,
mentioning only the eldest in a direct line. Adam had Caine, Caine Irad, he
Methuiael, he Methusael, he Lamech, Lamech had two wives, one Adah, the other
Zillah, Adah had Iabal and Iubal, Zillah had Tubal Cain, and a daughter called
Naamah, she is the first woman named after Evah, perhaps, Naamah why so
called, the first woman named after Eve, and why?
because she was a woman of great power and name in her time, for her name
signifies fair, or sweet, or pleasant, or beautiful, and it seems that in
those times beauty began to be much set by. Now for Lamech we must observe his
faults, I mean of his behavior, and the benefits he enjoyed and the misery
that befell him.

His faults are, 1. Lamechs faults, His Polygamy, the first beginner of it.
He corrupted the ordinance of marriage by taking two wives; God at first made
but one man and one woman and joined them together, and Adam said, they shall
be one flesh, signifying that he conceived it to be the will of God, that one
woman should serve for one man, and adds, A man shall forsake Father and
Mother and cleave to his wife, not wives. But this man would not satisfy
himself with Gods appointment, his lust (in all likelihood it was his lust,
for what other cause should move him I cannot conjecture) would not be
contained within the bounds of lawful matrimony. He dares add a second wife
and so bring into the world a painted whoredom, a gilded adultery, a
pretended marriage, but indeed a very breach of wedlock. For our Savior Christ
tells us, that he which puts away his wife and marries another commits
adultery, and if that be true as we must confess, Luke 16.18.
for his authority sake that spoke it, then without all question he that
keeps his former wife still and will needs take another to her, is guilty too
of committing adultery. The reason is clear and cannot be denied. For if it
were not adultery to have more women then one at one time, then the taking of
another wife upon a causeless divorce should not deserve that odious title,
and if it be so, poligamy must needs take the same title to it self. This was
therefore a grievous audaciousnesse in this wicked man, that he would leap
over the poles as it were which God had fixed. The thing was naught, and his
doing it first before others made it worse in him, and made him guilty of their
faults that after followed it upon his example. For indeed it was quickly taken
up and practiced in the world, insomuch that it continued to the time of
Abraham, and was practiced also by him as a thing not reputed sinful. For when
sin has gotten years and examples upon its back it does many times cease
to be counted what it is, and goes under the repute of a lawful thing, though
it be in it self even somewhat evidently unlawful; because partly the mind
of man corrupted by the pleasing or profitable effects of it, is willing not to
think it sin, and the judgment is easily sweyed by the will, and partly
because the example of men does work too much to draw unto evil, as an heavy
thing is easily cast downward.

2. His revengefullnesse.
Now to polygamie he adds a notorious revengefullnesse. Having married a
couple of women, it seems he found some distempers in them and therefore to
calm and overawe them a little, he falls to breath out revenge with violent
threats, saying, that he would kill a man in his wound, or for his wound, he
means because of wound received, and a young man for his hurt or bruise, he
means because of a bruise or stripe given him, yea he goes farther and adds,
that if Caine should be avenged sevenfold then he seventy times seven fold.
If any man whosoever he were should hurt him, he should die for it, yea were
he never so young and lusty a fellow that should offer to smite him, it should
cost him his life, and he would proceed to an higher degree of revenge, then
that which God himself had appointed to Caines murderer, viz. he would be
revenged seventy times seven times more, What it is to revenge.
that makes in all almost five hundred times as much more, here is passion and
pride in all extremity. To revenge is to render evil for evil, to revenge a
thing seven times is to inflict a thing seven times more grievous upon a wrong
doer then that which he did to another, to revenge seventie times and seven is
to lay an evil 490 times more heavy then that received. The Lord of Heaven
has cause, because he has authority, to enlarge his punishing justice, and
to execute a threat of seven times revenge, because after such a threat to
commit the fault makes it seven degree more faulty, as being an audacious
despising of his anger, and a very setting his threats at naught, but for any
man to exceed measure so far in punishing though he were a lawful
Magistrate, punishing the malefactor at the complaint and instance of the
wronged person, it were a great offense. How much more then for a private man
so far to exceed all degrees in respect of a wrong done to himself. Sure he
that threatens to be revenged 400 times more then Caine, conceived himself to
be more excellent than Caine 400 times, for according to the measure of the
parties worth that was wronged, must the revenge be increased. O how proud a
man was he! that durst so far prefer himself above his great
grandfathers Father, for so was Caine, who being then alive and departed from
under the government of Adam, was now the King of all the sons that
descended from him, during his life, and the Priest too, for Kingdoms and
Priest-hoods in those first times went to the eldest of the family by
succession. These were chief Rulers in matters civil and religious. He was
therefore a very haughty minded man, and a very passionate angry man, and so a
very revengefull man which springs from pride and and passion.

These be his faults, yet see how good and patient the Lord shows himself
unto such a wretch, for he had two sons by one wife, His benefits, he had
children
and a son and daughter by the other, God gave him the fruit of marriage,
though he were the first that so shamefully abused marriage, for God does not
instantly stretch forth a punishing arm against an offender, and these sons
of his too were very active and profitable men, of good parts and account, as
appears by their inventions mentioned in the Text. 2. His crosses, he led an
unquiet life by reason of his wives.
But yet he is not left quite unpunished, for his life was unquiet, as
appears by his threatening and bragging what he would do, for such kind of
threats be but boastings of the future time. It is not to be doubted of but
that his two wives, what by the brawles which would fall out betwixt them and
their children, and what by the stirs that they would make with him, each to
have him take her part against the other, made his life uncomfortable, so that
he was feign to see if he could make the matter a little better by big and
violent words, to keep them in awe by fear whom duty could not order. Now
this is Lamech.

Let us make some use of his Example, The uses of all.
even to blame our selves for having committed, if we have committed the like
sins to his, that we may be drawn to repentance which he was never so happy
as to perform.

Secondly, to arm ourselves against those sins, and to abound in the
contrary virtues, for so it is our duty, as Bees do honey out of weeds, to
gather good out of bad Examples. Come hither then and let me examine you in
Gods name. Is there not any amongst you that has violated marriage worse then
Lamech. He did sin by taking two wives. The Laws would punish you for
following him in that, and would not suffer you to keep two women under the
name of wives, have not you therefore fallen to flat and downright adultery.
If so, repent of this enormity; The Lord will not suffer the transgressors of
his Covenant to bear it free if repentance do not stay his hand.

Yea have not some of you been Lamechs in making the first breach into a
sin; Inventers of evil things, S. Paul calls them which are the first which
do them, that run into them not induced by any former examples, but carried
by their own corruptions, and so by going over the hedge, induce others to
follow them: such sinners be the more grievous before God by how much they show
a more impudent disposition, that dare lead the way to wickedness, and make
themselves captains and ringleaders to so vile and mischievous a thing, and
such sins do call for a larger measure of sorrow and humiliation.

Again, have none of you been passionate, angry, and full of threats, working
in proud wrath as Solomon calls it, and as here, you may see wicked Lamech
doing with an angry voice, and a countenance suitable thereto. You may be sure
he calls upon his wives to leave their brawling and let him speak, and then
blusters out these words, that he would kill the man whosoever should wrong
him. Are not there some men among you so mad and furious, that they threaten
blood and death to any that shall wrong them. O this wrathful and angry
roaring as I may call it, is a sign of much folly and pride, and therefore do
not please your selves in it, as they do most times that are given to it, but
abhor it, and judge your selves for it, and humbly acknowledge to God, that
you have deserved his wrath for showing your own wrath so immoderately. And
lastly consider, have you not been revengefull men? that would take no wrong
but return death and slaughter for a stroke, a wound, and seven yea twenty,
and if you were able an hundred blows for one, yea death for a word speaking,
and a great evil for a little.

Revenge is a great sin.
Brethren, revenge is a fearful sin; there are two ways of revenge, some
do compass it by maine strength, presently and openly if one wrong them, they
rail or strike and lay about them, as it were an angry Dog or Bear or other
Beast, others be more still in their revenge, they lay it up in store and set
it on the score till a fit opportunity come, and then they pay him home with
the like and more that has wronged them, both these revenges be naught, and it
is hard to say whether is the worse of the twain: the one has more craft, the
other more fury, both show an heart destitute of all meekness and charity
and faith. If you have found your selves so disposed, until you repent you
shall be sure to find God as bitter against you. He will be revenged of the
revengefull. He will be an enemy to him that will fight and keep a stir if
he be touched or wounded. Do not count it valor to give stroke for stroke or
wound for wound, or blow for blow, it is an hellish valor, it is not manhood,
it is dog-hood, or I may term it beare-hood, it is brutish, so will a Lion or
a bruit creature. It is not courage but outrage, it is not fortitude but mere
fury. And yet alas where shall you find breasts that do not bear the stamp
of Lamechs words within them, that perhaps be not come to such an high degree
as he was to revenge 490 times, but are come to that, that they resolve and
purpose, if a man wound them, they will wound him again if they can, if any
man strike, they will do the best they can to strike him again. Beloved, he
in whom this sin reigns, is a wicked man though it be not of so high a
growth in him as it was in this wretch. He that holds this purpose, I will
requite blow with blow^ wrong with wrong, he is not a true Christian, for he
does not overcome evil with good, but is overcome with evil. He is a man that
lives allowedly in a sin as bad in Gods account as theft or whoredom.
Revenge in Gods account is a sin as foul and fouler then lust or injustice.
I beseech you examine your selves, and if you have found your selves carried
away with revenge, and resolve to be so still, take notice that you be too like
to Lamech to be the children of God. Mat. 18.22.
Our Savior commands us if our neighbor offend to forgive him till seventy
times seven times, I think alluding to this very speech of this here in the
Text, and intending to teach you to labor to abound in patience, meekness,
and forbearance, as much as he abounded in proud revengefullnesse.

If any say, why then I shall expose my self to all manner of wrongs.

I answer, first, if one should do so, better suffer all manner of injuries
from man, then to have God enter into judgment with him for all his sins.

Secondly, I answer, that God has the rule of things, and as the sheep must
dwell in safety not by their own sturdinesse, but by the care and diligence of
the Shepherd, so must Gods people enjoy freedom from wrongs not by their own
violence but by his protection and wisdom.

And lastly, I say if the wrongs be notorious and such as it is not fit to
suffer, God has put the sword of revenge into the Magistrates hands, and so
far as the heart is not imbittered with Malice, but seeks alone his own
defense and safety without triumphing in the smart of an enemy, it is very
lawful to seek him for rescue.

So have we done with Lamech, Lamechs three sons inventers of Arts.
we go on to his three sons that were profitable persons and inventers of
good arts, at the least perfecters.

The one perfected that part of husbandry which consists in feeding cattle and
making tents to shelter both the Shepherds and the sheep, that with those
moveable habitations they might be able to drive their cattle from place to
place for the best pasture. It is likely that before his time they were feign
to be content with the shade of the trees, or with some cave under ground, or a
few turfes put upon some sticks of wood which they had made a shift to get into
the ground or some such like. But he considering better of the matter, invented
the way of making linen cloth and so with fitting that upon poles with peggs
and stakes to keep of great storms and heat, yea by this means they could
carry their houses with them whither soever they had occasion to travel for
pasture sake, and this kind of fleeting life, dwelling in tents and following
cattle continued to Abraham's time and long after, yea it was the commandment
of Ionadab to the Rechabites that they should always live so. Jer. 35.
This therefore was a commodious and beneficial invention, and it is for his
praise that first devised it, much is owing him by those that coming after
have enjoyed the benefit of his devices.

Iubal the next Son of Lamech, he was a man not given so much to toilesome
profit as to merriment and sport, he was a lover of music, and he perfected
the art of making Organes, and you must understand, playing upon them too, for
to what purpose would he find them out but to play on? This is a lawful
invention and good and comfortable. Cherfulness and Mirth so that it be
moderate and well guided for the circumstances, is a lawful thing, whether
Music by voice or instrument, whether wind instruments or other hand
instruments. It is a very good and lawful thing to solace ones self with
music, and a warrantable recreation, so that it be not abused, and he that
first found it out is to be counted a benefactor to mankind.

But the last named, he was the most profitable inventer, he that found out the
art of iron work, he was an excellent Smith. This was Tubal Caine, thought to
be the same that the Heathens called Vulcane. Smiths are a necessary calling.
Their art is helpefull to all other Sciences both for peace and war, to them
belongs the making of all the necessariest instruments of husbandry, of all
sort of tools for other trades and of arms also for the Soldier. No part of
man's life can be without iron work. A knife, a key, an hatchet, a forke, a
saw, a mattock, a sithe, a raking hook, a chezill, a sword, a spear, a
shield, an helmet, who can reckon up the things that Smiths do make for man's
use. This was therefore an exceeding fruitful invention, so much the more to
be commended by how much it is more wearisome and laborious, for it is you know
a strong labor in some things and a curious in other things, and much of it is
much annoyed with heat about the fire. And thus has God stored the world with
needful arts, by means of Lamechs sons that were it seems unsanctified
men.

The uses of all.
We must make some use of all this, first, to be thankful unto God that has
imparted to some men such good wits and understandings that they were able to
find out and perfect those several Sciences and Callings, for how toylesome
and uncomfortable would our lives be if we did not enjoy these helps and
comforts. Even this natural ability is from God and deserves thanks from us.

Again, men must set themselves to be profitable to the world, by either
inventing or adding to the inventions of others in any kind. It is good to do
something for which the world may be the better, and not to come into the world
merely as rats and mice only to devour victuals and to run squeaking up
and down. Be you followers of such, if you cannot invent and perfect an art,
yet learn and follow some that is already invented. These men were not
idlesbees, do naughts; O be you as good at least as these sons of Lamech,
only labor to be so moderate in following and using all these earthly things,
that you be not earthly minded thereby, but may become careful of things that
pertain to the soul and to another life, as well as of those that belong to
this present life and to this body of clay. It is good to use the world but not
to love it, to set our hands on work about the things of it, but not to set
our hearts upon it. This is a baiting place and not a place of habitation, we
make a journey through this world, we do not dwell in the world. O let our
minds and desires and wishes be in Heaven, and let us do those outward things
with reference unto Heaven, that by profiting men and serving God in a calling,
we may make our way to Heaven the easier, and our wages there the greater. And
so much for the lineage of Caine.

Now we come to another offspring of Adam. If is not to be thought that he
remained childlesse till the birth of Seth, or that God would smite him in that
newness of the world with so long a barrenness, or that he so long forbear
society with Evah. As it is said, that he lived an hundred and thirty years
and begat Seth, Genesis 5.3.
so it is said, he lived long after and begat sons and daughters; therefore
it is likely also, that in that hundred and thirty years before he begat
sons and daughters, but because the Lord intended to draw out the lineage of
Christ, therefore he lets all the rest go and fastens alone upon Seth, of whom
the promised seed was to come in a direct line: Of Seth then we must speak.
Seth little said of him.
His Birth gladded Evah and Adam too no doubt, because they understood by
revelation from God, that he should be a godly man. Therefore he is called
Seth, that is, he has appointed, because says Evah, Genesis 4.25.
God has appointed me another seed instead of Abel whom Caine slew. Lo it is
an hundred and thirty years after and yet she has not forgotten the murder
of Caine. The infamy of a sin will cleave long to a man's name, and the grief
of a cross if it be a stinging cross indeed as this was, will lie long upon
the soul. But why says she a seed instead of Abel, it may be it was,
because she saw little piety and goodness in the other sons and daughters:
none of them was like Abel in religion and godliness. But for Seth she
understood that God would make him as good a man as Abel, and therefore she
rejoices in him, for a good Parent is little gladded in children, if they
prove not pious and godly children, Gods children as well as his or hers;
wherefore those children that would glad the hearts of their Parents, must see
themselves to follow the ways of virtue, that their aged Parents may have joy
in them.

Now of Seth nothing is said, but that he begat a Son at an hundred and five
years old, as the next Chapter shows, calling him Enosh, that is, sorrow or
grief, because of the many griefs and sorrows to which men are subject in
this life. Well may man have the name of sorry given to him, so full of
miseries is he as Job spoke long after. Genesis 4.26
Only it is added, that in Seths days men began to callon the name of the
Lord. It may be rendered (some think) the name of God was profaned in calling
on, that is, men grew then very profane in a careless abusing Gods public
Service and Worship. Others thus, then it was begun to call on the name of the
Lord, that is, men began more publicly and religiously and openly to call on
the name of God, to profess true piety more carefully in public assemblies.
It notes in the former sense a growing worse of the times, in the latter a
growing better. I am in doubt whether sense to fasten upon, I think rather of
the twain it is a taxing of the public profanation of God in abusing his
worship, because it follows immediately upon the giving of the name Enosh,
sorrowful, miserable, mortal man, as a reason of that name, why did his
Father call him so, because Gods name then began to be profaned in calling
upon, men grew more and more careless and remiss in Gods service, and did it
in so bad and negligent and indevout a fashion, as it was rather a profaning
then a worshipping or honoring of his name. And this seems the rather to be
the meaning, because there is little reason to think that Adam and Seth did
not long before this apply themselves to the careful worshipping of God in
their assemblies, and to take all good means to save themselves from the
corruption of the Kaynites. Or it may be rendered, then it was begun to call by
the name of Lord, that is, men began then to have that name given them of the
sons of God, and this I like best of all the three, because in the beginning of
the sixth Chapter (which continues the story, and the fifth Chapter is but a
digression put in to show the age of the world at the flood) it is said, the
sons of God saw the daughters of the sons of men. Whereby it is apparent,
that to the men that professed true religion with Adam and Seth the name of the
sons of God was given, and to the rest the name of the sons of men. The
professors of the true religion were called sons of God, that did worship the
true God after the manner that God taught by Adam. The other were called sons
of men, that gave themselves over to worldliness, and vanity, and
profaneness; for my part I suppose that before the flood there was no
Idolatry, because the Holy Ghost would not have omitted the taxing of that
sin as well as those it does tax if it had been then used in the world. But
let us take the words to mean, then it was begun to call on the name of the
Lord, and then it shall be added as a commendation of Seth, that in his days
religion began to flourish more then ever before, by his diligence joining with
his Father Adam, much more respect was had to piety, and greater numbers of men
embraced the profession of piety. And this ought to be the care of every good
man to further the progress of true religion, and to cause the name of God to
be faithfully called upon of many.

Now of the rest of Adams seed there is a Catalogue made in the fifth Chapter
of all the ancient Fathers, from the first man Adam to Noah, in whose days the
flood fell out, by which it appears of what standing the world was, when it
was grown so corrupt, that the Lord could no longer endure the manners of it.
And in this Catalogue the Holy Ghost takes this order; 1. He shows of what age
every one was when he begat his eldest son. How many years he lived after
the birth of that son. 3. How old he was when he died. The number of the
persons are in all ten, Adam, Seth, Enoch, Cainan, Mahalaleel, Iared, Enoch,
Methuselah, Lamech, and Noah. Adam at a hundred and thirty years begat Seth,
and after lived eight hundred years and had more children in that time, and
died aged nine hundred and thirty years. Adam was in truth the eldest man all
things considered, for though Methuselah outlived him thirty nine years (for
he was nine hundred sixty nine years, and Adam but nine hundred and thirty)
yet Methuselah was borne an infant, Adam was made a perfect man the first day,
and in those times a man was but a child at thirty nine years, for no question
they would give their minds to marriage in that newness of the world, paucity
of men, and plenty of ground so soon as they were fit for it. So Adams perfect
estate at the first countervailed the living of forty years and more. Seth he
lived a hundred and five years and begat Enos, and living eight hundred and
seven years begat diverse more children, and ended his days at nine hundred
and two. Enos lived ninety years and begat Cainan, etc. as you may read in
the story. Nothing is mentioned of any one but the length of his life, the time
when he had his first son, and that he had more sons. Henoch.
Only of Henoch it is noted that he walked with God, that is, lived a most
holy life and that he died not at all, but was translated after he had lived
three hundred sixty five years. The Lord shortened the days of his pilgrimage,
and rewarded his singular piety with taking him up to Heaven, soul and body
immediately without dying. He was changed without any separating of his spirit
from his body, and in him we have an example what should have been the course
that God would have taken with all men if man had continued in the state of
innocence, viz. he should not have died, soul and body should never have
departed one from the other, but after a man had proceeded in godliness, till
he had gotten so large a measure of it, as in this life he could (for though
Adam were perfect habitually yet not actually, I mean though he had an
ability to attain perfect knowledge of God and the creatures, yet he had not
yet actually gotten all such knowledge as he was to get both of God and of the
creatures) then should he have been translated into Heaven to see God
immediately and to know him better then in this life he could be known. Sin
entering caused death, had not that come in we should have gone to Heaven
without death as this Henoch did.

Now out of all these things written concerning these Ancients the direct
parents of our Lord, we gather this, that death is common to all, and how long
soever a man lives at last he must leave the world, and therefore we learn
two things principally.

First, to prepare for death, that whenever it befalls we may change for
the better not for the worse, and this preparation for death must be not alone
a little before it comes, or at the hour of its approach, but in the whole
course of our life by beginning early to repent and continuing daily to turn
and renew our repentance, that so we may get an assurance of our being taken
from earth to Heaven: for he that begins unfaignedly to turn to God and so
continues, he shall surely be saved, and for the most part shall obtain
before his departure hence an assured apprehension of his salvation. Therefore
he must (as Henoch did) walk with God in a continual care of obeying him,
and laboring to hold fast a constant persuasion of his favor and love to him
in his Son, for it is testified of Enoch, that he pleased God, Heb. 11.5.
so that what in Genesis is called a walking with God, that S. Paul calls
pleasing of God, and also that by faith he was translated that he should not
see death, even by his believing and resting upon Gods mercy, for so it is
said, he believed that God was and was a rewarder of them that diligently seek
him, which finding himself to do, he resolved that God would reward him: So
must each of us walk with God, constantly resolve and endeavor to please God
in all things, and retain in our selves an assured peaswasion, that God will
graciously accept and reward us in Christ, with giving us life eternal and
causing us never to see the second death: though we must not be freed from the
first, for that was the special privilege of Enoch and Eliah, and was never
granted to any other that we read. Labor therefore to hold fast in your souls
a firm persuasion of Gods love to you in Christ, and withal a firm purpose
of pleasing him in all things. Let sincere truth of obedience be joined with a
firm persuasion of Gods love, and the firm persuasion of Gods love be joined
with a sincere endeavor of obedience, then death shall never come amiss, then
you are always ready for it, So David faith; Psalm. 119.166.
I have hoped in thy salvation and done thy Commandments. So then if we would
be ready for God we must do two things. Turn to him and walk with him. To
turn is to begin to walk with God, to walk with God is to continue to turn
to him. O ye that have not begun to turn do it to day, turn now, call to
mind your former evil ways to judge your selves for them, to lament them, to
seek of God in Christ forgiveness of them and power against them, and labor
to rest your selves upon his goodness in Christ for pardon and help, and so
have you made your peace, then keep your peace by a constant endeavor to
please God in holiness of life, and a constant renewing of your assured
persuasion of his love. O happy man he that can so fit himself for his latter
end. Brethren let the mention of the deaths of so many aged persons, make you
careful to prepare for death; you that be young do it, because death takes
away young men as well as old, and you that be old do it, because you may
meet with it very suddenly, and must needs meet with it before it be long.

Again, you see these long-lived men here, wrestling with the corruptions of
the world and their own, some a longer time and some a shorter, but all in
comparison of our selves a great while. The longest lived man for number of
days was Methuselah who lived nine hundred sixty nine years, but for
perfection of life Adam, who lived a perfect man nine hundred and thirty
years. The shortest lived of all the Patriarchs was Noah's Father, Methuselahs
Son, Lamech, for he lived seven hundred seventy and seven years, and died
the year before the flood, a little before his Father Methuselah, who lived
till that very year that the flood came and drowned all, and was taken away
that he might not see the flood.

Now why did God lengthen out the days of the Patriarchs? Why the Patriarchs
lived so long.


I answer, chiefly to maintain the knowledge of God and true religion in the
world, that by the long life of one godly man, the truth which then was not put
in writing, but by word of mouth delivered from man to man might be kept more
pure and undefiled. Adam lived till Methuselah was two hundred forty and three
years old. Methuselah lived till Sem the Son of Noah was one hundred years
lacking two; so that Sem talked with him that had talked with Adam, who could
acquaint him with all things concerning the creatures, the fall and the
promised seed out of his certain knowledge and experience, he had been made
of nothing, he had seen all perfections, and Methuselah could tell it to Sem,
and Sem lived to see Isaac borne and a Father. So that Isaac might speak mouth
to mouth with him that had spoken with him that had spoken with Adam the first
man that ever was. Was not this a notable confirmation of his Faith.

THE FIFTH EXAMPLE.
OF The Old World.
We have propounded particular Examples unto you hitherto, as also the
Scriptures have done. Now following them, we must set before your eyes the
Examples of an whole multitude, even of an whole World, full of men and women,
that gave themselves to work wickedness before the Lord. It is called in
Scripture, the old World, 2 Pet. 2.5.
and the world of ungodly. In the space of a 1656. years the generation of
mankind was grown to that height and exorbitancie of wickedness, that the
patience of God could no longer endure them.

Now concerning this Old World we will show you three things. 1. Their sins.
2. The goodness of God to them notwithstanding their sins. 3. The severe
punishment that fell upon them at the last, and so will make use of all. The
sins of the old world. 1. In general.


First, for their sins, the Holy Ghost sets them out in general, and more
particularly. In general, the sin of man is said to be great, Genesis 6.5.
and that every imagination of the thought of his heart was evil and only
evil and that continually. Secondly, it is said, Verse 11.
that all flesh had corrupted his way upon the earth. So their naughtiness was
remarkable in these two respects, it was exceeding heinous and grievous in
that they committed great and foul sins, in great abundance with great
wilfulness, and gave themselves to add sin to sin, doing nothing but
plodding and contriving wickedness, They all were given over to sinning,
except some in Noah's house.
and then all men gave themselves over to the same bad course; you could not
find a man that made scarce a show of goodness out of Noah's house. When all
consent together to sell over themselves to work iniquity, and grow past shame
or fear, running into most grievous and notorious sins with greediness and
wilfulness, this is very offensive to Almighty God, and will certainly
provoke his wrath to bring upon them some fearful and heavy punishments.

Diverse reasons may be thought of that caused this exceeding great growth of
sin in those times. Why sin was so great then.
1. The long life of men, for let an unsanctified man continue long, and he
will grow more and more sinful the longer he continues. Sin by frequent
exercise grows more and more violent and headstrong. So living a great space
of time they grew above measure naught.

2. They had strong and able bodies together with health and ability to enjoy
the things of this life.

3. They had great peace in regard they all lived under a paternall
government, the agedst in the family still being acknowledged the governor of
the family, and they had all one language and so no great cause of
controversy, and one religion too, it is like, seeing the Patriarchs lived so
long, that they were immediately taught of God, save that they degenerated to
profaneness and the most became of no religion, and so did not war with the
contrary little party, unless it were with jests, scoffs and contumelies.
Long life, great strength, great peace begat great wickedness.

2. In particular.
But more particularly the Lord takes notice here of their 1. Unlawful and
carnal marriages, 2. Of their violence and oppression. And our Savior tells
of their great worldliness, Mat. 24.37, 38.
that did sell over themselves to temporal dealings, and cared nothing for
better things; and S. Peter tells of their obstinacy in sinning, and their not
believing nor regarding, 1 Pet. 3.20.
they were disobedient whilst the long suffering of God waited in the days of
Noah. Mat. 24.38.
Yea our Savior tells of their notable unbeleefe, that did not give any
credit to Gods threats, nor knew of the flood till the waters came and drowned
them. All Noah's preaching prevailed nor to make them take notice of the
judgment that hanged over their heads.

Gods mercy to them.
The mercy of God toward them appears, in that he gave them a large warning,
a hundred and twenty years to repent, in which his Spirit continued to strive
with their wickedness, God takes to himself the similitude of a man, who
being greatly displeased with the ill carriage of his Inferiors, is feign to
strive with himself to keep down his anger, that it raise not up it self
against them in excess and over-suddenly. The striving of Gods Spirit is a
patient continuing to use the means of reclaiming sinners, to see if it be
possible to win them, Gods bounty takes pains as it were to break man's
sinful heart. So God resolved to continue striving but for a hundred and
twenty years, and all that while he determined to continue this course of
gentleness, and withal he used in that time the ministry of Noah, 2 Pet.
2.5.
who was therefore called a Minister and Preacher of righteousness by S.
Peter, that he might reduce them to some repentance and amendment; therefore is
it said, 1 Pet. 3.20.
The long-suffering of God waited in Noah's days, and in all this space they
had great outward mercies. Yea there were men of great stature borne which
prooved also men of great renown for wealth, riches, honors and outward
eminencies, so that they felt no manner of punishment almost in earthly things,
but were reserved to that great and heavy punishment which waited for them at
last, even to the deluge or flood of waters.

God made all the great deepes to break up, Their punishment.
and the springs to overflow, so that the waters gushed up from the ground,
and then opened the windows of Heaven, and caused all the waters from above to
fall down, till at length the rain continuing for the space of forty days,
The Deluge.
and the waters finding so violent an issue upwards, the whole earth and all
the highest mountains were covered with water fifteen cubits, that is, a
cubit being counted for half a yard, seven yards and an half high, to the
cutting off of all the sons and daughters of Adam, and of all the birds and
beasts that could not live in the water, save those few that were in the Arc
with Noah, who besides his preaching by the sign, of building the Arc did
warn them but all in vain of the following flood.

So you have the sum of the story of the old World in their sinfullnesse, and
Gods forbearance for along time, and Gods severity and their misery at the
last. Let us make due uses now of all. The uses of all.
For the chief thing in such stories as these is to make a good use, because
these are set forth for an Example to them that shall hereafter live ungodlily.
For their souls also perished eternally as well as their bodies, for anything
that can be learned out of Scripture to the contrary, except that we may
conceive, the Lord might be merciful to the souls of infants, that were not
of age to make use of the means that should have brought the rest to
repentance, nor did not run to the same extremity of wickedness, unless I
say we may hope in charity that God would show compassion on the souls of
these, the men of years perish soul and body both. Now what uses must we
make, 1. Of their sins, 2. Of Gods patience, 3. Of Gods severity. Of their
sins we must make diverse uses.

First, to take notice of our own corrupt nature that is ready to grow so
extremely naught. For we also are the posterity of Adam, and have the same
corruption of nature that these had, and our imaginations and the form and
frame of our hearts and all our thoughts will be only evil continually, if
God give us to ourselves, and there is not one of us that would not grow
unjust, voluptuous, worldly, violent, and most extremely wicked in every kind
of wickedness, as occasion would offer it self, if the Lord did not hold us
back, either by restraining or sanctifying, or both. To him let us give the
praise of our being restrained or sanctified, and let us confess his goodness
that does not give us over to all licentiousness, to commit all wickedness
with greediness. An hearty praising of God for delivering us from notorious
sinfullnesse, is a testimony of some grace. Man's heart is apt to turn such
freedom into matter of swelling and selfe-conceitednesse, if our less
badnesse makes us more thankful and humble not haughty and arrogant, it is a
sign of some truth of goodness. But innocence joined with swelling, lifting
up our selves and despising others, is no better then that of the Pharisee.
This is the first use of their sin.

The next is to teach us to take heed of such wickedness, that great sins
may not grow common, but that there may be some to oppose the rest, some to
mourn for the rest, and to take care of keeping themselves unspotted in the
world, that so great and public punishments may be kept back. Let us every way
strive to cause that sins grow not huge and universal, that they come not to
an high degree and to commonnesse, so that all join in them; for then likely
some great and heavy calamity must ensue. With us sins do grow very great,
great faults are committed by many, but yet we are to praise God that all flesh
has not corrupted their ways, there be some though but few in comparison of
the multitude, yet I say some, that set themselves against the great and common
iniquities, which may give us some hope, that the Lords chastisements shall
follow us only for reformation, not for utter extirpation of the Nation. Let
us all use our best diligence to hinder the greatness and commonnesse of
sin, that we may prevent destroying and all-devouring blows.

A third use from their sins is that we be careful to avoid these particular
sins, or to repent of them and to reform them, if we have committed them.

1. Take great heed of making carnal marriages with persons sinful and wicked
for beauties sake, or any such carnal respect. For if it offend God that men
be lewd to take wives void of true religion and piety because of their
fairness, then surely to be so far overruled with gain or any other
earthly consideration, as for these things sake to make matches with carnal
and naughty men must needs offend God. Let no man do so therefore, let piety I
say piety be the match-maker, let beauty, riches, and all such things come
after in the second or third place, and let no man for any respect of face,
fair state, etc. marry themselves to foul conditions, foul manners, false
religion, wicked conversation. Surely that which swayes a man most in
matrimony, swayes him most in his whole life, this being one of the maine
matters that concern him in his life. If godliness and religion be not of
force to command us in this thing it cannot be conceived that we have any sound
knowledge of it, and if outward things sway us most here, they have the
sovereignty and dominion of our hearts. Show your selves spiritual in choice
of yoke-fellowes, if you will enjoy the comfort of being so in good earnest and
in sincerity. And if any have done otherwise, O let them be much humbled, it is
a great fault an hazarding of ones self to destruction or of his children, a
sign that one does not rightly know neither sin or goodness, if in this
matter wickedness cannot disgrace all other things, and virtue overbalance
all other, and therefore if God have made such a match very dismal and
unhappie to any one, and that they have found these things unable to give
content, and with these they have been turned aside from the right way; let
them acknowledge the justice of God and turn the punishments into a means of
unfeigned repentance for the sin. It is just with God to cross men's false
opinions of things, and make them meet with wretchedness, where they did
falsely and unwarrantably promise to themselves contentment, as they do most
times in such kind of ill made marriages. If any good man have so
transgressed, he is now called to repentance for it, by Gods hand crossing, and
Gods Word warning him.

Again, beware I pray you of the next sin, viz. unjustice and violence, that
is, taking away the goods of others by strong hand, whether by manifest
violence, or by violent wresting and abusing of law through strength of wit, or
purse, or both. To take away that from another by any manner of strength which
is his in right that is violence. God has often in his Word spoken against
this, Violence what it is. A great sin.
for the waters of the flood have not yet washed it out, but it has place in
the world still. Those that are stronger then others will wrench and pull, and
make a shift to tug all they can unto themselves, though they have no right
unto such things, covetousness and greedy desires beget oppression to satisfy
such an unsatisfiable desire; David complains, Psalm. 55.9. that he has seen
violence in the city, and Psalm. 11.5. Him that loves violence his soul
hates. By violence men tread underfoot the light of nature, and bury their
reason in passion and under it. It is the property of beasts to be lead by will
and passion, what they desire to have if they can possibly get it by any device
or power they will have it, rules of right they acknowledge none nor can
acknowledge, because they want reason, which is the sole distinguisher betwixt
right and wrong. But man that has reason which can set down limits and bounds
to every man's possessions and benefits, should follow his reason and not take
so much as his hand can reach and pull unto it self, but alone that which he
finds the rules of equity to give him. He that does otherwise does infinitely
trespass upon Gods Royalty over the whole world, for he does not carry
himself in this great family according to the will of him that is the sole
maker and master of it, and so lives as if himself were Master and chief
Lord, and not bound to any rules but those of his own will. Violence therefore
is a grievous sin. It will bring Gods curse, and anger, and hatred upon the
committer. A violent man is odious in the world and in Heaven too, his love of
himself makes him i^jurious to all, and therefore also loathsome. Fly
violence therefore either of hand or head, and take nothing but what in true
right you can prove to be your own, and if you have gotten any thing by
violence, repent of it, and rid your hands of it, else the hand of God shall be
heavy upon you for it, he will bring your violence upon your own pates.

And know I beseech you, that as there be two sorts of violent beasts so of
men. You know there be Lions, and Bears, and Tigers, and great creatures that
prey upon the weaker as upon the Sheep, the Cow, etc. and then there be
little beasts too that prey upon the lesser, as the Weezle on the Mouse and on
Chickens, and such like that be lesser then themselves. So there be two sorts
of violent men too, the great and wealthy man, and the poor and meaner man.
The one can bear out his violence openly, and does it in greater things. The
other does it more closely and in lesser things, but both will have what equity
does not give them by one or other shift or wile, or act of his hand. And truly
as great wickedness is found in poor men this way as in the wealthier. He
that is as bad as his place will suffer, is as wicked a man as another that in
higher place is more apparently wicked. Give the Weezle the fangs and limbs of
a Lion, he will do as much mischief as a Lion. Therefore the poor robbing
the poor is compared to a sweeping rain that leaves no food, Prove. 28.3.
and none more violent then these little violent ones when they can tell how to
make way and bear out their violence, will not you see it evidently in the
boldness of the poorer sort to steal corn at this time of the year. He that
will pull a piece of ones sheafe from him, if he were a great Prince of name
and power, would pull his whole living from him. Beware therefore of those
unjust ways of getting which are under your hands, and in your powers incident
to your places, repent of them, shun them, and forbear them for conscience
sake, that you may not provoke Gods wrath against you.

Further, the men of this time were extremely worldly as our Lord Jesus
notes, they sold over themselves to the world, and cared not for Noah's
preaching, nor for any thing that might concern their souls, but sold over
themselves to earthly dealing as you read in Luke 17.26, 27. O be not many of
you such, are not your hearts fully possessed with all earthlinesse. Do not
you set your selves altogether to the things of this life with the mere
neglect of that which concerns a better. Surely those that do so are in heart
Atheists, they do not thoroughly believe that immortality of the soul, nor
the being of another world. For were every man's heart fully persuaded that his
soul should continue for ever in another world either in eternal weal or
woe, it were not possible for him not to consider of the estate to come as well
as of the state present, if we did as well know and believe that there is an
Hell and Heaven, as that there is an earth and in it misery and welfare, we
could not but be as studious to get the future happiness and escape the future
misery as the present. I pray you therefore strive against that sin of the
old World, viz. giving up your selves excessively to the world, and put your
selves in mind of a world that is to come, and mind the things that are above
and set your affections on them. If you so perform works of Gods Worship, as
that they weane you not from the world, you do them but hypocritically, you
have alone the form and not the power of godliness. Though a man use not
violence, yet if he be excessively worldly the Word of God is choked in him,
and will not bring forth the fruit of eternal life unto him.

Another sin of the old World is, 4 Disobedient. 1 Pet. 3.20. The flood came
upon them and they knew nothing.
they abused Gods long-suffering and Noah's preaching, and gat no manner of
knowledge of the long threatened flood, nor no care of amending their lives.
This is a fearful thing to get nothing by Gods patience or by the labors of
the Ministers whom he sends to teach and warn us. This shows that the Devil
ha^h blinded their eyes, that sin has hardened the heart, and that a man
has given over himself to the servitude of some lust: this is a great wrong
to Gods goodness and authority both, and it brings severe punishments, for in
aggravating the sins of men it must needs aggravate the punishment also. O
brethren consider of your selves if you be not guilty of this sin. How long
has God been striving to pull you out of your sins. How much patience has
he showed; how much teaching have you heard, and yet alas the old World got as
much by Gods kindness to them as you do and you no more then they. Many of
you know nothing of your miserable estate. As little be you acquainted with the
truths you are taught every day, as they were with the flood that came upon
them, as little does our preaching prevail to work you to amendment, as did
the preaching of Noah with them. We may well comfort our selves in this, that
our success is no worse then Noah's, and also lament that it is no better.
Indeed you have not had so many years preaching as the 120.
old World had, but consider it with the proportion to your lives and you have
more. Then men used to live some seven, eight, or nine hundred years. Lo God
gave them a Preacher a long time, and at length determined the very year of
the flood, it shall be a hundred and twenty years hence, and so from year to
year less as the years went up. Ye have lived and died (many of you that be
dead) under the Ministry. Indeed we cannot tell you the year of your death,
or bring you tidings of a flood of water to overflow you altogether, but of a
river of fire and brimstone to overflow and overwhelme you one after one we
can tell you from God, and you fear this flood of brimstone no more then they
did that flood of water. O repent of your long impenitency and miserable
unbeleefe and wilful ignorance of Gods threats, and other things that are
continually taught you out of the Word. And now cease to imitate this world of
ungodly men, but apply your selves to fly from the wrath to come and from the
vengeance that must overtake all wilful sinners. I beseech you lay to heart
the things you hear, take notice of them, believe them, and set your selves to
amend your lives and cast away all your sins, which this old World did not
but should have done: be better I say be better then they were, and let their
wickedness teach you some goodness. When will it once be that you will know
and believe the threats of God and his promises? when will it once be that you
will submit your selves to those that are as Noah was, Preachers of
righteousness, and seek to get the righteousness of faith, which Noah would
not have gotten himself, if it had not been the same that he preached to
others? Now I pray you at last to exceed this generation of wicked men. And
these uses you must make of their wickedness.

Now of Gods patience toward them in giving them all outward prosperity and
long deferring the execution of his wrath, and sending Noah by preaching and
building the Arc to draw them to repentance; learn first to praise God for
the like long-suffering to us, and using the like means to bring us to
repentance and to life eternal. It is the same God that ruled the world at
those times who rules us also at this time, and he discovers the same virtues
in his governing. O how patient is God now also? how great care does he take to
lead us to repentance also? How many outward benefits have we? This goodness
of God toward them that perish, whereby he took such order and care for them,
that they might have escaped perdition if they would have made use of his
means is not sufficiently heeded nor observed. Might not the world then have
escaped both drowning and hell too, if they would have hearkened to Noah and
believed him, and followed his instructions. Did any thing but their own
wilfulness and heedlesnesse shut them out of the Arc and out of Heaven, and
thrust them down into the Deluge and into Hell? Brethren, God magnifies his
mercies to the vessels of wrath, he does labor to bring them out of their ill
estate, he has not ceased for many years to entice them to repentance by his
long-suffering. Certainly this should magnify Gods goodness to us and make
us to applaud him exceedingly, and acknowledge the brightness of his Justice
in their future destruction. O how just was God in the drowning of these men?
is he not as just in the damning of the sinner now? Lord be thou praised for
thy mercy and forthy justice, and let the one serve to clear the other, and
both to commend thee.

Again, I pray you now the the second time to make a good use of Gods
clemency to you. He sent but one Noah to all the world, who yet is said to
condemn the world. He sends amongst you to every town almost one to tell you
of the judgment to come, and to stir you up to repentance. Now be entreated
to hearken and obey, and to get you to the Arc. Brethren we do here in Gods
name offer you assurance of pardon of sin, and freedom from hell and death,
if you will accept it, O let not our preaching be in vain. Come, come into the
Arc, come into Christ by true faith, into whom you are come by Baptism in
respect of outward profession. The Arc was a figure of Christ, and Baptism is
as it were the Arc: O labor for the true Baptism with the Spirit that you
may shun and escape the Deluge of Gods eternal wrath and vengeance. Let us
not preach to you in vain as Noah did to the old world. And present to your
selves the hideousness of that plague, O how did men's hearts ache within them?
how did horror take hold upon them, when they saw the waters rage so
furiously? O now did they find that in experience which they would not believe
by Noah's preaching! What crying, what roaring, what lamentation did fill the
Cities and Villages? they did not die of a sudden as in the overflowing of the
Sea, but they died by degrees, they had time to get up upon hills and trees,
and to foresee and fore-feare their choking by waters before it came, and to
see the Beasts many perishing before them, many looking for the same ruin with
them. Does not this flood pertain to you? Does not it pertain to you also?
Do you not here see, 1. The Omnipotent power of God, and his absolute and
sovereign command over all creatures. The Sea and Springs are his and will
break out upon us. The Clouds and Waters above are his and will fall down
upon us to revenge his quarrel. He is Lord of Hosts, O plant in your selves an
holy fear of him, and say to your selves, shall he threaten and not perform,
who has the whole world at hand to be serviceable unto him. If we would
represent the Lord before our eyes according to his fearful greatness, so as
to make us tremble and depart from sin, happy were we. Does not Christ send
us to the old World, and does not Peter also mind us of this destruction by
water. Surely the Lord is a terrible God still, he is now as terrible, as he
showed himself then in the overthrow by waters.

Again, you must in this plague see the justice of God, his will to punish
sinners by inflicting great evil upon them, that so you may yet make the fear
of him the more steadfast and more effectual, for as he is of power to crush
the highest and stoutest and those of greaest power in the world, so he is
resolved upon this course, and will surely declare his excellency by making
them smoke with most heavy calamities, that dare advance themselves against
his authority. See here how severe God is, he will not spare the wicked, he
will not hold them innocent, though he defer many days, yet will the
heaviness of the stroke answer the delay. The flood was long a coming, but
being come it is furious and irresistible, and wipes out all the sons of men
sparing none. The Lord can find in his heart to execute hideous evils upon
sinners. Let them if they please fancy a God wholly consisting of mercy, they
shall find him such as his Word describes, not as they themselves have
counterfeited, he will recompense vengeance on his Adversaries, he will not
pity their cries nor groans. He will not be melted with their complaints,
but utterly destroy them according as his Word has spoken.

Behold also the equity of Gods proceeding, he answers their sins with the
kind and measure of punishment. Great sins and great waters. All flesh
corrupted with sin, and all flesh cut off for sin, the earth filled with
violence and now filled with waters. None took care to forbear almost any
sin but Noah, and none escapes but Noah. No multitude of sinners can save
them out of his hand, as all sinned so all perish. This great and heavy
judgment should be often in our thoughts, 2 Pet. 2.5.
we should think thus, if God spared not the old World neither will be spare
us. It is S. Peter's inference, and it is a great sin in us, that we do not
often put our selves in mind of these things to frame our selves to humble
obedience.

If any say, but God has promised never again to destroy the world by water.

Genesis 9.11.
I answer, true, but he has never promised not to drown sinners, neither has
he promised not to punish them with punishments as fearful as this of
perishing by waters. God has great variety of weapons to wound his enemies; if
he has renounced the use of one, he has others enough to take up for that
purpose. And Brethren, I pray you take notice of what S. Peter tells us of,
That as the world that then was did perish being drowned in the waters, 2 Pet.
3.6, 7.
so the world that now is shall perish by fire, for he tells us, that it is
by the same word reserved for fire kept in store against the time to come. Jude
verse 14.
The Prophet Enoch foretold of that great day before Noah foretold of this
deluge. That day is longer before it come, but it shall be more terrible when
it comes, 2 Pet. 3.10.
for the heavens shall pass away with a noise, as the holy Apostle tells you.
Now as the righteous Noah showed a way how to escape that water, even repent
and get into the Arc, so we show away how to escape that fire, repent and
turn unto the Lord, otherwise when he shall come in flames of fire, you shall
receive the judgment of eternal destruction from before the presence of his
glory.

Brethren, I beseech you so to ponder upon that great misery which fell upon
the old World, that you may be the better for knowing all the passages of so
strange a story. It was the first remarkable judgment. No general calamity
that we read of did come upon the world till then. The first and last acts of
justice will be most severe, and the last likely severer then the first.

The Lord gave to the men of this old World a very long life, and very great
outward benefits, and showed to them exceeding great long-suffering, why so?
but because he would first, as he delights to do, prove men with benefits.
As if he should have said, I will prove Adams sons with the fruits of my
favor. They shall have time enough to repent, some eight or nine hundred
years, and they shall be allured by all prosperity, nothing but comforts shall
come upon them for a long time, but if they will not profit by this
gentleness, I will shorten their lives by half, having taken away all those
fearful sinners by a flood of waters. You see Gods displeasure against sin,
O at last profit by it and learn to be righteous, there is no way to escape
Gods judgments, but by following after righteousness, this course take, and
you shall be safe. (*)

THE SIXTH EXAMPLE.
OF NOAH.
ONe godly man is worth a whole million of sinners, as appears in that the
Lord made more reckoning of one Noah then of all the world of the ungodly.
Having laid before you the bad Example of that most wicked generation which
lived before the flood, I will now speak of one godly man which lived in the
same times with them, and saw them all swept away with the besome of
destruction. His name was Noah, the word signifies rest, and we have a reason
given us of imposing that name by his Father, Noah what it signifies.
Genesis 5.29. This same shall comfort us concerning our work and the toil of
our hands, because of the ground which the Lord has cursed. It is somewhat
doubtful how Noah was a comforter to the godly Patriarckes In respect of their
troubles of all kinds, both those they took in striving against the bad men of
their times, and the common labors of life in regard of the curse that was gone
out against man's sin. The most probable opinion is as I think, that because
he was a Preacher of righteousness, and did more largely and plainly denounce
Gods wrath against sinners, and his blessing to the godly (for a Preacher of
righteousness must needs do both these things) therefore he gave much
refreshing to the souls of the godly, and made all their labors easy. Even
as now if Gods people have a painful Minister amongst them, that cease not
to acquaint them with Gods mercy and justice, and to revive the remembrance of
Heaven and all the Promises in their hearts, they live much more comfortably,
then any outward thing without this help could make them to live. So it was in
those times also with those godly Patriarchs. Again, as it would be a great
comfort to good men now, if any man were sent by God to assure them of the last
day of judgment, for they would even lift up their heads and rejoice: so Noah
in telling of the flood which to that world was a kind of judgement-day did
greatly solace the spirits of the good against all their sorrows.

His Birth.
Now this Noah was the son of Lamech the son of Methuselah in the 1056.
year of the world. He was the tenth after Adam inclusively, borne after. Adams
and Seths death, and Henochs translation, and lived to see the death of Enos,
Kainan, Mahalaleel, Iared, Methuselah and Lamech. This is all we have to say of
his Birth or entrance into the world.

His life.
Now concerning his life I pray you consider four things, 1. His goodness. 2.
His bad deeds. 3. The sorrows and miseries he met with. 4. The benefits God
gave him. And let us make use of all as we go along and so come to his death
last of all.

In which 1. His virtues. 1. In general. Was a perfect man and walked with
God. Genesis 5 22. Heb. 11.4.
First for his goodness, it is set forth in the Scripture generally and
particularly. In general these three things are affirmed of him, Genesis 6.9. He
was a just man and upright, or perfect, and walked with God. Before it is
affirmed of Henoch that he walked with God, and the Scripture told us also of
Abel, that he obtained a divine testimony that he also was just, and Job is
said to have been a perfect man, yea it is added by way of amplification to
his goodness that he was a just man and perfect in his generations, that is,
in his own time, in those most sinful days when all were naught. Noah was
good when all had corrupted their ways, he was sincere and upright in his
ways. For this is the truest commendation of virtue, when it keeps a man
unspotted of those evils which are every where practiced in the world.

Let us now request you to consider of your selves every man whether he be a
Noah. Surely none but Noah's shall be admitted into the Arc, and escape the
waves of destruction: none but Noah's shall find favor with God, and be
delivered from eternal death. Whosoever cannot approve himself to be such a
one as this good man, let him never dream of coming to Heaven.

But who is a just man? who a perfect? who walks with God?

Who is a just or righteous man.
I answer, A just man is first he that renounceth his own justice which is of
the Law and imbraceth the righteousness of faith, even the righteousness
which is of God by faith, relying wholly upon the merits of Christ and Gods
mercy in Christ, for pardon of his offenses and acceptance of himself and his
endeavors to salvation. The Scripture witnesses that Noah was an heir of
this righteousness, Heb. 11.7. And this is that that must be first found in
every man. He must see and confess his own unrighteousness, and utterly
disclaim his own righteousness as knowing that it is no better then a
menstruous rag, in respect of his justification. Do you this my Brethren? Are
you made to see your selves grievous sinners, such as in your selves must needs
be damned, and cannot possibly be saved by the worth and merit of your own
goodness.

Secondly, a righteous man must stay, rest, depend on, believe in the
righteousness of Jesus Christ, laboring to build up in his own heart a
particular persuasion and assurance, that the Lord of Heaven will accept him as
perfectly righteous in the name and mediation of Jesus Christ his Son, and
that alone, Rom 4.
for so was Abraham made partaker of that blessedness, which stood in the
imputing unto him of righteousness without works, and Abraham is the Father
of the faithful, as he was justified so must all we be justified, and no
otherwise. See into your selves, do you rely upon our blessed Savior the Lord
Jesus for pardon of your sins? or do you waver from him or stay upon any
other besides him?

Lastly, a righteous man must himself also work righteousness, and give
himself to be a servant of righteousness, that is to say, he must resolve and
endeavor to leave every sin by Gods Word condemned, and to do every duty by
Gods Word commanded, and that also for Gods sake with reference to him, and out
of a desire to please him, that is, to keep his favor. This is a righteous
man. He strives in all things to please God according to his Word, but finding
his defects bewailes them, and rests alone on Gods goodness in Christ for
pardon and salvation. If you be such, then are you Noah's indeed and shall
surely be saved, if not you be but dissemblers, and no show of religion shall
save you from destruction.

Therefore all of you that are not such, I pray you feel your unhappiness,
you are not good enough to go to Heaven yet, whatsoever you have imagined of
your selves. Therefore also now seek to be such, begin with lamenting your
unrighteousness before God and craving pardon and help, and so proceed to
pray for and endeavor after all the things before prescribed. Be the better
for Noah's example. Let not this story be preached unto you in vain: you know
Noah was one whom God loved, whom God has saved, study to be such as Noah.
What riches he had, the Scripture takes no notice of, but righteous he was,
study you to be such and be happier then all riches can make you.

And especially I pray you labor to follow Noah in this onething, to be good
in your generations, in those things I mean wherein your present times take
general liberty to be naught, that so you as Noah may at once glorify God and
condemn the world. What evil things all do commit those do you forbear,
what good things all do neglect, those be you more careful to perform. Many
things are grown into common fashion, swearing, pride in apparel, formality
in religion, covetousness, monstrous fashions, misshapen long hair, O be ye
in these things careful to avoid the corruption which is in the world. Many
good things are grown quite out of all fashion almost, constant reading Gods
Word, holy conference, keeping a treasure or purse for God in your houses,
meditation of Gods Word, and careful sanctifying of the Lords day. O strive to
perform these duties. He that is good alone according to the common streyne is
hollowly good, we must be pure of those faults which are allowed almost of all.

2. His virtues in particular.

1. Was a Preacher of righteousness.

2 Pet. 2.5.


But let us consider the particular good things noted of Noah. First, S. Peter
testifies of him, that he was a Preacher of righteousness, meaning of that
righteousness whereof he was also an heir and practiser. All you cannot be
Preachers of righteousness by special office as Noah was, this belongs alone
to us Ministers, and O that we could learn to be like Noah in our places,
continuing faithfully to teach men the will of God and call them to repentance,
and to true righteousness in Christ and good life in themselves. Surely Noah
had slender encouragement, Isa. 49 4.
for we do not read of any one man that heeded his Preaching, he if any other
might complain that his labor was in vain, and that his time and strength
were spent to no purpose. We that are Preachers must imitate him in a patient
discharge of our duties, what if God do not vouchsafe to work with our
labors? to bring men to righteousness, shall we be disheartened? No no, but
following this good man, continuing to do Gods work and look for our reward
from him.

And again, I call upon you for great thankfulness to God, for that he has
set many Preachers of righteousness amongst you in this Kingdom, and has
vouchsafed to hold me in this office amongst you for these thirty years or
thereabouts, I have Preached righteousness among you according to that measure
of knowledge and utterance that God has vouchsafed me. O let me have some
better encouragement from you then Noah had from the old world, and indeed I
have had, and I bless God, and I bless those among you from whom I have had
it. Some of you have been careful hearers to the preaching of righteousness,
and have turned your feet into the paths of righteousness. The Lord stablish
you in those happy ways for ever. And one thing now I beseech of you, that you
be suitors unto God to raise up to all the places that have not Preachers, and
to continue to them that have such as Noah was, Preachers of righteousness,
which themselves also will practice; especially, I require you not to forget
your selves in this town, but make it one part of your daily supplications to
God, to grant you a succession of Preachers of righteousness when my self
must leave you, God knows when, O Lord let there never want so long as this
Town and Church stands, a faithful Preacher of righteousness to supply
this room in which I now stand amongst you this day.

But secondly, Noah is commended for his faith. 2. Had faith Heb. 11.7.
By faith Noah (says the Author to the Hebrews) did, etc. you must all labor
to get this same faith. This is the grace of graces commended in Abel, in
Henoch before named, and now in Noah, without which we cannot possibly please
God.

But what is this faith you will ask me?

I answer, I will show the nature of faith unto you: What faith is.
It is that grace by which a man assents to all that God speaks for the
authority sake of the speaker. This is the nature of faith in general. Under
it is comprehended that which is called justifying faith, being an assent to
the Promises of the Gospel, or of the new Covenant upon the same ground. This
assent is double, first general to the word generally spoken, and particular
to a particular conclusion duly deducted thence concerning ones self. And
whosoever does truly assent to the general, must needs assent to every
particular concluded under the general, because the contradiction of an
universal proposition is made by a particular contrary to it, and the general
is accounted false if it may be denied or be denied of any particular, for
Example, if I say all the twelve Apostles were godly men, and another say one
of them as Judas, was not a godly man, though a eleven were good, yet because
this one was not so, he has showed that proposition to be false. Now then,
mark that faith yields a double assent: First, to the thing generally spoken:
Secondly, to the particular conclusion contained therein and thence deduced,
and this assent must be grounded upon the bare authority of God the speaker in
respect of his perfect and infallible truth, because it judges him faithful,
therefore it esteems his words true, not because it can see reason for things
in his own discourse and understanding. This is faith, for example, God said
to Noah there shall be a flood to drown all the world, there was no reason to
think it should be so, Heb. 11.7.
but God said so ( warning Noah of things not seen as yet, as the Apostle
speaks) and therefore Noah was verily persuaded, that there should come such a
flood to destroy all mankind. Again, God promised Noah that if he would
build an Arc, God would save him and all his family, and all that would come
with him into the Arc, There was no natural likelihood for this neither, for
in such a flood an Arc or the best ship in the world could not keep men safe,
but that with the fury of the waters they would have been dashed against some
rock or other, and wracked, yet God said so to Noah and he believed it for
himself and his family. This you see was Noah his faith. And I call upon you
to consider, whether you have this faith or not. Do you assent to all the
narratiions, promises, threats of Gods Word, even because God the Author of it
is true and do you assent to the particular conclusion concerning your selves
in that general contained. The Lord threateneth in his Word, Gal. 3.10.
Cursed is every one that continues not in all things, do you believe this
general, and the particular that will follow from it, but I have not
continued, etc. therefore I am cursed. Again, the Gospel says, all that do
not repent and believe shall be damned. Do you believe this? and do you
believe the particular contained under this? I do not repent and believe the
Gospel, therefore I shall be damned, or contrarily I do repent and believe,
therefore I shall be saved. Search what authority Gods Word has with you, if
you deduct the particular from the general in every point, then you do
believe the general, else you do not.

And alas how manifest is it that most men have no faith but alone say they
have as S. James speaks, and beguile their own selves. The threats of Gods
Word and his promises are of no value with most men, they do not persuade
themselves, that any of those evils shall be performed against them which the
Scripture denounces against such sinners as they be, nor that any of the
promises shall be performed to those that perform the things contained in the
promises. If they see natural likelihood of any good or evil they can be
persuaded it will come, but if there be no proof but a bare promise or threat
out of the Bible, they make no reckoning that that good or evil will come ever
a whit the sooner.

Now I pray you see and lament your unbeleefe, it is the root of all sin,
neither can any sin be found to rule farther then this rules, and I pray you
cry to God to work faith in you by the Word you read and hear, for no good
at all can it do you if it be not mixed with faith. And if any man have such
faith in Gods Word indeed and not alone in profession and show, happy is that
man, for he shall be sure to find the like acceptance of God that Noah, he
that has this faith must needs be in Christ and Christ in him; for where Gods
Word dwells, there himself dwells, and the Word of God dwells in men by faith.

3. He was moved with fear. Heb. 11.7.
A third thing in Noah is noted by the Author to the Hebrews, that he was moved
with fear, you see he feared Gods threats, he was afraid least he should be
drowned with his family among the rest, if he did not obey God and live
virtuously and build the Arc at Gods Commandment, and indeed if he had not
done so he should have perished with the world: as whosoever lives wickedly
shall be damned, this is a threat, he that has true faith will not deceive
himself with vain words, and say, I am elected, I am a believer, I shall be
saved though I take liberty to sin, but he will fear and depart from evil,
and use those means of escaping destruction which God has appointed. So true
faith will undoubtedly work such a fear of Gods threat, as will make a man
depart from evil, because it brings a lively apprehension of danger and much
evil before his eyes if he sin, and therefore cannot but work fear, I
mean a fear of caution as they call it, whereby a man is made wary to shun
and escape the evil. There is a passionate fear whereby the heart is
perplexed, the joints shake, and such natural bodily accidents do follow it.
This fear arises from the bodily presence or imminent danger of some sensible
evil, and Noah did not so fear the flood. A double fear
There is another rational fear as I may well name it, by which a man
apprehends an evil thing to come, so as he is made careful to shun,
prevent, and dares not bring it upon himself. And this fear looks on things
a great way off, long before they offer themselves to the senses, and such was
Noah's fear. And such a fear faith will evermore bring with it. It will cause
that a man shall not dare to do the things forbidden out of an apprehension of
the greatness and extremity of the danger that will arise.

Now look to your selves my Brethren, do you fear Gods threats, do you
fear the curse of the Law, the wrath of God, hell fire, damnation, with such a
fear as makes you use the means to escape these evils, and makes that you
cannot be bold to do the things against which the Lord speaks these things.
If you brag of faith in Gods promises and have not faith in his threats, your
faith is a vain fancy, and a mere painted or dead faith, for no man can
credit any thing which God speaks if he do not credit all so far as he
knows and considers it, because God cannot be deceived in any thing. And if
you say you believe Gods threats and do not fear, I say again, be not moved
through fear to do the things by which you might escape those evils
threatened, even to forsake the sin and repent, certainly you deceive your
selves and do not believe. Now it is most evident, that most men entertain
Gods threats without any fear. They are not affected at all with the hearsay
of these evils, therefore it is sure they have no faith. See your want of
faith by the absence of this never failing effect thereof, and cosen your
selves with a shadow of faith no longer. And now pray God to plant in your
hearts such a fear of his threats as has been said. It is a most wholesome
thing to have the soul overawed with apprehension of the evils which God
denounces against evill-doing, and to be thereby kept down, so that it has
no courage to lift it self up to naughty deeds. Blessed is he that thus
fears always, O that you would work out your salvation in this fear and
trembling, O that the same mind might be in you that was in godly Job! who
said that terror from God did keep him from doing any wrong to his servant,
and that of the holy Apostle S. Paul, 2 Cor. 5.11.
who said that knowing this terror, he did persuade men and was made manifest
to God. Let those threats, if you live after the flesh you shall die, Romans 8.13.
and those that do such things shall not inherit the kingdom of God, 1 Cor.
6.9. Col. 3.6.
and for these things sake the wrath of God comes on the children of
disobedience, and many the like be often in your minds, let them awe you and
hold under the strength of your corruptions, causing you to deny your selves
all unlawful profits, pleasures and effects of sin, and to cross your own
wills, and to set your selves to do the things that are most contrary to flesh
and blood. Prove. 8.13.
The fear of the Lord is to depart from evil, this fear of the Lord is the
beginning of true saving wisdom, to them that thus fear are all the promises
of the Gospel made, Psalm. 34.9.
yea it is in one word said, those that fear the Lord shall want nothing.
Never think that your faith is right and good if it do not produce this fear,
for faith must acknowledge God to be faithful in all his words, threats as
well as promises, and this grace is that which being planted in the heart of
man, does keep him from falling away from faith, does preserve the soul to
salvation, by working in it this good and virtuous fear of damnation: as faith
kept Noah from drowning by making him holily to fear drowning.

4. He built an Arc as God bad him.
Now the last virtue of Noah is, that he built an Arc as God bad him, and
furnished it with all food, and went into it at the time appointed, and
received in with himself and family all manner of Beasts and Birds that could
not live but on dry ground: two and two, male and female of the unclean that
were not fit for food and Sacrifice, and 7. and 7. of those that were clean,
that is fit for food and Sacrifice, at least for the last.

Here is his faith which brought forth obedience to the word of God, in such
things which seemed ridiculous to the world, and made him a laughing stock
unto all the world almost: Noah forsooth the youngest of the Patriarchs, he
will needs be thought to have better acquaintance with God, then either Henoch
or Methuselah or Lamech or any of his Grandfathers that have lived or do live.
None of them could see a flood coming, none of them had a fancy of the worlds
being drowned, none of them bethought himself of making an Arc, but this
fellow has gotten some new revelation, and he is a building a huge thing like
a Chest almost so long, etc. So you think the man is not in his right wits!
Brethren you easily persuade your selves, that this good man was laden with
these scoffs, and the like behind his back, and like also before his face,
and to his very teeth. For wicked wits will never cease gybing at those good
things that cross their sense and reason, Yet Noah obeyed, went on, built the
Arc, that is, was obedient to God in a thing that made him ridiculous to the
world. So will true Faith do, it will make a man obey the Lord in those actions
by which he shall make himself a derision to all men almost, and more then a
derision, a prey and spoil too. The Obedience of Faith is such an Obedience as
will make all men to be at Gods beck in acts of that nature as will cause him
to be blamed and despised of all the world, as we see in Abraham, in Moses, and
in all those almost that are reckoned up in the 11. of the Heb. Because it
makes a man firmly and steadfastly to apprehend greater good things and greater
evil then those that are seen, and so those visible ones do not sway him and
rule on him; for he that sees a greater danger or evil, will easily cast
himself upon a far less to shun the greater, so contrarily a good thing.
And so much for Noah's goodness before the flood.

Now see in and after the flood how he carried himself. Noah's goodness in the
flood.
He entered into the Arc as God bad him, and committed himself to Gods
protection trusting on him for safety. Here was no mast, oar, rudder, canvasse
or mariners to steer and guide this vessel, a wonder it was that the
billows did not cast it over and over, that they did not break the bars by
their continued rage, and that it had not perished with all its burden. But in
went Noah taking all the Beasts with him, assuring himself to be safe, for so
God had told. Here is an excellent act of faith, even to use Gods means of
attaining the good things promised, and there rest himself without any further
carking and perplexity of mind. This was the act of Noah's faith all the flood
time, he heard it rain as if Heaven and Earth would come together, he
perceived the clouds to be in a fury with the sons of men, the waters raged
and roared, and through the windows he might see how all was changed into a
Sea, yet there he kept himself quiet, and made account, that himself and his
household should do well enough in all this confusion of nature. He had Bears,
Lions, Tigers, Wolves and all manner of devouring beasts within the Arc, he
was never a whit afraid of such neighbors, but rested himself peaceably upon
Gods promises. O Beloved that we could do so for our souls, for our estates,
for every thing, use Gods means, and then promise our selves the wished
effect, and trouble our selves with no further fear and dismayednesse as S.
Peter says, 1 Pet. 3.6.
doing well and not being dismayed with any fear. O how happy would our lives
be in the midst of a deluge of dangers, if we could thus enter into our closets
as it were, and shut the door: I mean use Gods means and rest on him.

Again, Noah continued in the Arc till God bad him come out, he perceived
the waters to cease raging, he discovered the tops of the mountains: he
sends out the discoverers, the Raven and the Dove, and learnes by them great
abatement, and he sees with his eyes all day when he had removed the top of the
Arc, yet he stirs not out till God bad him go out, who had bidden him go
in. So must you do my Brethren, you must tarry in the Arc as it were so long
as God sees fit and not make have out of it of your own heads. Be so long in
affliction as God will have you, go not out till he lead you out, you may
wish the time of deliverance, and send out the Raven and the Dove, use the best
means you can to help your selves, especially by prayers to God, and you may
remove the covering of the Arc, you may look round about by faith, and with
joy see your deliverance coming forward, but keep this as a certain
conclusion, not to stir out of any estate though never so troublesome, till
you have good warrant from God going before and guiding you.

Now at last see what good Noah did after the flood, Noah's goodness after the
flood.
he built an Altar to God and offered sacrifice in thanks for his
deliverance, and in a desire to frame his household to true piety, and to
establish the worship of God amongst them. O let each of us learn carefully to
acknowledge Gods goodness in great deliverances, and to offer him the
sacrifice of praise, if he have safe guarded us from the raging floods of
adversity and calamity. And let us be careful to establish and set up the
worship of God in our families, and amongst our people publicly and privately
every way. Build Gods altar, offer Gods sacrifices, I mean exercise Gods
religious worship, pray, hear, read, meditate, come to the Sacraments: set not
Gods ordinances at variance. Do not pick quarrels with anyone of them, exalt
not one to depresse another, let them all go together in their times, and
especially perform the true meaning of these sacrifices. Offer up the
sacrifice of Christ in a perpetual renewing of the memorial thereof in your
souls to God and renewing of your faith in it, offer up the sacrifice of a
contrite spirit and broken heart, sighing daily for daily sins and
infirmities, offer the sacrifice of earnest prayers for all good things, and of
hearty praises for what we have received already, and offer up your selves to
God by him to be sanctified to do him faithful service in all holy obedience
to all his holy laws. Be truly, heartily, uprightly religious and devoute in
your whole lives.

But next, Noah planted a vineyard, he fell to husbandry, for my part J doubt
not but that God had made vines from the first, and that though we hear of no
vineyard, yet there might have been store of them. But howsoever Noah set
himself to his calling, to husbandry. O let us every man follow him and give
himself to his husbandry and his vineyard, the tradesmans trade is his
vineyard, every man's calling is his vineyard, be like Noah fall to planting and
dressing this vine. Abhor idleness, have some vineyard, O how miserable is
he that has nothing to do? O how unhappy a thing is it to be in the world as
a cipher in Arithmeticke.

But lastly, Noah is a faithful Prophet, and pronounces Gods curse even
against his own sons, herein he becomes to us a pattern of fidelity in the
calling of a Minister, even to denounce all things that God puts into our
mouths against all persons, how near and dear soever they be, and so of all
Governors, to punish their inferiors without partiality, whatsoever their
offenses be.

Noah's sins.
And thus you have Noah's goodness, of his badnesse we have something related
too.

1. He was drunk.
First, that he drank of the wine which he had planted so over-liberally, as
that he was drunken, in his drunkenness discovered his nakedness, being
besides himself with excess of wine, he had not care to keep those parts
covered which nature would have to be concealed. So his Son Cham finding him
lying in this immodest fashion, was scandolized and drawn into a great offense.

Here we learn to take heed of drunkenness, and of all immodest carriage,
which being bad in case of drunkenness, must needs be worse when a man is
sober and has ability to consider better what he does, and to refrain from
such unseemely deeds. Brethren, if any of you have been drunken, if any have
in his drink or otherwise perpetrated immodest and lewd acts, I beseech you
learn of Noah to repent of it, and be assured that upon your repentance you
shall find pardon. And I pray make not your souls bolder to persist in
drunkenness, by abusing Noah's example, for he offended but once this way, and
through weakness it may seem, in that being desirous to refresh himself
after so long pensiveness in the flood, he was freer then was fit. Let not his
once offending out of weakness make you bold to do the same sin 100 and 100
times, yea be you more careful to avoid that trespass which sped so ill with
Noah. Drunkenness will make every man discover his nakedness, if not of body
yet of mind. There is no crime so notorious, but the drunken man will cast
himself into it, if occasion offer it self, as we may see also in Lot.
Wherefore know ye that a good man may be overtaken through infirmity with some
such gross sin, but he will not wallow in this mire, he will not allow
himself in the practice of it, and give over himself to be drunk day by day,
week by week. And as for these gross external acts of evil, you are to be
so much more careful to avoid them, by how much God has given you more power
to forbear them, for a man has power if he will to forbear drinking, and
therefore if he do not leave this fault, it is because he will not, and the
custom of sinning does make the will so inthralled to evil that a man will
needs do it, not needs must do it, whither he will or no, which is so far
from excusing the fault, that it aggravates it exceedingly.

Yea beloved take heed of all immodest and undecent carriages, by discovering
the shameful parts: for if this were a sin in a drunken man, that had not
understanding to know he did amiss, how much more in a man that is sober which
knows he does evil and will do it.

Now you have Noah's faults and his virtues. Look upon his crosses and his
benefits.

His crosses were besides the common miseries of man's life which he suffered
together with others, First, Noah's crosses 1 No man regarded his preaching.
he spent his time in vain Preaching and no man regarding it.

Secondly, he lived to see all mankind destroyed and to behold a fearful
deluge, 2 He lived to see all mankind destroyed
and for a whole year and more (for the flood began on the second month and
seventh day of his 600 year, and he came not out of the Arc till the twenty
seven day of the second month of his 601, year) he was as it were imprisoned
in the Arc, shut up amongst the beasts and other creatures.

Thirdly, 3 He had a wicked son.
he had a graceless wicked son and was put himself to pronounce a curse
against him with his own mouth in the name of God, for he did it not out of
anger or distemper, but as a Prophet in the Name of God and by his instigation
and authority.

4. Lived to see his offspring naught.
Lastly he lived to see his offspring after the flood grow very naught and
suffer fearful punishments. He saw the building of the tower of Babel, the
dispersion of men from Babel, the halving and quartering of men's ages, the
universal overspreading of idolatry, in so much that Abraham's father Nahor and
Terah did not escape it. Josh. 24 2.
These crosses did Noah suffer.

Buckle your selves to crosses, and be thankful if you have not felt so
grievous evils and universal as those of Noah. We should make our own
miseries more tolerable by comparing them with the greater miseries of better
men then ourselves, that have gone before us in the like and worse. Have you
lead children? so had Noah. Do you labor in vain in your places? so did
Noah. Does the world run all to wickedness? so did it in Noah's days.

Again let us fear to fall into those sins of his which did bring upon him
great misery. Be not drunk least you become a scandal to many through your
evil carriage, and least God set you to some work as contrary to your good
like as it was to Noah, when he was feign to pronounce a curse against his
own child. Now go and think of the crosses of Noah to fright thy self from
sin.

His benefits. 1 He found favor with God.
And last of all consider his benefits, 1. He found favor with God, that is,
God made known his love and kindness to him, made him know that he loved,
liked and accepted him to life, so it is testified of diverse others. Now labor
to be good, encourage your selves in piety, with God you shall find favor, he
will make manifest his love and kindness to you though men seem to disfavour
you, and the love of God is a thing so precious and comfortable, that it may
well overweigh all the anger wrath and displeasure of men. Jf God favor you no
matter who hates you, and this all Gods people may be said to find, by walking
in the ways of righteousness with Noah, for God is not an accepter of persons.

2. He was directed by God to a way of saving himself from the flood with his
family
Again Noah was directed by God to a course of saving himself from the flood
with his family and many other creatures, and accordingly did escape the common
destruction. This is a special favor of God to deliver his people from common
calamities, especially that eternal destruction of hell fire that must
overwhelme the world. This benefit God will give to all his Saints, and safety
also from common calamities when the time serves, and so far as is fit, if
they strive against the common sins by mourning and oppose the same. God will
be an arc unto them in the midst of a deluge, and they may triumph as David,
Psalm. 46.2, 3.
I will not fear though the waters rage, and though the mountains he cast
into the midst of the sea, as then they were. Let all Gods people set
themselves resolutely against common sins, and God will preserve them from
common judgments.

3 The Lord accepted his sacrifice.
Thirdly, The Lord accepted his sacrifice, and resolved he would not drown the
world anymore, and made a covenant with Noah and all creatures, confirming it
by the rainbow, as a sign thereof. So God did show his goodness to Noah,
and gave him dominion over all creatures, and power to eat flesh, which before
God had given them no warrant to do, and therefore I suppose the godly did not
usually unless in sacrifice if then. And herein the Lord was gracious to Noah,
that for his sake he made a covenant. And he was a figure of Christ in whom the
Lord did make a covenant with all mankind, then the second time, not to destroy
them with eternal destruction, if they would trust in his mercy, and repent of
their sins. For this temporal covenant was a shadow of that eternal, into
which all mankind was again admitted through Christ that was to come. But they
did soon cast of this covenant in running to other gods, which may seem to be
the only sin that then did cast the committers quite out of the covenant,
other sins did keep them from enjoying the good things of the covenant; but
this did cast them out of it altogether, so that having run into that they
were no longer in the covenant. Now see Gods grace more fully to us, that has
renewed this covenant which is in Christ more evidently, and take we heed of
casting our selves out of it again, by following strange Mediators and
Jesusses, as I think the Papists do. Whosoever does seek to any other merits
but only those of Christ, thrusts himself out of the covenant of grace, and
Christ is become of none effect unto him.

Lastly, Noah had two Godly sons, 4. He had two godly sons.
and this is a singular favor to give a man a Sem and Iaphet, if he have a
Came, and that all his sons be not discoverers of their Fathers shame.

Lastly after 950. years Noah died, Noah's death.
and so must we all after not so long a life, O therefore prepare we for the
coming of death, that it may not take us away in the midst of our impenitency.
(*)

THE SEVENTH EXAMPLE.
OF HAM, NIMROD, Babilonians.
I Have offered to your consideration the Examples of the Old World, I proceed
to speak of the World that now is, as S. Peter calls it, 1. from the flood to
Abraham, and then from Abraham to the death of Joseph, for there the Book of
Moses called Genesis is concluded. Now here first I will set before you the bad
examples of bad men, then the good examples of good. Of the bad we have Came,
Nimrod, particulars, and the builders of Babel in an heap as it were, and of
the good we have Sem and Iaphet, and the godly posterity of Sem, whose
geneologie is noted to show the age of the world till Abram.

First J will begin with Ham and note his parentage and life, Ham.
for of his death in particular Moses has made no mention. For his parentage,
he was the son of Noah borne to him before the flood after his 500. year. for
to that age lived he before he became a Father, His birth.
and after that in the whole time of his life he had no more children, God of
purpose it may seem giving him but few children, because his mind was to
begin the present world with a few, as he did the first with one man, that so
his blessing in the large increase of mankind afterward might be more
evidently discovered. But the youngest son was this Ham.

His life.
Now for his life I mark three things in it. First, the great benefits God
bestowed upon him. Secondly, the great sins he committed. Thirdly, the great
punishments which God inflicted upon him for his sins.

In which

1. His benefits, he was saved in the Arc from the Deluge.


First, God vouchsafed to save him in the Arc from the Deluge of waters, so
that he perished not with the world, but escaped with his Father and Brethren.
It was a special and singular favor, to make him one of the few, that is,
eight persons that were delivered from the raging waves, and enjoyed the
benefit of a miraculous preservation of that little handful of men, whereof
the Church visible did then consist. We see that one was an Hypocrite, a
dissembler, a wicked unsanctified man, who though he continued a professor of
the true religion, and worshipper of the true God with his Father and Brethren,
yet was destitute of true piety and continued graceless, a servant of sin,
void of due reverence and charity toward his aged Father, Gods Minister and
the most holy man of all those times, and served God with them alone in outward
form and fashion. For had he been truly good he would not have run into so
foul a sin, at least he would not have persisted in it without repentance as
he did.

See then that the Lord shows a great deal of patience, long-suffering and
goodness to hypocrites in the Church, and makes them partakers of all outward
benefits and privileges which are bestowed upon the Church: so did Ishmael
live in Abraham's family a long time, and Esau longer in Isaacs. So Core,
Dathan, Abiram, and the rest of those rebels and murmurers were brought out of
Egypt, passed thorough the sea, saw the miracles, and did eat Manna, and drunk
water out of the rock, and were shadowed with the cloud, and conducted by the
pillar of fire among the rest of the sons of Jacob. And I pray you to take heed
by this warning, of priding and pleasing your selves in this, that you be
members of the Church, escape diverse punishments, enjoy many mercies, live in
good esteem among the godly, and carry away as great credit as any other men
in the Church. All this befell Cham a wicked Hypocrite, and at last a damned
Reprobate. It is a dangerous thing to flatter our selves in a bad estate and to
cousen our selves with false arguments, making our selves to trust upon a false
conclusion, and to judge our selves Gods children and in the state of
salvation, upon such reasons as have no verity nor stability in them. You live
in the true Church, so did Cham, you live amongst godly men, have been borne
of godly parents, have been instructed in the doctrine of godliness, so was
Cham: you have escaped great punishments, enjoyed great benefits, and been
well reputed of by godly men: all this befell Cham, and all this
notwithstanding Cham was cursed and damned and so may you. In after times, the
Jews bragged of the Temple of the Lord, and the Temple of the Lord are we, and
yet the Lord rejected them and cast them out of his sight. In Christ's days the
Jews bragged that Abraham was their Father, for John Baptists warning would
not serve the turn to make them forbear such idle boasting of their Pedigree,
but our Savior tells them that the Devil was their Father; yea Judas
himself was one of Christ's Family and Disciples and Apostles, and trusted
with the bag, and yet a Devil. O therefore beguile not your selves with ill
grounded hopes and build not upon a rotten foundation.

If you say unto me, why then you leave us in uncertainty and afford us no
sure pillar upon which to ground our hopes.

I answer, not so, but I will turn you to some Texts of Scripture that shall
give you sure arguments of comfort, from which if you can conclude your selves
Gods people, that you are so indeed and not alone in show, your comforts will
hold water as it were in the day of death and judgment. Ierem 7 5. the Prophet
bids them thoroughly amend their ways and their doings and not trust in lying
words. Lo thorough and universal reformation of heart and life, that, that is
the only sufficient proof of being Gods children, and such as shall inherit
his Kingdom: all that can be alleged without this is no better then lying
words which will deceive, So John did after teach the Jews, Mat. 3.9. Say not
we have Abraham for our Father, that Allegation will prove fruitless if it
go alone, but what must they do more? Bring forth fruits meet for
repentance, that is, frame your selves to a thorough reformation of your hearts
and lives, and so S. John teaches, He that does good is of God, 3. Epist of
John 11.
he that does evil has not seen God, whosoever he be that makes so good use
of those helps which God has for that end provided in his Church, as to
attain true repentance, true amendment of life, that is, a constant and
upright care and endeavor to cast away all transgressions and make him a new
heart and a new spirit, resolving in nothing to sin, but in all things to
walk according to the direction of Gods Word, and where he fails still
continuing to lament and confess it before God, judging himself, and craving
pardon and help in the name of Christ, that man shall be saved, that man is a
solid Christian, that man is not a Cham, let him rejoice in God as a true
member of the Church: but whatsoever else may be either had or done without
this bringing forth fruits worthy of repentance, is no more then may be
alleged by some Cham or other. Therefore again, I beseech you satisfy not
your selves with other things, but apply your selves to this amendment of heart
and life with all speed and with all diligence. Let Cham be your warning, trust
not in lying words.

And further, now that you see in the Arc among the eight persons one
Hypocrite, who did afterward evidently discover his hypocrisy, learn to know
that there will be such in the Church to the worlds end, as were also in the
family of Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, David, Hezekiah and other good men, even tares
among the wheat, and goats among the sheep, and unfruitful branches in the
vine, that you may learn as to fear your selves, so especially to satisfy
your own hearts, and not to be offended by the like accidents in your own
times. If a man that has long lived in an orderly course of life and gotten
himself the name of a good man, and enjoyed many benefits in the Church, shall
afterward fall quite away from goodness, and manifest himself to have been
no better then a Cham, let not this trouble you nor dismay you, neither take
you occasion from their wickedness to condemn either goodness it self or
good men, as to say that they be all dissemblers, there is never a better in
the pack, but improve their fall to the making of your selves more watchful
over your selves and prayer-full for your selves: and still love and honor
Gods Church, though some that profess themselves to be lively members of it,
do manifest their guile by their utter falling away at the last.

We have done with the goodness of God to Cham in suffering him to live in the
Arc. Now follow his sins.

^. His sins. 1. He was a Hypocrite.
The first sin which we gather from that which succeeded is this, that he was
an Hypocrite, one that contented himself with a bare outward show of
goodness, and did not labor for the power of it to humble him, to discover
his secret faults to him, and to heal his soul by bringing the Image of God,
even the divine nature to him which was also the sin of Caine before, and
after too of Esau and of Judas, and Achitophel, and many others. Take you heed
of this Brethren, take you heed of this. Beware that you be not Hypocrites,
satisfied with some external show of religiousnesse joined with civil
conversation of life, freedom from gross sins, and orderly living to the
world-ward, but seek after the soule-spirit of godliness, which consists in
finding out and reforming the corruption of your natures, and the secret
disorders of your inward man. He that so prays and hears, that these
ordinances make him see and be humbled in the sight of the filthy quagmire of
sin that is within him, by which he is carried from God to himself, and to
sin, and the world for his own sake, and labors to have his inside more and
more cleansed and reformed, and drawn up to God and the things of God, this
man is a true Christian. But he that satisfies himself in an outward form of
holy duties and of civil honest conversation, not diving to the depth of his
heart, this man may prove, and if he mend not will prove a guilefull Cham at
last.

2. He saw the nakedness of his Father.

Genesis 9 22.


But now his next sin is, and Ham the Father of Canaan saw the nakedness of
his Father. If he had suddenly and occasionally come into the place where Noah
lay uncovered, and his eyes before he was aware, had lighted on that object,
and he had presently turned away his countenance from it with grief for his
old Parents fault, and out of tender compassion, that seeing had been no
sin. But the meaning is, he gave himself to stand and gaze upon his Fathers
unbeseeming carriage and unseemely parts, so as to delight in it, and thereby
to stir up and nourish in himself a contempt and slight esteem of his
Father. He did not see it with pity and remorse, and make the best of it as
of a matter of infirmity, into which the good old man fell unawares: but he
beheld it with gladness, laughter, derision, jesting, sporting at his Fathers
nakedness and misdemeanour. This is a great fault to behold the sins and
offenses chiefly of Parents and other superiors, and most of all of godly and
holy men. Fathers of the Church and of Religion as well as of our persons, I
say, to behold their faults with an over-open and a greedy eye, with scorn and
scoffs and contempt of them and of piety, and of goodness in and thorough
them. For this certainly comes from nothing else, but a secret dislike and
averseness from goodness it self, against which we are glad to pick a
quarrel, and are willing to have somewhat to object against it, that we may
hinder our selves from embracing it, and from a gladness also to have somewhat
to allege in excuse of our own naughtiness, and for the imboldening of our
selves to persist in it still without fear. It is nothing but hypocrisy, I
mean a being contented with a false counterfeit goodness, yea willingness to
favor and allow our selves in our own sins, that makes us with joy and
delight in our selves and scorn and contempt against them, to gaze upon the
faults and ill carriages of the godly men with whom we live, which is also so
much the more aggravated, if the reverence which we owe them in regard of their
places, and love in regard of their neerenesse to our selves, have not been
able to withdraw us from such injuriousnesse.

This is one sin of Ham, cursed Ham the Father of Canaan, come and examine
yourselves, if none of you have acted Hams part against your Parents, against
the Magistrate, against the Minister, against any Christian or neighbor: Have
you not beheld the faults of any such with content and gladness in it? have
you not been willing to stand thinking of that fault? and to make your hearts
thereby bold to despise and slight them, to laugh at them and to censure them.
If this have been to a person near and eminent, the fault receives great
aggravation by that circumstance, but if it have been done to any Christian
man though not of such worth or neerenesse, or to any man at all, it was a
wickedness to be abhorred, showing a most uncharitable disposition; 1 Cor.
13.6.
for charity rejoices not in iniquity, that is, is not glad to see another
commit sin, and withal an heart that is willing to hide its own sins and
make them seem little or nothing, and make it self bold to commit them still
by beholding other like sins in other men chiefly such as are bound in duty
to be, and in reason should be expected to be better then ones self: he
always sees the faults of others to some mischievous intention and with some
evil affection that looks upon them with an open and earnest eye, as taking
king some content in this, that such and such also be bad as well as himself.

Now if you have run into such a fault, call it to mind and repent of it,
and know that how great soever the crime was, your crime was as great or
greater in so beholding, Hams thus beholding his Fathers nakedness was worse
then his Fathers discovering himself. And now I require you to make Ham your
warning, do not as he did, but as your own consciences tell you that he
should have done. Ask thy self if thou be a reasonable man of any
judgment, what should this son have done in such a case, should he not have
turned away his eyes from looking on such a spectacle, should he not have
sighed and mourned, and said, alas, alas, how has this befalne my poor aged
and godly Father, O how was he overtaken with wine that was never wont to
exceed himself in food or the like. Should he not have prayed God to forgive
him and have told himself in this wise, ah do thou learn O Cham, how weak a
thing a man is, and how apt to fall into sin, that thy self may learn to
be more watchful, and so have cast some garment over the old man to have saved
him from further disgrace, if any other person might have had occasion to
approach him: Sure you cannot but yield that Chams duty had been to have
carried himself thus respectively and pitifully toward his Father, do you as
duty bound him to do, not as lewdness and naughtiness prompted him to do.
Mend his faults and imitate them not, be reformers and not followers of what
was amiss in him: Commiserate the sins and falls of other men, chiefly
Parents, Magistrates, Ministers, Aged men, and men of former godly conversation
and of virtuous and religious carriage in other things: I say commiserate them,
pray for them, lament their weakness and their slips, take notice of your
own dangers and so wake your selves by their offenses. But whosoever will
contemplate such doleful sights with gladness and insultations, saying, Aha,
aha, as David speaks of his Adversaries, that man will collect boldness to
sin and impenitencie in sin, and a sleighting of righteousness and
righteous men from such offenses, and so will stumble and fall and destroy
himself against those blocks as they may be termed.

But I come to another fault of Chams. He contented not himself to see but
must also blab abroad what he had seen, He acquainted his Brethren with his
Fathers nakedness.
and tells it not alone to one, but to his two Brethren that were without and
did not see it. He left his Father still uncovered, and gets him out of doors
to find Sem and Iaphet, and so soon as he met with them, reports, no doubt
laughingly and fleeringly what he had seen, like enough adding also words to
this purpose, to draw them to the like, and bid them go in and they should see
such a thing as they would little have thought ever to have seen. But let us
satisfy our selves to take the fault as it is set down. He told the fault and
told it to his two Brethren that were without and needed not to have been
acquainted with their Fathers nakedness, if he wretched whisperer could have
commanded himself silence.

So you have in him that foul sin of whispering of another man's faults
behind his back, Whispering is a great sin.
aggravated with the consideration of the persons against whom he sinned, his
Father, and toward whom, his Brethren both of them, and where, even without.
It is a sin and wickedness to scatter abroad the faults of others, and to
divulge those matters of disgrace against them, which a man might easily keep
close, if he were master of his mouth, and is not bound by any duty to reveal;
and especially to blab them to such as else would not know them, and such as
might be most grieved and hurt by hearing them. This J say is a sin, it
proceeds either from a twatling laxative humor causing that a man must vent
all he knows, and be talking of many things, or else from an uncharitable
disposition to the party whose name one tenders not, his person one loves not.
It is hurtful to the speaker, feeding his hypocrisy, making him ready to
commit the same or the like sins, and hurtful to the hearer, to infect him
or to grieve him, and to him of whom report is made to reproach and discredit
him, and withdraw the heart of the hearers from him. It is much aggravated when
the thing reported is false and uncertain, taken up upon mere hearesay, and
the person of whom J speak, either my Parent, Brother, Friend or Superior, my
Magistrate, Master, or of note in the Church, as a Minister, or eminent in
goodness, as this just Noah. This was the fault of Cham.

I call upon your consciences to find out your sins in the like kind, if not
degree, have you not spoken of the faults of your governors or of others, to
others merely to disgrace, or else merely to hold up talk when other matter
failed. Brethren do not count this a small offense, a talebearer, a whisperer,
a revealer of secrets, is no small offender. He does not walk according to
the plain rule of our Christian Religion, do as you would be done to, he does
not bridle his tongue, he does not walk according to charity. He is injurious
to the name of another, and a wrong doer to the whole world, by scattering
abroad examples of evil, he shows himself no hater of sin, that loves as
it were the smell and favor of it. He is a manifest transgressor of Gods
Commandment, and at last makes himself odious to those that hear him, and to
those that are ill spoken of by him. For the hearer cannot choose but discourse
thus, if he spare not another name, whether will he spare mine in another
place, and therefore I have no reason to trust him or be familiar with him, and
he whom he has misreported will hear of it at last, and then he will hate
him, as a person treacherous and false-hearted, and cannot but reason thus with
himself, so long I have lived by him and so near, so often have I been in
his company, he never opened his mouth to admonish me, but in mine absence to
do me disgrace he has not been sparing. It cannot be that he wishes my good
in his heart, that uses not his tongue to do me the greatest good, that is, to
reform, but does employ it to do me the greatest hurt he can, that is, to
disgrace me.

Therefore if you have been whisperers, see the fault and be sorry. It is a
Cham like trespass; And now charm your tongues I pray you, as from all evil
language, so specially from telling other men's secret sins abroad, and making
that open which might have been well kept close: Whosoever has made his
Brothers faults, especially a Parents or the like, open to any man, if he
himself might have kept them from that one without sin, has committed a
sin in so doing. Further then we are moved by the necessity of our duty to
reveal other men's offenses, we are bound in duty to conceal them, farther
then it would have been a sin not to have spoken of them, it cannot but be a
sin to talk of them. You must not think, that it is at your liberty to
declare your neighbors secret faults, when you will your selves, you would not
have others deal so with you. As we may not lawfully hurt our neighbors body
till some necessity of duty bind us, so neither his name, for the ninth
Commandment, at least the fifth requires to be as chary of that, as the sixth
does to be chary of his body. Cease, cease to be whisperers, above all take
heed you be not worse then Chams, for he spoke nothing but what he saw with
his own eyes, O do not you dare to speak what you never saw, but either
conjecture alone of your own head, or have only heard of others.

Thus we have done with Chams fault, now let us consider his punishments.

3. His punishments.

1. God cursed him in his son Canaan.


God cursed him in his son Canaan, not that himself in person was exempted,
but that the curse should show it self most apparently upon Canaan, and that
Israel might be more encouraged to go up against the Cananites, a nation
anciently cursed of God, and his curse stands in this, that he should be a
servant of servants, not so much to men, although that also in that was
understood and fulfilled, but to Idols, to sin, to Satan. So Cham by
discovering his Fathers fault gets a grievous curse upon himself and his
posterity.

O learn to terrify your selves from this sin, by threatening your selves
with this curse. Shall J provoke God to curse me and my children after me?
shall I sow the seed of misery for my self and those that are to come of my
body hereafter? Let Gods severity upon those whereof himself has given us
knowledge in the word, make us careful to preserve our selves from their
offenses, and to that let us both acknowledge our own aptness to the same
crimes, and inability to deliver our selves from them, as also crave at the
hands of God the gracious help of his Spirt to preserve us.

If any demand. But why should the curse fall on Canaan for Chams fault?

I Answer, The Lord has all the children of all wicked men so far obnoxious
to his justice, that it cannot be a wrong in him to punish the Father in the
sons, or the sons in the Parents. So have we done with Cham. Genesis 10.


The next bad man of whose badnesse the Holy Ghost takes notice is Nimrod. He
was the fourth from Noah, Nimrod.
and thus his geneologie rises, Noah, Cham, Cush, Nimrod. His name signifies
we will rebel, or a rebel, whitherby chance or otherwise given to him; What
his name signifies.
of him this one thing alone is noted, that he began to be mighty in the
earth, Genesis 10.8. he was a mighty hunter before the Lord, insomuch that his
name gave occasion to a proverbiall speech, if any man would describe a violent
tyrannical fellow, he would say, as Nimrod the mighty hunter. By hunter here
is not meant an hunter of beasts, but an hunter of men, the word translated
hunting may well be englished food or prey, and he may be called a man of
prey, that is, of spoil and booty. He was the first that affected to erect a
Monarchy, The first that strove to erect a Monarchy.
and to make himself a commander over men by force and strength of arms, so
that his sin, was ambition, usurpation, tyrannising, that is, a violent
enforcing men to yield to his dominion, Was as a tyrant and ambitions.
whether they would or not, though he had no right or title to command over
them, for he was the son of Cham, who was the youngest of Noah's sons, and
withal accursed of God to be a servant of servants, and yet he would make
himself a commander over others, and we have it noted, what City he began
first to erect his tyranny in, viz. Babel, whence it may seem the plague
spoken of afterward did drive him, and yet he left not but went to other
Cities, and made his dominion still larger and larger.

Learn of him to take heed of ambition and tyranny, J need not to pray you to
forbear a tyrannical usurpation over Cities and nations, but take you heed of
that degree of tyranny which is incident to men of your rank, even of carrying
out your own will against equity and right. A tyrant is an odious name, this
mighty hunting made Nimrod infamous, he did openly profess and practice it,
which seems to be meant by calling him mighty hunter in the sight of God. He
cared not for God nor man, but openly and in the sight of God and man attempted
to subdue the nations and people round about him, and to make himself a great
commander. Put away from you ambition, vain glory, covetousness, violence,
and all those sins which are together wrapped up in this one word tyranny; so
I have done with these two particular sinners.

I go on to set before you a troop of sinners all at once, whereof I conceive
that Nimrod was the ringleader, for it was done at Babylon his City which he
built, and which he had constituted the head and Metrapolitan City of his
dominion. The fault you have set down, Genesis 11.2, 3, 4. viz. The Babylonians.
that passing through the country Eastward from the place where Noah lived,
and meeting with a very fruitful plain in the land of Shinar, that is, of
Chaldea, Their faults.
they consulted to make brickes (for that the country afforded not hewne
stone,) and to use a kind of natural mortar or slime that abounded in that
place in steed of artificial mortar, and so to build a City and a Town that
should reach up to Heaven, moved thereto partly out of an ambitious desire of
a great name and credit to continue long afterward, and to spread far and
near for the present, to prevent dispersion, which their guilty consciences
caused them to fear, though no such thing was yet begun to be executed upon
them. Here we must inform you of their sin, which was not simply the
building of a City, nor building of it of such matter, but ambition and vain
glory, and carnal confidence, and then the punishment of their sin in the
dividing of their tongues, and scattering them abroad.

First then their sin is a vainglorious erecting of a strong City and an
exceeding high tower, joined with a confident persuasion that they should save
themselves from any mischief and calamity, by means of their City. The
occasion that did further them to this work is, that they were all of one
language, and so would easily agree upon a bad thing, and that they met with a
fit place, and had fit matter brick and slime, and that they were so fully
bent upon it to finish this their tower, that no means was left to stop them,
but Gods coming down upon them with some heavy chastisement, I conceive that
they had finished, or near finished their City, and were now setting apace and
eagerly about the tower, before the Lord did cross them by that punishment. For
seeing Babel was the beginning of Nimrods Kingdom, and that he could not have
finished it after the division of tongues, if he had not done it wholly, or for
the most part before, it will follow in likelihood, that they were permitted to
settle therealong while, and to finish their City. But when they grew so mad
that with a City they would have a Tower, as it were to outface God and save
them from dispersion in despite of him, then it was high time for the Lord
himself to oppose them. Vainglory, Carnal confidence.

Obstinacy.


Here there are 3. sins, 1. Vainglory, 2. Carnal confidence, 3.
Wilfulness and obstinacy. Vainglory, for they sought a name by an exceeding
strong City and high Tower. 2. Carnal confidence, for they imagined to make
themselves safe from dispersion and misery, by means of that City and Tower.
3. Obstinacy, because that God himself witnesses they were so fully bent upon
their projects, that except by violence, there was no way to stop them in their
attempts. Here be 3. sins in the Babel builders Tower.

They gave themselves to earthly mindedness in hunting after a name, and this
they would get forsooth, by such a building as the world had never seen the
like for greatness and height, and never should see. Vainglory a sin.
Be not you vainglorious, studying to do some earthly vain thing, for which
you may be talked of far and near, and for a long time. This is vainglory,
the vice by which men affect to be famous and much talked of, and magnified in
the world for some great earthly matter that they have gotten, for getting a
great deal of riches together, for raising their family, for a fine house, for
being the first that did such or such a thing or the like. Be not I say
vainglorious, let not your hearts affect this foaming froth of men's tongues.
Care not for such kind of praises and commendations: but set your hearts upon
better things, to get you a name in Heaven, and in earth to be good, holy,
just. Praise is a thing which the Apostle commands us to follow, but by
praise he means praise worthy things, not praise it self further then it is
a necessary effect and companion of things praiseworthy. Be good for
conscience sake to God, that so you may have, though you seek not after it,
good esteem of men and their good reports. This vainglory will so choke all
true desire of goodness and all true goodness, that at last it will make you
to fall into that high degree of Hypocrisy, as with the Pharisees you shall
do all your deeds to be seen of men, and if you do any good thing, shall
even loose your reward in Heaven.

But again, take heed also of carnal confidence, that is, 2. Carnal
confidence is a sin.
promising your selves safety from any affliction in respect of any outward
thing. That is carnal confidence, to make ones self believe that he shall
continue secure from all earthly dangers in respect of a City, a Tower, a
friend, a great estate, or the like. Alas, all these things be vanity and lies,
they are the arm of flesh. Trust not in Princes, trust not in Horses or in
Chariots, trust not in wisdom, trust not in man. The Holy Ghost does every
where dissuade men from this vain confidence, and pronounces a curse against
them that trust in flesh and tells them that they withdraw their hearts from
God. He that conceives so well of any earthly thing as to promise himself
safety from that, is made careless by that of seeking Gods favor, and is so
earnest after that, as he will not have leisure to think of pleasing and
obeying God, and seeking to him and trusting on him. It is a fearful sin,
and yet a common one, hardly can men keep their hearts from committing this
idolatry, you must humbly pray to God to discover to you the vanity of all
earthly and terrene things, and to show his Omnipotency and All Sufficiency,
that so he may be your confidence and your dread.

Lastly, beware of that sin of wilfulness and obstinacy, 3. Obstinacy is
a sin.
that are so bent upon an evil course, as no words nor other like means will
turn you from your ill courses, this was the sin of Elies sons, of
Pharaoh, of Israel, of Amaziah. This is a forerunner of mischief, He that
hardens his heart against a reproof shall surely come to mischief, let no man
stay him. When the Lord sees that words will not serve the turn, he comes with
rods, and if the rod will not divert men from their evil paths, then swords
must. Wherefore put you on a flexible and tractable disposition, and an heart
that will easily be dissuaded from an evil way. Pray to God, pray to him to
give you a mind full of light that may quickly discern evil, and an heart
full of softness that may quickly be withdrawn from it.

Now consider the punishments, God comes down to see, that is, Their
punishment.
takes notice of their sin and wilfulness in it, and therefore consults
with himself, the Father with the Son and Holy Ghost to go down (by the
powerful work of his hand) and to confound their languages, and by that
means to stop their work and scatter them thence, from which effect the world
did call that City Babel or confusion, so instead of great honor and a great
name, they gate shame and confusion, and were thence dispersed, from whence
they expected safety from dispersion. Thus God catches the wicked in their
own devices, brings mischief on them from that wherein they trusted for
safety, and shame from that from which they expected glory. Yea see here, that
God has strange and unwonted punishments to lay upon sinners, for who would
have ever had a dream of such a thing as this, viz. to have them made unable
to speak their mother languages, and all of a sudden to speak gibrish one to
another. So powerful is God over man that he can take from him, his tongue,
his wit, his soul, all things in a moment.

The punishment of strange languages is a heavy punishment.
It was an heavy chastisement making way to much ignorance and barbarism, and
to much war and bloodshed, and to a great estrangement among mankind, and to
great toil and labor for the getting of all learning, and causing much error
and mistaking in all Arts and Sciences chiefly in Religion, so that next to
our casting out of Paradise and to the flood it deserves the name of the
heaviest punishment that the world has felt, yea in respect of the succession
of men it was worse then the flood, that only drowned the men who lived in the
present time, this has drowned in ignorance and error all succeeding times.
Let us fear the Lord our God who only does wonderful things, and can tell
how to plague his enemies with heavy scourges. We have now finished the
Examples of these bad men.

Sem and Iaphet, their virtues, they covered their Fathers nakedness. Genesis 9.23.
Look to the good, Sem and Iaphet, and Sems posterity to Abram. Of Sem note his
good deed, his reward and his death; for his good deed, it was common with him
and Iaphet, they went backward, and so covered their Fathers nakedness, that
they might not see it, partly out of modesty, and partly out of filial
reverence and respect which they bare unto him. Thus, thus should all good
children do, even refuse to see their Parents nakedness or any thing that
might withdraw a due regard and fear of them, any sins or weaknesses of
theirs notwithstanding, yea all men should be so truly loving one toward
another, as to use the mantle and veil of love to cover a multitude of sins,
so as to go backward as it were and not see them. We should what in us lies
and so far as duty will suffer, conceal the faults of all men, further then
the necessity of healing them and of preventing the mischief that may else
follow of them will permit us. Every man would be so dealt withal himself.
Who does not praise the virtuous carriage of these two Brethren. Imitate it, I
beseech you chiefly toward Parents, Magistrates, Ministers, keep secret if
you can their secret faults, and hide their shame from breaking forth. Nothing
is more fit to be covered then sin. It is like a carcass which does least
hurt when it is buried under ground, so far therefore as duty will suffer
you, bury, bury it, under ground with it, and let it lie hid under the garment
of silence. See it not if you can choose, say nothing of it more then you must
needs.

Now consider the blessing with which their goodness was rewarded, Their
benefits, true religion was continued in their posterity.
Sem had God for his God and the dominion of Canaan given him, that is, the
true Religion was to continue in his posterity, the Messiah to come of him, and
his seed to have the possession of the land of Canaan, and Iaphet at last was
to be brought to the participation of the same Religion with him, by the
persuasion of the Gospel. So it is a great mercy to have the true Religion
continued in a man's posterity, and to be brought from error unto the truth.
Whether Iaphets self were a godly man, it is not certain, but in doubtful
things it is good to incline to the best side, and to take things in the best
part, therefore we will hope that he was so, and with Sem did inherit the
blessing in his person as well as after his seed was admitted unto it. And let
us now bless God that has performed this Prophecy, for it is likely that we
of these Countries are of Iaphets posterity, and now we see the Lord of Heaven
be blessed, that God has persuaded us to accept and embrace Christ and so to
dwell indeed in the tents of Sem.

But now for the seed of Sem they were these, The seed of Sem. Genesis 11.10.
Arphaxad who lived 438 years, almost 200 fewer then his Father Sem, as Sem
did 350 fewer then Noah. Selah who lived 433 years, the half alone of the
lives of men before the flood, for at the flood God did shorten men's lives by
half, to keep them from so great a height of wickedness, as in that long
lived age they came unto, and to shorten the toil of the godly upon earth.
Heber lived 464, the longest of all but Sem after the flood, it is likely he
was a very worthy man, from him the name Hebrews came to his posterity, and
endured for many years after. Peleg lived 239 years, about the building of
the Tower of Babel, so you see then God shortened man's life one half, seeing
them again to grow so exorbitantly wicked. Reu lived also 239 years, just as
long as his Father, which is not found in any other that I remember. Serug
lived 230 years. Nahor lived 148 years, it may seem that he was the first of
the Patriarchs that fell to Idolatry, for Laban swear by the gods of Nahor,
therefore his life is almost by half as short as any of his predecessors. Then
Terah lived 205 years, he fell to Idolatry but repented afterward and went
with his son Abraham toward the land of Canaan, dying in the way, and buried
his eldest son before himself, which had not befalne any Patriarch before
that we read of. (*)

THE EIGHT EXAMPLE.
OF ABRAHAM.
IT is agreed upon by all, that from Adam to the flood there passed 1656 years
inclusively, I mean from the beginning of Adams Creation. Noah was the tenth
from Adam inclusively, Abraham the tenth from Noah exclusively. I mean not
reckoning Noah as one. How many years passed betwixt the flood and Abraham's
birth, it is uncertain, because the relation of Abraham's birth Genesis 11.26. is
set down in such words as have ministered occasion of difference to the Reader.
Terah begat Abraham, Nahar and Haran, but at what age he begat each of them, it
is not manifested: Some think, that Abraham was the firstborn, begotten at
his fathers 70 year, some think that he was the youngest begotten at his 130
year, so there is difference of years in the account by this means, 60
years; but I rather incline to them that think Abraham was the eldest son
at his Fathers 70 year, for surely if Abraham's Father had been able to become
a Father at 130 years, it would not have been said of Abraham's self, that he
was as good as dead at a 100 years old. It is improbable, that there should
have been so great difference of bodily strength betwixt the Father and the
Son. Now from Abraham forward, the Holy Ghost makes his story more large
then that of former times. We shall follow Gods pen and propound unto you this
Father of the faithful, that by doing his works you may show your selves his
children. In him look to his 1. Birth. 2. Life. 3. Death.

Abraham's Birth.
For his Birth, he was the son of Terah, borne as some think about the 200th
year of the world, some 352 years after the flood, but as some think 60
years sooner, about 1948 of the world, and after the flood 298. His Life.
For his life we will consider his carriage good and bad, and the things that
befell him good and bad.

Let us begin with his virtues and good deeds, and observe him as an excellent
pattern of all virtues and goodness, that we may profit the better by
considering his life more particularly. Let us see what virtues and good deeds
he practiced toward God first, and then toward man.

His virtues toward God. 1 His faith. Heb. 11.8.
First for God, he is commended for faith, Abraham says the Author of the
Hebrews, by faith called of God, etc. and Abraham by faith offered up, so that
faith he had, and was called the friend of God, James 2.23.
as the Apostle S. James witnesses, now without faith no man can possibly
please God or be his friend. So had Abel as we showed you before, so had Noah,
so had Henoch, so had all the godly at all times. This grace is the cardinal
grace, the radical grace, that upon which all other graces grow as on their
root, and on which they move as the door upon its hinges. Therefore you that
would be called the children of Abram, heirs of the blessing of Abram, come
and compare your selves with him, and see whether you be faithful as he was,
What faith is.
to that end know, that faith is the grace by which we believe things invisible
and supernatural concerning another life hereafter. So the Apostle
distinguishes walking by faith from walking by sense or sight, Heb. 11.1.
and Faith is said to be the Evidence of things not seen and ground of things
hoped for. Reason and natural discourse will inform of things sensible and
natural concerning the present life, but the things that are above sense and
reason concerning a future life hoped for hereafter nothing does inform us but
faith, and faith is that grace by which the soul believes such things.

Three acts of faith

1. Faith of God, which has four acts.


It has three sorts of acts in regard of which it is styled by three titles:
Faith of God, Faith to God, Faith in God. Faith of God is that by which we
believe that there is such a God as indeed he is. All conceits of God are not
of faith, but those apprehensions of him which agree to his being and conceive
him to be such as himself does set forth himself to be, and you shall see
what Abraham believed concerning him. 1. He believed that this God was one and
but one as the Scripture witnesses of him. He worshipped God, he called on the
name of God, he builded an Altar to God, not to gods or more gods, but to one
God JEHOVAH. 2. He believed that this one God was True, Omnipotent, able and
willing to do any thing that he should speak, viz. that he was All-sufficient
and faithful, as S. Paul witnesses, being fully persuaded that what he had
spoken he was able also to perform, and Heb. 11. that he was able to raise him
from the dead. 3. He believed that this one God was possessor and judge, and
therefore also Maker of Heaven and Earth. And 4. That he was righteous and
would do righteousness in punishing the wicked that lived in sin, and in
sparing and being favorable to the righteous man that did study to walk
before him in a good conversation. Now these be the principal things to be
assented unto concerning God.

Secondly, Abraham had faith to God, that is, 2. Faith to God
he gave consent to all those things that God said, because he said them, which
necessarily follows from his acknowledgement of the truth, power, and
All Sufficiency of God: So does the Author to the Hebrews note, that it was a
land which after he should receive for an inheritance. He believed that God
would give him that land according to his promise, and he believed above hope
in hope, that he should be Father of many Nations, and it is said, that God
preached the Gospel unto him, saying, Gal. 3.8.
in thy seed (which is Christ) shall all Nations be blessed. He believed that
of his seed should come the Messiah which should free mankind from the curse,
and make them partakers of the blessing. So he believed Gods threats against
Sodom, that God would destroy it with fire.

Thirdly, he believed in God. 1. 3. Faith in God
He trusted upon his mercy in the promised seed, that for his sake, not for
the worth of his own righteousness, God would be merciful to him and save
him. Romans 4 3.
He believed in God, and this faith was counted unto him for righteousness. He
was justified by this faith as the instrument, he did not work, meaning in
respect of justification, he did not think to be pardoned and accepted for the
works sake, but believed in him that justified those which in themselves be
ungodly, by justifying he means, pardons their sins, as it is said, Psalm.
32.2.
Blessed is the man to whom the Lord will not impute sin, for the promise was
not made to him by the works of the Law, but the righteousness of faith, that
is, the righteousness without works as he described it before. Now if you
have this faith and all these acts of faith, then you are Abraham's sons, if
not, in vain do you lay title to his inheritance. Therefore try your selves,
and if you have this faith then know your selves happy, if not, you are far
from blessedness, you are still under the curse.

But secondly, Abraham feared God. 2. He feared God.
True faith will bring forth the fear of God, not the passion of fear, nor
slavish fear, nor fear of flight, but the fear of caution and wariness, a
not daring to offend God, as the Lord himself witnessed of him, saying, Now I
know that thou fear me when thou have not spared thine only son. Genesis
22.12.
Lo, the fear of God is such a disposition of heart to Godward, out of the
apprehension of his excellency and greatness and justice, that will cause a
man not to be bold to dare to omit any work that Gods Commandment injoyneth
him unto, and so not to commit any thing that God condemns. I pray you
consider, have have you this virtuous fear of God? Do your hearts stand in
awe of him? so that you fly from the offending and displeasing of him, as from
the greatest of all evils; those that have Gods fear before their eyes, they
are godly like Abraham, those that have it not, they are wicked, as Abram
thought the men of Gerar and Egypt to be; O labor for it, if you have it not
yet, get it, if you have it, labor to increase and nourish it by considering
his great excellency and great terriblenesse.

3. Was obedient.
A third virtue, Abraham had obedience, that is, his will was thoroughly subject
to Gods will in all things, so that he held this resolution within himself,
that whatsoever God bad him do that he would do, for which God praised him,
saying, because thou have obeyed my voice, and the Apostle, saying, he obeyed
and went out. Obedience is a resolution and endeavor to do all that God bids,
because he bids. Some special acts of Abraham's obedience
Let us take some special acts of obedience, wherein Abraham did cross his
reason, and his affection, and his credit, and his profit, and all to perform
the will of God, even therefore only, because God bad him, whom he durst not
out of fear and would not but out of love follow in all things.

1. Left his Country at Gods Commandment.
First, God gave him Commandment to leave his Country and Fathers house, to
go out into a land which he should show him: A strong Commandment, leave all
thy kindred and go into a Country thou know not whither, but go from
place to place as I shall show thee. Here seemed no reason in this
Commandment, but Abraham obeyed it, Genesis 12.1.

2. Lived in tents at Gods Commandment. Heb. 11.9.
Secondly, when he came into the land of Canaan, he did not build a City, nor
an house there, but dwelt in tents as the Apostle notes, as a pilgrim and a
stranger, not having possession in it at all, so much as a foot, God gave him
no place of abode, but caused him to wander as himself tells, Genesis 20.13.
This seemed an unhappy and unsettled life, and flesh and blood could not take
content in such a kind of living, but because God enjoined Abraham so to live.
He submitted himself and did live so, save that only he bought a place to
bury in, as being still mindful of his death.

3. Circumcised himself and all the males of his family.
A third heavy Commandment he received from God, Genesis 17. 10. and 26. God made
him to circumcise himself and all the males of his family, and all that should
after be borne when they were eight days old, and he made no question of it:
To circumcise was to cut off the top of the uppermost skin of the secret
part; This seemed the foolishest thing in the world, a matter of great reproach
which would make him, as it made his posterity after, to seem ridiculous to
all the world. It carried an appearance of much undecencie and shamefullnesse,
to cause all his servants to discover themselves unto him. Much more might have
been alleged against this ordinance, what good could it do? what was any man
the better because he had wounded himself and put his body to that torment?
yet for all this, Abraham disputed not, objected not, made no contrary
allegations, but presently the self same day took himself and his son
Ishmael and all his servants in his house, and circumcised them according to
the commandment of Almighty God.

Yet a fourth commandment more tedious and contrary to reason and affection
then all these, 4. He expelled his wife Hagar and son Ishmael.
which was of it self exceeding grievous in his sight, as the Holy Ghost
witnesses, that is, the expulsion or excommunicating of his son Ishmael, and
of his mother Hagar, yet when God commanded him to do it, Genesis 21.12. he rose
up the next morning betimes, v. 14. and sent away both the mother and the son.

But last of all he obeyed a commandment, that seemed to contradict nature and
religion, and Gods promise, and his own salvation, 5. He would have
sacrificed his son Isaac at Gods commandment.
and the salvation of all men, and the truth and honor of God himself, so
that God was said to try him to the utmost in that commandment. It was in
sacrificing Isaac, as the Spirit of God not^th. Heb. 11. and Genesis 23. God bad
him take Isaac, and not instantly kill him in the place, but go three days
journey, and not knock him on the head and there an end, but offer him for
sacrifice. But what was this son, the son of his old age, the son of his
love which was so dear unto him, yea the promised seed in whom it was said,
Heb. 11.18.
In Isaac shall thy seed be called, and this son he offered after a most
melting conference betwixt himself and Isaac his son all alone. Here was an
obedience incomparable and unparalable, no man ever did the like except our
Lord Jesus Christ, who offered up himself, which must needs be dearer to
himself then Isaac was to Abraham.

So now mark the excellency of Abraham's obedience, The excellency of Abraha^s
obedience.
he was obedient for the matter in hard and difficult things, for the manner
promptly and readily without gaine-saying, speedily and presently without
deferring, and universally without excepting, without picking and choosing. If
you be able to produce such obedience to justify your faith, that it may
appear your faith is a working faith, then have you faith indeed and not in
word alone: but if your faith be not accompanied with an obedience of the same
kind, though not in the same degree, whereby you are able to yield your selves
to God, resolving in all things readily and without delay or murmuring to yield
unto him, how are you obedient? how have you faith, such a faith as was
Abraham's. All therefore that say they believe as Abraham did, but yet obey not
as Abraham did, yea are wilful against Gods Commandments, refusing to do
known duties, and to leave known sins, that will not circumcise the
foreskin of their hearts, nor leave their country and Fathers house, nor cast
out their Ishmaels, nor offer up their Isaacs, all such are believers alone in
show and not in deed. Compare your selves with Abraham, and if your obedience
be not like his, I say as before, having the same ground, extent, and
properties, it is but a counterfeit faith whereof you boast, and no true faith.
Therefore now be earnest with the living God to work in you true subjection to
him, and to make you like Abraham his servant: for God that wrought his heart
to such flexiblenesse, will and can perform the same for you. Pray him to
incline your hearts to his statutes, beseech him to write his law in your
hearts, and to cause you to keep his Commandments and judgments and do
them. And if you find such an obedience, though not so great, yet that which
has the same ground, and strives to attain the same extent and properties,
then take comfort, and be not afraid to call your selves sons and daughters
of Abraham, for Zacheus was the son of Abraham, when leaving his greediness,
he could make restitution and give to the poor.

4. He was religious.
Now a fourth virtue in Abraham, was religiousnesse, for it is said of him, that
he built an Altar to God, and that he worshipped God, and that he called on
the name of God, and that he paid tithe of all he had to Melchisedech, and
this is for our learning. We must call upon God, we must profess and practice
true religion, we must offer real sacrifices on Christ the Altar, we must also
pay tithes of our goods, Genesis 12.7. You have an Altar built to God, a
profession of his true religion among the Cananites, there he called on Gods
name, that is, performed public worship of sacrificing and praying, one named
for all. And v. 13.14. again it is said, that he came to the place of the
Altar which he had made at the first, and there called on the name of the Lord.
And v. 18. there at Hebron he built an Altar to the Lord, and when God appeared
to him, C. 17. v. 3. he fell on his face before God, showing all due outward
respect unto him, when he spoke unto him. And C. 14. Melchisedech was Priest of
the most high God, and he met Abraham and blessed him, and Abraham gave him
tithes of all. I do not think he meant only of all the spoils, though that
he did too, but a constant tithing of all he had is meant. This tithing was an
acknowledgement of his subjection to Melchisedech, and so necessary to be
performed to Christ who is a Priest for ever after that order, who must bless
and take the tithes of us.

Surely tithing is no Leviticall ceremony, for it is not originally and
primarily due to the Leviticall Priesthood, but it is due to an eternal
Priesthood, even that after the order of Melchisedech, and therefore so far
as I see, it must be eternally due, neither can any man lawfully forbear to
pay them to Christ, neither can any man receive them in Christ's steed, but he
that is Christ's officer to preach in Christ's steed and sow his spiritual
things.

Now I pray you look that you be religious as Abraham, profess religion, come
to Gods house, call on Gods name. Learn that public prayer is an holy
ordinance of God, frequent that, and do not slight and despise it as many of
you do, offer up spiritual sacrifices to God. Pay your tithes duly of all,
which I know none of you all that does make conscience of, you think that too
dear a price to buy the worship of God with, but why should you not show your
selves subject to Christ's Priesthood as well as Abraham's? If you could make it
manifest to be a Leviticall ceremony, you might think your selves dispensed
with it by Christ's coming; But you cannot show any good reason why it should
be so, and here is a good reason it was not so, for it was due to a Priest of
another order then that of Aaron, wherefore show your selves truly religious,
by a conscionable setting a part to God the tithe of all you have, as Abraham
did. For when here it is said he tithed all, and in the Hebrew the spoils, it
is no reason to shorten the wider place by the narrower, but to reconcile both
together thus, he paid tithe of all, and also of the spoils, as well as other
things. I am in hope to prevail with you for all other things, but in this I
have no hope to prevail, because profit pleades against me, and because the
thing is controverted and denied by diverse. Now when a costly service is
questioned, O how hard is it to persuade men to see that truth and follow it.
Well I show you mine opinion, and leave it to God to persuade you, but in other
things which are not controverted, I pray you to obey as Abraham did, and to
show your religion as he did. And so we have showed you Abraham's faith,
obedience, fear and devotion. O that we could show the same virtues in our
lives.

I come to show you next the good carriage of Abraham to men-ward. 1. His
virtuous carriage toward men. 1. He was truly humble.
First himself, then others. For himself, I request you to note, First that
he was a very humble man, truly humble, one that did esteem himself nothing
in comparison with God, and that is true humility, to have a mean esteem of
himself out of a true apprehension of Gods greatness, and the infinite
distance between God and himself, you shall see this in Abraham, because when
God came to show him what should become of the Sodomites, and he out of mercy
was moved to pray earnestly for them, he says unto God, I am dust and ashes,
O good man, that when he came near to God, he had a sense of his own
meandness, and entitled himself no better then dust and ashes.

This humility must we also be clothed withal, it is a necessary fruit of
the knowledge of God and our selves, without which we cannot be true
Ceristians. It is the cabinet and storehouse of all graces. It allures God to
give us grace, it causes all crosses to seem easy if God will lay them on, it
makes all duties appear seasonable. Phil. 1.7. 2 Cor. 12.11. 1 Samuel 24.14.
Luke 14.11.
It is a grace by which a man becomes like unto Christ, who humbled and made
himself of no reputation. Paul was nothing in his own esteem. David counted
himself a flea and a dead dog, and Christ has said, that if we humble our
selves we shall be exalted. For alas, be we not sinful, and shall we not
then be humble? Be we not mortal men, be we not damnable creatures, and shall
we not be humble! Beloved, search if you have this grace, that is, a mean
esteem of your selves in respect of your nothingnesse compared to God, and
your sinfulness in your selves, and if you find your selves laid low and made
vile in your own estimation, this is to be like Abraham.

You have the virtues of Abraham in respect of himself. Now in respect of
other men, First his family, then others without his family.

2. Trained up his Family in the knowledge and fear of God.
For his family, considered generally and specially. Generally, he brought them
up godlily and religiously, and taught them virtue and goodness, as is
witnessed of him, Genesis 18.19. I know he will command his household to keep
judgment and justice, and to keep the way of the Lord. If he had not taught
them the good way how should he require them to keep it, and the word
signifies to command and teach both, The Hebrew word is ambiguous.
and it is that of which usually the word translated precepts does come.
Abraham then was careful to teach his people the ways of God and to teach
them all goodness. He did that to his household, Ephesians. 6.4.
which God has commanded us, bring them up in the nurture and information of
the Lord. For indeed God did bid him circumcise his children and servants, and
if he must administer the Seal of the Covenant to them, then he must teach
them the Covenant it self, even the whole doctrine of godliness.

Brethren, be not a number of you far from following Abraham in this matter?
you have not gotten so much knowledge as to be able to teach your people the
doctrine of true piety, the way of God, justice and judgment, nor do not
strive to get knowledge. And many that have knowledge make no care of
communicating. Ah if he that provides not for the family things needful to the
body denies the faith, how is he guilty of that fault, which does not provide
for their souls. I beseech you therefore be humbled for your omission of this
duty, and set about it now you have helps enough, and may have time enough, if
you will redeem time from vanity. Do what God praises Abraham for, and what
he makes an argument, why he will reveal to him all that he does.

Again, see how Abraham carried himself to the particular members of the
family. First toward his wife: secondly toward his children: thirdly toward
his servants.

3. Was loving and gentle to his wife.
For his wife, you have a notable example of love and gentleness to Sarah in
bearing with her passion and distemper, and imperiousness, as you have it
noted, Genesis 15.5, 6. when she flew upon Abraham with a false and vehement
reproof, saying, my wrong be upon thee, that is, thou art in blame, the fault
is thine, it is long of thee that I am slighted by my maid, she bears her
self bold of thee, thou hold her up in it, and so concludes with calling
God to be judge betwixt them. He does not answer her again with words as hot
and testie as hers, but in gentle manner yields to her, saying, thy
maidservant is in thine hand, do with her what thou will. This is an honor
to him, if he had been put into a rage by her rage then had he been overcome
of evil, but now he is a right conqueror and overcomes evil with good, when
he continued meek and passed by her distemper and yielded to her passion.

Beloved, you that be husbands, I pray you follow this example, I pray you be
not bitter against your wives. Be not wrathful to them if you see them in
passion, if they take you up falsely and causelessly, and blame you for that for
which you are not blameworthy, bear with them, give them good words, do what
you can to satisfy and content them, show love and wisdom both at once.
Carry your selves to them as men of knowledge, not as men of ignorance, and
give honor to the woman as the weaker vessel, this is the counsel that S.
Peter gives you. 1 Pet. 3.7.
Be ruled by Abraham's deeds and Peter's words. It is the greatest honor that a
man can show to himself to be able to bear and forbear. A wise man bears
things, Posse and nolle nobile.
an unwise man cannot bear. The wife is ones own flesh, a piece of a man's
self yea more then a piece. We are commanded to love them as much as our own
selves, and to cherish them as Christ does the Church; O be humbled for any
passions or distempers you have showed before your wives, or toward them, even
though they have provoked you first: and now beseech the Lord to make you like
Abraham that so you may keep your families in peace, even though you have
passionate wives.

Perhaps you will say, that Sarahs passion brake out but once, but your wives
very often.

I answer, first, it is not certain that Sarah was passionate only this one
time. She that did fall into other distempers might again fall into this, but
if she did not, Abraham that bare this, out of the same reason would have
borne them too, if it were a duty to deal thus mildely at one time, it was a
duty to do so always.

What then, shall a man let his wife bear out her passions still and slight
him that is her head?

I answer, first, better so, then fill ones self with passion too. And
secondly, I answer, a loving, mild, gentle, admonition afterward, will
prevail more to make a woman remember her self, then present rage and
bitterness. A drunken man is best cured by rebuke when he is sober, and
passion is but drunkenness.

You see Abraham's carriage to his wife, now I come to show you his carriage to
his two sons. 1. He loved them both very well, 4. He loved his two sons
very well.
as is evident by his praying for Ishmael, and his taking the matter heavily,
when Sarah would have him cast out of doors, but yet he loved neither of them
so well, but that he could be content to have the one cast out of his house,
and the other burnt for a Sacrifice, and to cut off both their foreskinnes.

So Parents must learn to love their children, but with a moderate love, such
as that they can be be content to put them to smart, so far as God will have
them put to smart, even by just correction to cut off the foreskinne of their
hearts, yea to part with them, if God will have them banished, or go into
another Country, yea to have them die if God will have them die. Such a
moderate love which is subordinate to the love of God, we must have and
exercise to the fruit of our bodies, and we must show the sincerity of our love
to them by praying for them, and the moderatenesse or our love by being able to
punish them duly, and to part with them even by death when God shall send it.
O bewail your carnallnesse and unlovingnesse, and immoderate love to them.
Inordinate love of a child is a great fault, it will undo the child, it will
make him despise and abuse the Parents, it will nourish all vices in him, it is
the next way to make God cross a man in him, it makes a child an Idol, pray
to God therefore to moderate your love.

Abraham provided for all his other children by gifts, and gave all he had to
Isaac, as we have it, Genesis 25.5, 6. So must a good Father provide for his
children convenient portions, that they may be able to live comfortably, and
provide them fit callings, as Abraham did, but make most account of the most
godly, and let him be heir whom God has made heir, even the eldest, unless
his wickedness dis-inherit him, and I suppose that it must be some great
wickedness for which a man should dispossess the eldest of the greater part
of his estate, yet still the eldest must have such a larger portion as that the
younger may have a convenient part for them too.

Learn to be ashamed, you that are spendalls, and keep nothing for your
children, have nothing to give them: and learn you all to be moderately
careful for them, and discreetely and indifferently liberal to them. Let not
one have all, the other nothing, let not any of them be thrust off with nothing
for the others sake, but be a Parent to all, O be husbandly and thrifty to get
and save, and be seasonably liberal to them, yet so, that still your selves be
in such case as not to make your selves underlings to them.

5. He provided a good wife for Isaac.
Again, for Isaac, Abraham was careful to provide a wife, even one of the best
he could though he sent far for her, and it may seem he had not much with
her, as you have it in the whole Chapter of Genesis 24. Here Abraham is to be
imitated, if in any thing concerning a child, he looked to have a good wife
more then a rich. O if you that be Parents would do so, how well would it go
with many a family? what is he or she, not what has he or she should be the
question?

Abraham knew that God would provide a wife for his son, it is probable he
had prayed for that mercy and received an answer, he could not else have
affirmed it so certainly. You that be Parents, must pray to God to give a wife
or husband to your son and daughter, and make piety and virtue the chief
match-makers: If you will ever show your love to be a spiritual love, let it
appear to be such to your children, if by any means you will show your selves
affected to them with a spiritual love, let it be in seeking their good
really, not imaginarily. That woman shall live happiest, not which has the
richest husband with largest revenues, but that has the godliest husband, most
abundant in virtues; sure a Father should make his daughters happiness the
maine end of his choosing an husband for her, or else he is not prudent, for
prudence is a virtue by which a man does work rightly to happiness. I say the
same concerning the wife; be you therefore imitators of Abraham here, and be
ashamed as our Savior says in another meaning, to seek those things after
which unsanctified men and heathen do only or principally seek.

I should have named one grace more in Abraham toward God, Another grace in
Abraham toward God, his Patience.
that is, patience, I do not mean so much or only in bearing afflictions, as
in a contented tarrying for the promised seed. A quiet waiting till benefits
come, and a quiet bearing of crosses that did come, this is patience, a being
silent to God and waiting on him: Abraham had waited diverse years, no son
came, his wife was barren, yet he waited and still continued to hope, that God
would give him a son at length according to his promise. See, how you can
wait upon God if he defer the performance of his promise, and that without
muttering and without fainting. This is an excellent thing to believe, pray and
hope still though God defer the accomplishment of his word. Learn this
grace, Blessed is he that by faith and patience can inherit the promises, as
it is said of our godly forefathers.

So Abraham's virtues to God are faith, fear, obedience, waiting or hope and
devotion. And to Sarah I should have named another. He mourned moderately for
her and buried her honorably, He mourned moderately for Sarah.
for he bought a burying place of the children of Heth, that he might interre
her with all due respect. So should an husband moderate his affection with
discretion, and join discretion with his affection, that he may both show some
convenient measure of sorrow for his wives decease, and also power to keep
sorrow within compass both for degree and continuance, and so should wives
stand affected to husbands, and all friends each to other, and a decent
funeral according to each man's place must be affoorded, to testify their good
will to the whole person when it lived, by due carriage to that earthie part of
it which is left behind. Those yoke-fellowes therefore that are glad or would
be glad of each others decease, and care not what becomes of the body of each
other, they must be blamed as naughty and unloving husbands, and those that
make no end nor keep no measure in mourning must be blamed as over-loving and
carnally loving. Let us so mourn as to show the thing was dear we parted
with, and withal, that we know we have better things remaining with us then an
earthly friend.

I must now speak of Abraham's good carriage to his servants; Abraham's good
carriage toward his servants, to Eliezer his principal servant.
There was one principal servant, Ruler, Steward, Over-seere of his house, his
name is Eliezer of Damascus, Genesis 15.2. Him 1. He loved much. 2. Trusted much,
because by good instructions and examples he had through Gods blessing made him
fit and worthy to be both loved and trusted. His love to him he shows in
saying to God (whereby it is manifest that he did not counterfeit, for Abraham
was too godly to tell a counterfeit tale to God) one borne in mine house shall
be mine heir. Genesis 15.3.
Lo a good servant should be very dear unto his master, A good servant should
be respected.
so that he should plentifully and liberally recompense him (for to say that a
servant should be made ones heir if he have no children, that I dare not, but
I dare say he should be plentifully and liberally rewarded out of great love.
Deuteronomy. 15.12, 13
) The Lord commanded that an Hebrew servant should not be put out empty, but
that his Master should communicate to him of his goods, Prove. 27.18.
and Solomon says, that as he that looks to the fig tree shall eat of the
fruit thereof, so shall a good servant that attends his master come to
honor, his meaning is to show, that Masters should not be indebted to their
servants, but should respect and prefer them. Those therefore that having
good and virtuous servants, shall not show themselves liberal, and courteous,
and loving, but quite contrarily, froward, and unloving, and niggardly, are
much to be condemned, as men that have not wisdom to consider, how much
benefit a man has by his servants, so that neither could men get riches nor
enjoy them if they wanted servants; neither could they be without them in many
other respects, and if the servants be good, next to God, above all men he
stands most beholding to them. His life is in their hands, his goods are in
their hand, and to speak as the truth is, he is more indebted to them then
they to him. A servant might more easily shift for himself without a Master,
then a Master live as he does without servants: wherefore I commend unto you
all humanity, love, courtesy toward your servants that be good and faithful,
such as fear God and do their duty in such sort as humane frailty will permit
unto your selves. Labor to bring your servants to be religious, and trusty,
and diligent, and if they be so, show all good will to them and encourage them
in their duty by loving entertainment, especially seeing now they be freemen
and not bondslaves that are your servants.

Again, Abraham trusted his servant with the weightiest business of his life,
getting a wife for Isaac, and bound him with an oath, but duly limited and
freed from all doubt and difficulty as much as might be, as you may read,
Genesis 24. in the beginning, causing him to lay his hand under his thigh and
swear about that business, alone limiting him so that he should be freed from
it if his friends were wanting to him. So a good Master should trust a good
servant, only giving him necessary instructions, and cautions, and if matter
be of such weight, laying the bond of an oath upon him, for no bond stronger
then that, none fitter to bind a godly man: what might be the meaning of
laying the hand under the thigh in swearing, I cannot learn nor conjecture my
self, only it had some due signification in all likelihood, as our laying the
hand on the Bible and kissing it. Jacob also required it of his son Joseph,
so that it may seem to have been done in some religious respect, whether
intimating the expectation of the promised seed to come out of the loins of
Jacob and Abraham I cannot say. But whatsoever this gesture might mean, we
note that Abraham trusted his servant, and so must all men needs do in some
degree, and therefore had need to choose good servants, or do their best to
make them such as may be trusted.

How for all the rest of his servants young men fit for war, they were 318.
with whom he fought against the Kings that vanquished the Sodomites. He did
train them up to war as was fit, and therefore they are called his trained
or instructed servants, and when he had gotten the victory, they had leave by
him to eat of the spoil; so that a good man should bring up his servants
according to his place fitly to do him service, and at least should see that
they have food for them, chiefly when they labor and take pains.

I proceed to Abraham's carriage toward forreiners that were not of his house,
whether kinsmen or frinmen as we call them, Abraham's carriage to his kinsmen.
he had one kinsman his Cousin german Lot, that was son to his brother Haran,
him he loved very well, and studied to keep all good peace and correspondency
with him, and to remove all contention, and for that end, when their states
were grown so great, that they could not conveniently dwell together, because
being sojournours they were to take up but the waste of the land, which no
natural inhabitant had possessed, or else to take land for money of the
inhabitants if they could spare the same, he came to Lot and made the motion of
peace, and after gave him his offer to choose what part of the country he
would, as you may read, Genesis 13.7. He was peaceable.


Here is an excellent virtue of so mild and peaceable a disposition, that to
prevent strife, can yield to his inferior, in seeking to pacify him by going
to him with peaceable and quiet words and offers, and so far part with his
own right, as to give the other the better a great deal, rather then proceed
to jarres and discontents. O that we could all imitate Abraham, especially
brethren, kinsmen, and near friends, and be so desirous of unity and accord
as he was, not stouting it out as many do, with shall I yield so far to him
as to go to him, to let him have his way, let him come to me if he please, and
let him yield to me. Most of our spirits be so big, that they will not bow to
any that is a little inferior, no not for peace sake, imparting with a little
of their right for it. But know, it is an honor to be able to bear and
forbear, he has the most wisdom and grace, that can part with his own
right, rather then continue a quarrel, if it be not in a matter of very great
weight, wherein great damage should come to him or his family, by parting with
it. And know, that to stand over highly upon terms, and not to bate a jot or
tittle, as some men use in boasting wise to affirm that they will not, is a
proof of a man led much by passion, and filled much with pride and self
conceitednesse. He knows not the value of peace, that will not redeem it
with bending somewhat even to his inferior, chiefly a near kinsman. The thing
therefore J am to commend unto you, is peaceablenesse, and for that end
moderation and lowliness of carriage, in yielding a little more then needs to
those that ought rather to yield to you, and certainly the comfort that peace
and concord will repay you withal, shall prove it a good bargain so to
purchase peace.

2. He rescued Lot and redeemed him out of his enemies hands.
Again, Lot Abraham's kinsman was taken by the Kings that conquered Sodom and
Gomorrah, and when Abraham heard of it, he armed his own servants, and got his
confederates to join with him, and by force of sword redeemed Lot out of their
hands, as you have the story, Genesis 14.14, 15, 16. together with all the goods
and people of Sodom, prudently ordering the battle by night, and coming
upon them secretly and unawares. Here are three excellent virtues of Abraham.
First, Love to his kinsman Lot. Second, Courage and resolution, that durst
fight for him. Third, Prudence in ordering the whole business. For you must
take notice that Abraham was a little Prince, a kind of petty King in those
days, as appears by the carriage of Abimelech and others to him, and
therefore he had warrant and ground enough to make war against any King,
State or person upon a just quarrel.

He was loving to Lot.
But first mark his love to Lot, although Lot was lately departed from him, yet
his love to Lot had not left him, but he was at cost and labor and hazard to
redeem him from captivity. Must not we learn of him to show great love to
our kinsmen and special friends, if they be in danger peril and misery, even
to do all that according to our places we may to succor, relieve and rescue
them, against wrong, violence, oppression and like calamities. Be charitable
and kind kinsmen and brethren, cleave to your kinsmen and brethren, and so
far as you may lawfully, and as your places will bear, defend, maintain and
help them against unjustice and injury. No man must join with his kindred in
a sinful and unjust cause, but in a good and honest and just cause, he is
not of Abraham's mind, that will not stick to them, and help them what in him
lies. All therefore that desert their friends in honest matters, for fear of
a little cost or pains or the like, are to see, that they be not good
imitators of this good man, nay nor any that does not according to his place,
succor the oppressed, which Solomon commends under a question saying, will thou not deliver him? For must we succor an Ass pressed with a burden, and
not a brother pressed with a bundle of injuries.

He was courageous.
Again, Abraham showed courage in this work, for had not he been of good
resolution, he would not have dared to opposed himself to a conquering army
and a Prince, that had held diverse other Princes in subjection, and now came
for that purpose into those parts, to subdue those that had cast of the yoke.
Lo how a good man must be courageous too, and not suffer himself to be
deterred from his duty, or any good and commendable work, by fear of danger.
Courage is such a disposition and frame of mind that will not be daunted by
perils and dangers, What courage is.
and by evil accidents, that he may encounter in the works that his place
requires, but will resolve what in him lies, with due resistance to repel
them, or if they cannot be repelled, to bear them. Such courage Abraham here
discovered, such courage do you also show and exercise, let not every show of
danger skare you: but go through with good works, whatsoever comes of it. It
is a good thing to be valiant in battle, where life is exposed to peril, and
is it not a good thing to be valiant against all other dangers?

And that you may be courageous in all things. First, Means to get courage.
be sure the causes in which you put your selves in hazard, be good and just.
Secondly, be sure that you take God along with you, by keeping his favor in a
holy conversation, as Abraham did, or else courage may quickly fail and
deceive you.

And next, learn to deal prudently in all affairs, as Abraham did, in
seeking the help of his confederates, and taking the opportunity of night, and
dividing his men against his enemies into several bands. The excellency of a
business is in the wise carriage of it, laboring to get convenient aid and
help, and then choosing fit times and seasons and other circumstances: We must
blame our selves therefore if by any indiscretion or failing, we have hindered
our own good success in our affairs, as often times men do, and must pray
to God to direct us with discretion (for it is his gift,) that we be not causes
of our own disappointment and misery.

Now see how Abraham behaved himself to frin-men as we call them. 1. To the
Sodomites, 2. To the Cananites, 3. To Angels whom he took to be travelers.

First to the Sodomites, Abraham's carriage to the Sodomites. He prayed for
them.
first he did most heartily intercede to God for their sparing, if there had
been found, 50.40, 30, 20. Yea but 10. just men therein: So great a lover of
good men was Abraham, that he would heartily pray to God to save them, and for
their sakes to save also the people whom they dwelt amongst, and how well
pleasing this service was to God, it is evident in the story, Genesis 18.23. ad
finem. For God did with wonderful patience accept his suites, even till he
came to so low a rate, as if he did find but 10. in the 5. Cities, that is, a
poor couple in every City.

We must learn hence, to show our loves to mankind in general, and
especially to just and good men, in praying God for all righteous men, that
they may be saved and delivered, and for the Societies and Cities and countries
wherein we live, that they also might prosper and escape for the good sake of
the good that live there. Fervent prayer for humane societies and for just men
in them, should be made by Gods people. Why should you not improve the right
you have unto Gods ears? For the good of many, 1 Timothy 2.1.
I will that prayers and supplications be made for all men, says S. Paul,
especially to pray that God would deliver Cities and Countries from public and
fearful destructions. Brethren, why are we so defective in this duty? Why do
we not pray for the nations abroad? in hope that there may be some righteous
amongst them, why are our mouths stopped from such suites? Let us now follow
our Father here, and let our hearts and mouths be enlarged with all humble
confidence to beseech God, for the good of those Cities and quarters of
Christendom that are ready to eat up one another, that God would show favor
to them and not give them over to perish by the sword each of other. Account
Prayer an exercise of some efficacy, have so much faith as to know that our
prayers shall not be vain labors, and that you believe, that God is a God
that hears prayers; only let all your prayers be as Abraham's were, servent,
humble, and reverend.

2. He showed humanity and kindness to the Sodomites he had taken.
Another good work of Abraham to the Sodomites was, that he did not make them
slaves to himself and keep them for his own use, nor sell them as slaves to
others, as by the Law of Nations he might well have done, but granted them
liberty, and set them again in state of freedom after he had by the sword
taken them out of the hands of those that had led them captive. He showed
humanity and kindness to them, though they were wicked men and not rigor and
extremity.

We must all learn to be kind and loving to mankind, and not to press men
with heavy and grievous burdens, even though we might do it in extremity of
right. This shall bring more love and good will, honor and good esteem, then
rougher and more severe carriage. It is better to be loved then hated, honored
then disgraced, be counted a friend and savior of men, then a proud person
that cares not what becomes of others, so that himself may make an advantage
of them. The comfort that gentleness and clemency brings, is also very much
more then that which will follow from the contrary. The dying heart can receive
no content in thinking he has crushed, inthralled or otherwise afflicted men,
but that he has delivered, comforted, saved them, that affoordeth great
consolation, in that it becomes an argument of goodness, and a means of
hope, that a man shall find mercy as he has showed and exercised it. Let not
either covetousness, or arrogancy, or a cruel disposition make you carry
your selves austerely to men for your own advantage sake, but use all
courtesy, as Abraham did even to these Sodomites. Let them enjoy good things,
even though you have power and some show of right to deprive them thereof,
only do not interrupt justice in her acts of severity. This was his dealing
with the Sodomites in general.

His carriage to the King of Sodom, he would receive nothing from him.
See how his dealing is with the King, as you have it, Genesis 14.21. He would not
take any thing that was his, no not to a shooe-latcher, and he says, that he
had lift up his hands to God to that end, that it might not be said by the King
of Sodom, I have made Abraham rich Here Abraham shows himself, first, a man
that did not regard riches, nor esteem the wealth of this world, in that of
his own accord he bound himself by a vow, not to touch so great a booty as
this, that fell into his hands by just conquest, and which in all equity he
might have taken and that with good thanks too for the present time from the
King of Sodom, who wished alone the persons, and did willingly yield the goods
to Abraham, but Abraham stood upon terms here of credit for his Religion sake,
and would not have the King of Sodom to triumph and say, that his wealth had
enriched Abraham.

You see, that we should so dis-valew riches, as freely to cast them away and
deny our selves of them, rather then incur any reproach or disgrace for them,
even though the imputation would be unjust. Should not all men labor to have
as generous a mind as Abraham? Sure, we should strive for the perfection of
virtue which has been found in the Saints. It cannot be said yet, Abraham
should have sinned if he had taken this spoil, neither was he bound so much
to the Sodomite, as to afford him either persons or goods: but he considered
before hand, that some aspersion of covetousness would have been cast upon
him, if he should have possessed himself of this wealth, and therefore he
binds himself from it by a vow. Noble Abraham, that regardest due esteem
rather then great riches, and would let go so fair a morsel, rather then
incur any the least show of disgrace for worldliness. Why should not we be
followers of Abraham his virtues? Why should we use means to get wealth joined
with apparent reproach? such as would set the mouths of all men on talking
against us, more then this fact would have filled the mouth of Chedarlaomer
with talk against Abraham: O what a business of mind is this news? and how
does it show our inordinate affection to riches more then to a good name? which
yet is to be preferred above all treasures, if we would hearken to Solomon. I
conclude, that we must show our true magnanimity, by sleighting great abundance
of outward things, so as that no man might ever have cause to grudge against
us, that these riches which should have been his if all things had been
fairly carried, have made us rich, especially let no man grow rich by taking
forfeitures of poor men, it is worse to use extremity to a mean person then
to a great.

Now consider this worthy man's carriage to the Cananites, Abraham's good
carriage to the Cananites.
inhabitants of the land in which he was a stranger. First for the Country it
self, then for the persons that dwelt in it. For the Country, Abraham made it
much the better for him by two things, wood and water, very necessary things
for the life of man. For he planted groves and he dug wells again, which
had been dug in the days of his Father. As concerning those groves, it is
conjectured that they might be for religious use, because it is said, there he
called on the name of God: but the word here used is not the same under which
such groves for religious use are after forbidden, therefore more like it is
that here alone was intended civil use, and sure it is a good thing to plant
wood for the benefit of mankind after our selves be dead. A man would have
thought, Planting of wood is a commendable thing.
what should a stranger trouble himself to make a grove? He is likely to
depart from the place soon, and then he cannot carry his trees with him; but
this did not discourage Abraham, he knew that some man might enjoy it if
himself did not. Indeed for wells and water, the profit redounded to himself
presently as well as to others for the future.

Now learn of him to be common Benefactors, by helping to store the world with
wood and water-springs, and other like things, the use of which shall redound
to many as well as to your selves: Especially the care of planting woods should
be commended unto you, our age destroies that necessary provision. All cut
down, none plant for another age, wood is useful for shade, for timber, for
fuel, it is one of the things we cannot want, it is one of the things, that
if it be discreetely done, will quit the cost that it requires. The tree after
a little time will grow without any labor of expense bestowed about it, it
will pay for its standing, if you set your hedge-rowes with trees, they would
grow as well as thorns. If here and there at convenient distance, trees were
planted, especially timber trees, the grass would not be much the less. But I
am not a husbandman good enough to commend these particulars to you; Let me
commend the thing in general, Order things for the common benefit, and show
your selves lovers of mankind, be not all for your selves and for the present.

Now to the persons generally, he shows courtesy, that is, a carriage
savouring of lowliness and good esteem, together with love and good will unto
the Hittites when he came unto them about the matter of a field of burial for
Sarah, He showed lowly and respective carriage toward the Hittites.
Genesis 23.7. He stood up and bowed himself, the word is the same that is in
other places translated worshipped, meaning he bowed his body with his face
downward in testimony of honor and respect, and afterward, verse 12. He
bowed down himself before the people of the Land. You see lowly and
respective carriage in this worthy servant of God.

We ought to carry our selves courteously to all men, Honor all men, says S.
Peter, he means it, of this kind of respective behavior of body. This is a
means to show love, and to beget love, and to increase love, and to keep out
jarres and discontents, as a sower and hautie and sullen dogged carriage does
proclaim contempt or hatred or both, and so causes jarres and fallings out,
and dislikes, and increases them if they have been begun. Those therefore
that be of a haughty carriage, or rude and boisterous behavior, not knowing
how to give due salutations or complements of courtesy are to be blamed, as
men that do not alone want education but charity and humility, for if those
graces did rule in the heart, though they could not prompt a man to a kind of
artificial demonstration of them, yet they would some way infuse themselves
into the carriage, and make it gentle and amiable. Therefore let your carriage
be fair, and kind, and sweet, bow, bend, salute, use cap, knees, all such
things as either nature or custom makes to be as it were badges and
professions of humble love and serviceablenesse, of a not too much preferring
your selves above others, and under-valewing them in comparison of your selves,
accustom your selves unto and use them for conscience sake, that they may
savor of piety in the estimation of God, who can see piety in such things, and
so they may be more then morrall virtues, even spiritual actions and fruits of
Sanctification. Only, I beseech you, to take heed of causing your courtesy to
be mere complement, and of being the more crafty by how much you seem more
courteous, and of ushering in some naughtiness by a goodly and lowly carriage
of your selves. If such virtues be corrupted, and that there be nothing in them
but the mere outside, the more loathsome to God, and at length also to man.

Particularly, see how he carries himself to Hephron the Hittite, Abraham's
carriage to Hephron.
with whom he bargained for a field of burial. He deals plainly and squarely
with him, Ephron offered to give it him freely, he would none. A wealthy man
should not be apt to receive a thing of gift, it would be a sign of
covetousness and of an having disposition. Then he asks the price and says,
that he will give as much as it is worth. I will give thee says he the money
of the field, that is, what it is worth, and Ephron answers, it is worth 400
shekels. A common shekell is thought to be worth 1 s. 3d. of our money, so 400
shekels is 25 lb. and then Abraham weighes him the money of silver current with
the Merchants. Abraham in a bargain of 25 lb. does not stand halfe-perthing,
and first bids 15, then 17, then 20, then 22, then 24, then 25, as a number of
base niggardly minded men would have done, but when he saw it to be worth the
money at a word he pays it, and when Ephron saw Abraham desirous of this land,
he does not ask 40, or 35, or 30, or 32, but at one word tells him so much it
is worth, and so they agree, the one also pays current money in full weight,
and the other gives present and good assurance, and so here is justice, and
plain upright dealing betwixt them.

O that you would learn of him to bargain and pay without any overreaching
or tricks either in bidding or asking, or other devices, that you might show
your selves not to be possessed with the love of money, which is the vice of
all vices, even the root of all evil. But I am sure, the contrary driving of
bargains is usual amongst us, that it may appear we do not buy and sell out
of respect of our duty unto God, and the common good, but alone out of desire
to wax as rich as we can, yea though it be by other men's losses.

Next consider, Abraham's carriage to Aner, Eshcol, and Mamre. His carriage to
Aner, Eshcol, and Mamre.
First, in making a Covenant with them it seems to have been a league of
peace offensive and defensive. Secondly, in making bold with them to crave
their aid in his battle against the King of Shiron, by whom Lot was
captivated. Thirdly, in allowing them to take their part of the booty though
himself would not do it. So a good man may and in some cases must join
himself in covenants and leagues so far as his own benefit, and the benefit
of other men requires it, and must use prudence and discretion to keep
himself safe, not relying on the care of God without care of using means. He
may also challenge of others, the performance of covenants, and must be content
to make himself beholding to his friends as occasion serves, and not stand
too much upon terms of being troublesome to them. And he must also leave his
friends to themselves, in point of their right, and not press them to those
things, whereto yet it may seem convenient to bind himself: for you hear
Abraham saying, Let Aner, Eshcol, and Mamre take their part of the booty,
though himself bound himself by oath to take no part of it. O that we could
carry our selves so to our friends! and not be still pinching to them, so as
we will part with nothing, unless they will be persuaded to part with as much.
It is a most base and abject disposition, and carries a relish of excessive
self-love, when a man is so greedy of his own gain, that unless others will
bear as great a part as himself in such and such things, he will hold and
keep and let nothing go from himself. But it is a noble and magnanimous
part, and a sign of true charity, when a man will rather put himself to
loss, and yet give others leave to have an eye unto their profit.

Abraham's carriage to Abimelech.

1. Makes a covenant wirh him.


Now see, how Abraham carries himself to Abimelech as you find it recorded,
Genesis 21.22. and 33. Abimelech with his chief Captain and inward friend came
to Abraham, desiring to make a Covenant of peace and amity with him, perceiving
that he was a man blessed of God and prosperous, and Abraham condiscended to
the motion and makes the oath unto him. So should we willingly embrace offers
of peace and concord, and covenants of love and amity, even if need be, to
bind our selves therein with a solemn oath, for the Lord of Heaven is so
great a lover of unity betwixt men, that he is well content, his holy and
great name should be used as a bond or obligation to tie them faster and surer
together. When therefore a lawful oath is required of us, for the assuring of
others that we will deal faithfully in any part of our duty, we shall not do
well to refuse such an oath, but must inform our selves by the practice of so
good a man as Abraham of the lawfullnesse and usefullnesse of such an oath;
only that we be careful to deal uprightly and sincerely, both in taking and
in keeping our oaths. Yea when an oath is ministered to bind as to forbear
all wrongful carriage and do good in our places, we should be glad to have
our consciences firmly tied in such cases.

2. Deals plainly with him.
Further note, that Abraham deals plainly with Abimelech, and reprooveth him
concerning a well of water which the servants of Abimelech had violently taken
away from Abraham. So must we deal freely and plainly with our neighbors
and friends, in expostulating such and such wrongs as may fall out to be done
unto us by them and theirs, and must not lay the matter up in our minds, so to
keep our selves estranged from them. For it may so come to pass, that we may
find that it was without their privitie and against their will, that such bad
measure has been offered unto us, as it fell out in the matter whereof
Abraham does complain to Abimelech. But we must be sure Beloved, in all
occasions of such complaints, to temper our anger, and keep our selves in so
good tune, that we break not forth into words of choler and discontent,
tending to provoke and exasperate them with whom we deal in such cases, but do
it with gentleness and mildness of speech, that quiet words may pacify wrath
if any be stirred, not grievous words stir up that which was ready to go
forth of it self. Yea when a just and reasonable apology or excuse is used by
any upon our complaints, we must be ready to accept of it, and to be satisfied,
that we may not prove our selves to be of an implacable disposition.

Yea we see, that Abraham deals also bountifully with Abimelech, 3. He dealt
bountifully with him.
for it is said, v. 27. he gave him Sheep and Oxen when they made a covenant,
so men that have wealth must be free handed and free hearted, and ready to
bestow convenient gifts and presents upon those whose favor they would keep,
and to whom they would have it manifest that they resolve to be fast and sure
friends. Nothing less be seems a wealthy man then niggardlinsse and
close-fistednesse, whereby he is so held in captivity, that he cannot willingly
let any thing go from him, but what he cannot keep though he would. Indeed
bounty is chiefly to be exercised to the poor and needy, but yet so that in
due time we must learn to practice it, by a free giving to our equals also,
and those that stand not in absolute need, for gifts are fit means to
express the lovers good will, as well as to supply the wants of the receivers.

Lastly, Abraham sets apart 7. Ewe Lambs, Abraham's good carriage to strangers.
and when Abimelech demanded the reason, he tells him that he should receive
those Lambs at his hand in testimony of his acknowledgement, that Abraham had
dug that well, and that the right thereof appertained to him. So we should
in wisdom learn to make all matters clear betwixt our selves and others, in
cases that have been in controversy, that so we may cut of all occasions of
heart-burning or contention for the time to come, and that though we put our
selves to a little cost, for the setting of things in stable peace betwixt them
and us.

The last part of Abraham's good carriage is to strangers, which he conceived at
first to be men, though indeed they proved to be Angels: for so you have his
hospitality recorded by the Holy Ghost, Genesis 18. 1. ad 17. When he saw certain
men which he took to be travelers, he ran to them, and with importunity
brought them on their way. A courteous, free and honorable intertaining of
strangers, is a virtue commended to our imitation, by the example of Abraham:
for so says the Author to the Hebrews. Heb. 13.2.
Be not forgetful to intertaine strangers, for by that means some have
received Angels unawares, and we are bidden to be given to hospitality. Let us
therefore be far from niggardliness in this case, and yet far from
profuseness too. And if to strangers, much more to our friends and
acquaintance, must we show our selves humane and liberal in this kind, and
most of all to our poor and needy neighbors, that cannot reward us, for our
Savior prefers mercy before courtesy, and tells us, that such cost shall be
reckoned for. So have we done with Abraham's virtues, which if we can take out
in our practice happy shall we be, for to this end are good men's good deeds
registered in the Book of God, that we which read them, by following them in
the ways of goodness, might be sure to over-take them in the end of our
journey, and to dwell in the place of happiness, whether they have safely gone
before us.

Abraham's faults before his calling. James. 3.2.
Now I proceed to tell of his sins and offenses, for such is the state of
mortal men in this life, that it shall be found true of every man, which S.
James tells us, in many things we offend all. Doubtless he arrogateth greater
perfection to himself, then ever the word of God has attributed to any mere
man since Adam, that conceives himself to be quite free from all evil
corruptions, and from the breaking out of corruptions.

His first fault idolatry.
The first fault of Abraham was that in which he lived before his calling by God
out of Vr of the Chaldees, for it is manifest in the 24. of Josh. v. 2. that
the Fathers in old time, even Terah the Father of Abraham and of Nahor, and
consequently the sons themselves, being so brought up of their Fathers,
served other gods. Here then is a sin in Abraham, that he took up the
religion of his Fathers without making any diligent inquiry into the matter,
whether the religion and gods were true or not. And this is a fault common to
all mankind, they take their religion on trust, serving those gods which they
find in the places where they dwell to be worshipped and served, and labor not
to find out and serve the true God alone, who is only worthy to be served, yea
if it fall out that the true God be served amongst them, they cleave not to him
out of judgment and well grounded knowledge, that he is the only true God,
but alone out of common custom, because all men do so, and this their religon
becomes but a vain religion, and is of no force to their salvation. Indeed
it was not so strange a thing that Abraham should be thus carried away after
false gods, according as he was led by the common example, seeing at that time
they had not the word of God written by Prophets and Apostles, to direct and
guide them in this matter. But for us whom God has so far favored as to
give us the clear light of his holy word, it is a most grievous sin to be
led wholly by custom and example, and not to build and ground our selves upon
that light which God has ministered unto us. And the true cause, why men do
follow such false guides in matter of Gods worship, is the blindness of their
minds, and carnallnesse of their hearts, and the secret atheism which is in
them, by which they are not thoroughly and certainly persuaded, that there is
a God at all, and therefore care not to find out and serve the living God, as
if it made no great matter, so they served one which they served.

Let us therefore beware of false gods and false religions, and let us beware
of walking after a false rule even in following the true God, that is, of
serving him, not because we have any true and certain knowledge of him in our
own minds, but only because we have been so taught of our Fathers, and see
the whole world where we live to take the same course, for he that is thus
blindly led, worships God but by chance as it were, and is as ready for a false
god as for a true, and this was Abraham's fault before his calling.

Now after his calling, he fell into some sins, Abraham's faults after his
calling.

1. Weakness of faith.


though not wilfully nor presumptuously, but of weakness and of infirmity.
The first fault was weakness of faith. Though he was the Father of the
faithful, and is commended in Scripture for the strength of his faith, and
that he wavered not nor staggered at the promise of God through unbeleefe, yet
at the first, his faith was mixed with unbeleefe, and showed it self to have
some feebleness in it. For first, when he went down into Egypt because of the
famine, and saw that the men were wicked and feared not God, he was in doubt,
least the men of the place would kill him for his wives sake. God had promised
him before that time to give the land of Canaan to him and to his seed after
him, and yet he had no seed, therefore as yet he could not be put to death,
unless the promise of God should fail him and come to nothing.
Notwithstanding the promise which should have been frustrated, if himself had
died without issue, he doubted least he might be slain by them, as being
distempered and diverted by fear from considering and taking diligent notice
of the promise. This was a manifest imperfection of faith you see. Wherefore
let us take notice that in the faithfullest of Gods people there will be
defects of faith, as also there was want of it in David, when he said, I shall
one day fall by the hand of Saul, and in Moses, 1 Samuel 27.1. Exodus 6.12.
when he said, How will Pharaoh hear me? seeing the Israelites did not, and
again, Why have thou sent me to deliver the people? seeing Pharaoh oppresses
them the more since I spoke to him.

And therefore, let us not be discouraged though we find weakness in our
faith, though faith I say do show it self feeble and be much troubled, and
sometimes foiled by doubting, especially in great and sore temptations; yet we
must not be heartlesse, nor conclude, that we are utterly destitute of faith,
or that our faith is not true and sincere, and unfeigned. True faith you see in
Abraham may be weak, yea cannot but be weak, so long as we be clothed with
tabernacles of flesh. He that truly believes, may yet be carried away with
doubting sometimes, when occasions of peril and danger encounter his faith;
and therefore also let us be careful to confirm and strengthen our faith more
and more, and to grow in it by renewing our meditations of Gods promises, and
putting our selves often in mind of the power and truth of God the
promise-maker, which are the pillars and foundations of our faith. For if
Abraham, when these doubts began to stir in his mind, had called to mind
Gods promise of giving him seed, and had reasoned with himself thus, has not
the living God possessour of Heaven and Earth undertaken to give me a seed to
inherit this land after me? How then can I be killed by the Philistines? How can
they take away my life whilst this promise is not yet fulfilled? Surely God
both can and also will give me life and preserve me from the hands of these
godless Philistines, for how else should he fulfill his promise to me of giving
me seed after me? If Abraham, I say, had thus stirred up his faith by serious
consideration of Gods power and truth, he had not been foiled so as he was.
Let his weakness and failings be our warning, that we may escape the evils
which he fell into.

Again, as Abraham's faith was weak and yielded a little to doubtings, 2. A
carnal fear of death.
so was he possessed somewhat strongly for the time with a kind of carnal
fear of death, Genesis 12.12. and afterward, Genesis ^0.13. He said, they will slay
me for my wives sake. So you must note another weakness in Gods people,
flowing from the former imperfection of faith. They are apt to be
over-fearefull of dangers, and by name of death, even to be so much terrified
with the apprehension of danger, especially of loosing their lives, that they
cannot must upon God and rest upon him for safety, as they should do. This
fear was found in David, it was found also in Peter, and in diverse others of
Gods people. The ground of it is, as I said, partly the weakness of their
faith, and partly the terriblenesse of death, which is the terriblest of all
terrible things, as being a separation of the soul from the body, and a
stripping a man at once of all those things that are most dear unto him, and
conveighing him out of this world into another; concerning his happiness
herein he is not always so full of assurance as he should be. For when these
fears do suddenly seize upon a man, upon occasion of some sensible object
that threatens him, they pull out of the mind for the time the thought of Gods
promises, and hold the soul alone in the apprehension of the greatness and
inevitableness of the danger which looks him in the face.

Let us therefore learn, not to be heartlesse our selves, because we hare have
been so transported with fear, as was Abraham, nor yet be censorious to
others, whom we shall see thus for a fit even shaken and almost overcome of
fear. It is a fault indeed, and we must blame our selves for it and be
humbled, but it is such a fault, as may stand with truth of grace, and which
does not give just reason to conclude ourselves unsanctified, or not to be Gods
true children.

And let us learn to beware of fear, to resist and oppose it at the beginning
by the opposition of Gods love and protection; yea, let us labor to work in
our minds such a true apprehension of the harmelesnesse of death and other
crosses, that we may learn not to be afraid of them, though we must needs
suffer them. For why should we fear that which cannot hurt, yea that which
shall be an advantage to us, Fear none of those things that you shall suffer,
says the Lord, and David says, I will not fear what man can do unto me,
and again, Psalm. 118.6. Psalm. 23.4.
I will not fear though I walk in the valley of the shadow of death. It is an
excellent thing and very comfortable, when our heart is so settled that fear
may not dismay us. And the way is to get assurance of Gods favor and of
eternal life, and that all things shall work for our good, and speedily to
set this faith on work, when dangers shall offer themselves unto our sight.

But further, Abraham to avoid this danger, 3. He dissembled.
consulted with flesh and blood, and used deceit, and shifting, and falsehood,
for though his words were in some sense true, as he tells Abimelech, because
Sarah was his sister by one side, yet in the meaning which he would have those
to interpret his words to whom he spoke them, they were not true. For his
intent was to make them conceive, that she was so his sister as not his wife.
He resolved to use false speeches, and draw his wife likewise to join with him
in these false speeches, yea they agreed upon it before hand as he tells
Abimelech, Genesis 20.13. Abraham said to her, this is the kindness thou shall
show me at every place whether we shall come, say he is my brother. You see
they agreed before hand to dissemble and to continue dissembling; yet sure
dissembling is a sin and ought not to be done, as Abraham hears even from
Abimelech himself, verse 9. Thou have done deeds unto me that ought not to be
done. So it may befall a good Abraham out of inconsiderateness and
heedlesnesse in not pondering their paths, nor thinking of their ways, or in
a sudden to dissemble and deal falsely for the preventing of danger, as may
be seen also in David, and in Peter, when he denied Christ, and when he
withdrew himself from communion with the Gentiles, for fear of them which
came from James to Antioch. For a thing not considered of, is for present as
useless as if it were not known at all.

Therefore here also we must learn not to be utterly discouraged, if we have
run into such a fault, when we bethink our selves after of such offenses, we
must be humbled, bewail them, confess them, condemn and judge our selves for
them, but we must not be fearful of asking pardon, and of entreating mercy to
forgive them, must not conclude, that there was no truth of grace in us,
because of such palpable failings, yea we must take boldness to go to the
throne of grace, renewing our repentance, and earnestly suing for pardon.

And we must also take heed of censuring others, and bitterly and harshly for
such offenses, though they be gross: even Abimelech did not esteem Abraham a
dishonest and naughty man, because he had found him tripping in this matter;
only take heed least we misuse this Example and the like, to build upon them a
boldness to such sins, that were a great wickedness. They must imbolden us
to repent and crave mercy, after we have through weakness offended, they must
not imbolden us before hand to resolve on a sinful deed. Yea when we behold
their stumblings, it should make us to be earnest in our prayers to God for a
great measure of strength, that we may escape such offenses, and to be more
frequent and firm in renewing our purposes of not finning in the like kind.
Resolve therefore, that nothing shall make you lie or dissemble, and if you do
resolve, you will seek pardon and strive to transgress no more.

4. He drew Sarah to sin, so far as to endanger her chastity.
Also note that Abraham draws Sarah here to sin in such a kind, as did even
hazard and endanger her chastity once or twice. O let good men take heed of
drawing one another to sin, for our sin will so endanger another, that we know
not when we shall be rid of the evil fruits of our fears and dissemblings.
When a man is in peril he does not likely look about him, to see those
mischiefs that will follow the bad courses he takes, to free himself from the
present evil. Sure if he would foresee them, he would rather suffer the
danger of fear, then expose himself to the bad consequents of his escape.
Would not Abraham rather have hazarded himself by saying she is my wife, then
of making her commit adultery, by saying she is my sister, if he had well
considered of it before hand.

But yet note we, that Abraham fell into this sin once, and again, and if
occasion had served, was ready to fall into it often, as we have alleged his
agreement with Sarah before. He did it first in Pharaohs Country, then in
Abimelechs Country, and entreated Sarah to do so where ever he came; so for
want of due considering, a good man may run into the same gross sin again
and again, yea and be ready to run into it very often, if he were put to it,
as we see also in Isaac in the same kind.

A double ignorance.
There is a double sin of ignorance. One concerning the fact in general, when
one knows not that such a thing is unlawful, the other concerning this
particular fact, when I do not take notice and observe that this act of mine
is such a sin. Often it falls out, that Gods children through the strength of
some passion or corruption, as here out of fear, do not consider of their
particular actions and so run often into foul offenses out of this particular
ignorance, as I may call it, they know the proposition, deceit is a sin, but
the assumption, this is an act of deceit, is not added for want of considering,
and therefore the conscience does not press, this is a deceitful act, you
must not do it. Now when we find our selves upon better consideration, to
have been carried thus to do evil, we must not be dismayed but renew our
repentance, and rest on Gods mercy in Christ for pardon, and so for the future,
resolve to forbear the sin. Also we must learn, often to consider of our
own ways least any such faults be found in us. Man's heart is full of
blindness and selfe-deceit, and unless he shake himself as it were, and
examine his ways often in his own heart, he may live in some great offense
and not find it, and though these kinds of sins will not hazard his
salvation, yet they may bring diverse crosses and miseries, and much reproach,
and give much offense, and procure sore temptations, and much disquietment of
conscience to him afterward: Let us not animate our selves to sin by the
falls of the Saints, but rather work in our selves an holy fear of our selves
and care of avoiding such sins.

Now I come to Abraham's last sin, which was his taking of Hagar, 5. Abraham
had two wives
a fault in it self, for God made one Man and one Woeman, to show, that he
would have marriage an individual society of life betwixt one Man and one
Woeman. But that point was not known it seems in those times, and therefore
both Sarah persuaded her husband, and he condescended to take Hagar. A good man
may live in a few sins of ignorance, and never particularly repent of them.
Take we heed therefore of condemning those, who conceiving such and such things
not to be sinful, take boldness to live in them. If want of will to see the
light, make a man to resist the light, offering it self to his conscience,
because that he will not know, fearful is such a man's estate, and I cannot
see that this may stand with sanctification. But if want of light or strength
of impediments hinder from knowing, we should not condemn a man that in other
things is upright for such faults, only we must labor with God to reveal to
us our secret faults, that so much as maybe, we may free our selves from those
sins of ignorance, and take heed of taking things on trust upon the opinion
and example even of most worthy men.

We go forward in considering Abraham's example, 3. Abraham's benefits.
and must observe the benefits which God bestowed upon him. These are of two
sorts. First, Temporal, then Spiritual. 1. Temporal.
The Temporal blessings are of two sorts. First, Those that were given to
himself. Secondly, Those that were granted to others for his sake.

First for himself, 1. For himself.
besides the common benefits of health and strength, and wit, and limbs and
the like, which most men receive at the hands of God. He gave him first a good
Wife, Sarah, 1. A good wife
who was obedient unto him as the Scripture notes, and did show all respect
and reverence to him, calling him Sir, or my Lord, 1 Pet. 3 6.
and though she was a woeman and had her fraileties, yet she was a good and
dutiful wife unto him, and in the maine a comfort unto him. Abraham had his
Sarah with whom he lived very comfortably in the state of matrimony, and there
never fell out that we read of, but one alone discontent and brawle betwixt
them, which yet by the wisdom and moderation of Abraham, was quickly made up
and healed.

Now this benefit must be marked as a singular and excellent blessing, A good
wife a great blessing
to have a loving, chaste, dutiful and respective wife, is a great blessing.
All those to whom God has vouchsafed the same mercy, must see and acknowledge
it with all thankfulness. And if we consider that a bad wife is like
continual droppings, and as rottenness in ones bones, and like oil in his
right hand, which will quickly discover it self, we shall learn the better to
prize and esteem this favor. He that obtains a wife says Solomon, Prove.
18.^2.
obtains mercy of the Lord. Prove. 9.14.
For house and goods be the inheritance of the Fathers, but a good wife is of
the Lord. Prove. 31.10, 11
And Solomon says, Who shall find a virtuous woeman? her price is above the
pearls. The heart of her husband shall trust in her, she will do him good
and not evil all the days of his life. This great benefit the Lord gave unto
his servant Abraham. All therefore that have obtained the like mercy in some
measure, must observe and value aright so principal a blessing. Though a man
have an yoake-fellows in some things imperfect and weak, yet if she be
generally good, will join with him in piety as Sarah did with Abraham, and
bear him company in all good things, and will leave house and all to journey
with him, if God call them forth to any service, it is a special goodness,
and a chief instrument of his comfort and welfare. Sarah honored Abraham,
Sarah obeyed Abraham, she was ready to provide a feast for the Angels at his
appointment, she was a good huswife and helpefull unto him in the overseeing
of his great family, she was every way contentfull and pleasing unto him, and
a little too obsequious, in being content for his sake, to say she was his
sister. Wherefore let this first benefit be noted, and let those that have it
confess it with praise and thanks to God, and let those that have it not as
yet, learn to seek it at Gods hands, knowing his readiness to exercise his
goodness upon all men in all ages, if they fear and obey him, as well as upon
Abraham in his time.

2 He had children.
Secondly, God gave Abraham children also. First he had Ishmael by Hagar, then
in due time he had Isaac by Sarah, the son of the promise, the son of his
old age, besides a godly and dutiful son, that inherited the promises and
the blessings with him, and in whom the covenant of God was established. He
gave him also many other children by Keturah, which had also children in his
life time.

Children are a blessing of God, chiefly if they be good and virtuous, willing
to be ruled by their parents. These are the inheritance of God, when they grow
up as Olive plants round about ones table, and the Psalmist says, Psalm. 127.5.
blessed are they which have their quiver full of them, they shall not be
ashamed when they speak with their enemies in the gate. These comfort him in
their childhood, and are a delight to him when they be young, these are a
staff to his old age. In them his name lives when his person is dead, and
they be as it were branches springing from himself as a root, and making his
house to flourish and be green. So God blessed Abraham in the fruit of his
body.

Let all those therefore whom God has blessed with this blessing, see Gods
good hand to them, and praise him for it. Indeed to be a parent of many and
towardly children, if it lift up the heart to God, and occasion our hearty
thankfulness unto the Lord, is a special favor. Those that have it must see
Gods good hand in it, and those that have it not, must seek it of God, and
walk before him obediently, that they may be capeable of it.

Next, God gave Abraham good servants, 3 He had good servants, especially one.
for they all hazarded themselves for and with him in the battle fought with
four victorious Kings, and helped him to redeem his brother Lot out of
captivity, and submitted to be circumcised, and to be taught and instructed.
Had they not been loving and courageous, Abraham could not have accomplished
his desire for his kinsmans deliverance. But especially he had one exceeding
faithful servant, religious, diligent, discreet, careful of his business,
and one in whom he might put his trust for the well ordering of his goods, and
for the dispatch of any affairs committed to him. You see his carriage in the
24. of Genesis. He was cautelous and wary in taking of his oath, and would not
swear rashly, He was careful in observing his oath after he had taken it. He
made use of his masters goods, and the power which his master had given him
over his family and goods, to finish well that great work of taking a wife for
Isaac. He commended the matter to God with earnest prayer. He followed it
thoroughly, and brought it to pass effectually. He made a good choice for
Isaac, and made have to return to his master, and bring him back the fruit of
his journey with good success. No doubt it was a great joy of heart to
Abraham, when he saw Eliezer returning with so good speed from Padan-Aram, and
bringing back with him so sweet and choice a Virgin for Isaac, according to
the earnest desire of Abraham.

Let all masters mark Gods dealing with them in their servants, and if he
please to store them with many good servants, or with one or two alone, of
excellent parts and graces, let them even praise God for it, considering how
great a vexation it is, to be crossed with servants of a contrary disposition,
which will be unto him even as smoke in his eyes, and as vinegar to his teeth.
And let all that desire such a blessing, take the same course that Abraham did,
that is, labor themselves to be good masters, and to command and teach their
servants to fear God as Abraham did, and to show themselves loving, kind and
liberal to them.

But further, Abraham had a good kinsman Lot, 4. Abraham had good kinsmen. 1.
Lot.
that consented to bear him company in a holy pilgrimage, and was easily won
by his wise dealing, to keep peace and amity with him, though some little
breach began, yet it was soon made up betwixt them, and Lot and he lived in
good peace and concord together. No doubt this also gladded Abraham's heart, and
proved a special consolation unto him. If God have given any man such a
religious and godly Cousin or Kinsman, let him make much of him, and be a kind
Kinsman as Abraham was. Yea the Brother of Abraham, 2. Nahor.
Nahor though he continued in the land of Aram, and went not out with Abraham,
yet was in his kind a good Kinsman too, for he rejoiced to hear of Abraham's
welfare, and entertained his servant courteously, and most readily sent his
daughter to him, so long a journey into a far country, to be a yoake-fellow
to Isaac his son, to the no small comfort of Abraham and Isaac both. Herein
he showed mercy and truth to Abraham, as the servant spoke, and did the office
of a good and loving Brother. If God afford such blessings to any, that he has
a loving wife and courteous Brother, ready to gratify and comfort him, he must
observe it with thanks, and those that would have the good hand of God to
stir up their Brethren to show them due respect, must even walk upright and
before God, that he may reward them as he rewarded Abraham.

5. Abraham had faithful friends.
But another blessing Abraham had too, he met with very faithful friends who
were confederate with him, and did most carefully observe the conditions of
friendship and amity, for you see they did readily join with him, and helped
him in his war against the forenamed conquering kings, and were instruments
by their valor to redeem Lot, and to vanquish those conquerours. This is a
most desirable benefit, to have true and trusty friends and allies, that will
stick to him in his need, and hazard themselves for him, and join with him in
his good cause, and not prove like unto a leg out of joint, or a broken tooth
when occasion serves to employ them and use their labor, or hazard for his
benefit. Do you not think that Abraham rejoiced in the fidelity and amity of
his associates. Do you not think that he blessed God for it, and did account
himself very happy in enjoying three such noble and worthy confederates. Let
us encourage our selves to obey God, and to forsake our country and kindred at
his command, for cannot he repay and repair that loss easily? by raising us
up even in a strange country, those that shall as heartily love us, and as
faithfully cleave to us, as any kinsmen in the world. Fear not to forsake
friends for Gods sake, for he can easily cause you to find as good in a
strange country, if need so require, as any you may leave behind you in your
own country. And if any have in his own country or abroad met with such
friends, he must attribute it to the wise and good providence of God over him,
and with solid and sincere praises acknowledge it, carrying himself friendly
also to them, and showing himself as willing to grant a benefit to them in fit
season, as ever he was to receive a benefit from them, Prove. 18.24.
for he that has friends, says Solomon, must behave himself friendly. Let
us yet consider another mercy.

5. Abraham had a good name.
Abraham had good esteem and reputation, an honest and honorable name amongst
the men of Heth where he lived, so that they all loved and respected him, as
appears. Melchisedech loved him and came out to meet him and blessed him, and
gave him bread and wine for himself and for his troops, Abimelech used him
courteously, and though Abraham and Sarah both had somewhat too grossly
overshot themselves, in dissembling that Sarah was his wife, and that way
endangered him to a great sin, and brought some heavy hand of God upon him
and his house; yet he showed himself affable and bountiful, restoring him his
wife, and not so alone, but giving him gifts, and commanding his people to
forbear all injurious carriage to him and his wife, and granting him leave to
dwell where he would in his country, and after repairing to him, desiring his
friendship, he acknowledged that God had blessed him and was with him, and
requested that a Covenant might be made betwixt them two, and that in the
solemnest manner. Was not this a sign of great respect and love in him to
Abraham? and was it not a singular comfort and credit to Abraham, and a sign
of Gods great favor to him, to incline the heart of such a person to him? Yea
in what repute and credit he lived, appears in that the Hittites honored
him, called him a Prince of God, and were ready to give him leave to make use
of any of their choicest Sepulchers to bury his wife in, and Ephron the
Hittite a man of good esteem amongst them, at first word did frankely offer to
give him his field, which he desired, and at first condiscended to sell it him
for a reasonable price. So God gave Abraham good will and credit where he came
and amongst all even high and low.

Let this also encourage all men to serve and obey God. He can give them a good
name and good favor every where, virtue, piety, and goodness shall win good
esteem and kindness from men that be not utterly slaves to sin, so far as
it is good for Gods people to enjoy. They must indeed, (if God see fit to try
them by that cross) endure disgrace and hatred, and causeless malice and
reproach, but so far as Gods Wisdom judges it beneficial for them, he both
can and will incline the hearts of all to respect and regard them, to love and
honor them. He will make them to be honored and favored of all with whom
they live. Fear not therefore to serve God, but cleave to him and obey him,
you see his bounty how he can and will requite his faithful servants.

And those that find the good hand of God going with them in this kind, that
they be respectfully and kindly entertained, that they have a good name and
loving kindness with all men, except perhaps some vile and base persons, that
they be cordially and heartily loved, that men speak well of them, wish and
do well to them, and are glad and ready to gratify them, they must
acknowledge Gods goodness in this mercy and rejoice in his love, that does
turn the hearts of men unto them, and praise, honor and love him the more,
for the praise, honor and love they receive in the world. We must prepare our
selves to meet with ill usage, ill will, ill language, but when we meet with
good, then we must confess, that the Lord our God is the ruler of all hearts,
and bless his name that causes us to find favor with men, as David did with
Saul at first, with all Israel and with Achish one of the Philistine Lords,
King of Gath, that gave him honorable entertainment in his Court.

Now another temporal blessing we observe to be granted to this good man, and
it is three or four times noted in Scripture, Genesis 13.2. Abraham was very rich
in silver, cattle, and gold. So Genesis 24.35. The Lord has blessed my Master
greatly, and he is become great, and he has given him flocks and herds, and
silver and gold, and men servants and maid servants and Camells and Asses, and
25.6. Abraham gave gifts to the sons of his Concubines. He could not have
enriched them, if he had not been rich himself; So God fulfilled his promise
to Abraham, and he was a very rich man as well as very good. Riches are in Gods
hand, he has them in abundance; He is able and ready to grant them to his
servants: Indeed they be but doubtful blessings, if a man have not power to
use them well, they will be more hurtful to him then profitable. But so far
as the perfect wisdom of God sees that they will be beneficial to them,
wisdom shall bring them also in her hand and fill the houses of her admirers
with them also.

Let Gods people learn therefore to trust upon him for their outward estate;
for though he make not all his children rich, for it is not good for all, yet
he will not see the meanest of them to starve, for then he should not answer
that bountiful and merciful title of a Father, by which he loves that his
servants should call him and call upon him. Encourage your selves therefore in
all holiness, righteousness and virtues, for sure the Lord that filled the
house of Abraham and made him so wealthy and great a man, will not neglect to
give you food convenient for you, and to supply you with necessaries.

And let those that have houses, goods, and wealth in abundance, learn to use
them well, to see it is Gods gift, and to use them as stewards, to praise God
for them, to make them a means of knitting their hearts more sure and fast to
him in love and obedience; and to employ them bountifully, liberally, and
mercifully as Abraham no doubt did, that they may lay up treasure for
themselves in Heaven, and that by well-doing they make them friends of the
riches of iniquity. Wealth honestly gotten, mercifully and bountifully used and
moderately enjoyed, is a great mercy of God. If God make you rich, do you show
your selves to be good as well as rich, or else riches do not make a man the
better that has them, neither can they make his life much more comfortable;
yea it does appear often that riches are laid up for the owners thereof for
hurt. Eccles. 5.13.


And these be the benefits temporal which Abraham had for himself, a good
wife, good children in their kind, and one religious, good servants, good
friends, good name, good favor and great wealth, to which add one particular
benefit, a great and famous victory over four great and conquering Kings, A
great and famous victory.
as the Holy Ghost tells us, Genesis 14.15. he pursued them, he divided himself
against them he and his servants by night, and smote them and pursued them to
Hobah, and brought back all the goods, and Lot his brother and his goods and
the women and his people. An absolute victory was obtained by Abraham's wisdom
and valor, God gave him the wisdom, God gave him the valor, God gave him the
success. The Prophet Esaias sets forth Gods goodness to Abraham in general, as
a sure argument, that God will show the like mercies to his people in after
times, bidding them look unto Abraham and Sarah, and saying, Isa. 51.2. I
called him, I blessed him and increased him, and 41.2, 3. He sets forth this
very benefit in magnificall phrases, saying, who raised up the righteous man
from the East? Isa. 41.2, 3.
called him to his foot? gave the nations before him and made him rule over
Kings? gave them as dust to his sword? as driven stubble to his bow; he
pursued them and passed safely by the way that he had not gone with his feet.
God would have his people take notice of this mercy in saving Abraham, and
making him victorious, to assure them of his like love in defending them, and
giving them victory over all their enemies, even the whole Church, and each
particular member thereof. He that sheltered Abraham, was with him, gave Kings
before him, shall not he declare his love as much in future ages to his people?
Surely he is the same for ever. Let this comfort us against all those that rise
up against us.

But what did God for others for Abraham's sake? First, 2. God did do good to
others for Abraham's sake.

1. Blessed Lot and delivered him.


he blessed Lot the more for Abraham's sake, and as it is noted, Lot that went
with Abraham had herds, and after when God destroyed Sodom he thought of
Abraham and delivered Lot also. So God for a good man's sake will bless and
help even his friends and well-willers, and those that belong to him shall be
much the better for him, according to the promise that he had made, saying, I
will bless them that bless thee.

And for Abraham's children, 2. Blessed Isaac giving him goods and goodness.
he blessed Isaac and gave him great outward things, yea gave him also grace
and made him heir of the Covenant, and continued the Church in his house,
giving him a son in the life time of Abraham. For Abraham had Isaac at a
hundred, and lived 175 years, and Isaac married at forty, and had Esau and
Jacob at sixty, so Abraham lived to see those two sons about five years old,
He gave also abundance of outward things to Ishmael.
and gave outward things to Ishmael and abundance to him, that Princes came of
him in likelihood during Abraham's life time, and he sent away his sons by
Keturah with great riches, and you know that even after Abraham's death, God
honored him still, by calling him his friend in many places, Showed favor to
him after his death.
and for his sake did great things for his sons after him in many generations.

Thus you see, how worth the while it is to serve, fear, and obey God, what
abundant blessings he grants, what honor and same even after death; though all
Gods people have not all these outward things in like manner bestowed upon
them, yet they have that which is sufficient for them, and those that find
their friends and children happy in outward respects, must observe Gods hand to
be thankful.

Yea we must all take notice of Gods like dealing with many of his people,
whose posterity flourish when they be dead, some in goodness as well as goods,
and some at least in earthly respects, and leave a good name behind them, so
that many years after their decease, their names are honorably mentioned, and
all men count them good and faithful servants of God. The name of the
righteous is had in everlasting remembrance, Psalm. 112.6.
whilst they live, and when they die God shows himself gracious and
bountiful to them, even in temporal blessings oftentimes as well as
spiritual. But if any want these outward benefits, they must consider of
themselves whether their sins do not deprive them thereof. For sometimes
such mercies are denied to Gods people to chastize, and keep down, and root
up some vices in them. David was crossed in his children, to correct his
fondness, and to chastize his adultery and murder: Salomons posterity was
brought low, to chastize his Idolatry; If in outward things the Lord seem
careless of his people, they might easily find by searching, that some evil
carriage of theirs has caused him to chastize them in this life, that by being
brought to repentance, they might not be destroyed and perish in another world,
and so much for these temporal benefits.

Abraham's spiritual blessings.

1. He was called from a false religion to the true.


Now for spiritual blessings, the first was, that God called him out of his
Country and Fathers house, from the Idols of his Fathers house, for they
served false gods there, Josh. 24.2. and acquainted him with himself the only
true God. No greater blessing can befall a man here, then to be called from a
false religion to the true religion, so that his heart be inclined also to the
practice of the true religion, and that he be effectually sanctified as was
Abraham. We must look that we have this mercy of effectual calling; Indeed
from Idols and such kind of false gods, we are called, or rather we have
been kept from following them at all, but ah, are we called to walk before
God in holiness and righteousness? not alone turning from darkness to
light, from a false religion to the true, but from the power of Satan unto God,
that is, from serving the Devil in a wicked life to serve God in an holy life.
If we be not so called, we are not sons of Abraham, and outward blessings
will do us little good. If we be, then we have cause to rejoice before the
Lord our God with exceeding great joy, for he that is so called, happy is he.
This is a mercy of mercies, to be a Saint by calling, one whom God has so
wrought upon by his Spirit, that his outward call has won him from the state
of corruption to the state of grace.

And if any find not himself so called, or find it doubtful to himself,
whether he have been so called yea or not, let him earnestly seek to God for
it, and if we would know whether we be called yea or not, compare our selves
with Abraham's Call, Genesis 12.1. God had said, meaning, before his Fathers death,
before he dwelt in Charran says Steven, for though because Terah was the
Father, the departure is ascribed to him, yet God gave the call first to
Abraham and he acquainted his Father with it, and so his Father went out and he
with his Father, as a son in the family and household of his Father, and
bids him leave kindred and Fathers house, and go into a Country which God
should show him, promising him large offspring, great blessings, and that the
promised and blessed seed should come of him: for S. Paul says, Gal. 3.8.
that God preached the Gospel before to Abraham, when he said, in thee shall
all Nations be blessed, so that he was more largely instructed by God of
remission of sins and salvation everlasting by one that was to be borne of
him. Now God caused him also to believe these promises, so that he left his
Fathers worship and obeyed God. If any of us have had the Word of God preached
in our ears, and by name the promises of the Gospel, and has found his heart
so affected with those promises, and the true belief of them, that it has
made him follow God in a holy conversation of life, and leave his former
sins, travel toward the land of life, that land which God had showed him in
the paths of righteousness and true holiness, this is effectual calling,
happy and blessed is this man. Rejoice in this calling, and bless God for it
more then for all earthly things whatsoever. And if any of you be not as yet so
called, let him see his misery, and now call upon God so to call him, till he
find his prayers granted: for if we turn to God he will turn to us, and if
we seek to him for the performance of his gracious Covenant in putting his
Spirit of Sanctification in our hearts, he will not fail to do it.

But a second spiritual blessing was 1. 2. Spiritual blessings.
He gave him most gracious promises. 2. He appeared to him many times to renew
those promises. 3. He entered into a Covenant with him and his seed after him.
4. He graciously accepted his prayers and after this life he saved his soul.

First, he made him gracious promises, Genesis 12.2. I will bless thee, 1. God
made him gracious promises.
and make thee a great Nation, and thou shall be a blessing, and I will bless
them that bless thee, and will curse them that curse thee. Again, he appears
to him to renew this blessing, and these promises. Genesis 13.4. promising him a
large offspring again, and the possession of the land of Canaan, understood
by Abraham to be a figure of an heavenly inheritance, for he sought a City to
come, says the Author to the Hebrews.

Again, Chap. 15.1. 2. Appeared to him many times to renew those promises.
and in the whole Chapter he confirms the promise again by another vision,
I am thy shield and thine exceeding great reward; so to comfort him against the
doubts which he might have, that the vanquished Kings might prepare an army
and return upon him, and there also again he renues the promise of giving him
a son, yea giving him a multitude of children after him, and by a sign
confirms it to him: Look up to Heaven (says he) and count the Stars, etc.
yea gave him faith to believe it, and assures him that he was justified, and
that he accepted that faith of him for righteousness, accounting him by
means of that faith for the sake of him in whom he believed, as perfectly
just, as if he had perfectly fulfilled the Law.

And yet more fully assuring him of his goodness by entering into a covenant
with him in a vision, 3. He entered into a covenant with him and his seed after
him.
and by sacrifice. And in Chap. 17. he renewes the same covenant with him
again, and confirms it by the seal of circumcision, and by changing his
name, assuring him also, that he should have the son of the promise, by his
most beloved wife Sarah, and telling him also what name he should be called
by, Isaac, from his laughing at the promise, not by way of distrust and
unbeleefe, but of faithful joy and gladness in it. And in Chap. 18. he
appears unto him again in form of a man, and tells him the particular time
of the child's birth, and acquaints him with his purpose concerning the
overthrow of Sodom. And last of all, after he had offered Isaac he appears
unto him again, and by an oath confirms to him the former blessings, Genesis
22.16. which he had never done before. This is a singular mercy to Abraham, to
give him so many promises, to renew them so often to him, and confirm them so
strongly to him. And you must look whether God vouchsafe to show himself thus
to you, even to bring home to your souls in the reading and hearing of his
word, and exercises of religion, the gracious promises of his word, giving you
by his Spirit assurance that he admittteth you into the covenant, is your God,
pardons you, blesses you, and will give you all needful things for soul and
body, and make you partakers of eternal felicity. All Gods servants that are
the seed of Abraham, have this holy communion with God in his word, in prayer,
in his ordinances, which Abraham had in these dreams and visions: for to the
Fathers God showed himself by those means, to us by these, and Christ says,
that his Father and he will come and show themselves unto those that love him
and keep his commandments, and suppe with them. O if you find this spiritual
familiarity with God, how happy are you. If not, truly earthly blessings are of
no great value, they be common to good and bad. And now seek you, seek you
these spiritual blessings, Gods assuring you of pardon of sin, and appearing
unto you more and more to confirm your faith in the promises of the Gospel,
and to make you assured of your eternal happiness, and that he is your God,
until at length he do even as it were swear it unto you, and make you
certain of it?

And Brethren, be you encouraged to answer Gods call, to repent, to live
holily, to cast of your sins and become obedient as was Abraham, for though
perhaps you may not be so rich as he, nor have so many childeren, nor have so
great outward favors, yet will God be your God, he will be your shield, he
will be your reward, he will bless you in all things, he will give you the
inheritance of life eternal, as sure as he did to Abraham; he will hear and
accept your prayers, and he will bring you safe to the land of rest, to Heaven
that true rest, where you shall have no more unquietness inward nor outward.
Into Abraham's bosom will he receive all those, that be the true sons of
Abraham.

Learn to esteem of these spiritual blessings, though perhaps they may be
separated from the temporal, God therefore alone divides them because he sees
you be not fit for both, but would be hindered from enjoying the one and
growing in the one, by the overfull enjoyment of the other. But the better I
say you shall surely have as well as Abraham, God will more and more assure you
of his favor, and of his kingdom, and show himself more and more graciously
unto you, in confirming to you his comfortable promises more and more. This is
better then all the riches of the whole world; If Abraham had enjoyed this
whole world and not this sweet intercourse with God, his life would not have
been half so comfortable and happy, but if his estate had bin never so poor
and mean in outward things, yet would this sweet fellowship with his Maker
have made him happy and blessed enough. Spirittuall good things are the chief
and principal, blessed is the man whom God pleases to take for his own, to
call to himself, to strengthen in faith, to make more and more certain of his
salvation. This is the blessing of Abraham that comes unto the Gentiles by
faith in Jesus Christ. This poor and afflicted Saints enjoy as well as rich;
This seek, this labor for, by endeavoring to walk with God, and by being
upright.

If any say, But alas I want this, I find not God showing himself to me in his
ordinances, I find him not settling my heart.

I Answer, If he have called thee out of sin to a good life, and that thou
indeavourest to follow him, he will in due time show himself unto thee, fear
it not, and the longer he seems to defer the revealing of himself, the more
abundant and exceeding great shall the comfort be at last. God will not fail
to bless his people with spiritual blessings, and comfort them with
spiritual comforts, if they walk before him in sincerity.

I proceed to tell you of good Abraham's crosses, Abraham's crosses.
which if you compare them with Isaacs, were much greater then his, if with
Jacobs they seem in some respects much less. But if you consider them simply,
they were some of them exceeding heavy to bear. We will rank them into a
certain order.

First, God put him to suffer an heavy cross at his first call, 1. He changed
his country and left his fathers house.
as many times also he does many of his servants. His kindred and his Fathers
house were all Idolaters, and God saw that he should have had much ado to have
maintained himself and the truth of his religion, if he should have continued
amongst them. Wherefore he caused him to leave that place, and those persons,
and to go into another land which he should show him, according as in the
Psalm, the Prophet speaks to Pharaohs daughter, Psalm. 45.10.
forsake thy kindred and thy fathers house, and this affliction often assaileth
the Saints of God, at their looking toward true piety, when they begin to
forsake sinful courses and to look toward Heaven; though they change not
their country for a new habitation, nor leave their fathers house to go into
a region far distant, yet their fathers house falls out with them, they
cease to be friends to them, and they feel that which sometimes our Lord has
foretold, Mat. 10.36.
a man's enemies shall be those of his own house, yea father hates the son,
and the son the Father. For a man's inward and nearest friends are more weary
of him then, then any other, because having occasion of conversing with him,
they more see his piety, else as Owls are more offended with the light, and
because wanting that commerce in evil and vanity which once they had, they are
more displeased at the change.

We must learn therefore whosoever minds to follow Christ and be his
Disciple, learn to love him above all persons, yea as himself teaches us, to
hate Father and Mother, even to hate them I say; that is, to be willing to part
with them, as if we hated them for Christ's sake. And as here the Lord so
provided for Abraham, that he wanted no friend in any place where ever he came,
a foreign country afforded him as much welfare as his native soil could have
done, so whosoever shall loose any such thing for Christ's sake, shall be sure
to receive in this life an 100. fold, that is, an hundred times more good and
comfort, then those things or persons could have afforded, yea many times also
a larger measure, and greater number of outward things and outward friends.

This was the first cross of Abraham, leaving his country, see next what he
met with in Canaan another country, in respect of his estate and the persons
that were dearest to him.

2. Was uncertain where he should dwell.
First for his estate, God gave him no possession, no not the breadth of a foot,
but made him travail up and down in tents, without either certain house or
any inheritance. This is a cross too, and a thing little pleasing to flesh and
blood, to be of a fleeting condition, not knowing where he shall dwell next
month or next year, to be without house or home, that he can call his own; by
which God taught Abraham, to use the world as though he used it not, and to set
his heart more upon the things above, because he had so little setlednesse in
the things below. The people of God must be content to be rolled as it were up
and down from place to place, to be in the Earth as in a Sea, in which they
shall be tossed now hither now thither, and have no fixed dwelling almost, and
our Lord Christ after he was a Preacher, was accustomed to such a kind of
Pilgrims life, now in Judea, now in Galilee, now in Caesarea, now in Cana, now
in Decapolis, he had not an house to lay his head in. S. Paul was likewise
accustomed amongst other miseries, to bear this, of having no certain
dwelling place. If God call any of us to such a condition, it must not seem
much to us, to eat the bread of such worthy men, nor to pledge them in the
same cup. He whose soul is not glewed to the world, can well endure this kind
of tumbling, none other will, unless he be a man that loves to wander.

3. Suffered crosses.

1. In Lot his kinsman.


Now for the persons near to him, first, his Kinsman, then those of his family.
One and only one Kinsman he had with him, that we read of, Lot. In him he
suffered two troublesome crosses. First, upon occasion of a trouble that fell
out betwixt the servants of Lot and of Abraham, they were feign to part
habitations. Their riches were so great, that the land affoorded not room for
both their herds and flocks, hence the herdsmen and shepherds on both sides
had occasion of jarring about places of pasture. One would have his cattle
here, another would have his, and so variance grew. Abraham saw that this
variance would proceed farther and farther, and to prevent mischief, gives Lot
his choice where he would dwell, so says the Scripture, they were separated a
man from his brother. This no doubt was tedious to Abraham, that Lot and he
might not be near neighbors at once, for the event after made it appear how
dear Lot was unto him, and therefore after Lots departure, the Lord appeared
unto Abraham to comfort him, as taking notice what a trouble it was unto him.
And this kind of cross does fall out to men, either increase of riches or
want of it, or some thing falls out, that causes they must be separated from
their special friends, or some unkindnesse and jarres grow betwixt them, that
their agreement is not so cordial and hearty as it ought to be.

But the next Cross in Lot was worse, for in the spoil of Sodom, he was
spoiled and taken captive by those that took the Sodomites captive. This
coming to Abraham's ears pierced him indeed, that his loving Cousin who had
been brought up in his house with him, and had borne him company in all his
peregrination from Vr till almost that time, should fall into the hands of so
cruel enemies, should have his cattle and goods seized upon, and himself,
and wife, and children, made slaves and bondmen. This affliction is usual
enough in the world. Much misery and distress befalls them to whom we wish
well, and we suffer in their sufferings whom natural affection does so indeere
us unto, as that we cannot but have a fellow-feeling with them in their
distresses, as the members of the body suffer by consent.

But a second evil that I had almost forgotten pinched Abraham in Lot, for Lot
lost all in Sodom and went and dwelt in the Mount, and there lay with his two
daughters, and begat of each of them a son. This was no doubt noised abroad,
it came to Abraham's ears, and filled his heart with a great deal of grief,
that such a man as he had taken Lot to be and found him to be, after God had
afflicted and chastened him, and also showed him mercy and delivered him,
should run into so monstrous and unnatural sins, as to commit incest, not
with one of his daughters which had been far too much, but even with both of
them, one after the other. This I say pierced Abraham's soul to think of, he
could not but be sensible of all the bitter reproachful taunts that the true
religion of God would suffer for this crime of Lot. The sins and crimes of
those that are dear to us, and the reproach that follows thence, both upon
themselves and sometimes upon the truth of God which they profess, must needs
breed much heaviness unto good men, and sometimes the providence of God so
disposes of things, that the people of God shall be humbled so, as Paul says
God would humble him he feared, when he should find many impenitent sinners in
Corinth, and it had brought anguish to his heart, that the incestuous man had
not alone so shamefully offended, but also been tolerated by the Church, as no
doubt also the hearsay of Rubens incest was a great vexation of heart to
Jacob, when the report of it was brought unto him.

Now see what Abraham suffered in his own house in respect of his wives and
children. 4. His wife Sarah was twice taken away from him.


First, his wife Sarah a good woman and dear to him, was twice taken away from
him, once by the King of Egypt, and after by the King of Gerar, and he could
not but be grieved at it so much the more, because it came to pass by his own
default and sin, and because she was so taken away, as that it was likely
every day, that she should have been married to another man, or at least have
been made a minister to serve his lust. What an anguish was this think you?
How did this gaul his heart? when he abode alone in his Tent, and Sarah was
not in hers, when he lay alone at home and Sarah bare him not company, yea when
she was perhaps in the bosom of another man, to whom he had betrayed her by
his cowardly fears and dissembling, it scarce befalls any of us to meet
with such a cross in his wife.

5. Sarah was barren.
But secondly, Sarah his wife was barren, she had no children, fruitfullnesse
and she were parted, as the Holy Ghost notes. This affliction has befallen
many good women, and it was so much the more bitter to Abraham, because he did
not intend to take any other woman, but that at last Sarah when her self was
now by means of age past all hope, did earnestly persuade him unto it. To be
childlesse is a cross wherewith some are exercised, but to Abraham it was a
worse cross then ordinary, because the want of a child was to him the want of
salvation too, for himself and all Nations were to be blessed in his seed: So
that if he had had no son, he could have had no Heaven, and nothing stood
as a stronger objection against his being saved, then his being childlesse.
Barrenness with this aggravation comes not to any of us, and if God had not
eased this burden to Abraham, by often renewing the promise of a child unto
him, doubtless it would have afflicted him sore.

6. There fell out a great jarre betwixt him and Sarah.
But another cross in Sarah upon occasion of Hagar, there fell out a great
jarre betwixt him and Sarah, and she that ever before had showed her self a
dutiful and respective wife, now brake forth into much tartness and passion
with him, eagerly and wrongfully charging him to maintain Hagar against her,
and to be the cause of her stubborn and contemptuous carriage. This sounded
harshly in Abraham's ears, and this language was tedious, to be so rated by
Sarah, it made him think the case strangely altered. Indeed he by his wisdom
calmed the tempest very soon, it continued not long, but it was a sour thing
for the time; many a man has the same trouble for matter, but more frequent
and more lasting. A wives passions are an husbands sufferings, her anger and
discontent and brawles with maids and men and children sometimes fall upon
him, and she is ready causelessly to quarrel with him, when she is displeased
with them, this cross is so much the more tedious, by how much a man does more
affect and love his wife, and sometimes too it is aggravated by this, that he
has some way been an occasion of it though unwittingly.

But lastly, Abraham buried Sarah, she died before him, 7. Sarah died before
him.
and he was feign to part with her unto the dust. This calamity falls upon
many men to bury their wives, but to many it is not a calamity, they know how
very quickly to make this affliction nothing, by a speedy bringing in of
another: but to Abraham who loved Sarah and had long lived with her, it must
needs be matter of sorrow, and so the Scripture witnesses saying, He rose up
from before his dead, Genesis 23.3.
whether he had gone before to mourn and weep for her. These things he
suffered in his wife Sarah.

Now in his Concubine Hagar, 8. He suffered in Hagars ill carriage to Sarah,
and in her running away being with-child.
first her ill carriage to Sarah was surely a grief to Abraham, when two such
persons fall at odds, he that is a common friend to both suffers in both. The
custom of Poligamie is weeded out of the Christian world, so that men now are
happier then to be vexed with the mutual brawling of two Antagonists, as I may
call them: but now the contentions of near friends do fall out somewhat bitter
sometimes, to them that love both so well that they know not where to take part.

Secondly, When she was now great by him, she ran away from him and Sarah, and
carried the fruit of his body away with her. This no doubt grieved Abraham, he
took her alone for desire of offspring, not to satisfy lustful desires, and
now when she promised seed, and his heart was raised up with expectation of a
son, to have all his hopes dashed by the quarrels that Sarah had with her,
she being gone away, and he knowing not where to have her, nor how to procure
her return, nor what was become of her, nor of his child wherewith she went,
and which was dear unto him, even now before he saw it in the world. This
surely put him to much grief and sorrow. This cross is not very usual, to
have a great bellied wife run from a man, but if such a kind of desertion
shall befall any, either he must be very respectlesse of his wife, or else it
would be a corrasive unto him.

But a worse cross or as bad befell him after, 9. He was made to divorce
Hagar and send her quite away.
for at last the Lord made him to divorce Hagar, and to send her quite away,
never again to live with him. This was as bad and worse then to bury her. If
God do even separate a man's wife from him, either his affection to her is
little, or else his grief for her will be much, but he had Sarah his first
wife, and that served to mitigate the putting away of his superadded woeman.

So you see his domestical afflictions in his wife, now consider what he
suffered in his childeren, 1. In Ishmael whom he had first, he was feign to
banish him, 10. He was forced to thrust Ishmael out of his family.
or excommunicate him whether you will, or both, this was an hard thing to him,
he had but two sons and now he must thrust one out of his family for ought
that he knew, never to see him again. He must adventure him to the wide
world, and send him abroad with his mother, in all probability of reason to
starve or beg he knew not whether. Would it not grieve and trouble any of
you? to send a pretty youth about a douzen or ten years old out of his house,
without any thing but a bag and a bottle, not knowing what he would do, or
whether he must go: yet God tried Abraham thus, he must learn to trust Gods
word without means and above hope. The promise was, that God would make him a
great man, and now God began to perform promise, by seeming to make him a
beggar; If God seem to threaten us with beggerie in our posterity, we must
consider, that such a cross seemed to be rushing upon Abraham, but God found
means to make that son great, to whom he was not suffered to give any
thing, that it might be made evident, that it is easy with God to enrich a man
cast out and destitute of all friends.

11. He was crossed in Isaac many ways.
But Abraham had another son, see the crosses that befell him in Isaac. First
he waited long for him before he had him. To be long deferred from enjoying a
thing promised and hoped for, is a burden somewhat tedious, if a man have not
faith and patience in some good measure and quantity. Thus God tried Abraham,
he lived twenty five years after the promise of a large offspring, before he
embraced the same which the promise pointed to. How could we brook the
deferring of a promise twenty five years?

But when he had him, was the last trial and worst of all; he must take him
and ride with him a long journey of three days to a certain mountain, and
there he must offer him up to God for a burnt offering, here God tried Abraham
to the quick. He must deny natural affection, in killing a son so dear
unto him, and that at this age: If God see fit to have him, why did he not
call for him when he was a young child, before he had filled his heart with
so intense love and earnest expectation; If he will have him now, why cannot
he send some disease to fetch him, but the Father must murder the son: so
nature must give place to Gods commandment. He must also deny his credit in
the world, and expose himself to most harsh, and in show just censure of all
men, yea of his family and of his wife Sarah too, whose grief for her
slaughtered son must needs cause her to lade her husband with grievous
complaints, and in appearance also righteous. Yea he must in some sense
contradict and cross even faith it self, by slaying him in whom the Lord had
said unto him. In Isaac shall thy seed be called. Thus faith must conquer
nature, conquer credit, and conquer it self, which also it did in Abraham:
Heb. 11.19.
For he considered that God was able to raise him up again from the dead,
from whence in a figure he had received him. So it seems good to God, to put
his servanrs hard to it, and to require such things at their hands, as cannot
but be very difficult unto them.

Thus you have heard of Abraham's life, Abraham's death.
now at last he died in peace and in a good old age, after he had lived 175.
years, not so long as his Fathers and forefathers, God still shortening the
age of man usually, that he might put them and us in mind of our latter end,
and make us careful to prepare for it continually. (*)

THE NINTH EXAMPLE.
OF SARAH, HAGAR.
AS Abraham is called the Father of the faithful, so it is also said to Godly
women concerning Sarah, 1 Pet. 3.6.
whose daughters ye are as long as ye do well, etc. So that she is honored
with this title of being the mother of believers, as he was the Father. Having
therefore set before you the example of Abraham, we proceed to consider the
example of Sarah his wife. Let us see 1. Her birth, 2. Her life, 3. Her death.

Concerning her birth, her Father is known, Sarahs birth.
her Mother is not known. She had the same Father with Abraham, not the same
Mother, for so he tells Abimelech saying, Genesis 20.12. She is indeed my
sister, the daughter of my Father, not the daughter of my mother, and she
became my wife. For as yet God had not forbidden to marry with any of the
kindered of ones flesh as after he did, so that as yet he might lawfully take
his sister by the one side to be his wife, the consort of his bed; and she was
borne 10. years after Abraham, for it is noted, that when Isaac was borne,
she was 90. years of age and he a 100. So was she 10. years younger then
himself, and he exceeded her in age 10. years, as it is meet though not
necessary, that the husband be somewhat elder then his wife, Genesis 21.5. Abraham
was a hundred years old when his son Isaac was borne to him. Genesis 17.17.
Shall Sarah that is ninety years old bear? so it is manifest, that there was
the difference of ten years betwixt Abraham and Sarah. And this is all we have
to say of her Birth.

Her life.
Now concerning her life, we will look into her carriage good and bad, and
then to the things that befell her good and bad.

1. Her virtues 1. Her faith.
First then for that which was good in her, in respect of God, man, and her
self. For God, she is commended for her faith, for the Author to the Hebrews
tells us, Heb 11.11.
That by faith she received strength to conceive seed, and was delivered of a
son when she was past age, because she was persuaded that he was faithful
which had promised, where you see the nature of faith, it is an acknowledging
of Gods faithfulness, a giving him the honor of his faith, and setting to
ones seal that God is true. Faith causes the mind of a man to submit it
self to the Word of God, and to be assured that he can and will keep
promise, for to the promise of God it looks principally, and this faith will
cause a man to receive power from God to do those things, which otherwise of
himself he wanted all power to do. This faith will make a weak man strong,
it will put fruitfullnesse into a barren womb, and life and strength into a
dead body, it will make a barren soul fruitful in good works, and make the
heart to conceive the Word so as to bring forth the fruit of good living,
whereto of it self it is as unable, as a body past age is unapt to bring forth
a child. Consider therefore, whether you have gotten such a faith into your
hearts, as makes you fruitful of good works. If we believe Gods promises
faithfully, it will sub-minister strength to produce all sorts of good works,
which otherwise the heart of it self would never produce. For he that
believes Gods promises shall obtain strength from God to obey his holy
Commandment, and according to the strength of it, to abound in good works of
all sorts. Faith is a strong grace and puts a new power into the soul by which
it shall be fit to do good works. We have more largely discoursed of the
nature of faith in the Example of Abraham, who is also commended for faith.

Then Sarah in respect of Abraham her husband had two worthy virtues. 2. She
obeyed her husband.
First, she obeyed Abraham her husband. Secondly, she reverenced him, and
that in her heart and tongue too, for she called him Sir when she thought of
him in heart. Her obedience showed it self in a cheerful forwardness to
prepare things necessary to entertain Angels that came unto her in the
likeness of men, for it is said, Genesis 18.6.
Abraham hasted into the Tent to Sarah, and bad her quickly make ready three
measures of fine flower and make cakes upon the hearth, which she did
accordingly without grumbling or deferring. She did not oppose her husband and
demand, husband, you know not what these men be? nor whence they come? why
should you make such care to prepare for them? but without any more ado, at
her husbands commandment, she gate all things ready according to his desire.
This is a commendable thing in a wife, and is to be followed by all you godly
women, who would be counted daughters of Sarah; if your husbands wish you to
do things honest and lawful, you must address your selves not to make your
objections, but to yield your cheerful obedience according to S. Paul's
commandment, that says, 1 Pet. 3.1.
Wives be subject to your husbands in all things.

If any say, that this was but a small matter.

I answer, true, but it is reported as it were a taste of her good disposition
in this matter, and a sign of her dutiful obedience, the glory whereof the
Holy Ghost gives her more generally, saying, that she obeyed her husband,
meaning, 1 Pet. 3.6.
constantly and generally she submitted her self and was obedient.

Secondly, it is noted of her, that she reverenced her husband, 3. She
reverenced her husband.
which is also commanded to wives by S. Paul, saying, Let the wife see that
she fear her husband. Lo it is earnestly charged upon women, they must look
to it that they yield it: Let the wife, that is, every wife, see, that is,
carefully look to it, and not make shifts or pretend excuses, but see, that
she do it, even fear her husband.

There is a double fear, A double fear
one which makes one tremble and fly from the thing feared as hurtful and
mischievous, so as men do fear a Lion or Bear, to run from him as fast as
they can, that he may not tear us in pieces, such a fear as this is not
required. Another fear is, fear of offending, wronging, or grieving the
person feared, flying and shunning all such things as would displease him and
make him conceive with dislike an irrespectivenesse of him. This is the fear
of the wife, not to dare to displease her husband or anger him, not so much
least he should fly upon her with reproves and blows, as least she should
be an instrument of grief to one, whom she loves and honors by her
undutifullnesse and rudeness. And it must be noted that she did so reverence
him as to call him Lord. And how did she call him Lord? not in speaking to
him, or in speaking of him before others, by whom it might be told him again
what she had said, but when she thought of him or spoke of him with the
inward speech of her heart, which none could relate again, but God who has
related this to her praise. For that title she gave him even in her inward
cogitations, when she said in her self at the hearing of the Angels promise,
that she should have a son, Genesis 18.12.
Shall I have pleasure after I have waxed old, my Lord being old also.

So the reverence of a good wife should be hearty, and cause her when she does
but think, of her husband, even then to give a title of due respect. Wherefore
to give rude and undecent terms to an husband, such as would but become a
Mistress speaking to her bondsman, Ned, Jack, Dick, Tom, Robbin, is even a
little too much familiarity in a wife, favoring of some degree of contempt.

The ground of these two duties, reverence and obedience, is the image of God
in the husband: For he does stand in Gods room over her, because as Christ is
the Head of his Church, so is the husband the wives head, 1 Cor. 11.3, 7
and the woman is the glory of the man, meaning, one that is made to bring some
glory and honor to him.

Now by this fruit of Sarahs obedience which the Holy Ghost has noted, it is
prooved that Sarah was huswifely in her house, even as a woman that could
stir about in her family, and look to the dispatching of necessary affairs
by her servants and them in her family. For had she been a coy and nice or
idle and sloathfull dame, she would neither have dressed meal, nor kneaded
it, nor made cakes of it, nor seen to the baking of them, nor yet have
followed her maidservants, and looked that they should have been diligent in
this business.

^ She was a loving Mother and nursed Isaac her self. Genesis 21.7.
Further in respect of her son Isaac, she was a very loving Mother and nursed
him with her own breasts, and thought it a duty for her so to do, for so it
is noted of her that she said by way of thankful wondering at the benefit,
who would have said to Abraham that Sarah should have given children suck? for
I have borne him a son in his old age, as if she confessed, that giving a
child suck should not be separated from bearing him. And indeed nature does
manifestly call upon women for this duty, for to what purpose has God given
them breasts? as it were bottles, at that time replenished with such a fit and
well pleasing food for the babe, surely not to milk out on the ground, not to
draw it back by medicines and devices, but to give it to the new inhabitant of
the world, with whom it came into the world. So soon as a woman has a child
in her womb ready to bring forth, she has also milk in her breasts fit for
its feeding, and is not this as much, as if the Lord should speak unto her and
say, I would have you take care to bring up this child which thou have brought
forth, with this nourishment, which I have laid up in store for it, for surely
God and nature make nothing in vain. This loving part of Sarah is more
considerable in respect of her age and her greatness of estate and household,
for she was ninety years old, and might in that respect have seemed warranted
to have given her self a dispensation from this service, and to have said,
should a woman of mine age endure the labor of watching and waking and looking
to a child, and enduring all its froward fits and a number of attendance? why
may I not set it to a younger woman stronger and better able to do it then my
self? She was wife to Abraham, a man of great place and state, fellow to a
King, with whom Kings sought to be in covenant, and should such a woman as I?
might she have objected, submit my self to this mean and laborious office,
may not I hire another to do it for me? mine husband, might, she have said;
is a great man and withal hospital. If he bring in men of place and fashion,
must I be hindered from intertaining them by dandling a child and being made
unhandsome and unfit for company with tending a babe? might not another do
this as well as I? of whom such intertaining would not be expected. Again,
have I not a very great household? must I leave the care of looking to them for
suckling of a child? which another ordinary body may do as well as my self,
that will not perform the duty of over-seeing mine house. Sarah made no such
excuses, but when she had borne Abraham a son she would also give the child
suck. And truly, this duty is a very good duty, and grounded upon very good
reason; For who does not see? that it is a very great means of causing Mothers
to grow in tenderness of love to their children, and so of making children
afterward more dutiful to them.

Last of all, 5. She apparelled her self modestly.
Sarah in regard of her self did apparel her self with modest and not
over-costly attire, for S. Peter's words propound her to be imitated by the
good women in that particular, saying, 1 Pet. 3.5.
so did the godly women that feared God in former time attire themselves as
Sarah, and she is manifestly brought in for a pattern of this virtue, even
decent, not flaring nor over-chargeable garments. The Holy Ghost has given
women warning in two places of this duty both by the pen of S. Paul and S.
Peter, 1 Pet. 3.3.4.
whose adorning (says he) let it not be that outward adorning of plaiting the
hair, wearing of gold, and putting on of apparel, but let it be the hidden
man of the heart, in the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, and S. Paul
says, Not with braided hair, or gold, or pearls, or costly attire, 1 Timothy
2.9, 10
but as beseems women professing godliness with good works, meekness,
quietness, good works, these must be the jewels and ornaments of a good
woman, gaudie and wanton tricks of frizling, platting, curling the hair, and
sumptuosity in gallant things and chargeable must not be looked after by good
women. This tricking and trimming does nothing but allure the eyes of
beholders, and call wanton eyes to play with them. It does nothing but speak
forth their haughtiness and self-conceit.

I know it is lawful for women of rich estate and high place to wear jewels,
silk, purple, scarlet, gold, silver, but women must be sure not to be given to
such things, nor to be more costly then their husbands purses and places will
bear, nor to be sumptuous this way, that if their costs about works of mercy
were laid in balance against their cost in attire, the former would prove in
a manner nothing to the latter.

For most times it prooves true, no women more niggardly and pinching to any
good work of bounty or mercy, then those that are most costly and finish in
their coats. Those that are so curious and costly in attire, are hard and
near in good works, and so do gain to themselves reproach and contempt in
steed of that credit and good esteem, which they think their garments do
bring them.

You see Sarahs virtues, compare your selves with her now. And those that find
themselves like her in some degree, viz. faithful in believing Gods Word,
especially his promises, obedient and reverent to their husbands, that have
nursed their own children, and do not curiously and sumptuously set up
themselves in their attire; Let them be commended, let their consciences
approove them and give them comfort in being found like to this godly Matrone.
It is an excellent thing to tread in the paths of those women Gods own pen
has renowned for gracious and virtuous, and has borne witness of their
uprightness and salvation We may with some good warrant promise our selves to
obtain favor of God and eternal life with them, whose godly conversation we
have followed. She that looking her self in this glass of Sarah finds her
self to resemble her in faith, in obedience, and reverence toward her husband,
in doing such good offices to her children, and in comely and not over-costly
arraying her self must bless the name of God, that has fashioned her
carriage according to the mould of so excellent persons. But those that instead
of these virtues, shall find themselves deformed and disguised with the
contrary vices, are to be greatly ashamed and humbled, and admonished to
repent. And all the women that would have the comfort of being daughters to
Sarah, must labor to get these graces and to abound in them. See that you be
dutiful and good wives, and pray to God to make you such as was Sarah.

Sarahs faults. 1. She was weak in faith
And now let us consider the weaknesses of Sarah. First, she was weak in
faith, for this caused her to give Hagar to Abraham her husband, and so to
bring the sin of Poligamy into the Church of God wherewith it may seem it
was not polluted before. She doubted least her self should not be fruitful,
and therefore brought Hagar to him, to try whether the promised seed might
come of her, and yet once more she bewrayed more unbeleefe, when the Angel of
God told Abraham in her hearing, that he should have a son by her at the time
of life, she laughed at the promise of God as at a thing ridiculous and
impossible, Genesis 18 12.
saying, After I am old shall I have pleasure? Ver. 11.
and my Lord being old also, for the Scripture says, She was old and it
ceased to be with her after the manner of women. See how when God promised a
thing in nature and reason utterly impossible, she so far forgot the
Omnipotent power of God, as to think sure it could never come to pass, though
God had promised it, and the Angel reprooved her, Ver. 14.
saying. Shall any thing be impossible with God?

Thus the people of God do sometimes stagger at the promise of God through
unbeleefe, when God says one thing and reason says the contrary, they consult
with flesh and blood, and credit their own reason above the authority of God
which speaks to them. This is a great fault, and tends much to the
dishonor of God, as if his power were limited by the rules of reason, or by
the course of nature, and did not exceed our reason and stand quite above the
power of nature. We must see this sin in our selves, laboring to be humbled
at it but not discouraged, for this weakness of faith may well stand with the
truth of faith, not he has no faith at all who is many times troubled with
doubting, but he which yields to it and is overcome by it.

We must also strive to wax strong in faith, by putting our selves in mind
of Gods Omnipotency and faithfulness, as Sarah did at length, for the Apostle
witnesses, Heb. 11.11.
that she judged him faithful which had promised, and those promises which we
must labor steadfastly to believe, are the promises of God to pardon our
sins, and write his Law in our hearts, and to make us able to walk in his
ways, and crown us at last with life and glory, nonwithstanding our sins
and imperfections. Though the performance of these promises seem to us as
impossible as that a dry woman should be a mother, yet we must labor to rest
upon them, because of the fidelity of him that has promised to perfect his
power in our weakness.

Another fault of Sarahs, was this, 2. She being ^ngry, ^al^ely acc^sed her
husband. Genesis 16.5.
that once she forgot her self to her husband, and was full of anger and
discontent, wrongfully charging him to take her maids part against her,
saying, My wrong he on thee for I have given my maid into thy bosom, and now
I am despised in her sight. It was true, that Hagar did slight her too much,
but that Abraham was guilty of this fault by bearing out Hagar in it, that was
altogether false, as his answer prooveth plainly, for he says, thy maid is
in thine hand, do with her what thou will. Verse 6.
So Sarahs anger made her use false accusations against her husband.

Be humbled ye wives, if you have chafed with your husbands and carried your
selves injuriously toward them in words, Sarah did this, but she did it not
often, it was this one time alone, so far as we read, in other things she
behaved her self meekely and reverently. O look to your selves, that you
offend not continually in that thing wherein this good woman offended once
alone, and no more, for this once was even too much, keep down anger
therefore and let it not break out against your husbands.

And you husbands, learn though your wives do transgress sometimes, not to
be harsh with them again, but heal their errors with the spirit of
meekness as Abraham also did. She must blame her self, but she may be
endued with grace for all this.

But another weakness of Sarah is, 3. She was somewhat too rough with Hagar.
that she was somewhat too rough with Hagar, insomuch that Hagar could not
endure it, for if she was so violent in words with Abraham, what do you
think her carriage was to the maid, yea she was something too earnest
against Ishmael and her too, when nothing would serve her, but that she must
have them both together cast out of doors. For though God bad Abraham do
according to her words, it follows not thence, that she was not
overpassionate in it. God for a mystery would have it done, and yet Sarah
might offend in doing it. So good people are apt to be overharsh to them that
wrong them, and exercise too much bitterness against them.

4. She dissembled at her husbands request.
Another fault of Sarahs was, that she dissembled at her husbands request, and
that two several times, saying she was his sister, and so saying it, that
those to whom she spoke, might think she was none of his wife, for that was
the intention both of Abraham and Sarah. It is a weakness in wives sometimes
to be led by their husbands, to do that that is evil, and to join with them
in sin. Here Sarah hazarded her chastity to content her husband, to satisfy
his fears, she was like to have brought her self and others into a fearful
sin.

This fault must be reformed by good wives amongst others, and they must
resolve not to sin against God for their husbands sakes, fearing his
displeasure more then the danger of their husbands or their anger. Indeed in
laying nay to such motions of their husbands, they must use reverence, and do
it in a calm and quiet manner, but refuse they must, being warned by the
example of Sarah.

5. She lied.
Sarahs last fault was, that she denied her laughter to the Angel, when she
had sinned in laughing. To lie in a passion for fear of blame, denying that
one has done a thing which indeed one has done, that so one may escape
reprehension or correction, is a sin to which man's nature is very subject,
springing from the want of the fear of God, and from an excessive carnal love
to ones self, and desire of his own temporal safety. This fault you may
read, Genesis 18.15. Read it not to do the like, but to amend it and to be
moved to repent of it, if you have committed it.

Now then let us reflect upon our selves, and consider of our own carriage,
both to condemn the like faults in our selves, and to bear with them in
others without bitter censuring, and so we shall profit by the knowledge of
their evil deeds.

Sarahs benefits.
Now let us consider the benefits that Sarah enjoyed, She had all those common
benefits of health and strength and the like, which God does usually bestow
upon all men, but besides she enjoyed excellent benefits.

1. She was a holy vvoeman.
The first, that God gave her faith and saving grace, pardoned and passed by her
offenses, and sanctified her and has saved her soul, notwithstanding her
faults. This is the mercy of mercies, that God pleases to sanctify and
pardon, and save a man, for if he be sanctified he is pardoned and shall be
saved, what profit has any one of other things if he want this, and so be
damned for ever, after a little content enjoyed here.

Let us therefore labor to find this goodness of God to us, let us humbly
pray him that made Sarah godly, to make us so too. If when we read of this
work of his grace to others, we praise him for it, he will grant it to us as
well as to them. The Lord is able to make any other man or woeman godly as well
as Sarah. She had as bad a nature, and as unable to make her self good as we
have, for she also was a daughter of Adam. Therefore if you find your selves
yet not to be endued with faith and holiness, take notice of these wants, and
go to the throne of grace for grace, beseeching the Lord to fulfill his
covenant to you, in giving you his Spirit to make you his children, and it
shall be unto you according to your constant and humble supplications.

And those whom God has been pleased to deal so graciously with, let them
heartily and constantly praise him, laboring to make all crosses seem nothing
to them in comparison of this benefit. Say, though I be poor, despised,
afflicted, yet God has given me some faith and some holiness, and begun to
sanctify and will preserve me in this estate to life eternal. What cause have
I to be discouraged at crosses; to make one truly godly, though they be not
without their faults, is the worthiest of all mercies. In Heaven the Saints
rejoice in God, and are not interrupted in his service, by remembrance of
former afflictions, we one earth should labor so to be glad in hope of that
eternal weight of glory, that neither feeling of present miseries nor fear of
future, should much hinder us therein.

Secondly, Sarah had a godly husband, 2 She had a godly and rich husband that
was well esteemed.
and did partake with him of his riches, honors, credit and all the good
things which he enjoyed. This is a great favor to a wife, if she be married
to a good and holy man, and a man also of convenient estate and good esteem,
that she may be comforted by his goodness, showing it self in good carriage
toward him, and may taste the sweetness of his good and of his credit. To
have an yoake-fellow that can patiently bear with ones wants, that is diligent
and trusty, and so provideth for his family that nothing is wanting to her
self and family, that lives in so good repute as she for his sake is better
respected; in a word, such a one as is a comfort and credit to her, a savior
of his body as indeed the husband should be, is a singular benefit. She has a
great blessing that has such a husband, and must not forget to be much and
often thankful, yea though in some things he may be faulty, to the hurting,
and hazarding, and bringing crosses both upon himself and her, as twice
Abraham did though an excellent man. Take notice of his favor, and learn to
be careful in doing your duties, so much the rather, because your husbands be
virtuous.

But next, she had Isaac at length, 3. She had a godly child.
if God give a woman children and good children, godly and holy, partakers of
the blessing of God in their souls, that is a benefit to the wife as well as
to the husband, She shall have joy of such a child as well as he, both the
parents of righteous children shall have joy of them. Let women as well as men
acknowledge this mercy, we see that those which are crossed in children are
much troubled at it, should not those whom God does free from that little
cross, giving them the contrary mercy, learn to praise and rejoice in him for
it?

4. God delivered her twice out of a misery into which she had cast herself.
But further, God did vouchsafe to deliver her twice out of that misery into
which twice she had cast her self, by her own fault. If any one by their own
unbeleefe, carnal fears, or other evil behavior, have thrust themselves
into the brambles, and God by his special providence and care has granted
them an happy issue and escape, they must even admire and applaud Gods
goodness, that has so undeservedly pitied them, and passing by their faults
has carried himself fatherly to them. Sarah by saying I am Abraham's sister,
procured, that she was taken by Pharaoh to be his wife, God hindered Pharaoh
from coming near her, and after by a dream warned him of the matter, and so
he dismissed Sarah untouched. After she offended in like manner again, and
again the Lord in like manner delivered her: what a graciousnesse of God was
this? She knew not in the world what to do, she had entangled her self in a
snare and could not get out, now God he sets in, he breaks the snare and
sets her at liberty. Without doubt Sarah and Abraham both were exceeding glad
of this escape, and praised God for it.

If by the mere providence of God without any fault of our hand, miseries
break in upon us, and then we cry to God and be rescued, we have cause to
acknowledge it as a great favor. How much more then when he draws us out of
the evils into the which we have sinnefully thrust our own selves, sending
some such means of help as we could never conceive of, or procure to our
selves. Call to mind such deliverances, to praise God with great fervency and
humility for them, and learn both to trust upon his goodness after the more
steadfastly, especially, if more then once we have thus ensnared our selves,
and more then once the Lord has pitied us and helped us, we must never cease
wondering at his goodness, resolving also to take heed of ever provoking him
by like folly, for he that can open the door of danger, when we our selves by
seeking sinnefully to escape some other evil, have locked it upon our selves,
can surely, yea and will keep us if we do cast our selves upon him, and
refuse to take up sinful and unlawful shifts. Could not the Lord have found
a good and holy way of saving Abraham's life and Sarahs chastity? of
restraining the cruelty of these men as well as their wantonness: If God can
help out of real and present danger beyond our hopes, he can surely keep us
out of feared and imaginary dangers above our thoughts.

And if any of Gods people have wound themselves into crosses, they must not be
dismayed from seeking to God for help, by aggravating their crosses with this
thought, O foolish and sinful man, I have pulled it upon my self by my
folly, how can I expect help from him? but most humbly acknowledge their own
folly and yet take boldness to sue to him for mercy, both to pardon and to help
them.

These be the special benefits given to Sarah. Now her crosses must be
considered.

First, She was barren a long time, this was a cross to her no doubt, Sarahs
crosses* 1. She was barren a long time.
because of her earnest desire to have childeren, and because as I said of
Abraham, the hope of her salvation did hang upon the fruit of her womb.
Barrenness is such a cross you see as has befallen a godly woeman. Let them
therefore that are exercised with it, learn to bear it with patience, and
labor to get hearts so much more fruitful of good works, that such
spiritual fruitfulness may make amends for the want of the fruit of their
bodies. If God make not a woeman to bear children, but make her pious and
godly, able to bring forth the fruits of the spirit in that spiritual marriage
betwixt Christ and her, she has cause to be so thankful for this
fruitfulness, as easily to brook the trouble of the other unfruitfulnesse.
And those whom God does not afflict with this affliction, must learn to praise
him for their fertile womb. It is a sin not to prize even these temporal
benefits, but to grumble at abundance of fruit of the body, is so foul a fault
of ingratitude and unbeleefe, that a man or woeman should greatly blame
themselves for turning a thing beneficial in it self into a distress and
misery unto themselves.

Another cross was, that she was slighted by her maid, 2. She was slighted
by her maid.
yea that she bare the cross somewhat impatiently, must be reckoned in the
number of her sins. Doubtless it is a trying affliction to be assaulted with
rude saucy and contemptuous words and gestures of a disobedient and undutifull
servant. Hardly shall the spirit of a governor be able to hold it self in
patience, when it shall see a servant or inferior to look too disdainefully
or arrogantly, or hear them utter surly and scoffing words. Pride in an
inferior shows it self by undutifulnesse, and it will prove an hard thing to
the superior not to think it equal that pride should encounter pride again
with passionate resistance of it. You must learn that have servants most times
(as most times Hagar was) dutiful, to be thankful for it, and must take
heed of doing any thing, by which you may give your servants occasion to
slight and contemn you, for their corruption will quickly lay hold upon any
occasion of such misdemeanour.

A third cross was this, 3. She was taken from her husband into the house of
Pharaoh and Abimelech.
to be taken from her husband into the house of Pharaoh, and after of
Abimelech. It Is true she could blame none but her self and her husband for
that cross, but that did not make it less a cross, as he is no less
wounded that wounds himself by mischance, then he whom an enemy should
purposely wound, and this cross was made a little the more bitter by this,
that she was though gently and with mild words, yet duly chidden for it by
Abimelech too, who tells her plainly of it saying, Genesis 20.16. I have given thy
brother, (this name he gives Abraham ironically, with somewhat a tart rebuke,
as much as if he had said, whom thou would have had us think to be only
thy brother) a 100. shekels, that is, of our money, some 72. lb. od money,
near upon a 100. marks, and adds, behold he is to thee a covering of thine
eyes, and to all that are with thee, and with all other: thus she was
reprooved. She was sensible of the rebuke, this was somewhat bitter, that a
stranger should chide her for not sufficiently covering her eyes. Sure it was a
grief to her to come under just reproof, we must take heed that our evil
carriage make us not subject to just reprehension. We shall be ashamed to hear
of what we were not careful to shun. And so much of Sarahs life.

Her death.
Of her death we read, Genesis 23. She lived a 127. years, and died at Hebron,
and was buried in the cave of Makphela, which Abraham bought for money of
Ephron the Hittite, for that use upon that occasion. She is the only woeman,
Her age only of all women is mentioned in Scripture.
(so far as my memory serves me,) whose time of living is registered in
Scripture, whither it have any mystery in it I cannot tell, no woemans age is
recorded but Sarahs alone, the mother of Isaac, doubtless God intended to
grace her in it above other women. And so we have done with Sarah too.

Hagar, nothing in Scripture of her birth or death.

It is probable she feared God, and why?


It will not be amiss to add Hagar to her, of whose birth we have nothing
recorded in Scripture, and as little of her death, but by that which the
Scripture speaks of her, there is some good probability that she was a woeman
fearing God, First because of all women in Sarahs house (who having above 300.
menservants, must needs have many maide-servants also) she made choice of her
to give unto her husband Abraham, to the end that some seed, yea the promised
seed might be taken from her. Sure Abraham and Sarah would not have preferred
her above all the maidens in the house, if they had not thought her also a good
and godly maiden. I suppose therefore that seeing her matter and mistress
thought her good, we should go against the rules of charity, though we read
of some faults she had, if we think not so too. Her life.
Let us consider of her life and see her virtues and faults, 1. Her Virtues.
benefits and crosses.

1. She was obedient to her governors.
First, it was a great virtue in her, that all the time of her dwelling with
Abraham before, she carried her self very dutifully and respectively to
Sarah, else she would never have given her into Abraham's bosom. Let all
servants learn of her to show all reverence and dutiful behavior to their
governors, and not only to the rich and wealthy, but to the poor also, nay
as S. Peter says, not only to the good and courteous, but also to the froward,
for so is Gods commandment to them expressly, Ephesians. 6. Col. 4. 1 Pet. 2. and
if any servant do otherwise, they do not garnish and adorn, but disgrace and
discredit true religion. The servant is no further godly then he or she shows
reverence and honor to the master and governesse. Look therefore that you set
your selves to please and content your governors with all obedience and duty,
if you will have God and your own consciences to approve of you.

2. She told the truth.
Secondly, when the Angel met her and asked her whence she came, and whither
she went, she answered plainly, and said, I fly from the face of my Mistress
Sarah, Genesis 16.8.
she told truth without lying, and that is a good thing and commendable to
speak truth though it be to ones own shame, but to have told a lie to an
Angel might have procured her great reproof, and herein you may see that
Hagar exceeded her Mistress, for when the Angel charged Sarah with laughing,
she denied it, but Hagar being examined confesses the truth without lying. We
shall do better in this case to follow the maid then the Mistress.

Another good thing in her was that when she was commanded by the Angel of
God to go and humble her self to her Mistress, 3. She submitted her self
to her Mistress a^ the Angels commandment.
she did so. Here all you inferiors must learn of her, nay rather of the
Angel which taught her what you should do, if you have by frowardness or ill
carriage provoked your Governors, so that they do use perhaps a little too
much rigor toward you, yet you must submit and humble your selves,
acknowledge your own faultiness, and patiently stoop to their words of
reproof, yea or blows of correction. This submission is the best way to
pacify wrath, and to settle peace. Afterward, we read of no falling our
betwixt Hagar and Sarah. Learn therefore all ye servants to stoop and be
submissive, that will show humility and win favor with God and man.

Further, 4. She was thankful to God for his goodness in bringing her home
to Abraham's family.
it was well done of Hagar and is some good proof of her piety, that she
considered of this vision, Genesis 16.13. and called the name of God, thou God
see me, confessing that now she took notice of Gods seeing and observing
her ways, and that she said moreover, have I also here looked after him that
sees me? as if she should say. Do I live after the Lord has come thus to
take notice of me, and to reproove me and send me home again, and so the
name was called it may be by Abraham, to whom when she returned she related
this vision, the well of him that lived, and him that saw, because the Angel
looked upon her and she lived, or because the living God pleased to see her
and look upon her. She was thankful to God for his goodness in looking
mercifully upon her and bringing her home again to Abraham's family. We must be
thankful if the Lord daigne us that favor to meet us in our wanderings, and
turn us back again from them.

Further, 5. She was patient.
it was a good thing in Hagar that she yielded her self to Abraham, to go
away without murmuring and distemper, when he sent her away and her son in
such poor fashion, patient bearing of such hard and severe usage was no little
proof of goodness. And when her son was like to die for thirst, she showed
her self patient, for she went a good way off, because she would not see him
die, and there she sat and wept, she might have done better to have prayed
with her weeping, but to sit and mourn, not to hang her nose over him weeping
and roaring was some sign of patient discretion, showing her love to him.

And lastly, she took care of him afterward, 6. She was careful to provide
her son a convenient wife.
to provide him a convenient wife, for so it is said, Genesis 21.21. this is a
duty of Parents to make fit provision for the timely bestowing of their
children in marriage, whereof to be negligent is a part of one that regards
not to keep his child in good order, and to make too much haste is to make
them hasten to misery. So Hagar was a good servant and a good wise Mother, and
a good woman, her carriage except in a few things was good.

Sarahs faults 1. She grew proud.
See her faults now. First, she grew proud, because she was with child by
Abraham and despised her Mistress. The Maidens of Leah and Rachel may shame
Hagar in this, for neither of them is accused for any such misdemeanour. Take
heed ye servants, that you grow not insolent and contemptuous against your
governors, you see how much it distempered Sarah, and it is a grievous sin
to put your rulers into passion by your ill carriage. When the Angel met Hagar
he commands her to go and humble her self to her Mistress. It is apparent
therefore her carriage to her was amiss. There be some servants that having
been over-familiar with the Master, take occasion soon to slight their
Mistress. So they add sin to sin and are found double offenders; If any of
you have offended in contempt, much more in so ill grounded a contempt, do that
which the Angel bad Hagar, humble your selves before God, if not to your
Mistresses. Follow what was good in Hagar not what was bad.

2. She ran away from her Mistress.
Another fault of hers was, that she ran away from her Mistress, which the
Angel also shows to have been sinful by sending her back again. Let not
the Devil make any of you play the fugitive by running away from your
governors if they be somewhat sharp to you, rather strive to pacify them by
submission, then to cast off the yoke by betaking your selves to your heels.
These be her only faults, for I am loath to charge her with having an hand in
Ishmaels mocking of Isaac, for Ishmael was then upon the point of sixteen
years old, for Abraham was eighty six when Ishmael was borne, and 100 when
Isaac was borne, and Isaac sucked some while, like enough above a year, and so
Ishmael must be near about sixteen, that she may think he was so sensible
of being Abraham's heir as to laugh at the stir made about the young child,
as if by his coming into the world he should be dis-inherited.

Her benefits. 1. She was one of Abraham's servants.
Now see her crosses and comforts; First, she was so happy as to be a servant
in Abraham's house and so a member of the true Church within the Covenant of
grace, by virtue of her being a member of that domestical Church. It is a very
good benefit, when the Lord vouchsafes to place a servant in a good family
under good and Christian Governors, which will afford them all good usage for
their bodies, and all needful helps also for the salvation of their souls.
They may enjoy as much comfort in this as in any one thing that can befall them
in respect of their habitation and dwelling, to have good Governors in a good
house. For in being under the roof and custody of a godly man, they be under
the custody of God himself, and guard of holy Angels.

Wherefore, let all those that have children and must dispose of them to be
servants, be principally careful of this matter. Let your care be to provide
for yours Masters, not alone of good estate with whom they may live comfortably
for their bodies, having good attire, good fare, good diet and the like, but by
whose means the may be helped to knowledge, faith, obedience, graces of all
sorts and to life eternal hereafter. Seeing your children be made after Gods
image, have a soul as well as a body, and have need as much of things
profitable for the soul, since that is the far better part, and if that be
well, the good estate thereof will easily countervaile and make amends for the
evils which the body suffered, but if it be in bad estate, all the bodily
benefits will nothing at all advantage it: therefore I require you in the first
place to respect this most necessary thing in placing out your children.

And all you servants that have been directed either by Gods providence, or by
the careful endeavors of your good friends unto such households wherein you
have all good usage for your outward man, and over and above the comfortable
helps of domestical duties to bring you unto goodness, take notice of this
mercy and thank God for it, and take heed that you grow not weary of those
holy duties, and show not your selves so profane, as to be troubled at that
which should be your greatest content. Yea I pray you so many as live in good
families, strive so to conform your selves to the goodness of the household,
as that you may have goodness by the means of goodness there used, for
otherwise that which should have procured life to you shall serve to make your
destruction more terrible. Learn to pray, learn to hear Gods Word, learn to
be good by the precepts and examples of your Governors, else as our Savior
tells, that it shall be easier with the Sodomites, then the Capernaites at
the day of judgment, so shall it be for the servants of profanest Masters then
for you that serve good and holy Masters and Mistresses.

Secondly, Hagar had the favor of her Mistress very much, 2. She had the
favor of her Master and Mistress.
else you may assure your selves that she would never have made her a
Concubine to her husband, neither would Abraham have taken her to be Concubine
wife if he had not thought some good of her. This therefore was a benefit to
her, that she was well reputed of both by Abraham and Sarah, both the
Governors of the family were well affected unto Hagar, and this is a great
comfort unto a servant, that their Rulers entertain them with good liking,
approoving well of them and of their services, for by that means they be made
capable of enjoying much comfort in their lives, and of receiving such
courtesies and rewards from their Governors as they be capable of, and of
escaping much hard usage which else they should likely feel.

This should teach all servants to do their uttermost endeavor that they may,
to win the love of their Governors by submissivenesse and obedience,
performing the commandment of the Apostle who commands to do service with
good will, Ephesians. 6.3. Tit. 2.9.
and to please them well in all things and to serve with fear, and to do the
will of God from the heart, remembering that they serve the Lord Christ, and if
God will as he has promised give them reward of inheritance, he will much more
cause the hearts of their Governors to favor and accept them. Thus Joseph gat
his Masters good will and was great in his house, this is the right way to
procure favor, take this course and God shall be with you, but put away far
from you all crossing and thwarting, and idleness, and eye-service, and
answering again, and the like evil carriages, which will alienate your Rulers
hearts from you and make you seem hateful to them, and if any of you do not
find your Governors good liking, take heed that your own naughty behavior
have not been the cause of it. And if you have it, take heed of abusing it to
wrong both them and your selves; and all you Governors, learn to show favor
to your servants, unless their sinfullnesse hinder it. Pro. 14 35. and 27.18.
For the favor of a King shall be to a good servant, says Solomon, and he
that waits on his Master shall be promoted to honor, as he that tends a
figtree shall eat of the fruit of it.

3. She received great mercies from God.
Furthermore, Hagar received great mercies from God, for he gave her to conceive
by Abraham, and when she ran away, met with her and directed her to go back
again, which she acknowledged with great thanks, for he gave her also a
heart to go back and submit to her Mistress. This is a great favor of God,
if he find us in our out-strayings, and give us both direction and will to
come into the right way again. Pray to God, that he would thus guide you and
not suffer you to continue and perish in your out-strayings.

4. She had Ishmael and a promise concerning him.
Another mercy of God to Hagar was, that she had Ishmael, and a promise, that
God would be with him and bless him, and make him a great man, and that he
made Ishmael after dutiful to her, for he was guided by her in taking a wife
which she had chosen for him. If children have not grace, yet if they prosper
in the world and yield themselves dutifully to their Parents to be guided by
them, they must acknowledge it as a great favor from Heaven.

Again, it was a special goodness of God to her, that when she wandered in
the wilderness, and the water was spent, and her son was ready to die for
thirst, God pitied both him and her, and showed her a Well whereby she gat
water to give him, and promised to bless him, and so he revived, and lived,
and prospered. All these favors Hagar had.

Her crosses.
Consider what crosses she felt, for some bitter things she met withal as well
as these comfortable and pleasing things. 1. Sarah used her hardly.
First, the hard usage of Sarah was tedious to her, and so much the more
tedious by how much she was more guilty of pulling it on her self by her
disobedience, stubbornenesse, rude and contemptuous carriage. All you that be
servants, if you find your Governors sharp and rigorous, consider with your
selves, whether your irreverent and disobedient behavior have nor provoked
them against you, and exposed you to this affliction, and if so, humble your
selves before God first, and after to them. But if any have escaped this
cross, let them bless the name of God that has kept them from stubborn and
undutifull courses, and given their governors wisdom and meekness not to
be sharp as some governors be without just cause.

Now another cross to Hagar was this, 2. She and her son were cast out of
Abraham's family.
that she and her son were both sent out of Abraham's family, in such a poor
and ill provided manner as the story tells us. This is a misery very heavy to
bear, to be cast out of ones country and place of habitation, where they
lived comfortably, and forced to want all those benefits being deprived of them
all at once. Wherefore take heed least by abusing these kind of benefits, you
provoke not the Lord to cast you out of the Church, or out of your houses and
dwellings, but make you a good use of such mercies that they may be continued
to you, and learn, if such a cross should befall you, yet not to be
disheartened and discouraged, but to humble your selves before God knowing that
in such extremity the Lord is ready to help and succor you.

The last cross of Hagars was, 3. She saw her son ready to die with thirst.
that she saw her son Ishmael spent with thirst and ready to die, and she was
utterly destitute of all means to help him, not being able farther to ease
him or her self but by getting out of sight and hearing, and sitting down to
weep and mourn. This is a lamentable heartbreaking to a Parent, if they be
destitute of things needful for this life, whether by occasion of travel and
wandering out of the way, or of penury and necessity at home. How most heavy a
heart has a Father or Mother, if they see their children ready to be famished
through hunger, and have no bread to break unto them, or are almost choked
through thirst, and have no drink to bestow upon them, neither know what to do
for them, but to conveigh themselves out of sight, and sitting down to empty
their griefs in tears. This is a misery that God sent upon the Parents of
Jerusalem, by reason of famine and scarcity their children sowned in the
streets, and no man could supply them with bread. Lament. 4.4.

We must learn to bless the name of God most heartily, that has freed us
from this misery, and has not caused us to behold such a lamentable sight by
one occasion or other, but has given us abundance of things necessary, yea if
he have not furnished us with great store, yet we have sufficient to keep our
selves and ours from pining away with want. O that we could be as full of
thanks, when we are freed from wants, as we have been of complaints even for
small crosses. And now use moderately your abundance, that God may not strip
you of all and bring you to such extremity, and why should we forfeit our
selves and ours to famishing? when we see that God is tender to us, and
willing to satisfy us with good things.

And lastly, let every man prepare for this cross, think of it, tell himself,
it may befall him, and resolve if the wisdom of God shall bring it upon him,
that he will labor patiently to undergo it, not so as to be sorrowlesse, that
were no way commendable, but so as to be moderate in grieving, and to turn his
grief into spiritual grief, and power it forth before the Lord in humble and
penitent confessions and lamentations for sin.

Before I depart from handling of Hagars Example, I must say something of Sarah
and her, which I knew not how so fitly to speak of in the life of either, viz.
that these two Mothers and the children borne of them were Allegories, as S.
Paul calls them, that is, figures of some other thing mystically signified by
them. For this we have the authority of S. Paul, Gal. 4.21.
Gal. 4.21. In these words, Hear you not what the Law (that is, the writings
of Moses commonly called the Law, because the Law was the principal part
thereof) does say, for it is written that Abraham had two sons, Ver. 22.
one of the bondwoman another of the freewoman, and the son of the bondman
was borne after the flesh that is, by a bare natural power of generation, as
any man naturally may beget a child of a woman without any power above nature
concurring to the work, Ver. 23.
But she that was borne of the freewoman was borne by promise, that is, not so
much by any natural strength of the Parents, as by virtue of Gods promise,
which bound his truth to set his Omnipotency a work above nature, otherwise
Abraham that had so long lived with Sarah in her youth, and could never become
a Father by her should much less have been so by her, Ver. 24.
now when her body was quite dried with age, which things (says S. Paul) are
an Allegory, according as I told you before. For these are Testaments or
Covenants, the one from Mount Sinai, which came thence being there published
and promulgated, it is the Law, the Covenant of works, whereof it is said, The
Law came by Moses, and this is said to gender unto bondage, that is, to beget
and make not sons and daughters of a free and ingenuous spirit, loving God,
and out of love doing him service, and merely of his grace, love, free favor
and promise expecting their reward, but bondslaves which out of a fear of
punishment or hope of reward, do service and expect the reward for the
worthiness sake of their works, Ver. 25.
and this Covenant is Hagar, meaning, is signified by Hagar, for says he, this
Hagar is Mount Sinai in Arabia, meaning is so by signification and
representation, and answers in signification and Type to Jerusalem, which now
is and is in bondage, meaning to the Law and to the curse and rigor of it,
being debtors to the whole Law to do it, or if they do it not to the curse to
suffer it. Ver. 26.
But this Jerusalem which is from above, that is, the Heavenly Jerusalem, the
Church, the number of true believers, that do indeed seriously embrace the
doctrine of the Gospel, which began by Christ and his Apostles to be preached
at Jerusalem, not hoping to be justified and saved by the merit or worth of
their own works, but by the free promise of God in Christ, those are free
from the curse and rigor of the Law, and she is the mother of all true
Christians of us all, that is, of my self and all those which with me look
for righteousness and salvation alone through the merits of Christ, and mercy
of God in Christ through faith in his name, Gal. 4.29.
and after he says, As then he that was after the flesh persecuted him that
was after the Spirit, even so (says he) it is now.

Here you have the full Allegory, two Mothers, a bondwoman and a freewoman,
two manners of begetting, after the flesh and after the Spirit, two kinds of
children, bondmen and freemen, and the bond still persecuting the free. The
Mothers are the two Covenants, that of the Law and that of Grace. The two
manners of begetting one of the promise, the other by the flesh, two kinds of
children, bondmen to good and freemen. The matter is this, Those that bring
nothing but their own natural power to the Law and so seek by it to be
justified, they are but of a slavish disposition, and have nothing but the
reward of slaves, but those that look to the goodness of God in the Covenant
of Grace, having the power of Gods Spirit, are made to love God as children,
and admitted to the inheritance of sons.

Let us take heed of being sons of the bondwoman, for many be such still.
The Papists will needs challenge salvation as due by the merits of their own
works, and so in very deed do exclude themselves from it by challenging it on
a wrong ground. And the multitude are in this respect no whit better then the
Papists; for their own good deeds are still in their mouths, as if they would
be saved by works, which yet cannot save them, yea some relics of this
ignorant and foolish pride was found in the Saints, who if they find not
(which they will never find) perfection in themselves, are still apt to
question their estate, as if it were their own goodness that should bring
them to Heaven, not the goodness of God in Christ, rewarding them freely with
that undeserved crown, because they are become the children of God by faith in
Christ. Now let us take heed of being the sons of Hagar, but let us
acknowledge still our own sinfullnesse and unworthiness, yet still rest on
his mercy in Christ, and strive to obey him in love, as children do their
Father, and so much for Hagar. (*)

THE TENTH EXAMPLE.
OF KETVRAH, ISHMAEL, ELIEZER.
NOw Abraham had a third wife, her name was Keturah. Keturah.
The Scripture brings her in as it were a dumb person, tells nothing of her
parents, life, nor death, but mentioning her bare name alone, shows that she
was Abraham's wife as I conceive, and what children she had by Abraham we are
told, Genesis 25.1. her sons were six, as you may read in that place. Now the
Lord seems to tell us this little of this woman and her sons, because we
should the more acknowledge the blessing of God upon Abraham in restoring him
to a second youth as it were, and making him so fruitful as to beget six
sons in his old age after Sarahs death, whereas before at an 100 he was as
good as dead, according to S. Paul's phrase, Romans 4. So Gods blessing is able to
make our souls fruitful in all good works, though of our selves we be
utterly barren and unfruitful. And thus we have done with Abraham's wives.

Now let us speak something of his contemporaries, beginning with his son
Ishmael. Ishmael.
Ishmael was son of Abraham and Hagar his maid servant, borne unto him at
his 86. years, as says the Holy Ghost, Genesis 16. ult. He was the son of a
godly Father, but whether himself were godly or not it is uncertain. But in
his life we must note, First, his Virtues. Secondly, his Faults. Thirdly, his
Benefits. Fourthly, his Crosses, and then shall we come to his death.

His Virtues. 1 He was outwardly conformable and obedient to his father.
His virtues. First he lived in his fathers house in outward conformity and
obedience, for he submitted to his father at 13. years to be circumcised, Genesis
17.25. and so had the outward seal of the covenant, but yet he was not the
promised seed, nor had the covenant made with him, nor had the Church and true
religion continuing in his family. So we must learn not to satisfy our selves
with being in the Church outwardly, but must labor to become true members of
it, and to enter into the covenant indeed. It will not profit us to have the
Sacraments outwardly administered to us, (for he is not a Jew which is one
without, neither is that circumcision which is outward in the flesh) but we
must endeavor after the inward circumcision, even to get the righteousness
which is by faith, that that faith may purify our hearts, and purge away from
us all filthiness of flesh and spirit. And if we make use of the outward
seal, thereby to be made to see and feel our uncircumcisednesse of heart, and
heartily acknowledge Gods will and power to make us partakers of the inward
circumcision, so putting forth our selves to beg for, and labor after that
inward circumcision, the Lord will surely bestow it upon us.

Again, all children must learn to submit themselves to their parents, at
least to an outward performance of such holy duties, as by their parents they
shall be instructed in, else they are worse then Ishmael, and will become
matter of anguish and vexation to their godly parents. Would Ishmael accept
circumcison, and wilt not thou accept instruction, learn the principles of
Christian religion, and settle thy self to some show of goodness, then shall
Ishmaels example rise up in judgment against thee and condemn thee. And
parents must observe Gods goodness in their childeren, if they find them even
in such a degree tractable and ruly, for this is far better then to be wild
and furious, and to cast of all semblance of goodness, and yet such would the
best man's childeren prove, if the hand of God did not restrain them.

2. He submitted himself to his father to be banished out of his house.


But another good thing in Ishmael was, that he submitted himself to his Father
to be banished out of his house, no question but Abraham that loved him, would
inform him of the necessity which lay upon himself so to expel his son,
and would furnish him with all good counsel, who then being some 16. years
old was capable of good advice, and so did he without murmuring or wilful
refusing to go yield himself to that punishment. It is a good thing in
childeren to take quietly their parents chastisement, even though they should
be somewhat severe. But to oppose them, or to rebel against them, or fall to
clamorousnesse and impatiency is a great sin, even though the correction
should be causeless and unjust, how much more if they be righteous and
deserved. Learn of Ishmael this submission, how will you hope that you be Gods
childeren, if you do not equal such a one as Ishmael in goodness?

Again, 3 He joined with Isaac in his Fathers funeral.


Ishmael did another good office in the conclusion of his Fathers life, for it
is noted of him, that he came to Isaac and joined with him in his Fathers
funeral, Genesis 25.9. by which it is manifest, that he bare no grudge against
his Father for casting him out of his house, but bore that respect toward him
which was due to a Father, and therefore did him the best honor he could at
his latter end, yea that he did not harbor in his mind any envious and
malicious thought against Isaac, and therefore would come unto him and unite
his pains to bury his Father. Learn so much good of him I pray you, as to
forget that severity which perhaps Parents may have showed to any of you, and
not put off the dutifulness of childeren, because you have met with something
that flesh and blood would call hard measure. The less inducement any man has
from a parents kindness to love and honor him, the more commendable it is if
he perform all honor to him: but he that will be so transported with
coffeehouse against a parent for some sharpness, as even to hate and
contemn him, most of all if his own folly have enforced his parent to such
proceedings, is without all doubt a graceless and a wretched child.

I pray you learn also by Ishmael, not to suffer envy to rise against your
Brethren if in any thing they be preferred before you to your detriment. Love
not them less then the name of a Brother or Sister does require, because you
may think that they have stood betwixt your parents love and bounty and your
selves, and so as it were overshadowed you, and kept the sunshine from you,
but behold the hand of God in so disposing of things and resolve to love still
as Brethren.

Further Ishmael did one good act of honor and duty toward his mother Hagar.
For it is said, Genesis 21.21. 4. He was ruled by his mother in marriage.


that his mother took him a wife out of the land of Egypt, so he was ruled by
his mother in marriage, having her liking and consent, yea giving himself to
be guided by her, as did also Isaac to Abraham, and Jacob to Isaac. It is a
needful thing for childeren to take the consent and assent of their parents,
(yea if it be but of the mother, supposing the father to be dead or absent,)
and not to rush into this estate against their wills and privity. No comfort
can come to the conscience in such a match, for whosoever is joined together
otherwise then Gods Word allows, can have no ground of comfort, as those are
that are joined without the good will of those whom God hoth made his deputies
in this business. The Lord says to Parents, take wives for your sons, and
give your daughters, plainly putting them into his room in that behalf,
wherefore having not consent from them, they live in an unlawful matrimony,
until such time as by humble repentance before God and submissive entreaties
to their parents, they have attained that good leave of their parents, which
they ought to have gotten before. If therefore any amongst you have so
offended, they must see the fault, and be humbled and seek pardon. Most times
the Lord does sensibly cross such matches, make use of those crosses to
increase your godly sorrow for sin. And let those children that are yet
unmarried, take heed of intangling their affections without the privity of
Parents, or of seeking to draw the affections of one another, until such
consent have gone before, for fear they make this duty very difficult unto
them, or thrust themselves out of the way of duty and obedience, by their
headstrong passions. So much of Ishmaels good deeds, now of his bad.

His faults. 1. He mocked his brother.
First, at some 15. or 16. years he mocked Isaac, this mocking was a degree of
persecution and a fault in him. I cannot conceive that he did it out of any
dislike of Isaacs piety, who being but a new weaned child could not discover
any piety unto him, at least any such act of piety as should stir up disdain
and derision, but seeing such a great gladness and a merry feast at the
weaning of Isaac, he made a sport of him, as it were disdaining that Isaac
should seem to thrust him out of the inheritance. Now it is a great sin to
mock any one out of envy and scorn that they should be preferred before them.
Mocking shows a great deal of pride in him that uses it, nothing but
overvaluing of our selves makes us undervalew others. Mocking is a tedious
thing to suffer, the good esteem we have of our selves and those that are
near unto us, makes the contrary carriage of others unsufferable, therefore is
mocking a great offense. Take heed I pray you of using it toward your brethren
or neighbors; It is an act that tends strongly to provoke, and we must not
provoke one another: It is then most loathsome when it comes from envy and
malice, make not a may game at your brethren, floute them not, break not
jests upon them; Ephesians. 5.4.
this jesting is that which S. Paul forbids, especially laugh not at their
miseries and at their sins, but most of all mock not at them for well doing.
Mocking is any carriage by which a man expresses his contempt of another, and
seeks to make him also contemptible and despicable unto others. He that can
set light by a man for goodness sake which should procure honor, how blind a
mind, how perverse a judgment has he. Be penitent if your folly have carried
you to such a sin, and now bridle your selves from such ill carriage, has
not God showed his dislike of it sufficiently, by punishing it in Ishmael with
banishment out of Abraham's house?

2 Was a wild man.


Another fault of Ishmael, is that which was foretold of him, that he was a
wild man, a kind of Asse-colt, that would not be subject to any almost, nor
ruled by any. This is a grievous fault indeed, when he that has the face,
shape and faculties of a man, and should have wisdom to submit himself to
such as have authority over him, will yet know no governor, submit to no
authority, be kept within no bounds, but leap over hedge and ditch as it
were, and run about after his own fancy, and live as he lists himself, that
is to say, will evertake upon him the qualities of a wild Asse-colt to
man-ward, will never carry himself as a sheep dutifully to Godward. Beware
of being such wild fellows that now follow their own humors, and care not
what tricks they play, not heeding any admonition or any reason. If any of you
have showed your selves such formerly, bewail it before God, pray him to
pardon you, pray him to turn you by showing you your sins, and miserable
estate by nature, and pray him to make you at length to learn to take the
yoke of obedience, and cast of all wild courses, live like men not like wild
Asses. The wild Ass runs up and down in the wilderness, and will not be
led nor driven, but will be where her fancy carries her. Be not you such, but
let the directions and admonitions of your parents and governors, like bounds
keep you within compass. He that will live wildly shall surely procure a
world of miseries to himself at last: hardship shall tame him whom nothing
else will tame, or else at the end of his wild race, he shall stake himself
as it were, upon the vengeance of God and eternal death.

Yet another fault, Every man's hand was against him, 3. He was a quarrellsome
fellow. Genesis 16.12.


and his against every man. The meaning is, he was a quarrelsome fellow, still
brawling and falling out, one that would easily take and give matter of strife
and debate; apt to speak and do that which would give distaste to others, and
apt to distaste the things that others said and did to him, so as to make it
the matter of a fray or grudge, or both. This is the fault that is described in
these words; Now a sore sin it is that makes a man troublesome to himself
and all his neighbors, and causes his life to be like the life of a Cock of
the game, that is still bloody with the blood of others and himself. I pray
you examine your selves whether you be not such froward contentious men, still
in suite, in contestation, in opposition with some or other, that will take no
show of wrong, but will do enough, that cannot long keep out of some brabling
matter. If it be a legal kind of quarrelling, it is a sign of much folly,
much pride, or both, much more if it be a kind of martial quarrelling that
tends to strokes and bloodshed. Repent, repent of this evil humor, and seek
to God to give you a meek and quiet spirit, able to bear and forbear, able
to show kindness and to pass by unkindnesse, for surely it is a kind of
diabolical life to live so unquietly, and it will cause Gods hand to be
stretched out against him, whose hand is against every body. And these are
Ishmaels faults.

Now his benefits are, First, deliverance from two great dangers, His Benefits.
1. Deliverance from two great dangers.
one before he was borne, when his mother was taking a course to undo both
her self and him, God was so favorable to both, as to meet her in the way
and turn her back from her wandering, that returning home again, Ishmael
might be borne in Abraham's house, and by him brought up in all good order till
his 17. year or thereabouts. A great benefit it was and the foundation of his
future worldly greatness. This mercy must be confessed, if God have prevented
danger from us whilst we were in our mothers wombes; and it were fit that
Parents should acquaint their children with such mercies, that they might
learn to enlarge their thankesgiving by mentioning of them also. We cannot
show our selves too exact and diligent in reckoning with God for his benefits.

2. God provided water for him when he was ready to die for thirst.


Secondly, God himself vouchsafed to meet him again when he was banished, and
to provide water for him and refresh him when he was now ready to die for
thirst. How great was Gods care of him? that sent an Angel to open his Mothers
eyes and cause her to see a Well near hand, which either grief of mind or
weakness of sight thorough faintness had disabled her from seeing, or else
made a Well for the purpose and then showed it her. Has not God succored some
of us in dangers almost as great? by sending us or showing us some present
means of help, which it was not possible for any wit of ours to provide. Let
not such a benefit be forgotten, and let us learn to trust upon him ever
after, and not to be carkingly troubled with casting dangers before hand and
disquieting our selves with fears, because we see no way out, God will have a
Well in store and show it us at the exigent.

3. God himself gave him his name.


Again, it was a great mercy of God, that himself vouchsafed to give him a
name and so sweet a name, as that of Ishmael, which signifies, God will hear,
and may seem to point out the deliverance whereof I spoke last, Genesis 21.17.
for then it is said, I have heard the cry of the lad. O that we could labor
to be Ishmaels in this sense, such as have interest unto this mercy of being
heard of God. Such we shall be if we depart from iniquity and study to please
God, for if any man do the will of God him will God hear. Joh. 9.31.


4. He prospered much in the world.


Lastly, God blessed Ishmael in outward things, and made him to prosper so much
in the world that he became a great man, and had twelve Princes issuing from
his loins and after a great nation. Why should the Saints doubt of things
needful? seeing even those of whom we are not sure that they were Saints,
enjoyed so great abundance, or why should any man boast himself of these
things? which an Ishmael may have as well as an Isaac. And why should not we be
encouraged to serve God in uprightness? who vouchsafes so liberally to reward
his servants, as to bless their children so much for their sakes. And so much
for the life of Ishmael.

His death.
Now for his death, which is set down, Genesis 25.17. These are the years of the
life of Ishmael 137 years, and then he gave up the ghost, and died, and was
gathered to his people. He lived ten years more then Sarah, for she lived 127
and he an 137 and this is to be noted of him, that the years of his life are
reckoned, which is not done to any wicked man in Scripture again, See
Ainsworth on Genesis 25.17
whereby some probability is given that he was a good man, seeing it is also
said, that He was gathered to his people, a phrase not used of any but good
men, signifying that he went among the Congregation of the good men which went
before him. But howsoever, we must learn by his death to prepare for ours,
that we may be gathered unto our people. If we live as Gods people, we shall
die as Gods people, and be gathered amongst them, and shall be raised up also
with them at the resurrection of the just. But if we live with the wicked, we
shall die with the wicked, and be gathered together with them to shame and
torment at the last. And so much of Ishmael Abraham's son by Hagar.

Now of others that lived at the same time. Eliezer.
Eliezer of Damascus the Steward of his house, into whose hands he committed
all that he had, so it is told us, Genesis 15.2. and 25.2. The Scripture says
nothing of his Birth and Death, nor of his faults.
He was his eldest servant, and ruled over all that he had, of his Birth and
Death we read nothing in Scripture, but of his Life some passages are related.
1. His virtues and good deeds, for of his bad deeds no mention is made, not
that he was altogether free from sin, for if Abraham and Sarah were in some
things found faulty, it cannot be thought that this man a servant of theirs was
faultlesse, but because the Lord did not write an entire story of his life, but
would set him before the eyes of servants as an example for them to imitate.
Now of him therefore we must note his good carriage, his benefits and his
crosses.

First for his good deeds, when Abraham called him and would have him put his
hand under his thigh (a gesture used to the godly Patriarchs by such as bound
themselves to them by an oath, perhaps to signify their subjection to them,
and faith in the promised seed which was to come out of their loins) he would
not hastily and handover-head take that oath which was ministered unto him, but
with due caution and wariness, that he might not thrust himself into the
danger of forswearing himself by rashness, but might have a quiet conscience
by seeing clearly how far his oath bound him and to what, that so he might
know himself able to perform his oath and might accordingly fulfill it.

In him therefore we learn to be wary in swearing and to swear in judgment,
that is, advisedly and with good consideration, informing our selves fully of
the thing sworn too, that it might not be either impossible or unlawful to
the intangling of our souls in the peril of falling into that heinous offense
of perjury. His virtues. 1. He proceeded warily to an oath.
No man must proceed to an oath hastily and inconsiderately, but must ponder
upon the thing sworn too, that he may have a full resolution to accomplish the
same. Look to your selves that you show the like religious respect to the
great name of God. An oath is a strong bond in which a man lays his soul as
it were in pawn to God, so that the breach of his oath is a forfeiture of his
precious soul to the hands of Gods judgment, so great a bond must not be
taken upon us without great cautelousnesse. They therefore that have sworn on
a sudden not deliberating seriously of it, must know that they have even
offered contempt to God, because though perhaps the thing was just and
possible, yet it was so by chance alone and as it fell out, and if it had been
otherwise, yet they would have taken it so that no thanks was due to any
religious care of theirs if it were otherwise. Repent therefore of your
hastiness and heedelesnesse in swearing, this is to show your selves such as
do not fear an oath, and so do not duly reverence and honor the great
Majesty of God, whose name in swearing you invocate against your selves.

Therefore also those that minister an oath must not be displeased at such
cautelousnesse, but must readily satisfy the doubts and scruples of those that
swear, that with good conscience and a quiet mind they may take it upon them,
for seeing they be careful before they swear to understand what they swear
unto, it gives good hope that after they have sworn they will be as careful
that they keep it, and so their oath shall be to some purpose, which should
very much content and satisfy him that gives them the oath. But he that will
speedily and without considering take an oath, will also be as ready to break
it, alleging his former ignorance or mistaking, as an excuse of his not
fulfilling it. Hitherto of his devotion to God in respect of his wary entering
into an oath.

2. Carried himself well to Abraham.


Now comes to be handled his good carriage toward Abraham in the business by
oath committed unto him. 1. He used speed in performing his oath.


First, he used due speed in fulfilling his oath, for without more then
necessary deferring he addressed himself to the performance of his oath
having thoroughly understood it, for knowing his Masters will to be that he
should fetch the woman and not bring Isaac back again thither, and that if
they would not give him a wife for Isaac without his own coming, then he
should be free from the oath, and withal being encouraged by Abraham's words,
The journey was about 300 miles.
that God would send his Angel before him and prosper his journey, he made all
good speed to take his journey about that weighty service, and went unto
Mesopotamia to dispatch it, taking to that end ten Camells with all other
things necessary, seeing all his Masters estate was at his command.

Here learn, that when you have sworn you must not delay the performance of
it, but so soon as shall be convenient, and as you have power, must settle to
do the thing sworn to. All you that have sworn any lawful and possible
thing, look on Abraham's godly servant and be mindful of your oaths, consider
the greatness of God to whom you are tied, and put not off the work from time
to time, seek not needless delays, make not fearful or sloathfull excuses,
but free your faith and pull your selves out of the danger of Gods displeasure
by a conscionable fulfilling of your oaths. The Pharisees could say, Mat. 5.33.
thou shall not forswear thy self but fulfill thine oaths to God. Let us
show our selves at least as wise and conscionable as a Pharisee could teach us
to be.

But what if we perceive the oath to have been of an unlawful thing?

I answer, then we must repent of our naughtiness in taking it, and so
forbear to add a second sin in doing that which is unlawful. For it is
impossible that an oath should be of more force to bind a man to a thing, then
Gods Commandment is to restrain him from it. Nothing can have more force to
bind conscience then Gods Commandment.

But what if it prove impossible?

I answer, if that impossibility might have been foreseen, our rashness in
not foreseeing it must be repented of, but if it could not have been
foreseen, we must rest our selves satisfied in this, that our mind was
faithfully to have fulfilled it, if God had not cast in our way such an
impediment, but no hazard, no cost, no labor must stand betwixt us and the
accomplishing of our oaths, Psalm. 15.4.
for David says, that a good man swears to his hinderance, and yet fulfills.
'Twere better for a man to be undone in the world or to loose this natural
life, then to break his oath for fear of loss or death. So much of this man's
conscionablenesse in regard of taking and keeping an oath.

Now see his virtuous carriage in the thing. 1. His great diligence in the
maine work. 2. His discretion. 3. His piety and religiousnesse.

To begin with the last, he served his Master religiously. First, 2. He served
his Master religiously.


he thanked God for his good success. 2. He prayed to God for good success.
His prayer is, Genesis 24.12, 13, 14. Wherein he besought God to cause him to
meet with a fit wife for Isaac. We must all learn specially servants, for of
such a one we speak now, to commend our Masters businesses to God, praying him
to prosper us. A good and godly servant when he imployeth himself in his
Masters work, must show himself to be Gods servant and to have faith in his
providence, trusting in his goodness and blessing more then in his own
ability. Indeed such a particular begging of such and such occurrents to show
us Gods mind was peculiar to him, and is not required of us, for he did it by
the peculiar inspiration of Gods Spirit, but in general to beg Gods assistacce
that belongs to all good Servants. You that would be counted godly servants,
have you thus sanctified your endeavors by prayer? have you thus called on his
name to guide and speed you? if you have, you have done well, take comfort in
it, it is a testimony that you serve for conscience sake, not as men-pleasers,
and that you serve the Lord in serving your Masters, if you have not, be
humbled and lament it, as a matter of profaneness and a cause of many crosses
and a means to make you proud of your selves, if good success attend you. And
now tread hereafter in the steps of this godly Servant. Pray, pray to him for
his assistance and blessing upon your selves, and the works you take in hand
for your Masters, that so it may appear you do all in faith and obedience to
God.

Again, this man finding that God did answer his requests, 3. He praised God
for his good success.


blesses God, verse 26, 27. Where is his reverent behavior outwardly, he
bowed, and then the matter of his thanks, he said, blessed be the Lord, you
must learn with all humble behavior of body and consequently of mind and with
all sincerity and heartinesse to praise God for your good success, and so it
will appear that you ascribe all to God and not to your selves. If you have
been thus thankful, it is an excellent thing in which you must take comfort;
nothing is a truer proof of true goodness, then a constant care to bless and
praise God for his perpetual goodness in prospering us, if not, lament the
want of it as a manifest proof of pride and want of faith.

And now let us all learn to be particularly thankful to God for particular
benefits, yea even such outward benefits, much more for inward. This is the way
to continue, to sanctify, and increase benefits, God loves thankfulness as
men also do. If we improove his benefits to so good a purpose, we shall not
want them in due time, only, see that your thanks be not alone verbal.

4. He was discreet.


You have seen his piety, now his discretion shows it self first in setting
down what a woman he would have for Isaac, viz. a courteous and laborious
woman, one that came out to draw water, and one that would respect a stranger,
and give him to drink and his Camels also; truly a woman courteous of
disposition, and of body strong, and healthy, and painful, is a fit woman to
make a wife.

Again, he proceeds, discreetly in his carriage to win her and her Parents,
he gives her gifts and them also, and truly relates the prosperous estate of
his Master, all which tend to persuade them to yield her, and her self to give
her self to Isaac for a wife. So must every servant use discretion and
prudence in his Masters affairs, taking the best course he can to make them
sort well in the end.

5. He had a care of his Camels.


Another part of his good behavior, is care of his Camels, to which he looks
to give water and provender in due time. So should a good servant, and every
good man in his travells, have a due care of his beasts, and look that they
have things fit for them. Yea first should he look to them unless necessity
compel otherwise, and then to himself, not like to them that tie their horses
to the rack-staves, and fill themselves with drink or victuals. 6 Was diligent
and made have about his business.




Then his last good deed is, he makes have about his business, to tell it and
set it a foot, for he would not eat till he had done his errand, and then he
effects his business fully, for he rose up betimes in the morning and would
not stay one day, but with all speed returns to let his Master see his good
success. O that you servants would all be such servants, Col. 3.22. Ephesians. 6.5.
faithful, diligent in your Masters affairs, religious, devout, prayerfull,
thankful on all occasions, and careful of the beasts and other goods
committed to your charge, and return home when your business is dispatched.

Now faults in him the Lord shows none as I said before for the cause then
mentioned.

His benefits. 1. God gave him a godly Master.
Benefits he had four very great. 1. That God gave him a godly Master, 2. That
God gave him favor in his eyes, so that he trusted him with all he had. 3.
That God made him a true Christian, for bond and free are all one to God. And
lastly, 2. He had his favor.


that he prospered him and brought him safe and with good success to his
Masters house. 3. He was a true Christian


You that be servants pray for these blessings. Beseech God to make you his
free men, and if God grant you favor and good success in your journeys, 4.
God prospered him.


learn to be very thankful for it.

And for his cross it was this, he was a servant, His cross, He was a
bondman.
to be a bondman is a less desirable condition as Paul entreats, saying,
if thou may be free use it rather, but it is an easy cross if a man can
meet with so godly a Master and be accepted with him, hence S. Paul says,
care not for it, you that must live by service, grumble not at this cross. For
your service is not a bondage for life; but alone as apprentices for a certain
time, or as hired servants from year to year, murmr not at the meandness
of your estate, but frame as this man to be faithful and godly, and you may
live as happily here, and get as much glory in Heaven hereafter as your
Masters. (*)

THE ELVENTH EXAMPLE.
OF LOT, his Wife and Daughters.
AFter the Example of Abraham and his Family, Abraham's Contemporaries.
we come to those that lived in the same Age with him, particular persons and
whole Cities and peoples. Among particular persons I will begin with Lot, and
then speak a word of his wife and daughters.

For himself, Lot.
when and of what Mother he was borne, it is not recorded, but we have notice
of his Father, who was Haran the brother of Abraham, who died before his Father
in the Country of Mesopotamia.

The death of Lot is also concealed in Scripture, His death is not mentioned in
Scripture.
so that we cannot acquaint you when he ended his days, nor where.

But in his life we must observe what good is found in him and what evil, and
secondly, what things he met withal in his life both good and bad. His
virtues. He was a righteous man. 2 Pet. 2.8.


First for his goodness in general, he has the testimony of the Holy Ghost
by the pen of S. Peter, that he was a righteous man. It is said there, that God
delivered just Lot, as also, that righteous man dwelling amongst them vexed his
righteous soul. This is proof enough of his goodness, and it was necessary
for the clearing of his name, that the New Testament should testify of his
righteousness, because the narration of his life in the old leaves him in such
a case as would make the Reader afraid, least he had quite fallen away from all
goodness, but Peter's testimony is proof enough, that the committing of that
great sin did not take him of from the number of the righteous.

No sin is so great but repentance wipeth it so clean away, that the
offender is righteous and must be so esteemed, notwithstanding the
grievousnesse of his crime. Now let each of us labor to get true
righteousness, that though this title be not bestowed upon him by the
undeceivable pen of some Author of holy Writ, yet he may hear it pronounced
by our blessed Savior at the last day, when standing on the right hand he may
be blessed with the blessing of the righteous. And let me be bold to turn my
speech unto you that have been and are the grievousest sinners; If you lament
your unrighteousness, rest on Christ's righteousness, and hereafter study
righteousness in your lives, you shall enjoy the happiness of righteous men
at last.

A twofold righteousness.
There is a seeming righteousness, a mere Pharisaicall paint, when a man
carries himself blamelesly to men ward, at least in respect of the grosser
acts of evil. This will save no man at the last, nor comfort him in time of
temptation; there is a true and real righteousness, which will undoubtedly
save them which can be so happy as to get it, and of this true righteousness
there are two sorts, one of the Law, it stands in a perfect conformity of
heart and life unto the exact rule of Gods Law, Gal. 3.21, 22.
And if there had been a Law given which could have given life, doubtless
righteousness should have been by the Law, but now the Scripture has
concluded all under sin, that the promise by the faith of Jesus Christ may be
given to them that believe: So now we must have a righteousness by promise,
that is, by the Gospel, for that of the Law is too high for us.

The righteousness of the Gospel is twofold.
And the righteousness of the Gospel is twofold, one without us, performed by
our blessed Savior for us, as a surety paies the debt for the debtors use and
benefit, by which we stand just before God, and have our sins pardoned and
are accepted to salvation. When we have so seen our own misery as to go quite
out of our selves and rest alone upon Christ for all good things according to
the promise. The other is within us, it is a gift bestowed upon and wrought in
us by the Spirit of God, always and inseparably joined with the former, by
which we are manifested to our selves and to others to be just, and it stands
in a true desire and endeavor to know and leave every sin forbidden by God,
and to know and do all good works required, so that we still continue to
humble our selves for our failings, and to seek unto God for pardon and help
in and by Christ and his Spirit. This righteousness of faith which denominates
him in whom it is righteous, you must all get, else you shall never attain
eternal life. It is a thing appointed of God in such perfection of goodness
and wisdom, that it cannot be found in any Hypocrite seem he never so good,
and will surely be found in any upright hearted man be he never so weak; never
leave striving till you have gotten it, and gotten certain knowledge that you
have it.

Do thou in thy heart see and acknowledge thy self to be a cursed sinner, by
reason of thy corrupt nature that is derived to thee from Adams loins and thy
wicked life, whereby thou thy self have actually transgressed the Law of God?
Yes. Do thou confess thy self altogether unable of thy self to satisfy
for or deserve pardon of any of these sins, or to conquer and overcome them
in thy self? Yes. Do thou acknowledge Jesus Christ to be a sufficient and
perfect Savior, ready and able to pardon thee and heal thee, and do thou
even labor and desire to rest upon his merits and his Spirit for pardon of
sin and true holiness? And do thou hereupon put on a resolution, and
proceed in an endeavor to cast away all sin and to work all
righteousness, still confessing and lamenting ^hy faults and failings, and
renewing thy requests for pardon and grace and thy purposes of amendment? Yes.
I say then to that soul amongst you that can truly make this answer to these
questions, that he is a righteous man according to the language of the Gospel,
not righteous with Legal righteousness (for in that sense never was any found
since our first Parents falling from the state of innocence, one alone, the
Lord Jesus Christ excepted, nor ever shall be to the last day, but righteous
with the righteousness of the Gospel, perfectly justified in the sight of God
and sincerely sanctified in himself, yea though any such amongst you have many
and strong corruptions diverse times stirring in you, and producing evil and
wicked acts, yet if he persist in lamenting them and renewing his repentance,
as often as he finds himself an offender, yet is he a just man, yea if any
have run into most foul and gross sins more then once, yet if he have now
cast away those sins, and be returned again to his purpose and endeavor of
godly living, he is a righteous man and shall be saved as was Lot. So much for
Lots goodness in general.

Now I will speak of those particular good deeds which he is commended for in
Scripture. First, Lots particular virtues.

1. He left his own Country and Fathers house.


he left his own Country and Fathers house with his Grandfather Terah and
his Uncle Abraham, this was a good deed and commendable. Indeed if he were
then a mere young man, not yet living as the Master of a family of himself,
but under the roof of his Father, then the commendation is not great, for he
might be then driven to it by the authority of his Grandfather, rather then be
lead by any faith in himself. But I suppose, he was then of age to make his
own choice of habitation, and might if it seemed good unto him, have stayed in
Aram Naharaim as well as his Uncle Nahor did the Father of Rebekah, for in the
year of the World 2079, Abraham left his Country, and in the year 2009 or
thereabouts, Sodom was consumed. So betwixt the coming out of Mesopotamia and
the conflagration of Sodom were but about thirty years, but Lot had at that
time two marriageable daughters, therefore it is likely that himself was of a
fit age at the time of his going out of the Country, to choose whether he
would have gone or stayed. Well, Lot left his Country, and so showed himself
a Pilgrim and stranger on earth together with Abraham, for though he inherited
not Canaan, yet because he left the false gods which were served by his kindred
in Mesopotamia, to serve the true God which Abraham went to serve, it prooveth,
that he had faith in that God and was accepted to life.

You must all learn to be ready to forsake false gods and cleave to the true,
if ever you desire to inherit salvation. Now the false gods that we are in
danger to serve, are the World, and the things of the World, and our selves,
Pleasure, profit, credit, ease, and the like, these be your Idols, these be the
things that men in our times and Countries do erect as it were stumbling
blocks unto themselves, the belly, the back, the purse, the profits and
contents of this world, these we seek for more then for Gods favor, these we
long for more then grace, to get or keep these we leave the ways of God, we
give our affections and thoughts more to these then unto God, and will not obey
his blessed Commandments farther then these wicked Idols will give us leave.
Now you can no more serve God and Mammon and the belly, then you can serve God
and Dagon or Ashtaroth, or God by Jupiter and Juno. The Lord has employed me
now thirty years or thereabouts, to call you from following these unhappy
Idols, at length rid your hands of them and do the same thing in effect, that
Lot did when he left his Country and came into the land of promise with
Abraham.

2. He was troubled at the evil conversation of the Sodomites.

2 Pet. 2.8.


But another good deed of Lots we read of, and that is, he vexed his righteous
soul from day to day with the unclean conversation of the Sodomites, and it
is said, he was laboring against, for so much the word in proper signification
of it does express. He was burdened with it, and even labored under it as
under a burden, he was also upon the rack with it. He grieved so for it, that
he would feign have amended it, and not finding that possible it was a torture
unto him to see it growing more and more. This is a good thing to grieve at the
common faults and sins, I beheld the transgressour and was grieved, Psalm.
119.136.
Psalm. 119.158. and in another place, Rivers of tears gush out of mine eyes,
because men keep not thy Law. If we hate sin, if we love the glory of God,
or the souls of men, we must needs be grieved to see that done which our
selves hate, and which tends to Gods dishonor and the damnation of men. If
we grieve for sin we shall be preserved from the contagion of it, and keep our
selves unspotted in the common pollution: but if we have not so much grace as
to bewail it, we shall quickly show our selves so weak as to fall to the
imitating it at least in some degrees. Yea the Prophet Ezekiel notes, that the
mourners were marked out for deliverance, as Noah was in the destruction of
Sodom and Gomorrha.

Now come let me enquire of you my Brethren. Do you take the sins of others
heavily? do they pierce your hearts with sorrow? Are they burdens to you? Ah,
how many do rather rejoice, in seeing other men's evils in secret, and join
with them in the same excess of riot, are glad to see and hear lewdness from
others, So in drunkenness.
and to join with them it. What are these? how far from deserving to be
called righteous? But even of those that be righteous (as we hope there are
some) so far inferior are they to Lot in goodness, though having far
better means then any Sodom affoorded, they ought also to be better persons,
that few tears serve them, and little sorrow is found in them for the common
sins. The common oaths, cursing, Sabbath-breaking which are every where
rife, do not grieve them at all. One little trifling loss or cross has made
them more take on with sorrow, then all the disorders of the Land. It is but
weak goodness that is not sensible of the contrary both in it self and
others too, and it is but little sensible of it that is but little grieved for
it.

If you say, our land is not like Sodom that we should live in it so as Lot
did there.

I answer, God be thanked in some things it is not, and in public the faults
break not out that there were done openly, but many of the sons of Sodom
are barefaced amongst us, and we look upon them without remorse. You must be
sorry that you have not been more sorry for the public iniquity. Surely if a
scourge come it shall take you away with the rest, because you have not showed
your zeal of Gods glory and detestation of sin in the rebellions of the rest.

And now set you to it, set you to it, it is said, that Lot did put his soul
upon the rack, he was an actor in this sorrow, he put himself upon it. I say
he was even willing to exercise himself in grieving for their naughtiness,
and he strove to make his sorrow piercing. O you must labor to do this as
well as any other good work, to chafe and grudge and be furious against such a
sinner and such a sinner, to jest, scoff, and gird, or rail, and bitterly
inveigh against such and such sins, be such strains and flashes of wit and
anger, as may be found in men of no true holiness, but to get alone and even
sell over himself to sighing, mourning, and lamentation for the common sins
that are every where run into, this can hardly be ascribed to any thing but
true piety, if the sins be such as do not in any particular respect touch a
man's self in way of wrong and injury. Indeed to grieve for such sins of
others, may seem in some respect as a more difficult thing, so a more sure
sign of truth then to grieve for ones own sins, you shall see men driven to
tears for their own offenses in respect of shame or loss, and sometimes
terror of heart, but grieving for the common sins can hardly proceed from
any thing but charity to them as they be men, and hatred against sin as it is
sin. If a mere friend of our own have offended, we are so tender of his
reproach, because it is somewhat linked with our own, that many men can
blubber for it exceedingly. O let us love the Commonwealth so well and the
state of mankind, as to yield some of our sorrow to quicken us in prayer
against their sins.

3. He was hospital.
And now a third good deed of Lots is, he was hospital in that unhospitall
City, you know he entertained the Angels. Herein he did follow the steps of
his Uncle Abraham, it is a good thing when a man carries the virtues which he
has seen amongst his friends as it were home with him, or about him
whethersoever he goes, and becomes a practitioner of them in all places. Of
Lots hospitality you may read, Genesis 19.2, 3. he entreated the Angels whom he
took for men to lodge in his house, and gave them the best entertainment he
could, yea and hazarded himself to defend them from the insolent attempt of
the brutish Sodomites. This is a work worthy to be imitated to be given to
hospitality, forget not to entertain strangers, Heb. 13.2. 1 Pet. 4.9.
use hospitality one to another without grudging. Gajus has this commendation,
that he was the Host of the Church, Romans 16.23. and a Minister is expressly
commanded to be hospital. This is a rich man's duty, I mean his that has some
indifferent proportion of wealth, he that has but one bed or room must lie
abroad himself, or sit up all night if he lodge strangers. But of those that
have to spare, the Lord requires a free communicating of what they have to
others. May not we be strangers? may not our children and near friends be
strangers? will not our hearts tell us? that it would be a very ill part in
them that should in such case neglect us.

But I am to commend unto you a kind of hospitality somewhat of another
nature, a stranger of any fashion by means of Innes, which it seems that age
did not know, is able to be hospital to himself with his money, even to buy
all things needful: but alas you have poor neighbors and kinsmen in the same
Town, or near hand inhabiting, O invite them to your houses, make them
cheerful with a good meal now and then, that have little provided at home.
This Hospitality has been formerly much practiced at this season of the
year, Christmas.
and certainly it is a fit season to practice it. If we would show our selves
glad for our Lords coming into the world, let us refresh his poor members
that they may rejoice with us. Some men be not rich enough to invite many of
their wealthy neighbors, but many be of so much ability that they may well
invite those of lower rank, to whom their own ordinary provision will be
better then a banquet to some wealthier persons. Let Lots example commend unto
you this hospitality.

Another good deed we have of Lot, He went out, and earnestly, 4. He entreated
the Sodomites to desist from their villainy.
yet lovingly and gently entreated the Sodomites to desist from their villainy,
My Brethren I pray do not so wickedly, and again, to these men do nothing,
for therefore came they under my roof, Genesis 19.7, 8. He would feign have
stopped these miscreants from their abominable attempt; If we see men rushing
into sinful courses we shall do a good office of charity if with all good
terms and gentle language we dissuade them from wickedness. If we must
reproove after a sin, sure we must dissuade aforehand: Eli dissuaded his
sons from persisting in evil, Abigail dissuaded David from murder; what
sin we hinder not to our best power, that we cause to be written in our own
score, and inwrap our selves within the guilt of it. Who would not entreat his
neighbor hard not to drink a cup of poison? If therefore any man have done
the contrary, instigated others to sin, and egged them forward rather then
held them back, surely his offense is great, he has been not alone a helper
but a father of the fault, and unless he repent must answer for it as much as
the principal. But though you have not forgotten your duty in so high a degree
as to moove others to evil, yet if you have so much neglected your duty as to
forbear to dissuade and hinder them, either out of carelessness or fear, you
are to be humbled for it, as an effect of want of love and zeal. And now I
pray you do this good office often, if you see a man going about an evil
thing, take up Lots words and say, I pray you Brethren do not so wickedly,
entreat him to forbear the doing of the like for the future. A loving
entreaty will sometimes prove of great efficacy. Had they been any but
Sodomites, Lot should not have been so churlishly rejected.

If you say, I shall but loose my labor.

I answer, First, what if you do? you have lost many worse labors. Secondly,
I say who can tell? why will you think so hardly of your Brother?

Why I have tried already?

I answer, God may give better success now. Again I answer, though he hearken
not, you shall not loose your labor, for you shall show love and obey Gods
commandment and receive a reward from him.

Yet another good deed of Lots was that he fought to deliver his sons in Law,
and persuaded them to get them out of Sodom too. 5. He sought to deliver his
sons in law.
We should labor not alone to get out of Sodom our selves, but to help
others out also, whether it be out of the sins or out of the punishment of
Sodom. We should detest that selvish humor which prevails with many, if
themselves escape danger, they care not what becomes of others. O self-love is
a fruit of brutishness, charity of a right understanding. Live not like
beasts, if they see peril approaching, they run away for their own
safeguard and never consider of the rest: let us strive to draw as many as we
can out of sin and misery.

6. For a good while he kept close to his Uncle Abraham.
The last good thing I will note, though it should have been brought in before
as being done before, was this, for a good while together he kept close to his
Uncle, went with him into Egypt, came with him out of Egypt and dwelt near
him, I mean in Canaan. It is a good thing to love the company of good men, and
delight to dwell with or near them, and happier had it been for Lot if he
had not suffered himself to be divided from his Uncle. Let men learn to count
it a great happiness to dwell near to good neighbors, and let them take
heed that a little thing do not separate them from such. And so much for Lots
goodness.

His faults. 1. He chose to dwell in a fertile place among sinful men.
Now his badnesse. And I will begin there where he began, first to show it. He
chose rather to dwell in a rich fertile place amongst vile sinful men then
with some earthly inconveniences with a godly and faithful man, so showing
too great a love to riches, and too small a love to goodness. I beseech you if
any of you be so minded that you will take notice of it as a fault. To be so
much engaged to earthly things, that for the more easy obtaining of a large
quantity thereof, a man can be content to pitch his Tents in Sodom and to
dwell there, is too great a proof of a worldly minded man. It was the
beginning of Lots ruin. In choice of your habitation look chiefly to the
good of the soul. If you do not, be assured that some way or other God will
cross you as he did Lot. We shall less bear out those faults with impunity
for which the godly in Scripture have smarted before us, because men did not
receive warning by the dealing of God with them. The brother is whipped more
severely that seeing another brother corrected before him was bold yet to rush
into the same fault. Do not commit the fault that cost Lot so dear a price.
Leave not a good place for the soul to get a great benefit for the body; let
not the world sway you, neither wholly nor chiefly in choosing the place of
your habitation. Lot should have said, Uncle, so much content and good do I
receive from your good self unto my soul, that I will make an hard shift
before I will leave you, yea I will rather abridge my cattle then loose your
company, or at least, I will be content to take a place near you though it be
not so fat and fruitful as some other places: Do you, as your own
understanding (now that you see the whole carriage of things) will teach you,
that Lot ought to have done. And so much for this fault.

2. He continued to dwell in Sodom among great sinners.
Now again, worldliness continued to grow stronger in Lot, for he continued
to dwell in Sodom, even though they were exceeding great sinners. It was well
done that he grieved for their sins, it would have been better done if he
had forsaken the City. He might have departed of his own accord with far
less loss, then God forced him out at length. Sure it is a fault, if a man
can possibly remove, to make his constant abode in an extreme wicked place,
where heinous and foul sins are usually and impudently committed, for if a
man's self escape the infection, yet it is too too probable that his children
shall be defiled, and catch the sins of the places as the daughters of Lot
and most of his servants did, for had they been righteous they should have
escaped with him. And most times if any man that has any the least goodness,
do suffer himself to be so neighboured, it is a fruit of some carnal passion
or other, in favor of which he hardens himself to endure such a miserable
thing, as the continual hearing and beholding of great wickedness. Let us
take heed no such thing in inveigle us to pitch out Tents in any Sodom.

But again, Lot I think, offended in going about to match his daughters with
any of the wicked generation of the Sodomites. What could he find none other
in all the world to give his children for wives but to two wicked men in that
wicked City? Would he be content to have his children, his childrens childrens
children, and all his posterity to live in that little hell, and to be
endangered unto the like abominations? Surely the love of the world prevailed
here with him more then it ought to have. It is a fault too common with us,
many a Father is regardlesse how bad the place and family be into which he
matcheth his daughter, so the state be good. Be the Town as bad as Sodom, and
the person as profane as these men, yet a good living will make them to plant
their children in such a garden, as it were, or wilderness rather. I cannot
conceive but that this is a proof of man's too high esteeming of outward
things, and I beseech you Fathers learn of Lot, provide better for the placing
of your children.

Another fault of Lots is, 3. He offered his two daughters to the Sodomites.
that he did offer his two daughters to the Sodomites, saying. Do to them what
seems good in your eyes. Out of a desire to save his guests from villainy he
prostitutes those that should have been dearer to him then any guests: and so
would redeem the strangers from wrong with the hazard of his childrens
chastity. He is to be somewhat excused by the present occasion, in that hurrie
and distemper he had not leisure to consider well of the thing he did, but
through have was pushed forward to do so great an hurt unto the two maids.
He does evil here that good may come of it, a thing that S. Paul would never
allow, for he says concerning it, God forbid. The doing of evil is simply
sinful, Romans 6.2.
the suffering of evil not so, wherefore a man should resolve rather to be a
patient in the greatest evil then an agent in the far lesser. In doing any
evil a man does disobey God and transgresses his Law, in suffering it he does
alone receive misery to himself: now the greatest misery is not so great an
evil as the least sin. It behooveth us to take heed that our carnal reason
do never so over-sway us, no not on the sudden, that we should consent to
act any evil for the procuring of any good. And if we have done otherwise,
we are to impute it to our selves as a great weakness, 4. He lingered in
Sodom till the Angels took him by the hand.
and so to confess it and humble our selves for it before God.

Again, Lot lingered in Sodom till the Angels took him by the hand and in a
kind of gracious violence set him in safety against his will. Willing he was
to escape the destruction which was now falling upon Sodom, but loath he was
to save his life at so dear a rate as the loosing of all his substance. It is
a sin to cleave so fast in affection to goods, as not to be willing with the
loss of all to save out lives. He loves riches too well that will cast his
life upon great danger for the saving of them, and not gladly leave them all to
free his life from perdition. Satan could say, Skin for skin and all that a
man has will he give for the redemption of his life. Job 2.4.
If we have at any time found our heart so glewed to wealth, that we have
been lingering about it, to the manifest indangering of our lives, much more
our souls, we should even heartily condemn our selves for too great lovers of
riches.

Another sin in Lot, was, that he was too timorous and durst not commit
himself to the Mountains (whither yet he was feign at length to fly) for
fear least some or other mischief might befall him there, and therefore was
he so over-importunate for the sparing of that City, because it was little,
might he not as well have trusted the Angels direction as his own conceits,
and sought and expected safety in the Mountains, when they commanded him to
escape thither. Doubtless, it is a fault not to trust God with our welfare,
but to cast in our heads, what evil may befall us there where he does send us
for safety. Let us not yield to our own fancies, nor frame peril to make us
discontent with that estate to which God does call us, for we shall find at
length, that our own hopes will deceive us, and we shall be never the farther
of from danger, because we followed our own heads. Let me go to Zoar (says
he) and my soul shall live, but after, he found that his soul could not live
with comfort there. Live where God would have us live, and look for his
protection there where it shall please him to appoint us to live.

6. He was twice drunken.
Now I come to his two last offenses, he suffered himself to be made drunken by
his daughters two several times, one shortly after another. You see how a good
man may be overtaken with grievous sins, and drawn by those whom he loves
and trusts to grievous abominations. O let us fear our selves and pity
others, and take heed we suffer not our nearest friends to be a snare unto us.
Especially beware of drunkenness, it is not alone a great offense it self,
but lays us open to all other crimes. Make a man drunken, and he will easily
be drawn to defloure his own daughter. Keep your selves from excessive
drinking of wine or strong drink. It is raging, it is mocking, it will change
you into very beasts, and make you run into such crimes, as your souls at
other times would even loath to think of. Labor to be temperate, or else you
do hardly be chaste and modest. Deprive not your selves of reason by pleasing
your palate, expose not your selves to the danger of the foulest of all sins,
by so base a pleasure as satisfying the taste with the relish of this liquor.
And all you Governors and Magistrates, set your selves with all diligent
severity to prevent and beat down drunkenness; if this offense abound, all
other evils will abound with it.

Now we come to Lots benefits. First, His benefits. 1. God gave him repentance.
God drew him out of his sins and gave him repentance, else S. Peter's words
had not been true, that called him a just man. O how great a mercy of God is
this? not to call us from the state of corruption at first, but when we have
almost departed back again to folly, to recall us from our grievous sins,
and heal our wounded souls, by causing us to repent unfainedly. Presume not
on this mercy, but if you have found it, praise God most earnestly for it, and
let not the greatness of sin discourage you from returning unto God again,
for such is his grace, that he will readily receive you after such wanderings.

Again, you see that God gave him riches great store, the Lord can give the
same to other of his people with as plentiful a hand, but if he do not, you
see in Lot what cause there is not to murmr; for riches did undo Lot almost,
and therefore was God feign to take them all again, because he could not so
use them as not to set his heart too much upon them. If God has been pleased
to grant you these things, let Lots example make you careful to keep your
hearts from being too much inamoured of them.

Further, 2. He and his were delivered out of the burning of Sodom.
Lot obtained a gracious deliverance for himself and his wife and his
daughters out of the burning of Sodom, he lamented their sins and escapes
the punishment. Learn the best way to save your selves from common strokes,
even by bewailing the common sins, and prooving your selves to be righteous
persons. Yea, God yielded much to Lots weakness in granting him leave to go
to Zoar, and saving that City also for his sake. Surely God is as ready also
now to pass by weaknesses, and will much more willingly grant the better
digested petitions of his servants.

Now Lots misery, His afflictions were four.
first he was taken Captive and lost all his goods. Secondly, he lost his
goods again in Sodom. Thirdly, his Wife. Lastly, he was plagued with wicked
children, that drew him to grievous offenses. Prepare to loose all you have,
especially if you find your souls over-earnestly addicted to them, and cause
not God to pull them out of your hands by setting your hearts upon them.
Prepare your hearts to loose your yoake-fellowes by some strange and unexpected
accidents. Prepare to have your children naught and wicked, and take heed that
your own folly in choosing for wealths sake an evil place of habitation be
not an instrument of making them such, yea learn to be thankful that God has
yet saved you from such miseries, and make your smaller crosses seem lighter
to you then else they would, by comparing them with these so heavy and
burdensome crosses.

Now what became of Lot after all this, the Scripture does not speak, and
therefore here we leave and will speak two words of his Wife also: first, the
benefits she received. Secondly, the sin she committed. Thirdly, the
punishment that fell upon her.

Lots wife. Her benefits. 1. Delivered from Captivity.
The benefits she received were two, first she was redeemed from the Captivity
of the Kings that had taken her self, Husband, Daughter and whole Family
prisoners in the Conquest of Sodom, where they dwelt at that time, and upon
their deliveance neither she nor her husband had the grace to consider of it,
and to remoove from Sodom and dwell again in some better place nearer
Abraham. 2. Delivered out of the burning of Sodom
Secondly, she was delivered out of the burning of Sodom together with her
Husband and Daughters, saving that she made the benefit unprofitable to her
self by her sinning.

Her sin, she looked back to Sodom.
And her sin though it seemed little in respect, yet indeed was very great.
The matter was small, the transgression was great, as in great poison,
fulness may be found in a small quantity of liquor, even in a drop or less
then a drop. She was forbidden by the Angel that sent her forth to look
back to Sodom and yet expressly against that charge she did look back,
the cause of that prohibition may seem to have been this, the Lord knowing
her too eager affection to the goods she left behind her, would have her now
cast off that inordinate passion, and accepting the goodness of God in giving
her her life for a prey, not so much as to turn and look toward Sodom, but
trust God for goods who had now vouchsafed them life, but she belike thinking
(as many of us would have thought) as good die as be sent away a beggar and
destitute of all things, could not keep her heart constant in taking notice of
the great benefit of escaping the fire, but out of grief to leave house and
all after her, turned back to salute them once again with her eye. This sin
was compounded of disobedience to God speaking in the Angel, and dis-esteeme
of the present mercy and over-grieving the loss of her wealth.

Take heed you give not your selves leave to commit a thing expressly
forbidden, for usually much naughtiness concurreth to produce such an act, so
the Lord that searches the heart accounts that great, which your blindness
makes you to esteem nothing, and so to punish it many times with some heavy
punishment. As it befell this woman, Her punishment.
her punishment was to be turned into a Pillar of salt. The Lord instantly
smote her with death, and taking her soul from her body changed the body into
a pillar, which whether it be called a pillar of salt, because it was of that
matter, or because of the everlasting continuance of it, as an everlasting
Covenant is called a covenant of salt, I cannot determine. The latter seems
to me the more probable, howsoever she is set forth to us for an example, by
which we may inform our selves thus much, that when God has chastened us and
by our chastisements taken pity upon us and granted us deliverances, and yet
we profit so little by both as to continue faulty in the same faults, we
shall then find his hand more heavy upon us by some exemplary blow, as it is
noted by David, that though the Lord brought the people out of Egypt, yet he
did after destroy them in the wilderness that did not believe. Let us fear
least the Lord set us up also as Monuments of his just severity when he finds
us not reformed by former goodness and gentleness. (*)

THE TWELFTH EXAMPLE.
OF LOTS Daughters, and others of that time.
WE have finished the things that are recorded of Lots self and his Wife.
Next let us tell you what is recorded of his two Daughters. Their names, their
birth, their death the Lord vouchsafes not to mention, and of their life not
much is written, and that which is tends all to their reproach.

First, Lots daughters had no virtues, their vices.
good deeds we have none for which to commend them, or in which to follow them,
but bad deeds too many, considering how great they were.

Their first sin was, 1. They agreed together about two grievous crimes.
that they consulted together and agreed about a most abominable sin, nay a
pair of grievous crimes at once. In which, the firstborn did make the
motion, and the younger gave her consent. In the consultation about it, see
what reason induced, and what it is to which they were induced by that reason.
The reason is, 1. Their Fathers age, Genesis 19.31.
who being now shortly to leave the world, they would not have his offspring
perish in themselves. 2. The want of other men to company with them, there is
not a man in all the earth to come in unto us after the earth. They wanted
other husbands to beget children of them in lawful matrimony; Surely their
late abode in Zoar might cause them to know, that the whole world was not
destroyed, if they meant that there was never another man left with whom they
might join themselves, they did beguile themselves too too palpably, for only
Sodom and Gomorrha, and Admah and Zeboim, four Cities of the plain were
consumed with fire from Heaven, the rest stood in their former estate. Zoar
they had seen standing and left it with their Father, and seeing they dwelt
upon a Mountain, they could not but discern other Cities round about, for
that Country was full of Towns and people. It is like therefore, that they
meant none near unto us, none of our blood and kindred. But why should they
make doubt of marrying any other besides their own kindred. They had been
betrothed to husbands in Sodom, might they not as well marry any other
Cananite as a Citizen of Sodom. It is apparent that their reasons were
frivolous and vain, yet upon them they build a full resolution of committing
two fearful offenses, for they agree together saying, Come let us make our
Father drink Wine, and then let us lie with him to preserve seed of him. They
would seem each to other to be carried with libidinous fancies as if lust led
them, but that a desire of preserving seed was the motive to the villainous
design.

We see how man's nature is easily drawn by weak and poor grounds to run
into very loathsome and foul crimes. Better the world should have wanted
continuance and ended in their persons, then have it stored with an incestuous
offspring. No other meeting together of man and woman, if it had been in the
way of Matrimony, is simply and of it self unlawful, but only that of
Parents and children, for there was a time when the Brother married the sister
without fault, as in the beginning when the world had no other persons in it
but brethren and sisters, but never at any time was it lawful for the
daughters to have the Father or the Mother the son. This therefore was the
most unlawful mixture in the same kind and of different Sex that possibly
could be. Yet upon a slender pretext that they knew not how to come by any
other man, and so their Fathers posterity should perish, they consent to
accomplish it. Had they not been made more then ordinarily immodest with the
conversation of impure Sodomites, they would have been restrained with shame
and blushing, from opening any such thought each to other, had it been to have
solicited another man, much more their Father. But custom of hearing and
seeing shameful deeds will banish shame quite away, and make men bold to
manifest their wicked conceits one to another, which else modesty would never
suffer them to speak of.

Here indeed the more aged maiden is most blameworthy, for the Spirit of God
witnesses that she was the first moover to this lewdness, but the younger
was greatly to be blamed also, for she consented to such a motion. Let those
that be of more age take heed of giving wicked counsel to the younger, and
let the younger take heed of opening their ears to lewd advice. Let us
beware we suffer not our selves to be drawn upon pretense of I know not what
necessity or urgent occasion, to resolve on things plainly sinful, especially
such as are extremely gross and unnatural. No necessity can excuse an evil
deed, much less when it is none other but a counterfeit and false appearance
of necessity. Would these sisters have deferred their desires a while, they
might have found their Father at length willing to have left that hole in a
Mountain, and to have conversed again amongst men. Why had they not rather
persuaded him to leave that solitary kind of living, and betaken himself to
his Uncle Abraham, who was not grown either so niggardly or unkind, but that
he would have welcomed them with good entertainment. Why had they not taken up
any resolution, rather then venture on this monstrous abomination? Let not the
Devil and carnal reason beset us so far, as to feign to ourselves a
necessity of evill-doing, and then to grow bold to do evil.

But what did they do now, to make their Father incestuous? Surely make him
drink wine not moderately and in due quantity, for then his wits would have
been his own still, and his sanctified conscience would have armed him
sufficieently against all their most wanton carriages; yea the gravity of his
countenance and parentall authority would have affrighted them from lascivious
words and gestures, that tended to produce such an effect. They therefore make
him stark drunk with wine, making him by little and little take into him such
a quantity as would bury his understanding, conscience and all, and turn him
into a bruit creature, and then they doubt not but that they may easily allure
him to commit folly with them. A fearful sin it is to resolve before hand
upon such a wickedness as this, and that also as a loade-stone to draw on
another worse wickedness. To make one drunk for any cause is bad enough, but
to make him drunk of purpose to make him filthy after, that is much worse.
Here is a most wicked end propounded, which would make a thing it self
otherwise lawful utterly sinful, if done for such a purpose. Here is also a
means utterly wicked, though it had been used for a most lawful end, but
when end and means are both so remarkeably and exorbitantly sinful, how great
was that sin. Had they began alone to drink for cheerful refreshing of
themselves and their old Father, and then one cup drawing on another had at
unawares made both themselves and their Father drunk, and then unpurposedly
fallen to wanton embraces and so to incest, that had been sin enough. But to
take advice upon it, to determine before hand, that is, to conclude fully that
they would do such a thing, this shows that they had smothered their
consciences, and were indeed void of all goodness.

O take heed of giving your selves leave deliberately to sin, take heed of
setting down a wicked conclusion in your minds, and saying, come and let us
do this or this that you know is naught. This is not to slip into the mire but
to wallow in it, this is a presumptuous and a wilful sin. This is to yield
your selves captives to sin, and to show your selves servants of it. And if
any one has in such sort sinned, great repentance is needful to wash away so
great a crime.

But if they had agreed in have to perpetrate this lewdness and yet before the
time came of acting it, had called to mind the loathsomenesse of the sin, and
repenting of their naughty intention, forborne to proceed, the matter would not
have been so foul, then it might have been attributed to weakness and
have. But they go on in it, the elder she first begins, and then she renewes
the matter to her Sister, who is easily persuaded to follow her, and so they
both consent to do evil and perform it also. This is a great aggravation of
sin, that if one have some leisure betwixt the resolving and executing, yet
he has persisted in his wicked resolution, and wanted the grace to change his
mind. Persisting in an evil purpose, shows much blindness of mind and
hardness of heart, and proves that God has for punishment of wilfulness even
given one over to his own hearts lusts.

But now the elder begins to offend, as it were to imbolden her Sister, as if
she should say, I will begin if thou will come after, I will do it to night
if thou will second me another night, so she sins of purpose to give her
Sister a bad example, to animate her to the like. Those sins are very
grievous, in which a man seeks not alone to satisfy his own evil desires,
but also to corrupt another, and draw him to the like evil. The sin is
greater by how much more love of sin is discovered, and he loves sin
exceeding much, that labors to increase the number of its servants.

Further, having layne with her Father, she speaks of it to her Sister,
rather in way of boasting then out of shame, and persuades her also to do the
like. It is a wickedness of an high nature to commit great sins, and after
be touched with no remorse for them, yea rather to talk of them with a bold
face, as if they were deeds at least not deserving blame, and when we have
done evil, to press our examples upon others to imitate. It seems the
younger Sister would not have followed, but that the elder provoked her the
second time. To use a kind of importunity toward another, and press them
again and again to naughtiness, is a proof of one set upon sin with a
full bent of will.

Now the second Sister, she follows her Sisters evil deeds, and evil
counsel, and they commit the same sin the second time with the same
wilfulness, for the elder is as guilty of her Sisters incest as of her own.
Men having transgressed the bounds of modesty, Qui semel verecundiae limits
transiluerit, graviter impudentem esse oportet.
grow extremely careless, and easily commit the second time what they have
ventured upon the first. It is more difficulty to forbear repeating of a sin
then committing it, as it is to drive out an enemy then to keep him out. Give
sin a strong denial at first, so shall we be soonest rid of it.

Now let us consider the offenses themselves, Their own sin, they make their
Father drunken.
for hitherto we have looked alone into certain aggravations of them. First to
make a man drunk, this is a grievous sin, a purposed lying in wait to
overcome another with wine or strong drink, is a foul fault; it has its
original ever in some further evil intention, either to laugh at the
offenders, or otherwise to wrong them, as here, and draw them to some
wickedness or inconvenience, which else they would not be drawn unto. He
seeks mischief to his neighbor, that seeks to spoil him of his
understanding, and makes him a beast, that he may draw him to beastly deeds.
Come now and consider your selves, if none of you have thus sinned against your
brethren. He is worse then a drunkard, that is a maker of drunkards; a man may
be drunk of mere weakness, but it is wilfulness that causes another to be
drunken. He loves this sin more, that causes it in another, then he that
commits the same himself; If any of you have so sinned against his brother, he
is a very lewd man, and must answer for that sin before God with more
severity then the person that has been drawn into it by his means. Much
repentance therefore is required of such an offender.

In keeping himself sober for an evil end, he is worse then if himself had
been drunken for company. These two sisters did keep themselves free from
excess, that they might better abuse their own reason to work upon their
Fathers unreasonablenesse. Had they been all overcome of wine, incest had not
so easily followed from drunkenness; but now that the man is swallowed up of
wine, and the woeman not so, they prevailed more easily to make their Father
lewd. It is a drunken sobriety that is directed to uncleanesse, they would not
be drunken because they desired to be filthy. Some men boast that themselves
have borne their cups wherewith another has been overcome, but that
soberness makes them greater offenders, then if they exceeded measure in
drinking. Wherefore you must blame your selves with exceeding detestation of
your selves, if you have abused a thing otherwise virtuous to make another man
more vicious. Thou made another to take cup after cup, that when he had lost
his wits, and thou kepst thine, thou might better prevail to draw him unto
further wickedness, thy soberness was as bad and much worse then his
drunkenness. O that you would see and lament your extreme ungraciousnesse in
this abusing both wit in yourselves, and want of wit in others.

But now Lot is drunken and fitted for any wickedness, the two Sisters in
their turns go to bed to him and solicit him to abuse their bodies, and
prevail with him, because he had not reason to know what he did. Incest is a
most unnatural crime, yet the wicked nature of man is apt to run into it,
and that wilfully. O what a filthy heart has a man and woman, that can
transgress all the dictates of reason to satisfy impure desires. No person
comes amiss to lust, the Father will serve as well as another man, when the
lewd desire has prevailed, they care not with whom the fault be committed so
that it be committed. Have none of you given way so far to libidinous
desires, as to mix your selves unlawfully and without marriage with those, to
whom you might not have drawn near, no not in the warrantable embraces of
Matrimony? Is there not some incestuous man or woman amongst you, yea some that
has not out of weakness but purposely run into incest? The crime is not so
often committed in so high a degree, but yet sometimes it falls out in the
world, that men may learn there is more evil in their nature then they would
have believed, but that experience teaches it; we have not another example of
it in Scripture, but here are two at once, that we might learn to know how
bad a nature we have. And so much for their sins common to both, making their
Father drunk, and then going to bed to him, for matter, and for manner
purposely and without remorse and without any sorrow after, for when they had
borne children, they give them such names as prooved that they rather boasted
of the crime then bewailed it, Ammon the son of my people, Moah of my Father,
as if they had rejoiced at their happiness in being with child by their own
Father. It is a cursed thing to sin, more to be so hardened as not to lament
it afterward, most to make a man's self glad of it.

Their special sins.
Their special sins are, the elder persuades to the sin, then gives a bad
example, and after again incourageth her Sister, and the younger yields and
follows. O see this naughtiness and take heed. Hitherto of Abraham's sons,
servants, and wives, and one of his children and of his Kinsman Lot, his Wife
and daughters.

Abraham's confederates.
Now of some others that lived with him, first his confederates Aner, Eshcol,
and Mamre, secondly, Ephron the Hittite, thirdly, King Pharaoh of Egypt,
fourthly, King Abimelech. Then of the Kings that did take Lot and so of the
Sodomites. Now for Aner, Eshcol, Their virtues.
and Mamre, they were three Brethren, Hittites, of whose birth and death
nothing is revealed, but in their lives two things are recorded deserving our
observation and imitation. 1. They were friends to Abraham.
First, they were friends and confederates with Abraham appears, Genesis 14.13.
Secondly, they did faithfully perform the office of friends, and confederates.
For the first, these three Brethren were in league with Abraham, joined in a
Covenant with him for mutual help of each other against any that should wrong
any of them. Their league it may seem was offensive and defensive.

It is a wise and good part to live in friendship with godly men and to be knit
to such in covenants of amity, It is a good thing to be a a friend to the godly.
peace and mutual help, as Hiram King of Tire was in covenant with David and
with Solomon his son after him, and it is recorded to his praise that he was
always a lover of David. For by this means great benefits are brought unto a
man.

First, he shall see their good conversation and hear their wise words, and
enjoy their good counsel and their godly prayers and so be in possibility to
be won to goodness by them, at least to a virtuous and civil conversation
through their means, Prove. 13.20.
for he that walks with the wise shall be made wise, as he that walks with
sinners shall be made worse by them. He that comes where sweet spices and
ointments are stirring, does carry away some of their sweet savor even though
he think not of it, so shall a man receive some savor and taste of goodness
from good men, if he live friendly and familiarly with them.

Again, the Lord had undertaken with Abraham, to be a friend to his friends
and an enemy to his enemies, and to bless them that blessed him as well as to
curse them that cursed him. Wherefore in entertaining friendship with them, a
man does interest himself into some degree of Gods favor and blessing
according to that promise, for God has tied himself as well to all Abraham's
sons, even all the faithful, as well as to himself; you see the profit of
such association with good men.

Wherefore they must be reprooved that are imbittered against godly men and are
enemies to those that love God, hating men even for goodness sake, and
persecuting them for righteousness sake, without doubt these provoke God to
fight against them and to become an enemy unto them, joining in the quarrel of
the Saints, which indeed for his sake they have taken up against them. It is an
evil thing to be a foe to those that fear God, and it shows not alone an
absence of goodness but also a great strength of wickedness. He is surely
carried by Satan at his pleasure, and a slave in a great degree to the Devil,
that cannot endure the image of God in a man. And yet our Lord tells his
servants, Mat. 10.22.
that they shall be hated of all men for his names sake.

But now let every man learn of these three wise men to make choice of godly
men for friends, familiars and allies. If a man be not himself a worshipper
and servant of God, yet let him at leastwise like and love those in whom
goodness shines. Acts 28.
The Centurian Julius, by being courteous and friendly to Paul who was then his
prisoner gate his life and the life of his soldiers for a reward, for God gave
unto Paul all the prisoners that were in the ship with him. So many blessings
as a natural man is capable of, he shall assuredly obtain from God by the
prayers of his servants, who cannot choose according to the precept of our
Savior, but pray for their persecutors, much more for their friends and
favorers.

2. They helped Abraham and kept their covenant.
Now another good thing in these three brethren is this, that according to their
covenant and confederation they did afford help to Abraham and joined their
strength with him, to fight against the four Kings for the recovering of Lot
Abraham's Cousin, and performed their part with so much courage, that Abraham
got the victory and won his brother and all the spoil of Sodom, for which
also Abraham was careful that they should have a full reward, in taking their
part of the booty which himself forbear to take.

This Example must be followed of all good men, when they have made a covenant,
they must so stand unto it, and be ready to afford such help and perform all
such offices as by covenant they have obliged themselves unto; Covenants and
agreements must be duly kept, though the things be such which come to be done
as require labor, cost, and hazard: for this is a practice of that excellent
virtue of truth or fidelity, then which nothing is more needful for the common
prosperity of humane societies, for unless men may trust one another words,
what living can there be together in the world, and without trustiness in
those that make promises, there is no believing their promises and so the
sinews of the world are as it were cut asunder or cracked. Therefore in the
15. Psalm it is indeed a sign of a godly man, that when he has sworn in
covenant or otherwise, he will not change though it should fall out to be for
his hurt. Faith requires that the thing be done which has been spoken, and
how can he challenge the name of a good man, in whom faithfulness is not
found? or how should it be expected that he will be faithful with God, whom
he never saw that is not faithful to his neighbor whom he sees daily.

Wherefore let every man compare himself with these civil righteous men, and
see whether himself has carried himself as honestly and justly as the very
light of nature instructed them to do. I mean whether he has faithfully kept
his covenants, for how shall he be able to justify his right and interest
unto the honorable name of a true Christian man, that falls short of those
virtues which many of the Gentiles have carefully practiced.

And if any man's heart accuse him of unfaithfullnesse and slipperinesse in this
kind, let him humble himself and be much ashamed of it. Should we not blush
to see Heathens exceed us in good conversation and that our righteousness is
not greater then that of the Pharisees who did at least equal the Heathen in
righteous dealing. Surely they shall never be admitted into the Kingdom of
Heaven, before whom the Gentiles have gone in good behavior of life; yet many
there be professing to be Christians, whose untrustinesse this way fills the
mouths of all that deal with them with just and grievous complaints. They be
so possessed with self-love, that when they have made a covenant promise or
compact, the least disadvantage will make them use the craftiness of wit to
wind themselves out and neglect their covenants. They know how to tie others
hard and leave themselves loose, through the looseness of an evil conscience.
These are men that be guilty of neglecting justice, judgment, and
faithfulness, and if they streine never so much at gnats and swallow these
camells, our Savior will be bold to entitle them, as he does the Pharisees,
and pronounce a woe against them, saying, Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees
Hypocrites. Learn now to be very sorrowful, if you have carried your selves
more unrighteously in this kind, then the honester sort of those have done who
lived out of the confines of the Church, and be careful to repent by their
example, that their goodness may not rise up in judgment against you and
condemn you. And resolve with your selves I pray you, now to prefer your
credit before any other thing in this earth, and to put your selves upon loss
and hazard, rather then incur the deserved reproach of men faithless and
dishonest. It is not witty tricks and devices that will save you from
reprehension before the Lord and your own consciences and other men, your name
shall rot and stink and become loathsome, if you deal untrustily, though you
paint your evil deeds over with never so fair and trim excuses. Wit is never
more abused, then when it is made a patron and a protector for falsehood and
evil dealing. Be righteous therefore in this particular, and put your selves
in mind of your promises and covenants to keep them, you cannot but know,
that this is a duty your consciences require you to do to others, even as you
desire that they should deal with you, and therefore must needs condemn you
for such falsitie which your selves with open mouth are ready to cry out
against in others. And so much for these three men.

Now for Ephron the Hittite he is named alone once, Genesis 23.10. Ephron. His
virtues.
and in his carriage we observe three things deserving commendation and fit to
be imitated by us. First, 1. He courteously saluteth Abraham.

2. He was liberal and kind to Abraham

3. He was just and true in his word.


he salutes Abraham with honorable and courteous language, saying, my Lord
hear me, and again, my Lord hear me. Secondly, he was liberal and kind
to Abraham, and offered freely to give him the Cave in which he desired to bury
Sarah. Thirdly, he was just and true in his word, he told Abraham a due and
right price, and made him good and full assurance of it, when he received the
money. The Holy Ghost has not for nothing inserted these stories of Scripture,
the virtuous deportment even of Heathens courtesy, bounty, and justice be
sweet virtues, they commend the practiser of them to the consciences of men,
they adorn him with real honor, and make him to find both love and praise
from all hearts and mouths. They be winning virtues, and give a man a kind of
command in the hearts of wise men, especially they become men of good place and
ability, for such an one was Ephron, and make him more gracious then without
them the greatest estate could. They are generous ornaments and set forth a man
more then any gallantnesse of a tire or house-roome. I beseech you fall in love
with them, and put them in continual practice, deal in courteous fashion with
all, be ready to give freely and deal justly in asking price and making
assurances. Why should a man yield himself to a stern and currish kind of
speech? Why should he be sour in his carriage, niggardly and pinching in his
conversation, and unjust and overreaching in his bargains? Nature teaches us
that which S. Paul teaches of wearing long hair, that it is a shame to him
that does it, 1 Cor. 11.14, 15.
and that the contrary is as it is affirmed, that long hair is to a woman a
glory unto her. Do not that which must needs be reproachful, neglect not that
which must needs be graceful. Be kind one to another, be bountiful, be
righteous, show that neither self-love nor the love of money does possess
you, the former of which causes austerenesse of carriage, the latter
niggardliness and unjust dealing. Press your selves to these virtues and say,
shall not religion make me more virtuous, then Heathenisme made this Hittite?
shall I be less affable, bounteous, righteous to my brethren and neighbors,
then a stranger of another nation and another religion was to Abraham who did
but sojourne near him? We are ill Scholars in the School of our blessed
Savior, if we receive not better instructions from him, then can be found in
an Heathen teacher; yea we Christians must practice the same virtues in a
better manner, on better grounds and to better ends. We must be courteous, and
for conscience sake, not barely for credit, to please God, not alone to win
men, and to those that wrong us and deal frowardly with us, not alone to them
that are courteous unto us. These virtues simply in themselves cannot entitle
us to the name of members of Christ, unless we do them with reference to
Gods Commandment and authority, but being so as it were dipped in true religion,
they will become Seals of our faith and cause unto us an ample recompense.

So I should have said of the former virtues commended in the three forenamed
Brethren, of being friends to the righteous, not so much for righteousness
sake as for other commendable parts, we see in them, or for the hope we may
have to be advantaged by them. This will not approove a man to be a true
Christian, but to love a righteous man in the name of a righteous, an Abraham
because he is an Abraham, servant to the most high God, this is a due sign of
one sanctified. But I have digressed and now return again to my Exhortation;
I pray you outstrip the Heathen in all virtues and let your conversing amongst
your neighbors be as fair and winning as that of theirs could be. So for
these men.

Pharaoh.
Now two Kings had occasion of intermedling with Abraham, the King of Egypt,
Pharaoh into whose country Abraham went to sojourne, for the famine that
oppressed Canaan, as you have it related, in Genesis 12.12, 14. in him we have to
observe some bad things and some good.

First, he showed himself lustful and wanton, His faults.

1 He was lustful.


and overslavish to a beautiful face, for he quickly hearkened to his servants
that commended Sarahs fairness to him, and took her into his house: what a
vanity and folly and excessive engagement to lustful pleasures is this in a
man? that he can no sooner hear of a fair woman, but he must covet and take
her to him. It is an impotency very incident to man's nature, to be too much led
with a fair face, with the mixture of the two colors white and red, and the
comely proportion of the face. The sense of seeing over-beares them, and they
scarce look to any thing so much in a woman, as that which Salomons experience
made him call vanity and deceitfulness, favor and beauty. We that have
greater helps to mortification, should not suffer our passions to be so far
masters over us. Surely Pharaohs Courtiers were well acquainted with his
inclination in that kind, they would not else have brought him so quick
tidings of Sarahs good face. It is a blameworthy weakness in a Heathen, much
more in a Christian, to make use of the means which God has given him to
mortify such passions, and let reason have dominion over you, rather then
eyesight and fancy. If Pharaoh had known her to be Abraham's wife, it may
seem, he would not have taken her from him for all her beauty, and be none of
you worse then Pharaoh pretended he would have been, to let beauty win you
to be adulterers, corrupters of those you know to be other men's wives. Let not
your dotage upon a comely visage, make you rush into so foul a crime as
adultery. Remember what Solomon says, desire not her beauty to thy hurt, Pro.
6.25.
be not taken with her eyelids.

Further it was a fault in him, 2. He carried himself over-churlishly to
Abraham.
that he carried himself over churlishly to Abraham, and in a kind of
revengefull passion and chiding of him, for calling her sister and not wife,
and so hazarding him to adultery, and in that passion sending him packing out
of his country. In anger and displeasure to take a man up for a fault, and
drive him away, make him be gone, is surely too great an yielding to that
distemper, which receiving of injuries does work, even a kind of heat and
unlovingnesse against the doer of them. Take you heed of giving your selves so
far over to wrath. That he did reprove Abraham was well, that he did it over
angerly and so dispatched him out of his country, this was not well. Shun
what was evil in him, and if you follow any thing, follow that was good.

And now take you notice of what was good in him. His virtues.

1. He dismissed Sarah presently when he knew her to be married.


First so soon as he perceives that God had punished him for taking Sarah, in
regard she was a married wife, he presently dismisseth her, so submitting
himself to Gods hand, and not hardening his heart against stripes. O how happy
should we be? if we could speedily observe Gods corrections, and finding out
the cause by diligent inquiry, rid our hands and houses instantly of those
offenses which are matter of provocation to him. How many miseries might we
escape by so speedy an observation of Gods hand and purpose, and a ready
yeeldance to him. Pray we to God to give us such a quick sight, such a
stooping disposition. He that gave it to an Heathen man, will much more give it
to a Christian. And if any of you have been stout against God Pharaoh-like,
let him abhor himself that has showed less piety then this Pharaoh did. It
is a proof of some softness of heart, to be driven from sin even by great
plagues.

2. He used Abraham kindly for Sarahs sake.
Another virtue in him was, that he used Abraham kindly for his sisters sake, so
was she reputed then, and by that means he grew in riches abundantly.
Favorable dealing with a man for his friends sake, especially for a fair
sister, a kinswomans sake, is a kind of bastard courtesy, and may befall a man
given to lust, yea many times the kindness of such is more won by such a
motive, then by any better deservings. Let us do the same thing, but on better
grounds, let the beauty of virtue make us esteem and countenance those that
show it, more then a beautiful Sister or Kinswoman: but better be loving to a
good man even upon such a sinister respect, then not at all to be courteous to
him.

3. He lets Abraham depart without offering any in^ury to him.
Another thing wherein this man dealed well, was that he dealt not over harshly
with Abraham, but lets him go without offering injury unto him in anything he
had. He does not take his life from him as Abraham feared he would have done,
nay nor his servants, nor his goods, nor any part of them; but takes order for
his safe passage and conduct out of his Country. Let us at least so moderate
our anger, that if it draw us to a little unkindnesse and soreness of
carriage, which is one degree of revenge, yet it may not cause us to leap over
the pale of justice, and to use unrighteousness and cruelty against those from
whom we have received injury So Pharaoh was not so far transported with
anger, though perhaps he might have been able to have done it, and it may
seem at first sight that he had cause of doing so. But it seems that the
sense of Gods great plagues had made him begin to see, that God was a dear
friend of Abraham's, and that he should have incurred further wrath for wronging
him in other things wittily, whose injuries God did prosecure so severely, even
when it was done ignorantly and unwittingly. We ought to have more fear of God
before us, then any King of Egypt. Deal justly therefore, let men go from us
with all they have, make not bold to wreake your teeme on any man, by sending
him away without his own.

But it is to be noted, that God plagued Pharaoh for his doing hurt to Abraham
though beyond his knowledge, even with great plagues, you see that sometimes
unwitting sins make God very angry with men, when done against his dear and
faithful servants, in things near and dear unto them, for he is a Father to
them and full of compassion, and pittieth their case when they sigh and mourn
before him, O with how much heavier evils will he plague them who wittingly
and of set purpose do wrong them. How shall his anger burn against
presumptuous and wilful sinners? when such heat arises upon occasion of
sins of mere ignorance. Take you heed of causing his wrath to arise against
you for such crimes, sure his sword will cut of for such faults, if it wound
and cut deep for the far lesser.

And again, see that even plagues sometimes are sent to do a man more good
then hurt, even to keep a man from such sins, as but for them he would have
committed, and to make him see and leave those which he did live in before and
not observe. It was a benefit to Pharaoh that he was so scourged, I conceive
that this Pharaoh was not a man sanctified, for then God would have warned him
by dream or some other way, as he did Ab^melech, rather then by severity of
plagues; but it is a kind of favor to any man to be kept from sin, even by
heavy plagues.

Surely the Lord will do as much for his own people, as for the Egyptians,
rather drive them out of their sins by sharpness of blows, then that they
shall live and die in them and perish. Happy is that smart or pain that
prevents a greater hurt. The Lord had rather his people should suffer any
thing, then continue in sin to their destruction, their outward fame troubles
him not so much as their inward wickedness. Therefore if you find by
experience that Gods hand has restrained you from much evil, and your own
souls can say, such and such a sin I should never have seen, never have left,
if God had not by his scourges and blows even forced me to open mine eyes, and
see them, and to cast them away even as it were against my will; be you
thankful to God for such chastisements, learn to say as David, It was good
for me that I was afflicted, Psalm. 119.71.
that I might learn thy righteous judgments. Will not men pay well for a
plaster that has a virtue to cure the sore? though it put the member to
smarting pain. Surely he does not hate sin according to its hatefulness, that
has not learned to be glad of any affliction which keeps him from sin, or
draws him out of it. And now if any of you do lie under heavy plagues, let
him become an humble suitor to God, to vouchsafe him as much goodness as he
pleased to grant unto this Pharaoh, even to show him the cause for which he
smites, and to give him notice of his faults and power to reform them, we
might hasten our deliverance out of calamities, if we would turn them to this
purpose. (*)

THE THIRTEENTH EXAMPLE.
OF ABIMELECH.
ANother man is mentioned living in Abraham's time, with whom also Abraham had
occasion to converse. Abimelech, nothing is said of his birth and death.
He was a King ruling over a city called Gerar, in the country of the
Philistines. In his country Abraham sojourned, you have the story of him, Genesis
20. and 21. v. 22. ad finem. Of his birth and death nothing is recorded. But in
his life we must observe, First, His fault. Secondly, His good deeds. Thirdly,
His crosses. Fourthly, his Benefits.

One fault alone of his we read of, viz. His fault, he was too lustful.
that he took Sarah to him, minding to make her his wife: we see him offending
in the same kind that Pharaoh King of Egypt was noted before to have offended
in. He was too too libidinous, and over-taken with an inordinate affection to
beauty. He had wives enough before, yet when one stranger singularly fair did
come into his country, he would needs take her to himself, and that not so
much by persuasion and entreaty, as by violence and strong hand, for so much
seems to be signified by the word he took her, he sent and took her,
hearing of a beautiful person, and having spoken with Abraham, and finding her
to be his sister alone and not his wife, for the former both of them affirmed,
the latter he did not inquire of so diligently as to learn the truth from
them, he resolved to have her to himself. God himself after does seem to
acquit Abimelech of any adulterous intention, for when he alleged that he had
done this in the integrity of his heart, God himself bears witness to his
uprightness in that respect saying, Genesis 20.6.
I know thou did this in the integrity of thy heart, meaning, that he thought
verily that she was only sister, not yoake-fellow to Abraham, and that if he
had known her to have been a wife he would not have taken her; so that he was
free from intending to commit adultery, but from an excessive desire of beauty
he is not free, for why should a man be so carried after women, that if he see
any beautiful Virgin, he must needs enjoy her, and not satisfy himself
with such wives as he had taken before? This verily must needs be a sin, for
God did not appoint the society of man and man for pleasures sake, that a man
might seek to satisfy himself in the delight of embracing so many fair
women as he could get, but for the increase of, and storing of the world with
people. Let us learn virtue out of other men's vices. This is the sole fault
which the Holy Ghost notes in this man, not because he had not more, but
because this alone was that wherein he wronged Abraham and Sarah, of whom the
Holy Ghost intended principally to make his history.

Now for his Virtues, diverse good things are told of him, First, in respect of
God, Secondly, of his own servants, Thirdly, of Abraham and Sarah.

His Virtues.
First, in respect of God. When the Lord appeared unto him in a vision, verse. 3.
and told him that he was but a dead man, meaning, was worthy of death, and so
should certainly die unless he reformed himself, because the woman he had
taken was another man's wife, he did defend his innocence before God, truly
alleging, that he did no way suspect her to be a married woman, because both
her self and Abraham said she was his sister, and would not be known of their
being joined together in matrimony, which also the Lord confesses to be true:
Yet so soon as God had commanded him to restore the woman, backing his
commandments with promises and threats, presently he obeyes the Lord, and
returns the matron to her husband.

1. He speedily and readily obeyed God.
It is a worthy virtue and a proof of integrity, speedily and readily to obey
the word of God, and amend those sins which before we did not know, when once
the Lord does vouchsafe to make them known unto us. This proves that the
soul is uprightly desirous to avoid all sins, when it will instantly reform
the fault once manifested. To linger and put of from time to time, and strive
to make ones self blind, and to wink and not see the sin, or not address
to a speedy reformation, that is a fruit of guilefulnesse, but to yield to God
and ones conscience, and without further delays to leave of the sin and put
it away and the occasions of it, that is a proof of sincerity at least in that
particular. When God declares a fault to us, bids us mend, promises life if
we do mend, threatens death if we will not reform; if we believe his promises
and threats, and submit to his Commandments, we show integrity, Abimelechs
Example must teach us this effect of uprightness.

If any of us be guilty of the contrary fruit of hollownesse, that we have
neglected to acknowledge a fault beginning to be revealed to us, and out of
love to the sin in respect of any profit, credit, pleasure it flattered us
withal, have rather endeavored to shut out the light by false reasonings,
then to receive the knowledge of the truth when it began to shine out of the
cloud of ignorance, we must greatly blame our selves for such hypocritical
behavior. This is that S. Paul accuses the Gentiles of, saying, that Gods
wrath is manifest from Heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of
men who detain the truth in unrighteousness, Romans 1.18.
who do as it were imprison and suppress truth and hold it down, that it may
not show it self unto them, out of a love they bear to sin and wickedness.
And sure Gods wrath shall appear evidently against all that in such manner
shall play the dissemblers with him; how much more then, if when a man cannot
so darken himself with fained pretenses, but that he must needs see and
confess the truth in his conscience, shall he be guilty of a great sin, if
still he uphold in himself a will and resolution to commit the sin, that he
could not but see to be a sin, or if he do not come to a present resolution
of amendment, but put it off till afterward and purpose to continue offending
once or twice or a little time longer. Shall not Abimelechs example condemn
our disobedience before God, if we show our selves so much inthralled to sin?

Two things show dominion of sin in a man, one where he refuses to know
though he have due means of knowledge, and a certain working of knowledge
offering to convince his conscience, another, when though he do know, yet he
resolves to persist in all evil, or at least remains irresolute and does not
determine to leave, but stands as it were unsettled in his will at least for
some time. If any of you find himself so disposed, it is certain, that sin
rules in him and he is not under grace. Wherefore you must diligently prove
your hearts in this respect, if you desire ever to enjoy the comfort of knowing
your selves to be upright. Now then learn to lend a dutiful ear to the Word
of God, and see the sins that it begins to show you, and put on a full and
settled resolution of not adventuring to commit them any more. And if any find
himself so subdued to the authority of God in all things, that he seem ready
to entertain the light of truth and to obey it, and will not struggle and
strive against the light in any thing, then may he assure himself, that his
heart is true within him, and that the Lord will surely accept him and forgive
his unpurposed offenses and sins of mere weakness and frailty. Indeed in
some one or two things that are too too gross as adultery here, a man may be
prepared to yield to truth, and yet not have an honest heart to God, but he
that in all things does thus submit himself, is surely good before the Lord.
And so much for Abimelechs obedience to God, in that he receives his
commandments here with faith and present obedience, which we shall also do,
if we seriously consider his promises of life to the obedient and threatenings
of death to the disobedient, till we work our hearts to a firm and steadfast
belief of them.

2. He acquaints his servants with Gods pleasure.
Now another good deed of Abimelech is in regard of his servants. As soon as it
is day he calls them together, and acquaints them with the things that God had
revealed unto him by a dream in the night. He does well to let his servants
know the matter, that so he might make them see the true cause of his restoring
Sarah to Abraham, and might approove of his practice therein, and learn
themselves to fear God which at least in some degree they did, for it is said,
the men feared exceedingly, verse 8. and so did not persuade him to keep Sarah
still, but rather furthered his intentions of her restitution. All governors
must be ready to acquaint their inferiors with the way that God shows them,
especially such as concern the reformation of the lives both of themselves and
of their inferiors, for it was needful that Abimelechs servants should know,
that Sarah was Abraham's wife, least they or some one of them should think of
taking her, when the King had left her, if they had remained ignorant of her
condition. Rulers therefore must show unto their inferiors the danger of sin
and what is sinful when the Lord has made them know it, that they may be an
instrument of keeping them also from evil deeds and from the punishment of
them. Learn we all of this man to tender the souls of our servants and
inferiors, and to reveal to them such things as God has taught us, that they
may be preserved from sin as well as our selves. And take heed of being
careless to show them the good and the evil way, that they sin not through
our default, because we have not duly instructed them. And let inferiors also
learn to receive such instructions with holy fear as the servants of
Abimelech did, that the words they hear may prevail to keep them also from
wickedness.

3. He admonishes Abraham and Sarah of their fault.
And now let us see his carriage to Abraham and Sarah. And first he does
admonish them both of their fault, and that not with a kind of discontent and
frowardness (as before Pharaoh had done) showing rather that he was sorrowful
he might not have Sarah then that he had attempted so far as he did, but in
gentle and yet plain manner, saying, What have thou done unto us? and again,
Wat saw thou that thou have done this? His reproof is sharp enough, and
yet as appears afterward, it was mixed with gentleness. So, it is a good
thing if our Brethren have sinned against us, to call for them or go to them,
and to demand what ground they had or what inducement to sin so, and to let
them understand, that the things they have done were such as ought not to have
been done, especially if they have gone about to draw us to sin, or to
occasion us to rush unwittingly into sin, that so we may bring them to
repentance, or at least free our selves from being partakers with them in their
sins. So did he deal with Sarah too, but not with the like earnestness, for
he considered the fault was chiefly Abraham's, who had confessed that she did
it at his entreaty, and therefore he does alone intimate a chiding to her,
saying, thy brother, and adding good counsel, He is to thee a covering of the
eyes to all that are with thee, and to all others, verse 16. and it is added,
for she was reprooved, meaning, that he intended to reproove her, and that
she did take it and was touched with it as with a reproof.

Let us resolve to behave our selves so to our brethren, even to tell them
plainly, but yet gently of their faults, and that with more or less
earnestness, as they shall appear to have been more or less faulty. Some
warmth must be in a reproof as here, but it must not be scalding hot, words of
reviling and disgrace they scald as it were, but words that tend to stir up
the conscience to a due consideration of the fault, they be duly warm and
tend to make the physic work the more kindly. If any have done otherwise,
either hiding the matter in his heart and so nourishing bitter dislike and
alienation of affection from one that has wronged him, or else opened his
mouth in a kind of rage, and used hunting and railing speeches* he must be
sorry that he was not as discreet and loving as Abimelech. To forbear reproof
of another, or to do it with bitterness of wrath be too common faults and
withal very blameworthy. The one shows want of love, the other of wisdom,
and in both we wrong our brother, in not taking the right way to help him out
of sin, and wrong our selves in making our selves at least in part guilty of
his sin. Be not you faulty in either of these kinds hereafter, but learn in
plain and mild manner to deal with them that have done you injury, and let
those that have done wrong learn of Abraham duly to accept of such reproves.

Another virtue in Abimelech is, 4. He not only restored Sarah, but also
satisfied Abraham in some sort.
that he does not alone restore Sarah, but also makes amends to Abraham, and
yields a kind of silent confession of his fault, and shows a desire of making
satisfaction, by giving him gifts; for verse. 14. It is said, he took sheep
and oxen and menservants and women-servants and gave them to Abraham, and
restored Sarah his wife. See a good duty here, we must not alone surcease to
wrong our brethren for future time, if either ignorantly or otherwise we have
begun to do them wrong, but if the wrong be manifest unto them, we must even
make them some due satisfaction by words, or deeds, or both, chiefly, if the
injury have been done wittingly and willingly. Think not that you have done
enough in forbearing to do evil to any man, but if the evil have been
evident unto him, O make also some good amends to repair the wrong, and to do
him as much good in some other kind as you have done him hurt before. That so
you may declare your selves as well sorry for the former offense, as careful
to offend so no more, and may make it appear you cease to be injurious in part
out of love to your brother, as well as for any other consideration, and may by
that means make the pardoning of the wrong more easy to him, and help to put
charity and kindness into him, which the receiving of wrongs will go near to
banish away, if some such care be not used to restore it again. But he that
either continues in a continues of injuriousnesse, or else barely breaks it
off without some demonstration of his sorrow for the fault and good affection
to the person offended, has not yet fully reformed himself though he have
ceased to do evil any further.

5. He granted Abraham liberty to dwell in his country in any place.
Another commendable thing in Abimelech is, that he does not thrust Abraham away
in a chase as Pharaoh had done, but he grante^h him liberty to dwell in his
Country in any place that shall seem good unto him. Learn of him not to be
so displeased with any man for a fault committed by him, especially if it be
done out of weakness, fear, or the like distemper as to caf him off, have no
more to do with him, or the like; but still to hope and think well of him,
especially, if he do confess his weakness as Abraham, and to afford any
due courtesy and kindness to him; over-harshnesse toward others for faults
which we find in them, is a sign of uncharitableness and pride. It shows
that we do not duly perceive our own faultiness and aptness to some other
as bad sins, yea perhaps to the very same sins, and that we do not bear
a tender compassion to them, because we have not a right knowledge of our
selves. Compare the dealing of Pharaoh before observed and Abimelechs carriage
here noted, and what your consciences tell you was the more commendable and
approveable, that imitate.

6. He takes notice of Gods goodness to Abraham.
I come to the last good deed of Abimelech. He takes notice of Gods goodness to
Abraham, saying, Chap. 21. ver. 22. God is with the in all that thou do, and
therefore accompanied with his principal Officer, one Phicol, goes and
intreates Abraham to make a league of amity with him, as you may read in the
Story, and when Abraham told him of a well of water which was taken from him by
his servants, he excuses himself, that he never knew of it before, and so
willingly restores the well and confesses Abraham's right to it, by taking the
Ewe-lambs, and consenting to name the well Beer sheba, that is, the well of an
oath, because they swore there each to other.

It is a good thing to observe the goodness of God so his people, thereupon to
think well of them and to desire to live in amity and peace with them. Why
should not we have our eyes open to see Gods blessing going along with men?
and when we see it, why should we not rather love them and wish their
friendship, then bear an evil eye toward them and malign them. It is a
sign of some goodness to acknowledge, that God is the Author of all good
success to men's affairs, herein we give him the honor of being the ruler of
the world. And it is a sign of some good will to men, when their prosperous
estate makes us rather like them and join friendship with them, then stirs
up grudging and repining at them. Surely Abimelechs carriage gives us some
probable grounds to conceive, that himself was a holy man, in that he shows
some knowledge of God, and good affection to so good a servant of God. Let us
go a little further, and strive to interest our selves into Gods blessing on
the godly, by following them in godliness. But let his willing restitution of
the Well which his servants had taken away by violence, teach us also not to
bear out the servants or people that are under our government in any unjust
carriage of theirs; yea rather, so soon as we come to the knowledge of their
naughty carriage, let us cause them to amend and to repair the wrongs that
they have done. A man's servants faults must not be imputed to him, till it be
known whether he be privy to them or not, but if when he is informed of
them, he be careless to see them amended, now is himself as guilty of the
sin as his servants were before. Thus you have the faults and virtues of
Abimelech so far as I could note them out of holy Writ.

Consider now what benefits God bestowed upon him. First, His benefits.
he made him a King. 1. God made him a King.
In those days it is evident that Kings were not rulers over so large
dominions as now they be; of old the chiefest ruler over one or two Cities and
the territories about it was a King, as in the land of Canaan there were 31
Kings, and the five Cities of the plain of Sodom and the rest had each of
them several Kings, and yet there were some Kings that reigned over whole
Countries as the King of Egypt, but in it self considered, it is a favor of
God to prefer a man unto the honor of a King, as the Scripture prooveth in
saying, Pro. 22.29.
a diligent servant shall stand before Kings and not before those of the meaner
sort; If to be in favor and account with a King, be a thing fit to be promised
as a reward of diligence, much more the enjoying of a Kingdom, therefore God
upbraides both Saul and David, when he would sharply reproove their sins, that
he had made them Kings over his people Israel; for Kings have likely, riches,
honor, and authority, by the two former of which they may partake of much
comfort themselves, and communicate much also to their friends and kindred, by
the latter they may bring much honor to God, and much good also to men in
establishing true religion and justice: Now God has not pleased to make any of
you Kings, but he has made some of you richer and greater then others, as I
may say little petty Kings in your places. Beware you pervert not this
goodness of God, by making your wealth and power a means of swelling your
hearts with pride, and imboldening you to wrong and oppress others, and
furnishing you with instruments to serve your own lusts, for the such abuse of
these benefits will turn them into poison, as it were to your souls, and
cause that they shall serve at length for the same purpose which S. James 5.3.
James says, the rust of the rich man's treasure shall do, even to consume
your flesh like fire, and to bring upon you greater damnation in another world,
to be preferred before this more then an inheritance is before the lease of one
alone year, none shall suffer so much torment and unhappiness as those that
have played the untrusty subjects to God, and made their high places a weapon
to bear out their sins. But take notice of God in your Eminency in this
present world, and labor to be so much more thankful and obedient to God,
and serviceable and profitable to men; and then shall preferrement here be a
means of enlarging your joys hereafter too. O happy is he, that shall be
great in Heaven as well as on Earth, by his well employing of his earthly
greatness, and you that cannot be great here, yet strive to attain a
Kingdom, and here too in a spiritual sense. Labor to be Kings over your
selves, in establishing the Kingdom of grace in your hearts, that you may be
Kings hereafter, and that in far greater glory and happiness, then the
greatest of all earthly Kings either did ever or ever could enjoy: the meanest
Christian may get the Kingdom of grace and of glory, as well as a David or a
Solomon.

2. God kept him from committing a sin which else he would have committed.


Another benefit we must observe, the Lord by his providence kept him from
committing that sin which else he would have committed, but indeed of mere
ignorance, for his heart was upright with God so far that if he had known
it he would not have committed it. So the Lord tells him, therefore I kept thee
that thou should not come near her, meaning Sarah. It is a great favor of
God to preserve a man from sinning by his providence, I mean, to order things
so, that he has not opportunity or freedom to do such things, as else he
would commit, because he does not know them to be sins. And this is one of
the graces that God does show to those whose hearts he finds upright with
him. O strive to get sincerity of soul, that he which searches the heart,
may vouchsafe you the same goodness, but if you be hollow and guilefull, the
Lord may and will justly punish you by giving you over to great offenses. And
if any man find, that God has restrained him from doing some wickedness
which he did not know and therefore should have done much more which he did
know and would have done, he must bless the name of God for it with heartiest
prayers. He that was in likeliehood before he knew of it to have fallen into
some great pit, or other like danger, traveling in the night, and finds in
the morning how near he came to mischief, and yet escaped the fame, is either
very blockish and profane, or else he must needs lift up his heart and eyes,
and hands to Heaven, and magnify the name of God that caused him to escape, so
much more must we do, if when we were in a forwardness to run into
grievous offenses, the Lord has used some or other means which our selves did
not provide to restrain us from that evil. Spiritual preservation deserves
serious and thankful acknowledgement as well as natural.

Another mercy of God is, 3. God revealed himself unto him in a dream by
night.


that he revealed himself unto him in a dream by night, and declared his
will by a commandment, promise and threat. I do not read of such a kindness
afforded to any wicked man, except it were to Balaam the false Prophet, which
was done not in favor to him, but unto Israel, that he might not dare to
curse his people, therefore am I conceited, that Abimelech was a godly man,
especially because the Lord does please to talk as it were in so friendly and
familiar a manner with him, as if he had nor been a stranger to God, but
rather of inward knowledge. You shall find if you read the dream, a kind of
lovingnesse expressed on Gods part, and a kind of dutiful boldness on
Abimelechs: so that for my part, I have a very good opinion of the man, and
think that the fear of God was in the King of that people, which were
themselves so wicked, that good Abraham said, there was no fear of God in
them. But the favor affoorded him is this, he was taught of God his duty by a
dream; Dreams were one of the ordinances whereby God did reveal his will
unto men in those times: Pharaoh was showed a thing in a dream, and so was
Nebuchadnezar, but God did not appear unto them and speak to them in dreams,
this was an ordinance of his I say, in which most times he used to teach good
men. Now this was a note of Gods kindness to Abimelech, that he so taught him
and not by heavy plagues, as he did Pharaoh King of Egypt forementioned. How
much more mercy shows the Lord to us, to whom he shows himself in the word,
and in the preaching of it, whereby we are taught our damnable estate, and
showed the means of escaping it, and called upon with continual threats and
promises to use those means, let us pray to God to work upon us by these his
ordinances, that they may win us to obedience in a thorough reformation of
life, as Abimelech was won to reform e this one fault, and then happy shall
we be. But if we imitate the naughtiness of Israel, and harden our hearts
that we may not hearken, then shall this mercy aggravate our sins, and we
shall only have this fruit of it, we shall know there was a Prophet amongst
us, when those greater fearful punishments befall us which were formerly
threatened against us in the word. Brethren, God does not please to speak to
men now in person by dreams, but he reveals his will by Pastors and
Teachers, speaking in his Name. He has employed me to you this thirty years
well near, to inform you that you are but dead men, because of the sins you
have gone a whoring after, and to threaten you with death if you refuse to
leave them, and encourage you with promise of life. upon your converting and
amending, O when will you hearken as this man did. I beseech you before you
come to Church to hear, take sometime to beg of God the assistance of his
Spirit, to make you obedient hearers, and then blessed be your ears that hear.

4. God speedily removed his chastisement.
Another benefit afforded to this King Abimelech was this, that he found God as
favorable to him as could be, in a speedy removing of the chastisement which
was sent upon him because of Sarah, viz. the barrenness of all his family, for
it is said, verse. ult. that God healed Abimelech, his wife, and his maids, and
his hand-maides, and they conceived, for he had fast shut up every womb in
the house of Abimelech, by which it may be thought, that God sent some gentle
sickness upon him, by which he was disabled from coming near to Sarah: Now
so soon as he did reform the fault, the Lord heard the prayer of Abraham,
and cured him and his house. This is a great favor of God, to make have to our
deliverance, and very quickly to hear our own prayers, and the prayers of
others made for us, and instantly to remove the miseries which did lie upon us;
for if the long lying on of a cross be tedious and heavy, because of the much
sorrow it brings, and many complaints it wringeth from the mouth even of good
men, saying, Lord how long? then surely freedom from all that anguish must be
received as a point of great grace. O my Brethren, do you imitate Abimelech
in the speedy mending of your faults, that the Lord may also favor you so much
as to remove your crosses quickly. If iniquity be in your heart, put it from
you, and remoove it out of your tabernacle, Job. 11.14, 15.
and then your light shall spring as the morning, as one of Jobs friends
speaks to him. But when we linger and hold sin under our tongues, and are
loath to cast it away, no wonder if God do take us in our own nets as it
were, and make sorrows and crosses linger as much upon us. Make have to obey
God and amend your lives, that he may also make have to heal. These be
Abimelechs mercies.

His crosses, God stroke him with sickness and weakness and his women with
barrenness.
The crosses that the Scripture tells us of, are no more but one only, viz.
God did strike him with sickness and weakness, and his women with
barrenness, and this cross was rather sent upon him, as a mercy to keep him
from touching Sarah, then in anger or displeasure against him. Sickness of a
man's person, wife and family are crosses, but sometimes the Lord does send them
upon men in favor, to prevent diverse sins, which else he knows they would
have committed in that time, if health had continued. Let us not murmr
against GOD because of such crosses, but rather take notice of his goodness in
the same, especially in point of sickness, if it linger upon us, and think
thus with our selves, how many sins might I have run into, if this bodily
feebleness had not kept me within doors. And when we be sick or otherwise
affected, let us turn our thoughts round about us, to find out if any such
thing be, some sin that we should have run into but for such prevention.
See if thine heart have not harbored some unconsidered fault, and further the
health of your bodies, by turning sickness into purging physic for your
souls. So have we finished the example of this King.

Somewhat about that time, there lived four Kings, whose names are recorded in
holy Writ, but nothing at all for their praise. Their names were, 1. Amraphel
King of Shinar, Four Kings.
that is, as it is thought, of Chaldea, or Babylon, where it may seem that
Nimrod erected a Monarchy, and it may be that this man was some successor of
his or one of his Posterity, and would needs enlarge his Monarchy so far as
the land of Canaan, with whom was joined Amoch King of Elkasar, Chedarlomer
King of Elam, and one Tydall King of Nations. What these Kings were? or whether
mentioned in Heathen Stories or not, They were violent.
it matters not to enquire. But here they are patterns of unjust violence in
War. They had the keener swords and therefore would make themselves Lords
over other Kings, and compel them by brunt of War to receive their yoke and
acknowledge some Homage. Nothing more usual then for potent Kings to make at
least unnecessary Wars for their growth in greatness, many times they do
not so much as allege a show of title, but their own ambition is the ground
of their plea, and sometimes they pretend most frivolous titles. So do they
disquiet themselves and others, and cause much innocent blood to be shed,
almost enforcing their Subjects to become wilful murderers.

We must bless God that has caused us to live now a good time under
peaceable Princes, and must enforce our prayers to God begging the like mercy
still. The Conquering side is often more miserable by sinning, then the
conquered by slaughter or captivity. But God does use these great Cocks of the
game as instruments of his Justice, to punish the naughtiness of those that
abuse peace, and become more wicked by so great a benefit. Let us learn to
take heed of wickedness, that the God of Heaven may not also make us a prey
to violence and ambition. And though you be not Kings, to whom I speak, yet I
pray you take heed that you run not into the same fault, that these Kings
though not in so high a degree, use not injustice and injuriousnesse and
violence so much as your lower places will suffer, a Weesell is a ravenous
beast as well as a Lion.

Their maine sin was taking Lot among the Sodomites.
But the maine sin that these committed, and which brought upon them their
ruin was this, that they would needs take Lot among the Sodomites. Suppose the
Sodomites did owe them Homage, and gave just cause of quarrel, yet was Lot no
Sodomite nor Patron of their rebellion. They should have spared him, that never
had been their subject, nor done them any wrong at all: Indeed if Lot had gone
to War against them, and involved himself in the Sodomites evil cause (if
their cause were evil) he was justly taken captive with them, but the brief
narration seems rather to intimate otherwise. Chap. 14. verse 11, 12. They
took the substance of Sodom, and their victuals and went their way, and they
took Lot also and his substance, for he dwelt in Sodom, intimating as I
said, that he was taken not in the battle, but in the spoiling of the City
afterward: but you see what is the manner of insulting conquerours, they sweep
away all they meet, and every thing and person shall be good booty that lies
within their reach, but they smart for this spoil; for hence was Abraham
justly occasioned to put forth his courage for the reskue of his Kinsman, and
so were they deprived of the whole victory, because they spared not a man whom
they should have spared. It often falls out, that one act of injustice
loses much that otherwise was justly gotten. Beware of swallowing ill gotten
wealth, it has a poysonfull operation, and like some such evil simple in the
stomach, will bring up the good food together with ill humors: It is said
the King of Sodom had rebelled, so intimating a kind of justification of the
War with him, but it is not said that Lot had rebelled, and therefore they
should not have seized on him for the Sodomites sake. Use justice and take
nothing from any man that is due unto him, neither punish any without right,
chiefly touch not a good man that fears GOD, unless his faults require that
he be made to smart for them: GOD can bear the carrying away Captive of many
Sodomites rather then of one Lot.

Now consider how God humbles these great and insolent Conquerours, that
carried all before them, he arms Abraham against them with so much wisdom
and valor, that he sets upon them by night and discomfits them, before they
could well tell who it was that fought with them. So it falls out often, that
God does beat far greater armies by the far fewer: He that fears God
and has a just cause, need never be discouraged from battle, because his
companies are but few. The God of War whom the Scripture calls a man of War,
carries victory to that side where he pleases to join, and tell me if he
have not most times given the greatest victories to his servants, when their
enemies power was such as far surpassed theirs. Some trust in bow and spear,
but he that makes mention of the name of God, he is in best possibility to
become a victor. Take heed of making God your enemy, that makes one man to
chase ten, and ten to fly before one. (*)

THE FOVRTEENTH EXAMPLE.
OF The Sodomites.
WE are come along in Abraham's time to the Sodomites, The Sodomites had no
virtues
Concerning whom the Holy Ghost found nothing so much as like to any virtue,
which might be commended or imitated in them, unless perhaps, it may have a
little relish of virtue that the King of Sodom after Abraham's victory over the
four Kings, Gen 14.17, 21. went out to meet Abraham, and willed him to give
unto him the persons, and take the goods for a booty to his own use. There may
seem to be a small shadow of gratitude in that he was willing that Abraham
should enjoy the spoil, but if we consider the matter better, this will show
it self to be rather a vice, for first, he does not so much as thank Abraham
for his hazard and pains in fighting with those Kings, that had vanquished
himself and his confederate Kings, and made Captives a number of his subjects,
and also that whereas both persons and booty were all Abraham's by the Law of
Arms, because he had won them in battle, yet he is bold to demand the
persons as if they were due unto himself. Wherefore I cannot perceive any good
at all in this King, or any of his subjects.

Their faults in general.
But for their faults and vices they be many and great. The Holy Ghost speaks
of them in general and more particularly. First in general, Genesis 13.13. that
they were wicked and sinners before the Lord exceedingly, and Genesis 18.20. The
cry of Sodom and Gomorrah is great and their sin is very grievous. Lo you
may see in them, that the wicked nature of man is apt to become out of measure
sinful, and to bring forth exceeding grievous sins, and such as make a
mighty cry in the ears of God, even as it were wearying his patience and
challenging his justice for revenge. As a thing beginning to rot becomes
exceeding rotten, even till it come to be very filth and dirt, and a man
beginning to tumble down the hill, makes no stop till he come to the very
bottom of the hill. For both Gods righteousness is offended and provoked to
punish them for a presumptuous and wilful sin, by giving them over to their
own blindness and hardness, and to Satan's power and temptations, and also
Satan is earnest to thrust sinners forward in the paths of iniquity, that if
it were possible, he might satisfy his hatred against mankind, by making
them all as bad as himself, and also corrupt nature it self finding pleasure,
delight, and content in sin, is made more and more prone to sin, and so
proceeds further and further, till the Lord shall strip them by opposing of
his just vengeance, and cutting them off in the midst of their wild race.

Learn we therefore to take heed of the beginnings of evil, and to license
our selves to commit any sin out of a conceit that it is small and little, or
yet because we mean to do it but once, and then an end, for sin once
committed will quickly return to tempt us again, and will more easily
prevail to break forth the second time then the first, and the third then the
second and so forward. It Is not in a falling man's choice and power to stop
himself when himself pleases, nor in one that is sinking in deep waters to
stay himself from sinking to the very bottom. And a little sin does but
make way for a greater till at length there be space enough for the greatest of
all to enter, yea harder it will be to abstain from the fowlest and most
grievous at the last, then from the very least of all at the first, presume not
therefore to sin out of any such conceit.

Again, if we have sinned in smaller degrees of evil, or once or twice done
amiss, let us make have to repent and turn, humbling our selves and craving
power and help against our own naughtiness, otherwise it is certain, that
extremity of the most horrible wickednesses will grow upon us, and we shall
become like them of Sodom, grievous sinners, and exceeding wicked before the
Lord, and our sins also will grow so rooring, as to waken the Lord out of his
slumber of patience and forbearance, yea and if God have stopped us in the
paths of sin, and not left us to the highest degree of wickedness, we must
acknowledge his goodness in keeping us from such excess of naughtiness, and
beware of boasting our selves because we are not stark naught; for did not a
divine power restrain and bridle corruption, and hold it down as it were by
strong hand, there is no man in the work so civil and so moderate, but he
would break forth into the greatest exorbitancy of wickedness, as the least
coal of fire if it be nourished with fuel and incited with blowing, will
undoubtedly break forth into a consuming flame within a little space of time.
If we be less evil then others, God is more good to us, not our selves more
good in our selves. Every carcass would breed worms if it were not imbalmed
or some way preserved from putrefying.

But now we proceed to consider the sins of Sodom more particularly. First,
as we find them recorded by Moses in Geneses, Their sins in particular.

1. They rebelled.


next as the Prophet Ezekiel does afterward tax them by way of upbraiding
Israel with the same abominations. The first sin noted in the Sodomites is,
Genesis 14.4. that having served the King of Shinar twelve years, in the 14 they
rebelled. Those that have been subdued by another Prince, and received the
yoke of subjection at length, covenanting Homage and obedience (as in such case
they always do to redeem their lives by their service) upon such and such
conditions, made betwixt the conqueror and conquered, are very weary of the
yoke for the most part, and watch all advantages of making themselves free
again by rebellion, whenever they think themselves strong enough to
justify and bear out their rebellions: but without doubt, this course is
sinful and unlawful, because it is a manifest breach of an oath and covenant,
which ought to be firmly kept amongst men even though a man's covenants be made
to his own disadvantage. Therefore was the Lord greatly displeased with
Zedekiah the last of Salomons race I think, that sat on the throne of David,
because he rebelled against the King of Babell Nebuchadnezzar, who had
conquered the land and made himself King over it, for so says Ezekiel the
Prophet, Chap. 17. ver. 15. He rebelled against the King of Babel in sending
his Ambassadors to Egypt, shall he escape that does such things? or shall he
break the covenant and be delivered? as I live says the Lord God, surely in
the place whose oath he despised and whose covenant he brake, he shalld die,
and ver. 8. Seeing he despised the oath by breaking the Covenant when he had
given his hand and has done all these things, he shall not escape. The Lord
you see is offended with such a kind of rebellion and punishes it, because it
is as you see a despising of an oath and breach of a covenant. For indeed this
is the way to trouble the world and make wars everlasting: though it be a
fault in a neighbor Prince without just cause and ground, to make War and
conquer his bordering neighbors and bring them under his yoke; yet when God by
his providence has made him conqueror, and the weakness of the conquered
has drawn them to subjection, and now covenants and agreements of peace have
been concluded upon, the breaking of the covenants does violate the rules of
truth and faithfulness amongst men, and breeds new troubles and broils
there, where might have been much peace and prosperity if they would have
been contented to have borne the yoke; as Jeremy is wished to command the
Kings whom Nebuchadnezzar had conquered that they should do, Chap. 21.2. -- 9.
The Lord then, that is a lover of truth and peace, does not likely leave such
rebellions unpunished.

This therefore must cause us to detest much more, as a much more plain and
fearful crime, the sin of rebellion, against those more rightful Kings and
Princes, to whom we owe more subjection, as being both natural borne subjects,
and also having tied our selves by an oath of allegiance and loyalty, for the
more confirming of us in our duty, and stronger tying our consciences to it.
And the Pope that takes upon him (for his own advantage you may be sure) to
dissolve and unloose such oaths, dispencing with them, and pretending to free
men's consciences from the obligation of them, and from all danger of sin by
breaking them, carries himself exceeding wickedly, and is most extremely
injurious to the consciences of men, and to the peace of the world, and most
impudently bold against the name of God, and the sacred and inviolable power
of an oath. Be you advertised, that this is to set himself above God, in
undertaking to dispense with an oath taken by the holy name of God, which the
Lord himself did never yet dispense withal, for he that dispenceth with the
conscience, must be Lord of the conscience, and he that dissolveth an oath,
must be greater then he that binds to the oath, and by the oath, and that is
the living God alone, whose Name is invocated in an oath. Wherefore abhor you
this man of sins impious boldness, and learn also to abhor all manner of
rebellion, learning of Solomon, not to meddle with the seditious, Prove. 24.21.
but to fear God and honor the King, and show all good fidelity and
allegiance unto him for conscience. Rebellion against our Kings cannot be
separated from rebellion against God, and this also is like the sin of
witchcraft or Idols. If Israel must bear the yoke of the King of Babell, how
much more every people of their natural Liege, Lord and Sovereign? And this
is the first sin of the Sodomites.

2. They mended not by their chastisement.
The next is, that when the Lord did scourge them by the hand of Amraphel and
his confederates, so that they lost the day, and many of them their lives, and
the rest their liberties and their goods, and after delivered them again by
the valor of Abraham, they were not any whit amended by this chastisement, but
their wickedness continued still to make the same outcry and shrill clamor
in the ears of God, as he told Abraham before. It is a great wickedness, not
to profit by corrections; Prove. 29.1.
He that hardens his heart being often reproved, much more corrected, shall
surely fall into mischief. God complains of Israel, Isa. 1.5.
why should ye be smitten any more? and again, thy children would receive no
correction. It is a great provocation to a man against his inferiors, Jer. 2
30.
if he have punished them for any offense, and cannot find them one whit
amended. Incorrigiblenesse increases wrath in all superiors. For, first it is
a frustration of their hopes and labors, and that is tedious. Secondly, it is
a proof that the offender is utterly heardened in an evil course, and that
does stop the way against all further proceeding of clemency, and makes justice
arm it self with vengeance, when mercy would be but abused if it should show
it self. Be warned therefore to compare your own selves with these
Sodomites, and judge betwixt the Lord and your selves, if you also have not
profited naught by his corrections.

I will press the point upon you in respect of every man's own particular,
has not God afflicted thee? made thee groan and complain with losses and
crosses, and more then one or two calamities, and yet after deliverance
granted, you have returned to your vomit, and again are become wallowers in
the mire, even giving over your selves to the self same crime, for which your
own souls did smite you in your miseries, and told you plainly that for
those very things the Lord sent those testimonies of his displeasure against
you, so great is that aggravation of thy fault, and will cause the Lord to make
his rods more smarting, and if future amendment upon future and worse crosses
do not come betwixt, to cut thee of and destroy thee at once, as here you see
in Sodom. Indeed the most horrible abomination that they did publicly live
in, required so extraordinary and public a punishment, but the particular
fault of one particular man in a matter vile enough though not so loathsome,
shall surely procure another and a sorer chastisement, or else even utter
destruction at length. Let this admonition enter into your souls, and move you
to repent now of that hardness of your hearts, which causes you not to repent
upon a former adversity, or else be sure, that you shall treasure up wrath to
your selves against the day of wrath, you that do presently lie under any hand
of God, set to the matter of finding out and reforming your offenses, and be
much more earnest with God to make the cross profitable to you in that
behalf, then to remove it from your shoulders. And you that have come lately
out of a cross, and now are gotten again into a large place, beware of
forgetting the hand of God, let the present exhortation stir you up to do
better then the Sodomites. Say in your consciences, was it not a great folly in
them, and a just forerunner of their final ruin? that captivity took away
nothing from their sins: why will you commit the same sin which you cannot
but condemn in them? They had no public admonishioner amongst them, that did
continually persuade them to profit by that calamity, and putting them in
remembrance of the lamentable condition in which they were fallen, wished them
earnestly to study reformation of life. God has made you his people, has
settled his ordinances amongst you, and cease not daily to remember your of
your duty: without doubt your sin in not being bettered by crosses, shall
offend him 10. times more then that of Sodom, and you shall find by
experience, that the wilfulness is the greater, by how much the means of
reclaiming have been greater.

3. They were unnaturally filthy.
I proceed now to a third sin, and that is their unnatural filthiness, in
offering to commit that foul crime of buggery with the strangers that came to
lodge amongst them for a night, and were but men as they conceived by their
outward behavior, though indeed they were Angels. Take notice of the lewdness
of these, worse then beasts, and learn to have it in utter detestation. First,
the crime it self. Secondly, the circumstances aggravating the crime.

1. The crime of Sodomitrie it self.
The crime it self is that base and vile, and worse then brutish wickedness,
of confounding the sexes which God has in the creation distinguished. For he
made the Male and Female, but these beasts would needs so much as was in them,
take away that so necessary and useful destinction, and would have abused
Males as if they had been Females, and turned men into women for the
satisfaction of their prodigious lust, and that not out of a kind of forced
necessity, because in the boiling of their unruly appetite there was not a
woman to be had, but merely out of the sinnefulnesse of their desires, which
made them take more delight in that which was against nature, and leaving the
natural society of the woman, they flamed in their lusts toward mankind, and
as they had no question wrought villainy one with another, so now they would
have violently committed the same outrage upon others. This is an horrible
sin, forbidden by God in the Law under pain of death, Lev. 20.13. the
Apostle says, 1 Cor. 9. that abusers of themselves with mankind, shall not
inherit the kingdom of God. If there be any light of nature left in a man's
mind, he cannot but see the wickedness of this fact; for seeing the Lord
ordained the conjuction of man and woman, for the impeopling of the world and
multiplication of mankind, it cannot but be against nature altogether to power
out lust in such a foul fashion, as that it becomes utterly impossible to
attain the proper end of such meeting, wherefore they are carried brutishly
after sensual pleasure with averseness from the fruit that God and nature
intend, which do give themselves over to this filthiness. This is the crime
of Sodomitry, so entitled from these Monsters of men that were the first
public committers of it. But how ordinary it was in Athens and Rome among both
Latin and Grecian even Philosophers and men accounted worthy and excellent?
the Stories will not suffer us to be ignorant. And S. Paul affirms, that the
Lord of purpose to avenge himself upon their impiety, in not finding out his
true worship, but changing the Image of the incorruptible God into an image
made like (...)o a corruptible man, Romans 1.23, 24.
and worshipping the creature besides the Creator, did give them up unto
uncleanenesse in their own hearts lusts, to dishonor their bodies amongst
themselves, and those that changed the truth of God, that truth which concerned
God and the knowledge of him, into a lie, and set up images of him, did after
put out the light of nature into darkness, and the natural use into that
which was against nature. Now how should it come to pass, that any one endued
with reason should grow so utterly unreasonable, as to prefer this
filthiness before that which is agreeable to the course of nature? Surely
because when lust has once taken possession of a man, and that he does not
find his expected satisfaction therein, then the Devil inflameth his fancies
to try new and strange ways of contenting himself, until he have multiplied
his sinful inventions to the utmost, and spent himself in a fruitless
pursuing of what he cannot overtake.

Now consider the several aggravations of their sin, First, 2. The
aggravations of this sin.

1. In respect of the persons to whom they would have offered this villainy.


in regard of the persons to whom they intended to offer this villainy, even
men that came within their gates to lodge and seek shelter from wrongs. Had
they not filthy persons enough among themselves to please their libidinous
fancies withal? but they must force honest and virtuous men to suffer such an
indignity. Lust is ever the more blameworthy in exercising it self, by how
much it uses more violence to effect its desire. It prevails by force worse
then by persuasion, although wickedly enough either way, for here is a double
wrong done to the same person, one of polluting, another forcing to suffer.
Abhor you all manner of impurities, but especially loath to give lust such an
headstrong command over you, that it should compel you by force and strength
to compel others to suffer your unchaste offers. And if any man has by
wrestling, and striving, and might even overcome a resisting person, let him
bewail the sin the more, because it is the greater, else the Lord will
violently punish him, that violently abused another.

Again beware of offering hard measure to a stranger, the more helpless any
man is, the more charity commands to pity him, the less to wrong him:
especially to be so madded with lust, as that a man should impure one with
filthy assayes whom he never saw before, this is to show a most licentious and
unsatisfiable humor, that is not contented, unless beast-like, it may have
any it sees at any time. That lust will know no bounds which is carried after
every stranger, and it is the property of lust, when it has overlashed more
then it ought, to disdain all bounds and limits. Perhaps these Angels appeared
in the form of very beautiful young men, and that might cause the filthy
Sodomites to cast libidinous looks upon them, but howsoever it was, lust does
not confine it self always to beauty, it is of a raunging humor and loves
variety, and might it have all in the world but one, it would not be pleased
without that one also, as other desires in their kinds are infinite and
insatiable.

Another aggravation of their wickedness, 2. In respect of the persons that
committed it.
is from the persons that committed it, not one vile fellow, or three or four
companions in villainy, consented together to act such a hideous part, but all
the men of the city, old and young, all from every quarter assembled together,
by which it is manifest, that the City was universally corrupted, and that
there was not a civil honest man left amongst them, but all were turned
abominable buggerers, and did take pleasure either to act that filthiness
themselves or to see it acted by others. It is a fearful thing, when such
grievous crimes grow common, when all commit them or like of them, none
reproves, none opposes them, but every one makes another worse then he would
be, and no man will think that wicked, which is done by each man in the town
or country, as well as by himself. Men follow sin amain, when they swim
down the stream of example unto it; they make themselves bold to do what all
do, and can hardly make themselves believe they offend in going with the heard
as it it were, O let us resist the overgrowing of sin, the overspreading of
all, that it be not as a spreading fretting leprosy: Seldom is it, that
hideous sins grow common, but that some common vengeance follows, and yet
you see the nature even of the worst sins to be such, that they will spread
themselves by little and become universal diseases, and when every man has
them, none knows how to be ashamed of them, or cares to cure them.

But see here the old decrepit goats, that were now scarce able to see or
hear or wag abroad, yet these had as lustful minds as the youngest there,
and what they could not act because of weakness, yet the strength of their
unmortified lusts did make them delight to behold, and attempt to perform so
far as they could. It is not age that will quench lust, this fault strikes
in the fancy and will not be cured by bodily inabilities, they can love to
speak wantonly, and to attempt this worst of evil, that yet are impotent
through age. But ah, it is a most undecent thing to see the sins of youth
prevailing in times of age, it were monstrous to behold green apples on a tree
in winter. If the frost of age cannot nip the blossoms of libidinous desires,
how great was that heat! who can think that he is at all mortified in other
things, where nature affords less help, that has not prevailed against the
things that should even die of themselves. But it is sure, that length of time
will not conquer his hateful passion, unless grace be granted from above, the
elder adulterer is the most neighing, he desires so much the more, by how much
he can effect less, as you see it in some kind of creatures whom the knife
has caused to cease to be perfect males. O if any old man amongst you have a
wanton heart, head, hand, tongue, and gives himself to please himself with
dalliances, and lascivious gestures, words and carriages, let him be
exceedingly abased in himself, the consideration of ones ancientnesse makes
the least attempt in him more loathsome, then any act in a young stripling, so
long as one is carried with the fervor of youth to such offenses, there is
hope that age will temper, but in whom these fires continue sparkling, when his
body is little warmer then a dead carcass, what hope can be conceived of his
amendment? what charity can think that he will ever be chaste? for he is
not chaste that cannot, but he that will not be lascivious.

But see here young men as well as old, the Holy Ghost names not alone men
come to the vigor of their youth, but even the younger youths that were scarce
past childhood, these also learnt of the elder, and it pleased them to be
present where filthy deeds were done. Verily, childhood will soon receive
the infection of lust and there is scarce a sin that will show it self more
early in imitating those evil speeches or acts it hears or sees; young ones
will drink in this poison greedily, and will show that themselves are of kin
to the elder, by bending the same way. How careful therefore should elder
persons be, to forbear all such words and carriages before these buds, as may
begin to season with evil too too timely? and why should any be so naught as
yet some parents have been, to delight to teach their childeren libidinous
songs and carriages? some love sin so well, that they delight to instruct
young ones in this foul and obscene trade. Has any amongst you spate out this
venom in the presence of young ones, to make them sooner wicked then else they
would? O how very great is his sin, whose filthiness will live in another
when himself is dead. A man has more cause to bewail the contagion of his
lust in this kind, then the lust it self in himself, he may kill it by
repentance, but what will he do to stop the contagion in another.

Again, 3. From the manner of doing it.
the fault is exceedingly aggravated from the manner of doing. First, they
carried themselves most impudently in this matter, they stuck not to tell
their mind plainly, bring them out to us, say they, and they do not pretend
any honest errand, nor will so much as go about the bush a little to shelter
their naughtiness, till opportunity served to put it in practice, but as if it
were the most honest occasion that might be, they proclaim, that we may know
them. The Holy Ghost abhors turpitude of speech, and therefore delivers
their meaning in a modest phrase, but whither they affected any such modest
veil of speaking, its greatly questionable, at least it is more probable, that
those which would declare their minds so openly and so loudly, would utter it
also as broadly, for shame is the only pull-backe to these kind of loose
speeches. Men fear to speak grossly, because they would not be thought so
vile as to delight in filthiness, and he that would be known to intend such a
lewdness, no question but he would also please himself in the worst phrases
he could invent.

Impudency in sin, especially in this sin against which God has pleased to
arm corrupt nature with some degree of shame; for were it not a matter of
reproach to offend in this kind, how few would live chastely in their younger
and wilder days? nay scarce in their elder. Men's credit is dearer to them then
their soul, pleasure would conquer conscience in those in whom it cannot
conquer vainglory: but I say impudency in all sins, chiefly in this sin,
does make it out of measure wicked: they cannot blush, says the Prophet, Isa.
3.9.
they declare their sin like Sodom, they know not how to be ashamed when
they had done evil. It is a sign that a man has stripped himself of the
nature of a man when he begins not to be ashamed of sin especially not of
this sin. A beast has not the understanding to discern the turpitude of
evil, therefore he cannot be ashamed, so the shameless is turned into a very
beast, having lost the sense of good and evil: such a one, if any, has gotten
to himself that which is called a reprobate mind, a mind that cannot try or
prove things, that can put no difference.

Therefore learn to preserve shamefastness in your selves, and to know how to
blush, it is the color of virtue in the younger sort, which should only
therefore be separated from elder persons, because they should then be more
perfect then to say or do things that might occasion it, else impudency in
vice is the more loathsome by how much the head is grayer; Indeed want of store
of blood will not give so red a hue to the cheeks, but if an old man be not
more confounded within himself for his wickedness then a younger, it is a
sign that his age has profited little in ability of judging, and discerning
evil from good and good from evil. If any amongst you find himself to have
a brazen forehead, that is never a whit abashed at the doing of evil,
chiefly of wanton deeds, that he cares not much who sees or knows, what dirt
is harbored in his mind, he is near neighbor to a Sodomite.

But as they did it impudently, so most wilfully, for when Lot by loving
dehortations, and (as any but a brutish person would have conceived) offers of
that which might have better contented them, then that which they propounded
(even his own two daughters virgins) yet they grew disdainefull toward him,
stand far of or beyond, the word is, approach beyond, as much as in our
phrase, get thee farther of, and accusing him of great insolency, that being a
stranger would needs make himself a Judge, (He takes upon him as a chief
ruler in the conceit of a wicked man that seeks to drive him from his sin)
they fall to threaten, that they will deal worse with him then with them. So
gentle words did rather exasperate them, then any thing mitigate their
eagerness, therefore the Angels pulling in Lot unto them into the house,
strike the men with blindness, a kind of giddiness of brain and dazeling of
eyes, like to those that have fed of some kind of root that makes them little
less then wild and mad for the time, they could not find the door by
groping, and yet continued still to weary themselves by groping after it.

Here is the greatest obstinacy and wilfulness in sinning that could be
imagined, when not alone no loving disswasion could withdraw their minds from
such a shameful attempt, but even the heavy and immediate hand of God was
unable to pull them back from continuing in their horrible and outrageous
onsets. God might by force hold them from doing the evil, but from
endeavoring to do it nothing would hinder; to be so hard-hearted in a sinful
course, that neither words nor blows will so much as interrupt a man in his
naughtiness, or cause him to turn a little aside, or make a little stop in
it, but that he rusheth like a horse into the battle, plunging himself in it
like a madman running to drown himself, and with violence striving to rid
himself of them that seek to hinder him from working his mischief, this may
seem as high a degree of sinning, as that of the Sodomites.

O take heed that sin lay not so fast hold upon you, let it not be so
absolute and mighty a commander. I pray you examine your selves, whether you
have not sinned grossly, boldly, wilfully, and obstinately in some other
kind, as the Sodomites in masculine lusts, at least whether you have not
discovered the same faults in lesser degrees, and know that more deep remorse
and wounding of heart is necessary to be sought after by all men for sins
that have so many weights at their heels to make them heavier. They must rend
our souls more, which are laden with such considerations, Was not the sin
gross? Yes. Did I not commit it presumptuously? Yes. Did I not commit it
shamelesly? Yes. Did I not commit it wilfully? Yes. Did I not persist in it
against dehortaions? Yes. Was I so furious that some strong hand of God
befalling in the instant could not hinder me? Yes. O then how Sodomiticall was
this sin, and how should I wonder that I should so far surpass all bounds
and break all bands as to commit such a crime in such a manner.

But here is one fault particularly to be noted in Lots sons in Law, The
sin of Lots sons in Law, they would not be ruled by their Father.
their Father sought to get them out of that place, and so out of that plague,
and therefore by commission from the Angels, went forth to them, acquainted
them with the peril and besought them to save themselves, they count his words
no better then the doting dreams of an old man, and will not be moved at
all, unless it be to laugh at him, and so they burn with the other Sodomites,
because they would not believe their danger. Thus do men yet still pull
perdition on themselves, the Ministers of the Gospel preach to us to the same
purpose, that Lot did speak unto his sons in Law. Come out of such and such
a sin, for God will surely destroy the committers of it, and what success
do we meet withal? After many an hour bestowed in seeking to make men see,
that if they do such things, they shall not inherit the Kingdom of Heaven,
but shall fall into the Lake that burns with fire and brimstone, we have no
other fruit, our words appear to them as if they were the words of one that
mocked or were in jest, they will not be made to think that any such danger is
near them. Tell me, I beseech you what you think? might not Lots two sons
have escaped this fire of Sodom if they would? What was the cause of their
perishing, but because they would not believe their Father in Law? also they
might have left the City with him and escaped the brimstone. Surely beloved you
shall be able to allege nothing at the last day to make your destruction more
tolerable, for why do you perish but because you will not give credit to the
threats of God? and labor to leave all sin which you may as well endeavor
to leave, if your wilfulness did not hinder, as Lots sons might have left
Sodom.

If you say, we could not believe those words.

I answer, true, but even as these wretches could not believe their Father,
because by hardening themselves in evil they had made themselves obstinate
against every thing that crossed their carnal desires. It is a fearful sin
Brethren, to be no otherwise affected to the threats denounced against your
sins by Gods Ministers, then as these graceless young men, even to think
them but words of sport, counterfeit words which have no truth nor substance in
them, but were very mockery and scoffage: so thought these foolish fellows,
but in the morning they were made to feel what they would not believe at
midnight; when they scorched in the flames, they in vain repented their ill
entertainment of their Father in Laws speeches and persuasions, and to no
purpose wished that they had been over-intreated by him. A number of you live
in the selfsame sin, he that threatens hellfire and destruction against
you, for your drunkenness, filthiness, revenge, worldliness, is counted a
mocker, an idle fellow, that knows not what he says, but must say something
when he is gotten into his Pulpit, and no more reckoning do you make of it:
but when death has carried your souls to hell, then you shall too late accuse
your own folly, and wish you had hearkened with more belief. O accept these
threats with faith, that they may draw you out of sin and save you out of
hell.

Other sins of the Sodomites.

1. Pride.


The sins of Sodom related by Moses you have heard of. The Prophet Ezekiel by
way of upbraiding Judah, relates some other sins together with this, as you
may read, Ezekiel. 16.49. Pride, fulness of bread, and abundance of idleness
were in her, and in her daughters, and they strengthened not the hand of the
poor and needy, and they were haughty and committed abomination before me.

Pride is a great sin.
First, the Holy Ghost tells us of their pride, this is a grievous vice, pride
of heart is a fearful sin. It Is like a great swelling in the body, which
unfitteth it for any good service, and is apt to putrify, Its nature fully
discovered.
and to break and run with loathsome and foul matter. So does this pride
disable the soul from any good duty, and at left breaks forth into most
odious and filthy deeds that cause it to be tedious to God and man. The
Scripture often condemns it, and pronounces heavy threats against it, Psalm.
73.6. a wicked man is blamed, because pride compasses him as a garment, he
wears it upon himself as some fair and gorgeous robe of which he is so
far from being ashamed, that he rejoices in it, and thinks himself to be
made more comely and honorable by it, and Prove. 8.13. he says, the fear of
God is to hate pride, amongst other things there named. It must needs be
concluded to be a fearful offense, the hatred of which must needs arise from
the fear of God. It is blamed in an Heathen Nation, Ier. 48.29. We have heard
of the pride of Moab, he is exceeding proud, his loftiness, arrogancy and
pride, and the haughtiness of his heart. The Prophet says of the Jews too,
Chap. 13.13. that he will weep in secret places for their pride. And our
Savior reckoning up that abominable litter and brood of sins which have
their original in man's heart, that is, his corrupt inward disposition, amongst
the rest names pride, Mark 7.22. And how much God hates this vice, is
evident by the threats which in his Word he has thundered against it. S. Peter
says, ^ Epist. Chap. 5.5. God resists the proud, he sets himself against
him as in an army ordered for the battle, he is always in the field as it
were with his troops ranked and ready to give the onset and take every
advantage of doing him mischief, Solomon says, Prove. 11.2. When pride comes
then comes a fall, a man is apt to run into most shameful faults, and so
to bring upon himself the greatest of all reproaches when once he gives
pride the possession of his heart, and after, Prove. 16.28. Pride goes before
destruction. This sin is a necessary forerunner of ruin, it is an Harbenger
to note our a lodging place for misery and calamity, and Chap. 29.23. A man's
pride shall bring him low, truly low enough, even as low as hell it self, for
must it not needs cast him low and low that makes God his utter enemy.

It must be a loathsome vice, if we consider the causes whence it comes, and
the fruits which it produces. The root of it is nothing but ignorance or
folly or both; Ignorance what? Folly what?
Ignorance is the not knowing of what one should know, Folly the not useful
considering of what one does know, and were not the heart made stark blind
with one or both of these vices, it could never rush into pride. For so mean
is a man in his very Creation that he comes of dust and nothing, and in his
sinful corruption, now much more mean when he is of his Father the Devil as
the Scripture says, nothing but the spawne of Hell, and a very bastard
mis-begotten by the Prince of darkness, and subject to so many miseries here,
and to such a weight of eternal misery hereafter, that if he were duly
informed of this baseness, and did rightly believe it, and consider of it, he
could not possibly be puffed up with a good conceit of himself. But his high
fancies are ever strong and working in him, when his heart is so filled up with
darkness and blindness, that either he does not at all or not certainly
know these things. A drunken beggar will carry himself like some Emperor, and
he cares for no man, because he has not the wit to take notice of his own
baseness. So it is with the proud man, so very a fool he is that he cannot
instruct himself of his own contemptiblenesse, and therefore he is apt to be
lifted up in himself, now folly and ignorance be so vile things themselves,
that no natural issue of them can choose but be like themselves even sinful
and wicked.

Again, the effects of it are exceeding hurtful, the punishments it causes
the Lord to lay upon men are great, as you heard before, he is a professed
enemy to him, he has threatened to pull him down, Luke 18.14. Isa. 23.9.
He that exalts himself shall be abased. God will mar the pride of men
and stain their excellency, and he plagues them often in their bodies and
states, by giving them up to such absurd carriages, as do pull ruin upon
themselves, and always in their souls by giving them up to the hardness of
their hearts, so that they be of all the most impenitent and irreformable, and
therefore it is said, that when God will convert a man he covers his pride by
chastisements, and when Jeremy charge the people to amend and give glory to
God before his judgments come upon them, he says, if you will not hear my
soul shall weep in secret for your pride, Jer. 13.17.
noting that this filthy pride does even stop up the ears against all
wholesome advertisements. O how fearful a vice is that which cuts off the way
to all amendment, by turning away the ear from receiving instruction, the
principal instrument of working amendment?

But it produces many sinful carriages in all respects.

First in respect of all persons. Secondly, of all states. Thirdly, of all
qualities. For persons, it makes him in whom it rules, and so far as it
rules rebellious against Gods precepts, careless of his promises, and
regardlesse of his threats, so that he despises and contemns all the
authority of God, and will not be guided by his counsel. Caine was a proud man
you all know, he would never else have killed his Brother on that quarrel
whereof you heard. Now when God himself came to admonish him and dissuade him
from that murder, it was all in vain, he would not hearken to God, but
continued to harbor malice till it brake forth into bloodshed.

In respect of men, for ones self it makes him selfe-ish, all for himself,
not regarding who be hurt so himself be pleased, selfe-willed and heady, so
that no counsel will rule, but he will head strongly like a madded beast
run on in his own race, as the Captains that came to Jeremy for counsel,
because they were proud men, and as the Scripture notes would not accept of his
counsel. And it fills him full always of discontent, fretting and vexation,
nothing, no person can please him, he is still finding faults, just like one
that has a swelling upon his hand, something or other touches it still and
drives him to outcries.

And for others, toward his superiors he is undutifull and will not heed
their words nor be ruled by them. He thinks himself too good to receive their
correction or reproves or chastisements, and grows worse rather then better.
For his inferiors he is likely tyrannical and Lionlike, and cares not how he
disgraceth, and wrongeth, and over-punisheth them, rating and striking, and
laying about him even for nothing or as good as nothing. For those that are
more prosperous then himself and excel him in any thing he is ever envious
and spiteful and malignes them for it. For those that are below him, he is
scornful and disdainefull, and insolent in deriding and sleighting them, for
his equals he is arrogant and insolent too, still lifting himself above them
and preferring himself before them. If he meet with men in a good estate he
grudgeth at them, if with miserable men he scorns them; and passes by them
pittilesly, if not scoffingly. And toward all in general, he is contentious
and froward, ready to pick and prosecute quarrels, to make the worst of every
thing, and to take all with the left hand ready to work in proud wrath, quickly
angry, and apt to vent his anger in lofty and scornful speeches, comparings,
revilings, upbraidings. If he deal with friends, he is unthankefull, they must
be his slaves still to humor him in every thing, also all former good turns,
are forgotten; toward his enemies he is infinitely revengfull, cares not what
ill he does them in requital, and will scarce ever forget an imaginary wrong.
I mean such a one as does seem none to any but himself, and those whom he
has made crooked by a false and partial relation. Thus in respect of persons.

For estates give him adversity, he is sullen, dogged, impatient, cannot stoop
to it: blames every body for it and cares not what shifts he uses to get out.
Give him prosperity, he abuses it and does mischief with it, at least does no
good with it but makes it an instrument of serving his pride and other lusts,
so that he is good for nothing in any place, he can stoop to no burden, nor
buckle to no service, being just like a goutie leg, well neither lying still
nor stirring, or a sick body neither well a bed nor up.

For qualities, the good qualities of others he knows how to vitiate, traduce,
calumniate and make them seem vices, and will have somewhat to say to blemish
them. For bad qualities he makes them worse then they be, aggravates them by
mis-relating, and turns them into a jest and laughter, scorning rather then
pitying him in whom he thinks they be, as the Pharisee did the Publican. His
own ill qualities, he will not see, he will not confess, he will not mend,
but hides them, excuses them, defends them, and many times boasts in them.
His good qualities he marres and corrupts, and does so lift himself up for
them, that most times they be even troublesome to others and reproachful to
himself, he knows them so too well and makes so too much of them, that no man
else can find any commendablenesse in them, they be but matter for bragging
and boasting and telling gay tales of himself, what he has done or can do;
so it makes his vices worse, and turns his virtues even into vices. Can that
be other then a most hateful and filthy vice that brings forth so many bad
effects? and yet all these and many more that I cannot reckon up, do most
apparently follow from pride in what degree it self is suffered to prevail in
men.

Now I pray you beloved search into your selves, and look about if you cannot
see this vice abroad in your neighbors. Let me propound this question to each
of you, do you know never a proud man in the Town? and do you see never a
one in the Church whom you judge to be full of pride? you would answer this
question in your own hearts. Do you see or know a proud man or woman in the
place where you dwell? I am afraid, you that be poor will look upon the gayer
clothes of the wealthy, and say without doubt they be monstrous proud that
must wear such gay things about them, when others of as good earth as
themselves go almost naked or so simply clad. And I fear, least you that are
wealthy will find cause to blame such a one and such a one for pride, because
their carriage is so and so: many of you can see pride (I doubt not) peeping
out of the poor man's rags, and crawling like a vermin out of his mean
garment: yea, you that be poor, I fear will find a great deal of pride
abroad, you will not return without finding it, for in truth it is a fruit of
pride to find pride every where but in ones self. Therefore I recant this
speech now, and I pray you leave that foreign inquiry, and come you home
every soul to himself, and search at home each in his own bosom, house,
carriage. And tell me or rather God who speaks to each, art not thou thy
self somewhat a kin to the generation of Sodom? a vessel in whom the
Devil and flesh has laid up a deal of pride.

You may perhaps ask me, how any man may know whether he be proud or no, I
mean overcome with pride, full of it, overruled by it.

I speak to thee that art poor and coursely clad, Do not you think that you
are as good men and women as those that are finelier clad? and if you had as
good suites and ornaments as they, you should be never a whit inferior to
them: have you not these kind of vying buzling thoughts in you? in truth, this
is nothing but pride. And you that are richer, do you not count these poor
snakes almost nothing? the mudde, the scumme, three-halfe-penny creatures,
less then dust almost to you, mushroms, shrubs, verily, these thoughts
proclaim you to be monstrous proud, and if you go away with them on either
side and find them not, stop them not, blame them not, it is certain this vice
has a strong party in you and in very deed does over-master you. It Is pride
of heart we seek for, and it is nothing but pride that sets up these bristling
thoughts in you.

But yet I shall give you another note, nothing is a surer proof of
overruling pride, then this, that a man sees no pride in himself, neither
will confess it to his own heart: It is certain, this vice is as natural to
all mankind as it is to be borne with eyes in their heads, with a mouth, with
an heart, with a liver, with brain: The vital parts of our body do not more
surely come into the world with us, then this vital part of the body of death
and of corruption. Now if you have never seen it nor could meet with it in
the effects of it, so as to know it, it is only because you are ignorant and
blind, and the more ignorant of your corruptions the more proud. When vices be
not seen, they be not lamented, nor resisted with spiritual weapons, nay not
with natural good considerations neither, and the less they be resisted, the
more they grow, and the more they grow, the stronger and bigger they be, and
the more they rule in him in whom they be. If it were not therefore for want of
understanding, by this time a great number of you might perceive that you
deserve to be called sons of pride, for your selves cannot deny, but that
you have in a manner always denied your selves to be proud, you never saw it
in your hearts, nor confessed before God with secret sorrow for it; Lord I am
very proud, such and such effects prove me to be very proud. And without
doubt, he that never did thus strive to mortify his pride, cannot but be a
very proud man. Lo now I have showed you how to find out your pride, by not
finding it out, and this is the surest way of finding it, where it is most it
hides it self most from his eyes in whom it is, like the foundation of a
building that is underground, though it bear up all that is above the ground,
or like some secret distemper in the inwards that shows not it self but by
its effects.

But let me tell you what pride is, that you may the better know it and
acknowledge it when you meet with it. Pride what it is?
I shall describe it in the words of an excellent describer of vices. The
inordinate desire of ones own excellency is but an effect of it. The Apostle
S. Paul tells you most briefly, and yet most clearly, what it is, when he
says, Gal. 6.3.
If a man think himself to be something when he is nothing, he deceives
himself. Lo a singular definition of this vice. It is that vice, by which a
man thinks himself something when he is nothing; whereby he makes too great
reckoning of himself, judging himself to be better then he is, taking
himself for gold when he is but copper, for a goodly thing when he is but
dirt, for something when he is nothing, says our Apostle. Pride is the vice
of over-prizing himself, setting too much store by himself, as a child out
of his folly makes a great account of a white pibble-stone, so man out of his
folly makes great reckoning unduely of himself, sets too high a price on
himself, as a covetous overreaching Chapman on his wares. A man if he would
consult with himself could not but confess that he is nothing, but he does,
with himself as some folks, do by Dogs and Monkies, they know they be paltry
carrions, beasts, yet they set great store by them and make precious account of
them for their minds sake, so do we men by our selves, notwithstanding the
imperfect knowledge of our nothingnesse, and this is the pride of heart which
we seek for. O see it, see it, that is it rules in each of us naturally,
every son of Adam makes an overgreat account of himself, sets himself at
too high a rate, for so slender is the knowledge of God that he sets more by
himself then by God, and I am sure that is to set too much by himself. A man
counts himself something that is nothing, yea he accounts him that is nothing,
more then him that is infinitely more then all things. Judge you if there be
not cause that God should resist him in whom there is this vice regnant, this
high thing that lifts it self against the knowledge of God.

I shall show you the degrees of this vice now. They be two, predominant and
mortified, predominant where it is not deposed by the power of sanctifying
grace, which alone kills sin, and so it rules in all men naturally, and
will rule until the Lord bestow his humbling Spirit upon them, which making
them firmly to believe the doctrine of man's misery begins by little and little
to dash them quite out of conceit with themselves, and to esteem themselves
the basest of all creatures almost, even creatures worthy to be damned and most
vile therefore. But when pride is thus cashiered by the entering in of true
humiliation, there it no longer reigns, there it is continually observed, the
evil fruit of it noted, arraigned, condemned before God, and many an heavy
sigh and supplication is sent up to God against it; and there it is not a King,
a Commander, there it is not imputed, there it does not denominate the man, but
where it is not thus deposed and dethroned, it is not marked, the ill fruits of
it are not drawn before Gods tribunal, they are not sorrowfully confessed,
nor carefully resisted, there it is the Lord of the heart, and there it does
reign and is imputed, and does denominate the man in whom it is, and he is a
proud man.

But now where it reigns, it is to be found in two plain differences. In the
one it is like unto a beast that is fed fat at grass, or is well provendred
with good feeding, lusty and strong, and sturdy and bold. In the other it is
like unto the same beast, kept lean and poor, and weak and feeble, over
wrought, thinly fed, and ill provendred; It is the same beast. still, but it
scarce looks like the same, or carries it self like the same: Sometimes pride
is fed with wealth and honor, and these outward things in abundance, and with
great excellent parts of nature, wit, learning, beauty, strength and the like,
yea and with a kind of fiery temper of body. When it has all, or many of these
encouragements and helps, it is like a flourishing King that goes abroad in
progress among his people; then it is bold and audacious to produce its ill
effects, it dares show it self in its proper person, and be seen by any eye,
then will a man affirm to himself, that he is a person of some value, one
that has such wit, etc. why he is I hope a worthy and excellent person. So
pride will stare a man in the face, and profess it self if it be well helped
up with these outward things; But if it be kept down with poverty, with
meandness in outward respects, and with great crosses, then it is somewhat
fearful to be seen, then it hides its head, it is like a King brought behind
by rebels, who keeps himself within some place of fortification, and will not
commit himself to hazard, but still he is a King, and takes upon him as a
King. So pride in such will not make a man say plainly he is some body, he is
a person of worth, but still in the secret of his heart he makes high account
of himself and is ready (as I said before) to think he is as good a man,
though he be not as rich, as learned; yea sometimes this vice of pride though
reigning, yet is like a bad tyrannical Prince, kept in by some counselor of
special trust, as Ioash by Iehojada. I mean, it is a little held in compass
by good education and precepts of morality, and a kind of restraining grace,
and then it is far more moderate in its effects, and will not so excessively
bewray it self, other times it is like a tyrant, which has a council as bad
as him self, it rangeth whether it lists, when it wants good education, and
restraint of a divine hand to keep it down, and then the effects of it be
prodigious. Know therefore that a man may be under the dominion of pride,
though he be not so outrageous and enormious in the effects of it, as some
others be, and if you will take a true trial, here it is. I can know what
account any man makes of a thing by his carriage, when that thing is depressed,
abused, wronged, vilified, and so may I know what account I make of my self by
my demeanor in occasion of such usage.

When you have learnt how to find out this sin, if you please, The means to
subdue. pride.
will you learn also to subdue it? the way is first to mark the fruits of
it, as they break forth in your lives, which fruits we have discovered before.
Impatiency, bragging, contention, envying, sleighting and despising of others,
and especially working in proud wrath, that is, falling into such extreme
fits of anger, that a man cares not almost what he says or does to them that
have angered him.

Secondly, When you find them to fall upon them with sorrow and lamentation,
arraigning and judging your selves for them before God, and labor to make your
selves seem base in your own eyes because of them.

Thirdly, To pray heartily against it, and to beg the Spirit of God to humble
you and cast you down. There is a thing that looks somewhat like humility,
and it is nothing but a heart a little kept down with crosses, or with
education and good instructions, this may be found where the Spirit of
sanctification is not, but true humility is an effect of Gods Spirit thoroughly
sanctifying the heart. A man by being conscious to himself of his own
natural imperfections and defects may be kept a little under, so that his
pride will not so boldly lift up it self, but no man deposes pride from
reigning, but by the Spirit of God, you must therefore entreat the Lord by the
operation of his Spirit to subdue your pride.

Lastly, You must exercise your selves in good meditations, concerning, First,
your natural misery and meandness. Secondly, your spiritual. The natural
seen in our birth, life, death, entrance into the world, continuance in it,
departure out of it.

First, how little and mean are we in respect of our entrance, what did we
come from at first, and originally but very nothing? there was a time when we
were not, having alone a potentiall being, that is, a being not yet in being,
but alone locked up as it were in the causes of it; yea there was a time, when
we were not in any secondary causes, but alone in the omnipotency of God, who
was able to make us of nothing. And surely, that which comes from nothing can
be no exceeding excellent thing in it self, and if it have any excellency, it
has it from another, to whom all the glory of it is due. Yea what was the
matter of which God made us at the first? not gold, silver, brass, iron, wood,
or any more then common thing, but even the dust of the earth, for you have
heard how Adam was formed. Doubtless the Lord did this of purpose to minister
matter of humbling men unto their meditations; for if I came from dust, I shall
surely savor of mine original; a thing made will have a relish of the matter
whereof it is made, unless it receive an exceeding great change, therefore
Abraham confessed unto the Lord, I am dust and ashes. Call we our selves by
that name seriously and often, and dust cannot swell: it may be blown away, it
cannot be puffed up.

But let us look upon a man in the course of his life, and that with reference
to the good he has and can do, and to the evil he has or is able to do.
The good he has first is exceeding little, compared to that which God and
Angels have, as no man will deny that shall make the comparison; Now he ought
if he were wise to compare himself with his betters, and not with his
inferiors. Set a man in balance to a beast he is some body, he has reason,
wisdom, and the like, set him in the balance with God, he is a mere fool,
a compound of weakness and vanity, all he does know, all he can know, is
less then nothing. Yea compare him with an Angel, how silly is he, how feeble?
one Angel is able to know more then all men, and to do more, one Angel can
beguile all men and destroy all men; yea if you compare him with beasts, he
has a little more wit then most of them, but they have stronger bodies,
perfecter senses are able to tear him in pieces, and can live without him many
of them better then he without them, so that he is more beholding to them then
they to him. So his good is little, little knowledge in respect of what God and
Angels have, and in respect of that he once had, and might have had still, but
that himself deprived himself of it. Little strength even in comparison of
beasts, and must continue here but for a little time.

Again, this little is all borrowed, it is none of his own; he has it of
mere courtesy, and from the goodness of another, so that he is not to be
counted better for it, but alone more indebted: who swells for a borrowed
thing; or if he do, who does not befoole him for it? If a man that has no
horse be friended with a good one, shall he be proud of it? and is not all we
have borrowed?

Nay thirdly must we not be accountable for all we have, so that we are but as
servants which have charge of their matters goods, and and must answer how they
have ordered it, shall such a person be proud?

And lastly, what we have is uncertain too, it is moveable it is fleeting, we
may loose it we know not how soon; we are like tenants at will, that cannot
challenge so much as a quarter, nay not a week or minute: it ill becomes so
mean a thing to think well of it self.

Now for the evil we have, that is much, and our own, that is inseparable and
inavoideable, it is great. O to how many and sore crosses is every man subject?
to diseases, to casualities for goods, to madness, to injuries, and to a 1000.
unhappinesses, from which neither wisdom nor strength, nor riches, nor high
places can fence and save him, especially to the vexation of his own heart,
which is enough to make him miserable though he were rid of all other evils.
And these evils are come unto him as due punishments of his own sins, as
fruits of his ill deservings, and as effects of his own folly, and misery is
shameful as well as bitter, when it is justly imputable to the persons ill
carriage that suffers it, because his faults have brought it on himself, and
this evil is properly his own, because he owes it to none properly but to
himself, neither can any care of his prevent it, but he shall be so during
life, and ever as he lives longer so shall he be subject to more misery. Indeed
some men escape in this world with more ease then diverse others, but every man
has his portion, enough to make him know himself to be nothing, and enough to
dash pride out of countenance, if he would not hide his own eyes from taking
notice of it.

Now look to him in his end, how little a thing will kill him? a hair, or a
stone of a raisin, the least thing going awry. How little a place will hold him
when he is dead? a poor winding sheet, a coffin, a little hole in the earth,
how little can he do then? nothing but feed worms and yield forth a stinking
smell. Look upon a man lying upon his deathbed, groaning and panting for
life, look upon him in his winding sheet and coffin, bound hand and foot,
and imprisoned in that narrow stocks. Look upon him in his grave, rotting and
smelling and putrefying, and I hope you will easily confess, he has cause to
make but mean account of himself, so will these thoughts help to chase out
pride.

But consider a man in his spiritual misery, he was conceived in sin, he is
of his father the Devil, he is a slave to sin, a traitor to God. He is full
of all wickedness, destitute of all holiness, and cannot escape eternal
damnation by any worth or power of his own, but must needs sink down to
hell, and be made fuel for that eternal burning. You see by what means you
may subdue pride, he that finds it out and resists it with these weapons,
shall undoubtedly prevail against it, he that thinks himself free from it
and takes no pains to subdue it, shall surely be conquered by it.

And let the consideration of this, that pride is so foul a vice; make you
bless God with much thankfulness for crosses, afflictions, and diverse
temptations and tribulations, for what be they else but medicines to take down
pride? and who that has a great swelling in his body, does not think it a
benefit deserving recompense as well as thanks, to have a fit medicine
prepared and applied, that at length may take down that swelling. It is to be
confessed that the best of men be too proud even now, notwithstanding all the
crosses they have felt, and sins they have committed. O how much more proud
would they have been had not God made use of such things to tame and depresse
them? And of their pride so much.

2. Fullness of bread.
The next fault is, fullness of bread, this is reckoned as a fault, and either
it is so indeed, or the Spirit of God was deceived, who put it down here in
the catalogue of Sodomitish crimes. You must either grant that fullness of
bread is a foul sin, or else you must tell the Prophet that himself and the
Spirit by which he spoke were both in an error. Luke 16.19.
It Is attributed to Dives in the Parable, he fared deliciously every day. It Is
charged on wealthy men, as one of the sins that shall procure their howling
and misery, you have nourished your selves in the day of slaughter, James. 5.5.
meaning, they gave themselves over to feasting and banqueting every day. A
daily continual stuffing the belly with store of savoury and delicate food,
is hurtful for the body and soul too. Use abstinence, feed sparingly, fare
hard and short sometimes. And so much for the second sin of Sodom, fullness of
bread.

3. Abundance of idleness.
The third is abundance of idleness, here is the fault it self idleness, and
the measure of it, very much idleness. Idleness is a sin especially when it
grows to be abundance of idleness. Solomon has bent himself to the disgrace
of this fault in many of his Proverbes, Go to the pismire O sluggard, Idleness
a great sin and why?
Prove. 6.9. and 9. how long will thou sleep? and 10. Yet a little sleep.
24.30. I went by the field of the sloathfull, and by the vineyard of the man
void of understanding, a witless fellow, a fool. And the Apostle condemns it
in the younger widows, that they learnt to be idle, 1 Timothy 5.13. and many
threats are made against the idle person and the sluggard, 19.15. an idle soul
shall suffer hunger.

There are diverse reasons to prove this fault to be a great sin.

and other necessaries, and makes himself a thief in all he eats and
drinks, and spends, for this cause S. Paul says, 2 Thessalonians. 3.10.
he that will not work let him not eat, so he is interdicted the use of
Gods creatures, as it were a man banished out of the world. A civil right in
the courts of justice he has to the possessing of things, because of his
title to them and interest in them, but a conscionable right to the use of them
he has not, Verse 11.
therefore Paul wishes men to labor and eat their own bread, intimating
that it is not their own in the court of conscience before God if they gain
not an interest to it by pains.

Thirdly, idleness is a great nourisher of all vices. It nourishes Prove.
26.26.
For the sluggard is wiser in his own eyes then seven men that can render a
reason; he is apt to filthiness and lust, why was Sodom so lewd, but because
they were idle? Every temptation does easily seize upon him that is at leisure,
and does nothing, as a bird that sits still on a tree is easily hit with an
arrow or bullet. He can have while to hearken to a temptation, and to ruminate
upon the evil things which Satan and the flesh do stir up. In nature things
that lie still gather rust, and standing water soon breeds noisome creatures,
and soon putrifies, and especially idleness makes a man a busy body, full of
meddling with other folks matters, and that for the most part to do more hurt
then good. The nature of man is active, and if it be not employed in some
useful thing, it must follow sin and vanity.

Lastly, this sin exposes a man to want, Idleness will cloth with and like
a traveller, Prove. 23.21. and 6.11.
hastily, surely, strongly, it cannot be resisted, it will not linger, He that
follows vain persons shall have poverty enough; and 28.19. and 20.4.
The sluggard will not plow in Winter, therefore he must beg in Summer and
have nothing. And if it fall out, that great means do keep an idle person
from want, yet he has a most poor and beggarly soul, utterly destitute of
saving graces and virtues, for he must labor for these things that will
attain them.

But let us see, what idleness is. It is that vice, What Idleness is.
by which men refuse to bestow themselves constantly and painefully in some
profitable thing, and take leave to spend their precious time in things
unprofitable. Some things are unprofitable simply, as fond and roving thoughts,
tatling and vain words, some things are unprofitable accidentally, in respect
of their excess, as sports and pastimes, and sleep, and ease, and sitting
still, and in respect of the manner of doing, as dealing with a slack hand and
working by halves. He that will not continue to take pains in things useful
and beneficial to himself and others, but whileth out his time in sitting
still and twatling with others of matters impertinent to him, or useless in
themselves, or discoursing with himself about like points, or gives himself
to excess of sleep or of sports, or else follows his business by the
halves, this man is idle, and if he do so much and often and almost
continually, then is he guilty even of abundance of idleness.

I pray you every one, set your consciences a work to find out your own
sinnefullnesse in this kind; Do not many of your hands refuse to labor? Are
you not such as will not work? Some are idle, because they have been so ill
educated, that they have not fitted themselves for any calling, they have
nothing to do nor cannot tell how to bestow themselves and their times. These
are a kind of vagrant people, though they have means enough to live of,
ciphers, good for nothing, but to eat and drink, vermin, Apes, Monkies,
whose whole life is to eat and drink and sleep and sport, and sit and talk
and laugh and be merry. These are excrements in humane societies, and the most
miserable of the sons of men, as having brought upon themselves by long use
an habit of being idlesbees, and a kind of necessity to continue naughty; yet
such a necessity as does not excuse but aggravate the fault: others again are
idle, because though they have a calling, yet they have no mind to follow it,
but are estranged from the works of their vocation, and love to be gadding and
rambling hither and thither, and every where, but where they should be. These
are great offenders, this idleness turns their food into poison, many such
sloathfull doe-naughts there are in the world. There be some servants sluggish,
slow-backs, whose hand is no sooner from under the Governors eye, but that it
is also off from the work, and they leave all and sit down to talk by the
fireside, or in a corner being men of tongue, and further then eye-service
drives them to it, their chief employment is twattle.

Now I pray you, if any be guilty to themselves of laziness, unwillingnesse to
exercise themselves painefully in their callings, either with hand or head or
both, that they take notice of it, sure they be of kin to these miscreants
the Sodomites; now begin to labor in this worthy work of repenting for thine
unprofitable living. For sure, if men must give an account for every idle word,
then other parts of idleness must likewise be brought unto the reckoning. I
pray those that be of the richer sort, that do not find a necessity of
laboring laid upon them for their bellies sake, to take heed that they pass
not over their idleness as a small matter. Most times riches make men turn
Sodomites, they are proud, they give themselves to fulness of bread, and to
abundance of idleness, they will not set themselves to any diligent following
of any good work, but delight in that which Solomon says his virtuous woman
would not do, Prove. 31.21.
to eat the bread of idleness. Surely the God that made them as well as other
men with bodies and minds fitted to do service, will not brook their doing
of nothing.

And secondly, I pray you shun, shun this Sodomitish sin, take not liberty to
be idle, but lay out your time so that you may comfortably answer it to God the
Maker of it and of you. Time is a thing most precious, all the wealth under
Heaven cannot redeem one misspent minute, by how much it is more dear and
irremediable, by so much ought it to be more carefully husbanded and warily
bestowed. Therefore, be you painful in your callings, break off sleep
seasonably in the morning; set close to some needful actions in the day, give
not the greater part of your time to sports, and sitting idle and discoursing
of this and that, but follow the works of your calling, and frame your selves
to some calling, make your selves a vocation in some matter or other, that
shall be worth your time. Painefullnesse in a calling will kill many vices, it
will exercise all virtues, it will prevent many temptations and sins: it will
make ones life comfortable, and his heart in good measure humble and discreet.
It will be a content at death, to think one has not wasted his life for
nothing. Do not dare to slip away from the works of your calling but upon
good ground, when you are able to allege some better thing to be done instead
of it, or just occasion of intermitting it, for your better fitting and
inabling to it. I do not commend toylesomenesse to you, but due diligence in
your places, that may cause you to differ much from the inhabitants of Sodom.
Especially, give not your selves to excessive sleep and sports; Solomon has
condemned the sluggard and the man that loves pastime to the stocks of want,
and one way or another the Lord will find a time and means to cast them into
those stocks.

Do not all things invite you to diligence in a calling? see, what care the
Sun has to run his daily and yearly course according to its proper
nature, see how all the rest of the heavenly army do keep themselves in
their own places, and swiftly perform their own motions. See how the waters
do ebb and flow, and that constantly, see how the fountains make have to the
brooks and rivers, and the rivers to the Sea; see how all things almost are
still in action. The earth that keeps in one place, yet is still doing
something in that place, either nourishing the roots or the branches of the
trees, and other things that grow on it, or else gathering heart to it self to
do the same work better for a little respite and intermission. And in Heaven,
though these natural actions cease, yet the spiritual employment of living,
rejoicing in honoring and praising of God does never cease. Quicken up your
selves therefore to this virtue of diligence, it is good for soul, good for
body, good for state, profitable every way, and at last will prove easy and
delightful too, to him that does it with moderation. The diligent man takes as
much content in his moderate labor, as the sluggard in somnolency and
easefullnesse. So much for this fault also. 4. They strengthened not the hands
of the poor.


A fourth is a sin of Omission, and that is, they strengthened not the hands
of the poor. What is that? They did not releeve his necessities with
convenient supply, but gave him either nothing at all, or but so small a
pittance, as would not suffice to give him any comfort.

It is you see a great fault to be pinching to the poor, and either to give
them nothing, or a very small quantity almost as good as nothing. Therefore he
reckons it as a proof of a good man that shall live, Ezekiel. 18.16. Has given
his bread to the hungry, and has covered the naked with a garment; but when
our Savior came to sentence the goats on the left hand, he gives this reason
of their rejection. Mat. 25.
I was sick and you did not visit, hungry and you gave me no meat, in prison
and you came not to me: and when they alleged that they never saw him in such
distressed cases, and withdrew themselves from succouring him, his answer is,
in that you did it not to these, you did it not to me. When the rich man
refused to sell all and give to the poor upon an extraordinary command from
him, he lets him go, and admits him not to follow him, nay by his words spoken
immediately after, Mar. 10.
it is as possible, he excludes him from Heaven, for he must needs be
understood of that rich man and such as he was. Now if not giving of all upon
an extraordinary occasion, will shut a man out of the Kingdom, then the not
giving of some convenient quantity upon an ordinary occasion, must needs
procure the like punishment, because the disobedience is equal in both cases.

The reason is, first, this is a flat disobedience to most express plain and
frequent Commandments. There is scarce a duty of the second Table which God
has more plainly laid down, more often repeated, more earnestly pressed then
this of giving to the poor. He therefore that lives in perpetual negligence
of this duty, and either will not acknowledge it or will not practice it,
lives in a wilful and constant rebellion against God. Think not my Brethren,
that it suffices to prove a man upright if he do not live in a sin of
commission, that is, in the continuance and allowed doing of something
forbidden by God. Nay if he live in a sin of omission, i. e. in the
continual and allowed neglect of a duty commanded, this is not to obey God in
all things, this shows ones heart is not universally subject to God. This
prooveth that some vice has dominion in him and that he loves and respects
something more then God, which cannot stand with uprightness, yea beloved this
hypocrisy which is so much overawed as it were by cleerenesse of knowledge,
that it scarce dares discover it self by taking boldness to commit sins of
commission, but knows how to hold in with sins of omission and to give them
allowance enough, is so much the more dangerous by how much it is less
discernable. For he seems to himself to have much to say for himself, why
this duty should not at this and this time bind him, because no affirmative
precept binds to all times, and so he will shift it from himself in such
manner, as not to take notice that he offends, whence grows the greatest
peril of all. Therefore know you that this unmercifullnesse to the poor, as
prooving that obedience is but partial, and so that the heart is not upright
is sure a very great sin.

But secondly, it declares that a man believes not the promises of God, and
so that his faith is not unfeigned. It is sure, that as he which obeys not
all Gods Commandments obeys none, so he that believes not all his promises
believes none. For if we submit to his truth because it is a perfect truth,
we must grant that he cannot lie nor be deceived in any thing, and if we
build not our consenting to his words upon his truth, that cannot be called
faith at all. Now God has made so many, so evident, so full promises to those
that are merciful to the poor, as no other duty almost can allege for it
self. A promise thoroughly believed, must needs produce obedience to the
Commandment whereto it is annexed, because every man is so truly desirous of
his own welfare, that what he does steadfastly persuade himself will procure
good unto him with the pains and cost, for that he will surely put himself
to the pains and to the cost. He theerefore that is not merciful does not
believe these promises, because he does not obey the Commandments to which
they be joined. How then does he believe any other promise? So we have prooved
him by this argument to be void of faith, and is not that a great sin which
convinces him to be void of faith in whom it is?

Further, no man has true charity that has not a heart to confirm the hand
of the poor; for S. John makes the conclusion thus, He that loves not his
Brother whom he has seen, 1 John 4.20.
how does he love God whom he has not seen? And he does but lie that says
he loves a man, unless he be ready to releeve him, for S. Paul says, that
love is bountiful, wherefore, S. John is peremptory in this conconclusion,
saying, He that has this worlds goods, 1 John 3.17.
and sees his Brother has need, and shuts up his compassion against him,
how dwells the love God? That therefore is a great offense, which prooveth
that a man has either none, or none but counterfeit charity.

I have showed you what a grievous offense this is of the Sodomites; before I
pass from it, let me show unto you a necessary distinction of poor men. Two
sorts of poor men. 1. Gods poor.
Some are Gods poor as I may term them, some the Devils. Gods poor are they,
whom his hand crossing them, or some natural mere indiscretion of their own,
or abundance of charge, want of work, 2. The Devils poor.
or the like has brought into and does keep in poverty. The Devils poor are
those whom idleness, wastfullnesse and unthriftinesse does make poor, because
either their hands refuse to labor, or else they consume it all up
superfluously when they have gotten it. The former kind of poor you ought to
strengthen, and the not strengthening of them is a sin. To strengthen the
hands of the latter is to strengthen their sin, and therefore their hands
must not be strengthened, for S. Paul's Canon is against it, He that will not
labor shall not eat. 2 Thessalonians. 3.10.


Now consider every man of himself, may it not be justly said of you, that you
do not strengthen the hands of the poor. Are not a number of you in your own
consciences convinced? or if you would not wink, might be convinced, that you
do not strengthen the poor man's hands. When have you with any willingness
given to any poor man any reasonable quantity? Yea, how backward are a number
of you to give any thing at all. Here is such complaining amongst you of your
being seized too much one, and too much another, that it is more then evident,
you have little will to part with your money to his purpose, I know not what
skill to use, for the fastening of a reproof upon a niggard, I will not so
much as strive to do it therefore: But I call upon each of your consciences,
to become a just and true Judge against you, and to find one your guiltiness
and to give you no quiet, till it have made you confess the fault and blame
you for it. But I call upon conscience in vain I fear, for the conscience of
a niggard is always a bad conscience, so inthralled to the love of money, that
he will not want excuses to make himself think he need not do that duty by
which he should lessen his heap. But these excuses shall one day aggravate the
sin, therefore whosoever is an offender in neglecting this duty of
strengthening the hands of the poor; I pray you give your consciences leave to
pass a right sentence upon you, viz. that your faith, love, obedience are in
that degree counterfeit and fained, that you take liberty to your selves to be
slack in this service.

And now I must require you in Gods name, to take great care that this sin of
Sodom do not show it self in you which would be counted Christians, I
suppose there is scarce a Congregation within many near you, that has been
more urged to this duty then I have urged you. Sodom had not the twentieth
part of this help, If God take it ill of them that they did not establish the
poor man's hand, how will he be offended at it in you? If ever you will have
comfort at your end? If ever you will have a reward of your religion? If ever
you will be called any thing but Hypocrites by your own consciences? I call
upon you to reform this fault, strengthen the poor man's hands.

Those poor that be idle, that be wastfull, that make themselves poor by
carrying the dirty yoke of vice, alehouse haunting, etc. I pray you chastize
them, correct them, spare not for their crying. It is no more pity to hear
them complain, then to hear a Woolfe howl when his foot is taken in a snare.
But those that be honest, sober and good, and have not put themselves into this
misery, but are put into it by Gods hand. I pray you confirm their hands,
help them to such a quantity of relief as may make their lives comfortable,
supply their needs, that God may supply all your needs according to his riches
in glory in Christ Jesus. God gives to some more, to some less, that there
may be an equality through the bounty of the one, notwithstanding the
inequality in gathering. So it should be concerning them of the household of
faith, you of the wealthier sort that fear God, should lay all your heads,
hands, and hearts together to take such order that the poorer sort of the same
place which make care to live well should not be overmuch scanted. O that you
would do so? and some amongst you help to stir up others, and to effect
the matter, as I do now stir you up all, and would be glad to give you an
example of bounty in this kind. No one man's purce can supply the wants of
all, but the superfluity of all united would do it abundantly. Why should we
not reform a fault which God would not brook no not in Sodom? We have done
with four of Sodomes sins.

The fifth is committing abomination, 5. They committed abomination.
he means that unnatural uncleanness whereof we spoke before out of Genesis
19.9. and therefore will pass it over in silence now.

The last sin is haughtiness, 6. They were haughty.
he charge them before with pride, and now here with haughty carriage. It
may be concluded hence, that pride and haughtiness be two distinct things,
seldom separated in practice, but in their nature to be so distinguished, as
the root and the branch, the fountain and the stream. How pride and
haughtiness differ.
For pride is a vice more inward, the nature of which stands in this, that it
causes a man to over-esteeme himself. Haughtiness is a vice more outward,
consisting in this, that it makes a man's outward carriage lofty and high. This
is that which S. John calls the pride of life, 1 John 2.16.
this is that which David denies of himself, saying, Psalm. 13 1.1.
that his eyes were not lofty, and it is one of the things whereto he binds
himself, to be so great an enemy, that none of those which accustomed
themselves unto it, should have admittance into his favor and house, Psalm.
101.5.
him that has a high look and a proud heart will I not suffer. He names an
high look first, because it was impossible for him to discern the proud
heart, but by the look or some external effect of it. And Solomon names it in
the Proverb. 6.17. as one of the things and the first in order which God
detesteth, viz. a proud look. And David in Psalm. 18.17. says, that God will
bring down high looks. You see, that this high and lofty carriage is a sin,
the cause is, it proceeds from pride of heart, it increases pride of heart in
him that so declares it; it infecteth others with the same pride, and it
grieveth and offends them that are not infected, and in all these respects
procures Gods hand upon the offender.

Now look everyone to himself. Art not thou, and thou, and thou of an haughty
carriage? Does not your behavior give a strong relish of selfe-conceitednesse?
Four things discover pride in the outward carriage.
There be four principal things that discover pride in the outward carriage.
The looks and countenance, the gate and pace, the words and language, the
garments and ornaments.

First the looks, when they be big and disdainefull, 1. The looks.
such as it is easier to observe where they be, then to describe them in
words. The color of red, blew, white may easily be discerned by the eye, the
judge of colors: but what words should a man use to describe a red color so
to the fancy? as a man might know it without seeing it; so hauty looks are
most easy things to be known when one sees them, but hard to be described, and
it is sure, that God would not have made so frequent mention of proud looks,
but that the countenance is very apt to bewray the high heart, but because a
man does seldom see his own face, therefore this is a fitter sign to show
pride to others, then to discover it to a man's self.

2. The gate.
The next, a proud gate with an outstretched neck, and mincing with ones feet,
or any other affected kind of going, is an act of haughtiness, that is, a
setting forth of ones self unduely, and a demonstration of pride, and this too
may be better perceived then expressed, and because a man cannot easily observe
the carriage of his own head and body in his going, therefore it is fitter for
the discovery of another then of ones self.

3. Words. 1 Samuel 2, 3.
There is a third act of haughtiness, that is, high words, speaking on high, as
Hannah has it in her song, by way of prohibiting it. When a man's tongue is
lofty his heart is so, words tending to vilify and abase others, especially
when he is angry with them, words of bragging and boasting, that have none
other use but to set up a man's self, and to paint him with gay colors.
Threatening words that are died with revengefulnesse, and the like to these,
they are all proud words and haughty speeches, and all kind of disdainefull
and scornful, and upbraiding words, tending unseasonably to cast a man's
faults in his teeth, for no man is covetous to disgrace another, but he has
overvalued himself first.

4. Clothes.
Lastly, haughtiness appears most apparently in clothes and the like
ornaments, when a man or woman will go as costly and gaily as ever his place
will bear, and a little more too; and when he must have trim clothes,
though he go in debt for them, when he must be fine though he spend all he can
get on his back, when he vieth with others, and must have as good things as
such and such. When in these things he does not as S. Paul bids, equal
himself with them of the lower sort but of the higher. Romans 12.16.
When though God have humbled his estate, yet he maust still keep up his port,
and by hook or crook, make a shift to be as gallant as ever. This prooves a
proud heart, for noe man would bestow so much garnishing upon himself, if he
did not count himself some body, and did not desire to be so accounted of
others. Therefore Isaiah among other fruits of proud vanity, Isa. 3. 16, etc.
speaks of the many gewgawes of the women of his time, by which they sought
immoderately to set out themselves. A number of you think your selves far
the better, when you have set up your selves with a deal of gaudinesse, such
lace, such ruffes so in the fashion. If it be suitable to your place and means,
it is no great discredit, but if above, surely it is as great a discredit as
can be, for it is as if you should wear a paper upon your heads or backs, in
which were written in great letters as in some other crimes has been done.
Be it known unto all men, that here goes a proud man and a proud woman, It is
even a Proclamation of your pride and folly, and a telling tales against your
selves, which I am sure you would not do if you did well think of it, yea it
is more then that, for it brings your names into question about your truth, and
if you be females about your honesty; there is such a man's servant, she is
exceedingly sleeked up, see what a wase-coate, what a gown, what a ruff, what
a dress she has, it might well beseem a man's daughter that would give her a
large portion, what has this wench to maintain it? Is her father able to do
much for her? no, well then I wish she get it by honest means, I wish that
either a false finger or an over-curteous lip do not help her to it. I am
afraid all is not well that she is so fine. This is all the good this
haughtiness does you, and will you not leave it?

The Sodomites punishments. First, they were taken captives, The Sodomites
punishments. 1. They were taken captive. 2. They were burned with fire here and
in h^ll. Jude. 7.
bless God that you have not felt this misery. Secondly, God sent fire and
brimstone and destroyed them all at once, Ezekiel. 16.49. They were set forth for
an example, Jude. v. 7. Sodom was turned into ashes, 2 Pet. 2.6. The ground is
now turned into a salt sea, called the Dead Sea, no fish will live in it, the
bird that flee over fall down dead. Thirdly, they were cast into the lake that
burns with fire and brimstone. Let us fear the sins of Sodom, God is able
to punish us in the same manner. (*)

THE FIFTEENTH EXAMPLE.
OF ISAAC.
HItherto of Abraham and those that lived with him, Isaac.
now we come to Isaac the son of Abraham, not of his body so much as of his
Faith, for he was the son of the promise, the son of the free woman, not
of the bondwoman, which was borne as S Paul says, Rom 9.
not by the flesh, nor by a mere natural power, but by promise, by virtue of
that gracious promise which God had made with him, for this was a word of
promise at that time, Gal. 4.28.
I will come and Sarah shall have a son, and in Isaac shall thy seed be
called, and we brethren (says the Apostle) as Isaac are sons of promise.
Now Isaac signifies laughter, or, he has laughed, or, shall laugh, a name
given to him by God himself, upon occasion of his Fathers laughter when he
heard the promise, not out of unbeleefe as Sarah once laughed, but out of the
joy which he conceived from the assured hope which he had of the performance
of the promise, and because God filled both Abraham and Sarah with gladness
and laughter at his birth, when they were both old, and in course of nature
were now past all possibility of having children.

His Birth.
Concerning Isaac, we must show his birth, life and death. For his birth he was
borne in the hundredth year of his Father, and the 90. of his mother. His
Father was Abraham, his Mother Sarah, both as good as dead, but by faith they
received strength to have a Son at that age. For Faith will make a barren
body fruitful, and also a barren heart. In in his life consider, First, his
Virtues and goodness. Secondly, his faults and weaknesses. Thirdly, his
prosperity and benefits. Lastly, his afflictions and crosses.

His Virtues toward God 1. His Faith.
For his Virtues in general, he was a true godly man, and was endued with
Faith, without which no man can please God. This Faith the Author to the
Hebrews takes notice of in him, saying, By Faith Isaac blessed Jacob and Esau
as concerning things to come. Heb. 11.20.
This virtue of Faith is that by which a man believes God in all that he
speaks barely by virtue of his truth and indeceiveable authority. And as it
apprehends the truth of all Gods word, so particularly the truth of his
promises, and by name, that great promise of remission of sins, and salvation
for the sake of Jesus Christ the true Messiah and promised seed, in whom all
spiritual blessings are conferred upon the sons of men, Gal. 3.8.
for it is said, in him shall all the nations of the earth be blessed.

Consider your selves therefore Brethren, whether you also have this same
virtue of Faith in your hearts, believing all that God speaks to you because
he speaks it, and specially all his promises, and by name, that principal
promise of grace and salvation by Christ, for without this Faith you cannot be
the children of God. If you have it not, you are strangers from God and from
the covenant of grace. If you have it, you are his sons and daughters,
justified before him, and accepted in his sight, through him the Beloved in
whom the Father is well pleased. And therefore labor to get it, and to grow in
it more and more, that it may exceedingly abound in you, as S. Paul says it
did in the Thessalonians. But beware you deceive not your selves in a bare
conceit of Faith, saying you believe, when indeed you do not so, but let your
Faith be a working Faith, approoving it self by love and by obedience, that so
you may indeed be the children of Abraham, and children of promise as Isaac
was, and If you can thus approove your Faith, then rejoice in it above all
things, knowing that you are rich in Faith, though you want all outward things,
for he that has Faith has God to be his, and that is sufficient to make him
happy in the absence of all other things.

More particularly Isaacs Faith showed it self by many excellent effects in
regard of God. For first, he submitted himself to God, to be offered on the
Altar by his Father according to Gods commandment, not making any resistance,
because his Father made it manifest unto him, that God had given him a
commandment so to offer him. Hard it is to say, whether the obedience of
Abraham in being willing to offer his soon, or of Isaac in yielding up
himself to be offered were greater, for a man does likely love his life as
well as he loves his child. Now Abraham subdued his love of his son unto
God, and Isaac subdued the love of his life to God, both notable patterns of
sincere obedience: This example you read in Genesis 22.9. when Abraham and Isaac
came to the place which God had appointed, Abraham built an Altar, laid on the
wood, and stretched forth his hand and took the knife to slay his son.
Isaac at that time was of such an age, that he might have resisted his Father
being old, or have got himself free by flight from him, but he gave up
himself into his Fathers hands, or rather into God hand, and yielded his
throat to the stroke of the sacrificing knife. Hereby it is apparent, that he
began to fear God betime, in that he would not withhold himself from God, as
his Father did not withhold his son.

O that we could approve our Faith by the like effects of it, even by a willing
yielding of our lives to him when he does call for them, and not refuse to die
if he should call us unto it for his commandments sake. God is the author and
Lord of our lives, and nothing is more agreeable to reason, then that we should
be content to give up life and all into his hands, from whom we have received
life and all things. And surely in this case it shall be proved true, which our
Lord Jesus tells in the Gospel, Mat. 10 39.
whosoever will loose his life shall save it. As Isaac was partaker of that
great blessing wherewith the Lord rewarded Abraham for his obedience in
offering of his son, saying, in blessing I will bless thee, Genesis 22.17.
and in multiplying I will multiply thee. Neither Father nor son you see were
loosers, by yielding up the one his son, the other his life into the hands of
God. But contrarily, he that will save his life shall undoubtedly loose his
life, for he must necessarily die at some other time as all other men, and then
his soul shall be lost together with his life, because he loved not God better
then his life, and he that hates not his own life in comparison of God, shall
not be counted worthy of him.

Let us therefore see that our souls be so thoroughly subjected unto God, if
ever we desire to be counted the seed of Abraham and the brothers of Isaac.
But oh how far short do very many of us come of this obedience? for how
should any man believe that we would readily part without lives for God, which
will not part with honor or goods, or pleasure, yea any of our sins at his
commandment. You be not Isaacs, if you cannot be content to give up your lives
to God, how much less if you stand with him for other matters far less then
life.

This is the first part of Isaacs goodness to Godward, he became obedient to
death.

Secondly, he was devoute and religious, given to all holy exercises, 2. He was
religious.
by name, to meditation and prayer, principal exercises of piety and religious
services of God, for so it is noted, Genesis 26.25. He builded an altar there,
and called on the name of the Lord. Lo here he worshipped God publicly by
sacrifices and prayers, and though it be not mentioned, that he offered or
prayed before an Altar at any other time as I remember, yet this once naming of
his piety is set down, to signify his constant care in this duty: his Father
brought him up in it, therefore he could say, Where is the lamb?

Indeed, the Lord has abolished such kind of Altars, and such kind of
sacrifices now since the coming of Jesus Christ into the world, and offering
himself once for all as a propitiatory sacrifice to take away the sins of
the world, Heb. 13.10.
but yet now also we have an Altar, whereof they have no right to eat that
partake of those sacrifices. Christ Jesus is our Altar, who sacrifieth all
those services which we offer up unto God by him, and our sacrifices are
spiritual sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. The offering of a
contrite and broken heart God does much esteem, the offering of praises and
prayers, the calves of our lips done unto God in the name of Christ, are very
pleasing unto him; the presenting of our selves, souls and bodies to him, Heb.
13.16.
is exceeding delightful, yea with doing of good and distributing as with
sacrifices, God is greatly contented, as S. Phil. 4.18.
Paul says, these are an odor of sweet savor, a sacrifice acceptable and
pleasing to God. If a man retire himself, and considering the death of Christ
for sin, do humbly present himself before God, confessing his sins, and
judging himself for them, and labor to lament them with hearty grief before
God, as causes of the death of his son, this is a grateful sacrifice. If he
praise God in the Name of Christ as for all other benefits, so for the great
blessing of redemption wrought by Christ, this also does give a sweet odor
unto God; if he even consecrate himself to God, resolving to walk before him
in all upright obedience, praying for the Spirit of God to sanctify him, that
in all things he may please God, no Bullock or Ram can please the Lord so
well: If he set apart some portion of his wealth to God, and give it to releeve
the necessities of the Saints, this is very sweet incense, so that he trust
not in the merit of the work, as if it could deserve any thing for the
worthiness of it, but trust alone in Christ for the acceptance of himself
and it, and all his services. Would you confirm to your own consciences that
you be true Isaacs? Ask your selves then, do you offer these burnt offerings,
if not, you be not as Isaac, childeren of the promise, if yea, you may assure
your souls that you be. O then study to abound in these services.

3. He prayed to God for all good things.


Again, it is noted that he called on the Name of God there, and so it is
noted, Genesis 25.21. that Isaac entreated the Lord for Rebeccah his wife, because
she was barren. He prayed constantly to God for a child, in this also
testifying his religiousnesse and his Faith. So we must be careful to pray to
God for all good things we need, for childeren if we want them, for good
success in our callings, and whatsoever else we need or desire. Phil. 4.6.
For God is the giver of all good things, and has commanded us in all things
to make our requests known unto him, and biddenus, to pray continually and in
all things give thanks, Ephesians 6.18.
so we are bound to pray as much as Isaac. Therefore those that are careless
of worshipping God in this duty according to that description of a wicked man
written by David in the fourteenth Psalm, they call not on the name of God,
are not surely the children of God as was Isaac, but the children of Satan
rather, for the Spirit of God is a Spirit of prayer, and a man careless of
praying to God does not trust in God but in himself, does not acknowledge his
providence nor live by faith in him. Let me quicken you to this duty, follow
Isaac, call on the name of God, entreat God for your selves, your wives, your
children, the Church, the Commonweal, all Saints. I say, recommend all
persons and all things to God by servent prayer, that he may give you his
blessing and all things may be sanctified to you; do this duty daily and
constantly. We must attain sprituall strength every day, from the works of
the day by daily prayer, as we attain natural strength daily by the food of
the day. Pray well and live well, pray ill and live ill. By this we have
fellowship with God, by this we become acquainted with him, and make him as it
were acquainted with us: by this we are made like unto him and draw grace from
him, and are more and more translated into his image. O resolve to be constant
in this service, and let no temptation of Satan drive you from it, or interrupt
you in it, let no backwardness of the flesh cause you to omit it, but do it
so well as you be able, and whatsoever objections arise break thorough the
same, and tell your selves, I will do it, heard or not heard, accepted or not
accepted, whatsoever I be, what sins soever I shall have, I will continue to
call on the name of the Lord, I will do my duty let me speed as pleases the
Lord.

Again, it is noted of Isaac, Genesis 24.63. 4. He meditated.

Genesis 24.63.


that he went out into the field to meditate in the evening. This also is an
excellent service of God, we are commanded to meditate on Gods Law
continually, and to meditate on all his wondrous works. For the circumstances
of time, place, manner, every man is left to his own choice, but the substance
of the duty must be done. We must meditate, we must exercise our selves in the
serious considerations of Gods Word and works, that we may raise our selves
to a fuller knowledge of them, and cause our wills and affections to be more
subject unto our knowledge. Meditation is that which makes all truths
profitable to us, without this our knowledge will be but speculative and
talking, 'twill not be practical and effectual without this, we shall find
no more benefit by our knowledge then by meat undigested, that cannot yield
good nourishment to the body. This must increase our knowledge and improove it,
this must bring it down from the head unto the heart, and so into the life.
Consider what I say, 2 Timothy 2.7.
says S. Paul to Timothy, and in other places, he that will a little withdraw
himself from all other businesses, and give himself to muse of holy things,
and take notice of the truth and certainety of them and so confirm his faith
in them, and then labor with himself to be affected with them, and draw from
them firm and stable resolutions for the well ordering of his life, shall
find more progress in one month in the life of godliness, then he that
without meditating does barely read and hear for many years together, you
must cover the spiritual seed with earth, you must bind the Word to the
tables of your hearts, you must hide the Word in your hearts. If you be slack
and careless of this duty, your growth in grace will prove exceeding slender;
Imitate Isaac in this service, I know not how a man should come to any steadfast
knowledge of his sincerity, if he be not one that meditateth on Gods Law.

So many as are guilty of utter omitting this duty, let them bewail and
confess this sin of omission, and now learn all that would build up
themselves in godliness, to be constant in it: Be not discouraged at your
imperfections and manifold distractions, and great averseness, All things of
this nature are most difficult at the first, who reads well at the first going
to school? who writes well at the first setting of pen to paper. It is
exercise that must perfect our abilities in all such things, begin and
continue, and be not out of heart for failings, which the Lord will easily and
graciously pass by, and you shall find the thing more and more easy and more
and more comfortable.

5. He feared God.
Another particular thing in Isaac was, that he was one which feared God, his
heart stood in awe of God, he durst not offend nor cross him, nor oppose
himself unto his good pleasure. So it is noted, Genesis 27.33. that when he had
unwittingly blessed Jacob, and Esau came in after him, he feared exceedingly,
and would not reverse that blessing, but said, I have blessed him and he shall
be blessed, and therefore, Genesis 31.53. Jacob swears by the fear of his
Father Isaac, that is, that God whom his Father feared, as in his whole life,
so especially at that time when he had newly blessed him; Isaac calling to
mind that God had given the blessing to Jacob, saying, the elder shall serve
the younger, and that he had carelessly and fondly gone about to transfer the
blessing to Esau, out of his carnal indulgence unto him because he was the
elder, was much afraid to think what a sin he had committed against God, and so
was restrained from being bold to persist in that carnal purpose, but
submitting his will to Gods, he ratifies that blessing, which he had ignorantly
pronounced, therefore it is said, Heb. 11.20. that by faith he blessed Esau and
Jacob as concerning things to come. It was faith that wrought this fear in
him, and made him resolute in the blessing given to Jacob: the story of this
fear you see, Genesis 27.33. he trembled exceedingly.

So it is a good thing to have such an high and reverent esteem of Gods
greatness, as to make us even tremble very much, when we perceive we have
offended him in going about to do things contrary to his will, as Isaac had in
attempting to bless Esau, which now he bethought himself of, when God had
unwittingly directed the blessing to Jacob which himself intended to misplace.
This is a proof of a soft and tender heart, and of an heart uprightly disposed
to serve God. It is a fruit of a good conscience, to check us for sin and
stir up fear in us when we have done amiss, so as to stop us from
proceeding in our sins.

Demand of your selves, have you this fear in your hearts, if you have not,
where is any other grace, for it is the beginning of wisdom and without it no
grace can grow, no corruption can be truly subdued. If you have it, be
thankful for it, and labor to grow in it, and to set it on work more and
more, particularly as just occasion is ministered. If you have sinned, if you be
about to sin, labor to fear, and so to fulfill and work out your salvation
in fear and trembling. The Lord our God is a great God and a consuming fire,
and if we find our selves to have in any kind offended him, our hearts should
even quake to think of his displeasure, till it have made us fall down before
him, and renew our repentance and seek out for a pardon. But he that has a
bold audatious fearelesse heart, that when he has done evil, feels no
stirring of fear, no awe, no dread, sees no danger or peril in the sin,
perhaps abusing the promise to make himself bold, surely cannot say, that he
sanctifies God in his heart and makes him his dread and his fear. Strive
therefore to get and strive to nourish and exercise this fear in you.

The last thing to be noted in Isaac, 5. He obeyed the Commandment of God.
was his obedience to the Commandment of God given him by vision, spoken of,
Genesis 26.6 the story runs thus, there was in his days a great famine in
Canaan, Abraham had gone down to Egypt to sojourne therein a time of dearth,
for it seems to have been a place of more constant plenty then Canaan, Isaac
had in his mind some thoughts of imitating his Father, God saw it not fit for
him to travel thither, and therefore God appeared to him in some vision and
bad him not to descend into Egypt, but to dwell or sojourne in that land, and
promises him a blessing; accordingly Isaac stops his journey, continues in
Gerar, and goes not down to Egypt. This was an act of true obedience, he
would not go to the place which God forbad him to go too, though it might
seem to have been fitter for his profit and advantage at that time.

We also Brethren, must learn to dwell where God would have us, and not to
make worldly profit, pleasure, ease or the like, the choosers of our
habitation; yea we must learn universal obedience, for if in point of
habitation I must follow God then in all other things besides. See what God
says in his Word unto us (and that is now insteede of all visions, therein now
he makes himself to appear unto us) do such or such a thing, do not such
or such a thing, promising a blessing as always he does unto the obedient. We
must not consult with flesh and blood, nor ask counsel of profit and
pleasure, but must resign our selves to his Commandment, and instantly set
about the one and relinquish the other. He that is so disposed, he is an Isaac,
let him take comfort, he is a true believer and a godly man, but he that in
such case refuses to obey, and will rather condescend to his carnal reason,
arguing from loss or commodity, danger or safety or the like, how can he call
himself an obedient child? He that refuses the plain directions of Gods
Word for earthly respects, is not one of the race of Isaac. He that causes all
such respect to stand bare unto Gods Commandment, and to give way unto it, his
heart is upright with God, and he is a holy man as was Isaac. And so much for
this good man's carriage toward God.

2. His virtuous carriage in regard of men and his estate
Look now in what sort he behaved himself in regard of men, and in regard of
his estate and the things of this life. For men, he had Parents, a Wife,
Children, Neighbors. See his manner of living with them all.

He was obedient to his Father.

1. In being ready to be killed.


For his Father, he was to him a most dutiful son, as is manifest in two
things. 1. He yielded himself to him to be bound and killed, Indeed here was
more obedience to God then to Abraham, and yet a great measure of obedience to
Abraham also. He bare great respect to his Father Abraham, in that he would be
persuaded by him that God had commanded him so strange a thing, he showed
himself dutiful to God and his Father both, in being content to be killed by
his Father at Gods appointment.

You see, how children should yield to their Parents in all things in the Lord.
It was extraordinary, that Isaac must yield to be slain when God would have it
so, and had extraordinarily required it. And in this particular without the
like warrant, (which will never be again in all the world) no child should
yield to let his Father kill him, but should fly away and oppose himself so
far as he might, without hurting and striking his Father, yea or so much as
railing at him, for these being things forbidden, a man should rather choose to
die even by the rage of his Father, then make bold to do them. But if in an
extraordinary Commandment, obedience must be given to Parents in such an
extraordinary thing, then without doubt in every ordinary thing a Parent must
be obeyed in all things in the Lord, even though the commandment should be so
heavy as death it self would not be heavier. The Apostle has said, Ephesians.
6.1.
Obey your Parents in all things in the Lord, and this is well pleasing to God,
and this is just.

Where are you rebellious children? Where are you stubborn and disobedient
daughters? Come lay your selves in the balance with Isaac; see how unlike him
you be, he would yield to death, you will not yield to leave those things which
are forbidden you only, because they will procure you death, undoing,
destruction. O you rebels and wretches, you are far enough from being Isaacs.
You set light by Father and Mother, and therefore against you ought all to take
up a curse and ratify the same with Amen. Woe, woe unto you, undutifull
children, who deal with your Parents as Israel dealt with God, they have
brought up and nourished children which have rebelled against them. God shall
cut you off from the land of the living, his hand shall be against you to
destroy you, Pro. 30.7.
and the Eagles of the valley shall pick out your beastly eyes, that are bold
to despise, slight and disobey your Parents, and wilfully refuse to obey their
lawful commandments.

But I beseech you repent of this sin, and prevent this judgment, and now
let all children be followers of Isaac, acknowledge your Parents authority,
submit to their lawful commandments and cross your selves rather to death
then be found undutifull. Do it I say, the great benefits you have received of
them requires it, you have your very being from them in your hild-hoods
education, and the Law of God requires the same of you, which requires all
reasonable things, and you cannot else be saved at last, for he that obeyes not
that Parent whom he sees daily, how shall he obey him whom he never saw?

And all you dutiful children, be encouraged, praise God that has bound your
hearts to respect your Parents, and entreat him to continue the same affection
in you still, and know that the Lord will bless you as he blessed Isaac, and
will raise you good Jacobs to require your submissivenesse to your Abraham's.

But Isaac submitted himself to his Father in another thing, 2. Was ruled by
him in marriage.
even when he was now grown to be about forty years of age, he gave himself
over to his Father to be ruled by him in marriage, he did not set his
affections upon any woman without his consent, nor draw away any woman's
affections, nor married any without the liking and privity of his Father, but
took the right and due course, gave up himself to his Fathers authority and
direction, and therefore God gave him a good Rebekah indeed, a comfortable wife
and virtuous woman.

In this therefore all children are bound also to imitate him, Children should
not marry without their Parents consent.
Children must take their Parents counsel and direction in matter of marriage,
and not bestow themselves without their good liking and consent, that they may
have Gods blessing attending them in their marriage, when they honor at once
both God and their Parents, in obeying Gods Commandment and showing due
respect unto their Parents. So did even Ishmael though otherwise a wild man,
for it is said of him, Genesis 21.21.
that his Mother took him a wife So did Jacob afterward, His Father blessed
him and sent him to Padan Aram to take him a wife of the daughters of Laban his
Mothers brother. Genesis 28.1, 2.
And when Sampson saw a woman of Timnah that pleased him well, Judge. 14.2.
he spoke to his Father and Mother to take the Maid for him, who went down
thither and made the match for him. Indeed the Parents have more discretion and
understanding then the children by reason of their age and experience, and
therefore it is for the childs good to follow their advice. And to whom must
the children go for comfort and help in case that any cross befall them in
marriage but only to their Parents? of which comfort and help they deprive
themselves if they venture upon marriage without them: we know that those God
has not joined in marriage, whom he does not unite in that estate. Now God
has made the Parents his Deputies in this behalf, saying unto them, give your
daughters in marriage and take sons for your daughters, and again, you shall
not give your daughters to them in marriage, nor take their sons to your
daughters. Now how can it be said that God joined them? if their Parents whom
he has made rulers over them in his steed do not join them, seeing
immediately he does join none in these our days. Also the children are the
goods of the Parents as a part of their possession, insomuch that they were
also to be sold to pay their debts. Wherefore as no bargain is firm in other
kinds of goods without the consent of those that have right unto those goods,
so neither can this covenant be good without the consent of Parents, which have
as much right from God in their children as in any other of their goods.

Wherefore those sons and daughters are much to be blamed who have neglected
this part of their duty to their Parents, and have suffered their blind and
strong passions so far to transport them, that against their Parents consent
and counsel they have bestowed themselves in Matrimony, and so have
transgressed against the plain commandment of God. Such must heartily repent
of their sin and humble themselves before God with much sorrow for their
great and wilful disobedience. Parents would not have their children thus to
slight and dishonor them, yea they take it grievously and are much perplexed
with sorrow for their children, in this case therefore children should be much
grieved themselves, if they have given this occasion of grief unto their
Parents. To satisfy men's own desires and affections without regard to Gods
ordinances, is a notorious disobedience and brings the guilt of a great
offense upon the souls of them that have so offended.

All you that have married in this disorderly manner, see that you do
unfaignedly repent of the sin before God, and confessing the fault before
him, seek to prevent the curse that must else fall upon you and your children
after you for so dishonouring your Parents.

And you young men and women that be not yet married, see that you bind your
consciences and resolve your wills to obey this commandment. Follow God in
your Parents, and be not so rash and selfe-willed as to cross them and follow
your own heads and passions. This duty will be easy, if you look carefully
to your passions at first and suffer them not to be undiscreetely fixed upon
any person, until you have acquainted your Parents with your desires, and
craved their allowance and consent. But if a man or maid do inthrall
themselves and entangle others by a disorderly placing of their affections,
then shall they make this otherwise easy duty hard and impossible to
themselves. Keep your selves therefore Masters of your own hearts and sell
not away your liberty through an overhasty yielding of your selves to your
unruly passions. Suffer not your minds to be drawn away by any means, but
pray God to keep your hearts in order. It is a sinful love as well as a
sinful passion in any other kind, which troubles an house and makes the
children contrary to their Parents, and to prove the greatest cross that may
be to them, to whom they ought to have been the greatest comfort.

2. He buried his Father. Genesis 25.9.
Lastly Isaac shows his due respect unto his Father, by joining with Ishmael
his brother in burying his Father. for so it is said, his sons Isaac and
Ishmael buried him in the cave of Machphelah. This is the last office that
childeren can perform, and they must show their love and duty to them in the
honorable performance of this last act, as to testify their love to their
Parents, so to declare their faithful hope of the resurrection from the dead.
For therefore are men with due solemnities committed to the bosom of the
earth, because they expect their glorious rising again, and they shall not
utterly perish and fall as do the brute and unreasonable creatures.

Now see Isaacs carriage toward his mother. 3. He loved his mother dearly.
There was no love lost betwixt them, but as Sarah did tenderly love Isaac, so
did he requite her love with love again, as is manifested in his sorrowful
taking of her death, though she lived with him to a great age. For so it is
written that after Rebekkah was brought unto him, and he was married unto her,
Genesis 24 ult. Isaac was comforted after his mothers death, intimating, that even
until then he was grieved for the loss of her. It is a fault therefore in
childeren, oversoone to forget their dead mothers, and to let their remembrance
quickly to slip out of their minds, how much more to be weary of their
overlong lives, and to be glad when the time comes that they must put them
into the dust, in respect of some paultrey gain of money, of land that they
shall possess when the Father and mother is dead. All that desire their
parents death for their goods sake, which they shall enjoy after them, and are
glad when they shall change their parents for their goods, must needs be
called wicked and ungrateful childeren. See therefore that you children love
even your mothers heartily, moderately lamenting their death, that you may make
it appear, their life was not a burden unto you.

And so have we seen Isaacs goodness toward his parents. Look into his
carriage toward his wife Rebeccah, and that also in two things mentioned in
Scripture

First, it is said, that he loved her, Genesis 24. ult. 4. He loved his wife
tenderly. Ephesians. 5.28, 29
This is a thing required of all husbands, they must account themselves and
their yoake-fellowes but one flesh, one body as S. Paul commands, yea they must
love them not with an idle and mere verbal love, but with such a love as they
bear unto themselves, that causes them to love and cherish themselves, so as
above all things they must not be bitter against them, as S. Paul informs the
Collossians. Col. 3.19.
Indeed because the Lord has knit man and wife together in the nearest bond,
causing them to be but one flesh, therefore should their loves be most fervent
and abundant. A man must therefore love his wife above all other persons, Genesis
2.24.
he must forsake father and mother and cleave unto his wife, as Adam said at
first, yea in respect of matrimonial love, he must love her alone and none
other but her.

You therefore that are husbands and have wives, come and answer before God,
how do you love your wives? how do you cherish them with all comfortable
maintenance and kindnesses? how are you careful to shun all tartness and
bitterness? all froward peevish words and gestures, all discurteous
quarrellings with them, and rating, revelling, and upbraiding terms. If your
consciences accuse you of unlovingnesse and bitterness, you are great sinners
before God, and must apply to your selves that of S. John, he that loves not
his wise whom he sees daily, how shall he love God whom he never saw. Lay
not the blame of your want of love upon your wives, in respect of their ill
qualities and carriage, men love their childrens persons above all other men's
children, though they be neither so personable nor well conditioned, and should
they not know how to do the same also to their wives? No man is dispensed
withal from doing his own duty, because of another persons failing in his
duty, for we must do our duty every one out of conscience to Gods
Commandments, not alone because of other inducements. It is therefore a great
offense in an husband, not to bear a tender and constant love unto his wife.

And now all you husbands profit by Isaacs example, and humbly pray to God to
frame your hearts to the unfaigned love of your wives. This is the way to make
you like comfortably and chastely, a man shall be happy if he enjoy what he
loves, and love what he must enjoy. They live with great peace in themselves,
that for conscience sake to God have their souls knit unto their wives, but
he, whose affections are disjoined and divorced from his wife, does live in
perpetual vexation, because he has not subjected his affections to the
commandment of God, and fixed his heart on her to whom God would have it
united. And he that loves not his wife honestly, is in perpetual danger to
be caught with the unchaste love of another woman, therefore Solomon bids one,
wander in the love of his own wife, Prove. 5.
for why says he should thou be taken with a strange woman.

This duty therefore is very requisite, and every good man must heartily cry
to God to work in his heart this virtuous affection toward his wife, that
love may make him able to perform all other duties, without which he must
needs be defective in all other matrimonial offices.

5. He contented himself with Rebekah.
Another thing very commendable in Isaac toward his wife was this, that he
contented himself with Rebekah alone, and did not take that unlawful liberty
which yet the common custom of those times did make to seem lawful to many
otherwise godly men, of having more wives then one, as had Abraham the Father
of Isaac, and Jacob his son. A man should keep himself wholly to the wife
of his youth, and not divide himself betwixt two, remembering, that God at
first made them male and female, and created but one for one, as Malachie.
2.15. notes, though he had abundance of spirit because he sought a godly
seed, yea he said, a man shall cleave to his wife (not wives) and they two,
as our Savior interprets it, shall be one flesh. The custom of our times
inforceth men to this duty, but it is a fault when they do it not heartily,
but rather for custom then for conscience, yea many that shame will not suffer
to keep more wives then one, yet secretly give themselves to other women, and
so violate their covenant of marriage, and defile themselves with great
pollutions.

Lastly, Isaac was ready to hearken to his wife Rebekahs counsel, 6. He
hearkened to Rebekahs wise counsel.
and when she complained of Esaus wives evil and froward behavior, telling
how bitter her life would prove if Jacob also should bring in such ill nurtured
wives, he sends him away according to her desire, to take a wife in Padan-aram:
So should every good man be ready to hearken to his wives advice and counsel,
and to gratify her in those things that are fit, not to cross and contradict
her. This is a part of due kindness to your wives, see that you neglect it not
to the procuring of mutual and continual discord betwixt you.

So have we considered Isaacs good carriage toward God and his parents, Father
and mother, and toward his wife; he was a parent and had children, even two
sons Esau and Jacob; Now he blessed both of them, and that out of Faith: 7.
He blessed his children out of faith. Heb. 11.20.
for his blessing was not a bare wishing and praying for a blessing upon them,
but a prophetical prediction of a blessing in Godsname, whereof if he had not
received a promise from God, and also believed that promise, neither he nor his
children would have made so great account of it. All of us cannot bless our
children in this manner, for the gift of prophecy is wanting unto us, but all
of us must in Faith bless our children, that is, pray for a blessing at Gods
hand upon our seed as well as our selves. Yea we must all apply our selves to
the sincere obedience which has an ample promise of blessing annexed, and
cannot fail to procure a blessing, since God will not fail to fulfill his
word. Why is a prophetical blessing of some value? surely, because it is a
certain thing, as having its original in Gods fidelity, who having said it
shall be so, must either accomplish it with his hand, or else falsify his
word, which is impossible. Now it is as impossible, that God should neglect to
keep his promise as to fulfill his predictions; wherefore seeing all blessings
are plentifully promised to him that walks before God uprightly and
constantly, do this O ye Fathers, this is to bless your childeren in faith,
but if you follow your own hearts and leave the ways of God, and go forward
in paths of impiety and unrighteousness, then do you curse your selves and
your children, and worse then pronounce a curse, even pull down a curse upon
your selves and them.

Further, 8. He conferred the principal blessing upon Jacob to whom God had
given it.
Isaac did confer the principal blessing upon Jacob to whom God had given
it, even that blessing which contained in it, the causing of Christ the
promised seed to come from his loins, the Church to continue in his
posterity, and spiritual benefits to belong to him and them. There was a time
when Isaac out of heedelessenesse or forgetfulness, or some other carnal
consideration, was minded to have settled this special blessing upon Esau, but
being made to perceive that he had offended therein and gone against the will
of God, he returned to a right course, and calling Jacob whom he had
unwittingly blessed before thinking him to be Esau, he now again wittingly
and willingly blesses under his own name and in his own person. Parents have
not now the bestowing of this spiritual blessing upon children as then Isaac
had it ministerially, but all parents should chiefly labor to interest their
children in it. For what will it avail to have the fat of the earth and dew of
Heaven, if we go without the favor of God in Christ? And when any Father
perceives that God has vouchsafed to any of their children this spiritual
blessing, in that they be made careful to serve, worship and obey him as Jacob
did, these must inherit their affections more plentifully then others of their
children in whom such grace is wanting. The image of God must overruled our
affections, not carnal things, as at length it did Isaacs.

Thus we have showed what was good in Isaac, in respect of those that were of
his own family, for we read not of any special point in his carriage to
servants. See now what a one he was to his neighbors farther of. First to
Abimelech, then to the men of Gerar.

For Abimelech, he had wronged him in affirming his wife to be his sister.
Abimelech by seeing some familiar carriage betwixt them, was induced to be
fully persuaded that she was his wife, and therefore calls him, and begins to
reprove him for it. Isaac makes no defense at all for himself, but by his
silence accepts the reproof, confessing his fault.

He accepted Abimelechs reproof.
It is a good thing when we have done amiss and are charged with it, at least
to refrain our tongues from denying, defending, excusing and the like, and at
least by not gaine-saying, to make it appear that we please not our selves
still in the same offense. Indeed a plain acknowledging is the best of all,
but a not gaine-saying, not shifting, not winding out by words is at least
necessary. It were a grace to a number, if they had a mind so willing to mend,
that they might not have a tongue ready to speak against a reproof.

But further, Abimelech came to him after to make a covenant with him, bringing
alone his chief officer and special favorite. Though Abimelech had been
somewhat discourteous to Abraham before, and had chased him away from him, yet
Isaac is not so far leavened with discontent as to reject Abimelechs motion,
but having gently minded him of that unkindnesse, is yet ready to embrace his
offer of amity. Why be not we all of a like mind in this matter? to pass by
unkindnesses quickly, and be never a whit the less forward to any good office
of love, because we have met with some very unloving passages from the same men
before. It is a fruit of wisdom and charity to cover wrongs as from others
by forbearing to blaze them abroad, so from ones self, by forbearing to call
them to mind, so as to be estranged from him that has offered them, and made
less forward to interchange amity with him afterward. But he has little
either love or humility or discretion, that knows not how to keep down the
thought of an injury, but that it makes him still averse from offering or
accepting courtesies from the authors of it.

Again, Isaac made Abimelech and his company a feast. 10. He made Abimelech
and his company a feast.
It is fit to use good hospitality, and with liberal entertainment to receive
those that have occasion to come unto us according to their places, Abraham did
this before. This degree of hospitality has been found in Heathens to their
commendation; but the best hospitality is that, which entertaines the poor
that are never likely to be able to make amends. God will become play master of
that cost which the poor is not able to requite.

Again, Isaac had something to do with the men of Gerar, for they contended
with him unjustly for diverse Wells of water which his servants had dug, and
he patiently yields to them and will not make a brawle of it. It behooveth us
to show the like moderation, and not to be fierce in striving against them
which will needs be unjust in striving against us.

Now for Isaacs estate, he was a good husband, dug Wells, 11. He was a good
husband
sowed corn, and so increased his estate through Gods blessing upon his
diligence.

Good husbandry is a thing commendable among all men as well as pleasing to
God, it has the promise of sufficiency of maintenance annexed to it for
encouragement. We must every man with so much diligence and discretion order
our estate, that we may become capable of abundance and may not deprive our
selves of so comfortable a thing as plenty is. Only in our labor, let us
look that we be moderate, that excessive laboring about earthly businesses
do not induce a neglect of those things that concern a better life, let your
chief care be for Heavenly things, and yet neglect not these temporary in
their places: but he that through unthriftinesse undoes or hinders himself,
how can we conceive that he shall be wise enough to seek spiritual things,
that has no wit to get temporal?

Again, when Isaac dug a Well, 12. He made a spiritual use of earthly
commodities.
for which at length the Philistines contended not with him, he called the
name of it Rehoboth, and said, now the Lord has made room for us and we
shall increase in the earth, Genesis 26.22. taking notice of Gods goodness, in
the quiet enjoyment of that benefit, and by faith persuading himself of Gods
blessing upon him, and so not carnally but spiritually rejoicing in the
temporal benefit.

Ah that we could make to our selves a spiritual use of earthly commodities
as Isaac, to see God in them with thankefullnesse, and to learn to depend upon
him for prosperity and not upon our own endeavors; and in particular, that if
God grant us quietness, and restrain men from contending and quarrelling with
us, so that we have peace in our houses, we could then give praise to him, and
take comfort in him and repose our confidence in him. The sight of God in
outward things is infinitely more comfortable, then the things themselves how
great soever they be.

His faults.
And thus much of Isaacs virtues; some faults he had too which we must look
upon to reform in our selves, not to imitate, for it is a childish folly to
follow after those that go before us, though they run thorough puddles:
Isaacs faults were some in respect of God, some in respect of man, viz. his
sons and Abimelech, and some in respect of himself.

1. He forgot the Word of God.
As for God, he sinned surely, in forgetting himself so far as to resolve in
his mind to bless his son Esau, whereas God had said, the elder shall serve
the younger. He should have been mindful of that prophetical answer, which
was given concerning those two sons, even when they strove in their Mothers
wombes: unless we shall say, that the whole passage was so carried as it was
concealed from Isaac: but that is nothing probable, it can hardly be conceived
that Rebekah would not acquaint her husband, both that she felt so strange a
striving in her womb, (which made her seek to God to know the matter) as also
what answer she received from God. Taking that for granted which is so
probable, that there is no reason to doubt of it, I say we may note a fault in
good Isaac, yea good old Isaac, he forgate the Word of God which had been
spoken some years before, and that so utterly, as he determined to have
crossed it and gone directly against it.

It is a fault from which the bed men alive are not exempted, even so to forget
Gods Word, as to be ready out of forgetfullnesse to transgress it. This
forgetfullnesse arises many times from heedelesnesse, and many times from
continuance and length of time, and sometimes from very strength of passion and
distemper, which does cast out the remembrance of good things from the mind.
David and all the Priests had forgotten that which at least some of them had
read concerning the not carting of God's Ark, but carrying it upon the Priests
shoulders; Jacob after had little less then forgate the vow he made unto God
in his affliction. I pray you take heed of such forgetfullnesse, meditate often
that you may remember seasonably, pray God to write his Laws in your hearts,
and to make his holy Spirit to become your remembrancer, that your knowledge be
not made unprofitable through forgetfullnesse, for that which is not fitly
called to mind is in a manner as if it were not. And if you meet with such a
weakness as this in your selves, look that you be duly abased in the sight
of it, but be not out of heart as if you were destitute of all grace, because
you are imperfect in it, but take comfort to seek and hope for pardon upon
your humble confession, when the Lord pleases to put you in remembrance
again. If Peter had remembered Christ's words before, he might perhaps have
escaped his great sin of denying his Master, but he remembered it after to
make him weep bitterly. It were a comfortable thing to call to mind those
things that should preserve us from sin so timely, that we might be so
preserved by them. But if we have done otherwise, it behooveth us to put our
selves in mind of them after to work godly sorrow, and then turning to God
we must not suffer our selves to doubt, but that he will vouchsafe to accept
us.

Now Isaac offended something against men. 2. He loved Esau better then Jacob,
and that for carnal respects.
In respect of his two sons, at first he loved Esau better then Jacob and
that for carnal respects, because Esau by his hunting supplied him with such
kind of meat as was contentfull to him. It was without doubt a weakness in
him and deserves taxing. Should Isaac bear favor to a graceless son for
venisons sake, rather then to a godly son for virtue sake? Should our
passions, fancies, appetites carry us away and overruled our affections.
Surely as David wished those that feared God to come unto him, and he would
choose them for his companions; so should every man make godliness the rule of
his affections, so as when other things be even to give piety the pre-eminence,
and cause godliness to cast the scale as it were. It is a fault in any man to
love a worse child above a better for any sinister respect, Abraham loved not
Ishmael above Isaac, to prevent that it may be thought, that God commanded
Ishmael to be cast out, that he might not be thought a meet person at least
to partake with Isaac in his inheritance. And as to be carried away in our
affections to children (by affecting them most that deserve it least) in
carnal respects is a sin, so likewise toward other persons also, servants,
neighbors or any other. Therefore he that has done so or finds himself so
inclined, must be humbled in his folly and labor at last to rectify his love,
as we showed you before, that Isaac did when God discovered his weakness to
him.

Now in respect of Abimelech, 3. He did lie out of fear.
Isaac offended by lying out of fear, when the men of Gerar began to question
with him about his wife, he began to suspect, that they meant no good in such
inquiry, and fearing some ill usage from them if he should have professed
himself her husband, helped the matter with a sudden lie, and said she was
his Sister, Genesis 26.7. you see he inheriteth here his Fathers carnal fear,
and carnal shift, of lying to prevent the evil feared. Here we have two
plain faults, his immoderate fear, and his lying to help himself at a
pinch; to be afraid of death so that there appear some likelihood that it will
come upon us suddenly and violently, we suffer our selves to be drawn into
sin for the escaping of it, is a sin and such a sin it is, as has often
discovered it self in good men. We noted it in Abraham twice upon the same
occasion that is here mentioned; So it befell David, when he came first to
Achish King of Gath, so to Peter and others. The inordinatenesse of the fear
of death arises from weakness of faith, both in that a man does not so
steadfastly rely upon God for defense and safeguard of life, as also for
salvation of his soul after death, or because he is not so well versed in the
meditations of death and Heaven, as to become sufficiently heavenly-minded. For
if we did fully persuade our selves that God would stand by us in peril, that
he would be our shield and buckler, then it would befall us according to that
of David, The Lord is on my side, Psalm. 118.6.
I will not fear what man can do unto me; but in the best this confidence is
often weakened, and they are taken unprovided through the suddenness of the
danger, or the like occasion, or it is likely that the soul which so fears
death, as by sin to shun the same, does not so thoroughly assure it self of
salvation, or has not so clearly and fully apprehended the excellency of
salvation; for doubtless death would be welcome to him rather then terrible,
that did apprehend it as a dark entry leading to the glorious palace of
glory, and had well considered of the greatness of that glory.

I beseech you take pains to help your selves against the fear of death, and
to work in your hearts so truly courageous a temper, that though it should
present it self to you naked and without disguise, and that suddenly, and that
in show unpreventably, yet you might be so constant and so settled as not to
betake your selves unto any sinful means of escape, but rather choose to die
then to sin against God, as knowing death to be no great matter, but sin to
be an hateful thing and worse by far then death. And how should this
undaunted and spiritual fortitude be attained but by conversing with death
often in your thoughts? so as to get some good assurance, that it shall not be
able to carry you to the region of darkness to eternal death, but alone to
let you out of this dungeon into a room far more lightsome and blisfull. He
that thinks much of death, so as to make himself careful by frequent
renewing of his repentance and amendment of his life, to get his salvation
assured to himself, shall at last be happily armed against the fear of death,
and shall be made so resolute as to choose rather to die then sin.

Again, if you find so much weakness in any of Gods Saints with whom you
live, as you find recorded in the story of Isaac, I pray you be no harsher so
them then you be to him. Tell me what think you of Isaac? was he a godly man
or not? if you say no, you contradict the Scripture, if you say yea, then you
must learn not to deny to another the name of a good man, because you meet
with the like disorders in him that are here noted in Isaac, if he fear too
much, if he has used some sinful means to escape death or other danger. Nay
a man ought not to deny himself the name of a man truly sanctified, because
he finds the same imperfections in himself. To call in question ones being
sanctified in respect of the hanging on of such weaknesses, is to nip and
discourage the work of grace, and to hinder the growth of it no less then a
cold frost does hinder fruits from growing.

But Isaac tells a manifest lie. Lying is a sin, and the lying tongue will
bring destruction; but to be so transported with some present passion, as to
be thrust into the mire of lying is such a thing as may befall a godly man.
Come and take heed, that you do not imbolden your selves to lie by abusing
this and the like Examples, but rather resolve and pray against it, as knowing
in how much danger you stand of falling into it. For though to be over-taken
with this sin in have, do not disproove the truth of sanctity; yet to be a
lier (one that makes account that this is so small an offense, that he will
not be so precise as to forbear to help himself by it if need be) this is a
proof of a man that has not yet gotten any sanctity. Lying is a sin so
plain, that scarce is it possible to be ignorant of it, but through
wilfulness, because a man refuses to be willing to know that fault which he
is not willing to leave. For no man can choose but blame it in another, and
therefore his inward soul does plainly tell him that it is also naught in
himself. Now to live purposely in a known sin, resolving that he must and
will do it if occasion serve, this is to be a worker of iniquity. Remember
therefore the word of S. Paul, Ephesians. 4.25.
Put away lying seeing you have put off the old man, intimating that he has
not cast off any, part of the old man, that has not thrown away this rag of
it. Lying will breed boldness to sin, hard-heartednesse in it, impudency
after it. Therefore you must determinately conclude with your selves, to put
away lying and speak the truth one to another. In these two things Isaac
sinned against GOD and himself.

But his sin against Abimelech was, 4. He scandalized Abimelech.
in that he was like to have drawn him occasionally into a great sin, he
did that which might easily have hazarded him to think of making Rebekah his
wife, that is, of committing adultery. It is a sin to become a stumbling
block to another by doing that which may make him bold to do a thing that is
sinful, as Abimelech complained to Abraham and also to Isaac; take heed that
you become not stumbling blocks in a more palpable fashion, by enticing,
persuading, exhorting, giving evil example or the like. Be careful not to
partake with other men's sins, and if you can call to mind any thing done by
your selves in the like nature, viz. such an act as might have pulled another
to wickedness, though the ill effect have not followed, yet you must repent of
your uncharitableness and rashness herein.

Another fault of Isaacs is this, 5. He loved good fare too much.
that he had too great respect to good fare, he loved his tooth and palate a
little too much, he was an aged man and he gave himself a little more then
enough to savoury meat, and his love to good fare carried him so far awry in
his affections, that he loved Esau more then Jacob, Genesis 25.28. Surely, it was
too great a love to Venison, that caused him to love a worse son above a
better. This is a weakness against which it is needful to strive, our
sensuality inclines us unto it, we are apt to think it no sin, may not a
man use Gods benefits and enjoy the comforts of this life in good measure? why
should not he fare well that has much given him by God? But sure to be so
overruled by ones palate, that any disorders be bred thence in ones life
toward any person or thing, cannot but be a sin for all these excuses. Do
not we know that cockering of the body does likely depresse the soul? and the
feeding of the belly and pleasing of the taste does breed an aptness to be
less delighted with better things.

Thus you have Isaacs faults. First, Forgetfulness of Gods promise. Secondly,
Carnal fear of death. Thirdly, Lying to prevent danger. Fourthly,
Scandalizing Abimelech. Fifthly, over-loving his worser son, and Sixthly,
Over-loving good fare. We will go on now to consider what blessings he enjoyed.

His Benefits.

1. Spiritual. God made his covenant with him.


First Spiritual, God pleased to make his covenant in him, and to bestow the
birthright and blessing upon him, and therefore also did appear to him and
blessed him, Genesis 25.3, 4. and after, Verse. 24. It is a singular favor of God,
to give a man spiritual blessings, to make him his child, to appear to him
and comfort him, by giving him assurance that he is his child, and confirm
his Faith in his gracious promises. This is the greatest favor, to bless us
with spiritual blessings, Ishmael had the terrene, but Isaac had the
spiritual blessings, these were given also to Jacob as a singular prerogative.
It is an admirable favor indeed to enjoy these, for they will not cease at
the end of this life, but will continue till another life and will be
perfected in another life eternally.

I pray you consider whether God have vouchsafed these unto you, has he caused
you to fear his name? has he made you to believe his promises? has he
appeared to you in his word and ordinances? and given you some happy
apprehension of his goodness in Christ, making you know, that he will fulfill
to you the blessing of Abraham. If he have, give hearty praises to him, take
unspeakable comfort in him, account all your other crosses nothing. Rejoice in
him evermore, that has translated you from the power of darkness to his own
Kingdom. Happy is he that is made the child of God, though he be in great
calamity for outward things. Know the incomparable greatness of his favor,
that you may rejoice in it, in despite of all crosses. And labor to get more
and more assurance of your interest unto God and happy estate this way, that
you may be more and more comforted. But if you have not these spiritual good
things, do not account your selves happy, because of the outward, think not
that you are in a good estate whatsoever you possess, if you possess not Gods
Spirit to make you Gods child, to seal you to the day of redemption, to
comfort you in all times, with making himself more and more assuredly known
unto you. What is it to enjoy a dream of prosperity in this sleep of natural
life? and then to spend ones eternal being in endless and irremediable and
unsufferable misery. Rest not your selves satisfied in outward things, count
not your selves happy in having them, never think you have any thing till you
have grace, till you have Christ, till you have interest into Heaven, that
eternal land of promise, and set your selves in feeling of the want of these
things to seek them in Gods ordinances. Prayer, the Word, Sacraments, and you
shall have them, for you want them not that live in the Church, but for want of
care duly to seek them.

Again, consider Isaacs temporal blessings, 2. Temporal

1 Had a good Wife.


he had a very good wife, Rebekah, that carried her self well toward him, and
was careful to keep him from offending, in translating the blessing contrary
to Gods pleasure, wherein though she used deceit, yet she brought him into
the right way, before he knew of it, and caused him to do well when her thought
to do evil.

Again, he had one very gracious and godly child, Jacob, 2. One godly child,
and a another that respected him.
and another though not so godly as we can assuredly say he feared God, yet one
that respected him, that did thrive in the world, and was of commendable
outward carriage among men, for so was Esau, he showed regard to Isaac, grew
great in worldly greatness, and had a name among men.

Thirdly, he had a great measure of wealth, 3. Was very rich.
and was a man of great state and esteem, so that King Abimelech desired his
friendship, and though some envied and wronged him, yet they could not hinder
Gods blessing from attending him, especially one year God gave him a singular
blessing, for he sowed and reaped, Genesis 26.12.
and as by Faith he believed that God would, so God did make him roomth and he
became fruitful in the land.

And last of all, 4. He lived long.
he lived a long time in this world to enjoy all these things, and lived to
continue with his wife Rebekah, she lived as long or near as long as he,
which could not but be a great comfort to him. So you see he had all abundance
of outward contents for his children, wife, state, etc.

Now I b^eseech you reckon betwixt God and your selves! has not God been as
favorable to some of you as to Isaac? so that you have good, virtuous, and
dutiful and religious wives, which will help your errors, and cherish your
bodies, and do you all the good they can. Has not he given some of you good
and godly children, at least some, or one, and the rest civil and thriving?
Has not he given you a wealthy estate? not so rich as Isaac but even rich
enough, I mean so much as will enable you to enjoy your selves in the world,
and to pass thorough the world with comfort. Has not he prospered the work
of your hands? and given you roomth, and made you increase, yea has he not
made you live a long time to enjoy all these things? If so, let these benefits
become matter of praise, let them become arguments of obedience, labor to be
truly thankful for them, that you may find them truly beneficial: make a
spiritual use of temporal blessings.

And if any want these things, let him see how rich God is, and let him even
trust in him for sufficiency in outward things, and count it enough that it
pleases God to give him better things as I exhorted before. And if any of Gods
people find not these things so granted to himself, let him not take Gods
dealing with him in the worst part, let him not ascribe it to want of love to
him, but to his wisdom, that seeing him not so capable of these things, does
withdraw from him that thing which he sees would be hurtful unto him. We
must not misconster Gods forbearing to give outward things. Yea now let all men
encourage themselves to be obedient to God, and to fear him as did Isaac, for
you see in him that God is ready to reward his servants with great commodities
and comforts in this life too. He will not alone save them, but so far as is
good, make their estate prosperous here below. That godliness which has the
promise shall also have the performance of good things for this present life
and that which is to come. I know, that these be common benefits, but when
they come sweetened with Gods blessing, then they are truly comfortable, and so
shall they be to him that interests himself to them by getting into Christ,
and walking in him in holiness and godly conversation.

Isaacs crosses.
So we have done with Isaacs benefits, now his crosses; for neither could he,
nor can any man in this life escape but that more or less he shall meet with
afflictions. First in respect of his body. 2. His state. 3. His children.

1. He was long blind.
For his body, he was blind many years, for he was married at forty, at
sixty he had Esau and Jacob; Jacob was about seventy six years when he came
to Laban, so then Isaac was a hundred thirty six years, and at that time he
could not discern Esau and Jacob one from the other by sight, and he lived in
all 180 years, from which if you subtract 136, then will remain forty four
years, so long did Isaac live without the use of his eyes. Therefore learn
you to be thankful that God has given you your eyesight even to your lives
end, so that you want not this sense at all till death, or at least want it not
so long a space of time. Sight is a great comfort, it is pleasant to see the
Sun and to be able with our eyes to behold and discern our friends and all
other creatures of GOD. Let us praise God for the use of this and other senses.

Secondly, let us prepare to suffer the same cross, who can tell how soon his
eyes may grow dim? let us use them well whilst we have them, and withdraw
them from looking after vanity, and all other abuses: for nothing will grieve
us more when we have lost them, then that we have abused them, nor comfort us
more, then to remember that we have kept them in order and bestowed them
holily. And indeed, they be things apt to be abused a 1000 ways; Prevent all
these abuses and put on a contented mind, if God see it fit to be deprived of
them, getting such a clearenesse of inward sight, that the comfort of that may
supply the want of outward eyes. He that has an understanding given him to
see God and Christ, to see Heaven and things spiritual, may easily miss the
sight of other things; but ah how comfortless is a blind body joined with a
blind mind? Take heed that this great darkness fall not upon you, for what
can this be but even a forerunner of utter and everlasting darkness.

Further, Isaac in his state met with diverse crosses, 2. Met with diverse
troubles in his state.
the Philistines envied him, chased him from them, wronged him by stopping his
Fathers Well and by unjust striving with him for those he himself had dug,
these be crosses and such as trouble the nature of man, and seem hard to
bear, but this good man wrestled with them.

Prepare your selves therefore to be envied and wronged, and to have enemies
that will contend and quarrel with you causelessly, and be careful to get Gods
favor, that the malice and injuriousnesse of men may not be able to hurt you,
but that God may bless you the more, by how much men do more envy you, wrong
you and contend against you, as it befell to Isaac. For God prospered him and
comforted him the more, by how much the world did more grudge at him, and seek
to disquiet him. Labor therefore to get Gods favor, that you may have a
patient, a cheerful mind the in midst of the greatest injuries. In the
mean time, expect such evil usage and strive to be able to bear it without
vexation and discontent, which are things more troublesome then the crosses
themselves.

Further, learn to be thankful to God, if he have pleased to keep you from
spite, wrong and strife, that either you be not envied, or else those that
envy you have not had ability to wrong you and contend against you. It is a
great goodness of God so to hedge about a man's estate, that no man has been
able to break in upon him to hurt him, and it is neither men's wit nor
greatness that can procure unto them this safety, but it is God alone that
makes them to dwell in safety. Let our hearts be lifted up to praise him, that
has so encompassed us with his favor as with a shield.

But next, Isaac was crossed in his children. First, 3. Was long without issue.
in that he continued long without issue, whereas God had promised him issue,
and the hope of his salvation depended upon the performance of his promise; for
out of his loins was that seed to proceed in whom all Nations were to be
blessed, and yet he was married twenty years before this promise was
fulfilled. So long did God exercise his faith with delay.

Learn to bear with patience Gods deferring of his promises and not to let
your hopes slip, but still to trust on God and wait for him, who will come in
due time though he satisfy not our hasty and over-eager desires. Hold to the
promise of God, it shall be fulfilled at length though we be made to tarry
somewhat long for it, that we may be better fitted to receive it with
thankefullnesse. The longer a good thing is desired and deferred, the more
abundant comfort it yields when it is come.

4. He was crossed in Esau.
But secondly, Esau prooved a cross to him in two things. First, that he took
into the house two such ill conditioned Maids, as were a grief of heart to
Isaac and Rebekah, Genesis 26. ult. This is a bitter cross to be pestered with
unquiet, froward, unruly and wicked daughters in Law, that shall make one weary
of his life, and like evil and bitter sauce, take away the sweetness of all
other comforts. Learn to be thankful, if you have escaped this cross, and
if God have provided such yoake-fellowes for your children, as by their
dutiful and loving carriage do make the comfort of your lives more abundant,
framing themselves to content you in all good and lawful things, as if they
were your own sons or daughters: It is a great satisfaction to see ones
children so happily matched; Let not this benefit be slighted and passed over
without particular thanks. And now prepare for this cross, or if you be
under it, labor to bear it, so as not to be made weary of life, but enjoy
the rest so thankefully, that the bitterness of this may be sweetened and
allayed. And pray to God to direct your selves and your children so in their
choice or yours for them, that they may not stumble upon a torment unawares,
and learn in choosing to choose for grace rather then sinister respects, so
may you hope to be directed aright, and to get a true benefit.

Again, Esau was a cross to his Father in his malice against his Brother,
whom he purposed to kill, and would not keep the thought to himself so, but
that it uttered it self. If Isaac knew not of it, he was not afflicted with
it, but if he did, he could not but take it heavily. Thank God if he have
not given over your children to such malice one against the other, and if you
lie under this misery, make it as easy as may be, by telling yourselves it
was Isaacs cross, and yet God kept it from ever coming to execution.

2. In Jacob.
But Isaac was crossed in Jacob too, for he lived a stranger from him twenty
years so that he did not enjoy him. Is it not a grief to have a good child
as it were banished and restrained from dwelling with his Father for so long a
time, whose company his love makes him to desire every day? But Isaac lived to
see much rudeness in his Grandchildren, for he outlived Joseph's selling
into Egypt, and was afflicted in Jacobs uncomfortablenesse under that cross.
Bless God if it have not happnend so to you, and if it have, mutter not, for
what are you that you may not be put to as much hardness as Isaac?

And lastly, Isaac died at 180 years, His death.
a long life indeed for those times, but it ended in death and burial, and so
must each of yours even a great while sooner, O therefore study to be prepared
for it.

THE SIXTEENTH EXAMPLE.
OF REBEKKAH.
REbekkah was the wife of Isaac, Rebekkahs neither birth nor death is mentioned
in Scripture.
of her birth and death the Scripture is silent. We are therefore to look into
her life, wherein observe the good she had and did, the evil she did and
suffered. The good she did,

First, Her virtues. 1. She was chaste while a Virgin.
whilst she lived young in her Fathers house, She was a Virgin untouched by
man, Genesis 24.16. No man knew her. It behooveth young women to behave themselves
so modestly, and shamefac'dly, that they may bring themselves unto their own
husbands undefiled. Therefore the holy Ghost appointed the Parents to be
careful of preserving the tokens of the maidens virginity, that they might be
able to prove it against the slanders of her husbands evil tongue (if he
should after report that he found her not a maid) but withal he appointed
that if the woman could not prove her self to have been a Virgin, she should
be brought out and publicly stoned at her Fathers door, Deuteronomy. 22, 13. You
see that God would have the daughter put to death which should be bold to
prostitute her self to any other men, and then deceive one that had not known
her, and thrust her self upon him as if she had been a Virgin, as much as if
he had ordered that such a defiled maiden should not marry any other but him
that had defiled her, unless first she had made the matter known unto that
other. Now what care should be taken to preserve chastity, the heathens may
teach us, who for mere credit sake, used diligence in this matter, and it
should be a shame for Christians not to exceed Pagans in any point of goodness.

Let me therefore speak unto you young maidens, and require you to follow
Rebekkah in this kind, keep your selves pure, suffer not your selves to be won
away with any solicitations for all occasions of sin. Be not haughty in conceit
of your own strength to withstand any allurement, but fear God, and beseech
him to keep you by virtue of his fear, else many a boasting maiden has been
forced out of her own experience to confess, that this offense cannot be
prevented by braging. I say therefore, let the fear of God, and an humble
heart, and a careful shunning of evil opportunities be the preservers of your
chastity. And if any of you have been corrupt, and vitiated, though it be
known to none but God and your selves, see that you be greatly humbled, and
truly penitent for it.

The custom of many is, if they can conceal themselves in this kind, and
that they prove not with child, to the public reproaching of themselves
before men, not at all to grieve for the sin committed, though it be
nevertheless abominable in Gods sight, because of such concealing it; yea,
some there be that add murder also to filthiness, using means of abortion to
themselves, or of hindering themselves from conceiving, by wicked reaches, and
devises: But the all-seeing eyes of God do discover their lewdness, and will
make their offenses known to all the world, and that so much the more to their
disgrace, and destruction, by how much they have declared themselves to be more
wicked, in fearing men, and not God. Indeed if the matter come to open
knowledge, they weep, and take on, showing evidently, that ignominy goes
nearer to their hearts than sin, and that they care not how lewd they be, if
their lewdness come not to light. But I say, be you careful to prevent secret
sins in this kind, and tender the health of your souls more than the credit
of your names, and undo that sin by unfeigned repentance, which will else make
you odious to God, though you hide it never so closly from men. And let Parents
also carry a watchful eye upon their daughters, not giving them liberty to
range up and down at unfit times, to unfit places, lest it befall them as it
did Dinah, Jacobs daughter, when she gave her self leave to gaze abroad to
see the fashions of the daughters of the country. And I must also speak to
young men, which go a wooing to young maidens, that they suffer not themselves
to be so far transported with unlawful, and unruly desires, as to pollute
those before marriage, or assay to solicit them whom they pretend to love so,
as to make them their wives. If they love them, let them keep them so worthy to
be beloved, and enter not into Gods Ordinance, through the devils Portall, as I
may call it; O be not so wicked, so injurious to the maid, and the friends of
the maid with whom you seek to make affinity, as to lay a snare and blot upon
your selves, and the kindred and parents of your selves, and of the Virgin to
whom you pretend love and good will, but enter purely into Matrimony, that the
blessing of God may accompany you in Matrimony. And so much for Rebekkahs
chastity, she came an unspotted Virgin to the bed of marriage.

Now further, she was a painful and a courteous maid, 2. She was painful and
courteous.

My Lord, said she: Sir, as you would say in English.


for she came out with her pitcher on her shoulder to draw water at a common
Well, and did not think so much of her labor, but that she was ready to draw
water, and fill the troughes till a number of Camels had drank their fill, and
courteously let down her pitcher to give the man that was a stranger to her, to
drink, and of her own accord offered her service to water his Camels too.

Learn you maidens to be painful, learn to be courteous, by labor you should
keep your bodies in good health, and your minds also free from vices and evil
desires, and by courtesy you shall show your selves to be of a good nature,
willing to be serviceable, and so shall win love, credit, and good esteem: but
an idle churlish person, that makes her self sick by her sloathfulnesse, and
by her backwardness to do service, (showing that she is good for nothing but
to trick up, and pride her self) becomes loathsome to God and man. Be not
idle, be not nice and dainty, be not sour and churlish, these things will
cause you to inherit as much disgrace as Rebekkah did inherit honor and good
will. Let me commend unto you the virtuous example of good Rebekkah, dress
your selves as it were at her glass, and adorn your selves with her virtues.
This Story you may read at large, Genesis 24.15. and so forward read it,
consider of it, and take it forth into your lives, and learn to live according
to the worthy presidents which the word of God commends unto you. The custom
of the world, and the corruption of nature will persuade you rather to pride,
niceness, sloathfulnesse, and discurtesie, but we must take heed of following
our own naughty nature, in the sinful fashions of the world; She is a
Christian indeed that is wiling to live according to the Scriptures.

Now consider another virtue of Rebekkahs, 3. She was willing to be ruled by
her friends in marriage.
she was willing to be ruled by her friends in marriage, and when they had
given their consent to Abraham's servant for the marrying of her to Isaac, she
also consented, and said, I will go with the man, Genesis 24.58. So should all
maidens yield themselves to the government of their parents and friends in this
matter, that they may with more assurance and comfort expect the blessing of
God to make their lives comfortable in marriage, by giving them love and favor
in their husbands eyes, and bestowing upon them good husbands, at least if they
meet with such as be not what they ought, they may with more contentedness
and patience undergo the cross when it comes not with a sting upon their
consciences, in that by their sinfulness they have even pulled misery upon
themselves. If you be well matched, the comfort will be doubled, when you shall
perceive that it is a fruit of Gods goodness unto you, in blessing your care
of observing his commandments, and directions, and if a cross come, it will
be far more easily borne, when you have your parents and friends ready to
comfort you, and help you, because you have followed their directions in
bestowing your selves. Thus you shall provide best for your own perpetual
welfare: for that inordinate passion, which is called love, will soon be
quenched like a fire of thorns, and then it is not the fulfilling of irregular
desires, that will minister comfort unto you. It is evident by experience, that
discord and dissension do quickly fall out betwixt them that followed passion
rather then duty, and discretion in placing themselves with a husband. Now you
shall be well able thus to perform your duty both to God and your Parents, if
you keep your selves owners of your own hearts, and suffer not your unruly
passions to make you slaves unto themselves, and so to make your duty difficult
and tedious. He that keeps his feet and legs free from shackles and chains, can
easily go about any businesses that are needful for him to do. But whosoever
will lade himself with irons and fetters, shall find it grievous to stir when
it is requisite for him to go any whither. Therefore shackle not you souls
with the chains of unruly affections, that you may cheerfully yield your
selves to your parents disposal, as both nature and religion do require at
your hands. Give not away your selves before hand, commit not that vile
Idolatry of making some one man a false god unto you, and let not your hearts
be inslaved to any one, before your Parents have given you, who have interest
from God to dispose of you according to the rules of discretion for your own
good. For Parents look to the constant good of their children in bestowing
them, but their own green heads do likely regard nothing else but the pleasing
of their eye and fancies, which likely does end in misery and discontent. And
so you have seen Rebekkahs good carriage while she was a maiden, living under
the government of her Eather in his Family.

Her good carriage when married.

1. She joined with her husband in prayer for children.


Now see how she carries her self afterward.

1. To God. 2. To her husband. 3. To her children.

1. To God, She joined with her husband in prayer for children, and therefore
she had faith in God, and trusted in him for issue, not barely to the course of
nature, for it is said Genesis 25.21. Isaac entreated the Lord for his wife,
because she was barren, she was present with her husband, and joined her own
supplications with his, for the obtaining of fruitfulness by him. A good woman
ought to be prayerfull, and both to unite her devotions to her husband, and
also to call upon God by her self alone. See therefore you wives that you be
ready to show piety in the same kind; pray to God with your husbands, yea pray
to him for your selves, husbands, and children, and for all good things. The
blessings are doubled that are gotten not alone by natural endeavors, but by
fervent prayers unto God, for this is a proof, that they be granted by God in
favor, and so they become tokens of his love to men, and by that means are
much more comfortable then of their own nature they could be. Those wives
therefore are too blame, that scarce are willing to pray themselves, or to
join with their husbands, but by their backwardness interrupt their praying
together, a thing condemned by S. Peter, when it is procured by discontents,
falling out betwixt, and consequently also by any other means. Mend this fault
O ye wives, and you that are husbands, if the fault have been in you, mend it,
and see that you join together, calling upon God. If you have children, yet
there be enough of other things for which you ought to visit the Throne of
grace. The graces of Gods Spirit are much more desirable then the fruit of our
bodies, and I am sure that our hearts are all barren of such fruit, and cannot
be made fruitful but by Gods Spirit working in our hearts, and prayer will
cause him to make a barren heart fruitful as well as a barren womb, but
without prayer the heart will never bring forth true grace. Natural benefits,
children, and the like, do fall into the laps of men and women though they do
not seek them from God by this exercise of prayer; but spiritual blessings
cannot be obtained by any other means, if this be not also joined to the
means to sanctify them. You have therefore cause enough to pray together as
well as Isaac and Rebekkah, even though you have not barren bodies, yea, and if
you have children, yet it is requisite to crave Gods favorable blessing upon
them, without which, they may prove afterward the greatest crosses you have,
instead of the greatest comforts; see therefore that you be not slack in this
service of God.

Again, Rebekkahs duty is seen, 2. She inquired of God when the children
strived in her womb.
in that she went to God to enquire when she found a more then ordinary
striving in her womb: we must all learn of her to keep our peace with God,
and to be always ready to seek to him, if any thing befall us that puts us to
fear or trouble, as you see the people of God have done at all times. It
becomes the children of God still to enquire of him, and seek to him in all
occurrents. Indeed it pleases him to send such occasions unto us, that by them
we may be drawn nearer unto him, and visit him more often, and more
cheerfully. They therefore that are strangers to God, and run any whether,
rather then to him for help and direction, when troubles do come unto them,
are much too blame themselves for profaneness. They acknowledge God alone in
word, but deny him in deed, that are thus estranged from him. Mend this fault
now, and that you may with more assurance run to God when crosses and cumbers
befall you, be sure to pray without ceasing, and to keep your hearts in with
him, by calling upon him at all times. It is a most happy thing to have the
Throne of grace always open to ones prayers; and it is kept open by
continuance, and daily exercising ones self in this service. If any say, how
shall we enquire of God now, seeing we are now destitute of extraordinary
Prophets, by whose means we may seek unto him? I answer, we have his Word, we
have his Name, we have his Ministers and faithful people to go unto, and by
those we may as sufficiently seek unto him, as by any extraordinary Prophets.
Wherefore as Rebekkah feeling that busling in her womb, said, why am I thus?
And went to enquire of God, Genesis 25.22. So must we in all occasions of
disquietment, either of body, or of mind, think with our selves, why is it
thus with me? and must come to prayer, and crave direction and help of him; We
must run to his word, and seek to inform our selves from thence, what may be
the cause of our present estate, and consult with his faithful servants that
have a larger measure of knowledge then our selves, that by their advice we may
learn what is fit for us to do, and upon what ground it is that matters be so
with us, and God by these means will settle and quiet our minds as surely, and
firmly, as of old he accustomed to do by means of his holy Prophets. So you
have Rebekkahs piety to God, now see her carriage to her husband, and we find
in the Story of her life, testimonies of her being a dutiful wife unto him.

3. She was dutiful to her husband.
For first, when she found him inclined to go against the will of God (in giving
away that solemn blessing which she inherited from his Father Abraham, unto
the Son to whom it was not due, because God had preferred the younger before
the elder) she was careful to prevent that sin, and to procure the blessing
unto Jacob, to whom it was due, and how? Not by brawling and falling out with
him, but by a gentle and a quiet means. I commend not the using of guile and
falsehood, but in that she fell not to it by violence of speech, but by a gentle
and mild way, in that I cannot but commend her. Herein she did the part of a
loving, discreet, and dutiful wife, who reverenced her husband, and desires
to keep him from sin. She came not chaffing to Isaac, as once Sarah did to
Abraham, but by a gentle course she caused him to escape the fault before he
could commit it, and beyond his purpose. So must you good wives carry your
selves, if your husbands be about to swerve out of the way, and you perceive
it, you must endeavor by sweet and dutiful courses to prevent, or recall them
from sin, not to use fierce passion, brawling, as sometimes women of a fierce
spirit do, who many times are punished for their indiscreet frowardness, by
failing of their desires, and making things worse, rather then changing them
for the better. The same disposition to her husband she showed in another
passage too, for that she might procure the sending of Jacob into Padan Aram,
she did not openly declare the matter to her husband, but came and related the
trouble she had with Esaus wives, and told how bitter a thing it would prove
unto her, if she were as bad yoked with another wife that Jacob should bring,
and so won him to dispatch Jacob for a wife into Padan Aram.

A woman should always deal by loving means with her husband, to get the
good she would at his hands, and not by violence and clamor. You that would
have the repute of good wives in your own hearts, see that you follow Rebekkah,
prevail by discreet, wise, and courteous courses, not by strong hand, and
violence. But these eager, sharp, and passionate women, that will wrest the
things the desire out of their husbands hands, (perhaps also inconvenient
things) by chiding, and big, and loud words, as once I told you Sarah sought to
do, or else by puling, and whining, and charging their husbands not to love
them else, as the wife of Sampson did, are to be blamed as undiscreet, and
disobedient wives, and if they repent not of their folly, and unrulinesse, the
Lord will one day call them to account for their misdemeanors; Gentleness,
and dutifulness must adorn your conversation, and your husbands must see your
conversation coupled with fear to displease, so shall you make your selve and
husbands happy, both at once, and have a kind of lawful power with them over
whom you have not any authority.

But now of Rebekkahs carriage to her Sons, she was in the right, 4. She loved
her best son most.
she loved the good son whom God loved most; Jacob was a plain man, but a good
man, beloved of God, therefore she did love him too, and herein she did much
excel her husband Isaac, and was more to be commended, and did better please
God. Indeed herein she showed her obedience to God, as well as her affection to
Jacob, whom she desired to have attain the blessing, because she knew that God
had appointed it unto him. It is a necessary thing, that men should submit
themselves unto God in every thing, and become furtherers the best they can of
fulfilling his good pleasure, when once he has vouchsafed to manifest it unto
them. O let us learn to submit our wills thus to Gods will, and to make it our
care to have those things done by our selves and others which he would have
done. And learn Parents, and all men, of Rebekkah, to love them best in whom
the Lord has printed his Image most clearly and abundantly. Let godliness be
the loadstone of our affections rather then any other thing, yea let us all
learn of her too, to strive to procure a blessing upon our children, though not
by such a course as she took, for herein she was manifestly blame worthy, yet
by all good and honest courses that we can, even by our prayers for them, and
good instructions to them; and the like. You have heard Rebekkahs goodness, so
much as I remember that the Scriptures have left upon record, saving it is
noted of her, that she made savoury meat for her husband, 5. She provided such
food for her husband as he liked.
such as he loved, she could not have done it so well then, if she had not
taken notice of it, and done it often before. So it is the part of a good woman
to cherish her husband in his diet, so far as her means and ability will
permit, and having informed himself what is pleasing to him, accordingly to
provide it for him. So shall she show good will to her husband, which always
makes one careful to please and gratify the party beloved. Here is a pattern
for you to live after, all you good women seek to give your husbands due
content in their food, prepare things acceptable to them as you be able,
especially, if they be weak, blind, or otherwise afflicted; that your kind
usage this way, may even countervaile the want of other benefits, and cause
their lives to be as comfortable to them, as in such crosses they may be: but
without doubt she is a bad and unloving wife, who neglects to give her
husband satisfaction in this point, who sets him short, and cares not to fit
him with pleasing food; if they be not destitute of means, yea, who feeds her
self deliciously in his absence, and must have some choice provision for her
self when she pleases, that shall be hidden from his eye, and withdrawn from
his mouth.

A great fault it is in a wife, to forget that her husband and she do make but
one body, and to divide him from her in eating and drinking to whom she is so
nearly linked in other society. Be no more offenders in this kind, if you have
been such, but now be good nurses to your husbands, and let them at least
partake with your selves of any good fare which you provide for your selves.
These be the things commendable in Rebekkah. Now I come to her faults.

Her faults, She used fraud to conveigh the blessing to Jacob.
First, she used deceit and fraud to conveigh the blessing unto Jacob, and
sought rather to hook it to him by a fleshly device, then to compass it by a
convenient and lawful way. You shall read the Story Genesis 27.1. and 17. She
knew her husband was blind, therefore she spoke to Jacob to get the blessing
by a cunning device, she sends for a Kid, makes such a dish as was pleasing to
Isaacs palate, uses means to make his hands and neck seem rough, like unto
Esaus, by covering them with the skins of the Kids as handsomely as she could,
and so sends him in to Isaac, having before emboldned him to say, though
falsely, that he was Esau the eldest Son. This was a sin in her, the matter of
it was fraud and fashood, the aggravations of it were, first, she drew Jacob
into the sin of lying and shifting, even contrary to his own temper, for the
Scripture witnesses of him, that He was a plain man.

Secondly, she was set upon it, that though Jacob objected he should get a
curse rather then a blessing, by seeming to his Father a deceiver and a mocker,
yet she found a means to encourage him in his lying, by a trick to beguile his
Father well enough; that he should never find him out, and so drew him to go
thorough with the crafty device: this was practiced even against her husband
also, to whom it least of all becomes a wife to use deceit and lying. Only
there was one mitigation and extenuation of her fault, she did aim at a good
end, but a good intention cannot justify unlawful means that are used to
accomplish it. We have in her then a fault of craftiness, and deceit, and
lying. There is a great difference betwixt wisdom and fraud, wisdom will
always hold it self to the side of justice, not alone in the thing it mainly
seeks, but also in the path which it chooses to walk in to that end; But
fraud is as it were a rotten wisdom, and cares not to follow equity and truth
in the way it takes, and neither many times in the end. Abhor fraud, that is,
the carrying of a thing wilily with lying, and falsehood, whether it be good or
bad, but most of all if it be bad. It is a sin to do evil that good may come
of it, as S. Paul teaches, Romans 3. It is a sin to lie, even for Gods cause,
and to defend even his justice with false tales, and figments. As Job
admonishes his frinds that did so, and that they might not seem to impute
unrighteousness to God in so sore punishing of Job, they did impute hypocrisy
to him that was punished. It is a sin to lie even for a purpose otherwise good,
for we are commanded to put away lying. Wherefore, consider of your selves, if
you have not lied and beguiled, if you have not allured and encouraged others
to join with you in lying, and beguiling, that else would not have done it. If
you have done it against those that were near to you, to whom you should have
used more respect: And worst of all, if you have done it for a sinful end too,
that is, not to get what was due to you, as here Jacob, but what was not due,
by overreaching your neighbors in bargaining, and the like, not to keep a man
from sin as here, but rather to draw him to sin, as in case of unjust
complaints to a superior, to make him punish, when he should not punish; Not
to do your selves good, as here Jacob, but to do another a mischief, as David's
false accusers to Saul, and if your consciences accuse you of such fraud,
repent of it before God, blame your selves for it, seek pardon, resolve to put
it away for hereafter, and entreat the Lord to fortify you against all such
wickedness, that so you may be pardoned, else great is the danger of such
wickedness, The bread of deceit shall be gravel in the belly, and wealth
gotten by lying shall prove but vanity tossed to and fro of them that seek
death. I pray you, consider how God chastised this guile in these two good
persons, and that though they had a good end in it; For, this occasioned the
rage of Esau, which made him threaten, yea, and after attempt to kill Jacob,
and so drove Jacob from Isaacs family, and kept them from that comfortable
enjoyment each of other, which else they might have had for twenty years
together. And be you now lovers of plainness, abhor shifting and falsehood,
trust God with the success of all your affairs, and trust not to your own
hearts, and heads, he that seeks to effect his desires by honest and just
means, he puts confidence in God, and not in himself, he that uses lying and
cousinage, he puts not his hope in God, but in his own wit and heart: Show true
and well grounded confidence in God, by keeping your selves within the paths of
equity and truth, lovely paths, fair paths, straight paths, which shall
surely lead you to more happiness and comfort at last, than lying, and fraud,
hateful, dirty, and crooked paths can possibly do. Learn as David says, Psalm.
119. To hate lying, and to love Gods Law, love to be guided by God, who is the
God of truth, and hate to follow lies, which are of the devil, the author of
lying. Do not object, that you cannot possibly escape such and such mischief,
bring about such and such a good business, unless you turn a little aside;
to a little lying. I answer first, trust God with success, believe above hope,
let faith guide you, not natural reason; Cannot he do that which reason will
call impossible? Has not be said, Roll thy self upon God, and thy ways, and
he shall bring it to pass? Will you not rest upon him for the performance of
so evident a promise? And secondly I answer, that the greatest evil must be
suffered rather than the smallest sin committed, and the attaining of the
greatest benefit, cannot countervaile the committing of the least sin, and that
man does not truly know either God, or sin, or the world, or himself, that
does not yield to these truths.

2. She was too much troubled at her evil daughters in law.
So you have this fault of Rebekkahs, another is, that she was too much troubled
at her evil daughters in law, and was weary of life because of them. This is a
fault, to make crosses too too heavy our selves, to be so distempered with
them, so, as to become weary of life because of them, yea, it is a fault found
in those that were truly religious, and godly; Eliah would fain have parted
with his soul, because of the troubles which he met withal, he desired to die,
says the Story, 2 King. 19.4.
and said, It is enough, Now Lord take away my soul from me, for I am no
better than my Fathers. Moses would fain have dyed too, when the people
murmured against him, and he poures forth his grief before God in these words,
If thou will deal thus with me, kill me now, kill me if I have found favor in
thine eyes, and let me not see mine evil. Sometimes you find good men
desirous to escape death, and crying, Lord save me from the hands of mine
enemies, and sometimes again even covetous of it, and crying with vehemence
again and again, kill me Lord, kill me, and if thou love me, kill me. Job was
exceeding desirous to die, To desire death because of misery, is a sin, and why?
and said, He would seek for it as for gold, yea, and fine gold, So you
perceive that man's nature is prone to wax weary of living, because of
affliction, and that this is a fault, and a weakness, is evident. It is an act
of ingratitude, because a man considers not as well the good he enjoys, as
the evil, for if he would reckon well, he does always receive more good at
Gods hand in this life, than evil, but as one bitter morsel causes that the
mouth tastes nothing almost but bitterness, though it have before received
many dainty morsels, so it is with us in this case.

despair that casts it into such swounes, as Job said, As for mine hope, where
is it?

Thirdly, pride is one great cause of this disposition, men consider not with
themselves how unworthy they be of any good, how much they have deserved far
greater evil, and therefore are immoderately vexed with those they feel, and
therefore count their being a burden. But is it not a fruit of great pride in
a man, that as if he were his own maker, preserver, disposer, will be no longer
then he may have his own will? and may see things to go along with him after
his own wishes.

Further, a man wrongs himself exceedingly, by suffering himself to grow weary
of life, for first, he makes the misery greater, by making himself weaker to
bear it. If a man be to bear a great burden, it does him much hurt to scratch
the skin of his shoulder, for that will add much to the pain of bearing. A
gauled place will smart of it self, how ill does be provide for himself, that
rubs off the skin from his shoulders, when he is put to carry a thing. So does
he that will needs give way to so much impatiency, as to be weary of life, yea,
he exposes himself to the danger of becoming a self-murtherer, that yields
to this weariness of life. For it will not be very hard to persuade any man to
cast away that which is his burden. So it is evident, that this was an offense
in Rebekkah.

And now come you men and women of all ranks, look into your selves. Have not
you also been weary of life, and that upon a very small occasion? A maid is
crossed in her desires, by her parents for her good, and she sees no likelihood
of having what she would have, then she pules and takes on, and wishes she
were dead and buried, she would forgive him that would knock her on the head. A
man has met with somewhat a froward woman which vexes him with her words,
then he will be dead in a chafe, I would I were out of the world, never man was
so pestered with a shrew as I, so it is with wives too. Come now, recount you
own passions, are you not ashamed of these drunken distempers? what is life, a
thing so dog cheap with you, that upon every occasion you would cast it away?
Are your selves things of so little value that so small a matter should make
you weary of your selves? You wrong God exceedingly in such distempers, for you
make it appear that you think of him, as of an angry governor, that cares not
how unreasonably he lays upon his servants in his anger: Either these
corrections are sufferable, or not, (I mean such as by wisdom and discretion
you might compose your selves to bear with gentleness,) or they be not, if
they be, why do you chafe thus? If they be not, who has sent them? Verily you
provoke God to send unsufferable crosses, that will make easy crosses
unsufferable; What says the Father to the froward child, do you cry for
nothing, take you that then to make you cry for something, and so doubles and
redoubles his blows with a strong arm, till the child, feeling the smart of
his Fathers anger, begins to compose himself to a little more sufferance.
Brethren, let us repent of this folly, there scarce lives a man that has not
overshot himself in this fashion: O let us repent of it, and let us diligently
resist such disorderly passions hereafter; Let nothing make us weary of life
but sin, and not that so excessively, as to make us intemperately wish death.
Of sin we should be weary, but of life for sins sake I know not whether we may
allow our selves at all to be weary. But for crosses, be they what they will,
we should not be so weak and impatient, as to grow weary of life. For God is
able to deliver us out of all crosses, and will do it, and he will so sanctify
them to us, that it may be more for our profit than if it were removed, and can
give, as in Jobs case he did, so blessed an issue, that our selves shall
confess it was but our folly, not to be willing to continue under them
according to his will. Had not Job cause to unwish his former wishes, when the
Lord did make so large an addition of happy days unto him? Above all, we must
consider of our worthiness to be damned, that we may not think much of
crosses, and labor so to rest upon God for the escape of damnation, that
afflictions which are but for a short season, may not seem unto us extreme.
Look upon our Lord Jesus Christ, what sufferings were comparable to his? Yet
we never meet with any weariness of life, or wishing of death in him. Look
upon S. Paul too, Never man had feeling of greater tribulation, and he tells us,
that he took pleasure in necessities, afflictions, tribulations; but that he
wished himself dead, that he might be free from his crosses, we never read.

Let us follow the virtues of godly men, but let their weaknesses be our
warnings. And that we may not distaste life for any crosses that befall us
therein, let us often renew our faith in Gods gracious promises, to give us an
happy issue out of all, and to bring us safely to his heavenly kingdom.
Moreover, if sometimes these fainting fits do gather upon us, and our minds
be overtaken with this tirednesse of spirit, let us learn though to be
humbled, yet not to be discouraged. We conclude not against Elias, Moses,
Rebekkah, Job, that they were not truly sanctified, because they were imperfect
in patience; Why should we make such untrue, and uncharitable, and indiscreet
conclusions, either against our selves, or others with whom we live? As an
extenuating of faults to make them seem nothing, and make our hearts hard
under them, is to be condemned, so an over-aggravating of them to make our
selves seem no children, making our case worse then ever any man's before, is
likewise to be condemned; Satan is author of both these follies, and the effect
of the latter is to drive us from God, as well as of the former, and all things
are ill used when they tend to keep us from coming to God, and trusting in
him. So much of Rebekkahs good and bad, now of the good and evil occurrents
that befell her.

Her prosperity first was great, 3. Her prosperity, She was effectually called.
for God called her from her Fathers house, in which Idolatry did reign, and
false worship prevailed, to be a member of Abraham's house, and a mother of the
Messiah, and a professor, and practiser of Gods true religion; and not alone
so, but gave her grace to be a godly woman, an heir of the promise made to
Abraham, together with her husband. This is the greatest of mercies here below,
to be called from darkness to light, from serving the devil and Idols, to
serve the true and living God.

If God have granted to any this mercy, even to call them effectually to
himself out of the darkness of a false worship and religion, to the light of
a godly life. How much cause has he to bless God, and to rejoice in this
mercy above all mercies, and be freequently and heartily thankful? But if you
have not yet attained it, for many live in the Church that be not of it; take
notice of your wretched condition, and now cry earnestly to God to bring you to
the effectual and saving knowledge of his truth, that you also may be indeed,
and ^ot in bare profession, of the household of Abraham, the true Church.

But Rebekkah had other benefits, beauty, health, and strength, Genesis 24.16.20
2. She was beautiful, healthy, strong, had a rich and godly husband, and a
good child.
for ought we read, after marriage as before. A rich and godly husband in whom
she was doubly happy for her soul and state, and one godly child too, whom
she dearly loved, and who showed himself a man worthy to be loved. A good
husband, a good state, a good child, good health, be they not benefits
indebting us to God in many praises, and thanks, and much careful obedience?
Let not these mercies be strangers to your thoughts, but ponder upon them to
stir up your selves to thanksgiving and obedience.

Now for her crosses, 4. Her afflictions.
some she suffered in her days as well as others.

First, her husband fell blind and weak, and almost bedridden. 1. Her husband
was blind and weak.
No doubt but she did participate with him in this affliction, and it was a
grief to her to see him so imprisoned in darkness, and some trouble it must
needs be though her love made it easy to give attendance upon him in that
estate. 2. Her husbands affections were set too much on the worser son.

3. Esaus resolution to kill Jacob.


Likewise she could not but grieve to see her husbands affections to be so much
more than they should have been for a long time upon her elder, but worser son.

It was also a great grief unto her to see the rudeness and bloodinesse of
her son Esau, who comforted himself against his brother, with an intention, so
soon as his Fathers funerals were over, to dispatch him, and rob him of the
blessing, though he could not get it to himself. Would it not cut the heart of
one of you Parents, to hear that one of your sons (you having but a couple in
all the world) should resolve to become a murderer of the other, and so you
stood in danger of being deprived of them both at once; would not both these
things grieve you? Again, 4. Jacob was banished from her as it were.
it was a grief to her to have her good son as it were banished from her
house, and compelled to fly away in secret for his life. For had he not been
compelled to steal into Padan Aram in respect of Esau, as to steal thence
again in respect of Laban, his Fathers estate was not so low, that he must
needs have travailed over that Jordan with a staff, and come to Labans house
all alone, and there have served an hard service for a wife. Sure Isaac was not
a prodigal, he had not consumed his estate so, that Abraham's grandchilde must
be sent out so poorly appointed, whose steward when he fetched a wife for
Isaac, had ten Camels well laden with rich things, and many servants to attend
him, and so with speed returned home with his errand. But fear of Esau caused
him to go speedily and secretly, that no man might know it, lest so he might
have fallen into mischief by his means, and to tarry so long till he might
hear his brother was pacified.

Now did not this, think you, wound Rebekkahs heart? Did she not part with a
great part of her comfort, when she parted with her beloved son Jacob? so far,
so long, and in such a manner.

5. She was vexed with the frowardness of her daughters.
But worst of all, so long as she lived with her daughters, she was miserably
vexed with their frowardness, and ill conditions. Indeed at length Esau took
his journey to mount Seir, where her friends dwelled, and made this cross more
easy, by removing his habitation with his wives and all he had: but in the
mean it was an anguish to her, and that ( viz. loss of Esau too, when Jacob
was gone) could not but minister matter of some affliction to her in mind.

Now let all of us be persuaded to look for these and the like crosses, that
by fortifying our selves against them, we may be made more patient, and so
bear them with less discontent: for what are we, that God should handle us
with more indulgence than this so good a woman? And those that lie under any
such cross in husband, sons, daughters, daughters in law, let them frame
themselves to a more contented suffering, because they find that they be no
other kind of evils, than those wherewith their Father has exercised their
betters in former times, as he does also for the present; He must be an unruly
child that will roar, and take on, when he bears no more than his other
brethren and sisters bear before him; yea, and if we have escaped these
particular crosses, let us be thankful to God for our freedom even from them,
and make the bearing of the rest more easy, because we have not (as we have
deserved, and might have had) the same we have, and these also for an overplus
of misery.

THE SEVENTENTH EXAMPLE.
OF ESAV.
WE are now to handle the example of Esau: He was a twin, Jacob being the
other twin: We must treat of his birth, life, and death.

First, for his birth, Esau his birth.
we are informed that he was the son of Isaac, and of Rebekkah the wife of
Isaac, daughter of Bethuel, by his wife Milcah. Which Bethuel was son of
Nachor, the brother of Abraham. He was borne in the year of the world 2108, as
some think; and as others, in the year 2168. and after the flood, as some
think 512. and as others, 562. for there is 60. years difference in
chronology, because of the doubt about Abraham's birth. Now the manner of his
birth was this, as the Scriptures relate, Genesis 25.25. He came out first in
color red, and all over rough, as an hairy garment, for which cause his name
was called Esau, which sign made as one that was stronger than ordinary
children be, and all over covered with hair. In him the Lord showed the
freedom of his election, as the Apostle notes, Romans 9. For, Before the
children were borne, or, had done good or evil, it was said, The elder shall
serve the younger. God chose not him but Jacob, though they were borne both of
the same Parents, and at the same burden.

Now concerning his life, we must consider; 1. That which was good therein. 2.
That which was evil. 3. His prosperity. 4. His crosses and miseries.

1 His good quality.

1. He showed good respect unto Isaac his Father.


For the first, some things he did that for matter were good and commendable, as
even a bad man may have some good things found in him. The first good thing
was, that he did show good respect unto Isaac his Father. For he was glad to
gratify him in his diet, bringing home the Venison that he caught, of which
was made dainty meat, which the old man loved to feed upon, and when he came to
him to present his Venison, according to his Fathers appointment, that he might
receive the blessing from his Father, he spoke reverently unto him. For when he
brought the meat ready prepared for his eating, he said thus to him, Let my
Father arise and eat of his sons Venison, that thy soul may bless me. Chap.
27.31. and after ver. 34. Bless me, even me also, o my Father, and ver. 38.
Have thou but one blessing my Father, bless me, even me also, o my Father.
Though his Father had given the blessing to Jacob his brother, yet he does not
rage and grow into passionate expostulations, but with gentle and reverent
terms, and with tears, and with prayers seeks to get some blessing from him.
This proves evidently, that he carried a reverent esteem of his Father in his
heart, and honored him duly. The same love and respect he showed to Isaac
after, for when his wrath was kindled against his brother Jacob, and that he
minded to revenge himself by killing Jacob: Yet he resolved to forbear till
Isaac was dead, that he might not procure too much grief and sorrow to him in
his old age, and therefore it is recorded, that he said, The days of mourning
for my Father are at hand, then will I kill my brother Jacob, ver. 41. He would
not have deferred the murder of his brother for Isaacs sake till after his
death, but that he bare some respect and good will unto his Father. And he
showed the same respect unto him after, Chap. 28.6. For when he perceived his
Father had blessed Jacob, and sent him to fetch a wife from Padan Aram, and not
to take any Canaanitish woman, and that the daughters of Canaan which he had
married displeased his Father, he went to his Uncle Ishmael, and took his
daughter Mahalath to wife, seeking as well as his wit could serve, to please
his Father in that latter match, although indeed he went not rightly to work in
that marriage neither. Some care you see he showed to give his Father content,
though he had not wisdom enough to order himself rightly for that end.

Thus this Esau, though he wanted grace, and feared not God, yet he bare love
and reverence in some degree as a carnal man could unto his Father Isaac; who
loved him dearly, and so he requited his love again, with such a kind of
love as might be found in an unsanctified person. Now all you sons and
daughters that have Parents living with you, or have had, come and lay your
selves in the balance with Esau, and consider if you have so much as equalled
him in this kind of imperfect dutifulness toward your Parents. He out of a
kind of natural inclination, or out of hope of being still kindly used and
blessed of his Father, showed much respect unto him diverse ways. Has nature,
have carnal ends prevailed so much with you to incline your hearts to your
parents, as they prevailed with Esau? If so, yet boast not of this, think not
much the better of your selves, these kind of shadows of virtues, cannot prove
you to be godly children, nor afford you sound comfort, because themselves be
not sound and perfect. You have no great reason to please your selves, because
you are as good as Esau, an unsanctified man, and one of whom we can give
little hope, but that he was a casta-way. I say therefore, satisfy not your
selves, be not good in your own eyes because of this painted and counterfeit
goodness. But if otherwise it be, and that it is evident you come far short of
Esau, and have not declared so much regard of your parents as he has done,
then how bad must you account your selves, that are much more sinful even than
an Esau might have been? And it is clear, that diverse children be far worse
than this bad son of Isaac, for they show no reverence, no submission to their
aged Parents, but apparently slight them in word and deed; grumble at them,
chafe against them, carry themselves cuttedly, and currishly toward them, if
at any time they be crossed by them; will not be held from following their own
evil desires, as Esau was from killing his Brother, by a desire not to grieve
them, but wilfully run on in their wicked courses, even though they see and
know that their wicked carriage does greatly afflict and torment their Parents;
but purposely some do things to torment them. O, sin has a greater sway and
dominion in such childrens hearts than it had in Esaus, and they are far more
wicked than he was. Yea, when they see their Parents displeased with their
ways, yet they have not so much desire to give them content as Esau had, nor
do not so much as labor in any manner, though never so poorly, to give them
any satisfaction at all. Woe, woe unto such children; what can he expect from
God, that is a viler son than Esau was? Let such shame themselves by his
example, and now receive reproof with meekness, and greatly repent of their
undutifulnesse, if ever they purpose to attain pardon. And now, let all
children that desire to enjoy in themselves the comfort of being the children
and chosen of God, strive to outstrip Esau in filial obedience and duty. Let
them for conscience sake to God, put on a largor measure of love, and a greater
reverence to their Parents, laboring to please them in all things, in the
Lord, and out of conscience, to submit themselves unto them, and honor them
because God has required it at their hands, and to labor to forbear all sin,
as in an holy regard to God, so in part also, out of a fear to vex and kill
their godly Parents, whose tender affection to them cannot but cause that their
wicked carriage shall prove a mighty corrasive unto their souls. Be as good as
Esau, yea in this matter be you far better than he, content not thy self to be
even with a miserable Esau in dutifulness to your Parents. Another thing in
Esau we have recorded in Scripture, which is commendable, and that toward his
brother Jacob, for though he went against him with four hundred men, intending
to take a sharp revenge by killing him at least, if not his wives and children
too, 2. He was melted with his brothers loving, kind, humble carriage.
yet when he saw his brothers loving, and kind, and humble carriage, in
sending him a rich present, and in bowing down and saluting him with his face
to the ground seven times; his natural affection prevailed against his former
unruly passion, and he handled him very courteously, and ran to him, wept on his
neck, kissed him, gave him kind words, invited him to his country, and would
have left off his servants with him to do him service, and so returned, and did
him no hurt at all.

Every man sees that this was well done of Esau. Come and imitate him, and if
you have been transported with rage against any, specially against a brother
for any true or imaginary iniquity; yet when submissivenesse and courtesy is
showed unto you, let it melt you, let it win you, pacify, appease you, and
cause your passion to depart, and though you have intended, attempted, and
begun to use violence, yet cast out such thoughts, forbear the execution of
such evil purposes, and turn your violence into kindness and humanity. Be
better than Esau, and do this to any man, as he to a brother, and without such
gifts and submission, which be did by such inducements, and show love and
kindness for very conscience, as he did out of natural passion striving in
him: Yea, if any man have been imbittered against another for any cause, and
has so far yielded to his own fury, as to begin to do naughtily in seeking
revenge; O let him do as well as Esau did, go back in the midst of his
enterprise, and not suffer himself to be so confirmed in wickedness, as to go
through with sinful designs. Let the fear of God, the checks of conscience,
the apprehension of Gods displeasure against the doers of such things, even
reclaim you in the midst, as natural kindness did this sinful man. Be not
satisfied to do as well as Esau in this case, but exceed him, and do far
better than he, that you may show your selves to have that grace of which Esau
was destitute.

3. He was not greedy of gifts
Farther Esau, for matter of goods, shows himself not to be extremely greedy
and worldly minded, for when his brother bad sent unto him a great drove of
cattle, even a gift of great value. Genesis 32. 14, 15. Two hundred she Goats,
and as many Ewes, with twenty he Goats, and as many Rams, with thirty milch
Camels and their Colts, and forty Kine, and ten Bulls, and twenty she Asses
with ten Foales. I say a rich and gay booty, he did earnestly and heartily
refuse the same, saying, Chap. 33.9. I have enough my brother, keep that which
is thine own, and would not take it but upon urgent pressing: First, it is
said ver. 11. He urged him, and he took it. Now will you not show your selves
as good men as Esau in this case? Know when you have enough, be not greedy of
gifts, and when your state is already rich and abundant, seek not to get into
your hands though it be by receiving a gift, that which is another. O that
Esau should be able to say, I have enough, keep that which is thine, and many
that be Christians in show, should not be able to discern when they have
enough, but should be as eager to get even by worse means, or as bad as this,
even by taking gifts and bribes for doing but even justice or which is worse,
for doing injustice, and should by oppression and harsh dealing even with poor
and needy men, their Tenants and underlings, seek to get even more than enough.

If any man amongst you find himself so earthly disposed, let him earnestly
condemn himself, and say alas, what a slave am I to riches? that have not yet
so far denied the world, but that I am more covetous and unjust than Esau
showed himself.

If any say, yea, Esau did this toward a brother;

I answer, does not Christianity teach us to love our neighbors as our selves?

If any say, but though Esau said he had enough, yet it may be, that he thought
not so;

I answer, In saying so, he shows he thought he was so at that time, and knew
he should be so, therefore should a good man that would be counted far better
than Esau set himself to be so indeed, and at all times?

Come then, you that have estates large enough to afford you all due content,
come I say, and learn of Esau to know when you have enough, and not strive to
get more by any greedy, unjust and oppressive course.

Let others enjoy their own, and be you content with your own, yea go yet
farther, and be content to lose some of you own to those that are poor, and
in necessity, and far lower and meaner than your selves.

But last of all, 4. He joined with his brother in burying his Father
Esau joined with his brother Jacob in burying his Father Isaac, and so at once
showed his respect to his Father, in doing that last duty, and his perfect
reconciliation to his brother, in joining with him to do it. Learn you to
show honor to your Parents in the last act, and let not an old grudge stick so
in your stomachs, as to hinder you from doing any good work because you cannot
bring your hearts to be partners with those that have offended you. Esau, Esau
shall rise in judgment against you, if you continue still to have such a coare
against them from whom you have received injury, as that their presence will
keep you from doing good works with them in their company, and in their
society.

And these be all the good things which I can call to mind that the Scripture
tells of this evil man. Let us therefore pass on to the consideration of his
faults, which are more, and greater.

And first in general, His faults, 1. In general, he was an hypocrite.
though he lived more than forty years in his Fathers house a religious man,
and a careful worshipper of God, yet he lived there as an hypocrite, and got
no true goodness, as appears by that he was not kept from fratricide, or
brother-murdering, by any conscience to God, but alone by a kind of love and
respect to his Father. Look to your selves I pray you, you that be children of
godly Parents, and have been trained up by them as well as they knew how, look
to your selves, that you continue not sinful, and wicked, and hypocrites at
the last, such I mean, as care not to get the true knowledge of God, but
continue still lovers and servants of sin, though you have a little form of
godliness, to forbear some sins, and do some good things for your Parents
sake. This is to be an Esau, even to enjoy the means of grace and salvation in
a godly house, and there to conform a little outwardly, and to abstain from
some sins out of respect to the Governors, though you have no true conscience
to God. Search your hearts you wives, children, servants, that are educated,
and live under the roof of good men in the Church of God, under good means,
and see your misery, if you be no better than this man was. And now labor to
profit by the means of grace, to get the truth of grace causing you to stand in
awe of God, and to depart from all wickedness, out of due obedience to his
Majesty, that it may be said of you, these and these, and all sins you resolve
to leave, not for sinister respects of this or that person, or thing, of a
Father, or the like, but out of love to God, and a true desire to honor him
that has taken you to be his people. Think not well of your selves because
some self respect, or humane consideration keeps you from running into grosser
sins, but drive to imprint such a filial regard to the living God in your
hearts, that may cause you to shun all wickedness for the Lords sake, and then
you may comfortably say in your selves, now I know I am a true member of the
Church, and not as Esau was, at least then, a rotten, and a withering, and a
fruitless branch, that brings forth leaves alone and no good fruit.

But let us more particularly search into Esau:

First, in respect of his carriage of himself in respect of outward things:
then of his carriage for matters of religion, and the things of God. Thirdly,
His behavior to his Parents. Lastly, to his brother.

2. His particular faults. 1. He gave himself wholly to hunting.
For the first, his life was very faulty in the manner of his orders for the
world, for in his younger time he gave himself wholly to hunting, as it is
said of him, Genesis 25.27. The boys grew up, and Esau was a cunning Hunter, a
man of the field; He means a gallant fellow that gave himself to little else
but the sport of hunting, and was still, in the field following that sport. He
was a rich man's son, and his Father had great means, and allowed him enough,
wherefore he cared not for any useful kind of living, but followed sports and
jollity, and by name was a great hunter still in the fields, to please himself
in that humor. Is not this also the common sin of many richer persons? who as
they had wealth given them to be fuel to idleness and voluptuousness, give
themselves over to sports, and some to this of hunting, and regard not to
profit in any good study or profitable trade of life. Esaus hunting may seem
not to have been according to our present custom, with kennels of bounds, but
with bow and quiver, as it is noted, Chap. 25. But howsoever, he was set wholly
upon sports, and sold himself to that kind of delight, leting go other
things of better note and use. Surely then, it is a sin to live voluptuously,
to have none other calling but pastimes and vain sports, to make that ones
occupation, that should be alone his recreation, and to spend himself in such
a trifling vain thing that should be used as a triflle alone, to refresh our
selves after matters of greater consequence. Nimrod was an hunter, Ishmael was
an archer, Esau a field man; you read no such thing of Sem, Abraham, Isaac,
Jacob. Why should you follow the pattern of those men whom the Scripture
speaks of with disgrace? and not theirs rather, who have an honorable name
in the book of God. I pray you call your selves to an account for your expense
of time, must we not answer to God how we have lived, how we have bestowed our
days and hours, will this be a good answer? I spent the day in hunting,
hawking, carding, dicing, and so I did from time to time, one day at one sport
or merry meeting, another, at another, but all in such toys; Can you be so
fond as to imagine or believe, that God for this cause gave you wit, senses,
lives, health, strength, wealth, and other like means of doing good?

See this fault now, so many as are guilty, and set your selves to a more
profitable kind of living, or else the day will come when you shall bootlesly
wish that you had never been; O so lay out your life, that the world and your
selves may be the better for it. Live as Abraham and Jacob did, not as Esau,
follow some study, follow some good husbandry.

Live, as those that know there is another life after this, and that there be
more weighty and honorable things to do than playing and sporting: Take heed
of bringing your selves into the number of those that are Lovers of pleasures,
more than lovers of God. If you say, why? Then do you condemn all use of
sports, as hunting, fowling, or the like?

I answer, no. I do not, but I say, let not this in a manner be the total
sum of your employment. Have figures, as well as ciphers in the number of
your days, let these kinds of exercises have some small quantity of time for
your refreshment, but spend your selves in better things, or else you shall be
censured with S. James his censure, You have lived in pleasure upon earth, and
then I am sure you shall live in torment when you must leave the earth.

But another fault we have in Esau, for the manner of his hunting, 2. He
followed his hunting over-eagerly.
ver. 29. He came from the field, and was faint, he followed his pastime
over-eagerly and excessively, and knew not how to break it off in due time,
till very hunger and faintness brought him home. Sure reason will conclude
that it must needs be folly and a sin to be so bound to some sport, that one
knows not a due season of leaving it off, but must run after it a long time
together, till faintness or hunger follow. To be eager after pastimes, and
stay so long at them as if they were great matters, even till extreme
weariness and hunger take one off, and rather compel, than persuade him to
leave, this is an inordinate using of sports. For these recreations are in the
very wisdom of nature appointed alone to cheer up the mind, when it is
wearied with great employments, that it may be fitted the better for them
afterward: and they are not to be followed for their own sakes, as not being
worthy to be made any part of the end of a wise man's life. Now he that follows
them with so immoderate eagerness, and so long together, makes it appear that
he does not use them as their nature requires, and instead of fitting himself
for better actions by them, does altogether unfit himself for any good action.
For what can he perform well, that has toiled himself in a toy till he be
quite spent?

Learn I pray you to see this fault in your selves, and amend it, even staying
too long at your gawdes, following them such a space of time together, or with
such great violence, that you be even tired and spent by them. Sports must be
done sportingly, not with the like seriousness, and earnestness, as serious
matters. A small deal of time should be allotted for matters of small value,
for seeing time is precious, to give much of a precious thing for that which is
a very mean and worthless thing, is surely to suffer ones self to be
consumed by fancy and passions, and not to walk rationally, and discreetly.

Learn therefore not to suffer your selves to be brought under the bondage of
any the most lawful recreation, but to be able to break off seasonably.

And when is the season, ye may ask?

I answer, when you have bestowed so much time in them, as to have attained the
proper end of them. As in meat and drink, a man should forbear to take more,
when he has received so much as is requisite for the ends of food. So in
sports.

And every man's discretion will tell him, unless he has put out his eyes by
making himself a bondsman to pastimes, that the end is to fit him for better
matters, by preserving the health, and maintaining the vigor and
cheerfulness of his body and mind. He must not tarry at them as long as he
can, or till he be weary; but when he has been so long constant in them as is
fit to stir and exercise his body, and prepare him for serious matters, then
must he leave them off, and go to serious matters. And I pray you, let me
propound to your considerations a fit rule for the measuring of your time for
sports. Will not sanctified reason tell you that you ought not to bestow more
time in recreations, though never so honest, to refresh your bodies then in
spiritual and holy duties to edify your souls. Give not more hours usually
to these basest of all things, plays and games than to those most useful of
all things, reading the Scriptures, Prayer, Meditations, and those things that
are next to spiritual duties in value and usefulness, studying some worthy
knowledge, or doing some profitable business in your callings. Let not the
more worthy thing be set behind the less worthy: let not the Vassal be set
above his Sovereign, and have more honor than his Lord and King.

Another fault in Esau in regard of his conversation about earthly things is,
that when he came now to be an ageder man, 3. He made himself great by war.
and saw it vain to follow pastime, he fell, as Isaac tells him, Genesis 27.40. By
thy sword shall thou live. He made himself great by war. The sword was not
appointed to get lands and livings withal, but to defend and maintain men
against unjust violence, and to punish offenders and malefactors. But Esau
followed the wars to make himself great, as it has been used much formerly,
and is now. Men would fight with others to take away their lands and goods from
them, and to make themselves possessours and Lords of their countries, to get
riches, command, and glory, and make themselves great in worldly respects, they
would betake themselves to weapons and fighting. This is, so far as I can
discern, a fault and sin, I say, to take occasion of warring, and making
battles, to win men's lands and goods from them.

If you say, how was this a part of Isaacs blessing to Esau, if it were a sin?

I answer; Isaacs meaning is, to relate what outward prosperity Esau should
have: so that he does not justify all the means he should use to make
himself great, but alone shows, that he should be great, and obtain a gallant
country. It is a kind of temporal blessing to overthrow in war, and to
conquer, though one deal not justly in that matter of war. Indeed if men may
live by their sword, where is the rule of equity, Do you as you would be done
by; where is the following after peace? which all are commanded to follow with
all. Where is that threat, or curse become? Which David pronounces from God by
way of just imprecation against such, Scatter the people that delight in war:
Such kind of war as is enterprized to make a living of, and to get away other
men's possessions; for else to fight Gods battles, as Iosuah and David did, in
pursuing them with the sword which were Gods enemies, and whom he appointed to
be so pursued, is a good thing and honorable; and such as those worthy men
before named did much delight in. So then to make wars and stirs, by
invading others, and picking and ready accepting any occasion of quarrel for
the raising of a Monarchy or Principality to himself, is a sin, and, so
far as I see it, was Esaus sin, who by his sword made himself owner of
such a Country, as within a little time his posterity was raised to a great
Kingdom; for he dispossessed the inhabitants of Mount Seir, and erected the
beginning of the kingdom of Edom. Indeed, to live by ones sword, or by his
wits, may well dispute for the precedence in sinfulness. The one couzens, the
other kills, the one uses secret tricks, the other open force. The one armeth
it self with fraud, the other with violence. The one hurts men in goods, the
other in life too; the one will have it because he can overreach you in wit,
the other because he can over-master you in strength; the one cares not so he
can beguile you, whether he have just title or no, the other cares not so he
can beat you, whether his title be good or not; the one breaks the eighth
and ninth Commandments, the other the eighth and sixth Commandments: never a
better of them, but that the worse, which is joined with more cruelty and
bloudinesse. And Esau had a kind of presage of his fierce and bloody nature,
when he looked so red at his very birth, and when he was affected with the red
color of the pottage, so red, so red, in respect whereof also his name began
to be called Edom, which signifies red.

Here you may see what an erring judgment man has since his fall, for how
have men honored Conquerours and great fighters, and soldiers; whereas if the
war was entered into, not out of compulsion to defend, or out of justice to
punish public injuries against Cities, or Commonwealths, or Countries, it was
mere robbery and murder: they were but great Pirates, and great Thieves, and
great murderers; and yet the foolish blindness of men will needs give them
honor and good esteem.

But I need not disgrace war to you, only this you must note, that Esau which
gave himself in his younger time to nothing else but sports afterward gave
himself to nothing else but war and spoils.

Often voluptuous youth many times ends in an injurious old age.

They set up themselves by bad means at last, which gave themselves to vanity
and toys before. Thus much of Esaus conversation in respect of these earthly
things: Now see his behavior in respect of spiritual things.

4. He was a profane man, which prophannesse showed it self in 3. acts.

1. In selling his birth right

2 In despising it.

3. In leaving the land of Canaan.


And herein he was so bad a liver, that the Apostle calls him a profane fellow,
and warnes all of us not to be profane as he was.

His prophannesse showed it self in two acts:

First, in selling his birthright.

Secondly, in despising it, and that continually, and with great carelessness;
so shall you read in the Story of Genesis 25.31, 32. The matter was thus, Esau
came hungry and faint from hunting, Jacob had made red pottage, Esaus hunger
made his eye apt to be taken with the lively color of the red broth; he was as
hungry men be, very eager after food, and prays his brother to give him a
mess of the red pottage. Jacob says, Sell me thy birthright then, that is,
pass over to me all those privileges that appertain to thee as the elder
brother, and on that condition I will give thee broth enough: Esau thinks,
perhaps also he said so too, I am going to die. I cannot conceive that he
means, I am now ready for hunger to give up the ghost, and must needs die, if
I have not instantly some of this food, for such faintness would scarce have
given him leave to have entered into such a parle, and Isaacs house, or some in
it would have afforded the young master something to have kept him from
starving. But I suppose he means, I must shortly die, and the inheritance
that is to follow of this birthright, is of this land for many years hence, and
therefore this birthright will do me no good, and so he is content to sell it,
and to confirm the bargain with an oath. Lo here is one act of prophannesse. He
shows that he did not care for heaven and life eternal, whereof that land was a
type and figure, or that he did not take notice of it as a type and figure of
heaven, and therefore is content to sell it, as we use to speak, dogcheap, for
a morsel of meat, or a mess of pottage. To part with the things that are
signs and means of attaining eternal life, for the base and trifling matters
of this life, and if he cannot have both, to choose rather to have the earthly,
and let the spiritual go, lo this is I say prophanness. A setting of earthly
trifling good things, as it were a mess of good broth; before the signs and
outward means of attaining life everlasting, even those things that should do
us spiritual good, by helping us to grace and glory, this I say is
prophannesse, this is Esaus offense. The birthright carried with it diverse
things, 1. The sovereignty and chief government of the family. 2. The
priesthood also, and right to be as the minister of the whole family. 3. Here
and in this case, interest to the land of Canaan. as a type of heaven, and to
the continuance of the visible Church, and the means of grace and salvation in
his posterity and family, all which were translated to Jacob with the
birthright. Now Esau an hunting fellow, that gave himself to his Cross-bow and
sports, he either had not informed himself of these matters, or did not heed
them not consider them, therefore he lets all go for a good mess of pottage.

Brethren, prophannesse is a fearful sin, I mean to have so little esteem of
the outward means of salvation, as to part with them for a song as we say. But
yet an higher degree of prophannesse. He went his way and despised his
birthright, he never considered of his folly afterward to repent heartily of
it, and so to seek pardon, and (though not the recovering of his birthright,
yet) to be still admitted as a member of Isaacs family, and so to enjoy the
privileges that were promised to him and his seed, but even despises it, he
cares not a pin for it, it never grieves nor troubles him that he had sold it,
let it go, as if it had been scarce so much worth as he paid for it. So the sin
is grievous, to despise and contemn as vain and useless those things that
tend to bring unto us spiritual graces, and eternal life.

Now brethren, be not many of you such, that set light and despise the means
of grace, you care not for the word of God, for the Sacraments, for praying,
etc. The least outward benefit will make you part with these helps to life
eternal, you think them not worth any thing, you can be persuaded to part with
them for any little gain, or the like. Nay, do not some of you despise them?
count it a folly to make so much ado about them, and would not care a rush, if
you should never come at Word, or Sacrament more, never use prayer any more. If
any be so disposed, as the lives of many show they be, let them consider that
they shall in vain dream of having the blessing, even the spiritual blessing
of Gods favor, and life eternal: Esau could not prevail by any tears and
entreaties to have his Father give him a spiritual blessing, God by fear
strengthened Isaacs heart against all his entreaties. It may seem he would fain
have had the blessing of Abraham, which carries with it a spiritual blessing,
some confused notion it is like he had of heaven, that must be given to
Abraham's children, and that must go along in the family of Abraham, and Isaac,
and their seed, this he would fain have had, and in a fit weeps hard, and did
much desire to make his Father repent of his being deceived, and blessing
Jacob, but he could not prevail. If himself had sought at Gods hand to give
him repentance for his prophannesse and other sins, he should not have been
rejected; but that was not the thing he sought alone, he would have had his
Father to have changed his mind, and given him assurance of heaven. Such a
confused desire of heaven may be found in the heart of a profane man, but when
in this manner they would inherit the blssing, they shall not. They that care
not for the birthright, shall miss of the blessing; they that regard not the
outward signs and means of life eternal, shall never attain life eternal. A
profane man, a contemner of religion and religious services of God, shall never
go to heaven without amendment; O if any of you be such, now let Esaus example
stir you up to repentance, and reformation, and be no more profane, as was
Esau. But 2. stir up your selves to be truly devout, make great account of Gods
Ordinances, to which he has annexed the promise of life. Make high account of
the Sacraments, Word, Prayer. These be his Ordinances, to have the interest and
enjoyment of them, is to have the birthright: O esteem them highly for that
excellent purpose to which they are assigned, and seek grace in them, that you
may attain salvation by them, which those that do, are followers of Jacob, and
not of Esau, and shall speed as Jacob. But the last act of profannesse in Esau
was worst of all: He leaves the land of Canaan, and of his own accord goes
away to Mount Seir from Jacob, because he found it not so commodious an
habitation. He and his brother could not dwell together there, and he would not
dwell in Tents as Isaac and Jacob, to show himself an heir through hope of the
same promises, and so this was an utter forsaking of all care of true religion,
and turning mere worldly and earthly. O take heed that none of you suffer
profaneness to take so strong a hold, and settle so deep rooting in you, that
you should quite and clean give over all show of piety, and follow the world
wholly altogether and professedly.

He is profane that has no great care of heaven, at least not at all to get
grace, and therefore first makes no great reckoning of, next despises, and
after relinquisheth, and casts off the signs and means of grace that God
has appointed. O let not any of you be such, perish not after the example of
Esaus naughtiness, but let his badnesse teach you to fear to be bad in the
same kind, and labor to be devout, holy, and religious, that you may be saved.

Yet more faults must be spoken of, 5. He showed not due respect to his Parents.
toward his Father and Mother he did not show that due respect which he ought
unto them, for he married Cananitish wives, against their good liking you may
be sure which proved an heartbreaking unto them, and when he thought to mend
the matter in super-adding the daughter of Ishmael, he went yet in the same
road that before, not craving their advice and counsel, but did it of his own
head, which though be were now married, he should not have done so long as he
lived, as then it may seem he did live under their roof. Beware you children
of this sin of Esau, wrong not the authority of God and your parents both, by
marrying without their consent, liking, or privity; whether is it safe, better,
and more desirable to be Jacobs imitators or Esaus? but of that I have spoken
already.

Another rank of faults see toward his brother. First, 6. He falsely accused
his brother.
he accuses him for beguiling him of his birthright, which was a false
accusation, for he could not cousen him of that, but himself out of a profane
ignorance and contempt of the worth thereof, sold it away for a poor price, a
mess of pottage. But man is ever ready to cast the blame of his faults upon
others, if they have any color so to do, it were better plainly to confess
and take the blame unto ones self, than to double the fault by covering it with
falsehood springing from self-love: Let no man say, that another has deceived
him of that which he has fondly cast away, or the like. But when Jacob had
indeed beguiled him of the blessing, which I cannot tell how to excuse, then he
hated him.

It is a grievous offense to be so imbittered, 7. He hated his brother.
specially against a brother, or kinsman, as to entertain hatred against him.
Thou shall not hate thy neighbor in thine heart, Love your enemies, do good to
them that do evil to you, says our Savior. This is far from being like God,
and so from being a fruit of the Spirit of Christ, who loved his enemies.
Should not the Image of God in a man prevail more to make one love, than his
own injury to make him hate. If any of you be an Esauite in this thing, an
hater of one that has done him wrong, let him be assured that it is a great
sin, and if he excuse it, defend it, deny it, will not see it, not carefully
resist it, let him be assured that his sin is not pardoned. He that says he
loves God, and hates his brother, is a liar: and he that says he is a
child of God, and is not a lover of God, is a liar too.

You may ask me what it is to hate ones brother? I answer.

There is a passion of hatred, and a habit of hatred, and both work in two
degrees.

The passion of hatred is a kind of averseness, and rising of the heart
against a man when one sees him, so that he cannot away with him, nor can
speak unto, or look courteously, or peaceably upon him, but ones countenance
falls when he sees him, and he even turns away, and by his goodwill would have
nothing to do with him. To be so disposed to a man in respect of his soul and
wicked carriage, is not a sin; but to be affected in respect of an injury, is
this sinful hating of him. But the habit of hatred is, when the heart is so
settled in this alienation and estrangement, that it grows to wish and desire,
and seek his hurt; now sometimes these passions, and these grudges be seen,
lamented, resisted, and by degrees overcome; here hatred rules not: sometimes
a man will not see his sin in such hatred, and takes no pains to chase this
sour leaven out of his heart. This overruling hatred is a sin that cannot
stand with true charity to God. O take heed of it, see it, amend it, and be no
longer like Esau!

8. He comforted himself in the thought of killing his brother.
Next, he not alone intends to kill his brother, but comforts himself in that
thought, as you may read, Genesis 27.44. It is a fearful thing to resolve upon
murder, and that with delight and pleasure, so that the heart concludes to
commit it so soon as such and such a let is removed, or fit occasion offered,
and that so setledly, as not conscionable obedience to God, but alone some
mere respect to men does hinder the accomplishment. So the Pharisees resolved
to kill Christ, only fearing the people they forbeared; it was glad news to
them when Judas offered his service to betray him. This is to give ones self
over as a servant to sin, and cannot be found in any child of God, at least,
not usually or often. Do any of you sin thus in any kind? What should I
call you but Esaus? and I beseech you to take heed of malice, that it may not
produce murder, and of all the inward motions to evil with allowance, for
fear they produce the grossest acts of evil. Nay, Esaus malice strived twenty
years in his breast, for he went out against his brother when he returned from
Padan Aram, Genesis 22. with four hundred men after him, minding to destroy him,
but that God vouchsafed to stop him by putting a passion of kindness upon
him. A great sin it is to attempt grievous offenses, though one be stopped in
the midst, yea though the stoppage grow from some inward motion in himself;
for this shows that the heart was once fully bent unto it; but if some outward
hinderance alone have been the cause of its not being done, then the thanks of
forbearance is less.

Repent therefore of such purposes and attempts, and show your selves truly
sorrowful and penitent, by confessing to God the sin of attempting, and
blessing his name for not permitting you to follow your wicked desires.

3. His benefits all temporal.
His benefits, they were all temporal, The dew of heaven, and the fatness of
the earth; He was rich, prosperous, mighty, a conqueror, had many children,
yet he could never inherit the spiritual blessing, though he would feign have
had his Father to have repented.

Cain, Ishmael, Nimrod, Esau, had temporal blessings, boast not of these
things, think not your selves better than men for these things; His miseries,
except his loss of the birth right, His afflictions
he had few temporal crosses, Heb. 12.17. Take heed of carrying your selves
so, that it go not ill with your souls, that God plague you not with
spiritual plagues. For his death, His death is not mentioned in Scripture.
the Scripture speaks nothing of it, herein Ishmael is preferred before Esau. *

THE EIGHTEENTH EXAMPLE.
OF ABIMELECH, And the men of GERAR.
IN the service of Isaac, the holy Ghost makes mention by the way, of some
other persons with whom Isaac had occasion to converse. And first, he tells
of some passages between him and Abimelech King of Gerar, then of the men of
Gerar. We will therefore consider of those things which are written concerning
them.

First then, of Abimelech King of the Philistines. Genesis 26.1. Genesis 26 1.
Whether this were the same man with whom Abraham sojourned, or some son, or
successor of his, it is not certain.

But in him let us see what is commendable, Abimelech his virtues.
and fit for our imitation, for the Story tells not of much sin in him. But
we have some virtues of his mentioned, and one thing that is likely to be a
fault; His virtues are these.

First, he did not take Rebekkah from Isaac, 1. He took not Rebekkah from
Isaac, though he affirmed her to be his sister.
though he for fear affirmed her to be his sister, when the men of the place
asked him of her; but he left her alone with Isaac, perhaps to make trial yet
farther, whether she were his wife or not; it may be, remembering what had been
done before to Abraham, and with what success. That is praiseworthy in him,
and we must learn to be wary in our proceedings, and not presently to do such
things as may be doubtful, whether they be faults or not, Ver. 8.
but to take time to look thoroughly into matters before we adventure.

2. He construed Isaacs sporting with Rebekkah in the best sense.
But next, when he saw Isaac sporting with Rebekkah in a very familiar manner,
he did not misconstrue this deed of theirs to the worst sense, condemning him
of wantonness, and incest, as if he had been so naught as to carry himself
over-familiarly to his sister, but conceived rather that she was his wife, and
that he would not have taken liberty to carry himself in that manner toward
her, if she had not been his wife: He did well to take things in the best sense
as he did for when he saw such behaviors pass between these two, as were not
convenient betwixt any, any other but man and wife; he concludes, sure she is
his wife, else he would not have sported with her in that fashion, and then
goes and tells him what he conceives; so must we judge the best of the
doubtful things we see done by good men.

Had he been of a suspicious and uncharitable disposition, he would have passed
a bitter sentence both upon Isaac and Rebekkah, and thought this, without doubt
this woman is a light woman, and this man a libidinous and incestuous man, that
shows such gestures to his sister, who did also entertain him, but be thinks
rather, surely the man is so good a man that he would never have been bold to
bear himself so amorously toward his sister, and therefore, though he said
she was his sister, for fear or other considerations, yet verily she is his
wife.

We must be as charitable in our censures of men, as was this Abimelech, and
not take leave to think the worst of any man's actions, but favorably
interpret them, and make the fairest construction of them that may be. But to
be harsh in our ce^sures of any man, and think he is naught, he means
wickedly, this is a testimony of a heart guilty of as bad sins in himself, and
of one desirous to hide his own eyes from his own badnesse, by measuring
others by himself. For he that is himself ready to do evil, is prone to
conclude, that others are as bad as himself; and therefore, when he sees them
do such a thing as may possibly be meant to an evil purpose, he concludes
presently, that so it is. For he will not think better of others, than
himself, and therefore will resolve that they have done as ill as he finds
that himself would have done in like case.

Take heed that you betray not your own naughtiness, in being forward and
hasty to blame others.

Ver. 9.

3. He told Isaac plainly of his fault.


Another good thing in this Abimelech is, that so soon as he perceived that
Isaac was Rebekkahs husband, and she his wife, he goes to him presently, and
tells him, saying, Sure she is thy wife, why then said thou, she is my sister,
for one of the people might lightly have lien with thy wife, and thou should
have brought upon us guiltiness. This is a good thing, and agreeable to the
commandment of the Law, to tell our brother plainly of his sin. If any man
shall do some unlawful thing to our knowledge, we must go and enquire why
they did so, and even rebuke them for it by showing them how hurtful or
mischievous it was, or might have proved.

So did another Abimelech, or this same to Abraham before, they therefore have
not walked rightly, that if they know any fault by their brother, keep the
matter to themselves, and entertain hard conceits of them, but speak no word
of reproof or admonition to them. So did Absalom behave himself toward his
brother Amnon, when he had sinned in forcing his sister. This proves, that
they do not desire their brothers amending, and that they are more displeased
with the person than the sin, and if it be a wrong, with the injury done
against themselves, than with the offense done against God. If any of you have
thus stored up the faults of another in his breast, to breed alienation of
heart, and evil conceits against them, he must humble himself for such
uncharitableness: And now, you must learn to be bold and free in this
behalf, as Abimelech. Indeed you see him not bitter nor violent, but he is
plain and duly round with him; so must we learn to forbear distempered
speeches and gestures, but a plain laying open of the fault before the
offender, is necessary to bring him to the sight of his fault, and to a free
confession, and at least to an outward reformation. Look that you carry your
selves thus hereafter to your offending brethren, and if they repent not at the
first, do it again and again, till you have brought them to an end or proved
them incorrigible.

Further, Abimelech shows in his words evidently, Ver. 10.

4. He knew adultery to be a sin, and was unwilling to commit it.


both that he knew adultery to be a grievous sin, even though a man did not
perfectly know the woman to be married with whom he committed it, and also
believes that God will severely punish it in the committer, and so he was not
a wilful liver in that sin, nor would have yielded himself wittingly to run
into it for the pleasing of lustful passions. Be you as good as he shows
himself, know that adultery is a great sin, that it shall bring guiltiness
and punishment upon you, and therefore terrify your selves from committing it:
Why should we Christians be of less knowledge, and have less conscience,
less fear to offend God, less faith in his justice then this Philistian had?
Why should we be bold to run into that crime which he was displeased with Isaac
for ministering occasion of doing unwittingly? Why should we flatter our selves
with hope of impunity for such a sin as he did certainly believe would bring
guiltiness upon the committer? Consider with your selves, whether you have not
been so blinded and hardened with the deceitfulness of sin, as knowingly, and
of purpose to rush into the evil which an Heathen man was fearful to commit.

Ver. 11.

5. He charged that none should wrong Abraham or his wife.


Again, it is well done of Abimelech, that he by a first commandment ratified
with a threat of death, charged that no man should dare to wrong this man or
his wife: He was a King, and had power to make such an edict, and for the
securing of Isaac against his fears, and preventing any evil, publishes it
to his people. Governors must use their authority to keep their inferiors
from sins by threatening, and if that prevail not by punishing with due
severity. They must terrify them from crimes of death by denouncing the
punishment of death, and not suffer them to be more easily drawn to
naughtiness through hope of impunity.

Most men forbear sin for fear of punishment, rather then hatred of
wickedness, wherefore they must have this fear wrought in them by the
Governors, that they may be so restrained, and the Magistrate is to show
himself such, that if men do evil they may fear. You Governors have not
power to make laws, but you have the care of executing laws entrusted to you,
see therefore that you be unpartially, and wisely, and righteously severe in
putting the laws in execution which are made to terrify malefactors, else you
bring the guilt of their sins upon your own souls, and sin at once against
God the supreme Ruler, the Commonwealth, the sinners themselves, and your own
souls too.

A fault in Isaac to conceive too hardly of the Philistims.
But here by the way, I must observe something that was worthy blame in Isaac,
he had too hard a conceit of these Philistims, and thought them worse then he
found them; for he conceived they would have killed him for his wives sake:
Sure this fear did cast an aspersion not on the men of lower rank, but upon
the chief persons and Rulers; but lo, the King is far from doing so wickedly,
yea, he does the quite contrary, and uses due care to prevent this
wickedness. We must learn to beware of such rashness, and not think so
hardly of others, that they will wrong us in such and such kinds, till we have
just ground for such thoughts. A man is to use discretion, and thinking that
such whom he knows not may happily wrong him, must take such prudent order,
that they may not be able though they should be willing; or if he can take no
such course, he must leave the matter to Gods providence, but he must not
conclude, sure they will wrong me, and so condemn them before he hears them,
and turn himself to base shifts for escaping the wrong.

Ver. 26.

6. He desires to make a covenant of peace and amity with Isaac.


Now another thing is also commendable in Abimelech, he goes to Isaac, ver. 26.
with his friend and chief Captain, and desires to make a covenant of peace
and amity with him, giving also the true reason of his desire, and intimating
an acknowledgement of the former unkindnesse in discharging him the country,
For we have seen (says he) that God is with thee, and thou the blessed of the
Lord do it. It is a part of wisdom and goodness too, to be in covenant and
peace with good men, and to observe how God does please to bless men, and to
ascribe their prosperity to Gods favorable blessing, all which things you see
in Abimelech. He had refused to let Isaac dwell in his Country, yet he is not
so stout hearted, but that he will come to him, and seek his friendship, and
that in honorable manner, acknowledging his worth and Gods blessing upon him.
We must learn to do the same things, but in a better manner, he looks to
Isreal's prosperity, we must look to the goodness of men, and in love of their
virtues, rather then in hope and fear of earthly things, be at peace with
them, and live in amity toward them. It is a good thing to be friends with
Gods friends, even on whatsoever considerations; for by so doing a man
interests himself into that blessing which God says that he will grant to
them that bless his people. But if love of their religion and piety make us
desire the friendship of any, then it is a good sign, that the same piety and
virtue is found in him whom it wins to bear good will unto the professor
of it: for virtuous men are seldom loved, and never for virtues sake, but by
those that have some virtue. And it gives us some good hope, that Abimelech
might be a man that acknowledged the true God whom Isaac professed, seeing he
took notice of his blessing upon Isaac, and called him the Blessed of the Lord.
And this is Abimelechs goodness. One thing seems to have been faulty in him,
of which Isaac also tells him, when he came to make a Covenant, saying, Ye
hate me, Ver. 27.

His fault, he drives Isaac so away from him, that he had cause to think it
done out of hatred.


and have driven me away from you. This is likely to be a fault, to drive a
man, a good man, so from ones country house or familiarity, that he shall have
cause to think it is done out of hatred. Indeed in the 16. ver. of the 26.
Chapter, Abimelech would not seem to do it out of hatred, but out of policy,
because of Isaacs greatness: as if he should say, It will not stand with our
safety to suffer so great a man to sojourne in our country. But Isaac saw a
piece of malice and ill will in it, as the holy Ghost in the Story does
intimate, saying, They envied him, and v. 16. Then Abimelech bade him depart,
moved like enough by the persuasions of those that did envy him, if not a
little leavened with the same leaven himself. Beware of committing the like
offense, show not ill will toward any good man, by chasing him from you,
refusing to give him leave to be with you, or in general, by any discurteous
carriage toward him. But be rather glad of his society and neighborhood.

And so we have done with Abimelech.

Now something of his Subjects the Philistims, The Philistims.
and particularly the men of Gerar. The Philistims envyed him, ver. 14. in
respect of his greatness and prosperity. 1. They envied Isaac.
This sin of envy ( i. e. being grieved at another man's prosperity, and bearing
ill will against him for it, which will surely follow such grief, Envy is a
great sin.
for that grief is an effect springing from uncharitableness, and therefore
will cause it to grow stronger and worser) I say, this sin is a great offense,
blamed in Cain, in Joseph's brethren, in the Pharisees, and most of all in the
devils.

It is a wrong to God in that we satisfy not our selves in his disposing of
things, for may not God show more or less favor to men as it seems good to
himself? and why, should our eye be evil because his eye is good? It is a
wrong to the person envyed, in that we do not so behave our selves toward him,
as we would that all other should do to our selves, for men would that others
should rejoice in their welfare, and not repine at it. Secondly, in that it
makes us apt to do them any injury, as here is seen in the Example that we
speak of, who stopped Isaacs Wells out of envy. And it is a wrong to ones
self, in that he brings needless vexation upon himself, and fills his
heart with gall, when he might have fed on honey as it were; for we should
rejoice with them that rejoice, and then we should partake of the benefit;
because the best fruit of a good thing is to have joy of it.

And this envy springs from mere self-love, and pride, and folly, in not
seeing God in things, and submitting to his wisdom. Whosoever finds a kind
of tangue of this disease in himself, must blame himself for it heartily, and
think thus with himself, What shall I be an imitatour of wicked men, yea of
the wicked spirits? What a foolish man am I that will not see Gods wise
providence and yield to it? What a wretch, that think all good things lost
which fall besides my self? What a foolish man that will make a cross to my
self where it need not be, nor indeed is? And if any think, if he had not
this prosperity it might befall me, and therefore at least I may grieve that
he has it to my damage.

I answer.

That is but a very May-be, for it will not follow that the Philistims would
have grown very rich, if Isaac had not gotten so much, nor that Cain should
have been accepted if Abel had not; Yea verily, those things that have moved
God not to grant them so much prosperity as another, would have caused him to
withdraw it from them, even though he had not given it to that other. For God
does not forbear to give to this person, because he gave to that; this kind
of abstaining to give is proper to men, who want sufficient means to give to
all, but God can replenish all without leaving himself destitute: but God
withholds his benefits from those that have them not, because their sins
provoke him, or because he would afflict or chastise them.

The faults of men keep good things from their possessions, and they would not
have been less faulty, if another had been less prosperous. Wherefore I say,
confess this sin, see it, condemn it in your selves, yield not to it.

Yea but I am sure that his getting hinders my gains.

Answer. First, say that it does, will thou be vexed that another hinders thee?
Is not this to be vexed at Gods providence?

But secondly, I answer, thou can not be sure of this, for God could and if
he purposed to cross thee, deny thee such benefits, though this man were not.

Now I pray you, hate and abhor envy, and learn to rejoice with them that
rejoice, rather then torment your selves at them, and to be thankful to God
for showing favor to your neighbors, rather then to fret in your selves.
Indeed if we see wicked men prosper, we must beware of over-grieving, lest it
make us fall to imitating: But to grieve at the prosperity of an Isaac, is to
show, that one loves not goodness, as a reward of which the Lord vouchsafes
that prosperity.

Now secondly, when they had entertained envy, Cha. 26.15. 2. They wronged him.
then they fall to injury; They stopped his Wels, and filled them with dust,
viz. The Wells his Father had dugge; Lo, a wickedness; to do injury to
another, by hurting and hindering him, though ones self can reap no benefit
by it. Indeed to do a neighbor hurt in body or goods without just cause (
viz. punishing him for some fault by virtue of authority which God has put
into my hand) is a great sin, and against the plain Law that says, Do as
you would be done by, and that Commandment, Be innocent as Doves; but to hurt
a man without any profit to himself, this is an high degree of wickedness,
and proceeds from nothing else but envy, which is one of the worst kinds of
malice. To advantage my self by another man's loss is most unjust, but to
hinder another without any advantage to my self, this is a far more palpable
and wilful injustice.

O call to mind your own ways, have not you walked as crookedly as these men
of the Philistime Nation? Stopped up another man's Wels as it were, that is, put
your selves to pains to do him damage, to hinder him, though you get nothing
by it your selves. This is a plain proof of a man stuffed with envy, and with
great wickedness, whereby he loves to do evil, even for the pleasure sake he
takes in doing, not for any other fruit of it. This is to be just like the
devil, that seeks to keep others out of heaven, and to bring them to hell,
though it ease not his torments one whit, because it a little satisfies his
stomach. Repent, repent exceedingly, if you have been so devilish.

Another fault of the Philistims you meet with. Genesis 26.19, Ver. 19, 20, 21.
20, 21. Isaac dug a Well in the valley, and found there a fountain of
living water: that is, such as did run with a full and constant stream, 3.
They contended with him.
And the Shepherds of Gerar contended for it with Isaacs Shepherds, saying,
the water is ours. Wherefore Isaac called the name of it Hezek, or strife,
because they strove with him. Then they dug another Well, and they strove
for that also, and he called the name of it Sitnah, which signifies hatred or
enmity, because he saw that they contended with him now, not for need of the
water, but out of mere hatred, because they were enemies and adversaries to
him, and were grieved at his welfare.

The fault is (you see) contentiousnesse, and strife, growing out of hatred and
ill will. The nature of man is full of this vice, as S. Paul, Filled with envy,
murder, debate. Romans 1.9. and Hatred, variance, emulation, strife, sedition,
are reckoned among the fruits of the flesh, Gal. 5.19. S. Paul tells the
Corinths; Left that when he comes unto them, he shall find amongst them
(with other sins) debates, and strife. This strife has its original in
pride, which easily breeds envy, and hatred, and so contention and strife;
and S. James says, That those which have envying and strife among themselves,
this wisdom is not from above, but is earthly, sensual, and devilish, and
that where envying and strife is, Iam. 3. ult. and chap. 4.1.
there is confusion, and every evil work. He says also, That wars and
fightings are amongst them, from their lusts that war in their members. You see
the loathsomenesse of this vice, from the bad causes and effects of it.

Take notice therefore of your own hearts and lives, and see if none of you
be a quarellous and contentious person; that is, ready upon every occasion to
strive with his brother, and to break forth into brawles and suits,
challenging that which is none of his, and disquieting his brethren and
himself.

A man may use legal means to get and keep that which is rightfully due to
him, but he must not do this in a froward manner, with bitterness and rage
against his adversary; but for the things that appertain not to him in equity,
he must make no striving at all, otherwise he is a contentious man. And
because self-love makes us so blind, that we are apt to deceive our selves,
and to imagine we have good title to that which indeed belongs not to us, we
must be content to refer our selves willingly to other men's judgments, and
not stand upon our own opinions; I mean to other indifferent, and uninterested
persons, whose judgments are like to be clearer than our own, in things
wherein themselves be not engaged.

Let me therefore commend peace and concord, let nothing be done of strife, in
an humor to cross and oppose another, or to vex and anger him. If
covetousness or envy rule in a man's heart, he will boil with contention, and
flame forth into debates and strifes; but if he have an heart contented with
his estate, and charitably disposed to his brethren, he will then ensue peace,
and follow after it. For a just controversy may be carried in a quiet and
peaceable manner, and so ought to be; but be the cause of striving never so
equal, if the thing be carried, tumultuously with bitter words and behavior,
with railings, swellings, whisperings, backbitings, mutual, disgracing and
upbraiding one another, this is a sign of a naughty heart, in whom the wisdom
that is from below does rule and bear sway.

Resolve therefore to follow peace with all men, not striving but upon just
cause and then also in a loving, gentle, and mild manner. And so much for
Isaacs contemporaries, with whom his occasions gave him cause of intermingling.
I proceed now to Isaacs heir and successor, that is to say, Jacob. *

THE EIGHTEENTH EXAMPLE.
OF JACOB.
THE word Jacob signifies, he holds the heel: the reason of which name you
may read Genesis 25. 26. He and Esau were Twins born at one birth, Esau was the
first borne, and when he was borne, his brother came out after him and held him
by the heel, whence this name was given him.

Of Jacob we must show three things, as in former Examples. His birth, life,
and death.

Concerning his birth, Jacob his birth
the time and parents were the same which we noted before of Esau, the manner
was as you have heard, as if he had wrestled with his brother for the
birthright even in the birth; in which may seem to be signified the great stir
that should be betwixt their Successors as well as themselves, yea, and
betwixt the good and bad in all ages, even those that are heirs of the
promise, and those that be contemners of the promise. For the Lord had
foretold, that two Nations were in Rebekkahs womb, which should be separated
one from the other, and in them the Lord did manifest the freedom of his
Election, seeing he chose the younger before the elder to inherit the
promises, and that before they had done good or evil, that the purpose of God
according to election might remain (or be firm) not of works, but of him
that calls: meaning, that Gods intention of saving by his grace, who freely
calls, not of any works in any person, whether repenting, believing, or any
other works, might be steadfast and stable. No works cause God to call one, or
to purpose to call one, or not to call another, but alone his good pleasure,
whereof though it be sure that God has in himself just reason (for he is a
reasonable agent, and does all things, and most understandingly) yet he sees it
not good to reveal to us any reason, because he would make us see what
subjection we owe to him (that is to say) to rest in his will as a sufficient
reason to satisfy us. God might have purposed to call, and also have called
all without any picking or choosing, or preferring one before another, but his
purpose was according to election or choice, he intended not to raise up all
out of the miserable estate into which Adam brought all, but alone some; and in
his choosing he might have left whom he took, and contrarily, but he would
take some, not all, and these, not those because in his wisdom he saw it fit;
and so great is his power and sovereignty, that we ought to be contented with
this reason, God would have it so.

What Gods election is.
Gods Election is his purpose to call such and such, leaving the rest: and of
this purpose we can give no other cause but this, so it seemed good unto him:
though himself have such grounds of his choice within himself, as it is fit
for a wise agent to have for the ground of all his actions. He that will not
quiet himself thus in the matter of election, shall entangle himself so, that
he will never be loosed.

And so much of Jacobs birth.

His life.
Now for his life, we will consider his virtues, faults, crosses, benefits.

1. His virtues.
For his virtues, we will speak of them first in general, and here two things
are noted in him, Genesis 25.27.
Genesis 25.27. Jacob was a plain man, and did dwell in Tents, The word
translated a plain man, signifies a perfect or upright man. 1. In general:

1. He was an upright man.


It is of larger signification than that phrase of ours, A plain man, for that
in common speech notes one that is simple, and deals squarely and eavenly
without fraud, deceit, guile, or any tricks in his actions, so may one be and
have no great goodness in him. But this word is used to denote an upright
hearted man, a truly and entirely godly man, a perfect man that is good within
as well as without, and good in all things, at all times, and in all places one
as well as another, one that carefully follows all the Commandments of God,
not giving himself leave to swerve from any of Gods ways at any time.

What perfection is.
Perfection is that property in things, by which they have all which is
requisite for their due constitution.

It is twofold.
There is a double perfection, one of degrees, unattainable in this life, and it
is when a man has all the parts of obedience in the highest degree that the
Law requires of him, this is a legal perfection, without which no man can be
justified before God by the Law, and because no man can attain it, therefore,
By the Law shall no flesh be justified, but believers have it in Christ, in
whom they are made the righteousness or God, and to whom righteousness
without works (meaning works of their own working, for they are such as work
not in this sense) is imputed.

Perfection of parts, is when all the parts of goodness are found in a man. As
a child of five years is a perfect man in respect of parts, he has a soul,
and body, he has hands, head, heart, legs, etc. and therefore is that way
perfect, though stature and strength, and discretion be not found in him in the
same degree that after, when he is a grown man.

Now there are two kinds of parts found in every thing first.

First, the parts essential, as matter and form.

Secondly, the parts integrall, viz. as the several members of the matter,
heart, head, etc. in a man.

So in the point of goodness, goodness is perfect when it has all the parts
of goodness, viz. the matter, which is the act of doing good and leaving
evils. 2. The form, which is the subjection of the will to the will of God; in
that a man is therefore careful to leave evil and do good, because he
acknowledges himself to owe, and is willing to perform all obedience unto God
his maker and Redeemer, and these are the essential parts of goodness.

The integrall, are the doing of good in every kind, and leaving of evil in
every kind, with an endeavor, and striving, and wishing to do it in every
degree, even to leave all evil, the very least degree, and to do all good in
the very highest degree. Thus you see what perfection is. It is an endeavor
and resolution to do all things which God commands, and to leave all the
things which he forbids, perfectly in obedience to his authority; or if you
will, in brief, Perfection of the Gospel is a striving after the perfection
of the Law. Now we must be thus perfect, because it is a singular goodness of
God to accept such an imperfect perfection at our hands. For he might have held
us still to the condition of works, and so rejecting our endeavors, because
falling short of what the Law requires, might have destroyed us
notwithstanding such endeavors, but he has been pleased to make a new
Covenant, in which he requires and accepts our hearty endeavors, though
there be much failing. O should not this move us to labor and strive! As if a
debtor owing an hundred pounds, and not able to pay it, should have these
conditions propounded to him from his Creditor, well, pay me what you be able,
so you bring me good money, not counterfeit, and I will accept it. Should not
this make them very careful to bring him so much as they were able, and that
in good silver, not copper and false coin? Again, we lose both our goodness
and our selves also, if we be not plain and perfect; If we have respect to all
Gods Commandments, and be found in Gods presence, we shall not be ashamed:
but confusion will cover our faces at the end, if we satisfy our selves with
hollow and defective goodness; for a lame sacrifice will not be acceptable on
Gods Altar.

Now I pray you let each of us consider of himself, whether he be such a
dissembler, that has little show of piety, and is not pious indeed. We must be
followers of them that by patience and faith inherit the promises, and be such
as they that have gone to heaven, if our selves purpose to go to heaven. And
if you be not so, but openly sinful, or hollowly and dissemblingly good; now
see your misery, you shall never be heirs with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, if
you labor not to be like unto them in this perfection. And the way to be
perfect, is to see our want, and to pray to God to make us such. We have him
tied by a just faithful promise to fill the hungry, and to hear them that
call upon him.

2. He was a skillful, and able Shepherd.
Further it is said, that Jacob dwelt in Tents, not only meaning that he was a
man brought up to tend cattle, as they did that dwelt in Tents, (whereas Esau
was an huntsman first, and a soldier after,) but chiefly that he did not set
himself to seek great possessions, and fair palaces, and houses in the world,
but sojourned in the land of Canaan, as in a strange country, dwelling in
Tents with his Father Isaac, as before him Abraham had done: which thing the
Apostle takes notice of, as a profession of their being Pilgrims and Strangers
upon earth, and seeking an enduring City.

So here are two things observable, and imitable in Jacob; one, that he gave
himself to tend cattle, and was a very skillful and able Shepherd, as
appeared after, when he undertook to tend his Father in laws flocks.

Every one must follow some calling.
It is necessary that a man have some calling, some profitable employment, by
which he is able with the common benefit of others to maintain his own self
and family, and to uphold his estate. It is a promise, Thou shall eat the
labor of thine hands. Lo, labor must get our food, else we have not the good
man's blessing: In the sweat of thy brow shall thou get thy bread. This is a
punishment, so far as it tends to inflict disquietment and troublesomenesse
upon men in their labors, but so far as it enjoyneth labor, it is not a
punishment, but a precept: He that tilleth his ground shall have bread enough.
Tilling of ones ground, that is, diligent following of ones honest calling is
required; and how shall a man follow that which he has not? Also nature
teaches this plainly enough: the contrary also is full of danger to the soul,
exposing a man to many temptations, and filling the heart with noisome lust,
and making it harder to escape, and to walk in a Christian manner of life.
Wherefore those that have imitated Esau rather than Jacob, and have given
themselves to sports and vanity, so that they be not able to do any thing for
their maintenance, if need required, have much to answer for before God, and
have brought much misery on themselves, in regard they are in greater
difficulty of being saved than other men, in giving Satan and flesh an
exceeding great advantage against their souls: He that has no calling is in
danger to be a follower of idle companions, and the troops of such persons
lead not in the way to heaven. Therefore I call upon all you that are Parents,
and all you children that are come to years of discretion, requiring you to be
careful of your childrens education, and to train them up for some due
vocation and calling; and you children to be obsequious to your Parents in this
behalf, yielding your selves to their directions; and this exhortation I would
enforce not only upon the poorer sort, whose belly craveth it of them, as
Solomon says, but even on the wealthier sort too, whose souls I am sure do
as much crave it of them. For there is no man of so great birth and blood, but
that there is some noble study or other, and some honorable employment,
wherein it will be to his honor to be skillful and conversant. Men of place
should not need to be slaves to Dice, and Wine, and Harlots, and Sports, if
they would be servants to God in some worthy vocation or other.

But Jacob dwelt in Tents: that is, lived as a Pilgrim or stranger, 3. He lived
as a Pilgrim, professing himself an heir of the promise made to Abraham.
professing himself an heir of the Promise made to Abraham. Though we be not
all bound to dwell in Tents, and to be Pilgrims in that sense, yet we else are
all bound to have our hearts withdrawn from earthly things, and set on heaven,
to count this world and the things of it no better than a Tent or a Tabernacle,
weak, fickle, and uncertain, and so to carry our selves toward it, and to be
in it, even as in a strange country, not as in an habitation of our own, in
which we mean to settle our selves. To behave our selves in the world as
strangers, and to the world and things thereof, as to a strange place, through
which we are traveling to our own country: This is a noble thing, a divine, a
celestial thing. A most remarkable difference betwixt a true and a false
hearted Christian, because one has the right, and the other contents himself
with counterfeit goodness. Thus did our Lord Jesus Christ live; thus Paul;
thus all the Saints; and thus are we commanded to live, even as Pilgrims and
strangers. And it stands in this, that we make no reckoning of earthly things
in comparison of heavenly, and that we desire earthly things none other way but
in order to heavenly, and use earthly things only so, as to be furtherances to
our earthly being, and do not suffer them to steal away our affections from
heaven, nor to hinder our diligent and constant practicing of all those things
that do directly concern our heavenly estate. Thus to mind, not the things
below, but the things above, is a sure proof of a man truly enlightened and
sanctified, and made conformable to the death and Resurrection of our Lord
Jesus Christ. In a word, it stands in esteeming all earthly things as vanity
and vexation of spirit, and using them all as furtherances to our spiritual
well-being, otherwise making none account of them at all. For so does a
stranger use the country wherein he travelleth, and all the things and persons
that he does meet withal therein. Now let us make use to our selves of this
great virtue, by blaming our own selves for being so far unlike to Jacob in
this matter. How far we are from dwelling in Tents, and from behaving our
selves as Pilgrims in the world, is it not more than manifest? O how much
esteem do we make of worldly things and persons? how are our hearts set upon
them? how eagerly do we follow them? how overmuch do we rejoice in them!
Certainly this argues a great deal of folly. For to mistake the worth and
prices of things, is a special point of folly; we do for the most part live
like men of the world, that are not acquainted with any things more excellent
than the vanities of this life: We think not of our mortality and uncertainty
of earthly things, we have our consolation in earth, rather than heaven.

This worldly mindedness is to be observed, confessed, lamented, refused; we
must blame our selves for it, as for a great fault, and must oppose it with
serious meditations, of earth, and heaven, and of our mortality.

We must earnestly pray to God to divorce us from the world, and to pull our
hearts upward, that we may not be glued as it were to this dirt and dung. To
see this fault, is a sign of some true grace; for the world will not see it to
be a fault, that they are over earnestly bent unto the world; as the Fish
finds it not troublesome to live in the waters.

And now let me call upon you, to be heavenly minded hereafter, to use this
world as though you did not use it, to set it lower than spiritual graces, and
than the hope of heavenly things. A child is wedded to his gawdes so long as
his childishness prevails, but when he has gotten more mature
understanding, he rejects them, and minds other things; so must we if we
will show our selves to be perfect men in understanding. If a master sets his
servant to gather chips, he does it, and should do it diligently in obedience
to his master; but still he takes not the chips for excellent things, but
reckons of them as of chips: so for conscience sake to God must we labor in
the world, yet still so, that we account the world as a vain shadow, and must
show that we so esteem it, by being satisfied even with a small portion, if
God see it fit to give us no more; and by being well contented if we have food
and raiment; yea, and patient too, if we be put to suffer need, and want them.

And so much now for Jacobs virtues in general, He was a perfect man, and
dwelt in Tents. Now let as consider them more particularly.

First, let us see his carriage to Godward, then to men-ward, both himself
and others, both those that were nearer to him, and those that were further
from him.

First then, Jacob had true faith in God, His special virtues in respect of
God. 1. He had faith, which he showed by many fruits. Genesis 25.30.
a common grace which is found in all Gods people, and he showed this faith by
many comfortable and worthy fruits of faith; viz. these which the Story of the
Bible notes.

First, by his desire to get the birthright, and to buy it of his brother who
despised it; for, if it was a testimony of prophannesse and Esau, to sell and
slight his birthright; then must it be also a proof of holiness and faith
in Jacob, to desire it and buy it. Indeed they were both young, and so Jacob
gets it in a childish way, by giving his brother a mess of broth on that
condition, that he would resign up to him all interest, right, and title unto
it that he had, or might have: But yet in the main matter, Jacob believed Gods
promises for the spiritual benefits annexed to the birthright, else he would
not have sought it in that manner. Graces work in men according to the age and
ability of discretion that is found in the party which has them.

There be certain childish and imperfect expressions of grace mixed as it were
with the weakness of head that is in children; yet be these true proofs of
grace, and such as the Lord accepts for the substance of them; though the
weaknesses mixed with them deserve no acceptance; and for the love of the
good, he passes by those weaknesses. Sure had not Jacob believed the promises
of God concerning the land of Canaan, and the rest, he would never have took
any care of the birthright; but in that he does long for it, and in such a
fashion as a young man could do, contracts for it with his brother, it argues
his faith, which caused him so to esteem of it. Indeed it was not that
bargain betwixt them that made it his, but Gods promise before made to his
mother, The elder shall serve the younger: but this affecting of it showed that
he had been taught by his mother this his interest; and that he was possessed
with an earnest desire of getting it, which is the first fruit of his faith.

Secondly, he desired also, and highly esteemed the blessing, as is

Indeed, Esau also had a desire of the blessing, as appears by his earnest
entreaty, and tears to his Father, but Jacobs desires looked more to
spiritual things, Esaus to earthly: So, the ones was a fruit of faith in Gods
promises, the other a fruit of mere natural love to ones self, by which
every man would feign attain that which he thinks would prove beneficial.

A third note and fruit of Jacobs faith, was his grateful accepting Genesis 28.16.
as he was going on his way; for he presently took notice that Gods was
there, and began to be reverently affected toward God, and was careful to
erect the stone for a Pillar, and to pour oil upon it, which was nothing else
but a thankful expression of his faith in Gods promises, which also caused him
to make the Vow following unto God, as you have it, Genesis 28.10. to the end. A
thankful and comfortable receiving of Gods promises, being cheared with them,
as with things most certain, proves faith to the promise maker, and to the
promises; showing that a man is persuaded they shall be performed without fail.

Jacob showed his faith in making choice of his ways, when Laban would have
him to continue looking to his sheep after the fourteen years of service
were past for his two daughters; for he desired to have the spotted, speckled,
and brown cattle that should fall after, for his wages: Showing that he
looked to God, whose hand alone could dispose of this so abstruse and hidden a
thing in the course of nature. He was willing to stand to Gods kindness and
love, rather than to any certain agreement with Laban; which he would not have
done, had he not believed Gods promises to bless him and to increase him, as
was told him in his dream forementioned. And therefore he tells his wives, that
the Angel came to him in a dream, and bad him look on the Rams leaping,
the Ewes which brought forth the Lambs spotted and grizled, and so it was of
God that he used the means of laying pilled sticks in the troughes, at the
time when the stronger cattle went to the Males.

Let any man make trial of the same course now, and he shall not find the
same success. Such a sight before the ingendring cattle will hardly cause the
young to be spotted; but that be did in faith, as having been I guess, guided
to it by the Angel, which bid him look and see the cattle bringing forth
Lambs and Goats of that color. And here is a good proof, when a man can rest
himself upon God for his wages, and for his means even in this world; and not
upon his own wisdom, or any such like outward thing. A man would have thought
this a very uncertain match, but Jacob staying on Gods promise, was desirous
of this way rather than any other to receive his reward by it.

Joseph, yea, and all his own, as a sensible declaration to his children that
he did not make any doubt of their possessing that Land, according to Gods
covenant with Abraham, and promise to himself often renewed.

Now brethren, I pray you let us labor to give credit unto that which God
speaks to us, and rest upon his goodness for the gracious performance of his
faithful promises, which is the root of all graces, and will cause us to live
holily, if we once get it confirmed and strengthened in our hearts; and let us
labor to show our faith by the same fruits that are to be seen in Jacob, as
was before noted.

Let us highly esteem those signs of his goodness, and means of attaining
his spiritual benefits, as Jacob did of his birthright. Let us make great
account of his blessing, especially spiritual blessings in things concerning
our salvation, whereof the Land of promise was a figure. Let us receive his
promises with reverend joyfulnesse and thankfulness: Let us trust upon him for
our reward of any faithful service, in any kind that we perform, laboring
to be persuaded that he will see us requited abundantly, if men should neglect
us.

A good man must trust to Gods blessing on his labors, in things that depend
upon his gracious providence, and the disposition of things by it, rather than
to any other course wherein his wit may seem to make matters more certain.
Let us show our faith by trusting also on God to bless our children, and by
leaving proofs even at our dying, that we be mindful of heaven, and that we
make no doubt but God will perform his promises. If our faith show it self by
these good effects, it is true; and we must more and more see our weakness in
faith, by the contrary effects, and more and more labor to prove the truth and
strength of it too, by its more and more producing those and the like effects.

Jacob also showed his faith by running to God when Esau came

Now secondly, Jacob was a religious and devout man, 2. He was religious.
that was careful to serve the true God, in the true exercises of religion, as
appeared in the particular duties of religion which he performed.

First, he was prayerfull, and ready to call upon Gods name on all occasions;
when his brother Esau met him, he presently framed himself to call upon the
name of God, as you have it, Genesis 32.9. Where is also an excellent form of
prayer; for first, he lays down the grounds of his boldness to come to God
in prayer, saying, God of my Father, that is, thou art my God in Covenant with
me, therefore seek I help of thee, and Thou said unto me, return; as if
he should say, I have thy word of Commandment and promise guiding me to this
journey, therefore I seek to thee.

And secondly, he humbles and abaseth himself before God, as unworthy any
benefit, saying, I am less than the least, etc. Then he makes his request,
Deliver me I pray thee, etc. and confirms it by the greatness of the danger,
and his inability to save himself, procuring great fear, Whom I fear, etc.
and next, from the promise made unto him, Thou said.

Lo here, a sweet pattern for our prayers to God when we fear any cross.

First, remember the Covenant and promise of God, and declare the misery, then
humble our selves in acknowledgement of our unworthiness. So make our suits
boldly, and make our moan to God of our dangers, and fears, and helplesnesse;
and again urge him with his promises. Had not Jacob been accustomed to pray,
he could not have solicited the Lord after this manner, in this extremity.

Again, in the end of the same Chapter, when Christ appeared unto him in an
humane likeness, ver. 24. He wrastled with him all night for a blessing, and
would not give over till he had a promise from him; though he went limping
away, the Angel giving him such a crush on the hollow of his thigh in
wrestling, as made him draw his legs after him, by the dislocation, or
dis-joynting of his hip bone; it may seem it was through the shrinking of the
sinew which had that bone in the socket.

Ah, it is an excellent thing, as it were to wrestle with God, and though he
seem angry with us, and ready to lame us and maime us, as yet still to mind
our selves of his promises, and continue fervent and constant in prayers, till
at last he please to answer us and make us know that we shall prevail with
him. If Jacob had not been a devout man, well skilled in calling upon Gods
name, he could never have maintained in his heart such an invincible
resolution as this, I will not let thee go till thou bless me, even then,
when instead of blessing he had such a wrench as might seem rather to testify
anger against his importunity, then any mind to yield unto it.

Again, when he was to send Benjamin unto Egypt, Genesis 43.14. He followed him
with his prayers, saying, God Almighty grant you favor before the Man, that he
may send away your brother, and Benjamin. You must not think that he
contented himself with this short ejaculation, but he made his request to God
for this great thing in more words and oftener.

So you see Jacob was a prayerfull man; this is one part of religiousnesse.

O that we could be prayerfull? O that we could also make Gods name our
refuge at all times? which they that do not, can hardly take any true comfort
in their estate, nor account themselves true Israelites; and those that do,
show themselves to be guided with the same Spirit that Israel: Especially let
us learn to wrestle with God, resolving to continue earnest and importunate,
and to take no nay in begging for the performance of his promises, and for his
blessing, though we seem to gain nothing, but that the Lord carries a show of
being angry with us, at length we shall prevail if we continue fervent, and
refuse to give over, as our Lord also teaches by his Parables in the Gospel,
of a child, a friend, and the poor Widow toward the unjust Judge.

Again, you shall see Jacob vowing a vow to God, Chap. 28.20, Jacob vowed a
vow to God.
21. verses, the sum of which is this, that if God would provide him
necessaries, and preserve him safely in his return home to his Fathers, he
would 1. make God his God, by adhering to him, and worshipping him alone, and
not embracing any false God, whereof the world was every where full in those
days.

Secondly, That the Pillar should be Gods house; that is, a place of public
worshipping God, where he would openly and solemnly serve him, with prayers,
sacrifices, and all fit services.

And lastly, that he would give his tenth to God, of all that God should give
him. Lo, you must learn the use of a vow, which is required in the Psalm,
Vow and pay to the Lord.

A vow is a binding ones self in an oath to God, What a vow is
to do some lawful thing which is in his power, that he may the better
attain to his suits. And the use of it is, in afflictions to confirm our
faith for the attaining of Gods help, or in prosperity to testify our
thankfulness for a benefit. Let us be cautelous what we vow, and let us as
need and occasion shall offer, make vows to God, especially the use of a vow
may be to tie our selves from things otherwise lawful, that have been
occasions of sins to us; or to quicken us to such good duties as we find our
selves most slack in: only take heed of vowing rashly, and vowing perpetually
any thing, but what we be bound unto by duty: for it is not unfit to bind our
selves to needful and commanded things by a vow, as here Jacob voweth that God
shall be his God.

I say therefore, use vows as just occasion shall serve, but not hastily, nor
in passion, for such vows likely prove mischievous. And especially be careful
to do the things vowed, that is, to make God your God, sticking close to him,
and abhorring all foreign gods. And seeing now the danger is not so great, a
running after heathenish false gods, beware of going after those heart-Idols,
pleasure, profit, credit, ease. Make not the belly your God, by loving riches,
wealth, good fare, etc. more than God, and caring for these things more than
for the favor and honor of God.

These be the most dangerous Idols of our times, many a man that abhorres to
worship an Image, a Saint, an Angel, does yet worship Mammon, and make the
world his God; take heed of this Idolatry, labor to know, love, fear, trust
in, obey God, to remember him, to choose him, etc. to give him that whole, and
inward spiritual, most needful, most acceptable worship of the heart, which
shall not cease to be worship even in heaven.

The other Commandments continue in force during this life, of praying,
reading, hearing, Sacraments, no use in heaven of oath, vows, and such a
manner of sanctifying Gods name as now, in heaven there is no use. So in the
rest:

But to know, love, fear, delight in, obey, there is always use, and make God
your God in this manner.

Again, prepare God an house, let him have a place of public service and
worship. That you have provided to your hands: I need but request to keep it in
handsome and decent fashion, to maintain it comelily as beseems Gods house,
not as if it were a barn or some out-house.

Former times you see built goodly and fair houses for God: will not you keep
them fairly, and so, that they shall be sweet, and dry, and sightly, not in
such plight that would bring the imputation of baseness upon your selves, if
any of your houses should lie so? Can you be at cost to adorn and furnish your
own houses, and not Gods? For assure your selves, these places separated for
religious meetings be Gods houses sacred to him, dedicated, assigned, given to
him, he has interest into them. If an Idols-Temple be an Idols-Temple; that
is, such an house as an Idol has interest in, and is sacred with a false and
unholy kind of sacredness; sure then a Church to God is Gods Church, and such
a thing as he is interessed into, and is sacred with a true and real
sacredness: Mine house shall be called an house of prayer to all nations. Lo,
an house of prayer, that is, of public worship (a part for the whole) and
this house Gods house, and that among all Nations. Would you wish a clearer
proof for the warrant of Churches and their sacredness? but what availes it
to keep a Church handsome if you frequent it not? O therefore come to Gods
house, frequent the public worship there performed. The meanest service done
amongst us, if it be but reading of a Chapter, is more noble (because not so
typical) than the killing of a beast: Come therefore to Gods house constantly;
sure Jacob did not mean that he would set apart a place for public worship
and not come near it, but that his care should be there to worship God.

O that you would all come frequently to Gods house for conscience and love? At
least, O that the Officers would compel them by fear, whom goodness cannot
bring? that so they may be in good way of being bettered by Gods Ordinances.

But Jacob vows to give the tenth of all that God should give him, to God,
even to the maintaining his public worship in that place, for Gods worship
will be costly. Himself personally can receive nothing, but by giving it to
his worship, and the places, and things, and persons that belong to his
worship, it is given to him. If there be any amongst you, that thinks examples
of holy writ to bind him, as it seems some do in other things, where the
matter is such as will put them to no great cost, let them ask their
consciences, Why should not this example bind them as well as any other
example? That it should be a typical, ceremonial, and temporal ordinance,
to give God tithe of all we have; I could never yet hear any reason of any
force: Some do strain their wits to find out a kind of shadow in it, and
tell what it may signify; but the Scripture, for ought I know, does not give
any notice of any such thing. You see it was the use before the Leviticall
priesthood, and therefore it is not a thing depending upon the Leviticall
priesthood: Nay, the Apostle makes mention, of it as a thing due to the
eternal priesthood of Melchisedek. Therefore why should any man think his
conscience bound by any other Example, and not by this? But to me it seems
plain, that Abraham and Jacob would never have observed this portion in
measuring out these paiments to God, if they had not conceived it a perpetual
and a natural duty. It is surely a moral precept to honor God with our
goods, and by bringing presents to him. Seeing these holy men thought it fit to
grant God so liberal a portion, why should we not think him worthy as much?
But if you cannot bring your selves to think that so much is due to God; yet I
hope you will make your selves believe, that surely something must be due to
God, and that in a liberal quantity. For God is worthy to be honored with
our goods, I trow, as much now as ever: and do we honor him if we bring him
no present, no gift? will you therefore be somewhat liberal to God? will you
bind your selves by vow? or without vow freely dedicate some good part of your
substance to God, and as God blesses you, lay still aside something (if you
distrust God so much, as you think he will not reward such a quantity as the
Tenth, why then with a ninth, or an eighth, or a seventh, or a fifth, with
something I say, that shall show, you are desirous to obey every Commandment,
and so to prove your selves sincere to God. Surely to mark how God prospers a
man's labor, and then to be constant in laying aside a good portion for God;
this shall be none of mine, it shall be Gods, ready at hand for pious uses, to
keep up, and beautify Gods house, to further Gods worship any way, and to
relieve the poor members of Christ, would make you so rich in good works, and
so increase your liberality by exercise, as would undoubtedly pull a rich
blessing upon you, and cause you to have interest into the blessing of having
your prayers to run over with increase.

Show your selves liberal to God, and be good Jacobs; else, he that is a
niggard to God, and will honor him indeed with his lips, not with his goods,
gives others reason to think, though himself be so full of self-love, that he
will not think so of himself that he honors him only with his lips.

If any say, his state is so poor that he cannot. I answer.

God has propounded this as a means to get riches; and the poor man has no
reason to think that Gods means will be unavaileable.

But a poor necessitous man that is feign to live of the bounty much what of
others, must not be a rule for those that have better estates. I am verily
persuaded, that one great cause of many a Christian man's poverty, is this; he
honors not God with his riches, and why should God make him rich? If we see a
man not to honor God with his wit and strength, and then God deprive him of
wit and strength; Do we not readily impute this cross to the desert of that
sin? and why are we not induced to conclude, God does not prosper this man in
his estate, because he did not honor God with his estate? And so much for
Jacobs devotion in vowing, and the things vowed.

4. He worshipped God also by sacrifice, and performed his vow to God. See Genesis
33.10.
Now he worshipped God also by sacrifice, and performed his vow to God at last.
Genesis 35.3. I will make an Altar unto God at Bethel, who answered me in the day
of my distress, and was with me in the way which I went; by which it is to be
thought, that Jacob prayed in his journey, when he was benighted in the way,
and that dream was Gods answer to his prayer: and ver. 7. He builded an Altar,
and called it El Bethel. Now this Altar was not without sacrifices, and a
public profession of Gods whole worship: He made God a house, and began there
to settle the public worship of God according to his vow. Indeed it was a
weakness in him to stay so long, till God was feign to put him in mind, both
by a sore cross, and by a Vision of going to Bethel for this end; but he was
religious, and kept his Vow at last. O let us keep our vows, let us offer
spiritual sacrifices of prayers, praises, contrite hearts, our own selves,
almesdeeds, and so show our selves right Israelites, or Iacobites.

5. He took an oath religiously.
Lastly, his devotion shows it self in his religious taking of an oath
himself to Laban, and ministering it to his son Joseph, as you see Genesis 31.53.
He swear by the fear of Isaac, he was careful to keep him to the true God,
and swearing by him, and that seriously, and on a just occasion, not lightly
and vainly; and Genesis 47.29. He did most religiously minister an oath to Joseph,
to bury him in the Land of Canaan, (a type of heaven,) as Abraham had done to
his servant before, making him put his hand under his thigh; of which I cannot
give you a certain and infallible reason, whether the gesture were to show
subjection to him to whom he swore, or respect to the promised seed that was to
come out of those loins: I cannot assure you, but I pray you learn to
reverence an oath by this Example, and to use it upon due and weighty
occasions, and in a due and reverend manner.

We lay our hands often on the book, and it is our accustomed solemnity, and a
very fit one; by which you may see that it is no fault or sin to use some
solemnities in Gods worship, not commanded, nor so much as exemplified; for an
oath is Gods worship, and no man yet questioned the lawfulness of that
solemnity, in taking an oath. I say we lay our hands often on the book with
little consideration of that God by whose name we swear. But the not fearing
of an oath is alleged as part of the description of an ungodly man; see
therefore that you take heed of profane swearing.

He was also careful to give thanks to God for benefits received, 6. He gave
thanks to God for benefits received.
to praise him, and continue the remembrance of his goodness, that had so
favored him in the place where he appeared to him: He set up the stone for a
Pillar, and poured oil upon it; (which was nothing else but a solemn
thanksgiving) and after, when God appeared to him again at Bethel, He set up a
Pillar, and poured oil upon it. This was to perpetuate the remembrance of the
thing, at least to bring it to his own mind and his childrens, which were
after to inherit the Land; and to show his thankful mind to God, in offering
that oil, and that wine in testimony of his joyful acknowledgement of Gods
goodness to him.

These kind of ceremonies we have not cause to use, but a careful stirring up
of Gods benefits in our minds, and thankful acknowledgement of his goodness
we must ever perform. So he called the place Peniel, where God appeared to him
in his wrestling, and Mahanaim, when the Host of God appeared to him; and the
like. All these things were proofs of a mind desirous to be perpetually
mindful of Gods benefits, that by them he might be stirred up to a more
careful obedience of his Commandments.

Lastly, Jacob was obedient to God, 7. He was obedient to God.
ready to be ruled by him in the course of his life, as appears in two things
principally, viz. his return from Padan Aram to Canaan; for so soon as God
appeared unto him, commanding his return, by and by he returned, and when
Joseph his son had sent for him, he would not leave the Land of Canaan, until
he had consulted with God, and been warned by him in a dream to go up, and
then went he up: Indeed Jacobs whole life was a pattern of dutiful obedience
unto God.

Let us learn by his example to give our selves obediently unto God in all
things, and to be ruled by him in everything, after the directions of the holy
Word, as Jacob was in these particulars, by the Dreams in which God appeared
unto him.

And so much for Jacobs virtues in respect of God. 2. Jacobs virtues in respect
of himself. 1. He was an humble man.
Now in respect of himself.

He was an humble man, as appears in his prayer to God before, when he
confesses, that he is Less than the least of all his mercies: meaning, that
he is unworthy the smallest of them, and had not deserved even the meanest.

It is a worthy grace to see ones own unworthiness of any good thing, and to
be so mean in his own conceit, that he challenges nothing of desert.

Humility is in the Angels and blessed Spirits; Humility is an excellent grace.
when they present themselves before God, they fall down before him, and
account themselves unworthy his benefits: for that which has its original
from nothing, merely by the pleasure of another, cannot but be base and
contemptible in comparison of that from whence it came; and so stands the case
betwixt God and all creatures: Wherefore, they ought to be possessed with the
sense of this distance betwixt God and them, so as to esteem themselves
nothing in comparison of him, and as Jacob here expresses it; than which, we
cannot conceive a better expression, Less than the least of all his mercies.
This humility will make one thankful for mercies, and careful to use them
well, and able meekly to part with them, and so fit to enjoy them. This
humility pleases God exceedingly, because it fitteth the creature for that
end, to which God did principally look in creating him, even to glorify his
Creator. See that you get it, and increase it continually; harbor lowly
thoughts of your selves, go to God for good things, but go, flying alone to
the throne of grace and mercy, not at all trusting in your selves, or in any
thing that is in your selves. The more one can disavow his own worth, and
still build his prayers, and hopes on Gods mercies, the more pleasing to God
are both himself and his services.

2. He was contented with a little.
Secondly, Jacob was a man contented with a little, a small portion of outward
things would satisfy him: therefore when he vows to God, he does not ask
great matters, but Bread to eat, and raiment to put on. This contentedness of
mind is a worthy and rare grace, it arises partly from humility, partly from
a right understanding of the nature of these earthly things, and an holy
advancement of spirit in the desire of heavenly things, and it helps much to
that right tranquillity of mind, in which the greatest of man's happiness does
consist, and strengthens the soul against all unjust and sinful means of
getting riches, and disposes a man to liberality and mercy to others; to eat
to the contentation of his soul, is better than to fare exceeding daintily and
plentifully without contentation. To have enough, and know when one has
enough, is better than all abundance that can be attained. Blame your selves,
that a little will not give you content, but you are still greedy of more,
though you have already food and raiment in abundance.

Follow S. Paul's precept, and Jacobs example; you must take pains often with
you selves, to settle your hearts in this contentation, else it will not be
gotten, for man's corrupt nature makes him unsatiable. But he that can place his
whole happiness in God, will soon be able to stay his desires in a few other
things, even in food and raiment.

3. He was a discreet man.
Further, Jacob was a prudent, discreet man, and knew how to carry himself
fitly for the avoiding of danger, as may be seen in his behavior toward his
brother Esau, when he came against him full of wrath and fury, to revenge
himself for his supposed wrong, in getting from him his birthright, and his
blessing.

For first, he divided his family into two parts, saying, If Esau come and
smite the one company, the other shall escape.

Secondly, He prayed earnestly to God to save him from the hands of his
brother, whom he greatly feared.

Thirdly, he presents him with a large present, and set a space betwixt drove
and drove, commanding them to answer his brother with all submisnesse; saying
when they should be asked, Whose are these before thee? They be thy brother
Jacobs. It is a present sent to my Lord Esau, and he is behind us: and so the
second and the third, and all that followed the droves, saying, I will pacify
him with a gift that goes before me, and afterward, I will see his face,
peradventure he will accept of me, and then having wrastled with God, Chap. 32.
he saw his brother coming, and divided his children to Leah and Rachel, and
the young maidens, and setting the hand maids first, then Leah, then Rachel,
himself went before them, and fell on the ground seven times, and did
obeisance, and so caused the handmaids and his wives to do the like, and so by
his submissive carriage he pacified his brothers anger, and God working with
his prudence, found him exceeding kind and loving: and when he would have gone
before him, excuses himself by the pace of the young Infants and cattle, he
avoided his company, and by pressing caused him to receive the gift, and in
very modest manner refused the train which his brother left with him, and
escaped his hands. So he proved that to be true, which after Solomon told, That
a gift in the bosom pacifieth great wrath, Prove. 21.14. And a gift is as a
precious stone in the eyes of him that has it, and it prospers whethersoever
it goes, Eccles. 10.4. Yielding pacifieth great offenses. Thus Jacob carried
himself prudently, and escaped his brothers fury. Let us learn of Jacob, by
liberality and submissivenesse to appease the fury of unreasonable men: We must
not yield so far as to sin, but to yield in all meek and lowly gestures even to
worthy men, is not a sin but a virtue. So likewise Bribery is naught, that is,
to seek to turn a Governor from justice by gifts, and hire him to do wrong;
but by gifts to pacify an angry man, and hire him to forbear sinning, that is
a lawful use of gifts, and to practice liberality in so due a season, to
redeem the life by the goods, and to make them quiet that were enraged, is a
very good thing.

Seasonable stooping, and seasonable bounty be fruits of prudence, and by such
means to save our selves from danger, is a part of wisdom and discretion. The
like prudence Jacob practiced toward the Egyptian Lord whom he thought to be
offended, not knowing that it was his son Joseph; for when they were to have
Benjamin in before him, he wished them to take a present with them, and double
money in their hands, that they might prevent all occasion of distaste, in
respect of the money that was in his sackes mouth, Genesis 43.11, 12.

We must pray to God to give us the likewise discretion, that we may carefully
use all fit means to assuage wrath, and so by Gods blessing upon our discreet
care, may free our selves from evil. But stubbornness, and niggardliness,
and a kind of four standing upon our right or innocence, that it may carry a
show of courage and resolution, is yet indeed a fruit of folly and self-conceit.

4. He was painful and industrious.
Further, Jacob was a painful and industrious person, for when he came to
Padan Aram, and met with the Shepherds, and with Rachel coming with her
Fathers flocks, he advised them concerning the ordering of their cattle, and
himself rouled away the stone from the Wells mouth, and watered Rachels sheep.
Chap. 29.8, 9, 10. and afterward, he abode in Labans house for a month, he
did not live idly there, but behaved himself so painfully and serviceably,
that Laban himself made him offer of wages, saying, Thou shall not serve me
for naught: so that Laban found him a painful and serviceable man, which made
him willing to entertain him. But especially when he had undertaken the care
of his Father in Laws sheep, He served him with all his might, as he tells his
two wives, Chap. 31.6. Which also he alleges to Labans self, In the day the
drought consumed me, and the frost by night, and sleep departed from mine eyes.
Chap. 31. 40. You see, that he was not idle, careless, and sluggish, but very
diligent and laborious.

Diligence and painfulnesse is commendable.
Herein we must imitate him, every man in his place, The diligent hand makes
rich, says Solomon, And he that tilleth his ground, shall be satisfied with
bread, and the good man shall eat the labor of his hands. But on the other
part, slothfulness, idleness, loytering, are disgraced in the book of God,
and misery and want is threatened as a punishment against them, They shall be
clothed with rags, and shall have want enough: and The way of the slothful is
like a thornie hedge; still full of pricking griefs and crosses.

Wherefore now betake your selves to all painfulnesse in your Vocations, and be
not weary of well-doing; This diligence has the promise of a blessing, and
shall have the performance. It helps against vices, by name, against pride,
and makes the soul humble, only so, that inordinatenesse and excess through
love of outward things do not corrupt and putrify it. How diligent also was
Saint Paul in his calling? and how are the servants commended for diligent
employment in their Talents? and the good housewife for her labors; and
contrarily, the slothful servant is rated and punished by losing his Talent,
and being cast into utter darkness.

5. Jacob was just in his dealings with all.
Lastly, Jacob was also just in his dealings with all, for when Laban pursued
him, as if he had been a thief, he bids him search among all his goods, if he
could find any thing there that was his; and when nothing was found there
unjustly gotten, he is bold to chide with Laban for pursuing him in that
violent manner, Genesis 31.37. and so when the money was returned back in his sons
sacks mouths, he not knowing how it came thither, wishes them to return it
back, lest it might be an oversight. Lo, he would not make advantage of an
oversight, but that which was another or might be, he was careful to return
unto the right owner, and that though it might seem in show an easy matter to
keep it. Let us learn righteousness of him, take not any other man's goods,
keep not that which is not your own, but give every one his own, and take to
your selves that and only that which is your own, the contrary whereto is
theft before God, though we can conceal it from men.

The Law of nature commands us To do as we would be done unto, Quod tibi
fieri non vis, alteri neficeris.
and every man's heart within tells him, that he expects all just dealing from
other men, and therefore cannot but find fault with those that shall use any
unrighteousness toward him. Let us not neglect the plain directions of
natural light; and though a man may suppose that the Bread of deceit and other
unjustice is sweet, yet Solomon says, It shall prove but gravel in the
mouth, a thing troublesome and unsavory. Yea Solomon says, The riches gotten
by lying, are but vainly tossed to and fro of them that seek death; and that,
The deceitful man shall not roast what he took in hunting: and that, An
inheritance may be hastily gotten at the beginning, but the latter end thereof
shall not be blessed, for he that gets goods, and not by right, shall leave
them in the midst of his days, and in his end shall prove a fool. Wherefore,
that we may attain the blessing of God upon our estates, let us put away all
kinds of unrighteousness; especially take we heed that we do not take our
advantage upon other men's oversights or imperfections, by misreckonings, false
measures, or any kind of encroaching. If one leave in another hand any thing
and forget, let not his forgetfulness cause him to take it as his own. If one
lend us, and take no witness or security, let not his inability to prove the
debt make us bold to detain it. Let not the love of riches and immoderate
desire of gain so blind our eyes, as to make us unable to perceive the
unequalnesse and sinfulness of our course, nor yet so harden our hearts and
dull our consciences, that we should be emboldened against our knowledge to
enrich our selves by such devices.

So much for Jacobs virtues respecting himself.

Now see his carriage toward others: Jacobs virtuous carriage to others. 1. He
was obedient to his Parents. Genesis 29.


First, those that were near to him; Then strangers.

And first, of his kindred, his Superiors, Equals, Inferiors; for his
Superiors, they be his Parents, Isaac and Rebekkah, to whom he was loving and
obedient; his obedience he showed in travailing to Padan Aram at his Mothers
advice, and Fathers persuasion for a wife. It behooveth children to show all
good subjection, and that particularly in this point of being ruled by their
discreet and religious Parents in choice of a wife or husband, so as to make
them their guiders and directors in this weighty business, and they must not
suffer their hearts to be set upon any person in that respect, without the
knowledge and consent of their Parents; nor hearken to motions made to them
without the good liking of their Parents.

If it be said, how if Parents will cross their children in their affections?
I answer.

The world is full of examples, by which it is manifest, that many come
together in great heat of love, and within a few years grow so froward,
discontented, and careless either of other, as none can be more. And again,
others come together with discretion, not in such vehemence of Love, and their
hearts afterward do cleave each to other in singular love and deernesse.
Therefore it would become a child to cross his affection, rather than his
Parents.

But what if Parents will force their Children either not at all to marry, or
else to marry with such as are unfit for them, in regard of Age, Religion, and
in respect of evident deformities of Body, or disorders of Life.

I answer:

Parents are bound to provide fit yoake-fellowes for their children.
I know no such unlimited authority granted to Parents, as to compel their
children upon inconveniences in any of these respects. Parents are bound to
tender fit yoake-fellowes to their Children, as God did to Adam: else the
Children in not following their advice do forbear to be ruled, not by their
authority, but by their lusts. For if Parents may not provoke their Children to
wrath, lest they be discouraged, surely they may not thrust them upon other
miseries and distempers.

But what must be done in such a case? I answer:

By patience and long suffering, and entreaty of common friends, and like
means, the Children must seek to win their Parents to reason; which if they
cannot do, they must refer themselves to the Governors, Magistrates, or
Ministers: and if these will not, or by the Laws cannot provide for their
help, they must even follow the advice of virtuous and wise Friends and
Neighbors.

But suppose that in such case the Parents frowardness be such that they will
not yield to reason, and that they will rather drive their Children to an
inconvenient match, or yield their good liking to none, what must the child
do then?

I answer:

If God vouchsafe that gift he must forbear Marriage, esteeming himself
called of God to the single life: But if he cannot by all good ways so far
overcome himself, but that his mind is conquered by desires of Marriage, he
has a plain rule from S. Paul: It is better to marry than to burn. Yea, but
then the Parents displeasure follows, and loss of such means or portion as
else he might have had.

I answer:

Every good Christian must resolve to take up his cross and follow Christ;
therefore I require you sons that have not trodden in Jacobs steps for this
matter, to be humbled for it with true and hearty repentance. Sin will hazard
a good man to some severity of punishment (I mean that of known sins, such
as a man does, or would be careful might understand to be sins) until
particular repentance come betwixt, to stop or remove that same; but when a man
has and does conveniently at fit times humble himself for a fault, it cease
to make him liable to temporal evils, further then they be needful to
increase and make up what would be wanting in his repentance, and he that will
at Gods reproof turn unto him in humiliation and amendment, shall find the
Lord a gracious Father, and such a one as will not proceed to smarting
corrections, if loving and earnest admonitions may prevail.

Again, all you children to whom God has vouchsafed such Parents as have
dealt wisely and mildly with you in this matter presenting unto you fit
yokefellows, and such against whom no exception might be justly made, or have
yielded you to your own choice, and that has so guided you too, that you have
pleased your Parents in your matches, and so with good will and approbation on
both sides have entered into this estate, be you thankful to God that has
ordered this affair so properously for you, and take heed of ascribing this
comfort to your own wit and goodness, without giving the whole honor to God,
that gave the wit, and the goodness, and the success, without whose
favorable providence, neither wit, nor goodness would have brought the
business.

If benefits be perverted to nourish our good conceits of our selves, not to
increase our thanks and praises to God, they be but unsanctified benefits,
such as at last will make our state more miserable than the want of them would
have done.

But all you young, and yet unmarried folk, look to your selves, pray to God
to subdue your passions to reason, and both to your Parents; take notice it is
your duty to give this honor to your Parents, and resolve that by Gods
assistance you will perform it.

Hearken to no enticements, let no beauty or other allurement win ground upon
your hearts, but still keep your selves free and in fit case to continue
dutiful observers of the fifth Commandment.

But we have another Superior with whom Jacob had occasion at last to deal,
viz. Laban. 2. He was respective to his Uncle Laban.


First, An Uncle.

Secondly, A Master.

Thirdly, A Father in Law.

See how well Jacob carried himself to Laban in all these respects.

1. As he was an Uncle, before he entered into the other relations, he lived so
lovingly and painfully with him in his house for the space of a month
together, that Labans self was both willing to give him some due wages and
allowance for his service, which of his own accord he offered himself to do,
and also when motion was made of giving him Rachel, did willingly accept the
motion, yea put the other upon him too against his will, whereby it is evident,
that he behaved not himself so, as to be a cumber and burden to the family,
but was helpful to it: This was very commendable in him, that he carried
himself temperately, and virtuously, and profitably in his Uncles house, where
he came to sojourne for a time.

O that all those, whose occasions invite them to visit their kindred and to
abide some time with them, would show themselves so virtuous, and wise, and
orderly in their whole behavior, that their friends might not have occasion to
account them burdens, but rather benefits unto themselves and their families,
so long as they shall have cause to continue, and not so rudely, wastfully,
idly, that the house is discharged as it were of some ill humor, when the time
comes that they shall be gone away.

3. He craved his good will to marry his daughter.
Further, Laban had two daughters, and Jacob loved one entirely, yet we see that
he craved the Fathers good will before he made any suit at all to the maiden. He
went not to Rachel to get her good will, and to win a promise from her, but
takes the fittest occasion that offered it self, to let the Father understand
his mind, and to make agreement with him. Here also young men have an
excellent pattern to imitate, and a sweet direction for their proceedings in
marriage; First, to make sure with the Parents and Governors, and after to
deal with the young persons themselves, as also Sampson did, and the servant
of Abraham, and as nature it self teaches it should be done; for why should
not he that has right into any thing, be consulted withal about parting with
it, before we seek to drive away the thing it self which appertains to him.

O those of you that have done, or are now in doing otherwise, be you blamed
as men that proceed not virtuously in this course, and therefore are either
through lucre of portion, or else inordinate affection (which men call love)
thrust aside from a right, to a wrong path. Now at last Jacob becomes a servant
to his Father in Law, and agrees to perform seven years service for one
daughter, and as many for the other.

For my part I cannot commend Jacobs prudence in this matter, he bound himself
to a very long apprentiship. He might have taken order to have sent messengers
betwixt Isaac and Laban, that his portion might have procured this match rather
than his service. But herein yet he deals well with Laban, whom he was willing
to advantage so much for his daughters sake. So far was he from being desirous
to steal away Rachel, that he chose rather to sue for her: every young man
must learn hence not that particular thing which Jacob did, to serve for a
wife, but that common rule of equity which he followed, to give a man all
reasonable and good content in marrying his daughter, in affording such
convenient allowance to her as is fit, neither will he be unwilling to this
duty; that is, not moved more with base ends, than love of her whom he marries.

4. Took patiently the wrong that he offered him.
But Jacob shows a singular gentleness and respect to him in that, when he had
beguiled him, and put Leah upon him instead of Rachel, yet he did not put her
away, and refuse to have her, but was rather contented to serve another seven
years for Rachael, than he would make any stir. As for the matter of Polygamy
and marrying two sisters, the last was not then a sin, the former was not
esteemed to be one; but surely Jacob received very hard measure of Laban in
obtruding another upon him, than was agreed upon to be his wife; yet you see
he devoures the injury without any great outcry, only he tells him of the
wrong in words, nothing savouring of bitterness.

O that we also could learn to reprove a wrong-doer, specially a superior
doing us wrong, with mild and good language, without railing, without
clamorousnesse and disgraceful speeches. It were a sweet thing to have so much
government over our passions and tongues, that they might not carry us to set
out wrongs with too many and large aggravations, and with invective and
contumelious speeches against him that has done us the wrong. It is never
tried to the purpose what humility, what true discretion the soul is endowed
withal, until it receive the trial of injuries. He that in such case can
keep himself within compass, that his words be neither many nor violent,
shows that he has some command of himself, and some feeling acknowledgement
of Gods provident government, and his own worthiness of far greater evils.

But he that has never done amplifying such a wrong, and is furious and bitter
against the offender, shows that he has a great heart that can make the
wrong so great, and does not look to the hand, but to the rod, against which
he gives himself to show so much distemper.

Again you see, that Jacob is even ready patiently to sit down by the wrong,
and is content now to make himself an Apprentice for another seven years,
rather than he will make a great stir, and contend with Laban. We cannot think
so hardly of any times, that there were no Laws or Governors that would and
should have righted this wrong, if Jacob would have made his complaints: but
Jacob was from his Fathers house, and a stranger, and friendlesse, and
therefore thought it more wisdom to sit down and be content with somewhat
hard conditions, than to make a greater quarrel and contention.

O that we could get our hearts stored with a proportion of wisdom and
meekness, suitable to that of Jacob, even to make us able to devour wrongs
with somewhat ill and harsh consequences, rather than to make a great brawle,
specially if we be inferiors also, and find our selves likely to mend our
selves little by contending, such a submissive and peaceable disposition will
make us capable of a larger blessing from God than any we could get by
striving and brawling; and not only so, but would give us more quietness and
content in our selves, than the either revenging or redressing of a wrong
another way.

Follow Jacob therefore in this his carriage toward his Father in Law.

And now we find Jacob a servant, and that for fourteen years: he married
the two daughters within a few months after his coming thither, as may be
demonstrated by the ages of the children, by name of Joseph the youngest, who
was seventeene when he was sold into Egypt, and thirty when he stood before
Pharaoh first, and lived after, seven years of plenty, and then two years of
scarcity; that is, thirty nine in all, and then was Jacob one hundred and
thirty. So that Jacob was ninty and one years of age when he begat him, and
that was in the last of the fourteen years agreed upon, for by and by upon
his birth, Jacob would have labored for his own house, and Laban agrees upon
wages. Therefore he was seventy and seven years or thereabouts, when he came
to Laban, and being of that age, it was not likely that he would live so long
unmarried before he took a wife.

Again, betwixt Jacobs going to Padan, and returning, were but two years at
the most, and then was Joseph seven years old, for he was borne toward the
end of the fourteenth year; and if Jacob had not married Leah till seven
years were ended, the eldest of Jacobs sons could be but seven years at
most elder than he; that is, fourteen years, and Joseph was thirty and nine
years when Jacob came to him, or thereabouts; Therefore, the eldest of Jacobs
sons at that time was but forty and six, and Judah was the fourth of the same
mother; so he must be but forty and two, or thereabouts, and yet had he three
sons marriageable before he begat Pharez, and Pharez had two sons when
they went down to Egypt. Allow Judah to marry at fifteen, Er at fifteen,
and let Thamar wait but two years for the third son, now Judah was thirty
and two: Let Pharez marry at fifteen, and have two sons in two years, that
is seventeene, so have we forty and nine years: and therefore seeing greater
haste could not be made, at least so many years did pass betwixt, and that
will come to just seven years more than the time will amount too, if Jacob
married at the end of seven years; therefore he married the first year.

But whenever he married, in making himself a son in Law, he made himself
an hired servant too; now how did he carry himself as a servant.

5. He was diligent and faithful in his service to Laban.
First, with all diligence.

Secondly, faithfulness.

For he followed his masters business painfully, and constantly, and ordered
himself toward them most innocently, and so made his little, much, through
the blessing of God upon his labor and fidelity.

Now these duties appertain to all servants, and are required of S. Paul,
saying, doing Service with good will, and not with eye service, as men
pleasers, but with singleness of heart, fearing God, and showing all good
faithfulness, that the name of God be not evil spoken of. And seeing God
would have families maintained, and a distinction of Master, and Servants in
the families, it was requisite that he should oblige servants to these duties,
for upon the prosperity of families depends the welfare of Towns and
Countries, and so of the whole World.

An house in which good servants live, prospers; but idle and untrusty servants
quickly bring it to naught; God therefore that made all things for good,
welfare, and prosperity, must needs, according to the rules of his own wisdom,
fit the means to the end, and require servants in this manner to govern
themselves to their Governors.

Now you that have been servants formerly, which has been the state and
condition of the greater number amongst you; Consider what servants you have
been, let not your younger days be passed over forgetfully.

It is a principal part of an aged man's duty to look back upon his former
times, and to find out the mistakes of his youth, that by humbling himself
for them, he may attain pardon from God.

Lo this duty now, and if you can remember your selves to have been slothful,
wastfull, undutifull servants, as far unlike to Jacob, as black and white are
unlike each to other; then take time to present your selves before God, and
judging your selves for such injuriousnesse, beg pardon and remission, and
resolve against the like corruptions of your present places.

And you who find that God did enable you in that estate to show your selves
diligent and trusty, give God the glory, and rejoice in his great goodness,
that gave you not over to the unbridlednesse of your evil natures.

An aged man, whose youth has been indifferently well ordered, has great
cause to bless Gods name that gave him not over to the licentiousness of that
age. And all you that be servants, must pray to God that he would make you good
and conscionable servants, that not alone out of love to your own reputation,
and a desire to thrive in the world, that you may be painful and trusty, but
out of a desire and intention to please God in your places and callings; for S.
Paul would have servants to remember, that They serve the Lord Christ, and To
look unto the immortal inheritance, with which he will reward them, as well
as those that serve him in higher callings.

Again, He discovered a great deal of patience, 6. He was patient and gentle
to Laban, though he changed his wages.
and gentleness toward him, for Laban was fickle and inconstant, and changed
his wages many times, he says ten times I suppose, using by a wonted figure, a
certain number for an uncertain. But Jacob devoures this wrong patiently,
does not expostulate with him, nor show himself sharp or bitter, but puts it
over without words, and goes not from him through discontent, till God by an
Angel bid him go to his Fathers house again.

So should servants show themselves gentle to their ungentle masters that are
unkind and injurious to them, and do not use them so well as equity
requires, and not be clamorous and violent against them. But most servants,
though they receive no hard measure, but alone are justly reproved and
corrected for their faults, are so impatient that they cannot bear it, but
make false and harsh complaints, and are so imbittered and discontented, that
they straight resolve to run away, and cannot bring themselves to stoop: these
are of a contrary spirit to Jacob.

7. In the conclusion, when he parted from him, he showed moderation of his
Passions.
Now lastly, in the cloze of all, when Jacob went from his Father in Law, he
showed himself a man, that though he were sensible of injuries, could yet
moderate his passions, and keep anger within due limits; for he chid with him
indeed, and was angry against him, which any man may lawfully do against him
that seeks to do him hurt; but he does not rail at him, nor give him foul
language, only he tells him before their common friends, of his former and
evil usage; acknowledging Gods goodness in preserving him from his rage.

O that we could learn of him to be so far masters of our selves, that when
just occasion of anger does offer it self, we might then command our selves
to forbear bitter and reviling speeches, and not be so transported beyond our
selves, as to rail, swear, curse, threaten, and it may be worse than all
this. Most men, when anger begins to boil, forget almost that they be men,
altogether that they be Christian men, and are so madded, that they care not
what vile language proceeds out of their mouths, and what sharpness of a
razor they discover in their tongues; ^erifying that of S. James, That the
tongue is set on fire of hell, and it self sets on fire the whole course of
nature; and that though our Savior have somanifestly adjudged to hell, him
that does rail at his brother with the name of Fool.

See your folly and pride in this venting of distempered anger, and bewail it,
and now learn of Gods faithful servant Jacob (so honorable a Patriarch, that
by him the whole Church is called Jacob and Israel) to be so angry, as not to
sin by being driven forth into bitterness of carriage.

He was quickly pacified with his Father in Law.
But last of all, he was so quickly pacified, that when his Father did alone
intimate (and not plainly make) a confession of his fault, by requesting a
Covenant of peace betwixt them, quickly without any words he condescended, and
makes a feast for Laban and the rest, and confirms the Covenant by an oath, as
you may read it in Genesis 31.45. to the end.

Here is a man of a quiet spirit indeed! His Father in Law had wronged him
formerly, and presently, by pursuing him, and by charging him to have stolen
his Idols, which he foolishly calls gods, yet he had so soon forgotten all
this, as at the first word to embrace an offer of reconciliation, and to enter
into a Covenant with him of peaceable carriage to himself and his daughters.
It is a most excellent grace to be quickly and easily pacified, and to blot out
the remembrance of wrongs, and to carry himself lovingly to such a man as has
offered him hard measure, and that also many times, even as if he had received
no such injury from him.

This is to imitate God and our Lord Jesus Christ, who does so forgive us, and
a surer proof of an humble and discreet spirit we cannot have any other.

O you that find your selves of a bitter revengefull spirit, that if you have
been wrongfully entreated know not how to forget it, know not how to forbear
taking all advantages of requiting like for like: See how contrary you be to
this godly man, and entertain even anger and detestation against your selves
for such maliciousness, and labor now so to press upon your selves the
Commandment of God, and example both of God and good men withal, beseeching
the Lord by his Spirit to work the like gentleness, long-suffering, and
meekness in you, that you also may be easily pacified, and so soon able to
quench the apprehension of injuries. Let us profit by good examples, and frame
to the discharge of these duties, which the precept of God tells us that we
ought to do, and the practice of godly men assures us they may be done. If a
thing be required, and possible, why should we not address our selves unto it?

So much of Jacobs virtuous behavior to his Superiors:

Now consider of his demeanor to his brother Esau.

He uses all submissive gesture and loving carriage to pacify his anger, as
we have showed you before: 9 He uses all submissive gestures and loving
carriage to pacify his Brother Esau's anger.
then we commended him for his prudence and discretion to save himself; here
we are to commend him for his exceeding submissive and winning carriage to his
brother.

Jacob was not destitute of means to have hired as many soldiers as Esau
brought with him, or some means he might have be thought himself of whereby
to resist him; but he chooses rather to stoop and pacify him by the fairest
ways he could. God commands his people to offer terms of peace before they
besieged a City.

Surely, submissive and melting carriage is the best way to pacify wrath, and
we must seek to that course first, not alone, when we be over marched with an
enemy, but even then when we have power in our hands to save our selves by
force, as we see in Iephta toward the King of Ammon. But so sturdy of nature
be some, yea many, that they would rather expose themselves to the rage of an
Esau, than have so bowed, they count it a baseness of mind to stoop and fall
down before another, having such a blind eye that they cannot distinguish
betwixt humility and abjectnes. He that yields submissive and pacifying words
and gestures, is humble: he that stoops so low as to please another, he is
abased.

And so much for Jacobs virtues to Esau.

Now toward his own Family:

First, in general considered, He is careful to provide for it.

Secondly, to pray for it.

Thirdly, to purge it from sin.

10 He is careful to provide for his own Family.
First, to provide for it, for you shall see him returning this answer to his
Father in Law after the end of his two apprentiships, When shall I provide for
mine own house, Genesis 30.30. When shall I do or work also for mine own house.
Jacob had a rich Father in Law, Laban, and and a rich Father, Isaac, and yet
will not he cast himself upon them to provide for his wife and children, but
himself will work for that end: This is a thing required of all men by the
light of nature, as well as by the Laws of God, to make provision of things
needful for their families.

All those beasts and birds which live by couples, and are not sold over to
promiscuous generation, do provide holes and nests for their young, and join
to maintain them when they be young: See you not the poor Rookes now in the
height of the trees preaching to you this duty with so loud croakings? that you
can scarce pass by a Grove, but that inarticulate language will admonish you;
how quiet be they all the Winter, and other seasons? But when the Spring comes,
and that now nature prompts them to procreate youngs they are so diligent to
build nests, and to hatch the young, and to feed them till they can shift for
themselves, that no hour sees them idle, or ceasing from that duty; you may
see the same in the poor Starlings: Seeing they be here, I will commend them
to you for masters of this duty, early and late they be close at this work
(taking indeed a little time morning and evening to sit and chirp out their
merry tune, as if they would teach you to take time for the praising of God,
however urgent your business may seem to be) but else all day long, flying
too and fro with food to put into the mouths of their gaping young.

Can you see these things and not be instructed to good husbandry? S. Paul
calls him worse than an Infidel, that does not labor for his family, to
provide it necessaries. He might have gone a little further, and called him
worse than the feathered foul, and the brute beasts; for even Foxes, Wolves,
Bears, and Lions have this care ingraffed in them by nature.

Now therefore, you unnatural, slothful, wastfull Fathers and Mothers that
are so wickedly given over to idleness, and drunkenness, or gaming, or other
loosnesse, that you either will not work at all, or else will not work for
your Families, but your lusts to spend it on them. I pray you at length be
ashamed of such worse than brutish distemper of mind, and more than beast-like
misdemeanour; what account can you give to God when he shall call you to an
account?

Where was your natural affection to your own bodies and bowels? where was
your dutiful obedience to the Law of God and Nature, and the Laws of well
ordered Common wealths? where were your wits and your consciences? and where be
they that you live more sinfully and scandalously than the ignorant. Go home I
beseech you with shame and sorrow in your hearts and countenances, be not
hardened against this reproof, after so many former reproves; but fall down
before God, condemning your selves to the pit of Hell for such your
unthriftinesse, and confessing your own extreme slavery to sin, and
unfitness to mend that or any other fault, beseech the living God to reform
you by his Spirit, and to pardon you by the blood of his Son, and even
believe his promise that he will grant your prayers, and heal your Souls, and
forgive your sins for his Sons sake; and so in Faith to his promises, and
Obedience to his Commandments, set about the reformation of this and other
faults; and cease not praying, repenting, striving, and you shall prevail:
unthriftinesse will prove a disease of exceeding difficult care, but not
uncurable: and you whom God has pleased to make good and provident, and
thrifty husbands, bless him for it indeed; and withal pray him to order you
so in laboring for your families, that it may show it self to be a good
Flower, growing up as a Fruit of Gods Spirit; not as a Weed springing up from a
corrupt, though restrained Nature, by going into excess, making you so eager
in providing for your houses, as that you become niggardly unjust, or otherwise
excessive. For the worldly minded man, though he live in better reputation on
Earth, has no better reputation in Heaven than the waste-good: nor shall have
less torment in Hell, seeing the worldly minded are enemies to God, as well as
the sensual minded. So Jacob provided for his family.

Now he prays for them, 11. He prays for his family.
as you see he did when Isaac came against him; Save me, for I fear lest he
come and strike the Mother with the Children. Parents must bless their
children; and in this sense also the whole families, and cry to God for
prosperity and peace. If the Apostles be bidden to pronounce peace, surely
then we must pray for it. If S. Paul prayed for the household of Onesiphorus,
were it not a wonder that Onesiphorus should not pray for his own household?
You Governors, show your selves religious as well as thrifty: call upon God
for the people committed to your charge: If publque supplications must be made
for all men, surely then even man must privately pray for them that are his
own. Be not profane, content not your selves alone to labor and toil for
your families; but visit the Throne of Grace in their behalf, and call
earnestly upon God to save them chiefly from sin and wickedness.

Further, Jacob purged his family, as you have it, Gen 35.2. 12 He purged his
family.
to the requiring them to put away the false gods, and to be clean, and
change their garments, and then having received of them all their idolatrous
and superstitious trinkets, he buried them under the Oak mentioned there.

O that all Parents would be careful to cleanse all vices out of their houses,
as well as Idolatry, and this as well as other vices.

But Parents are most times too too careless of their families and see and
wink at their sins, their undecent behavior, riot, idleness, disguised
attire, and any naughtiness that does not bring forth great discredit in the
World. Purify your houses, and so see the faults, as to chase them out, and
call your people to amendment, to cleanness, to changing their garments; if
they be proud, vain, foolish, as well as if they be superstitious.

13. He instructed his family, and brought them to the Worship of God.
Lastly, Jacob instructed his people here, and called them to the worship of the
true God, telling them that he would go to Bethel, and make an Altar to God
that had fulfilled his vow, and met him when he fled from Esau. We should all
call upon our families, and bring them to Gods Worship, and labor to instruct
them therein, that they may be able to perform it holily and fruitfully:
Surely, had not Jacob taught his people what Duty they did owe to God in these
sacrifices, and how to perform them in spiritual manner, he must have
endeavored only to make them hypocritical abusers of Gods service.

So much for Jacobs regard to his whole family.

Now see how he showed himself in particular to his Wives and Ghildren.

14. Jacob was a very kind Husband to all his Wives.
To his Wives. He was undoubtedly a very kind Husband to them all; for we read
of no jarres or brawles.

O that Husbands would live void of contention with their Wives! O that their
houses might be peaceable! It is a forerunner of ruin, when an house is
divided against it self. But specially toward Rachael it is noted how he
loved her, Genesis 29.30. that is, very much more than the rest. Indeed he had
cause, she was his true Wife for whom he first agreed, Leah was forced upon
him, he might lawfully have refused her; yea, and had not the custom of the
times tolerated poligamy, he must have refused her and taken Rachael, for whom
he made his agreement, and so in a sort contracted himself too.

Now the light that has showed it self amongst us, causes that poligamy is
banished; therefore every one amongst us is bound to love his Wife as Jacob did
Rachael, which is also the special commandment. Woe unto those Husbands
therefore that what show of love soever they make unto their Wives at first;
yet within a while are so sour and churlish unto them, that they show an
extinguishment of love to have befallen them. So far as any man fails of
loving his Wife, he must also fail of loving God: It is possible to love the
Wife and not God, but to love God and not the wife is impossible. Therefore now
you husbands strive to love your wives: and you Wives carry your selves so
respectively and humbly, as to win love at your husbands hands. Nothing but
this can make you live happily together; all riches, honors, pleasures, be no
farther soundly comfortable, than the husband and wife are loving each to other.

Now God can give love to them that ask, as well as wisdom, Jacob was duly
angry with his wife. Genesis 30.1, 2.
and let him that would love his wife, pray for it, and withal withdraw his
heart from strange women. But again, Jacob could be duly angry with his wife,
and reprove her for her fault, for when she in a great rage calls to him for
children, and would die if she had none. He is angry at her, but with such
moderation, that he gives her a due reproof, but no distempered language,
saying, Am I in Gods stead, that has withholden from thee the fruit of the
womb. As Jacob tempered his anger toward his Father in Law; so toward his
wife, he is indeed moved with some passion, but it does not carry him to any
violence, or to inordinate sharpness. Here husbands must learn to follow this
virtuous man, if there be just cause of being angry at the wife in regard of
some great over-shooting her self toward themselves or others, they may be
angry, but their anger must be so kept down by love, that they may not be
bitter, which the Apostle does precisely forbid to husbands; they must blame
the fault, but not admixe words, to show alienation of heart for the faults
sake.

Two things husbands must look to in respect of this anger toward their
wives: Husbands must look to two things in respect of their anger to their
wives.


First, that it arise not but from some plain and evident fault, such as you
see here in the Text; she began to fall out with him for want of children, as
if it had been his fault that she conceived not as her sister did.

Secondly, that it produce not tartness and reproachful speeches, and a
constant sowrenesse, but alone a due and fit reproof, as here also. Happy men
that can so guide anger, and their tongues in anger.

So has Jacob done the office of a good householder in general, and of a good
husband. See now what a kind Father he was, and what good he performed toward
his children.

1. To all of them; then to some. Genesis 46.34. and Chap. 47.3


He did two things to them all;

First, he brought them up in a calling, to be Grasiers, 16. He brought up his
children in a calling.
as we call them, to breed Cattle, Sheep, Oxen, Camels, Goats, and the like,
wherein himself abounded.

This he might the more easily do, Parents sold bring up their children in
some calling, and why.
because himself living in the quality of a servant to Laban his Father in
Law, and having them borne to him in the time of his service, he had fit
opportunity to acquaint them with that business in which himself was so
totally employed. Herein all good Parents are to imitate him, for the duty is
necessary for the childrens sake, and for the Commonwealth, and for the
Parents own sake too. Prove. 22.6.
Train up a child in the way he should go; He does not mean it alone,
Catechize him in matters of religion, and good conversation, but also in
affairs of this world too, because it is a part of his way to live in the
world, as well as to know the things that belong to his souls health. We need
not the authority of Scripture for that, for which nature it self is
sufficient; If God command men to walk orderly, and to eat the labor of
their hands, their Parents must inure their children to such a walking, and see
that they observe that Commandment of God. If they must provide for them food
and raiment for the present, much more the things that are needful for their
well-being for ever.

Now a calling (an ability to do some profitable thing by which they may
maintain themselves with the public advantage) is necessary for their
well-being in the whole course of their lives.



and overruled his will, and he is amended; But those that have lived over
loosly, and are not able to do any thing, are almost desperate the Magistrate
knows not which way to turn himself to the procuring of his reformation, but
by using great extremities; for how shall he be compelled to do any thing,
that can do nothing? and to make him learn some faculty when he is old, how
extremely difficult is that? So now nothing remains but an house of
Correction, or Galleys, or the like, whereby to force men, which should go
much against the hearts of Governors, if any other course may suffice.
Wherefore it concerns Parents as they love the Commonwealth, not to deliver
over into the Magistrates, such cross and crooked pieces as cannot be made fit
for any use without so much hewing.

And for the benefit of the childs self, it helps much to his He that
tilleth his ground, shall be satisfied with bread, Prove. 28.19. and 22, 23.
and again, In all labor there is abundance; but being destitute of this
ability, how shall he but want, unless a very great portion of goods or lands
be given him? Yea, he that having lands and goods, has not skill to employ
them, grows far sooner wastfull and unthrifty, and consumes his great estate,
and then is put many times to base, many times to sinful shifts, which had he
a good calling he might escape. Besides, labor in a calling subdues vice, and
he that has a calling, may be painful in it, he that has none, cannot: Yea,
if God call any person that has been unprofitably brought up, to the knowledge
of himself, such a one shall be much more to seek how to live religiously,
than another that has some employment; for in not knowing what course to take,
he is made to stand distracted, and doubtful of his course, and so full of
vexation and unquietness. Now all you Parents, that have neglected your
children very much, and suffered them to trifle out all that golden season of
youth, in which they should have fitted themselves for a profitable and
comfortable life in elder days, be ashamed; you have been so foolish, as not
alone to transgress the duty of Christians, but even that which the heathens
have done: You have been causes of your childrens misery, and the Commonwealth
too, and if it proceed not from some other cause then from wisdom, your
children must be but burdens and diseases to themselves, and the world. Rich
Parents are sometimes guilty of this fault, for they think they shall leave
them sufficient to maintain them though they do nothing, and therefore intend
them not to any vocation, not considering how soon the Lord can empty a full
Vessel, and make the River Jordan, yea, the red Sea dry as dry ground, and
then what will become of their children? Yea, as not considering that to leave
children much wealth, and not some sufficiency for good employment of
themselves, is to leave them furnished to do themselves hurt and others, and
to bring all to naught quickly. But many of the poorer rank are guilty of this
fault too, who give themselves so to unthriftinesse, that they cannot bestow so
much as reading and writing on them, much less some higher calling to which
these should fit them. If any man's unpreventable poverty disable him, we blame
him not for that to which necessity compels him, only so that he pull not that
necessity on himself: but he that in a poor estate has not some care to
bring up his children to work, and if he cannot effect it himself, does not
herein seek help of the public and able persons, is not so good a Parent as
nature will teach him that he should; therefore now I commend Jacobs pattern
to your eyes, and pray you to cut out your lives according to his scantling: Be
not wanting to your childrens welfare, the common prosperity, and your own
comfort. Let not others have cause to bestow upon you the reproof of Solomon.
A child left to himself, Prove. 29.15.
makes his Mother ashamed; and what is he but left to himself and the
devil, that is not acquainted with any profitable employment in a calling? And
let me speak something to children in this behalf: If Parents take never so
due care, and children will cast off the yoke, what can the Parents do?
Therefore you must learn you selves to practice subjection to your Parents; as
in all other things, so in this.

Be careful in the callings wherein your Parents have thought fit to place
you, that you may get ability in them to do good to your selves and others.
The inconveniences that else will press you hereafter shall prove more burden
some unto your consciences, when you shall be upbraided with these thoughts,
ah, I might have done well but for mine own wilfulness, had I answered my
Parents care and cost, it would not have been thus evil with me.

17. He blessed all his children. Genesis 49.28.
But now to a second duty performed to them all: He blessed them all according
to their several blessings, as is noted of him, that is, he pronounced in Gods
name, and by way of promise from him, what good things God would do for each
of them in his posterity that was to come after him. For a man's self is
blessed, when he is assured that benefits shall be granted to his childrens
children in future generations.

We must bless our children, though not as he did.
Now in this way of blessing we cannot imitate him, because we want the Spirit
of prophecy to foretell future events; but there is a way of blessing which
lies upon each of us; we must pray for a blessing to our children, and to our
posterity after us, and must carry our selves so religiously, and righteously,
that we may procure a blessing to them by virtue of Gods promise to the seed of
the righteous. A good man walks in his integrity, Prove 20 7.
and his children shall be blessed after him: and Blessed is the man that
fears the Lord, Psalm. 12.1.
his children shall be like Olive plants. Lo how you must bless your
children, fear God, walk uprightly, and then shall you conveigh a blessing to
them.

And so it is said, He is ever merciful, and lends, Psalm. 37.26.
and his seed is blessed. There cannot be a better Counselor than Gods Spirit;
see the way of blessing your children, and you that have cursed your children,
(as many a Father has done both with bitter curses in word, and also by
walking in a way of cursednesse) abhor your selves that have walked into a
way quite contrary to that wherein Jacob did walk. The Lord has appointed,
that the Son which curses the Father should die the death. Although the Parent
owe not so much respect, reverence, and gratitude to the child as on the other
side, yet sure he does owe as much love (and this cursing contradicts love,
because to love is to wish well, and to curse, is to wish ill) therefore God
will punish him severely also, that curses his children: I do not mean, him
that in Gods name does pronounce a curse against them, but him that in his fury
does make some ill wish against them.

O how unnatural is that man, who does worse than ever it was heard that any
bruit beast has done yet! that is, in a rage teareth his own children in
pieces. If it be a proof of an unsanctified man, that His mouth is full of
cursing and bitterness; then sure he is extremely unsanctified, that curses
his own children; for that mouth is full of cursing to the very brim, that
will dash over against the fruit of ones own body. But you that have not yet
cast off all, so much as likeness to Christianity, I pray you learn of so
holy a man; Bless your children in your kind, as he did in his: live not in
so wicked courses, as may curse your seed and root them out to destruction. If
you desire that God should grant prosperity to your offspring, walk in the
ways of his Commandments.

Interest your selves into his promises, by being upright and merciful, and
following every good way.

But I proceed to let you see what Jacob did to some of his children in
particular.

First, Simeon and Levi that had committed a great murder, 18. He reproved
Simeon and Levi for their murder. Genesis 34.30.
he reproved them, although indeed I think with too much lenity, sayin, Ye
have troubled me, etc. In which words he aggravates the fault from the
mischief it was like to bring upon himself, not mentioning the sinfulness
against God, perhaps because he saw their temper to be such, that they would
little regard the sin, but would be somewhat moved with the danger; but on his
deathbed he is justly severe, saying, Cursed be their rage, for it was fierce;
and their fury, Genesis 49.7.
for it was cruel: as in the former verse he had said, O my soul, come not
thou into their secret; therefore also does he disinherite them, saying, I will
divide them, etc.

They shall be but a poor and despised Tribe, and not inherit an entire
portion.

And Reuben for his incest.
So likewise for Reuben, who had defiled his bed; we read of nothing he said to
him before, yet on his deathbed he deprives and disinherites him for it, Genesis
49.3, 4.
Thou shall not excel; meaning, shall not have the double portion, and
pre-eminence that belongs to the firstborn, because thou wentest up to thy
Fathers bed. Do you not think that it did put Simeon, Levi, and Reuben, the
three eldest sons unto sorrow and shame? when they heard these words from their
now dying Fathers mouth; you have been incestuously lewd Reuben, therefore you
shall not be mine heir; and you Simeon and Levi were furiously revengefull,
therefore neither shall the blessing be yours.

All Parents must learn to admonish and reprove their children for their
faults, and to chastise them also, and show their dislike of their faults,
though for some necessary circumstances we be not bound to follow Jacob, yet
for the matter of the duty we must follow him.

If our children give themselves to sinful courses, we must call them to us,
chide them, show our displeasure against them, diminish the testimonies of our
love, which else we should show, and by that means help forward their
repentance so much as may be.

Especially, when a man lies on his deathbed, he should not forget then to
leave some such words sticking in his childrens minds, as may cause them more
seriously to be humbled, that if they have not yet been duly sorrowful, they
may then begin to be humbled at the consideration of a Parents dying words; if
they have, yet they may make their humiliation more deep and piercing.

He greatly loved Joseph and Benjamin, and why.
But for Joseph and Benjamin, he loved them both exceedingly more than any of
their brethren: Partly, because they were the sons of his best beloved wife;
partly because they were his youngest children, dillings as we call them; and
chiefly, because they were the best of his children, at least, Joseph was, and
for Benjamin he was the least evil, if he did not show any great virtue. What
affection grew toward these, in those two former respects, is but a thing
natural. It is natural to love the youngest, because when they be young, no
expectation of more is left; and because the elder being grown up, have not so
much present occasion of being still in hand, and of receiving of those kind
of testimonies of love, and because the youngest being least able to help
themselves, do call the Parents heart more toward them. It is also natural
to love the children of them very well, whose own selves one has so loved.

If therefore one do follow nature in these particulars, he is not to be
blamed. Only this you must observe, that Jacobs love to Rachels children made
him not neglect Leahs quite, or be careless of doing for them what became him
to do.

Take heed you Parents that have had, or may have more wives successively,
though not together, that the present wife (who if her ill carriage hinder not,
must needs be best beloved, because she is present to receive love, and to
requite it) I say, that the present wife make you not neglect or wrong the dead
wives children; If it do, God may cross you in the children of the living.
God has expressly taken order for this case, and given this Commandment in the
Law, If a man have two wives, one beloved, the other hated; that is, Deuteronomy.
21.15, 16, 17.
comparatively hated, less loved, and children by them both; he shall not give
the birth right from the son of the less loved, if he be first borne, to the
son of the more loved, but shall acknowledge him for the heir, which is so,
though his mother find less favor in his eyes.

It is a great fault, and shows a man is led by passion, not by reason, when
he suffers his affections to be misguided by such respects, as in true
judgment should not overruled them. But to love the child the better for the
mothers sake, is no way unwarrantable, so that it be not with such an excessive
love as produces injury or neglect against the rest: Only one thing common now
amongst us, I must not let pass without a kind of wondering how it should come
to pass that many with us hate the Mother, yet dote of the child, or hate the
Father, yet be fond of the Son.

Surely either the bad carriage of the Parent quenches affection, or else to
loath the root, and love the fruit, is a thing no way conformable to right
reason.

But Jacob is much to be commended for that be loved Joseph most for his
goodness; He was his best son, and he amongst all that were come to any
growth, did show forth the fear of God early. That should rule the love of
Parents to their children most of all, where they see most holiness and fear
of God, there should they bear most affection.

For as any thing is most lovely, so with due reservation of other respects,
most love should be showed: as if I have five children, all being children,
and one having most grace, should be most loved, because grace makes most
lovely, seeing it proves a man to be loved of God, therefore must that child
be loved more than any of the rest, and so in other like respects; The most
gracious kinsman, the most gracious neighbor, the most gracious poor man.

They therefore are even rotten in naughtiness, that love the most godly
children least, yea, that hate such; and they are but weak in goodness sure,
whose loves are drawn more by base attractives, than by grace.

Surely, the liker we be to God in our love and hatred, the better we be, and
the more unlike the worse.

Therefore Jacob gave the double portion of Land to Joseph's stock, which was
one of the dignities attending the first borne; and the pre-eminence of
government he gave to Judah, because he knew that Christ, the Ruler of the
Church was to come of him, and so was led by due reason in both his bequests.

And of Jacobs virtues to his Domestics you have heard: now how he is to
strangers.

18. He courteously saluteth men of his own profession. Genesis 29.4.
We have but two passages of his carriage that way, which come to my mind;
First, those that he met withal at Padan Aram when he came thither; They were
Shepherds, men of his own profession, and he courteously saluteth them, and
carries himself with a kind of familiarnesse toward them, for he calls
them brethren, demands where they dwell, enquires of them about his Uncles
welfare, and gives them husbandly counsel about their cattle: and so should
every man stand disposed to men, as they be men, though dwelling many miles
distant from him, he should show himself amiable, meek, loving, ready to
salute them with good words, and titles, and to speak lovingly to them, to
give them good advice, and to do any other good office, as occasion may offer
it self. We are commanded to Show all meekness to all men, and to Keep peace
with all men, and besides brotherly love, To be charitable to all, and to
account a stranger a neighbor, in loving him as our selves. For God has made
all mankind of one blood, and knit them together in diverse common bands. All
be of one kind, all of one Parent, matter, form, all redeemed with one blood,
wherefore all must be loved, and kindly dealt with.

They therefore who are churlish, sour, crabbed to strangers, and can scarce
speak to them in any courteous accent, yea, that are apt if they meet with
such, to give them flouts and taunts, rather than any good words, and to offer
them injury, rather than to help them with any good advice, are worthy to be
called Swine, rather than Men. For even beasts themselves show some respect
unto them of the same kind, more than those of another, unless it be some
most fierce beasts, and when occasion of quarrel falls out betwixt them.

And let me now commend the virtue of humanity unto you, that is, of being
ready to show love to man, as he is man, and because he is a man, one made
after Gods own image, and proceeding out of the same common root. We all met
in Adams loins, and in Noah's; let us therefore do good even to strangers.
This good will which is communicated to such, savours least of self-love, and
of self-respect, and is therefore the more to be commended. It tends to the
uniting of the common body of the world together, and to make all mankind
happy.

And brethren, are not all (as they are men) equally dear to God? why
therefore should not all be in some measure dear to each other, I mean
equally dear in respect of the common work of Creation.

But Jacob here showed specially love to Rachel, for he salutes her; 19. He
showed special love to Rachel his kinswoman.
and takes pains to water her Sheep. Surely a near kinswoman may challenge
and must have a larger portion of love than a mere stranger, and he that is
not somewhat moved by the title of Uncle, Cousin, and so forth, will scarce be
moved by that of a man: they be therefore in some degree destitute of natural
affection, who are led nothing by kindred, unless there be some riches found
with a kinsman, by which he may do them some credit or advantage.

Let none of you be so, but show due respect to a kinsman or kinswoman, rich or
poor; for may not thou need their kindness hereafter, as they thine for the
present?

And so much for Jacobs virtues to these strangers.

Now to Pharaoh he was a stranger too, but he was a King, and a King that had
advanced his son Joseph: 20. He thanked Pharaoh for his kindness showed to
Joseph.
Wherefore coming and going he blessed him, that is, thanked him for his
extraordinary kindness to Joseph, and all his for Joseph's sake, praying God to
bless him for it.

So he was a thankful man, and ready to give thanks for a benefit. So must we
be to all that have pleasured us, though they be far less persons, and have
pleasured us in far lesser things. And thus of Jacobs virtues.

Now of his faults, which are neither many nor great, His faults.
but some they were, as there was never any man (except our Lord Jesus Christ)
in whom some sin was not found:

First then, he was somewhat faulty toward God, 1. He was a little forgetful
of his Vow made to God. Genesis 35.1.
in that he did show himself a little forgetful of his Vow made to God in his
trouble, and deferred the performance of it somewhat too long, even till the
Lord did force him unto it by a sore chastisement, and that chastisement would
not serve to revive his memory, till in a Vision the Lord spoke unto him, and
wished him to go to Bethel, and there to rear an Altar unto him, that had
appeared to him when he fled from the face of his brother. It was twenty
years space betwixt the Vow, and Jacobs return, so that it may seem that
Jacob had well near forgotten the Vow. A good man may grow forgetful of a Vow
in twenty years, and indeed omissions through forgetfulness and commissions
through inconsiderateness, are not unwonted in good men. I pray you look that
none of you offend through the same example of forgetfulness; indeed there are
greater faults, but a good man must show his uprightness by forsaking all
faults, great as well as small, and small as well as great.

Now let me put you in mind of your former forgetfulness: Is there none of
you that has formerly bound himself to God by a Vow, and has either deferred
wittingly, or put off through forgetfulness the accomplishment of it? If so,
let him now be induced to remember himself, and to make all convenient have to
make good his Vow, for fear the Lord send some heavy cross upon him, and
waken his conscience by terrors. Jacob should have considered his promise to
God so soon as the Lord had brought him safely home to his Fathers house, but
it seems he deferred it, for that was the time prescribed in his Vow.

I pray you do as Jacob should have done, not as he did, in a thing wherein it
is evident that he did amiss, and call to mind often the words of Solomon,
Eccles. 5.3.
When thou vowest a Vow unto the Lord, defer not to pay it, for he has no
pleasure in fools; pay what thou owe: and before him Moses in the Law says,
Deuteronomy. 23.22.
Be not slack to perform thy Vows. If you have tied your souls in an oath to
God, defer not from day today, be not forgetful.

It is a great carelessness to forget a great bond, and to let the payment be
put off from time to time; yet if any man have committed such a sin, he must
not be discouraged: the sin is not to be unduly extenuated, nor yet aggravated
above measure. It is such a fault as calls for unfeigned repentance, and that
done, shall be pardoned; yea, the most wilful breach of a Vow is pardonable
to the penitent.

But other faults he is to be blamed for in respect of his Parents:

Genesis 27. tot. 2. He abused his old Father with lies and dissembling. Genesis
27.12.
First, he abused his old Father with lies and dissembling; the lie it self and
dissimulation we meddle not with in it self, but that he bare so little
respect unto aged Isaac, as to go about to mock him with tricks and tales.
Indeed before his doing of it his conscience told him, that this was a sin, and
yet he was induced by his Mother to do it. So he sinned in this against his
conscience.

Have any of you done the like offense, but in a worse manner, and to a worse
end toward your Fathers, to hide your faults, or to wrest money from them to
serve the turn of your inordinate lusts, flapped them in the mouth, as our
proverb is, with leasings, and abased the weakness of their senses, memory or
discretion, with cheating tricks. This is a villainy, God punished it severely
in Jacob, though he did it at his Mothers instigation, and that to keep his
Father from giving away the blessing. How much more must God punish in you,
that perhaps have done it oftener, and that without any such motive, and to far
worse purposes?

Come, as you have sinned with Jacob, repent with him, for though the Scripture
does not rehearse his repentance in particular, yet because he is commended for
faith, we are sure that he could not but repent for so known a sin, and so I
beseech you do you all that are guilty, and you also shall be pardoned.

And now do not embolden your selves to sin any of you by the abuse of his
example, for you see into how great misery this fault cast him; but rather
learn by him to shun that which cost him so dear. Jacob had not a former
example to terrify him, as you have his; Jacob had not the Scripture (as you
have) to terrify him: Let our hearts resolve to hate a sin, and strive against
it the more, because in others we may see our aptness to it. And let us beware
that we pass not overhasty censures upon them that have so offended, yea,
though they have herein neglected the checks of their own consciences: We must
not judge any man as an hypocrite, for any fault that is common to him, with
Jacob.

Further, Jacob offended in regard of his mother, Genesis 27. tot. 3. He obeyed
his mother against Gods Commandment.
with an excess of obedience, for he was ruled by her against Gods
Commandment; she bade him dissemble and lie, and by her fair words and
persuasions he was drawn to commit that great sin of lying. It is an easy
matter for Inferiors to obey their Governors carnally, not in the Lord, not
with reservation of their duty to God, but a little too unlimitedly, which is a
fault that must needs be very offensive to God.

But take heed of this sin I beseech you, it is a preferring of man before God,
and an act that does exceeding highly dishonor God; now strive to work in
your hearts such an high esteem of God, that you may be resolute not to sin
against him for the sake of any man, though never so much your Superior,
though never so much beloved.

But if you have done otherwise, be not disheartened, but return unto God with
confessions and humble petitions, renewing your former purposes, and you shall
be pardoned. For the Lord is at this time as abundant in mercy to all that call
upon him, as formerly he was: Neither let any man suffer himself to
entertain too hard a conceit against another whom he shall see to have been
either over-intreated, or by threatenings over-borne, to do some evil thing
at a Superiors motion; but consider thine own weakness, and remember, that
even Jacob did so too, and that when he was now past a child, for he was at
least sixty years when he did this, so that no part of the blame can fall on
the weakness of youth or childhood.

But in respect of his children some faults he was guilty of.

First, he did excessively love Joseph, Genesis 37.3. 4. He loved Joseph
excessively.
and indiscreetly manifest his love unto him, so that his brethren discerning
it, were enviously disposed to him, and procured him much misery.

This is a weakness of Parents, not alone to overlove some child above the
rest, but also to show it too apparently, to the breeding of envy in the hearts
of the rest, and sometimes pride and self-conceit in him that finds himself
over-loved, and so does mischief both ways.

Be instructed you Parents to moderate your affections to your children, and to
each child, and to moderate the demonstrations of your affections; let them
not be too vehement, too frequent, too fondling.

I know it is in vain to give this diriction to Parents, for they will not see
out of the blindness that love works, what is too vehement love, and what be
too vehement expressions of it, and rules to discern it can hardly be given.
For those of not sparing them in any sin, and the like, do discover rather the
unsanctity of love in other respects, than the excess. It is alone a fleshly,
not a spiritual love, when it will suffer them to sin, but it may be
excessive, though it be not extremely carnal. Pray to God to discover it to
you, and to reform it in you; It is better to love too much than too little,
But it is better to show love too little, than to show it too much, especially
if it be with partiality.

And Benjamin also.

Genesis 42.38.


Again, Jacob was somewhat tied toward Benjamin, and would not suffer him to
go out of his sight, for fear lest evil should betide him by the way, and
rather endured to be almost starved, than to hazard him in a journey. This was
a little too immoderate love, and fear too; but he had lost one son in a
journey, and he is to be somewhat more pitied in this fear, because of that
former loss; yet at last he suffered himself to be over-perswaded by Judah.
Indeed at first he was over-peremptory, My son shall not go down: Take heed
of these faults, To his family. 1. In general. Genesis 35.

1. How came false gods into your family.

Genesis 43.6. and 42.36.


take heed of being so fond and over-fearefull of your children, so that you
cannot suffer them to take necessary journies lest they may miscarry: and be
not over-resolute in any thing, this I will not do, that I will not do; God
may have purposed that that shall be done which thou resolvest shall not; be
not over-setled in a purpose about things of this nature, for against sinful
deeds a man must be resolute, and it is better to fail of keeping ones
resolution, than not to have it, and that also strong.

Jacob he was so careless a Governor, that they might commit this great fault
without his knowledge.
Further, Jacob was a little too wayward with his sons, when he blamed them
for telling the Ruler of Egypt, that he had yet another son: we must beware of
growing pettish, because we be crossed in any thing so as to accuse the
faultlesse, but in such case rather look up to Gods hand, and condemn not
those that are guiltless, saying, it was long of you, and why did you so? when
the thing followed alone accidentally, and as we call it, by mere chance; so
that no foresight could discern or prevent what would follow.

2. He hated Leah, i. e. comparatively, yet she was the honester, and more
meek, and virtuous wife.
But Jacob over-lamented Joseph too, and so becomes an example of excessivenesse
of grief, which likely will attend upon excessive love. One affection put out
of tune, brings another into the same distemper: O take heed of suffering this
passion of over-grieving at a childs death, though sudden and violent, or any
other cross to prevail over you so, that you shall even set your selves to
grieve, and refuse to take heart to your selves, and use your own reason to
comfort your selves.

The three last things concerning Jacob, are his benefits, crosses, and death.

3. His benefits.
Now we must speak of the great benefits which God gave to Jacob, which are of
two sorts.

1. Spiritual.
First, Spiritual. Secondly, Temporal.

The spiritual benefits are of two sorts.

1. The chief and principal.

2. Those that followed hereupon.

The chief spiritual blessing was this, 1. He was a godly man.
that he made him a godly man, giving him true faith, so that he did unfainedly
believe in God, and was a right godly and religious man. For it is noted of
him, that he believed in God, and was an heir with Abraham of the same
promises, both concerning the land of Canaan, as a Type, and heaven it self,
the thing figured by the land of Canaan; So Jacob was a true servant of God,
and member of Christ, and inheritour of heaven, and from him the Church is many
times called by the name of Jacob and Israel. And this is the greatest good
that can be found in this life, in comparison of which, all other benefits are
of no value, and without which, other things are not sufficient to make a man
happy, though he should possess them in never so great abundance; for what
will it advantage a man to win the whole world, and lose his own soul.

Now therefore we must learn most earnestly to seek this benefit which God is
ready to give to us, as well as to him. For Jacob was not godly by nature, nor
by any power of his own, but by the free grace of God, and the mighty and
saving work of his own blessed Spirit, which Spirit he has promised to all
that ask, even as undoubtedly as any tender hearted Father will give food unto
his hungry child that shall crave it at his hands.

Let no man be discouraged because of the corruption and naughtiness of his
nature, for the same bad and depraved nature was found in Jacob that in
himself, seeing Jacob also was a son of Adam, by corrupt nature a child of
wrath, and heir of death as well as any other; but God did circumcise his
heart as well as his flesh, and made him partaker of the divine nature, by
which he prevailed against the corruptions that are in the world through lust.
Wherefore let each of us take notice of his own wickedness, and inability to
make himself good, and of his manifold sins, and inability to procure pardon
of them to himself; and let him earnestly call upon God to work true
repentance, and unfeigned faith in him, and the Lord will graciously work these
things in him, as well as in Jacob, and will pardon his sins, and sanctify his
soul, and make him an inheritour of his heavenly Kingdom.

I beseech you therefore, bury not your selves in the world, and in the study
of earthly things, but Seek first the Kingdom of God, and his righteousness,
and labor to come into the state of grace by meditating on the Gospel, seeing
your misery in your selves, and endeavoring to turn unto the Lord.

For in the Church no man is left destitute of grace, but through his own
default in neglecting the great salvation that is there offered unto him.

Again, those to whom the Lord has pleased to show the same goodness,
working in them true faith, inabling them to believe in his mercy through
Christ, and to walk in his ways with truth and uprightness of heart, must
learn to show themselves exceeding thankful to God for this mercy, and strive
to take comfort in it, and to walk worthy of it. Bless God with constant and
daily blessings, that has blessed thee with, spiritual blessings in Christ,
and rejoice in the riches of that inheritance to which thou are interessed and
shall possess, whatsoever wants, afflictions, crosses thou may be exercised
withal; yet be glad in the Lord, and count thy self an happy man, because the
Lord has granted thee that which may abundantly satisfy thy soul in the want
of all outward things, and support thee in all afflictions and miseries, and
countervaile, and more then overweigh all manner of calamities. Let not the
rich man rejoice in his riches, nor the wise man in his wisdom, nor the strong
man in his strength, nor any man in any terrene thing he has, but Let him that
rejoices, rejoice in this, that he knows me says the Lord. It is our duty
to raise up our hearts so, that no earthly adversity may cool or damp our
prayers, and dismay our hearts, and fill us with anguish and grief, and that no
outward benefits may glut and satt our hearts, and turn us away from taking
comfort in this true and everlasting mercy.

God has made us his own, given us faith, sanctified us by his Spirit, united
us to his Son, and caused us to see, believe, and embrace his promises. What
though we want wealth, honor, pleasure, and these sensual benefits? He has
given us Wheat. What though he feed us not with husks? He has given us Gold.
What though he lade us not with dirt? He has given us himself, and his Son.
What though he give us not the vanities of this life? It is a sin for a godly
man to be out of heart and comfortless, because of any other want, and any
other cross. If God have granted you this chief benefit, glory in it, and
think that you have gotten a good portion, though your estate in the world be
never so low and poor; only be sure that your faith be true, by causing you
to abound in those fruits of it which we showed you before, that it brought
forth in Jacob.

Now I come to some less principal mercies flowing from this.

2. He had the privilege of the firstborn.
First, he gave him the privilege of the firstborn, that Christ should come
of him, and that the visible Church should continue in his posterity: That part
of the dignity of the primogeniture, to have Christ the blessed seed come of
him, cannot be bestowed upon any of us: neither that, to have a great Nation
flow from our loins: that shall be also the Church of God, and a Nation, in
which true religion and piety shall be continued. But to have our children
godly, and become members of the Church, that we must earnestly desire and
seek for, and that we may hope for and attain, if we pray earnestly for it,
and make our children as good as we can, by bringing them up in the true
knowledge and worshipping of God.

3. He had the blessing given him.
Further, Jacob had the blessing given him;

First, by his Fathers mistake, when he took him for his eldest son Esau, to
whom he intended the blessing; then after by his Fathers witting and deliberate
pronouncing it upon him, by the direction of Gods Spirit.

The former you may see pronounced upon him in Genesis, Genesis 27.28, 29. and
29.34.
where he says; God give thee of the dew of heaven, and after. God Almighty
bless thee, and give thee the blessing of Abraham. This blessing is the
bestowing upon him all temporal benefits, so far as they are subordinate to
his spiritual: and then spiritual benefits, viz. all sorts of graces by which
he may be happily guided to the possession of life eternal.

This is an excellent mercy, to be freed from the curse of the Law, and to be
made partaker of the blessing of Abraham; even that God shall love one, take
care of him, and prosper him in all things he takes in hand, and conduct him
safe to heaven at the length: Seek this blessing of God; If you fear God and
walk in his ways, he will bless you, if you faithfully believe in Christ,
and rest upon him alone, you shall be blessed, for Christ has freed us from
the curse, and prepared the blessing for us, if we be under the works of the
Law, we are under the curse, but if we be of the faith of Abraham, we shall be
blessed with faithful Abraham, as S. Paul tells us. Gal 3.9, 10.
Labor to believe, labor to go out of your selves, and to stay alone upon
the righteousness of Christ by faith made yours, and then you shall inherit
the blessing, and then you shall inherit the blessing, and then you shall
receive the promise of the Spirit through faith, then God will keep his
Covenant of grace with you, pardon your sins, give you his Spirit, and make all
work together for good. Through faith and patience you must inherit the
promises; and the blessing which Esau was excluded from, (though he would have
inherited it,) because he sought it not of God, but of Isaac his Father.

And you that have right unto Gods blessing, because you are faithful, take
comfort in it, and be thankful for it. Gods blessing is a rich thing, it is
more than all honors, it is fruitful of all comforts; he that is blessed of
God shall want no good thing, shall have earth and heaven, and all things that
his heart can desire.

If any say, but we see that such men meet with evil enough in the world?

The answer is, that if we look with the eye of flesh alone, we think that
we see it so, but we think falsely; for if we would look with the eye of
faith, we should see it otherwise, for the blessing of God causes crosses to
work for our spiritual good, for our increase of holiness and happiness,
and it is the efficacy of Gods blessing, that it turns evil things unto good
for them to whom it is granted: as it is the efficacy of Gods curse, that it
turns all good things to hurt in them that lie under it. You may therefore be
assured you are under the blessing, whereof you may be assured, if by a firm
faith you cleave unto God.

4. God did often appear to Jacob, to confirm and establish his faith. Genesis
28.13, 14
But further, the Lord did often appear to Jacob to confirm and establish his
faith, and to comfort his soul, and fill him full of spiritual joy and peace.

Jacobs heart in this exigent; that God himself took care of him, and came to
him in such an excellent vision to comfort him.

Labans house, and received very hard measure from Laban about his wages, and
gave him gracious promises to sustain his drooping spirit, bidding him look
on the Rams leaping on the cattle ring streaked, Genesis 31.31.
and bade him return home to his Fathers house, promising him that he would be
with him: no doubt but though the grumbling of Laban, and the discurteous
carriage of his sons, as well as himself, did make the soul of Jacob sad
and pensive, yet the visions of God cleared up his sad countenance, and
enlivened his drooping spirit again, and made him able to take comfort,
notwithstanding all those injuries.

Laban was departed from him, Genesis 32.1.
causing an whole host and army of Angels to attend him, making him know that
he should be safe enough in his Church, how weakly soever he seemed to go
provided: for these two hosts of immortal spirits would serve him against any
rage of man.

Esau met him, Genesis 32.24.
after he was informed of his coming, and though he wrastled with him, to try
his faith, yet at last he blessed him, and called him Israel, and told him,
that He had power with God as a Prince, and with man too, and should prevail:
How did this chase away all his fears, and fill his soul with confidence and
joy?

Israel to him, Genesis 35.9.
and promised to multiply him, and give the land of Canaan to his seed after
him. This also was a great consolation to him, and confirmed him against the
fears he conceived, lest the men of the Country might be insenced against him
for the wickedness of his sons.

Yet a sixth time God appeared unto him when he was about to go down to
Egypt at his son Joseph's sending for him, Genesis 46.1.
and told him he was his God, bid him not fear, told him he would make him a
great Nation, etc. as you may there read, which was a most joyful and
comfortable thing unto the old man's soul.

Here now is a great favor, which God affoorded to this good man, he appeared
to him oftener than ever he had done to any of his Forefathers, that ever we
read of.

If any say, what is that to us, to whom God uses not now to appear in
dreams and visions, and like kinds of apparitions?

I answer. It is much to us, and we must consider whether God vouchsafe to
appear to us also. For now he appears more spiritually, but not less
comfortably to his servants; when we come to his Word and find him there, in
his Ordinances, confirming our faith, strengthening our souls; now he
appears to us. So when we come to his Sacrament, and by it feel an increase
of faith, and in ward joys, now we see God. So in meditations, and
soliloquies. O labor to carry your selves so, that you may see God in his
Sanctuary, as David says in the Psalm, and that your hearts may be filled
with spiritual joy. These spiritual visions are the comfortablest things in
the world, when we labor to walk humbly with God, then will he come to us,
and show himself to us, as our Lord promises, and suppe with us, even make us
to feel his favor in sensible manner.

And if God do appear to us so, you are to esteem highly of his favor, and
to study to requite his mercy by a more careful endeavor to walk holily
before, and with him.

Lastly, a great spiritual blessing it was, 5. God heard his prayers.
that God heard his prayers, when he prayed to him in his several necessities,
and that he was able to prevail with God, as you have heard before that he
did. That a poor mean worm should have access unto the Throne of grace with
confidence, and should no sooner ask any thing of God, but that the Lord opens
his ear and grants it; what a singular privilege is it, and this is a mercy
promised to all Saints. For so says our Savior, If my mords abide in you, and
you abide in me, John 15.17.
ask what you will and you shall have it. And again, S. John tells us, 1
John 5.14.
This is our confidence, that whatsoever we ask according to his will, he
hears us: Therefore let us keep our interest into this mercy, by not having
respect to sin in our hearts, and by constant endeavor to walk holily
before the Lord. And if we have found, and do find God favorable to us in
this kind, so that we lose not our prayers which we make unto him, let us
then comfort our selves in this benefit, and be careful to yield as obedient
an ear to his word, as he does yield a patient ear to our supplications.

And now of Jacobs temporal benefits.

First, he was blessed with a large estate in the world, 2. His temporal
benefits. 1. He had a large estate.
according to his profession, being a Shepherd, his flocks did thrive, he had
cattle and servants in abundance. God blessed him in Labans house, and made
all the stronger cattle to bring forth just such kind of young as Laban had
consented to give him for his wages, so that he could not but see a Divine
hand, taking Labans goods, Genesis 31.9.
and giving them to him, as himself notes.

Riches are do great matter, but when God gives them as tokens of his love and
tender respect, they are desirable. Let those that enjoy them, be sure that
they come to them from God as fruits of his goodness, or else the worst men
may be wealthier than the best. And let those that are upright with Jacob,
learn to trust God with their estate, and to know that what shall be good for
them, shall be seasonably provided for them.

2. God delivered him out of all adversity. Genesis 48.16. Vouchsafed him three
great deliverances.

1. From Esau.


Secondly, God delivered him out of all adversity, as himself says on his
deathbed; The Angel that redeemed me from all evil.

His three greatest dangers were first from Esau, both when he went unto Padan
Aram, and when he returned; at the former time God brought him safe to Padan,
and so restrained the mind of Esau, that then he put off the thought of
killing him, to his Fathers death; and at the later time God so melted him,
that he showed himself exceeding kind, and fell upon his neck and kissed
him, instead of killing him, which he had intended; and therefore he tells
Esau, that he had seen his face as the face of GOD.

2. Laban. Genesis 33.10.
Laban pursued him too with a purpose to strip him of all, and to send him
empty home, and he had power in his hand to do it, as himself says; Genesis
31.42.
but God appeared to him, and rebuked him, that he durst not handle him amiss.

3. The Inhabitants of the Country. Genesis 35.5.
The Inhabitants of the Country were much insenced against him in respect of
that outrageous murder and rapine committed upon the Sichemites, and by his
Sons; in so much that Jacob feared much that they would pursue him, and cut him
off: but God cast a fear into their hearts, so that they did not offer any
violence unto him, as is noted by the Story.

These three great deliverances God vouchsafed Jacob. O let us learn to turn
to God, and to walk before him in truth, and then we shall have God ready to
help us in all our necessities, and at that time, and in those exigents to
provide for us means of escape by his providence, when our own wit and
strength fails; as we find him dealing with Jacob: What could he do against
Esau, Laban, or the Inhabitants of the Country? Let us cleave to God, that he
may be out Buckler also, and our strong Tower, and Rock of defense; and if we
have found so much favor with God, as to rescue us out of such dangers as
seemed unpreventable, let not us attribute the deliverances to any other
secondary causes, but even see God in them, ascribe them to him, and learn
thence to fear, honor, and praise him. Those deliverances are indeed
profitable, that are cords of kindness to tie us nearer to God.

He that improveth not such benefits to that end, loses the most desirable
fruit of them.

3. Jacob had a large offspring.
Further, Jacob had a large offspring of children, twelve sons and one
daughter, this is a favor to give a man store of children; of these sons all
had wealth enough, Joseph was very religious in his youth, and Benjamin civil
and orderly at least, and at the end all of them turned home and became godly
men. O happiness, to have so many children, some good betime, all holy at
last! all prosperous in outward things, and one much advanced.

Another mercy of God, 4. Joseph maintained him and his in the famine.
was the providing of Joseph as a man before to maintain him and his family in
Egypt, and bringing him to see Joseph, and enjoy his preferment for seventeen
years together, where he lived in as great a fullness of prosperity, and
concluded his days as happily as ever man did, living in Joseph's bosom as it
were, seeing all his children godly and prosperous, and feeling no considerable
adversity, having Joseph's oath also to bury him in Canaan. This is a singular
favor of God, to make ones old age prosperous, and to cause his eyes to see so
much happiness as he can wish, when now he is ready to leave the world. Mark
the righteous man in the Psalm, it is said, The end of that man is peace.
Study righteousness, that you may inherit this blessing, and never threaten
your selves how miserable you shall be hereafter: God can provide ways that
you know not, to make you safe and comfortable beyond your thoughts. O be
faithful with him, and trust in him, and fear nothing. So much for Jacobs
life.

Now for his death.

It was a most seasonable death, after a large time of life, His death was
seasonable, peaceable, religious, and comfortable.
a most peaceable death in the midst of his Sons, a most religious death,
blessing them, and confirming their faith with his last words; a most
comfortable death, so soon as he had ended his blessing, he pulled up his legs
and gave up the Ghost; and then he had also an honorable embalming and
burial, as at large is set down in the Story. Who would not wish such a death?

And yet more, after death he has an honorable name on earth, After death he
had an honorable name.
and lives in eternal glory in heaven.

Now let us imitate Jacobs virtues, and labor to be upright, and then
notwithstanding many sins, we shall have at last eternal happiness, and so
much happiness in this world also as is needful for us.

Now we will show you what calamities he suffered, 4. His crosses.
for the people of God must look to suffer much tribulation in this world, as
it is foretold them, both because their own need requires it, to make, and
keep them good, and cause them to grow in goodness; as also because the Lord
sees it fit thus to magnify his power, justice, wisdom, and goodness, in
sustaining and delivering them. His chastisements then were these.

First, that his Father did not love him so well as his brother, 1. His Father
loved him not so well as his brother.
but did manifestly prefer hunting Esau before him in his affections, and
afforded him no great signs of love; but this was somewhat mitigaed, because
God inclined his mothers heart to him, who at least in this matter was better
than her husband.

Genesis 27.25, 26.
Now if it be the lot of any child to be neglected of his Parents, and to have
irreligious brethren preferred before him, let him bear it patiently, it was
Jacobs lot, and let him not be discouraged from good ways, for at last God may
change his Parents hearts unto him. It could not but grieve Jacob, that his
Father should so disaffect him, as to give away the blessing from him. But let
children to whom it befalls, bear the cross quietly, for it is easy with
God to make all end well.

2. His brother Esau hated him, and resolved to kill him.
Another cross that befell him in his Fathers house, was this, his brother Esau
was bitter against him, and resolved to kill him. A miserable calamity to be
hated of his own brother, and to have his own brother, yea a twin, borne at
the same time, to hate him so sharply, as to intend his death. You must look
for such a cross, and bear it if it come, and bless God if he have pleased
to keep you from suffering it; so that your brothers and kindred agree well
with you, and rather show you kindness.

3. He fled in to Padan Aram. Genesis 28. fin.
A third cross, was his flight into Padan Aram, and being benighted in the way,
in a solitary and desert place all alone, which yet was mitigated by the
goodness of God appearing to him in a dream. To be driven out of one
Country, and forced to hard and solitary travel, and to meet with such kind
of accidents, as benighting, and the like, be calamities; we must even prepare
for them, that we may bear them without discouragement, as seeing God in them,
and considering that he is with us, when we want other company.

4. Laban his Father in Law deceived him in his wife. Genesis 29.
Now in Labans house he met with great crosses.

1. His Father deceived him in his wife, substituting Leah in Rachels stead,
then which, how could a man more beguile another, for by that means he was
compelled to add seven years service more.

2. In his wages
Again, he sought to deceive him in his wages, and changed it many times, being
angry that God gave him so large and plentiful a recompense; then he grumbled
at him, and looked discurteously upon him, as also did his sons.

3. Pursued him with an intention to take all from him.
And last of all he pursued him with an intention to take all from him, and
there falsely accuses him of stealing his gods. See here from his Father in
Law, and Uncle, most unjust and discurteous usage: you that have found at least
with your nearest friends just and kind dealing, acknowledge Gods goodness in
it. The contrary would taste very sour, let this drive you to most hearty and
humble thanksgiving. It should be confessed a very great mercy to escape very
great crosses; and if you pehaps meet with the same crosses, be quiet, for did
not Jacob bear them, and why not you? We must not think, never man was so
used as I am, and by that counterfeit aggravation flatter our selves in our
impatiency, and make our selves believe we have cause to be disturbed; but
rather inform our selves of that which fell to other of Gods Saints, and so
bring our passions to a reasonable calmnesse.

But in his journey he was like to fall into a great danger, 5. Esau came
against him with an army intending to kill him. Genesis 35.22. and Chap. 34.
for his brother Esau came against him with four hundred soldiers, intending
to kill him, and that affrighted him exceeding much; but you see what end God
made. Learn to stand always ready for death, and yet always confident in
God, though you see not how to escape the same; but now see his crosses in his
children.

First, Reuben deflowred his Concubine; 6. He was crossed in his children.
Dinah his daughter was deflowred; His sons used fraud and deceit to cousen
the Sichemites, and then most barbarous cruelty in killing all the men, and
spoiling the women, children, and goods, and when he reproved them for it, they
made him a surly answer. Genesis 35.16.
Shall they abuse our sister as a Whore? Then Rachel dyed in childbed, or
travel; then Joseph was sold into Egypt, but as he thought, slain, even
Joseph his most beloved and towardly son. After Judah went from him, and his
two sons were naught, and himself defiled his daughter in Law, and had two
sons by her.

A great grief and disgrace to Jacob; 7. He lived in a grievous famine for two
years.
Then Simeon was detained in Egypt, and Benjamin must needs travel down, to
the great fear and doubt of the old man: and this was the last of his crosses;
save that he lived in a grievous famine for two years, till he came down to
Egypt.

So have I briefly run over Jacobs miseries, but they lay hard and heavy upon
him. Of all which you must make these uses.

First, be thankful for escaping the like, prepare for them hereafter, bear
those that do come, patiently. And take heed of provoking God, for he is not a
fond Father, but Will scourge every son whom he receives.

For the first, you have heard how many miseries this godly man was exercised
withal: Let me propound one question unto you. Think you that your selves
have more wit than he had, or more goodness, or more of both? I presume I may
make answer for you, that you will not be so over conceited of your selves, as
to affirm either of these things.

Now if you be neither wiser, nor godlier than he; how comes it that you have
so long lived in the world, and yet have not met with diverse of those crosses
that followed him? No, nor any in all your lives so pinching or grievous. Sure
if it be not to be attributed to your understanding, and piety (as it is not,
if you do indeed acknowledge your selves to be not superior, or rather not
equal unto Jacob therein, who yet did meet with them) then must you ascribe
the same to the wisdom and goodness of God, that has disposed of things so
by his wakefull providence, as that such miseries have not waylaid you, and
seized upon you. Therefore you must learn to be humbly thankful to him, and
praise his holy name, acknowledge his bountifulness, graciousnesse, and
tenderness, that has spared you from such smarting strokes, as these that
fetched blood and tears as it were from good Jacob, so holy a man. If we be
preserved from crosses that other men feel, we begin to lift up our selves,
to commend and prefer our selves above them that are heavier laden, and to
flatter our selves, as if we were more loved of God than they; then our ease is
our bane, and it shows that we have not grace to make a good use of ease; but
if we confess that we have deserved as much and more, and had as little
ability to shun them, only God tendering our weakness, has used us with more
clemency, and so make this clemency an argument of praising him, and of being
more careful to please him, who would not strike us, though he had both
provocation from us, and ability in himself, this is an holy use of the
absence of the cross.

Say then, wast thou ever driven out of thine own habitation, to serve in a
strange place, and an hard master that wronged thee, and used thee
discurteously? Wast thou ever in danger to have all thy goods taken from thee
by an enraged man, stronger than thy self, and pursuing thee with a
revengefull mind? nor wast thou never in peril of thy life by a revengefull
person armed with four hundred soldiers? nor wast thou never tormented with
seeing thy sons murderers, couzeners, and robbers? nor have thou never lost a
dear child, and thought him slain by a violent death? nor did never no son
of thine commit incest with his mother in law? if not, see how favorable God
has been to thee above Jacob, and praise, love, an honor him, and make his
gentleness an argument of turning and obeying; for if thou compare thy sins
with Jacobs, there need be no doubt, but that thine have been as great as his,
and thy repentance as little. But it is our good, not our sins that God looks
to in correcting, as a Father corrects not a little child for as great a
fault, so much as he does a stronger.

Again, learn to bear the crosses thou have, with more patience and
quietness of mind, by comparing them with Jacobs crosses, which have been
more in number, and more weighty, and grievous.

Why does any of you my Brethren take the matter so heavily, that some child
of his is somewhat stubborn and ill disposed? When none of them have committed
murder, incest, rapine, and such sins as Jacobs sons did commit. Why do you
make such a stir at wrongs? When none of you were ever so pursued by any foe,
as Jacob was by his brother and Father in Law; Why do you take on so for the
ordinary and natural death of a child? seeing none of you has had such a
child torn by wild beasts, or some other like violence, as Jacob conceived
Joseph to have miscarried. Why do you complain of famine, and of want? When
none of you has suffered such a famine as compelled him to send so far as
Jacob sent to Egypt for Corn, which is thought to be not much less than two
hundred miles: We complain of ease. If our so much lamented afflictions were
laid in the balance with Jacobs, we should find them very light and trifling
businesses in comparison. Want of looking about, and observing the burdens that
are fastened unto other men's shoulders, causes us to aggravate our own so
much in our own conceits, as that by making them seem extraordinarily heavy,
we even wilfully cast our selves into excessive sorrow for them.

But again, you that are, yet at ease, and have not tasted any so bitter a cup
as Jacob did many, must be persuaded to take some pains with your own
hearts, to make your selves think that some such crosses may befall you, and
therefore to prepare for them by resolving to bear them, and praying God to
sit you for them, and sanctify them to you.

Man's self-loving mind is willing to flatter it self with good hopes, rather
then to forewarne it self with wise warnings: O I hope I shall never see my
children, my wife so naught, I shall never find such ill usage, I hope. Come
hither vain man, and either give a good reason of thine hopes, or else
confess them to be fruits of thine extreme folly, and doting self-love.

Has God ever promised thee, that no such thing should befall thee? I am sure
thou can show no such promise. Have not thou deserved as much as Jacob, to be
severely chastened of God? I am sure thou ought to say yes. Does not thy
body, soul, name, children, lie abroad in as open a Sea, and as tempestuous?
Here also thou ought to say yes, and therefore should also condemn these
silken soft hopes of thine, and say, Well, God may make me as afflicted as
Jacob, and therefore I will even expect the same, or as bad; and if they come I
will bear them all, seeing God and my ill deservings in them. Yonder is a very
towardly boy, I love him dearly: what if I should hear he were torn of
beasts? Lord if it be thy will, let it not be so; but if it be, make me to
bear it with quietness: and why should I not so stoop to thy will in every
thing; yea I will do it by thy grace. If thou say, I see many escape such
crosses.

I answer, and thou see many afflicted with them, and why may not thou be
amongst the number of those that suffer them, as well as of those that escape
them.

But lastly, take heed of making over-bold with Gods favor, as a wanton
child, that presumes he shall not be whipped, and therefore cares not almost
what wanton and evil prankes he plays. Do you not see here that the Lord of
heaven knows how to whip his own children thoroughly and to purpose? You have
not to deal with a foolishly pitiful Father, that cannot find in his heart
to hear his children cry, and see them smart and bleed. No, he can strike, he
can lay it on soundly, he can make you roar, and cry, and bleed, he can do
it; yea, and he will do it too, if he find that your conceit of his love and
gentleness brings forth no better fruit in you than this, that by presuming of
it, you are made more wicked.

Wherefore say to thy self, if such abominable fancies arise; foolish man that
I am, do I so requite the Lords kindness? Do I put his clemency to this use?
Did he not cut and wound Jacobs soul? Did he not handle him roughly? even
though we never read that he did entertain such presumptuous conceits. How
then will he deal with me, if I do so exceedingly provoke him, by so
exceedingly abusing his goodness? And so frame to condemn and blame thy
wickedness in having such motions, and pray to God to work in thine heart a
reverend awe of his Majesty, by making his justice and anger so terrible to
thee, as to make sin abominable, that would insence that wrath and justice
against thee. *

THE TWENTIETH EXAMPLE.
OF JACOBS Wives.
FRom the Story of Jacob, I proceed to his Wives and Children, and so to other
his contemporaries. Jacob had four Wives. It was not his own seeking, that his
Wives grew to such a number, for he was painful and laborious, and a chaste
man, that would very contentedly have satisfied himself with one woman. But he
was drawn into this way of Polygamy by several occasions.

Now of his Wives, the true and lawful Wife was Rachel, for her he agreed,
with her he espoused himself (as it is like, for we cannot think but that
after his Father had promised to give her to him upon seven years service, he
would acquaint her with it, and desire her good will, and unless he had
attained it, the marriage would not have proceeded, and been as it was,
solemnly celebrated) to her he bare singular affection, and her alone he
looked for.

Now for Rachel, you know whose daughter she was, viz. Labans, Rachel her birth.
the brother of Rebekkah; here Cousin-germans married without scruple; but no
marvel, for they made no question of nearer matches. A man might marry his
Fathers daughter, his sister, as Abraham did Sarah. A man might marry with two
sisters, as Jacob did Rachel and Leah. The Lord had not yet abridged the
liberty of contracting marriage, as with any more remote, so with them that were
nearest in blood and alliance. Therefore their examples must be no president
for us in this matter.

But of Rachel let us consider after her Parentage, her life and death, and in
her life: 1. Her faults. 2. Her virtues. 3. Her crosses. 4. Her benefits, and
so to her death.

1. Her faults.
First then, her faults; She was a woman of great imperfections: these are
plainly noted in her.

1. She was envious toward her sister.
First, she was envious toward her sister, as you see Genesis 30.1. It vexed her
not alone that she had no children, but that her sister had: Envy is a sin much
to be blamed, Envy is a great vice.
you may see in this Example what it is; such a vexing at another having what
I have not, as does estrange my mind, and work a degree of hatred toward the
person that has it.

The first, and most remarkable example of this vice is found in Cain, it
shows it self here again in Rachel. Let us consider what a loathsome vice it
is, that we may the better shun it. The Word of God has given us frequent
warning of it in blaming it so often, it shows how apt we are to it, and how
diligently we should oppose it, and preserve our selves from it; Mark. 7.22.
our Savior is pleased to reckon it among the evil things that come out of
the heart, and do defile the man, and gives it the name of an evil eye,
because it shows it self presently in the eye and countenance, and causes a
dejected countenance, and a vile look toward the party envied, as it is seen
in Cain and Saul. It is a passion that will not be kept in, but will bewray it
self in odd looks and casts of the eye. Romans 1.29.
S. Paul reckons it up among those sins wherewith the Gentiles were full, viz.
of Envy, murder, etc. and you see with what companions he joins it, murder,
debate, for these indeed be the fruits that follow from it, as in Saul, Cain,
and the Pharisees is evident. S. Paul also reckons it amongst the number of the
things which are fruits of the flesh, Gal. 5.21.
and which he that does, shall not inherit the kingdom of heaven, envyings,
murders, where you see likewise how he fellows it with murders, as he had done
before. In the same Epistle he forbids it, saying, Let us not be covetous of
vainglory, provoking one another, envying one another. Saint James says, that
Where, envying and strife is, there is confusion, and all manner of evil
works. It is thought to have been one of the first sins of the devil. For
what could move him to seek the overthrow of our first Parents Adam and Eve;
but together with an hatred of God from whom himself had fallen, an evil
affection toward them that stood entire in that good estate, which himself
had lost, viz. the favor of God, and true happiness? Now this vice is
injurious to God, to the party envyed, to the enviers self, and to the
societies of mankind.

First to God, to whom it will not grant the freedom of disposing his own
gifts according to his own good pleasure. Envy against him that excels us,
carries with it by way of implication at least, and sometimes expressly,
blaming, condemning, muttering against him that has granted to another what he
has denied unto me. They murmured against the householder in the parable, that
were troubled to see those of the eleventh hour to have equal wages with them
at the first.

Now what an audaciousnesse is this in the creatures, to set rules to the
Creator? and to bind him, that he shall not show himself more bountiful to
another than to ones self. Are not we discontented, if one child grudge
because another has a bigger or better thing than himself? We cannot endure
that our inferiors should set laws to us, and appoint us what to give to
others, what to them: We must know our selves to forget our selves much if we
will prescribe to God, and it is nothing else but a very prescribing to God,
when we take occasion from his bounty to repine. For if it be well done, why
are we vexed? If not, upon whom is the blame laid?

Further, it is a wrong to the party envyed, for it is to measure such measure
to him, as we would not have measured to our selves by another. Who does not
blame another for vexing at his prosperity, and for having a grudge against him
because God has done him good? Would we not that all should rather love us,
respect us more, and rejoice with us? Therefore we do injury to our neighbor,
in doing what we would not have done to our selves: The envious wrongeth
himself both because he does vex and eat out his own heart to no purpose
(for neither shall another prosper less, nor he more, because of such his
inordinate distempers) as also because he makes himself lie open to most
grievous sins of detracting, slandering and practicing all injuries, yea, and
murder at the last. He is in the high way that will lead him to many sins, yea,
to the shedding of innocent blood, that entertaineth this diabolical humor of
envy. And he wrongeth the whole society, because he is distempered at that
which makes for the common good, even the distribution of Gods gifts
differently as himself sees fit, and in that he is broody of quarrels, which
all hinder the common welfare of the places where they be. Besides, this is a
fruit of pride and uncharitableness, and must needs be hateful to God, who
loves only the humble and charitable. Envy is a vice, unto the making of which
many vices concur: Ignorance, folly, pride, uncharitableness, self-love, and
the like: It is a vice which brings forth many other vices, contention,
strife, swellings, tumults, whisperings, back-bitings, murders and all evil
deeds. Therefore let us find it out, and chase it away: You shall easily
perceive that it is a weed which grows in our corrupt nature. How soon do
children begin to show it? how does it grow stronger by continuance, increasing
in strength as the body increases? yea, how does it live in old men too, and
vex them also that should have more understanding? as experience shows.
Indeed the elder can use more craft to hide it, but many times they have no
more wisdom to subdue it than the younger.

I pray you find it out each one in himself, and fight against it, as one of
the most loathsome fruits of the flesh. And strive you to get such a measure of
humility and charity, as may not alone preserve you from this vice, but make
you rejoice with them that rejoice, and turn the prosperity of others into
matter of gladness, even then when your selves want it: Happy is he that
partakes in every man's happiness. It is in a man's power to taste some of the
sweet of every man's estate, and to heal his wounds by a medicine made of
comfortable rejoicing in their soundness. Why should we not make our selves
merry at things, rather than sad and discontented? If we were so wise and godly
as to seek and desire Gods glory as our maine end, then we should rejoice at
all those things which conduced to that end, and so do the benefits bestowed
upon our brethren, as well as those that our selves enjoy. If we could be
lovers of the common good, and desirers of the public welfare, why the
benefits of others further that, and therefore should also glad us. Mankind
was increased, the power of God in furnishing the world demonstrated by Leahs
off spring, as well as if Rachel had conceived two, and she two; be we
therefore lovers of Gods glory, and lovers of the common good, and we shall not
be envious. This vice sometimes seeks a reason to hide its unreasonablenesse,
by conceiting that another having such things hinders himself, and so it may
fall out in some cases; as when two stand in competition for the same thing:
but this is no wrong though it be a damage, and therefore should not produce
any grudge. For seeing but one can have the thing, and he has it; is it just
to be offended with him, that has done no more to my self, than I would have
done to him? even preferred himself before me: Wherefore see that you give not
place to this wicked vice, but learn so to love your neighbors as your
selves, that you may rejoice in their prosperity as in your own: But let us
every man prepare himself to meet with this fell monster of envy, that if it
encounter us, yet we may not be thrust into distempers by it. It is not in any
man's power to hinder the malicious and malignant natures of other men from
showing it self; but to be quiet, mild, and patient toward him that envies a
man, that his wisdom and charity should enable him to perform; for is it not
common to all good things, to come attended with envy? Was not Christ envied?
Was not Paul? Have not the best been? Yea, we must endure envy even from our
nearest kindred. The brother must be prepared to suffer the envy of the
brother, the sister of the sister, and must be able to hold their spirits in
such order, that they may not less love one that envies them, which yet is
hard to love those that use us ill. For by how much envy proves more
implacable than other kinds of grudges, by so much carnal reason will bid us
to be more apt unto it; but Gods Spirit frames men to a gentle carriage. Pray
God to make you of such a temper, that you may be able to show kindness even
to him that envies you.

I come to another fault of Rachels, 2. She was passionate toward her husband
Jacob.
she was passionate and snappish toward her husband Jacob, and in a fume she
quarrels with him for not having children, as if it were his fault that her
self was barren.

It is a great fault in a wife to be angry and find fault with the husband
without due cause, and to lay blame upon him when he deserves it not, as did
Sarah upon Abraham. It is contrary to the reverence, obedience, and love which
they owe to their husbands: it is a means of estranging the husbands heart, by
putting him into frequent fits of anger.

You wives be sorrowful if you have in such a case over-shot your selves, and
now labor for so much discretion and meekness of wisdom that may preserve
your tongues from speaking passionately and unadvisedly to those whom the Lord
commands you to fear. What a fond speech was Rachels? Give me children. Beware
that anger do not fill your mouths with foolish words. And if this be a
fault in your Wives, good men, know it is a great fault in your selves, in whom
more wisdom is required. Nourish peace betwixt your selves, your
yoake-fellows, and shun angry and brawling words, that breed such a koare of
unkindnesse as sometimes runs forth into alienation, and perpetual jarring.

But Rachel was discontented, so that she would die if she had no children:
she does not mean that she would kill her self.

We must not put the worst sense, no not upon choleric speeches; but she
means that she thought her self no better than dead, that she should not
enjoy her life, that it would do her no good, that she wished her self
rather dead than alive. This she means, and this is bad enough. O what a
mixture of pride and folly is it, to wish ones self dead for so small crosses
as this, that one has continued a little while barren?

Good men have been over-taken with such clouds of discontent as have made
them desire death, but to be weary of life because one has not a child, I
meet not with such impatiency any where, but in Rachel.

Take heed to your selves, that no crosses, no not the greatest, draw such
distempers into your minds, as to make you weary of life; but be much more
ashamed if a small thing has thus put you out. It is true, that many times
this lavish talk of Would I were dead, is from the teeth alone. If death
should offer it self at that instant, they would find some other employment
for him, than to take them out of the world; but to be so full of discontent
and vexation as to give vent to such words, whether they seriously mean them
or not, is a proof of a man that does not weigh things rightly in his mind.
Rachel had a good husband, she had likelihood of a good estate, and now lived
abundantly, she had the love of her husband, she had health. What, and was
not the fruition of all these able to make life sweet to her, but she must die
if she had not a child? Did we not forget or dis esteem the favors God has
showed us, we could never be put so far out of taste as it were, that want of
one benefit should imbitter it self. But envy does so rot the bones, that no
ease can be felt of him that has suffered that sickness to breed and grow
strong in him; Yea, see how all Hamans honor contented him nothing, so long as
Mordecai was an eyesore to him. Pray God to keep you from such disordered
passions, and greatly bewail them when you meet with them.

3. She brought her servant to her husband to be his wife.
But see another folly of Rachels. She brings her maid servant to her husband,
and he must take her for his Concubine, to see if she might be made a kind of
foster-mother by her.

Fond Rachel! was not Leah nearer to thee than Bilhah? Could thou not have
esteemed thy sisters children thine own, as well as thy bondmaids? Here were
two faults.

First, she pressed her husband to Polygamy; but that was a fault of mere
ignorance, let it be passed by.

The next was, that she would feed her self with a fancy, that they should be
her children which Bilhah should bear, and not that Leah had borne.

Nature made Leah dear to her, the bondwoman was of no such kindred; but she
forgets nature, and lets fancy overruled, she had taken such a conceit against
her sister, that she was desirous any woman should have children by their
common husband, rather than she. Let us see such follies in our selves, that
fancy rules us against all reason, and that we sometimes take such a stitch and
spleen against those whom nature has tied to us, that of all other we are
less pleased with their prosperity, and most estranged from them. And let us
beware that we do not discover such senseless and absurd impressions of mind.

4. She makes God a partner with her fond passions.
And see her folly yet further, when Bilhah had Dan, then she will needs make
God an approver of their folly, God has judged: as if she had great wrong
before, and now God had righted it in giving her a son: Why, she might have
accounted that God had given her a son when Reuben or Judah was borne, as well
as Dan? But she will needs make God partner with her fond passions. We are
apt to wrong God in misinterpreting the acts of his providence, as if he
showed his love unto us in that wherein his Majesty intended no such matter.
What is it to judge? that she should say, God had judged her. For my part I can
see no sense in her words, why this should be counted an act of Gods judging.
No man had wronged her before, she was never a whit better now than before, no
whit less barren. But such is our foolish self-love, that we will needs
threape kindness upon God sometimes beyond his liking; take heed of this
fault, it is a fruit of an overmeane conceit of God, when we will cause him to
be a servant to our lusts, and unreasonable fancies.

But after the second child she is more foolish, 5. She insults over her
sister because she won her husband to beget children of her handmaid.
and then she triumphs, With wrastlings of God have I wrastled with my sister,
and I have prevailed: And so the boys name must needs be Nephthali. She
insults over her sister, as for a notable victory, because she had won her
husband so far, as to beget children of her handmaide. Why says she that she
had wrastled with her sister? Did Leah hinder her from children? Was it because
of Jacobs doting on Leah, that Rachel conceived not? Sure the Holy Ghost tells
us that his over-loving of her, and despising of her sister caused God to
humble her with barrenness.

So foolish is a man, that he often triumphs in a thing as a great matter,
which is nothing at all, and thinks he has gotten a victory, when he has
rather gotten a blot, as we see here in Rachel. Let us moderate our joys, and
take heed of insulting in a thing that has showed our folly, and else nothing
advantaged us.

Now another weakness is, 6. She was over earnestly desirous of Reubens
Mandrakes.
that she was so earnestly desirous of Reubens Mandrakes. I consent to them
that think these Mandrakes to have been nothing else but goodly flowers, which
Reuben, who was now some six or seven years old, had gathered in the fields,
or whether they were some pleasant fruit or nor, I cannot tell; the word
signifies Lovelinesses, such things as were lovely. But that Rachel had such an
appetite to them, as she must needs have some of them, it shows that she was a
woman given too much to her fancy and appetite. If in case of breeding
children, and weakness of body, some distempers follow, it is a misery, but it
wants not a spice of sin too, when by yielding overmuch to the eye, a man is
so enslaved to his eye, that he must have every fine thing he sees. Rachel is
the copy of a fond woman; all you good women see her follies to avoid them.

But the worst and last fault is, 7. She stole away her Fathers Idols, and
dissembled with him afterward.
she stole her Fathers Idols and concealed them with dissembling and false
excuses. She had been wife to Jacob for twenty years space, she had called
upon God for a child, and he had given her a son, she had showed some faith in
him, by calling the son Joseph, professing her hope of having yet another son.
Either we must throw an imputation of great carelessness upon Jacob if he
taught her not the true God, and his true worship, or else upon her, that after
so long time of teaching had not gotten her out of those Idolatrous fancies,
but must even steal away with her her Fathers Idols, it was not done out of
detestation of Idolatry, to free her Fathers house from them, that she might
have done without the trouble of carrying them so far, she might have burnt
them, or otherwise destroyed them sure enough: but I conceive she did it out of
a superstitious conceit of some goodness in the gods, or in those pictures of
gods. The word signifies Images of men, and they were belike little Images,
else she could not have conveyed them so quickly, and so secretly, but that
they would have been known. It is much ado to wear superstition out of the
heart of one that has been superstitiously brought up.

This is the first place that I remember in which these Idols are mentioned,
but Rachel had so drunk in the opinion of their being sacred, that she could
not lay it aside. It is no easy matter to leave such falsehoods in points of
religion, as have prevailed in the places, and among the persons with whom ones
self was trained up. We should bless God that has granted us education in
the true religion.

And secondly, we must even pity them, that have been superstitiously
educated. They may have some good thing in them, though they cannot shake off
those misconceits, but hanker too much after their Images. I would be loath to
say, and I think so would any of you that Rachel had no true piety in her,
because she stood so affected to the Idols of her Father. But let us rather
think that Jacob had brought her to some knowledge of the true God, though the
old smell of that falsehood wherewith she was first seasoned, would not forsake
the vessel: and let us strive to bring our children rather into a detestation
of such graven Images, for sure the Lord can speak of nothing more
contemptibly. And Images made now to represent the true God, must needs be as
loathsome as Aarons and Ieroboams Calves, which were intended to represent the
true God, and not a false. But she used dissembling, and cosenage to cover her
fact, as the Story tells, hiding them in the Camels litter, and then sitting
upon them, and craving pardon of her Father for not rising up to him,
pretending, that the custom of women was upon her; whether this were true or
not, yet she dissembled, for that was not the cause of her not rising, but
alone the care she had to keep the Idols secret, else she would have risen
well enough. You see that committing of evil draws men on to more sin, to
hide and conceal that which they have already committed, as it did Jacob, and
David, and others, because fear of shame or danger disturbeth the mind, and
turns away the thoughts from considering the mischief of sinning. Therefore
let us all take heed of entering into the path of evil, for if we be once in,
no man can tell what lying, dissembling, and other evils the devil will draw
us into by means of that sin. He intangles himself as a sheep in the briars,
that run into any gross or shameful sin, and he can hardly come off with one
wound alone. And if you have thus covered sin with sin, bewail it as a great
fault, but yet take heart to repent, and turn to God for favor, for it is no
new thing with God to forgive such trespasses, only do not embolden your
selves of purpose to sin, because you know how to conceal it, and hope to
keep it close, for then shall the same become a presumptuous sin, and so much
more hardly pardoned.

I have showed you Rachels faults. Her good deeds be but few, Her virtues.
yet some:

First, she was one of her Fathers sheep-keepers, 1. She was one of her Fathers
sheep-keepers.
and did not disdain to drive them to the water, at least when the Shepherds
were otherwise employed. So it is a commendable thing in a young maid, to be
ready to take pains, and do service in domestical businesses, such as accord
to her Fathers state. But an idle, coy, finish maid is so much the more
disdained of wise persons, by how much she does more disdain labor in any
profitable business for which God did make men.

Further, Rachel at last saw God in her barrenness, 2. She saw God in her
barrenness at last, and fell to prayer.
and fell to prayer; for it is said, God hearkened to her, and opened her
womb. This gives us some hope that she was humbled, and sought God, which is
good in our wants of any good thing, by it to be drawn to God in fervent
prayers. Then be they graciously supplied, when our need of them makes us
supplicate to his bounty: Rachel got nothing by chafing, envying, or giving her
maid to her husband, all that time the womb is not opened; but when she
remembered God, God remembered her; and when she prayed, he hearkened and gave
her a son. Let us in all our necessities make all the have we can to this
remedy, comfort and deliverance will never come half so happily by other
means without this. They be our prayers that must sanctify other means, and
procure Gods cooperation with them for our good success. Jacob was Rachels
husband before, but prayer had not made her fruitful till now. God is the
ruler of all things, learn to call upon him and trust in him; He can remove
any cross, as well as barrenness.

Again, it was a good thing in her to desire children, 3. She desired
children, and when she had one, blessed God for him.
and when she had one, to see God, and bless him, and say, God has taken away
my reproach. When we have gotten things by prayer, we must also see God in
them, and give him thanks; yea she says, God will give me yet another son;
the thankful receiving of one benefit, may assure us of another, God will add
to mercies, if we take notice of his goodness after we have called upon him in
hearing our request. Every benefit gotten by prayer, may and should be called a
Joseph.

Another good thing was, 4. She requested a kindness from her sister (for all
her envy) and returned a kindness to her.
that her envy to her sister did not so prevail with her, but that she would
ask her for her sons Mandrakes.

Though the humor of envy was sharp in her, yet it may seem to have waxed a
little milder after a while, and she could both request a kindness from her,
and return a kindness to her. Let us look that envy do not continue in its
height, so as sometimes it does, to make us grow bitter enemies. And she did
well in granting to Jacobs motion to return into Canaan, for a wife is to
forsake Father, and Mother, and cleave to her husband. She shall do far
amiss that prefers not her husband before her Parents, and goes not with him
rather than tarries with them.

5. She preferred her husband before her Parents. 3. Her crosses. 1. She was
barren.
So you have what is good and bad in her; now look upon her crosses; we can
find but few, and one which at last too was removed, she was barren: This
barrenness God sent of purpose to keep her down, because she should not too
much slight her sister; but she made this a great cross, though it be no
great one in it self; you see that barrenness is a cross, and to some people
a great cross, because of their earnest desire of issue on some or other
consideration. But it is needful that God tame and humble us with some or
other crosses, and either make them great, or make use of our folly to our
further humbling, by giving us over to our selves, to make them great that else
would not be so. We must pray God to sanctify crosses, and then we shall
never repent of them when they be past: many a man has repented for other
things, but sanctified crosses were never yet bewailed afterward. Perhaps one
may esteem it a cross that she was feign to leave her Fathers house, but
indeed that was a benefit, for by that means she was quite (we hope) freed
from the Idolatry of her Fathers house, from which, so long as she lived there,
she was not quite purged.

2. Her childrens carriage was ill.
But her crosses that she felt with her husband in respect of her childrens ill
carriage were heavy; for a good woman cannot be senseless of her husbands
sorrows, only death shut up her eyes from beholding that cross which in
likelihood would have killed her quite, seeing it went so near to Jacob; she
was dead before Joseph was taken away from them.

Her benefits, health, strength maintenance, beauty, and her husbands love, her
prayers were heard, her fault hidden, Her death, she dyed in childbed. Objected.
But her benefits were common benefits of health, strength, maintenance, and the
like, and she had beauty, and her husbands love, and after her prayers were
heard, and a son given her, and it pleased God to hide her fault which she
committed in stealing her Fathers Idols, which if it had come to light, would
have much provoked her Fathers anger, and her husbands. We must observe even
such mercies, to be thankful to God that has not dealt with us after our
sins. And we hope that she was a godly woman too, because she prayed to God;
and it is said, God remembered her and heard her: but her death was an heavy
death, she dyed in childbed, or in travel, and took it heavily, calling her
son, The son of her sorrows, whom after Jacob called The son of his right hand;
Women with child should even prepare for death, they pass through the danger
of it. And me thinks, notwithstanding whatsoever has been to the contrary,
delivering out of childbed-perils is a mercy that may well be acknowledged with
a public and solemn giving of thanks, and a feast. The equity of Jewish
ceremonies remaining, though the ceremonies be abolished, and though there be
no legal uncleanness, yet there is a real danger escaped, and a real
benefit attained, and that should (me thinks) crave an acknowledgement.

If you would learn, that all things are pure unto the pure, you would not be
hindered from so good a service by any scruple or abuse.

But I am afraid niggardliness has as great a hand in breaking of such
feasts, as any thing else. Whether you feast or not, be it at your choice; but
me thinks, again I repeat it, safe escaping the danger that took away
Rachel, may well call for even a public and thankful acknowledgement.

So much of Rachel, whom we leave by her husband solemnly interred unner a
monument erected upon her grave, which kept her name up long, and occasioned
the calling of all the mothers dwelling thereabouts by her name, When it is
said, Rachel weeping for her children, because they were not.

Now of Leah, she was a wife of Jacobs, the first he had given, though not
promised.

Of her virtues we have not much noted; Leah her virtues, she was patient and
loving to her husband, and thankful to God.
but she showed her self patient and loving to her husband, somewhat quiet to
her envious sister, and thankful to God for her children; though her husband
loved her less than was meet, yet we read of no brawles either with him or her
sister. She entertained him very lovingly when he came home from field, and she
had hired him of her sister. She consented also to go with him into Canaan,
she was desirous of children, and had many; but a fault or two she slipped in.

First, Her faults. 1. She went to bed to her sisters husband, at her Fathers
persuasion.
she went to bed to her sisters husband at her fathers persuasion, which she
ought not to have done. In him that thought she was Rachel, there was no sin;
in her that knew she was not Rachel, it was a great fault, but excused by the
fathers authority; but she wronged Jacob much, and made her own life full of
affliction.

Another little fault she had, 2. She was a little too unkind to her sister.
she seemed a little too unkind to her sister, in not being willing to impart
some of her sons mandrakes; but often unkindnesses and wrongs breed such an
estrangement betwixt them, who are otherwise nearly joined, as that they stick
at small courtesies. We must take heed it do not so with us; but Leah had a
little anger with her, she could upbraid her sister with an injury, when she
came for a courtesy.

O that she had not too many followers in this weakness!

Her benefits were these, Her benefits. She had a good husband, many children,
and was matched into the Church, and went to heaven.
she had a good husband and many children, and was matched into the Church, and
we hope went to Heaven, for her carriage in respect of her children shows some
goodness. Indeed she was faulty in imitating her sister, and giving Zilpah to
Jacob; much more faulty in thinking that God gave her the next son for a
reward of that fault. But so weak we are, and ignorant of sin sometimes, that
we verily think God is pleased with our sins, and recompenceth them with
benefits.

3. Her crosses, want of her husbands love and cohabitation with her, and the
miseries she suffered with her husband, and the unkindnes of her Father, she
was also bleare-eved. Zilpah, Bilhah, guilty of incest.
And for her crosses, they were, want of her husbands love and comfortable
cohabitation, and all the miseries she underwent with her husband besides, her
Father was something unkind, as it may seem, for she says, He counted them
strangers; and she also had an imperfection in her visage, for she was
bleare-eyed. I hope you will all learn to imitate her virtues, fly her sins,
be thankful for the like mercies, and patient under the like crosses, and then
you shall not be losers of time by hearing her story.

Now the two handmaidens, Zilpah and Bilhah.

Zilpah has nothing said of her, but that She bare Jacob two children, Gad
and Asher, So called of Leah, that would needs imitate her sisters weakness,
and call them hers.

Bilhah is taxed of a grievous sin, she suffered her self to be polluted with
incest by Jacobs first borne. If he offered her violence, or surprised her by
any device, it was his fault, not hers; but it is not likely to have been so,
because God does not report it so. For God would not wrong any in reporting
their acts to the worst, but if there had been any excuse of her fault, the
Lord would have done her right in rehearsing it, he should not else do the
office of a good writer of a Story. O let all women take heed of adultery, and
chiefly of incestuous adulteries with their husbands son in law, or brothers,
or a like near of blood, where the offense is made much more heinous by that
aggravation: and if any have committed any such crime, let the mentioning of it
in this woman bring it to their remembrance, and provoke them to repentance,
that they may not have so fearful a crime to answer for upon their sickbed
in the hour of death. Likely such gross crimes will cry out then, if they
have been smothered before; but a conscience purged from them by sincere
repentance performed in health, may enjoy quiet and peace in death,
notwithstanding the remembrance of them. For a sin repented of shall be
pardoned, and a pardoned debt cannot hurt at all, not so much as terrify, if
the pardon of it be known. But something there was in it, that God saw it fit
to have his Church stored with the seed of bond-women, (for two of Jacobs wives
were such) because he would have us know, that he does not much stand upon
nobility, and being free borne, and the like. One third part of his people
Israel were seed of bond-women. Though he would not let Hagars seed inherit,
yet that was not because he did look to her condition, but that he might
figuratively set forth his averseness from them, that will needs be in bondage
under the Law, when the Gospel brings them liberty, and therefore now he does
equally take into the Church, Dan and Nephthali, Gad and Asher; as well as
Reuben, and Levi, Simeon, and Judah. These earthly considerations vary nothing
with God, nor is the one any more acceptable with him than the other. Let not
those which enjoy the privileges of this world in these matters, slight or
despise such as want them; and let not those that are meanlier borne, trouble
themselves at that depression. Spiritual privileges may belong to those that
are of no reckoning in the world, and those that are of high esteem in it may
be deprived of them. The Tribes that came of the bondwoman were admitted into
the possession of Canaan, and to the fellowship of the Tabernacle as well as
the rest. It were a misery indeed to be outwardly mean, if that would impeach
our spiritual estate, but seeing no such thing will follow, let us show our
high esteem of the soul above the body, by not regarding the things of the
body, so that the soul be well. *

THE ONE AND TWENTIETH EXAMPLE.
OF LABAN.
WE have spoken of Jacobs self, and of his Wives; Laban.
now I will go on to speak of his Uncle, and so of his Children. The
Scripture says nothing of his birth or death.
His Uncle and Father in law was one Laban of Padan Aram, of whose birth and
death the Scripture takes no notice at all: and indeed it is scarce worth the
while to mention the birth and death of wicked men. It is no great matter, when
they were borne, or when they died, seeing both their coming into the world,
and their departure out of it do perish, for they come to nothing, and both
come in and go out as it were in an evil time.

But we have something to say of his parentage and life. His Parentage
For his Parentage, we learn, Genesis 22.26. and 24.29. that he was the son of
one Bethuel, who was the son of Nachor the brother of Abraham, who did not
leave his Country and Fathers house with Abraham, when he traveled at Gods
Commandment into the land of Canaan, but abode still in Padan Aram, the land
of his Nativity, and there continued to follow strange gods, and commit
Idolatry; of which all the world, and by name the country was then full. So
he was the Idolatrous son of an Idolatrous Father, and Grandfather, which did
as most men do, take up the religion of his forefathers without more ado, not
looking whether he served God aright, but counted it sufficient to serve God
as his Progenitors had done before, not at all considering whether it were the
true God or the false whom they served, His life.
or whether it were true or false worship which they performed.

His civil virtues.
Now in his life we must consider his deeds, good and bad, and the things that
befell him good and bad.

First then, for his good deeds, for even a bad man may have some civil
virtues found in his life, out of a common work of Gods Spirit, who will not
suffer men to be so far over-runne with vices, but that for the preservation
of humane societies, they shall have some shadows of virtues seen in them.

These good deeds of his look partly to men, and partly to God.

His good deeds to men-ward, are first, to Abraham's servant.

Secondly, to Rebekkah his sister.

Thirdly, to Jacob his kinsman.

Fourthly, to his Daughters and Grandchildren.

1. He vouchsafe courteous entertainment unto Eliezer.
First, let us consider his carriage to Abraham's servant Eliezer of Damascus,
who was sent by his master Abraham, to fetch a wife for his son Isaac out of
Padan Aram, because he would not match him with the cursed seed of the
Canaanites.

The first thing commendable in him is, that he vouchsafes courteous
entertainment unto him; for when the servant meeting with Rebekkah had found
great kindness from her in watering his Camels, as well as giving himself
drink out of her pitcher, and that he had rewarded her with precious gifts,
Genesis 24.22. viz. with a golden eare-ring of half a shekel weight, and two
golden bracelets of ten shekels weight for her hands; and that she had invited
him to her Fathers house, and coming home had told Laban her brother of the
man, who he was, and what he had bestowed upon her: presently Laban goes
forth to the man, ver. 31. and invites him to the house with very kind words,
saying, Come in thou blessed of the Lord, wherefore stand thou without? for
I have prepared the house and room for thy Camels: and so bringing him home,
they ungirded the Camels, and he gave him straw and provender for them, and
water to wash his feet, and the feet of those that were with him, and then
set meat before him, that he might eat.

Lo here, an example of courteous hospitality, he gave him good and loving
words, and provided and ministered to him all things necessary for his cattle,
and companions, and himself.

Thus should men use kind and liberal hospitality toward such friends as
upon occasion do repair unto their houses, and this is a kind of virtue
which may be found in men that are destitute of all true grace and piety. For
even nature it self teaches men to show love and humanity to men that are of
the same nature with themselves, because they look to find the like
gentleness themselves from others upon like occasions.

Here is one thing in Laban worthy praise and imitation: 2. He gave him an
honest and good answer.
another is, that he gives him an honest and good answer when he had declared
unto them his errand. For the man refusing to eat till he had related his
business unto them, being very faithful to his master, and diligent in the
matter committed to his trust, up and told them all that had fallen out, why
he came thither, and how he had by a special providence of God met with
Rebekkah at the fountain of water, requested to know their mind, and what he
must trust unto in this matter: and from Bethuel the maids Father, and Laban
of whom we are speaking, her Brother, he received this just and discreet
answer, That the thing proceeded from God, and they were able to say neither
good nor bad unto him: that is, Neither by fair means nor by soul.
not to cross his motion by any allegation one way or other; concluding, that
Rebekkah was before him, and that he might with their good consent take her
and go, that she might be his Masters sons wife, as God had spoken, ver. 50*
51. of the same Chapter.

In this passage you see a great deal of honest plainness; seeing God had
directed him by his special hand to this maiden, they would be no hinderance
unto him, but would give their willing consent to the marriage.

It is a good thing for men to consent unto honest and good motions, chiefly
when they see God himself by his good providence going before them, and as it
were, leading the way unto them.

A third good thing in Laban was, 3. He speedily dismissed him.
that he does speedily dismiss the man, and hindered not his present return
unto his Master, with a wife for his son. For so it is written ver. 59. that
when he rising betimes in the morning was earnest to return that very day,
and that they at first required ten days stay for Rebekkah, but he requesting
them not to hinder his expedition, seeing God had prospered him; they called
the Damsel and asked her consent, viz. Whether she was willing to go with
the man? and finding her very forward, they sent her away without further
lingering.

It is a good thing, when we have entertained any one in our house, and his
desire is as his occasions shall require to make haste home, to further him by
all means, and not to stop his proceedings with delays. For many times such
deferring proves very unpleasing, and sometimes dangerous to the party to whom
we would seem to show love and good will, as we see it did in case of the
Levite, whose Father in Laws importunity caused him to stay a day or two beyond
his desire, in the later end of the Story of Judges.

Thus has Labans carriage been good to this servant of Abraham's. We must
follow the goodness of all men, even Idolaters and Heathens.

4. Was loving to his sister, made a feast to his neighbors and friends. Genesis
29.21, 22.
Now consider how he behaved himself to his sister, to whom he discovers good
affection, and love by a courteous dismissing of her, ver. 60. They blessed her
and said, thou art our sister, be thou the mother of thousands, of millions,
and let thy seed possess the gates of them which hate them: that is, prevail
mightily against all their enemies, and conquer them if they have just cause to
contend with them. Brethren should wish all prosperity and welfare to their
sisters and brethren, and to their children after them, even that they may grow
strong and mighty in the world, for carnal men having but a carnal mind and
affection, can wish no better but carnal benefits unto their friends and
kindred, and these they ought to wish heartily, and to procure also, so far as
opportunity shall be offered.

But now it is time that we show Labans good carriage to Jacob, the son of this
his sister a long time after.

5. He lovingly entertained Jacob when he came unto him.
First, he does lovingly entertain him also when he came unto him but even in
a poor and naked fashion, nothing so richly provided nor attended as the
forenamed servant was in the former narration. Jacob came all alone, and with
nothing almost but his staff in his hand, but yet when he had faithfully
reported to him both who he was, and what occasion drove him in such manner
out of his Fathers house, he receives him with all courtesy. For it is noted,
Genesis 29.12, 13, 14. That when Rachel had heard of Jacobs mouth who he was, and
had acquainted her Father with his coming, he hearing this tidings of his
sisters son, ran to meet him, and embraced him, and kissed him, and
brought him to his house, and when Jacob had certified him of his matters, he
answered him lovingly, saying, Surely thou art my bone and my flesh; that is,
be not troubled for these things, I acknowledge thee to be my kinsman, and I
will carry my self toward thee accordingly.

Lo, how a man void of true religion, may yet have good natural affection to
his kinsman, and that though he find him in somewhat a poor case, and
destitute of things needful. And doubtless it is a virtue, and deserves
praise, to stand so disposed unto ones kinsmen or kinswomen, that are as Laban
could say, Our bone and flesh.

Nearenesse of blood requires some special love and respect to those to whom
nature has so nearely united to us. Every man promises himself kindness
from such persons, and therefore the common phrase of the world has entitled
them friends by a kind of excellency, because they should be forward to
perform all loving and friendly offices.

Another virtue in Laban is, 6. Of his own accord he offered Jacob wages for
his work.
that of his own accord he does offer wages or recompense unto him for his
work, for perceiving him to be of an industrious disposition, that knew not
how to pass his time idly, though in a strange place, and withal, skillful
and understanding in matters of such nature as Labans calling stood upon, viz.
in Cattle, he says thus unto him, ver. 15. Because thou art my brother, that
is, kinsman, Should thou serve me for naught? that is, that were an
unreasonable thing indeed, and therefore tell me, what shall thy wages be.

Lo, he would not deal so unjustly with his kinsman, as to take his labor
and service for nothing, but is willing to give him such convenient
satisfaction as he should demand.

This is such a point of righteousness and equity, as even nature it self
does teach, and a mere natural man, not too much over run with worldliness
of mind, may practice toward others. For seeing every man must make himself
the measure of his dealing with his neighbor, and that it cannot but seem
unrighteous to any man, if he be driven to work for nothing, surely he cannot
but conclude, that himself also is bound to recompense the labor and service
of another. And this justice was so well known to Laban, and he had so much
goodness remaining in him afterward too, that he continues to exercise it
after Jacob had finished his fourteen years service, and was now to make a
new bargain, as you shall read Chap. 30. ver. 25. and 35. For when Jacob
requested his good will to return home, because he knew how faithfully he
had served, he acknowledges his painfulnesse, and trustiness, and his good
success too, and therefore requests him to tarry with him, and makes him this
offer, saying, Appoint me thy wages and I will give it; and when Jacob made a
reasonable motion, (that for the clearing of his innocence, and preventing of
all mistakings, he might have for his wages the speckled and spotted amongst
the Goats, and the brown amongst the Sheep, that should after be yeaned he
means) he agrees to the condition, and so Jacob was willing to serve him on
these terms. Here you see justice in Laban, he is willing to give his servant
due wages for his work. This point of equity is written in nature, and little
goodness is left in him that does not know and follow it.

So you have Labans just dealing with Jacob.

Now look into a third thing commendable in him, and that is, 7. He was
willing to bestow his daughters upon him.
when Jacob offers to serve him seven years for his younger daughter Rachel,
Chap. 29. ver. 18, 19. He consents to the motion, saying, It is better that I
give her to thee than to another man, and so bids him abide with him: that is,
I will give her thee on this condition, and not only so, but he puts upon him
the elder daughter, and so makes him his son in Law in both of them.

That which was faulty in this passage, we shall speak of anon, when we come
to mention his faults; but this was a good thing in him, that he liked so well
of Jacobs carriage, that he was willing to bestow his daughters upon him.

It is a matter both of prudence and honesty too, to like so well of the virtue
and good qualities of an honest and good man, as to be willing for these things
sake (other matters not too too much gainsaying) to make choice of him for a
son in Law.

The qualities of a man are principally to be regarded in the choice of a
son in Law, and yet he is not truly discreet and wise, that does not look
unto this thing in the choice of an husband for his daughter. A person
painful, diligent, thrifty, and of good carriage, and sufficiencies is rather
to be taken, than one destitute of these qualities, though he be far more
high and rich.

It is the husbands self that will make the Wives life either most miserable
or most happy: and Laban did well in making such a choice, and never shall he
repent the match that finds these things in him with whom he matcheth; but
without these things in the person, the state and quality of the man in other
respects cannot hinder, but that a little time will make both Father and
daughter too, unwish the bargain they have made.

8 He quickly laid down his anger, and made a covenant with him.
How let us see what was good in Laban, in the very cloze of all with Jacob, as
you have it Chap. 31.44. ad finem. He lays by all anger and discontent, and
considering the nearenesse that was betwixt them, he made the motion of
entering into covenant with Jacob, and so they solemnly ratify the covenant, by
setting up an heap of stones, and feasting upon the heap, and eating and
drinking lovingly and chearefully together, and by a solemn oath each to other.

It is a good thing to swallow down all jarres and differences that fall out
betwixt ones self and his friends and neighbors, and to part lovingly and
courteously each from other in peace and concord, not in discontents and
heart-burnings. Surely quarrels would not be held up long betwixt kinsmen and
allies specially, but though they have met in a kind of heat, and anger, and
jealousy one of another, yet they should cause all these things to depart from
them, and be friends before they depart one from another.

Peace is a comfortable thing, and it is a praiseworthy thing to speak the
first word of agreement.

9. He shows himself loving and kind to his daughters and grandchildren
And so much for Labans carriage to Jacob.

Now to his daughters and grandchildren he shows himself also loving and
kind, both taking care for them, and even binding Jacob by covenant to use
them well; ver. 49. Chap. 31. and also kissing them, and blessing them at the
time of parting. A Father should be careful of his childrens welfare, even
when he has placed them forth into other families, and should show all
courtesy and love unto them when he parts with them, he should get good
husbands for his daughters, so far as he can, and use all good means to
make them live lovingly together. Laban did both these offices to his
daughters, and every Parent should attain at least so much goodness as a
Laban.

But one thing more we note in Laban, and that is, 10. He made a feast at the
marriage of his daughter.
he invited the neighbors, and made a feast at the marriage of his daughters.
Chap. 29. ver. 22. A wedding feast is not indeed absolutely necessary, but it
is of commendable use, so that excess and disorders be avoided, and unless
just cause be to the contrary, it has a smacke of niggardliness to neglect
it. A man should do well to show love to his neighbors, and to be willing to
embrace fit opportunities of inviting and feasting them; only still so, that
immoderatenesse of all sorts be avoided, and that a man keep himself within
the compare of his place and means, and affect not vainglorious superfluity
in feasting.

And so much for Labans goodness to man-ward, now to Godward something is
good in him.

First, 11. He took notice of Gods blessing as the cause of his prosperity.
that he took notice of Gods blessing to be the cause of his prosperity by
Jacobs labors, as you read Genesis 30.27. I have learned by experience, that God
has blessed me for thy sake. Surely it is a good thing to put ones self in
mind that Gods blessing makes rich; yea, and to observe how his blessing
attends his faithful people too in the labors of their hands. Laban ascribes
his riches to the blessing of God following Jacob.

It is a good thing to have ones eyes so far opened toward God, and to mark
by experience his favorable proceeding toward his faithful servants, as it
seems also Joseph's master did, and it is sure Pharaoh did when he was his
servant, and Nebuchadnezar toward Daniel and the three children, as also
Darius in his time.

Again, 12. He forbore what God forbad.
when God met Laban by the way and commanded him to speak to Jacob neither
good nor bad (that is, not to hinder his journey either by fair means or
soul) he both acknowledges it, ver. 29. and accordingly obeyes it, for he
dismisseth him peaceably, and stops him not in his course homewards, though as
he says, it was in his power to have done otherwise.

This is to be praised in him, that what God forbad him, he forbeares, though
he saw otherwise no danger in it. Certainly the duty of a man is to abstain
from what God prohibiteth, though he have never so much both power,
provocation, and opportunity to do it. We ought so to fear God, as not to
provoke him, so to love God as not to offend him, and so to acknowledge our
absolute dependence upon him, as not to cross him. He knows not neither how
much he owes to God, nor yet how obnoxious he stands unto him, that does not
so far submit himself unto him.

We noted the like yielding to God in Abimelech before, what though he does
not now appear to us in dreams and visions, Yet have we a more sure word of
Prophecy, to whom we should do well to take heed: as S. Peter advises us.

And this is all the good I have noted in Laban.

Let us make some use of this to our selves.

First, what shall a man think of himself if he be not found equal to
Laban in goodness? Nay, if the quite contrary vices be apparent in him, to
those virtues which were in so mean a man, I mean in goodness. And yet so it
is, that many who term themselves brethren and Christians, are far short of
Laban in these shows of virtues. Laban was courteous, they are churlish. Laban
entertained Abraham's servant well, niggardliness will scarce suffer them to
entertain any well. He found Laban ready to gratify him and dismiss him,
they do neither; many care not for kindred or any the like bonds, many care
not how they serve themselves of others labors, specially servants, and every
way are far worse matters than Laban. No bounty, no justice, no show of
seeing God in things. No show of peaceablenesse, no regard of Gods prohibiting
them any thing, but what they will do, they will do, though the God of heaven
himself forbid them, and though they know as much.

He is very unlikely to be of the seed of Jacob, that has not come so far
as Laban.

Again, there is little cause that a man should applaud himself in so short
and defective a goodness as this of Labans, yet this is all that some have to
please themselves and to glory in. They deal courteously with their kindred,
they be willing to show kindness to their neighbors. They love well their
children, and can give good hospitality to such friends as come about them. And
they desire to live peaceably with their neighbors, and are ready to compose
quarrels, and some things they are willing to leave or forbear that God
forbids.

Alas, these be poor evidences for heaven, these are poor proofs of their
being good men, and in Gods favor. A man must not think that such a measure
of goodness will prove him a good Christian, that may show well enough a
tolerable Heathen. I pray you therefore that all these things may be found in
you in a better manner, and a larger measure, upon better grounds, for better
ends, more constantly, and more sincerely. Be courteous, bountiful, and
peaceable, and so in the rest with reference to God, in obedience to his
commandment, in love to him, and with a desire to please him, and abstain
from all that he forbids, and let your peaceablenesse and courtesy extend it
self even to enemies.

That virtue is but a seeming virtue which does not spring from a root of
piety, and is not watered with an heavenly dew, and made to grow up with godly
considerations taken from the divine Majesty.

We must walk with God, live to him, seek him, please him, or else some bare
naked good deeds will not suffice to prove us his children and his heirs.

So much for the good of Laban; His faults.
now his evil must be observed too.

First, to Godward, 1. He was an Idolater.
though he had Jacob living in his house, and had observed by experience, that
God did bless him for his sake, yet he would not leave his false gods, his
Idols, his Teraphim, but keep them still, and made such store of them, that
he took it very ill that Jacob should steal them away, as he conceived he
had done, though falsely, and therefore also he swear by the gods of Nahor, and
the gods of their Fathers.

He was brought up an Idolater, and continued an Idolater, living and dying in
the worship of false and imaginary gods; which they that do, shall not
inherit the kingdom of God, he had Images of these false gods, Images of men
it may seem they were by their name.

O how natural it is to man to err in the conceit of a multiplicity of gods,
and in setting up pictures, and representations of God to himself? Great
darkness possesses the minds of men in the matter of Gods nature, he will
take upon trust any fable in this kind, and will scarce use his own reason to
examine religion, but for the worshipping God in an Image, though it be a
point of the greatest foppery in the world, he will count it singular wisdom,
and count himself so much devouter, by how much he is liker the block or
picture before which he does his false devotions.

Let us bless God that has delivered us from conceit of fantastical gods,
and from the love and liking of Images and pictures, which the Lord may seem
to have in detestation; because in likelihood they were occasions of inducing
the damnable opinion of multitude of gods into the world. And let us pray to
God to bring the poor ignorant persons (that run after other gods, or else
dote upon pictures) out of such their miserable condition, and to set up the
truth in so great power, that men may no longer cast themselves headlong by
that which themselves account religion, and the right way to please God.

But Laban dealt very ill with Jacob.

2. He loved Jacob in a worldly manner.
First, the love he bare him was a mere worldly self-respecting love, he
found he gate well by him, therefore he desired his company. But for Jacobs
piety and true religion, he regarded him not a jot the better.

So most times, yea, evermore the love of worldlings does grow from the root
of worldliness.

If by some good Jacob they have attained, or hope to attain profit and
advantage, they are loath to part with him; but unless such things do commend
a man to them, he may sit without doors long enough, and his goodness with
him, before they will take him into house.

Such a carnal love to good men is none other thing than may be seen in as
bad a man as he of whom we entreat. You must therefore learn to love a
Jacob as a Jacob, and in the name of a Jacob, that love will demonstrate some
piety to your selves. And when we perceive the kindness of any man to have
its original in such base ends, we must esteem it a point of discretion not
to trust at all in their loves, they will soon turn enemies for gain, whom
gain makes friends.

3. He cousened Jacob.
Further, Laban did palpably deceive and cousin Jacob in a matter wherein deceit
should least of all be used, even in point of Matrimony.

Jacob intended to live contentedly with his own wife, as his Father Isaac had
done before him, and therefore setting his affections on the younger daughter
Rachel, agrees to serve Laban for her seven years, instead of dowry which he
had not to give. Laban agrees to it, as I showed you before, and assembling his
neighbors, celebrates the marriage with a feast.

It must not be doubted, but that they were all made to understand which of
the maids was the Bride, as well as which young man was the Bridegroom. But
at night it may seem the Bride was brought into the Bridegroomes Chamber
veiled for modesty sake.

Laban persuades his eldest daughter Leah to possess the place of her younger
sister, whether with or without her consent it is not expressed; but most
likely without, and so is Jacob in the morning greatly discontented, to see a
stranger bedded with him instead of his own Spouse. Wherefore complaining of
the wrong to his Father in Law, he is answered with a shift, that the custom
of that place is not to bestow the younger before the elder; but if he would
serve seven years more for Rachel, he should have her too: for Polygamy was
not then reputed a sin. Jacob must needs be content with that which he
could not help, and is compelled to make his apprentiship longer by half than
he intended, here was flat cousenage. To wind in Jacob for seven years more
than he meant at first, and to bestow both his daughters upon so thriving a
man, and so advantage himself more ways than one at once; this fellow fears
not to break Covenant, and to beguile and defraud a man in his wife. And when
he was told of it he pretends a contrary custom; If there were no such
custom, he plays the lying fellow, in saying wittingly that which was not
for the excusing of his fault: If there were such a custom, he plays the
cousening companion in concealing it before, and not acquainting Jacob with it
when he made the motion. He should have said, I would willingly give her thee,
but that the custom of the country hinders: but if thou will have them both,
first the elder, then the younger; I am content. This had been plain dealing;
but to lead Jacob on with words, and then at last pull him on in this fashion
to seven years bondage more, was flat dishonesty.

And such is the disposition of a worldling for advantage sake, that he cares
not with tricks to out-reach and beguile any with whom he deals; but we
have a better direction from Gods Word, saying, Let none of you defraud or
overreach another in any matter, for God is an avenger of all that do such
things.

He used the like guilefull dealing after, in changing his wages so many
times, and all proceeded from the same evil humor of covetousness.

But now see another sin, whereof Jacob makes mention to his Wives in way of
persuading them to depart with him; Jacob beheld Labans countenance, that it
was not to him at before:

Lo, he looks doggedly upon him, 4. He looked doggedly upon him because he
hindered his wealth, though without any wrong.
and has a kind of envious grudge against him: not for any fault of his, but
alone because he hindered his wealth, in that God gave his riches to Jacob, by
causing most of the Ewes and she Goats to bring forth still young of such
color as was agreed upon for Jacobs wages. ver. 8. If he said the speckled
shall be thy wages, all the cattle bare speckled; and now this caused the
falling out.

See here the guise of a carnal and earthly minded man, he will become an
enemy and bear a grudge to any that hinders him in his gain, though it be
without any wrong or injustice.

It was not any injury, though it were a damage to Laban, that still the
greater number, and better cattle were Jacobs, but because he sees it so,
therefore he bears an ill affection to Jacob; as Saul hated David because he
saw that God had intended to turn the kingdom unto him.

Nature will show that this is a fault: for why should I hate a man because God
prospers him? but desire of gain will so blind the eyes, that he which is led
with it, will not avoid this fault, nor will take notice likely that it is a
fault: you must observe it in Laban, and inform your selves how unreasonable a
thing it is; and the sons of Laban too did join with him in the same fault,
for they also muttered against him in this respect.

5. He pursued Jacob with an hostile mind.
And now I proceed to his next fault, he pursued Jacob with an hostile mind,
intending either to bring him back again, and then he must have served him
on poor and hard terms, or else to have sent him empty enough away, and
accordingly provided himself of company, in so much that himself says, It
was in his power to have done Jacob hurt; but that God forbade him, and Jacob
upbraides him with it.

Indeed God needed not to have appeared to him for the forbidding of such a
thing, if he had not seen what would else have been the issue.

A very great sin this was in his purpose, though God hindered the execution:
we must mark his sin, he followed Jacob in anger, meaning to have stripped
him of all. A wicked thing it is, upon occasion of something that looks like
a fault, to attempt such a business; for the worst that he could allege,
was Jacobs stealing away without giving him warning or leave, and this in Jacob
was no fault at all, because God commanded him so to do, neither had it been
a fault, though God had not bidden it; for it seems their agreement was but
from year to year, or for a less space of time, in that Laban changed the
wages so often, and therefore the time prefixed being fulfilled, Jacob was at his
liberty, and might go without asking his leave, or making him privy to his
purpose. But Laban is glad to have an advantage of such a pretense, and
resolves. Is he gone without my liking and knowledge? Well, I will teach him
better manners toward his Master and Father in Law; I will fetch him back
with a witness: and so strengthening himself with company, he makes after
him with a revengefull meaning, and overtaking him begins to quarrel, charge
him to have done foolishly in conveighing himself away, with his two
daughters, and their children so privately. This is a wickedness, to intend to
hurt a man, to spoil him of his estate, and to send him empty away, taking the
advantage of something by him done, which may seem to have been done somewhat
indiscreetly and faultily, only or chiefly out of envy and covetousness to
get ones goods, and to be revenged of him. No man is so blind but he would
blame this in another, and therefore must needs sin against his knowledge, if
he do it himself.

The last fault of Laban is, 6. He falsely charge Jacob with stealing his
Idols.
that he falsely charge Jacob with stealing his Idols, and merely upon
surmises; they were gone at that time when Jacob went, and therefore his
conclusion was, Jacob must needs have them; yea, he was so peremptory, that
Jacobs denial would not satisfy, though he denied so strongly, as to offer
the offender to death if he could find them: but he rifles and searches all
his goods for them, imagining perhaps that some body else might have stolen
them without Jacobs privity, which was true indeed. But here by the way, I must
tax Jacob for a little too much confidence in his offer, had Laban found the
Idols, he would not have consented to the death of Rachel, nor to the taking
of her from him.

It is good to be moderate in our speeches, and not over-confident; but Laban
is the subject of our speech now: he did falsely charge Jacob with theft, upon
a surmise of his own.

This is a sin which no man can brook from another, without blaming him for
it, therefore he has light enough if he could use the light to discover it
in himself. Too easily to believe, and too earnestly to affirm against
another, that he has committed such a sin, because we have some
probabilities to allege against him, is a sin against our brother, and an
injurious defiling of his name, against whom we ought not to raise up an ill
report: Neither without just or sure proof, nor yet in public manner, as
Laban did, if we might reform it privately.

So Laban failed both in the manner and manner of his accusation; the matter,
it was false; the manner, it was over-publike, when it should and might have
been private, though it had been true.

Now I pray you let us search our selves, to see if we be not guilty of the
same faults with Laban, and learn with grief and shame to confess, that our
selves who have far more and better means, have yet been as palpably faulty
as this Idolater, as unjust, as worldly, as envious, as apt to follow surmises,
and so in the rest; and let us greatly abhor our selves, that better helps
have prevailed no more with us; and now let us resolve to put away these
faults: and seeing we have given our names to Christ, and enjoy the Word, Name,
and Sacraments of Christ, let us abhor to run into those evils which being
blameworthy enough in an Heathen, are ten times more loathsome in a Christian.

So much of his deeds, good and bad; Now the things that befell him are some
good, and some bad, at least as he accounted it.

3. His benefits 1. He had a good son in law.
Good, he had a good son in law for his daughters, through Gods disposing
more then his own seeking, who married them on terms easy enough for him.
Indeed he liked him for his good husbandry, a thing within his element; but
he was a godly husband too, which we should learn to prize as a great mercy,
and should be able to discern it: an happiness it is to have daughters
bestowed on thriving and godly yoakefellowes; Pray for it, use means for it,
be thankful for it.

2. He was rich
Also he had a state rich enough, he was a wealthy man in the place where he
lived: Surely God that casts these things on such persons accounts them not
excellent, and if he deny them to his servants, does it not out of
unwillingnesse or want of means, but alone because he knows it better for
their souls to be destitute of them than to abound; wherefore they must
learn contentment in their absence. And those that have them must take heed
they over-prize them not, and suffer not themselves by having them to be made
as Laban was, worldly minded.

4. His crosses.

1. His daughters and grand children went far from him.


Now for crosses: We read little of Labans affliction; it may be it was a
grief to him that his daughters and grandchildren went so far from him, but
such a cross even a natural wise man may make easy to himself, by
considerations of reason, that the good of their children so requires, and that
their comfort in their children stands not so much in seeing them, as in their
well-doing: Only Laban did make Jacobs prosperity a cross to himself, in
suffering his mind to be alienated from Jacob, because Jacob did thrive a
great deal faster than himself, and to his hinderance, which cannot be done
without a great deal of vexation.

2. He was troubled at Jacobs prosperity.
It is an ill disease to be sick of another man's prosperity; take heed you
suffer not covetousness, or other distempers to bring such sickness upon you.

With far less vexation may a man lose half he has, than bear the
torment which such estrangement of heart will bring with it.

His death.
And now for Labans death, we hear nothing of it, only he lived and dyed so
far as we see, like a carnal man, and he had no grace in him, but after a
little time here spent in earth prosperously enough; at last, so far as we can
see, he perished eternally, for no footsteps of faith and true piety appear in
him.

O my brethren, take heed that you do not carry your selves so foolishly, as
to live in a mere worldly fashion, scraping together a great heap of muck and
dung, on which the much deceived world does falsely bestow the name of goods,
and then (with the rich glutton, and him that said, Soul, eat, and drink,
and be merry, for thou have much riches laid up in store for many years) have
your soul taken away, and carried into the place and state of eternal death:
for our Savior has said, that So is every one which is rich in the world, and
is not in GOD. *

THE TWO AND TWENTIETH EXAMPLE.
OF JACOBS Children.
AFter Jacobs Wives and Father in Law, we will proceed to his children, Jacobs
children.
which were twelve sons and one daughter. Concerning his sons, they were six
of Leah, Reuben, Simeon, Levi, Judah, Issachar, Zebulun: two of Bilhah, Dan and
Nephthali: two of Zilpah, Gad and Asher: two of Rachel, Joseph borne in Padan
Aram, and Benjamin borne in the Land of Canaan. The daughter was Dinah of Leah;
of the birth and names of each of these the Scripture takes special notice.

Reuben signifies, Behold a son, Reuben, what it signifies. Genesis 29.3.
for his mother took it as a great favor of God, whereby he would mitigate
her sorrow, yea and help to remove it too, by winning her husbands love to her,
the want whereof was her greatest trouble, as you shall find.

Simeon signifies, the hearing of God, because she said, Simeon, what it
signifies.
God heard that she was hated, and has given me this son too. It was a good
thing in Leah to give her sons such names, as might mind her of Gods goodness
in considering her affliction; and when she says that God saw first, and then
heard her affliction; the last speech is a proof that she made her moan and
complaint to God, and so this mercy came to her as a fruit of her prayers.

Levi, what it signifies.
The next son is called Levi, for said she, Now my husband will be united to me,
or cleave to me, for the word Levi signifies as much as cleaving. She was
earnestly desirous of her husbands love, and would as it were, mind him of her
hopes and desires, that he would recompense her pains of bringing him three
sons, with the increase of his affection. A wife is not good if she be not very
covetous of her husbands love; some probably say, that he, meaning Jacob,
hearing Leahs word, to comfort her, called him Levi, and the original seems
to lead us to that opinion, for the former word translated, called is of the
feminine gender, and is plainly referred to the woman spoken of before; but the
latter is of the masculine, and so may very likely note the husband, of whom
she had immediately spoken. And if so, it was well done of Jacob, at last to
speak some word of comfort to his drooping wife, and to let her see, that the
riches of three sons had made him forget that great wrong she did him, of
obtruding her self upon him against his will, and without his knowledge, which
she ought not to have done, though at her Fathers command.

Judah, what it signifies.
The fourth son is Iehudah, in short Judah, as much as praise of the Lord, or
the Lord be, or is praised, to express her thankfulness, for she said, Now I
will praise the Lord, which has caused mine husbands affections somewhat more
to incline unto me, by making me a mother of four sons. For so it may seem
they did, and that also maybe justly accounted one cause of her sisters envy,
because she saw Jacob begin to love her more heartily than before. These four
were borne one after another, year by year, without long intermission; then
she ceased bearing, till Jacob had four children by the two handmaids, then
she had two more sons.

Genesis 30.18. Issachar, what it signifies.
Issachar the fifth son, signifying there is a reward for giving her maid to
her husband, but in this she was much mistaken, God is not wont to give rewards
for our bad deeds, and though it was of ignorance, yet it was a sin in her to
give her maid to her husband; therefore we must take heed of imitating her in
conceiting that God is well pleased with our faults. Such is the blindness of
our minds, that we are apt to run into such errors.

Zebulun, what it signifies.
The last son was Zebulun, signifying dwelling, because God had given her so
goodly a dowry as six sons, she now begins to hope not alone that her husband
will love her more, but so much now, as to afford her more of his company, and
dwell with her, which it seems before he accustomed not to do, but with
Rachel. For love is never satisfied unless it enjoy the presence and company
of the person loved; these are Leahs sins, envy at her maid, Rachel so far
played the foolish woman, that she gave her handmaiden Bilhah to be her husbands
Concubine, and she had two sons, which Rachel would needs take as her own,
rather than those that her own sister brought forth, and the first she called
Dan, Dan, what it signifies.
which signifies, He has judged, for says she, God has judged me, and has
heard my cause, and has given me a son. She bewrayes a distempered passion,
and would needs interest God into her folly, as if now God in great favor,
seeing how she was wronged, had come to right her: Fond Rachel, no body
wronged her but her self, by entertaining the bone-rotting vice of envy into
her bosom, and yet she will needs take this as a righting of her wrong from
above, for so the word judging signifies; so foolish we be that we will count
our selves either to be wronged by men, when we have received none at all, or
righted of God, when his Majesty means no such matter.

O ignorant and self-deceiving, and self-conceited creatures that we be, let us
beg more wisdom and unpartialnesse to our selves at Gods hand.

The second son of Bilhah is Nephthali, which signifies wrestling, Nephthali,
what it signifies.
because says she, I have wrastled with great wrastlings with my sister, and
have prevailed. Certainly she plays the unwise woman here too, and makes too
bold with Gods name, in saying, With wrastlings of God, and does her sister
great injury. Poor Leah used no means to keep her from fruitfulness, she
neither did keep her husband from her, nor any other thing by which to hinder
her from being a mother, therefore her wrastlings were only conceited
wrastlings, and she proved that envy will cause one to think he is opposed,
when indeed he is not; let us take heed of dreaming that we be wrastled
withal, and prevail, when in very deed, it is neither so nor so.

The two sons of Zilpah are next borne; the first Gad, Gad, what it signifies.
which signifies a troop, whereby Leah shows that her desires or hopes were
yet raised to look for a many more children, as indeed she had three after,
this by Jacob of her own body, and one more whom her imitation of her sisters
weakness made her to account her own too.

The next son is called Asher, for now says she, Asher, what it signifies.
The daughters will count me happy, and the name signifies happiness; sure,
for ought that I can judge, no body ever applauded Leahs happiness in this
matter, yea, she would rather have been judged happy, if she could have counted
it happiness enough, to have borne sons her self, and not followed her
sisters folly, in giving her maid to Jacob: Wherein yet she is less excusable
than her sister, who might seem to have more reason for her fact, because she
her self was childlesse. But you may see what fond things we be many times,
to count that a great matter of happiness, and take great content in it, which
of it self verily is nothing for our good.

But the children of Rachel come at last; Joseph, Joseph, what it signifies.
which signifies, he will add, or give me another son; here Rachel begins to
show some goodness, some faith; the receiving of one benefit, upon her
prayers, makes her hope that God will give her another.

Benjamin, what it signifies.
Then follows Benjamin, called by her Benoni, The son of my sorrow, and Jacob
not willing to have a son of so ill and ominous a name, yet comes to the name
as near as he can, saying, he shall be called Benjamin; as much as if he
had said, One whom I will love as my right hand, and never suffer to depart
from me, for his mothers sake that bare him.

Dinah, what it signifies.
And these be all Jacobs sons. His daughter was Dinah, Leahs seventh child:
the word signifies judgment; and why she was so named, because the Scripture
affirms not, I will not trouble you with my conjectures.

In speaking of them we will begin with the maiden, of whom we have nothing at
all noted that good is.

Who she was.
Some think she was Jobs wife, whose life they cast into the time of Jacob; I
have nothing to allege either for, or against this opinion. It is a
conjecture, take it as you see good: but it is probable, that Job might live
about this time, but of that no more till we come to speak of Job.

No good thing is spoken of her. Her faults.

1. She went into the City, to see the daughters of the country.


Now we go on with Dinah, of whom we read, as I said, nothing but evil, Genesis
34.1. She would needs walk into the City of Shechem, when Jacob lived
thereabouts; forsooth, To see the daughters of the Country, whether they were
fair maidens, what garments they wore, of what carriage, what garbes and
fashion they had. A folly to which many of you maids be too subject, you let
your eyes look over wistly upon the daughters: If you did alone take up your
selves in contemplating the fashions at the Market, or as you walk in the
streets, or the like; yet it were a spending of time worse than you need to
spend it, sure it is not good to go abroad idly, when there is nothing to
do but gaze here and there, when the mind has no employment or business to
set it self about.

A gazing eye shows in empty heart, and tempts the devil to come thither, one
tempting to fill the heart with evil fancies, that is empty of God.

I pray you Virgins take warning by Dinah, be not you gadding abroad hither and
thither, to see and be seen alone; Dinahs success may give you cause of
fearing your selves in such occasions. But especially let me exhort you to
teach your eyes more piety, than to bestow themselves in looking abroad to see
fashions then, when you come to the house of God, there to do service unto
God. Then I say, do not show your selves so disregardfull of God, so very
hypocrites, such persons as let their hearts wander (for that wanders if the
eye wander) when the body approaches him: When you should be marking what is
read, or what is prayed, or what is sung, or what is preached. A wandering eye
at Church is a very bad thing, and is the devils instrument to steal away all
you hear, and to make you unprofitable hearers.

I fear that this is the truest cause why many of you learn just nothing, and
cannot answer what you hear, your eye carried away your minds, that they
could not attend by the ear, to what was spoken.

Maidens let me propound Dinahs example to you, and warn you to take heed of
being desirous to go abroad to see fashions.

But a second thing is, a young man saw her, and took her, 2. A young man saw
her, and lay with her.
and lay with her, and humbled her; you see what hurt followed here; She went
to see the daughters, but one of the sons saw her, and worse than that, lusted
after her, and took her, and abused her body, whether by solicitation and
enticement, or by force and strength, or whether by a mixture of both, partly
striving, and partly soliciting, I cannot say, the words are such as may carry
the sense of soliciting, as well as of ravishing: but we are willing to take
things at the best for poor Dinah, and because the Scripture uses these
phrases to describe a Rape, Deuteronomy. 22.28, 29. calling it a humbling her, as
here; we will in charity think, that the same misery befell her in the City:
for it was the Kings son, who might easily bring her to such a room in an
house as might cause that her crying voice might not be heard, or she might be
loath to cry, knowing what he was, and that she was a stranger. But if it were
so, I am fearful that her more light carriage than was fit, gave occasion to
the young man of such fancies, and imboldened him to offer such a kind of
violence as he thought would not be resisted.

Let maids take heed least their wanton eye and over-light countenance and
promising looks do not inflame the beholder, and offer such violence to their
corruption, as it were to make them offer violence to them; and take heed much
more, that they be not allured to such an evil, as nothing but the violence of
the doer can free them from the imputation of a grievous sin, if they suffer.
Let their care be to keep themselves out of places inconvenient; what did
Dinah with this young man in so secret a place, as might encourage him to offer
force? Sure he would not have forced her in the midst of the streets, he was
not so debausht and brutish, as to compel her in an house before many. Nay,
scarce any man so lewd, that he will attempt such a thing, but when no person
is present. If she were ravished, yet she was somewhat guilty of her own rape,
because she would be enticed to go into an house with a stranger. Had she
been of his long acquaintance, had he been a suitor to her before with the
good consent and allowance of both Parents, had she been allowed to set her
mind upon him, so as to intend to become his wife, then it had not been so
blameworthy, to have so far trusted her self with him. But when her
business was nothing but to see and be seen, to suffer her self to be led by
a stranger into such a place as might give him opportunity to do her violence,
was a sign that her carriage was scarce modest, not at all discreet.

For to excuse her by her age, seems no just excuse, seeing it appears by
the young man's suit for her afterward, that she was now marriageable. Now
therefore let her example make you maidens civil, and sober, and modest in
your carriage, and so prudent, discreet, and bashful, as not to venture your
selves into the company of young men at such places and times, as may produce
as bad inconveniences to you, as this that befell Dinah.

And so much for this daughter, for after this we hear no more of her, but
that her brethren took her out of Hamors house after they had committed the
execrable murder, whereof we shall have cause to speak after.

The sons. Their common faults.
Now come we to the sons, and first, I will handle the things that were common
to them all, viz. their sins, their good deeds, their miseries, their
benefits.

1. All of them were bad except Joseph and Benjamin. Genesis 37.2.
First, it is common to them all save Joseph and Benjamin, that they were men of
no goodness nor conscience; They had a good Father and Grandfather, and they
professed a good religion, but their conversation was naught and scandalous, so
that Joseph being young could not in his conscience choose but acquaint his
Father with their evil deeds.

O this is a grievous thing, that children which have godly education by godly
Parents, and have knowledge of the true God, and are members of the true
Church, should be yet of manifest ill behavior, should run into palpable and
gross naughtiness openly, to the torment of their Parents hearts, and
disgrace of true religion.

Be not some of you youths (whose Parents, though they must not be compared to
Jacob, yet are such as have feared God, and affoorded you the best helps they
could to virtue and piety) as lewd and sinful in your carriage as Jacobs
sons. Yes, yes, some of you are as guilty of evil demeanor as these
youths, though you have the same furtherances to goodness. Now for the living
Gods sake, whose name you take upon you, for your own souls sake, which else
will one day rue this naughtiness and rudeness, and for your Parents and
friends sake, that are ashamed and vexed with your ill report, be entreated at
length to consider how great a wickedness it is to live naughtily, when God
has vouchsafed you so many means to make you good, and turn you from your
evil ways, and frame you to such a conversation as will beseem and comfort
your selves and your Parents.

O let not a Jacobs son be a drunkard, a gamester, a wanton, a night-walker,
and ill company keeper; a quarreller; let not such nettles grow upon a garden,
learn to shun what was loathsome in the sons of Jacob. 2. They all beguiled
Hamor ^he Sichemite.

Genesis 35.




But secondly, they were all guilty of beguiling Hamor and the Sichemites with
purposed fraud and guile, yea, and with pretending conscience and respect of
religion: You know the story it self, Shechem after he had defloured Jacobs
daughter, continued yet to be strongly enamoured of her, and sued for her to
her Father and Brethren, offering any dowry. They would seem to be hindered
from granting the suit by religion; They were circumcised, of the true
religion, a religion slighted and neglected in Canaan, and it was not a safe
thing in conscience, and would be a reproach to them to make marriages with
persons uncircumcised, but if they would embrace their religion, and testify
it by being circumcised, then they would willingly condescend; Now all this
talk of circumcision tended but to bring the Sichemites to such a case, that
they might the better accomplish revenge.

O miserable fault, to cover hatred with deceitful words, A Potsheard covered
with silver dross. To speak one thing and mean the contrary, to pretend a
good purpose to cover a bad, and the more easily to effect it by covering.

Here was a mixture of impiety, Deceit is a great sin.

Prove. 6.10 18. and 26.26.


in making religion a cloak to revenge, and of fraud in harboring and
intending, and yet disguizing revenge.

So dealt Absalom with his Father David, and the shame of such shall break
forth in the Congregation, he is a fool, though he thinks himself wise.

Now I beseech you take heed of deceit and guile, the deceitful shall not live
out half his days. To hate, and yet dissemble with his lips, laying up deceit
within him, is a loathsome thing. It is a part of the description of an
unsanctified man, Romans 3.
With their tongues they have used deceit; Nature teaches men to blame this
sin in others, therefore nature gives light enough to discover it in ones
self. Shame it therefore, and hate it: It is bad to have used this fraud for
covetousness or ambition sake, to get wealth or honor, by overreaching
others; but it is worst of all when it is joined with revenge and with
bloodinesse, that a man make himself a bloody and deceitful man. It is naught
when only good will is pretended, but when religion is made the cloak of
cruelty and villainy, this is to abuse the noblest thing in the world, by making
it a drudge to the basest.

Now if any of your consciences be guilty of abusing pretenses of religion for
the compassing of revenge, of goods, of lust, of any other villainous end, he
has sinned the sin of Jacobs sons. Let him be induced to repent, and let us
all be induced to abhor so great a wickedness; he that does compass any
unlawful end by deceit, makes the sin twice as grievous as else it would be:
He shows that he commits it with almost a full consent of will, he makes his
reason a slave to his appetite, and serves sin willingly, most willingly and
deliberately.

Let us love true, plain, and just dealing, and abhor cousenage and falsehood.

3. They all consented to the murder of the Sichemites.
Another fault of Jacobs sons was this, they all so far engaged themselves
into the murder of the Sichemites, that they consented to it, for they all
joined to spoil the goods of the Sichemites, they all played the robbers in
revenge, it was not so much covetousness as revenge that made them spoil the
City.

O how vile a sin is this revenge! one had done them wrong, they revenge it
upon a whole City: one had injuried them in one sister, they wrong a number in
many sisters and goods besides: here is injustice and malice both in a very
high degree. They are said to have been grieved but with a carnal grief, and
to have been wroth, but with a carnal wrath, for the folly committed by
Shechem, and that it was a carnal wrath is manifest; for lo, it makes them
seek to revenge themselves by a most excessive and a most unjust course.

I call upon you to crucify this humor of revenge, it is evidently blamed:
Avenge not your selves, but give place unto wrath; Recompense not evil for
evil: Be not overcome of evil. Return not evil to him that has done thee
evil; if any thing may disgrace private revenge, this example may; for you
see, when men think good to take upon them to revenge their own quarrels,
they know not how to observe any equality or moderation.

And now I require you all, as you will prove your selves true Christians, and
ever have the comfort of being Christ's sheep, follow him in not revenging
wrongs, for he gave you an example: S. Peter says, of this virtue, when he
did not render reviling for reviling, nor threatening words neither, for evil
deeds. If you harbor revenge, you forgive not, and if you will not forgive,
you shall not be forgiven.

Moral Philosophy teaches us not to wrong or hurt another unprovoked, but it
tolerates it when we are provoked by wrongs; but the perfection of Christian
religion is this, that it teaches, and where it is in truth, enableth not
alone, not to recompense wrong to a wrong doer, but also to do good against
evil.

Shun you this wickedness, and follow not the wickedness of Jacobs sons,
but take heed of wronging any in their goods, for revenge sake.

4. They hated their brother Joseph.
Another fault of these young men, they hated their brother Joseph out of envy,
and could not speak peaceably to him; and when God by dreams foretold his
preferment above them, they envyed him and hated him yet worse; yea, all but
Reuben resolved to kill him, and to see what would become of his dreams, and
mocked him with the name of This dreamer; and all but Reuben too consent to
sell him for a bondslave, and accordingly do it, and when in that anguish of
his soul he besought them, as themselves after confess, they would not hear
him.

Ah beware you of these sins of envying, for that will bring forth a desire
to murder or as bad as to murder and harden one to all cruelty that no entreaty
shall soften. Take heed, take heed of these vices, Envy, murderousnesse,
deriding, hard-heartednesse, cruelty. They be fearful vices, transforming a
man into a Devil.

If any of you have been overruled by them, let him nor defer to bewail
and confess them before God, and let us all oppose these vices, if they
assault us, by holy meditations and prayers; betray not your selves into the
hands of so horrible vices, for want of resisting them earnestly, constantly
and by spiritual means. Especially suffer not your selves to be transported
thus against a brother, to hate a brother or near kinsman, to think on
murdering a brother, to neglect the cries of a brother and be inexorable
against a brother, entreating not to be murdered, to cast him into a pit and
sell him for a slave or to do such kind of injury to a person so near by
bonds of Nature, O what an unnaturalness is it, and what a great height and
dominion of Vice does it prove! Religion may be absent from an heart in which
yet some relics of good nature do remain, but he has quenched all sparks
of all goodness in him, that can behave himself so mischievously to one, to
whom nearenesse of blood obliges him. None of these were brethren to Joseph
by the mothers side, but alone by the Fathers, but an half brother is so
nearely joined, that that name should have been sufficient to have kept them
back from such wickedness.

Pray to God to preserve you from unnaturallnesse, and if any of you have
trampled these natural bonds under feet; let him address himself to most
hearty lamentation, or else the God of nature will sharply punish the
sleighting of natural bonds. It is a diabolical fury of sin that causes a
man to break asunder these bonds of brass and iron.

But yet as bad or worse then this, 5. They lied and cousened their old Father.
they lied and cousened their old Father to make him believe, that Joseph was
killed by a wild beast, as the Story shows, Genesis 37.31. Indeed Reuben was not
consenting to the selling of Joseph, but it may seem that he was willing to
hold his peace, and to conceal their fact, which he thought could neither be
prevented nor redressed by revealing, and it may well be that they did not
acquaint him with their selling of Joseph. But lo they all agree to color
their sin to their Father and bring him into such a conceit as filled his
heart with extremity of anguish: Evil children they were that would cover
their fault by telling such a lie unto their Father as they needed not to have
told; for their sin would not have been the more revealed, if they had said
nothing then to counterfit such a thing, and Jacobs greifes perhaps would not
have been so great if there had remained any hope of his sons life. But it
is like that they were desirous to put him into a conceit of Joseph death, for
fear least hope of his life might put him upon such an enquiry as might find
him out again, and so discover their lewdness, for an ill conscience is
always full of fear and suspicion, and will conjecture such ways of
discovery as no man else can dream of.

Has any of you lied to a Parent and sought to conceal their naughtiness by
falsehood? See this wickedness with remorse, and now take heed of abusing your
Parents with tales; yea I beseech you beware of running into gross sins,
which will always hazard you to lying and falsehood for the covering of them.

See here how one sin begets another in these men, envy does breed an
intention of murder and a wrongful act as bad as murder, to sell a Brother
for a slave. This wickedness brings on lying to hide it, and that in such a
sort as had well nigh killed their own Father with grief. Fear to sin, for
it will so entangle you being once in that you shall not know how to get out.

The use of all.
But one use we must make of all this discourse, to see how bad our own natures
be and to be wondrous thankful, that God has not so far left us to our
selves, as to be drawn to such enormous offenses. He that can look upon the
worst men that have been and the worst deeds, so as to accuse himself of the
same bad nature, and to confess himself obnoxious to the same crimes, and
therefore labors to be more humble in himself, because of the badnesse of his
nature, and to be thankful to God for the goodness he shows in restraining
that bad nature, he makes a singular use of other men's sins. But if we hear or
see other men's faults only to brag of our selves, that we have not so offended
nor will not so offend, it is a testimony of much blindness and
unacquaintednesse with our selves, and may justly cause the Lord to make us
know our selves by giving us over to our own selves in like manner.

Their common goodness. 1. They all strove to comfort their Father in his great
sadness.
But now a word of the common goodness of all, first to their Father, they all
gathered together to comfort him when he was in his great and exceeding
sadness. This was well done, though they had wronged him in being a cause of
his sorrow, yet it may seem they were greatly troubled to think of their
naughtiness, and were careful to to use all means of restoring him to
contentment again. But ah what bitter accusations must those their words
reflect upon their own selves which they used to comfort their Father? How
could they choose but almost bewray themselves by blushing one while and
palenesse another through the cheeks of their own consciences, when ever they
heard him, as often no doubt they did hear him name the name of Joseph? But
howsoever, it was commendably done that now they sought to assuage his
sorrows. 2. They were dutiful to him in going down to Egypt and not taking
Benjamin with them.
All good children should strive to minister matter of comfort to their grieved
Parents, and it is an heinous and unnatural hardness to do otherwise.

Further, they were all dutiful to him in going down to Egypt and not taking
Benjamin with them secretly or against his will, and showed much love and
honor in burying him and lamenting him, and showed themselves careful of
their families and very penitent to Joseph at last, and called to mind this
sin in their troubles at Egypt, and declared by their submission to Joseph that
they had truly repented, besides in their behavior to Joseph before they knew
him, they show lowliness and good discretion. So in one word they grew better
and better as fruits by time grow ripe and mellow, and at last unfainedly
repented and all turned godly men.

O that you which have been rude, wild, debaushed in youth, would be careful
now in your more stayed time to be truly penitent and become truly godly. There
is a kind of amendment by age which is nor sufficient to salvation, though it
something recover the credit. It is to lay aside the practice of ones grosser
faults, and to frame to a civil carriage and to a creditable behavior, though
still the heart remain vain and earthly, and be not humbled duly by the
sight of these faults which were formerly committed. Such a kind of moral
amendment is better then none, but I pray you that be old, do not satisfy
your selves with that, but mend throughout. See and lament your badnesse as
well as your bad lives, lament and bewail in secret and frequently the former
disorders. Be base in your own eyes because of them, and labor to get them
pardoned, and your corrupt natures healed, and to shine in piety and holiness
and all goodness so much the more by how much your youth was more sinful.
All you that have been grievous sinners in youth take this counsel, learn
this lesson of Jacobs sons.

And you young men that have too too much broken forth, O take your selves to
task betime, and begin to amend betime. Let your Parents have the happiness
to see you reformed in their life time, to behold your change, that they may
rejoice in your reformation, and bless God for his goodness in hearing their
prayers and granting their desires, and you may cause them to live so much
longer and more cheerfully, by seeing so happy and desirable a sight. It will
add a new youth to an aged Parent, if he may see his much offending children
returned quite back to the ways of God and goodness, most comfortably will
they leave earth and go to Heaven when they leave their children in such
plight as they may hope to meet them there at last.

But let us look into the benefits which the Lord bestowed upon them. 3. Their
benefits.

1. They had a godly Father and themselves were pillars of the true Church.




First, they had a godly Father and Progenitors and were themselves members,
yea and pillars of the Church of God, of them came a most populous and
flourishing nation, in whom the visible Church continued then, when all the
nations of the world besides did lie in darkness.

A greater mercy then this the world cannot have, to be the Church of God to
have the Church continue in a man's posterity, this is a singular favor, and
God pleased to take all these sons and to make them heirs of his promise;
Isaac had but two sons, Jacob and Esau, God took Jacob and refused Esau,
Abraham had but two sons, God cast out Ishmael and gave the blessing and
promise to one alone even to Isaac; but see the great favor showed to all
these, they be all taken into the Church, all partake of the blessing, all are
made heirs of the promise. If we consider their carriage, Ishmael never
committed so great and monstrous a fault against the second Table as Judah, for
he never fell into incest, but he scorned Isaac. Esau never did so foul a
fault as Simeon and Levi; but he despised his birthright and hated Jacob. So
God did not take these for their goodness, but of his mercy, though they were
of rude carriage he suffered them not to despise and contemn the truth and so
still kept them within the Church. Furthermore, four of these were borne of
hand-maidens as well as Ishmael, and yet the Lord rejected them not. This is
the first benefit, we must learn to esteem it a choice mercy that God
vouchsafes us the same, in making us members of his Church, and in planting
the true Church amongst us.

2 God saved them all from a great danger.
Further, God saved them all from a great danger, over-awing the Canaanites that
they did not pursue and destroy them for that insolency they showed at Shechem.

It is a great mercy if God repress the wrath of men toward any, so that when
they have both provocation and power, yet they be restrained from taking
vengeance; God has the hearts of men in his hand and can if he pleases and
often does overruled and overawe them in this manner.

3. They had store of riches.
Thirdly, they had riches and wealth in abundance, this is a common benefit,
learn not to over-esteeme it nor abuse it, and be confident that if we fear
God, he will not deny us necessaries.

4. Joseph nourished them in the famine.
Lastly, they had a good friend sent down to Egypt to provide for them, that
their families and themselves might not perish by famine, and he forgetting all
their cruelty and injustice took care of them and their children, comforting
and succouring and countenancing them even after their Father was dead, so that
they lived most comfortably during his life. This is a most remarkable favor,
that God provides long before for the helping of his people out of distress,
and that by such ways as they could never guess, of advancing such persons,
as they did least conceive should be helpful to them, and inclining their
hearts to do them good, of whom they could least expect kindness. But see the
folly of man that is often bitter against those things, by which God intends
their great welfare, as Joseph's Brethren against his preferment, without which
they had perished.

Their crosses.
Now for their crosses we read of few, they were in danger from Esau when they
were children, yet not so young but that they had some sense of it, but that
was soon over and they were never the better for it. They were in danger at
Shechem, 1. In danger from Esau when children 2. In danger at Shechem. 3. Felt
a famine and were roughly handled by Joseph.
but that they considered not of, and God saved them before they were aware. But
the famine pinched them and their family, and their rough handling in Egypt
crushed them, so that they were tamed with it and thoroughly brought to
repentance. It is a great goodness of our heavenly Father to heal the souls
of his people by fatherly chastizements and by blows to lead them to
repentance.

We must be thankful to God for our escaping of famine, rough usage, and
other like crosses, but specially we must beseech him that what crosses he
sees fit to inflict, may be sanctified unto us to bring us to repentance, to
revive in us the remembrance of sins past, and humble our hearts for them;
far better is it to have medicinable crosses then to live at ease without
crosses. *

THE TWENTY THIRD EXAMPLE.
OF REVBEN, SIMEON, LEVI, IVDAH.
SOmewhat must be spoken of Jacobs sons in several, so many of them as the
Scripture sets forth unto us in respect of any special thing done by them.
These are Reuben, Simeon, Levi, Reuben.
Judah, Joseph.

First for Reuben, we note his bad deeds, 1. His faults. Genesis 35.22.
his good deeds, his crosses and benefits.

First for his bad deeds. Besides what was common with the rest, He committed
incest with his Fathers Concubine, Bilhah the maide-servant of Rachel, 1. He
committed incest with his Fathers Concubine. Incest is a great sin.
whom Jacob had taken to himself at the instance of his wife, her Reuben
defiled.

Incest is a great sin, it defiles the Fathers bed, it is a wrong to
himself and the party with whom he offends as any sin in that kind, and
it is much against nature showing a most violent and brutish rage of lust,
treading down all considerations even of the laws and rules of nature it
self, in discovering the Fathers nakedness, 1 Cor. 5.
and wronging so dear a person in so high a degree, and in a thing so near
unto him. Paul speaks of it as of a thing not so much as named among the
Heathen, and was greatly grieved that it was committed and not duly punished
among the Corinths. Absalom committed it with an high hand and extreme
wilfulness and presumption, even upon ten of his Fathers Concubines one after
another, and that openly and of purpose to vex his Father and make the jarre
betwixt them irreconcilable, the law plainly forbad it.

Now how comes it to pass that men run into such gross sins?

Answer, First, God pleases to leave men unto themselves and permit their
breaking forth into such horrible crimes, to make the wickedness of man's heart
known, to humble the offenders and make way for the demonstration of his
mercy, or else to show his justice in punishing one sin with another, and in
punishing all at last with much severity, and to warn others by the example of
the offenders, and therefore this Gods permission is not to be blamed or
murmured at: for he is ready to forgive such enormous evils to the penitent,
as he did also pardon Reuben.

Again, the Devil out of the filthiness of his own nature and his most
outrageous wickedness and deadly hatred of God and man, is ready to thrust men
out even into such abominations, because the greater the offense the more it
dishonours God, and hurts the soul, name, and all of the offenders, which he
delights in, and he hopes by one bad example to draw others to the like
evil, and so to do more mischief to mankind.

And for man, his corruptions are very strong, and there is little or no fear
of God before his eyes, wherefore by degrees he will wax extremely wicked,
and run into crimes against the very light of nature: for when any thing
begins to corrupt it does grow worse and worse, till it come to extremity;
because it is a kind of easy motion to go from bad to worse, and especially
it is so in this corruption of the soul, because every sin adds blindness
and hardness to the mind and heart, and so causes the sins to seem far
less vile and mischievous then they be, besides all sins do flatter with a
kind of carnal and sensual content, and so carry away the fancy and
passions, and by them also the will to give consent and to act the wickedest
things.

We must learn first to see our vile nature and to fear and look to our
selves, striving against less sins, that we may not be delivered over to
greater through Gods justice and the strength of our lusts, yea to repent of
lesser sins and strive to get them pardoned and healed, and to cry earnestly
to God that he would keep us, seeing alas we be sorry and simple keepers of
our selves, thus we may escape grosser evils: we must not therefore brag, and
censure, and presume, but know our own nature, pity others and heedfully
watch over our selves.

Again, we are to be greatly thankful to God for keeping us from such
notorious vices, for such is his goodness that he restraines the greater
number from such crimes, because he will not have humane societies too much
disordered and polluted, to hasten his vengeance on the world, this restraint
is a favor deserving thanks. O how often has God in the time of our
unregeneracie held us off from most foul evils that we would have committed.
Let us magnify God therefore and not lift up our selves for such preservation.

And if any have committed such vile sins, let them be much humbled and make
have to repent, knowing the goodness of God who if we cast down our selves,
is ready to pardon such sins and sinners. Be not hardened, grow not impudent
in sinning, neither seek to extenuate great sins, but labor to be greatly
ashamed of them, sorrowful for them, and earnestly sue for grace to heal your
natures, and willingly confess them before God, if they break out so as to
prove scandalous before men also.

Now see Reubens particular good deeds. 2. His virtues. 1. He wisely dissuaded
his Brethren from killing of Joseph.


First, he turned his Brethren from their purpose of killing Joseph, not by
earnest opposition which would rather have exasperated them and hastened the
execution of their evil plot, but by a kind of artificial discreet and
gentle way dissuading from the unnaturallnesse, seeing he was their Brother
and propounding a way less unnatural in it self to seem too, and yet not
less fit for their purpose, kill him not with your hands, but cast him into a
pit and let him starve there. His meaning was not to let him perish, but he
knew that he could not by force take him out of their hands now, yet he had
good hope secretly and in their absence to pull him out of the pit and deliver
him safe to his Father.

You see here respect to his Brother mixed with tender love to his Father also,
whose affection to Joseph he well knew and could not but foresee that which
fell out after, how most heavily and indeed over-heavily he would take the
loss of Joseph. So a good Brother should pity his Brother, being a man fit
to be pitied and save him from wrong. A good son should pity his Father and
Parents, and strive to prevent the things that will be grievous to them.
Especially the more any man has once sinned against his Parent as Reuben had,
the more careful he should be as it were to make amends for his former
wickedness, by seeking to do them good the more afterward.

And in opposing our selves to evil counsel and deeds, we should learn of
Reuben to use wisdom and prudence, and when we want power to do a good
thing openly, directly and by strong hand, then to do it artificially and
indirectly and under hand, propounding to the contrivers of such counsel some
other way less evil, which we may be able to cross more easily. It is not a
fault to seem to yield to some smaller fault with a purpose and resolution of
preventing the whole matter, by making a show of yeeldance to some degree or
part of it, and here you see some appearance of evil is not to be disliked, as
Solomon also seemed to intend the dividing of the living child, for the
finding out of the true Mother. When for a little space a man only seems to
allow a fault, that shortly after he may the better manifest his dislike by
effecting some good, this is not to do evil that good may come of it, but to
do good in a prudent manner. Let us take care to hinder other men's faults and
to do it wisely, that over-earnestnesse may not hinder our success. 2. He was
fully minded to restore Joseph to his Father again.


Secondly, as he sought to prevent his death and hurt, so was he fully minded
to restore him to his Father again.

So we must intend and seek out fit means of bringing our intentions about to
do good unto those men whom we so causelessly pursued by ill men and to set them
in safety and prosperity; especially to those that are near unto us, and when
we may bring comfort also to others by procuring the safety of such as are
dear to them, as Judah after would have been a bondman to Joseph in
Benjamins stead, that he might send him home in safety which would have been
less to his Fathers grief, because he was more able to loose Judah then
Benjamin. When such cases fall out, we must take fit opportunities of doing
good.

3 He grieved to see his hopes disappointed, and Joseph taken out of the pit.
Lastly, it grieved Reuben exceedingly when he found his hopes disappointed and
saw Joseph taken out of the pit, for then though he did not know what they had
done with him, yet he conjectured that it was not for good that they had
remooved him, and therefore he rends his clothes, saying in a doleful
complaint, the Lad is not yonder, and I whither shall I go? He could not
think I suppose of incurring his Fathers anger for not preserving Joseph, for
he might well enough conceive that the matter should never come to his Fathers
knowledge, but sorrow for his former fault by which he had grieved him very
much, made him exceedingly heavy, that now a new cross should fall out to
poor Jacob, which he knew would crush him much more then his fault had done.
So that consciousnesse and penitent sorrow for his former evil, made him much
more loving now to his Father, much more desirous to prevent his grief, and
much more discontented and troubled when he found himself prevented of the
thing he desired.

All men must learn to be grieved if any occasion fall out against their wills
and knowledge, by which they be hindered from doing such good as they intended.
Indeed it can hardly be thought, that one did seriously purpose to cross an
evil plot, if the thing being of weight, he be not seriously troubled, that he
is disabled from crossing it.

But the matter which I would most commend to the imitation of children is
this: The more they have by their offenses grieved their Parents already, the
more careful they must be to show their love and respect unto them afterward
by all means, and to take heavily those things which they know will grieve
them. But most wicked and impenitent and graceless must they be counted that
still add wrong to wrong, and persist in a continual course of vexing and
tormenting their Parents hearts by their misdemeanors, breaking forth still
more and more.

Further Reuben did a good work when he sought to remoove his Father from his
stiffenesse in resolving not to send Benjamin to Egypt, 4 He sought to remove
his Father from his stiffenes in refusing to send Benjamin into Egypt.
and if it were possible to win him to that which was so behoovefull for them
all; yea and doing it with much earnestness too, saying, Slay my Sons if I
bring him not to thee again; he did not mean to expose his Sons to the
danger of death by his Fathers and their Grandfathers hand; for he knew him
to be a far more loving Grandfather, then that he could find in his heart
to take such a fruitless and bootlesse revenge, but his meaning is to deal
most effectually with his Father, to persuade him to a needful thing and
dissuade him from an harmefull peremptorinesse, as much as if he had told him,
that he would use as much care and diligence for Benjamins preservation, as if
the life of his two sons did lie at stake for him.

It is a good thing even very vehemently to strive to remoove our friends from
ill and unreasonable resolutions, and this may well be done even to Parents
and Governors, so that still we observe such a manner as may not discover any
dis-regarding or sleighting of them. Let no man therefore abstain from doing
such a good office to his Governor though it seem not so pleasing for the
time, for at the last it shall so commend it self to him that finds the
benefit of it, as that dislike will be turned into favor, only so that an
over-rough manner of doing do not add to the bitterness of the thing, as it
did in Ioab when he persuaded David to go out and speak unto his servants.

And let not Governors be offended with their Inferiors for taking upon them
so far. It is no transgression of duty, even earnestly strive to dissuade or
persuade a Ruler in such things. It is weakness enough in a Governor on such
an occasion to say, nay, but to chafe and be angry is a double fault, we
find noe such distemper in Jacob. This is the good of Reuben.

His afflictions, so far as is recorded, were not many, His crosses. His
Father minded him of his incest on his deathbed.
indeed none but what was common with his other Brethren, except we may count
that a cross, that he was suffered to sin so far, and doubtless it was a
corrasive to him all his days after, and that his forementioned grief, as it
was in some sense an act of virtue, so it was a suffering of evil. For to be
grieved for some misery like to befall our friends is a great misery to him
that so grieveth.

But one cross he had, that his Father did mind him of his fault on his
deathbed before all his brethren, and did then and there dis-inherit him, he
took it well, and made no angry reply.

It is an affliction to be dis-inherited or otherwise deprived of any benefit
which else we should have had; because of our sins: And we must learn when
such a cross is laid upon us, to bear it quietly and fruitfully too, I mean
so as not to break forth in anger and discontent against him that does
withdraw such things from us, nor yet to pass it over slightly and carelessly
as not regarding the hand of God, but to accept it as a just punishment of our
faults, and make it a means of renewing and increasing our Repentance.

3. His benefits he had diverse sons.
Of the benefits of Reuben besides the common, we read of his fruitfullnesse,
for he had diverse sons when they went down to Egypt, and so he made one
of the twelve Tribes. We have noted this mercy before in others; let us take
heed that the commonnesse of this mercy make us not disvalew it. A benefit is
no whit less to be esteemed, because the Lord vouchsafes to communicate it to
many, and it is nothing but our folly that takes occasion to slight such
favors.

Simeon and Levi their sin double,

1. The murder of the Sichemites.


Now I come to Simeon and Levi, we have their special sin and the punishment of
it noted.

The sin is double. First, They were the Actors of that bloody and ragefull
murder and spoil committed on the Sichemites, in killing Hamor, Shechem and
all the Males. They drew their swords and went in boldly on the third day when
all were sore, and slew all the men they met withal. Jacob does curse their
rage and anger, and does abominate the same.

It is a grievous sin to kill men in a wrathful passion, without just
warrant and calling from God, indeed to kill one particular person is sin
enough, and calls for the Sword of the Magistrate to cut of the sinner, how
much more to fill ones hands with blood, and kill as here a whole city or town.

Murder is a great sin.
Murder is a sin against the light of Scripture and of Nature, against the
Laws of GOD and every well ordered Commonweal, a gross sin and palpable,
a mischievous sin, wronging the Person murdered in his life, the pretiousest
thing he has, with an irrecoverable wrong, wronging his Friends, wronging the
Commonweal, and wronging GOD extremely in presumptuous incroching upon his
prerogative, to be the taker as he has been the giver of life.

O be thankful to the living God, that he has kept you from this red and
crimson sin, especially if any have been so inflamed with rage as once
David, that he has even desired, and resolved, and intended, and attempted to
commit murder, as it fell out to David, and he has kept him from it, either by
preventing the occasion, or some counsel coming betwixt, or some diverting of
the blow or the like, O let him be thankful that he has escaped the fact of
murder, as well as be humble, that he has desired to commit the fault. We
must not ascribe to our selves the immunity from gross sins, and please our
selves in our estate because of it, but we must give God the glory, and loath
and abase our selves and our bad nature, that should fall into them if we were
left to our selves, chiefly if nothing have stopped us from them but want of
opportunity.

And now ever mortify anger and wrath, and revengefull boiling of heart, for
he that nourishes wrath, malice, envy in his spirit within, shall at last be
carried away so far with that inward distemper, that if occasion offer it
self, he shall flame forth into the gross act of murder. All corruptions
being fed in the heart within, do gather such strength, that if there be
fitness of occasion they will break out indeed: O bring not your selves into
such a temper, that the Devil shall have you in readiness to make murderers
of, if ever he can fit you with time and place and other circumstances.

Beware of bloods, beware of bloods, this sin tears the conscience in an
hundred pieces when once it is made sensible. This sin leaves a deep stain,
it begets grievous horrors, and makes the soul still fierce in pronouncing
evil against it, after it has been fierce in doing so great an evil unto
others. Pray to God to preserve you from it, and get meek, gentle, quiet,
patient spirits, which may keep you from being provoked with wrongs.

And if any of you have transgressed in this kind, though not in so high a
degree, let the example of these two encourage him to repent, and make him fly
to the throne of grace, that God would work in him true repentance, and both
pardon and heal him. You see two young men here drowned in a river of blood,
most innocent blood, by them most causelessly and groundlesly spilt, you see
them yet pardoned. Nay they were stained with their brothers blood, whom they
consented to kill, and actually sold for a slave, and yet they be pardoned.
Run to God, he can pardon many murders as well as one angry word, and will
do it if you submit and convert. He that judges himself for his sins past,
resolving thoroughly by Gods help to reform his heart and life, and takes
boldness to ask remission and sanctification at Gods hand in Christ's name,
shall be pardoned, although the guilt of the blood of God the son did stick to
his fingers.

But another fault they committed, when their Father in the bitterness of his
soul and his great fears told them of their fault and their danger, 2. They
showed no repentance when their Father told them of their fault.
they showed no repentance, no fear at all either of God or men, but returned
him a surly kind of foolish excuse, saying, should he abuse our sister as a
whore. If you frame this answer into a due form of reasoning, and apply it to
the justifying of their murder, for to that purpose they alleged it, it must
run thus. If any man wrong us notoriously we may and will kill him, and
there is no cause of reprehending us, but he has done so, for he has abused
our sister as an whore, wherefore we do not deserve to be reprooved for
killing them. First if they had slain only the ravisher, it might seem to
have been justified by this reason had it been good, but Hamor and the other
Citizens knew nothing of this abuse, at least they were not guilty of it, none
of them had abused their sister. Secondly, who ever made this law, that a man
greatly wronged should kill him from whom he had received wrong; so their
reason is naught, and if it were good, yet would it not reach far enough to
justify their deeds.

Here we have two faults, to answer their Father surlily, and impenitently
justifying the fault in a kind of angry muttering at the reproof; this is a
common fault amongst inferiors, if they be reprehended, they go away
grumbling some sorry excuses or other being angry within, and showing it as
far as well they dare by mumbling out some fond words, so as they cannot be
distinctly heard. This is a kind of replying to Governors and is a sin,
showing that there is no spark of true repentance for the fault, at least that
then that spark is even raked up. But if after the heat of passion that
carried one to commit the fault, a man be told mildly of his fault, and then
mumble out such foolish excuses, sure he is not penitent, and in very deed
such mutterers would have their mouths stopped and stomach taken down with
smart and blows. This shows a sleighting of the Governor as well as not
repenting of the fault, I pray you inferiors now you are quiet, consider how
undecent a thing it is, and how ill beseeming your places? that you may blame
it in your selves, and condemn it for the future, and seek to get it
pardoned. And now learn to do better, give such an answer as these young
youths should have done but did not, that is, confess your offenses, humble
your selves, resolve upon, and unfaignedly promise amendment, and pacify the
anger at once of God, your Governors, and your own consciences.

And see in them a second fault in this one answer, a bearing out of themselves
in their sins without fear, shame or remorse, and that upon so fond a
pretext as this, that they had received a wrong first. To continue heardned in
a sin, such a sin, not to be able to see the hatefulness of it, not to
feel the weightinesse of it, not to fear the just judgments of God and due
punishments of men, but in steed of sorrow to show stiffenesse, as much as to
say, if it were to do again I would do it, and I am not sorry that I have
done it, this is a great badnesse, and to bear ones self thus in sin upon
mere false conceits, that have no probability of truth in them, argues a most
blind mind and a stupid conscience, and makes the sin much more offensive
to God, as showing that the mind is not carried to sin on a sudden
temptation, but gives it self to sin out of the place it has given to the
belief of false principles, as these had concluded with themselves, that it
was reason to kill him that abused their sister, and therefore deliberately had
resolved to do it. Let us take heed to our selves, that we be not thus
hardened by the deceitfulnes of sinning.

Now the punishment of this sin is this, Their punishment.

They lost part of the birthright.


that they were minded of it by Jacob, and had not that part of the birthright
settled upon them though the next in age that Reuben had forfeited, but were
scattered and divided in Israel, and made to be two of the smallest and meanest
tribes, not fit either to command and rule, or else to have the double portion,
because of their small number. God did afterward turn this to Levi to a
blessing, but in it self it was a punishment. God causes that for murder and
such insolences toward the Father, the whole posterity after them does fare
the worse in earthly things for their fault, and just it is that he should do
so, for he looks upon Parent and childeren, as upon root and branch, making
but one common body where each is a part, and therefore in smiting the root
does bring misery upon the branches too, and contrarily. O let us take up this
argument to fortify our resolutions against sin, shun earnestly the doing
of those evils which may provoke God to scatter and disperse thine offspring
after thee.

And so much of Simeon and Levi, Levies death.
only we have mention of Levies death too, how long he lived and then he died,
Exodus 6.15. that he lived 137. years.

Now of Judah in several, consider his faults and virtues, Judah.
benefits and crosses.

His faults were these besides what was common in the matter of of Joseph and
the rest. First, His faults, 1. He left his Fathers house.
that he separated himself from his Fathers house, and went and lived with a
certain Cananite called an Adullamite, because he lived near a place called
Adullam, and out of I know not what occasion, there grew a great and inward
friend with him. This was to get out of Gods blessing into the warm sun, to
leave the family of Jacob, and table with Hiram, this was to excommunicate
himself out of the Church what in him lay, and to bid adue to God and all his
spiritual blessings.

It must be noted as a great fault, for any worldly respect whatsoever,
voluntarily to transplant a man's self out of the visible Church into a profane
and unhallowed place where the Church is not. There where you have Gods Word,
Gods Sacraments, Gods Name and Gods people, and find your selves spiritually
edified, there abide though it be with some inconveniences to your estate, and
be willing rather to suffer outward damage then inward, show more love of
goodness then Judah did when he was a profane young man. After you see he
returned home to his Fathers house, it had been better not to have departed
thence at all.

2. He was led by his eye in marriage.
A second fault, being there he is led by his eye to marry a Cananitish woman.
It is likely without consent or privity of his old Father, it is scarce like he
would go to him to ask counsel, whose family he had forsaken.

Beware young men of erring with Judah, and marrying your selves to profane
and idolatrous persons of your own heads for sinister respects, least the Lord
punish you as he did Judah. The youth of Judah does a little excuse, for he was
very young when he had his first child, as appears, because his child by
Tamar viz. Pharez, had two sons at the time of their going down to Egypt,
when Joseph was but 39. years, for he was 30. before the years of famine came
when he stood before Pharaoh, and there had been 7. years of plenty past
after his preferment and two of famine. Now Judah was Jacobs fourth son,
borne about the fourth or fifth year of his being in Padan, and Joseph the
last borne there about the 14. year, so there was some 10. years space
betwixt that, therefore Joseph being 39. he could be at most but 49. Tamar by
whom he had Pharez, was married to two of his sons and stayed till the third
was marrigeable, that could not be less then some 18. or 19 years, and Pharez
could not be thought to have two sons, but that he must be some 18. or 19.
years, which make some 32. at least, therefore Judah when he married must be
no more then some 18. or 19. years. His youth therefore I say extenuates his
fault, but let none of your ages be blemished with such a fault, as was too
blameworthy even in the greenenesse of his youth.

3. He committed incest with his daughter in law.
Thirdly he sinned in committing as he thought whoredom with a professed
harlot, but it was indeed incest with his daughter in law, who of purpose lay
to entice him in the habit of a harlot, by the way where she knew he must go;
This is a filthiness, that a man should suffer himself to be so far
inslaved to lust after a disguised harlot by the way, as to solicit her, and
hire her, and abuse her. He was at that time a widdower, and the time of
mourning for his wife was past, and now he made no great conscience of single
whoredom, but God will judge whoremongers, Heb 13 4. 1 Cor. 6.9.
and whoremongers shall not inherit Gods kingdom.

If there be any amongst you as bad as Judah, that makes little conscience of
avoiding whoredom if he may do it closely and without knowledge, and has
abused his wealth to hire an object for his unlawful lust to work upon, he
must see his fault in Judah and repent of it.

And you must all be exhorted to arm your selves with a resolution of flying
fornication, and of watching over your selves, and so carefully resisting the
first motions to evil, that you may not be so easily drawn away and enticed.
And such as God has made of a better temper, then that such an object would so
soon entangle them, and has not entangled them, must acknowledge Gods favor
in preventing them from such evils, and take heed to themselves that they
allow not others as bad, revenge, quarrelling, drunkenness, deceit or the like.

Another fault of Judah was, 4. He dissembled with his daughter in Law.
that he dissembled with his daughter in Law, making her believe she should
have his son Shelah, if she would stay a little till he was grown up, but
never meant to perform it, nor did not go about to accomplish the marriage
when the young man was grown up, which caused her to think of a sharp and
lewd revenge, even to draw him to do that unlawfully which his son should
have done lawfully, raise up seed to his brother, a custom which was then in
use amongst them I know not on what ground, but it seems to be from God,
because he did establish it by Moses Law after.

You must learn to take heed of counterfeiting and deceiving, making promises
alone for shifts and delays which you mind never to perform, but alone to
serve a present turn especially in matters of some weight. This is flat lying
for to speak otherwise then my meaning is, to go against the mind and to
utter falsehood of set purpose, as much as any other made lie can be thought to
be, yet nothing more common then this, men for an advantage will promise and
say any thing which they never mean or think to make good, how can he say
he is a true Israelite in whom there is so much guile? How can he say that
he speaks the truth that is in his heart? ye false promising double tongued
men, see how you be dishonest and unjust, and false men, and learn to bewail
and amend this wickedness. Now promise nothing but what you fully intend, and
know that upon good reason you may intend to perform, and when the promise is
made, give it seasonable accomplishment. We must read Stories and Scriptures
to see and amend, not to excuse the like faults in our selves.

But Judah showed a fault or two more in dealing with Tamar, 5. He forgot his
own naughtiness, and would have had Tamar burnt.
when her big belly showed what she had done, he forgot his own naughtiness
and would have had her burnt. What authority he had in that place I know not,
whether he had made himself a member of that town of Adullam, and had gotten
to be a Ruler, but she was accordingly brought forth to be burnt, and then
seeing the signs he could not deny them, and then blames himself, and the
sentence of burning grew cold, because both or neither it seems were to be
burnt. But before he knew his own guiltiness, he was glad to have an
occasion of being rid of her, that his sone Shelah might escape her.

Lo what rash censurers we are like to be of other men's faults, and willing
to have them punished, in the mean time forgetting our own as great offenses;
Let us learn to be more moderate, and to have the wisdom to look upon our
own offenses before they be brought to our minds by such tokens as made Judah
confess his fault.

6. Repented not of his whoredom, but sought to redeem his pledge.
Again, when Judah had committed whoredom, he goes his way never repenting,
but all his care is to redeem his pledge by sending the kid, which either was
of less worth or at least not so apt to bewray him, and when the woman could
not be found, and that his friend returned ashamed to make so infamous an
inquiry, he said, let her take it least we be laughed at, so the sin did
not much moove him if he might escape the reproach.

It is thus with most men, such a sleepie conscience they have within them,
that if they bear out the fault with secrecy, they be not grieved for it,
only reproach by having the business known would make them startle and be
troubled; O if any be so affected, he shows that no fear of God is before his
eyes.

Let us labor at least to have so much truth of goodness left in us, that if
we should fall into any gross sin though never so secretly and without
knowledge of it to any, yet we might be affected with sorrow in regard of the
offense done to God, and so fall down before him and lament it, and confess
it, and repent of it before him, and renew our purposes of amendment and she
for pardon and help, which till we have done we are not recovered out of the
snare of the Devil, but shall be carried into the same sin again and
again, so often as he can present us with occasions. He that can let sin go
lightly away if no natural evil follow from it, is either destitute of all
graces or has his graces much abated and infeebled by the prevailing of
corruption.

Hitherto of Iudahs faults, now his particular good deeds.

His virtues. 1. He returned at last to his Fathers house.
First, he returned at last to his Fathers house, and dwelt there with his
Brethren as a member of his Fathers family again, when he made his return I
know not, but that he did it is most certain.

If any have departed out of the Church and society of good men, let him learn
of Judah to turn back again the better way, and to come home to the place
where God dwells. David was grieved, that he was forcibly driven out of Gods
Inheritance, and wished nothing more then that he might have liberty to dwell
in Gods Tabernacles. Let us if we have banished our selves from such
habitations be careful to return with speed from our voluntary wandering.

2. He was somewhat humbled for his sin.
Secondly, Judah shows himself somewhat humbled for his sin with Tamar, for
seeing the tokens he had left with her, and knowing his fault, he confesses
his fault and says, she is more righteous then I. For Shelah was grown up
and was not given unto her.

So must we do, if we have sinned and been an occasion of others sins,
let us justify them above our selves and condemn our selves more then them,
and not be possessed so with the partiality of self-love, as still to stand
in our own light, denying the fault or laying the blame upon another. True
repentance will be ready to blame it self, but an impenitent heart is witty to
cast the blame still from it self upon another.

Again, it is said, he knew Tamar no more afterward, and we read not of
any other wife or child he had afterward, so that he forbear her because she
was his daughter in Law, and forbear to take another wife voluntarily, it is
like, in humiliation for this unbridled fact he had committed.

If any have sinned in unlawful deeds of this kind, his care must be with
Judah to offend so no more, and to be so humbled with his former offense, that
the consideration of it may make him temper himself for the future.

Further, Judah carried himself well toward his Father, 3. He carried
himself well to his Father.
for he was earnest to get him send Benjamin with them to the Governor in
Egypt, and at last prevailed by interposing his faithful promise to bring him
back again, as you read in the Story. Genesis 43.


It is a good thing in an Inferior to turn away his Superior from
stiffenesse in an indiscreet purpose, and he has performed a worthy office,
that has so far prevailed with his superior for the good of himself and of
others, wherefore do this good deed with humbleness and discretion, as
occasion serves.

The last good deed of Judah and most commendable, 4. He faithfully kept
promise with his Father.
was his faithful keeping of his promise with Jacob, in offering himself to
be a bondslave in Benjamins room, whose absence he knew would even kill his
old Father, so that he was content to take the punishment of another fault
upon himself, rather then falsify his word of presenting the Lad again unto
his Father. How was love and faithfulness joined both in one act?

We must learn to practice even so, to love a Parent so, as if it be possible
to prevent his grief with our own so great a misery as perpetual bondage
during life.

How much are they to blame that occasion their Parents misery by their wilful
sins, and can well enough be content to see their Parents go mourning to the
grave, even for their incorrigible naughtiness. Sure the affection of good
children is far otherwise.

And now children, have a loving pity to your Parents, and frame your selves
rather to suffer any misery then the sight of your Parents pining away in
grief, especially then the procuring of it by your own misdemeanors.

Again, he showed here great fidelity for having given his Word to his Father,
that he would bring Benjamin again to him, he preferres the performing of his
promise before his own liberty, and would rather keep his promise with his
Father then live at home with him in freedom.

Let us learn to show the like care in keeping our promises, even to do what
we have said chiefly in matters of weight, though we cannot do it without
great inconveniences to our selves, let us keep promise though it be to our
hurt.

5. He did courageously bear an evil accident.
Again, Judah makes a most pithy and rhetorical speech to Joseph, for
affection will make a reasonable wit to do the office of a good Orator. This
was a commendable thing in Judah, to bear so sudden and terrible an accident
with so much strength of mind, that he could apply himself to take that
course which was fit and behoofefull, notwithstanding his griefs.

Let us labor to be of so well compact a spirit, that extremity of sudden
blows may not disable us from carrying our selves discreetely even in such
unexpected accidents. This is a gift that we must beg at Gods hands, and the
best way to get it, is as Judah did, to see God in it, and be humbled before
him for our sins that procured it. And so much for Iudahs particular good deeds.

His crosses. 1. He had two very wicked sons.
Now his crosses were, first that he had two sons so wicked, that God himself
could not brook them, but even slew them for their extreme wickedness.

It is a cross that has befallen many a Father to have very lewd children;
Labor what you can to prevent it by being good your selves, and carry not your
selves so wickedly as to pull this cross upon your selves, as Judah did in
running to Hiram and marrying a Canaanitish woman; for what could he look for
but that the sons of such a woman and brought up in such a place should
prove wicked? And if it do befall any of you or have befalne you, be indeed
humbled by it, but not put quite out of heart. Let it help to make your selves
better if your children be wicked.

His daughter in Law drew him to incest when he intended fornication only.
Another cross was, that his daughter in Laws discontent drew her to
prostitute her self to him in the disguize of an Harlot and so drew him to
incest, when he thought but to have committed fornication.

It is a misery to be drawn into a more grievous sin then one intended to
commit; Let us resolve to commit none at all, that such an addition of
faultiness may not be put upon our sins beyond our own knowledge, and if it
have befalne us, let us learn to be humbled very much. It is just with God to
give a man over to a worse sin then he thought of, that is bold to take
liberty to commit some sin which he ought not to have done.

3. His sin brake forth to his shame.
Lastly, God did cause the sin of Judah to break forth to his shame, as you
know, though he feared the shame more then the sin.

And this is surely a great punishment to make ones evils known which he
hoped should have been kept still in secrecy. And a just thing it is with God
to dishonor a man before men, when he will dishonor God by sinning boldly in
secret.

And if God have buried any man's faults in darkness, let him bury them by
repentance, else they shall break out more reproachfully at last day to his
utter confusion. But if God have cast the dirt of any man's sin upon his face,
and laid his gross crimes open to all the world, he must make this use of it,
to be more humbled before God, and improve the grief that shame and reproach
will stir in him, to the more hearty bewailing of the sin that deserved it,
otherwise to be greatly grieved, for the shame is nothing else but a carnal
and unsanctified sorrow.

And so much for Iudahs crosses. His benefits.
Now his particular benefits are these.

First, he was a man of very good natural parts, 1. He had very good natural
parts.
and it seems excelled his brethren all but Joseph in these natural
abilities as is probable, because Jacob trusted Benjamin with him, whom he
would not trust with Reuben, and sent him before to Joseph, and it is most
clear by his excellently discreet and wise Oration, that he made to Joseph on
the sudden when they were brought back again with the cup.

To have wit, good speech, good audacity, and other like natural parts, is a
great favor of God. Those that have them not are to seek for so much the more
grace, that the presence of the more excellent may supply the want of the
meaner. A less wit with more grace does avail more to happiness here in the
world then a far greater wit without grace.

Again, those that have these good abilities, must take heed of marrying
themselves and defiling them by being proud of them and abusing them, but must
walk humbly, as knowing that they be but common benefits, such as the
wickeddest enjoy, and things lent by God for which they must answer. Therefore
they should employ them virtuously and for good purposes, that so they may have
the true credit and comfort of them. Ah if these be sanctified, how great a
luster do they receive from grace, else the Devil has more of them then any
man alive, and yet remains a hateful and a cursed creature.

Further, Judah had a part of the birthright settled upon him, 2. He had a
part of the birthright settled upon him.
with a rich country and the Principallity of Israel, that out of his loins
should come the Kings of Israel, and the Messiah himself the King of Kings
should be borne. For though he committed diverse great faults, yet none so
over-grosse and palpable as were those of Reuben, Simeon or Levi his elder
brethren. Indeed his fault fell out to be incest, but it was unwittingly, for
in his purpose it was single whoredom not incest. God then saw it fit to
settle a part of the birthright upon him notwithstanding his sins.

It is a great kindness of God to pass by ones unworthiness, to give him
superiority in blessings, though his sins may seem to deserve the loss of
them. And though none of us can have that privilege of being progenitors to
the Messiah, yet God does often grant riches and a flourishing estate and
dignity above others, even to those that well-neere equalled others in
wickedness. This benefit must be observed with humble thankfulness.

THE TWENTY FOVRTH EXAMPLE.
OF Shechem, Hamor, Hiram, Er, Onan, Tamar, the Midianites.
NOne other of Jacobs sons ( Joseph alone excepted) have any great matter
rehearsed of them in Scripture. Potipher and his wife.
The order of our story requires therefore, that we should proceed to tell you
what we read of him, but because his life is related at large in respect of the
great things wrought by him, I will therefore handle other of Jacobs
contemporaries and of his too, before I come to speak of him, and I will begin
with those with whom Jacob had most to do.

First, Shechem.
we have Shechem coming in an evil time to disquiet the peace of Jacob now
returned and settled in the land of Canaan, and in him you must note, First,
what was good, Secondly, what was naught. Thirdly, his prosperity. Fourthly,
his adversity.

His faults. 1. He looked lustfully on Dinah. Genesis 34.
His bad deeds come first to be noted, and that was first, he gave his eye
liberty to wander with a lustful wandering. It is said, he saw Dinah and took
her, the Devil and sin prevailed against him by the disordered use of his
sense. He gave himself leave to gaze over-earnestly upon her beauty and other
good parts, wherewith the eye is usually taken and the heart inflamed.

Let us learn to repress an evil and a wanton look, and to keep the Devil
from possessing himself of this window as it were of the soul, to be master
of this conveighance, by which so much comes in and goes out of the soul. The
eye must be looked to with diligence, by him that would not be surprised with
lust, he must turn away his eye from beholding this vanity, the beauty of a
woman: he must as Job make a covenant with his eye, Job. 31.1.
that it let not in lust and wanton desires, he that mortifieth not as other of
his senses so this, shall never be thoroughly master of himself, nor get any
notable victory against his corruptions. You are not ignorant of our Saviors
command, Mat. 5 29.
to pull out the right eye if it offend. This is one way of pulling out an eye,
to bridle it from looking upon such objects as may stir up lust and other
evil desires in the heart, and that the eye may be thus bridled, the heart
must be overawed with the fear of God, and so settled in a firm, steadfast and
full resolution of not sinning in any kind or degree, and in an earnest
endeavor to loath and detest sin, not alone to leave it. Hatred has such a
power over the whole man, that it will not suffer the eye without some inward
rising to fix it self upon the thing hated, or any thing that has a fitness
that way. Let all good Christians get the heart so armed, and the eye will be
sufficiently defended. Here now is his first fault, he looked upon a woman to
lust after her, and did not check the desire, nor refrain the wandering eye.
Take heed of the beginning of his offense, if you would not come to the end of
it.

2. He enticed or forced her to naughtines, or both.
The next fault is, he either forced or enticed, or as it is likely, partly by
persuasion and partly by some kind of violence brought her into a fit place for
his purpose, and so his lust made more headstrong by fitness of the
opportunity, committed the act of fornication and folly with her, and as it was
after said, wrought folly in Israel. His sin was the sin of fornication,
and it is like enough we may call it a rape, he forced a maiden. I am rather
induced to think it was done most by force, because that the maiden made the
thing known to her Father, who (had it been done by her free consent) should
not (it is likely) have come to the knowledge of it by her means, nor could by
any other, so then he forced a maiden. It may well be that by fair and
courteous carriage he wan her into a house, and then by strength mixed with
persuasion, wanne her to his will. And in him you see the right progress of
this sin, when the desire has over-wonne the will and gained consent, then
does the heart seek the opportunity of time, place and like circumstances, and
by the fitness of these Satan is so tempted to tempt, and the coals of lust
are so blowed, that it flameth forth and carries a man or woman or both to act
wickedness.

If therefore any man would escape the foul acts of this sin, he must oppose
himself to the first desires, and cross them by following the Apostles
command, fly fornication. 1 Cor. 6.18.
This sin must be run away from, the only sure and most safe way of escaping
it is to run from it. If Shechem finding these desires boiling within his heart
by means of the fire that lighted in at his eye, would have opposed wise and
virtuous thoughts, and so gotten himself out of the company and sight of the
Maiden, his desires had not drawn him to that which brought him to
destruction, but he presently fell to plot and contrive how he might get the
Maid into some house and lonely place, and ceased not till he had so far
gratified his inordinate passion, and then lo he was not at his own command
to forbear the lewd action.

You have heard Shechems fault, 2. What was good in him. 1. He continued to
affect her when he had defloured her.
next see what is commendable in him. Though he had done the Maiden this wrong
to devirginate her, yet he continues to affect her, whereby it is probable that
he found her so chaste as that she did not willingly consent unto the
forementioned evil act. But howsoever he continues to affect her and desires
to repair the wrong he had done so much as it might be repaired by making her
his wife. This is a matter worthy some good commendation, that his heart is not
estranged from her now when he had given his evil desires some satisfaction,
but he proceeds to seek her in the way of Matrimony. The Law appointed too,
that if any had enticed a Maiden, he should marry her and not be divorced from
her during her life, unless her Father would not grant consent and then he
should pay a fine in money. Deuteronomy. 22.28, 29.


Another thing praiseworthy in him is, 2. He acquaints his Father with his
love to her and in treates him to speak to her Father for him
he takes the right way to get her to wife by acquainting his own Father with
his own affections, and employing him to her Father to mediate and make up the
match. All you young men and women, learn the right, due, and honest course of
proceeding in Matrimony, if you like any person and would feign bestow your
selves upon them. Acquaint your own Parents first, and let their consent be
obtained, that they may also be your suitors, and so you may proceed with free
consent on all hands. This way of proceeding gives honor to Parents, brings
comfort to children and yields obedience to God and follows the rules of right
reason. So did Sampson too in his love, Heathen men you see here, and in
Sampson Israelites that were wise, and would go on fairly, took this course.
Let them that have been more preposterous blame themselves, repent; and learn
to follow good examples, all you that are yet to marry.

Furthermore, it was well done of the young man and his Father too, 3. He stood
not overmuch upon matter of portion.
that they stood not overmuch upon matter of portion, but bid him ask dowry
enough. I know that a wise care must be had this way, that the married couple
may not want convenient means of maintenance: for to marry without regard of
thinking how to live when they be married, is so great a folly as does show him
to be quite bereft of all good understanding that does it, but yet money must
not be the maine matter, as if one went to chaffer and buy and sell when they
go to make marriages.

4. He would have all things agreed upon before marriage.
Another thing was commendable in this young man and his Father, they would have
all matters agreed upon concerning dowry and other like conditions, and
themselves having agreed upon conditions are careful to perform them, indeed
they were necessitated, for they could not have the Maiden upon other terms.
So it is good for Parents and all, to make some plain and settled agreement of
all worldly matters, that there may not fall out any interruption afterward,
to the tormenting of the young peoples minds with actual breaking or fear of
breaking.

5. He was constant in his love to the end
Again, this young man was constant in his love to the end, and was fully
settled and bent to marry the Maiden here. No man should enter into terms of
marriage in sport or jest, but should proceed seriously and settled in that
business, especially they who have once made a serious promise of marriage
either to other with mutual knowledge and consent of Parents. I suppose that
promises being not limited with any unperformed condition, they are bound in
conscience to proceed unless a great and very just let fall out, and I can
scarce be made to think that they may break off in such case with mutual
consent. What betrothing is?
My reason is, God calls the betrothed Maid his wife that has betrothed
her, and to me it seems, that betrothing is nothing but a serious promise of
future marriage, and that nothing is essential to it but the fitness of
persons for age, and the freeness of undeceived consent in respect of the
persons, and consent of Parents mutually, who else may make void a promise
made to man, seeing they make void a vow made to God. If any of you therefore
be guilty of inconstancy in such case, and of flying from such promises, at
least let him be humbled, and consider well with your selves what you do
before you betake your selves to others.

3. His benefits. He was his Fathers heir who was a great man.
Hitherto the young man's virtues, now his benefits.

He was his Fathers son and heir, and his Father was the Prince of that
City, he was a rich man and honorable in the place where he lived, even the
principal person of the house. This is a benefit indeed, if he that has it
use it orderly, so as to walk worthy of that place and eminency, and to get
and exercise so much more virtue; but if it make him proud, bold to do evil,
as here it may seem it did and very often does, then it were better be the
meanest of the family, and of the town. You that be heirs to wealthy Parents
and likely by them to be wealthily left, O stand not upon these terms so as to
lift up your hearts to swell, but carry humble hearts, and labor to add grace
and virtues to your places, else they shall prove but as an high gibbet to
bring you to more disgrace in this world and torment in the next.

The misery of this Shechem was, His crosses. 1 He prooved an occasion of the
overthrow of his Father and his whole family and the City.
he prooved an occasion of the bane and overthrow of his Father and his whole
Family, and of the whole City, and that by falling into the hands of bloody and
deceitful men. O pray to God to keep you from having occasions with such
persons, and being faulty of such crimes. Beware of gross sins and wrongs,
for you know nor what sharp vengeance may lie in wait for you afterward.
Sin is not all paid for in an instant, God does sometimes call sinners to a
severe reckoning even in this life besides that which is to come.

So much for Shechem the son.

Now for Hamor the Father, I have one fault to note, Hamor. His faults. 1. He
was willing to be circumcized for a by end.
he is ready to embrace a religious adjunct, not for religion sake but for some
by end, even that he may get such a wife for his son as he desires. He
imbraceth the religion for the woman's sake, not the woman for the religions
sake. Father and Son concur in this fault.

A common fault it is, religion is made of the by, it serves some other
Mistress. It is a stalking horse for policy on both sides. Wickedly do Jacobs
sons seem to stand on religion for their secret ends, and it was not well
done of them to take a religion up for mere private ends: but such is the
custom of the men of this world, they can embrace any ordinance for their
profit and any religion. O look that you be entire in embracing Gods
Ordinance and Gods Truth, take heed that sinister ends do not mar and
destroy your seeming religiousnesse, and make that you shall seem to God not
the better men but the worse Hypocrites.

Again, something was ill done of him, we see no sharp correction nor
reproof of his son for his wrong done to Dinah, 2. He did not reproove nor
correct his son for the wrong done to Dinah
and that provokes the maids friends.

O how indulgent are Parents to their childrens crimes, scarce with a word will
they check them, at most but with a word for that which deserves many blows,
yea the stroke of death. This indulgence of theirs often makes children bold
to sin, as in Adoniah and Absalom is seen, and so does make them at length
correctors of their Parents, that should have corrected them. Let Parents take
heed to themselves, that they show not themselves to love God less then their
children, by loving their children so much as to put out or smother the hatred
of sin; and let Parents at last learn to make natural affection give place
to justice.

You have his faults, his virtues are, 1. To his Son, His virtues. 1. He is
willing to satisfy his son in point of marriage so far as was fit.
he is willing to satisfy him in point of marriage so far as was fit, and so
should all wise Parents be. If the affections of their children carry them not
to matches too inconvenient, they should gratify them for fear of those
mischiefs which often come by crossing them, and that because nothing is more
likely to procure the welfare of children, then when they be matched to whom
they love; Unless their folly be such as to make too too foolish choises, let
Parents learn to show themselves mild and gentle here if in any other thing.

2. He deals well with his Subjects, persuading them to be circumcised.
Further, he deals well with the Shechemites his Subjects, whom he seeks not
to force but to persuade to accept circumcision. In things of this nature a
good Prince must not compel but allure Subjects, and let them see reason
rather then feel violence: but his reason is taken from the profit of the
people. That is the wisest argument which will most prevail with him to whom
it is used, and so it sped accordingly.

3. He dealt well with Jacob, plainly seeking his daughter and yielding to
equal conditions,

3 His prosperity.

1 His son was indifferently good.


Further, he dealt well with Jacob too, for in all plainness he seeks his
daughter for his son, and is willing to yield to any equal conditions.
Plain dealing is commendable in an Heathen, how much should it be commended to
us Christians?

Now see his prosperity. He had a son indifferent good, that at least sought
his consent and showed himself orderly, though at the first he had been rude.
It is a comfort to have a son not altogether rude and misgoverned, that if he
over-shoote himself in some things, yet will keep his order and reform
himself. Be you such children, O ye sons and daughters, and be thankful ye
Parents that have such children.

2. His Subjects were good.
He had also good Subjects that would be persuaded by him, and such Subjects let
us learn to be, so that we use prudence as well as subjection.

4. His cross. Himself and all his Family and City were murdered.
But his cross was great, he was over-reacht by crafty heads, and himself and
all his Family and City butchered by bloody hands. O how could you brook such
a cross? and why will not you stand prepared to loose life, goods, children,
friends and all? seeing you perceive in the Shechemites how soon all these may
be lost, even then when you think your selves secure; and why do you not
thank God for preserving you from such both craft and outrage hitherto?

Hiram.
Now I proceed to speak of some others. The Adullamite Hiram is a better friend
then a man, indeed a good friend but a bad man. His friendship appears to be
morally good in its kind, He was a good moral friend.

His friendship was

1. Lasting.


because first it was lasting, secondly, it was serviceable, thirdly, it was
secret. Lasting, for it continued to Judah so long, till his third son was
marrigeable and began before his marriage. You cannot conceive it under some
twenty years standing, though you should think that Judah married about
sixteen or seventeene years of age. Friendship is like wine, the elder the
better, the longer it lasts, the more it is to be praised. Learn to be
durable friends, let not a year or two see you changed and estranged, but be
like Christ in that respect, whom you love love to the end, unless they do
even too too unfriendlily cast you off, and break the laws of friendship. And
those that have been fickle friends, let them be ashamed, for it is too too
evident, that they were false, seeking themselves alone and not their friends.

Again, his friendship was serviceable, 2. Serviceable.
stooping to somewhat a base office to help Judah out with his whoredom as
secretly and undiscernedly as might be. Indeed a true friend must be
serviceable to his friend not alone with his cost and labor, but sometimes
also with a little blemish, not by helping him to sin, nor lying, or so
forth, but by doing what may honestly and lawfully be done; for the secret
carrying of his faults and saving him from blame, even carnal friends are
forward enough this way; take heed that you deny not good offices to your
inward acquaintance, and take no less heed that you gratify them not with bad.

For here you see the secrecy of this Adullamite, 3. Secret.
no body knew by him of that fault which he himself knew only by Judah.
Nothing becomes a friend better then secrecy of his friends faults, and he that
has once played the blab in this kind, has no wrong if he be never trusted
after. Nay verily, this may seem a most just cause of dividing friendship,
therefore so far as may be without sin against God and against the Country
and Superiors, every friend must affect this trustiness. Surely had not Judah
found him faithful in this kind, he would never have engaged himself so
far?

So was Hiram a good friend, but yet he was not a good man, Yet he was a bad
man.
for we find not that he did rebuke Judah for his fault at all, which he must
have done if he had been as good a man as a friend. And do you learn to add
that to other good fruits of friendship, even to reprehend them for their
faults, though you do not divulge them, that so friendship may not be a
mutual infecting of one another but a mutual healing.

So much for the Adullamite Iudahs friend, Er and Onan, the first was so wicked
that God cut him off.
now for Er and Onan Iudahs sons.

The first of them was so wicked a man, that God in his justice would not let
him live to stain that good family; O let him be a a warning to all you
children that you proceed not to such a height of wickedness in your
blossoming bud, as to force God to destroy you before the midst of your days.
How sure is his punishment in Hell whom God in his just wrath would not suffer
to live on earth?

And O ye Parents be thankful if God have not crossed you with such wicked
children, so notoriously, so unsufferably naught, or if he have, learn to
prepare for some untimely end of theirs, for often the Lord does so at once
correct the Parent and destroy the child.

And take heed that you take not that course to bring the same evil on your
children, even to have God give them over to naughtiness and destroy them for
it. How is that you will say. Marry not sinful wives, Idolatresses and the
like, be not inward with bad men, live not in bad places. What could Judah
look that Er should see other in the Family of Hiram and in that place and
from that Mother and Grandfather but that which should make him very wicked?
Had he lived in Jacobs family, and taken a better wife he might perhaps have
had a better son; let us not make our selves guilty of our childrens
naughtiness by choosing bad yoake-fellowes, bad friends, bad places of
habitation.

Onan was also wicked and cut off by God in his youth.
Now as for Onan he was also a wicked man and cut off by Gods hand in his youth.

So much of Iudahs two sons.

Tamar a very bad woman.
Now of his daughter in Law Tamar, who was a very bad and lewd woman it may
seem, else she would never have invented such a revenge upon Judah, as to
way-lay him in the habit of an Harlot where she knew he must go, and that of
purpose to try if she could entice him to commit folly with her, and you may
be sure that she did use all the art she could to draw him to this sin,
seeing she placed her self there for that purpose. Indeed she handled him
subtly, that she might be able to convince him, if he should (as else no
doubt he would) have denied it. For he would never have been made to believe
that this woman was Tamar. Instead of hire she asks his signet, staff and
handkercheefe, tokens that were past all gaine-saying. Here is revenge and
filthiness and fraud, and a number of naughts put together to make each other
worse. Why had she not rather expostulated the wrong with her Father in Law
and besought him to give her Shelah her husband? If she were ashamed to speak
for a husband, why was she not more ashamed to entice her Father in Law by
such a trick? But herein mark the wickedness into which revenge will draw
them that harbor it, even to hurt themselves that they may hurt another also,
and take heed you women of following her in a fact of so much impudency; only
note Gods justice against Judah, that would punish him by giving him up to this
disgraceful fact for his other sins that were not joined with so much
reproach. So does God oftentimes deal with men both good and bad, Judah cared
not to go from his Fathers house, he cared not to deal falsely with Tamar,
and lo now God will shame him for all by suffering him to be catched in Tamars
trap. Beware that you sell not over yourselves to such sins as he world does
not intertaine disgracefully, least God give you over to such as will bring
disgrace.

The Midianitish Merchants. Genesis 37.25.
We will proceed next to the Midianitish Merchants that bought Joseph, they were
part Midianites part Ishmaelites, an intermingled company and therefore are in
the story called by both names, here you must note a special providence of
God, overruling the journey of these Midianites to the saving of Joseph's life,
and conveighing him down to Egypt: God has you see store of means to effect
his own purposes which men cannot find out. He goes beyond our thoughts and
beyond the intentions of those which are his instruments, as a man makes his
horse serve his turn for the dispatch of those businesses, whereof the horse
is ignorant.

Therefore we must learn to trust his promises, even then when our eyes can
see no way how to have them accomplished, it pertaines to him that makes a
promise to find means of making it good. If another have given his word to
pay me money, he, not I, must take care to provide it. We wrong God and take
his office to our selves if we be sollicitous about the means. If he give us
any we may use them, but if none, we should trouble our selves no further but
wait upon him and let him alone with his own works.

Again, the Midianites and Ishmalites for the whole troop consisted of both,
were carrying the precious things of another country into Egypt, that they
might sell them there, and so by commerce enrich themselves and profit the
whole world. It was well done of them that they employed themselves in
Merchandise, transporting by land the commodities of one place to another for
the common good, and their own convenient maintenance.

Buying, selling, traffiquing, Merchandise is commendable.
transporting of commodities from place to place are necessary actions, without
which the inhabitants of the world could not partake of each others benefits,
nor supply each others wants, and so should not be knit together in so near
bonds; but by this means the several parts of the world or of any Nation, do
interchangeably communicate whatsoever necessary or delightful thing they have
either to other.

The more pity it is to see men so besotted with pride and vanity, that they
think it a braver and gayer life to live idling at home and following base
pastimes, then to give themselves to a commodious and serviceable employment.
But certainly, no calling nor pains in my calling can so much dis-become a
man, or reproach and abase him before God and men, that are not charmed with
the same witchcraft that themselves, then this of having no calling. Better a
mender of shoes then have nothing to do, better be the meanest member of the
body, then a boil or ulcer, such as the idle man is.

But let men that profess the name of Christians, look to themselves that they
shun the vices with which man's corrupt nature does polute trading and
Merchandise in respect of many particular abuses. Make not riches the end of
your labor, so says Solomon, Pro. 23.4.
Labor not to be rich, shun all injustice in your dealing, shun
greediness of gain that makes one troublesome to all about him, and use
justice, equity, and moderation. Buy as if thou boughtst not, sell as though
thou soldst not. Use the world as not abusing it, and then the following of an
honest trade does lead you as readily to Heaven as those callings that carry a
more glittering show in the world.

Further, we must consider their buying of Joseph, Buying and selling of men,
the original of it.
here we must speak a little of that custom of buying and selling men, how it
may seem to have come into the world. It may seem to have entered either by
war, or else by debt; In war the conquering side, that had the conquered in
their power, having saved their lives, did make their persons absolute slaves
unto themselves, making this law too, that the children which they should beget
(bondmen and bond-women mixing together) should be also bondmen. So came the
greatest number of slaves, men yielding themselves in battle, made themselves
servants for ever. But it may seem, that debt was another cause, when a man
did owe more then he could pay, his person and his children became the
creditors servants, that he might satisfy by labor what he was not able
otherwise, so it came in.

Quest. Is it just or not to buy and sell and keep servants?

The justice of it.
I Answer, at first sight, it seems harsh to use reasonable creatures like
horses, and to make merchandise of our own flesh; but God allowing his people
Israel to have servants, and buy and sell them of any saving their own nation,
does evidently show the lawfulness of it; for it would not stand with his
justice to allow them a thing unlawful.

Again, when S. Paul teaches masters how to use their servants, and does not
command to manumit them, it is evident that it is lawful to have, and
therefore also to buy and sell servants. But it is a very commendable thing in
Christians, that they have as it were by a common consent, laid down this
custom of bond-service, and left it to the Turks and Pagans. So in this the
Merchants offended not, but if they did by any means perceive that Joseph was
a freeman, as no doubt they did by his manner of carriage toward his
brethren, then they did greatly offend in buying and selling him. If it be a
sin to buy stolen goods if one knew them to be such, much more to buy and
sell a free man (if one have any probable reasons to declare his freedom) as
if he were a slave, but it is usual with Merchants to buy any thing that
promises gain, without consideration how justly it be come by of them that
sell it, of which be you tradesmen warned, for think you what you please of
it, it is a fearful sin, and makes you partakers of the same unjustice
which was found in the seller.

So much of the Midianitish merchants that did bring Joseph to Egypt. Now of
those with whom he had occasion to converse in Egypt.

Potiphar, Potiphar a great man.
First, his master that bought him, he was a man of principal place and command
in Egypt, his name was Potiphar, his office was, Prince of the slaughterers, as
the word signifies, as we would call him, Captain of the Gaurd. Princes of old
have had about them, even men that attended them continually, as to defend
them, so to do execution upon such as themselves appointed to die. Such men
had need of a discreet, and prudent and stout man to be their Captain; this
office was put upon Joseph's master; it may seem by his carriage that he was a
man of an indifferent good nature, we will note his faults, his good deeds, his
crosses and his benefits.

For his faults. First, it carries a show of a fault at least, His faults.
Chap. 39.6. 1. He gave himself wholly over to his ease having a good steward
that having gotten a trusty steward, and finding him both faithful and
prosperous, he gave himself wholly over to his ease, and took account or care
of nothing but of his diet. He would not appoint Joseph what provision to make
for his belly, himself would look to that, to nothing else he would look. So
it may seem he was as we use to term such persons, a very belly-god, that
took thought for nothing but good fare. If he had not been too much given to
his pallar, he would have left the matter of his tabling to him as well as
other things, but that he which would brook none other thoughts, would
himself have an eye to his meat, it is a very probable proof, that he was
too great a friend to his belly, and over-loved fine and dainty fare. A man of
place might have found some higher and nobler business wherein to have
employed his freedom from domestical cares, then about the kitchen: but such
an epicure was Potiphar, that his mind soared little higher then a beasts does,
to please his tooth and pamper his flesh with delicacies.

And I pray you be there not many gentlemen Potiphars, that leave all other
affairs at random, and oversee nothing but that they may fare well. Men of
great state have little else to do, and will have little else but to cram
themselves, and show themselves good trencher-men. Businesses of any moment
they neither do, nor will know how to do, but stuff themselves with good
victuals, and to get them a stomach is the maine matter of their life, that
they may eat a better meal, and digest it better. Such as give themselves to
live in pleasure on earth, and nourish themselves as in a day of slaughter,
James. 5.1.
are bidden by S. James to howl and weep for the miseries that shall come
upon them, but for the most part they be grown so brawny-hearted, that they
would but laugh at Christ himself if he should bid them weep; yet if any
amongst you be such that cares for no more but to give himself over to sports
and feasting, let him see how brutish he has made himself, and be sure that
Heaven is still shut against Divesses, and Hell is still open to receive them.

Next, I should think it a reasonable exhortation to you that be Christians,
that if you have leisure or freedom from other worldly cares, you would bestow
your time better then this Egyptian, in some profitable study, in reading
chiefly the Scriptures, and in a large bestowing your selves on exercises of
piety, and then in other fit knowledge, or knowledges whereby you may be better
able to do your country service with comfort to your selves, you must account
with God for time. If an idle word must come under a reckoning, sure other no
less idle wasting of time shall not be slipped over. Live as those that know
there is a God, that he will call them to judgment, that ill and unprofitable
spending of time shall go for a crime. No man forbids you good fare, and a
convenient measure of recreation by lawful sports, but to make your lives
nothing else but a chaining of breakefast, dinner, supper together, with the
linkes of diverse kinds of sportes, if this be not a ready way to Hell, I
profess I cannot find any in Scripture or in nature, that will bring men
thither, do you think that our Savior spoke the Parable of the rich glutton
in vain?

2. He believed his wives cunning slander against his servant.
But another fault of his was, that he believed his wives cunning slander
against his servant Joseph, and was so wrath, that instantly he cast him into
prison, very likely without calling him, or at least patient hearing him to
answer for himself. She accused Joseph to have enticed her and offered to
ravish her, the man believes his wife, is in fierce wrath against innocent
Joseph, and imprisons him.

It is a fault to receive a report or accusation against any man with full
belief, so as to suffer wrath to arise against the person accused, until a
man have well weighed the matter, and given the man accused leave to use all
the good ways of clearing himself. And by how much the fault is the greater
wherewith any one is charged, by so much easiness to believe it, and an
over-speedy intertaining of the accusation is more blameworthy, because it
shows less charity, for a common imperfection is very likely to be found in
the best men, but we must see cause to suspect him of great naughtiness,
concerning whom we believe a grievous accusation. It was Saul's fault also to be
open eared unto false accusers, indeed the consideration of the person
accusing, a wife, her manner of doing it in such a bold, and withal subtle
fashion, faigning her self to be so vexed at the indignity, that her servant
should offer such a thing to her, and then the sight of his coat in her hand
left there, as others that came in at her cry would witness just upon his
going out. All these mitigated his fault, but did not wholly excuse it; for he
should have considered how faithful Joseph had showed himself, and how
virtuous, and should not have conceived that he would so soon have turned so
desperately evil, as to have offered violence to his mistress.

Be you therefore humbled, if any of you have believed and been angry with,
and punished so much as you could, another for a fault wherewith he was
wrongfully burdened, if the end or issue make it appear the party was
innocent, though the person accusing, and manner of accusing may extenuate the
fault of your credulity, yet it cannot utterly take it away.

And now learn to use both ears, before you credit a report or accusation
against any whose course has been virtuous and commendable, though it come
even from a wife or person very near. Indeed a man whose known evil carriage
does give it self for a very probable argument of his guiltiness, has no
wrong if a probable though not all out true narration be believed against him,
but it is a great fault to credit a lewd tale against a Joseph. Search
thorougly into such accusers and accusations, and be not angry at first, for
that will hinder a man from being indifferent in searching out the truth of the
matter.

You see Potiphers faults, see his good deeds. His good deeds.

1. He observed his servants faithfulness and good success, nd loved and
rewarded him for it. Deuteronomy. 15.1, 14.




First, he marked the Faithfulness of his servant, and his good success in
all things, and accordingly both loved, trusted, and preferred him in his
house. It is a point of wisdom in any man to show due love and respect to a
faithful and prosperous servant, as after the Governor of the prison did, and
as Laban did before. To see this is a point of discretion, but to like and
reward it, adds justice to discretion, virtue would be noted in the meanest
condition, and where it is seen it is worthy to be honored, especially in a
servant, by whose virtues a man's estate is so greatly furthered. It is a wrong
to ones self and to all masters, not to cherish good behavior, by showing
good liking, and giving good reward. Therefore God commanded the masters to
impart to their servants when they set them free, some good part of the
substance wherewith God had blessed them under their labors. And Solomon
says, that as he that tends the fig tree shall eat of its fruits, Prove.
27.18.
so he that attends on his master shall come to honor. It is a shame for
the fig tree if the gardener do not fare the better for it, and an arrant
shame for the master if a diligent servant reap not benefit from him.

If any of you masters have been barren fig trees to your faithful servants,
confess it to be a fault of unjustice, and a kind of ingratitude, a fruit of
niggardize and self-love, and a just cause to provoke God to give you such
wicked servants, as may become a plague to such sorry and pinching masters. The
Holy Ghost bids us do to servants that which is just and equal; Col. 4.1.
and to recompense a man well for his pains and fidelity, is a point of
equity. He that will not requite a servant, does but seek himself, not
exercise virtue, if he seem ready to requite his equals and superiors; he
would be as sl^cke toward them as to his servants, if he did not either fear
some loss, or expect some gain from them; learn of Christ to be good
masters, nay learn of Potiphar.

And if any of you have been so much favored by the divine providence, as to
be provided of these household instruments, good and faithful, and every way
virtuous, let them afford them all encouragements by all good usage. You know
how much it concerns an Artificer to get a good, and strong, and fit tool, no
less needful is a prudent, diligent and trusty servant. Consider now that
which Potiphar could not consider, Gal. 3.28.
that in Jesus Christ there is neither bond nor free, the meaning is, that
Christ will not respect men more or less in respect of grace or salvation,
because of their being masters or bondmen: therefore seeing God will reward a
servants graces, why should not masters reward their pains? Nothing but
worldly-mindednesse will oppose this exhortation, and none but very worldly
minded men will neglect it.

Another thing to be liked in him is, 2. He did not take away Joseph's life in a
rage.
that he did but imprison Joseph and not take away his life in a rage,
considering what was the crime and who the accuser.

It is a good thing even in unjust punishing, yet to observe some moderation,
so as not to proceed to capital blows, till time of respight have been
taken, to take more thorough notice of the matter. And it is probable that
Potiphar had a little kind of pacification toward Joseph, because he proceeded
not after to greater severity.

Learn you to put some time betwixt the accusing and utmost punishing, that
truth may have leisure to clear it self, and see how monstrously cruel many
of ours be, that will kill in a rage (and not only be angry) for that for
which their own more sober thoughts would account even a blow to be an
over-measure of punishment.

These are the faults and good deeds of Potiphar.

His benefits. He had an honorable office.
His benefits were very great but all temporal. He had an honorable office
about the King, he had riches and prosperity in his outward estate, and that in
abundance. He lighted upon a wise and faithful and diligent servant, who
being his Steward, ordered all his businesses so well, that Gods blessing
attended him in all things. So he had dignity and wealth, and an excellent
steward.

You see that these common benefits are cast upon Heathen men, and therefore be
exhorted not to set your hearts upon them, nor to satisfy yourselves in them,
but to seek the Kingdom of God and its righteousness, and to esteem of
these things but as the vantage, not the principal bargain, as most times men
do.

And seeing the having of these things does not difference you from
unsanctified men, let the using; use them not alone for your own credit and
carnal content, but for the common good, and for the relief especially of the
poor Saints. Have them so as not to be puffed up by them, not to trust in them,
not to account your selves one whit the better men or women for them; have them
so as to be thankful for them and ready to part with them, and the so having
them will prove you true Christians, and that these outward things are given
you in favor, as a reward of goodness and an instrument of it.

His crosses, He had a lewd woman to his wife.
Now among these many benefits, this man had one heavy cross, but it was not
heavy to him because he did not know of it, He had a lewd woman to his wife,
an adulterous woman, that was so impudent as to solicit his servant to commit
folly with her, and then so graceless as to accuse him falsely to her husband,
and so cause him to deprive himself of one of the greatest benefits he had,
even an excellent servant.

It is the lot of many men to be crossed in their wives, amongst other crosses,
some have lewd women, impudent, false, crafty. They on whom God has laid this
cross, must labor to bear it quietly, they suffer none other things then
many before have suffered and shall suffer hereafter. Crosses must be made as
easy as is possible by the patient beating, chafing, raging, vexing will not
diminish our misery but increase it. But those that have better wives, must
learn to prize that jewel and to be thankful, and to bear with common
weaknesses, which no women nor men are free from, because the Lord has not
laid the worst cross upon them by sending them yoke-fellowes of the vilest
qualities. And so much for Potiphar. Potiphars wife


Now for his wife, she was a most wicked woman, of her good deeds we read
nothing, of her naughtiness a great deal. No good in her.

Her faults. 1. She was an adulterous woman.


These were her faults.

First, she was a lewd, adulterous woman, not contented with her own husband,
but giving her eye leave to wander upon the comeliness of a servant of her
husbands.

Secondly, she was impudent and earnest in her filthiness, 2. Impudent and
earnest in her filthiness.
would take no nay in her unclean suite, but solicited Joseph again and
again though he shunned her company, and at last watching her time to get him
alone before he knew of it, she grew to that outrageous boldness in lust, as
to lay hold on him and offer him as much violence as a woman could offer a man,
catches him by the garment, and is not ashamed to pull him to her, and
entreat him to lie with her, holding him so fast that he had no way left to be
rid of her but to leave the garment in her hand and get him out of the room.

Thirdly, she was a most malicious woman, 3. Most malicious.
turning her inordinate love and lust into bitter hatred, and resolving to
ruinate him by subtilty, whom she was not able to overcome by enticements, for
fear it may be that he should discover her wickedness, she prevents him with
false accusations, and being fitted with a sudden occasion her naughty wit does
quickly apprehend it, finding himself gone, his garment left, she cries out
aloud, as if she had some force offered to her, and when company came rushing
in at the outcry, she shows his garments, and with a fained rage, says, he
has brought in an Hebrew, which name was odious among the Egyptians, and so
having laid a crafty foundation for her malicious design when her Lord comes
home, she shows him the garment and accuses him in the same fashions that he
came in to her and offered to commit villainy with her, but when she cried he
hasted away leaving his garment for haste. Here is lust, here is impudency,
here is wilfulness in lust, here is bitter malice and causeless, here is
subtilty and great craft, here is lying and great falsehood.

O let all women and all men beware of these sins; beware of looking upon a
handsome body and a fair face with a lustful eye; beware of nourishing
lustful desires; beware of impudency and shamelessness; beware of alluring,
enticing, almost compelling men to lewdness; beware of hating those whom you
cannot win to be sinful; beware of lying, false accusing, laying snares to
entrap men in and crafty and bold bearing out of lies; and beware of going on
still in sin and carrying it out with an high hand. This Egyptian Lady that
knew not God, might easily run into such abominations, and it is no wonder
that Satan could draw one of his own slaves to do this drudgery, but let none
of those that know and profess to fear God prostitute themselves to
lewdness, malice, lying, and guile, take heed of giving your selves leave to
be wanton; the woman that prostitutes her body will soon become full of all
other vices.

THE TWENTY FIFTH EXAMPLE.
OF Pharaohs Butler and Baker, and Pharaoh himself and the Egyptians.
BEfore I speak of Joseph, Pharaohs Butler and Baker.
some thing must be noted of a few more with whom he lived and had occasion of
commerce. First, the Butler and Baker of Pharaoh, in whom we may take notice,
1. That they were both Officers to a mighty King. 2. That they both did offend
or seemed to offend their King. 3. They both were imprisoned. 4. That they both
dreamed true dreams, somewhat like in appearance but quite contrary in
signification. Lastly, that they felt the effect of their dreams, and that the
Butler was forgetful of Joseph a great while but at last remembered him. So we
have their good deeds, their bad deeds, their benefits, 1. Their good deeds.
their crosses.

1. They bare their imprisonment patiently and cheerfully. Genesis 40.7.
The good deeds of both are that so far as we see they bare their
imprisonment patiently and cheerfully, for Joseph witnesses that they had not
been sad in former time, when he found their countenance heavy for want of an
interpreter of their dreams, saying, why are you so sad to day, intimating
that they wonted not to be so. There is a certain natural cherfulness
that will bear a man out in common crosses, such as imprisonment and make them
merry, even though they lie by it, and be in some danger of death as these.
This is a thing that looks like virtue, but he that out of natural wisdom
is cheerful is morally virtuous, he that is so out of the sight of God and
the innocence and quietness of his conscience, is religious. Labor to get so
much grace as to prevail more with your selves, then an Heathen man, even to
bear all crosses with an undejected countenance, let not calamities make your
looks heavy. Indeed if we give our selves to grieve for our sins upon
occasion of our crosses, it is commendable, but sadness at a cross bewraies
weakness of judgment, because it is a bootelesse macerating of ones self,
and making himself more miserable then else the cross could make him. It is
true, God has set grief amongst our affections, that it might somewhat
quicken us to shun crosses and to seek an issue out of them, and such
quantity of grief as is requisite for that end, may well be entertained,
though it swell not so big as to write it self upon our cheeks and
countenance.

But these two men whom imprisonment could not make to change countenance, yet
became sad when they wanted interpreters of their dreams. It was one of the
ways by which the Lord was pleased to reveal himself in those times, this
was a divine dream offered unto each of them by God of purpose to finish the
thing he had intended about Joseph, and hence they cannot be cheerful till
they know the meaning of the dream.

To be heavy when we want fit means of making us understand that which much
concerns us to know, is not blameworthy. If these were sad for want of a fit
Interpreter of dreams, how much more cause have they to be sad that want an
Interpreter of Gods Word unto them? Did they as well know the need of knowing
the Scriptures, as these knew the want of an Interpreter, they would be sad
upon a juster occasion. But it may seem much that we meet with interpreters
of dreams, yet it is likely, nay certain, that there were some which
undertook that office, as there were that exercised other curious arts. I
suppose that God who gave dreams to some, gave then to others the knowledge of
interpreting of dreams, and hence the Devils imitating God did set his
Idolatrous Priests a work to do the same thing, and hence the Interpreters of
dreams among the Gentiles. It was not to be discommended but rather approoved
in these men, that having had dreams, they would have sought to the
Interpreters, and were sad that their opportunity served them not. How much
more should we seek to those that can teach us better things, and are
appointed for that purpose and even be sorry that we want such helps?

But another thing commendable is, 2. They despised not Joseph's youth or mean
condition.
that they despised not Joseph's either youth or mean condition, but open their
dreams. And indeed this is a thing which adversity will work men even of high
spirits unto, not to deny familiarity unto those that be far meaner then
themselves. It is a matter of necessity, for a great Officer in prison to carry
himself affably and sociably to a poor youth attending in the prison, but to
be affable to mean persons when preferment and liberty meet together, that is
a point of moral virtue at least. It is more beautiful in a great man's
carriage, then any jewel or multitude of jewels in his apparel; whosoever
desires to be had in good account, let him show forth this virtue.

Another good act we have in the chief Butler, that when he was put in
remembrance of Joseph by the falling out of the dream of Pharaoh, and the
insufficiency of the other Wisemen to interpret, then he did a good office to
his King (though I cannot call it a good office to Joseph as he did it) even to
inform the King of it, and bring Joseph's ability to light, and make this gift
of his serviceable to Pharaoh in this exigent.

They do a good office to a King or any other man, who help them to men of
commendable sufficiencies to do any necessary service for them, and who
certify those with whom they live what benefits themselves have received by
another, that others may receive the like benefit in the like necessity. All
men should be so charitable to their neighbors, as to commend unto them the
spring from whence themselves have drank refreshing waters.

But see the faults of these men, Their faults. 1. They both seemed to commit
some trespass.
first they both seemed to have committed some trespass (some matter of
treason likely it was, because the one died for it, and the other should have
died had he been found guilty) you see how dangerous a thing it is to commit
trespasses against a Sovereign King by any kind of treacherous attempts or
carriages, yea so much as in thought or word, for this is such a thing as
indangereth the offender both in liberty and life. Therefore Solomon warns us
not to meddle with seditions, and tells us, Pro. 16.14.
that the wrath of a King is like the roaring of a Lion, and that whosoever
sins against him, sins against his own soul. It may befall an innocent
man to be suspected of this crime, as here it may seem the Butler found by
experience, but it is needful that we carefully shun the crime, though we
cannot shun the suspicion. Fear God and honor the King, 1 Pet. 2 17.
let your hearts be subdued to his Majesty, and your tongues and much more your
hands. Do nothing by which you may sin against him, or cause him to be wroth
against you. Kings are a little Model of Gods Sovereignty, he has made them
his deputies, S. Peter calls them the Supreme, S. 1 Pet. 2.13. Romans 13.1.
Paul the higher Powers. How ill speed had Absalom, and Shebah, and Bigtam, and
Zeresh, and others that attempted against Kings? Learn to be duly subject unto
them by whom the God of Heaven does as it were keep his possession of the
world; Hitherto their common faults.

The Butlers special fault the forgetting of Joseph.
Now the special fault of the Butler was forgetting of Joseph, though Joseph
had besought him to remember him, signifying also the wrong that he had in
being brought either as a slave into the country, or as a prisoner into that
place, but the words of Joseph vanished, and the chief Butler had quite
forgotten him whom he left in prison, now that himself was gotten out of
prison. So is the guize of men, when themselves have escaped crosses, they
remember not to be helpful to others that are in like calamity, yea though
they have been beholding to them in the time of their misery, and have found
them instruments of great comfort in their misery. This is an unthankful kind
of unmercifullnesse, it is a compound of two faults, want of pity and want of
gratitude.

I pray if any be guilty of this fault, let him not forget it now, but being
put in mind of it by the hearing of a like offense in this Officer of Pharaoh,
let him see it to be as bad a vice in himself, as at the reading of it he
cannot choose but judge it in this Courtier. Had he seen so much
serviceablenesse, so excellent skill in so hidden a thing as interpreting of
dreams, and such excellent parts in Joseph, and had himself found him so true
an Interpreter, as that all things came to pass according to his word, and was
he not worth once thinking of for a whole years space together? Sure he was
glutted with his own prosperity, that in all those days could not find in his
heart to cast one thought back again to the prison, and think of the wrong
done to that so worthy a young man, who both ministered unto him in prison and
foretold his deliverance out of prison.

This forgetfullnesse of a man to whom we have been indebted in misery, is a
testimony that self-love has so abounded in him as that it has choked and
consumed all charity. It is a most disbecomming vice, it causes hard censures
from every mouth that does hear, he that has practiced it in himself cannot
but condemn it in another, as David did his own fault in a third person;
forget not to blame your selves for having so forgotten.

And now be taught to use your memory virtuously to remember those that are
indistresse and under injuries, and those that have suffered with you, and
those that have been instruments of comfort to you in the common sorrows that
befell both. Memory cannot be better exercised next after the remembrance of
God and his benefits and our sins, then in remembering the miseries of others,
with whom once our own selves were joined in the same misery, and the
kindnesses we have received of them in our miseries. And so much of the faults
of these men.

Their cross. They were both imprisoned.
Now of their crosses, they both were imprisoned, and sure imprisonment is a
cross. To be limited to one chamber, to be denied the common benefits that
bruit creatures enjoy, drawing in the fresh air, and a free beholding of
Heaven and Earth, to want the benefit of ones friends company, and be so
restrained, that neither he can go to them nor they can come to him, to have
one wall, one chimney, Imprisonment is a cross.
one window for his prospect, and either none or but a few and those
disconsolate persons as himself to talk withal, this is a cross I say so
tedious, as none can judge of it but by experience, yet many persons both of
high place and of great virtues have suffered it.

O now therefore let me counsel you to be thankful for liberty, and to
praise God that has not laid you fast in some place of custody, that has set
you at large and given you liberty to be with whom and where you would your
selves, in your own houses, or in your friends houses, or where you desire to
be, where you have no doors locked upon you, no keeper to shut you in and let
you forth, no controler to take you up with surly words, none to find fault
with you in that kind, or to exact upon you. I say, thank God for liberty and
know the benefit by having, which would seem great unto you if you wanted it.

And secondly, use your liberty well, keep your selves from ill company and
ill courses; run not into places worse then prisons, then when you be out of
prison. Moderate your selves in your freedom, that you may not be abridged of
your freedom, especially take heed of running into such crimes, as should
cause you to deserve imprisonment. Harmefull creatures are chained or tied up,
so must harmefull men, let your behavior be such, that you may not enforce
Governors to lay you fast, let not Satan get you into his bondage, be not
prisoners to your lusts, Gal. 5.13.
and in this sense also I may use Peter's words, Abuse not your liberty as a
cloak of maliciousness, or as an occasion to the flesh, the abuse of mercies
does forfeit them and adds bitterness to the want of them. If there be not a
gross fatness grown over the heart of a man, he will call to mind with
anguish his unbridled walking in his liberty that now is bound to one place.

But howsoever, learn to prepare for imprisonment and for that purpose keep
friendship with God in your own consciences, with whom you may comfortably
confer when the prison doors be shut and your other friends are kept out
from you. And labor to get the knowledge of the Word of God, the meditation of
which may be sweet unto you when solitariness would else cast you into your
dumpes. He that can power out his soul to God in prayers and in supplications
and in thankesgivings, may make his prison comfortable to him, he that can
hear peaceable answers from his conscience may sing Psalms in the stocks,
and he that can meditate of Gods Word can never languish with solitariness,
when he lies under lock and key and that himself alone also.

And another cross is to the Baker alone, he lost his life violently, The
Bakers cross alone, he was hanged.
disgracefully, and it may seem deservedly; for on the third day the King
took them both out of prison, and then putting them to trial, hanged the one
and acquitted the other, restoring him to his place.

To die an unnatural, and shameful and violent death is a misery, a cross, a
punishment, death at what door soever it carry a man out of the world, is
grimme enough to look upon, but to hale a man out of the world by violence and
disgrace, makes his approach more terrible. Nature hates its own destruction,
the soul and body cannot well endure their separation, but so much the less
by how much the destruction is more violent, and the parting more contumelious.

Let us be thankful to God therefore that has taken our friends out of the
world by fair and natural deaths, and let us abhor and shun those
capital sins that may cause the Lord to bring us into the like misery, and
to pull us out of the world before our time, and with much contempt also: and
let us be always ready not for death alone, but for such a kind of death. A
man is to brook reproach with death and as well as death. If only malefactors
did fall in this manner, it were our duty to care for no more but to prevent
crimes, but seeing the innocent also have been oppressed, witness above all
exceptions, our Lord Jesus Christ and his blessed Prophets and Martyrs, now it
is requisite for us to prepare for a violent death, only praying to God that
we may not pull it on our selves by our sins, and then bearing it quietly,
though it should befall us without doing ill, and most comfortably if it should
befall us for having done well.

Their benefits. 1. They were both in high place under a great King.
And so much for the crosses of these men. Now their benefits.

First, they were both officers under a great King, enjoying places of honor,
and like by too (if they wanted not good husbandry) of wealth.

To have preferment and riches, or to be in the way of both, by attending upon
a mighty Prince, is such an outward thing as men make great account of; O how
much more worthy a thing is it to be an attendant on God, and a special
officer as it werein his Court? They know not God and his service, that cannot
see an excellency in being admitted so near to the King of Kings.

2. They had Joseph to attend them in prison.
But secondly, they had in the prison an excellent person to attend them, and
one of such endowments, that was ready by diligence to minister any thing unto
them, and by wisdom to advise, counsel and inform them.

It is a great happiness in misery to meet with a person able and ready to
comfort and cheer up a sad heart by cheerful serving and by hearty counsel.
He is as happy as one can be in prison, that has a Joseph to be with him or
to wait upon him; God can give this benefit to us, we must supplicate for it,
and learn to make as great account of such in prosperity as in adversity.

Now it might have been to the Baker a benefit, if his want of due knowledge
had not unfitted him to make it useful, that he had three days warning to fit
him for death. There is no man that can promise himself life for the space of
three days, but so easy are we to make and believe promises of life to our
selves, unless we see the time of our life most inevitably determined, that we
will hardly set our selves to prepare heartily for death, unless we be made to
see that now before such a time we must needs die. But it is our duty to look
for that, and walk prepared for it that may come every hour, must come within
a short time; for what is the longest life when once the conclusion of it is
come upon us.

Again, it was a benefit to the Butler, The Butlers benefit.

He both knew he should be delivered, and was delivered out of prison.


he both knew he must be delivered, and was delivered out of prison, and
retured to his place of honor again.

To have a comfortable deliverance out of crosses is a benefit that we can
easily discern to be great, who does not desire it, rejoice in it, pray for it
and applaud others for it. It is therefore a great goodness of God to grant
it, indeed if one have been caught by some affliction through wrongful
means, when nothing worthy thereof has been done by him; it is a favor of
God to make his innocence known, and so to grant him a happy escape, but
howsoever it is a mercy. But you see here it is a common mercy, be thankful
for it, walk capable of it, by being such as God has engaged himself unto,
to deliver them out of all adversity.

And most of all, make a good use of your crosses and deliverances both, that
you may be better after a cross, and that your deliverance may deliver you
also from sin. He that gets not some more grace in adversity then he had
before it came, and does not use that grace after to show himself to have
profited by his cross, comes out of a cross none otherwise then a beast may
scramble out of a ditch, and to such an one a worse thing shall befall
afterward. And so much for this couple.

Now we proceed to Pharaoh himself King of Egypt, we consider in him the same
things, his good and bad deeds, the good and bad occurrents that befell him.

First for his good deeds, Pharaoh his good deeds. He was wise and had good
moral parts. 1. He used all the means he could to come to the knowledge of
his dream.
Pharaoh was indeed an Heathen and an Idolater, but he seems to have been a
man of good wisdom and moral parts, the good deeds recorded of him in
Scripture are these. First, having dreamed a divine dream, I mean a dream
sent to him of God for some special purpose, he used all the ways he could to
come to the knowledge of it, and was much troubled when he saw that he could
not attain the interpretation of it. For a dream was but a kind of riddle or
similitude offered unto a man in his sleep, which did darkely, and yet truly
represent some truth, necessary for him to know. Indeed sometimes God did
appear to his servants in dreams without any such dark and obscure
revelations, and in express and plain terms did tell them the things which
they were to know, as in the dreams of Abimelech and of Abraham, but many
times he appeared to them alone in similitudes, yet so that he made them know
the meaning easily, as in Joseph's dreams, and in Jacobs dream of the ladder,
now such an enigmaticall dream being offered unto Pharaoh, he sought all
means of getting the interpretation of it: surely we should much more seek to
attain the knowledge of the Scripture, and desire to have some to interpret
the same unto us where it is doubtful and obscure. And if we neglect to seek
the meaning of it, we shall do as much wrong to our selves as Pharaoh should
have done to himself, if he had slighted this dream, for then should his
land have been consumed by famine as well as other lands. Therefore since God
has appointed you his written word for your instruction in matters concerning
salvation, as then he pleased by dreams to reveal what he saw fit unto men,
see that you seek to know the word of God as he sought to know these dreams.
Only know this, that often the wise men and men of repute in the world, cannot
tell you these things, but some poor imprisoned and neglected Joseph. This is
Pharaohs first good deed.

2. He contemned not Joseph because he was a poor servant and of low degree
Joh. 1.46.
Nex when he hears of Joseph he contemnes him not because he was a poor
servant and of low degree, but is careful to send for him and to consult with
him, and by this means attaineth to the knowledge of that which all his
inchanters, wisemen, and diviners could not help him unto.

Surely it is a point of wisdom not to slight men because of their outward
meandness, but without prejudice to confer with them if we hear good of
them, and to be ready to hearken to their wise words. Can any good come out of
Nazareth, says Nathaniel, prejudice against the means of Christ's birth and
education would have kept him from Christ, if he had not followed Philips
advise, who bid him come and see. It pleases God to triumph over the folly of
men, that will measure things by worldly greatness, and to give them over to
undo themselves. In Ieremies time the Priests and men of note were opposite to
him; so Christ was therefore neglected because he was the son of a Carpenter.
Take heed that you measure not men by their high place and worldly
accoutrements, God is often pleased to slight great ones and to respect the
meaner: In this case learn wisdom of Pharaoh and judge not by the appearance.

3. When he saw Joseph's wisdom he preferred him.
Thirdly, when he saw the high wisdom that God had given to Joseph, he prefers
him, and makes him chief ruler of his Kingdom next under himself, and
commits into his hand the care of gathering corn in the years of plenty, to
serve against the years of famine.

Oh how desirable a thing is it in Princes to commend men to high place for
their worth sake? And how happy is that nation, when not a man's either friends,
or money, or flattery, or ambitious insinuations of himself, but his parts,
the abilities God has given him, and fitness to discharge an high place, is
the rule which the Prince does follow in advancing men? It shall procure a
world of welfare to the state, and comfort to the Prince, to whom the Lord
gives so much wisdom, as thus to dispense places of preferment. But I speak
to subjects, we must be helpefull to our Sovereign Lord with our prayers,
that is all which our hands can reach unto.

A fourth thing is, Pharaoh continued to favor Joseph all his life long, 4.
He continued to favor Joseph all his life long, and favored his Father and
brethren for his sake.
and for his sake showed great respect unto his brethren and to his Father,
sending for him willingly and saluting him courteously, and planting him and his
in the fruitful place of his Kingdom, and fittest for cattle, even in the
land of Goshen. Thus it behooves a good King, yea and a good man, to favor
still whom he has begun deservedly to favor, and for his sake to show all
good esteeeme to his friends and kindred, so far as they show not themselves
unworthy to be favored. Constancy in loving and honoring a worthy man becomes
Kings, and largeness of love, even a kind of royal love, beseems their
persons and places, for a worthy servants sake to advance his Father, Brethren
and kindred. This is a right Kingly love, and such as can sort alone with men
of such high quality. Meaner persons want means to show their favorable
respect in such a spreading manner. Indeed to prefer unworthy persons,
because they be of kin to a man of great worth and much favored, is not
agreeable to the rules of wisdom; but let them be men capeable of favor, and
he does not love a man thoroughly, that for his sake does not also love those
that are near unto him. And if Princes have such a Princely love to their
virtuous favorites, how much more has the living God to his? These be things
commendable in Pharaoh.

For his faults, His faults. He continued a Heathen though he had a Joseph in
his Court.
God has been pleased to reveal none but that common fault, he continued an
Heathen though he had a Joseph in his Court, and highly preferred by himself.
It is a hard matter to get out of darkness and to come into light, a divine
spirit must join with the means, or else the means will prove ineffectuall.

Let us pray to God to lead us into the knowledge of his truth, or else we may
live long with them that know it, and yet learn nothing of it. It is in our
nature to settle our selves in the religion of our forefathers, and not to
consider whether it be true and good, yea or not. A kind of slitenesse in
matter of religion, does reign in the world, men will not be at the trouble to
examine that which they find in use, they will not hazard themselves in
crossing the common-voice; so they swim down the stream, and run into
perdition for company. Let us be careful to examine the things that we find,
and seeing God has vouchsafed us the happy guidance of his word, let us learn
to try all things and hold fast the good: 2 These. 5.21.
Only in crying we must take heed that we be not of a kind of cross humor,
that will strive to go in a single way, and will refuse things upon slight
grounds, as if they were glad to find occasion to go alone. And so much for
Pharaohs faults too.

Now his prosperity was great. First, 3. His benefits. 1. God warned him of the
famine before hand.
God warned him of the Famine before hand that he might prevent the danger of
it to his people: a great mercy to be made to understand evils long before,
that a man may hide himself from the evil of them, the wisdom of man can
alone guess of future things, and of some it cannot so much as guess. O how
great favor does God show to men when he will lend them a little part of his
Wisdom, and tell them what mischiefs are coming on the world. So God told
David, how Saul and the men of Keilah would have conspired against him, Christ
foretold his Disciples of the ruin of Jerusalem, and made them able to save
themselves out of that destruction. Now we must learn to esteem it a greater
mercy, that we are forewarned of the evil to come in another world, and
acquainted with the only means of flying from that unsufferable wrath. Let us
be as careful to believe those predictions and to follow that counsel for
escaping the mischief foretold, as here Pharaoh was to believe Joseph and to
take his counsel, and then shall we as assuredly escape the misery of eternal
destruction, as he and his Country escaped the unhappiness of Famine.

God gave him a faithful and wise servant.
A second benefit, God gave Pharaoh a Joseph, a worthy servant, a man of
excellent Wisdom and faithfulness, fit for that high honor of being Second
to Pharaoh, who in all things behaved himself as became a wise and godly man.
The Lord cannot give a greater benefit to a King and a Kingdom, then by
preferring a Joseph, by providing such a man, and inclining the hearts of Kings
to favor such; this is a mercy which our prayers must obtain for our King and
for our selves. Lord send Joseph's to the Court, and guide the heart of his
Majesty to love and advance Joseph's.

3. He was a rich and mighty Prince.
A third mercy, he grew exceeding wealthy and a mighty Prince, possessor in a
manner of all the land of Egypt, and had all the people as his servants to plow
the ground for him, so that he was a rich and mighty Prince. But when Princes
or other men become very great and high, many times their weakness and
corruptions turn that benefit into a misery and occasion of much mischief;
learn so to receive this benefit, as to be earnest for grace, to use it well
that it may not turn to your destruction.

Nothing said of his crosses.
But of Pharaohs crosses we read nothing, he was so prosperous a King, that no
adverse accident is recorded to have befallen him. Even to escape great crosses
must be accounted a great mercy, and if the Lord have caused any man's life
amongst us to run with so even a thread as it were that no adversity has,
interrupted it, he is so to take notice of this mercy, as to take heed withal,
that he flatter not himself with vain thoughts, as if he were therefore much
in Gods favor, because of such immunity from outward evils. Not so, but we
must ever remember that in the Psalm, Psalm. 38 19. and 73.4, 5.
That the wicked are lusty and strong, that they have no bonds in their death,
and that they be not in adversity as other men.

The Egyptians
Hitherto of Pharaoh, now of the Egyptians, both the land in general and the
chief officers about Pharaoh.

Canaan is compared to it.
The land of Egypt was a rich land and fertile, the Holy Ghost does not speak
much of their idolatry in Genesis. But in after times they were infamous for
it, and there did Israel learn to be Idolatrous If God leave a people to
themselves, they will soon degenerate either into profaneness and a mere
contempt of God or into false worship and Idolatry. How thankful ought we to
be to whom the Lord has pleased to reveal his truth and to keep us far
from worshipping a false god or embracing a false religion?

But we have an example of some good in these Egyptians, Their virtues They
submitted themselves to their Governors.
and a great virtue it was they submitted themselves to their Governors with a
very great submission. The Famine lay upon them, they were content to buy corn
of Joseph for money, and when that failed, to pawn their cattle, and when
that means was gone, to sell their lands and themselves, and did not rebel
and with strong hand take corn to themselves, whither Pharaoh and Joseph would
or not. This was a most commendable thing in the Egyptians, they would rather
sell themselves to the skin, yea sell themselves and all, then they would
tumultuously rise in arms, make sedition, take corn by force and strong hand.

O that we could see our duty in theirs, and learn to submit our selves so
conscionably to our Governors, that nothing may drive us to sedition or
rebellion. A man might have brought great show of reason, why the Egyptians
should have refused to sell themselves and their lands, if he would have given
leave to wit and words: but these men are content to stoop so far, rather
then to forget that they were subjects. Why should not religion make us able to
keep our stomachs down from all disloyal practices, as well as nature taught
it the Egyptians?

Now for the faults of Egypt, I have one to mark, it is said, Their faults.
They were mad with famine.
they were faint with famine, Genesis 47.13. or mad with famine, so some translate
if, and better; great crosses put men almost out of their wits, and drive them
into a certain kind of fury they know not what to do. We must pray to God
for such a measure of wisdom and patience, that crosses may not work so
distemperedly upon us.

But another good deed. They were thankful to Joseph.
They show themselves very thankful to Joseph and acknowledged that he had
saved their lives. It is a good thing to confess the good we have received
from others, and thankefully to acknowledge to whom we owe our lives or any
great office of love.

Also the Egyptians had a great cross for they were utterly impoverished by
famine. Their cross. They were impoverished by famine. Four benefits.


But they had great benefits, First, seven very plentiful years, and
secondly, a man of wisdom that provided for them before hand, thirdly, a man
of equity that made them tenants upon due and easy rates, viz. they paid the
fifth part of their increase to Pharaoh and had four parts to themselves, then
which what Tenant can desire a more equal rent. Who could wish to have a
better bargain? So they had you see an interchange of good and evil, as most
times the Lord does please to send unto the sons of men. Let us see our
mercies to make us more patient under our crosses, and let us see our crosses
to make us more thankful for our mercies, and let not either pass from us
without a good use.

Pharaohs servants respected Joseph.
Now for Pharaohs Servants and Counselors and Princes, we read not of any
envy they had against Joseph, but that they applied themselves to him in all
kindness, and spoke to Pharaoh to suffer him to go into the land of Canaan to
bury his Father, and accompanied him thither with great pomp. He was an
Hebrew, yet his graces and good carriage caused that they all loved and
honored him.

It is a commendable thing so to respect excellent virtues, as not to be moved
with envy at their prosperity whom virtue does advance, yea to love, esteem,
and honor them the more, because they have showed themselves worthy the
highest dignities that have befalne them. The Court of Cyrus was filled with
men of another temper then Pharaohs Court, How did they practice against
Daniels life through envy? Let us be liker the Egyptian Lords here then the
Persian. (*)

THE TWENTY SIXTH EXAMPLE.
OF JOSEPH.
AT last, we have passed through the persons that lived with Jacob, and Joseph,
Joseph, 1. in general.
and now must speak of himself. First in general: Joseph was a godly man,
full of Virtue, who began betime to show himself good, and continued so to his
last: for he was sold into Egypt not long after seventeene years of age;
before then, Genesis 37.28.
he began to walk holily, He was a godly man, and began to be so betimes.
and God began to reveal future things unto him by Dreams (a sign of his
special favor and love) and by name, his own future prosperity and
advancement. The same goodness continued to his end; for when he was about to
dye, he gave commandment concerning his bones, as the Author to the Hebrews
notes. Heb. 11.22. Young men should labor to be good betimes, and why.
O let us labor to be followers of so good a pattern as this: there be among
you some young youths of the age of 16, 17. or thereabouts, Joseph's age, when
God began to show himself to him. To you let me use the words of the Psalmist,
Come Children, let me teach you the fear of the Lord.

Here is an example which will teach it to you, if you will follow it: I
beseech you to begin betime to entertain true piety; you are not so young, but
that God can work grace in your hearts; you may come to Gods Ordinances, and
do come, you have means to make you good, and your age brings with it to
Church such abilities of wit and memory, as are fit to be instruments of
working Grace in your hearts.

Mark now, I will show you good reasons why you should apply your selves unto
Godliness, even so early, and then I will show you means by which you may be
so.

Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth. Lo God desires to have you
come unto him in the prime of your age. There be some persons so young, that
scarce any man will entertain them for his servants, for they be not
sufficient yet to do service: but God who entertaineth servants, not to gain
by their service, but to make them gainers, he will admit them into his house,
and make them his servants, that are willing to be his Apprentices, as it were
at 7, 8, 9 years; he rejects none, because they be yet but children: nay
you shall see how desirous he is to be served with such, for when his disciples
prohibited those that brought young Children, he reproved them, and commanded
to suffer young Children to come unto him, because of such, (meaning not alone
of those that be like young children, in humility, but even of young Children
themselves) is the Kingdom of Heaven. Why should you be so unwilling to serve
so great a Master, who is willing to accept you so young into his service?





The Lambs skin comes as soon to the market, as the sheep.
Further, your life is uncertain, and it is a doubtful thing whether you shall
continue in this World, till old age or till middle age, make use therefore of
the present time, which God does give you.

And lastly, GOD is as able and willing and ready to give Isaac and Joseph,
and that also of Josiah a King, who began to seek God when he was not above
12 years old.

These reasons should persuade you, let them persuade you that are to follow
after Godliness: it is a rare thing, but the rarer the better; it shall never
repent you to have gone before others in well doing: now let me tell you how
you may be good.

First ponder much of your Baptism, Means to be good betimes.
and inform your selves very carefully, what interest you have into God, and
he into you, and from hence embolden your selves to pray to God for the inward
washing, that he would baptize you with the Holy Ghost, and make you able to
turn to him and obey him.

Secondly be careful to attend to Gods Word in public, and to read it, and
to ponder on it, 2. He continued good to his end. Genesis ult. Heb. 11.22.
resolving to obey it in your private meditations, and these means will make a
young man good: and as Joseph began to be good betimes, so continued he good a
long space, even to his last age, to the end. He was good in his Fathers house,
in Putiphars house, in the Prison, at Court, in youth, in age: for he died at
an hundred and ten years.

Now I beseech you that have begun early with him, to continue to the end with
him, and see, that neither change of place, nor of state, adversity nor
prosperity turn you out of the ways of Godliness: and if any of you have
seemed at Joseph's age very forward in Religion, but are now in a manner waxed
key cold, and stark naught, scarce retaining any savor of your former piety;
let Joseph's example make you take notice of your want of perseverance, that now
at last you may consider your decays, and strive to recover again, and so to
run to the end of the race with comfort. And you that are Young, strive to
get truth, and to stand by Gods strength, continually using Gods means, and
you shall be constant: and so much of Joseph's goodness in general, especially
in respect of its beginning and continuance.

Now more particularly, 2. More particularly.
consider what was good in him in his Fathers house, and in Egypt, for so may
his life be fitly distinguished, by the places wherein he lived.

In his Fathers house. 1. 1. His goodness in his Fathers house. Genesis 37.2.

1. He acquainted his father with his brethrens ill carriage.


He was willing to tell of his Brethrens ill carriage unto his Father, so that
they might be reformed. Those of you that are of so slender authority or
power, by reason of their youth, or upon other considerations of meannesse of
estate, or the like, that their own admonitions are not likely to prevail
with offenders, shall do a good office, if they make known the faults of such
offenders to their betters and superiors, that so the care may be wrought by
another hand, which themselves cannot work.

Thus they of the house of Cloe complained to Paul of the contentions and
divisions that were so rife and scandalous amongst the Corinths. This a man is
enjoined and bound unto by the rules of Charity, which command him to seek his
Brothers amendment and reformation of those things that are evil. I know that
most men will hate such as complain of them, and call them tell tales, but this
kind of, complaining may be carried closely enough, that it shall not procure
envy to the complainer, if the Governor will use his discretion, and take
care to find it out some other way, as in most cases he may, rather then to
seem to have come to the knowledge of it by such a means. But if it cannot be
concealed, all men must form their duties, though they hazard themselves to
some ill will and danger.

Now you children and Servants, that live together in families, take notice of
Joseph's example if you see any evil way of your common inferiors, speak to
them, admonish them if it be fit, and if they will not reform, bring their bad
deeds to their parents, or masters ears, that so you may not partake in their
sins, for want of using due means to reform them: Only take heed,

First, that you be not apt to complain for every light weakness, which
ought to be passed by, and

Secondly, that you never aggravate any thing, much less feign, lie,
counterfeit; for false and slanderous complaining against a servant to his
master, is forbidden expressly by Solomon, saying, accuse not a Servant to his
Master: Pro. 30.10.
the word is used to denote slanderous and malicious accusations, and such must
be avoided in respect of servants, and men of lower rank, that by setting
their betters against them, they may not occasion much causeless misery to
them.

Again, if there be any that have chafed, and entertained great discontent
against their fellow servants, or others, for telling of their faults, to their
Governors; they must now condemn themselves for this ungrounded and
causeless anger, especially if they have been first admonished, and no
amendment has followed; yea, though the others have told it first to their
Governors, the fault being gross, and themselves so low, as there was no
likelihood that they should have been heard, for why should any man be
offended because another has done his duty, and imitated so good an example as
Joseph? For seeing all men must take heed of partaking of others faults, they
shall partake in those, they seek not to reform by such fit means as they may
use: and this of complaining to Governors, is a fit means, it follows that
they were bound in Conscience to open their mouths in this kind, and it is
doubtless a sin to be offended with another, for that which he could not
omit without Sin. This falling out with him that has detected a man's faults,
is an evident sign of a man that loves his Sin, and would willingly live in
it, but for fear of punishment.

Secondly, Joseph whilst he lived in his Fathers house, had divine Dreams
afforded unto him, as foretelling his own advancement, and these he
faithfully and truly told unto his Father, and unto all his Brethren, although
his Brethren did hate him for it, and his Father seemed to rebuke him, 2. He
had divine Dreams Gen 37.6, 7. Which he told to his Father and Brethren.
but his reproof was very gentle, and rather for fashion sake to mitigate his
Brethrens anger, then because he esteemed him an offender in telling his
Dreams. So it behooves all men to communicate their knowledge unto others, so
far as is convenient, especially those whom God has made seers, and put into
an office of teaching others, must be careful to instruct them, though the
things be such, as they will rather hate them for, then accept.

Dreams were at that time Ordinances of God, to instruct men; If Joseph could
not forbear to tell his dreams, how much less should any forbear to
instruct, teach, or admonish their fellow servants, or brethren, or any that
are near to them. Young Samuel did tell his master Eli his Dream, and did
well in telling it, yea, Eli charged him with great earnestness to tell him
all the truth: But let men be sure their Dreams be from God, before they tell
them, I mean, that they have just cause to speak, and that it be the
certain truth they speak, before they speak to any.

Thirdly, while Joseph was young, 3. He was obedient to his Father. Genesis 37.13,
14.
he showed himself obedient to his Father, for when he called him to send him
to visit his Brethren, he was ready to obey him, and did the office of a
dutiful Son, addressing himself to the appointed business, although it was
to take a journey of two or 3 days on foot. Come young men and young women,
and learn of this good youth how to carry your selves to your Parents; if they
call you, come, and give them dutiful and mannerly answers, if they send you,
go, and prefer the doing of their will in lawful things, before your own
ease and pleasure.

You know how precisely the Lord has imposed this duty upon the consciences of
children; Children obey your Parents in all things. You must make no
restriction of the largeness of this Commandment, but by adding that word,
Lawful, which out of other Scriptures must needs be understood, and he
gives a reason, saying, this is the first Commandment, meaning of the second
Table, with promise, and with promise of welfare, saying, that it may be well
with thee. As ever you desire to find prosperity from God, so you must be
dutiful to your Fathers and Mothers, the instruments of your being, and
bringing up, and the most immediate Deputies of God and you, which he has set
in his stead, to take care of you, and to rule you.

Now you that are sinful and disobedient Sons and Daughters, whose carriage
does far differ from that of Joseph's, see the foulness of your Vice, by
opposing unto it the fairness of his Virtue.

Do not your hearts within you say, that it was very well done in Joseph to
say to his Father, here am I, when he called him to go on his errand, and
when his father had told him his work by and by to set about it, do you not
think that Joseph did the office of a godly child, and that which his duty
bound him to, and wherewith God was well pleased? If he did, as your selves must
needs affirm he did, be you grieved and ashamed within your selves, of your
quite contrary carriage, whose consciences can tell, that instead of answering
here I am, have retained some surly answer, and instead of going on the
business, have gone a quite contrary way. Let your hearts smite you to
Repentance, that you may comfort your Parents with obedience hereafter, whose
hearts you have formerly vexed by your graceless stubbornness.

4. He entreated his Brethren, when they went about to sell him to strangers.
Fourthly, when Joseph's Brethren used him exceeding injuriously and hardly, viz.
selling him to forrainers, for a Bondman: what did he, but even entreat and
beseech them to deal better with him? as themselves tell of his carriage, when
they were touched with some remorce for their cruelty. Genesis 42.21. He besought
us, and we would not hear. Lo how it behooves a good body to behave himself
to his equals or betters, or any, that being too strong for him, when they do
offer hard measure unto him, even entreat, pray, beseech, use all submissive,
gentle, quiet and mild words, and carriage. Learn that of S. Paul who says,
being defamed, we entreat. You know Abigals carriage toward David, 1 Cor. 4.13.
1 Samuel 25.23.24.
when she found him in a great chafe against her husband, and ready to do
violence to her family, she entreated him, and caused his passion to stop it
self by her fair words. Proverb. 15.1.
Solomon has told us, that gentle words pacify wrath: and if any thing in the
world will assuage the fury, and mollify the hardness, and remove the cruelty
of an enemy, it is this kind of language and behavior: If therefore any of us
be guilty of betaking our selves, in such case, to railing, bitterness, and
violence, giving all the vile terms, that wrath would put into our mouths,
against our Superiors, when they wronged us, and dawbing them with most foul
names, let us take notice of our folly in being wrathful.

This was not the course that natural discretion, much less that Christian
Religion would prescribe to a wronged man: this shows him to be as proud and
bitter, that suffers, as they that offer the wrong. 1 Pet. 3.9.
S. Peter says, we should not render, reviling for reviling, if we must not
rail on him that abuses us in words, neither then on them that abuse as in
actions. Now then learn meekness of Joseph, learn to frame your tongues to
this kind of humble speech, when you be wronged.

Perhaps you may say, that Joseph did this because he durst do no otherwise.

I answer, if he feared his Brethren, are not you to fear God? if he durst
not speak wrathfully to them, that he might not the more provoke and move
them, should not you take heed of provoking GOD with the licentious use of your
evil tongue?

But secondly I answer that it is very probable, Joseph did not this out of
bare fear, for then when he saw that the matter grew desperate, and he could
not prevail by entreaty, he would have fallen to bitterness at last;
wherefore follow his mildness, beseech when you are wronged, but do not rail
and revile. This is all I have noted of Joseph's private life in his Fathers
house, 2. His good carryage in Egypt in Putiphars house.

1. He was a most diligent and faithful servant to him.


now we will follow him into Egypt, and see how he carried himself there. 1.
in private in the house. 1. of Putiphaer 2. in prison, 2. more publicly.
Joseph's carriage in Putiphars house deserves praise, 1. because he was a
diligent and faithful servant unto him, Joseph had been bred up tenderly as
the free son of a noble and great man Jacob; of a sudden God by his
providence made him a bondsman, he frames himself to such dutifulness and
fidelity, that he winnes his Master, and gains greater favor with him then
any other servant, as you may read Genesis 39. ad 7. For had not he been
faithful and painful, God had not been with him nor prospered him as he did.

Let me commend his example to you that be servants to imitate it, labor you
to be good servants, faithful, diligent in your Masters business and
respective toward their persons, that so God may be with you too, and prosper
you, and you also may draw the loves and good wills of your Masters. Your
service is not bond service, but free service, at the worst it is but a service
of eight or nine years likely.

See the commandment of God lying upon you as much as it did upon Joseph, and
do that which you see in him is possible to do; this is the way to make your
service most easy and comfortable to your selves, and most acceptable and
pleasing to God: you are servants now, you may be Masters or Governors
hereafter, so frame your selves in the function of servants, that God may
bless you with good servants. Carry your selves toward your Masters, as you
would wish your servants to carry themselves to you, and for the most part, you
shall find that in this as well as in other things the Lord will return a man's
own measure into his own bosom. The living God marks the carriage of
servants, accepts their diligence and fidelity, and rewards it, and it is as
evident a note of true piety, to be a good servant, as a good King or a good
Minister, and that will make you good servants, if you know that in so doing
you shall be accepted by God, and have your wages from him, if your Governors
should be froward. And to remember that Saint Peter requires you, to show your
selves true Christians, by being good servants, even to unquiet and crooked
Masters. 1 Pet. 2.18.
But if any of you have showed your selves froward servants, sullen, dogged,
sloathfull, idle, false, untrusty, at best but eye-servants that ca^ed no
further to do your duty, then you conceived your Masters should know of your
carriage, otherwise not caring how you loitered out the time, how wastfull you
were, and adding to these faults also answering again, and frowardness and
falsehood, denying your faults. O be humbled in seeing your selves so unlike to
Joseph, you would be accounted good Christians as he was a good son to Jacob,
and be sorrowful you have not approved your selves such as he did approve
himself. When we see the godliness of those whom the Scriptures commend unto
us, we must take notice of our own naughtiness with remorse and sorrow, and
run to God to pardon and reform it. God that made Joseph a good servant can
make thee so too, 2. He showed the true fear of God. Isay 33.6.
seek unto him for his Spirit to make thee humble and conscionable. Secondly,
in his Masters house this godly man showed the true fear of God, in that he
forbear to commit a sin to which he was so vehemently solicited, saying to
his Mistress, How shall do this great evil, and sin against God, Genesis
39.9. We must all labor to plant an awful apprehension of Gods greatness,
justice, and presence in our minds, that we may not dare to sin against him,
this is the virtue so much commended in the Scriptures, so often required, and
that has so many promises made unto it! This is that virtue which must prove
our knowledge of God and our faith in him: I mean a not daring to sin in
respect that we know it is offensive to him, and will provoke him against us:
This virtue will hold the heart from secret sin, and such to which we are
much solicited and perhaps also much inclined. He that has this grace is
mounded and armed against the strongest temptations of Satan and of evil men.
Esa. 33.6.
No man can do himself a better turn then to abound in it, the Prophet calls
it our treasure. He that has gotten it in any good quantity, has gotten the
richest treasure in the world, and that which will do him more good then all
gold and silver. Solomon calls it the beginning or head, or chief part, or
first fruits of wisdom. It is a grace which makes knowledge useful, which
else will end or rather vanish in mere discourse and twattle. It is a grace
that cannot be found, but in a heart thoroughly sanctified: he that has it is
sure to find favor with God, and to walk holily with God. No man can
sufficiently set forth the excellency of this grace? It is that by which we
must work out our salvation, without which we cannot hold out in the way of
piety, it must help us against false fears and false hopes, against pleasure,
against profit, against credit, against discredit, against all the ways that
Satan has to draw us to sin. It will make you forbear secret sins, and
such as flesh has much to say, why it must needs commit: a large measure of
fear will make you forbear such sins, and if there be any there, it will
make you careful of rising out of them by speedy repentance. But you that are
bold to sin in secret, and careless to repent of the sins that you can
keep secret, flatter not your selves with a false imagination, that you have
the fear of God before your eyes. Genesis 39.9. 3. Had a thankful and loving
Master.


Thirdly, this worthy man had a thankful and loving respect unto his Master,
for says he, my Master has thus and thus honored and trusted me, and shall I
so requite his love as to defile his wife? you see that every man ought to take
great heed of wronging that person in any thing from whom he has received much
kindness in any respect.

The good that another has done as should offer it self unto our minds to
make us steadfast in forbearing to do any thing that may wrong him, as we
should abstain from injurying a benefactour in his wife or goods, or name, or
in his children, or in his body, or in any other respect. Consider if you have
been thus thankful or not, and he that is proved by the verdict of his own
soul to be ungrateful, (having not remembered good turns received, to make
him temper himself from injuries) let him know, that this shall be a great
aggravation of his fault, that what should have prevayled to withdraw a man
from sin, and has not, shall certainly prevail to make his punishment the
more grievous:

Have thou wronged any one in his good name, wife, etc. Concerning whom if
ingratitude and love of sin had not polluted and corrupted thy memory, thou
might have said, he has done this and this for me, and shall I so requite
him? blush for shame to think that thou have incurred the odious name of an
ungrateful man, a term of as much reproach as any can be.

And now tread in Joseph's steps this way, show that you do account your selves
indebted for favors and courtesies, by having them ready in your minds, as a
disswasive from any manner of injuriousnesse, to them in whose debt you stand
for such courtesies. Let your memories serve you for good purposes, Corruption
will soon recall injuries to hinder from gratifying another, 4. He was very
chaste.
let us as soon recall kindnesses to hinder from hurting.

But fourthly, This Joseph shows forth that excellent virtue of chastity, and
that in an high degree, for being a young man, and earnestly and often, yea
almost continually importuned by his Mistress to commit adultery with her, he
continues to repel her temptations with a peremptory denial, and shuns her
company by all the ways he can, and when she caught him at such an advantage
once, that having him alone she durst lay hands upon him, and offer as much
violence as that sex could offer in that case, he leaves his garment with her
and runs out, so far is he from yielding; a truer and nobler pattern of
continency, how can we think of? If we consider his age and his person and the
person of the solicittesse, and the continuance of her evil suit, and her
earnestness in it, how great a pattern is he of constant and invincible
purity? But the words that can be bestowed in commending him will all fall
short of his worthiness, Chastity is an excellent virtue.
I shall endeavor to commend this grace unto you, chastity is a sweet and
excellent virtue.

The keeping of the Body pure and undefiled, and forbearing to mix ones self
with any person not allowed by God, according to his Ordinance, especially when
strong temptations are offered to inflame libidinous fancies, deserves great
praise, for it shows that the heart is fully resolved not to do evil. Indeed
if the not entertaining of such motions arise from inability of body and
unfitness to satisfy them, this cannot be called castity, but debility.

1 Cor. 6. fin.
We must consider how much the Apostle disgraceth uncleanness and fornication,
he says, it is injurious to Christ, to the Holy Ghost, to a man's own body; to
Christ, if he be a professor of Christianity that does it, for it takes one
that is joined to him, and to his mystical body, as a member thereof, and
makes it the member of an harlot, which is a great indignity to the Holy Ghost,
for it takes a Temple dedicated to him, such is the body and soul of every
Christian, and makes it a hog-sty, to lodge filthy lusts in; to a man's own
body, for he that does it, sins against his own body, in making-that the
very instrument of committing that soul sin.

Now as much as may be said in the reproach of the sin, so much on the
contrary maybe said in praise of continency, by it a man keeps Christ's members,
and the holy-Ghosts Temples, and his own body, free from so great baseness,
of being made subject

Helps against Fornication.
The way is, first to plant in ones own heart a reverend fear of Gods
all-seeing eye, yea to pray much to God, to bestow a good measure of this grace
upon him.

this great wickedness. The holding fast in ones mind an apprehension of the
grievousnesse of a fault, is a great preservative against it; but if one once
yield to fancy, that it is no great matter, then will it prove no great matter
to draw us to it.

And indeed this sin of Adultery must needs be a great wickedness, because
it sins against a clear light, and is contrary to a solemn vow and Covenant
made betwixt the married.







Labor you that be young, and you that be elder, and all, to attain this
power over ill desires, God that wrought it in Joseph, can work it in any
other as well, you shall do well to produce Joseph's Example unto God, and
beseech him to show his Spirit and his fear in you, as he did in him.

Why are godly men's worthy deeds set up before our eyes in Scriptures, but
that we may strive and pray, and hope to be made like unto them? But as all
must be exhorted to get Chastity, so chiefly those which have been overtaken
already with the contrary crime of Adultery or fornication, or both. It is more
easy to forbear a sin the first time, then the second, the second then the
third, and so forth; unless great care be used, to get the heart thoroughly
healed.

If Joseph had lived in Fornication with any other, he could never have
resisted his mistresses inticements. They that have yielded to this sin shall
more hardly save themselves from it, then those that have never yielded: but if
a man do frequently and unfainedly repent of this, as well as of other sins,
it will be made so loathsome to him, that by Gods assistance he shall prevail
against it; yea even though it be his darling corruption.

I go on to show how Joseph behaved himself in the house of his Prison, and
that to his Master there the Jailer, 2. Joseph's good carriage in prison. Genesis
39.31.

1. He was diligent and faithful.


and also to the Kings Officers that were committed thither.

First, he fell to his old trade of diligence and faithfulness, carrying
himself in so virtuous a manner, that the Jailer did affect him, and liked him
more and more, till at last he entrusted him with all the charge of the prison.
This was a great trust, for you know what extreme danger a Jailer, chiefly of
such prisoners, does put himself in, if his prisoners escape: there again
therefore let all inferiors be persuaded to seek to win their Superiors,
by good and virtuous carriage, especially meekness, submissivenesse,
painfulness and trustiness. This will work a man into favor, even with an
hard master, but I spoke of that matter a little before, I will show you his
carriage to the prisoners, to whom he was an Attendant, it is commendable in
these three respects.

First he showed himself desirous to comfort them, Genesis 40. 3 He strives to
comfort the prisoners, being sad, which he attended upon.
when they were sad and dejected, asking them why they were sad: had he not
bin of a kind and tender disposition, he would not have heeded how a person,
to whom himself had no, more relation, had fared, whether sorrowfully, or
merrily; but so kind was he, that he seeks to comfort them, by asking them
the cause of their sadness, and seeking to remove it. We should all learn to
practice this courteousnesse to all men, chiefly to such as are in affliction
otherwise, even help to raise up their hearts with good words, and so much as
we can, to become instruments of cheering them, as you see Joseph entreating to
know their Dreams, and diligent to interpret the same. It is an excellent
virtue to be ready to comfort the afflicted, and to revive the spirits of them
that be cast down, so far as we be able, but a churlish, careless temper,
whereby a man cares not whether men cry or laugh, be merry or sad, is a proof
of much pride and stupidity of spirit, and must be abhorred.

3. He was faithful in interpreting their dreams.
Again, you see him faithful in interpreting their dreams, not seeking to
flatter the Baker in regard of the likeness of the dreams, You must learn to
deal truly with men, telling them as the thing is, not falsifying your words
to please them, and to prevent their sorrows.

Most of all, must men deal truly in interpreting and applying Gods Word, and
you must learn to be so wise, as to accept such true and plain dealing.

4. He was careful to get out of prison.
Lastly, Joseph was so wise, and so prudently careful of redeeming himself out
of prison, that he would not let slip the opportunity of speaking to the Butler
to remember him. It is very lawful for any man to use good means of getting
out of a cross, and to take all such advantages as God shall afford, of suing
and supplicating unto such as may be helpefull to him in that behalf, as
Joseph does, but still we must take heed that we be not overapt to accuse and
disgrace others, whilst we seek to gain friends to our selves. Joseph spoke
nothing sharply against his brethren, no nor yet against his Mistress, the
more to prevail in his request to the Butler, that might speed him.

3. Joseph's good carriage in public.

1. To strangers.

1. To Pharaoh.

1. Before his preferment

1. He deals plainly and faithfully with him.


Hitherto of Joseph's private life, now of his more public carriage: 1. To
strangers. 2. Toward his own kindred and Fathers house. First, toward the
Egyptians, both to Pharaoh, and then to the Communalty of Egypt. First, in his
carryage to Pharaoh. 1. Before his preferment, and then after. Before his
preferment, 1. he deals plainly and faithfully with him (as before) in
interpreting his two dreams; After he had shaved himself and changed his
garments he came in speedily to the King, and told him the meaning of his
dreams, fully showing what was signified by the seven fat and lean Kine, and
what by the seven full and lean Ears of corn, and then what by the seven
lean Kine and lean Ears, which devoured the fat ones, viz. By the former,
seven most plentiful years, in which the earth should bring forth corn and
all fruits in great abundance, and by the latter, seven most scant and
penurious years of great famine in which the earth should yield none increase
at all, so that the plenty should be utterly forgotten, and the Land should be
consumed with scarcity, and the doubling of the dream, he says, did show that
the thing was certain to be accomplished without all fail, and also the
speednesse of the thing which should begin presently to be accomplished.

Dreams one of Gods ordinances.
Thus Joseph tells the things to come with all plainness, and most fully:
Dreams were one of Gods ordinances, by which he did in those times reveal
those things to men, which he intended they should know, and the interpreter of
Dreams was to show the true meaning of God, plainly without adding or
diminishing, and without any doubting or ambiguity. Hence all those to whom the
interpretation of Gods will revealed unto men shall be committed, must learn
to deal plainly, fully, and truly. They must with all evidence and
perspicuity show the things which God has told them, and must not not hide or
alter any thing at all; what God declares, they must declare, making manifest
also the certainty and speediness of the things, both that they shall surely
come to pass and presently, in the due time appointed.

Oh that the Lord would thrust out into his Church able, faithful and painful
men, that might search diligently into the meaning of his Oracles, and fully
declare his will unto his people, carefully stirring them to believe the
things, and to expect them, and make use of them: now you see his faithfulness.

Secondly, mark his wisdom and prudence, 2. He shows prudence and love.
joined with love and good will, for he persuades Pharaoh to appoint fit
persons to gather up the abundance of the plentiful years, and keep the same
in store against the penurious and scant years, that so he may prevent the
misery, which else would have fallen on the land. So those that are to
interpret Gods Word to his people, must add counsel, advice, persuasions, and
exhortations to provide them to make good use of their knowledge, even to
provide against the danger to come, and to make use of all those good helps,
which God shall afford them for that purpose.

We have now plentiful times of spiritual provision, by which we may get
knowledge how to prevent the danger of eternal death: who can tell what scant
and thin times may come hereafter, in which we may feel a sore famine of the
Word, and not be able to get instruction and exhortation, which now we have in
abundance?

Let us store our heart with knowledge, now in these times of plenty, that our
souls may not perish for want of true knowledge: and then when the means of
knowledge shall be diminished, make use of Gods goodness, that you perish not
for want of true knowledge: Yea the Lord in his Word has plainly revealed his
mind concerning the damnation of impenitent sinners, and salvation of the
penitent. O now labor to get repentance in these happy seasons of Repentance,
wherein God offers grace unto you, and put not off these great works till
after uncertain times, when no more means of repentance shall be granted,
then the Egyptians had of getting corn, in the seven years of deadly famine;
use the opportunity of getting grace, as Pharaoh did of getting Corn. Now it
is the day time, now the light shines, now the Lord continues to stretch out
his hand, oh turn to him, feed of the Word of life; hear the Word, read it,
and ponder upon it, obey it, and turn to God, and believe, and obey, whilst it
is called to day, that you may not hereafter labor in vain, about so
necessary a business.

Thirdly, you shall see in Joseph's carriage great humility, 3. He carried
himself humbly.
lowliness of heart, he brags not of himself and his own skill and ability,
he does not lift up himself, because this rare gift of interpreting of
Dreams was given unto him from God, but says, it is not in me, God shall give
Pharaoh an answer of peace.

We see the same humility in Daniel, when he did likewise interpret the
dreams of Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 2.30.
for he says expressly, as for me, this secret is not revealed unto me for
any wisdom that I have more then any living. Lo he depresseth himself, and
gives the glory to God, we must learn to bestow Gods gifts humbly, not
vaine-gloriously, and with ostentation, setting up our selves, but humbly
acknowledging our own meandness, must give God the honor, and labor our
selves to be made instruments of good to men, by those indowments, wherewith
the Lord shall enrich us.

Humility adorneth and beautifieth all graces, it is this Virtue that adds
luster to all graces, and commends him in whom it is, more then all his
abilities besides: but vain glory and ostentation, and self conceitednesse,
and vaunting ones self, and being pussed up, does as it were soil and sullie,
and defile and dawb all gifts, and makes him, in whom they work this effect,
as loathsome and contemptible, as if he wanted all of them, learn not to exalt
your selves, that God may exalt you.

4. He showed all reverence and due respect to the King.
Another thing to be noted in Joseph, he showed all reverence and due respect
to the King, as Daniel also did, giving him dutiful words, and carrying
himself submissively: so must we do whenever we approach before Rulers and
Kings, our words and gestures must be decent and respective, tending to
express an honorable esteem of them, because of the Image of Gods Majesty
and greatness, which shines in them. Joseph would not come before Pharaoh, in
the sordid garments of his prison house, nor with the hair of the dungeon, but
polleth himself, and gets on better attire, and sets himself in all his
carriage to honor the King, saying, God has showed Pharaoh, what he is about
to do, and God will answer for Pharaohs peace. Oh that we could learn
mannerly, and dutiful, and respective carriage toward Princes and Superiors,
even for conscience sake to God.

How frequently does the Scripture mention the good carriage of godly men to
Kings, they bowed to them with their faces to the ground, they worshipped them,
they gave them fit titles, and did not think it much to stoop low unto them,
as we see in the stories of Scripture.

Woe unto them therefore that despise government, speak evil of dignities,
and slight those whom God has advanced, no thing but foolish pride, and a
want, as it were, of seeing Gods face, in these his Vicegerents, has
emboldned them to contemptuous words, and carriages: Yea, you must know, that
not alone to Monarchs, Potentates, and great Commanders in the World, this
reverend carriage is due, but to all Governors in their several, though far
lower places, seeing all the places are of God, and not only the highest powers.

Therefore to inferior Magistrates, to husbands. Fathers, Masters, does the
Scripture call for Reverence, and whosoever is bold to despise inferior
Governors, does not for any Conscience appear reverend to the higher powers,
but alone out of carnal sear and sinister respects. Ah, repent of your
irreverent, disdainefull, and intemperate behavior toward, Governors, and
now learn to declare your fear of the great Ruler of all things, by showing
fear toward all those for his sake, whom he has binne pleased to set over
you.

Another point of faithfulness, respect and loyalty, 2. After his preferment,
he was also faithful and loyal to Pharaoh.
Joseph also showed to Pharaoh King of Egypt, after his advancement, he did
not send for his Brethren, nor place them without the license of the King, nor
would take his journey after to bury his Father til he had attained the Kings
good leave. So must al Princes, high Officers, and Nobles under a King, show
themselves so loyal and respective to the King, as to do no matter of weight,
but by his license and direction, neither must they advance their friends and
kindred, nor show respect unto them otherwise, then with due subordination and
subjection to the Kings authority and will. Kings must be honored, respected,
obeyed; and all faithfulness must be showed toward them; the safety of a
Kingdom is upheld by the respect declared unto him, whom God has made head of
it.

Let all that would show themselves to fear God, be careful to follow Joseph
in thus honoring the Royal Majesty, we must not wrong them, nor slight them,
nor presume too much on them, nor advance those we like, with injury to them.

Joseph's carriage after his preferment, in other respects was commendable;
Pharaoh seeing his great wisdom, is so taken with it, that he makes him the
chief ruler over the Land of Egypt, and giving him his ring from his own
hand, makes him the chief ruler under him, as you would say, the Lord
Chancellor of the Kingdom of Egypt.

Now in this great office, 2. He behaved himself in his office most faithfully,
diligently and discreetly.

1. He was diligent and faithful in gathering Corn.


he carries and behaveth himself most faithfully, diligently, and discreetly,
for he, goes out from the presence of Pharaoh, and goes throughout all the
Land of Egypt, and gathers up all the food (meaning the overplus of food) of
the seven plentiful years, and laid up the food of every City of the field,
that was round about it, till it was past numbering; he himself did not every
thing, that were impossible, but himself took care to prepare fit store
houses, and fit persons, and Money, and all things requisite for so great, a
work, and was a careful Overseer of the business, that no failing or false
hood might be found in any one.

Here I pray you to fulfill the Offices that are committed unto you with all
painfulness, care and diligence, refuse no labor, be weary of no pains,
but always give your selves to your businesses in your offices, let him that
has an office, wait on it. Paul speaks it, especially of ecclesiastical
offices, it is true also of civil: as Joseph in this matter did discharge the
trust reposed in him, so do you in all places whereto you shall be called: if
any man be preferred to any place of command in Church or commonweal, he is as
much tied to undergo the labor of the works of that place, as Joseph was to
this of collecting corn: and he that in his place is careless, negligent, or
unfaithful, sins against God and his own soul, and the commonweal;
therefore the Apostle bids us, not to be sloathfull in business. We must not
suffer our selves to wax weary of the pains, and be tired with the works of
our callings, in such places, but by a conscionable consideration of Gods
Providence, in setting us in such places, we must quicken our selves against
all dullness and wearisomnesse. This shall be an honor to a man, before those
that are truly wise and judicious, for not the possessing of a place of power,
but the due discharge of it is a credit unto men.

Magistratus virum indicat:
The worst and most unworthy man, may be lifted up on high, as was Haman, but it
is a proof of true virtue to do the work of the place, fitly, as did Daniel
when Cyrus advanced him to be the third Ruler in the Kingdom. This also shall
comfort the heart of a man, when that time comes that he must give an
account to God, and his conscience, of his behavior in his place: for you must
consider brethren, that every man from the lowest to the highest must give an
account of his stewardship, and then, not the great honor that he has
possessed, nor the great state he has gotten, shall cheer up his soul, but
his faithful and conscionable discharge of his duty.

Set up Joseph's practice therefore before your eyes, and follow him, that God
may honor you at the last day, as Joseph is honored in the Book of God. But
another thing is to be learned hence, even a point of prudence and good
husbandry, that is, to lay up the overplus of great abundance, against a time
of scarcity. This was wise counsel of Joseph, and wisely followed by Pharaoh,
and by Joseph executed. It is not alone lawful, but needful and useful, when
God does send great store of corn, or any like commodity, that may be fitly
kept in store, then to reserve some part of the plenty for a future time, when
perhaps there shall be no such plenty: we must not spend all the store of a
plenteous year; it is not for me to counsel States and Princes, but it is
fit that every man be wise for himself, as well as a King for his Kingdom.
The proverb for a wise and good proverb, that says, when a thing is cheap,
lay it on a heap. Such hoording is no oppression, but good husbandry, he whom
God has furnished with means, shall do well in doing so. To force a dearth by
engrossing, by making things dear, when they are in one hand, when a man
inriches himself with the common loss, this is a sin, and an act of
covetousness; but to provide, in laying up the surplusage of Plenty, is a
thing to be commended.

It were good that men of ability would deal thus wisely, not alone for their
private, but also for the public good, the pismire lays up in summer, man
should be wiser then a silly creeping thing: oh how foolish and naught be
those, that when they get much, spend all, and reserve nothing for harder
times? You have some men can earne much in health, but lay up nothing against
sickness, can get much in youth, but reserve nothing for age. Most just it is
that they should be pinched in a dear year, which lavished and surfetted in a
plentiful.

Brethren, you must not always have such years, as will bring forth by
handfuls, be wise therefore for our estates, I wish you not to be niggardly,
and defraud your selves, but to be discreet, and lay up for yourl selves: if
God send no more then is needful, spend it and trust his providence, if he
send an overplus, so much I mean as will serve for the present, and some to
spare, waste not all at the present, but know that now he calls to storing
up, remember Salomons Proverb, in the house of the wise is treasure and oil,
but the fool consumes it up. Be not fools, but in plenty remember dearth, as
in dearth you wish for plenty, you know that by well, husbanding of plenty, a
wise man should take such an order, that he may feel no dearth. The love of
riches is a banefull thing, but the wel-husbanding of abundance, is not always
a fruit of loving riches, but of a wise foresight. And so much for one part of
Joseph's care, diligence and fidelity in gathering corn.

Now he is in like manner faithful in bringing out the corn in due time: for
when all the corn of private men was spent, 2. He is faithful in bringing
forth the corn in due time.
and that Egypt also began to be affamished, Gen 41.55. and the people cried
unto Pharaoh, and he sent them to Joseph, it is noted that Joseph opened the
storehouses, and sold unto the Egyptians: one would have conceived, that the
Egyptians having heard of Pharaohs dreams, the interpretations, as such a
rare thing must needs fly throughout all the Kingdom speedily, as having
occasioned the strange preferment of Joseph, a prisoner, and an Hebrew, which
could not but fill the mouths of people with discourse, should each man have
provided of his own abundance to serve their turn in hard times, for they were
informed both how long, and how strange the plenty would be, and how hard, and
of what continuance the dearth: but it is apparent that most of them were so
foolish, that they did not so, therefore now the public storehouses must
supply them, or else they must dye.

See in them the fault of improvident carelessenesse, whereof we spoke before:
but note Joseph's faithfulness; he does open the storehouses, now that
pinching want began to bite them, and sels them Corn. It is fit that men in
dearth, should bring out and sell Corn, if they have it, and not to suffer
their neighbors to starve for want of that, which themselves have in their
possession.

We must not love gain more then the lives of men, ye see that Joseph sold to
strangers too, and not alone to Egyptians, so that our charity in this case
must exercise it self, as ability will serve, to men of other Nations, as well
as our own country men. The Natives must not mutter, because forreiners are
helped with some of the abundance of their own countries: see here Joseph's
charitablenesse, to put you on the like good disposition, when time shall call
for it, and if you have store of corn, bring it forth. The people shall curse
him, says Solomon, that hoordeth up corn, but they shall bless him which does
Sell it. To that purpose his Proverb is, do not bring a curse upon your
selves, but a blessing, for when God says, they will curse or bless, his
meaning is, not only that the people shall do thus, but that the thing shall
fall out accordingly, they shall so curse and bless, that neither shall be in
vain.

Genesis 47.14.
Again, it is noted, that Joseph by his means got all the money in the Land;
you may see here that it is lawful to make a gain of ones providence, and by
dear selling of what he bought in plentiful times, to enrich himself much,
so did Joseph; I think his example is a due warrant; indeed care is to be
taken, that oppression be avoided, and then it is lawful to make ones self a
gainer, not by other men's losses, but by his own providence, for by this
means Joseph did gain also the land, and persons for the King: it is not
contrary to equity to sell things at a great and dear rate, when there is great
want of them. A thing must be esteemed worth so much, and may be sold for so
much as the present dearth does make it worth, and in such case he does not
wrong, that takes the present times; only note, that Joseph did not oppress
the poor, but they had of him as well as the rich, the one gave all, and the
other could give but all, and both had necessaries, so should it be done in
hard times by public charity. The poor must be provided for, as well as the
rich; but note also Joseph's faithfulness, no doubt himself was not wanting to
his own enriching, how else could he have maintained his Fathers household
with necessaries? but he contented himself to take what was allowed him, and
brought the money to Pharaohs house, not to his own, and made the Cattle and
land sure to Pharaoh, not to himself: Oh that all Officers would learn to
enrich the King above themselves, and themselves but in such a proportion as is
fit under the King, but in our times it has bin noted, that often the Officers
rise, and the King is indebted, would we had Joseph's under his Majesty, and
then he could not want for money.

3. He shows himself just.
And last of all, note his Justice as well as his wise dealing, for to assure
the land to the King, he removes and translates the inhabitants, so that wise
care may lawfully be used, to assure a man's title to that which is his own,
and then he makes this order, that Pharaoh shall have a fifth part of the
increase, and they four parts to live on.

He lets the land out unto them again at a reasonable rate, whereby
themselves might live comfortably of it, and this is the duty of all Landlords
that have such things to set, they ought not to raise rents to so high a rate,
that the people shall toil the hearts out and get nothing, but remember that
themselves be Gods Tenants, who has commanded all men to do as they would be
done to, and that we should not seek every man his own things only, but the
things that are another, they must as well look, that the people have to live
of chearefully, as that themselves be made rich. But how unconscionable men be
now a days, in ordering themselves to those that must live upon them, whether
by taking lands from them, or being set a work by them, it is evident, for
which God will one day reckon with them severely.

I beseech you learn of Joseph a better lesson, and let those which are under
you live well by your lands or payments, as your selves gain by their labors.
He does not love God that does not love man, and he does not love man, that in
these kind of bargainings and dealings, has not respect to another well
living, as to his own enriching. Wealth gotten by grinding the poor, shall
never prove good meal, God will mix it with gravel to them that eat it. He
that eats and drinks the blood of men, as they do that are hard exactors in
this kind, sucking such as are under them to great penury and unreasonable
hardness, shall one day find, that God accounts of such, none otherwise then
of ravenous beasts, that live by tearing and devouring flesh. Let not this
admontion taken from Joseph's example be sounded in your ears to no purpose,
but be you charitable and conscionable in this case, as the pen of Moses
notes, that he was. And so much of Joseph's carryage to strangers.

Now see how he behaved himself to his own kindred: 2 His good behavior to
his kindred.

1. To his brethren.

1. Before he made himself known to them.

1. He deals roughly with them, and mixeth love therewith.

1. He takes them for spies.


1. His brethren, and that before he made himself known to them, and after.
Before he carried himself strangely with a kind of admixture of anger and
love, that they might be driven to wonder* and so be drawn to repentance. His
harsh dealings are these. 1. He takes them for spies, and will not intertaine
better thoughts of them, though they gave him a satisfying reason, viz. that
they were the sons of one man, and it was never heard of, that one man would
venture ten sons at once upon such a dangerous business, as that of going
to spy out a nation, yet because they said they were twelve brethren, and one
was not, and the youngest was with their Father, he continued to charge this
crime upon them, making exceptions against them, as if they had contradicted
themselves in their speech.

Secondly, he will be satisfied by nothing else, 2. He sends one of his
brethren to fetch their younger brother, the rest remaining prisoners till he
came.
but by sending one of them to fetch their younger brother, the rest remaining
prisoners till he came. Little did Joseph think how burdensome a thing it
would be with Jacob to part with Benjamin, but this he does alone to have
occasion of keeping them longer in hold, that they might have leisure enough to
repent, and therefore,

3. He kept them in prison three days together.
Thirdly, he kept them in prison three days all together. This was harsh
dealing at their first coming down, yet here he shows some kindness
betwixt, viz. in that on the third day he calls them forth, and takes pity of
them, propounding to them an easy condition, viz. That one of them should
remain bound, and the rest should return with corn for their families, and
bring their younger brother thither: now he shows love also in going away,
weeping, when he heard them talking of their sin, and confessing that for
that cause this cross came on them; But it was some matter of hardness, that
he took Simeon and bound him, because he was the eldest next to Ruben, and was
present when he was sold, but did not labor to save him from selling, as
Reuben saved him from killing, Another act of kindness to them was, that he
commanded their sacks to be filled with corn, and that their money should be
restored to them.
wherefore he forbear to take and bind Reuben. Another act of kindness to them
was, that he commanded their sackes to be filled with corn, and the money also
to be restored unto them, which he did of purpose to put them in a fit of
wondering and amazement, that still they might be furthered in the work of
repentance, which he perceived was begun in them.

Now at their second coming up, he shows nothing to them almost but
kindness, saving in one thing, whereby he casts them seemingly into a great
danger, that he might thoroughly humble them, and try them before he revealed
himself unto them.

First, he invites them all to dinner with him. 2. He entertaineth their
present, and talks lovingly with them of their Father, asking how he does,
and salutes Benjamin, toward whom he was so affected, that he hasts to weep,
being hardly able to forbear, till he could step into a corner to do it
there. Lastly, he carries himself most cheerfully with them at dinner,
placing them in the order of their age, and sending them messes from his own
table, and sending five times as much to Benjamin as to any of them. All which
he seems to have done to have brought them to some knowledge of himself, if
it had been possible.

Another thing is by hiding his cup in Benjamins sack, he causes them to be
brought back again as it were guilty of theft, and then seems to be much
displeased at such ill dealing, and would hold Benjamin in prison, till Iudahs
Oration melted him, and then with much secrecy and great affectionatenesse he
shows himself to them plainly, and weeps over them, and comforts their
astonished spirits.

Some acts of Joseph's carriage were doubtful and extraordinary.
Now many particulars of Joseph's carriage are somewhat doubtful and
extraordinary, and we cannot tell what to say of them, viz. his charging of
them to be spies, when he knew they were not, and his picking quarrels with
their answer, and imprisoning them, and then causing his cup to be hid in one
of their sacks, and so bringing them into the guilt of theft causelessely. But
all this was done in seeming, only to bring them to thorough repentance for
their sin, which when he perceived by Iudahs speech and all their carriage,
that it was effected, then he shows himself to them speedily.

The thing we must imitate is this, to use all care of bringing those that are
near to us, to repentance for their faults, by intermixing seasonable sharpnes
and kindness, as Joseph did to his brethren.

Again, it may seem to be lawful by the example of Joseph in way of
probation and trial, to counterfeit discontent, and to lay grievous things to
the charge of men, and press them as if they were guilty, though one know the
contrary: I still say, if it be done by way of trial, so that at last it be
made manifest, that it was merely in trial, and that which would seem a lie,
if it were affirmed expressly and not with reference to such an end, being
said to such an end is not a lie, because it is indeed not an affirming, but a
seeming to affirm for a time. For in such a case a man's words do not differ
from his mind and meaning, but alone he conceales his meaning for a time. So
Solomon seemed angry, and commanded to divide the child betwixt the two
wrangling harlots that came before him, our Savior made as if he would have
gone further, when the Disciples had him in with them at Emmaus. So if a Judge
seeing great probability, and in a manner certainty of the guiltiness of an
offendour, shall affirm something to him, to draw a confession from him, as
for example, that some companion of his has confessed it, and that it is in
vain for him any longer to deny, or that he was seen at such time in such a
place, by such and such, when indeed these things were not so, but somewhat
equivalent to them, was true, viz. Arguments convincing their guiltiness, even
as much as these things would, though not to make them confess. I say such
courses taken by way of probation and trial, and finding out guiltiness, are
not to be esteemed lies, because here the meaning is to be taken according to
that which shall be shortly discovered, and not according to the present show
of words. These be but a kind of ironicall carryage, no more lies then an
irony, that by affirming one thing in such and such a manner and gesture, does
affirm the quite contrary. But to do thus in way of excusing or hiding a
fault, and keeping ones self from the knowledge of a Governor, is altogether
sinful and naught, and must not be allowed.

Take heed that you do not imbolden your selves to deny, and to shift them off
from your Superiors examining you, because you see Joseph trying his brethren,
by talking with them, so as is apparent he meant not as he said.

Again, Joseph made it evident, He forgate all his brethrens wrongs.
that he had forgotten all his brethrens wrongs, and therefore uses them
exceeding kindly, for he weeps over them, and comforts them, bidding them not
to be sorry that they had sold him, and he sends for their families, and gives
them gifts, and maintains them and their families, and sets some of them
before Pharaoh, and prevails to get them the Land of Goshen to dwell in, and
after their Fathers death when they send and come to him, he uses them with
all kindness, weeping and comforting them, as is manifest in the story. So
that he had utterly forgotten all wrongs, and loves them no whit less now that
they have repented, then if they had never sinned.

Hence we must learn the duty of Brothers one to another, even to communicate
their wealth one to another, and the richer to help to maintain the poor in
case of dearth or want, or any hand of God afflicting and distressing them.

Indeed if any bring want upon themselves, abler kinsmen are not bound to
provide for them that spend it on their lusts; if they will serve the Devil
with what they have, let them be pinched, no man is to pity them in such case.
But when Gods hands brings affliction, when they frame to good courses, then
they are to be helped by those of their kindred that are of ability. And one
able person should improve his wealthinesse to the helping and enriching of
those that be poorer, and to their maintenance in their necessity as Joseph
did, else they are guilty of wanting natural affection, and of great
uncharitableness.

Further you see, that when men have truly repented of their sins, be they
never so great, their sins must be forgotten, and they must be accepted and
regarded, even as if they had never sinned. Joseph is as loving to his
brethren, as if they had been the honestest men in the world, because now they
were truly changed. So should men be to the greatest offenders, when a sound
and thorough reformation and amendment shows it self in their lives. Till
sins be amended, it is not requisite to show such respect, but when they be
amended. Therefore every sinner should hasten to amend, that he might repair
his broken estimation, and regaine the love which he has lost with good and
wise men. And those must not please themselves in their folly, that to a man
truly reformed, are still objecting and upbrayding former evil deeds. Herein
they show not the detestation of the vices, but wrath and discontent against
the persons, and are far unlike to God himself, who does blot the sins of
his converting children out of his remembrance, and that so, as if they commit
them no more, he will no more remember them.

He was easy to pardon.
Again, in Joseph's carryage to his brethren, we see how easy he was to pardon,
for though he showed himself rough at first, yet that was not out of a
revengefull passion, but out of a desire to bring them to repentance for their
sins, for he knew they had been very wild and faulty in their youth; but he
still shows love and kindness, notwithstanding the hatred that they showed to
him, and he sees God in it, and would have them see God in it, and so comforts
them, and pacifieth himself. All good men must imitate him in this, forgive
and forget huge, great, and enormous injuries. If one have gone about to
deprive us of our liberty, our goods, of our lives, yea have not alone gone
about it, but effected it so much as in him lay, and after falls into our hands,
so that we may if we will revenge our selves of him, yet we must not yield our
selves to thoughts of revenge, but must do good against evil, especially if a
near kinsman or brother have so forgotten himself, yet must not we so far
forget our selves, as to requite like for like, evils with evils, but must do
them all the good we can, and blot their faults out of our minds. Our Savior
teaches this in the Parable; you know, he that has been forgiven the 1000
Talents, as all of us have, must be easily persuaded to forgive the hundred
pence. And this will make us forgive and forget our brethrens offenses, if we
frequently remember our own, to admire the goodness of God, that so
graciously does pardon us. If any therefore find themselves apt to remember and
requite wrongs, yea petty small wrongs, nothing so high as these of Joseph's
brethren, they must blame the greatness of their stomachs, and condemn that
rancour which swells within them as a great fault, showing, that they have
not well considered the love that God showed to mankind in Christ, to forgive
iniquity, transgression and sin. And now learn all of you this excellent
virtue, strive to be of a sweet, and a mild, and an amiable nature, ready to
pass by great injuries, to show great kindness against great unkindnesse, and
to overcome bad with good. This is a thing well pleasing to God, and shall
comfort the conscience in the day of any affliction, more then all the riches
in the world. Revenge tastes sweet in the doing, but after, it shall lade the
conscience with terrors; passing by faults, loving enemies, doing good to
those which have done us evil, be hid things to the flesh and blood, and seem
difficult in the practice, but the remembrance of them after, shall afford
unspeakeable content.

I have spoken of Joseph's good deeds in some part, viz. Those that he showed in
his Fathers house, and some of those that he showed in Egypt, viz. In his
private estate, both in his Masters house, and his prison house, and in his
public estate before his advancement to Pharaoh, in respect of his dreams,
and after his advancement to Pharaoh, and to the Egyptians and his brethren.

Lastly, Joseph after his Father was dead, Genesis 50.16. to 22.
carried himself lovingly to his brethren, for had he revenged himself after
his Fathers death, every one would have said, he had but dissembled before; so
we must continue doing good, Joseph's good carryage to his Father.

1. He loved him.

1. He inquired of his health.


when natural and carnal motives are gone, and not resemble Ioash, who served
God only as long as good Iehojadah was alive.

Now follows Joseph's good behavior to his Father. He did those 3 things
which children are taught in their infancy, viz. To love, honor, and succor
their Father, 1. He enquired of his health and welfare, and welfare, as soon
as he saw his brethren; he visited him in his sickness, Genesis 48, 1. and he
showed great love to him after his death.

2. He honored him in private and public. 50. Genesis


as soon as he saw his brethren, Genesis 43.7. and in 45. 3^ 9. and 46.29. he did
gratify him in his request 47. chap. 29 30.2. Visited him in his sickness,
Genesis 48.1.3 He showed great love to him, after his death. Genesis 50.5. If you do
thus to your Parents, the Lord will prosper you, if not, curse you, all the
people were to say, Amen. When a curse was pronounced against a wicked child.
2. He showed his honoring of him by these effects. 1. He sent honorably for
him, Genesis 45.21. He presented him to Pharaoh, Genesis 47.7. and used him
respectively when he was with him, Genesis 48.12. He bowed down to the ground to
him, and afforded him a very honorable buryall. Thus he honored him in
private, in public, alive and dead. The eye of him (says Solomon) that
despises Father or Mother, the Eagle of the valley shall pick out; Cursed is
Cham to the worlds end, 3. He succored him.
for slighting his old Father. 3. He succored his Father, readily and
abundantly he promised it. Genesis 45.11. And accordingly performed it. 47. Genesis
12. Honor is required expressly in the Commandment, and love follows
necessarily from this. And 1 Timothy 5.4. the other is enjoined. If I must either
see my Father starve or my son, I must releeve my Father first.

Joseph's faults,
His faults are few, there is nothing spoken of any thing done amiss by
Mordecai, Nehemiah, Ester, little by Josiah, Moses, Joseph. 1. 1. He swore.
He swore Genesis 42.15.16. Undoubtedly it was a sin. 1. The matter did not
require an oath. 2. He should not however have sworn by the life of Pharaoh:
yet there were some things to extenuate it. 1. He was out of the Church. 2. He
had not such means then to reveal this to be an oath, Mat. 5.
so catching a thing as a rash oath may befall a good man.

Learn therefore to take heed of committing faults ordinarily practiced,
fashion not your selves according to this world. 2. In special takeheed of
this common fault, 2. He came too near an untruth.
an oath.

Secondly, he did trench a little too near upon an untruth, you are spies,
says he, and to see the nakedness of the Land are you come. This was spoken
of him merely by way of probation, and not with an intention of accusing them,
but trying them, it was a long ironie. His crosses were many.

1. His brethrens hatred.

2. They consulted to take away his life.




Now follow the crosses and benefits which Joseph had. His afflictions were
many, 1. The hatred of his brethren which proceeded from envy. 2. They
consulted to take away his life, Genesis 35. Saying, You comes the Dreamer, come
let us kill him, and then shall we see what will become of his dreams, but
God raised up Reuben at that time, to show him favor for his Fathers sake,
because he knew how dear he was to Jacob, 3. They sold him as a bondslave.

4. He served as slave in Pautiphars house.


and he persuaded them not to be so unnaturally as to imbrue their hands in
their brothers blood, bur rather to cast him into a pit, to deliver him out of
their hands for the present, intending himself after to pull him out in due
season. 3. They sold him for a bond-slave to Midianitish Merchant. 4. He
served as a slave in the house of Puriphar, and toyled, 4. He served as a slave
in Puriphars house.
and moiled there like some base person, though God showed him some favor by
inclining his Mistresses heart toward him, but all was over turned again, by
means of his lewd Mistress.

Fifthly, he was cast into prison by his Mistresses false accusation, 5. He was
cast into prison by his Mistress false accusation.

6. He was forgotten by the Butler.

The Use of al his crosses together.


and there he lay at least for two years, Psalm. 105. till the iron entered into
his soul, that is, he was so laden with chains, that his flesh was eaten with
them.

Sixthly, He was forgotten by the chief Butler.

Be ye thankful to God, if you have escaped many of these crosses, make your
crosses easy, by laying them by the hard ones of Joseph, who was better then
you: then learn to prepare for crosses, forget not what you may be, slaves,
accused of foul crimes, prepare for the hatred of your Brethren.

Secondly his Benefits. His Benefits.


The Lord bestowed upon him a great number of Benefits.

First spiritual.

Secondly Natural.

First for spiritual. 1. Spiritual. He did partake of the Holy Ordinances,
and was made holy by them.
The Lord was exceeding gracious to his soul, not only giving him the outward
Ordinances, which he enjoyed in his Fathers house, then the Church of God, for
then the form of the Church-Governement was domestical, where he had
sacrifices, circumcision, and teaching by the Prophets of God. viz. His
Grandfather Isaac, and his Father Jacob, for Isaac lived till he was of
years fit for teaching; but also vouchsafing by these Ordinances to work
Faith, and true holiness in his heart, so that he was an heir of the
righteousness of faith, and partaker of the promises made to his Forefathers.
And this is the greatest of benefits that can be granted a man in this life,
even to cause him so to live in the Church, as to become an holy man, that is a
true member of the same.

So God dealt with Isaac, and with Jacob, and at last also with other
Patriarchs, Jacobs sons, and Joseph's Brethren; but he sanctified Joseph
betime, and let his Brethren run on a longer time, in the course of
unregeneracie. Wherefore beloved brethren, let each of us so look upon the
goodness of God to Joseph, as to consider whether himself have attained the
same favor, even to be sanctified, and to be made a true believer, an holy
man, a Saint of God, we must be Saints in this life, if eVer we hope to come
to these fellowship of Saints hereafter.

If any of you find himself to be converted, and see that GOD has dealt
very favorably with him, as with Joseph, and that perhaps also in his
Childe-hood, and Youth; let him enlarge himself in thanks, and stir up his
heart to bless the great and Holy Name of GOD, for this benefit, and the
greatest of all benefits, and let him prize and esteem this goodness of God,
at a high rate.

Secondly, the Lord having made him good, did confirm him in his goodness, 2.
He was confirmed in goodness.
for that he was not turned out of the ways of Righteousness, by all the
changes and alterations that befell him.

His fathers indeed excessive and somewhat fond affection, did not make him
wax conceited, and so decline to evil ways, and wax worse than before. The
envy and hatred of his Brethren could not make him forsake the trade of piety,
and join with them in their disordered courses. His service in Putiphars
idolatrous house, nor his preferment there could not alter him. His Mistresses
love and solicitations did not change him, nor the irons eating in his soul,
did not diminish goodness in him; nay his high and sudden preferment in
Egypt, did not make him forget God, and turn either an Egyptian idolater, or
a wicked man: but Joseph was Joseph still, in all his tossings and tumblings of
his estate; if you be still good in all estates, adverse and prosperous as
JOSEPH was, magnify Gods grace, that has established you in every good word
and work, 2. These. 2.17.
and confess that you have stood by his power: 1 Pet. 5.10.
but if any have declined or back slided from his goodness, let him see his
misery, and do his first works, Ier. 3.22.
returning to God, who calls back-sliders, and promises to heal their
backsliding.

2. Natural.
So much for Joseph's spiritual benefits, now for the natural benefits.

1. In General.

Genesis 39.2.23. He was a prosperous man. 1. Job.


And first in general. He was a prosperous man, and God made all he did to
prosper, both in Putiphars house, and in the Prison. So God prospered David
where ever he went, and Job too for a while; this brings contentment to a man's
self, and gets him a good esteem from others.

See therefore whether God vouchsafe you this mercy, ascribe the praise of your
prosperity to him, and let this goodness allure you to love, fear and obey
him, to seek his honor, and to do all good with that prosperity of thine,
but if contrarily, God crosses any of you, and sets himself against you so,
that nothing thrives with you; see Gods hand that does walk contrary to you,
and find out the cause, and turn this adversity, into an occasion of the
greatest prosperity.

There is a sanctified adversity, as well as cursed prosperity, labor to fear
God, and walk in uprightness before him, and disesteeme earthly things. 2.
More particularly.
And so much for his general good estate, more particularly.

1. God delivered him out of heavy and grievous calamities.
First God delivered him out of sore, heavy, and grievous calamities, and by his
special providence, and in a manner, more then ordinary.

First when his Father sent him to his Brethren, he lost himself wandering
about, and knew not where to go, then God caused a man to meet him, that it may
seem did know him, and told him where he should find his Brethren.

Secondly, when his Brethren consulted to take away his life, God raised up
Reuben to deliver him, and when they thought after to have dispatched him, the
Merchants came by, and so God took them off then; when he was in bondage, God
inclined Putiphars heart toward him, and his Masters likewise in the prison,
and lastly, the Butler remembered him when he had long lien there, and by that
means God brought him out of the prison, and advanced him to be chief Officer
in Egypt.

Thus you see strange and happy escapes out of misery, so that Joseph might
well have called God by the same title, that his old Father Jacob did, the God
that delivered his soul out of all adversity, as David also intitles him. Has
God strangely also delivered you out of great miseries, either from keeping
them from falling upon you, when in all likelihood they must have come, or in
helping you, when your selves could see no way out? if so, acknowledge Gods
Providence and goodness, and forget not him in your good estate, that
remembered you in your low estate: let those that are in misery, learn to cast
themselves upon God, as Joseph did, submit, be patient, trust in him.

The Lord in bringing his servants into calamities, aims at their bettering by
them, and his Glory, in their deliverances: learn patience therefore and
confidence. So you see how God pulled him out of evils.

Next consider what good things he stored him withal, 2. He laded him with
benefits.
for indeed he laded him with benefits, as it is in the Psalm. And to begin
with the gifts of his mind.

First the Lord gave him that extraordinary gift of interpreting Dreams, even
from his childehood almost, 1. God gave him the gift of interpreting Dreams.
with which he furnished Daniel too, and made it a means of great preferment
to them both.

You know how readily he could tell the Butler and the Baker, what was meant
by three vine branches, three days, and the wringing of them into Pharaohs
Cup, and giving them into, Pharaohs hand, the restoring of him again unto his
office. So in the Dream of the other servant of Pharaoh. 3. Baskets are three
days, the eating of meat out of the highest by the fowls upon his head,
signified the devouring of his flesh by birds, after that Pharaoh had hanged
him on the third day. So for Pharaohs Dreams, the number of the kine, and
ears of corn 7, and 7, signifying each seven years, the quality of the kine
and ears, full and good ears, with fat, fleshie, and well favored kine,
plentiful years; thin, blasted, and empty ears, with lean ill fleshed and
ill favored kine, years of famine. The eating up of the fat and goodly by the
lean, the utter forgetting of the past abundance, by the following of the
famine, and the number of dreams.

Secondly, the certainty and near approaching of the things which was to be.
surely and instantly fulfilled. You see how apt these dreams were to signify
these things, and when God gave to Joseph the spirit of interpretation, how
easy the interpretation is, and how fit and handsome, as it were, all things
sorting so reasonably for such a meaning. Doubtless this interpretation by its
own clearenesse, and fitness, did carry the credit of truth with, it. Now at
those times, when God did please to make Dreams an ordinance of his, for the
revealing of things necessary, it was a special favor of his to give the
power of interpreting them too, for what is a dream if it be not interpreted,
but a means of perplexed thoughts and fears? Now God that gave power to show
the meaning of Dreams, when Dreams were his Ordinance, is able also to give
the gift of interpreting his Word unto men, seeing the Word is now his
Ordinance, for the revealing of all truth to men, needful to salvation.

We must beseech God to power gifts upon his servants now, even to give unto
his Ministers skill and will, to become faithful interpreters of his Word; and
if God do give to any an extraordinary gift this way, let him be thankful to
God, and use it for their good that need it.

2. Great wisdom in mannaging any business.
Another gift of his mind, was great wisdom and dexterity to manage any
business committed to his charge: You see how he dispatched matters in the
great household of Putiphar so, that they perceived, that all things went well,
which could not have bin so, if the person that ordered all, had not had an
excellent head to guide them; and after, when he was in prison, by little and
little his Master found out his excellent sufficiencies, to do any work, and
therefore, as the former master did, so he entrusted him with all. Where shall
we find one wise like this?
And when from ordering a family, he came to order the whole Kingdom of
Egypt, he underwent that busy and toilesome work with so much discretion, as
gave the King and all his people content, so that to Joseph, Pharaoh sent them,
and unto Joseph they gladly repaired.

It is a singular favor, when God gives one, as they call it, a good
Headpiece, an aptness and fitness, to contrive matters discreetly, and to
order them prudently, as it is said of the Deputy in the Acts, that he was a
prudent man, one that could resolve and execute well, and square out fit means
for each end, and follow it accordingly.

This wisdom as well as other Learning, was given to DANIEL, and to SOLOMON,
and to many good men, and the same was found out also in ACHITOPHEL and in bad
men. It is not a gift of holiness proper to those who must be saved, but a
gift which the LORD sees fit for the common benefit of Mankind, to bestow
upon wicked and unsanctified men.

Indeed many times God chooses, rather the simple heads of the world, then
these nimble and deep pates, that it may appear it is of his grace, and not of
nature, that men be godly and virtuous. But an excellent gift it is, and makes
way for their preferment in worldly things that have it, but let them which
have it take heed of suffering it to degenerate into Craft, for then it will
become pernicious.

Craft is natural wisdom, separated from Justice, Truth, Craft, what it is.
Charity, and other graces, and joined with falsehood, injuriousnesse, and
self-love, as it were a weapon in the hands of Traitors, a fort possessed by
Rebels, by which they do make war against their Prince.

Again, take heed that you wax not proud of this gift, but stir up your
selves to bless God for it, and make use of it for the good and benefit of
simpler heads, and not only for your particular advantage, and let men be
careful to beg, not only natural, but spiritual wisdom of God, both are
promised by him.

Thus far of his gifts of mind, I go on to speak of external gifts, I
mean the good things that were without himself.

The first is, that where ever he came, he was esteemed, loved, 3. Where ever
he came, he was esteemed, loved, trusted.
trusted. His Father loved him above all his Brethren, and esteemed more of
him, then of them all, and put confidence in him, so that he believed his
reports of his Brethren, and observed his dreams: his Master Putiphar, the
Egyptian, loved him above all his servants, and trusted him with all his
estate, and had him in great account: putting all into his hand: his mistress
esteemed him, but too much, and loved him too much, and durst trust him, with
her name and honor, in the case you know of; then Pharaoh trusted him with his
ring, and the command of all Egypt, and employed him in that most important
affair of providing and selling Corn, and what estimation he had with Pharaoh
is evident, and what love, when for his sake he so respected his Father and
Brethren as to give them the land of Goshen for a possession, the people also
they loved and honored him exceedingly, and even put their lives and lands and
all into his hands.

A man more affected, respected and esteemed, then Joseph in his time, no story
can name; it is a singular thing to be loved, regarded, trusted, accounted,
not only a wise, but a just, good, worthy man, and to have the good wills of men
attending him always. So it was with David, all loved and honored him, but he
which should have honored him most, his father in Law, Saul. let all strive by
showing all Joseph's virtues, to get the good will, as of God, so of men, that
they may be capable of doing and receiving so much more good, by how much he
has more command in the hearts of men.

Indeed Gods people have lived sometimes amongst so evil persons, and in so
evil days, that their virtues have begotten hatred and reproach; but if men's
practice be not evil, and times be not very bad, good carriage will get good
will and good esteem, be not so far carried with men's words and liking, as
to condescend to their sinful courses; for the attaining thereof, but so
far, as faithful, wise, loving and virtuous behavior will win men, every
man should labor and seek to procure the affections of others.

4. He had great outward preferment.
Secondly, Joseph had great outward preferment, he was made a chief Commander
and Counselor of State in Egypt, to teach his Senators wisdom, as is in the
Psalms, and withal he had an heart given him to use his preferment well, for
the common benefit of mankind, and opportunity too, to use it for the
particular good of his father and family, and for the preservation of the
Church.

To be preferred unto a place of great honor and authority, is a thing that
most men's eyes do gaze after, and ambitiously wish and seek after; but to
have it cast upon man, by God, for his good deservings, and then to be so
blessed in it, as to make it a means of benefitting many, especially the
Church of God, this is a great benefit.

So did Hester use her preferment, and Mordecay his, so Daniel his, so David
and Solomon theirs: you are not likely any of you, to come to very high place,
yet who can tell perhaps, there may be some young scholar or other amongst
you, that may come to high place; let me speak such a word to him now, that
may come into his heart hereafter and do him good. If you be advanced, strive
to do good to the Commonweal, and let the Nation fare the better for you:
strive to do good to your kindred, and the Church, though the Church may not
consist only of your family.

Honor and great titles, and offices, will be but like a high gibbet, to
expose men unto disgrace, if they be used at the Commandment of self-love,
and other vices, bat happy is, and shall he be, that has Joseph's preferment,
and Joseph's heart to use it according to his example.

But woe unto those persons which being lifted up to honor prove like a stone
in a sling to destroy many, and chiefly to batter down virtue and piety and
them that follow it.

5. He had a strong and able body.
Thirdly for gifts of body, Joseph had a strong and able body, as appears by
his living to a 110 years old. This is a great benefit to them in whom it is
found in the way of righteousness, live so, young men, that you may be capable
of it: and you that are old, be thankful if God have granted you it in the
same manner as he did to Joseph, even to be long in the world to enjoy the
comforts of the world as he did. For he was thirty years old at his
preferment, and therefore he lived in that flourishing honourful eighty years.
A happy recompense for all the service he did to the Church of God, and for
his true fear of God not offending him, to get his Mistress favor, and to
rise that way.

For his misery into which he seemed to cast himself by his goodness, was
even a pair of stairs to lift him up into the place of honor, wherein the
Lord caused him to continue eighty years. His goodness in complaining of his
brothers faults, made them hate him, his goodness in denying his Mistresses
solicitations, made her hate him.

Their hatred made him a slave, her hatred made him a prisoner, bondage and
imprisonment brought him acquainted with the chief Butler, made himself known
to Pharaoh, and so brought him up to this exceeding height of place. Blessed be
God for his goodness to his people, no man shall hazard himself to temporal
misery for conscience sake, but God will requite him with a hundred fold (at
least more comfort) here, as well as with life eternal hereafter. Let Joseph's
wages make you not afraid, so far as you are called to it, to do Joseph's
work, that is, to say and do good, and forbear evil, though you incur
hatred and danger, and much affliction thereby. 6 He was blessed too in his
posterity.


Lastly, Joseph was blessed too in his posterity, to make his welfare up
fully, he lived to see the sons of Manasseth and Ephraim his two sons, and
he lived to see the part of the birthright even the double portion conferred
upon his children, and that by the mouth of his Father, inspired by God, when
he made his last will. Jacob adopted his two sons to himself to make two
Tribes, and God made them both great, but especially the younger he made him a
principal Tribe for possessions, and command afterward; and this also is some
satisfaction to a Father, if he know that his children after him shall flourish
for many generations.

O that we could fear God and follow true virtue and piety as Joseph did, that
he might bless us also as he did him, in our selves and posterity, in our
state and our name, in our bodies, and in our souls, and in all that
pertains to us according to his promise. And let all that fear God be
assured, that so far as is good for them, the Lord will give them prosperity
in these things, for he made the same promises to all his people and will
confirm them, so far as they are capable, and it may stand with their
spiritual good.

Now you have heard of Joseph's life, conclude we with the conclusion of his
life, his death. His death.


For neither honors, nor favors, nor grace, nor any thing could keep death
away, and it must befall me, and you, and all that now live and are to live
hereafter: only mark that he dyed a godly and comfortable death, for in the
cloze of his life, he made profession of his being an Hebrew, not an Egyptian,
by taking an oath of them for the carrying of his bones into the Land of
Canaan, gave them a promise of their return thither which was also an exercise
of his faith, to demonstrate his comfortable expectation of life eternal,
whereof the Land of Promise was a figure. You are not ignorant Brethren, that
within the compass of an hundred years a minute being compared to eternity,
the whole number of you must be as well as Joseph dying and dead men. Be
entreated to divorce your hearts from sin, the cause of death, from the
world, which at death you must leave, and from men which cannot help you,
neither in nor after death, and labor to get righteousness which will deliver
from death, some assurance of heaven, that ye may have a place of comfort after
death, and interest into Christ, who can save you from the hurt of death. And
these things if you attain, you may triumph over death with Paul's question,
Death where is thy sting? else death will triumph over you, with the question
of Christ, Whose then shall be these things of which thou gloriest? So much of
Joseph.

THE TWENTY SEVENTH EXAMPLE.
OF JOSEPH'S STEWARD.
ONE person alone remains to be spoken of, whom we cannot name to you,
Joseph's Steward.

His name is not expressed in Scripture, neither any thing said of his birth or
death: he was a good servant.


for the Scripture gives him no name at all. He has a good name, a good
report in Scripture for a good man, but no name, that is, no particular
surname, or proper name, by which he was usually known and distinguished from
other men of his Country or progenitors: of his birth or death we have nothing,
but he is set forth by his relation to Joseph, he was Joseph's Steward; for as
Joseph sowed, so did he reap, what a kind of servant and Steward himself was
to Putiphar, such a kind of Steward in some degree, did God provide for him. He
himself was a good servant to his Master, and himself being a Master, enjoyes
a good servant to himself; many times the Lord sees fit to bring a man's good
deeds into his own bosom, a good child to his Parents, has good children
himself, a good servant has good servants, and so in the rest. Let this
encourage you that be in the place of servants, to perform your duties
diligently unto your domestical Rulers your Masters, for by this means you
may lay up for your selves, a comfortable hope of being served with like care
and diligence your selves. God no doubt has a special hand in disposing of
servants to every Master, it is he that orders things so, as such a man has
good, and such a one bad servants* men often use great care to choose a
servant, and meet with a very bad one contrary to all their hopes and care,
again sometimes by mere casualty almost men light upon a very good servant.

He was good to his Master and to his brethren.

1. Teachable. Genesis 43.23.


More particularly his carriage was good to his Master, and to the strangers,
brethren to his Master, but not by him known so to be. 1. Teachable, they
learnt some knowledge of the true God from him. The God of your Fathers, says
he, and your God has given you this treasure. How came this man to know a
distinction of Gods? How came he to know that they had a God of their own,
peculiar to them and to their Fathers, which was not then acknowledged to be
the God of all the world? Egypt had many Gods, this man acknowledges one God,
and that one God which was acknowledged and worshipped by these men and by
their Forefathers. It is not likely, that Joseph told his Steward, that these
were his brethren, but it is undoubtedly manifest, that they were some such as
he knew to be worshippers of the true God, which he knew by some few men, to
be worshipped in the Land of Canaan. Therefore you see how kindly he speaks to
them, that a man may even perceive by his words, that they were so much dearer
to him, because they pertained to that God. This was the more observable,
because he was an Egyptian servant; O that all you which be servants to godly
Governors, would learn some goodness from them, even to know and serve God;
you all have some knowledge of that one God: but learn also the fear and love
of that God, the sincere and careful worship of that God from your Governors,
that would fain teach it you, and would count themselves happy if you would
learn it from them. But for a servant to live in the family of a Joseph, that
labors to teach godliness unto him by word and example, and yet declares no
sense nor feeling of God, no knowledge or respect of him, how great a sin is
this, and how certainly shall this Steward of Joseph rise up against such in
judgment?

2. He was a very dutiful servant.
But secondly, Joseph's servant was a very obsequious and dutiful servant,
whatsoever his Master bad him do was presently done, c. 42. ver. 25. Joseph
commanded him to fill their sackes with corn as much as they could carry, and
to put every man's money into his sackes mouths, and to put his silver cup in
the youngest sackes mouth, and his corn money, and he did according to his
Masters words, and c. 44.4. He bids him run after them, and say, Why have you
returned evil for good? is not this the cup in which my Lord drinks, and for
which he would make diligent search, That was an evil act and unlawful.
for so I think it should be rendered, for the matter of divining was far
enough from Joseph's. Lo the obedience of this servant; he by the light of
nature without Scripture, was taught to do that, and did it, which the holy
Scriptures teaches us to do, viz. to be obedient to our Masters, as you read
by Saint Paul to the Ephesians. Co^os. As also to Timothy, and by Peter. Therefore
they are to be blamed, that living in times of clearer light, and enjoying more
helps toward virtue, are yet far less obedience then this man was.

As vinegar to the teeth, and smoke to the eyes, Solomon in Proverb.
so is a sloathfull messenger to him that sends him, and even so is a
sloathfull or careless servant to them that employ him: as vinegar sets the
teeth an edge, smoke makes the eyes to mart, so these provoke anger and grief
in their Governors. Fulfill therefore the honest commandments of your
Governors, with speed and diligence, what things they appoint you to dispatch,
let them be dispatched in fit season, and manner. If thou were a Master thou
would have such a servant, be thou therefore such a one, and do as thou
would be done by. O but his Master (may some say) bad him do that which was
not lawful, viz. To lay snares for the men, in putting the cup into Benjamins
sack unawares to him, and then following after them with a grievous
accusation; that they had done great wrong, and showed great ingratitude in
taking away his Masters cup, and so bringing them back as if they had been
great malefactors. I answer, that it is probable, Joseph had acquainted his
Steward with his meaning, that he did this not with an intention of bringing
them into servitude, or doing them any wrong, but making a little further
trial of them for some consideration, and so the thing was not ill done of
Joseph, nor of him. Let your obedience, therefore know its due limits, obey
your Masters in all things, so far as justice and your duty to God will
permit.

Thirdly, 3. He was very kind courteous to Joseph's brethren.
his carryage to Joseph's brethren was very kind and courteous, he brings them to
his Masters house, speaks comfortably to them, says peace be to you, freeth
them from their fears, wherewith they were perplexed, lifts up their hearts to
God, and says, he had given them that money, brings Simeon forth to them whom
they had left bound behind, and gives them water to wash their feet, and
provender to their Cattle. Lo what store of kindness and courtesy he shows
to these strangers? his Master appointed him to bring them to his house, but
all the other kind usage is from himself as it were an overplus, besides that
which was enjoined him, out of a good and affable nature, and out of some good
will he bare them, because he had been informed of the God of their Fathers.

Now let him be an Example to us, of practicing like courtesy to strangers, and
specially when we see them troubled and grieved, and most of all, if we
perceive them to be servants to the true God, learn that virtue of this
Steward, though he was a servant, and bondman, yet it was to Joseph.

Thus have I finished the Examples of the Book of Genesis, which contains a
short and brief story of the things done from the beginning of the world to
the death of Joseph, for the space as it is thought by some, of 2309 years or
therabouts, and of some, of 60 more, because they do differ in judgment, so
much about the age of Terah, when he begat Abraham.

The maine thing in the whole story to be observed is, how wonderfully the
providence of God, wrought by degrees, to bring his Church from out of the
loins of Abraham, and to make it a great and mighty Nation, which was but a
little family, preserving truth, and Religion, in that household and lineage,
when he suffered all other Nations by little and little to follow their own
way and run into Idolatry and abominations.

FINIS.

