A DISCOVRSE CONTAINING A LOVING INVITATION both Honorable, and profitable to
all such as shall be Adventurers, either in person, or purse, for the
advancement of his Majesty's most hopeful Plantation in the NEVV-FOVND-LAND,
lately undertaken.

WRITTEN BY CAPTAIN RICHARD WHITBOVRNE of Exmouth, in the County of Deuon.

Imprinted at London by Felix Kyngston, dwelling in Paternoster Row. 1622.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE HENRY LORD CARRY, Viscount of Faulkland, Controller of
his Majesty's household, and one of his Majesty's most Honorable privy
Council.
RIGHT HONORABLE:
THe Plantation of New Foundland, to which my former Discourse, (not unknown
to your Lordship) as a Harbinger has in part already chalked out the way, and
so far prevailed with the cleerenesse and solidity of your judgment, that
lying on the natural truth of my reasons, I am confident there need no second
motives to confirm your Honors approbation of my first; seeing the same has
been approved by the Lords of his Majesty's most Honorable privy Council, as
a Work both profitable and necessary for his Majesty's Kingdoms in general:
But because the affections and resolutions of men do sometimes freeze, in
stead of heating, and most decline, when, to the eye of the world, they seem
most to advance; I have therefore adventured to fortify and assist my former
printed discourse, with this second; and by unfolding other reasons unto all
such as are willing to be Adventurers in your pretended purpose, whereby to
make it apparent that the said Plantation bears its persuasion with it: yea,
that it has all the grounds, and runs on all the feet of good probabilities,
as Religion, Honor, Empire, and Profit. For it will propagate Christians, where
there are as yet but few. It will adorn the Crown of our Sovereign with a
spacious Continent: yea, it will empty England of many people, which may so
well be spared, and yearly replenish it with abundance of treasure, which it
so much wants. And although my ensuing Discourse be plain, yet I
affirmatively auerre, it is true: for as I have delighted in the latitude of
matter, and not in the altitude of words; so I have written it out of my
certain experience and knowledge, and not out of any borrowed speculation; as
having many years, with much labor, industry and cost, played the practicke
part in that Country, as well as the theoricke: and therefore know well how to
reduce my former contemplation, into future action, as it may partly appear by
representing your Lordships several Circuits of land in that Country (to the
open view) in her native and natural colors, and by proposing and discovering
the means how, and where the Plantation may be made firm, flourishing, and
profitable, to all such as will adventure therein. Now as you have undertaken
it with much zeal and judgment, so I no ways doubt, but you will be the
means to establish and settle it with renown and profit. And even as little
Pinnaces do often look when the greater Ships will weigh Anchor, whereby they
may pass with the more safety under their conduct, unto their wished Port: So
the eyes of many subjects do rejoice, that your Honor gives spirit and life
to this Plantation, whereby they may be employed therein. For mine own part,
I have received many testimonies of favor from your hands, during my long
attendance at Court herein: although, as yet, the Subjects are not possessed with
my books, whereby they may be informed of the validity of the reasons they
contain for the establishing of this Plantation. And thus I humbly present
these my endeavors, as a thankful expression and acknowledgement in part of
such great favors, as I have already received from your hands, until the
providence of God, and the pleasure of his Majesty command me to make trial
of what my two discoueries and narrations have proposed and promised. Thus with
hearty desire unto the Almighty for your long life, with increase of great
honor, and happiness, I will ever remain.

Your Lordships, in all duty and humbleness to be commanded, RICHARD
WHITBOVRNE.

TO THE READER.
GOod Reader, I have, in my former printed Discourse, laid open a discovery of
the New Foundland, and purpose (in this my second labors, to acquaint all
Undertakers of that Plantation, what particular profit may redownd to
themselves and posterities, and what honors (through their industry) will
accrue to the English Nation; Bear therefore, I beseech thee, with my rough
style, and plain meaning, in which I strive rather to show truth in her own
brightness, then to heap applause or glory to my self. To crown that
Country of New Foundland with due praises, that she may (by the approbation
and favor of his Majesty) be justly called a Sister-land to this great Island
of Britannia, Ireland, Virginia, New England, and Noua-Scotia: And that she may
claim her self this bold and honorable Title, the world, I think, will be
on her side, especially because she, from her own mouth, does show what
infinite and unspeakable benefits for many years together, the negotiation of
our Kingdom with her, has brought to all our people, not only by the
increrse of Mariners and shipping, but by enriching of many a subject, and so
consequently by the relieuing of many thousands of families, which else had
lived in miserable wants for lack of honest employments; Our English Nation,
having more then fourscore years together, made thriuing and profitable
Voyages to that Country, the possession whereof began in our late Sovereign
of happy memory, Queen Elizabeth, and so continues more strongly now in his
Majesty, without the claim, interest, or authority of any other Prince.

Touching the Island it self: It lies a great part thereof more to the South
then 47. degrees of North-latitude, which is five degrees nearer the
Equinoctial line, then the City of London: the distance of it on this side
from the Continent of America, bearing the same proportion that England does to
the nearest part of France, and lies near the course, and half the way
between Ireland and Virginia.

This proper and commodious situation of the place, together with the
correspondency of benefits, which not only England, but Scotland, and Ireland
may, and do receive from the same, filles me more with an ardent desire, so to
have her styled, a Sister-land. And worthily may that Royalty be bestowed upon
her: For as great Britain has ever been a cherishing nurse and mother to
other foreign sons and daughters, feeding them with the milk of her
plenty, and fatting them at her breasts, when they have been even starued at
their own: Even so has this worthy Country of New Foundland from time to
time given free and liberal entertainment to all that desired her blessings:
and chiefly (above all other Nations) to the English. What receive we from the
hands of our own Country, which in most bountious manner, we have not had, or
may have at hers? Nay, what can the world yield, to the sustentation of man,
which is not in her to be gotten? Desire you wholesome air (the very food of
life?) It is there: shall any Land power in abundant heaps of nourishments and
necessaries before you? There you have them: What seas so abounding in fish,
what shores so replenished with fresh and sweet waters? The wants of other
Kingdoms are not felt here, and those provisions which many Countries want,
are from thence supplied. How much is Spain, France, Portugal, Italy, and
other places beholding to this noble part of the world for fish and other
commodities, it is to be admired. Let the Dutch report what sweetness they
have sucked from her by trade thither, in buying of fish from our Nation. And
(albeit all the rest should be dumb) the voices of them are as Trumpets loud
enough, to make England fall more and more in love with such a sister-land. I
will not weary thee (good Reader) with leading thee to those famous, fair,
and profitable rivers, nor to those delightful, large and inestimable woods,
neither over all those fruitful and enticing hills, and delightful valleys,
there to hawke and hunt, where there is neither Clown, nor savage people to
hinder thy sports. They are such, that in so small a piece of paper, as now my
love salutes thee with, I cannot fully set them down as they deserve: and
therefore entreat thee, with judgment, with patience, and with desire, for the
benefit of they Country, to read over this Discourse, which I trust may
encourage thee to further so hopeful a Plantation, as it appears to be, and
also give thee ample satisfaction, and just cause to answer opposers, if any
out of ignorance, or other sinister respect, shall seek to hinder so
honorable and worthy designs. So wishing thee all happiness, I rest

Ever thine, for my Countries good, RICHARD WHITBOVRNE.

A LOVING INVITATION TO ALL his Majesty's loving Subjects, for their general
good.
SEeing it has pleased the Kings most excellent Majesty, long since, to grant
a Patent unto some right Honorable and right worshipful persons, and others,
for a Plantation in the New Foundland: my often travels to that Country, and
many wrongs which I received there, gave me cause to take some notice, and
observe the unfitness of the place where the said Plantation was first begun;
as also how in several years, Pirates, and erring Subjects were there
entertained; which as I conceived, was a dishonor to his Majesty, an abuse to
the Undertakers of that worthy purpose; as also a general wrong to all his
Majesty's subjects which adventure thither. And likewise often seeing great
abuses committed there yearly by the traders thither, I was thereby imboldened
to compile my former discovery of that Country as now it is. The which when I
had so done, I did not trust only to my own judgment, that the same was fit
to be presented unto his Majesty, until I had the approbation of some
judicial Lords, and other right worshipful Knights, that it was a business
of worth to be so presented, as it has been. Since which time, I have not
seen any reason to the contrary in my self, neither have I hitherto found any
judicial contradiction in others, but that to inhabit and plant several
Colonies of his Majesty's subjects in that Country, will be both honorable
and profitable to them all in general. Whereunto seeing your Honor is led by
your own proper virtues and generosity: as also the right Honorable Sir George
Caluert Knight (one of the principal Secretaries to his Majesty) and diverse
others right worshipful Knights and Esquires in some other several parts
there, whereby it appears that your Honors, nor any of the other Undertakers
are dis-heartened therein, by reason the same has not been as yet so orderly
proceeded on as ye both intend. For there is no doubt, but that other men's
errors will make you and yours the more curious in the conduction thereof;
like expert Pilots, who by the discovery of rocks and shelues, know how to
avoid them, and by sight of other men's shipwracks, perfectly know how to
prevent their own. Of which Country, considering his Majesty, out of his
Princely care and understanding, has taken such deep and singular notice; by
which both ye, and diverse others are, as also partly by my discoueries,
encouraged thereunto to make it famous unto all posterities; And since
Plantations as well as reformations begin by degrees: so you have all the
pregnant reasons of the world to rest assured; that when you have begun to
settle your directions and designs well therein, you have half ended: and
because the attempt and enterprise hereof is as full of assurances, as hopes,
the issue thereof will undoubtedly prove fortunate, and the success glorious.
And although your judgments and reasons have already made you, not only
credulous, but confident hereof, yet to inform and prepare the knowledge of
those who shall be willing to assist the same with you both, in the honors and
profits which will accrue thereby, I have adventured to compile and divulge
this ensuing Treatise, which tends and leads that way; although I know well,
that the work deserves a more curious pen to make it pass current with the
judicious Reader: Yet my sincerity and integrity in penning it, will, I trust,
supply the defects, or at least the truth thereof; which is indeed the only
proper foundation, structure, and ornament herein. And thus fearing, lest I
should make this my introduction over tedious: I will proceed and lay open the
matter and reasons for the performance thereof, to the sight and censure of
whomsoever has seen that Country, or shall be willing to assist your so
noble and worthy designs.

The two several circuits of land in that Country, which is so granted unto
your Lordship, and your heirs in fee for ever, I have here plainly expressed
in what a temperate Climate it lies; As also in what manner the bounds thereof
extend: Likewise the commodious lying of some good Harbors, Bays, and Roades
within the same; where great store of Shipping has long time used to ride at
Anchor, for making of their fishing Voyages: As also partly the pleasantness
of some parts of the said several Circuits: And what the particular charge may
amount unto, for victualing forth a Ship of one hundred Tun burden to that
Country with forty persons, provided with all necessaries for the fishing
voyage, and for the good of the said Plantation: As also what yearly benefit
may accrue unto the Adventurers thereby: And withal, by Gods assistance, the
said Plantation to be proceeded on with much facility: As also in what liberal
manner you will be pleased to entertain such as shall be willing to adventure
with you therein. The reasons which I shall deliver, to perform what I have
written herein, I humbly submit unto your favor and judgment: the defects and
things needless, to your honorable censure and pardon. So shall I not fear,
any who has seen that Country, shall be able justly to disprove the same.

The Southmost part of your Circuit in that Land, which is now called by the
name of South-Fawlkland, lies near in forty six degrees and a half of
Northerly latitude, beginning on the East side of that Island, at a certain
Harbor called Renowze: And from thence West unto a certain Bay in that Island,
called by the name of Pleasaunce: And from the foresaid harbor of Renowze
toward the North, so far as half the way between another certain Harbor
there, called Agafort, and another Harbor called Formosa: And from thence
toward the West, so far as the foresaid Bay of Pleasaunce: And so from the
said West line toward the South, unto the abouesaid West line, which comes
there from the aforesaid Harbor of Renowze: And all that which is inclusiuely
within the said Circuit.

From the said Harbor of Renowze, unto the middle way between the said
Agafort and Formosa: it is in breadth South and North, above 6. English miles:
And in length no less then 50. East and West.

Formosa is a Harbor fit for any Ship, of what burden soever, there to ride
well at Anchor, and stretches toward the West from the entrance thereof,
near four miles; into which Harbor there yearly comes above 20. sail of
English Ships, which have commodious places to salt and dry fish on: and also
diverse Portugal Ships; It is a Harbor that with small charge may be well
defended, so as no Pirates might come in there, but by leave. The Land on the
North side of the said Harbor, near a mile in length by the Harbors side, is
fit for drying of fish, and other purposes; the rest of the North side of the
said Harbor, to the innermost part thereof, by the Harbors side, is something
rocky, where grow store of Fur and Spruise trees, and other fruits. There are
diverse commodious places on the South side of the said Harbor, for salting and
drying of fish, and building of houses, and many more such convenient places
may very fitly be made there, when people begin to inhabit that place. For the
fertility of the soil, in diverse places between Formosa and Renowze, I think
it to be so good as any other Land in all that Country, not only for the
pleasantness of the Climate it lies in; but also for the goodness, commodious
and level lying of many hundred acres in large valleys of good deep earth,
open and clean, without rocks and trees, which (questionless) is fit for
Wheat, Rye, Barley, and other grain: As also for Flax, Hemp, Woad, Tobacco,
and many other purposes. How the goodness of that Circuit is toward the West,
from the innermost parts of these two harbors, I cannot directly write of;
more then five miles. The which Land further into the Country, as I did often
observe it, standing on the hills, it seemed to me, so far as I could descry, to
be very pleasant, and promise well. There are large ponds, and a fair, broad,
and long river of deep fresh waters upon the hills, between the said two
harbors; wherein are store of good Trowts taken some times; And the Fur and
Spruise trees growing round about the said Ponds and River fresh and green,
Winter and Summer, with such flagrant shows, as no trees in such a Clymate can
make a more delightful sight of greenness, then those do there; whereon the
Thrush, Thrussels, Nightingales, and other birds do often sit and sing so
pleasantly, as if they were never pincht with cold, or want of food, as such
birds are in England diverse winters.

Between the harbors of Formosa and Renowze, it is three English miles, where
ways may be commodiously and easily made both for man and beast, to travel
from one of the said harbors to the other: And in my opinion (which I submit
to better censures) the fittest place within that Circuit, first to settle a
Colony, is near unto the harbor of Renowze, which lies five degrees more
toward the South, then the City of London; which is is no less then 280.
English miles: It is a very pleasant place for that purpose, having several
large valleys, which are more then three hundred acres of good open land,
deep earth, clean without rocks and trees, lying under the hills on the
Northside of them very commodiously; which are fit to be employed (with little
labor) for corn, meddowes, pasture, or whatsoever. And there are several
brooks of fresh water which fall into the said harbor, where comes yearly
great store of good Salmons, Salmon-peales, Trowts, and other fish, of which
kinds there are taken great store.

Look into the woods, and open lands near unto Renowze; there comes often
great store of Dear, and other beasts, which are fit for profit and delight:
As also in and near thereunto infinite numbers of land-fowle, and sea-fowle:
and in Summer time, there are abundance of fruits, as there are not better of
such kinds elsewhere: As also herbs, and pleasant flowers which grow there
naturally very plentifully. And diverse Fishermen have carried thither seeds,
and sowed them in convenient places; whereby they have often had good Cabbage,
Lettice, Beetes, Carrets, and such like, very fair and good: and for Turnips,
I never saw better then there, both for greatness, relish, and goodness; I
esteem them to be equal with any Potato roots which are growing elsewhere.
There is also store of Spruise, Fur, Pine, and Birch trees fit for many
serviceable purposes: And many long rushes which are fit to cover houses
withal, as the reed of wheat or rye, wherewith diverse men's houses of good
ability are covered: And I am also of opinion, upon some proof which I made,
that there are lime stones, which is a special necessary to begin a Plantation
withal.

There come yearly to that harbor of Renowze above twenty sail of English
Ships, to fish, besides other Nations, and there are commodious places for them
all to salt and dry fish on; and much better, in time, may those places be
made for that purpose: And there come also into those two harbors, Ships and
Barks yearly from England, and other places, to load fish, and train oil,
from the Fishermen: In which Ships great store of people and provisions; as
also beasts may be cheaply carried thither.

There is a small Island of stones and Beach, at the innermost part of the
harbor of Renowze, whereon a ship of sixty tun burden may well labor to
make his fishing voyage on; which is near the circuit of two acres of ground,
and it does ebb and flow in and out by both sides of the said Island, six foot
of water upright every tide, and that tide runs half a mile above the said
Island, where it is very deep water, and of a good breadth: diverse Ships do
yearly salt, and dry their fish, above the said Island on both sides of that
River; although there is not water for any Boat to pass in or out by the said
Island at every low water, for the space of more then an hour. And there may be
commodiously a Bridge made on either side, in less then half a day, fit to
pass at al times, both for man and beast, from one side of the harbor to the
other, upon any occasion, which is a greater commodity, for that purpose, then
any other harbor in that land, which I know that has the like. And from
thence to the harbors mouth, a piece of Ordnance will shoot a Bullet level;
and so the like above, to every place where men use to salt and dry fish: so
that if a sortification be made in that Island, where the fresh Rivers are so
pleasant, it will not only offend any enemy, from coming into that harbor;
but also defend such Ships and men which come yearly there a fishing, or to
trade.

And if any enemies should at any time come thither by land from any other
place, to pretend hurt to any man there; he cannot be at any place on either
side of the said harbor, where men use to labor about their fish; but that a
piece of Ordnance, being placed on that Island, will shoot a Bullet to any
such; so that by such a fortification, every man which comes there, may in more
security reap the benefit of their labors, then some men have done in that
Country in former times. And then there may fitly be some shelters builded,
whereby to succor such Beasts as are carried thither at the first, so as no
devouring beast of that Country may spoil them by night: and in the day time,
they may feed in the pleasant valleys, and upon the hills, even close by the
said Island, on both sides of the said harbor, where a piece of Ordnance will
shoot a Bullet unto them if there be cause.

There usually come every year in the fishing trade, unto the harbors of
Formosa, and Renowze, above eight hundred English men; which men may, to assist
one another upon any occasion, come together in less time then two hours
warning, either by Sea or Land. And there is yearly all the Summer time, great
fishing near unto both the said harbors mouths, where men may, when they
think good, stand upon the land, and call unto the Fishermen to come into the
said harbors unto them; which is also such a good commodity for security, as
few harbors in that land have the like.

In both which harbors, there is store of Lobsters, Crabbes, Muscles, and
other Shellfish; And above the foresaid Island, it is the most commodious place
for Geese, Ducks, and other Water-fowle, winter and summer, as there is not the
like in any other harbor on the East side of that Land, to the Southward of
the Bay of Conception; whereof those men, which I left there all the winter
season, in Anno 1618. made good proof, and so likewise the winter before that
time, and sithence.

THus having expressed a part of the commodiousnesse of the Land and Sea, near
unto the harbors of Formosa and Renowze; I will also relate a part of the
commodiousnesse, and great hope of good, which may come unto such as will be
Adventurers with your Lordship, in your other circuit of Lands in that
Country, now called by the name of Trinity Land, which begins at the middle
way of the entrance into the Bay of Trinity in 48. degrees, and two terces of
Northerly latitude; and from thence toward the West, unto the inmost part of
the said Trinity Bay, and from the inmost part of Trinity Bay, unto the bounds
of the Sea, on the West side of that Land. And from the foresaid latitude, at
the entrance into the said Trinity Bay, directly from thence toward the North,
so far as the Northmost part of a certain small Island, lying near the
latitude of 51. degrees, called by the name of Penguin Island; And from thence
to the Westermost part of the New Foundland, in that latitude; And from that
latitude on the West side of the said Trinity Land, so far to the South, as
the foresaid West line, which comes from the inmost part of the foresaid
Trinity Bay; And all the Lands, Harbors, Bays, Roades, Islands, and
whatsoever, which is inclusiuely within the said circuit.

The Cape Bona vista, is the head land on the North side of the entrance into
Trinity Bay, and there is a reasonable good harbor, where Ships do yearly
use to fish, called the harbor of Bona vista, and diverse small Islands are
near thereunto; where yearly breed great abundance of diverse sorts of
Sea-fowles, of which birds and their eggs, men may take so many of them as
they list; and from the harbor of Bona vista, unto a little harbor called S.
Catalina, on the North side of Trinity Bay, where fisher Boats do often
harbor, upon some occasions; it is near six leagues West South-west in,
toward the said Bay; And from thence unto a Road for Ships, called English
Harbor, toward the North-west, it is two leagues, where some years 6. or 7.
sail of good Ships have made their fishing voyages; And from thence to the
North-west, half a league, lies a harbor, called Salmon Coue, wheresome
years 10. sail of good Ships have made their voyages; And from thence to the
West a league, lies a good Road, called Robin Hoods Bay, where some years 6.
good Ships have made their voyages; From thence unto the West, half a league,
lie the best harbors in that Land, called by the name of Trinity Harbor,
where some years, above 20. sail of good Ships have made their fishing
voyages; And from Trinity harbor toward the West two leagues, lies the
harbor of Bonauenter, where some years, 5. or 6. good Ships make their
voyages; And from thence to the West near two leagues, lies a River or Inlet
nauigable, fit for any ship to sail in, stretching toward the North, which I
may well call the River of Bonauenter, because it is supposed to run into the
Bay of Flowers, which lies on the North side of Trinity harbor; At the
entrance of of which River, some years, diverse Ships hau^ rid there at anchor,
to make their voyages; And from thence West 4. leagues, lies a harbor called
Hartsease, where diverse good Ships have made their voyages; And between the
foresaid River of Bonauenter, and the said harbor of Hartsease; there is a
very good harbor, stretching toward the North, above 6. leagues, called
Hayleford Haven, where Ships do not use to fish, by reason there are no
convenient places to dry their fish on, near the entrance into the said
harbor. And above the said harbor of Hartsease, to the Westermost part of
Trinity Bay, it is no less then twelve leagues: And there is also good
fishing far into the Bay, within the said harbor of Hartsease, as by good
proof has been often made.

Between the said harbor of Hartsease, and the foresaid English harbor,
there are many delightful and fruitful Islands, none of them above a mile from
the Land; And the Bay of Trinity is in breadth, at the nearest place, which is
right over against the harbor of Hartsease, above 5. leagues; And those that
fish on the South side of the said Bay, do yearly send their Boats to the
North side, for bait to take their fish withal; because such bait is there
in great abundance; And on those foresaid Islands, there yearly breed
innumerable store of Geese, Ducks, Gulls, and other Sea-fowle, to which places
the natives of the Country do often come from the North, and fetch those
Fowls and their eggs, as they have been often seen so to do.

There have diverse years been above sixty sail of good Ships fishing in the
foresaid Trinity harbor, and those foresaid Bays, Roades, and harbors, and
they have all made as great thriuing voyages there, as any other Ships have
made at any other place in that Country; all that North side of Trinity Bay
lies pleasantly against the South, being near in the latitude of 49. degrees,
by which it may be well conceived, the Climate of it self should be very
pleasant, considering that the City of London is more then three degrees to the
North, then that place, which is no less then 180. English miles; and there is
all such fruits in great abundance, as are formerly recited in my discovery of
that Country, and all such sorts of fish of what kind soever, so plentiful,
as in any other part to the Southward on that Coast; and the Fur, Spruise,
Pine, and Birch trees are there much greater, and longer, and the Country
fuller of woods, then it is to the Southward; and if some people do once begin
to inhabit there, questionless, there is great hope in doing much good, not
only in fishing, and manuring of land, but also in sawing of boords, and
squaring of Timber, fit to be transported from thence into other Countries; as
also for making of Iron, Salt, Soap, Pitch and Tar; whereby good profit may
be gotten; considering what commodities in all Europe do more decay then wood,
whereof there is no likelihood (in the opinion of man) ever to be any want
thereof in that Country. So that it may be well conceived, it is a good
neighbor Country to lay hold on, seeing it may be possessed so fitly.

Thus according to my certain knowledge, I have partly showed how your
several Circuits lie in that Country; and partly the great hope whereby it
may encourage diverse worthy men to become suitors unto your Honor, to be
Adventurers to further the same, when they shall also be made acquainted with
such bountiful conditions, as you will be pleased to grant unto every such
Aduenturer.

Which conditions, are as it has pleased your Lordship something to acquaint
me withal, That any who will adventure 100. pounds to settle a Colony near
unto the foresaid harbor of Renowze, and toward the setting forth of such
shipping thither yearly in the fishing trade, as it may please you; and such
as shall adventure therein to think good, whereby to advance the said
Plantation, and also to defray the charge in setting forth such shipping with
good profit.

So that such shipping so employed, shall carry people yearly, and provisions,
for all such as shall continue there, and such beasts, and all other
necessaries as may be thought fit, and not to hire any other Ship for that
purpose only: And that any Aduenturer shall not only have his equal part,
proportionably of the benefit which may be yearly gotten there, by the
fishing; but also such part of the benefit as may be gotten by the labors and
industry of those which shall yearly be sent to remain there, as servants to
you and the Adventurers, who are to provide for them.

And also any such shall likewise have (which adventures 100. pounds to be
employed as aforesaid) the one half part and preogatiue of one of the foresaid
Harbors, Bay, or Road on the Northside of Trinity Bay, and the circuit of two
thousand acres of such land and woods as is next adjoining thereunto, in fee
for ever to be holden of your Lordship, by the rent of a penny by the year for
every such hundred acres of land and woods, which is twenty pence by the year
for two thousand acres.

And also he shall have in fee for ever, to him and his assigns, a convenient
place to build a Stage, and necessary rooms to salt fish on, and to build a
dwelling house, and other convenient houses, near unto the harbors of Formosa
and Renowze, with a sufficient circuit of ground to dry fish on, and for some
other purposes, fit for a Ship of fouresore Tun burden.

So that any such undertaker do within a fit time limited, settle and
maintain there to inhabit eight persons at least: and so many more as he
shall think good; and take the benefit of their labors to his own particular
account, which may be worth yearly a great profit to any such Aduenturer, and
to pay for the same as a rent by the year 10.s. And for default of not
continuing there yearly, after a fit time limited, eight persons; or for non
payment of the foresaid rents of ten shillings by the year; and the abouesaid
rent of twenty pence by the year: then any such undertaker shall forfeit his
right, title and interest in all such land and woods; and likewise in the said
place for salting and drying of fish (but not the benefit of such a sum as he
shall so adventure.) And if any such aduenturer, or any of his servants or
assigns, shall at any time find within your said lands there, any mines of
gold, silver, or what metal soever, he shall yield unto your Lordship or
assigns an indifferent part thereof.

And whosoever will adventure 200. pounds, may not only have a whole Harbor,
Bay, or Road to himself in fee for ever, and four thousand acres of land, and
woods thereunto adjoining on the North side of Trinity Bay; but also a
convenient place, and ground to build Stages and houses, and for drying of fish
fit for a Ships fishing voyage of 160. tun burden, near unto the harbors of
Formosa and Renowze; so that any such Undertaker, or his assigns do, within
such a convenient time as shall be set down in his grant, maintain there
sixteen persons, as his servants or tenants, and to pay double so much rent by
the year, as whosoever adventures but 100. pounds as aforesaid: And likewise
he shall receive double so much of the benefit and good, which may come by the
adventure of any such sum, in setting forth of such shipping as are to be
employed as aforesaid; and also the like by the labors of those which shall be
employed in the intended Plantation.

And whosoever shall adventure less then 100. li. be it 80. li. 60. li. 50.
li. 30. li. or 20. li. shall have less proportionably in every respect, what
he shall have that adventures 100. pounds: And whosoever shall adventure 200.
pounds or a greater sum, or but 100. pounds or a less sum, should disburse
the one moity or half part thereof this first year, whereby to make
provisions for the fishing voyage, and shipping to be in perfect readiness in
fit time.

And any man which shall thus adventure 200. pounds or a greater or less
sum, he should bring in the other half part of such a sum as he does
promise, and subscribe to adventure the second year at convenient time, whereby
to make fit provisions in readiness of all necessaries, as shall be then
thought fitting for the year following, and then by Gods assistance, there is
great hope of gain to be made, and good proceedings in the said Plantation.

Some of those which will be Adventurers in this manner, may be as Committees,
to give their best opinions, what they should conceive to be most fitting in
every respect; whereby there may be the more orderly proceedings therein, and
whatsoever any 4, 5, 6, or a more number of them may think fit: one, or more of
them may at convenient times acquaint your Honor withal, whereby it may the
more speedily be put in action, and you so little troubled withal, from your
other weighty occasions as possible may be: And so one of the said Committees
to be as Treasurer, who may keep the books of accounts, of whatsoever may be
so adventured, and likewise to be received, which will give a good content to
every Aduenturer.

And as concerning the manner how Ships and men should be employed in this
intended Plantation, I shall as follows acquaint you; whereby there may be
hired some industrious men, which are most pliable for the fishing voyage,
agreed withal in time to fail in such shipping, and with such men some others
may go to be as Servants in the voyage, which may be Tradesmen, and their
wives; who will labor fitly in the fishing, whiles it lasts, and afterward
continue there to plant.

It is to be understood, that a Ship which usually carries there in an
ordinary fishing voyage 30. men and boys, and returns yearly with them,
should not, that is thus employed, carry above 34. men, women and some Youths
of 13. or 14. years of age, whose victual and wages, for more then three
quarters of the year, will be even defrayed upon the ordinary charge of the
fishing voyage; for any such Ship may well be sailed thither, and home again,
with less then twenty men; So that those other fourteen may be accounted
unprofitable passengers to be carried, and so recarryed from thence as usually
is done.

And therefore it is requisite, that such as shall remain there to inhabit,
should be agreed withal in time, whereby to prepare themselves for that
purpose, and not to seek after such in haste, for then should you not only
have those which are not so fit as I do wish, for that purpose; but also they
will be much more dearer (as I have often proved what they will be) if they be
taken when they proffer their service.

And he that is either a fit house-Carpenter, Mason, Smith, Brick-maker,
Lime-burner, Turner, Tyler, Husbandman, Gardener, or what trade soever, and
will carry his wife with him, should be so agreed withal at first; so that
notwithstanding their trades, they should help to fish, and labor diligently
about the same, when time serves for all building of houses, which is a thing
will fitly be done at all times, very commodiously, with little labor and
less charge, when the fish fails.

And if any Aduenturer will send thither a kinsman, friend, or servant, to be
employed in the said Plantation, which will take pains, he may have a fit
hire allowed him by the year, as the Treasurer, and one, or more of the
Adventurers may think fit: And any such so employed, may see such lands and
woods allotted out for his said Master or friend, and yearly certify him from
thence what fit proceedings there are in the said Plantation.

And also any that shall serve their 5. years industriously, may not only be
well paid, as he shall be agreed withal, but you will then also give him 100.
acres of land and woods in the South part of that Country in fee for ever to
him, his heirs and assigns, if he will continue there to live, or any other
man for him; which is to be holden of your Honor, paying at the sealing of his
Deed, 8. shillings, and ever after but a penny rent by the year for the said
hundred acres: which will be a good encouragement to such as will go there to
live; and be also a fit means to people the Country, with such as may be well
spared from all his Majesty's Kingdoms. And thus in time they may find out
diverse good commodities there, which as yet lie undiscovered, whereof there is
great hope in some special thing, which I omit to write of.

By this it may be partly understood, what great hope of good there may come
unto his Majesty, and all his Majesty's Kingdoms, by settling people to
inhabit there, seeing it is a Country already so well approved, to be so
healthy and warm in winter as England, and yields yearly, as the trade is now
in fishing only above 150000.li. into this Kingdom, besides the great
maintenance and increase of shipping, and Mariners; and the relieuing of many
families, the which trade only may well, in little time, be worth double so
much yearly to his Majesty's subjects, then now it is, besides the great hope
of gain which is there to be gotten otherways.

In the year of our Lord God 1615. being there with a Commission directed unto
me out of his Majesty's high Court of Admiralty, for the reformation of abuses,
and settling of fit orders amongst such as yearly trade to that Country,
wherein I did spend much time, and was at great charge; and then sailing from
harbor to harbor; I found the masters of English Ships then there, willing to
have such abuses reformed, and thereunto above 170. of them being impanelled in
several inquests for that service, they did deliver unto me their several
presentiments under their hands and seals, to the use of the Kings Majesty;
which were the first Iuries that ever were impanelled there, to the use of any
Christian Prince; In which presentiments are contained diverse orders, which upon
my return from thence, I did present into the high Court of Admiraltie; in
which service I took notice there was on that Coast above 250. sail of Ships
great and small of our Nation, with above 6000. Subjects in them.

Now if it may please his Majesty, and that but 200. of such Ships which
yearly sail thither a Fishing, will leave there in the end of the year, when
their voyages are made, but four persons from every of them, there to inhabit
with fit provision for them, until the next Summer that the said Owners Ships
repair thither again, and take the benefit of their labor in that time: then
after that proportion there will be above 800. persons fitly and cheapely left
there, and maintained the first year: and so every year some people so left,
both men and women, will not only be a great ease to this Kingdom, but also
save a great charge in carrying thither, and in returning yearly from thence
so many persons, and they will be also worth unto such Adventurers, as will so
leave them there, in diverse labors, whiles the Ships are wanting from thence,
a great benefit, and also the greater security unto every such Ship and
company, that have people so left in the Country, to provide against their
coming; whereby they need not then sail thitherward bound so timely in the
year, and in such casual and so desperate a manner, as yearly now they use to
do. And if such a beneficial course be taken for peopling of that Land, how
may there be a fitter Plantation settled there, or elsewhere, let any man
judge; and so fit to be united unto his Majesty's other Kingdoms, without
charge, bloodshed, or usurpation. Any man that will thus adventure, shall not
only have a great quantity of land there to him and his heirs, with many other
privileges, upon fit conditions; but also he shall have the yearly benefit of
such a sum as he shall so disburse, for the setting forth of any such
shipping, and the labors of such as shall be so employed; so that your
Lordship intends not to have the benefit of any such sum, as shall be thus
adventured therein by any other man, but only your equal part, of such a great
sum as you pretend, by Gods assistance, to adventure therein likewise.

Then who will not be willing to employ a part of his estate, or to go
himself, or send a friend to inhabit that Country, though he have but small
means; or but only his merit to advance his fortune, there to tread and plant
that Land, he shall so purchase by his good endeavors, if he have the taste of
virtue and magnanimity? What to such a mind can be more pleasant, then building
a foundation for his posterity, so to be gotten without prejudice to any, if
he have any zeal in Religion? What can he do less hurtful to any, or more
agreeable to God, then to seek to convert the poor Savages (which live in the
North part of that Country) to know their Creator and Redeemer? What so truly
suites with honor and honesty, as by informing the ignorant, and reforming
things unjust, teaching virtue, and gain to our native mother Country, another
Kingdom, near as spacious as Ireland to attend her, where there may be found
employments for those that now live idly? Which is so far from wronging any,
as to cause posterity to remember them, and remembering them, ever to honor
that remembrance with praise.

Then who would live at home idly, that may be there employed, or think
himself worthy to live, only to eat, drink, and sleep, and so die; having
consumed that carelessly, his friends got worthily, or by using that talent
miserably, which may thus maintain virtue honestly?

Now my hope is, that gain will make some to affect that, which Religion,
charity, and the common good cannot: I having for my own part no other purpose
herein, but for the general good of all his Majesty's Subjects, and not any
desire to persuade any man to adventure thither, but for honor and profit:
neither is my purpose by these persuasions, to draw children from their
parents, men from their wives, nor servants from their masters; but only such
as with a free consent will go, or may be spared from such Cities and
Parishes, that will but apparel some of their fatherless children of
fourteen or fifteen years of age; and some such young married people, as
have but small means, to set themselves forth; who by their good industry, may
live there pleasantly, and grow rich in little time; And if any man, which
shall be willing to adventure thither, desire to be further satisfied, they may
read my discovery of that Country, and what defect is found in either, they
shall find supplied in me to further their good desire therein, that have thus
freely thrown myself, with my mite, into the treasury of my Countries good,
which I esteem worth much more then Columbus could certainly give the
Spaniards at his first enterprise of any such certainties of great wealth, by
his designs in the West Indies, as since has bin there found: and although I
cannot now at first promise to have such Mines of gold in New Foundland, yet
let us in that Plantation something imitate our near neighbors the Hollanders,
whose wealth and strength gotten in few years only by fishing, are good
testimonies, whereby they have in little time gotten their wealth and strength;
and if the Plantation at New Foundland, be orderly proceeded on, the trades
thither, and at other of his Majesty's Western Plantations, would
questionless in time afford yearly a greater quantity of gold and silver into
all his Majesty's Kingdoms, then all the Mines of the West Indies do now
yearly yield to the King of Spain, and with less hazard, and more certainty
and felicity. And thus I descend to the charge of victualling forth a Ship of
100. Tun, with 40. persons, to be employed for the more orderly proceeding in
the said Plantation.

THE CHARGE AS FOLLOWS.
li. s. d. IN primis, eleven thousand weight of Biscuit bread, bought at XV.
shillings the hundred weight 082 10 0 Twenty six Tun of Beer and Sider, at 53.
shillings 4. pence the Tun 069 07 0 Two Hogs-heads of very good English Beef
010 00 0 Two Hogs-heads of Irish Beef 005 00 0 Ten fat Hogs salted, Caske and
Salt 010 10 0 Thirty bushels of Pease, at 006 00 0 Two Firkins of Butter 003 00
0 Two hundred weight of Cheese 002 10 0 One bushel of Mustard-seede 000 06 0
One Hogs-head of Vinegar 001 05 0 Wood to dress meat withal 001 00 0 One
great Copper kettle 002 00 0 Two small Kettles 002 00 0 Two Frying pans 000 03
4 Platters, Ladles, and Cans for Beer 001 00 0 A pair of Bellows for the
Cook 000 02 0 Locks for the bread Rooms 000 02 6 Tap, Boriers, and Funnels
000 02 0 One hundred weight of Candles 002 10 0 One hundred and thirty quarter
of Salt, at 2. s. the bushel, 15. gallons to the bushel, is 16. shillings the
quarter 104 00 0 Mats and dynnage to lie under the salt in the Ship 002 10 0
Salt shouels 000 10 0 More in provisions for the foresaid 40. persons, to keep
8. fishing boats at Sea, with three men in every boat, is, 24. men, for which
eight Pinnaces, it is fit to carry 500. foot of Elm boords, of an inch in
thicknes, at 8. s. the hundred 002 00 0 Two thousand nails for the said boats
and Stages, at 13. s. 4. d. the thousand 001 06 8 Four thousand nails, at 6.
s. 8. d. the thousand 001 06 8 Two thousand nails, at 5. d. the hundred 000 08
0 Five hundred weight of Pitch, at 8. s. the hundred 002 00 0 A barrel of
Tar 000 10 0 Two hundred weight of black Ocome. 001 00 0 Thrummes for Pitch
mabs 000 01 6 Bolles, Buckets, and Funnels 001 00 0 Two brazen Crocks 002 00 0
Canuase to make boat sails, and small ropes fitting for them; at 25. s. for
each sail 012 10 0 Ten Boats, Anchors, Roapes, which contain 600. weight, at
30. s the hundred 010 00 0 Twelve doozen of fishing lines 006 00 0 Twenty four
doozen of fishing hooks 002 00 0 Squid hooks and stems for them 000 02 0 For
Squid line 000 03 0 For Pots and liver Mands 000 18 0 Iron works for ten
fishing Boats Ruthers 002 00 0 Ten keipnet Irons 000 10 0 Twine to make
keipnets, and gainge hooks 000 06 0 Ten good Nets, at 26. s. a Net 013 00 0
Two Saines, a greater and a less 012 00 0 Two hundred weight of Sow Lead 001
00 0 Two couple of small Ropes for the Saines 001 00 0 Dry Fats 000 06 0
Flaskets, and bread boxes 000 15 0 Twine for store 000 05 0 For so much
haire-cloth as may cost 010 00 0 Three Tun of Vinegar Caske, for fresh water
001 06 8 Two barrels of Oatemeale 001 06 0 One doozen of Deal boards 000 10 0
One hundred weight of Spikes 002 05 0 Headding and splitting Knives 001 05 0
Two good Axes, four hand Hatchets, four short Wood hooks, two drawing Irons,
and two Adizes 000 16 0 Three yards of good woollen Cloth 000 10 0 Eight yards
of good Canuase 000 10 0 A grinding stone or two 000 06 0 An Iron pitch pot and
hooks 000 06 0 One thousand five hundred of dry fish, to spend thitherward 006
00 0 One Hogs-head of Aqua vitae 004 00 0 Two thousand of good Orlop nails 002
05 0 Four arm Sawes, four hand Sawes, four thwart Sawes, three Augers, two
Crows of Iron, and two Sledges, four Iron Shouels, two Pickaxes, Four
Mattocks, and four Cloe hammers 005 00 0 More for some other small necessaries
003 4 The total sum of which particulars is, 420 1 4

ALL these former provisions, the Master of the Ship, or the Purser are to be
accountable unto your Honor and the other Adventurers in every voyage, what is
spent thereof, and what is left of the same, with those which shall continue
there to plant; of which number, if but ten persons remain there, they may well
have reserved for the^ of the former victuals and provisions, these particulars
following, viz.

Five hundred weight of the Biscuit bread, five hogs-heads of beer, or sider,
half a hogs-head of beef, four whole sides of dry bacon, four bushels of
pease, half a firkin of butter, half a hundred weight of cheeses, a pecke of
mustard seed, a barrel of vinegar, twelve pound weight of candles, two pecks
of oatmeale, half a hogs-head of aqua vitae, two copper kettles, one brass
crock, one frying pan, a grinding stone, and all the axes, hatchets,
wood-hookes, augers, sawes, crows of iron, sledges, hammers, mattocks,
pick-axes, shoouels, drawing irons, splitting knives, haire-cloth, pynnaces
sails, pynnaces anchor ropes, a said, some nets; and keep all the eight
fishing boats, and the iron works appertaining to them, in perfect readiness
there, from year to year; and many of the other small necessaries, when the
fishing voyage is made, as pikes, nails, and such like, which may serve to
help build houses, cleanse land, and such like services fitly for the
Inhabitants to labor withal in the winter time, whiles the Ships are wanting
from them.

Now to make an estimate what fish all the 40. persons fit for such a voyage,
may well take, and keep eight fishing boats all the Summer time there at Sea,
with three good Fishermen in every of the said boats; and so many men do
usually kill above twenty five thousand fish for every boat, which may amount
unto two hundred thousand, six score fishes to every hundred: and diverse Ships
being so well provided, have yearly taken there above thirty five thousand, for
every boat: so as they not only load their Ship, but also sell great
quantities, besides their loadings yearly to Merchants; and if such Ships which
are so well manned for that purpose, cannot make sale of such fish as they take
over and above their loading; then they give over taking of any more in diverse
years, when there is great abundance easily to be taken, because there are no
fit houses to lay up the same in safety for another year.

Now to make an estimation but of twenty five thousand of fish, for every of
the eight boats, it will amount unto two hundred thousand; which may be a fit
quantity to fill and load a Ship of an hundred Tun burden, if the fish be not
very small; if it be large, a Ship of that burden will not load so much,
besides the water, wood; victual, and other provisions, fit for so many men as
shall sail in the said Ship from thence, to make sale and employments of the
said fish, which, as I conceive, will be a fit course so to do, and thereby
great charge, and some adventure will be saved in carrying the same directly to
a market, in regard what it would be, if it should be returned home into
England, and then afterward relade the same again and send it to a market.

Wherein my opinion is, that the said Ship, having her voyage at
New Foundland, should sail from thence directly to Marseiles or Talloon,
which places lying within the Straits of Gibraltar in the French Kings
dominions, where the customs upon Fish are but little, and the Kentall less
then ninety English pounds weight; and the price of such Fish there I have not
known, to be sold for less at any time, then twelve shillings of current
English payment for every Kentall, and commonly a far greater price; and
there speedy sales are usually made of such Fish, and good returns had: and if
any man will return his money from thence, he may have sure bills of exchange,
for payment thereof here in London, upon sight of any such bills.

The foresaid two hundred thousand of Fish, loading the said Ship, it will then
make at Marseiles above two and twenty hundred Kentalls of that weight; which
being sold but at twelve shillings the Kentall, amounts to thirteen hundred
and twenty pound sterling, and is -- 1320. pounds.

A Ship of that burden to serve the voyage, being hired by the month, when
she is there unloaded, may be then there paid for her hire, and so discharged;
or being hired for a longer time, may return from thence unto some other place
in Spain, to be reloaded home with some Merchandise, which may be well
performed, and the said Ship return in fit time to sail again unto
New Foundland the year following, with less charge then the first year; and
then greater hope of benefit it will be to the Adventurers then the first year,
when people are there beforehand, and all things in fit readiness against
their coming.

There may well be of the foresaid two hundred thousand of Fish, twelve Tun of
train Oil, or a greater quantity, the which being sold and delivered in
New Foundland at ten pounds the Tun, as commonly it is the price there, it
will amount to the sum of six score pounds, and is -- 120. pounds.

And also there may be well made over and above the foresaid quantity of two
hundred thousand dry fish, ten thousand of large green fish; which being sold
in New Foundland, but at five pounds the thousand, it will amount to the sum
of fifty pounds; I say, 050. l. which green fish being brought into England,
it may yield above ten pounds the thousand; and the twelve Tun of train
Oil, being likewise brought home, is usually sold at some places in this
Kingdom, for above eighteen pounds the Tun, and sometimes at twenty; which
ouer-prices of the said Oil and green fish, I do here omit to sum the same,
what it may be more.

Now if the foresaid two hundred thousand of Fish may be sold at Marseiles, at
sixteen shillings the Kentall, as often such Fish is, and much dearer; the two
thousand two hundred Kentals, will then amount to the sum of seventeen
hundred and threescore pounds. -- 1760. pounds.

And it is very likely that the foresaid eight fishing boats being well
manned, and stay continually fishing in the Country, until the 15. day of
October, as they may well, they may then take above thirty five thousand of Fish
for every boat, as diverse years many men have done: which will then amount to
fourscore thousand more then the former two hundred thousand.

The which fourscore thousand so gotten over and above the Ships loading, may
be otherwise disposed of at New Foundland; be it more or less, it may yield
there four pounds the thousand, allowing to that price all the train Oil and
green Fish which may come thereof: so that there may be well gotten over and
above the Ships loading, fourscore thousand of Fish, and much more; the which
at four pounds the thousand, will amount to the sum of-0320.li.-s.-d.

Adding thereunto the former sum of-1320.-0.-0.-0.

And also for the aforesaid Oil. -- -0120.-0.-0.-0.

And also for the 10000. green Fish.-0050.-0.-0-0.

And also for the ouer-price at Marseiles, being sold at sixteen shillings
the Kentall, it will be some -- 0440.-0.-0.-0.

Total Sum -- 2250.-0.-0.-0.

OF which sum, be it more or less, whatsoever is gotten in the voyage; if
victuals, Salt, and the other former provisions, be provided at reasonable
cheap prices: Then the Master and Company have a third part thereof, allowing
some small matter from the same, toward the victualing; and there is another
third part likewise to be allowed, toward the Ships travel and charge,
deducting something likewise thereof toward the Master of the Ship, for taking
the charge, and for some other of the better sort of men, which they usually
have over and above their shares of the former third: and the other third
remains unto the Victualers forth of the Ship.

So that the voyage amounting as aforesaid, to the sum of two thousand, two
hundred and fifty pounds: A third will be the sum of seven hundred and fifty
pounds for the victualling part; from which deducting the former charge of
420.li. -- 01.s. -- 04.d. which is to be for the victualling forth of a Ship
with forty persons; there may remain to the Adventurers for the bearing the
Adventure, and all Charges discharged, the sum of -- 331.li. -- 11.s. And in
some years, when salt, bread and beer is dear bought; the victualling part
is allowed the one moity or half part of what is gotten in the voyage, and the
Company and Ship the other half part.

Now omitting to write of any greater price, which may be gotten upon the sales
of the two hundred thousand of Fish at Marseiles, or the benefit which may be
made upon the returns of the money for the same from thence, or what may be
gotten by the employments of the foresaid sum, at the place where the sales
are made:

Likewise what may be more gotten upon the train Oil and green Fish, if it
be not sold in New Foundland, but brought home, and sold here at the best
hand:

And if a Ship be hired by the month to perform this voyage, which may be
ended in less then nine months, the Ship to be free at Marseiles, when the
Fish is unloaded there; and being hired at forty pound a month or much
cheaper; it may then be esteemed what may be gotten by hiring of a Ship in that
manner, if the Fish and train Oil amount unto the prices, as it is valued: if
it yield more, then the greater benefit will come by hiring of a Ship; if
less, after the rate accordingly.

And if Pans be provided for the making of Salt in the New Foundland, as fitly
and cheapely it may be, then will the charge in setting forth of any Ship by
the Adventurers, be much less, and the benefit much the greater.

Now whereas there are but twenty four men of the forty nominated to fish; the
other are to labor the Fish at land, (of which sixteen) seven are to be
skillful headders, and splitters of fish; two boys to lay the fish on a table,
and three to salt the fish, which labor, three women may fitly do; three men
may fetch a-land salt, and tend to wash fish, and dry the same; which may be
two house Carpenters and a Mason, the other may be a woman, which makes up
sixteen to be a-land, who may be fit to provide meat, and to wash, and dry
fish so well as men, and other labors also.

And those persons which remain there, should be hired by the year, whose
yearly wages will not be above 8. or 9. pounds a couple one with the other,
and apparel themselves; which apparel the adventurers are to provide; and
those which are thus hired, to allow for the same again out of their yearly
wages. The which yearly wages, for every couple of those which should continue
there, will be borne yearly on that part of the fish and oil, which may come
to the Companies part, as aforesaid, if the business be orderly carried; So
that the victuals of those persons which should remain there to plant, from
the 20. day of March, unto the 20. day of November; and their whole years pay
should every year be, as it were charged and raised out of the Companies third
part, from year to year; Neither should the adventurers be any other way
charged for them, but only for some fit quantity of Meal, Malt, Beef,
Porke, Butter, Cheese, Aqua vitae, and some other fit things to serve them in
winter, until the Ships return to them again, in the beginning of every
Summer; and then they are to be again as of the Ships company.

In which time of winter, their labors upon the land, in building of houses,
sawing of boords, squaring of timber, manuring of land, and doing other
services, may well defray the said charge, with good benefit over and above the
same.

And then the second year, every of those persons, which so shall remain
there, may have their equal shares with the Fishermen, which may well pay
their wages and charge that the Adventurers should be at for them.

This is the order and course, which I have long time had an opinion, that an
orderly and beneficial Plantation in the New Foundland, is to be at first
proceeded on, and not by carriage of beasts thither to till the land, before
such time as provisions be made for them to live in winter, which will require
some time to fit Meddowes at first for hay, and fit houses for them.

A Ship of a hundred Tun burden, being thus employed, may also well carry in
her the first year for increase, Hogs, Goats, and Poultry, which will not be
chargeable, nor pester much room in the Ship, and they will prove and
increase exceeding well there, as I have often proved, and be at very little
or no charge in keeping of them there; And after the first year, the said Ship
sailing thither with a less number of people, provision being made there in
readiness, she may carry in her great store of Beasts and provision for them.

And for the better proceeding in this Plantation, it will be good for the
Adventurers to hire two small Barks, near the burden of 30. Tun apiece by the
month, to be victualled and manned by them, which should serve as in a
fishing voyage, with ten persons in each Bark, and they should have in every
of them, all provisions fit to keep two Fisher boats at Sea, either of them
all the summer, and then those Barks may also well carry some beasts for
increase; and they should depart hence before the Ship of a hundred Tun burden,
for some special services, and then the Ship of a hundred Tun, with 40.
persons, need not depart out of England, before toward the end of March,
which Barks being there timely in the year, may be in many respects worth much
more, for the good of the fishing voyage, and the said Plantation, then their
hire by the month will amount unto, as for many reasons which I can deliver.

And then taking that course, there may be some sales made beforehand of a
hundred thousand of fish or a greater quantity to some Merchants, to be
delivered in New Foundland, and to receive money for the same here in London,
upon Bills of Exchange; All which, by Gods assistance, may be well performed,
and the bigger Ship also, well laden, to sail from thence to some good market,
to make sales of the same.

And then one of those Barks may load all such train oil as may be gotten in
the voyage, and return with the same, where it may be thought best to make
sale thereof; And the other Bark may then load all such green fish as may be
made, and return home to England or elsewhere to dispose thereof.

Thus it may be all well performed, and store of fish left for the provision of
those which are to stay in the Country to inhabit: and also for the hogs and
waterfowle to feed on in winter when there is cause.

Now whether it may be best to buy a Ship of 100. Tun burden, or bigger, to
serve for the said voyage, or to hire such a one by the month, for that
purpose; I leave it to the consideration of your Lordship, and the other
Adventurers.

THus I have showed in what a temperate climate your several circuits of land
do lie in that Country, as also how the bounds thereof extend; and also
partly what good Harbors, Bays, and Roads for shipping to ride safe at
Anchor, are within the same; as also such conditions as you will be pleased to
grant unto any that will be an Aduenturer with you therein; and also partly
the great hope, both of honor and profit to all those that shall be willing
to be Adventurers with you, to further the same.

Whereby it may be well understood, that by an orderly settling of the said
Plantation, it will be for the general good of all his Majesty's Subjects, and
not hurtful to any; And it will be also a most special benefit, and good for
all those which yearly trade there in fishing, what now it is, though they
settle no people there to plant, whereby to keep and maintain their certain
places, there to salt and dry their fish on: by reason that those which shall
inhabit there, will upon request, and some small gratuity, preserve their
fishing Boats yearly from spoiling, so as they may have them and their
Stages, and all commodious and necessary rooms in such perfect readiness,
yearly against their coming thither, which may undoubtedly be worth unto
them in their fishing voyages, many thousands of pounds more yearly then now
it is, as it cannot be denied by any that knows the manner and order of these
New Foundland voyages.

Now having thus plainly expressed with what facility this Plantation may be
orderly proceeded on; I will also make known my opinion and certain
knowledge, how some such Adventurers to that Country, of his Majesty's
subjects may yearly make much greater benefit of trade, in returning from
thence, then any man that I have ever heard of, or known, which has as yet
put in practice, leaving it to those that will make trial thereof.

IT is well known, that from the foresaid harbor of Renowze, unto a place
called the Bank, which lies East from thence toward England, near 25.
leagues in the like altitude as the said harbor of Renowze is, which Bank is
a sand, in most places near twelve leagues broad; and in length Northeast, and
Southwest, above 100. leagues; on which Bank, there is no less then 20.
fadome of water at any place: and there fish above 100. sail of French Ships,
Winter and Summer, some of them making two voyages there in a year, and
another voyage to some other place also in the same year.

I have often (sailing toward the New Foundland) met with some French Ships,
coming from thence, deep laden with fish, in the first of April, who have
taken the same there, in January, February, and March, which are the sharpest
months in the year for storms and cruel weather.

To which Bank our Nation may do great good in fishing, such as will sail
from the New Foundland in the later part of the Summer, when the fish begins
to draw from that coast, as commonly it does when the Winter comes on; I mean,
such shipping as are to be employed by whomsoever may undertake to plant there,
and likewise any other Ships that sail thither a fishing, as now they use to
do, who having disposed away such fish and train oil as they take there in
the Summer time unto Merchants, as usually every year some have done, they may
then (salt being made there) as it may be fitly and cheaply, take in thereof a
fit quantity, and fresh water, wood, fresh fowls great store, and other
victual, and likewise a sufficient quantity of Herrings, Mackerell, Capeling,
and Lawnce, to bait their hooks withal for taking of fish; because such bait
the Frenchmen are not able to have, that sail purposely to fish at the said
Bank, but are constrained to bait their hooks with a part of the same Codfish
they take there, wherewith they load their Ships.

The which fish so taken there, are larger, thicker, and sweeter, then the same
kind of fishes that are taken on the coast of New Foundland. Whereby it may be
well understood to be more necessary, for such as will sail there to fish, to
carry such kind of bait as aforesaid, with them, and then they shall more
speedily load their Ships then the Frenchmen do, who have there no such bait
to take fish withal, neither any other fresh victual of flesh kind, wood, or
fresh water to dress their meat withal, but only such as they carry with
them from France.

Whereby it may be well conceived, that the fishing which the Frenchmen have
there, is a very profitable trade; seeing they not only sail thither in the
hardest time of Winter, which is above 650. leagues distance from the nearest
part of France; and in all which time to live upon the Sea in a cold place,
with but little wood, wherewith to make sometimes a good fire to dress their
meat, and to sit by to warm themselves.

All which hardness of living so on the said Bank, the gain which they make
by the said fishing trade, does make them delight therein: whereby it may be
well understood, to be a far better trade for our Nation: such as fish the
Summer time at New Foundland, and do provide for that purpose, they may there
reload their Ships again with good fish, in twenty days, coming thither, so
well provided as aforesaid: and so they may then at times sit by a good fire,
when they have labored hard all day; whereby they will be the better able to
take more fish in a day, then so many Frenchmen shall be able to take in two.

And thus may any perform the said voyage homeward bound in fit order, and be
at no charge about trimming of any Ship, which shall serve in such a voyage,
but only as is used every year for the New Foundland voyage only, and with
a small addition of bread and beer to be allowed more thereunto.

Neither need the Masters and Sailors of any Ships that will undertake the
said voyage, prepare themselves with any other apparel or necessary
provisions, then they yearly use to do for the New Foundland voyage only.

Which voyage, I am of opinion, diverse men will gladly undertake, when those
Plantations, now lately intended, are orderly settled; which is likely to prove
very profitable, for any that will prepare themselves for that purpose, seeing
it will be unto such, as a double voyage, and all under one charge.

And whosoever will so employ Ships, they may sail with their loading so
gotten there, unto France, Portugal, or Spain, where that kind of fish does
usually sell at a great price; and return laden from thence (by Gods
assistance) yearly against Christmasse, with some Salt, Oil, Wine, Fruit, and
some Royalls of Plate; and so make four voyages in three quarters of a year,
and all under one setting forth.

And then such may afterward spend the time at their homes, until it be
toward April in every year, which is timely enough to set forth again in
the said voyages.

And if any Ship so employed, do return from thence directly home to England,
that kind of fish will sell so well here, and is so good as any powdered Cod
which is taken in the North Seas, or upon the coast of England or Ireland.

Thus briefly and plainly, but not curiously, I have run through my intended
task of my second motives and reasons, which leads to the advancement of his
Majesty's most hopeful Plantation in the New Foundland; not that my
resolution is any way to insinuate with the capacity, either of the highest, or
meaner sort of people, thereby to inuit them to the setting forth of this
great and happy enterprise, further then the sollidity of the truth, and well
grounded probabilities, shall direct and lead them; but rather to inform
their judgments of the natural state, condition, benefits, and trade to that
Country, which promises so many hopes; and these hopes so much assurance of a
most flourishing and succesfull issue, that indeed, to use but few words for
all, we need only desire to know the New Foundland, and to love it as we
should.

But as the smallest terrestrial action cannot possibly prosper, without Gods
divine assistance, to perfect and finish it: so this great work, so pious and
noble of it self, as tending to the propagation of so many Christian souls to
God, will (by his eternal providence and great mercy) be both furthered and
blessed in the attempt, preservation, and establishing thereof.

As for my self, who out of mine own experience, and the integrity of my
thoughts, am confident, that the end will crown the beginning of this most
hopeful Plantation, I shall ever, like a true hearted Englishman, and his
Majesty's humble and faithful Subject, religiously desire, and wish to see it
in a fair forwardness and good proceeding: howsoever, as virtue is subject
and incident to be crossed, and maligned by the followers of vice; and that we
sometimes see many excellent and noble proiects strangled or made abortiue in
their birthes: Even so this great work may (perhaps) be either blasted by
nipping whirle-windes at home, or decay and die, through some fatal and
disasterous misfortune, in the miscarrying or unskillfulness of such as may
seek, and be employed in the managing and conduction thereof, as many worthy
attempts have been, by taking unfit agents and proceedings.

And if it should so happen (which God defend) either in your Lordships good
purpose therein, or the right Honorable Master Secretary Caluerts: who having
already (partly by my information) sent some people there to plant; and that
shortly ye both intend to send greater numbers thither to your several
Colonies:

That then, for the better proceeding in both your good resolutions, it cannot
be gainsaid but that it may do well, that those people which are to be sent
thither at first, are to be directed by such as well understand how to employ
every several person there at all times; not only in the fishing trade, when
the times serve; which (indeed) is the only instrument and sinew that is best
like at first to give comfort, and hold life unto this so pious work: For even
as it is a special good rule, and most fit, in time of Harvest, to be
industrious and careful to reap and gather the sheaues into some places of
safety: So is it also requisite, that a provident course be taken with all
those which are to be employed to that Country, that they should be either
skillful in such things as shall be fitting, when time serves, or directed by
those which are well experienced therein; Because that in the Summer time, when
those great Shoales of the Cod-fish draw to that coast to spawne, and take his
fill on multitudes of smaller fishes, which they follow there close to the
cliffes and sands; commonly thirty days together, before they hale off from
the shore again, and in such manner, there come three several Shoales of the
Cod-fishes in the Summer time: The one of them follows on the Herrings: the
other follows the Capling, which is a fish like the Smelt: And the third
follows the Squid, which is a fish something like the Cuddell.

Now at those times there usually go many Boats forth a fishing from that
coast, only with three men in each Boat; And those three being fit Fishermen,
will daily take at those times above 1200. of those Cod-fishes, six score to
the hundred, and every of those fishes with the Oil which comes of them, being
valued but at a penny for every such fish, which is a cheap rate, it will
amount to be worth six pound starling, being splitted, salted, and dried, as
the same ought to be; wherein there is good industry, experience, and much
judgment to be used; otherwise there is but little hope that such fish can be
taken and fitly preserved, whereby to defray the charge, and bring profit
withal to both your Honors, and all other Adventurers with you, as I much
desire that ye and they all may have.

By this it may be well understood, it is good angling with the hook and line
there, when a single man may take in that employment above forty shillings
worth of fish a day: for I have often seen there, that those who are most
industrious in taking and well handling of such fish, have certainly been most
willing, fittest and readiest to build, and do any other service there, at
such times whilst the fish fails; when some others that are unskillful in the
one, will stand and talk with their hands in their Gloves or Pockets, and do
but little to any purpose in the other; like those that come on the Stage to
act their part in a Comedy, but perform it not sufficiently: so that they are
not only scoffed and hist at; but also those which are at the charge, and
chief Actors thereof, receive some disgrace and wrong thereby: for I have
often known there some proper men, which have not been well acquainted with
those affairs; yet have had some other good parts in them, and would speak
well when they have come from thence, yet never performed any thing there
worthy of great commendations.

THus I have endeavored with much travail, great expense, and loss of time,
to make it plainly appear, that it will be pleasing, honorable, and
beneficial unto all those that shall be willing to advance the said
Plantation; which, praised be God, is now partly by my several relations, come
unto a fair forwardnes.

And although I have but little hope to receive any benefit by the said
Plantation to my self; or for my endeavors, great expense, and loss of time
herein: yet by Gods blessed assistance, I shall, among many other great losses
and discontents which I have had, as it is well known, bear this one content
to my grave, that I have ever been a true loving Subject to my Prince and
Country; and in the solicitation by these my two several Treatises, and
otherwise, I have dealt truly with his Majesty, carefully and uprightly with
either of your Honors, and sincerely with all those which shall be willing to
assist either of your good purposes therein.

Now if any which shall not be willing, or is not able to perform a part, for
the perfecting of this great and most hopeful work, should dislike that I
have thus laid open a gap into those grounds, which some do seem to
challenge, and appropriate, as it were unto themselves, and so would not have
all others of his Majesty's Subjects made acquainted with the trade and
benefit, which is there like to be obtained:

Such (as I conceive) may be compared to be something like unto Esops dog,
which could eat no Hay, neither would he suffer the hungry Ass to feed
thereon.

Yet my hope is, that such may well understand by what I have written, that my
true desire is, to show unto any of them, that by the said Plantation and
trading to that Country, being so well followed, as it may orderly be, that
all his Majesty's Kingdoms, which now are beholding unto other Countries for
some necessary commodities, might not only be furnished with the like from
thence, but also in taking of such fish, as those Seas do yield at an easier
rate then now we use to have them: whereby we may serve France, Spain,
Portugal, Italy, and other places, much cheaper with that sort of fish, then
any of these other nations shall be able to fetch the same from thence, and
thereby have and retain all the trade of that Country, unto his Majesty's
Subjects hands only.

For whereas there sail yearly to that Country above 250. sail of Ships
from England only, with above 5000. English men in them; by whose labors,
there is yearly gotten into this Kingdom, above the sum of 150000. li. and
also thereby many families set on work and relieved: then it may be well
understood, what a great benefit and strength it will be, when there shall
fail thither 500. sail of Ships, and above 10000. serviceable Subjects in
them, which will be able to gain, with the help of such numbers of other men,
women, and children, as may yearly be so commodiously carried thither few
years, when the Subjects are made acquainted with such an orderly course, as
both your Honors have already taken for the advancement of the said Plantation.

Whereby there may be thus yearly gotten, not only much wealth, but also
great strength against such time, as any other Prince should break league with
his Majesty, that then to have in such readiness 500. sail of his Subjects
Ships, so ready to come from thence, with more then 10000. serviceable Seamen
in them, in less time then 15. days warning, if the wind serve, which is so
short a time, as Sailors may be pressed in some part of this Kingdom, and be
able to come from thence unto his Majesty's Navy Royal at Chattam, upon any
occasion of service.

The like strength by Sea, there is not any other Prince in the world able to
call home unto him in so short a time of his own subjects, from any one place
of trading, if he have never so great occasion.

Thus, God blessing the said Trade and Plantation, it will be, not only a
great augmentation to his Majesty in his revenues and customs, but also a
general good unto all his Highness Kingdoms and Subjects, both in enriching
of adventurers in particular, and also in strengthening the wall of defense,
which God has set about our native nest, Great Britain, namely, Navigations,
which must needs be much cherished and furnished by this Seminary of Fishers,
employed in such Colonies, and out of that shoale, will be always in
readiness and of ability to be translated higher, from fishing vessels, into
fighting Ships Royal; and so are always useful for peace or war,
merchandise or defense, as the occasions of our estate and welfare shall
require.

And so I leave the success thereof to the good pleasure of God: to whom be
all the glory. RICH. WHITBOVRNE.


