AN ANSWER TO THE TEN REASONS OF EDMUND CAMPIAN THE IESVIT, IN CONFIDENCE
WHEREOF HE offered disputation to the Ministers of the Church of England, in
the controversy of faith.

WHEREUNTO IS ADDED IN BRIEF MARGINALL NOTES, THE sum of the defense of
those reasons by JOHN DVRAEVS the Scot, being a Priest and a Jesuit, with a
reply unto it.

WRITTEN FIRST IN THE LATIN TONGVE BY THE REVEREND AND faithful servant of
Christ and his Church, WILLIAM WHITAKERS, Doctor in Divinity, and the Kings
Professor and public Reader of Divinity in the University of Cambridge.

AND NOW FAITHFVLLY TRANSLATED FOR the benefit of the unlearned (at the
appointment and desire of some in authority) into the English tongue; by
RICHARD STOCK, Preacher in London.

IN THIS TREATISE, MOST OF THE Controversies betwixt us and the Church of Rome
are briefly and plainly handled.

THE PRINCIPAL THINGS IN EVERY ANSWER are gathered into a short sum, and
are set down after the Epistle to the Reader.

Imprinted at London by FELIX KYNGSTON, for Cuthbert Burby and Edmund Weauer.
1606.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE WILLIAM LORD KNOVVLES, BARON OF GREYS, TREASVRER OF
HIS MAJESTY'S Household, and one of the Lords of his Majesty's most Honorable
privy Council.
RIght Honorable, the Religion, or more truly, the superstition of the
malignant Church of Rome, has two special privileges above any religion in
the world that either has been, or is. The one, that the professors of it may
eat their God in the Sacrament: the other, that they may kill their King in
their coffeehouse; not only when he is an Heretic, but, as the law says,
It is the reason given why Pope Zachary deposed Hilaerike King of France, and
set up Pipine in his place in Gratians decree. part. 2. cause. 15. c. 3. Alius.
when he is Inutilis, not for their turn and to their minds. The former has
bin the cause of the spilling of much blood in the days of Q. Mary: the latter
of deposing of so many Kings, and murdering of them, in France, and other
places of Christendom, and of the manifold treasons in the days of Queen
Elizabeth of blessed and happy memory. And of two attempts against his sacred
person and state, in these three years space. The first was but a smoke, the
latter should have been a sire: the first was but the lightning; the latter
should have been the thunderclap; if he that is the God both of lightning and
thunder had not graciously prevented it. Now the former of these points they
defend every where: but the latter they a little blush to hear of; not that it
is not in their hearts, but because their hands want power to effect it. Yet
that it is their doctrine and constant opinion, has been proved in a small
treatise, which I presented to ^our I honor some few months ago. And that so
apparently that they are at a default, as the Council was Act. 4.16. What
shall we do to these men? for surely a manifest sign is done by them, and is
openly known to all them who dwell in Jerusalem: and we cannot deny it. So
with a little change it may be said by them; What shall we say to these
things? for surely a manifest truth is told by them, and it is openly known to
all them who dwell in England: and we cannot deny it. For though they have
endeavored to answer it, yet they have not bin able to deny any thing in it.
Only these Charmers of the spiritual Egypt have endeavored to do in like
manner with their enchantments. Exodus 7.11.
But as all the Sorcerers miracles were not true, but only sleights and
tricks by the help of Satan: so are not these for the most part, but only
Iaglings, and not able to deceive any but fools and children, either the
ignorant, or the seduced already. And in many things in effect they say as
Judah: Genesis 44.16.
How can we justify our selves? God and man has found out the wickedness of
us all. But not to digress further: at the time of my presenting of the
foresaid Treatise to your Honor, it pleased you to show me Campians ten
Reasons, lately taken in a Papists house, translated into English; wherewith
many were peru^^^ed, and others made to stagger in the way o^ truth; because of
the goodly show of truth that such gilded lies have put upon them by such
cunning Orators. Your Honor was then given to understand, that they were
answered by diverse, especially by that worthy and excellent Instrument of Gods
glory, and one of the most glorious lights of our English Church, Doctor
Whitakers. The book was showed you; but being written in the Latin tongue, you
wished for the m re benefit of the general, that it might be turned into
English. Your will was a command unto me, who profess I owe much duty to
your Honor, and have had less opportunity than will to show it, for these
few years space I have been toward you: and now as soon as I could, for my
public service of the Church in my poor ministry, I have effected it.
Touching which if I may be bold to deliver what I think in few words, thus
much I say for Campians reasons: I account him bold in all, foolish in many
things; yet wise in this, that in the beginning he tells us they are his ten
chief Reasons. Herein he is like to the foolish Painter, who when he had made
two pictures of two small beasts, which after they were made, nothing resembled
those which he intended, writ over their heads, This is such a beast, and this
such an one. So he having composed these ten Rhetorical speeches, being so
without reason, which he intended they should have had, he calls them reasons,
lest the reader in perusing should have mistaken them, as he he had done in
writing. Doubtless at a conclusion Campian is an excellent fellow; and if he
could have furnished as good premises, as he has enhaunced and amplified the
conclusion, he would have put the answerer to much trouble. But now we may say
of them as Hierom said of the books of Iouinian: Hieron. aduers. Iouinian.
lib. 1.
It is harder to know what he holds, Multo difficilius est nosse, quam vincere.
(...). Portenta verborum descriptionis dedecus. Vel per f^brem somniare, vel a
reptum morbo phrenetico, Hippocratis vinculis alligandum. Hieron. cont. Heluid.
cap. 3. Ne respondendo dignus fieret, qui vinceretur. Quia loquacitat^m
facundia existimat. Quia maledicere omnibus, bonae consereatiae signum
arbitratur. Obscandalum fratrum, qui ad cius rabien mouebantur.
than to confute his opinions: not for any deepnes of matter, but because he is
as Hierome calls Iouinian, one that loves to speak darkly. For he has (as he
speaks) bumbasted words, deformed discourses, and he that reads him
advisedly, would think him either dreaming in some distempered fit of an Ague,
or perhaps rather sick of a frenzy, so that he had need of Hippocrates
physic or fetters: which had been far more meet for him, than an answer
from so worthy a man. Hierome had three special reasons why he was hardly
induced to answer Heluidius. First, lest by answering he should make him be
thought worthy the encounter. Secondly, because he accounted his babbling to
be eloquence. Thirdly, because he made it a note of a good conscience, to
rail and speak evil of others. Which things might well have stayed this
worthy man from writing, seeing all these three might well be feared, yea
manifestly sound in this heretical Jesuit, more than in Heluidius. But as
Hierome, to remove the scandal of the brethren, who were moved by his outrage,
or might be infected by his poison, broke off his silence: so did this
excellent Champion of Christ encounter with this uncircumcised Philistine of
Antichrist; and has answered him for manner, not as he and his manner of
writing well deserved, August. cont. lit. Petill. Do not. lib. 2. c. 37. Tantum
vos diliganius, vt viuatis, quantis ^estiis errorem odimus, vt intereat, qui
vos perdit.
but yet withal so, as his own nature and mild disposition was accustomed,
who might have said of himself as Augustine of his dealing with the Donatists:
We so love your persons that we wish you may live; and so hate your error, as
desiring it should perish, which works your ruin. So meekly has he answered
him in all things, save some few times by his prouecations he is a little
sharp, as Moses the meekest man was once or twice moved at his people and
their peruersenes. For the matter, he has kept that course with him, which he
has commonly and commendably (in my poor opinion) observed, when he dealt
with other adversaries, that is, has answered to the full that is objected,
but has not troubled himself to forecast what might be moreover objected, to
take that away; which makes any man's work both tedious and obscure. And this
as it seems has been the cause of Duraeus his reply: it falling out in this
war, which Campian speaks of, as in marshall affairs; when the defendant
makes show of no more strength, then that by which he might well repel and
conquer the present assaults of the first part of the band; the second is
provoked and tolled on upon hope of the victory, as if there were not strength
enough to resist them: so Duraeus happily thought, that D. Whitakers had spent
all his strength in opposing of Campian, and that he should have found an easy
adversary in a second encounter: but his hopes deceived him, for he has found
him sufficient for this assault also. Now Duraeus his defense of Campian, and
D. Whitakers of himself, have I, according to your Honors desire, annexed to
the other, but yet only by brief marginall notes: wherein I have endeavored to
make both the objection and answer as full as I could, and do injury unto
neither. If the adversaries shall think that I have not given their Champions
reasons and objections, their full weight, I protest to them wittingly I have
not diminished him any thing at all. If they think he has any more force in
himself, let them translate him into English; and though my leisure be small
from my public Ministry and ordinary studies, yet will I take so much time
from them, as to translate Doctor Whitakers also to the full. In this which I
have done, I have not taken that liberty in translating of the answers, as I
find he has done who has translated Campian, and yet have I not stricktly
tied my self unto the words, but followed our English phrase, which has his
propriety of speech, as well as the Latin. Not to be too troublesome to your
Honor in withholding you from the treatise which follows. When you come to
it, you shall hardly find any controversy betwixt us and the Synagogue of
Rome, but it is in part touched, (confusedly I grant, but otherwise it could
not be, seeing he was to follow the steps of him who had very little method in
him, and less matter) and therefore it may be as an Enchiridion, which being
ever had with you, and read with some diligence, as your great affairs of the
state will permit you, you shall hardly be unfurnished of some pregaant matter,
against almost all the points, which the adversaries have made goodly in show,
but nothing in substance. And thus I commend these my small labors to your
Honor, who set me on work. Vouchsafe I humbly beseech you, to accept the^ as
a memorial of my duty to your Honor. And as you have always professed the
true Christian and Apostolic faith, and detested error and superstition: so I
entreat your Honor that according to your place you will still endeavor to
maintain the same truth against all Opposers: and further the good laws, Ille
haereticum interficit, qui esse haereticum patitur. Caeterum nostra correptio,
viuificatio est, vt haeresi moriens, viuas Catholicae fidei. Hieron. coat.
Pelag. lib. 3. c. 6
but specially the execution of them against all such seducers as this Campian
was in his time. And if that be true of Jerome: He kills an heretic who suffers
him to be an heretic: but a just punishment of them is the quickening and
putting life into them, that dying to their heresy, they may live to the
Catholic faith. Vouchsafe them also this pity, knowing at length by
experience it is not the way for authority to wi^ them by lenity, but to
repress them, and so gain them by just severity. At the leastwise have
compassion on the many thousands of this kingdom that have been and daily are
corrupted by their enchantments, and thereby made archenemies of their Prince,
the Church, and State, yea and of their own salvation. Now the God of glory,
1. Sam. 2.^0.
who honors them that honor him, increase your spiritual graces and earthly
honor, and make you more and more a special instrument under his Highness of
the peace and welfare of the Church and Commonwealth, accomplishing all your
desires for present prosperity and future felicity.

Your Honors Chaplain in all humble service, RICHARD STOCK.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READERS.
THe holy Apostle S. Paul knowing his calling, and remembering well his
commission, which he had received from Christ, says: Christ sent me not to
baptize, but to preach the Gospel. 1. Cor. 1.17.
Not meaning that he had no commission to baptize at all, for then had he
offended, when he baptized some; but that this was the special end, and the
chiefest part of his calling, to preach. So to allude to it, I may say of my
calling, that Christ sent me not to write, but to preach; so I judge of that
one talent Christ has given me, if I be able to judge aright of it. Which has
been the reason why I have withstood so many motions of friends, who have set
upon me with earnestnes to have published in print diverse things, God enabled
me to utter in preaching. And knowing the necessity of preaching, and feeling
the greatness of the burden, as S. Paul said, Who is sufficient for these
things, 1. Cor. 2.16.
I find all my private studies little enough for my public Ministry, that
the more I attain unto, the more I may communicate to others. As the Preacher
says, Eccles. 12.9
The more wise the Preacher was, the more he taught the people knowledge, and
caused them to hear, and searched forth, and prepared many parables. I am not
of their minds, who think that a man may gather Manna enough upon the day
before the Sabbath, to serve his family or charge upon the Sabbath it self.
And though I know me^ have their several gifts, some men able to do that in an
hour, which another cannot do in three; yet I know and acknowledge my own
strength and ability to be such, as that I must have much more time than many
others; which both has made me unwilling, and will so make me still, to
distract my self, or entangle my mind with any other thing than with my
ordinary Ministry. I have often thought of Augustines observation, that our
Savior Christ preached much, De consens^ Evangelist. lib. 1. cap. 7.
but wrote nothing: and thence have imputed it a fault to those who have the
room of Christ, which are given to write much, and preach little; specially
when their places in the Church requires preaching more than writing. I know
well that writing is and has bin very profitable to the Church; yet I find a
corruption in our times that makes it less profitable, because I see men buy
books more for the Author, than the matter, and delight more to have such a
book in their houses, than by diligent reading to have it either in their
heads or hearts; by which they are neither able to instruct in the truth, and
inform in their duties such as belong to them; neither to defend the truth of
God, when they come in places where they meet with such as resist the truth, as
Iannes and Iambres did Moses, 2. Tim. 3.8.
Atheists and Papists I mean, and such like, men of corrupt minds, reprobate
concerning the faith. And so their books are a judgment to condemn them for
vain foolish men, according to that of Solomon: Prou. 17.16
Wherefore is there a price in the hand of the fool to get wisdom, and he
has no heart? But beloved, let it not be so with you, or so no more, the times
are dangerous, there are many deceivers abroad, and many daily deceived, for
that they have had a price and opportunity all these golden and happy days
of the Gospel to have got wisdom, but have no hearts, but only for wealth,
honor, pleasure, and such like. And if you have neglected the opportunity
with them, think it high time to lay hold of it, lest it be too late, when the
fit occasion is altogether past; and labor and pray for hearts to seek
Wisdom, while she cries in the streets and seeks for you; lest you seek her
when she will not be found. And the rather, because when there is no love of
truth, 2 Thessalonians. 2.11.12.
God sends strong delusions, that men should believe lies. That all they might
be damned, that believe not the truth, but have pleasure in unrighteousness. It
is the wisdom of men when they hear that many false coyners are abroad, to
look well what silver or gold they receive, and if they have not either the
scales and weights, or the touchstone of the Goldsmith, or the skill to use
them to try that they receive, they will ask, and being men that have much to
receive and their state stands upon it, they will both have them, and learn
the skill to use them. Should it not be so with you? shall these be wiser in
their generation, than the children of light? or will you be wiser for the
world, than for heaven? If you love heaven, I say, not as you ought, but even
in any sort as you love the world, and have in any measure the like care for
your spiritual estate, as you have for the temporal, in these dangerous times
get to you the balance of the Sanctuary, not to have it in your houses only,
but in your hearts and memories. The exhortation of Chrysostom is not so
necessary for these times: Commentar. in Coloss. 3.16.
Provide for your selves Bibles; for most have them in their hands and houses.
But that he says in another place is fitter for our times: Hom. 3. de Laza.
When you are at home, give your selves to a continual reading of the holy
Scriptures. A thing verily much neglected of most in our times, to whom his
complaint will well agree: Which of our people go about any thing worthy the
name of a Christian? Hom. 13. in Joan.
who searches out the sense of the Scriptures? undoubtedly none: but the
Chesse-board and dice-play we find often and every where; but their books are
seldom in hand. For your books are seldom in hand, but when you go to
Church: they lie in your houses covered with dust, and as it were spread over
with spiders webbes, as if it seemed you durst not touch them; when the Tables
are kept clean with use, and Cards worn black with continual play. But
beloved these things should not be so, if either you regard the commandment of
Christ, Job. 5.39.
Search the Scriptures; which is as absolute and general, as that
Commandment, Thou shall not commit adultery, or steal: or if you reverence
the counsel of the Apostle, which is as much as a commandment: Let the word
of God dwell plentifully in you in all wisdom. Coloss. 3.16.
As good scholars therefore in the school of Christ, give obedience to these
things, and use a continual and constant reading of the word, at least every
day some part of it: which because it is obscure, not in it self, but by the
weakness of man's understanding, as men do to weak eyes apply some wholesome
salve, not to make the light more perspicuous, but the eyes more able: so use
the help of some other writers, by which you may more profitably read it, and
enable your selves the better to conceive of it, and to know how to apply to
every occurrence the things, which are there set down in their most excellent
and wise order, though somewhat hidden and infolded to those, who have not
their senses, as they ought, exercised therein. And if any desire some
direction for himself, in studying both the Scriptures and other books, which
may help for the understanding of them, and their better instruction in the
matters of salvation; I woul entreat them first to hear the ancient and
worthy Father and Elder of the ancient Romish Church (when as, though not
without some blemishes, Note that it is neither new, nor heretical, nor
dangerous for the common people to read the scripture, and that by the
judgment of the Church of Rome, in her purer times. Hieron. ad Laetam de
institut. siliae, epist. 7.
it held the foundation, which now it has quite overthrown) Hierome I mean,
whose counsel I would make the ground of my advice fitting our times. He
directing Lata for the education of her daughter for this point, advises thus:
Let her first read the Psalms, that by such heavenly hymns she may withdraw
her self from vain delites. Then the Proverbs of Solomon, that thence she
may have excellent instructions for the government of her life. Then
Ecclesiastes, that by it she may learn to conte^ne al worldly things. After
these the book of Job, that she may follow the examples of virtue and
patience: let her proceed to the Gospels, and never lay them out of her hands:
the Acts and the Epistles of the Apostles, let her studiously read and make
them the delight of her heart. And when she has furnished the storehouse of her
soul with these riches, let her heedfully read the Prophets, the five books
of Moses, the books of the Kings and Chronicles, and the small volumes of Ezra
and Hester. And in the last place the Song of Songs; lest if she read it first
of all, she may happily be wounded, while she is not able to understand the
spiritual marriage Song, set out under carnal words. But let her take heed of
all the books of Apocrypha: and if at any time she will read them, not for
the truth of doctrine, but for the reverent resemblance they may seem to have
with the holy Scriptures; let her take this instruction withal, that they were
not written by those, whose names they carry, and that in them also there are
many corrupt things scattered here and there: and therefore it is a special
point of wisdom to cull out the gold from the dross. Let her have with her
the books of Cyprian: let her run over the Epistles of Athanasius and books
of Hilarie, without fear of error. Let her delight in their writings and ^its,
in whose books is delivered the sound doctrine of faith. Other men's works let
her so read, that she may rather censure them, than be tied to follow them.
Thus far Hierome. Which direction of his, as touching the forepart of it, the
Scriptures and Apocrypha, if any think they could better advise, let them for
me enjoy their conceit, under their correction I will subscribe fully to it. In
the latter part, because he speaks of Authors not in our natural tongue, in
stead of them I would commend these unto you, written originally in our own
tongue. For matter of controversy, Doctor Bilson, now Lord Bishop of
Winchester, his true defense between Christian subjection and unchristian
rebellion against the Jesuits. Doctor Fulke his answer to the Rhemist
Testament, and diverse other of his works: and Doctor Willets Synopsis. For
matter of conscience, the Works of Master Greenham and Master Rogers. For
matter both of conscience and soundnes of faith, the Works of Master Perkins.
Many other particular Treatises of special things there are, written by good
and learned men; which you may read as occasion may offer it, and the advice
of discreet men may encourage you. Now with the books of the first kind
would I commend this particular book, which, at the commanding request of an
honorable person, I have both reduced into one book, written by several
Authors in several Treatises, and translated into English for your benefit. In
which the greatest part of the controversies betwixt us and the Church of Rome,
you shall find in some part touched. The state of the question plainly laid
down, and some manifest, short and pithie answer or resolution of it. Two
Papists are the opponents, Campian an Englishman, and Duraeus a Scot; one
Englishman and a famous light of our Church has answered them both. The
answer to the first was more sparing, because the adversaries objections were
either slender, or slightly urged. But there is so full a supply made thereof
by the answer to the second, that he had little stomach or ability to make a
reioynder.

The whole work I assure you (if you dare take my judgment) will be very
profitable, if so be you will be attentive and diligent readers. For besides
that good which is in it self, it will be a notable introduction to all other
Treatises of controversies, that with more ease and facility you may read
them, and with more profit be conversant in them. The text (as I may so call
it) is Campians and Doctor Whitakers; the marginall notes are composed of
Duraeus his objections in defense of Campian and the Romish errors, and the
reply of Doctor Whitakers in defense of the truth and his own answer.
Duraeus is noted thus; DVR. Doctor Whitakers thus; WHIT. I have as fitly as I
could placed every objection with his answer near unto that which is excepted
against: and if any thing happen, by the oversight of the Printer, or length of
the note to be not so aptly placed, take a little pains to look over the
precedent and subsequent pages.

I confess I have in Duraeus omitted many things, because they either were not
pertinent for the defense of Campian, or but the multiplication of many
testimonies out of the Fathers, which have their full answer in the general,
or answered in some other place before.

The number in every answer notes the page where it is to be found in Doctor
Whitakers his reply, that any man may turn and read the answer at large, if
he understand the tongue, and receive more contentment. Yet this know, there
are several impressions of the books, which also differ; that which I followed
was imprinted anno 1583.

For the most part I have only in quotations set down the book, chapter and
verse, both of the Scriptures and Fathers, and seldom recited the whole words
(because the margent would not bear it) but when the substance of the answer
consisted in the^; and therefore you must both help me and your selves in using
your Bibles to peruse the places.

The superiors directing you to what place every note belongs, are the letters
of the Alphabet. If there be sometimes a note and no superior, you must
conceive it belongs unto the former note, where ye superior is. And if the
number be sometimes omitted, you must so understand that the answer is in the
second page where ye former is noted.

The objection you shall often find to have diverse parts and particulars in
it, and so also the answer semblably. Therefore you must take pains for your
profit to compare one thing with another, and one part with another.

If you follow these directions, you shall read the whole with no small fruit
to your selves. And yet to make it more profitable unto you, I have in reading
the sheets over, as they were printed, gathered the sum of every answer and
the chief matter in it, not in any order, I confess, which had bin a thing
impossible, because no method is in it; not from any error of the Answerer, but
because he was forced to follow a fellow that rode a wild goose chase. The
benefit of which epitomie may be this: If you read the sum of every answer,
before you read each particular answer, it will well prepare you to conceive
of the answer it self; if after, which I could wish also you would do, then
it will present to you the whole as it were in a map. When you have read both
and the whole book, if at any time you remember some thing you would see more
particularly, and can but tell or make some nie conjecture in what answer it
is laid down, with reading of one page you may find in what (...) of the
(...) be found. Finally, let it encourage you the ^^ther to read this
Treatise, because you shall find in it whatsoever is by our late Papists in
their P^^phlets and Treatises, which they have audaciously sent abroad in these
few last years, (when the laws have been laid asleep and the just severity
of them greatly qualified) I say, whatsoever is in them either objected against
our Church and doctrine, or spoken in their own defense, is here to be found,
and a solid answer given unto them, if any thing would give them satisfaction.
If you be but well exercised in this one book, out of it you may gather some
smooth stones, as out of a brook, by which, though you should not be enabled
to hold any long war with a cunning Papist, yet you may smite him in the
forehead, and fell him groueling to the earth, 1. Sam. 17.
as David did the uncircumcised Philistine. The Apostle exhorts that we
earnestly contend for the maintenance of the faith, Jude verse. 3.
which was once given unto the Saints. A naked and unarmed man may well
contend, but shall never be able to maintain any thing committed to him, but
it will soon be taken from him; so may I say for the truth, it is not words
but weapons, and weight of divine reason that must defend it: therefore must
every Christian soldier, that thinks to have the crown, take to him such
armor as Gods Armourie will afford him. Now those weapons if so be you cannot
fetch so readily in the word of truth it self, because of your infirmity,
they are here brought to your hand, and you withal are led by the hand to the
particular places where they are in the word it self. Now the Lord of hosts
strengthen you in the truth, and arm you with his grace, that you may be able
to stand against all the enemies of your salvation, 2. Tim. 4.7.8.
and that you may fight a good fight, and finish your course, and keep the
faith that you may obtain the crown of righteousness, which the Lord the
righteous Judge will give at the last day unto all those that love his
appearing.

Yours ever in the Lord, Richard Stock.

The sum of the answer to the first Reason, which is holy Scripture.
1 PApiste account themselves disarmed if they must fight only with the
scriptures. Page 24. nota. 2 Of the number of the Canonical scriptures, that
Luther and Calvin and their followers have put out none which antiquity and
the purest Churches have received. Page 26 3 Campian was an Apostata, not
Luther. Page 26 4 Luther only thought not basely of the Epistle of S. James,
but antiquity also. Page 27 5 All Protestants highly reverence this Epistle of
S. James. Page 28. 30 6 Luther never writ so contempteously of the Epistle of
Saint James as Campian affirms. Page 29 7 S. Paul and the Fathers have taught
justification by faith alone. Page 30 8 The place of S. James expounded and
proved not to be contrary to the doctrine of justification by faith only.
Page 31 9 Not Protestants of late, but the Fathers of old, have put out of the
Canon Tobias, Ecclesiasticus, the two books of Machabees, and diverse other
books. Page 32. 33 10 The Papists cannot defend the Articles of their religion
by the Canonical scriptures, but are forced to fly to the Apochrypha. Page 34
11 Duraeus contrary to the Council of Trent denies traditions to be of equal
authority with the scripture. Page 34 12 Protestants have denied no one book,
or word of any book of Canonical scriptures. Page 35 13 Angels do defend the
elect, but their hirarchy and degrees are without warrant of the word, and
their worship flat against the word. Page 35. 36 14 Man has no fr^^will by
nature. Page 37 15 The books of the Machabees are rejected by diverse Fathers,
and the Laodicene Council. ibid. 16 Neither prayers to the dead, nor for the
dead are lawful. Page 38 17 Se^^en books of the Apochrypha were put out of
the Canon by Hierome, a thousand years before Calvin was borne. Page 39 18
The 3. and 4. books of Esdra sometime were highly accounted by the church of
Rome. Page 39 19 Protestants have not cut out of the Canon six epistles of the
new Testament, but honor them much, neither have the Lutherans. Page 40 20
Augustine and Hierome in their difference for the number of the Canonical
books reconciled. Page 41. 42 21 Meli^o Bishop of Sardis though he put the
book of Wisdom in the Canon, yet he excludes all the rest. Page 43 22 The
Laodicene Council forbids the reading of those books which are without the
Canon, and allows only the reading of th^se which we put in the Canon of the
old and new Testament. 43.44. The Council of Carthage allowed them only for
manners: nota, for three hundred years these books were not in the Canon, so
confesses Duraeus, nota Page 43 23 The Council of Carthage denied the Pope to
be universal Bishop. Page 43 24 The Papists cruelty far surpasses the
Protestants just severity. Page 45 25 The scriptures have in themselves many
proofs that they are the word of God, but the certain, infallible, and saving
assurance is from the spirit of God. Page 46. 47 26 Campian scorneth the
judgment of the spirit in respect of the judgment of the Church, as if they
were contrary Page 46. 48 27 The Church can make no writing Canonical, neither
does the authority of it depend on the Church. It has in it self his own
authority. Page 48 28 Without the spirit a man may have some knowledge of the
scripture but no faith. The testiments of the spirit as not (...) confute
others, but confirms our selves: Page 45. nota 29 The Lutherans did not only
surde somewhat lacking in the Apocalypse, but oven antiquity received it not,
you re^ected it. Page 50 30 Luther prefers the Gospel of S. John, and
Paul's Epistles before the other Gospels, and why. Page 50. 51 31 What a
Gospel is, and who especially is an Evangelist. Page 51 32 Campian slandereth
Luther as touching S. Lukes Gospel. Page 52 33 Beza has no more offended in
charging S. Luke with a solecisme then Hierome did in charging S. Paul. Page 53
34 The words of institution in the Supper of the Lord a little examined and
explaned. Page 53. 54
The sum of the second answer, touching the true meaning of the Scripture.
1 The substance and soul of the scripture is the true meaning. Page 59 2 The
sense is not that which most hold, but which is agreeable to the scripture.
ibid. nota 3 Papists make the Church the interpreter of scriptures; that is,
first Bishops, then Councels; in their defect, the Pope: for he so challenges
it, that whatsoever he thinks, that must be the meaning of it. Page 60 4 It
is very absurd to hang the sense of the scriptures upon one man's judgment,
especially upon the Pope, so unlearned and absurd an interpreter as many of
them have bin Page 60. 61 5 They teach the sense of the scripture may be
changed with the times and occasions. Page 61 6 Four senses of every scripture
made by Papists. Page 61. 62 7 The manner of interpreting the scriptures
amongst Protestants, which is ancient and safe. Page 62 8 Protestants do not
exclude Christ from the supper, as Papists falsely accuse them; yet they
include him not in it, as Papists do; his natural body they place in heaven,
but the virtue, communion, and benefit of this body they exclude not, but
mainte^^ that whole Christ is present to each man's faith. Page 63 9 Christ is
as present in Baptism, and was to the Fathers, as in the Supper. ibid. nota 10
The popish and false interpretation of these words, This is my body, this my
blood, confuted by the same rule whereby Campian would confirm them, that is,
by conference of them with the words adjoining. Page 64. 65 11 That the words
of the sacrament be figurative, is proved by the induction of other
sacraments. Page 65. 66 12 There is no miracle in the sacrament. Page 67 13
Papists affirm that the wicked eat the body of Christ as well as the
believer. Page 67 14 All antiquity is on the Protestants side for the
interpretation of the words of the sacrament against the Papists, and so their
transubstantiation is a new invention. Page 67 15 The testimonies of Tertullian
and Augustine alleged, and of Theodoret. Page 68. 69 16 The testimony of
Macarius a Monk. Page 70 17 Campian deals unequally, pressing the
Protestants to leave the judgment of the scripture and stand to the judgment
of the Pope being an enemy to them. Page 71
The sum of the third answer, touching the nature of the Church.
1 The true notes of the Church, whose present being makes a true Church,
whose absence marreth and overthrows it, are the word the whole and pure
sacraments. Page 77. 78 2 The Church is more hid and unknown then the
Scripture. Page 78. nota 3 The Church is ever and must be upon the earth and
oftentimes invisible, compared therefore of Augustine to the Moon. Page 78 4
In the days of Ahab and of Christ it was invisible, or scarce visible. Page 80
5 Succession not necessary to the being of the Church, for it has bin and yet
no Church, as in the Church of the Jews. Page 81 6 The small number of the
faithful as Christ's (...). Page 82 7 What is a visible Church. Page 82. 83 8
Though particular Churches are visible, it follows not that the Catholic
Church is ever visible. ibid. 9 The antiquity of our faith and doctrine is
from the Apostles time. Page 83. 84 10 Superstitious growing upon the Church.
Page 84 11 The growing of the Popes authority to the height, it is now at. 84.
nota 12 The bringing of Images into the Church. Page 84. nota 13 The Grecians
not subject to the Romish Church. ibid. 14 The vow of virginity not understood
by faith in S. Paul, and what is meant by it. Page 86. nota 15 To what Church
the Protestants will subscribe. Page 87 16 In the visible Church are both good
and hypocrites: in the invisible, only godly and faithful men. Page 88 17 The
distinction of visible and invisible make not two Churches, but one, and how
they differ; and what the Catholic Church is. nota
The sum of the fourth Answer, touching general Councels.
1 Protestants with consent of antiquity prefer the Scripture before Councels.
Page 94. nota 2 Nazianzenes hard censure of Councels. Page 95 3 The first
Council hold by the Apostles and Church by necessary consequent condemns
the multitude of popish ce^^^^nies. Page 96 4 Augustine condemns the
multitude of ceremonies in his time, how would he complain if he saw the
multitude of popish ceremonies. Page 96 5 Gregory's speech expounded touching
the four general Councels. Page 97 6 The judgment of the Church of England
touching the four general Councels. Page 98 7 The Popes may not have Peter's
honor, seeing they have not his virtues and piet^^. 99 8 The Canon of the
Council of Nice utterly ouerthrowed the supremacy of the Pope, giving him no
authority over other churches, no more then others over his. Page 100. 101 9
The Council of Calcedon does not confirm the Popes supremacy, but
overthrows it. The Council gave to the church of R^^^ greater prerogatives,
because it was the chief seat of the Empire, and not for any law of God, and
made the Bishop of Constantinople equal with the Bishop of Rome. Page 101. 102
10 The Council of Constantinople gave unto the sea of Rome the honor of
precedence and place, not of authority. Page 103 11 The Council of Ephesus
ascribes no more to the Bishop of Rome then to other Bishops. ibid. 12 The
Council of Nice does not establish the unbloody sacrifice of the altar, for
in the canon named, there is no mention of sacrifice or altar. Page 104 13 The
Fathers have called the Lords Supper an unbloody sacrifice, because it is
without blood, and not because no blood is then shed. Page 105 14 Saints
departed know neither us nor the things we do or sl^^^d in need of, no reason
then we should pray unto them, though the custom be ancient it has no
warrant. Page 106 15 Saints departed know our general conditions, as we
theirs, not our particular state. nota 16 S. Paul prayed not to the Romans and
Corinthians, as Papists do to Saints, but required of them a christian duty.
nota 17 The Council of Calcedon admi^teth ministering Widows, who are but 40.
years of age, forbidding them marriage; when as S. Paul would have them 60.
before they be admitted. Page 107 18 Duraeus confesses that in the first age
they did not prefer continone is before marriage. nota 19 They who have vowed
single life, and cannot perform it, have done evil in vowing, but not in
marrying, and for to vow things not in our power, is to mock God. Page 108 20
Chastity and single life is not in man's power. nota 21 Cyprian allows
Virgins who have vowed virginity, if they cannot live honestly, to marry. Page
109 22 Campian makes the Council of Trent and other Councels equal with the
four Evangelists. Page 110 23 Private men alleging the scripture, rather to
be believed, then the Council, is not only Lo^hers judgment, but Gersons and
Panormitans. Page 111 24 The reasons why Protestants went not to the Council
of Trent. Page 112 25 John Husse burned at the Council of Constance contrary
to the Emperors warrant. Page 112 26 No promise made by the Emperor or any
secular Prince may hinder the proceedings of Ecclesinsticall Judges. nota 27
Ecclesiastical Judges, that is the Council, is abone the Emperor. Page 113
28 Luther goes to the Council upon the Emperors word. Page 114
The sum of the fifth answer, touching the Fathers.
1 It is a foolish brag of Papists to challenge all the Fathers for theirs and
to be on their side, when there is nothing less. Page 124 2 The popish Denis
was not the Denis Areopagite, whom Paul converted to the faith; and his
hierarchy as novelty. Page 124. 125 3 Ignatius, they boast so much of, was a
counterfeit. Page 125. 126 4 The argument is weak; Ireneus is challenged by
Protestants to have written something unsoundly, therefore he is altogether on
the Papists side* he errect about the time of Christ's preaching, baptism, and
death; he was a Millenarie. Page 126 5 Clemens taught that Christ did neither
hunger nor thirst, and that he taught but (...) veare. And that the
Philosophers in hellexpe^ted Christ's coming, and being taught by him believed.
Page 127 6 Tertullian in his book of prescriptions has many things against
the Romish church. Page 127 7 The popish Hippolytus is counterfeit, and his
book of Antichrist, which gesseth that the Devil was Antichrist. Page 127.
nota 8 Caussaeus excused for his censure of Cyprian, by Nazianzenes report of
him what he was in his youth. Page 128 9 Cyprian and other Fathers corrupted
the doctrine of repentance, making it a kind of satisfaction, they detracted
from the death of Christ and the power of it. Page 129 10 Chrysostom,
Nazianzene, Ambrose, and Hierome, are not wholly on the Papists side, because
Luther and others censured them in some things. Page 130 11 Papists are not the
children of the Fathers, but as the Pharisees were of Moses, and the Jews of
Abraham. Protestants reverence the Fathers, but acknowledge but one father,
which is in heaven. nota 12 Beza did Hierome no wrong, if Erasmus said true of
his censuring of S. Paul for want of moderation in ans^ering the high Priest,
and imputing some wants to Christ. Page 131 13 Hierome often much wresteth the
scripture. Page 132 14 It is lawful to prefer one man in the truth, before all
Fathers and Councels in error. Page 132 15 Lent fast though ancient, yet was
it not ordained by Christ or his Apostles, the manner of obscruing it, not the
same in all Churches. Page 133. nota 16 What fasts Protestants allow, the same
judgment they have which Augustine has, who knew not Lenten^fast. Page 134 17
The popish Monks are marvelous voluptuous, and live in sensuality, far unlike
those who have been. Page 134 18 Relics of Saints not burned, nor their
funerals removed, but their superstitions, injurious to God and his glory. Page
135 19 Augustine in his book of freewill does not establish it, but shows,
that sin comes from man's freewill, not from God, and therefore entitled his
book so. Page 136 20 The Papists and Pelagians differ not much in freewill.
Page 137. nota 21 Necessity is not opposite to the freedom of Will, but to
force and compulsion; man lost not his will, but the quality of it. nota 22
Augustine esteemed much of antiquity, unity, and succession, if sincere
wisdom and truth went with them, else he preferred truth before them; so do
Protestants. Page 138 23 Optatus confuted Donatists by the communion of the
Catholic Church, so are schismatikes to be dealt with, but not from the now
Romish church which is no true church. Page 138. 139 24 Anthony and other
Hermites like him, have not successors like themselves. He accounted a
Monastery for a Monk as water is to fish. Page 140. nota 25 Prudentius used a
poetical liberty in his devotions to Saints. Page 140. and nota 26 Praying
to Saints had gotten great footing in the Church when Ambrose lived, and he
and other Fathers were corrupted by it. Page 141. nota 27 Gregory without any
warrant called Images lay men's books. Page 141 28 It is lawful to break
down^ Images by warrant of the word and examples in it, and in the stories of
the primitive Church. nota 29 Not Protestants but Papists reject oftentimes the
testimony of the Fathers, and fly to Councels. page 142. Then Campians
argument is not good: Protestants reject some things in the Fathers, therefore
they reject their whole volumes; for if it be good, it will fall upon
themselves. Page 142 30 Protestants have reason to prohibit popish books
being full of sedition and horesie, specially seeing in Queen Maryes time they
executed martial law upon any that had the books of Protestants. Page 143 31
Bishop Jewel proved all the ancient Fathers to be against the church of Rome,
in disputing with Harding, as he had assumed at the Cross. Page 144. 145
The sum of the sixth Answer touching the foundation of the Fathers.
1. Campians reason is weak: The Fathers have studied the scriptures
diligently, and preferred them before all other writings, therefore their
exposition of them is sound and good, not to be rejected without sin. Page
150 2 Hierome and Augustine dissent about the exposition of Gal. 2.11. Page 151
3 Not only every particular Fatherma^erre, but all of one age have erred in a
particular of setting up Images in the Church. Page 150 nota 4 Augustine,
Innocent, and other Bishops thought it nece^sary the Eucharist should be given
to infants. Page 151. nota 5 Papists leave the scriptures and search out and
follow after men's invention. Page 152 6 The Papists allow the learned only to
read them, but Christ commands all. Page 152. nota 7 It is proved against
Duraeus, that Christ has commanded the simple to read the scriptures, and
has left to them the books of the scriptures. Page 152. nota 8 Protestants
will subscribe to the Fathers so far as they keep them to the scriptures. Page
153 9 Denis is against the private Mass. Page 160 10 Private Masses cannot
profit the absent. Page 160. nota 11 In Iustine Martyrs time they gave to the
people both the bread and wine. ibid. 12 Cyprian makes all the Apostles equal
with Peter, and denies that any appeals should be made to the Bishop of Rome.
ibid. and page 161. nota 13 Lactantius denies that true religion and Images can
stand together. ibid. 14 The heathen worshipped not their Images, but the Gods
expressed by them. ibid. nota 15 Athanasius makes the scriptures sufficient.
ibid. 16 Epiphanius condemns all worshipping of the virgin Mary. ibid. and
page 162 17 The Papists do worship and offer up sacrifices to the virgin Mary
and other Saints. Page 162. nota 18 Basil says in his time the prayers of the
Church were in a known tongue. ibid. 19 Prayers in an unknown tongue profit
not the people, as Duraeus thinks they do. ibid. nota 20 Nazianzene allows
and praises civil society no less then Monkish life. ibid. 21 Ambrose
condemns all prayers to Saints, and their intercession. Page 163 22 Duraeus
vain distinction of Intercessors and Suffragators. ibid. nota 23 Hierome makes
a Bishop and a Priest of equal authority b^ the la^ of God. ibid. 24 Pope
Gelasius condemns as sacrilegious the t^king away of the cup from the people,
and commands that either both the elements be given to them, or neither.
Page 164 25 Duraeus makes the Manechies the first authors of dismembring the
supper. ibid. nota 26 Vigilius denies the presence of Christ in the Church in
both natures. ibid. 27 Chrysostom exhorts all men to read the scriptures.
ibid. 28 Augustine is wholly on the Protestants side. Page 165 29 By Gregory's
judgment he that calls himself Universal Bishop, is a forerunner of
Antichrist. Page 161 30 John Bishop of Constantinople first challenged the
title of Universal Bishop. ibid. 31 What is meant by universal Bishop by
Gregory's judgment, which touches the Pope home. ibid. nota 32 Boniface the
3. took the name of universal Bishop, and derived it to his successors. Page
166. nota
The sum of the seventh Answer, touching histories.
1 Campian only numbering up the Historiographers, foolishly concludes, all
are on their side. page 169 2 Protestants refuse not to examine their doctrine
by histories, so they be not tied to the apparent blemishes in the^. Page 170 3
Historiographers are tainted with the corruptions of their times, and the later
they are, the more corrupt for the most part they are found to be. Page 161 4
The church of Rome is maruelously corrupted, though we could not tell when it
begun to be so, and yet see the beginning of some particulars, as of usurped
authority over Churches, of denial of Priests marriages, of worshipping Images,
of carnal eating in the Sacrament* of Transubstantiation* of Purgatory of the
Pope above Councels. Page 177. nota 5 The corruption of it gre^ not all at
once* no more then of Jerusalem, but by little and little, as in the Greek
church also. Page 172 6 The heads of the heretics who rose up in the Greek
church, so of those who rose up in the Latin church. ibid. nota 7 The Church
all the Apostles time was a pure virgin, after their departure became corrupt.
Page 173. 174 8 The promises of the Churches perpetual preservation from
corruption, did and do belong to the Church of the elect, not to particular
Churches. ibid. nota 9 In the Council of Africa where there were present Page
217. Bishops, and Augustine himself, the Bishop of Rome affected to have all
appeals made to him, but the Council denied it unto him. Page 175 10 The
Legates of the Pope forge a Canon of the Council of Nice to persuade this
Council, which forgerie is found out by search. ibid. 11 Augustine and the
Bishops of Afric censured for schismatikes by Boniface for resisting the
Bishop of Rome, who affirms, that they were moved unto it by the Devil. Page
176 12 Eulalius the first Bishop of Carthage, who admitted the Popes power over
the Churches of Afrike. ibid. 13 Then became the Church of Rome plainly
Antichristian, when Phocas the murderer granted to her to be the head of
Churches, and Boniface the 3. to be universal Bishop. ibid. 14 Gregory the
great was the last good, and the first bad Bishop of the church of Rome. Page
177 15 Bernard, and Aeneas Siluius, who was afterward ca^^d Pope Pius,
maruellously inue^ed against the corruptions of the church of Rome. ibid. 16
Bernard cries out of the pomp of Eugenius the P^^e, and the impiety of his
court. ibid. nota 17 All sins in Rome might both be practiced and
reprehended. Page 1^8 18 The censure of Cornelius which he gave of the church
of Rome in the Council of Trent. ibid. 19 The Argument is weak; the church of
Rome was once holy, therefore it is so still. ibid. 20 Rome though it be
Babylon, yet not that which S. Peter spoke of, 1. Pet. 5.13. Neither have they
yet proved that Peter was at Rome. Page 179 21 If histories do mention any
such thing, yet it is with such variety, that there is no certainty of it; in
the scriptures there is not one tittle of it, nay by necessary collection they
disclaim it: when as this then is the whole ground of the hierarchy of the
Papacy, it is a ground without any foundation of the scripture. ibid. nota 22
Calvin confesses the church of Rome in the time of Syricius and other Bishops
to have been the Church of Christ, but denies not but it had erred. Page 181 23
Errors overthrow not a Church for being a true Church. ibid. 24 Syricius the
first who enforced single life upon the Ministers. ibid. nota. and Page 182 25
Syricius and Innocent did condemn marriage as evil. Page 182. nota 26 The
Church of Rome is but a Church in show and pomp, else it has nothing in it of
a true Church. Page 183. nota 27 Pelagius and Papists agree both about grace
inbred in man's nature. ibid.
The sum of the eight Answer, touching the Paradoxes of the Adversaries.
1 Calvin nor any Protestant makes God the author of sin. page 193. nota, and
Page 194. nota. 2 God has a finger in the action which is evil, not in the
corruption of it, which is wholly from man, but in the motion and action which
is in it selse good. Page 195 3 If we say God permits sin unwillingly,
we overthrow his providence and omnipotency; he wills, yet allows not,
that which is evil. Page 196 4 Men are guilty of sin in the things they
do, which are evil; and yet God holy, though he wills them. Augustine, and
Hugo de Sancto Victore do so think. Page 197. and Page 198 5 The Lord works
both in him that sins, and in him that works well, but after a diverse
manner. Page 199 6 Christ is the Son of the essence of the Father, not by
decision or propagation, but by communication. But he is God of himself. Page
201. and nota. 7 The essence is not begotten, but the person of the person.
Page 202. and Page 203 8 Beza corrected his error, of two personal unions in
Christ. ibid. 9 The 10. of John verse. 30. expounded and defended, that it
proves not the unity of essence in Christ and his Father. Page 204 10 Not
Luther only, but many of the Fathers disliked and repented the bringing in of
the word Homousion, yet they held the thing. Page 205 11 Christ was not at the
first perfect in wisdom, but mcreased* as in body, so in his mind and
wisdom. Page 206 12 Christ was ignorant of many things but without sin.
Page 208 13 Christ was ignorant of the last day, as man, and not only because
he would not, or did not reveal it to others. Page 208. nota. and Page 210 14
There is a negative ignorance which is not sin. Page 208. 209 15 Ch^^^t ^^oke
upon him the punishment due to sin both ^gnorance and death. Page ^^9 16 That
which raised such fear and horror in Christ, was not the fear of natural
death, but the bitter wrath of God against mankind. page 210. and 211 17 What
the hell was which Christ suffered, and as man feared. page 211. nota 18 Christ
suffered in soul as well as in body. page 211. 212 19 Christ did not go into
Limbus after his death. page 214 20 Many ancient Creedes both in the Roman
and East Church have not this article of Christ's descension into heil. page
215. nota 21 What the image of God was in man before his fall. page 216 22 The
whole image of God is not razed in man, but some relics are remaining.
Natural gifts are corrupted, supernatural distinguished. page 216. 217 23
That which is in the regenerate of themselves is corrupt, that which they have
from God is contrary to their corruption. page 218 24 Sin is not a substance
nor a mere privation, but an accident, and a corrupt habit, like to a disease.
page 220 25 Concupiscence is sin, and so judged by Augustine upon great and
weighty reason. ibid. nota 26 Sometime he calls it no sin in opposition to
actual sin. page 221 nota 27 Sins are not equal neither do Protestants so
teach; they all deserve eternal death, though some more some less. page 221.
222 28 Grace is double, either the free mercy and love of God toward us,
which is without us, in God: or those gifts which flow from this grace, and
this is in us. page 223 224 29 Christ's righteousness is onputed to us, as our
sins to him; Christ having paid our debt, the payment must needs be ours by
imputation: and if Papists allow the imputation of the righteousness of Saints,
why should they so much scorn the imputation of Christ his righteousness? ibid.
nota 30 Charity cannot justify us, because it is imperfect: for that which is
faulty cannot justify us. ibid. 31 Imputed and infused righteousness go
together in one and the some man. Justification and sanctification are
distinguished in the word. page 225. nota 32 The regenerate by grace cannot so
resist their temptations that they should never sin: as the example of S.
Paul and others manifest. page 226. 227. and nota 33 Our righteousness is a
real relation. 228. nota 34 All our righteousness being stained, cannot
justify us, and faith, hope, and charity being imperfect, cannot, do it.
page 229 35 Christ is he that covers us, by whose righteousness we are
adorned. Our righteousness is the covering of the fault. page 231 36 Faith alone
justifies: but it is not alone when it does justify. page 232 37 The reasons
why we are exhorted to perform works and obedience, as also that we are
commanded to apprehend Christ's righteousness by faith. page 230 38 A man ought
and may be certain of his salvation by the certainty of faith. page 232. 233.
nota 39 Many are deceived with a conceit of faith: but he that has it knows
certainly that he has it. page 233. nota 40 From Gods predestination a man may
be sure of his perseverance; so the Fathers teach: yet a man must use the
means. page 234. 235 nota 41 The number of Sacraments are but two in the
Church; the novelty of the other five, not any antiquity for them, and
pregnant reasons against them. page 237. and nota 42 Hugo de S. Victore, and
Peter Lombard brought seven Sacraments first into the Church. No Council
before the Florentine did ever confirm them. ibid. nota 43 Popish ceremonies
in Baptism are new. ibid. nota 44 Protestants have both bread and wine and the
body and blood of Christ; Papists have no bread nor wine. nota. page 239 45
Baptism is both a chanel of grace and that which confirms grace, but gives
not grace by the word wrought. Duraeus contrary to the schoolmen, makes it
but an instrument. page 239. and nota 46 The Baptismes of John and of Christ
were both one in cerem^^ie, in doctrine, and in grace. page 240 47 The place
against it, Matthew. 3.11. Act. 19.4.5. expounded and answered ibid. nota 48
Baptism is not so simply necessary to salvation, that the want of it will
condemn; but the neglect or contempt of it is a sin. page 241 49 Papists
think infants dying without Baptism are d^^^^^ed. A barbarous and a
se^selesse opinion, and against all reason. ibid. nota 50 Infants may have
faith, as they have life, and know not of it. page 242 51 The Sacrament is a
Sacrament to all without faith, but not a saving Sacrament to men of years
without faith; yet to infants it may be, because the spirit works secretly
and powerfully. ibid. nota 52 Luther earnestly held that Baptism ought to be
given to children, and thought they had faith. page 243 53 Calvin against the
Anabaptists proved the baptism of infants not by tradition, but Scripture.
page 244. nota 54 Campian has no cause to vpbraid Protestants with corruption
of manners, so long as Rome is so corrupt as as is, and public Stews
maintained in it. page 245 55 Luthers lascivious speech objected by Campian
plainly excused: and a worse objected of Pope Clements. 246.247 56 Luther makes
three causes of divorce; and the Papists many more. page 246. and nota 57
Marriage is most necessary, for men who cannot live chaste, and commanded. page
247 58 Marriage is oftentimes simply better than virginity, though this be to
be embraced when a man has the gift, that he may more freely serve the Lord.
page 248. and nota 59 The speech of Lauther, saying, The more wicked that thou
art, the necrer art thou unto grace: defended in his true sense. page 249 60
How all our good actions are tainted with sin, and so may be called sins in
Gods severe indgement, and yet good and to be done. page 250. and nota 61 The
good actions of those who are once in Christ, though tainted, are acceptable
unto God, because he looks upon the person, not the work. page 251 62 The law
belongs to Christians for a rule of their life, though it be abrogated by the
new covenant. For they are delivered not from the obedience of it, but the
curse of it by Christ. page 252 253. 254. and nota 63 God respects the good
works of his, but not to instification. page 254. and nota 64 The just not
only lives, but is justified by his faith, and so much the place of Habacuck
proves. ibid. nota 65 Works not the cause, but the manifestation of
righteousness, out of Thomas. ibid. 66 They who have broken hearts and contrite
spirits are fittest ghuests for the Lords table, neither is this against faith.
page 255 67 Luther was not against public confession, but a private auricular
confession of all sins to a Priest only, when by the word it may be made to
others. page 256. and nota 68 A believing man may have remission of his sins,
though the Minister who pronounces it intend no such thing. page 256 69 It is
not the duty of the Minister of the Gospel to read prayers by the hour but
to give diligence to reading, exhortation and doctrine. page 257 70 Christians
are bound to obey the laws of Magistrates, but are freed from the religion of
them. Their particular laws bind not the conscience, though men must obey
their government for conscience sake. page 267. ^58. and nota
The sum of the ninth Answer, touching the sophismes of the Adversary.
1 Jesuits be chief Sophisters and kings of all other in the kingdom of
Popery. page 263 2 The sophismes of the Papists, by which they would overthrow
the marriage of Ministers and Deacons. page 264 3 Pope Innocent thought
marriage duty to be an unholy thing. ibid. nota 4 Their sophismes, for the
Popes supremacy: and his excellency above the Emperor: that he is not to be
reproved* that he cannot err. page 265. 266. 267 5 Though one Pastor have
rule over one flock, it follows not one must have over all. ibid. nota 6
Their sophismes for private Mass: the Priests communicating alone: that the
people must have only one part. page 267 7 Their sophismes, that prayers must
be in an unknown (...) us: that the people may not read the Scriptures. page
268 8 Their sophismes, that the bread is Christ's body, and that it is to be
worshipped: that election is for merit. ibid. 9 Their sophismes, that the sick
should be anointed: that marriage is a sacrament. That a Monkish life is
warrantable by the examples of Elias and John Baptist; but it is unsound. page
269. and nota 10 Their sophismes, that there are seven Sacraments: that images
must be set up in Churches. That we are justified by charity, and not by
faith. ibid. 11 Their sophismes, that men have free will: that Christ delivered
the Fathers out of Lambus: that the authority of the Church is above the
Scripture. page 270 12 Their sophismes, that all things are not written which
are necessary to salvation. That men pass thorough the fire of Purgatory to
eternal life. page 271 13 The place 2. These. 2.15. does not establish
traditions. ibid. nota 14 The 1. Cor. 3.15. does not prove Purgatory. ibid.
nota 15 Some sophismes of Campians. ibid. 16 It is no sophisme from the
commendation of marriage to overthrow the vow of virginity. page 272 17 The
Prelates have spoken most basely and impiously of marriage, like to the ancient
Heretics. page 273 18 They prefer virginity before it, without any Scripture,
and yet they make it a Sacrament, and virginity none. page 272. nota 19
Marriage is honorable in all, and impure in to degree. page 273 20 Protestats
use no sophisme in disputing against merits. ibid. 21 Papists teach that their
merits dipped in Christ's blood does merit salvation: that is, that Christ has
merited by his blood that men might merit salvation. page 274 22 That good
works cannot merit is proved. ibid. nota. and page 275 23 Neither Angels can,
nor Adam could merit any thing. ibid. nota 24 Protestants use no sophisme in
disputing against worship of Saints. ibid. 25 Saints are not to be worshipped
or prayed unto. 275. nota 26 Duraeus says the Saints are in far distant
places at once. 276. nota 27 Papists blasphemies touching the Virgin Mary.
ibid. 28 Protestants use no sophisme in disputing against the Mass and
Purgatory. 277 29 Neither Mass nor Purgatory is to be found in the
scripture* neither the names nor the things are there. ibid. 30 In the Supper
th^re was no sacrifice, neither now can be; nor unbloody sacrifice. 278. nota
31 There is neither the name nor the office of a Priest in the new Testament
appropriated to any one kind of men. 279 32 There is no sacrifice in the
Gospel, but that which is common to all to offer. 280 33 The Church has
lawful power to choose her Ministers. 280: nota 34 The Papists choice of meat,
and their set days of fasting, are ridiculous and superstitious. 281 35 The
examples of Elisha, Daniel, and John Baptist, will not warrant Popish fasts.
282. nota 36 S. Paul reproved the Galathians for observing days and times,
because they accounted it necessary to salvation: as Papists do now teach.
282. and nota 37 Papists fastings condemned by the 1. Tim. 4.23. and differ
from the old Christian fast. ibid. 38 Ae^^^s was not condemned of the Church as
an heretic for judging of fasting, as Protestants do. 283. nota 39 Ancient
Christians fasted voluntarily, not by canon or precept. ibid. 40 The word and
Sacraments are the true notes of the Church. 283.284 41 The Fathers in the
greatest matters are wholly the Protestants. 285. and nota 42 Papists prefer
the Fathers before the Canonical Scriptures. ibid. nota 43 By Aquinas his
judgment, things are necessarily proved by the Scripture, but only probably
by the Fathers. ibid.
The sum of the tenth Answer, touching all manner of Witnesses.
1 It is Campians witless kind of reasoning, when an enumeration of all kind
of witnesses, to conclude, all are on his side. 299 2 They only find the way
spoken of Isay 35.8. who are taught by Christ, and be holy. 300. and nota 3 In
visible particular Churches are good and bad, not in the invisible Catholic
Church. ibid. nota 4 No Jesuit nor any Papist can be in heaven, because they
have the mark of the beast. 301 5 Many Bishops of Rome are in heaven* but
never a Pope. ibid. 6 Ignatius was not on the Papists side* because he taught,
that a Bishop was above a King; for Protestants hold the same for the
administration of the offices of a Bishop. Yet the King above him in
commanding him to do them, and in pu^^shing him if he neglect them. 301.302 7
Protestants receive Traditions, so long as they agree with the writing^ of the
Apostles. ibid. 8 Neither Telesphorus revived, nor the Apostles ordained the
fast of Lent. ibid. and nota 303 9 The decretall epistles of the Pope were not
framed by them, but by their parasites. ibid. 10 I^enaeus allowed not the
succession of Bishops in Rome, but while there was succession of truth with it.
ibid. 11 Victor could not make the Churches of Asia keep Easter after the
manner of the Roman Church, but the Council of Nice prevailed more. ibid. and
nota 12 The Church of Smyrna never gathered the bones of Polycarpe for
relics, but to bury them. 304 13 Cornelius the Pope could never abolish the
error which Cyprian and the Church of Affrike did hold. ibid. and nota 14
Sixtus was no more on the Papists side, then on the Protestants, because he had
Deacons to help him to celebrate divine service. ibid. 15 Helen^ i^ ^he found
the Cross, yet she worshipped it not, as P^p^^t^ do and that with ^a^r^a. 305.
nota 16 Mon^^^ de^ired not to be sacrificed for at the M^^^e for remission of
sin, but to be remembered as the Patriarks, Prophets, and Apostles were; to
show she was of the communion of Saints. ibid. and 306. and nota 17 Prayer for
the dead rose not from the scriptures, but from the excessive love of the
living to the dead. ibid. 18 Augustine never prayed for his mother, as thinking
her to be in Purgatory. ibid. 19 The ancient Fathers are to be judged of, not
by one particular judgment, but by their constant opinion. ibid. 20 The Monks
of Popery much unlike the Monks of ancient time. 307 21 Satyrus challenged by
Campian for this, because he could swim. ibid. 22 The Schoolmen differ often
in matter of faith. 308. nota 23 Papists and the Jesuits live as if there were
no heaven. ibi. 24 The doctrine of Papists is such as whosoever holds, it
wholly cannot reign with Christ. 309 25 Antichrist of Rome has enlarged hell
more then all tyrants and heretics. ibid. 26 The cause why Christians resorted
so much to Jerusalem after Christ's death. 310 27 Superstitious pilgrimages are
contrary to the word, and condemned by Gregory Nyssen, and Bernard. ibid. nota
28 The cause why the Jews hate Christians is the Gospel, not the spoiling of
them of their priesthood and kingdom which was done by heathenish Tyrants.
ibid. nota 29 The Papists great friends to the Jews, allowing them toleration.
311 30 Papists are not the offspring of the Fathers. 312 31 Lights were used by
Christians only when they were forced to meet in the night, and after without
any ground of scripture custom brought them to be lighted at noone day. 312.
and nota 32 The church of Rome was once poor, when it had wooden Chalices,
and golden Priests. But V^bane the Pope made all the ministering dishes of
silver. 313. nota 33 Constantine quieted the troubles of the church of Rome,
and since his time as s^e has increased in wealth, so she has decreased in
piety. ibid. 34 Constantine was not baptized by Syluester Bishop of Rome, who
was dead long before his baptism. 314 35 Constantine used the cross in his
arms and banners, but never worshipped it. ibid. 36 Constantine had not the
lowest place in the Council of Nice, but the chiefest. ibid. 37 The Turk
never less prevailed the^ since Luthers time. 315 38 The Pope and his dealings
did much enlarge the Turks by dividing the Empire. ibid. 39 The Turks are
greater enemies to the Greek Church then to the Latin. 316 40 Simon Magus
denied all freewill unto men, which Protestants do not, neither did Calvin.
ibid. and nota 41 Protestants are far from that error of the Nouatians
touching the repentance of those who are fallen. ibid. 42 They are far
different from the Manichees in the matter of Baptism. 317 43 The church of
Rome for along time was more excellent then the rest, and so accounted: yet for
all that, it never had, neither in that respect ought to have dominion over the
rest. 318. and nota 44 Augustine and the Council of Carthage forbad that the
Bishop of the chief sea should not be called Prince of Priests. ibid. And to
it the Bishop of Rome submitted himself for a time. 319. and nota 45 The
Greek Church is opposite to the Roman Church, and has her bishoply
succession. ibid. 46 The Papists have not overthrown the idols of the heathen,
but filled the world full of their idols. 321 47 The Jesuits have divided
Christ, and have no propriety in the name of Jesus. ibid. and nota 48 Luther
preached the true Christ, the papists neither have him, nor preach him. 322 49
Britanie received the faith many ages before August. the Monk came, who
brought more evil then good with him. ibid.
The end of the Contents.
TO THE MOST LEARNED UNIVERSITY MEN, FLOURISHING BOTH AT OXFORD AND Cambridge,
Edmond Campian sends greeting.
WHen I returned (most worthy men) into this Island, a year ago, upon
commandment of my superiors, according to the order of that Religion, which I
profess; I found storms far more dangerous on the English coasts, than
those were which I had lately escaped on the Britain Ocean. But when I had
gone further into England, I saw nothing more usual, then unusual
punishments, nothing more certain than uncertain dangers. Then I plucks up
my heart, as well as I could, calling to mind the goodness of my cause, and not
forgetting the troubles of these times. And least peradventure I should be
caught before that any man heard what I had to say; forthwith I writ down my
determination, why I came, what I sought for, what manner of war, and against
whom I purposed to proclaim it. The first draught of my writing, I kept still
about me, that if I were apprehended it might be found with me. A copy thereof
I left in keeping with a friend of mine, which unawares truly to me, was
showed to many other men, and by them coppied out. The Adversaries took the
schedule, being published, in ill part, most spitefully reprehending both all
the rest, as also this, that I alone in this matter of Religion, had made the
challenge to all. Although in very deed, I alone would not have entered the
list; if with license of her Majesty, and safe conduct these disputations had
been granted: Hanmer and Charke, have made answer to my challenge: what I pray
you? though it were long before? To no purpose at all, for they shall give no
answer honestly but one, which I fear they will never give, to wit: We accept
of your answer, The Queens Majesty has given her word, that you shall come
and go safe: make haste hitherwarde. In the mean while they are full of their
exclamations: Fie upon thy society, out upon thy seditions, art thou not
ashamed of thine arrogancy, thou art a Traitor, doubtless thou art a Traitor:
foolishly said of them: Why do those men, not the vnaduisedst of all the rest,
so lauishlie loose their labor and cost of pen ink and paper? But there is of
late a little book very plain, set forth for these two men to peruse (the
former of which for his pleasure and recreation took my said paper in hand, to
confute the same: the other more maliciously hudleth up the whole matter) which
so far forth as was expedient, entreates both of our society, and of these
men's injuries, and of the charge which I have undertaken. There remains only
for me (for as I perceive, our Bishops provide scourges, and not Schools) that
I might render an account of my said fact, evidently to show, and as it were
with my finger to point out unto you the chief Chapters and fountains of the
things, that breed in me such confidence. And withal to exhort you, who
especially above all others have to do herein, that you will look unto this
charge, with such careful diligence, as Christ, the Church, the Commonwealth,
and the salvation of your own souls do require at your hands. If I upon the
affiance of my wit, learning, art, reading, or memory, have thus challenged
the best learned of the Adversaries, I was in so doing most vainglorious, and
proud above measure, for that I considered neither them, nor my self more
deeply. But if upon considerations of the cause, I thought my self able enough
to prove that this sun shines now at Midday, you must bear with this my
fervent zeal, which the honor of Jesus Christ my King, and invincible truth,
have urged me unto.

Ye know that Marcus Tullius in his oration for Quintius, when Roscius
warranted him that he should get the better, if he could prove that it was not
possible for a man to travail 700. miles within two days space, was not only
nothing afraid of the force and strength of that famous Orator Hortensius, but
also cared nothing for Philippus, Cotta, Antonius, or Crassus, who were Orators
far more excellent then Hortensius was. And were (as he judged) the
principal Orators of his time. There is undoubtedly a truth in all matters, so
apparent and evident, that neither any iugling tricks, or enchaunting words
can darken the beams thereof. But that which I intend to prove is much more
plain, then was that supposition of Roscius: for if I shall prove this, that
there is a heaven, a God, a faith, a Christ, I have gotten the victory. Should
I not in this cause then be courageous? Truly well may I be killed, but overcome
I cannot be: for I depend upon those Doctors, whom that holy spirit has
instructed, which can neither be deceived nor overcome. I beseech you, have a
care of your souls health: of whom I shall obtain this, I expect the rest
assuredly. Let this be your only care and cogitation: First to give your selves
to earnest prayer, then diligently to study also: and ye shall find out the
very depth of the matter, and that the Adversaries are in despair; and that we
being so surely grounded, have good cause, chearefully and courageously, to
look and long after these disputations. I am the shorter in this preface,
because that all the Treatise following appertains properly to you.

Fare you well.
AN ANSWER TO CAMPIANS EPISTLE WRITTEN TO THE STVDENTS OF THE two famous
Universities, Oxford and Cambridge.
A Year ago, you write, it fell out, That according to the order of the
religion which you profess, upon the commandment of your Superiors, you
returned into this Island. Whether, Campian, you came willingly and of your own
accord; or of a certain necessity by the order of your profession and
Jesuitical sect, you were compelled to return into England (whence some
years ago you departed) I will not be inquisitiue of, because it is not much
for the purpose we have in hand: It had bin far more glorious for you, and more
befitting the person you made show to be, not to have crept in obscurely and by
stealth, but to have returned with credit and authority. But who is he that
had power to send you an Embassage into a foreign country, or what necessity
lay upon you to obey his commandment, who had no authority to enjoin you a
journey, whither you were unwilling to go? If that Spanish Soldier, the first
Author of your Jesuitical society, were now alive and should enjoin you to
set your country on fire; would you obey him? I am sure you would say, he would
never command so foul a fact. And yet he might better command and you
execute that, then this thing for which you profess you are now come hither.
For whether, I pray you, may we deem less, to set houses on fire, then to
divert the minds of people from true Religion, to trouble the peace of a
Commonwealth, to estrange the minds of loyal Subjects from their lawful
Prince, and to turn all things topsie turuie; which yet was the end of your
coming, and the order of your profession required no less at your hands? But
let us hear how you go about your Embassage: when, say you, I had gone further
into England I saw nothing more usual then unusual punishments. But Campian,
what be they? Do you eft-soones so slander the mild government of gracious
Elizabeth, and accuse it of cruelty, (England never enjoying a more merciful
Prince) that you affirm you find nothing so common as unusual punishments?
But what new kind of torture have you seen in England since you came into it?
Or which of your men can you name who has bin condemned and put to death for
Religion, not only since you came into England, but for these 23. years, the
whole time that good Elizabeth has swayed the Scepter of this kingdom? It is
true indeed that some few have bin punished who iumpe with you in opinion and
Religion; but they died not for religion, but were by open judgment of law
convicted of Treason. There was of late executed one Euerard a Priest, sent
from the College at Rhemes into England. Who though he was in danger to the
Laws many ways, yet might have had his life, but that impudently at the bar
he uttered things shameful, vile, and intolerable; For he boasted himself
both to be the subject and Vassal of the Pope, even in England, and affirmed
that the Pope was no less the head of the Church of England, then of the
Church of Rome. Auouching further that he was verily persuaded, that the Pope
did not err when he termed Queen Elizabeth an Heretic, and the Patron of
Heretics, and denounced her no lawful Queen. Euerard was for this confession
convicted and condemned, who afterward (as if this had not been enough) in
prison professed plainly and directly in the presence and hearing of Sixteen
men of credit; That it was no sin against God to commit treason against his
Prince. Yet for all this he suffered no new and unusual punishment, but the
same that all Traitors suffer among us in the like case. But who are you and
what is your religion, that you so bouldly object cruelty unto us? Hear me
this one thing, Campian, and deny it if you can. It is not long since more of
our brethren were condemned by you at one Session, executed in one day,
consumed in one fire, then you can recount to me have yet bin put to death for
the Popes cause at any time, or by any kind of death, in the whole happy
reign of Queen Elizabeth. Do but call to mind, Campian, the rare cruelty,
the exquisite tortures, the frequent Martyrdom of former times: and if there
be in you any spark of humanity, you cannot choose but confess that your side
has been extreme cruel, and we sufficiently provoked to severity against
you, and to have repayed you with the like. For what times I pray you can
afford us such and so many butcheries of men, as was to be seen when you were
Lords over us, and which are yet fresh in memory? Tell us what sex or age you
spared, and did not bloodilie execute all without difference and distinction of
learned or unlearned, male or female, old or young, Children, Virgins, Married,
Clergy and Laytie, Bishops, Archbishops escaped not your hands? The Martyrs
you did beat with rods, their tongues you pulled out of their mouths, their
hands you burned off with Torches, you tormented, crucified, hanged and
beheaded them, you burnt them alive, and tosted them at a soft fire, yea the
Infant leaping out of the mothers belly you received upon the spears point
and cast it into the flaming fire. To conclude, whatsoever barbarous cruelty
could invent, that you were not wanting to put in execution against them. And
if your cruelty had ended with the living, and had terminated in their
deaths, it had been less; but so raging was your tyranny, that you took up
the bodies of Saints interred in the earth, you arreigned them upon a day,
accused them at a bar, condemned them to death, and burned them at a stake;
even exceeding those old tyrants in fury, and cruelty. Can you name any one
such savage fact amongst us? or what was he that was put to death amongst us,
whom every good man that heard of him judged not worthy of death threefold
more then life? Wherefore Campian acknowledge your own cruelty, and accuse
not ours, which if it were as great as you would make men believe, yea if any
at all, you would not have so easily and speedily obeyed your Principal,
commanding your return hither. But proceed to tell us after your coming what
you did: least peradventure (say you) I should have been caught before that any
man heard what I had to say, forthwith I writ down my determination and
purpose why I came, what I sought for, what manner of war, and against whom I
purposed to proclaim it. The end then of your coming was to proclaim war
against us. But neither he that sent you was an enemy for any just cause on our
parts, neither have you duly performed an Heralds office: for you no sooner set
your foot upon English ground, but you hid your self in corners, that we
could enjoy no sight of you. If this be to discharge your commission, judge
you. Believe me, this so tymorous and foolish proclaiming of war, made little
for your honesty, or the honor of your holy Father that sent you. The first
draught of writing (say you) I kept still about me, that if I were apprehended,
it might be found with me. A copy thereof I left in keeping with a friend of
mine, which unawares truly to me was showed unto many other men, and by them
copied out. How true this Narration of yours is, let others conceive as they
list, for my part I give no credit at all to it. For if you came, as you say,
to proclaim war against us, shall we think those letters of defiance were
published without and against your priuitie? Besides your letters of challenge
which your favorites spread abroad, were so cleerelie written, that they
foretold not of an enemy coming on, but pointed at him as already come, and
ready to pray upon us; so that after I saw your glorious and marvelous
challenge, I made full account to see you shortly after in the midst of our
Universities, either Oxford or Cambridge. But why did you set down your
determination in writing, except your purpose were to publish it? you say: that
it might be found with you, if you were taken. What is that we hear from you,
Campian? came you to lurk in holes, and to betake your self to your hecles,
or came you to dispute? I find no truth in your words, nor liklihood of truth
in this tale; I would I could find you had either judgment or memory. Hanmer
and Charke, say you, have answered my challenge: verily these two worthy men,
now named, have so entertained your most vain and more then intolerable
bragging schedule and Libell, as it well deserved, and have passing well abated
your Jesuitical and childish triumph. But why I pray you, have you slipped
over that answer of learned M. Charke, and made no reply to it? you refute all
they bring against you in one word, saying. All that they allege is to no
purpose at all. An answer soon made, and not unsuitable to Campians carriage.
but tell us why? for say you, they can make no answer to the purpose, but
this: we accept your offers, her Majesty has promised safe conduct; come let
us confer; how childish is it to expect such an answer; which if they should
promise, it is not in their power to perform. Though Campian, persuade your
self, if this liberty were granted us, it should be as acceptable to us in
deed, as it is to you in show. If her excellent Majesty and her wise Counsel
did think it fit, and for common peace that public disputation should be held
about Religion, are you so silly to think you should have none to encounter
with you, or you should carry the day without blow or bloodshed? I am not
comparable to Charke, Hanmer, nor infinite others, who are either professors in
the University, or have a charge in the Church, yet I should not think my
self fit to live, if I feared to buckle in any controversy with you: for if
you be the man, Campian, whom we here some weeks past in a great concourse,
discoursing what you could, and disputing your best, I see not any cause, why
any one of us should fear to join with such an Adversary in any
controversy. For how did you acquit your self that day? you were dealt withal
by our men in some parts of your pamphlet, wherein it is likely you could
easily give every man satisfaction and least you should complain you were
injured, if any new thing had been propounded to you. And whereas in the
entrance you bitterly inueighed against Luther, and writ that in some desperate
mood he called the Epistle of James a swelling, barren, co^tentious, and
strawen Epistle. The book was brought you, where you feigned such things were
written, and you were willed to show the place; when you saw you were taken
tardy, you would feign have put off the imputation of a slaunderer, and
invented a shift, worth all men's observation; for, say you, the preface where
it was, is purged of it, and yet it is very manifest, that there was never one
word changed in it. At last you made this answer, which made all men laugh
exceedingly, and indeed it was very rediculous; that you would send to the
Emperor and to the Duke of Bauaria, who should certify her Majesty, that
Luther had written such things. But yet in another book of his, you think you
have gotten some matter of triumph. For Luther in his book written of the
captivity of Babylon, has this saying, that many with great probability
avouch, This Epistle to be none of S. James, nor to be answerable to the spirit
of an Apostle: here you cry out, oh horrible blasphemy? Answer was made you,
that Luther did not say it himself, but brought others in, probably affirming
it. Do you suppose there is no difference betwixt these two? yet you still
urged the point, and clamorously objected blasphemy: Eusebius was showed you,
who in plain words calls this Epistle corrupt, and counterfeit; and with
this you were put to silence, and had not to answer: only that you might
probably in show convince Luther of blasphemy, you demanded of our men their
judgment of this Epistle. They clearly answered that they accounted this
Epistle of S. James, as all other the Epistles and books of the new Testament,
to be Canonical. Affirming that all our Churches were of the same judgment.
And from this you would conclude, that Luther therefore was blasphemous,
because he had written that some probably called the authority of this
Epistle into question. To this our men replied, the consequence was naught,
from our reverent opinion of this Epistle, to infer, that whosoever made any
question of it, did blaspheme. And here you plainly yielded; For when you
boasted of two other reasons that you had, you produced none at all. After this
you came to the old Testament, where you accuse us to have raced many books
out of the true Canon. The testimony of Antiquity was laid before you, whence
it was clear that those books were not Canonical. Here you preferred the
late Councels and Fathers before the ancient, which may not be permitted you.
And you set Austine in opposition against Hierom, when it had been fitter you
would have reconciled them. Augustine, he affirms these books to be
Canonical, Hierome denies them, yea expressly, plainly, and evidently. For
Augustine our men answered, that he used the word Canonical doubtfully, or in
diverse signification. And that they showed plainly out of Augustines own
words, and Cardinal Caietans. Augustine you shifted off, and Caietan you
audaciously reproached, affirming that the Cardinal lost all his grace and
elegancie, when he once began to Comment upon the Scriptures. At length,
Campian, you were forced even in Gratian, not without blushing, to acknowledge
this ambiguity of the word. And whereas you could not be ignorant of ancient
records, it was a wonder to our men to see you write, that we had of a sudden
raced out these books. Surely this word escaped you very unlearnedly and
inconsideratly; we have store both of ancient witnesses, and of others
succeeding them, who will and can free us from such imputation of Novelty. To
pass by Origin and Eusebius, Cyprian, or whosoever he was that writ the
exposition of the Creed, we find among his works after he had reckoned up all
the Canonical books of the old and new Testament, he adds: These are those
books which the Fathers have included in the Canon, Cyprian. in expos. Symbo.
where they would that all the grounds of our faith, should have their
foundation. Yet we must know that there are other books which were not called
of our predecessors Canonical, but Ecclesiastical, as the book of Wisdom,
said to be Salomons, and another book of Wisdom, said to be Syrackes. Of the
same rank, is the little book of Toby, and Judith, and the books of the
Machabies. To him I will add another, later in time, and yet he writ 400.
years ago. Hugo de sancto victore, a very learned man, and famous in his
time. If you have not read, what he has written in this kind, read it; if you
have read it, remember it, with me: after he had reckoned up by name the
Canonical books of the old Testament, in the end he thus writes. There are
besides in the old Testament, Hugo de Sanct. victore in prologo pomi. lib. de
Sacram. cap. 7.
certain other books, which indeed we read, but are not written in the
corpse of the text, or in the authentike Canon. As the book of Toby, and
Judith, and Machabees, and the book called the Wisdom of Solomon and
Ecclesiasticus. I omit others, and many which I could produce in this kind, and
that of all ages, out of which the constant judgment of the Church touching
these books may be discerned. Which being so, does it become you Campian, to
be so injurious unto us, so boldly to affirm that we have lately crossed out
those books out of the Canon? or which of us will be afraid of you triffling so
childishly? please not your self too much with your wit, neither abuse the
gifts and parts, which you have gotten by nature or industry, to defend
falsehood, and to uphold the kingdom of Antichrist. Lay your hand upon your
heart, and know your self well, and cease from that arrogancy, with which your
vain sect has puffed you up, leave off your lying, shake off that Jesuitical
light be hauiour of yours. And as Augustine persuaded Hierome, take to you the
gravity of a Christian, and make recantation. For it is no dishonor to recant
an error, but to persist in it. But let us again come to your preface. There
remains only for me, say you, an account to be given of my fact, and
evidently to show, and as it were with the finger to point at those Chapters
and fountains, which breed in me such confidence. But we Campian, can see no
cause at all, why you should promise so great things of your self, or so trust
in those fountains, which are as vain as may be, and light as water; for
these your ten heads, which have made you so headie and bold, are so many
gilded lies, upon which if you rely, your case is far more lamentable, then
of those Jews whom the Prophet Jeremy reproues: Trust not in lying words,
Jer. 7.4.
saying, The Temple of the Lord, The Temple of the Lord. And what is your
Euensong but this, or that which is far more foolish and desperate? But you
say, You are able enough to prove that this Sun shines now at midday. Your
sufficiency all men may see. You are as well able, Campian, to turn the day
into night, and to pull the Sun out of the heavens, as defend these heads.
Those unusual boastings and promises so usual with you, argue a mind proud
and swelling with arrogancy, and not endued with sound knowledge and learning.
The emptier the vessels be, the louder they sound. What insolency I pray you
made you add that of Roscius Supposition? as if the things you defend, were as
manifestly true as it is impossible any man should run 700. miles in two days.
I am ashamed, Campian, to see how vain you be, and full of boasting and
arrogance. What, dare you undertake to convince all the most famous and
excellent Churches of the world of error, as directly and plainly, as it is
impossible for a man to walk 700. miles in two days? If Campian, you can
compass the world in three days, if you can outgoe the Sun, if touch the
heavens with your fingers, if number the stars, if drink up the sea, you may
demonstrate the truth of your cause to which you are so devoted. But if those
things surpass your strength, then shall you never make this good; no though
the whole knot of Jesuits join with you. Now whereas you entreat us to have a
care of our souls health, we take in good part your desire and endeavor of our
salvation. And indeed we our selves do give all diligence we can to attain
true saving health: to which seeing there is but one way, and that plainly
laid down in the Scriptures: we again beseech you, that renouncing all humane
inventions, and forsaking those innumerable fictions of Popery, whereto for
these few years past you have bin addicted, you would also with us labor for
that eternal salvation, which the Scripture has propounded to all Christians,
and to as many as are desirous of eternal life. For what profits it to wish
for salvation, and miserably to err in the search of it? Wherefore Campian, we
pray and beseech you to return from these your wanderings and errors tending
to death, into the plain and straight way of salvation. For this know, so long
as you remain a Jesuit, you neither can be saved, nor indeed can desire it.
And here you say you are the briefer, because you will deal with us in a
Treatise following. Therefore now let us hear your discourse.

REASONS OF CAMPIANS CHALLENGE RENDERED AND GIVEN TO THE Students of the English
Universities.
EDMUND CAMPIAN.
My principal reasons are ten, 1. Holy Scriptures. 2. True meaning of the
holy Scriptures. 3. Nature of the Church. 4. General Councels. 5. Fathers. 6.
Sure ground of the Fathers. 7. History. 8. Paradoxes of the Adversaries. 9.
Sophismes of the Adversaries. 10. All manner of witnesses.


The first reason, which is holy Scriptures.
WHereas there are many things. which evidently open the Adversaries mistrust
in the cause, yet nothing so much, as the majesty of Gods books, by them most
filthilie It is false: for we have corrupted no part of the Bible.
corrupted. For they, who after that they have rejected the voices and
testimonies of all other witnesses, and are nevertheless, driven to so narrow
shifts, that they cannot defend their cause to be good, except they lay violent
hands upon the holy Scriptures also, assuredly show themselves to be in great
distress, and all other helps failing and fainting, must now try the last and
uttermost shift. What cause had the Manachies to cancel Aug. lib. 28. contra
Faust. cap. 2 and de vtilit. cre. c. 3.
S. Matthewes Gospel, and the Acts of the Apostles? Desperation: for they were
tormented with these books, both because they had denied Christ to be Matthew. 1.
borne of a Virgin, and also had falsely affirmed, that then the holy Act. 2.
Ghost came first down from heaven amongst Christians, when their Manes.
Paraclete, that most wicked Persian leapt out. What made the Jren. lib. 1.
cap. 26.
Ebionits to abandon all S. Paul's Epistles? De^peration: for so long as these
kept their authority, Circumcision is abolished, which they had brought back
again. What enforced Praefat in Epist. Iac. vide etiam lib. de capt. Babyl.
and centur. 2.
Luther that most wicked Apostata, to call the Epistle of S. James, This is
most false, for Luther greatly approves of this Epistle, neither ever did he
call it a contentious, swelling, barren, or strawne Epistle.
contentious, proud, barren, rushy, and judge it to be unworthy an Apostolic
spirit? Desperation: Iaco. ca. 2.
For by this Epistle that miserable caitife affirming our justification to be
by faith This is false: for the place makes nothing at all against
Justification by faith only.
only, is utterly confuted and confounded what incensed Bibl. Geneu.
Luthers whelps, on a sudden to put out of the It is false, th^se books
were never accounted part of the true Canon.
true Canon of Scripture, Tobias, Ecclesiasticus, and the two books of the
Macchabees; and in despite of them many other Of the old Testament.
books, unto which they picked the like quarrel? Desperation: for by these
heavenly Tob. 12. Eccles. 15. 1. Macha. 12 1. Machab. 15.
Oracles they be expressly convinced, as often as they dispute against the
defense of Angels, as often as they dispute against Free Will, as often as they
dispute against praying for the dead, as often as they dispute against praying
to Saints. Is it so indeed? Is there such frowardnes, is there such presumption
amongst me^? when they had trodden under foot the authority of the Churches,
Councils * Seas, Fathers, Martyrs, Emperors, People, Laws, Universities,
Histories, all Monuments of Antiquity and holiness; and had openly proclaimed,
that they would have all controversies decided by the written word of God only;
would they then have dismembered the very same word, which only remained, by
cutting out of the whole body, so many, so good, and so excellent parts
thereof. For the Caluinists have cut out of the old Testament Baruch. Tob.
Judith. Sapient. Eccles. Macha. d^o.
seven whole books, besides certain other small pieces, which I let pass
unspoken of The Lutherans likewise have cut off S. James Epist and for spite
of it, Epistol. ad Hebr. Epist Jud. Epist. 2. Pet. Ep. 2 and 3. Iohannis. it a
censent Luth. in praefat. Mag. Cent. 1. lib. 2. cap 4. Kem. in exam. con. Tri.
Ses. 4. De doct. chr. lib. 2. cap. 8. Ses. 4. vide Mel. Can. lib. 2. de Loc.
Theol. cap. 9.10.11. de praedest. Sanct. cap. 14.
five others, which some where else also were once called in question. To these
also, do the late Geneuans add the book of Hester, and a great part of the
third chapter, and all the two last chapters of Daniel, which the Anabaptists
their school-fellowes had a little before condemned, and laughed to scorn; But
how much more modest lie dealt S. Austine, who making a Catologue of the books
of holy Scriptures, took for his rule neither the Hebrew Alphabet, as the
Jews do, nor yet his own private spirit, as Heretics use to do; but that
spirit wherewith Christ quickneth the whole body of his Church, which Church
being not Lady (as Heretics do cauil) but only keeper of this gage, has by
old This is false, for the Laodicene Council does so number the books of the
Scriptures as we do, and not as the Council of Trent does.
ancient Councels, openly challenged this whole and entire treasure of the
books of Scripture, which the late Counsel of Trent also has embraced? The
self-same S. Augustine, entreating particularly of one parcel of Scripture,
could not persuade himself, that the book of Wisdom, should by any man's
rashness, or secret false suggestion, be thrust out of the Canon of Scripture,
which even in his time, by judgment of the Church, process of time,
testimony af ancient writers, and instruction of faithful men, had kept his
authority, as a sound and Canonical book; what would he say if he were now
living upon the earth again, and should see the Lutherans and Caluinists to be
Bible makers, who with their sine and smooth style, have raced both the old and
new Testament, and put out of the Canon of holy Scriptures, not only the book
of Wisdom, but many books more also? so that, that which shall not be uttered
out of their shops, must by their brain-sicke decree be rejected as a thing
most rude and loath some. They that are driven to this horrible and detestable
shift, though their Arms be blazed never so far abroad, by their own
disciples, though they buy and sel^ benefices, though in their Sermons, they
cry out against Catholics, though they procure them the sword, rack. and
gallows, yet are they overcome, naught set by, horrible in men's sight, and
quite overthrown. For as much as the taking upon them the authority of
Censorors and sitting as honorable Judges, do dash out at their pleasure such
holy Scriptures, as they found would not serve their turn; is there any body
though never so simple, which can fear these sub^tle sleights of the
Adversaries, who, as soon as they should enter within your assemiblie that are
learned men, and fly unto such their usual snifts, as it were unto their
familiar spirit, should, though not with reproach full words, yet at the least
with trampling of your feet be thrust out of your schools? I would demand of
them, (for example sake) b^ what authority they mayme and rob the corpse of
the Bible? They answer they do not cut out any true Canonical Scriptures but
cull out only such as are not Canonical, that have been forsted into the
Bible, and are indeed but counterfeits. Who shall be judge? the Campian
refuses the holy Ghost as Judge.
holy Ghost; for this very answer does 1. Lib. Inst. cap. 7.
Calvin give, thereby to escape the judgment of the Church, by whose
authority all spirits are tried; why then do some of you cut off certain
books, and others of your crew, allow the same, seeing you all vaunt of the
self-same spirit? The Caeluinists spirit allows of six Epistles, which the
Lutheran spirit does d^sallow, and yet both of you (as you say) have the holy
spirit. The Xistus Sen. lib. 7.
Anabaptists do call the history of Job a fable interlaced with tragical and
Comicall meeters: how know they that? by the spirit that instructs them.
Praefat. in Cant.
Castalio, that lecherous varlet made no more account of that mystical book
of Solomon, commonly called Cantica canticorum (which the Catholics do as
highly esteem as a Paradise of the soul, as that heavenly food Manna, which
was laid up and kept in the tabernacle, and as delicate dainties in Christ)
then he did of a This is falsoe for Castalio in his preface has no such word.
baudie song, and ribaudous ta^be of a Courtly waiting maid with her lover;
where had he this? of the spirit? In the Apocalypse of Epist. ad Paul.
S. John, every little title whereof S. Hierome affirms to contain some high
and notable mystery; yet nevertheless, these Praef. in Apoc.
severe Judges, Luther, Brentius and Kemnitius find I know not what lacking
shooting all at this mark, that the book might be defaced, and be of no
authority: whom did they ask? the spirit. This is most false: read the
answer to it.
Luther upon a prepostorous zeal casts a bone amongst the Praefat. in nouum
Test.
four Evangelists, and preferring S. Paul's Epistles far before the three
former Gospels, in the end concludes, that the one only Gospel of S. John is
from henceforth to be taken, for the gay, for the true, and the principal
Gospel; as one that as much as in him lay would gladly have made the Apostles
also partakers of his brawling in religious matters: who was his Tutor? the
spirit. Besides this, that peevish Ser. de Pharis and Publican.
Friar was so malapert, as to endeavor to make This is false: for Luther never
spoke saucily of S. Luke.
S. Lukes Gospel to be suspected to be written in a wanton style, because
therein good works are often commended unto us: whom has he consulted with?
the spirit. Theodorus Beza was so bold as to reprehend that mystical word
taken out of the 22. Chapter Luc. C. 22. (...).
of S. Luke, Hic est Calix nouum Testamentum in sanguine meo, qui (calix) pro
vobis fundetur: This is the Cup of the new Testament in my blood, which (Cup)
shall be sh^dde for you: as very corrupt and euilly placed there; because this
sentence cannot admit any interpretation, but of the This is false: for by no
means can he endure thi^ exposition.
wine of the Cup changed into the very true blood of Christ: where learned he
that? of the spirit. Finally, when every man commits every thing to his
private spirit, they belie the name of the holy Ghost most blasphemously. Do
not these fellows which deal thus, bewray themselves, and show what they are?
are they not easily confuted? are they not in the assembly of such men, as you
of both the Universities be, quickly perceived, and soon represt: Ought I to
fear disputations with these in defense of the Catholic faith, who with much
falsehood have handled the very word not of man, but of God himself? Here I
pass over such things, as they have depraved in their false translations,
though there be intolerable matters wherewith I may well charge them. I am very
loath to take away any part of the matter, either from my old College fellow
Master Gregory Martin, a man of excellent great knowledge in the three tongues,
Latin Greek and Hebrew.
which will handle this matter far more learnedly and copiously then I can;
or from some others, which (as I understand) have already undertaken this
matter. The matter that I now write of, is far more heinous and horrible.
There were lately discovered certain petty Doctors, that upon a drunken pange
laid violent hands upon the divine Scriptures, and have condemned them, as
corrupted, as maimed, as falsified, as craftily foisted in, in sundry places;
some parts thereof they have corrected, some they have raced, and some they
have quite pulled out. And lastly they have changed, as the fortress of this
authentical writing of Gods own hand, wherewith before it was fenced, unto
certain Lutherane spirits, as though it were into vain bulwarks of their
own imaginations, or into bare painted walls, least peradventure they should
have bin mum for want of matter, when they should stumble at such places of
Scripture, as are plain against their heresies. Of which nevertheless, they
could no sooner shift their hands, then suppe up hot coals or eat hard
stones. Then this first reason seemed to me urgent and just, which when it had
evidently laid before mine eyes, that the Adversaries side was but
counterfeited and feeble, truly it encouraged me much, being both a Christian,
and also somewhat beaten in this kind of study, in defense of the everlasting
Kings Charter, to encounter with the remnaunts of these discomfited enemies.

WILLIAM WHITAKERS. The answer to the first Reason.
THat Campian, which made you most cheerful in the cause you have undertaken,
and boulder then a Jesuit (being newly come out of your den or cabbine where
you have lurked these diverse years) to proclaim war against us all, and
challenge to the combat the most valiant of us; that, you say, was the
evident apprehension of our distrust and diffidence in our cause. But what
manhood is this for so valourous a man as you make show to be, to provoke and
with sharp war to pursue so timorous adversaries, who are ready to betake
themselves to their heels, not daring to stand to it, but distrusting their
own strength? But tell us in what things our distrust has bin so sensible.
There are many things, say you, which evidently bewray the adversaries mistrust
in the cause. Verelie if boldness in oppugning and withstanding Religion were of
as great force, as usually it is in making of war, and scaling the enemies
walls, and racing his towns, we might well fear your furious and desperate
attempts: for whatsoever could be compassed by rage, fury, and cruelty, that
has not in this combat and contention been wanting. But such weapons cannot
dare religion and truth, neither can they displace it. Let it be granted, we
have not been so cheerful and ready in the defense of a good cause as we
ought, and as the cause it self well deserved, neither have we put to flight
your forces so soon as we ought to have vanquished the^, yet we never gave
ground, we never turned our backs upon you, neither ever sled out of the field.
DVR. You boats much of your valor. but whether think you is he valorous or
fearful, who dare not otherwise buckle with his adversary, but upon
condition he may forbid him what weapons he list, and choose for himself what
he list? Now here is your valor, you forbid us the weapons of the Church,
Councels, Fathers. You only leave us the weapons of the Scriptures? WH. Page 4.
He that will overcome in this cause must only use those weapons, which are
allowed in this kind of sight. For it is not lawful here, as in war, to
take any weapon, by which you can wound your enemy. But weapons must be
fetched out of the armorie of the Scriptures, and the spirit of God, or else
there will be no foyling of an adversary. And this is that which the
Scriptures do warrant; and Constantine commanded the Fathers of the Nicene
Council to use against the Arrians, and to end controversies; the books of the
Evangelists and Apostles, and the oracles of the old Prophets. Theodoret. lib.
2. cap. 6. And the like teaches Hillarie de Trinit. lib. 7. August. Epist. 3.
and contr. liter. Petil. Donat. lib. 3. cap. 6. and in diverse other places. Why
do you then repoue this thing in us? Tell me, whose cause think you is best?
whether ours, who are content with the S^riptures alone, and being armed
with them can defend our own, and refel others; or yours, which in no case
can be safe, if the cause must be tried by the Scripture only. Therefore at the
first you are forced to confess that you must come into the field unarmed and
naked, if no weapons will be afforded you besides the Scriptures.
For tell us Campian if you can, and remember the bypast times. Did we ever
cu^ningly avoid any disputation? did we ever refuse any combat? did we ever
shift off any of your offers and challenges? But how often have we publicly
entered the combat with you? how often have we refuted your often iterated
Sophistications? what writing of yours is yet unanswered by us? or what course
of disputation have we not yielded to? Are not all those disputations held at
Wittenberge, Ratesbone, Augusta, Spire, Worms, Bearne, Possia, London,
Cambridge, Oxford, most plentiful and pregnant witnesses, with what spirits,
with what learning, with what truth we defended our Religion? what show or
sign of fear, or diffidence found you amongst us? nay rather how true and
singular confidence did there appear in us? you it is, and not we, when it
comes to a trial indeed that begins to sweat, change countenance, tremble
every joint of you, and bewray your deep distrust and the naughtines of your
cause. Wherefore, Campian, take it from me, if you think our distrustfulnes
will help you any thing, you much deceive your self, for if we have with
courage stood against your predecessors so far surpassing you, we will not
yield a hair to you? nor fear your manner of conflict, being so childish in
the judgment of all men. But this diffidence, you so cast in our dish, tell us
what it is, and how it appears so clearly, Forsooth we distrust our hold in
the Scriptures, and the majesty of Gods books we have most filthilie
corrupted. This indeed is a very great crimination you object to us, and an
undoubted proof of our distrust: for they who are not able to maintain the
Religion they profess, unless they lay violent hands upon the Scriptures, and
impeach the sacred authority of those heavenly books, the cause on their side
must be very naught and desperate indeed. Therefore I grant unto you, that it
was very fearful desperation, which made the Manachies renounce the old
Testament wholly, and cancel part of the new: the same also made Ebion reject
all Paul's Epistles, and other heretics to do so too: for there was nothing
fitter for them to uphold those their monstrous opinions, then by denying those
books of holy Scripture.

But I pray you Campian, let us see how these things make for your purpose: or
what it is wherein we are so like those forenamed Heretics. Me thinks it
little beseems your learning and eloquence, to slander us, and to pin upon
our sleeves such odious crimes of ancient heretics so undeservedly. If we
have shaken hands with the Manachees, if with the Ebionits, tell us wherein?
But if we are culpable of no such thing, the Lord shall judge your outrageous
and bold slanders, and maintain our vprightnes and innocence. For who ever
thought and spoke more honorably, reverently and with more due regard of the
Scriptures then we? who have received and embraced all Scripture given by
inspiration, as the very voice of God himself; holding it for the only mystery
of our faith and religion, and so resting in it, as that we desire no other
help as necessary to salvation? which if we had not with more diligence and
devotion defended, then you ever did, long ere this the glory of it had
perished, and it had bin counted as a dead letter: For what have we done for
these many years with more endeavor and diligence, then maintain the majesty
and excellency of the Scriptures, which you have so unworthily violated? And
yet you blush not to match us with the Manachees and Ebionits, who have
violently laid most impure and villainous hands upon those sacred books. But,
say you, Luther that most wicked Apostata, called the Epistle of S. James a
contentious, swelling, barren and strawen Epistle, and judged it unworthy the
spirit of an Apostle: still the fat would be in the fire, Campian, if you had
not one fit of railing at Luther, for this is to show your self a right
Jesuit, as indeed you are, shamelessely and audaciously to break out into
railing, and specially to tear Luther with most bitter reproaches. This is your
faculty and profession, this you have undertaken to do, whatsoever you^ leave
undone: surely he is an happy man, whom the Lord thus honoreth with the enmity
and hatred of such wicked men: for he cannot choose but be an excellent man,
whom wicked men do so deadly pursue. But you object against Luther his
Apostasy: look to your self Campian, if you may not be more justly accused
of this crime: for doubtless you are either an Apostata, or you were a cunning
hypocrite. But if it be Apostasy to forsake Apostataes, then was Luther such
an Apostata. For he abandoned thieves, heretics, Apostataes, and separated
himself from that Curch, in which that daily Apostasy from religion, 2 Thessalonians. 2.3
which the Apostle did foretell, was now come to the height: they then who
would not be Apostataes must fly from the Apostasy of your Church.

But say you, Luther spoke not so reverently of the Epistle of S. James as was
fitting: It is well all you can challenge him with, is touching this Epistle
only: he never did by any one word impeach the Gospels of Matthew, Mark, Luke,
and John, neither the Epistles of Saint Paul, or Saint Peter; only a little he
taxed the Epistle of Saint James. Is Luther alone in this crime? has all
Antiquity received this Epistle of S. James, and Luther only rejected it?
undoubtedly, no: neither was Luther ignorant what censure the ancient Church
gave of this Epistle: Lib. 2. c. pa 23.
Eusebius adue^tured to write expressly of this Epistle thus. DVR. But Eusebius
only says, that this Epistle was thought of diverse, not to be written by S.
James; and denies not the canonical authority of it. For after he says: It
was received of many Churches. WHIT. Page 12. You wrest both the words and
sense of Eusebius: for he alleges not other men's opinions, but his own
direct judgment. But if we admit that you say, it must the rather be
counterfeit; for if Saint James did not write it, and yet he calls himself
James the servant of God, and of our Lord Jesus Christ: must it not be forced?
^aue the penmen of the Scripture used to take other men's names unto them? If
you deny it to be written by Saint James, you must needs confess it to be
Apocrypha: and so after your sense, Eusebius has rejected this Epistle; which
thing to him that reads Eusebius will manifestly appear. And that he says
many Churches receive it, and not all; must needs prove that he thought it was
not Canonical.
Be it known to all men that this Epistle which is fathered on Saint James, is
counterfeit: what can be written more plainly? it may be you will except
against Eusebius. But tell us why? therefore not to stand with you, Hieronym.
in Catalogo.
will you hear what Hierome says, who as you well know was an Elder of the
Church of Rome? The Epistle of James is held to have been published under his
name by some other. The one says it is counterfeit, the other writes, that it
was thought to be published not by the Apostle, but by some other. Why then are
you angry with Luther, whom you see not unadvisedly and rashly to doubt of the
authority of that Epistle, but therein follows the judgment and censure of
the ancient Church? for from hence it is very clear, DVR. Does he therefore
doubt of the authority of this book; what shall we then say to Calvin, who
has plainly denied that the Epistle to the Hebrews was written by Saint
Paul? and if you had not been a deceiuer, you would have alleged Hierome
wholy: for it follovveth. Though by little and little in succeeding ages it
obtained authority. WHIT. Page 16 He that says, It is thus held, and neither
dislikes nor refures such a suspicion, shows he not himself also doubtful of
it? Calvin had some reason, because that Epistle was not published in the name
of Saint Paul, as this was of Saint James. What comparison is there in these
two? the Epistle of Saint James has his name in the beginning of it, as the
author of it; so has not the other the name of Saint Paul: so that he that
denies that to be written by Saint James, must needs make it counterfeit. But
no such thing here. Therefore may this be held to be canonical, though it be
denied to be written by Saint Paul. If you had read but a few lines more, you
should find that I used no deceit, neither had you caus^ to be so bitter. And
these words of Hierome prove directly, that the authority of this Epistle was
sometimes doubted of.
that the first age of the Church doubted somewhat of the credit and authority
of this Epistle. But you will say, it was afterward received, and Hierome
witnesses as much. I inquire not how justly that might be received in a
succeeding age, which once was rejected, that the credit and authority it had
not in the beginning, it might gain in time by men's calmnesse in judging:
neither will I contend about the authority of this Epistle. Let it be as great
as ever any book had; we verily receive it, and put it in the Canon of the
Scriptures; for whatsoever Luther or any other may conclude touching this
Epistle, or lessen the credit of it any way; yet all our Churches willingly
embrace it, and judge it written by the Apostle, or some Apostolic man; and in
it do undoubtedly acknowledge the doctrine and spirit of an Apostle. Calvin. in
argument. in Epist. Jacob.
I, says Calvin, willingly and without controversy receive this Epistle,
because I see no just cause to reject it. Therefore object no longer unto us
other men's sharp censures and hard speeches, whereof we are no ways guilty:
for what is it to us, what other men think of this Epistle, who dispraise no
part of it, neither detract any thing from the authority thereof? But where I
pray you writ Luther any such thing, which you make mention of? let us see the
place, that we may perceive how faithfully you deal. You tell us of a Preface
he writ upon the Epistle of S. James, such as I think few men know: for it is
no where to be found amongst Luthers works: yet by accident I light upon that
preface, and read it from the beginning to the ending, in which not any of
those things is to be seen which you mention: so that we may easily conjecture
what we are like to find of you in the sequel, when in the beginning you are
not ashamed to lie so palpablie. For Luther begins his preface thus. The
Epistle of S. James though rejected of Antiquity, I much comme^d and hold very
fitting and profitable. And in this book of the Babylonish captivity, he thus
writes of this Epistle. I pass over that which many probably affirm, that
this was not the Epistle of S. James the Apostle, nor agreeing with the spirit
of an Apostle. These things very gravely and modestly has Luther written
concerning this Epistle of S. James; DVR. Jf you had seen the copy printed at
Jena you should see that Luther thus speaks of this Epistle. WHIT. p. 22. I
acknowledge that Luther in a most ancient preface published by himself at
Wittenberge 1525. called it a strawen Epistle in comparison of the Epistles of
Saint Peter and Saint Paul, but find not that, you affirm any where.
and never culled it as you affirm, a contentious, barren, swelling, or a
strawen Epistle: though I deny not but Luther was of that opinion, that he
greatly called in question the Author and Argument of this Epistle. And it had
been your part, who condemn his opinion, to have confuted his reasons. Erasmus
evidently writes, that this Epistle has no taste of Apostolic authority; so
that Luther judged more tolerably of this Epistle, then Erasmus. But howsoever
the case stand, Luther in his judgment is not without the consent of the DVR.
Jf he agreed with the first and purest Churches: you differing from him, do
dissent from them. WHIT. I call them the purest Churches, not for their sincere
judgment of this Epistle, but for that they flourished in the best and purest
times.
first and purest Churches. And yet to let Luther pass, we have no other
opinion of this Epistle, then your selves have, and honor it as much, as you
think it deserves. And let me promise and anow this for us all; whatsoever in
this combat, which you have undertaken, you prove out of this Epistle, we will
most willingly embrace, and not shift it off, as you suspect we will. All the
sentences of this Epistle, we allow of, and reject not any one. For as for that
instance, which you give of sole faith, it is but a silly and lame trick of
your sophistry; our doctrine of justification by faith only is most true and
holy; which S. Paul also clearly teaches, though he do not DVR. Saint Paul
never in plain words has affirmed our justification by faith only. WHIT.
page 27. When S. Paul says we are justified by faith, it is as much as by
faith alone, because faith respects only mercy, and withal excludes works:
Romans 3.28 and cap. 4.5.6. and cap. 3.20. Gal. 2.16. and lastly he says we are
freely justified by grace: Ephesians. 2.7.8. Romans 3.24. then he affirms that faith
only does justify.
expressly use these words, Romans 3.24.28.
Faith alone. And the ancient do so expound and interpret S. Paul. Ambrose
says; DVR. Ambrose by his sole faith excludes only the works of the
ceremonial law, and so he speaks in that place. WHIT. page 33. It is enough
that he affirms that this is S. Paul's position: we are justified by faith
only. And when he excludes only the works of the ceremonial law, in that he
is against the judgment of Augustine and Hierome and himself also, in lib. 2.
cap. 2. de Jacob. and vita beata.
They are justified only by faith, it is the gift of God. DVR. Basil excludes
only those works which are wrought by the sole power of freewill. WHIT. page
38. Basil excludes not only the works wrought by the power of freewill, but
even those which proceed from faith and grace; for he produced S. Paul, and
Saint Peter whom he denies to have been justified by works, yet had they both
faith and grace.
Basil says; They are justified by faith alone in Christ. DVR. Nazianzene
excludes only that high knowledge of divine mysteries. WHIT. page 41.
Nazianzene excludes not only that high knowledge of divine mysteries, but also
by it all other works; for seeing it is the most excellent, and so excluding
the greatest, he must needs exclude the less.
Nazianzene says; Righteousness consists in faith only. Why should I recite
any other sayings of other of the Fathers of the Church? This doctrine is both
Evangelical and Apostolical; contrary to this, if James or an Angel from
heaven should preach, let him be held as impious, wicked, and accursed. But you
will say S. James denies justification by faith only, yea affirms that we are
justified by works. We answer, that the Apostle speaks of a DVR. Saint
James speaks not of a feigned faith: for how can be the^ speak of Abraham's
faith? how is it feigned to believe that God is? WHIT. page 42. S. James
speak^th of a feigned faith, as is plain verse. 14. for it is in words only
verse. 15.16. it gives nothing, when relief is required. verse 17. it is
without works and dead. verse. 18 only that is true faith, which can be showed
by works, here no works verse. 19. It is only such a faith as the devils
have: so a feigned and dead faith. page 44. And Augustine thus expounds it, De
fide and oper. Cap. 14. and in Psalm. 31. in Praefat. and page 45. Though
Abraham's faith was a true faith, because it showed it self by true fruits and
true works: that proves not, but their faith is feigned who have no works. Of
which Saint James speaks. page 46. faith is not the less feigned and vain,
because it believes that God is: seeing Saint James affirms the di^els
believe as much.
feigned dead, idle, and counterfeite faith, which many boasted of, and falsely
persuaded themselves they were just by it. This faith, which we may more truly
call a carcass of faith, Saint James denies to be sufficient for salvation to
any, and he that is justified he teaches must be justified by works, that is,
must be proved, and declared to be just: for it must needs be, that faith be
living, fruitful and accompanied with good works, that all may clearly
perceive and discern, you are endued with true faith. And so does S. James
very fitly accord with S. Paul, while he disputes from the effects; when as S.
Paul argues from the cause. The principal and immediate cause of our
justification, S. Paul makes faith; S. James writes that a man is justified by
works, that is, every man by his works as by most pregnant testimonies is
DVR. It is ridiculous to think, that Saint James should teach men how to show
themselves just, and speak nothing of true justice. WHIT. page 47. We say not
that Saint James teaches only how a man may obtain the opinion of justice
with men, but how he may show and declare himself by certain proofs and
arguments to be endued with true justice. And that this place touches the
declaration of true faith by works, and so the demonstration of our
justification, not we, but your own men do so teach. Thomas Aquin. in Jacob.
2. Glossa-Ordin. in Jacob.
known and acknowledged just, while his invisible faith is witnessed and
declared by his visible works. Therefore you see there is no reason why for
this cause Luther should either find fault with, or fear the Epistle of S.
James. And thus Augustine has reconciled these two Apostles James and Paul,
that you may see that we are not broachers of any Novelty. Wherefore, says
DVR. Augustine makes nothing for you, but against you. WHIT. page 50.
Augustin^ affirm^th directly that S. James speaks of a vain and feigned
faith, which is as much as we here produce him for.
Augustine; Aug. quaes^. 85 quae^t. 76.
the judgments of the two Apostles, S. Paul, and S. James, are not contrary
each to other, when the one says a man is justified by faith without works;
and the other says, that it is a vain faith which is without works; because
S. Paul speak^th of works which go before faith: Saint James of works which
follow faith; at S. Paul himself shows in many places. Therefore the Apostle
S. James would not, neither ought to detract any thing from the doctrine of
justification, which Luther learned from S. Paul. Yea all Papists and Jesuits
shall sooner be torn asunder, then this judgment of Luther, touching faith
alone, shall either quail or be overthrown.

From Luther you turn the edge of your speech to the whelps of Luther: for so
you, as an unclean dog, term men famous and flourishing with all good
qualities. But why you should so call them, I well conceive not, unless it be,
for that they never cease barking against your Bishops and Monks, and other
Church robbers, like your self. But let us hear what heinous thing those
whelps have committed. They have on a sudden put out of the true Canon of
the Scripture, Tobias, Ecclesiasticus, the two books of the Macchabees, and
many other books. Say you of a sudden, Campian? Is it true indeed that you
are such a stranger in the writings of the ancient Fathers, that you know not
that long ago these books were raced out of the Canon? Look I pray you into
Hierome, and out of him call to mind what antiquity has done. That we may
know, says DVR Hierome says that the former Churches did not receive these
books for Canonical: but denies them not to be Canonical. WHIT. page 52.
Hicrome affirms not only that these books were not received of the
foregoing Churches for Canonical, but himself often times denies them to be
such, and plainly calls them Apoch^ypha books, which he would never have done
if the Church then had taken them for Canonical; yea and as Duraeus
confesses, they were not so taken until ^lmo^t 70^ ye^res after Christ.
Hierome, Hieron. i^ Prologo Galiato.
Whatsoever books are more then these, they are to be accounted among the
Apochrypha. Therefore Wisdom, which commonly is called the Wisdom of Solomon,
and the book of Jesus the son of Syrach, and Judith, and Tobias, and Pastor,
are not in the Canon. Will you that are but a Friar put these books in the
Canon, which Hierome following the judgment of the ancient Church, and the
truth it self, denies to be in the Canon? mark well his own words: They are
not in the Canon. You say that we have dashed them out; and why should we not
so do? For, says Hierome, they are not in the Canon. Desire you any further
testimonies? Epiphanius says as much as Hierome, who after he had recited
diverse books, which you say we have put out of the Canon, he thus writes; as
Cornarius renders his words out of the Greek. These books verily are
profitable and helpefull, Epiphan. in lib. de mensur. and Ponder.
but they are not reckoned in the number of those which are received. Therefore
they are not to be found in Aaron, neither in the arc of the Covenant. But see
out of Hierome more manifest and pregnant things. Hieron. praefat. in lib.
Solomon.
As therefore the Church reads the books of Judith, Tobias, and Macchabees,
but accounts them not Canonical Scripture: so also these two books (he
means Wisdom and Ecclesiasticus) it reads for edification of the common
sort, not for confirmation of any doctrine of the Church. If, Campian, you be
ignorant of these ancient testimonies you are but a young soldier in that
kind of fight, where you would be thought a well experienced Captain; but if
you know them, you are too unjust and injurious unto us, to object to us, I
know not what desporation, because we admit not those books in the Canon of
the Scripture, which Antiquity tells us directly, were never admitted, neither
are to be admitted: Caietan. in cap 24. Mattb.
And verily Cardinal Caietan, fears not to avouch that he that writ the book
of the Macchabees, in a certain prophecy of Daniels, was a liar: but the holy
Ghost was never wont to be deceived in the interpreting of the Scripture. Now
whereas you imagine that we are convinced by those Oracles, as often as we
dispute against the defense of Angels, as often as we dispute against freewill,
as often as we dispute against praying to Saints: You must first, before you
can convince us, prove that an argument will conclude necessarily out of those
books, to confirm the doctrine of the Church, which Hierome demeth, and you
shall never be able to prove, though you call all the Jesuits to a
consultation. And seeing you object desperation to us, see ho^ you bewray your
own miserable ^esperation; who cannot establish the Articles of your faith by
the Canonical Scriptures, but you she to the Apoc^ypha, whose authority has
bin* and for ever shall be doubted of in the Church. The Lord has committed his
Will and Wo^d to writing, and commended it to his Church: Those writings with
all diligence and piety we receive and reverence; we are content with them, and
we maintain their sufficiency; let go then these questionable, obscure, and
Apochrypha books, and out of these contend with us about religion. But your
religion long ago has passed beyond the bounds of the sacred Scripture, and
has broken forth into many superstitions. And hence it is that you do the
thing, than which nothing can be more malapert and intolerable; that is, make
of like authority with holy Scripture, not only the Apochrypha books, but
every DVR. Page 5^. ^^e do not aff^me Traditions, to be of the same authority
with the holy Scriptures. WHIT. page 59 Though Duraeus here denies it, yet
the Council of ^rent does with the like holy affection and reverence receive
and honor them, as it does the books o^ the old and new Testam^nt. See Dec^et.
1. Sess. 4.
unwritten. Tradition, whersoeuer you come by them, at the second or third
hand. But what do I telling you of these things, who shamefully have adventured
long since to violate and inf^inge all the laws, both of God and man? Take
this from me: if you can demonstrate that we have condemned or rejected any one
book, or any DVR. Page 64. You have raced out these words out of S. John:
Every spirit which divides Christis not of God: and the history of the
adulterous woman John 8.3. WHIT. page 65. We have not raced it out of the
^cripture; for it is not to be found in the most ancient Greek copies, but as
we read it, 1. Ioh. 4.3. Cyprian also l. b. 2. cap. 8. testim. contra Iudaeos
so reads it, and Augustine also ad Po^^ent. lib. 2. cap. 7. reads bo h. The
history of the woman taken in adultery we race not out: though some of the
ancient have done, and Beza though he demurred about it, ve^ never dashed it
out.
part and portion of any book, which appears to have bin written and
confirmed by divine authority, I will never contend any longer, but yield you
the day, and give up our weapons to you. But if we have ever most faithfully
kept the whole corpse of the Scriptures, and have severed the true books from
false, and have defended the heavenly truth of God, and preserved it vncorrupt,
why do you poor silly F^ier cry out of our desperation, when your self is so
far plunged in desperation it self, that there is no certainty of your
salvation, but by the deprauation and corruption of the holy Scriptures?

Now in that you affirm we are convinced by those oracles: As often as we
dispute of the defense of Angels, of freewill, of praying for the dead, and of
praying to Saints: they are thing which we have discussed a thousand times, and
have exactly determined them out of the true oracles of God. The defense of
Angels is taught us in the Scripture, where we are taught that God has set his
Angels over certain people, Dan. 10. and 12. ^sal. 91.11.
places, and men; and of this in general we nothing doubt, but that Angels have
that commission from the Lord, that they must provide for men's safety and
salvation. So that we deny them not some kind of ministration, yea we attribute
as much to them as the Lord has taught us we should. And as for your DVR.
Denis ^as S Paul's disciple, and he has manifested such m^^teries. WHIT. page
68. Why did not S. Paul, who wa^ rapt up into the third heaven, and saw such
great things, declare unto us the hierarchy of Angels? did he bur^e it in
silence, and his disciple tell it abroad? But Denis was not the disciple of S.
Paul, as shall in another place be proved.
Hierarchy and manifold degrees of Angels, we are willingly ignorant of them,
and no whit envy your knowledge, who have had the revelation of such great
mysteries from your Denis, who has (that I may use the words of S. Paul)
advanced himself in those things whic he never saw. But it is another
patronage of Angels which you defend, and hold that we ought to worship them
and call upon them, which the Scripture in plain words forbids, for DVR.
Saint Paul forbids only the offering up of sacrifice to Angels, and making of
them new mediat^rs. WHIT page 70. S. Paul fo^bids all worshipping of them, and
so prayers, a swell as sacrifice^; they being a part of worship. page 71.
Chrysostom. in Coloss. 2. hom. 7. in these words: Occumen. in Coloss. 2. whom you
allege, do not interpret them for you, but for our opinion, and as the truth
is.
S. Paul condemns Worshipping of Angels. Coloss. 2.18.
And the Angel once and again called S. John from this kind of worship. DVR.
Saint John did not worship the Angel, but took the person of those who held
that Angels were to be worshipped with sacrifices, that he being forbidden,
they might be reproved in him. WHIT. page 72. John did not as you say; for
neither offered he any sacrifice^, neither affirms he that he dissembled; but
says directly: I fell down to worship before him. You on the contrary say, he
fell not down to worship. And your Thomas upon Apoc. 19. says, S. John
intended to worship with Dulia. And upon Apocal. 22. with Latria.
See thou do it not, Apoc. 19.10 and 22 9. Tob. 12.
I am thy fellow servant, and one of thy brethren: worship God. As for Raphael
in DVR. The ancient Fathers have cited the book of Toby, a^ Irene, Cyprian,
H^la. WHIT. page 73. Then will it follovv: that out of what book soever the
Fathers have alleged any testimony, it must be of the Canon, and ^o the 3 and
4. books of Esdra; for Augustine, Cyprian, and Ambrose cite them, yet your
Church rejects them. DVR. Hierome puts them out of the Jewish Canon, not
of the Canon of the Church. WHIT. page 74. It is strange those Fathers should
make them Canonical, when i^ Hieromes time long after them, they were not; no
they were neither in the Canons of the Church, nor of the Jews Canon. Hieron.
in Prasat. in lib. Salom. DVR. Your English Synagogues read Toby very much.
WHIT. page 76. And other Apochryphae^, but accounts them not in the Canon.
Tobie, we pass not greatly, neither do acknowledge those seven Angels of
whom he speaks. All that which was spoken of Raphael, or which he speaks of
himself, i^ far differing from the holy Scriptures, and it sauoureth strongly
of superstition. The place of Ecclesiasticus does not much trouble me, neither
should I the sooner believe DVR. page 76. If you de^y free will to man by
nature; and that be cannot but sin, you establish the Fate of the S^^ickes.
WHIT. page 77. No more, then when we say Angels necessarily do good, and
devils ever evil. Again we deny not man's freewill to natural and civil
actions, but to the duties of faith; because till the son has made him free,
he must needs be a servant of sin.
free will, though he an hundred times should repeat that sentence;
Ecclesiast. 15.17. Genesis 6.5.
before man is life and death: seeing that the DVR. The Scripture does not
teach that men have lost free will by nature. WHIT. p. 78. What then means
it, 1. Cor. 2.14. If man cannot understand the things of God and eternal life,
how can he will them or do them? Phil. 2.13. The will and deed is wrought in
us by God. Genesis 6.5. If he can think nothing but evil, where is free will?
Scripture teaches that man lost his freedom by sin: the same thing teach
the DVR. The Fathers do not deny free will. WHIT. page 79. August. Enchirid.
cap. 30. Ambrose de vocat. gent. cap. 9. Bernard de libr. arb^t. do deny it.
Fathers also, and every man's own experience: howsoever these words may be
understood of mankind, as he was sometime in Adam. For thus he writes a little
before. Ecelesi^it. 15. verse. 14.
He made man from the beginning, and left him in the hand of his own
counsel; if he speak of the first condition and state of man, and of his
perfect and vncorrupt nature, wherein he was created of the Lord, he speaks
very true: but if he made it now free for us, as we are natural men, to choose
or refuse life or death at our own pleasure; I am not so bound by the
authority of this book and testimony, but that I may appeal from his
Apochryphall sentence to the tried Oracles of God. Now for your book of the
DVR. No Church ever rejected the book of the Macchabees. WHIT. page 83. The
Church of the Jews did wholly: and the Church of the Christians as I have
showed before. Yea, Gregory, the great, who was Bishop of Rome, in Job. lib.
17. Cap. 16. denies them to be in the Canon. And the Fathers, though they cite
them as he did, yet so accounted them for no better. DVR. Augustine places
them in the Canon. WHIT. page 83. Yet Gregory who lived 200. years after him,
denies them to be Canonical, besides Augustine so calls them, because the
Church of Christians read them, and did not reject them so as the Jews did.
August. de ciuitat. De^ lib. 18. cap. 36. and August. cont. Gauden. lib. 2.
cap. 23. further, Duraeus, confesses that they were neither written by a
Prophet, nor confirmed by a Prophet: then certain it is they are not in the
Canon. DVR. Christians must be ruled by the judgment of the Catholic Church.
WHIT. page 85. The Catholic Church cannot make those books which are not
Canonical to be Canonical: besides I have showed, that the Catholic Church
does reject them.
Macchabees, I make far less account of it, which Hierome, Epiphanius,
Athanasius, Cyprian, have hissed out, and the Leodicene Council has rejected.
Moreover that which is therein spoken of the sacrifice offered up for the
sins of the dead, is merely matter of supposall, and forced into the text:
for neither in Josephus is any such thing to be found in the Greek, neither in
Josephus the son of Gerion, who yet writ the self-same history in Hebrew, is
there any mention of any such sacrifice, neither had the DVR. The Jews Machzor
shows that they do pray and offer sacrifice for the dead. WHIT. page 85. I
much ^egard not what the Jews do now: I affirmed that the old Jews had
neither precept nor practice for it.
Jews either by precept, or practice any such custom, to offer sacrifice and
prayers for the dead. Lastly in the Greek copy there is that inuersion and
disordered placing of the words, that you can hardly make any true sense, or
any whole sentence hang together. View the place in the Greek text, and if you
can fitly translate it so, that all things may hang well together, I will
yield, you are a better Grecian then I took you for. Shall I be tied then by
the authority and force of this book, place, or sentence, to offer with you
prayers and oblations for the dead? you are too too childish, Campian, to
think such things can incline the Students of our Universities to like your
side: other manner of matter must you bring, and of more force, if you will
gain our favorable audience and good conceit: for these things long ago we
have distasted and spit out; but who ever said, your self excepted, that this
place of the Macchabees does prove and confirm invocation of Saints? It is one
thing to offer sacrifice for the dead, and another thing to say that the Saints
departed make intercession for us. As for Judas DVR. Many things were declared
to the Prophets by dreams. WHIT. page 87. Must I therefore believe every
dream written in the Apochrypha books, as divine oracles? neither did that
dream make the Macchabees pray to Onia or Jeremie, but to the Lord only. 2.
Mac. 15.21. DVR. The Jews thought that Christ had prayed to Eliah, when
Matthew. 27.47. he said Eli Eli Lamb. etc. therefore praying to Saints was
familiar and common with them. WHIT. page 87. It is plain that the Jews said
this only to deri^e Christ, whom they thought God had forsaken, and therefore
he fled to Eliah for help.
dream touching Onia, of which we read 2. Macchab. 15. I pass it over as a
dream: but the matter is not great whether you understand the intercession of
the dead, or oblations for the dead: both is yours, and both most false. And
here again you cry out with great vehemence; Is it true indeed? is there such
frowardnes, is there such presumption among men? here is neither the one, nor
the other, Campian^ we have done nothing frowardly; nothing presumptuously: I
wonder at your frowardnes and presumption, that those books which God
disclaimes, as none of his, which reverend antiquity has put out of the
Canon; yet you in your horrible and detestable frowardnes and presu^ption, will
bring into the Canon, whether God will or no, the holy Fathers denying them, and
the books themselves disclaiming it. The Caluinists, say you, have cut off
from the body of the old Testament, These are Ba^uch, Tob^as, Iud^th, Su^^ent
a. Ec^^ejias^icus. t^^o Macchabees. H^^ron prae f^t. in Ier.
seven whole books: Why you shameless Friar, did not Hierome a thousand
years before Calvin was borne, race them out? Why then slip you over
Hierome, and quarrel with Calvin only, when they are both in one predicament?
Hear yet again what Hierome says. Whatsoever is besides these books, is to
be accounted Apocrypha: but these seven books which you reckon up, and
calumniously avouch that we have raced them out, are besides those Hierome
makes mention of; they are then to be accounted Apochrypha. For most of these
we have sufficiently answered. For Baruch, Hierome says, We neither read it,
nor find it in the Hebrew; all the other he casts out of the Canon, Hieron ad
Domnion, and Rogatian.
and writes freely. Those books which are not to be found in the Hebrew,
neither are any of the 24. are tobe rejected of those, who are of ripe years
and knowledge. But you Jesuits are always Children, as the Egyptian Priest
answered Solon touching the Grecians. I wonder why you say never a word
touching the third and fourth book of Esdra: it may be you are ashamed of
them, being books, as Hierome writes, full of dotages: yet your Church has
had them in great account, and the Fathers often times have alleged
testimonies out of them; why do you, Campian, suddeinly dash these books out
of the Canon? If you judge they must be kept in the Canon, why do you not tax
the Caluinists, who, as all men know, have cut them out of the old Testament?
Why when you number up all those sacred books, cut out of the Canon by the
Caluinists, omit you these altogether? Or if these be Apocrypha, why should we
deem the rest to be Canonical? I am not a little desirous to know, what is
your judgment of these books: but you say further: Epist. Jacob. Ep ad Heb.
Epist. Juda. Epist. 2. Pet. Epist. 2. and 3. Joan.
The Lutherans have cut off Saint* James Epistle, and for spite of it, five
others, which somewhere else also were once called in question. That these were
once and elsewhere in question, you cannot deny. The light and evidence of the
story has wrung this from you. But tell us who made question of them? Did
heretics only? Then account Eusebius and Hierome amongst heretics, who have
reported to us their own judgment of these Epistles, with the judgment of
the Church. Can you prove that they were accounted heretics, in the first and
pure ages of the Church, who took out of the Canon these Epistles? For the
Epistle of Saint James, I have answered sufficiently: we neither reject that,
nor any of the other Epistles, which you falsely accuse the Lutherans to have
cut out; this is no fauit of ours, whom you know to be far from
Lutheranisme: quarrel then with them: as for us, we never cunningly shifted
off the testimonies and allegations of those Epistles. Can you in equity
require any more of us? At length then forbear to vpbraide us with I know not
what desperation, frowardnes and presumption: we willingly admit, receive, and
allow of your own books, which your self make use of in disputation; to
their judgment will we stand, if you can convince us by these you win the
field.

That which you add of the book of Ester, and of almost three whole chapters
of Daniel, is nothing but cauilling. The book of Ester we account Canonical,
as much as by Gods authority is written in DVR. As if the Hebrew tongue were
the rule of the Canon, and of divine authority. WHIT. page 90. No book is a
part of the new Testament, which is written in Latin, yet is not Greek the
rule of the Canon.
Hebrew: but those fragments, which commonly are annexed to that holy history
of Ester, we cannot so highly account of: as for those three chapters, they are
none of Daniels, of which read, if you please, DVR. Hicrome to Ruffinus,
seems to approve those three chapters of Daniel. WHIT. page 92. Erasmus noted
that Hierome dealt craftily, having in his preface shevved he thought otherwise.
Hieromes preface upon Daniel. And there you shall find, that not the
Anabaptists only, but the ancient Jews have rejected and derided them. But,
Campian, why do you trifle thus? were you wont to build much upon the
authority of those books? did you in these lay the foundations of your faith?
why then do you seek to make us odious by these books, which if they were
never so Canonical, would further your cause never a whit the more?

Now you much commend Augustines modesty. Who, August. de doctrine. Christ.
lib. 2. cap. 8.
say you, has made a Catalogue of the books of holy Scripture, far better
then either the Jews, or Sectaries. I could wish you Jesuits had a little more
modesty, that ye might be more like Augustine; for all men speak and cry out
of your male pertnes and insolency. But Augustine counted those books
Canouicall, which we do not; true, I deny it not, but what of that? is not
Augustine opposite to Hierome? for Hierome expressly denies those books to be
nu^bred in the Canon. And Augustine setting down the whole Canon of the
Scripture, does annex these to it. It seems there is a great difference in
their judgments: for those which Hierome denies, Augustine affirms to be
Canonical: both famous men and such as have deserved well of the Church of
God; how then may we satisfy Augustine, whom Campian obiecteth unto us? No
otherwise then as the truth is. The terms of Apochrypha and Canonical Hierome
uses in one sense, and Augustine in another: Hierome accounted all these
books Apochrypha, which were not written in Hebrew: Augustine though in deed
and in truth he differed not, yet he gave this name especially to those books,
which were not fraught with fables and lies, such as those times afforded very
many. For so he writes lib. 15. cap. 23. de ciuit. Dei. Though there be some
truth found in the Apochrypha books, yet they have no Canonical authority,
there being so many lies in them. Therefore he names in the Canon the book of
Judith and Toby and Ecclesiasticus, and other of that sort, because there was
more truth and sincerity in them, then in those common and diuulged fables.
Therefore Augustine uses the term of Canonical Scripture more largely then
Hierome, and of Apochrypha more strictly: unless happily we will suppose that
of set purpose Augustine would differ from Hierome in a thing of that moment.
Besides the Romish Cardinal, Caietan. in fine comenta. in histor. veter.
Testameuti.
of whom we spoke before, writes that certain Councels with Augustine
accounted these books Canonical because they were rules for manners, not for
faith and doctrine. And what reason Augustine had to plead for the book of
Wisdom, De predest. Sanct. c. 24.
least it should be turned out of the Canon, let him look to it himself; this
very book Hierom, (whom you Jesuits usually prefer before Augustine) has by
name excluded, and from the selfsame place where Augustine confirms the
authority of this book, every man may gather, that it was not commonly
received in the Canon; for when Augustine cited a testimony out of that book.
He was taken away, Wisd. 4.11.
least wickedness should alter his understanding, many of the brethren who were
present cried out; It was not alleged out of a Canonical book. DVR. But you
revive not Augustines answer, and how he objected against them, the consent
of all Bishops, faithf^ll Laity. etc. WHIT. page 97. Augustine does not accuse
them of impudency or sacrilege for denying it, nor reprou^s them much, only he
says it is better then other treatises; which I acknovvledge. And the
consents of the former he alleged to prove that a sentence of this book, is
not lightly to be rejected, seeing many Churches did read it, though all did
not receive it, as himself says de ciuit. Dei lib. 27. cap. 20.
Now it is like, they never would have rejected the argument and testimony of
this speech, if the authority of that book had been Canonical in the Church.
And yet I deny not but that Antiquity might think more reverently of this
book, then of other of the books of Apochryphaes. For I observe in Eusebius,
that DVR. Melito affirms this book to be Canonical. WHIT. page 98. Be it
so, yet he reiectes all your other and what have you got by it? But by the name
of Wisdom some think, he means the Proverbs of Solomon.
Melita, the Bishop of Sardis, in a certain Epistle written to Onesimus,
wherein he sets down exactly the number of the sacred books of the old
Testament, and accounts this book as one of the Canon: yet he mentions not
one of the others which we call Apochrypha, neither Toby, nor Judith, nor the
Macchabees, nor Ecclesiasticus, nor yet any of the rest, for which you strive
so much; yet he affirms that he took great pains to know exactly those
ancient books, and professes that he fully attained his end. Eusebius lib.
4. cap. 26.
After, says he, I had learned exactly what books belong to the old
Testament, I sent them here under written unto you. And this it may be induced
Augustine to attribute the more to this book, and yet it cannot be proved
hence, as you would have it, that this book was Authentical and Canonical by
the account of the Church, for Augustine himself witnesses that it was not
allowed as Canonical by the judgment of the Church; neither indeed if the
Church would have given it all the allowance she could, could she have made it
Authentical, except it had before it own Authenticalnes in it self from
above.

But you who glory so greatly in Antiquity, in the voice of the Church, in
Councels, what will you answer to the Laodicene Council, Council. Laodic.
Canon. 59.
which forbids the reading of those books, which are without the Canon, and
commands the reading of those only which are of the Canon of the old and new
Testament: DVR. It has been answered a thousand times, that as yet in this age
all the books were not received into the Canon. WHIT. page 102. Then by your
confession, for 300. years after Christ these books were not in the Canon; it
skilleth not much what the latter Churches have affirmed, when the purest and
most ancient Churches affirm the same wedo. DVR. The Councels of Carthage,
Florence, and Trent, have allowed them for Canonical. WHIT. page 102. We
acknowledge not the two last to be lawful Councels, the first allowed it for
manners, not doctrine and faith, and if the authority of it be so great with
you, then you may not call your Pope universal Bishop? for that Council
denied it to him. Carthag. 3. cap. 26. distinct. 99. prima sedis.
But which are they? are all those which the Tridentine Council has put in
the Catalogue? nothing less, but those only which our Church does hold
Canonical. If Campian, you will stand to the judgment of this Council,
neither the book of Wisdom, nor any one of the other shall have place among
the Canonical Scriptures. Now then whatsoever Augustine should say, if he were
alive, does not much trouble us: for whatsoever he should say in this kind, he
could speak nothing against us, but it would touch the Fathers of the
Laodicene Council, whose decree in this point, touching the Canonical
Scriptures, either he had seen, or at least might take notice of it.

Now for the things which follow you show much color but little reason. You
call this a horrible and detestable shift. Then do you, Campian, if you can,
drive us out of this hold. Me thinks it is so safe and well fortified, that
it will easily bear off and repel all your assaults. Though, say you, their
arms be blased never so far abroad by their own disciples, though they buy
and sell benefices, though in their sermons they cry out against Catholics,
though they procure them the sword, rack and gallows, yet are they overcome,
naught set by, horrible in men's sight, and quite overthrown. But yet young
Friar, ^ow thus much, by Gods blessing we hitherto stand upright on our seete,
neither ever were we soyled at your hands, but have long ago by the help of
God scattered, overthrown, and put to flight many of your armies. And the
whole huge form of your pontifical and glorious synagogue has long since
tottered, and in short time will fall to the ground, as Dagon before the Arc;
unless you Jesuits manfully uphold and sustain it: for it is impossible for
us to be vanquished of you, in the defense of this cause. Therefore with good
courage and cheerefulnes we pursue this flight, nothing doubting but that the
Lord in the end will repress you, and all the enemies of his name and glory,
and make you his footstool. And for that you write, touching buying and
selling of benefices, if any be yet amongst us, it is but the relics of your
wicked practices heretofore among us. For you know the custom of the Romish
Court, you know their filthiness, their avarice, their Simony, yea you know how
the whole world cries out, and that continually of your most gainful
Marchandizes. Have you now leisure since you left Rome, to pry into our
carriage, are all things so well at home, that you can without shame find faults
abroad? Suppose you were now become honest and holy; yet you shall never be
able to clear your Church of those filthy blemishes, wherewith it has bin
desiled in former times. And if there be any yet amongst us that use so foul a
trade, they are well worthy to hear such reproaches from you, as such
practices do deserve. But I marvel the less that you object to us buying and
selling of Benefices, when you complain of our cruelty. Now, good God, are we
so cruel and you so mild? what shall I say to it or what answer may I make?
sure it is, there is nothing more inhumane, then cruelty, or more opposite to a
Christians virtue: for the disciples of Christ ought to be gentle, clement, and
meek, master-like: what then? are we more cruel then you? I will never deny
this trial, that their cause should be judged the worst, whose cruelty
appears to be the greatest: I call to witness all the people of the Christian
world, who have yet any sense of humanity and equity remaining in them. Let
Italy speak, also Germany, Spain, France, and our England. It were tedious
to recite the horrible murders, the fearful burnings, and exquisite
punishments you exercised amongst us. Your cruelty is known, and is yet fresh
in memory, neither shall ever be buried in oblivion: what like to these did we
ever practice, or wherein is our cruelty so great? was it because we suffered
not our throats to be cut by you, nor received your weapons into our bodies,
nor laid our necks upon the block, nor willingly gave up our lives, that we
might give you leave to live as you list. This is it indeed you wished for, for
this you labor, and go about: we poor wretches are accounted cruel, because
we live, and live to withstand your proceedings. But I doubt not but all
indifferent men do sufficiently discern, DVR Campian himself had experience
of your cruelty. WHIT. page 105. If Campian was by public proceeding condemned
for treason, and put to death: who will accuse our cruelty, and not the
greatness of his offense, yea and that he suffered not for religion, appears
thus; others who were condemned with him at the same time, and for the same
offense, when they renounced the Popes authority of deposing of Kings, and
freeing of subjects from obedience, were not put to death, as he was.
how injuriously you lay this crimination upon us, for these things which you
name as the sword, the rack, the gallows, and fire, are the instruments of
your cruelty, and had it not been for these, your Church had been overthrown
long ago: for by these weapons it was first founded, after increased, and is
now maintained? if once these fail you, questionless it cannot long continue.

But you now begin to press your adversaries somewhat more forceably; and you
demand of them, for example sake, by what authority they maime; and rob the
corpse of the Bible, I answer we offer no violence to this body, neither do we
cut off any which do appertain to the substance, and perfection of it; we dash
out no part of it, we pull away no member. For (to use your own words) we do
not cut out any true Canonical Scriptures, but cull out such as are not
Canonical, but foisted in and counterfeit. But you would know who shall be
judge; you make Calvin to answer for us: the holy Ghost: and you suggesting
that he gives this answer, to escape the judgment of the Church; if you
enquire how we know these writings, which we call Scriptures, to be heavenly,
and given by the inspiration of God, that is, by what testimony we are
persuaded that those writings are holy Scripture, which are so called: I would
ask you with as much reason another question, how know you the son is the
son, or how ye come not to doubt, that God is God: for we verily have as much
certeinty that th^se books are the sacred Scripture, commended of the Lord to
the Church, written by the Prophets and Apostles, proceeding from divine
authority, as that the Moon is the Moon, yea as we are sure of any thing
else, which by undoubted knowledge we are full assured of; this answer Calvin
also has given you, Iustit. lib. 1. cap. 7. sect. 4. cap. 8. toto.
writing that many things might be produced, which would easily prove, that if
there be a God in heaven, the Law, the Prophets, and the Gospel came from him:
yea and with many words at large he urges it with most strong arguments, such
as may satisfy any reasonable man touching the authority, and credit of the
Scriptures. There are in the books themselves proofs enough, both certain;
and perspicuous, which will prove and demonstrate the credit of the Scriptures,
that no man need boubt of them. But because the sense and reason of man is
often times weak, and easily distracted into diverse and doubtful cogitations,
the inward and hidden testimony of the spirit must be had, that men may firmly
rest in the Scriptures. For though outward testimonies will so convince us,
that for shame we cannot deny the Scriptures to be the word of God; yet then
only do we attain a certain and saving full assurance, when the same spirit,
which writ and published them, does persuade our hearts of the credit of them.
And this is that spirit, which the Lord has promised to his Church, and which
dwells in the hearts of the faithful, and is as a seal unto them, he that
has not this spirit, shall ever in himself be uncertain and doubtful,
though he hear the Church a thousand times. What is the fault then you find,
Campian? Calvin, say you, does make the spirit Judge thereby to escape the
judgment of the Church, by whose authority all spirits are tried. The
judgment of the Church ought not to differ from the judgment of the spirit:
the same spirit governs the whole DVR. What an absurd thing is this, that you
contemn the voice of the Church, and allow your common people to judge rather
of the Script^res, and give all to the spirit; when the Fathers have objected
the Church against heretics? WHIT. page 109. We contemn not the voice of the
first Church, wherein these were written, and from the^ commended to succeeding
Churches. But, page 108. we much regard not the voice of your Romish Church;
for as we know there is a God, though it tell us not so much: so that the
Scriptures are the word of God, though it be silent; and by the same grounds
that your Church knows the Scriptures to be the Scriptures, by the same
proofs may every private Christian know them. page 111. If you know not, that
the grace of the spirit is necessary to discern the Scriptures, then read
these places John 14, 26. 1. John 2, 26, 27. 1, Cor. 2, 14, 10. Esaias 51, 16.
Now the same spirit who w^it them, seals them up to us: without which some
knowledge may be had of them, b^t no faith; we may acknowledge them, but not
certainly believe them without the spirit. And if the Fathers have objected the
Church against heretics, in the like case we will do the same. For the
testimony of the spirit is not of validity to confute others, but to confirm
our selves.
Church and every particular believer. But your Church knows not this spirit;
no marvel then if it dislike the judgment of the spirit: yet I would have you
take this for an answer once for all: that the authority of the Scriptures
does not depend upon the judgment of the Church: for let the Church judge what
it will, yet can it never by all the authority it has make the Canonical
books to be no Canonical; and that those which are not Canonical, should be
had in reputation as Canonical. The Scripture has it own proper authority in
it self, not borrowed from another. And as little can the Church add authority
to the Scripture, as it can to God, the author of it. But say you, how comes
it to pass, that the Caluinists spirit allows six Epistles, which the
Lutheran spirit does disallow? you go in a ring, making only the repetition of
the same things without any proceeding. Those Epistles the Lutherans DVR. That
the Luthe^an^ do not like these Epi^iles, they of Magdeburg. Centur. 1. lib. 2.
cap. 4. tell us plainly. WHIT. page 117. What is that to us who think as
honorably of them as you do? but if they, by the example of ancient ^hurches
have spoken somewhat hardly of those Epistles, is there here any such
difference of ^pirits? All things are not reue^led to all a like: all have not
the like measure of the spirit. If any be otherwise minded, God will in his
time reue^le ^t to him.
do not reject, nor dash them out of the new Testament; yea they acknowledge
them, they make use of them in unfolding of controversies, they expound them
in their schools and churches, and they read them both privately and
publicly: upon many of them Luther has written DVR. By the same reason, if
Luther should comment upon certain of Aesops fables, and Illyricus upon al,
then by their spirit they are certainly received into the Canon. WHIT. page
117. And why may not Aesops fables be in the Canon, if your Church please;
seeing your VVolfangus and Hermannus affirm, the Scriptures are of no more
authority, then those fables without the authority of your Church? But I add
if you would have seen it, that they used them in preaching, in expounding
Scriptures, in deciding controversies, and did interpret them both privately
and publicly.
Commentaries, Illyricus upon all. That of the authority of those Epistles in
times past the Catholic Church made some doubt, they discover to their
Auditors, and show withal the causes of that doubt, and that done, leave it
undetermined. I pray you, Campian, what contradiction find you here, betwixt
the spirit of the Caluinists and the Lutherans? Yet still you cauil at this
judgment of the spirit, which of all other is most certain and heavenly: and
here you produce Anabaptists, Castalio, Brentius, Kemnitius, Luther, and Beza.
And by these you hope that you may diminish the authority of the spirit. Sixth.
Senens. lib. 7.
The Anabaptists, (say you) call the history of Job a fable, interlaced with
tragical and Comicall matters. As though we were ignorant, how wickedly and
blasphemously they conceive, not only of the history of Job, but also of the
whole books both of the new and old Testament; and that spirit of the
Anabaptists, what was it but a kind of frency, and a violent and headstrong
madness; which no spirit ever did more repress, then DVR. The Anabaptists will
as well accuse the spirit of Calnin of madness and solly. WHIT. page 119. Yet I
durst make you judge of this controu^^fie, and unless you were also as mad, you
would judge them very unlike.
the Caluinist and Lutheran spirit? Why then do you mention their madness,
thereby to scoff at the certain judgments of the holy Ghost? Prafat. in
Cantic.
Castalio, say you, made no more account of Salomons Song, then he did of a
bandy song and ribauldous talk of a Courtly waiting maid with her lover. I
will not take upon me to defend all that any man has written at random, much
less will I trouble my self to defend the credit of Castalio, whom I well
know has erred in many great points very shamefully. Yet in this place I find
you have notably abused Castalio: for in that short preface which he has set
before this book, he has none of those you speak of, neither a song, nor a
Love, nor courtly waiting maids, nor wanton talk, nor any such thing, but
has truly, learnedly, and modestly in few words comprised the sum of the
whole book: his first words are these: A conference betwixt the Savior and
his Church. Now you may see how highly Caestalio accounted of this song, and
how shameless your cavil is against him. I cannot now be much offended with
you, for casting so many false things upon Calvin and Luther, when you are not
ashamed so palpably to belly Castalio. And that you say next touching the
Revelation, is much like to the rest of your cauils. In it, say you, Luther,
and Brentius, Praefat in Apo^al. lib. 3. cap. 24. and cap. 39.
and Kemnisius, find, I know not what, lacking. What is the meaning of this,
They find somewhat lacking? do they reject it, do they disallow it? you cannot
say so: therefore you speak faintly and diffidently: They find somewhat
lacking. Howsoever, if you will read Eusebius, you shall understand that in it
many things were found lacking, and that it was not received of all, yea
plainly rejected of many. But what is this to us, when as you cannot deny we
have received this book, and do no less reverence the mysteries that are in
it, then your selves? and perhaps it had fitted your turn well, if this book
had either perished, or been of no credit at all: for it does so lively paint
out your Pope, and your purple whore in her colors, that it clearly
discovers to all men, who is Antichrist.

Have you yet any thing more against Luther? Praefat. in nouum Testamentum.
Luther, say you, casts a boue among the four Evangelists and preferring S.
Paul's Epistles far before the three former Gospels, in the end concludes,
that the only Gospel of S. John from henceforth is to be taken for the gay,
the true, and the principal Gospel; Luther indeed prefers the Gospel of
John before the other three, because he sets down the Acts of Christ more
briefly, and his Sermons more fully. Now a Gospel consists rather in
heavenly doctrine, then in the history of things done. Yet he denies not but
that the other Gospels are well set out, true, and very excellent; and far is
he from esteeming this the only gay and true Gospel. Now this very point you
speak of here, I find also in the preface of the first Epistle of S. Peter.
And I would entreat the Christian reader to take thorough notice of this
thing, so shall he easily perceive both Luthers integrity, and Campians
cauilling. First Luther teaches what a Gospel is: and writes that a Gospel
signifies nothing else, But the preaching and publishing of the grace, and
mercy of God by the Lord Christ, merited and purchased to us by his death. He
that either preaches or writes this grace and mercy of God in Christ, he, as
Luther affirms, teaches the Gospel. And therefore not the four Evangelists
only have taught the Gospel; but also all the Apostles have done so too, and
especially Saint Paul and Saint Peter in their Epistles. And moreover he
affirms, that of all those they are the best DVR. What Scripture teaches
us, that be is an Evangelist, which teaches iustificatio by faith only? Jf
any, then Luther was the best Evangelist. WHIT. page 125. I can reckon you up
many, but these may suffice, Esaias 52* 7. Romans 10.15. Now peace ^iseth of our
reconciliation with God and remission of sins, which things faith only lays
hold on. Romans 5.1. 2, Cor. 5, 19. Romans 4, 4. And this matter S. Paul
principally, in his Epistles to the Romans and Galathians, has fully and
plainly handled, and not Luther so much. DVR. But the Angel tau^ht no such
thing Luke 2.10. WHIT. page 126. If you had looked to the next verse, you should
have found that the Angel did te^ch as much in effect.
Evangelists, who have therein specially labored, to teach justification by
faith in Christ alone: for this is the sum of the Gospel. And hereupon he
concludes that the Epistles of Paul may more fitly be called the Gospel, then
those things Matthew, Mark, and Luke have written: for that he does more fully
and plentifully decipher to us the grace of God in Christ, then those three,
whose history is for the most part spent in the declaration of the Acts and
Miracles of Christ. And this is the true cause wherefore he preferred the
Gospel of S. John and the Epistles of S. Paul before the three other Gospels;
whereby he neither casts a bone among the Evangelists, nor goes about to
make the Apostles partakers of his brawlings; neither has said any thing
either frowardly or preposterously: for why, I pray you, may we not say, that
S. Paul has more clearly and excellently described the power of the Cross of
Christ in his Epistles, then any of the Evangelists in their history; when as
by it the authority of the history of the Gospel is nothing disparaged? And
now I doubt not but I have sufficiently defended Luthers innocence against your
railing and outrageous saucines.

But yet again you assault Luther: whom you say doubted not to tax S. Lukes
Gospel, Sermon. de Pharis. and Publi.
as if it were written in a wanton style, because therein good works are often
recommended unto us. Was there ever read or heard of the like impudency,
audaciousnes, and treacherous dealing in any man? The place you note in the
margent I have very diligently and heedfully observed, that I might discern;
wherein Luther has showed such male pertnes: but I have not found one unholy,
nor dishonorable term, unfit to be given to S. Luke, as being an heavenly
Evangelist. For that which Luther propounds to himself is to take out of men's
minds a scruple, which S. Lukes often mention of works might move in them;
lest any happily might think that S. Luke by often speaking of works, should
detract somewhat from faith, or place our justification in our works. And this
is, as you affirm, saucilie to give S. Luke a wipe; if you can tell me of any
greater matter, I will no ways defend or excuse Luthers malepertnes. But what
malepertnes is this of yours, Campian, whom neither the fear of God, nor the
reverence of men, can restrain from writing or diuulging of those things,
which your own conscience tells you are most false? and you cannot pass by
Beza neither without the like Calumnious censure. Who, say you, was so bold as
to reprehend that mystical word, Hic est calix, n^u^m Testame^tum in s^^guine
meo, qui (calix) pro vobis fundetur, This is the cup of the new Testament in my
blood, which (cup) shall be shed for you; a^ corrupted and depraved. I see
well where your error is in following that corrupt and adulterous vulgar
translation, for (...), you thus translate. DVR. I confess there is a Metonymy
in the cup: the cup being put for the blood. WHIT. page 130. Then, this cup, is
as much, as this blood: Then see what a sentence you have made: This blood is
the new Testament in my blood, which is shed for you. As if Christ had said:
This blood is the new Testament in my blood. And so here are two bloods, and
the one in the other.
Hic est calix nouum Testamentum. This is the cup of the new Testament: when
the words are rather thus to be placed. Hic calix est nouum Testamentum, This
cup is the new Testament: and (...) being a participle of the present tence,
you translate by a verb of the future tence: Qui fundetur, shall be shed for
you: for, Qui funditur, is shed for you. But you dare not go a hairs
breadth from the vulgar translation, for fear of incurring that curse of the
Council of Trent. But here Theodor Beza apparently is caught in a heinous
crime: for he writes that Luke has committed a Solecisme: what then I pray
you? a very foul fact and very intolerable. Is it so indeed? how shall we then
defend Hierome, who writes that Paul committed such solecismes in his words,
that by no good ordering any good sense could be made of them? In cap. 3.
Epist. ad Ephesians.
If S. Paul might commit Solecismes in his words, why may we not think S. Luke
may do as much? and if Hierome without sin might accuse S. Paul, not to
speak properly or scholer-like; why might not Beza note some want of propriety
of speech in S. Luke? for you are wide, Campian, if you think this any thing
diminishes the authority and dignity of the Scriptures, for Hier^me
construeth it quite contrary. Let us look therefore upon the place of the
Evangelist, that we may judge where this fault is.

The words run thus. This cup is the new Testament in my blood which is
shed for you. If you change nothing in the words and exclude all
incongruitie, then these last words, Which is shed for you, must be referred to
the first, This cup. And so this should be the meaning, This cup is shed for
you: But not the cup, but the blood of Christ was shed for us. But you will say
the cup is put for the wine in the cup. So that whether you will or no, you
must acknowledge that in these words there is a trope or figure: though you
Papists usually deny the same, and vehemently cry out, none of them is to be
taken figuratively. But you your selves in these words make two figures; first
you take the cup for the wine in it, then the wine for the blood of Christ,
which in no hand you can do without a figure: therefore hereafter stand not
upon words; for if you will now stand to the words, you must either grant that
the cup was shed for us, or you must admit a solecisme and improper speech. If
we will read them as Basil does; Basil. in Eth. (...).
Which blood is shed for you: the meaning will be plain, when these words which
is shed for you, are referred to the blood of Christ. These are Campians
collectio^s of such things, wherein our men have offended against the
authority and dignity of the Scripture. These he cries out do evidently open
our diffidence and desperation, these are those things he propounds unto you,
that are most learned of the University. Whose judgment I am therefore also
well contented to stand unto, because I well know your learning and wisdom,
together with your studious endeavors in the best authors, to be such, that
this silly foolish sophister with all his slanders and lies shall never be
able to remove or corrupt you: for what matter has he brought, or what
invention, which may seem to savor either of deep learning, much reading, or
witty conceit? Therefore you shall do well to set light by the threats of this
Philistine, and to cleave with constancy to that holy religion which you have
learned out of the holy Scriptures: as also proceed in that course of virtue
and learning you have begun, that the Jesuits with all their inchauntments may
lose all their labor in seeking to seduce you.

Hitherto Campian has busied himself in discoursing unto us, what he could,
concerning the holy books, being desirous also to deliver unto us, such things
as we have depraved in our false translations: save that, as he says, he
reserues this labor for his old College fellow Gregory Martin, and some
others, whom he well knows will perform it far more learnedly and
copiously then himself. Therefore if you think good, we will expect this
Martin of whom you speak, and whom I shall easily conceive to be a man of more
learning then your self, unless he be a very doult indeed. And I doubt not
but we shall be able to maintain our translations, both Latin and English,
against your Martin and all your Colleagnes. And as for those petty Doctors
whom you lastly reproach, I neither know them, nor the nature of their offense.
But when once your friend Martin shall come abroad, who now perhaps is
hammering some special piece of work, we shall learn from him many new and
excellent points. This your first reason seemed very just in your conceit to
maintain your glorious challenge of disputation, with some of the learned of
our Universities. But Campian, you had dealt a great deal wiser for your self,
if either you had never conceived these reasons, or streightway upon the birth
smothered them. For before by your great challenge you begat a marvelous and
wonderful conceit of your self in every man's mind: and now when they shall
read^ those slender reasons of yours, they will easily perceive, there is no
cause why you should take so much upon you, and they will tontemptuously deride
you, as you well deserve, and hiss you out of their schools. Therefore the
counsel which Archidamu^ gave to his Son headily venturing to right with the
Athenians, the same do our University men give to to you: Either add to thy
might, or abate of thy mind: for no man, Campian, ever took more upon him, and
performed less than you have done. But let us see what other things you bring
us.

EDMUND CAMPIAN. The second Reason, which is the right sense of the Scriptures.
ANother matter that provoked me to undertake this enterprise; and that
enforced me little to fear these my adversaries slender armies, is the usual
inclination of my enemy in expounding the Scriptures, full of deceit, and
void of wisdom. These things you Philosophers would quickly find out; and
therefore I was desirous of your audience. Let us demand (for example sake) of
our adversaries, what caused them to devise this new opinion, whereby Christ is
This is false, for we do not exclude Christ from the Supper.
excluded out of the mystical supper? If they name the Gospel, we join with
them, the very words they are for us. Matthew. 26 Mark. 14. Luke 22.
This is my body, this is my blood: which words seemed to Luther in epist. ad
Argen.
Luther so forcible, that when he earnestly desired to be of Zuinglius mind,
because by that means he might have wrought the Pope most displeasure; yet
notwithstanding he yielded, being overcome and vanquished by the most plain
text of Scripture, and as unwillingly confessed that Christ is truly present in
the most holy Sacrament, as the Matthew. ^. Mark 1.
devils in time past being overcome with miracles, with outcries confessed that
Christ is the son of God. Go to then, the written word does favor us: the
controversy is about the true meaning of the written word. Let us try out
this by the words thereunto adjoining: Luke 22. Mattb. 22.
Corpus meum quod pro vobis datur, sanguis meus, qui pro multis e^lundetur:
that is, My body which is given for you, my blood which shall be shed for many.
Yet the matter goes hard on Caluins side* and makes very manifestly and
plainly for us. What say they else? Confer say they, the Scriptures
together. Agreed. The John. 6. Matthew. 16. Marc. 14. Luc. 22.
Gospels make for us, 1. Cor. 10. and 11.
S. Paul accords also. The words, the sentences, the whole connection of
Scriptures do often most reverently repeat the bread and the wine, a not able
miracle, heavenly food, his flesh, his body, his blood. Here is nothing
figurative, nothing obscured by doubtful speeches: yet notwithstanding the
adversaries stand stiffely in their opinion, and never cease wrangling. What
shall we then do? I hope antiquity may be heard, and that the reverend hoare
head of Fathers of all former ages, to Christ's time more nigh, and farther off
from the time of these controversies, may be their judgment, determine this
debate, which we cannot end amongst our selves, being suspected one of another.
This is false, for in this controversy we willingly admit Antiquity as
witness.
They cannot away with that; they say then they are betrayed. They cry out for
the sincere and pure word of God: they utterly reject all men's commentaries:
trecherouslie and witlesselie done. We will urge them with the word of God;
they darken it: we call the Saints in heaven for witnesses; they refuse them.
In few words this is their drift, that unless thou will stand to their own
judgment that are guilty, there is no judgment to be had. And so they behave
themselves in every controversy between us. As concerning grace powered into
us from heaven, inherent justice, the visible Church, the necessity of
Baptism, Sacraments, and sacrifices, meritorious works of good folk; hope and
fear, inequality of offenses, the authority of S. Peter, the keys, vows,
Evangelical counsels, and other like controversies, we Catholics in sundry
of our books, in our mutual conference, in churches, in schools have brought
forth many and weighty places of Scripture, and have both tried and applied
the same. They have scorned at this. We have alleged the interpretations of
the ancient Greek and Latin Churches; they have refused them. What say they
then? marry that M. Doctor Martin Luther, or else M. Philip Melanthon, or
certainly M. Zuinglius, or without doubt M. Calvin, and M. Beza have
faithfully entreated upon these matters. Can I imagine any of you to be so
stuffed in the nose, that being forewarned, cannot quickly smell out this
subtle iugling? wherefore I confess plainly that I am desirous to have
audience in the University schools, that after I have called these
Ruffian-like knights out of their dark dens into the open and plain field, I
may before your eyes discomfite them, not by my own strength, which am not to
be compared with the worst of an hundred of our side, but by the puissance of
the cause, and certainty of the truth which we maintain.

WILLIAM WHITAKERS. The answer to the second Reason.
WHat could be said touching the Scriptures we have heard, we must proceed to
hear what can be said for the interpretation and exposition of them; for our
usual inclination in expounding the Scriptures, (says Campian) has
encouraged and incited him earnestly to desire this encounter. And we also (
Campian) have long ago desired to buckle with you herein. And at length the
Lord has brought you out of your lurking holes into the broad light, that we
might try it out with you; but what is our disposition you speak of? It is
full of deceit, say you, and void of wisdom. Thus you being a man of small
reach, and less discretion, do conceit our inclination. Assuredly the matter
you have now in hand is a cause of great weight: for the force, the substance,
and as it were the soul of the Scripture consists in the meaning: very well
said Hierome: The Scriptures are not in the letter, but in the understanding:
Contra Lucifer. in 1. cap. ad Gila.
and in another place: DVR. Then Luther and Calvin obtruded a new Gospel upon
the Church; when they brought in a new sense of the words, such as the whole
Christian ^orld knew not; yea it had a far other sense of the Scriptures. WHIT.
page 138. If this last be granted you, yet it follows not that they brought
in a new Gospel, because they differed from that sense: for the sense is not
to be sought for among the multitude; but we must look to the Scriptures and
to God speaking in them: as the men of Berea did not take the sense of the
most, but searched the Scriptures whether Paul taught things agreeing unto it.
The Gospel is not in the words of the Scripture, but in the sense. They then
have the best end of the staff, and are the best patrons of Religion and
truth, who find out and keep the true and natural meaning of the Scripture.
For the letter or word is plain; all controversies depend upon the meaning of
the Word. The state of the question is then thus, whether of us twain have
attained the true and natural meaning of the Scripture: whether you Jesuits,
falsely called Catholics; or we, who oppose your opinion and judgment. First
therefore in general, and in few words we will see what is your opinion and
judgment: then we will answer to your cauils. Now it is most clear that you
make both the Scripture it self, and the interpretation of it to depend upon
the authority of the DVR. Js it some heinous offense to require the judgment
of the Church in interpreting the Scriptures? WHIT. page 142. We contemn not
the judgment of the Church, but highly esteem it as profitable to the well
interpreting of the Scriptures. But we contemn the judgment of your Church,
which has not any thing which a true Church should have. DVR Whither then
should we go to find the sense? WHIT. Even whether Christ bids us, go
search the Scriptures, John 5.39. And this use they have, says S. Paul. 2.
Tim. 3.15.16.
Church. And the Church you call not the whole multitude of Christians and
faithful men, but you restrain both the name and nature of the Church unto
your DVR. You reprove us, that we give the interpretation of the Scriptures
to Bishops: they verily ought to deliver the true sense they have received from
their predecessors to the people. WHIT. page 144. S. Paul allows all
Ministers of the Gospel this power to interpret the Scriptures, 1. Cor.
14.29.30. who ought as well to deliver the true sense, as Bishops. Besides, you
must know that the knowledge of t^^ Scriptures and the gifts of the spirit are
not hereditarie, or to be delivered from hand to hand.
Bishops. But your Bishops may differ touching the sense of the Scriptures, so
shall we be uncertain and shall not resolve which of them to believe. But you
can help this, general DVR. Great and many controversies have been decided by
Councels. WHIT. page 145. It follows not hereupon, that the interpreting of
the Scriptures is to be sought for of the^; or if good Councels by the true
interpretation of the Scriptures have taken away some errors and heresies; that
therefor all interpretation is theirs, or that we must look for the same from
imp^ous and unlearned Councels.
Councels must decide and determine all questions and controversies. Shall we
then rest in them? no more then in the other: for the DVR. And why not? seeing
no Council is of any authority, which was not confirmed by the Pope? WHIT.
page 146. This is false: for the sixth African Council, and the Calcedon
Council have their authority without him. And Emperors, Patria^kes, and
Bishops have confinued Councels. And the Council of Constantinople by letters
desired the confirmation of the decrees from Theodosius the Emperor. DVR.. God
set over the Jews one High Priest. Deuteronomy. 17.11. Then would Christ never
neglect his Spouse, but leave her a chief judge upon the earth. WHIT. page
151. Yet that judge was to determine according to the Law; Deuteronomy. 17.11. But the
Pope makes interpretations, not out of the word written, but out of his own
brain. Again it follows not, if over one little nation God set one chief
judge, Christ must set but one over the whole world. Besides the Jewish judge
was a type of Christ. Lastly, it follows not that Christ has left his Church
no judge; i^ he have not le^t it one only; for every Church ha^h her Pastor to
teach her, and to d^^ermine questions in her.
Pope must be judge over the Councels. So in the conclusion, the whole
interpretation of holy Scriptures is transferred to the Pope, and must be
fetched out of his breast: yea and as a proper right he so challenges the power
of interpreting of the Scripture, that whatsoever he thinks, that must be
accounted the sense and meaning of them. This is your constant and perpetual
property and disposition in interpreting the Scriptures, full of dotage,
error, and falsehood, void of advise, knowledge and wisdom. For what an absurd
and horrible thing is it, that the sense and meaning of the holy Scripture
should depend upon one man's judgment and voice? specially being such a one, as
commonly the Bishops of Rome have been, unlearned, wicked, heretical. And
hence have proceeded all those goodly interpretations, Take, Eat, that is, you
Priests say private Masses: Did. 31. Tenere.
Drink ye all of this, that is, only the Priests must drink. Be ye holy,
for I am holy, DVR. Which o^ the Popes or what Catholic ^riter ever collected
this out of that place? WHIT. page 159. Pope Syricius did first of all so
collect: and after him Pope Innocent, as you may read in Gra^^an Did. 31.
cap. Ten^re; Did. 82. cap. prop^suisti: cap. plurimos.
therefore it is unlawful for the Minister of the Word to marry a wife. Give ye
not holy things to dogs, therefore the people must be forbidden to read the
Scriptures. What should I number up innumerable more of your interpretations, by
which you do nothing but pervert and wrest the Scriptures? Is this indeed,
Campian, the right interpreting of Scripture? or must all Christians receive
this exposition as the oracle of God?

But what should I speak of the constant tenor you keep in the
interpretation of Scripture? for you make the sense of Scriptures so
changeable, so diverse, and inconstant, like to a nose of wax and a leaden
rule, Pighius.
that at all assaies it may ever serve your turn. So writes DVR. Cusanus has
written very rightly, for there are diverse senses of the Scriptures. WHIT. page
162. What rule then can be more uncertain then the Scriptures? or what can be
spoken more vilely of the Scripture? how then is the Scripture one rule? Phil.
3.16. how is i^ firm enduring for ever? 1. Pet. 1.25. how no deceitful
balance. Augus^. d^* Baptis. cont. Don. lib. 2. cap. 6.
Nicholas Cusanus, a Cardinal of Rome, Nicol. Cusan. Epist. 2. Epist. 7.
to the Bohemians. This understand that the Scriptures are fitted to the time,
and diuersely to be understood; so that at one time they may be expounded
according to the common and customable course: but change that, and the sense
is changed; so that it is no marvel if the custom of the Church at one time
interpret the Scriptures after this manner, and another time after that. Was
there ever the like bouldnes heard of; that men would wrest the eternal and
immutable word of God, which ever has but one and the same sense, to serve the
will of the Church, that is, of the Pope of Rome? Thom. 1.^. 1. art. 10.
besides this you have made so many DV^. The Fathers and Antiquity have ever
made these four senses of the Scriptures. WHIT. page 163. To feign such four
senses in every sentence differs not much from a learned kind of madness.
Allegories I confess many are in the Scriptures, but such as the holy Ghost
himself has made; but to make other Allegories, when the words may be
understood without a Trope, or when the Grammatical sense is not absurd and
repugnant to sound doctrine, I think is too great boldness and temerity. A
Tropologicall sense is not a new sense differing from the Grammatical, but one
^s it were with it. Finally, if the Fathers as men have erred, must we needs
follow their errors? The Fathers rejected the errors and false interpretations
of their predecessors, why may not we deal so with them?
senses of every place, to wit, an allegorical, a tropological, an anagogicall
sense, that by your Ledgerdemaine, you have abolished the true and native
sense. Now, Campian, since you know that this is the manner of your Church in
the interpreting of the Scripture, than which what can be more corrupt, how
dare you presume to reprehend our manner of interpretation? But we follow no
other course then that which the Fathers have prescribed, and which the thing
it self argues to be most fit. For that is our course which Augustine advised:
we interpret obscure places by those which are plainer, we observe the phrase
and style of the Scripture, we weigh circumstances, we compare scripture with
scripture, we go not one jot from the Analogy of faith. They who take this
course, adjoining their hearty prayers, that the Lord would open this sealed
book unto them; and teach them the true sense of the scripture, shall never
need to run to Rome, and enquire of that sacred Oracle of the Pope, who
himself neither understands the true sense of scripture, neither is able to
expound them to others.

But to return now to Campian: what is the usual fault he finds in our
dealing with the scripture? and what be the arguments by which he does confute
us? Let us demand, says he, (for example sake) of our Adversaries what caused
them to devise this new opinion, whereby Christ is excluded out of the
mystical Supper. We, Campian, do not DVR. If you place Christ's body and your
supper so far asunder, how do you not exclude h m from i^? WHIT. page 168. It
is true, if things that are severed could no way be joined but by a corporal
ouching; but without it, it may fitly be, as all believers are joined together,
though they be far distant and distracted one from another; as Jews,
Grecians, and all other godly, make but one body with Christ: what is that bond
of this union, but the power of the spirit? Such an union is this in the
Sacrament, and it has the some bond.
exclude Christ out of the Supper, neither do we otherwise think of the
Sacrament then both Christ has taught us, and the old Church has prescribed.
We certainly affirm, that the faithful in the supper receive whole Christ,
God and Man: we believe and teach that they eat his body and drink his blood.
Neither doubt we to affirm, but that he, that comes to the supper, and does
not in the supper partake of Christ, that he is in danger of condemnation. Do
we now exclude Christ from the supper? But whosoever includes Christ in the
supper as you do, he faineth and forgeth a new Christ to himself, he
confounds heaven and eart^ together, he offers violence to nature, and mu^^
needs admit innumerable absurdities. Wherefore we following the scripture, as
our schole-masters, not taking up any new opinion, place the natural and
humane body of Christ in heaven; for so the Apostle Peter speaks, whom the
heavens must contain, until the time that all things be restered; Act. 3.21.
yet the DVR. The^ is Christ as present in Baptism, and in the word, and
wheresoever your faith seeks for him, as in the supper; yea as present to the
Father^ in the old Testament as now to us. WHIT. page 169. So quest^onlesse he
is, unless all men be without hope of life and salvation, who are deprived of
the Supper. For John 6.53. yea all Christians communicate of Christ alike, as
well such as come to the supper, as they who cannot partake in it: And that he
was present to the Fathers it is proved. 1. Cor. 10.3.4.
virtue, the communion, the benefit of this body we exclude not from the
supper: but stiffly maintain, that in the supper whole Christ is present to
each man's faith. This is the sum of our opinion, which I no less doubt to be
the true sense of the scripture, then that Christ is Christ, or that to be
scripture which is scripture. This opinion out of all others which we hold,
have you made choice of, as an example to impugn and gainsay: Let us see now
how scholler-like you acquit your self. If they name the Gospel, say you, we
join with them. The very words make for us. This is my body, this is my blood:
I acknowledge the words do, but I enquire now for the sense of them: whether
they should be so expounded as your Church teaches: that the bread is
Transubstantiated into the body, and the wine into the blood of Christ: or by
a Trope and in a mystical sense, that the bread is the Sacrament, the sign
and symboll of the body, and so the wine of the blood of Christ, as we
interpret them. Whether opinion has more truth in it, we will now discuss. As
for that which you tell us of Luther, I suppose you will not expect any answer
from me: and undoubtedly in this thing Luther was far more opposite to your
opinion, then ours. For he ever condemned your Transubstantiation, as it is,
for an accursed invention and fiction of Satan. Luther we acknowledge was a
man, who though he saw the truth in many things, yet he might err in some
things: his good things we embrace, but we are bound by no law to defend his
errors.

But how shall we find out the meaning of this saying? Let us try out this, say
you, by the words thereto adjoining. Nothing can be spoken more truly, nothing
more fitly, nor more ingenuously. And verily I could wish you would always
do, as you pretend in this place to do, sist out the meaning of the scripture
by the circumstances of the words. But what are the words adjoining? My body
which is given for you, my blood which is shed for you. Campian, you are too
sparing and scant in the point: repeat, and say, that which goes before. As
they did eat, Christ took bread, he blessed it, he brake it, and gave it to
his disciples, and said, Take, eat, this is my body, and he took the cup, and
gave thanks, and gau^ it to them saying, Drink ye all of this, for this is
my blood etc. So now, Campian, I will deal with you from the words which are
now adjoining. What was it Christ took? you will say bread: what brake he?
bread: what gave he to his disciples? bread: wh^^ did he bid them take and
eat? bread: what said he was his body? was it any other thing, ^hen the very
same bread which he took into his hands, brake and DVR. He took bread, but he
gave not bread to his disciples, but his body. WHIT. page 183. Then one body
of Christ is made two, one sitting among them, another delivered unto them; yea
as many bodies as there were Communicants. And the disciples did receive, chaw,
and eat him, whom they saw s^ting with them: but when was the change made? for
before he had spoken these operative words, This is my body, he brake it and
gave it ^o his disciples: either these words make not the change, or he ga^e to
his disciples, bread unchanged. DVR. ^f there was no change, then the blessing
wa^ without profit. WHIT. page 185. As if all blessings were without profit if
they change not the nature of things: God blessed our first parents, Genesis 1.28.
Noah and his Sons, Genesis 9.1 Christ his disciples at his departure, Luke
24.51. was their blessing without profit, because they changed not their
natures and substance? Besides to bless is nothing else but to give thanks,
as Luke has it, which was done by words before, not by those, This is my body.
gave to his disciples. Therefore that when Christ says. This is my body: this
is my blood; is as much as if he said: This bread is my body, and this cup is
my blood. But the bread and the body of Christ, the cup and the blood of
Christ, are they not differing, and wel-nigh contrary? Then tell us, how they
can affirm, or be spoken one of another, unless you will admit a Tropicall
speech. Yet, Campian, to use your own words, the matter gocth hard on your
side, and makes very plainly and manifestly for us. For Christ says plainly
that the bread is his body, which cannot be true without a figure, that bread
made to eat, should be properly Christ's body. And this is that figure which we
find so often in the Scriptures, specially when any Sacram^nt is spoken of. So
in Genesis cap. 17. the Lord says of Circumcision DV^. This is neither here,
nor any where else to be found in the Scriptures. WHIT. page 173. Ma^ke well.
This is my covenant which you shall keep, that every manchild be circumcised:
what I pray you is, This, but that every manchild be circumcised, and ^o you
have it in this place directly: but see, Genesis 17.13. My covenant shall be in
your flesh, what is this but circumcision? read Act. 7.8. DVR. This,
signifies not circumcision, but agreement or covenant betwixt God and Abraham
touching circumcision. WHIT. That agreemen^, was it the covenant or not? ^f it
was, then see what a goodly sentence you have made, This my covenant is my
covenant. But if it was not: the^ you must needs acknowledge a Me^^nymy; that
is, that the name of the thing is given to the sign, howsoever then it must be
understood by a figure.
This is the covenant betwixt me and Genesis 17.10.
you. Yet Circumcision was not the covenant, but the sign of the covenant. Now
tell us I pray you, what difference betwixt these two: This is my covenant and
this is my body? The former you cannot deny, but must be understood by a
Metonymy: and can any man make doubt, but that the latter likewise is to be so
expounded. The like we read of the Lamb. Exodus 12.11.
DVR. These words are not to be found there. WHIT. page 174. Observe the words.
Thus shall you eat it, for it is the Lords Passover. That which was to be
eaten is called the Lords Passover. Now they we^e commanded to eat the Lamb,
read Exodus 12. ve^se 27.
(...) is the Lords Passover. And yet the Lamb was not the Passover, but a
memorial of it: like to this is that of S. Paul. DVR. There is no figure in
the word Christ, but in rock; for the rock was the sign of Christ. WHIT.
page 175. Then you acknowledge a Metonymy in the word^, because the rock was
the Sac^amen^ of Christ. And if here there be a Trope, then why not in these
words of this Sacrament?
The rock was Christ. 1. Cor. 10.1.
Now as the rock was Christ, so is this mystical bread the body of Christ.
Thus as yet you see the matter is never the better on your side; have you any
thing else? The Gospel, say you, makes for us, S. Paul accords also. Nay S.
Paul utterly overthrows your opinion: 1. Cor. 11.
for when he speaks of this Sacrament in one continued speech, he uses the
word DVR. S. Paul call^th it so because it was now Christ, who vva^ the
living bread. WHIT. page 188. many of your fellows interpret it far otherwise,
yea your sh^^t S. Paul overthrows, 1. Cor. 10.16. The bread which we
break, is it not the Comunion of the body of Christ? Now not Christ was broken
but the bread.
bread, four several times, and that after Consecration; so that it
appears* ^earely to have the proper nature of bread, though it be said to be
the body of Christ. But yet you add: The words, the sentences, the whole
conuection of Scripture, do often most reverently repeat the bread, the wine,
a notable miracle, heavenly food, his flesh* his body, his blood. In good
earnest you discourse of these things with great reverence and shamefastnes.
For you would prove that in this Sacrament, there remains neither bread nor
wine, but certain qualities of these things, hanging in the air, and void^ of
the things themselves. And for any notable miracle, I acknowledge none, but
answer you with Austen. They may be honored as religious things, De Trinit.
lib. 3. c. 10.
but they cannot be wondered at as DVR. Augustine speaks of these miracles
which are made of a bodily substanc^, and so are sensible: now no such thing
is seen in the Eucharist. WHIT. page 191. But if there were a true miracle, it
would be sensible, and have the witness of the senses, as all other miracles
of the Scriptures have. For things that are hid (says Augustine) are not
miracles. He writ three books of the miracles of the Scriptures, in which he
has not spoken one word of this miracle. Therefore he knew not the Popish
Transubstantiation.
minacles. No man ever denied, but that in the Sacrament heavenly food is both
prepared, and offered to all the godly. But those heavenly and holy banquets,
whereby our souls are nourished up to eternal life, you make profane and
common, when you imagine, that Christ may be received and eaten like other
meats, as well of the DVR. Not we, but the Scripture, the Fathers, and reason
it self does affirm it, but specially S. Paul. 1. Cor. 11.27. Whosoever
eats this bread. WHIT. page* 195. None of these affirm it, and least of all
S. Paul; for he says not, whosoever eats the body of Christ, but whosoever
eats this bread.
wicked, as of the most devout men in the world; which is an horrible opinion,
senseless and unsound. For that you add of flesh, body, and blood, I
confess: for being the Sacraments of these things, they have their names given
unto them: for signs of things (says Augustine) are said to be the things of
which they are signs. But, say you, here is nothing figurative, nothing
obscure by doubtful speeches. True it is there is never a riddle in the words,
no obscurity. For the obscurity that is, is not in the words, but in your
interpretation of them, which ten Apolloes cannot so unfold and open, that
things might agree and answer fitly one to another.

What rests yet, is it not that at length we find out some certain and true
sense of these words? I hope, say you, Antiquity may be heard. I verily in
this controversy will reject no Antiquity, no Council, no ancient Father,
neither will I refuse any monument of true Antiquity. For that same reverend
hoarie head of Fathers which you speak of, could never come to the knowledge
of this new doctrine of Transubstantiation lately hatched. If those holy
Fathers and reverend Elders did now live, they would never acknowledge this
mo^ster, nor endure the sight of it, but judge it worthy to be abandoned into
the utmost parts of the world. Whereas then you say, They cannot away with
that, They say then they are betrayed. You trifle and say nothing to the
purpose: for we can away well with this trial, and fear no treachery in it.
But will call you very willingly to this reverend Antiquity, as to a bar of
trial. Therefore if you please we will demand of those reverend Fathers, what
they judge to be the meaning of those words, which you have produced for
example sake. And seeing there is no necessity to collect all their sayings,
some few of them shall speak, to give us a taste of the rest. DVR. Tertullian
speaks not of that bread, which Christ in his last supper made his body, but
of another bread, which was the figure of his body under the law. WHIT. page
2^0. The pla^e shows very plainly that he speaks of no other bread, then of
tha^ which Christ had said, this is my body: and which, in the night he was
betrayed, he took, brake, and gave to his disciples. Tell us where under the
law Christ ever said thus, or did thus with any bread? DVR. Bread and wine in
the old Testament were Figures of Christ's body and blood: therefore in the new
Testament of the bread must the true body of Christ be made, and of the v^ine
his blood. WHIT. page 202. It will well follow from this, that Christ must have
in the new Testament a true body and true blood: but it cannot be enforced
hereupo^, that it must be made of bread and wine. As if because their
Sacramen^s were figures, the^fore ours must be tra^substantiated into the
things themselves. Then will it follow, that because the flood, the ^edsea, and
the cloud were types of our Bap^isme, therefore it should not be a figure or a
sign, but be turned into the very blood of Christ.
Tertullian says, Tertul. lib. 4 contra Marc.
Christ professed his desire to eat the Pass^ouer, as his own, and having
taken bread, and distributed it to his disciples, he made it his body, by
saying* this is my body, that is, the figure or sign of my body. You
acknowledge both Tertullians words and his meaning. DVR Augustine signifies
the Sacrament by the name of figure. WHIT page 204. It is true, Christ gave the
Sacrament to his di^ci^les* but Augustine uses not the word Sacrament, but
figure: to show that as no figu^e or sign is the thing whereof it is a fi u^e:
so the bread is not properly the body, nor the w^ne the blood of Christ.
Augustine says, August. in Psalm. 3.
Christ admitted Judas to that banquet, in which he commended to his disciples
the figure of his body and blood. In another place also. DVR Augustine
disputes in this p^ace against the Ma^^chees, carp^ng at Moses words. The
blood is the soul of the beast. And says, it is so spoke, as the Sacrament of
the body of Christ is called his body, the blood is called the soul, because
it is as the sign of the soul, which lies hid in the blood, as the Sacramet
is the sign of the body of Christ, which is contained in it WH T page 206.
Nay I infer the contrary as the soul is not the blood, when it is o^^ of the
veins, and may be eaten; so Christ is not in the Sacrament. And as the blood
is the sign of the soul, which is not in it: so is the Sacrament of the body
which is not contained in it.
The Lord verily doubted not to speak thus. Contra. Adimant. cap. 12.
This is my body, when he gave the sign of his body. And that you may
understand, that this was Augustines perpetual tenor in interpreting of these
words, and that he determined far diverse to you touching the eating of
Christ's flesh: hear what he says in his books of Christian Instruction,
where he gives diverse precepts for the understanding of the phrase of the
Scriptures. If, says he, any sentence there seem to command any impious act,
De doctr. Christ. lib. 3. cap. 16.
or to forbid any duty tending to the profit or good of others, it is a
figurative speech; unless, says Christ, you eat the flesh of the Son of man,
and drink his blood, you have no life in you: It seems to inioyne an DVR
Augustine did not think that it was an heinous thing, to eat the flesh of
Christ, but to cate (...) (as the Capernites thought) that is, torn and rent
in pieces. WHIT. page 209. You answer somewhat as touching the fact, but
nothing for the figure. But Augustine says there is a figure, which cannot be,
if the flesh of Christ be either eaten, as you say, whole, or chopped in pieces,
as the Capernites affirm. And if it be an horrible fact to eat the small
parts of Christ's bo^ie, is it not a more beastly and bloody thing to devour
the whole body of Christ at one mor^el^? DVR. It is no more heinous for a
Christian to eat the flesh of Christ whole, then it was for the blessed Virgin
to conceive and to nourish it in her womb. WHIT. page 211. What is this, but
as if you had said, It is no heinous thing to conceive and bring forth an
Infant: Therefore it is none to devour it after it is borne.
heinous act. It is therefore a figurative speech, commanding us to communicate
in the Passion of the Lord. Do you think this reverend old man dotes, or has
he not given a judicious interpretation, well agreeing unto the judgment of the
ancient? I think matters yet go worse on your side, then they did before:
but perhaps you will say, these are too ancient to serve your turn, hear
then some of latter times. Theod.
Theodoret a Gretian and a learned man writes thus in his Dialogue^ DVR
Theodorets meaning is, that the signs have not lost their natural properties,
though their nature be changed. WHIT. page 214. If the natural properties
remain, then certainly their natures must, for esse^t^all properties can never
be separated from their natures: yea in the words follow ng in this very place,
Theodoret affirms, that the nature remains. The mystical bread, says he,
remains in the nature it first had, in the figure, and in the form.
Mystical signs do not lose their proper nature. This very speech quite
overthrows your Transubstantiation, for if their proper nature remain,
without doubt nothing can be Transubstantiated or changed. Now the bread
keeps his proper and old nature, therefore there can be no
Transubstantiation: but I will join to Theodoret Marcarius; whose homilies
Morelius had out of the Kings Library, and has published them in Greek: and
I suppose that you being a Friar, will not reject the testimony of so ancient
a Monk: he writes thus. In the Church, says he, Marcar. homil.
is offered bread and wine, DVR. An antitype or resemblance of the type is not
the type or figure, but the substance signified by that type or figure. WHIT.
page 217. An antitype is never properly the substance of the type, though
sometime it be another type answering to it, and both of them are but
similitudes and figures of the substance. And sometimes a type and an antitype
are both one and the same: as Heb. 9.24. The Tabernacle is called an antitype
of heaven, being the substance signified by the Tabernacle and no answering
type to the Tabernacle. And in this sense do diverse of the Fathers use the
word Antitype: as Basil, Nazianzen, Theodoret, Chrysostom.
antitypes or resemblances of his body and blood. What, says he, bread and
wine? but bread is already turned into flesh, and wine into blood. Ought a
Monk to speak after this manner? give you them so slender a name, as
similitudes? Pardon me, Campian, this Monk was never used to speak after
your manner, neither was your Transubstantiation as yet come abroad? what say
you now? are you pleased with this reverend hoare head of the Fathers? If you
rest not here, it shall be free for you to appeal to any one of the whole
reverend company of the holy Fathers; not one of them, no not any one of them,
do I except against. For I make no doubt, but if they may be judges, you shall
ever have the worst. From henceforth therefore do not cast any such
calumni^^ions upon us, and boast your self of the bare names of the Fathers;
for the Fathers both in this controversy and in many others are firm on our
side. As for the Fathers of whom you name many, but I believe have read but a
few, I thus answer you. We are not the servants of the Fathers, but the
sons. When they prescribe us any thing out of the Law and divine authority,
we obey them, as our parents. If they inioyne any thing against the voice of
the heavenly truth, we have learned not to harken to them, but to God. You as
Vassals and base servants receive whatsoever the Fathers say, without
judgment or reason, being afraid, as I think, either of the whippe, or the
halter, if every thing they speak be not Gospel with you.

In few words, say you, this is their drift, unless thou will stand to their
own judgment, that are guilty, there is no judgment to be had. Verily this
fits you a great deal better then us, for you will receive no judgment but
the judgment of the Pope, and Church of Rome; which Church and Pope we have
proved long ago to be guilty of most heinous crimes, and there has been a
perpetual variance betwixt him and us. Is there any equity then in your
demands that we should stand to his judgment, who (...) both a person guilty,
and an adversary to us? And well should we deserve to lose the cause, if we
would be so witless contenders. Much truer speaks Augustine, Let one matter
encounter with another, Contra Maxim. lib. 3. c. 14.
one cause with another, one reason with another, by the authority of the holy
Scriptures, which are not proper to either side, but common DVR. How foolishly
do you allege Augustine, who makes the Scripture a witness of the truth, not a
judge, as you would have it. WHIT. page 243. If the Scripture be the witness,
where shall we find a judge answerable to this witness? Is it the Church? Then
must it be of more authority then the Scripture, which here you affirm not,
neither may it be granted; for the Scripture is the word of God, therefore he
that is the judge of it, must be the judge of God himself. To deny the
Scriptures then the pre-eminence in judging, is to thrust God out of his throne
Therefore as God, so the Scripture the word of God, has the authority both of
a witness and a judge. DVR. Augustine ever thought, that the Popes judgment
was the highest tribunal upon earth, where all controversies must be decided.
WHIT. page 244. Augustine never thought so, but writ the contrary De ciuitat
Dei lib. 15. ^ap. 3. The Lord, says he, has penned the Scripture, which is
called Canonical, because it is of highest authority, yea he never once
pressed the Arrians, either with the authority of the Pope, or of the
Council, which undoubtedly he would have done, neither could he have done
better, if the highest judgment had been in the Church.
witnesses for both. And to their judgments would we have you to stand, not
ours. As for other things you speak of, I pass them over, for you will
reserve them for us till another place; and whereas you say, you have cited many
and worthy places of Scripture, we have weighed those places in their
balances, and have found them to light to prove what you proposed. And it is
your use indeed, rather to take them by number, then by weight. But you charged
us with scorning at this and shifting them off, we did nothing less; all we
did was to free them from your cauils. We have, say you, alleged the
interpretations of the Greek and Latin Churches. I confess it, but we have
wrung all those weapons from you, and have by them battered all your holds. But
say you, what say they then? marry that M. Doctor Martin Luther, or M. Philip
Melangthon, or certainly M. Zuinglius, or without doubt M. Calvin, and M. Beza,
have faithfully entreated upon those matters. Tell us, Friar, what should
hinder, why every one of these you have nominated, may not as faithfully
entreat of th^se things, as those who have lived before them in ages past?
what wanted they, which the other had? what skill of art, what knowledge of the
tongues, what other helps? there is not any one of these, but has far
surpassed in learning, and all deserved commendation, the whole society of
Jesuits.

But why do I compare these burning lights, bright stars of piety and
religion, with the base scumme of your Doctors? and this now is another of your
reasons, why you were so desirous to have audience in the University Schools.
If you be, Campian, sodesirous, as you would make the world believe, I marvel
why you are so long a coming: for our schools were ever open for you, but you
could never find the way into them. If you hereafter come, you shall find many
in our schools, that will encounter with you in all kind of learning. And
here you end your discourse of the right sense of the Scriptures.

EDMUND CAMPIAN. The third Reason, which is the nature of the Church.
SO soon as the Adversary heard the Church named, he waxed wanne: yet
notwithstanding he has devised one thing, which I would wish you to note
well; that thereby you may perceive, the ruin and hard shifts of falsehood.
The enemy perceived that both in the Apoc. 2. Psalm. 7. Isay q. and 32. Cant. 6.
old and new Mat. 13. Ephesians. 5. 1. Cor. 12. 1. Tim. 3. Joan. 15. Matthew. 16.
Matthew. 18.
Testament, there is every where The scripture makes honorable mention of the
Church, therefore the Roman Church is that true Church of Christ, of which the
Scripture speaks so ^^ten.
honorable mention made of the Church, and that it is called a holy city, a
fruitful vineyard, an high hill, a direct path, the only dove, the kingdom of
heaven, the spouse and body of Christ, the pillar of truth, the multitude unto
which the holy Ghost being promised, powers all things needful to salvation.
The congregation, against all which the gates of hell shall never so prevail,
that they shall utterly extinguish the same. The congregation, which who so
repugneth, though he confess Christ with his mouth, yet has he no more to do
with Christ, then has a Publican and heathen man. He durst not say any thing
against this openly, neither would he seem to gainsay that Church, whereof
the Scriptures so often make mention. He kept craftily still, the name of the
Church, but the thing it self by describing it, he This is false, for your
definition makes a true Church
took quite away. For he has portraied the Church with such properties as do
altogether hide it and make it, as if it were Plato his Idea; Calvin. Jnst.
lib. 4. cup. 1. Number. 2.3. Apoc. 1.2 3.
unapt to be seen with the senses, but subject to the privy insight and
speculation of a very few men, such only as by special inspiration, might in
their imagination comprehend this arrie body, and could likewise with a sharp
eye discern such as are members of this chosen society, what is become of
truth? where is plain dealing? what Scriptures? what just judgments, what
Fathers describe the Church in this sort? Particular Churches are visible:
therefore the Catholic Church is visible.
There are Epistles in the Apocalyppes of S. John written by Act. 8.10.11. and
seq.
Christ himself to the seven Churches which were in Asia. There are also
diverse Epistles written by S. Peter, S. Paul, S. John. and by others unto
sundry Churches. In the Acts of the Apostles, we find mention made of many
Churches begun and enlarged: what were those? were they known to God only,
and to his Saints, or also to all sorts of Christians? But truly necessity
is a deadly dart; pardon them: for they that all these This is false, our
doctrine has been derived from Christ himself unto us, by the faithful of
all ages.
1500 years cannot spy out so much, as one time, one village, one house
embrued with their doctrine, until that unhappy Lutherus.
Moncke by his incestuous marriage had destoured a Nun, dedicated to God by
former solemn vow: or until that quarrelling Swizer Zuinglius.
had conspired against his country: or until that infamous runagate Caluinus.
had undertaken an usurped authority in Geneua. If they will have any Church
at all, they must needs fetch the same out of blind corners, and challenge
those for their ancestors, whom they neither knew themselves, neither any
mortal man has seen, except they brage of such forefathers, who were
manifest heretics, as Aerius, Iouinianus, Henri. Pantal. in Chrenogra.
Heluidius, Vigillantius, the Image breakers, Berengarius, Waldensis,
Lothardus, Wyclife, Husse, of all which they have begged some pieces of their
devilish doctrine. Marvel not though I have not feared these smoders, which
if I shall once come to the clear light, I shall easily expel. For this is
our speech together. Tell me, do thou believe as the Church does, which
flourished these many hundred years past? Yea verily: let us therefore
discourse of our countries and times; what Church do thou believe? The
congregation of the faithful, whosenames are unknown, but it is apparent that
many such have been: Is it apparent that many such have been. To whom it is
apparent? To God; who says so? we that have received our doctrine from God
himself. This is a loud lie, how may I believe it? If thou were fervent in
faith, thou should know this as assuredly, as thou do that thou art alive:
Can you refrain laughing when you hear such foolish answers? All Christian
people are commannded to cleave fast unto the Church, they are warned to take
heed, lest they be slain with the spiritual sword: they are bid keep peace
in the house of God: to commit their souls in trust unto this pillar of truth,
there to make all their complaints to take for heathen all such as are cast out
of this Church: and yet all that, have so many men, so many hundred years,
been ignorant, where that Church is, or who belong unto it; will they in
darkness still stand upon that point? that where or in what place soever the
Church is, there are contained therein, only saints, and such as are
predestinate to go to heaven: whereby it falls out that if any man will
refuse to obey his prelate, he may think himself to be blameless in so
doing: if he persuade himself that his said prelate has committed any great
offense, and by that means is excommunicated out of the Church. When I
perceived that my adversaries invented such devises, and that they would not
associate themselves to any Church, that heretofore has been: and that when
they were quite deprived of the thing it self, they would needs (though with
much ado) keep still the bare name in possession, I solaced my self, with
the hope I conceived of your ripe judgments, yea and I nothing doubted, but
that as soon as you should find out even by their own confessions, these their
iugling tricks, you would straightwaies, like plain honest and wise men cut
off such foolish snares, framed of set purpose to work your overthrow.

WILLIAM WHITAKERS. The answer to the third Reason.
WHat is it, Campian, you further bring unto us? you propound unto us the
nature of the Church, wherein you bring nothing besides your accustomed manner
of vain and childish oratorie, neither worthy the hearing of our University
men, or answerable to the opinion that is held of you. As touching the Church
there are many questions and great controversies, and at this day almost all
disputations about religion are reduced to this head. For your DVR. It is well,
that once you will acknowledge us to be Catholics. WHIT. page 247. Triumph not
much for the name, my meaning is to give it you no otherwise, the^ usually the
name of man is given to a dead and dry corpse, where nothing is but skin and
bone. He is a Catholic, not who follows the popish Apostasy, but that
professes the doctrine of Christ.
Catholics being tossed with the boisterous storms of other disputations,
have been willing to take DVR. Is it so great a fault to fly into the haven of
the Church? WHIT. page That is not the fault we tax you for, but that you
cover all your errors by pretending the name of the Church. And if we by
manifest arguments out of the Scripture, reprove and refell your heresies, you
cry out you are the Church, and by that thinks to defend all things, though
they be never so absurd.
harbor in this haven of the Church. Here they dwell, here they place all their
hopes of safety and victory, here they hide themselves, whenever they are
beaten out of the field. Therefore they fortify this sconce with all the skill
they can, and strengthen it with munition on all sides; for which cause I
marvel so much the more to find you, from whom so great things are expected,
in this controversy to be so slight and shallow; for you neither teach, nor
conclude, nor yet propound any thing for your Church against ours, which has
in it either forceable reason or proof. But it may be this is but your first
skirmish, you will happily afterward deal with us hand to hand; yet I will
trace you out in your own steps, that I may lay hold of you, if happily I may
find you any where certain.

So soon, say you, as the adversary heard the Church but named, he waxed
wanne: yea Campian, it made him blush, when he perceived so chaste and holy a
matron, so impiously and insolently to be abused by you. The Church does ever
expel you, and deny al commerce with you. Yet you as very audacious and
importunate wooers give not over your suite to compass her. Sure there was no
cause why your adversary should wax so wanne, unless he feared some evil
measure from such cutthroats as you are. Yet notwithstanding, say you, he has
devised one thing, which I would wish you to note well. You will sure acquaint
us with some great and unheard of matter; verily I much desire to know what is
this one thing: yet I fear it will prove stark nothing; and for all your
throes, you will bring forth but a mouse. As for the honorable praises of the
Church, you mention, we both acknowledge those, and speak far greater things
of it: but verily they agree not to your Church at all; for it is the
Babylonish whore, a branch cut off from the true Vine, a den of thieves, a
broad way leading to destruction, the kingdom of hell, the body of Antichrist,
a sink of errors, a great mother of fornications, the Church of the wicked,
out of which every Christian ought to depart, which Christ shall one day
fearfully destroy, and give her the just recompense of all her sins. In
vain then do you reckon up the praises of the Church, unless you can
demonstrate that they are proper to your Church, which you shall never be able
to do, so long as Rome stands. He would not, say you, seem to gainsay the
Church, he kept craftily still the name of the Church, but the thing it self
by his definition he took quite away. We verily, Campian, DVR. Why do you not
then defend her authority, but diminish and lessen it, yea and horribly
blaspheme, affirming that the spouse of Christ may err and be deceived? WHIT.
page 248. It is you that blaspheme, making the Church equal to God, to whom it
is only peculiar not to err, not be deceived. For the Church may err though
she be his Spouse, but not persist in any deadly error: as the Church of the
Apostles did, when she thought her husbands kingdom was of this world, yea
and after showed her ignorance of the calling of the Gentiles.
reverence and honor the Church, as our mother, and in our definition we both
retain the name, and clearly set out the nature of the thing it self. But
you having lost the Church long since, do yet challenge the name and the vain
title of the church. Our definition of the Church does nothing like you; why I
pray you? because we describe the Church by those properties which do
altogether darken and hide it. We ascribe those properties to the Church which
comprise the true nature of the Church, whose presence make a Church, and their
absence mar or destroy a Church. But what are those properties which you
affirm to darken and hide the Church? we verily judge this to be proper to the
true Church, to DVR. The Church is not to be sought for by these, as by notes,
but they are to be learned from the Church. WHIT. page 252. Will it therefore
follow because the word is no where else truly preached, but in the Church, nor
the Sacraments purely administered, that the Church is not to be known and
found out by then? Yea the contrary follows, because they are not elsewhere
but in the Church: therefore by these notes the true Church is to be known
and demonstrated. For if only Peripatetians profess the Philosophy of
Aristotle, then that kind of learning points out the Peripatetians, and
distinguishes them from all other sects of Philosophers. DVR. Thus to search
out the Church, is but to secke out one unknown thing by another, which is
more unknown. WHIT. page 254. As if the Scripture were more hidden and
unknown then the Church, and the Scripture could better be known by the
Church, then it by the Scripture: undoubtedly no. 1. Because the Scripture
begeteth and makes a Church; and then is a ting hknovvne, when the cause is
known. 2. I here are many and diverse Churches, but there is but one constant
Scripture alvvaies like it self. 3. If at any time there was ever doubt made
of the Scripture; yet there have been many more questions and doubts concerning
the Church. Lastly the Scripture is called a Canon, a rule; now the rule as it
is straighter, so is it more certain then the thing that is squared by it.
DVR. The notes of the Church ought to be such, as are agreed upon among all, as
are proper to it, neither can be challeng^d probably by any other Church.
WHIT. page 356. I conf^sse as much, and such are our notes in all things;
whereas yours, are nothing lest. DVR. But every sect lays claim to your
notes. WHIT. page 256. What then, what if you lay claim to the things I
possess, are they therefore not mine own? Be it that heretics do lay claim
to the Scriptures, yet they do it without all show of reason, and out of the
Scriptures only can they be confuted.
hear the word of Christ, and keep it, to use wholly and purely those
Sacraments, which Christ, when he departed from his Church, left her, as a
pledge of his love to her, and as a proof of her loyalty to him. These we
maintain as the most true and substantial properties of the Church, and this
definition, made of the natural and inbred principles and grounds of the
thing, which we define, you shall never be able to overthrow. I pray you what
is there here that hides the Church? does the word of God; do the Sacraments
hide the Church? yea these are they that make the DVR. Why say you then that
your Church lay hid for so many years together? WHIT. page 260. Our Church did
never lie so hid, but it was discerned by your Pope, unless for so many
years he persecuted shadows.
Church appear as clear as any thing at noone day, these give unto the Church
strength, health and beauty: abolish these, there will remain nothing but the
carkase of the Church. What drowsy dream then is this, you tell us of an airy
body? as if we denied that the Church could be found on the earth; we never
doubted but the Church ever has been, and ever shall be upon the earth: though
we also grant that the sight of it being sometime so clear that it may be seen
of all: at another time is so obscured and ever shadowed, that one can hardly
know it. But no Church pleases you, save that which is continually
flourishing, and which is visible to all men's eyes, which has a continual
succession of Bishops to be fetched from the beginning, and which is subject to
the Pope. Now Campian, as for you, you come to late to tell us of these
frantike popish dreams; we have heard, discussed, and distolued them, above a
thousand times. Do you think you are able to make us believe, that the state
of the Church is such, that it cannot be hid, that treachery should prevail
nothing against it, an open enemy nothing, Antichrist himself nothing? These
can never quite overthrow the Church, they may drive it to straits and thrust
it into corners. August. 4.8.
Augustine compares the Church to the Moon, which sometime while it is
enlightened by the Sunne-beames, shines out, a^ another time it is deprived of
the greatest part of the light, and sometime shines not at all. So the Church
sometime shines most brightly, sometime is more obscured, sometime hardly
appears, and her whole course is continually gayning and losing of light.

Will you that I manifest it to you by examples? while David and Solomon
reigned, the Church flourished in Israel; but when Ahab reigned, the face of
the Church was so far obscured, that the most divine Prophet DVR. Elias spoke
not of the whole Church, but of the kingdom of Israel, wherein he lived.
WHIT. page 261. He lived at that time, not in the kingdom of Israel, but in
the mountain of God, Mount Horeb. 1. King. 19.8. But grant he spoke of Israel
only: it is no less for our purpose. For that which happened there, that no good
men appeared, though many lay hid, so it may fall out in other churches, and at
other times, that none or few of the faithful appear; yet God may have a
multitude of unknown believers.
Eliah complained that there was not one remaining save himself. If there
could be such a havoc made of the Church, 1 King. 14.10. hhm. 10.3.
that of all that great number of the godly, there was scarce one to be seen,
(though there was a good sum remaining of them.) it need be no wonder that in
the kingdom of Antichrist, who surpasses all Ahabs and Iezabels in all
brabarous cruelty, that the Church should be so wasted, that there should
appear a marvelous scarcity of faithful men. And yet could Antichrist in
that great havoc of religion and the Church, never so far prevail, but there
was a remanant of many thousand thousands of Saints, who never bowed their
knees to the beast, neither ever received the mark of the beast. Let us pass
along to those times when Christ lived upon the earth, and consider the state
of the Church of Jerusalem. For no Church can be more like to the Church of
Rome, then that, as the state of it was, when Christ did perform the work of
our salvation. They had the Scripture, they were a people zealous of the law,
they had the Temple, they had Leuits, Priests, yea a high Priest; what was
wanting here to make a perfect Church? Christ at length shows himself
openly, and brings that happy message of salvation; this very Church hated,
persecuted, cursed, and in the end killed this Christ, the Son of God, the
lagat of his Father, the teacher of celestial doctrine; the author of our
salvation. This Church then, Campian, was it a true Church or no, what think
you? If it was, then the true Church hated Christ, and judged him worthy of
death. If it was not, then where and what is the true Church? for Christ at the
first had a very small number, that if you answer DVR. The Church vndoubtenly
was in Christ and his Apostes. WHIT. page 262. See then what follows for our
advantage; it it so fell out that the true Church was not amongst them who had
a lawful succession ordained of the Lord; who also had the place, the name,
the dignity, and magnificent ornaments of the Church; but it was in a few, who
after a sort were cut off from the Church, it is a thing without question, that
the Church is not always to be sought for in a visible multitude, and an
outward succession of men: but often times in obscure places, and amongst a
very few.
Christ and his company was the Church, then you fall into that crime, which
you reprove us for. If then this might befall the DVR. That which befell the
Synagogue of Hierusal^^^, cannot befall to the Church of Christ, whieth the
Prophets have plainly foretold should never perish. Isay. 19.21. Icrem. 31.31.
Eze^. 37.26. WHIT. page 264. As if the Church of Jerusalem was not the Church
of Christ? what then happened unto it, which may not befall my others? And for
the Prophesies you recier, they belong to the company of the elect, and not to
your popish Church to which the Lord never promised any such thing. Christ
verily will never endure that his Church should be abolished or perish: but it
is one thing for it to perish, and another to lie hid for a time, and not to
be seen; he has promised it shall ever be preserved, not that it shall ever
be visible and glorious. DVR Christ has promised to be with his Church to the
end of the world. WHIT. page 265. Will it therefore follow that his Church
shall never be hid, nor shut up in a few? nothing less: for he has promised
that wheresoever two or three are gathered together in his name, he will be in
the midst of them.
Church of Jerusalem, that though it had, and by continued succession inioyed
the name of the Church, yet in very truth it was nothing else but a cave and
den of thieves: I see not what the Church of Rome can challenge to it self,
why it may not be said long agot to have lost the body of the Church, though it
keep still the visard, the name, and the vestments of the Church. What if the
Romish Church condemned Luther? shall we say therefore Luther is an heretic,
and that it is the Catholic Church? The Church of Jerusalem condemned Christ,
and him and his they would have denied to be the true Church, if by any color
they could, that they might free themselves out of those straights, they were
brought into. But happily they will say, there is no such thing to be found in
Christ's new Church. 2 Thessalonians. 2.
But S. Paul prophesies of an Apostasy, that should be before Christ's coming
to judgment, DVR. The Fathers have understood the place of Antichrist, or of a
defection from the Roman Empire. WHIT. page 268. Nay Cyrill of Jerusalem (a
man you much esteem) Catech. 11. does interpret it of an Apostasy from the
true faith, so does Chrysostom, Oecumenius, so many others. Yea your Divines
of Rhemes have so expounded it.
which Apostafie is from religion and the Church, as the most auncien^ Fathers
do understand it: and Christ prophesied evidently of the small number of his.
Luke. 18.8.
When the Soune of man shall come shall he find DVR. Augustine de vultat.
Ecclesiae cap. 13. says, WE understand this speech, either for the perfection
of faith, or for the multitude of the wicked, or for the small number of the
good. So does Hierome contr. Luciferano^. WHIT. page 270. What if these Fathers
mistook the place, must we rest in their exposition? we have Nazianzene cont.
Arran. Theophyla. in 28. Luc. Caietan upon this place against them: nay further
when Augustine writes that there is signified the multitude of the wicked, and
the small number of the good, does he not defend our opinion, that the number
of the wicked shall be great, but of the godly small?
faith on the earth? If hardly any faith shall remain on the earth, and the
Church cannot be said to be a Church, but improperly without faith, it
follows necessarily that when Christ comes, their number shall be very
small, who may truly be called the Church. You have now those Scriptures which
do thus paint out the Church unto us, unless you think your self better able
to puttray it, then the holy Ghost himself could do, who has set out the
Church in far better colors and manner, then I find yours to be, in which
there is nothing left but painted walls. But, say you, there are Epistles of
Christ written to the seven Churches which were in Asia; there are also diverse
Epistles which were written by S. Peter, S. Paul, S. John, and by others unto
sundry Churches; in the Acts of the Apostles we find mention made of many
Churches begun and enlarged. What then, Campian, what think you may be inferred
hereupon? These were not known to God only, but also to all Christians: who
ever denied that? These same Churches of Asia to whom Christ sent Epistles and
the Churches of the Corinthians, Philippians, Thessalonians, Colossians, to
which Paul writ, were particular visible Churches. Did we ever seem to make
question whether a Church might be visible or no? we verily call all those
visible and apparent Churches, which profess the pure word of God and hold
those rights and Sacraments which are commanded by Christ. And so at this day
by the blessing of God there are many visible Churches in England, Scotland,
Germany, France, and other parts of Christendom, though it grieve you
Jesuits they should be so visible and apparent. But what kind of reasoning is
this? DVR. All particular Churches on which the Catholic Church consists, as
on parts, are visible: therefore the Catholic Church it self is visible.
WHIT. page 272. All particular Churches which make the Catholic, are not
visible: because it consists not of the Churches of this time only, but of
Churches of the times past, and of those which shall be in the time to come.
But say it were compact and made of the Churches of this time only, yet it
follows not that it must be visible: nay so long (...) particulars are
visible, it cannot, for when all the parts are grown into o^^, then is the
whole visible, but not each several part; so when the several parts may be
seen, the whole cannot be seen, because the parts are no^^ow become one. So
the contrary to your collection will follow that because the parts are visible,
the whole cannot be seen.
Those Churches to whom Christ and his Apostles writ were visible: therefore
the Catholic Church is ever visible. Have you learned such Logic as this at
Rome in your famous schoolts of Jesuits? or do you, Campian, think that these
manner of Allegations should go for proofs in the ears of our University
men? but where are those Churches now, which were then so flourishing? Show me
the Church of Ephesus, Smyrna, Pergamus, Corinthes, and the rest. Now they are
no where to be seen, and are no longer Churches. And that which we have seen
already befall those Churches, teach us, I pray you, how it may not also betide
the Church of Rome? And though Rome become a heap, yet the Church shall be
safe: neither shall the downfall of any city or Empire ever be able to abolish
it. And at this day there are many flourishing Churches, which are equal to
your falsely called Catholic Church, for the number, and undoubtedly are far
better for the truth they hold.

But you say, That for 1500. years we could not spy out one town, one
village, one house seasoned with our doctrine. Nay, Campian, that is very
false, DVR. The Arrians, M^^cedonians, and all other ancient heretics may by
the same probability say as much. WHIT. page 272. It the Arrians or any other
heretic can prove the doctrine of their Churches out of the holy Scriptures,
they may answer the same which we do, for every Church which holds the
Apostles doctrine, may profess that all cities, village^, (...) which were
religous, were seasoned with their doctrine.
for in the Apostles time, all Churches, all cities, all towns, every family
embraced the same faith and religion which we now profess. After that by
little and little, the purity of doctrine DVR. Tell me then from whom, and in
what age any doctrine of our profession was brought into the Church. WHIT. page
277. The motion of the Sun is so very swift, that we may see it has moved,
though we cannot discern the moving of it: so such is the mystery of your
iniquity that I well perceive by the Scriptures your doctrines are not
Apostolical; but the time when, and the manner how they were brought in, is
not much to our purpose. And it were too long to tell all, yet hear some, Your
Romish Bishop a long time together was but equal to other Bishops th^ugh much
was given to him for the excellency of that Church. After the Christian world
was divided into four Provinces, when he became the chief of the Patriarchs,
after this he began to challenge authority over other Churches, and for that
purpose counterfeited the Council of Nice: but he was repressed by the African
Council. Then Gregory the great, greatly inueyed against John of
Constantinople, because he sought the name of universal Bishop, and for that
ambition called him the forerunner of Antichrist. Lastly, Boniface the eight
with a great sum obtained that honor of Phocas the Parricide. And since that
he grew to that height, that he made not only Churches and Kings, but the
Christian Emperor himself to kiss his feet. But see another example. Time
was when there were no images in Churches: As that of Epiphanius proves, who
rent a veil in pieces, because there was in it an image of Christ or of some
Saint. But in time they were received into the Church, but no honor given them:
yet after that, good Bishops brake them and cast them out again; as Gregory
writes that Serenus the Bishop of Massilia did, whom he thus checketh for it.
In that you forbad them to be worshipped, we commend you, but that you brake
them, we reprehend you. Gregor. regist. lib. 7. Epist. 9. Lastly the second
Nicene Council decreed, that they were not to be broken, yea that they were
religiously to be worshipped. And thus has it succeeded in other things, as S.
Paul did foretell^e saying; The mystery of iniquity does already work. 2 Thessalonians. 2.7.
began to be corrupted, and diverse superstitions spread far and near; though
the holy Fathers did as much as they could, resist, 2 Thessalonians. 2.7.
until that mystery of iniquity, which took rooting in the very Apostles
time, spread it self DVR. What can be spoken or imagined more wicked and
impious. WHIT. page 278. Then prophesied S. Paul impiously, when he did so
^^^ell of a departing, and that Antichrist should sit in the Temple of God. Is
this any other then that the mystery of iniquity should spread it self over
the Church?
by all the parts of the Church, and at length possessed it wholly. Yet
Antichrist that man of sin, could never prevail so far, but a great
multitude of the Saints remained; and those, whose names were written in the
book of life, did utterly abhor all those filthy and wicked superstitions
of Antichrist. For in the Church of Rome it self even in the worth times of
it, yet many were ever found, who worshipped the God of their Fathers, and kept
themselves unpolluted with that horrible Idolatry. And this can histories of
all times witness, which I could now recite if it were needful, and reckon up
to you, many houses, villages, towns, cities, and countries, where Christ had
many and populous Churches. The DVR. This is very false, for in the Flore^tine
Council the Emperor Paleolus, together with the Grecians and Armenians freely
acknowledged the Pope to be the Vicar of Christ, and embraced the Roman faith,
yea and at this day they dissent from us in few things, as Icremy the Patriarch
of Constantinople has plainly written. WHIT page 279. Why are they then of you
accounted Schismatickes, or why obey they not the Pope? why came they not to
the Council of Trent? the Pope by all means has sought to have the^ subject
to him, but they still contemn him to his no small grief. It is true, the
Emperor, the Patriarch, and a multitude of Bishops came to the Flore^tine
Counsel. They agreed with the^ in many things, ^^^hers they dissented; your
Tra^substantiation they utterly renou^ced. At that time Iesaphus their
Patriarch suddenly died. Eugenius the Pope instantly urged a new election.
They denied to make any till they came to Constantinople. See you not how
well they agree? I have a book of yours, not of Ieremies, neither will a
small thing make me believe it is his: for both the Grecian^, and particularly
he, has giver great approbation of our Churches, as we find it in his works
published both in Greek and Latin.
Greek Church could never yet be brought to join it self to your Church, and
it is (...) opposite to you, as ever our Church was. And yet you so forge these
things, as if the Pope of Rome long ago had had the whole world under his
subjection. Until that unhappy Monk, as you say, by his incest^^^^ marriage
had defloured a Nun, dedicated to God by (...) sole^^^^ (...) or until that
quarrelling Sw^^^ had c^^spired against his country, or that infamous ^^^^gate
had undertaken an usurped authority in Ge^^^^. So, Campian, go on to rail and
revile every good man, power out the gall of your bitterness, seeing you have
undertaken to spend all your venomous darts upon them. Luthers name is written
in the book of life; and his memory shall ever be sacred among all good men, and
your reproaches shall not be able to pearce or wound him. It is a true saying,
that a false repreach pierces not the skin: you call him Monk, and your
self is but a Friar; now Monks were ever accounted more honest then Friars.
But he by incestuous marriage de^^oured (...) Nom^^^, dedicated to God by
solemn vow. DVR. But you go against S. Paul, who directly denounced damnation
to those who will marry, having broken their first says; which is understood
by all the Fathers of violating the vow of single life by incestuous marriages.
WHIT. page 281. But how prove you that the Apostle understands by that faith,
the vow of virginity? Nay the scope of the place shows us the contrary, for
he forbids that younger widows, whom he persuades to marry, should be
taken into that office; only such as were threescore years old, who may well
abstain from marriages and follow this calling. Now if they be not of this
age, he shows what may be feared of them namely lest that rather then they
should not many, they would wa^ wa^^on against Christ, and break their first
faith, which is not their vow, but the profession of Christian religion, which
such light buswiues would easily co^^^^^, that they might enjoy their
pleasures. And that this is his meaning the 1^. verse shows: For certain are
already turned back after Satan; showing what some had done, he admonishes
them to be wary lest others should do the like. And as for the Fathers, if they
did also expound these words, (as indeed they do not) yet the argument is very
weak in divinity: The Fathers have thus expounded it, therefore the exposition
is true.
Luther indeed took to wife in holy wedlock, a Virgin that once was entangled
by a rash and superstitious vow, after she had bin more rightly instructed in
the truth of religion. Exclaim bitterly as you list. Call Zuinglius also a
swash buckler, seeing your self is a player of a Price. But tell us wherein he
did ever show himself such a cutter? forsooth he boldly ventered his life with
his fellow citizens. Slerdum lib. 8. Occolam. Ephesians. lib. 4.
If Zuinglius at the command of the Senate went to war against the enemies
of his country and religion, where he perished by cruel thieves, who lay in
wait for him, what did he unbefitting a valiant man, a good citizen, and a
faithful Pastor to do. For whereas you challenge him with conspiracy against
his country, besides that it is a shameless lie, I wonder why you should
object such a crime to him, seeing with you it is a thing very commendable for
men to conspire against their Prince and country. As for Calvin whom you call a
seareback: runagate, the whole Church of Christ knows to be an excellent man,
and a most constant servant of the Lord: who was as far from lewdnes and
dishonastie, as you are from shamefastnes and honesty. If he was seared, S.
Paul was so too, Gal. 6.17.
yea and diverse others: but indeed he was not. And whereas you call him a
runagate, I pray you tell us, where you have lived for these diverse years, and
remember what your self were. Calvin never forsook the Church, he once took
upon him to govern, but there he lived with the special love of all, and
there he ended his days: but why do I answer you anything in defense of
those excellent and worthy men, whom you shall never justly defame, though you
burst your heart with lying.

But let us now hear your communication as you call it. And here you demand,
Whether we will subscribe to the Church which flourished these many hundred
youres? we answer, we will subscribe: but say you, to which Church? I answer
DVR. He did not demand whether you would subscribe to that Church, which had
continued in the precept of the Apostles, but whether to that Church, which
has flourished these many hundred years; which if you would, you must needs
yield as overcome, when none but ours have flourished thus long. WHIT. page
285. As if no Church but the Romish Church had flourished these many hundred
years: or for many ages together in the opinion of men, it only h^^ the name
of ^^e church: (...) will subscribe to all Churches whether they flourished now
(...) they hold the Apostles doctrine: but you shall never prove (...) we must
necessarily subscribe to place, Sea, and succession, no more then Christ and
his disciples were bound when there was no true Church flourishing upon the
earth.
to the Church which is built upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles:
that is, to the Churches of Jerusalem, Antioch, Ephesus, and all those famous
and excellent Churches of which we read in the Epistles written by the
Apostles, yea even to the ancient Church of Rome, to which yours is no more
like then an apple to an oyste^. Finally we subscribe to those Churches, of
whom we read in histories that they kept the seed of that doctrine, which the
Apostles taught among them, sound and vncorrupt. These Churches as long as they
did continue in the Apostles doctrine, were true Churches; and to those
Churches we have and ever will subscribe. And by this I think we have cut off
the progress of your conference, for we have not given you such an answer as
you fained to your self. Wherefore that which follows in you hangs
together like a rope of sand. but no answer will please you, unless we offer
to subscribe to your Romish Church: but that we justly disclaim, because it
has foully corrupted the ^^^stles writing. You must find you out other
subscribers, Campian, for we will subscribe to none but the Apostolical
Churches. But one thing, say you, they will still stand upon in darkness, that
where and in what place soever the Church is, there are con^eiued therein only
Saints, and such as are predestinate to go to heaven. We speak not so of the
Church as you write: for we are taught by the Scriptures thus to distinguish
the Church, that it is sometimes DVR. I believe only one Catholic Church, as
the Apostles and Nicene Creed has taught me, which contains both the elect,
and as many as profess true religion. Now you teach me to believe two
Churches. WHIT. page 286. This distinction takes not away the unity of the
Church, no more then when the Church is said to be m^^^an and u^^^phant,
universal and particular. For the visible and ^^uisible Church make but one:
called visible, for the outward policy or order of it, which is seen and
discerned; inuis^ble because Gods election and the electes faith is not to be
seen with eyes. And this distinction we have, Esaias. 1.9. Matthew. 22.14. As for
the Creedes you mention, we believe them in this point as well as you. But tell
us; this one Catholic Church what is it? If you restrain the name to the
visible Church; first, you exclude both that in heaven of the Saints, and that
which shall be of these which a^e unborn, and yet do belong to the Catholic
Church: secondly you place faith in the sense, which the Apostle says is of
things which are not seen, Heb. 11.1. As for that Catholic Church which we
believe, it is the company of all the elect, even as many as have been from the
beginning of the world, and shall be to the end; therefore it is called the
Apostolic and holy Church, the communion of Saints. And to this communion
belong no profane and wicked men, no hypocrites; because they have no
fellowship with Christ. For the holy Church is the mystical body of Christ, of
which body no member can at any time perish.
visible and sometimes invisible. In a particular visible Church, of which they
are members, who will hear the Word, and receive the Sacraments: we confess
there are many fained Christians, who had rather have the visard of faith, then
true faith indeed. An invisible Church we affirm to contain only the godly,
who with a true faith lay hold on the Gospel. These though they may be seen
as long as they live amongst men, seeing they are men as others be, yet
because neither their faith nor Gods love, which makes them members of the
Church, is visible, we affirm that this Church, consisting of holy and
faithful men, is altogether invisible. Christ is the head of this Church, to
this only the elect ca^ join themselves, we then acknowledge another Church
besides that, which co^teineth only Saints (for so should there be no visible
Church at all) but what company of men soever upon the earth does profess the
doctrine of the Apostles and Prophets, we profess that to be the true Church
of Christ, though many wicked men be found in it. Neither are we the first who
did invent and devise these things, as you say of us, but are ready to prove
the^ both by the holy scripture and by authority of Antiquity. Comfort then
your self, Campian, as much as you can, with the wits of our University men,
and promise to your self great things from us, but see you bring more
dexterity of wit, or else without doubt you can never deceive us with this
shallow conceit. If you should propound these foolish and childish things in
the populous assemblies of our University men, I persuade my self, they would
not only tear to pieces these your childish shifts, but do as much by you too,
for abusing so shamefully their learned conceits.

EDMUND CAMPIAN. The fourth Reason, which is general Councels.
AGreat controversy for the keeping of the ceremonies of the old law, which in
the Primitive Church much moved the minds of faithful people, was by a
Council gathered together, of the Apostles and some elders decided. Children
then believed their Parents, and sheep their Sheepheards, charging them in
this sort: Act. 15
It has pleased the holy Ghost, and us; after this there were holden four
general Councels of ancient Fathers, for the rooting out of heresy, which
budded up abundantly in every age, which were of such authority above Greg.
li. 1. epist. 24.
1000. years ago, that Gregory made ye four Councels, equal to the
Evangelists.
great honor was attributed unto them, as though it had been unto the four
Gospels. I will seek no further; even here in our own Country by an Anno 1.
Elizab.
act of Parliament, the self same Councels do retain still their former
force, and pure authority: which said act I will here allege: And call
thee, thy self O England, my most loving Country, to witness. If thou
reverence, as thou pretendest, those Councels, Nic. Can. 6. Chal. act. 4. and
16. Constan. c. 5. Ephesians. conc. in epist. ad Nestorium. Nic. con. 14 Chal. act.
11 Nic. conc. apud. Soc. lib. 1 cap. 8. Vide Chalc. can. 4.15.23
then will thou yield up the supremacy to the Bishop of the chief sea, that
is, to Saint Peter. Then will thou acknowledge upon the altar, the unbloody
sacrifice of the body and blood of Christ. Then will thou pray the blessed
Martyrs and all the Saints in Heaven to make intercession to Christ for thee.
Then will thou restrain these leacherous Apostataes from their filthy carnal
copulation, and open incest. Then will thou build up many things, which now
thou pullest down, and wish many things undone, which now thou do.
Moreover, I promise and undertake, as occasion and time shall serve, to prove,
that the Campian makes all Synods equal with the Gospel.
Councels holden at other times, and namely the Council of Trent, have been of
equal authority and credit with the four first Councels. Wherefore then
should I not come to this place of trial, securely and courageously, to mark
into what corner my enemy will creep, seeing I am This is false, ancient
Councels do not confirm the Romish faith.
aided with the valiant and piked garrison of all the Councels? For I will
allege both most manifest matter which he shall not be able to wrest aside,
and also most substantially proved, which he dare not contemptuously reject.
He will perhaps go about to trifle out the time, with multiplying of many
words: but if you be the men that I have always taken you for, you will take
so good heed unto him, that he shall neither rob you of your ears nor eyes. If
there shall be any at all so mad, as to oppose himself against the sages of
all Christendom, and those, such men as for holiness of life learning and
antiquity, are too great to be challenged; I would willingly behold that
brazen face, the which when I shall show you, I will leave the rest to your
imaginations. In the mean while, I will give you this caveat, that whosoever
affirms, that a general Council, The Council of Trent was neither a full
Council, nor lawfully held. And so both the Emperor and the French King have
judged. Sleidan. anno 1551. lib. 33. The assembly of certain men.
duly and orderly kept, and finished, is of no force or authority, the same
man seems to me, to be one of no judgment, nor of any wit; and not only an
ass in divinity, but also void of discretion in worldly policy. If ever the
spirit of God illuminated the Church, surely then that time is most fit to send
down the holy Ghost, when the religion, perfection, knowledge, wisdom and
honor of all Churches dispersed throughout all Christendom, are assembled
together into one City: and using all means both divine and humane, whereby
the truth may be searched out, Matthew 18.
they call upon the holy Ghost, promised Joh. 14.
by God unto them, that by his assistance, they may establish godly laws, for
the safe and wise government of the Church. Now let there some petty peart
heretical Doctor leap out, let him look up stately, let him scorn and
mock, let him lay all shame aside, let him saucily give judgment of his own
judges, what game, what pastime shall he make; we have spied out such a one,
even Martin Lib. de capt. Bab.
Luther, who says, that he more esteems of the voices of two honest and
learned men (ye may well imagine his own, and Philip Melancthons) if they come
together in Christ's name, then he did of all general Councels. O worthy
company! We have found out also, another of the same crew, to wit Martini
Kemnitij examen Conc. Tridentini.
Kemnitius, who has undertaken to examine the Council of Trent, by his own
unreasonable giddie brain: what has he gained? an evil name: so that he,
except he prevent it by recanting, shall be buried for an heriticke with
Arrius: whereas the Council of Trent, the elder it waxes, by so much more it
shall flourish daily and continually. The famous praises of the Council of
Trent.
O good Lord, with what diversity of people out of all countries, with what
choice of Bishops throughout all Christendom, with what excellency of Kings
and Commonweals, with what profound divines, with what Two Bishops were taken
in adultery and put to death. Illyric.
devotion, with what lamentations, with what abstinence and fasting, with what
flowers of Universities, with what knowledge of strange tongues, with what
sharp wits, with what study, with what endless reading, with what store of
virtues and exercises was that sacred place replenished? I heard with my own
ears Bishops rejoice, being men of great birth and very well learned, of
which, one was Anthony Archbishop of Prage (who created me Priest) for that
they had been brought up certain years in that famous School; so that they
acknowledged no benefit that ever the Emperor Ferdinando bestowed on them (to
whom otherwise also they thought themselves no little beholding) to be more
princely and bountiful, then this was, that by him being sent in Embassage
from Pannonia, they sat in the Council of Trent, together with the rest of
the Fathers there present. This thing the Emperor full well perceived, who
greeted them in this sort at their return: We have maintained you in an
exceeding good School, why made the adversaries no have hither, being promised
to go and come safe; that they might openly have confuted them, against whom
they croke like Toads out of their hoales. They have broken promise (say they)
with Husse and Hierome, who? the heads of the Council of Constance. That is a
lie: Ioh. Huss.
for they made them no promise. And yet Husse had not been put to death; if
that he, false and treacherous villain as he was, not only by an escape, which
the Emperor Sigismundus had forbidden him upon pain of death; and being
taken, was brought back again: but also by This is false, for he broke no
conditions.
breaking certain covenants which he had made in writing with the Emperor had
not lost the benefit of that safe conduct: Husse was hedged in for his hasty
knauerie; for whereas at his country in Bohem, he had stirred up barbarous
tumults, and was therefore commanded to appear before the general Council at
Constance, he contemned the prerogative of the Council, and made suite for a
safe conduct to the Emperor. The Note.
Emperor sealed him one; all Christendom, which is greater then the Emperor,
unsealed it again: the arch heretic would not recant, and therefore he was
burnt: Hierome of Prage.
As for Hierome of Prage, he came privately without any safe conduct at all to
the Council of Constance, and being apprehended did appear, and had liberty
to say what he could, and was very courteously entreated, and suffered to go
abroad at his pleasure. He was cured of his disease, and abiured his heresy,
he fell again, and therefore was burnt. But wherefore do they so often
inculcate and call to memory, this one example amongst six hundred? Anno 1518
Let them peruse their chronicles: Martin Luther, one hated both of God and
man, personally appeared at Augusta before the Cardinal Caietane, and did he
not belche forth of his venemouse gorge, what poisoned speeches he could, and
at length being protected with the Emperor Maximilians safe conduct, went he
not safe away? Anno 1521
The same Martin Luther being sent for, to come to Worms, though he had both
the Emperor, and almost all the Princes of the Empire his Enemies, did he not
upon the Emperors word come and go safe? Finally, did not the ringleaders of
the Lutherans and Zuinglians in the presence of Charles the fifth, the open
enemy to all heretics, Conqueror, and sovereign, upon a truce granted them,
exhibit at an assembly at Augusta, August. confess. Vide acta Conc. Trid.
the confession of their faith, which before they had so often altered, and
went they not without hurt away? Likewise the council of Trent provided for
the adversary most large warrants to come and go safe, but he would not use
the same. He beasteth forsooth of himself in corners, where when he can utter
three greek words, he may seem to be a great learned man: He flies from the
light, which would make a slender scholar to be accounted learned, and so
advance him to seats of great dignity. Let them purchase for us English
Catholics, if they love their souls health, There is not the same reason.
such a safe conduct in writing: we will not allege Husse for our excuse,
but make our speedy repair to the court, putting our whole trust in the
Queens Majesty's word. But that I may return thither from whence I digressed:
All general Councels are on my side, the first, the last, the rest; these
shall be my weapons. Let the adversary expect, a well headed dart, which he
shall never be able to shake off. God grant that Satan in him may be quite
overthrown, and Christ reuined.

WILLIAM WHITAKERS. The answer to the fourth Reason.
THE next place is concerning Councels, not much differing from the former; for
what is a Council but the flower, and as it were a little model of the whole
Church? And therefore whatsoever may be said of Councils, it appertains to
the nature of the Church; but when as these for more plainnes sake, are
sometimes distinguished, I do easily permit you to propound them distinctly.
DVR. But you coutemne the authority of the holy Ghost, speaking by Councels,
which all the ancient Fathers have had in singular respect. WHIT. page 290. You
accuse us falsely, for howsoever we assent not with you, who make them shoulder
the Scriptures with equal authority; because we know that both they might, and
also have grossly erred in many things, as the Fathers have confessed, and ye
your selves cannot deny; yet wherein they are consonant with the Scriptures, we
embrace their authority* and have them in singular respect, and estination. And
in preferring the Scripture before them, we follow but the example of the
Fathers. August. de Baptis. contra Donat. lib. 2. cap. 3. idem contra Maxim.
lib. 3* cap. 14. and de vnitat. Eccle. cap. 16. Hieron. in Galatas. Ambros.
Epist. 32.
Now the name of Councels is honorable, their credit singular, and their
authority of great esteem, and you do never more insolently brag, then in
this place: for when you do but name Councels, you think that you have
sufficiently confuted your adversaries, and promise unto your self assured
victory. Neither will I go about to extenuate the dignity of Councels,
wo^dering that DVR. Nazianzene d^d not judge inturiously nor writet^ bitterly
of Councels, as you suppose; but only a^fi^med that the fraud and malice of the
heretics of those times, hindered the assembling of lawful Councels. WHIT.
page 264. It seems you have not read his Epistle, or but very sle^gtly,
^eeing he therein plainly set^eth down two reasons why he absented himself
from the Council, when he was called: f^^st the weakness of his body, and
secondly, his judgment concerning Councels: which was, that he thought such
assemblies were to be avoided, because he had seen no good of any Synod, and
that hereby occasions of evils were rather increased then taken away. DVR. Yea
but he has shened his contrary judgment vvriting his Cledonius. WHIT. Nothing
less: but only he affirms that he would subscribe to the Apollinarian
heretics, if they could prove that they were received of the west Council;
which he knevv they could not.
Nazianzene, Nazianz. Epist. 4^. ad Procop. (...).
should so unjustly judge, and so injuriously write of them. For he says, that
he had deliberated with himself and fully resolved to avoid Episcopal
Conuocations, because he had never seen a good issue of any Synod. Which
howsoever it has bin true of many, which by reason of the ambition, and busy
meddling of some, have not taken away ancient controversies, but rather have
sowed the seed of new contentions: yet many Councels have been approved and
commended by their most wished event. Whereas therefore you appeal to
Councels, we will follow you in many, and in their most weighty censures and
decrees: for in all neither do you your selves judge it necessary. But let us
now hear you discoursing concerning Councels.

A weighty question, (say you) concerning lawful cere^^^ies, was cleared in a
Council of the Apostles and Fld^rs assembled together. The children believed
their Parents, and the Sheep their Sheph^ard, commanding in this form of
speech; It bath pleased the holy Ghost and us. Where you make mention of a
Council most excellent, and above all exceptions: in which nothing was done
rashly, peruersely, and factiously (as sometimes in other Councels it has been
accustomed) but al things divinely, and by the authority of the holy Ghost
himself. and therefore if we did not believe this Council, we were unworthy of
the name, either of children or of sheep. This Council resolved that important
question concerning ceremonies, and freed the necks of Christians from that
most grievous yoke of Mosaicall rites: whereby the greater cause of grief is
offered us by you, who have imposed upon the Church, contrary to the express
commandment of this Council, another yoke much more intolerable, then that of
Moses. For this is clear and manifest, that the ceremonies brought into the
Church by you, and imposed upon the consciences of men, are twice as many, as
those which in time past Moses by Gods express commandment enjoined unto the
people of Israel. August. ad Ianuar.
And this is that of which DVR. Angustine when he writ this, did not after
your manner carpe at Ecclesiastical ceremonies, but shows that be would
not have them instituted at every man's pleasure. For in his first Epistle to
Ianuariu^ he thus vvriteth. If the whole Church use any of these, it i^
insolent madness to dispute, whether such a thing is to be done or no? WHIT.
page 296. Augustine condemns the multitude of ceremonies in his time, and
would have us rest contented with those few ceremonies, which are commended
unto us in the Scriptures. Ad Ianuar. Epist. 118. cap. 1. and Epist. 119.19.
His words which you allege, I willingly embrace; for we use and esteem
those ceremonies, which all Churches have received as necessary for order and
comeliness. But of this kind yours are not, neither can you wrest those
speeches concerning the ceremonies of the Church to approve your Traditions:
seeing the Church of Rome long since ceased to be the Church of Christ.
Augustine long agone complained, namely that by the multitudes of ceremonies,
the state of Christians, was become worse then the state of the Jews
themselves, which if Augustine spoke of the ceremonies of his time, how much
more would he have thus complained, had he seen the great multitudes, which
were afterward added to them. But if the Apostles and Elders according to the
meaning and judgment of the holy Ghost, did determine that those ceremonies
which the Lord himself had ordained, were to be abolished, how intolerable is
your boldness, who contrary to the decree of this spirit, and Council have
obtruded, upon Christians your innumerable traditions and needles ceremonies.
Did the Lord therefore abolish his own ceremonies, that he might establish
yours? did he abroga^^ a few, that he might bring in a multitude? did he ease
us of lighter, that he might impose heavier. Whereby it appears that the
divine institution of this Council, which, as it was before all other in time,
so above all other in excellency, is most wickedly by you violated. And is it
to be thought possible, that you, who have demeaned your selves so impiously
toward these Parents and Pastors, will be more respective toward others? Nay
there is not any Council, which you have not long ago trodden under feet, so
that every one of you, are infoulded in a thousand exco^munications. And dare
you, Campian, notwithstanding make mention of Councels, which if they were in
any force, surely you should no more be tolerated in the Church, then Publicans
and Pagans. There follows this, say you, for the rooting out of heresy, the
four general Councels of the ancient Fathers, which were of such strength and
authority, that a thousand years since, they were had in singular account even
as Gods word it self. And we likewise do freely confess, that the authority
of those four Councels was good and profitable. Luthe. de Council.
Read what learned Luther has writ of those four general Councels, and so
also you may know our judgment of them. Notwithstanding there is no reason why
we should assent unto Gregory, Gregor. lib. 1. Epist. 24.
who professes that he does embrace and reverence these four Councels, as the
four books of the holy Gospel. For this were rather to violate the Gospel,
then to reverence the Councels. Although as I take it, Gregory's meaning was,
that what was decreed and concluded in these four Councels, out of Gods word
against Arriu^, Eu^^onius, Macedonius, Nostorius, Eutyches, and Diosc^ru^, that
he firmly embraced, and would not suffer these decree, which are approved by
the Evangelical writings, and in which this impious heresy is condemned, to
be revoked and repealed no more then the Gospel it self, neither can I
imagine that it was Gregory's purpose to affirm this of all these Councels,
that the Council of Nice, Constantin^ple, Ephesus and Chalced^n, were fully
equal unto the holy Gospel in authority and dignity. And so we our selves do
not doubt, that those things which these Fathers have determined against those
heretics, before named concerning the consubstantiall subsistence of the
Father and the Son, of the divinity of the holy Ghost, of the one person of
Christ in two natures, are as true as the Gospel it self; not because these
Councels so judged and concluded, but because in the Gospel, the self same
doctrine of faith is delivered. Further you say, That also i^ ^^r own country,
by our Parliaments, the same Councels retain their ancient right. It is true
indeed, that in these and all other things, which they propound, if they be
consonant to the holy Scriptures, they do still retain their ancient right
and dignity. But lest you should suppose that we did ever attribute thus much
to these Councels, that we judge all that to be necessarily embraced,
whatsoever they have decreed; hear you now what our Church has thought and
ordained of these general Councels. Councels, not only may err, but also
sometimes have erred, In the Artic. of Religion, Artic. 21.
and that in these things, which belong to the rule of piety, and therefore
whatsoever by them is decreed as necessary to salvation, has no vertus nor
authority, unless it may be showed that it is taken ou^ of the holy
Scriptures. Cite you now these words, and then contest (as you call it) your
sweet country. And in like manner, this your most dear country in which you
were borne, brought up and graced, does contest, entreat, and beseech you, by
all those things, which are unto you most swee^e and best esteemed, that you
desist any more in this b^dde cause to be troublesome unto her; that you will
no^ corrupt her children with an impious and strange religion; that you will
make more preciou^ account of her dignity, then of a foreign enemy: and that
you would at length return thither, from whence you have stra^ed. And surely
you would not contemn this speech of your country, if you could, even for a
little space, lay aside, that preiudicate opinion which you have sucked from
Rome, and brought with you hither into England.

But let us hear, what is this your contestation? If, say you, you will
re^erence these four^ Councels, you will chiefly hon^r the Bishop of the
chief^ S^^, that is Peter. And so do we ascribe great honor, unto Peter, and
that worthily; neither do we contend with you about him; but this affirm,
that those things which were proper unto Peter, cannot in any wise appertain
to your Pope, who was never like either Peter or Paul. And in truth what madness
is this, so insolently to brag of Peter's great virtues, when in the mean
time, you cannot prove that your Popes are endued with any such? Do you suppose
that any man that is in his right wits, will think that Peter's faith, piety,
and all the rest of his virtues, have bin derived to your Pope by a lineall
descent, from so many other Popes, of whom a great number, were not men, but
monsters? This doubtless is a gross dotage, and fit to be taken away, Quouis
helleboro dignum.
with the mad man's purge, and as one says, for those diseases, reprehension is
the best ma^^^r of cure. Should I entitle your Gregori^ the 13. who now
governs at Rome, with the name of Peter? does he teach? does he feed Christ's
sheep? surely he cannot. Does he perform the duty of an Apostle, or of a
Bishop? nothing less. How therefore does he demean himself? Sitting in the
Vatican, he provoke to war, moves seditions, armeth subjects against their
Princes, and fills the whole world with vpro^^^^* Did Peter thus behave
himself? is this to be Peter? can you deny that these things be true, and
shall I then yield unto him the like honor, that is due to Peter, being so
unlike him in conditions? But let us further examine your words; You will (say
you) chiefly honor the Bishop of the chief Sea, that is Peter; but by what
Council do you prove that necessary? you allege the Council of Nice Can. 6.
In which there is not so much as any mention of the Bishop of the chief Sea,
or of Peter; neither in truth could any thing be produced of greater force
against your Bishop, then that decree of Nicene Synod: for it matcheth all
Metropolitanes and Patriarchs in an equal rank of honor with the Bishop of
Rome; neither does it attribute any more to him, then unto ye Metropolitanes of
Antioch, Alexandria, and the rest of the other Provinces. If you please, you
shall hear the words of the Council: Council. Nicen. Can. 6.
DVR. This cause by you alleged makes much for establishing the authority of
the Roman Sea over all Churches. For when as the Fathers to prove the
authority of the Bishop of Alexandria, allege the custom of the Church of
Rome, they show hereby that Alexandria depends upon Rome; as the mother
Church from which she has all her authority. And that this was their mind
appears by the words of Paschasmus the Popes Legate in the Council of
Chalcedon, and is also proved by the 39. Canon translated out of Arabicke into
Latin. The same Fathers likewise assembled at Sardis approved the Supremacy of
the Roman Sea. WHIT. page 299. Nothing could be alleged more direct against
the Romish Supremacy then this Canon, wherein their own proper limits of
jurisdiction are assigned to every Metropolitan. For if the Pope should rule
over the whole Church, it had bin absurd to limit every one their own
borders, wherein they should have supreme authority according to the custom
of the Church of Rome. Neither does this prove the supremacy of the Romish
Church, because they allege her custom and example, as you ignorantly
infer: seeing an example may be taken as well from an equal or inferior, as
from a superious. It is no marvel if Paschasinus, being the Popes Legate,
spoke for the supremacy of the Roman Sea, neither is his testimony to be
regarded, being a party. Your Arabicke Canon is merely Arabicke, and not
Nicene; for of this Council there were only 20. Canons written in Greek, and
not in the Arabian tongue. The Canon of the Council of Sardis helps you not,
seeing the Council of Afric testifies that i^ was counterfeite.
Let the ancient custom be in force, which was in Egypt, Libya, and
Pentapolis, that the Bishop of Alexandria have the chief dignity, over all
these things: because also this was the custom of the Bishop of Rome: and in
like manner at Antioch, and in the rest of the Provinces, let the Primacy and
authority be received unto the Churches.

You see (Campian) I suppose that no extraordinary prerogative has been given
to the Bishop of Rome: and that his Province and Jurisdiction has been
circumscribed within determined bounds and borders. Ruffin. lib. Decim^.
And after this same manner does Ruffinus, (if you do not credit us) interpret
this Canon. This Ancient custom is observed at Alexandria, and in the city
of Rome, that the Bishop of Alexandria take the charges of Egypt, and the
Bishop of Rome of the Churches of the cities neire adjoining. And therefore let
the Bishop of Rome take care of the bordering Churches of the neighbor cities,
with which the Nicene Synod has enjoined him to rest satisfied; and hereafter
let him not trouble himself, with the care of our Churches, which appertain
not unto his charge. And so you see, that if you had been well advised, you
would never have mentioned this Council. Act. 4.16.
But you adioyne also unto this the Council of DVR. The Council of Chalcedon
stands so directly for the supremacy of the Roman Sea, that you ca with no
shifts avoid it. For therein Dioscorus, as for diuer, other faults, so
especially for excommunstating the Pope, was deprived of Episcopal authority,
Act. 3. Besides they writ thus to Pope Leo. He exte^deth his madness against
him, unto whom the custody of the vineyard is committed by our Savior, and
against thee who labourest to unite the body of the Church. Again, they desire
that their decrees should be confirmed of the same Pope. And Paschasinus says
that the Pope of Rome, vvhichus head of all the Churches, deprived him; because
as Lucentius adds, he presumed to call a Council without the authority of
the Apostolic Sea. WHIT. page 302. This council is so far from confirming the
Popes supremacy, that it plainly overthrows it: for though Pope Leo with all
earnestnes opposed against the honor and dignity of the Bishop of
Constantinople, yet he obtein^^ of the Council that degree of honor which he
desired, which he could not have done if the Council had acknowledged the
Popes supremacy. Concerning Dioscorus, he was deprived for many notable crimes,
as murder, blasphemy against the Trinity burglary, adultery and
excommunicating the Pope; and you make this last a special cause of his
deprivation, as though it were a more heinous crime then murder, adultery and
blasphemy. Therein aduauncing your Pope, as your manner is, above the blessed
Trinity. The committing of the vineyard to Peter, makes nothing for your Pope,
who is not Peter, nor any thing like him. Prove that it was committed to the
Pope and you say something. The confirmation of the decrees was not a thing
proper to the Pope, but also appertained to the other Patriarckes and
Metropolitanes; yea to the Emperors. Paschasinus and Lucentius accusing
Dioscorus, say not a word of the Popes supremacy, although they were the Popes
Legates. And whereas he calls Rome the head of all the Churches, his meaning
was, that it was the first, greatest, and most famous Church.
Chalcedon, that thereby you may prove that the chief honor is to be ascribed
unto the Bishop of the chief sea, that is unto Peter. I grant, Campian, that
this sea in time past, was had in the chief place of honor, and I know very
well that the chief dignity was attributed to the Bishop of this sea; the
reason whereof you may easily perceive out of the self same Council. For
this was not done by any commandment of Christ, that the Church of Rome
should excel in dignity, all other Churches of the world: but the Fathers
testify, that the cause why that City was invested with greater privilege
than others, was this, because it was the chief seat of the Empire. You may
find the words themselves in the same act which you cite. Act. 16.
But if (as you say) the Church of Rome ought to have the pre-eminence above
all other Churches in the world, in divine authority, what then meant the
Chalcedonian Fathers, to affirm that there were some prerogatives granted
unto that Church, for this cause alone; in that Rome was the head of the
Empire, and therefore they thought that the Bishop of that City, which was the
Empress of the world, was worthy of some more honor than others? And this
honor to speak of was only this; that the Bishop of Rome should have the
pre-eminence of place in Councels, the prioritie of speech in delivering his
opinion, and the precedence in rank and place. And thus neither do we our
selves, now much envy this honor to the Roman Bishop, but that if so it
please him, he may enjoy it; so that he do not (because he has the chief
place) imperiously tyranize over his brethren, as he has done for many ages,
and persuades himself that he may do it lawfully. But seeing it pleases you
to object unto us, the Counsel of Chalcedon, that you may challenge the chief
honor, as due to your Bishop of the chief Sea, before I proceed further, I
would gladly you should resolve me in this question, why the DVR. This was not
the judgment of the whole Counsel, but of certain men. Neither did the
Constantinopolitanes require that their Sea should be of equal authority with
the Sea of Rome, but that it should have the like sovereignty in
Ecclesiastical matters, and obtain^ the next place to it. WHIT. page 306. This
was the judgment of the whole Council, except the Popes own Legates
Paschasinus, Bonefacius, and Lucentius, who in vain opposed: for the decree
runs thus. These things we all say, these things please us all. And contrary
to your assertion, these Fathers decreed that the Bishop of Constantinople
should be matched in equal privilege, with the Bishop of Rome; which equality
of privileges, cannot stand with the vnequality of authority. Neither did
prioritie of place prove, that the Bishop of Rome had any priority of
authority, s^^ing this was only for orders sake: otherwise by the same reason
the Bishop of Constantinople should have had the like authority over the Bishop
of Alexandri^, because he sat above him.
Fathers of this Council, made the Sea of Constantinople, equal to the Sea of
Rome? for so they decree, and diffinitiuely determine: that seeing great
privileges were granted to the Church of Rome, in respect of the Empire of
the city, they thought it a matter of great equity, that the new Rome that was
now graced with the Empire and Senate, should enjoy the same privileges which
old Rome had done. And although the Bishop of Rome did most earnestly contend
and labor, that the Bishop of Constantinople might not be made his equal, yet
he could not by his best means effect his desire, but that the decree of the
Council prevailed, which had equalized the Bishop of Constantinople, with the
Bishop of Rome. And therefore me thinks you have but ill defended the honor
and dignity of your Bishop, when you allege the decree of that Council.
Moreover, the Council of DVR. The filth Canon of the Council of
Constantinople, ascribed greater honor to the Roman Sea, then to any other.
WHIT. page 311. This honor was only of precedence and place, and not of
authority; as plainly appears in the words of the Council it self. Chap.
^8. and in that the like prerogative was granted in the next place to the
Bishop of Constantinople, and therefore by the like reason he might ^rrog^^^
authority over the whole Church.
Constantinople which you also cite, Canon. 5.
decreed no other thing for the Roman Sea, then that the Bishop of
Constantinople should have the prerogative of honor next to the Bishop of Rome.
And this we also confess, that in times past the Provinces were so
distributed, that Rome had the chief, Constantinople the next, and so every
one in their own order. But what makes that to this cause, which we have now
in hand? For this is not the honor which the Bishop of Rome challenges unto
himself: this not the height of power and majesty which he so often
arrogateth. Ephesians. Conc. in Epist. ad Nestor.
The Council also of DVR. In the Council of Ephesus diverse things are
contained, which approve the supremacy of the Sea of Rome, etc. WHIT. page
313. Campian cited the Epistle of the Council to Nestorius, wherein there is
nothing which any way favors the Popes supremacy; the which you perceiving,
do rake together other fragments concerning things which are not in
controversy, and leave out those points which make against you.
Ephesus is alleged by you with as little reason, seeing it ascribes nothing
to the Bishop of Rome, which did not also agree to other Bishops: for if you
take hold on this, that Celestinus the Bishop of Rome, was called the holy
president, and most reverend Father, because he threatened to excommunicate
Nestorius, unless he abiuted his heresy; these things are common unto the
Bishop of Rome with others: neither was he only entitled reverend, neither
could he alone pronounce judgment against heretics. But if these would rather
please you; This is the faith of the Catholic and Orthodoxall Church, unto
which all the Orthodoxall Bishops give their assent; you interpret these words
amiss. For in these words all the Orthodoxall Bishops are said not to assent
to the Church, but to the faith: and that faith, which the Fathers in those
their letters embraced, all Orthodoxall Bishops in every place have approved,
and we also do defend.

But what now follows in your contestation? Thou will (say you) acknowledge
the unbloody sacrifice of the body and blood of Christ on the Altar. And for
this you cite the 14. Canon of the Nicence Counsel, in which there is not so
much as any mention made neither of unbloody, nor of DVR. The word Sacrifice is
in the 14. Canon of the Nicene Council. And in the institutions of this
Council, it is said that the Lamb of God is on the holy table, which is
offered of the Priests without blood, etc. WHIT page 316. It is not to be found
in the words of the Council in the Greek, but they are your words of the
Tra^slator. And concerning the institutio^s, their authority was always
doubtful in the Church, neither do they make for you, seeing we grant that in
the right use of the Sacrament we receive the Lamb of God, Sacramentally.
sacrifice, nor of Altar. But Deacons are there prohibited to arrogate so much
unto themselves, that Bishops or Priests being present, they should take upon
them to administer the Sacrament of the Lords supper, because it was not
lawful for Deacons to deliver the Lords body unto Priests. Now it is an usual
thing to call bread the Lords body, because it is a Sacrament of the Lords
body; neither in the mean time do I deny that the supper of the Lord is called
by many of the DVR. The testimonies of the Fathers which you allege, wherein
the Sacrament is called an unbloody sacrifice, make nothing for you: seeing
that with them is called unbloody, not that is without blood but without
effusion of blood. WHIT page 318. The word (...), unbloody, used by them,
signifies such a thing as has no blood in it. If therefore this be (...), an
unbloody sacrifice, as the Fathers call it, then it is a Sacrifice without
blood, and not only without shedding of blood. Again if it be a sacrifice
wherein no blood is spilt, then is it not the sacrifice of Christ; for in this
blood was shed: nor any true sacrifice, for there is no sacrifice that has
blood without the shedding thereof. Heb. 9.22.
ancient Fathers, an unbloody sacrifice: both because we retain the
mysteries of Christ's death without any blood, and also offer up praises and
thanksgiving as it were for sacrifices unto God; and therefore Cyrill joins
in the supper, these together, unbloody sacrifices and praises. Cyril. ad
Regin. Eusebius de Demon. lib. 1.
And Eusebius writes, that we build an Altar to the Lord, of unbloody and
reasonable sacrifices, according to the new mysteries. Now if you ask what
manner of unbloody sacrifice this is, let Eusebius himself answer you in his
own words. He has delivered unto us, a DVR. Eusebius does not call it a
sacrifice, because it is a sole and bare memorial of the new Testament, as you
suppose: but because we offer an unbloody socrifice, for a memorial of a
bloody sacrifice. WHIT. page 323. Neither do I affirm it, for this is not a
bare memorial, seeing the thing it self, thereby signified, is therein
contained in the right use of it. But withal I deny that this memorial is the
same sacrifice which Christ offered, as you would have it; for how can a
sacrifice be ye self same with it of which it is a memorial? If therefore this
be an unbloody sacrifice, the^ it is not the Sacrifice which Christ offered,
which was bloody, and the memorial of no other sacrifice. See Eus. de Demon. l.
1.
memorial of his death, which we offer unto him in place of a Sacrifice.
Again, you propound the eleventh act of the Council of Chalcedon, which
contains nothing at all, which appertains to this matter in hand, neither
that place of Socrates which you quote. Lib. 1. cap. 8
You might have dealt better and more simply, if you would have cited the words
themselves, and not only quoted uncertain and confused notes in ye margent:
but you feared lest you might have bin too easily discovered, unless you had
masked your self under the vizard of deceit.

But let us examine the remainder of your contestation: Thou will pray (say
you) unto the Martyrs and all the Saints, that they would mediate for thee unto
Christ. Thou will restrain effeminate Apostataes from wicked copulation.
Whether the Martyrs and heavenly Saints pray unto Christ for us or no, DVR. You
cannot be ignorant of this, that the Saints pray for us, if in the doctrine of
faith you insist in the steps of the Fathers. WHIT. p. 328. We are ignorant
thereof because there is no such thing contained in the Canonical Scriptures,
which should not have bin omitted if the spirit of God had thought this
knowledge necessary. Neither is it con^^ouersed what the Fathers thought of it;
not does it follow because they have care of us, they pray for us; neither if
they do pray, therefore we should pray unto them.
we know not: but certain it is, that they are DVR. We know the blessedness of
the Saints in heaven, and therefore they are not ignorant of our misery in
earth. Again, Christ has reueiled unto the Saints living on the earth, divine
and heavenly things, and therefore he reueileth to the Saints in heaven, what
is done in earth. WHIT. page 330. Although we generally know that the Saints in
heaven are blessed, yet we know not their particular state, their actions, the
manner and degree of their happiness: and therefore if your argument be good, it
confuteth your self; seeing therefore it follows, that they likewise are
ignorant of our particular state and actions. Moreover Christ reueiled to the
Saints on earth, heavenly things, but not what was done in heaven, only he made
those divine mysteries know unto them, which were necessary to salvation;
whereof it follows not that he reuealeth to the Saints in heaven, what is
particularly done on earth, unless you can prove that there is the like
necessity of this knowledge.
ignorant of those things we do. And therefore we rather go unto DVR. S. Paul
desires the Romans and Corinthians to pray for him, and therefore we may
desire the same of the Saints in heaven. We know that we obtain all in the
name of Christ, but seeing all are not in like grace with God, the Fathers and
we have made choice of those who are most gracious. WHIT. page 336. The first
part of your answer confuteth the latter, unless you will say that Paul was
less gracious with God, then the Romans and Corinthians; and both are weak
and of no value: for first Paul prays not to them as you do to Saints, but
only desires them to perform a mutual Christian duty, which the Saints
living, who are acquainted with one another estate and wants, ought not to
neglect: if he had made the likesuite to a Prophet departed, John Baptist, or
James slain by Herod, you had somewhat to say. Lastly if those are to be made
choice of for mediators, who are in greatest grace with God, to whom should we
go but unto Christ his dearly beloved Son, in whom God is well pleased and
we reconciled? Ephesians. 16. Matthew. 3.17. Ioh. 14.6. 1. Tim. 2.5.
Christ, and pray unto him alone, who both knows our wants, and also will and
can grant unto us such things as we desire. You if you please may seek after
the pirling streams, but we will draw out of the fountain it self, neither
do we regard the inueterate custom of praying unto saints (for though this
custom is ancient; nevertheless, it has flowed from the wellhead of humane
superstition, and not from divine authority:) and whereas you adioyne your
conceit concerning the restraining offeminate Apostataes from wicked
copulation; and for this purpose allege some Canons of the Council of
Chalcedon: Council. Chale. can. 4.15.23.
in this you follow your old wont: for there is only one Canon to be found
against ministering widows, which after they had taken upon them the office of
ministration, married again: but how unjust this law is, it may easily
appear. 1. Tim. 5.
For when as Saint Paul would have these widows to be DVR. There is nothing
determined in the Scriptures concerning the age of vviddovves. That which S.
Paul vvriteth, was profitable for the insancie of the Church; but when the
Gospel had taken deeper ^oot in men's hearts, they began to prefer co^tiuency
before marriage. WHIT. page 337. Your impudency is to be admired, seeing S.
Paul has plainly determined that they should be fixtie years of age at the
least, 1. Tim. 5.9. neither were such Apostolical constitutions to endure only
for a time, but until the coming of Christ, as appears. 1. Tim. 6.14. And
whereas you say the Gospel after the Apostles times, took deeper root in
men's minds, it is merely false; it was indeed further propagated, but the
Church was never in after ages endued with the like measure of grace, and
extraordinary gifts, as it was in the Apostles times, when they received the
first fruits of the spirit. And I would pray the Reader to consider that
Duraeus does confess, that in the first age of the Church single life was not
so much desired of most, and in later times they only beg^n to prefer
continency before matriage. But how much better it had been to have kept the
Apostolic institutions, and to have changed compelled continency for lawful
and holy marriage, the lamentable event has sufficiently proved.
sixty years old at least; this Canon does admit of those who are but forty:
and yet notwithstanding permits them not to marry. But you will say they
have vowed single life: First, prove that they ought to make any such vow, and
then, that if they shall perceive, they can by no means perform their vow,
that they have done otherwise then they should when they married. DVR. You say,
to vovv that which we cannot perform, is to mock God; but this we may
perform, seeing God bestows the virtue of continency upon those, who
seek it by fasting and prayer: and seeing the vestall Nuns and Egyptian
Priests atteined unto it, and vvines also, when their husbands are long
absent upon necessary occasion. WHIT. page 340. God grants not all things we
pray for, but those things which he has promised, as appears in the example
of S. Paul 2. Cor. 12.8. But we have no promise of the gift of continency; yea
contrariwise Christ has taught us, that all are not capable of it, but those
only to who^ it is given Matthew. 19.11. and the Apostle says that it is a gift
proper to some only. 1. Cor. 7.7. and therefore we have no ground absolutely
to pray for it with assurance of being heard. The vestall Nuns and Egyptian
Priests are fit examples for your imitation, who lived single, but not chaste:
and yet the Vestals might marry when they were past thirty years old; and
some Egyptian Priests, as appears, Genesis 41.45. Concerning the chastity of
wives in their husbands necessary absence, the reason is not alike; for it is
one thing to impose upon our selves a voluntary necessity, and another to
undergo it when it is imposed by God. God will keep us in our ways, Psalm.
90.14. but not when we rashly thrust our selves into needless difficulties.
To make a vow in things indifferent, which you cannot possibly perform, is to
mock God, and to commit the crime of impious temeritie: but to persist in this
wicked vow is a double sin. And therefore that which the law prescribes is
to be embraced: The best course in evil promises made, is not to observe them;
and we are so to behave our selves, as Bernard counsels his sister. In evil
promises keep not touch. Bernard. ad Soror. de modo been viuendi Sermon. 62.
DVR. Bernard vvriteth not against the vovv of virginity, but only wills us
to break a dishonest vovv, neither is this book, you know, thought to be
his. WHIT. page 342. It is not much material who was the author, but his
judgment is to be embraced: seeing then that is a dishonest vow, the
performance whereof is joined with dishonestie, it follovveth that the vovv of
single life is such, when as it causes men to burn in the flame of lust, and
therefore is rather to be broken then observed.
In a dishonest vow change thy purpose. Do not perform that which thou have
vowed unadvisedly; for that promise is impious which is wickedly performed. Now
what can be more wicked and odious in the sight of God, then to be inwardly
inflamed with the fire of lust, and to refuse that lawful mean^^ whereby it
might be quenched? But you are always harping upon this string; that they are
bound by the laws of a vow: Cyprian. lib. 1. Epist. 1. 1. Pet. 1.
therefore let Cyprian make you answer. DVR. The words of Cyprian are not to
be understood of Virgins already consecrated unto God, but he wills those who
will not persevere in virginity, that they do not consecrate themselves to
Christ, but rather marry, WHIT. page 343. Cyprian speaks plainly of such
Virgins as were already consecrated, for he reprehendeth such as having
consecrated themselves to Christ, did live incontinently, and wills them, if
they will not persevere in chastity, to marry. lib. 1. Epistol. 11. And
Erasmus thought thus as appears by a marginall note of his. Here marriages
are permitted to holy Virgins.
If they have by their vow, consecrated themselves to Christ, 1. Pet. 1.
let them persevere honestly and chastely without any feined devises. But if
they will not or cannot perse^ere, their best course is to marry. And would
Cyprian, think you Campian, have given this counsel to Virgins, if he had
judged such marriages wicked, or no better than public incest, as you in your
intemperate style term it? And indeed how much more honest course were it for
you Monks and Friars, to avoid your too too public and notoriously wicked
fornication, by embracing chaste marriage? for so it might come to pass, Plus
secund.
as your old Pope Pius was wont to say: That many of you might be saved in
marriage, which are now damned in single life: But he that is filthy, let him
go forward in his filthiness unto his old age; and let him that is holy, ^lie
uncleanness, and prefer sanctimonie of life, before vice and wickedness. And
these are the maine matters which you have delivered unto us, in that your
grave contestation, and have labored to persuade by interposing the authority
of Councels. But you might have considered (Campian) that the counterfeit names
of Councels, ought to be of far less authority with us, then the most
undoubted truth of Gods word. And whereas you further affirm, that The Synods
of other times, and namely that of Trent, are of equal authority and credit
with those first Councels: I must tell you, I believe you not, although you
promise and take upon you to prove it, when need requires. You promise indeed
much, but perform nothing. But here I entreat the godly Reader, and beseech
all Christians, that they would attentively mark, what Campian here avouches,
to wit, that all Synodes, and namely that of Trent, are equal to the four
general Councels: which four Councels, are by DVR. Gregory does not match
the four Councels in equal authority with the four Gospels; but only
says, that as he does undoubtedly and certainly believe the scriptures, so
also the four Councels. WHIT. page 348. Gregory says, that he does embrace
and reverence the four Councels as the four books of the Gospel, Epist.
libr. 1. Epist. 24. And what is this, but to make them equal? For if there be
any inequality, woe cannot embrace and reverence them both alike.
Gregory, whom Campian cites, marched in equal authority with the four
Gospels: from whence it necessarily follows, that all Councels of other times
are of the same authority and credit with the four Evangelists. I will not
urge this point further, neither will I now shake you up, as you usually do
Master Luther, but rather leave you to be beaten with the rod of men's silent
judgments. After this you being shadowed with this impenitrable shield of
Councels, enter the lists, and observe whether your adversary conuaieth
himself; for so great a warrier you are, such a skillful Champion, and so
fierce in fight, that as soon as you but show your self, forthwith all your
enemies betake them to their heels; and eftsoons you declare how you mean to
behave your self in this fight, and what a great slaughter you intend to make.
But take heed, Campian, least that may worthily be applied to you, which is
spoken in the Proverbs: He that is rashly confident, before the conflict, is
commonly a coward in the combat.

You speak much of the dignity of Councels, which we also acknowledge to be
very great, but nevertheless, the holy Ghost is not bound to multitudes of
men, to stately preparations, nor to sumptuous pomp. And we may often observe
that in Councels there is much contending amongst contrary factions, and
sometimes the greater part prevails against the better. You say that Luther
durst presume to affirm, that he preferred the judgment and suffrages of two
good and learned men, before the Councels. And in truth why might he not
prefer them; and who could justly find fault with that speech? Seeing Gerson
the Moderator of the Council of Constance, doubted not to prefer the
judgment of one man, before the whole Council. DVR. Gerson did never prefer
the judgment of one man before a whole Council. WHIT. page 349. It is
untrue, for he thus writes. We ought rather to b^leeue in a point of ^octrine
a simple man not authorized, but yet excellently learned in the scriptures,
the^ the Pope. Again a man thus learned, ought to oppose himself against a
general Council, if he perceive that the greater part incline to that which
is contrary to the Gospel, either through malice or ignorance, Gers. de exam.
doctr. 1. par. Considerat. 5.
We are, says he, to give more credit unto a man learned in the holy
Scriptures alleging catholic authority, then to a general Council: Tit. de
elect. can. signifi^^sti.
which also Pa^ormitan has confirmed, writing in this manner: We ought (says
he) rather to believe a simple lay man, alleging the Scripture, than the whole
Council together. You say further, That Kemnisius dared to peise the Council
of Trent in the balance of his own giddie brain. But Kemnisius did not
examine that Council by his own square, but by the rule of Gods holy word:
And what gained he? (say you) and answering your self in your own question,
you say, nothing but infamy: If Kemnisius have not your good word, it is no
great wonder; for he has achieved that by his learning, virtue and industry,
that he may seem worthy of envy and hatred from such as you are. But if true
and deserved praise be due to good deeds, he has obtained an honorable
reward; even the everlasting glory of a good name. Yea (say you) if he take
not heed, he shall be buried with Arrius. But it behooued you, Campian, to
trouble your head, rather about your own, then Kemnisius his funerals: and
take you heed, least for your evil deeds, there be a sepulcher provided for
you amongst the damned.

Now here again you begin more highly to extol the Council of Trent; as
though we knew not the notable carriage and behavior of that famous and goodly
Synod. But for my part I easily allow you to be so far in love with it,
neither in truth will I become your rival. Sleidanus. Illyricus. Kemnisius.
Caluinus. Joan. Iuellus.
Others have spoken of it those things that are most true: both how it was
called, how handled, and how it was dismissed; and therefore I will not go
about to refute your affections. Let it enjoy, for me, that credit and
estimation which it can. Although every one knows thus much, that it was not
to be esteemed a Council of the whole Christian state, An assembly of
certain men.
but rather a Conuenticle of a few men running together into the same place.
There was there present a sort of sill^e Friars which did sustain the greatest
part of the burden, by disputing, writing and playing the Orators. For as for
the Bishops and chief Cardinals, they busied their heads about other matters,
for which they were specially assembled. But as I said, let it be such as it
was, for I am not offended at your commendations. And let the Bishops make
their glorious bragges, that they long abode in that school; out of which as
yet, as far as I know, not many, either learned divines or good Pastors have
come. You also usher in Antonie of Prage greatly congratulating with himself;
for you would needs show him some kindness, because he made you a Priest. Well;
Campian was created Priest by Antony Archbishop of Prage; surely I fear lest
you traveled too far to buy such base wares. But now you may celebrate your
Masses, seeing you are shaven and anointed, and made a Priest.

Moreover you demand and exceedingly triumph, why your Adversaries called
hither, and secured by the caution of public promise, did not make all have to
come unto it? In which you are sufficiently answered in the Apoligie of our
Church. For what should we do there? or to what end should we undertake so
long a journey, either that being mocked and abused, we might return home
again, or being burned in the Council, we should pay for our rashness? For
what place of disputation was left amongst those, who had every man plighted
their faith to the Bishop of Rome, and had religiously bound themselves by
oath, that they would never either do or say any thing againg his dignity and
pleasure? what therefore might be hoped for from these, which might draw any to
the disputation? besides the DVR. John Husse was not called by the Council of
Constance, neither received from it any public promise. And whereas you say
that it was decreed in this Council, that faith is not to be kept with
heretics, it is false. WHIT. page 352. The Emperor Sigismund gave him his
public warrant, which the Council most dishonorably infringed. And after they
had put Husse to death contrary to public promise, they enacted a law that a
promise made unto heretics by the Emperor or by any King or secular Prince,
should not hinder any Ecclesiastical Judges from proceeding against them
according to law. Council. Constant. Sess. 19.
calamity of John Husse of Bohemia, and Hierome of Prage, whom the Fathers
burned in the Council of Constance, brought just cause of fear. And yet Husse
came to the Council, trusting in the protection of a public promise. Yea but
(say you) the Constantine Fathers made no promise, and therefore did not break
any. But Sigismonde the Emperor gave his public warrant, unto whom it was fit
that he should give credit. Notwithstanding, coming to the Council, he was
presently apprehended and cast into prison, and pleading his cause before the
Council he was condemned and burned, although Sigismond stormed at it. Neither
did he fly, as you falsely report, neither in truth could he escape: but
thus this holy and innocent man was devoured like a sheep by furious wolves.
And what I pray you, did the Emperors authority, commandment, or public
warrantize profit him? The Emperor (say you) signed it, but the state of
Christendom, greater than the Emperors, did repeal it. And who then can be
safe, if the Emperors bear no sway in the Council? Neither does the horrible
murder of John Husse, contrary to a public warrant of protection, so much
discourage us from coming to your Councels, as that decree published by the
Council it self, That promise is not to be kept with Heretics. Should I then
believe you, who I know will keep no promise? If I do, surely I am worthy to
perish after the same manner. Hierome of Prage likewise came to the Council of
his own accord, and making public profession of his faith, was burned. So
that the case of these two, (than the which all Christendom at that time had
not any more holy or learned) shall remain as a perpetual monument of your
treachery and most horrible cruelty; and as a notable caveat unto all the
godly, to beware of you for the time to come. Concerning Luther, whom you,
cursed Friar, call the hatred of God and men, the hand and power of God
himself so defended him, that you could never hurt him. For will was not
wanting to you for the destruction of Luther, but opportunity. But he was safe
(say you) upon the Emperors word: neither in truth durst the Pope attempt
Luthers death, after the Emperor had promised him safety. For would Charles
the fifth, think you, have endured it? It was not behoofefull for the Pope to
have attempted any thing, whereby the Emperors faith might appear falsified:
for Charles would never so easily have put up such an indignity as Sigismond
had done in time past.

But (say you) they do too much brag in corners, in which when they have but
sounded three Greek words, they would seem to be very wise. They might
perhaps seem wise to you, who scarcely (as I suppose) can sound three Greek
words. They cannot (as you say) endure the light, which would bring a Scholar
into account, and would recall him into some place of reckening: and is this
it, Campian, which you hunt after, a name, same, places of account, to be
poynted at with the finger, and to be thus spoken of, This is the man advanced
to greatest grace, excelling in worth, and worthy place? Does this grieve you
that you are not highly esteemed of, and do not sit in high place? Well man,
proceed in your virtuous courses, and go forward in the way, into the which
you are entered to your great praise, and there is good hope you may ascend unto
such an high place as you are worthy of.

But whereas you desire, That the English Catholics may obtain a Patent of
impunity, if they love the salvation of their souls, surely you require a
thing unjust and unequal. For what liknes is there in this, that learned men
should assemble from all parts, unto a public Council, and that Runnagates
should be permitted to return unto their country? We will (say you) with
winged speed have unto the Court, relying our selves upon the Princes word. And
so indeed you safely may: for if she give her word, you may promise unto your
selves assured security. And I the more easily believe you speak the truth,
seeing some of you already, have hasted into the Gourt, having no promise from
the Prince to rest upon. But Campian, fly you rather to the Indians, that you
may take a survey of your Popes new Province: for our most wise Prince desires
no such guests, but banisheth you as far as she can from her.

But now at length you return thither whence you have digressed, and
gloriously conclude this point, concerning Councels: saying, The general
Councels make all for me, the first, last, and middle. You have gotten an easy
and speedy victory: I am almost persuaded that you are become another Caesar:
V^ni, vidi, vici, I came, I saw, I overcame; but this is not to dart your
Iaueling, which you say is looped for the purpose. I see words as it were tied
together with strings, or rather frantic speeches; but as yet I discern no
spear: either a Iauelin, or a thongue, or strength, or (which I rather
believe) all these are wanting unto you. Surely we of the Universities,
Campian, do greatly desire to try how skilfully you have learned to toss
your spear, and we hope it will come to pass, that you being pierced with our
darts, will at length know and acknowledge your audacious temeritie and
slothful ignorance of this fight.

EDMUND CAMPIAN. The fifth Reason, which is the Fathers.
AS that famous Surname of Christians increased first in Act. 1^.
Antioch, so 1. Cor. 12. Ephesians. 4.1. Cor. 14.
Doctors, that is, very deep Divines, and Prophets, that is, most famous
Preachers, first flourished there. Our Lord himself provided for his flock in
time to come, such a sort of Matthew. 13.23.
Scribes and wise men, as were experienced in the kingdom of God, bringing
forth both old and new things, that is, having God still both in Christ and
Moses, in the new and old Testament. How mischievous an act is it to expel with
rebuke these men, which were given us by God for a special benefit? The
Adversary has This is false, for we never hissed out any learned scribe.
expelled them. For what cause? for that if they had stood upright, he of
necessity had fallen down. So soon, as I thoroughly perceived that, without
any more adoo, I desired to make, not that flourishing fight which the common
sort of people use, when they contend one with another in the open streets,
but that severe and sharp combat, by which we buckle* one with another in
your Philosophy schools, foot by foot, and man by man, close joined together.
If we may once come to the Fathers, the field is fought, and the wager won,
on our side. For they are all ours, assure as Gregory the 13. is a most loving
Father to all the Churches children. For to S. Dion. Areo page de quo vide Adon
Treu. in Martyrel. Adon. Turon. Sing. Suid. Metap.
omit diverse places, which here and there dispersed, being gathered together
out of the ancient writings of the Fathers, do very fitly and plainly
fortify our faith: we have their whole books, which of set purpose do
expressly and copiously paint out lively that self same Evangelical religion
which we maintain. What orders of heavenly powers, what sacrifices, what
solomne rites, does that twofold Hierarchy of the Martyr S. Denis, make known
unto us? That matter touched Coment. in 1.13 17. Deuteronomy. Item in cap. ^ab.
Luther so nigh the quick, that he affirmed this blessed man's writings to be
most like to dreams and most pernicious. Dial. 5. and 11.
Caussaeus an obscure vpstart in France, following the steps of his Father
Luther, blushed not to term this Apostle S. This Denis is counterfeice and
forged.
Denis borne in a noble country, an old dotard. Cent. 2. cap. 10. Inst. lib.
1. cap. 13 number. 29.
The Magdeburgeans which lately set forth the Ecclesiastical history in
Centuries, were greatly grieved at S. This Ignatius is counterfeite.
Ignatius, so was Calvin also. Insomuch that these bench whistlers pried out
certain foul blemeshes and unsavory speeches in his Epistles. In these men's
conceits also S. Ireneus writ one foolish toy; and S. Clement, who was author
of the book called Stromatum, yielded out of his works cockle and dregs. And
the residue Cent. 2. cap. 5. vide Cent. 1. lib. 2. cap. 10. and Seqq.
of the Fathers of this age, which were in very deed They were Apostolic men,
yet they did not commit to writing all the things the Apostles did.
Apostolic men, left unto their posterity blasphemous and monstrous doctrine.
In Lib. de Prascript. contra Ha^.
Tertullian they greedily catch at that fault, which being told thereof by us,
they with us also detest. But let them call to mind, the book which he writ de
Praescriptionibus, wherewith the heretics of our time had so sound a blow, was
never hither to reprehended by the Church. How sufficiently and evidently has
This Hyppolitus is counterfeite.
Hyppolitus Orat. de consum. Secul.
Bishop of Portua foreshewed the reign of Luthers heresies, which was a strong
pillar* in Antichrists building? And for that cause they call him amost
childish scrible, and a masker. That Iuel. etc. causs. Dial. 8. and 11.
critical French man Caussaeus, and the Cent. 3. cap. 4.
Magdeburgeans do call S. Cyprian (who was the flower and honor of Afric) a
block head, a man cast out of Gods sight a deprauer of the true doctrine of
Penance: why, what has he done? he has writ for sooth one book of Virginity,
and another of those that are Relapsed, and certain treatises of the unity of
the Church, yea and such Epistles also unto Cornelius Bishop of Rome, that
except this blessed Martyr be disgraced, Peter Martyr the Vermillian, and all
his confeder a^s, must be taken for worse then adulternous and Church-robbers.
And lest I should stand too long upon particularties, aft the Fathers of that
age are Cent. 3. cap. 4.
generally This is false, for none do condemn or reject the Fathers of this
age.
condemned, as men that have corrupted wonderfully, the sincere doctrine of
Penance. Ho^ I pray you? the Austerity for sooth of the Canones Poenitenti^
ve^eres.
Canons which at that time was used, does highly displease this plausible sect,
which are fitter for Chambers then for Churches, and is accustomed to tickle
sensual ears, and to so ^cushions to every elbow: wherein, I say, wherein
has the next age offended? forsooth S. Chrysostom and other Fathers of that
time have foully darkened justification by faith only S. Gregory Nazianzen, whom
ancient writers for honor sake, have Surnamed Theologus. 1. the Divine, by
Caussaeus judgment, was but a Dia. 6.7.8
brabler and knew not what to say: S. Ambrose was bewitched of an evil spirit.
S. Beza in Act. Apost. ca. 23. Stancha. li. de Trin.
Hierome is as This which concerns S. Hierome is all false.
deeply damned in hell, as the devil himself, because he was injurious to the
Apostle, a blasphemer, a naughty man, a wicked fellow. Gregory Massonius
esteems more of one Calvin, then of an hundred Augustines, a hundred is but a
few. Lib. cent. Henry. 8. Reg. Aug^.
Martin Luther cares not a button, if there were against him a thousand
Augustines, a thousand Cyprians, a thousand Churches. I think it will be to no
purpose to wade any further in this matter, for who may marvel, if they that
thus rail against these worthy men, have also been saucy against Optatus,
Athanasius, Hilarious, both Cyrils, Epiphanius, Basil, Vincentius, Fulgentius,
Leo, and Gregory the Roman? And yet if there may be any just defense of an
unjust cause, I do not deny but the Fathers have, wheresoever you read in
their works, such matter, as may cause the Adversary to take pepper in the
nose, so long as they follow their own humors. For they that cannot away with
prescript days of abstinence, how is it likely that they can abide S, Basil,
S. Gregory Nazianzene, S. Leo, and S. Chrysostom, who have set forth in print
z^ch. 13. Praef. in cent. 5.
very godly sermons, concerning Lent, and Ember days, as things usually at
that time observed among Christian people. Can those men choose, which have sold
their souls for riches, bodily pleasure, dainty fare, and fine apparel, but
bear deadly hatred to S. Basil, S. Chrysostom, S. Hierome, and S. Augustine,
whose excellent books of the order, rule, and virtuous life of But these
Monks were most unlike to ours.
Monks, are usually in every man's band? May they that have intruded seruill
will into man, that have cut off all Christian funerals, that have set on fire
the relics of Saints, continue friendship with S. Augustine? who has penned
three whole books of man's But in these books he does not establish freewill.
freewill, Lib. 22. de Ciuit. Dei. cap. 8. and ser. de diverse. 34. and sequent.
one book of care to be taken for the dead, one long chapter of that his noble
work De ciuitat. Dei, concerning miracles wrought at the Churches, Chapels,
and sepulchers of holy Martyrs, and certain Sermons of the same matter. Can
such as measure faith by their own captiousnes, refrain from anger toward S.
Augustine, of whose penning there is extant a notable Cont. epist. Man. quam
vocant. fundam. c. 4.
Epistle against Manachie, wherein he confesses, that for his faith he will
cleave unto Yet in that very place Augustine preferred truth before all these.
Antiquity, unity, continual succession, and to the Church, which by
prescription alone challenges among so many heresies, the title of Catholic?
Li. 1. cont. Pa^men.
Optatus This Optatus is an old Father newly printed.
Bishop of Miletan confuteth such as took part with Donatus, by the Catholic
co^munity. Their wickedness he accuses by the decree of the Pope Melchiades; he
reproves Lib. 2.
their heresy by the succession of the Bishops of Rome. He displaieth their
Lib. 3.
madness, by their dafiling both of the blessed Eucharist, and also of the holy
oil. He abhors their Lib. 6.
sacrilege, in breaking down of holy Altars, whereupon Christ's body is laid,
and also in polluting of the Chalices, which contained Christ's blood: I would
gladly know what they think of Optatus, who is commended by S. Aug. lib. 1
cont. Parmen. De Unit. ca. 16. and lib. 3 de Doct. Christ. c. 40.
Augustine as a worthy and Catholic Bishop not inferior to S. Ambrose, and S.
Cyprian, and whom S. Fulgent. li. 2. ad Monim. Vide epist. Synod. Alex. ad
Feli. 2.
Fulgentius also records to have been an holy man and faithful Interpretor
of S. Paul, not unlike unto S. Augustine, and S. Ambrose. They read S.
Athanasius Creed in their Churches: Do they for all that bear him any good
will, who has highly commended as an ancient writer in an exact book, S.
Antony that hermit of Egypt, and also has humbly appealed, with the Council
of A counterfeit Epistle.
Alexandria unto the Sea Apostolic of S. Peter? How often does S. Prudentius
in his Hymns pray unto the blessed Martyrs? what Hymns does he endite in
their praise? how often does he worship the King of Martyrs at their ashes and
bones? will they allow of this man? S. Hierome in the defense of Relics, and
honor of Saints writes against Vigillantius, and for the pre-eminence of
virginity against Iouinian: will they tolerate this? An high solemn feast was
kept by Vide Epist. de Ambros. ad Epist. It al. Fom. 3. Sil^^ and tiusdem Amb.
Epist. 85. Item Sermon. 91.
S. Ambrose in the honor of his Patrones Geruasius and Protasius, to the great
reproach of the Arrians; which act the holy August. lib. 22. de ciuie. Dei.
cap. 1.
Fathers have highly commended, and God himself adorned with many miracles:
will they be friends with S. Ambrose? Greg^r. Tur. lib. de gloria Mar. cap. 46.
Metaphrast.
S. Gregory the great, that Apostle of Gregory the great was neither our
Apostle, nor an Apostle at all.
ours, is flat on our side and for that title is hated of our Adversaries, whom
Calvin in his fury does deny to be brought up in the Just. lib. 1. cap. 11. n.
5.
school of the holy Ghost, because he called holi^ Images the books of
unlearned people. A whole day would not be enough for me to reckon all the
Epistles, Sermons, Homilies, Orations, Treatises, and disputations of the old
Fathers, wherein of set purpose both gravely and eloquently, they have
confirmed our Catholic doctrine. So long as these books of these Fathers
shall be sold at the Stationers shop, in vain are the havens and sea coasts
watched so narrowly; to no purpose, are houses, coffers, and chests straightly
searched; to no end, are penal proclamations set upon so many gates. For none
of our late writers, neither Harding, nor Sanders, nor Allen, nor Stapleton,
nor Bristol, do more vehemently inueigh against these their new found dreams,
then those Fathers do, whom I have named: which things when I well considered,
my courage began to rise, and I had a desire to fight, in which conflict, on
which side soever the aduer sarie shall start, except he yield due honor unto
God, he shall have the foil: if he allow of the Fathers, he is caught; if he
disallow of them, he is no body. Thus it fell out when I was: a young student at
Oxford. This word Bishop Jewel did never eat, neither will we ever renounce.
John Jewel the captain of English Caluinists, challenged in most bragging
sort all Catholics at Paul's Cross in London, urging and alleging like an
hypocrite, all the Fathers that ever flourished within six hundred years
after Christ. Certain worthy men, which then for religion lived as banished
men, in the University of Lonan, thoug through the iniquity of the time, they
lived in great distress, yet answered his challenge. That subtlety, folly,
impudency, and saucines of Jewel, which the fore said writers have luckily
discovered, has done so much good to the common sort of people in England,
that within my remembrance I dare boldly say, there scarcely happened any one
thing more profitable, to the afflicted English Church then this. Proclamatio^s
forth* with were set on every gate, that no such But Bishop Jewel published the
whole book of the Adversaries that all might read them.
books might lawfully be read or kept in their houses, whereas Jewels
exclamations at Paul's Cross, did almost extort the same out of the writers
hands. But they that came to the scanning of this matter found that the Fathers
were all Catholic, that is, on our side. Neither did Lib. de vita Iuclii.
Laurence Humphrey conceal this blow given him and his fellows, who when he
had highly extolled Jewel otherwise, noted yet want of This is false, he never
vpbraided him with any impudency.
discretion in him for this one thing, that he for his part had allowed the
judgments of the Fathers in matters of controversy, which when the said
Laurence Humphrey without any circumstances plainly protests that he neither
has, nor will have any thing to do. I did once also familiarly request Toby
Matthew, who new for preaching bears the bell, whom for good learning sake and
likely seeds of other good virtues, I dearly loved, that he would plainly
tell me, whether he that so diligently read the Fathers, could be of that side,
whereunto he labored to allure his audience. He replied no, if he both read
them, and withal believed them. This is most false, they who give most to the
Fathers are most dissenting from you.
This his answer is very true, and I persuade my self, that neither he now,
nor Matthew Hutton, who as I hear is a famous man, and bent much to study the
Fathers, nor any other of the Adversaries, which do the like, do otherwise
think. Wherefore, yet I might come surely to this combat, to encounter with
such, who as though they had a Wolf by the ears, are enforced to discredit
their cause for ever, whether they reject the Fathers or stand to their
judgment. For by doing the one, they trusse up their trinckets to fly away,
and by doing the other, they are streightwaies strangled.

WILLIAM WHITAKERS. The answer to the fifth Reason, which is the Fathers.
NOw Campian calls upon the Fathers, from whom, because he presumes of a
firm defense, he earnestly desires a conflict, not like those light
skirmishes of men in the streets, but a serious and constant disputation, such
as Philosophers use: Campian (you see) has a better mind to converse with
Philosophers, than with Divines: for being furnished with Rhetoric and
Logic, and having spent most of his time in often declaiming and in inuenting
and answering sophistical captions, he doubts not of a famous victory, if
Philosophers were Judges. But (Campian) these matters are not to be disputed
among Philosophers, which are otherwhiles deceived with probability and
appearance of truth, following that opinion which themselves judge most
agreeable to reason. This question in hand, must be discusted in the assembly
of most grave and learned Divines, whom no iugling of words, no subtlety in
disputation, no wit, no cunning, no youthful insolent boldness, in quarrelling
lying, or soolish vaunting, can once move, much less remove them from the
truth they are persuaded of. Here can you not have liberty to brag of your
counterfeit devises, Philosophy may not sit as judge in these controversies,
neither will those things, wherein you chiefly trust, be here of any
authority: you must leave your own erroneous and endless walks, and be
drawn perforce into the compass and limits of Scripture and true divinity.
For Christ and his Apostles (as that discreet man said in the Nicene Council)
commended not Logic and vain subtlety unto us, Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 8.
but a naked opinion, consisting in faith and good works: And this simple and
sincere word of truth, will easily dissolve all your cauils, will dispell your
artificial mists, and will hold you fast as in a net, so that the more you
struggle to get out, the faster and straiter are you tied. But you haste to the
Fathers, and say, If we may once come unto them, the war is ended. Now I must
tell you, you make too much have, and ouerslippe many things. Is the battle
ended, say you? Why, who had the victory? This is verily childish and too
ridiculous, but yet usual in your combats, to triumph before the victory.
But I would hear how you have finished the war, with such admirable
expedition: For (say you) the Fathers are as surely ours, as Gregory the
thirteenth himself; the most loving Father of the Children of the Church. Give
me leave to answer you in your own words: My friends who are present, can you
forbear langhing? What could be affirmed, more weakly, fondly, or absurdly?
Call you him, the most loving Father of the Churches Children, whom we knew to
be their furious and mortal adversaries? And conclude you that other to be
as true as this? I grant as well the one as the other, for both are most false.
What think you? have you not got a famous victory? And thus (Campian) you use
to make an end of battles, and put to flight great armies of adversaries.
What remains, but that as Conqueror, you be crowned with a Laurel garland,
and carried with triumph into the Vatican, and solace your self many years
with your dear Father Gregory, that good old man? But now (Campian) proceed
and prosecute the victory, which you have gotten. We have (say you) whole
volumes of the Fathers, which do fully, distincty, and purposely declare that
Evangelical religion, which we now defend. Now you muster and reckon up your
armies; whereby you procured this victory, look well to them, you were best,
and lay sure hold of them, lest they revolt, and forsaking you, come to our
Tents: for you force them to be with you against their wills. So that in the
most dangerous and important fight, they fly unto us with speed, and do most
sharply assault and batter you. But let us consider your volumes: The two fold
Hierarchy of Denis the Martyr, what orders does it teach us, what sacrifices,
what rites? Assuredly it teaches us novelties, unheard of in the Scriptures;
we therefore leave both them and their author wholly unto you. For, though this
Denis, whosoever he were, was both for time ancient, and in his style of
writing, not unlearned; yet, that he should be the Ar^^pagit^, whom Paul at
Athens converted to the Faith, is altogether incredible. If you ask me a
reason of this my opinion, I pray you read diligently and consideratly that
which Laurentius Valla, and Eras^us of Roteradam have written of him. Both of
them persuade, by no fained surmises, but by very weighty reasons, and such as
(I ween) you will hardly gainsay, that this Denis cannot be the party you
report him to be. You then have no reason to be angry with Luther or Caussaeus
if they handled this DVR. You say that Deny^ is counterfeite, but prove it by
no reason. But Origin, Nazianzene, Zoph^ine Archbishop of Jerusalem,
Damascene, Nicephorus, Euthemius, Dionysius Archbishop of Alexandria,
acknowledge his books and him to have been a disciple of S. Paul. WHIT. page
357. But I say that Antiquity was altogether ignorant of his books; which
could not be if they bad been written of Denis Arc^pagita: for Eus^biu:
diligently searching out, and setting down all ancient writers, and all th^^r
books and Epistles which they writ, mentions not ^im, nor his works,
neither do any (...) the Greek and Latin Fathers speak of him. But who can
think that the books of a disciple of Saint Paul should be unknown, and not
highly esteemed^ of all in those days? Besides he cites the Epistles of
Ig^^tius, as also the Gospel and Revelation of S. John, which must needs be
written diverse years after the death of Denis Ar^^pagita: he writes* an
Epistle to Polycarpus and calls him a ruler of the Church, when at his detah
Polycarpus must needs be very young* for Denis was slain Anno Dom 96. Polycarpe
died 1^6. being but 86. years of age; he calls Timothy his son, who was
converted before ever that Ar^^pagita was: he acknowledges that his masters
had their learning from the Apostles, does he not thereby deny himself S.
Paul's scholar? finally the Church Hierarchy and all the names of the officers
reckoned up by him, were never known in the Apostles time* For your authors
they are all new and late writers, but two. The first Origin, whom Erasmus
denies Annot. in Act. 17. once to have made m^otion of him in all his
writings: neither ever does Nazianzene.
counterfeit somewhat roughly, and censured him freely. Where you say Calvin
and the writers of the Centuries were offended with Ignatius, Ignatius.
I confess they had just cause of offense. If heretics alleged him, to be a
patron of a wicked and detestable opinion, Calvin might with reason and
discretion reject him: how aptly and truly he was by them alleged, I cannot
tell, let them look to it. Howsoever it be, the truth ought not by his
authority to be borne down, whose credit is little, if any at all: you are
not ignorant what the judgment of all the learned is those Epistles of
Ignatius. Eusebius indeed makes mention of some of his Epistles, and Hierome of
others: but now many more go under his name, which they have not mentioned.
Hierome DVR. If diverse of those things there cited out of him be not to be
found, how. follovveth it that those works of his which are extant, be
forged and noue of his? WHIT. page 360. From thence verily it will follow that
his works are not perfect, yea many things are found in his Epistles, which are
incredible to have been taught in those days: as the strict keeping of Lent,
and fasting upon the Sabbath days; yea it was but lately that these Epistles
were printed and published, and so of the less credit and authority.
also reports a saying of his; Hier^n. Dial. 3. con. Pel. Theod. Dial. 3.
and Theodoret another, which are not found in those Epistles which are carried
about: what would you have more? Gratian himself favors not overmuch this
your Ignatius. You see then, of how obscure, suspected and uncertain
reputation are these two, which you place in the forefront of your army.

You are offended, that the Censors, as you call them, vpbraide Irenaeus, as in
some thing fantastical. We use not to speak reprochfully of Irenaus, whom we
confess to have been both holy and learned: but what is this to the purpose?
If Iraneus have written something foolishly, must be therefore by and by, be
wholly yours? And if some where we have noted his opinion, as not true and
sound, do we therefore reject all his works? Is this your manner of disputing
(Campian) is this your skirmishing? are you of opinion, that never any word
passed from Irenaeus unadvisedly, or which might justly be termed
unreasonable? Then tell DVR. You that acknovveledge, and admit nothing but the
Scriptures, can by no argument confute this err^r. WHIT. p. 362. What may worse
beseem a liuine, then thus to speak? What think you of these places: Christ
when he began to preach the Gospel was about thirty years of age? Luke 3.23.
After his Baptism John makes mention of three Pasleouers, and that in the
third he was put to death? Is not the time then very plainly set down? and
indeed what can be more plain and casie? Hence we may observe that the
Fathers have plainly erred, where you would hardly believe any man could err.
me, Campian, Lib. 2. cap. 39.40.
how Christ preached only one year, yet was baptized the thirtieth year of
his age, and died the fiftieth? what, shall we believe, that Christ taught
only one year, and that the fortieth year? will you deny this to be a very
new, strange, and almost frantic novelty? Besides that, many write Irenaeus
to have been one of them, whom the Fathers call Millenaries; think you that
was not a frantic opinion? And can you doubt of Clemens, whether he has
sometimes sown Tares? what call you that, where he denies, that Christ indeed
did either hunger or thirst? Again, that Christ taught but one year, which he
had of Irenaus? Again, Clement. Stromat. lib. 3. idem lib. 1. idem. lib. 5.
that the Philosophers in hell expected the coming of Christ, and being taught
by own mouth believed? Will you deny those to be Tares? and many of this kind
are his to be found in the worthiest writers of that age. If you deny it,
bring me one whom I will not convince to have erred by your own judgment. You
dare not say, Tertul.
we have wronged Tertullian: But you will us to remember, that the book of
Prescriptions was never taxed; which, for ought I remember, never was: though I
confess that writing, which you name, is notable, in which many things are
written, very divinely, against your Church. DVR. But you tell us not any one
particular whereby this may appear. WHIT. page 365. I suppose you never read
this book, or else you would not make doubt of it. Is any thing more against
your traditions, then that he pronounces a curie to them that shall bring any
doctrine, but the self same which the nations received from the Apostles, and
they from Christ himself? And that men cannot be otherwise persuaded of the
things of faith, then from the writings of faith? when he gathers from Christ
sending of his Apostles, that no Ministers are else to be receive, but such as
Christ has ordained? when whatsoever is later brought is foreign and false?
when he w^^^eth, that faith must be built and borne up, upon the writings of
the Law and of the Prophets, the Evangelists and Apostles?
I wonder you are not ashamed of Hippolytus; of whom Harding himself was
almost ashamed. Hippolyt.
Think not that we are ought moved with DVR. Why do you reject this book of
Hippolyte as counterfeite? Hierome affirms, that he was a Bishop, and has
written many Commentaries upon the Scriptures. WHIT. page 367. Will it
therefore follow that this book is not counterfeit? nay it is the rather
forged, because Hierom does not number it amongst his books. Hyppolitus was a
very worthy man, of whom Eusebius. Hierom, Theodoret, Nicephorus have made
very honorable mention. But this book is childish in the beginning, and in
the whole altogether unanswerable to his eloquence and judgment.
authors of so small credit, so lately drawn but of darkness, as they scarce
yet have learned to look upon the light. For what was this Hippolytus? He
writ, you say, of Antichrist. But how worthily? that foolish book of
Hippolytus, which a certain man, I know not who, of late days published,
gesseth, that the Devil is Antichrist, and faineth many other things: which
neither can be true, nor were ever esteemed for true. And yet you marvel we
set him so light, whom no man regards or reads, or almost knows. I can give
you good leave to reckon him for your own, and if you will, let him have a
better note in your army.

The accusation concerning Cyprian, Cyprian.
is more heinous, whom all men reverence for his singular faith and excellent
learning. But Caussaeus terms him senseless and without God. They of
Magdenburge, call him a corrupter of penance. Shall I be tied to take upon me,
and defend every speech, which any man has at any time uttered? This Caussaeus
I never saw, nor before this ever heard of him. But in as much, as you so
odiously accuse him, I suppose him to be some learned and godly man. Unto that
he says of Cyprian, I answer that which I remember I have read in DVR. That
Cyprian which Nazianzene speaks of, was not our Cyprian the Father of the
Church. WHIT. page 367. Nazianzene certainly speaks of the same Cyprian. for
see how he describes him; He did not only govern the Church of Carthage, and
all Affricke, but the whole West, and almost the East, the Southern and
Northern parts: how think you, is it not the same Cyprian?
Nazianzene, viz. that he was in his youth dissolute and given to much vice,
and worshipped Devils, and used the help of Devils: He was (says Nazianzene)
a worshipper of Devils, and after a disciple of Christ. Nazian. de Cypri.
Your unreasonableness forces me to mention those things, which I had rather
have concealed. For in the Fathers imperfections, you stick fast like a burre,
and cease not to rub up the remembrance of those things, which you should do
better, not once to touch, If these things which Nazianzene reports of
Cyprian be true, then Caussaeus might say, that Cyprian at that time was
foolish and godless. For I cannot think that Caussaeus would write so of him,
but in regard of those times, or that any man would conceive so injuriously, of
that godly Martyr: whereas they of Magdenburge complain that he corrupted the
doctrine of repentance, therein they forge against him no new accusation, but
rather disclose that which all men know to have been too true. Cyprian wrote
some thing of Repentance very unseasonably and indiscreetly, and not he DVR. O
singular impudency! O intolerable arrogancy! what, have all the Fathers in
that age erred so sousely in so great a matter? As if they were ignorant that
the works of repentance had any virtue any where else. but from the merits and
blood of Christ. WHIT. page 369. What need all this heat? It had been your
part to have showed that the Fathers who then lived, have spoken nothing
unfitly of repentance, so had you confuted that I charge them with, which your
hear will not cure. And what if the Fathers have thought that men's works have
all their virtue and power from the merit of Christ; will it thence follow they
have spoken nothing unfitly of repentance and works? As if Christ by his death
had only merited that we might by our works and merits deserve eternal life;
or that they who hold the foundation may not build timber or haie upon it.
alone, but all the holy Fathers of that time, were tainted with that error.
For being desirous by severe laws, to limit and restrain the evil manners of
men, they made the greatest part of Repentance to consist, in certain outward
disciplines, which they appointed: which severe censuring of sin and sharp
punishing of wickedness, might happily be borne withal: but when they thought
the punishment of sin to be discharged, Gods justice satisfied, freedom from
sin, and certain forgiveness with righteousness hereby to be procured; herein
they diminished the power of Christ's death, they attributed too much to their
own inventions, and in a word depraved the doctrine of repentance: because our
sins are cleansed and removed, by no offices or works of ours, but only by
the blood and passion of Christ. And so your objection of Repentance is
answered. We do not for all this deny the works of Cyprian, nor reject the
books of any Father of that age, as you falsely affirm, seeing both he and
they agree with us in the greatest questions: but this is the privilege of you
and your fellows, that you even greedily hunt after, and pursue, whatsoever is
faulty in any author, as if all the Fathers errors, served to make up the body
and faith of your religion. Something, you say, Cyprian wrote to Cornelius,
which if we give credit unto: then Peter Martyr and his co^federats, must be
held for worse the^ adulterous and sacrilegious; but what that is, I cannot so
much as couiecture. I know that Cyprian sent many letters to Cornelius, but
none of them accuse us, either of adultery or sacrilege; neither can you out
of those letters allege any thing to our prejudice or your advantage: but
this is ever your manner, to prove nothing clearly and distinctly, but only to
name the Fathers, and from their names, to raise certain rouing and uncertain
suspicions. That which you write of Chambers and pillowes, I pass over as
nothing else, but scoffing and reproachful taunts, such as is common in every
varlets mouth. Now you come to the next age, and here you mention Chrysostom,
Nazianzene, Ambrose, and Hierome. But to what purpose I pray you? Chrysostom.
for what if Luther do censure Chrysostom sharply, because by too much
aduauncing our works and merits, he obscureth the righteousness of faith? what
though Caussaeus find some thing fabulous in Nazianzene? Nazian.
DVR. You freely grant that Chrysostom, Nazianzene, Ambrose, and Hierome are
on Campians side: and yet you pleasantly demand are these Fathers wholly yours?
we, who are then true sons, do not challenge them as half Fathers, but
wholly our Fathers. WHIT. page 370. When did I ever grant Campian so much? I
should certainly do the Fathers great injury, if I should adiudge them for
Campian, who are so far different from him. And for your kindred with them;
it is but as the Jews were Abraham's children: for if you were the children of
the Fathers, you would hold the faith of the Fathers. For the Scribes and
Pharisees were not the children of Moses, because they sat in Moses chair.
Neither are they the children of the Saints, who hold the places of the Saints;
as Hierome. Neither have they the inheritance of Peter, which have not the
faith of Peter; as Ambrose: neither ought faith to be tried by persons, but
persons by says, as Tertullian has written. We verily love and duly reverence
the Fathers, yet we acknowledge but one Father in heaven, and one teacher,
which is Christ. And if you acknowledge them wholly your Fathers, why do you
forsake many of their opinions?
therefore are these Fathers wholly on your side? what is this else but dotage,
and to speak without wit or fear? Some body said that Ambrose was bewitched
by the devil; Ambrose.
whether any ever said it or no, I never knew, neither is it greatly material;
the best and most righteous men, may sometimes be so far bewitched, as they
do not in some things perceive the truth: and you do too openly bewray your
malice, by laboring to raise an evil opinion of him, and to make us infamous
for such speeches as may have a good construction, though at the first they
seem odious. Certainly I have read many Papists, and heard of some, all
passing shameless, and malepere; but more impudent then your self, in all my
life, did I never know any. There is no end of your lying, you fear no men's
censure, there is neither faith nor truth in any thing you speak. Even now you
set upon Beza with a fresh lie. He (you say) has written that Hierome is as
surely damned, as the devil, because he was injurious to the Apostles, a
blasphemous, a wicked, and an ungodly man. That Beza affirms not these
things, I protest and a^ow: let any man that will, see the place; if it be
otherwise, let me be accounted very infamous. For as for those first words,
that Hierome was damned as well a^ the devil, either they are by malicious
cauelling fetched out of some other place, as all the rest are, or altogether
forged, as the most. In the place alleged, there is no such thing: Concerning
that he says of Injury and Blasphemy, I will set down Beza his own words,
that all men may know your impudency. Even Hierome, Beza in annot. noui Testam.
in Act. Apost. cap. 23.
says Beza, if it be true that Erasmus upon this place says of him, is not
only injurious to the Apostle, in that he finds want of moderation, in this
speech, wherein rather appears his Divine courage but also is openly
blasphemous, in that even in Christ himself he has found some sign of
imperfection. Thus far Beza: the matter of his complaint, is about S. Paul's
sharp answer unto the high Priest, in which Hierome, (as Erasmus testifies)
in his Dialogues against Pelagius, finds some want of moderation, and not
only so, but even in Christ himself, he looks for some imperfection of piety;
which reports of Hierome, if it be true as Erasmus affirms, why might not
Beza justly esteem him, in the one injurious to the Apostle, in the other so
blasphemous against Christ? For what can be devised more unworthy the Apostle
then that in his answer to the high Priest, he should show too much spleen,
or what could be spoken more blasphemous against Christ, the^ that the grace,
wherewith he was endued, was imperfect. But Beza further reprehendeth Hieromes
exceeding boldness, in wresting the Scriptures, wherein he has most just cause
of complaint: for either Hierome wrested the Scriptures, or they are so weak
and easy of themselves, as they may be any way turned. And truly he must be
very desperate, that should defend Hieromes interpretations. Gregorius
Massonius esteems more of Calvin, then of a thousand Augustines: Luther is
not moved though a thousand Austens, Cyprians, Churches* be against him. The
answer is ready: whosoever speaks truth, in that respect, is more to be
esteemed, then a great multitude that could not discern the truth. They
therefore that have observed the errors of the Fathers, either those you have
named, or the rest, which here also you reckon up, Optatus, Athanasius,
Hilarie, Cyrill, Epiphanius Basil, Vincentius, Fulgentius, Lee, and Gregory of
Rome, and have admonished the Readers of them; are so far from malepertnes
herein; as that contrary, they have performed a work, for the Church needful,
profitable, and acceptable to all good and godly men. For as the true
expositions of Scriptures, are to be expounded to the Churches, so are the
contrary to be rejected. Hierom. Paul. August.
Hierome says well, it is the worst kind of teaching, to deprave sentences of
Scripture, and to draw them perforce to serve our turns. Wherefore we profess
with Augustine; All writers and their sayings must be DVR. That trial must not
be made by Apostate Monks, but by lawful Pastors and doctors. WHIT. page 372.
And why not I pray you? is it because they are Monks? I think not: or because
they have departed from you? That is the matter; as it none might touch, read,
and examine the scriptures, but those who have plight their troth to you, never
to assent to the Scriptures, though they directly co^tradict popish doctrine we
would willingly harke^ to lawful Pastors, examining and interpreting the
Scriptures, such as you have none. Because with you examinatio^s must not be
made by the rule of ye scriptures, but after the will of the Pope, and all your
Pastors have tied themselves to the judgment of the Romish Antichrist: that,
yt which they see, they will not see, if it displease ye Pope, by whose spirit
they are guided.
judged, according to the holy Scriptures, the authority whereof is more
excellent, then the whole nature of man is able to conceive: not that I
disallow the opinions of the most worthy Fathers, but I follow those that come
nearest unto the Scriptures, and when the Scripture it self is manifest, I
embrace it before them all. Whereas then we consider the sayings of the
Fathers, and examine them by the light of Scriptures, we do here nothing
unwonted, nothing boldly or arrogantly; but you have always been fliers of the
light of Scriptures, as Tertullian speaks: Tertul. de Resurrect.
and therefore do so diligently provide for lurking holes in the Fathers, that
you may always have some place of refuge. For seeing Scriptures fail you,
what remains, but that you seek aid from any, even the meanest?

But you tell us, why we do so much anoid the Fathers. I had rather you would
tell us why you do so carefully avoid the Scriptures. For (say you) they that
cannot away with set times of Fasting, must needs be offended with Basil,
Naziancene, Leo, and Chrysostom, which have published excellent Sermons of
Lent. Christ ordained no set and ordinary fasts in the Gospel, DVR. Who has
but so much as saluted the Fathers, and knows not this to be salfe? for the
observation of Lent is most ancient and ordained by the Apostles. WHIT. page
371. I deny it not to be most ancient, but not instituted by the Apostles; for
Apollonius writes that Montanus first made laws for let and certain fasts;
and Tertullian when he was become a Montanist, writes as much in his book
wherein he defends the fasts of Montanus. Again, the Apostles never put any
religion in choice and change of meats, Romans 14.17. Coll. 2 16. Tit. 1.1^. and
so ordained not Lene. Lastly the Churches of the Apostles differed much in this
fast, both in their times, and in their kinds of meat; as Eusebius and ^ocrates
record; which would never have bin if it had bin Apostolical, at least as
Papists do affirm, who take in for a truth, that those Churches would
faithfully persist in the Apostles decrees.
Lent was appointed long after, and the manner of observing it in those times,
was not one and the same in all Churches. We both allow and use public and
Christian fasts which are fitted to the time and the Churches occasions: as for
your appointed, and yearly solemn fasts, we do with good reason reject them,
because they are full of superstition, and injurious unto Christian liberty.
Our judgment of fasting is the same which Augustine has taught: August.
Epist. 86.
I find it not set down in any Commandment of the Lord, or his Apostles, what
days we ought to fast, what not. Augustine then knew not these your set
yearly ceremonies of fasting, not your Lenten fast, which has a certain time
and number of days prescribed. Further (you say) they that have set their
souls to sale for gold, lust, excess, and worldly ostentation how can they be
but most opposite to Basil, Chrysostom, Hierome, and Augustine, whose books
of the profession of Monks are in every man's hands? what will you censure all
to be covetous, lustful, gluttonous, or ambitious that are not Monks? back
with that foot you were best, for fear of your head: for neither the Pope, nor
his Cardinals and Bishops, hold it either necessary, or convenient for them to
lay aside, their abundant wealth, continual pleasures, their dainty fare,
their kingly honor, and thrust themselves into a Monastery; whosoever lives
after their fashion, cannot be well affected to Basil, nor any man that is
holy. DVR. When you are overcome by the truth, you slander our lives, and
speak evil of our persons. WHIT. page 377. I do not slander you, nor detract
from you, the world has understood long ago what manner of men you were. If
you be grown better I should be glad of it. But I know men have judged
otherwise of this order, and such as did not hate your Monastical life. For
the Romish Cardinals and Priors did write thus to the Pope himself. There is
another abuse amongst the orders of religious men, for many are so deformed and
out of order, that they are a great scandale to the people, and hurt much by
their example. We think that all orders ought to be abolished.
For they are altogether so drowned in sensuality and excess, making
themselves drudges unto their ambitions, banquets, and delights. And to
conclude: in the whole course of their lives, so behauing themselves, as
becomes better sensual and voluptuous persons, proceeding out of the gardens
of Epicures, then grave teachers out of Christ's School. Who knows not that
the whole world cries shame upon you, and has done continually and most
deservedly? you for all that blush not to lay those things to our charge, which
are well enough known to be your own fault; your Prelates and Monks, whose
goodly order and strait rule of severe discipline, (you report) differ as much
from other men, as the Tarrentines were wont to affirm that they excelled all
others, who giving themselves wholly over to pleasures, (while the most took
great pains and always did something whereby to live) thought their life the
only true life. Such is and has bin your life, that others must seem not to
live, if that be to live which you have esteemed. But what need I answer you
any more of fasting and Monkish orders, which have not one Monk in your whole
Church any thing resembling those of ancient time, neither do you observe the
old manner of fasting? but you go on, and vpbraide us with fouler matters.
They that have brought a bondage upon man's will, which have taken away
Christian funerals, which have burned Saints relics can they (say you) be
well pleased with Augustine? we (Campion) have wronged no Saints, we have
neither burned their relics, nor taken away their funerals: DVR. Therefore
you have taken away the relics of the Saints, and the funerals of Christians,
as superstitions and injurious to the majesty of God. WHIT. page 370. Are you
so without judgment, that you cannot distinguish betwixt things and the
superstitious use of them? It is not these not any comely burial we dislike,
but Popish pompcions funerals and impious worshipping of relics.
only we could not suffer any profane superstition, injurious to the Majesty
and glory of God; and for this we have the direction of God himself, being
our pattern whom we follow, and Augustine also herein consents with us: But
we have captiuated the will of man, and then (you say) how can we be well
affected unto Augustine? well enough, why not? for (say you) he writ three
books of free will. A most witles and ridiculous collection: Augustine writ
three books of freewill, ergo Augustine affirms that men have freewill. If
that reason be current, then this also: Augustine writ a book of two souls
against the Manichees; also a book of lying; another of the quantity of the
soul; ergo Augustine defends two souls in a man; ergo he praised lying;
ergo he attributes greatness and quantity to the soul. I pray you what
difference is there? I grant Augustine writ those books you mention, but they
overthrow not our opinion, who affirm that the will of man is in bondage: and
if ever you had perused those books, you would never have affirmed it, nor
once named the books in this matter. Augustine writ these books against the
Manichees, wherein he disputes not of man's freewill, which is the point in
controversy, but of the cause of sin which proceeded from freewill, and he
entitled those books of freewill, because in them he intends to show, that
the original and beginning of sin is to be found in man's freewill, not in
God. This you might easily have learned out of his retractations; for thus he
writes. Retract. lib. 1.1. q.
The discourse was undertaken for them that deny sin to have his original from
the free action of our will, affirming, that from this would follow, that God
himself the author of nature is culpable. And so proceeds, utterly denying,
that he had any purpose in those books, to speak of that will, which is made
free by Gods grace. And whatsoever in these books passed his pen, which seemed
to favor the Pellegians, then Patrons of freewill, as you are now, all that he
carefully collecteth out of the whole work, and clears it from their cauils.
Have we any cause to be offended with Augustine, which in this question is not
against us? And that you may plainly perceive, how indiscreetly you alleged
these books of freewill, mark what he writes of the will of man in those
same books: DVR. Whereto tends this but to bewray your ignorance? all
Catholics believe that the will of man, though free, is able to do nothing to
merit heaven by, but by the grace of God. And you are ignorant that the
freedom of will consists in this, that by no necessity it is carried to
either part. WHIT. page 382. Pelagians in former time believed as much. But as
Pelagius affirmed that the will was only helped with grace, and not made good
by grace: so you teach that no new will is infused, but the natural is helped,
and as it were unloosed by grace; which is not much from Pelagianisme: for both
of you defend that the liberty of will remains in man's corrupt nature, that it
need not be given him from above, but only by the help of grace, to be drawn
out of certain difficulties, in which the corruption of sin had left it. And
as for my ignorance I confess it, and think it more learned then your
knowledge; for if those who do things necessarily, do them not freely, then
neither God nor the devil works not freely; for God works well, and the
devil evil, necessarily. So you see necessity is not opposed to freewill: for
not necessity, but force and compulsion takes away the freedom of the will.
Hold thou fast (says Augustine) this principal of piety, Delibere Arbit.
61.2. cap. 20.
that no good thing happens unto thee, either when thou think or
understand, or any way imaginest, which is not from God. And this was
Augustines constant opinion of freewill: after that being stirred by the
Pellagians, he thoroughly understood the question, viz. that he judged it, to be
utterly lost and gone. DVR. The meaning of the place is this, that man so lost
his freewill, that be lost himself; yet so as no man in his right wits will
deny, but he is a man still. WHIT. page 384. You grant as much as we desire:
for as man lost himself, and yet remained a man, but not such as he was, good,
just, holy, endued with perfection, but clean changed: so the free will of man
was lost, not that no will remained, but that it was changed from good to evil;
for we say not there is remaining no freewill at all; but no good will: as we
affirm not, there is no man at all remaining, but no good man.
Man (says he) by abusing his freewill lost both it and himself. Enchir. 3.


But yet further you urge Augustine against us, for (say you) they that make
their captious devises, the rule of their faith, must not they be offended
with Augustine, which has an excellent Epistle against Manicheus? An Epistle
(Campian) do you call it? it was ever accounted a book: but what is there in
that Epistle (as you call it) against us? in which he professes himself to
agree with Antiquity, unity, perpetual succession, and with that Church, which
alone amongst so many heresies, has attained unto the name Catholic by
prescription. We also agree with that Church, which has all these. And yet to
these must be added (as Augustine says in the same place) sincere wisdom and
truth; else all the other bind us not; for they are of no value without that
wisdom; but this wisdom and truth, though without these, is of it self to
be preserred before all things: so says Augustine, Cont. Fundam. cap. 4.
if the truth appear manifestly, so as it cannot be doubted of, it alone is
more to be esteemed then DVR Augustine affirms, that these cannot be without
the truth. WHIT. page 387. Nay Augustine shows the contrary: for if truth
cannot be separated from these, he had spoken very unfitly, when he said, he
preferred the truth before all these. If you can take or rightly challenge the
possession of truth, in the next place you may inquire of Antiquity, Unity, and
Succession.
all those reasons, that keep me in the Catholic Church. Thus then Augustine
sets more by the truth it self alone, and sincere wisdom, then all those
things you mention, Antiquity Unity, Succession, and we perceiving this truth
and wisdom so manifestly in our Churches, that none, that will see the truth,
can doubt whether we hold the truth or no; do willingly give you free liberty
to brag, whilst you list, of antiquity, unity, and succession, without the
truth. There is then, as you see, no cause, why we should be angry with
Augustine, either now or before.

But at length you leave Augustine, and call out Optatus, Bishop of Miletum; of
whom you say, you desire to know, what our opinion is. I verily think he was a
good Father, and very like unto Augustine, and I take the things to be true,
which many worthy men have said in his commendation. But he disproued the
Donatists by the communion of the Catholic Church. Why should he not? or what
does that concern us? Augustine also observed the same course, and it was a
good motive, that the communion of the Church should be objected to the
schismatic Donatists, which seditiously without cause, separated themselves
from the Church. But we deny your Church to be Catholic, and therefore you
cannot thus convince us, though Optatus might thereby confute the Donatists. It
must first appear, that it is the Church, before we can be convicted of
schism. The DVR. So indeed Calvin answers, but it will not serve your turn:
for Opratus proves himself to be in the Catholic Church, because he joined
himself to Saint Peter's chair. WHIT page 388. And what call you Peter's
chair? the external seat, or the succession of Bishops? you shall never
prove it, and the contrary I cen easily object out of Optatus himself. Optatus
calls Syritius Bishop of Rome his fellow, and the companion of other Bishops
who held a sound and Catholic judgment. With all those Syricius agreed in one
society and fellowship, by their letters sent one to another as witnesses of
their consenting in doctrine and lawful ordination: Optatus then proves that
he was a Catholic, because he kept the Catholic confession and conjunction
with Syrrcius and other Bishops. Finally his argument was good against the
Donatists, who did separate themselves from the communion of the Catholic
Church, while they consented not with these Churches, where the doctrine of the
Apostles and a lawful ordination of Bishops did ever flourish. But it is
nothing to us and you.
Church of Rome was then the preserver of Religion, the maintainer of the true
faith, and shined like a star in the sight of all other Churches: no marvel
then though the most holy Fathers, esteemed much the reverence of this Church,
and urged the heretics with the example of it, Irenaeus. August.
as a great prejudice unto them. Hence it is, that sometimes they allege the
decrees and succession of the Bishops of Rome, thereby proving that the
heresies, by them refuted, were not heard of, in the most famous and honorable
Church. But since that time the course of the Church is turned, and the Sea of
Rome has declined and degenerated from her sincere faith, to detestable
falsehood. Restore us (Campian) the old Church of Rome, and we will never
separate our selves from her: but of that Church you have nothing left, but the
walls and old rubbish, yet still you brag of the name of the Catholic
Church. And whereas you mention Altars, on which the members of Christ are
carried, and Chalices containing his blood, I know well many things concerning
Altars, are to be found in the ancient Fathers, which Altars in Africa, were
not of stone, but DVR. What difference is there? the Donatists overthrew
vvoodden Altany, and you Altars of stone. WHIT page 389. They troubled sacred
tables by their sacrilege: not reproving the administration of the Sacrament,
but the ordination of Bishops, which yet was lawful: we have cast down Altars
wickedly erected for the wicked Mass and profane Idolatry. Is there no
difference, think you?
wooden, as you may see in Augustines Epistle to Boniface: and I grant the
members of Christ, and his DVR. Optatus writes that the body of Christ
dwells upon the Altar. WHIT. page 390. I answer that the sacrament of the
body of Christ is after a sort Christ's body, and the name of the thing is given
to the sign,, as is usual in all Sacraments. For the body of Christ is no
where properly but in heaven at the right hand of his Father, where it shall
remain to the end of the world.
blood are received in the holy mysteries, but after a heavenly and spiritual
manner, Epist. 50.
appropriate unto our most holy faith. As for your devouring of flesh, Optatus
was not acquainted with it, and the ancient Church of Christ, not so much as
ever dreamed of so great a monster.

They sing (say you) in their Churches, the Creed of Athanasius, but they
favor him not; and why? because he praises Antony the Hermit. You speak
wisely; as DVR. But do you think Hermits are worthy of any praise, whom
Athanasius praised in the person of Antony? WHIT. page 391. Grant we well
approve of the old Hermits, yet may we think bad enough of your Monks, as we
have done and profess it for just causes, seeing they differ both so much in
manners and judgments. Antonius the Hermits grandfather was wont to say,
that it was as dangerous for a Monk to go out of his hermitage, as for fishes
to leave the water. If you praise Antony so much, why do you not follovv him?
why do you swarm in all cities and famous places, and do not rather live in
some remote wilderness, as fishes swim in the Sea? so should you be more like
to Antony, and free these parts from great damage.
though we were so envious, that we could not with patience endure any man to
be praised: nay there is somewhat else. Athan. Ep. ad Fell. 2.
He with his Synod of Alexandria, humbly appealed unto the sentence of the
Apostolic Sea: this Epistle is all counterfeit, compacted of many lies, and
monstrous flattery. Prudentius I grant as a DVR. Because he was a Poet, forgate
he to be a Christian? or did he any thing in verse, which infinite and learned
^athers have not done before in prose? WHIT. page 392. Who knovveth not that
Poets were wont to weigh what the verse required, more then what piety
called for, and to follovv the elegancy of poetry more then the straight
doctrine of the Scriptures? And such liberty of Poets men commonly find no
great fault with: yet see how foolish it is to auovv poetical exornations
for reasons in the controversies of religion. And if Prudentius follovved so
many Fathers, why name you not one of them* For 300. years after Christ there
was no such custom in the Church, which you affirm so infinite a number of
Fathers used: and it rose up in the Church but a little before Prudentius
days; but both this and all other superstitions must be corrected by the
authority of the word.
Poet, sometimes called upon the Martyrs, whose acts he describes in verse, and
the superstitious custom of praying to Saints had now taken deep root in the
Church: which as a Tyrant haled sometimes the holy Fathers into the same error.
As for Vigillantius and Iouinian, against whom Hirr^^^^ writes most bitterly;
if they taught those things that are laid to their charge, we maintain them
not. That DVR. It seems you have nothing to answer to Ambrose at all. WHIT.
page 393. Have I answered nothing, when a few lines before I affirmed that this
superstition had got great footing in the Church? was it not answer enough to
show I allowed not the corrupt judgment of some Fathers? What gain you by
this, if we profess freely that some Fathers were infected with the errors of
the time, who yet kept sound doctrine in the fundamental points; whereas
notorious corruption has spread it self over your whole Church and consumed
it, and the beginnings of corruptions in them, is grown to an height in you
without hope of cure?
Ambrose should be careful, to commend and set sorth the praises of his
friends Geruasius and Protasius, we willingly permit. Neither do we wholly
mislike Gregory, with whom surely you have more cause to be offended, then we.
But whereas he said that Images were laymens books, he neither learned in
DVR. Answer me, in what school did you learn to break down Images? not in
the schools of Christians, but of Jews. WHIT. page 395. I learned it out of
the school of the holy Ghost, Deuteronomy 5.8. Josh. 24.23. where we are taught to
worship one God with religious worship, and to cast out of the Church, to
break and burn the Images of men, though never so holy. Moses beat the Calfe
to powder, and the holy Ghost commended Hez^^^a for breaking asunder the brazen
Serpent, though it was set up by God^ authority, when the Israelits abused it
to super^^^ion; how much more ought we to destroy profane Images and monuments
of cursed idolatry? Epiphanius being taught in this school rent the veil
which was hung up in the temple, having painted innt the picture of Christ or
some Saint. As also Serenus Bishop of Massilia, who took down and broke the
Images of his time. I have learned this then not out of the schools of the
Jews, ^innike^ and Idolaters, but out of the schools of Christians, which may
not be polluted with Images.
the school of the holy Ghost, nor found DVR You show your ignorance or
impudency, when you know not, or deny that which is every vvhereto be read
among the Fathers, as in Theodoret, Domasen, Augustine, Gregory Nissen.
Metaphrastes, Athanasius and others. WHIT. page 399. These testimonies do
rather show your rashness and desire to deceive; for they are partly faired, as
that of Gregory Nissen and Athanasius, and partly not to the purpose by them I
understand that Images were made, but they prove not that they were placed in
the churches and worshipped. Your reason concludes not, There were Images
among the Christians before the times of Gregory: therefore they placed them in
their churches to teach the people, and to be worshipped of them with holy
worship.
it in the books of the Fathers yt were before him; and thus at length, have
you finished this long catalogue of the Fathers. The reason I would feign
know, that moved you to go thorough them on this manner. For what? are you so
blockish your self to think, or hope you, that any others will like of this
kind of reasoning: viz. Luther, Calvin and their confederates, do write that
Irenaus, Tertullian, Cyprian, Chrysostom, Augustine, Hierome, Ambrose,
Gregory, Basil, and Nazi^^zen, do otherwiles err in some questions in this or
that book, and they saw not the true meaning of some Scripture, but were
sometimes deceived, that is, they were men: therefore they banish, reject and
condemn all these Fathers? Is this your meaning, Campian? why then do you your
selves, being very often by plain authorities of the Fathers co^uinced, deny
flatly that you are tied to the authority of any father, and from them you
appeal to the judgment of the Church? Would you not think your self hardly
dealt withal, if hence I should infer, that you disallow the Fathers whole
volumes? But this is the issue of your disputation, and the mark whereat all
this your discourse aymeth, namely, that because we dislike some things in the
Fathers, which in their writings cannot be defended, therefore we violate all,
we offer great wrong and reproach to the Fathers, we commit a heinous and
vnhard-of wickedness.

Think not (Campian) our University to be so childish that they cannot
discern the indifferency of our proceeding herein, from your unjust
calumniation. The Fathers we esteem highly, we peruse them daily, we commend
them to the reading of all such as exactly and diligently study Divinity. By
this means we increase our knowledge, and are better furnished with armor of
defense against you. You are afraid to want time, and therefore you omit many
things, Epistles, Sermons, Homilies, Orations, Works, Disputations of Fathers,
by which the Catholics opinions are confirmed. Some fragments perhaps, say
you, thrown in corners, which without much pains and wearines you could not
collect, yet your fellows of late years have diligently sought out and
published: Whilst they (say you) are to be sold at the Stationers, so long
our men's books are in vain prohibited: we are sorry you should write such
things, as we must of necessity restrain, your books are such as it
behooves us to stop their passage, unless we would suffer the State to be
stirred to sedition, the Church in danger of heresy, and men's minds filled
with cursed opinions. For if Magistrates ought carefully to prevent, lest the
infection of the plague, be from other places brought into their cities; much
more care is to be had, that pestilent and pernicious books be nor openly
spread abroad, out of which simple and unlearned men do suck poison of deadly
error. Neither are we the first that have taken this course. You may remember
in Queen Mary's time, that they proceeded by marshall law against all those,
with whom any of our books were found. If this were in us a matter worthy of
death, so that we were by and by drawn to punishment, as men guilty of high
treason, and that without any iud^^^al proceedings, small reason have you to
look, that your books now, should have such free liberty, to be every where
publikelie sold. We take order, that the books of the holy Fathers, are
brought unto us from every matte, we buie them, we have them in our private
studies and public Liberarie a wo^ place them in open view, that they be
knowns; nor only by face, but by daily familiaricie. Where you affirm, that
neither Sanders, nor Harding, nor Allen, nor Stapleton, nor Bristol, do more
^^gerly inneigh against those dreams, then the Fatherd before mentioned: you
have added this saying as an overplus to the things that went before. These
your old soldiers have employed in this case, whatsoever, either reading or
leisure, or cunning, or wit, or diligence, or malice, could supply unto them,
and for all this have gained nothing: and hope you, that are not worthy to be
compared with these, to perform that, wherein they have failed? yet you said,
that thinking of these things, your courage increased, and you desired the
combat. I bewail (Campian) your rashness, and foolish hardines, which will
needs take upon you, the patronage of a desperate cause, with the undoubted
loss of your credit and safety; and I wish that the day may once come, wherein
you may make trial of your strength in the combat which you desire.

John Jewel (say you) challenged the Catholics, when you were a young student,
calling upon and desiring the help of the Fathers, as many as flourished 600.
years after Christ. That worthy man, did that he knew himself able to
perform: he had read over all the Fathers with special judgment and
diligence; he saw how you deceived the ignorant, he had a care to preserve his
countrymen from your dangerous error. And hereupon without any boasting, as you
would have it, but trusting only in the power of God, and the truth of the
cause, he calls forth all the generation of Papists unto this trial, viz. if
they could confirm their opinions by the holy Scriptures, or by the witness of
Fathers and Councels, they should overcome: if they failed, they should
confess themselves were vanquished. Certain renowned men (say you) living as
Exiles as Lo^ane, entertain the offer, and allow of the condition. Harding was
the captain of these, he adventured himself hand to hand, in this combat,
but how worthily performed he the condition? I^wel calls for Fathers; Harding
produces certain Clements, Abdies, Martials, Hippolyes, Amphilochytes, and
others of this rank, Fathers of worshipful antiquity: If all the ancient
Fathers of the Church, be (as you brag) of your side, why should Harding
turn his back so cowardly, bringing in for witnesses in a most weighty cause
wherein we demanded the judgment of antiquity, a company of vpstart bastards,
I know not fromwhence, whom no man before had saluted, seen or heard of,
passing by of purpose, the known and truly noble Fathers? Is this the reverend
antiquity you talk of? must we have these fellows dug out of their
graves, to help you in your desperate cause? hear me (Campian) that which
Jewel then said most truly and confidently, challenging you to the trial of
six hundred years antiquity, offering also to yield you the victory, if you
brought one plain and manifest authority, out of any Father or Council; that
same we do all profess and promise, and will surely perform it.

Twenty years are expired, and not one of you hitherto could perform the
condition: if you persuade your self to have more sufficiency hereunto, then
your masters before have had, why stay you? why sit you still? why discontinue
you the defense of so good a cause? But alas, you are no body, you have read
nothing, you have no strength answerable to such an endeavor. The learned
Humphrey did not tax Jewel, as if he had too liberally undertaken for the
Fathers, or performed less then he promised; but only that he had yielded
further unto you, then he needed, and called back the cause which was already
determined by the Scriptures, to the authorities of the Fathers; which yet he
did not, as though he distrusted any thing, the trial of Scriptures; for he
knew that they were sufficient to refute all popish errors: but that hereby he
might beat down that their insolent and most false brag of antiquity,
which prevailed with many. You say further that you have conferred sometimes
familiarly with To^y Matthew, and w^^led him to answer freely, whether he
that read the Fathers diligently, could be of that part which ^e favored.
Although in private and familiar conference we say many things, which we would
not have further reported, or dispersed, yet I doubt not, but the worthy Matthew
gave you such an answer, as was both agreeable to the truth, and fit for his
judgment and wisdom. We must not in all things believe the Fathers, nor does
our faith depend upon their word. Sometimes they have erred and been the
occasion of errors unto others; yet may we read them, and by their truths be
more learned, by the contrary more wary. And this also thinks Matthew Hutton
that famous man, whom you surmise to be the only man amongst us conversant in
the Fathers. And this also is all our opinions. After you have thus finished
your discourse, you will now (as you say) without fear come into the battle
and fight with us. You are still telling us of armies, skirmishes, wars,
camps and of your battles: but you should remember that the trial of war
is common to both sides, and the issues of battles uncertain. The and of
war lies in the strength of arms, not in the stoutnes of words.

EDMUND CAMPIAN. The sixth Reason, which is the foundation of the Fathers.
IF ever that saying ( Job. 5.
search the Scriptures) was loved, and liked of by any, which was greatly
regarded and ought to be amongst us; the holy Fathers assuredly herein excelled
and exceeded: for by their labor and cost were the Bibles copied out, and
conveyed to so many countries and nations of strange languages; by their great
perils and torments were they delivered from burning by the enemies, and from
destruction; by their pains and teachings, have they been throughout expounded
most faithfully; they spent whole days and nights in the study of holy
Scriptures; they preached out of every Pulpit the holy Scriptures; they
enriched long volumes with holy Scriptures; with most faithful Commentaries
they explained the holy Scriptures; they seasoned as well their feasting as
their fasting, with holy Scriptures. And finally they exercised themselves,
even until crooked old age crept upon them in holy Scriptures. And although
they grounded their reasons also upon the authority of their Ancestors, upon
the common practice of the Church, upon the succession of Bishops, upon
general Councels, upon Traditions of the Apostles, upon the bloodshedding of
Martyrs, upon the decrees of Pre^^^s, upon strange signs and marn^^^^us
^^^racles, yet their greatest desire was, especially to fill their treatises,
with store of testimonies out of the holy Scriptures. These they urge, upon
these they make their habitation, to these Scriptures as unto the coat Cant. 4.
armor of valiant soldiers, they worthily yield the highest and most honorable
place, like noble captains, daily desending the Catholic Church, which is the
city of God, by them kept in good repair, against all mischeeuous assaults of
her enemy: the which thing makes me the more to marvel, at that proud and
foolish exception of the adversary, who like one that seeks for water in the
running river, complains for the scarsity of Scriptures, where greatest store
of Scriptures are alleged. So long he says he is content to be judged by the
Fathers as they swerve not from the Scriptures. Does he speak as he thinks?
I will see then that these most famous writers, most ancient Fathers, and most
holy men, Saint Denis, S. Cyprian, S. Athanasius, S. Basil, S. Gregory
Nazianzen, S. Ambrose, S. Hierome, S. Chrysostom, S. Augustine, and S. Gregory
the great shall come forth well armed and vpholden with Christ, with the
Prophets, with the Apostles, and with the whole furniture of the Bible. Grant
good Lord, that, that religion may And at this day the same faith flourishes
in England, which those Fathers did had and defended.
reign in England, I say good Christ grant, that, that religion may reign in
England, that these Fathers that embrace the Scriptures, so lovingly have
builded up out of the Scriptures. Look what Scriptures they bring, we will
bring the same; look what Scriptures they confer, we will confer the same;
look what Scriptures they allege, we will allege the same. Art thou also
contented with this? cough out Sir a Gods name, and tell me plainly what you
think. I like them not thou will say except they interpret the said Scriptures
rightly; what meanest thou by saying rightly? o now I know, after thy own
fancy. Art thou not ashamed of this blind entreat dealing? Then for as much as
I am in good hope, that in the foresaid Universities, that most freshly
flourish, there will join together a great number of such as will look into
these controversies; not grosely, but with sharp judgment, and will weigh
these men's trifling answer not partially, but in equal balance; I will
therefore, with a cheerful courage expect this day of battle, as one that
minds to march forward with the nobility, and force of Christ's Church,
against a monkes^ multitude of ragged Rogues.

WILLIAM WHITAKERS. The answer to the sixth Reason, which is the foundation of
the Fathers.
I Cannot well conjecture, Campion, what these new foundations of the fathers
may be, which you propound unto us. As touching the fathers we have given you
your answer, and have plainly proved, that they afford no foundation for
you to build your cause upon. And it is probable that you thought so your self;
therefore you judged it not safe for you to rest in them, unless you brought
forth certain foundations by which you might strengthen the fathers
themselves. For after you had said what you could remember touching the
fathers, that you might show you esteemed their sayings as divine Oracles,
because you saw that was too slender, and that no man would iumpe with you in
that point, you now endeavor by certain foundations to fortify and strengthen
the authority of the Fathers. Now the strength, and as it were the bond and
sinews of this disputation is this DVR. Campian does not dispute so; but say
he do, what reprove you? for he speaks not of one Father, but of the consent
of all, who flourished in one age, whom Saint Paul says, Christ has made
Pastors and teachers of his Church, Ephesians. 4.11. WHIT. page 408. Then, as you
confess, I swarued not much from his sense. But think you the reason is of
force? The ancient Fathers have diligently read and searched the Scriptures,
therefore they never erred in their interpretation. If i^ hold in the Fathers,
why not in others which do search the Scriptures as well as they? which if
you once grant, you ouerturne your own cause. And though they were Pastors of
the Church, yet were there many other Pastors and teachers of the Church, who
either writ nothing at all, or their vvritings are perished; so that what
they delivered, we possibly cannot know: what a vain thing is it then to
brag of the consent of all, when you can hardly name twenty in the most
flourishing age that ever was, whose books came to our hands. Besides, the
consent of all in one age in no controversy can you bring against us, except
it were in the most corrupt ages. Lastly, the Pastors Christ gave to his
Church, were men, such as might err, and who had no promise to be kept from
error, if at any time they turned aside from the Scriptures.
The Fathers have searched the Scriptures most diligently, they have heaped up
store of testimonies out of the holy Scriptures, they have attributed the
chief place to these: therefore we ought to be content with their exposition
of Scriptures; and without sin we may desire no better. This either is the
sense of this place, or else there is no sense in it. And verily I profess you
have laid these things down so faintlie and looselie, that I can hardly
discern their scope: for what, I pray you, can be spoken more loosely? The
fathers have diligently labored to understand the Scriptures: therefore in
their exposition of them they have never erred. But we find many strange
differing and dissenting expositions in the Fathers; which all may well be
false, but more then one of them cannot be true. I will give you one example
for a thousand. DVR. We confess every Father may err^, but we deny that all
the Fathers of one age did ever fall into any error, which was contrary to
faith. WHIT. page 412. As if this were not a matter of faith, whether S. Paul
lied, or whether he ingenuously reproved S. Peter as he professed he did. For
if S. Paul did it dissemblingly, then may it be lavvfull for us to dissemble,
and after confirm it with a lie; both which are contrary to sound doctrine.
But particular dissentions you stand not upon, you desire to see some general,
when you grant every particular may err, will it not follovv that all may?
But see an example. In the Council of Constantinople held under Leo the Pope,
the Fathers there decreed to abolish Images out of Churches. But the Nicene
Council under Iren. condemned this Canon, yea and by a third Council held in
Germany, this decree was again condemned. One of these certainly must needs
be deceived. Again, have you forgotten that Augustine with Innocent the
Bishop of Rome, and other Bishops of the Church, did think it necessary that
the Eucharist should be given to Infants? which error continued a long time in
the Church. Think you these are not points of faith?
S. Paul writes, Gala. 2.11.
that at Antioch he withstood Peter to his face: what a kind of opposition
this was you would know, but cannot of your self find it out. You wonder that
Paul would oppose Peter, one Apostle another, and happily you suspect some
mystery may be hid in it: you go to the fathers, you enquire of Hierome,
August. and Hieron. in Epistol.
and of Augustine, two very famous lights of the Latin Church. What do they
tell you? Augustine think that S. Paul spoke ingenuously and as he thought
Hierome that he spoke fainedly. If you approve the one, you must needs reject
the other; for you cannot consent with both. Six hundred of this kind I could
propound unto you. I know how, says Hierome, otherwise to account of the
Apostles, then of other writers. Hieron. in Epist. ad Theophilis.
They ever sp^^k^ the tr^^^, these as man have erred in some things. Yet they
read the Scriptures, they were conversant in them, and spent themselves wholly
in meditating upon them. From these you may discern how your accusation is
most unjust, and our defense most equal and just. I desire not to diminish the
fathers due and worthy commendations: so you will confess they are men, extol
them with all the praises you can to the very heavens, where they are now free
Denizens. I could wish, that that which they constantly did, either you would
do, search the Scripture, or suffer us to do: then I doubt not but this fight
would have a good issue. But the Scriptures which Christ ratified with his own
voice, and commended to our diligent search, you fly from and abhor, as
thieves do the gallows, you abandon them out of men's sight, and yet you have
never done searching; for you compass sea and land to find out old traditions
and customs long ago dead and buried, men's inventions, decrees of Popes, the
corruptions of Churches, fained and forged books, diriges, scrappes; dreams
and fables, but the holy Scripture you touch not at all, lest, as I suppose,
they would make against you. At length for shame cast away those your trifles
which you so busily hunt after, and search the Scriptures, DVR. We allow all
to read the Scriptures, as many as can well and safely do it. And then we
account the search good and sound, when men are able to interpret them not out
of their own heads, but by the authority of the ancient Fathers. WHIT page
415. You show your good nature, that you will not reprove that which is well
done. But may none else read the Scriptures, but men qualified as you write?
then very few must spend their labor in them. But Christ commanded to search
the Scriptures, not the opinions and exposition of the Fathers, yea and he
commanded all whosoever to seek eternal life, and desire to know Christ,
Joh. 5.39. and not the learned only.
as Christ has commanded, Origin. in Isas. hom. 1.
and the ancient fathers have done. And would to God (as Origin writes) we all
would do that which is written, Search the Scriptures) If we were commanded to
search the fathers of the Church, unwritten verities, the Popes Canons, we
would willingly set up our rest there; but when we are called from them to the
diligent search of the Scriptures, do not much blame us, if we so far, as
you speak, subscribe to the fathers, as they agree with the Scriptures. For
you cannot justly blame that in us which you confess is commendable in them.
DVR. If you think Christ commanded all, you are greatly deceived, for how
should the rude and ignorant search the Scriptures? who as Augustine
witnesses must be saved, not by sharpness of understanding, but by
simplicity of believing. Moreover Christ gave unto the people, Pastors and
Doctors, and not the books of the Scriptures. WHIT. page 417. Christ verily
spoke to the people, not to the learned, and if he commanded all the Jews to
search the Scriptures, why not all Christians? but that they ought, is proved
by these places, Act. 17.11. Coll. 3.16. Chrysostom upon that place, Hom. 9.
Hierome upon the same. Origin. in Jsaiam hom. 2. Chrysostom. in Euangel. Joan.
hom. 13. Further if the people be ignorant, you take the way to keep them so.
But they verily ought to have knowledge; and you very learnedly make an
argument from their defect. Augustine as you would have it, does not maintain
the ignorance of the people, only he requires not of them any subtle
knowledge: all must believe, which none can do without the knowledge of the
Scripture, but the same quicknes of understanding is not required in all.
Finally Christ who gave them teachers, gave them also the Word; neither were
the Pastors to teach them any thing, but the Scriptures; why then speak you
thus? as if these things ordained one under another were contrary: It is
worthy the observing, that in your judgment Christ gave not the Scriptures
unto the people; if then they read them, they meddle with other men's right.
For Christ commanded us as well as them, to search the Scriptures. That
therefore which is enjoined us both, to search, it ought to be the purpose of
both to find out. And do you judge it equal, DVR. Who will believe that
you have found out, that they could not? or who are you that accuse them of
ignorance and error? WHIT. page 423. I verily acknowledge that the Fathers
excelled in all kind of learning, I am so far from accusing them of
ignorance. But if the Fathers have often and greatly erred, which you must
confess whether you will or no: why may not we, who are commanded to
read the Scriptures asvvvell as they, hold fast the truth we have found, and
reject the errors they have delivered? who while they lived, ingenuously
confessed themselves ignorant of many things, and that they erred not in a
fevv, and would also do no less if they were alive again.
that if they have erred in searching, we should tread in their steps, and
reject the truth we have found out? For wheresoever they find out the truth
they sought after, we receive it and consent with them. And therefore,
Campian, make you no doubt, we speak unfeignedly; we will subscribe to the
fathers, while they consent to the Scriptures. Does this thing please you? so
it seems. For you say, You will see that these most ancient writers, S.
Denis, S. Cyprian, S. Athanasius, S. Basil, S. Gregory Nazianzene, S. Ambrose,
S. Hierome, S. Chrysostom, S. Augustine, and S. Gregory the great, shall come
forth well armed with the whole furniture of the bible. But what if they will
not obey your commandment, neither serve for wages in your tents? will you
compel them against their wills to bear arms in your camps? It is more
then you can do: they will not endure themselves to be thus compelled or
forced. You call them man by man, but they will not answer to those names: yea,
both these now named by you, and all ancient fathers do proclaim open war
against you, and if you please, let us spend a little time in the trial of it.

This Deuis whosoever he was cannot be on your side, while you maintain DVR.
We Catholics neither defend nor acknowledge a private Mass^, for all Masses
are said by a public Minister of the Church, in the name of the whole, and for
the salvation of all the children of the Church is it offered. WHIT. page 428.
It is childish to contend about the Word, you defend such a Mass as the Church
knew not in the days when Denis lived; for your Masses are performed by one,
but the form he speaks of, is performed by many. And what if a public
Minister do it, yet that being done of one must needs be private, specially
when either there are no people present, or if they be present, yet they do
nothing but look on: and what profit can come to them by that he does? as if
that meat the Priest eats feeds the people. Besi^es Christ never ordained
such an offering, himself once offered, is the sacrifice which is profitable
to the whole Church. Again, what needs the people once to communicant with
him, or what greater fruits shall they have by it, if they do? Lastly if the
whole people may receive salvation from that Mass which they neither taste,
see, nor yet dream of, why will you not grant that Christ may be present to
our faith, though we be far disioyned from his body.
private Mass. For he has described the public communion of the whole
Church, such as Christ at the first instituted, and the ancient Church ever
held. The very same thing does Iustine the Philosopher and martyr, Justin.
Apol. 2.
who in his Apology before Anthony the Emperor, laid open the order of
discipline, which Christ held in his holy assembly. At that time the whole
people received DVR. Jf you had but lightly read over Iustine, you would never
have been so impudent, for he altogether allows our judgment, and no where
speaks he of bread and wine given to the people. WHIT. page 430. If you had
read the place, you might have seen the contrary to your opinion and to all
that you say, his own words shall manifest all. They, who with us are called
Deacons, give to every one that is present part of the bread, wine and water,
for which thanks are given. Can any thing be said more contrary to your, and
more manifest for our opinion.
bread and wine, now with you they receive neither. DVR. Yet Cyprian writ thus
Epist. 55. The premacie is given to S. Peter that it might appear there is one
Church and one chair. WHIT. page 433. They are not Cyprians words, but
Pamelius who has corrupted Cyprian, bringing out of the margent into the
text, as appears by ancient copies. And Gratian also observed the same,
Causa. 24.9.1. loquitur.
Cyprian makes all the Apostles equal with Peter, Cyprian. de Simplicitat.
praelat. Lib. 1. Epist. 4.
and directly affirms that they have like honor and authority with him, and
forbids all appeals to the Bishop of Rome. Therefore he must needs deest your
Pope, who prefers himself both in dignity and authority before all other
Bishops, and from all parts draws unto his courts all appeals. DVR. Cyprian
in this place speaks not at all touching any appeal. WHIT. page 434. If you
consider the place well, you shall find that he inueigheth against certain
false Bishops, who being condemned by the voices and censures of the Bishops of
Afrike for just causes, would have the causes pleaded again at Rome before
Cornelius the Bishop. And in his discourse. 1. He shevved that causes ought to
be heard where the crimes are committed. And so not things done in Afrike, at
Rome. 2. He affirms that every Bishop has his portion of the flock, for
which he must give an account. Then not the Bishop of Rome the whole, nor the
administration of all causes: finally he calls them desperate and forlorn
men, who thought the authority of the Bishops of Afrike to be less then of
the Bishops of other countries, and so with reproach he rejects the
supreme authority of the Bishop of Rome. Is there here any thing less then
we have affirmed?
Lactantius writes that it is a thing without question. Lactan. 2. cap. 19.
DVR. Lactantius speaks not of the Images of Christians, but of the Idols of
the Heathen, which he condemns because they are made of the earth: besides
the Ieves had their Cherubins. WHIT. page 436. He names not Idols, but Images,
such as your Church is full of, and so can there be no religion in it. Besides
your Images are no more heavenly then theirs, but made of the earth as theirs,
who pretended for themselves, as he vvriteth lib. 2. cap. 2. as you do, that
they worshipped not the Images, but the God, expressed by them. Further for
the Cherubins, they were placed in the most holy place, into which the people
might not enter, not yet look in: and show us particular precepts for yours,
as they had for theirs, and we have done. But he that commanded theirs,
forbids every where all others.
There can be no religion wheresoever there is an image. If he now lived and
saw your Churches full of images, would he acknowledge any sign of true
Religion? Athanasius affirms, Athanas. conts a Gentas.
That the holy Scriptures given by inspiration are sufficient to instruct men
in all truth: wherein with one word he has put to slight the whole armies of
your DVR. Will not all your University men account you a cosener, when
Athanasius joins the books of the Fathers with the Scriptures. WHIT. page
438. If Athanasius, say as much as I affirm: The Scriptures are sufficient of
themselves, why do you reptoach me? but he adds the books of the Fathers:
he does, but not as traditions differing from the Scriptures, but as
Commentaries upon them. For, says he, by reading of them a man may in some
measure understand the sense of the Scripture. These words make not for you,
neither against us, therefore I used neither cosening nor disceite.
traditions. Epiphanius sharply reprooueth certain foolish women, Epipham.
lib. 3. Haeres. 79.
who worshipped the virgin Mary with a certain new kind of worship, and
condemns all that superstition. DVR. Epiphanius speaks nothing of the
adoring of the Saints, but reproves ^omen for offering up sacrifices to the
Virgin Mary a^ to a G^^ld^^^e. WHIT. page 440. Nay he speaks against the
adoration and honoring of Saints and not of sacrificing only; his words are
plain. ^et none of the Saints be adored. The word he uses signifies to bovv
and prostrate our selves, and to worship one with Divine honor; which being
proper to God you impiously give to the Virgin Mary and to other innumerable
Saints
Let none, says he, worship the Virgin Mary. What would he say if he now saw
not only foolish women, but also men, and all mortal wights DVR No C^t^o^ike
does offer up sacrifice or perform vows to the Virgin Mary. WHIT. Yet you
confess you do such things to the honor of the Virgin and other Saints: I pray
you what may be the meaning of this; you offer up sacrifices and vows to God
in honor of the Saints? let me demand of you as Epiphanius of these women;
what Scriputre ^peaketh any thing of this matter? Then answer; your Masses are
they offered to the Virgin Mary, or for her? whether soever, Epiphanius says
It is foolish, strange, and that which proceeded from the spirit of Devils
Again, who knows not that you offer up prayers and intercessions to the
Virgin Mary and all Saints? And no man is found either so greatly covetous, or
so little superst^tious, but he voweth somewhat to some Saint, specially to the
Virgin Mary
offering up sacrifices and vows to the Virgin Mary? Basil. in Epist. ad
Cleric Neocaesariae.
Basil is the author, that in his days there was a DVR. Basil does not say it
was the custom of all Churches. WHIT. page 442. It seems you have not read
Basil, read the place and you shall find these words there. The c^^ome we now
keep, is consonant and agreeable to all the Churches of God. And he reckons
the Churches of Egypt, Afrike, Thebes, Palestine, and all who use singing of
Psalms.
custom in all Churches, that the people repeated the Psalms in the holy
assemblies. But in your Churches the people can DVR. As if the public prayers
of the Church did not profit the people, unless they understand the (...):
what a foolish dream is this. WHIT. page 443. We had rather dream with the
Apostle, then watch with you; for thus S. Paul speaks 1. Cor. 14 4.5.6. He
that speaks a strange tongue, speaks not unto men, but unto God, verse. 6.
If I come unto you speaking diverse tongues, what shall I profit you? Strange
tongues then profit not, unless your tongues have some more Divine power then
the Apostles tongue had.
neither hear nor understand those things which are read; but are only
deluded with ridiculous gestures and pompous shows. DVR. Gregory never
thought so, but in the same place he commends the solitary life as more
excellent then any humane condition; neither speaks he of the common life of
Christians, but of that which is spent in the duties of charity. WHIT. page
444. I prove it easily out of his words. Hierome the Philosopher, says he,
proposed unto himself to know whether of our lives was more to be wished
for, and more profitable, to the end he might make choice of it. And when he
knew that every man was not borne for himself only, but for all others, who
bear the same nature with him, he embraced this common life rather then that
solitary life. Does he not now prefer this life? and from the praise he
gives the other, he has somewhat detracted, when he shows that it is only
for themselves, and so less profitable and fruitful? Finally what is a
Christian life, but that which is spent in the duties of charity, for all
Christians are bound unto these duties. Then notwithstanding all these,
Gregory is still with us.
Nazianzen. de haer. Philosoph.
Nazianzene speaks no less honorably of this civil and sociable life,
than of the solitary life of Monks: which your cloister men cannot endure.
Ambros. in Romans cap. 1.
DVR. Ambrose codemneth suffragators, not intercessors, that is, such as might
inform God, what we are, not such as might comme^d our wants to him. WHIT.
page 446. As if God did not know as well our wants, without an intercessor, as
what we are without a suffragator. If he do, why should the one be allowed more
then the other? This new distinction of yours, I think our University men,
neither know, not will acknowledge: or what is intercession but a suffragation?
or what do you else desire of the Saints, but that they would speak favorably
for you to God?
Ambrose enueigheth bitterly against them, who think it necessary for them,
when they would go to God to use some mediators, as men do in courts of
Princes, before they can be brought to the King himself, they must seek the
favor of some of his near attendants. Does not this thing touch you, does not
this speech draw blood of you? who never ask any thing of God in your prayers,
but first you seek some of the Saints to be a mediator for you, to whom you
commend the care of your business and requests. Hieron. Ep.
DVR Hierome never vvriteth thus, but affirms that there is the like
difference betwixt a Bishop a Priest, and a Deacon, as was betwixt Aaron, and
his sons and the Levites. Epist. ad Euagr. And if there be equality, it is in
jurisdiction, not in power of order. WHIT. page 447. It is strange that you
deny that which Hierome directly affirms in the beginning of the same Epistle
namely, that the Apostle does plainly teach, that a Bishop, and a Priest are
all one: and this he proves by many testimonies of the Scripture. And upon the
1. chap. to Titus, he affirms plainly that a Bishop is above a Priest by
custom, not by Gods ordinance. And so must that be understood you bring out of
the forenamed Epistle. And where you acknowledge the same jurisdiction of both
by the law of God (which happily slipped from you unawares) their unequal
power must needs be only by the law of man.
Hierome did too much contemn your Pope, and other your glorious Bishops, when
he writes that a Priest and a Bishop, by the law of God are all one; do you
judge him worthy to be a Father of the Romish Church, the Bishop whereof you
make not only to be far above all Priests, but also all Bishops? DVR Leo the
Pope did decree this first of all, and Gelatius the fourth after him confirmed
it, least any of the Manichies. who superstitiously and wickedly abstained
from blood, might look among the Catholics. WHIT page 451. I will accept your
answer, though your Gratian be against it. But who sees not what a goodly
patron you are of the popish cause, who make the Manichies the first author of
the dismembring of the Supper. But whosoever did it, Gelatius censureth it
thus. The division of one and the same mystery cannot be without great
sacrilege. And so by a Pope is the whole Popish Church condemned of sacrilege.
Gelasius who himself was a Bishop of Rome, condemns your dry and maimed
supper as Sacrilegious, and strictly commands, De consecrat did. 2.
Comperimus. Vigil. lib. 1. cont. Eutych.
that either the whole be received, or it be wholly omitted. Will the
authority of the Pope move you no whit at all? Vigilius writes that Christ is
departed from us in his humane nature. DVR. Vigilius means that Christ
withdrevv from the world the visible presence of his humanity, and not the
humane nature himself. WHIT. page 453. But the words that follow after show
the clean contrary. He therefore is with us, and not with us, because whom he
left, and from whom he departed in his humanity, he has not left, nor forsaken
in his Divinity. And again, in lib. 4. contr. Eutych. when he was in the
earth, he was not in heaven: and now that he is in heaven, he is not in the
earth. And again: he was circumscribed in a place according to his humane
nature, and not contained in a place according to his Divinity: this is the
Catholic confession and faith, which the Apostles have delivered; the Martyrs
have confirmed, and the faithful have kept to this day. If this be the
Catholic faith, then are not you Catholics who judge far othe^vvise of the
humanity of Christ.
The Son of God in his humane nature is gone from us: but in his divine
nature he is always with us, whereas you say Christ is present in both
natures. DVR. Chrysostom, because he savv many so addicted and given to
theaters, stage plays, and impious Interludes, did thus admonish them, lest
they should distaste the reading of the Scriptures. WHIT page 458. Be it so:
have you also no impious places and spectacles and profane exercises? And yet
with you any thing is lawful, save reading of the Scriptures. But who so
reads Chrysostom, in Joan. hom. 13. in Epist. ad Coloss. hom. 9. de Lazaro
hom. 3. shall find that he required this simply, necessarily, and generally of
all men.
Chrysostom exhorts lay men and all the people that they would get them
Bibles, Chrysostom ad Coloss. hom. 9. and in Joan. hom. 8.
read the Scriptures, and that at home in their houses the husband with the
wife, the father with his children, would confer among themselves of the
Scriptures. But this neither can, nor lawfully may be done in your Church, yea,
it is a certain proof of an heretic, for any to have the Bible in his
house. What shall I say of Augustine, who in the greatest and most principal
controversies, as of grace, predestination, free will, justification, the
Scripture, the Law, the Gospel, sin, good works, Sacraments, and Church is
wholly and fully ours. I should never make an end if I should pursue
particulars, and collect but a little of every thing. Gregor. lib. 4. Epist.
30. and 34.
Gregory the great, though he was a Bishop of Rome, yet will he take our part
against you: For tell me, does he not touch your Pope to the quick, when
peremptorily he affirmed, that whosoever should call himself the DVR. Gregory
condemned John, because he sought for such an authority over all Bishops, as
the Emperor had over the Kings, who are subject unto them. WHIT. page 460.
Whether John of Constantinople sought such a power or no; it is not certain:
but no man can be ignorant, how the Pope affects it: And long ago has not
only got authority over the Bishops, but has subdued the Emperor himself:
which John of Constantin^ple never once assayed to do. Gregory tells us what
he means by universal Bishop, he who endeavors to bring into subjection
to himself all the members of Christ by the title of universal. Whereby he
touches home your Pope, who subiecteth all the members of Christ to himself as
to their head: neither did ever any Emperor rule more tyrannously over his
Kings and vassals, then the Pope has over the Bishops of all Churches.
universal Bishop, undoubtedly was the forerunner of Antichrist? Touching
which title there has been deadly hatred and bloody contentions betwixt the
Bishops of Constantinople and Rome. John of Constantinople being a proud man,
and very insolent, and ambitious, first challenged this unto himself: Gregory
while he lived earnestly and constantly withstood him. And within a while
after this title was taken from the Bishop of Constantinople, and given to the
Bishop of Rome. Leave trifling, Campian, and even tell me plainly, DVR. Who
sees not in what sense th^se Bishops of Rome would not this name unto
themselves, though they always professed them Bishops of the universal and
Catholic Church, and the Vicars of Christ. WHIT page 463. It seems you did
not mean to be understood of any who speak on this manner: but tell us, is
the Pope universal Bishop or no? If he be, how comes the change, that, that
which was Antichristian in the Patriarch of Constantinople by the judgment of
Pelagius and Gregory, both Bishops of Rome, should be Catholic and holy in
the Pope? For that which so insolently John of Constantinople took unto
himself, and enjoyed for a while, not long after Boniface the third earnestly
took unto himself, and translated to his successors, as says Platina in vita
Bonifac. 3. and Sabellicus Ennead. 8. lib. 6. Vispergensis in Phoca. They then
have not only the thing, but the name, and so are Antichristian.
if that name in the Bishop of Constantinople was a sign of the approaching of
Antichrist, why may we not judge it in the Bishop of Rome, a notable ensign
of the same Antichrist? now I have given you a taste by which you may judge
other things: you must either get you other fathers, or for all these you must
needs yield as overcome. Do we at length speak without riddles? what is it
you else desire of us? wherefore Campian, get you into this camp, and show
forth all your valor: you shall verily find you have to deal, not with naked
and unarmed beggars, but with well appointed and well harnessed adversaries.

EDMUND CAMPIAN. The seventh Reason, which is the History.
THe ancient Histories of former times, do plainly discover the true form of
the Primitive Church, thither do I appeal: as for the ancient
Historiographers, Generales Historici.
whose authority all the adversaries do sometime usurp, these are well nigh
all of them. Eusebius, Damasus, Hierome, Ruffinus, Orosas, Socrates, Sozomenus,
Theodoretus, Cassiodorus, Gregory of Tours, Oswaldus, Regino, Marianus,
Sigibertus, Sonoras, Cedrenus, Nicephorus. What song, I pray you, do these men
sing? a song in praise of Catholics of their prosperous proceedings, of their
interchangeable alterations, and what enemies they had; yea moreover (which I
would have you well to mark) these men which are our daily enemies for our
Religion sake, Hareticoru^ Chronica and Historica. Anno Dom. 1500.
to wit, Philip Melangthon, Pantalion, Functius, and the Magdeburgeans, when
they went about, to write either Chronicle or Ecclesiastical History, they
should have had nothing at all to write of for the space of 1500. years after
Christ, except they had gathered together the acts of those men, that take our
part, and put in writing the treacheries and outrages of the enemies of our
Church. Consider also the particular Historiographers of some special
countries, Historici certarum Gentium.
who bended themselves curiously and busily to search out the special affairs
of every such people as they undertook to write of. These as men desirous by
all means they possibly could to enrich and beautify that work they had in
hand, omitted not so much as banqueting feasts, or long sleeued coats, or
strange haftes of daggers, or gilded spurs, and such like trifles, but they
made mention thereof, if it had any smacke of novelty. These men doubtless,
if there had been any alteration in religion, or any digression, from their
former faith, which was in the Primitive Church, that had come to their ears,
many of the^ would have recorded it: if not many, yet some few of them at the
least; if not some few, yet some one or other doubtless would have made
mention thereof. This is false, for many have made mention of the corruption of
the Church.
But no body at all, neither friend nor foe, made any muttering, or gave any
inkling of any such matter. As for example sake, the adversaries grant (because
they cannot otherwise choose) that the Church of Rome, was once an holy
Catholic and Apostolic Church, even then when it deserved these commendations
of Romans 1.
S. Paul, Your faith is spoken of throughout the whole world. I cease not to
remember you in my prayers. I Romans 15.
know that when I come unto you; I shall come in the abundance of the blessings
of Romans 16.
Christ. All the Churches of Christ do greet you, for your obedience is spread
abroad in all places. Then also, when S. Paul having free Act. 28.
liberty of the prison, there preached the Gospel abroad. Then also, when S.
Peter governed the Church, gathered together long ago in that City of Rome,
which he called by the 1. Pet. 5.
name of Babylon. Campian acknowledges that Rome is Bayblon.
The when that same S. Hieron. in cap. semp. Eccl. and Papias apud E^s^b. 2.
Hist. 15.
Clement, whom the Philip. 4.
Apostle so highly commends, was chief head of that Church: then also, when
Fren. lib. 3. cap. 3. Inst, lib. 4. cap. 2. number. 3. and in Epist. ad Sadol.
vide Co^l in Anno 1523.
Heathen Emperors, as Domitian, Nero, Traiane, and Antonius most cruelly
murdered the Bishops of Rome. Then also, This is false, Calvin testifies no
such thing.
Calvin himself does witness, This is false, Calvin testifies no such thing.
when Damasus, Syticius, Anastasius, and Innocentius were governors of the Sea
Apostolic. For at this time he freely confesses that men nothing swarued,
especially at Rome from the true doctrine of the Gospel. At what time then
has Rome lost this faith so highly commended by S. Paul? when fainted faith
which before so flourished? In what age, under what Pole, upon what occasion,
by whose compulsion, by whose power, has a new strange Religion invaded, not
only that city of Rome, but the whole world besides? what outcries, what
rufflings, what weeping and wailing has it caused? were all men in all the
world besides in a dead sleep, while Rome, I say, Rome brought forth new
Sacraments, new sacrifice, and new doctrine of religion? There has not been
found any one Historiographer either Latin or Greek, neither abroad nor at
home, which has vouchsafed so much as to make a little note in his books of
so notable a matter, though it had been never so slenderly. Wherefore this is a
matter manifest enough, if the History which is a faithful witness of
antiquity, and the life of memory, do in many and sundry places copiously
entreat and spoake of that faith which we profess: and if no History at all
since the creation of the world do affirm, that, that faith which the
adversaries do thrust upon us, was (...) allowed in the Catholic Church; then
are all the Historiographers on our part, and the invasions of the adversaries
are not frivolous, and such as can make no man afraid, except it be first
granted, that all Christians throughout every age, have fallen to gross
infidelity and consequently into the deep pit of hell; until that Friar
Luther committed aduoutrie with the Nun Katherine Bore.

WILLIAM WHITAKERS. The answer to the seventh Reason, which is the History.
NOw you call us to History, the witness of times and reporter of Antiquity:
and all that have taken pains in publishing the Ecclesiastical History,
their names you set down, and like dumb shows, you carry them in great
pomp: as though, Campian, the particular naming of all that have published any
History were sufficient for the remembrance, and searching out the monuments
of Antiquity. What insolent new kind of Logic is this, to reckon up the
Historians of the whole world, and of particular countries, and then conclude
they are your own? Have you of late from above procured this privilege, that
whatsoever you lay your hands upon, shall by and by become yours? we have long
since perused the ancient Chronicles, wherein the beginning and proceeding of
the Church is set down, and we find not that they favor you more then us. If
in them be some things against us, many more, and more weighty testimonies they
have against you, and such as give you a deadly wound; else would we never
have collected the Histories of the ancient Church so accuratelie, and
diligently, penning them exactlie, and distinguishing the several ages and
times; neither would we have published them in the world, if they were so
contrary unto us, as you surmise: for who have taken more pains to find out,
or more faithfully restored the Ecclesiastical Histories, then our men,
without whose labors many monuments of Antiquity had been buried in
darlinesse? We therefore will never deny this trial of Antiquity, and seeing
you appeal to ancient Histories, we condescend; yet with this caution, that
we be not tied to those things which were apparently blemishes in the ancient
Church. Especially seeing that writers of Histories intending to make a
natration of things done, do not so much teach us what ought to be done, but
have an eye to that which was then performed, and by that means set down many
things worthy of reprehension, rather than imitation: and for the most part it
happens, that Historiographers are possessed with the errors of the times
wherein they writ; and ever the later writer the more corrupt. But here you
exclaim that we seek euasions, and very peruersly you slander us, that
because we do not allow all, we refuse all. They that reform what is
amiss, do not blame the rest that is not faulty. Strive while you list
(Campian) and cry out of mazes and labyrinths, at length will you, nill you,
by the cares must we bring you to the judgment of the Scriptures.

And herein, Campian, you very much DVR. And why may not Campian trumph, for
what impudency is this to cry out that the Church of Rome is full of
innumerable heresies; and yet you cannot tell, when one of them ever began, in
what Popes time, by what means, how it increased in the Church? WHIT. page
477. A good cause would be defended by reasons, not raylings. But does it
follow that the Church of Rome is not corrupt, because we cannot tell the
moment of time when it began to be corrupt? but being so manifest as it is,
what need we search the Histories to show the beginning? what I pray? if you
see a man sick of the pestilence, a city corrupt with riote and wickedness,
a house ruinous and ready to fall, a ship sincking; will you deny all these,
unless one can tell you the time when he began to be sick, the means how the
city grew corrupt, who was ovvnet and in what year the house grevv ruinous,
and in what da^e the ship began first to leake? And what is the force of
your reason and demand other then this? But, do not your own Histories tell
when and by whom innouations and corruptions entered? see a fevv of them. He
that first usurped authority over other Churches was Pope Victor, after him
Zozimus, Boniface, Celestiue, and the^ successura. Pope Syricius first fo^bad
Priests marriages. The Manichies first denied the Cup to the people. The Nicene
Council first ordained worshipping of Images. Pope Nicolas the second, first
taught: the body of Christ must carnally be handled, broken and eaten. Pope
Jnnocent the third, first established the doctrine of Transubstantiation.
Boniface the third, that the Pope was the head of all Churches. Gregory the
great taught Purgatory first for a certain truth. The Florentine Council,
that the Pope was above Councels. Jnnocent the third, brought in auricular
confession. If these were not sufficient I could produce sire hundred more.
triumph, when you demand at what time, under what Bishop, by what way, and
proceeding, was a new religion spread over the City of Rome, and the whole
world: and do not doubt, but that if any change and declining had been, many
writers would have made mention of it, or diverse, or one at the least. It is
hard for us to answer at what time, neither is it necessary to set down the
very instant of time. All things were not at once ouerturned in the Church of
Rome, sin and wickedness came to his height by degrees, and by leisure to
ripenes; the hairs of our head are not all gray of a sudden, neither does
any thing suddenly come to his maturitie, and the growth of every thing
appears long after. This is manifest in such things, as having small
beginning go on forward unto a greater quantity, until they come to
perfection; you cannot deny, but there was a great alteration of Religion, in
the Church of DVR. It is not hard to know the heresies of the Jews, for
Philastrius, Epiphanius, Josephus, have written of them. WHIT page 484. It is
as easy to know the heresies of Christians, being more in the Christian Church
then ever were in the Church of Jerusalem, and of these also have many books
been written.
Jerusalem, what then? was the change all at once? show us then how those
novelties entered into the Church, what time, what way, who was Bishop, and by
what proceedings it increased. You Romanis^ condemn the Greek Church, and yet
it is nothing so corrupt as yours. DVR. You require an easy thing; for the
authors of the heresies of the Greek Church, we can easily number out of
their stories, Samosatenus, Eutyches, Sergius, Arrius, Nestorius, Macedonius,
and such like. WHIT. page 486. It is a vvonder that you will object these
heresies unto the Greek Church: when you cannot be ignorant but that more and
more horrible heresies sprung up in the Romish Church, and almost in the
midst of Rome: For Valentinus, Marcion, Cerdon, Florentius, Blasius,
Tatianus, Nouatus, Pelagius, Julianus, Celestinus, and other such did broach
most pestiferous heresies in Rome. If you answer the Latin Church condemned
these; I can answer so for the Greek Church. And if you think you have
objected well in numbering certain heresies of the Greek Church, you may
think I have ansvvered asvvell in reckoning the heresies of the Latin Church.
Declare now unto me those circumstances of time in the declining of this
Church, which you demand for your own. Point out the time, the Bishop, and
the growth of their Apostasy. As the alteration of these Churches was then
easy to be discerned when it first began, though now it be very hard to
find out those circumstances: so we see plainly a great change in the Church
of Rome, yet can we not certainly pronounce the several times of their
several declining. Many are manifest, which were too long to rehearse, and
those are distinguished according to their times and seasons. The case was with
the Church of Rome, as we see it is in a great building: for as a house which
is strongly built at the first, continues so of it self a long time after
sound and whole; but if for a time it be left and neglected, it begins in
some place to decay, and to be full of chinkes, which in time wax big by
degrees, till they threaten ruin to the posts and roofes themselves, and at
length by this means, the whole building is ruinated and falls down: so the
Roman Church in process of time declined from her ancient estate, and by the
infection of error and superstition daily prevailing, at length she lost the
very spirit and life of the Church. Eusebius reports, that one Polycrates
Bishop of Ephesus, had written of the Church, that she was, whilst the
Apostles lived, a chaste and undefiled Virgin. For then they that would have
altered the holy pattern of sound doctrine, did it faintly and fearfully, not
daring to creep out of their holes. DVR. O horrible fact! o intolerable
wickedness! with what face can you thus speak, if you remember how Christ
promised his spouse perpetual preservation? Hose. 2.20. Isa, 59.21. Psalm.
131.17. and such like WHIT page 4^8. If your arguments were as great as your
outeries, who could deal with you? That the Church may be corrupted, see
these places Matthew. 13.25. 1. Cor. 5.6. 2. Cor. 11.3. Isay. 1.21. Gal. 1.6. and
2.1. Further what have I else spoken that Eusebius lib. 3. cap. 32. and
Nicephorus lib. 3. cap. 7. and 10. have not before time written? And when I
writ these things, I remembered well those promises and many other of that
kind. But I know that they belong to the Church of the elect, and hinder not,
but that particular Churches may be corrupted by error and false doctrine.
DVR. Eusebius does not anouch these from Polycrates, but from Hegesippus, who
called the Church a Virgin, because heretics as yet had not openly opposed
her, and corrupted the seats of the Apostles: and did not say that she was
corrupted after them. WHIT. page 490. The matter is not great which of them
spoke the words, for whosoever shall vvergh the words, shall see that the
sense of them is as I have said. And if the Church was ever to remain a chaste
and pure Virgin, how foolish should that Hegesippus be in affirming that
hitherto she remained a Virgin, or what may his meaning be else then that the
Apostles being dead, she began to be corrupted, which the words follovving
prove, when that age was ouerpassed; then she began to be corrupted with
impious error? Yea and when you say that as yet heretics had not assaulted
her, nor invaded the tents of the Apostles, either you say nothing, or you
grant that after the Apostles time, they did assault her, and prevail against
her.
But after that the Apostles departed unto the heavenly mansions, and none of
that age left, that had been hearers of Christ himself, neither any of the
Apostles living, then began abominable error to gather strength, and openly in
the Churches to advance it self. What more pregnant testimony of antiquity
and history can you desire? Whilst the Apostles lived the Church was a
Virgin, as soon as they were dead, she became corrupted, and the mischief no
doubt in time increased and spread it self abroad. But I wonder that this
DVR. Nay rather if he were living he would wonder at your fo^lie, who are
either so ignorant or so forgetful, that you observe not, how Polycrates sent
letters to Pope Victor touching the new controversy about the cele bration of
the Passover. WHIT. page 492. It seems in policy you pass over this place
in silence, without answer; and tell us a tale of another different thing,
which affords us a strong argument against the tyranny of the Pope: for if
the most learned and holy Bishops of the Greek Churches, dissented greatly
from the Pope in the celebration of Easter, and would not follow the custom of
the Pope and Romish Church, though the Pope sought it by all means, who can
doubt, but that this supreme power of the Pope over all Churches under Christ
as his Vicar, was unknown and unheard of among them?
Polycrates, was either so ignorant or forgetful that he considered not this,
that the Pope of Rome was left unto the Church, in the Apostles rooms, to
defend this Virgin, and preserve her chastity. Why calls he the Church a
Virgin? Because the Apostles were living, by whom her audacious adversaries
were always discouraged and discomforted. But either in this respect the
Church now wants a Pope, or else she needs him not at all. But Polycrates,
although there were none left to preserve the purity of this Virgin, bewaileth
her want as you see, which surely had been vnaduifedly done, if his opinion had
been, that this charge belonged to the Bishop of Rome. The Church then from the
Apostles time began to decline, and inclined to the apostasy, which the
Apostle did foretell should be, and we see now fulfilled. Then those Wolves of
whom the Apostle did forewarne, Act. ^0.19.
came into the Church and ceased not to destroy the flock. Then those
Antichrists, whereof John affirms some were in his time, 1. Ioh. ^.18.
began to undertake the work, which after was perfected and accomplished: I
might here show you many evident tokens of your Churches Apostasy, out of
these your own Chronicles: they are no secrets, but such as any man that will
read and observe, may easily discern.

And since you call us unto Histories, DVR. Two things here are, of which you
would persuade the Reader, one that the Fathers of the Council allowed not
that which the Pope affected by his Legates: another that the Legates did
maliciously produce a forged Canon. What would you do if you could find any
thing of weight in any story against us? WHIT page 494. They are the things
indeed wherein I would instruct the Reader, and what can any story afford us
more solid and perspicuous, for whether you respect the a^^bition and fraud
not used in former times by the Bishops of Rome, or the authority of the
Council, or that famous sentence given against the Bishops of Rome, there is
no man so ignorant and unexperienced, but he will confess that they enacted
and decreed a great matter, and of no small importance.
I will put you in mind of one thing related in an ancient story, consider it
well whether it touch your Pope, or no, and then answer fully concerning the
whole matter. A Council was assembled in Afric, of 217. Council. Carthag. 6.
cap. 3.1.7.9.
Bishops; whereof Augustine himself was one, the glory and star of Afric:
I will set down the story briefly. Zozimus Bishop of Rome sent thither his
Legates, which should persuade the Fathers of Afric, that appeals might be
made to the Bishop of Rome from all other Bishops. The Legates make relation
hereof unto the Fathers, and withal produce a Canon of the Council of Nice,
wherein the privilege was recorded: the Fathers wonder at this new decree, and
answer the Legates that they never saw any such Canon in any copy Greek or
Latin, and that, as they thought, the true and perfect copy of that Council
remained with them, which Cecilianus Bishop of Carthage, which was himself
present at that Council, had brought into Afric; notwithstanding they
determine to send to Constantinople, Alexandria, and Antioch, such as might
receive the true and natural copies, from the Bishops of those cities. The
Popes Legates would feign have stayed them from sending, but could not. Cyrill
Bishop of Alexandria, and Atticus of Constantinople deliver unto the messengers
the copies with letters to the Fathers of Africa, wherein they do avouch that
those copies were most true and sincere. Council. Af^^c. Can. 105.
Then at length the forgery appears in the Canon of the Council of Nice no
such thing can be found: so they writ to Celestine then Pope, and command him
to surcease from making any such claim ever after and not to send abroad his
Collectors, lest thereby they may seem to bring the presumptuous smokie pride
of the world into the Church of Christ. The Pope for the time yielded not
voluntarily, but perforce: for an hundred years after Boniface the second in
an Epistle unto Eulalius inueigheth bitterly against Aurelius Bishop of
Carthage, which was now President of the African Council, and affirms that
he and his fellows, whereof Augustine was the chief, were all moved by the
devil to withstand the Church of Rome; thus Pope Boniface censureth as
schismatikes, Aurelius of Carthage, and other the African Bishops, yea and
Augustine himself among the rest, because they resisted the Bishop of Rome in
that matter: as for Eulalius then Bishop of Carthage, he gives him great
thanks because he made friendship with the Church of Rome, that is he
willingly permitted the immediate power of the Bishop of Rome over the Church
of Afric. These things I have related out of their truest records, and of
this kind I could rehearse many more, so little cause have you to promise your
self much help out of History.

Hence may be perceived what the purpose and endeavor of the Bishops of Rome
have bin these many years, viz. to make themselves Lords of all Churches,
which also at length they obtained. But because you ask the question and
desire answer, when Rome lost her faith so much commended, and what that,
which once was; ceased to be? I may truly affirm that though in many things
she had made shipwreck of faith before, yet the^ did it begin to be the seat
of Antichrist, when Phocas the murderer granted unto Boniface the third, that
the Church of Rome should be head of all Churches, and the Bishop of Rome
should be called Universal Bishop. I will not too curiously search into the
moments of times, a mischief creeps privily, for a time unespied of men. But
the common opinion which men conceived of those times was, that Gregory the
great was the last good, and the first ill Bishop of Rome. He was no better
then he should be, and all that succeeded him were stark naught, every one
striving to go beyond his predecessor in all lewdnes: so that, now a sincke of
all wickedness has violently burst into the Church, and has possessed all the
parts thereof. You force me, Campian, to open the sores of your Church, which I
had rather not touch, but you are so unreasonable, yt you neither spare us nor
your selves. Barnard, who was the only religious man, your Church had for many
years, how often, and how grievously, does he bewail, the most desperate
estace of your Church? DVR. Bernard speaks not of the doctrine of the Church,
but of the manners of the wicked. and in the Church the evil men were ever
mixed among the good. WHIT. page 504. I wonder what was in your mind, when you
confess that the manners of your predecessors were such, as he describes both
here, and ad Eugen. lib. 4. Amongst these you being their Pastor, walk
decked with much precious apparel. If I durst speaze it; these are rather
pa^^ors for devils then for Christ's sheep, Your Court usually receives good
men, but makes sevv good. There the wicked are not made better, but the good
far worse. A number of such places I could allege out of him, neither
bewail^th l^ethe mixture of the bad, as you say, but the perishing of the good,
and the ru^ne of the Church.
A shameful contagion sprea^^^h over the body of the whole Church: Bernard. in
Cant. Ser. 33 De conuer. Pauli.
the servants of Christ serve Antichrist. From the sole of the foot to the
crown of the head nothing is sound. With these and the like speeches used
Bernard to bewail and complain of the intolerable wickedness of your Church,
which he would never have done without sufficient reason, moving thereunto.
Aeneas Syluius ad Casparem Schlik.
Aeneas Syluius, afterward Pope, writes that charity was waxed cold, and
faith utterly gone, and what manner of Church shall we judge this to have been,
when she had lost both faith and charity? But it may be you will say that he
wrote this of malice unto the Church, and that after he changing his opinion,
when of Aeneas he was made Pius, for that was ever his usual speech. Cast away
Aeneas and take Pius. What shall I further recite Petrarch, Mantuan, and other
Poets both learned and famous, which feared not with Satiricall verses to
inueigh against the Pope and Cardinals and the whole clergy? all things were
then so out of order, that all sins might without controul^^ent both be
practiced and openly blamed. I need not to seek far, remember what Cornelius
Bishop of Bicontine, not many years ago, at the Council of Trent spoke
openly in the presence and audience of the whole Church: whose witness must
needs be strong and effectual against you, though of it self it be little
worth. Thus he says, Cornel. Bicontin. in council. Crident.
Would to God they had not all with one consent turned from religion to
superstition, from faith to infidelity, from Christ to Antichrist, from God to
Epicurisme. Behold the Marks of your Church, su^^^stition, infidelity,
Antichrist, Epicure, for all this you are not ashamed to affirm that no
History either yours or ours has bewrayed or testified any such matter. But
Campian, the more you defend the integrity of your Church, the more you cause
us to manifest the corruptions of it.

Our adversaries, say you, do grant that the Roman Church was once a holy
Church. This we confesle, and that then it was holy when Paul published those
her worthy praise, which you remember; and yet those praises by you mentioned,
do not belong to that Church alone, but were given also to other Churches.
Romans 1.^.
For what if the faith of the Romans were published in the whole world? this
was no proper or peculiar privilege of that Church. Has not the Apostle
written as much of the Church of Thessalonica, 1 Thessalonians. 1.8.
Your faith to wards God is spread in all places? What if he made mention of
the Romans without ceasing? Romans 1.9.
so did he also incessantly remember the Thessalonians. 1 Thessalonians. 1.3.
What though he doubted not but he should come unto the Romans in abundance
of the blessing of Christ? Romans 15.29.
think you his coming into other Churches was less fruitful? Romans 16.19.
What if all Churches saluted the Romans, and their obedience was every where
spoken of? know you not that all the Saints used to salute one another? or
suppose you that other Churches were not as obedient to the Apostles as this?
But we grant you, that at this time it was holy: what would you more? Act. 28.
Then also when Paul preached the Gospel there in his favorable restraint.
This also we grant: what more? 1. Pet. 5.13.
And then also when Peter gathered and governed the Church there, calling it
Babylon. We deny not this. And though I can be well content that you call Rome
Babylon, for I doubt not, but it is the same of which DVR. Saint John speaks
of Rome when it yet abhorred the says of Christ, and persecuted Christians.
WHIT. page 512. Nay S. J^^n described Rome as it was restored and reedified by
Antichrist, for when ^e w^^teth Apoc. 18.^. who sees not that this cannot be
understood of ancient Rome, but of Rome when it was the habitation of Saints
rather then Devils, and the hold of the Spirit of God rather then foul spirits.
John writes so much in the Revelation, the mother of whoredoms, and
abominations of the earth; yet I cannot be so easily persuaded that DVR. Yet
Oecumenius, Hierome, Eusebius. Tertullian, to say nothing of others, do grant
it And to make question of Peter's being at Rome, is as if you should doubt,
whether ever Romulus, Julius Caeser, or Pompeie was there. For if Cyprian,
Eusebius, Do^o^heus, Epiphanius, Optatus, Hicrom, and many others may not be
believed, what shall ever be certain in any History? WHIT page 508. All these
testimonies prove nothing that I have either doubted of or denied; for I desire
authority of Scriptures, not the opinions of men; I desire every man who
desires salvation to weigh this one thing well. That whereas the whole
government and Hierarchy of the Papacy hangs on this soundation, that S.
Peter was Bishop of Rome, yet they have no word in the Scriptures to show that
he ever was so: and so the whole Papacy is hanged upon the conjectures of men,
as upon a rotten thread; for what if many Histories say he was there, if the
Scripture say no such thing, what assurance can be of it for matter of faith,
the mind must needs be suspicious and doubtful; it is true that the received
opinion is that he was there. But who knows not that, that which one
delivers at the first, may increase by fame, and be by many reserved to
posterity. At the first an ancient writer mentioned S. Peter's apposing of
Simon Magus and says it was at Rome, and him have many followed since: and
hence from the common rumors and suspi^ions of men sprung up the Popes chair^.
And who shall then give assurance of faith in this thing, when there is no
place of Scripture for it, nay when many places are against it. These specially
Galat. 2.7.9. Now if S. Peter should be Bishop of Rome and for so many years,
it was against both his order of life and his faith. Act. 28.22.23. Now they
could not be so ignorant, if that S. Peter for so many years before had
governed that Church: S. Paul abode in Rome two years and thence writ many
Ep^stles, and in them spoke of many of the brethren, but never once named S.
Peter; supole you he would be two years from his Church? Galat. 2.1.2. But
he ought rather to have been at Rome, as a good Bishop ought to be with his
flock, unless you can prove he might substitute a Vicar. Besides the
Histories themselves are in such ^ariety of opinions, that you can hardly tell
whom to follovv: some say he came ^o Rome in the first year of Claud^us the
Emperor, some in the second, some in the fou^^^, and some in the tenth year:
and it may be that none of these is true, sure it is all cannot be true.
Peter means Rome in this place; here Campian you are always at a nonplus,
and could yet never pro^ue that Peter was at Rome. But you take this for
granted, and as already proved; which if any man once deny, then like the
Mathematicians, you have done, and can go no further. But why may I not
reasonably think, that Peter means that Babylon, which once was the chief
City of the Assi^ians, in which City certainly were many Jews, Galat. 2.9.
unto whom Peter was appointed Apostle peculiarly. If I should set down that
which I could allege in this cause, I fear I should try your patience too
much. In the mean time I allow well your confession that Rome is Babylon, and
hereafter, at your leisure, you may declare upon what occasion the name of it
was altered. You may not now be angry with us, if following Peter's example,
from henceforth we also call Rome Babylon.

Now I hope at length you will rest and be satisfied. Nay, but you proceed
still unto the ages that succeeded: Then when Clemens governed the Church: then
also, when the Heathen Emperors massacred the Bishops of Rome: Even then I
confess, Rome was an excellent Church of Christ. Will this content you? Nay
further you say; Then also when Damasus, Siricius, Anastasius, Innocentius
executed the Apostolic function. This is not to descend by degrees, but to
leap; for you hasten too fast from the forenamed to these. But how will you
persuade us to yield you thus much; Because Calvin (as you say) frankly
confesses, I^st. lib. 4. cap. 2. s^ct. 3 and Epist. ad Sad^l.
that as yet they had not digressed from the doctrine of the Gospel: Do not
you, Campian, catch hold of that which no man will give you, nor be too
confident of others liberality? Calvin does not grant that which you take for
granted: therefore you must redeliuer it. Calvin in that place answers to
your ouerworne argument of succession, and she weth that the purpose of the
Fathers, when they alleged the succession of Bishops, was not to prove those
to be true Churches, where Bishops succeeded one another: but this first they
assumed as most certain, that from the beginning of the Church unto the ages,
whereof they speak, there was no alteration in religion; and thus they opposed
to the new broched errors that doctrine which from the times of the Apostles
was still preserved in the Church. Calvin then says not that they had DVR. Do
you acknowledge it to be the Church of Christ, which swarueth and strayeth
from the Apostles doctrine* what can be sp^ken more absurdly. WHIT. page 513.
You that object absurdity to others are most absurd your self, for vv^^ not
the Church of the jews even then when it abounded with many errors, the Church
of God. The Corinthians and Galathians, when they had many ways declined from
the doctrine of the Gospel, yet S. Paul saluted them (...) Churches, 1 Cor.
1.2. Gal. 1.2. which he would not have done, if he had not acknowledged them to
be Churches for all their errors.
altered nothing in any point of faith, but that the Fathers used this argument
of succession only in those cases, wherein it might appear they had innouated
and altered nothing. Wherefore as we grant that the Church of Rome in the time
of these Bishops was the true Church of Christ; but that they in nothing
digressed from the doctrine of the Gospel, that Calvin never confessed, and
we constantly deny. To say nothing of the rest. Thus DVR. This error is
common to you and many of your fello^es: for Syricius was not the first, we
have a direct Canon of the Council of Carthage, which numbreth this among the
Apostolic tr^ditions, Carthag. 1. Can. 2. so has Clemen^ it in his Epistle to
S. James the Lords brother. Amongst the Grecians the custom of the Priests
wa^ not to keep their wives as wives which they bad before their Priest-bood,
Epiphan. h^^rel. 59. And Hierome against Vi^ilantius vigeth this ancient
custom of the Church. WHIT. page 514. But your Gratian writes that Syritius
was the first maker of this impious law. The which many Priests before him of
their own acccrd embraced single life, yet none was compelled by law against
his will: and as for the Council of Carthage, it was held in the time of this
Syricius. And so not before him, for your Cleme^s you know he is of no
vvorth, but a mere counterfeite. That you report of the Grecians is
incredible, when as in the Council of Nice Paphuntius hindered this law,
neither would the Grecians ever endure this snare: Hierome indeed produces an
old custom, but no Apostolic, nor yet perpetual custom.
Syricius swarued from the doctrine of the Gospel, when he entangled the
Ministers of the word with the snares of enforced continency: and this
doubtless was no small digression, but a plain departing from the DVR. What
Catholic ever said that marriage was evil? S. Paul teaches us to take beedo
of the Manichies and Gnostikes, and other heretics of that sort. WHIT. page
516. To your question my answer is easy: your Syricius and Innocent when
they feared Ministers from marriage, used those reasons which either condemned
marriages simply, or else they conclude nothing. For when they thus reason,
Priests may not marry, because they must be the temple and the vessel of the
Lord, and the Chapel of the holy Ghost, therefore they ought not to give
themselves to chambering and uncleanness, because they ought to be holy: because
they shall be polluted with carnal concupiscence, and to the unclean all
things are unclean: because they who are in the flesh cannot please God. What
I pray you is this else but to affirm that marriages are evil, impure, and
wicked? Make these then no Catholics, or else your question is ansvvered. To
tie S. Paul to those ancient heretics only, is absurd, as if he delivered
not a perpetual doctrine for all times: yea and he has taxed not those only
who condemn marriage, but who forbid them, which cannot be denied but your
Pope and Church does.
Apostolic doctrine. 1. Tim. 4.3. Heb. 13.4.
Now at length you make a stay, and pursue the histories of the Church no
further: only you demand, when Rome ceased to be as formerly it had bin; unto
which question we have sufficiently answered. If you make doubt whether it now
be the same it was, you may also if you list doubt whether the sun shine at
noone. For this is as clear and without question, as that the present city of
Rome, is become unlike the ancient flourishing Romans common wealth. And as
he could not find Samnius in Samnius, and the other of whom the Epigram
speaks wittily, who found naught of Rome in the midst of Rome. So if you
would now in the present DVR. What impudency is this? there was never
heresy that assaulted this Church, of which it carried not the victory. As
over the Donatists, Iouinian, Pelagius the Britain and others. WHIT. page 521.
I contempe your reproaches, and stand to that I have said. The Church of Rome
which once flourished is now so oppressed with Antichrist, that besides the
outvvard face, image, countenance of a Church, and a vain pomp, there is
nothing else left in it. There is no word but it is corrupted with
pestiferous leaued, no Sacrament but polluted with sacrilege and corruption,
no discipline but Antichristian: I pass not for your Popes chair; your
College of Cardinals, the glory of your Bishops, your Priests, Monks,
Temples, riches, nothing move me; I search for a living Church, not bare
walls, for a man, not a picture, for a body, not a shadow: as for your
criumphes you boast of, they are no more proper to the true Church, then the
triumphs of old Rome over Pyrrhus, Anniball, Perses, Antiochus, are to be
esteemed the triumphs of Rome now being. Finally as for Pelagius, he
triumphed over the whole Popish kingdom. For did he not teach that grace was
inbred in nature? and your Popish crew defends the same; who sees not then
Pelagius sitting in your triumphant chariot?
Romish Church, seek for the ancient Church of Rome, you shall never find it,
for she has now lost, not the life only, but the very color and appearance
of the true Church.

Seeing therefore all other things fail you, and also Histories themselves, on
which you seemed much to rely, help you nothing, what remains but one of
these two? either must you yield before the battle, or die in the battle. I
wish you would once at length take knowledge of that which Nazianzen writes.
We have learned it to be commendable, as well to yield unto reason, as with
reason to overcome.

EDMUND CAMPIAN. The eighth Reason, which is the Paradoxes of our adversaries.
WHen that (most excellent men) I reuolue in my mind amongst many heresies
wherewith I have to do, certain monstrous opinions of such as are
fantasticallie given; I could not but condemn my self of slouthfulnes and
cowardlines, if making trial thereof, I should be afraid of any man's
actiuitie and strength: let him be as eloquent as ye would wish, let him be as
much exercised as you would desire, yea let him be one that has thoroughly
studied all sorts of books, yet must he needs be to seek, both for matter and
words also when he shall undertake to maintain those his impossible
propositions as follow: for (if he perhaps will give his consent) we will
dispute of God, of Christ, of Man, of sin, of Justice, of Sacraments, and of
Manners, I will try whether they dare maintain their opinions, and such
sayings, as they, lingering after their own lure, have bruted abroad by their
writings. God grant they will acknowledge these their own De Deo. Call. Inst.
lib. 1. cap. 18. lib 2. cap. 4. lib. 3. cap. 23. and 24. Pet. Mart. in 1. Sam.
2. Methanct. in cap. Romans 8. VVittem. 1524. Sic docet Luther. in asser. 36. and
in resol. asser. 36. and in lib. de ser. arbit. Praesat. in anno Phil. In Apol.
Eccl. Ang. Vide Ench. pre. an. 1543
axioms: This is most false, not any one of our men have affirmed that God is
the author of sin.
God is the author and cause of sin, willing, prompting, making, commanding,
and working it, and their governing the wicked counsels of naughty men. This is
false, we do not so compare together.
The adultery of David, and the treason of the Traitor Judas, was as properly
the work of God, as the calling of S. Paul was. This monstrous doctrine,
whereof Philip, Melancthon was once ashamed, yet Martin Luther from whose breast
Philip sucked the same, as highly extolleth, as though it had been some heavenly
oracle, and therefore matcheth his said scholar in a manner with the Apostle
S. Paul. I will demand also what mind Luther was of whom the English
Caluinists affirm to have been a man sent from God to lighten the Word, when
he razed out of the Letany used in the Church this verse, O blessed Trinity,
and one God have mercy upon us: then in order I will proceed to the person of
De Christ. Inst. lib. 1. c. 13. nu. 23. and 24. Beza in Hess. Beza contra
Schmidel. lib. de unit. Hypost. dua. in Christ. not.
Christ, and demand of them, what these Paradoxes mean, whereas the Catholic
Church holds that Christ is the Son of God, and God of God. Christ is Son of
the Father, but God of himself.
Calvin says that Christ is God of himself, and Beza affirms that he was
not begotten of the substance of the Father: also be it agreed (says he) that
there are in Christ two unions consisting in one substance, the one of the
soul with the flesh, and the other of the Divinity with the humanity. That
place of S. Calvin. in Ioh. 10. v. 30
John, I and the Father are one, does not prove that Christ is God of one
substance with God the Father: yea and my soul ( This is false, read the
answer.
says Luther cont. Laton.
Luther) cannot brook this word (Homouotin.) Proceed ye forward, Bucer. in
Lu. 2. Calu. in ^ar. Eu.
Christ from his infancy was not full of grace, but daily increased in gifts
of the mind, as other men usually do, and waxed wiser through experience every
day more then other, so that in his childhood he was subject to Luth. Loss.
Hem. Mela. in Euang. de. 1. post. Epist. Marl. in Matt. 26. Call. in Har. Euan
Brentius in Luc. par. 2. Hom. 65. and in Catech. an. 1551. and in Ioh. Hom. 54.
ignorance, which is all one as if they should say that Christ was corrupted,
with the spot and stain of This is false, for all ignorance rises not from
original corruption.
original sin. But listen and you shall know more pernicious doctrine then
this. Christ when he prayed in the garden, and plentifully sweat both water and
blood, trembled through fear, and sensibly feeling of eternal damnation,
uttered certain speeches without reason, and without consent of the inward
spirit, yea speeches without consideration through the vehemency of his
grief: the which speeches as unadvisedly spoken, he quickly corrected. Is
there any more such stuff? give dilligent ear: Christ, when he cried out with a
loud voice, hanging on the Cross, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me,
was tormented with the flames of hell fire, he let ouer-slip This is false,
neither Birutius nor any of our men ever said so.
him Calvin. in Har. Euang. in eand. sent. Loss. in Matthew. 26.
desperate speeches, being no otherwise affectioned, then if he should have
died an eternal death; if they have any worse stuff then this, let them
empty their gorge. Christ they say, descended into hell, that is, Christ
after he was dead, tasted of the pains of hell, nowhit Schmidel. conci. de
Pass and c^^ua Dom. Aepinus Com. in Psalm. 16.
less then the damned souls do, saving that he was to be restored again;
for as much as by his corporal death, he could have profited us nothing, it
was therefore requisite that his Calvin. Instit lib. 2. cap. 16. Bren. in
Catechis. 1551.
soul also should strive with eternal death, and in this manner to tolerate
the pain, and pay the ransom of our sins. And lest peradventure any man
should suspect, that this escaped Calvin by oversight, the said Instit. lib. 2
cap. 16. nu. 12.
Calvin calls you all forlorn knaves, if any of you, have debated upon this
They who deny this doctrine to be full of comfort may worthily be accounted
desperate men.
comfortable doctrine, oh cursed times! oh cursed days! what miserable
doctrine have you bred up? Has that precious and princely blood, which gushed
out of the torn pierced side of that most innocent Lamb Christ Jesus (every
little drop of which blood, for the worthiness of the sacrifice, was sufficient
to have redeemed a thousand worlds) reliened mankind nothing at all, 1. Tim. 2.
Apoc. 2.6.
except the man Christ Jesus the mediator between God and man had suffered also
the Which of us spoke after that manner?
second death, the death of the soul, the want of grace, which is due only for
sin, and detestable blasphemy? In comparison of this madness. Bucer. in Matt.
26.
Bucer shall seem modest, though absolutely he is indeed very impudent in that
he takes this word Infernus in the Creed only to signify Sepulchrum, that is,
a grave, by a very over thou art figure Epexegesis, (which is a latter
recital, or rather by a foolish and fond figure, which is commonly called
Tautologia,) that is an idle and superfluous telling of one^tale often. Of the
English sectaries, some are accustomed to hang upon Calvin, whom they make
their God, and some to take part with Bucer their great master. Some also
mutter in their slieues against this article, dewising with themselves how
without causing of an vproare, it may be quite cut out of the Creed, that it
molest them no more. That, that also was This is most false, this was never
assayed in our Church.
attempted in a certain assembly at London, I remember one Richard Chenie, a
miserable old man, that was amongst them told me, who though he was euilly
entreated of thieves abroad, yet did he not repair home into his fathers
house. And thus far, as concerning Christ his own person: now what say they
of man? marry that the De Homine Illyri. in par. lib. de ^^t. Pec. col. Inst.
lib. 2. ca. 3 Sacer. de cons. ve. Eccl. Aepin. de ^^b. and Pecc. Sanct. Rem.
contra Cens. Col. De peccato.
Image This is false, we deny this directly.
of God is clean blotted out of a man, so that there is not so much as one
spark of goodness remaining in him. His whole nature as touching all the whole
faculties of the soul, is so quite altered, that no man not even he that is
lately christened, nor any holy virtuous man, is any thing else inwardly, but
mere corruption and contagion; but whereto tends this? forsooth to no other
purpose, but that they who will snatch at heaven, by their only faith, leading
their lives in loosest sort, may accuse nature, may despair to attain to
virtue, and cast off the burden of the holy Commandments from their backs. To
this has Jllyri. in vari. lib. de peccat. orig. vide Heshis. in Epist. ad
Illyr. An peccatu^ sit substa^tia. Call. in Antid. Conc. Trid. idem docuerat
VViclef apud VVald. lib. 2. de Sacra. c. 154. De gratia.
Illyricus the sta^dard bearer to the Magdeburgeans annexed, that his devilish
decree of original sin, which he holds to be the most inward substance of
men's souls, because (says he) after the fall of Adam, the very Devil himself
does shape them anew, and transform them into his own substance. This is also
an usual saying amongst these abiects, that This is most false, our men ever
abhorred this doctrine.
all sins are equal; but with this condition, (lest peradventure the
Stoickes do quicken again*) that they be weighed in the balance of Gods just
judgment: as though God, which is as a most gentle judge, would rather
aggrauate, then ease our burden; and notwithstanding that he is most righteous,
he would yet exaggerate the offense, and make it more then it is in very deed.
By this balla^ce a silly poor Tauernour that kills a cock when there is no
need, offe^deth God no lee, if he give judgment in his fury, then did that
vile butcherly fellow being great with child of Beza his doctrine, that
secretly with arpistolet most treacherously murdered that great noblema^ of
France, the Duk of Guise, a Prince of rare virtue, which was the most horrible,
and lamentable deed, that ever was dove in any time, within the compass of the
wide world. But peradventure those men that are set so eagerly in handling of
the nature of sin, De Gratia.
will show themselves great Philosophers in disputing of Gods grace, which will
help to heal and cure this malady. Luth. in resp. contra Louan. Bucer. in
Ioh. 1 Well. in not. Christi. Brent. hom. 12. in Ioh. Cent. lib. 1. cap. 4. De
Iustitia.
Good offices it seems, that they appoint for this grace, the which they
impudently cry out to be powered into our hearts, or to have sufficient ability,
to withstand all sorts of sins: and place it altogeter out of our reach, in
the only favor of God: which favor (they say) This is false, the grace of God
begeteth justification, and sanctification follows justification always, and
necessarily.
does neither amend the wicked, nor purify the corrupted, nor lighten those
that be in darkness, nor enrich them that want good works, but only does hide
that old heap of sins still remaining and sticking within us, by Gods
wincking thereat, to the intent that it be not imputed as deformed and odious
in his sight: with which their vain imaginations they are so well pleased,
that even This is false, we confess Christ is every way full of grace.
Christ himself, for no other cause in their judgments may be said to be full
of grace and truth: but because that God the Father did wonderfully favor him.
What manner of thing then is Justice? a certain respective relation: not
composed of the three Theological virtues, Faith, Hope, and Charity, which do
close the soul with their beauty, but only a cloaking of sin, the which
whosoever can apprehend by his bare faith, that man is as sure of his
salvation, as if he were already in present possession of the endless joys
of heaven: but go to, let him dream of this, yet how can he assure himself of
future perseverance until his death? which Matthew. 12 Luc. 11.
gift of perseverance whosoever wants; he comes to most miserable end,
though for a season he embraced justice both sincerely and zealously. Nay
verily, except this thy faith (says Inst. lib. 3. c. 2. nu. 40.
Calvin) does foreshew thee thy perseverance so infalliblie, that thou can
not be deceived therein, thou ought to account it as a weak and feeble
faith. By this point I know him to be Luthers own scholar: for a Lib. de
capt. ^ab.
Christian man (says he) though he would, cannot Luther speaks of the grace
of Baptism which is not lost by sin.
damn himself, but only by incredulity. I will make have to the sacraments:
De Sacramentis.
they have lest (O blessed Christ) no Sacrament, I say none, not two, not one;
for their bread Calvin. Instit. lib. 4. cap. 15. Cent. 1. lib. 1 cap. 16. Luth.
lib. de cap. Babyl. Cent 2. and 5. cap. 4. Luth. aduer. Gochl. item Epist. ad
Melanct. 10.2. and in Epist. ad VVald. Anabaptistas.
is stark poison. Their Baptism, though it be true Baptism, by their
judgment is nothing at all: It is not water of salvation, it is not a conduite
of grace, and does not make us partakers of Christ's merits, it is but This is
false, we say not that they are only signs.
only a bare sign of salvation. Therefore as concerning the nature of the
thing, they esteem Christ's Baptism no more then the outward ceremony of
Saint John. If thou have it, it is well, This is false, he speaks not so of
Baptism.
if thou want it, it is no hurt at all: only believe, and thou art sure to be
saved before thou be baptized. What then shall we say of silly young Infants,
who except they be helped by the virtue of this Sacrament, can purchase nothing
by their own faith? Rather (say the Magdeburgeans) then we will attribute any
virtue to the Sacraments of Baptism, let us grant that there is faith in such
infants sufficient whereby they may be saved, certain secret motions of which
faith they feel in themselves; whereas without doubt, as yet they cannot
discerue by any sense whether they live or no. A hard case surely for poor
Infants: but if this seem so hard, mark what medicines Luther will minister
for it. This Luther speaks upon their supposition, who affirm that children
want all faith.
Better it were, says he, to omit Baptism altogether, for except the infant
believe himself, the washing of him in water is to no purpose at all. This
tale they tell that stand wavering, what they may absolutely affirm in this
point. Why then let Baltazar Pacimontanus intrude himself to strike the stroke
between them, Anabaptista.
as an indifferent man, who being the first founder of the Annabaptists, when
he could not conceive in his mind that there was any motion of faith in young
children, allowed of Luthers simple shift, and abandoning the Baptism of
Infants out of all Churches decreed that none should be christened until he
come to years of understanding. As for the rest of the Sacraments, though
that the Pope of Rome.
beast with-manie heads, spoken of in the Apocalypse, do belch out many
horrible blasphemies against them. Nevertheless because they are common at
this present and have hardened our ears with the sound thereof, I will here let
them pass. De moribus.
There remain certain pestiferous fragments of heretical doctrine, concerning
life and manners, which Sermon. de Matri. lib. de ^o. con. and ass. art. 16. Lib
de vo. mona. Cha^. lib. in censor. suum Luth. Sermon. de Pis. Pee. asser. art. 32
Lab. de Ser. arb. and Ser. de Moyse. lib. de cap. Babyl.
Luther spued out upon papers, for to infect those that read his books, with
such poisoned stuff, as issued out of the stinking sincke of his filthy
breast; listen patiently, and blush for sham, and pardon me for reciting them. A
notable slander, as all the rest which follow be: read the answer.
If my wife will not come, or cannot, then let my maid come to my bed. For the
use of a woman is as necessary for every man, as either meat or drink or
sleep is: Matrimony is better then virginity, Christ dissuaded and S. Paul
dissuaded Christian people from virginity. But peradventure he will say that
those are Luthers peculiar heresies. I say they are not. They are also
maintained by Charke, though faintly and fearefullie. Will you see any more of
this stuff? why not? By how much the more wicked thou art (says he) by so
much the more art thou nigher to grace. All good works are sins; yea if God
deal with us iudicially, they are deadly sins, but if God deal with us
mercifully, they are but small venial sins: No man thinks of his own
freewill any evil thought. The ten Commandments of almighty God, belong
nothing at all to Christians. God has no regard of our works. Those only are
worthy partakers of the Lords Supper which bring with them sorrowful,
afflicted, tormented, confounded and unconstant consciences. We ought to
confess our sins, but it forces not to whom. For if any man obsolue thee,
though it be but in This is false: for Luther speaks not this of every man,
but of the Ministers.
jest, if thou believe that thy sins are forgiven thee, thou art absolved. It
is not the office of Priests, but of Lay men to say their daily appointed
service. Christian people are exempted from the laws of men. But I think I
have raked deep enough, and I fear me a little too deep in stirring of this
stinking puddle: wherefore now I will make an end: and I would not have you
think that I have dealt unjustly in reproving the Lutherans and Zuinglians
jointly together: for the Zuinglians well remembering out of what school they
came, wish with all their hearts to be accounted as dear friends and loving
brethren one with another: so that they think they have great wrong done unto
them when there is any difference put between them, except it be in one only
matter. I for my own part, truly do think that I am unworthy to take upon
me so much as a mean room amongst a great number of chosen Divines, which in
these days have proclaimed wars against all sorts of heresies. But this one
thing I know assuredly* that be I never so simple, I cannot by the grace of
Christ he in any hazard, whiles that I shall contend against such feigned*
odious, foolish, and brutish devices, so long as I have both heaven and earth
to help me.

WILLIAM WHITAKERS. The answer to the eighth Reason, which is the Paradoxes of
our adversaries.
HIerome said that he would not have any man to be patient, if he were
suspected of heresy. And therefore, Campian, in so much the worser part do I
take it, that these which you term Paradoxes, being so false, so many, and so
horrible, be now by you objected against us. And certainly you that have ever
exceeded all other Papists in impudency and audaciousnes, have in this place in
very deed surpassed your self: for unless you had quite and clean put off
both all religion of God, and reverence toward men, and now of late made
shipwreck of your own conscience, and cast off utterly all humanity, you
would never have admitted so much impiety into your self, as to vpbraide us
with these monstrous opinions. But I perceive what you intend: for you hope
that by slaundering boldly, as he being most like you, was wont to say,
somewhat would always clean fast. For since you lack true imputations,
whereby you might oppugn our Churches, it remained that either you should
leave off writing, which had been your honestest way, or at lest devise some
slanders, which you would cast like vnomed darts upon us; which thing is both
in it self very filthy, and also a sure argument of your desperatenes. But now
if I shall so wipe away these your Paradoxes and impossibilities, that al men
may perceive, they were ascribed to us by you most falsely and most impudently;
I do crave not only of all men of our Universities, but also of all Christians,
that have care of true religion, and of their own salvation, that they will
not suffer themselves to be misled by any lies and impostures of the
adversary, from that holy doctrine which they have learned. Wherefore I will
set upon these your monsters, Campian, that after I have stopped your mouth,
being full of blasphemy, both the glory of God, which is in hand, and our
innocence, which is oppugned, may be preserved from your violence. You say, the
disputation shall be, if they please, of God, of Christ, of Man, of Sin, of
Righteousness, of the Sacraments, of Manners. But we are ready to dispute with
you not only about these, but also about other points, which are now in
difference: of the Scripture, of the Church, of the Bishop of Rome, of
Transubstantiation, of Freewill, of Indulgences, of Purgatory, and of the rest
of your doctrines. Nevertheless either many are deceived, or else you do
rather think of fighting then disputing. And I hope that you shall once have
freedom granted you for that disputation, which you so often desire. But now
let us attend how you endeavor to make us know these positions of our men.

God (say you) is the willing, Of God.
suggesting, efficient, commanding, and working author and cause of sin, and
such a one as therein governs the impious counsels of the wicked. It is an
horrible thing and not to be vttred, Campian, that any one should make God the
author of sin: such an one were worthy to be smitten instantly by the Lord,
with a thunderbolt into the deepest pit of hell. If DVR. But if I do not show,
that Calvin is the maintainer of this so horrible ablasphemy. I refuse no
punishment for so great a sla^der: thus he writes Instit. lib. 1. cap. 18.
sect. 1. Absalom defiling his fathers bed with incest committed a detestable
crime: yet God pronounces that this was his work. WHIT page 525. I wonder
that there is any man found like to Campian, who will ^uow that to be said and
defended by our men, which they have ever most plainly condemned, as Melanct.
on Romans 1. etc. Pet. Mart on Judge 9. and Calvin on Iam. 1. verse. 13. Beza
against Castellio, of eternal predestination: for touching these words which
you object to Calvin, what does he affirm, but that which the Scripture has
delivered, 2. Sam 12.11.12? unless perhap^ you will deny that to be Gods deed,
which God himself witnesses to be his. Neither will your sophisme follow
hereupon, ergo God is the author of sin: for Calvin ascribes not the sin,
but the work to God. For if in that incest you can consider nothing but sin,
it must be imputed to your ignorance.
Calvin, or Martyr, or Philip, or Luther, or any of us do affirm it, I do not
deny but we are all guilty of horrible blasphemy and impiety. If I would
largely prosecute this whole cause, which you do but touch, I should make no
end: therefore I will declare in few words, both what we teach, and wherein you
lie. We profess, not only that God is good, but also goodness it self; yea good
in himself and in his own essence: in whom there is no evil; from whom
nothing but good can come: who is so good, that all his doings be very good,
and that not so much as any of his thoughts can be evil. These things we
speak, these things we teach, these things we believe with our hearts, and
confess with our mouths. Seeing therefore God is so perfectly good, that all
his things be in a certain excellent manner good, it has been in times past
inquired and most gravely disputed, whence that evil sprung, which had spread
so far, and what might be the cause of this evil. This question Augustine
often handled, because of the M^nichies, In 12. quest. 79. art. 1. and 2.
and therein also Thomas of Aquine employed himself much and diligently. We
say that this evil was brought in by the DVR. But Calvin says, that when the
Devil moves men to sin, he is rather the instrument of God, than the author
o^ sin. Instit. lib. 2. cap. 4. Ser. 5. WHIT page 528. This allegation is
full of slander. This is Caluins meaning, that albeit the Devil be rather an
instrument than the author of the action, yet he is the supreme and chief of
the sin in the action.
Devil, who although he were made good in the beginning by the Lord, yet by
his freewill he made defection from the Lord and sinned; and did persuade, and
was the author unto man, to commit sin: from hence, whatsoever is sin either in
the devils, or in men, did wholly flow, and not any the least piece of it had
being from God, whom we do maintain by infinite testimonies of Scripture to be
the author of no DVR. But what is more often in the mouth of Calvin and all
Caluinists, ^hen this, that God does not only permit but will sin, that he
does move and thrust us forward to sin, nay that be does by the efficacy of
his will impose a necessity of sinning upon us? WHIT. page 529. God wills
sin, but not simply, and so far forth as it is sin, but as it is a
chastisement, so 1. Pet. 4.19. and God does stir up and move that sin which
lies hid in us, yet he does not frame or put sin into us: as the
Physician, is not the author of d^seases, when he purges out the most corrupt
humors. And man not endued with the holy Ghost, falls of his own accord
into a necessity of sinning, so as he sins, not by any fault of God, but by
his own fault.
sin; and so do teach it in our schools and Churches. Psalm. 44. Zach. 8.17.
Genesis 18.25. 1. Ioh. 1.5.
For he hates sin, he loves righteousness: he which is the Judge of the whole
earth, it must needs be that he is every way most just: God is light, and there
is no darkness in him. And these are the things which we teach the people
concerning God, that all may understand he is a most severe revenger of all
sins. Now then, Campian, with what face dare you, seeing you know these to
be our doctrines, impute unto us such a sla^der not to be vttred, in so much
as you affirm that we speak and think things flat contrary? But you say
Calvin and Martyr have taught this this thing. Nay rather they are wholly bent
upon this, that they maintain, that can by no means be. It would be long to
set down their words. I do beseech the Reader, to read with an attentive and
peaceable mind, these same very places, which Campian has abused unto slander.
And if they do not both deny most plainly that God is the author and cause of
sin; and also if they do not prove that they do most truly deny this, which
they deny, I will submit my self to any punishment. But yet there is
doubtless somewhat, which these men say, and which Campian does attribute to
them: what that is, let us consider.

There was a certain inueterate opinion among men, that whatsoever sin was
committed by any, all that was done, God only permitting, and not willing it:
now they did separate this permission utterly from all will of God, so as they
affirmed that God did no way will those things which he had permitted. But now
seeing the Lord is to be held to DVR. Here you, while you, would defend that
God is not the author of sin, yet do nothing else but make him the author of
sin: for if he do not only permit, but also wills that man sin, tell me
which way, if the will of God be the first and effecting cause of sin, God is
not the author of sin. WHIT. page* 535. There is no need that I should expound
to you that which you demand for we do not make the will of God to be the
first and ^ffecting cause of the sin, but of the action, which as it comes
from a wicked man, is vicious, so then not the will of God, but the naughtines
of the instrument, is the cause that those things are done vvic^edly, which the
Lord does rightly.
permit those things which are done, not only that they might be done, as if
he did no whit intermeddle himself in those things, nor had nothing at all to
do therein, but also does by his special providence so govern all things, as
that nothing in the whole world happens against tha^, that he has willed and
decreed: certainly it cannot be denied, that God does will after a sort those
things, which the wicked do, and that this will of God is so effectual, that in
the wicked actions of men, God does execute his own decree. For in sin two
things are to be considered, the action it self, and the corruption of the
action: which thing your Aquine might teach you, which also he learned from
Augustine. The action so far forth as it is a thing and a work, is good; for
God effects it: but so far forth as this self same action is vicious, it
proceeds not from God, but from the corrupt nature of man. Although therefore
God who works all things in all, and against whose will nothing can be done;
does bring to pass a certain work of his in the evil actions of men; yet
he does those things that are just, nor ought he any way to be thought to be
guilty of the sins of the men themselves: therefore that which a wicked man
does, that, as it is a sin, and as it has the proper nature of sin, the
Lord neither wills nor suggesteth, nor bids, nor effects; nay he
detesteth and reuengeth it, and judges it worthy of everlasting punishment.
But that which is spoken of the thing, that you apply maliciously and
unskillfully, to the quality of the thing, that you may conclude, that God,
because he is the author and cause of the action, is also the author and cause
of whatsoever corruption is found in that action. I will not prosecute any long
digression, nor ouerwhelme you with that multitude of Scr^ptures, which I could
here use: for I have not taken upon me to expound any point in the Schools,
but briefly to confute your filthy slander.

Now answer me, Campian, do you think that that which any one does, how
wicked soever, is done whether God will or no? If you hold that any thing is
done against Gods will, what providence or omnipotency do you leave him? For
he which permits that to be done, which he would by no means have to be done,
it is certain that he is not endued with so great power, as that he can forbid
that which he would not have done. Wherefore you must need^ confess that all
things which are done, are done by the will of God; not that God does will,
that is, DVR. You say that God wills evil, but that he does not allow it: as
if God could will that which he does not allow, or as if he could not allow
his own judgment and decree. WHIT. page 538. It is no hard thing to prove
this, that God does will many things which he does not allow: for if is do
happen to Princes, that they do not simply allow of war, as being
dangerous to them and their subjects, but they would willingly shun it it
they could, and yet they are compelled sometime to will it for the public
peace sake: and so to a Magistrate, who spares the lives of his people, and
never likes of murder, yet now and then does willingly deliver some one or
other malefactor unto the executioner; shall we think that the like cannot
happen unto God, that he wills some thing in some sort and for some other
respect, which he does not allow simply and of it self? Thus then God
cannot but allow the action, which he has destinated to a certain end: but
he does not allow the corruption and sin of the action, whereof not he but
man is the author.
allow the sins of men, but because by this means he does exercise his
judgment and execute his decree, which he both wills and allows. God can
use evil instruments well, and bring to pass by wicked men, those things
which agree with his will and liking. Now whatsoever things God does by evil
instruments, those he neither does nor allows, as they be evil things, but
as they be his good and holy judgments: so as although he both wills those
things which be done, and does move the wills of men, and does exercise in evil
instruments, though unknown to the instruments themselves, an effectual
power, and does govern the wicked counsels of impious men, that they can do
nothing which he wills not; yet both men are wicked, albeit they do those
things which the Lord wills; and the Lord is holy, howsoever he wills those
things which the wicked do. This may be made manifest by examples; but I had
rather you should hear Augustine than me. When the Father (says he) delivered
the son, August. Epist. 48. ad Vincent.
and the Lord his body, and Judas the Lord by treachery, why is God just in
this delivery, and man guilty, but because in one thing which they did, the
cause was not one for which they did it? Again, In that the wicked sin, it
is their own: in that in sinning they do this or that, it comes from the
power of God, who diuides the darkness as he sees good. And in another place:
It skilleth much (says he) what will agrees to man, and what to God, and to
what end each one refers his will, so as it may be allowed or disallowed.
For God fulfilleth certain of his wills, being surely good, by the evil wills
of evil men: as by the ill willed Jews, through the good will of the father,
Christ was slain, which was so great a good, that the Apostle Peter, what time
he would not have had it done, is termed Satan by him who was willing to be
slain. And elsewhere: God (says he) hardened Pharao by just judgment, De
Great. and lib. arbit. cap. 23.
and Pharao hardened himself by his own free will. And that you may plainly
perceive there is nothing taught by us touching the will of God, but that which
the Church of Christ long since has taught, I will annexe some other sentences
which the same Augustine has written in another place: Great are (says he)
the works of the Lord distinguished into all his wills, Enchirid. ad Laurent.
cap. 100.
so as after a wonderful and unutterable manner that is not done without his
will, which also is not done against his will: because it should not be done,
if he did not suffer it, neither certainly does he suffer it unwilling, but
willing. And again: God works in the hearts of men to incline their wills
whither so ever he will, De Great. and lib. arbit. ca. 21.
whether to good according to his mercy, or unto evil, according to their
merits. And that certainly in his judgment sometime open, sometime secret,
but always just. I can use infinite testimonies in this matter, but I think,
not very needful. I will raise up out of your own school Hugo de Sancto
victore, who shall most clearly approve our opinion with his own words. For
thus he writes: De Sacra. part. 2. c. 14.
His will is never idle, so as that is not done, which he wills: neither in a
word can any thing be done at any time which he wills not. And a little
after: Cap. 15.
The will of God is ever fulfilled, and wicked men are not therefore excused,
because the will of God is performed in them and by them, for that they are not
directed by their own will, to fulfill the will of God, but by his secret
providence.

Do you perceive at length (Campian) that no new paradoxe is defended in our
Churches, which was not both received in times past in the Churches of Christ,
and is also defended as the truth it self? For that which you add, As the
calling of Paul, so also David's adultery, and Judas his treachery, were the
proper work of God: from whence you drew these positions I know not. These
works of God not one of our writers do so compare together, as that we should
say that God wrought alike in David and Judas to the committing of heinous
offenses, as he did in Paul for his effectual conversion. Indeed the Lord
wrought both in this and in them, but not after one and the like manner: he did
inspire inwardly the heart of Paul by his spirit, and endued his mind with
true faith, which he lacked before: but to David and Judas he did cast in no
new kind of impiety or inclination of will, nor did he stir up new motions
unto sinning (God forbid that any Christian should so much as think it:) but
they running of their own accord, and stirred up by and of themselves, be did
so hold and bend, that they unwitting to themselves, and not imagining any such
thing, did execute Gods decree. For by this adultery of David the Lord did
both chastise David, in that he did punish sin with sin, as he is wont,
and also he made a way open for his purposes in time succeeding. Like hereunto
is that of Absalom: he defiled David's Concubines: 2. Sam. 17.22.
the h^inousnes of which offense cannot be uttered: yet this way the Lord had
decreed to take punishment of David. But the treachery of Judas, if you
respect the covetousness and perfidiousnes of the man, did so displease God,
that never any thing did offend him more: and yet the Lord used both Judas
treachery and the Priests cruelty for the finishing of that work of our
s^luation, and he would have these wretched instruments to effect that divine
work. Therefore the Apostles do testify that all these did nothing else but
those things which the hand and counsel of the Lord did decree to be done.
Act. 4.28.
And yet there is not here any monstrous thing, whereof either Philip Melanchton
or any other ought to be ashamed, unless perhaps the holy doctrine of the
Scripture seem monstrous to you.

As for that that you demand with what mind Luther did take away this verse
from the Church prayers, O holy Trinity, one God, have mercy upon us,
certainly you are too suspicious. If Luther did think erroneously touching the
Trinity, convince him: his books are in men's hands, and they are read by you,
as it seems, very diligently. Allege, if you can, any one word, injurious
either to the Trinity or Unity. For if out of all his writings, which are
innumerable, you can draw no probable inkling of this suspicion, why do you
make question about one verse taken away from the Church prayers? which whether
it be taken away or no, I know not: and though it be taken away, yet how
appears it that it was taken away by him? But Luthers condition is very hard,
who must stand unto, both what he has written, and what he has not written.
And these are those our paradoxes concerning God, which you could carpe at in
the books of all our writers, which have come forth in a manner infinitely.
The matter is safe and sound: the adversary has viewed over all of them, and
yet has found nothing.

By and by you proceed to the person of Christ, Of Christ.
and you demand what these words of Calvin mean; Christ i^ the son of God,
God of God, God of himself* What reprove you here Campian? what, that he
said, Christ is the Son of God? or for that he termed him God of God? or
else, that he affirms him to be God of himself? But which of these
assertions is it, that is not holy, not granted, not agreeable to the Catholic
faith? which if you deny, you do not convince any Paradox of ours, but you
bewray your own heresy. But this is the point, unless I be deceived, wherein
you have found, I know not what, knot, as it were in a rush. The Nicene Fathers
do profess Christ to be God of God, to the end they may teach that the Son
is of the same substance with the Father. This saying, some afterward caught at
so, as that they did maintain that Christ is not God by himself and of
himself, but that he received it of his Father: wherein they quite took away
the Divinity of Christ. For unless he be God of himself, he cannot be God at
all. For that he may be God, he must needs be God of himself. Wherefore
howsoever those Fathers did say that Christ is God of God, yes Calain
maintains that it is most firmly to be believed, that Christ has this, to
be God of himself, unless we will rob Christ of his Divinity. To be the Son,
he received that indeed of the Father: for he is the Son of the Father. To be
God, he has that of DVR. If the Son of God have not his essence from the
Father, surely be is not the Son of the Father. WHIT. page 542. And why so?
did Calvin ever deny that the Son has his essence from the Father? he and we
all teach that the Son was begotten of the Fathers essence; and that the
Son has the whole essence of the Father, and that not by decision or
propagation, as the wicked Prithe^^s dream, but by communication. And yet h^^e
you multiply Scriptures and Fathers needlessly. This we say, Christ is God of
himself, but in this sense, that, that essence which is in the Son, is not
from any other essence, but of and from himself, seeing that the essence of
the Father and the Son is one and the same. For essence, as Basil truly
vvriteth against Eunomius, cannot be generated: and page 543. wherefore
Christ, so far forth as he is God, is of himself; and so far forth as he
is the Son, is of the Father: for he cannot be God, whose essence is not of
and from it self, so Basil and Augustine.
himself, because he is God by himself. What say you now Campian? God of God,
is with Calvin, God of himself: and say you so indeed? has not Calvin
admonished you of this, that the name of God is to be taken for the Father,
when as Christ is termed the Son of God? That therefore which the Nicene
Fathers deliver, that Christ is God of God, that is so to be understood, that
we should confess the Son to be begotten of the Father, and not that we
should attribute the name of God only to the Father: for we must look to it,
that we do not so determine the Son to be of the Father, as that we
should deny him to be God of himself. And these things Calvin has interpreted
most diligently and most holily, nor has he set forth any one word at all
different from the faith of the Scriptures and of the Catholic Church.
Remember that sentence of Augustine: Christ in respect of himself is termed
God, Hom. de Temp. 38.
but in respect of the Father he is termed the Son: wherein you may
acknowledge the opinion of the ancient Church.

Now you set upon Beza: for like to the fashion of mad dogs, you stand not in
one place, but fly hither and thither, and upon whomsoever you light, you bite
him shrewdly with your venomous teeth. Beza says (as you say) he is not
begotten of the essence of the Father. Why are you angry with Beza, if he say
the same things, which are wont to be said and maintained by your own selves?
For you cannot be ignorant, what your Lombard teaches touching the oslence of
God, which both he, and the school men that have followed him do affirm,
neither to get, nor to be begotten. For that essence is not begotten by
essence, but person by person. If Beza would imitate these, in saying that
Christ was begotten not of the essence but of the person of the Father, why do
you reprove him? and yet we may not imagine that the essence is separated from
the person, as if the essence of the Son were another from the essence of the
Father: (for there is but one simple essence of the Deity) but for as much as
person is distinguished from essence; albeit not in the thing, yet by rolation;
and since tho Ancient were wont to speak after this manner, that they said
Christ was begotten of the person of the Father, rather then of his essence: it
is no marvel that the same form of speech did like Beza best, whose judgment
it was ever, that we ought to set down determinations touching the highest
mysteries very warily and with great consideration. Now that the essence is not
begotten, the whole ancient Church held, as Basil writes expressly: C^ntr.
Eu^^m. lib. 1.
God is not begotten either of himself (...) of any other. Albeit I do not
very well know, whether these be Beza^ words which you recite: surely I remember
not that I have ever read them in Beza, nor can I find them in this place which
you quote. But those that follow, are very malicious. Beza said once, that
there be two personal unions in Christ, as you say, the one of the soul with
the body, the other of the Godhead with the manhood. Which speech of his James
Andreas reproved: and indeed not without cause; albeit this does not follow out
of that speech, that there are two persons in Christ, though there be two
personal unions: but that, because it was written ambiguously, Beza professes
that he would willingly mend it. And what can you desire more? if he have
erred, yet he persisted not in his error, but has amended his fault: with what
face therefore can you vpbraide him with that, which fell from him but once ere
he was aware, seeing he corrected it after? And touching the person of Christ,
Beza every where teaches those things, than which nothing can be more true and
sincere: nor is there any of us that is wont to affirm or defend that which
you object concerning those two personal unions. For we confess but one
person, constituted of the two natures, as also we acknowledge but one
personal union: for although Christ did assume both body and an humane soul;
yet these parts are not so personally joined together in Christ, as that they
do make any person separate from his Godhead, lest we should imagine that
Christ consists of two persons.

Now again you make recourse to Calvin, whom I thought you had quite given
over before. Calvin denies* that the place of John, I and my Father are one,
does show that Christ is God of the same substance with the Father. What then
Campian? was it so heinous an offense, to dissent from the ancient Fathers in
the exposition of one place? Did he ever deny that Christ is of the same
substance with the Father? you cannot maintain it. For he always taught it
most constantly, and confuted the Arrians by other innumerable texts of holy
Scripture. For what? do you think that he cannot be of the same substance
with the Father, unless this place teach it? he that heedfully reads over
that dispute of Christ with the Jews, which John in that chapter sets
down, Ioh. 10.
shall easily perceive that rather DVR. What is this that you say? John
signified the union of power and will, and not of essence: are you so rude, as
that you are ignorant that in God, power, and essence are the same? WHIT. page
546. I am not so rude, but that I well understand, that the power of God is the
essence of God: but does it follow, if Christ being endowed and environed with
the power of God could not be overcome, but that God also should be overcome,
that the essential power of God and Christ is the same?
an unity of will and power, then of essence, is signified. Christ affirms
that no man can take his sheep out of his hands: and that he may persuade it
plainly, he adioyneth, I and my Father are one. I do not see how you can
thereout conclude an unity of substance, unless you still understand that same
word, One, of the substance. What is it then that Christ says, not of himself
only, and his Father, but of all the faithful, Job. 17.21. 1. Ioh. 5.8.
that they all may be one, as thou O Father art in me, and I in thee? That
place in the Epistle of John, These three are one, the Ordinary Gloss does
thus expound, that is, witnessing of the same thing. Erasmus in annot. in 1.
Job. c. 5.
But Erasmus does much more vehemently find fault with the old Fathers, because
they abused these words, I and the Father are one, against the Arrians. Not, I
think, for that he did any whit favor the Arria^t, but because he thought it
was done by the Fathers with no great reason. But you say, that, that word,
Homoousion, was odious to Luther. For he says, my soul hates this word,
Homoousion. Luther never said that: only this he said, if he had hated that
word, Homoousion, yet he should be no heretic as long as he held the thing it
self. These are Luthers words: But if my soul did hate that word, Homoousion,
and would not use it, I should not be an heretic: for who should compel me
to use it, so as I hold the thing, which was determined in a Council by the
Scriptures? DVR. What more foolish then to hate a name vncopable of hatred?
WHIT. page 547. Then is he no heretic for hating the name, when he loves the
thing: and out of these words to feign and cast such a position upon Luther as
this; My soul hates that word, Homoousion; it is a devise most worthily
deserving perpetual hatred.
But howsoever he did hate the name, yet he did love the thing it self as his
own soul. And with this same name, it is certain that many and those very
excellent men were in times past offended, in so much as they have wished it
had never been heard of. For this name being once brought in, the Churches were
at such conflicts between themselves through hatreds and contentions, that the
holy Fathers themselves did not a little repent them of that name: nor if a man
would have perhaps some name to be taken away, which has given occasion of
many dissentions, is he therefore to be thought to disallow the thing declared
by that name. Hieron. in Epist. ad Damas.
Hierome could not be persuaded to receive the three Hypostases, because he had
that new name, Hypostasis, in suspicion: for he was afraid lest there lay some
venom under that name: yet he did acknowledge and preach three persons. And
now both those terms are received, nor ought any one to be offended with it.

Go ye forward, say you: go you also forward, Campian, seeing you will needs
do so, but it had been better for you rather to give over, than to go on of
this fashion. It is better to retire than to run ill. You reproach us now for
this, that we say, Christ was not perfect in Grace from his infancy, but that
he grew in the gifts of his mind as other men do, and was made wiser every day
by experience. I do easily endure you to object many paradoxes against us,
seeing you tax the very history of the Gospel with the same fault: for who
may hope that he can escape your slander, who stick not most audaciously to
fly upon the writings of the Gospel: for what do we teach else herein, but
that which the Evangelist has expressed in his writings once or twice? for
thus we read in Luke. The Child increased, Luke 2.40.
and was strengthened in the spirit, and he was filled with wisdom, and the
grace of God was in him. And again, Verse. 52.
Jesus grew DVR. That is, says Jeremy, and the ancient Fathers, Christ grew
in wisdom, because together with his age that his wisdom did every day more
shine forth and show it self to men. Jeremy thus, a woman shall compass a
man; and Augustine, Iustine, Clement, and Hilary say, to ascribe to Christ
ignorance, is an impious thing, and not to be believed. WHIT. page 550. Thus
you ^rgue, Jeremy chap. 31. wrote: A woman shall compass a man: therefore
Christ was a man in his mothers womb, full of knowledge and wisdom. Out of
all doubt with these arguments you will win the field: but yet take this with
you; if a woman compassed a man, in such sort as you affirm, then it will
follow that Christ was a man, before he was borne; and Marie did bear him, not
an infant, but a man; and old Symeon took in his arms a man, and not a child.
These are expositions worthy your patronage. As for the Fathers that you cite,
they speak only of Christ's Divine nature. DVR. Adam in his creation was
endued with excellent wisdom and knowledge: what madness is it then to
attribute to Christ the infirmity of ignorance? WHIT. I answer, you dispute
very admirablie. Adam was created with excellent knowledge, therefore Christ
was ignorant of nothing: first, Adam know not all things, but you say Christ
was never ignorant of any thing. Again from this ground you may conclude, that
Christ is not dead. For if Adam in the beginning was so created, that he could
not die, what madness is it, (to use your own words) to attribute the
infirmity of mortality to Christ? Tell me I pray you, which is more befitting
to Christ, mortality or infirmity? But when the Scripture is manifest, that
Christ did not take our nature whole and sound, as it was then in Adam, but
infirm and weak, yet without sin; it is no marvel if he would be borne
such as we are, not such as Adam was created.
in wisdom, and in stature, and in favor both with God and men. What else can
be understood out of these words, but that Jesus did increase both in stature
and wisdom, and the more he grew in age, so much the greater progresses had he
in the gifts of the holy Ghost: for so our Evangelist had written a little
before of John: The Child grew and was strengthened in the spirit. Luke 1.82.
Do you think that John was presently as soon as he was borne endewed with
perfect wisdom and grace of the spirit, so as he had no addition ever made
him? But Luke says that Christ was full of wisdom. I do not deny it: (...).
albeit Luke do not say filled, as though he were full of wisdom, but
filling, whereby some growth and addition is signified. But to grant that he was
full, will you therefore have it that nothing was added afterward? what then
do you determine of John, of whom the Angel foretold that he should be full
of the holy Ghost from his mothers womb? Wherefore if Christ had this, that at
what time he first was made man, absolute and perfect wisdom, and other gifts
of the spirit were heaped upon him, certainly he had it not alone; nor am I
moved with the authority of the schoolmen, who lest they might seem to think
less honorably of Christ, do attribute to him presently all perfections. And
Damascens argument taken from the personal union does not conclude it, Damasc.
lib. 3. de Orthodox. side.
unless we will think that the Deity did infuse all the quality of it self
into the humanity of Christ. That which the Evangelist writes of this
progress of wisdom, pertains only to the human nature of Christ? And seeing
that Christ would assume the whole nature of man, Heb. 4.15.
saving in sin, and lay off that person of God, and empty himself, and take
the form of a servant, Phil. 2.
will it be unbeseeming the person of Christ, that we say he was made both
wiser and fuller of grace by little and little? He was indeed most full of
grace, and whatsoever grace any body has, all that he drew out of this ever
remaining fountain of most abundant grace: Ioh. 1.16.
but yet this hinders not, but that Christ, as the Evangelist writes, might
grow in grace: which thing also Ambrose confesses. For so he says: Ambros. in
Luc. lib. 2. cap. 2.
DVR. But he says, lib. 5. de fide cap. 8. I say that the Son was ignorant
of nothing, but he took upon him our affection, that he might say, he was
ignorant by our ignorance. WHIT page 553. If Christ as a child was ignorant of
nothing, because of the personal union with the Deity, yet it is a very
childish argument, to reason from the person to the humane nature; that because
the man Christ is ignorant of nothing, therefore the humani^y of Christ is not
ignorant of any thing. If Ambrose sometime upon occasion diffe^ from himself,
let him look to it.
According to the flesh certainly he was filled with wisdom and grace. Nor
do some of your men, Campian, differ from this judgment, lest you should
perhaps imagine it to be so horrible, as that it cannot fall upon a Catholic:
for I ansenii^^ Bishop of Gandaua, Comment. in concord. cap. 12. Erasm. annot.
in Luc. cap. 2.
who was present at the Co^uenticle of Trent, professes that he does willingly
incline to this judgment: and Erasmus (albeit I name him not among writers on
your side) does give his note that it is the truer opinion.

But, say you, they affirm also, that Christ was ignorant of some things. And
why may they not affirm it? This (say you) is as much, as if they affirmed
that he was defiled with original sin. Now at length you begin to argue very
wittely, that our University men may understand your wonderful subtlety in
disputing. Would you deal on this manner with us, Campian, if that dispute,
which you so often wish, might be permitted you? For what could be spoken more
absurdly? Christ was ignorant of something: therefore Christ was defiled with
original sin. As if he that is ignorant of something, which may be known,
or he which is not endued with the perfect knowledge of all things, it must
needs be that he is defiled with sin. Thus then I will return you a like
argument: DVR. Though they were ignorant of many things, yet they had not that
ignorance, which comes fr^ original corruption, which if you say Christ
had, you must affirm that he was defiled with original sin. WHIT. page
555. All ignorance comes not from original sin, as appears by the
ignorance of Adam and the Angels; therefore Christ might be ignorant without
sin. And though we affirm all ignorance is now the punishment of sin: yet
will it not follow that no ignorance was in Christ, nay rather that there was;
for he was to take upon him the punishment of all our sins. Therefore he
underwent not only this punishment, but also death, being the punishment of
sin, Romans 6.2^. yet for all this was he not defiled with original sin.
DVR. The Fathers say he knevv not the day of judgment, because he has not
revealed it, and would that others should be ignorant of it. WHIT. page 556.
This interpretation is easily refelled. For from this will follow that the
Father also was ignorant of it, seeing the Father did no more tell it and
manifest it to others, then the Son did.
The Angels are now ignorant of many things (for they know not that day and
hour) and Adam, Mar. 14.36
before he sinned, was ignorant of many things: (for he did not understand that
Satan lay in wait for him) therefore both the Angels are now defiled with sin,
and Adam in his greatest innocence was a sinner. You shall never prick us
with these goades so, as that we may fear any deadly wound. If you know not
that there is an ignorance void of all fault, learn it of Thomas, who will
teach you, that negative ignorance, which he terms nescience, 12. q. 76. art.
2.
is not sin, but the privative. If you can conclude that consequent out of
our judgment, that Christ was ignorant of somewhat, which he then ought to
have known, when he was ignorant of it, then you put us down from this our
standing. For it is not a fault not to know those things, which yet may be
known, unless it concern us to have them known. For who will blame a
Porter, for that he is ignorant of the Mathematikes? But concerning Christ, I
answer now that unto you, which touches this cause nearer. Although he were
most pure from all spot of sin, so as nothing could be more vncorrupt; yet
he took upon himself the punishment due to sin, that he might deliver us
from it. Therefore also he would die, albeit death issued from sin. He then
that suffered death for us, which sin brought in; can any thing, which is
ours, be unbeseeming him, so as it be not infected with sin? And you can never
prove, that ignorance in Christ was any whit more faulty, than death. Christ
as he was a true man, albeit a pure man, so he did never think, imagine or
understand all things at once, and he did sleep sometimes. Do you think that
Christ while he was sleeping, did comprehend all things in his memory? which
though you should affirm, yet I see no reason to believe you. That which
Christ spoke of that day and hour, ( no man knows it, Marc. 13.32.
nor the Son himself) Cyrill writes that Christ spoke it of himself, and
that he knew not the day of judgment, Cyril. Thesaur. lib. 9. cap. 4.
as he was man, because it is proper to the humane nature to be ignorant of
things to come.

But now, say you, we shall take knowledge of worse things, and here you
recite many things concerning Christ's swea^e, horror, and sudden outcrie. I
acknowledge that which you allege, but I see no paradoxe therein. I am not
ignorant what is wont to be given out by you in corners, that Christ is
reproched, when we say he was tormented with so great griefs of mind. But it
is so far off, Campian, that I do either deny or dissemble those things
which you now object, that I do teach and auow them openly and freely. And
though the whole nation of Jesuits should set upon me, yet I will never be
ashamed to celebrate Christ's mercy, which I see to be violated by them with
unspeakable injuries. For what think you was it that Christ felt, which
brought so great sadness and vexation to him, that it wrung from him a bloody
sweat? was it only death, (...)
which takes away life and sense? Do you think that Christ could be broken so
with the fear of that death that he should conceive so much grief in his
mind, to make him sweat water and blood, for the desire he had to escape
tasting of that cup which he came to drink of? Did Christ so much abhor
this death, which the Martyrs have gone unto, joyful and cheerful? That were
indeed to cast a greater reproach upon Christ, while ye would avoid the
lesser. Wherefore that which raised so great horrors in Christ, was the most
bitter wrath of God against mankind, which Christ must needs have suffered
for a time. For the whole weight of our sins was imposed upon Christ, which
brought with it a most heavy remembrance of Gods wrath. Seeing therefore
Christ our Mediator being laden with our sins, did suffer the greatness of Gods
displeasure, and did alone endure the punishment of our sins, certainly he
did quake, as man, and did express those incredible sorrows of his mind many
ways. Hence came that speech upon the Cross, My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me? which he uttered not fainedly, but from his heart; not
despairingly, as you wickedly write, but upon the consideration of Gods wrath,
which then he was to be subject unto. DVR. Christ truly was the Son of God,
who knew nothing in himself worthy of wrath, and so could not fear the
pains of hell. WHIT. page 558. You dispute wittily: as if he were not the
Son of Man also, and sustained the person of sinful men. Neither did he so
fear hell, as you imagine: but when the punishment of us all was upon him
alone, he must needs as a man be greatly affected and moved with it. For God
was exceedingly incensed against us for our sins: Christ interposed himself;
and he alone vn^erwent the greatness of that wrath powered upon him, he therefore
that says, Christ felt nothing, diminishes the greatness of sin, the justice
of God, and the merit of Christ. I hat he was not swallowed up of those
torments, it must be imputed to the power of his divine nature. DVR. But how
could he think himself forsaken of God. who offered himself wholy to God?
WHIT. page 559. If be did nor feel this defection, why did he say vainly and
rashly that he was forsaken? he o^^ed himself by his eternal spirit, that is,
his Divinity, Hebr. 9.14. Therefore this freewill offering did not hinder, but
that he might feel in his mind those sorrows which men should have suffered.
This is that Hell, of which Christ while he was alive, and not as you object
against Calvin, after he was dead, did taste. And certainly this vexation,
which Christ endured at that time, did equal after a sort the very pains of
hell. But these things are reproved by you, because they be not understood.
For the Papists with their dull hearts cannot conceive, what Christ performed
for us by his death, and what pains he endured for the satisfying of his
Father. Therefore they think wrong is done to Christ, when we say he suffered
those things which he both would and ought to have suffered for us. For it was
necessary not only that Christ should die in DVR. Christ being God and man
satisfied the divine justice, not by the greatness and multitude of his
punishment, but by the weight of his actions, every one of which is
sufficient to be a full price of man's redemption. Neither was it necessary
that Christ should undergo the same punishment; which man should have
suffered, as if any man would free another from prison, who is cast into it
for debt; it is not necessary that be go into prison for him. Besides, who will
say that the body of man aid sin? it is man that sins, not the body.
WHIT. page 562. See I pray you what follows upon your defense, that it was
needless that Christ should die at all: for if any action of him being God and
man, would have satisfied Gods justice, and wrought man's redemption, in vain
did he shead his blood and suffer death But if this be contrary to the decree
and justice of God, and not every punishment but extreme sufferings both of
body and soul was to be undergone, as Christ suffered in his body the most
b^^ter ^eath, so did he in his soul exquisite and extreme sorrows. And out
of your similitude it will follow ^s well, that he need not to have descended
from heaven to have been made man, or to have suffered any sorrows: and yet
who knows not, that not only the debtors themselves, but their su^^ies must
be cast into prison, till the creditor be sa^^fied? And seeing that in such a
suerty as this, not the bare payment of money, but a real suffering of
grievous pains was necessary, why should we doubt but Christ has most truly
accomplished the part of a suertie? Lastly if the body do not sin, why
should it suffer the punishment of sin? for is it equal, that the body,
which in your judgment does not sin, should be grievously and eternally
punished for sin? And if it be as you say, that the man does sin, then
must the body have a finger in it; for the soul of it self is not a man. And
if Christ took man's sin upon him, it was certainly the sin of the whole man,
because he has redeemed the whole.
body, but also in his soul wrestle with death, because not only man's body,
but also his soul had offended God, and deserved everlasting death. And they
that speak against this doctrine, being very full of divine comfort, if Calvin
do prosecute somewhat eagerly, no good man ought justly to be displeased with
him for this cause. But that you cannot abide: and therefore you cry out, Oh
wicked days! oh monstrous times! It may be you have seen a monster at Rome,
or rather many monsters, which trouble you now with furious thoughts, and urge
you to make an outcrie. But we University men are not wont much to be moved
with the clamours of mad men. For he ouercomes in the Schools, not who can
cry out most shrilly, but who ca^ dispute most sitly unto the truth. But I
pray you, Campian, spare your voice a while, and gather your wits together, and
then I trust you will be somewhat milder anon, when you have rested you a
little, for I do not hear that this is the continual dint of your mind, and
I do not doubt but you may be pacified with words. You say that Christ has
contumelious injury offered him by us. Wherefore? because he is by this means
too much abased, and much is detracted from his Majesty. Concerning that
Nazianzen answers you: Is Christ therefore spoiled of his honor, Nazianz.
because he is become humble for thy sake? Now how great bitterness of grief
Christ felt, learn of Rabanus, Rabanus, in Catena Thoma.
if happily you regard him. Thus does he expound those words of Christ, Why
have thou forsaken me: Our Savior (says he) spoke this, carrying about him
our affections, who being in danger think our selves to be forsaken. For his
humane nature was forsaken because of sin: but because the Son of God was
made our Advocate, he bewailes their misery whose fault he took upon him. And
Hierome though he did differ from this opinion because of the Arrians, Hieronym.
yet the very power of truth did wring from him some confession. Concerning
Christ's prayer, wherein he entreated, that that cup might be taken away, thus
he writes: Nevertheless returning to himself, that which he had refused
somewhat fearfully in his nature, as man, he ratifieth in his nature as he was
God and the Son: Yet not as I will, but as thou will, says he, let not this
be done which I speak in my humane affection, but that for which I came down
to the earth by thy will. Ambrosius.
And Ambrose uses these words to Gratian: As he took my will, so he took my
sorrow. Finally, Melch. Canus. lib. 12. cap. 13.
I will annexe the judgment of Melchior Canus, to whom you owe much on good
cause, that you may know the opinion of a flat Catholic touching this matter.
Surely (says he) it was convenient that the Son of God, being to exhibit
himself a sacrifice for sin, should take upon him not only the sorrows of
the body, and of the sensitive faculty of the soul, but also the DVR. But it
follows not that so he did despair or feel the pains of hell. WHIT. page
564. There was no danger, lest Christ might perchance despair, nor is it
necessary, that whosoever sustaineth the pains of hell for a while, the same
should be overwhelmed with perpetual despair: many of the godly are sometime
afflicted with a very deep sense of Gods anger, which they yet overcome
through Gods spirit, much more then could Christ overcome all the pains of
hell.
torments of the spirit, and the grief of the will, to the end that that most
acceptable sacrifice to God for all our sins, might be by all means broken
and bruised. And a little after: He being forsaken of God, and destitute
utterly of all comfort, did not rejoice.

You say that Bucer in comparison of this madness was modest, although he were
very impudent, who takes Hell in the Creed for the grave. I let pass your
reproach, which you lack not in any place, nor am I disposed to extend any
longer answer about this Hell. The matter is in some difference among learned
men, who albeit they agree not so well among themselves about the thing, yet
they agree herein excellent well, in that they affirm that the Papists do
very wickedly understand it of Christ's descent into Hell. For as for Hell,
whether it signify the burial of Christ, as Bucer thought, or that sorrow of
mind, wherewith Christ was affected a little before his death, as Calvin would
have it; yet we retain the Article, and we teach yt Christ did descend into
Hell. If that cannot be otherwise understood than thus, that Christ did
descend into, I know not what, Limbus Patrum, wherein you suppose the Fathers
to have been, and that he did out of that place bring with him an infinite
multitude of holy men, I will confess that Bucer did err, and that Calvin
made a foul slip. But those your dreams concerning Hell, are worthy to be
buried in Hell it self. Now as for that you say, that it was in deliberation
in a certain conuenticle at London, how that article might be taken out of
the Creed, this certainly is the first time that ever I heard of it, neither
do I give any credit either to your self, or to your wretched Cheiny, who
told you this tale. Although if the ancient Creeds of the Roman and East
Church did lack that Article, as he affirms, whosoever he is, that in
Cyprians works expounded the Creed with his Commentaries, perhaps their fault
was DVR. Js it a small fault to cross out of the Apostles Creed Christ his
descension into hell? It is solid in the Creed of Athanasius, where there is
mention of burial, and in the Nicene Creed, when his burial is mentioned,
this descension is not expressed. And who sees not that it was necessary that
his soul must descend into the common place of other souls? WHIT. page 568.
If it be a heinous fact to put out this article, then the Church of Rome (which
you say cannot err) is guilty of this, as Ruffinus writes in exposit. Symb.
And it is no strange thing, when in very few ancient Creeds it is to be found.
I could produce fifty Creeds, which have it not; in certain it is found, but
then says Ruffinus it must be understood by the precedent article, for it is
the same with that, which says he was buried. And this was Bucers opinion,
which the two Creeds of Athanasius and Nice do confirm: for if they be so
diversely set down, that in some of them is mention of his burial only, in
others only of his descension; it is manifest, that there is one and the same
sense in them, and that to be buried is as much as to descend into hell, and
this as much as that. Finally it is true his soul went into the common
receptacle of souls, but how prove you that that place is in hell? for if his
soul went into Paradise, it could not go into hell, unless Paradise be there.
less, which would imitate the Church of Rome, which you hold cannot err.

Of Man.
Now you make your question concerning man: and you bring us in speaking on this
fashion. The image of God is utterly blotted out in man, no spark of good
being left: For so, say you, have Illyricus and Calvin taught. I know well the
judgment of Illyricus, which I do not think ought to be laid to our
charge. For you are not ignorant, Campian, that his opinion touching the image
of God, and of the nature of original sin, has been reproved and confuted
by our men: he went somewhat farther than he should; I believe he did it, that
he might remove himself farthest off from you, whom he thoroughly hated. But
I would he had amended some things: then certainly had he been a very
excellent man. As for Calvin you do him open wrong, whom you join with
Illyricus in the fellowship of this judgment: for he writes directly and
flatly contrary to that, Inslit. lib. 1. cap. 15. sect. 4.
that you bring him in speaking; DVR. But Calvin says, that the Saints have
nothing within but contagion and corruption. For if there be in the Saints no
true justice, but all their works are sins, what can be in them besides
corruption, and contagion. WHIT. page 572. Do you neither fear God, nor
reverence man? Show v^ any such words of Calvin, if you can: if you cannot, why
do you repeat that which Campian most falsely objected at the first? There
are in the Saints and the regenerate many excellent virtues and graces of the
holy Ghost, as faith, love, hope, patience, etc. who ever said that these were
nothing but corruption and contagion? fie, away with you and your slander. As
for your argument it is marue lous slender, for though the Saints have no
justice of their own, which does perfectly satisfy the Law of God, yet
they are endued with many excellent virtues and ornaments of the holy Ghost.
If I should reason, because there is no sound learning in you at all, therefore
there is nothing but mere ignorance in you, I should conclude the one as
truly, as you the other. As for your last slander, that all the works of the
Saints are sins; we say no that they are sins, but that by reason of the
inherent corruption they are tainted with some spot of sin, and have not that
perfection which the law and justice of God requires. Will you say, that he
who is lightly touched with some disease, is nothing else, but the disease?
you should certainly stand in need of Physicians and much Physic, if you
should thus speak.
That the image of God was not quite blotted out in man. But this is your
fashion, that when you cannot reprove those things which we do say, then you
feign those things to be said by us, which may easily be reproved. We teach,
that man was created and formed so in the beginning, that he was answerable to
the image of God in all things. Now that image was a most perfect entirenes of
all parts, heaped up with all good graces and virtues, which could be incident
to the pure nature of man. Whatsoever he did imagine, desire, will, think, or
understand, was holy and right, and agreeable to Gods will, yea even to the
rule of that law, Thou shall love God with all thy heart, with all thy soul,
with all thy strength, and thy neighbor as thy self. But after that Adam had
slid back from God, we say that this image was pitifully corrupted and
deformed, that neither the understanding did retain that ancient light, nor
the will did love God, nay the whole will was turned from him, neither did
there remain entire any faculty either of body or soul. Although therefore
we deny not that some relics of that most noble image do remain still, yet
we hold that all that which may reconcile and make us acceptable unto God, and
be sufficient for us to salvation, is blotted out and extinguished. All
reason, and judgment, and understanding, which was some little piece of that
image, is not utterly lost, there is not no will at all left in us; but yet the
fall of Adam did inflict such a blow upon all these faculties which yet remain
in us, that neither can our will of it self will any thing, which God may like
of, nor our mind think, understand, or judge right and true things without
error. Therefore John says that the light shines in the darkness, Joh. 1.5.
but yet the darkness comprehends it not. But now those greater things,
faith, righteousness, holiness, and perfect virtue, which may lead us unto
everlasting felicity, these did not only receive a wound to become weaker,
but they did quite perish, and became none, until that they be renewed in us
by the holy Ghost and the grace of regeneration. Wherefore thus does the Lord
speak touching man whom he had fashioned after his own image, whom also he
knew thoroughly: Genesis 6.5.
The wickedness of man was great in the earth, and all the imagination of the
thoughes of his heart was only evil continually. And that we might understand
that these things were pronounced of mankind as it is in it self, and not
only of those wicked men, who lived before the flood, the Lord does again
repeat these things after the flood, what time Noah only with his family
were left alive upon the earth: Genesis 8.21.
Hereafter (says he) I will not curse the earth any more for man's sake, for
the frame of man's heart is evil from his youth. Can you, Campian, judge better
and righter of the image of man, than the Lord himself could? If all the
thoughts of man's heart be both always and only evil, and the very frame and
beginning and fountain as it were of al his thoughts most corrupt, what now is
left of that image which was sometime so excellent, which may help any whit to
attain happiness? Hitherto belongs that which Christ says, That which is
borne of the flesh, Ioh. 3.6.
is flesh: and that which is borne of the spirit, is spirit. If the whole man
be flesh, certainly the whole is unclean. And Paul says, we were the children
of wrath. Ephesians. 2.3^
But the Lord does not hate his own image, nay wheresoever he beholds it, he
loves it entirely. And Paul pronounces that the whole man every whit is the
child of wrath: wherefore that image which may make us acceptable to God, can
never now be found in us. For he says, not only that we are so hurt and
wounded, as that yet some hope of life remains, but that we wholly, such as
we are in our selves, are obnoxious and subject to everlasting death, as if
nature had framed us thereunto. What should I heap up more testimonies of the
Scriptures, which are so plentiful through the whole Scripture, that nothing is
oftener repeated than the loss of this image? wherefore we judge so of man after
sin, before restitution, even as Augustine writes, whom the very Schoolmen
themselves durst not reprove. Natural gifts were corrupted in man by sin,
and the supernatural extinguished. But of man regenerate we do not say those
things, which you affirm, that nothing is found in him but mere corruption
and contagion. For he is endued with the spirit of Christ, he possesses Christ
dwelling in him, he is endued with faith, hope, and charity. But he who has
nothing in him but corruption, it is certain that he is no whit regenerate.
For the new man which is created according to God, Ephesians. 4.14
must be reformed after righteousness and true holiness. Indeed that which the
regenerate man has of his own and proper to himself, is vicious. For so the
Apostle saw another law in his members rebelling against the law of his mind:
Romans 7.23.
but those things which he received from God, are contrary to this corruption
and contagion; which if any do deny to be good and holy, he may well be held
blasphemous against the holy Ghost. As for that you both feign that we speak
these things, and also express for what cause we speak them, you bewray your
wonderful wisdom, which for those things that are not at all, can set down
a reason wherefore they be. But we do willingly preach faith, and do easily
permit it to be contemned of you. For you that defend nature against grace,
and do trust rather to your own power than to Christ's mercy, and do make
void the promises by precepts, cannot have an honorable opinion of faith.

You never keep your standing, Of Sin.
Campian, and you begin the battle like a runnaway. For you have a wandering
and unstable wit, as it seems. You oppose Illyricus to us again in the same
cause, whose testimony ought not to be of force against us. For herein I
profess my self no less an adversary to him than your self, I had almost
said, than to your self. For what an unjust and unreasonable thing is it, that
you should tax that opinion as defended by us, which your self knows to be
condemned by our Churches? Object our own opinion to us, Campian, if you can
object any: we are not such, as that we should think whatsoever Illyricus
could, as being a man, err in, did any whit concerno us. But either Illyricus
must needs be drawn into this taxation, or else this place was quite to be
left void by you. For beside Illyricus, I think you have no man that thinks
so. If you desire to know our opinion of this matter, I confess indeed that
that defense of Illyricus did seem ever very absurd to me. For it both smells
of the folly of the Manichies, and it makes two souls in a regenerate man:
and which is a greater matter, it destroys the soul. That was always the
judgment of the Catholic Church, which I profess to be ours, that the
substance of the soul was not quite slain by sin, but only charged and
infected with vicious qualities: and that sin is no inward substance of the
soul, but an DVR. The Catholic Church never believed that sin was an
accident or quality, but only a privation, for if it were an accident, God
should be the cause and author of it. WHIT. page 573. But this privation is it
not an accidental thing? why then make you a scruple in words, when you
understand the sense? An accident is commonly called that which is in some
substance, but is no part of it, which may either be absent or present without
the corruption of the subject and such a thing every man knovveth sin is. And
though I confess that the nature of sin consists in a privation; yet it is
not a bare privation, as you may learn ou^ of your Thomas. For. 1.2. quaest.
82. art. 1. he says, sin is not a mere privation, but a corrupt habit, like
unto a disease, whereby not only health is taken away, but bad humors are
brought upon the body. And the School men when they make privation of
original justice to be the form of original sin, and the matter to be
concupiscence or a corrupt inclination of the faculties of the soul, what do
they teach, but that in sin there is some positive thing, as Thomas uses to
call it? But why do I endeavor to refell you, for whom Physike is fitter then
a refuration? As for your reason it has no force; for God is not to be
accounted the author of all accidencies, but indirectly and by accident. Basil
says, That the root and cause of sin is in our selves, even our freewill.
accident. DVR. Basil says not, that sin is an accident or a quality, but an
affection contrary to virtue. WHIT. page 575. Then must it be somevvhat, for
nothing cannot be contrary to virtue.
Basil writes truly, in that he denies that sin is any living substance,
or endued with a soul, Basil. i^ub^^p. hons. 2. August. de nuptijs. lib. 1.
cap. 25.
but a quality contrary to the virtue of the soul. Augustine: DVR. Augustine
will accuse you for slandering him, because he spoke not of sin, but of
concupiscence, which he accounted to be no sin. WHIT. page 576. Does
Augustine account concupiscence no sin? why then calls he it an affection
of an evil quality? why does he compare it to a disease? why does he demand
the question, how concupiscence should remain in the regenerate, whose
sins are all remitted, if it were not a sin? his answer proves it yet
more fully. For he says, concupiscence is remitted in Baptism, not that it
should be no sin at all as you would have it, but that it should not be
imputed for a sin. If it were no sin, how could it be imputed for a
sin? Finally August. cont. ^ulian. lib. 5 cap. 3. affirms that it is a
sin, and a punishment of sin, and a cause of sin, and that in the
regenerate. It is manifest in the place, that he speaks of that concupiscence
against which the spirit lusts, and which in without the consent of the
will. It at any time he deny it to be a sin, it i^ not simply, but in
opposition to actual sin; for how should that be nothing, which is
remitted in Baptism, which Christ satisfied for by his blood? or is God angry
with us for nothing? It must therefore needs be sin.
Original sin (says he) remains not substantially, as it were some body
or spirit, but it is a certain affection of an evil quality, like a disease.
Finally Ambrose most plainly: Ambros. in Romans 6. c. 7.
DVR. Ambrose his words refell your error. WHIT. page 577. Nay they refell
your error. For he says, it is a straying from good. Now this straying is an
action, and not a mere privation. And you your selves earnestly defend that
sin is an action. If it be an action, then an accident, then no mere
privation, the^ not nothing.
How dwells sin in the flesh, seeing it is no substance, but a straying from
good? Therefore let us, if you please, send away the suspicion of this error
imposed by you upon us, to the author himself.

As for that you add, that it is a thing commonly held by this filthy sect,
that all sins be equal, verily nothing could be spoken more impudently.
Pardon me, Campian, if I answer you somewhat sharply: for your immodest and
intolerable impudency wrung that term from me. Are you so far spent that you
are not able to charge us with any true crime, but shamelessely to object those
things against us, from which we, of all others, are farthest off? For who did
ever more vehemently disallow, or more strongly confute this paradoxe of the
Stoiks, than our Divines, whom you now pursue? All records of these times may
be witnesses hereof, our books, Churches and Schools be witnesses, as also
both the civil and Church Discipline may be a witness. Did you think that
you could creep into the minds of our University men by these means, by
lying so openly, so shamefully, and so boldly? O Rome, what a Campian have thou
returned to us! how much changed from him that he was when thou receiuedst
him? Art thou wont so to instruct, adorn and polish thy pensioners, as that
they retain nothing of their ancient shamefastnes? What may I complain of,
or to whom should I appeal? surely even to the very same our University men,
to whom you your self write: they may convince you by their testimonies. For
within these two years our Cambridge men have heard this very matter twice
propounded and defended in the divinity Schools, That sins are not equal.
If neither our own confession, nor the testimony of all mortal men can make
enough for the defending of our innocence; be it, that we are Stoikes, and
heretics, and every thing else.

But these are DVR. Herein Calvin made sins equal, for that he thought all
sins to be deadly, and worthy of everlasting punishment. WHIT. page 578.
Therefore does Calvin make all sins equal, because he proves that all
sinner are in their own nature deadly? but the Scripture has taught this most
plainly. For if every sin be the transgression of Gods law, and an auersion
and defection from God, which is the chiefest good, it must needs in it self
deserve eternal death, Romans 6.21.23. Iam. 2.10. though every sin in Gods
justice is odiudged to eternal death, yet it does not equally deserve it.
Caluins words, says Campian, howsoever with an exception, if they be pondered
by God the Judge. What are these the words of Calvin? that he says sins are
equal, but so, if they be weighed by God the Judge? nothing less: for Gods
judgments could not be right, if so be he did judge sins to be equal. But
mark ye a singular witness. The Fathers of the Council of Trent pronounce a
curse on them, who affirm that a just man does sin either mortally or venially
in every good work. To this Calvin answers that which Solomon says,
Antidot. 6. Sess. in Can. 25.
that man thinks his own ways right, but God pondereth the hearts. But in
the judgment of God nothing is sincere and honest, but that which flows from
the perfect love of him. Calvin speaks not one word of the equality of sins,
nor was there any cause why he should. Only this he intends, if the Lord
would weigh in his balance the excellentest works of godly men, that he would
easily find what to condemn: what is this to the purpose?

As for that, that Thomas Walsingham did object against Wicliffe, it is not
much material, he wrote many things against Wicliffe being dead, and let pass
no slander which witty malice could devise. While Wicliffe was alive, no
adversaries could hurt him, but being dead they condemned him, they plucked him
out of his grave, burned his body, when they might without danger devise any
thing against that most holy man. Neither can I ever be induced to believe,
that Wicliffe taught these things, if this imputation depend upon no greater
credit than of an adversary. As touching that, that you report of the Duke of
Guise, I defend not the fact: he that committed it, suffered punishment greater
I wis, than Tauerners are wont, that kill pullen when there is no need. I
confess that the Guise was a man of admirable fortitude: I would he had been
of more clemency. He was flaine, even as you say, by a wicked man, whom if
perhaps either hope of impunity or fear of punishment did induce, that being
examined, he did accuse very noble and innocent men, it is neither marvelous
nor new. Him that he did appeach as the Ringleader of his plot, the King
himself did pronounce an innocent: but as for Beza all good men have acquitted
him in their judgments long ago.

From Sin you pass your speech to Grace: Of Grace.
I would rather you your self did make passage: and you hope, that we who are
so strict in the matter of sin, will play the Philosophers so gloriously about
Gods Grace. Surely we shall think we play the Philosophers very well, if we
refer all our Philosophy for the amplifying of the Cross of Christ. Gal.
6.14.
You also do treat of Grace, but as still you are wont, in few words. But what
do you reprove in our Philosophy? because we place Grace out of us only in the
fauouer of God. For you, Campian, would have your men to be persuaded, that we
take all Grace from man, and do place it only in the mind of God, like Platoes
Idea. But either you know not what you talk of in this place, and that you are
ignorant of this Philosophy, or else you suffer not our opinion, being infolded
in your slanders, to be manifest. For we make grace to be twofold (that I
may omit many distinctions) wherein we do not disallow the Philosophy of
your School men. For either Grace declares the free goodwill and clemency of
God toward us, or else it signifies those gifts, which flow out of that mercy
of God to us. That they commonly call, Grace making acceptable; and this, Grace
freely given. Now for that DVR. I know well your doctrine of imputative
justice, than which I know not whether any man can devise one thing more
against the Scriptures. WHIT. page 582. Thus you speak, like a Jesuit: but
what is there that the Scripture does more celebrate than imputative justice?
Romans 4.3.4.5.6. is a most clear text for it. But what? know you not that our
sins were imputed to Christ? and why then may not Christ's righteousness be
imputed to us in l^ke manner? Think you that Christ had our sins really
infused into him? I suppose, you will never say so: seeing then in the one part
you are compelled against your will to confess an imputation, why do you not
also grant it in the other, specially seeing the Apostle himself propounds
us this Antithesis, 2. Cor. 5.21. Christ was made sin for us, that we might
be made the righteousness of God in him? Therefore we are so made righteousness
in Christ, as he was made sin for us, which must necessarily be understood
of imputation. And ve^^ly whereas our injustice or iniquity is a debt, and
Christ has paid it, then must it of necessity follow, that, that payment is
ours no otherwise then only by imputation. Again, I pray you, what can be
imagined more absurd, then that the merit^ of Saints should be imputed unto
us, and Christ his righteousness cannot be? for they who buy indulgences with
money, do not doubt but to reap much fruit from the merits of others. It then
the merits of Saints, as you think, can make them more just, in whom they are
not inherent, what an impious and absurd thing were it to give less power of
imputation to the merits and righteousness of Christ? DVR. Charity i^ the end of
the Law. Romans 13. For he that loves his brother has fulfilled the Law. So
that if charity be truly in us, we have true justice: and well said
Augustine, Charity begun, is justice begun; charity increased, is justice
increased; great charity is great justice; perfect charity is perfect justice.
WHIT. page 583. All is true you say touching charity. Love your neighbor as
the law requires, and you have fulfilled the second Fable: but this you cannot
do; therefore be not brag in the opinion of your charity, which if it were as
great as ever any man had, yet it should be far short of that the Law
requires, neither can it make you just. As for Augustine we confess as much
as he says: but this is not the justice which fre^th us from the wrath of
God, for that never increases or grows, but is ever most absolute and
perfect, that is Christ his obedience imputed unto us by faith. Of charity
August. Epist. 29. writes thus. As long as charity may be increased, that
verily which is less, is faulty: by that which is faulty, there is none just
upon earth.
goodwill and favor whereby the Lord embraces us in Christ, and forgiueth us
our sins, and receives us into favor; we place it in God: but the effects
of this Grace are in us: which effects are these, that we do by the holy Ghost
perceive that we are loved of God, that we believe in God, and repose al hope
of salvation in that mercy of God. We do not therefore take away all grace from
man, and place it only in Gods favor: but that first grace, whereby he has
reconciled us to himself in Christ, and wherein our salvation is contained,
that alone we place in God; which being felt by us, faith, hope, and charity
and other virtues do follow it, which are ours, and resident in us. But we deny
that position of yours of infused grace, whereby you defend, that the grace
whereby we are justified, is a certain habit situate in our minds within: and
we acknowledge no other justifying DVR. Why do you not then freely confess
that you do place all grace only in the favor of God without us, which
favor does neither amend the wicked, nor purge, nor illuminate, nor enrich
them, but only dissemble their old remaining and stinking channel, God winking
at it? WHIT. page 584. You cease not to trouble us with your ignorance: for
does it follow that we remove all grace from us, because we place justifying
grace, which is the mercy of God in Christ, not in us, but in God only? for
beside this grace, there is another grace communicated to all the Saints,
whereby their souls ^re purged and renewed. This consists in faith, and in
the fruits of faith, which they commonly call Grace infused: therefore that
channel of sin does remain not within them, that have attained true
righteousness, as you slander us to teach; but by the power of the holy Ghost it
is daily purged out; yet so, that as long as we live there remain some
relics of sin and old Adam. For if that chanel were so purged, that no blots
of sin did remain in us; neither would S. Paul complain of the law of his
members, and the body of death, Romans 7.23.24. Neither should we need the
renewing of the spirit, 2. Cor. 4.16.
grace, but the great and free mercy of God, whereby he did elect and
predestinate us in Christ before all eternity unto life everlasting, and has
called us in time and justified us. DVR. But what place of Scripture does
distinguish justification from sanctification? S. Paul does not, 1. Cor. 6.11.
Romans 6.13. That also is a strange thing, that faith should justify us and not
sanctify us: but more strange that Christ should impute his righteousness to
us, that we may be just, and yet not holy and sanctified. WHIT. page 586. Who
can read the Scripture, specially the Epistle to the Romans, and not find
these two distinguished? for in the first part of it he treats of
justification, in the latter of sanctification; what is more manifest then
that he vvriteth, Rom 8.30. whom he has called, those he has justified;
whom he has iustisted, those he has glorified. Now this glorification
signifies the glorious renouation, which is begun here, and perfected in
another life, as your Thomas upon this place has observed. Again, 1. Cor.
1.30. Is not here justification and sanctification distinguished?
justification and sanctification are inseparable, yet must they be
distinguished: which because you do not, you place justification in
sanctification Your place out of the Epistle to the Corinthes, does plainly
distinguish them. Your second place shows that a kind of justification is in
sanctification: but it is not that perpect justice, by which we are justified
before God, but only an imperfect one. As for your wonde^s and strange things,
they come from your ignorance: for we have never sepa^ated these two, but
affirm that he who is by faith partaker of Christ his righteou^nes, must needs
have the old man crucified, and the body of sin destroyed in him, that he may
no longer serve sin.
For grace infused, wherein regeneration and sanctification consists, and
which the Scriptures call the new man, is not strong enough to justify us,
DVR. Grace infused and our inherent righteousness, though it be not perfect, yet
it is true justice, and does justify us. WHIT. page 58^. By this you overthrow
your doctrine of justification: for that justice which does reconcile us to God
ought to be most perfect, that such as neither the law nor God himself can
require a more perfect. That which is not perfect, is in it kind corrupt. If
then ^n imperfect justice can please God, then a corrupt thing will please him,
and so should he not be perfectly just: but being most just, that only pleases
him, which is according to the prescription of the law, most perfect. Luke
10.27.28. Leuit. 18.5.
because it never satisfies the law of God in this life, and ought every day
to be restored, and aspire to greater perfection. For so Paul says, 2. Cor.
4.16.
Although our outward man perish, yet our inward man is renewed daily: which
place Augustine has very often used in this cause. You see therefore both what
grace we place in God, and what we confess to be infused into our hearts. For
as for that you say we bark out, that grace is not strong enough for the
resisting of sin, therein you go about thorough our sides to wound Paul
himself, upon who^ this your reproach reboundeth. Romans 7.18.19.21.23.
For though he were endued with infused grace, as much as any other, yet he
denies that he could attain, to perfect that which is good: DVR. S. Paul
says only, that he was assayed and tempted by those motions; but seeing it
is not sin, where the consent of the will is not, be says, it was not
he that did it, but the flesh, for he doubted not but grace was sufficient
for him, whereby be might overcome all these, seeing he had the word of
Christ for it. 2. Cor. 12.9. And he shevoeth that by this grace we may
overcome our corruptions, Romans 7.25. WHIT. page 594. But the Apostle shows
that he was not only tempted by these, but overcome. Romans 7.15. he ^aith, he
did that which he hated. Why did he hate it, unless it were worthy hatred?
Now nothing is worthy hatred, but sin. And verse. 19. he adds, he did the
evil, which he would not. Then he sinned: for to be tempted with evil, is
not to do that a man would not: but to be tempted and to overcome them, is to
do that a man both should and would do. And verse. 23. he says, he was led
captive to the law of sin. How can he be a captive and not be overcome?
Believe the Apostle then, and he could not resist sin always by all his
grace. But you say his will did not give consent: be it so, yet those motions
are sin against the tenth Commandment. For Romans 7.7. he shows that he
speaks of concupiscence without consent. For lusts with consent, subduing the
will, the Philosophers confessed to be sin. For the place you allege 2. Cor.
12.9. the sufficiency of Gods grace is but so much, that he should not be
swallowed up of temptations. The godly fall often, but God lifts them up
again. For the other place, Romans 7.25. you are deceived by the corrupt Latin
translation. For in the Greek it is, I thank God by Jesus Christ: you read
it as if asking the question, who should deliver him from the body of death;
he had answered himself; The grace of God by jesus Christ, when he gives
thanks to God, as if he had said; Though this body of death be troublesome
unto me, because it compels me to serve sin, yet I rest in that hope, which
I have placed in Christ.
for that he did not the good which he would, but the evil that he would not:
and that when he desired to do good, evil was present with him: finally that
the law of his members does so rebel against the law of his mind, that it
makes him captive to the law of sin. Hence you may know how great strength
sin has, which even the Apostle himself, albeit he were endued with
singular grace, could not so fully resist, but that sometimes he was both
overcome of it, and bound up in it, as Augustine speaks. If you doubt,
Campians, whether the Apostle spoke this of himself, I had rather you should
take advise of Augustine, August. de verb. Apost. Sermon. 5 and ^libi. Gal. 5.17.
than of the Masters of Trent, seeing they be very bad interpreters of the
Apostle. What should I remember to you David, and the rest of the Fathers, who
have taught by their examples, that it is not easy to resist sin? but herein
you are like your self, in that you say, that Christ is no otherwise said by
us to b^ full of grace and truth, but th^^, that the Father did very much
favor him. I pray you Campian, whence could you gather this? Do we not say
that Christ was full of grace so; that from his fulness we all receive grace:
who of us did ever deny that there was very great and infinite grace in Christ.
For they that say that Christ was so full of grace, that all men did declare
that he was worthy of the unspeakable favor both of God and men, they do
not only hold, that Christ was no otherwise full of grace, but herein that God
did very much favor him; but also they do set out Christ's grace to have bin
more abundant. For they do confess, Ioh. 3.34.
both that the grace of the spirit was plentiful in Christ without measure, and
also they hold that there did an outward grace so shine forth in Christ, that
all did love him and did perceive that he was beloved of God, this does
Brentius and Bucer, and all our Divines acknowledge.

What thing therefore (say you) is Justice? Of Justice.
you make answer to your self, a Relation. If you commence an action against
us about Aristotle's Predicaments, certainly we fear not, but we shall have a
Philosopher gentle enough in this cause. For though Justice be DVR. That which
is not at all cannot be a real Relation. WHIT. page 600. But Christ's
righteousness is not, not at all. For Christ performed all things which the
Law required, therefore was endued with the quality of perfect justice: but
that reason which persuades us, to confess, that this righteousness of the
Law in Christ was a quality, the same compels us to think that this
righteousness is not a quality inherent in us; for that we never in our own
person obeyed the Law. Now what does let, that that righteousness in Christ
cannot be made ours by relation and imputation? for common sense might have
taught you this, if a man do pay money in your name, this payment is yours by
imputation. If you ask, how that is yours, which is not inherent in you; I
say again, which thing the Apostle does so often press, it is yours by
imputation. Now rub up your Philosophy, if you can, to prove that nothing is
made ours by imputation.
a Relation, yet Philosophy will not be cashierd: but that it is a quality you
can never prove, either out of the Predicaments, or out of the chiefest
Philosophy. But your Theological virtues, faith, hope, and charity, had never
any injury offered to them by us: indeed they be so handled by you, that you
seem to take them not for Theological, but for Philosophical virtues. But
the cause that makes us not to hold, that our righteousness is compounded of
these virtues, as you would have it, is this, because they are never so perfect
in this life, as thoroughly to satisfy the law of God: now the law must be
satisfied or else we cannot be just. For the Lord does allow no other
righteousness, but the very same which is described in the law, which whosoever
cannot attain, are pronounced guilty of eternal death. Therefore if we will be
righteous and saved, and free from that horrible curse, such a righteousness
must be sought out, than which the law cannot require a more absolute. And
where shall we find this? Is it in our virtues, in our faith, in our charity?
But these are weak many ways, and want that integrity which the law
requires, and whereunto it propounds righteousness. For faith is but begun,
and we are always to pray that it may be increased in us. Now if faith be
weak, Rom 1.17. Luc. 17.5.
other virtues which spring from faith, cannot be perfect. But righteousness
must be of that kind, as that nothing at all may be added thereunto. From hence
it follows, that righteousness is not compounded of our virtues, as you
unfitly speak, but it must be fetched elsewhere. Seeing therefore we had no
such virtue, as might obtain righteousness for us with the Lord, Christ was
given us by the Lord, who performed perfect obedience to the law, that by his
obedience we might be made righteous. For this obedience of Christ imputed to
us, and apprehended by faith, Romans 5.19.
is that righteousness of ours, which you enquire after, not heaped up with our
virtues, as you would have it, but place in Christ, who is made unto us of God,
1. Cor. 1.30.
wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption. And this is our DVR.
The Scripture plainly witnesses, that as we are made sinners by Adam, so we
are made just by Christ. Romans 5. WHIT. page 602. You understand not the
Apostle. For though we be just in Christ, as we were sinners in Adam, yet not
after the same manner. In Adam we sinned, and had his sin by propagation
derived to us: but the justice of Christ, thought it was communicated unto us
by imputation, ye (...) ^as it not so derived unto us. The Apostle would only
teach and say this, as Adam was the author of sin, so Christ was the author of
righteousness.
righteousness, even Christ DVR. Answer me I pray you, why the Apostles and
Christ do so often exhort us to the obedience of the law? and never bid us
apprehend the righteousness of Christ by faith? as Luke 10. Matthew. 25. WHIT.
page 603. Christ and his Apostles do exhort us to the obedience of the law, not
to the end we may deserve everlasting life by our works, but because it is
our duty to walk in that race of piety wherein we are placed, that we
walking in those good works, and insisting in that way which the Lord has
propounded to us, may come at length to that most happy mark For albeit we
never come to a mark unless we go the right way, yet the way is not the
cause of the mark. Now whereas you say that we are no where commanded to
apprehend Christ righteousness by faith, you bewray your miserable ignorance.
Peruse therefore better these famous places for proof of that the Scriptures
do command us this. Romans 4.5. Romans 5.19. Romans 1.17. Gal. 2.16. Gal. 3.14. Ion.
3 18. Ioh. 5.24. Act. 10.43. As for the cause for which Christ in Matthew. 25.
says he will make mention of works in the day of judgment, it is for that
as James ( chap. 2.18.) says, works do make show and proof of faith. But in
that very place verse. 34. before Christ mentions those works of the Saints,
he touches the true and proper causes of salvation. 1. Gods adoption in Christ
(...) possess by the right of inheritance. For that which one possesses by
the right of inheritance, he does not deserve it by his merits. 2. The
eternal election of God, when he says that it is a kingdom prepared for
the^ from the fou^dations of the world. Now if your opinion be this, that God
did prepare them this kingdom, because he did foresee their great good
works, your own Thomas is an adversary against you. Thom de verit. quast.
6. art. 2. and Thom. 1. part quaest. 23. art 1.
himself, whose DVR. Christ is called by S. Paul our righteousness: so in the
same place he says, that he is our vvisdome, and our sanctification. WHIT
page 609. That vvisdome, and righteousness, and sanctification, which S. Paul
affirms Christ to be made unto us, are not resi^ent in us as qualities, nor
are they otherwise ours, than as we do embrace and possess whole Christ by
faith.
righteousness and innocence being ascribed unto us, does bring assured
remission of sins, and true righteousness. This the Divines call the first
justice, after which follows another, compounded of these virtues of yours.
For with that remission of sins, which depends on Christ's obedience, faith,
and hope, and charity are joined, which make us just also after a sort, but
inchoatiuely not perfectly.

I have declared to you in few words our opinion touching righteousness, since
you make inquiry, what it is. But your virtues cannot so cloth the soul round
about, as that no naked thing may appear. For all our righteousnesses, are
like DVR. Jf you speak of that justice, which we get to our selves without
the help of Christ, you say truly: but if of that which Christ has purchased
for us by his blood, and powered into our hearts, you do an intolerable iuturie
unto Christ. WHIT. page 610. I speak of that righteousness which every
regenerate man has by the help of Christ. For do you think the Prophet wanted
the help of Christ? yet he professes his righteousness is impure and
imperfect: if you think he did speak of their works which are not
regenerate, you must deny that he was regenerate, who confesses the
imperfection of his works. Of this righteousness Beruard does understand it,
Sermon. 5. de verbis Isay And all the godly have thus confessed of them clues.
Psalm. 130.3. Dan. 9.7. Ezra. 9.15. Job. 9.3.28. 1. Ioh. 1.8. and 1. Ioh. 2.7.
filthy clouts, Esaias 64.6.
and those not only defiled, but also torn and rent in many pieces. Romans
13.14. Phil. 3 9. 2. Cor. 5.19.
Christ himself must be put upon us, that we may be found in him, not having
our own DVR. Saint Paul calls the righteousness of the law, that which is
gotten by the doctrine of the law without the help of Grace: And the justice
of faith, not any apprehended by faith, but because they come unto it by faith.
WHIT. page 613. In examining the place we shall see of what justice S. Paul
speaks: first he denies that to be any part of justice, whatsoever he had
gloriously done when he was a Pharisie; that though he was then according to
the justice of the Law without reproof, and endued with many good qualities,
yet he accounted all loffe for Christ's sake. verse. 4.5.6.7. And lest any should
think that he attributed any thing to his works ofter faith; he adds that
he rejects these also, neither ascribed his justification unto them. Adding
in the 8. verse. that he accounted all things loss. Not the other, but these
also I contemn: and upon this infers. verse. 9. Not having my own
righteousness, which is of the law* but that which is through the faith of
Christ. When then he excludes all kind of works, he must needs understand
the justice of Christ.
righteousness which is of the law, but that which is by the faith of Christ;
namely the righteousness that is of God through faith. For God was in Christ and
reconciled the world unto himself, not imputing their sins to them. With
this clothing our souls must be clothed, that they may be beautified and
gloriously adorned: neither are we ashamed of that word, upon which you play,
when we say that our righteousness is a covering of the fault. For so does the
Prophet David pronounce him to be a blessed man, Psalm. 22.1. Romans 4.6.
whose iniquities be forgiven, and whose sins are covered. And this pardon we
apprehe^d only by faith: now this faith is not feined, nor dead, nor separate
from other virtues, nor void of good works, but it is of that nature, that it
works by love. It is therefore faith alone, which justifies, that is, which
embraces Christ's obedience wherein our righteousness consists; but yet this
faith which justifies, is never alone: for it is ever accompanied with hope,
and charity, and does not suffer it self to be disioyned from it. For as the
heat alone of the fire does set the wood on fire, and yet this heat is not
alone, but continually joined with the light: so faith alone of it self does
justify, albeit it can never be quite alone.

Now seeing that all our righteousness and happiness, do consist in the pardon of
sins, we also teach that this ought to be most certainly persuaded to us and
known of us, so as our souls may rest therein as in a most safe and quiet
haven. For being justified by faith, we have peace toward God, through our
Lord Jesus Christ. Now what could this peace be, it we were always distracted
with a doubtful hope and thoughts, and tossed as it were with waves hither and
thither about our salvation? Albeit therefore our consciences are set upon
oftentimes by many terrors, so as they cannot be so secure in this life, as if
we did already enjoy the endless joy of heaven; yet we say that this faith
ought to depend most certainly and strongly upon the promises of God, so as we
may expel all doubting about the grace of God, our adoption, and salvation.
For true faith cannot agree with unbelief. It is the property of this to
distrust Gods promises, but the property of that is to overcome and drive away
all doubting; as much as may be. But if faith be full of doubting, wherein does
it go beyond unbelief? let us believe the Apostle, who both knew very well,
and has described exactly the nature of true faith. He propounds Abraham
unto un, in whom we may behold a most notable image of true faith. What did
he? did he stagger? was he in suspense with himself? did he doubt? nay in him
al things were contrary: Romans 4.1^.
he against hope did believe under hope: he was not weak in the faith: he did
not discourse against the promise of God through unbelief: he was strengthened
in the faith: he was fully persuaded, that God which had promised, could
perform it. And this faith was imputed to him for righteousness. (...).
This was Abraham's faith: shall ours be unlike it? but he is our Father, we
his children, and children should be like their father. The conclusion is made
now against you Campian, that by faith we are DVR. You can never show out of
Gods word, that forgiveness of all sins is given to them, who apprehend the
righteousness of Christ by says. WHIT. page 618. This that you deny to be
showed in the Scriptures, is most plainly taught in them, as Ioh. 3.16. Act.
10.43. Act. 13.39. DVR. But we know not whether we be endued with true
faith. WHIT. page 620. Indeed it cannot be denied, that many are deceived with
a fained faith: but they who are endued with true faith, they do know that
they have true faith: so did Paul 2. Tim. 1.12. know for himself and in 2. Cor.
13.5. he bids other learn to know it. So a Christian may know that he has
true faith, and that by the spirit that he has given us, as 1. Ioh. 3.24.
made certain of our salvation, and that your variable and suspicious faith is
liker to infidelity than to faith. Basil. in (...).
DVR. That which you bring out of Basil and the Tridentime Catechism does
overthrow your self: and what certainty can a man have of his justification,
when as S. Paul says. 1. Cor. 4.4. I know nothing by my self, yet am I not
thereby justified. And the like has Job. cap. 9.15.20. WHIT page 622. If they
attribute to faith a most certain persvvasion without doubting, as they do, do
they not confirm our doctrine, that a man may be certain of his salvation.
For those temptations which come from the flesh, though they may shake it, yet
they cannot overthrow it. As for S. Paul does he deny himself to be
justified, does he doubt of his salvation? Read the end of the eight to the
Romans, and you shall find him so certain of his justification and salvation,
as that you Papists are glad to answer, that he had it by an extraordinary
revelation of the spirit. And do you now make him doubting of his salvation?
But you understand not Saint Paul in the place you allege: for he does not
not deny that he is justified; but he says that thereby he is not justified,
because he knovveth nothing by himself. Job also though he dare not trust to
his own works and innocence, yet he shows himself to be certain of his
own salvation. Job 19.26.
Basil says excellently: What is the property of faith? a full or certain
persuasion void of all doubting. But what mean I to convince you by
testimonies of the ancient, whom the very Catechism of Trent does confute?
Catechis. Trid. in 1. art Symb.
The word belief (says it) as the holy Scriptures teach, has the force of
most certain consent. Wherefore he believes, to whom any thing is certain
and assured without doubting. Now we believe everlasting life, therefore it
ought to be most certain and assured to us without any doubting. I require now
nothing more, the Catechism of the Council of Trent, ratified by the
authority of the Pope and Council, teaches me that a man ought to be
certain of his salvation.

But are you not yet quiet, but still question farther, for (say you) how can a
man be sure DVR. Who could ever be certain of his own perseverance to the
end, without the peculiar revelation of God? WHIT. page 626. In this speech
you cut in sunder the sinevves of Gods everlasting decree. For seeing Gods
predestination is certain and unchangeable, it does cause our calling,
justifying, and glorifying to be as certain as it self. For is it in your
power to dissolve and break in sunder that golden chain of the Apostle? Romans
8.30. and to whom can his own perseverance be doubtful, seeing God
testifies his perpetual good will toward us, as these scriptures fully teach.
Ier. 32 40. Ioh. 13. 1. Luc 22.32. Job. 17.20.21. Matthew. 21.22. Romans 8.9. Ioh.
14.16. Ioh. 10.28. Phil. 2.6. Romans 11.29. 1. Ioh. 3.9. Matthew. 24.24.
of his future perseverance? That may be certain, Campian, by faith, which if
it be true cannot utterly decay. Heb. 11.1.
The Apostle terms faith the DVR. No man ever doubted but that all those
things which we believe are most certain. But you ought to show that every
ode ought to believe that he shall persevere in that faith to his end, Saint
Paul she vveth that certain had made shipwreck of faith. 1. Tim. 1.19. WHIT.
page 627. The question is not whether things believed be certain or no: for
that the Devils do certainly know; which is as much as you Papists do
believe, by your own confession, and so you confess your selves to be void
of true faith But the faith, the Apostle speaks of, does not only believe
those things are true in themselves, but that they are partakers of them.
Therefore he says, it is the ground of things hoped for, because it enjoys
those good things which are prepared for another life by a certain and an
approved hopes and the evidence of things not seen, because it now beholds
things that are hid from our eyes. The perseverance then of the faithful is so
certain, that they may think they have the possession of those things which
they shall receive in another world. Now the faith S. Paul speaks of, is
not a justifying faith, but only true and sound doctrine, of which Hym^naeus
and Alexander had made shipvvtacke.
ground of things that are hoped for, and the evidence of things that are not
seen. Now how are those things extant which be hoped for, or demonstrated
which are not seen, if faith be not perpetual? But they which are endued
with this faith, they do now after a sort enjoy those good things, which are
yet hoped for, and they do contemplate those things, which cannot be seen with
men's eyes. So that faith admits us being alive here, and as the Apostle says,
2. Cor. 5.7.
walking by faith and not by sight, into the very possession of heaven, so as
because we are DVR. 1. Cor. 10. He that stands let him take heed lest he
fall. Phil. 2. work out your salvation which fear:the like. Heb. 4. WHIT.
page 633. 1. You have falsified, 1. Cor. 10. for Paul's words are, he that
thinks he stands let him take heed lest he fall. Wherein you go against
even your own authentical Latin translation. Blush you not at this? 2. The
very Saints themselves are diligently to be admonished, to fly carnal
security, to be ware of Satan's assaults, and to be in continual care. And yet
this hind^eth not, but that they are in the mean while most certain of their
salvation. For although Paul ( Act. 27) sailing, did not doubt a whit whether
he should come safe to land, yet he let pass nothing, which it behooued a man
careful of his safety, to care for and to do.
certain that we shall one day be there, we seem now after a sort to live
and converse in heaven. But all these things would be fading and light, if
says could not persevere. Therefore DVR Will you say that the Apostle speaks
in the person of all the elect. WHIT. page 629. The Apostle proves it,
speaking ^n their person; what shall separate us (not me only) from the love
of Christ. And again, I am persuaded that nothing shall separate us (not me
only) from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus. Therefore he speaks of
all those who are predestined.
Paul had a most certain persuasion, that neither life nor death, nor things
present, nor things to come, nor any other creature can separate us from the
love of God which is in Christ Jesus. (...) Romans 8.38.
But such as do not persevere, they may be separated: but these cannot be
separated, therefore they persevere. And for this cause the pledge of our
adoption, even the holy Ghost himself is given to us, who assures us most
certainly that we are the sons of God, so as now we do not doubt to call God
Father. Call. 4.6.
But how dare such a one call him Father, who thinks that he may be sometime
not his son? for the Saints may profess with the Apostle, 1. Ioh. 3.2.
we know that we shall be like him. Knowledge is certain, and consists on
assured principles: to doubt is the property of opinion, not of knowledge.
Hear Cyprian: Cyprian. de mortal.
Let such a man fear to die, who not being borne again of water and the
spirit, is thrall to the fire. Let him fear to die, that thinks not he has
his part in Christ's Cross and Passion. Chrysostom. cap. 5. ad Romans
Chrysostom upon these words of the Apostle, Into this grace wherein we stand,
writes thus: The grace of God has no end, it knows no full point, but it
makes progress unto greater. And anon after, says he, we must be fully
assured not only of things given, but also of things to be given as well as of
things given already. And Augustine: August. in Psalm. 88.
because therefore (says he) the promise is firm not according to our merits,
but according to his mercy, no man ought with fearefulnes to preach (the
kingdom of Christ in his Saints) whereof he ought not to doubt. But Augustine
is wholly ours. For as you did lately conclude, that Augustine did allow free
will, because he wrote three books of free will, so may I reason after the
same manner, that Augustine did think of perseverance, as we do, because he
wrote one book of the good of perseverance. To this I will join Bernard,
whose golden words these be, Bernard. in Can. Ser. 61.
My conscience is troubled, but it is not over troubled, because I will
remember the wounds of the Lord. But I will allege no more testimonies. Faith
is either perpetual, or else it is none at all: either it perseuers to the
last breath, ot else that which is esteemed for faith, is but some fancy.

As for that, that you allege touching Luther, who you say affirms, that a
Christian though he will cannot lose his salvation, unless he will not
believe, this Luther never affirmed, either in that book or any where else. For
if you shall turn over all Luthers writings, which you have not saluted, nor I
believe, so much as seen, yet you can find this sentence no where. The
Fathers of Trent have condemned this proposition and worthily: for it is
impious, and to be reckoned among the chiefest paradoxes. But whose soever it
was, certainly it was not Luthers. But, say you, Luther wrote so in his book
of the captivity of Babylon. That is false: yet he wrote some such thing. I
will tell you what it is; and that in a word. Luther reproves the Papists, for
that they thought that the grace of Baptism is quite lost by sin, and
withal they brought in Penance a new Sacrament, which they term a second
board, whereby the grace of Baptism might be recovered. Therefore he denies
that the power and grace of Baptism can so be lost by sins, but that it may
be repaired by faith; which thing he proves by many and mighty reasons. In
that therefore Luther taught, that the grace of Baptism cannot be lost,
unless one will not believe; and this the Fathers of Trent and our countriman
Campian do so interpret, as if he had said, that which these men object, that
a Christian though he will cannot leese his salvation, unless he will not
believe. Why should I confute so unsavory an imagination with more words?

You make have to the Sacraments. Of the Sacraments.
And I will pursue you as much have as you make. Now here you cry ont most
pitifully, O blessed Christ, they have left never a Sacrament, not two, not
one. Dare you appeal to Christ, whose Sacraments ye have banished with great
reproach out of the Church, that ye might bring in certain impure Sacraments
not worthy to be named? we retain those Sacraments which Christ has commended
to us: if there had been need of more, he would have left more. We have two
Sacraments, Baptism, and the Lords Supper: these Christ did institute, DVR.
Our seven Sacraments stand upon good ground and reason, and has antiquity for
them. WHIT. page 643. You should then produce some antiquity for the proof of
them; but having none, why do you so brag of it. I wonder not at your silence,
because I know that, that this number was never heard of before Hugo de Sancto
Victore, and Peter Lombard brought them into the Church: and yet for them
Lombard never gathered any testimony of ancient Fathers. Neither ever any
Council, before the Florentine Council, did approve or establish this number.
But your five bastard Sacraments, 1. Order. 2. Confirmation. 3. Extreme
Unction. 4. Penance. 5. Marriage. I prove thus to be no true Sacraments of
Christ's Church. 1. In every Sacrament is necessarily required and eleme^t or
visible matter. But that neither your Order, not Confirmation, nor Penance, nor
Marriage have, by any warrant of Scripture. 2. Those which are the proper
Sacraments of the Church Christ did institute. But Christ instituted not any
one of those five for Sacraments. 3. Sacraments belong to all Christians, But
your Order, and Marriage pertain to a few in comparison. 4. Seeing you feign
that grace lye^h hid in the Sacraments, and is by them transmitted unto men,
prove us which parts of these Sacraments do contain the grace enclosed. What
answer soever you make you will be taken napping. Therefore these five bastard
Sacraments, are no true Sacraments of Christ's Church.
these the ancient Church acknowledge, and with these the later Church ought
to have been contented. For that it is most evident, that for seven Sacraments,
for so many you hold, that not a footstep of antiquity can be found. O blessed
Christ, they have seven Sacraments, and yet they have no Sacrament, because
they have not thine. For those Sacraments which are not thine, are no
Sacraments at all. Their bread, say you, is poison, and what is our wine? but
the common people among you taste not of that at all: belike, lest they should
think that you did drink to them of a poison. We do use that bread and that
wine in the Lords Supper, which Christ himself commanded to use. That which
he delivered, we have received: that which he did, we do: in the bread and
wine we celebrate the remembrance of our Redeemer. If those were wholesome,
ours cannot be deadly. Baptism (say you) although it be as yet among them
true, notwithstanding in their judgment it is nothing. You your self confess
that our Baptism is true^ I take it for granted. But why is it true? because
we baptize so, as Christ has commanded us. We keep the law of Christ, we
throw your, I know not DVR. What is that you call trash? which of the ancient
Fathers have been. who have not made mention of our ceremonies. WHIT. page
658. Christ commanded nothing to the Church touching these trifles; and though
we read often of Baptism in the word, and of many, yet there is no word
touching any of these Shall we then think that the Church in later times has
known better, what ceremonies were fitter for the Sacrament then Christ and
his Apostles? where did ever any of them use salt, spittle, candles, etc. in
this Sacrament.
what, trash away; the like have we done in the other Sacrament, not have we
departed a nails breadth from Christ's precept. If ours be true Baptism, then
is out DVR. When bread and wine is your Eucharist (neither do you believe
Christ gave any other thing in the Supper) we leave you your Eucharist also.
WHIT. page 660. If we have true Baptism; why not the Eucharist? we follow
Christ's commandment in both. Further you falsely accuse us, who think bread
and wine to be but one part of the Sacrament, as Ireneus and antiquity has
done; and Christ his body and blood the other. But you have no Eucharist at
all, who profess you have neither bread nor wine.
Eucharist true also. But in their judgment (say you) it is nothing. Why so?
It is not the water of salvation, it is not the conduit of grace, it does not
derive the merits of Christ into vt; but only it is a signification of
salvation. All these things are feined and false. For we preach it to be the
saving water, and a DVR But Calvin denies all this, making it only a sign and
seal, by which we are assured of the grace best^^ed upon us. WHIT. page 663.
Does it follow hence that grace and remission of sin is not given unto us in
Baptism? As if by the seal of the Kings Charter some thing is not both given
unto us, and confirmed? And in Baptism this confirmation is but a more
bountiful donation.
channel of grace, and we doubt not but it deriueth Christ's merits into us. For
it does not only signify salvation, but also it performs and brings it
indeed to them that use Baptism aright and holily. For in Baptism we receive
forgiuene* of our sins, we are accepted into the family of Christ, we are
endowed with the holy Ghost, we are raised up to a most certain hope of
everlasting life. Are these matters of nothing to you, Campian? shall this
Baptism be nothing, wherein we obtain so many and so great good things? but
what manner of thing is your Baptism: or what has it more, which ours ought
to have? has it grace? or the merits of Christ? or salvation? Ours also has
these things; what then is wanting in it, why it should not be true both in
ours and others judgment? I know your meaning. It conueigheth not grace by the
work wrought. This indeed is a magical and pestilent device, that you should
think DVR. We think not so, but that it is in it, as in an instrument. And
so has Thomas taught. WHIT. page 664. Then you reject and condemn all your
old Sophisters, who have taught that grace is included in the Sacrament, as
health is in a medicine or salve. For as that does cure the disease whether he
believe or no that is sick, only if he take it: so the Sacrament does give
grace without any faith or good motion of the receiver, so he has no mortal
sin to hinder it.
grace to be enclosed in the water it self, as it were in a pipe, which
sheadeth it self forth into all men, though quite void of faith. For what
avails the Sacrament without faith, but to his perdition who receives the
Sacrament: that monster I do abhor and detest with mine whole heart. You
add, therefore they have made no more reckoning of the Baptism of Christ, then
of John's, that is, a mere ceremony. I am not ignorant what the Fathers
thought of the Baptism of John. But I heed what the Scriptures teaches, not
what they imagined. In them both there was the DVR. But Matthew. 3.11. John
baptized with water only, Christ with the Spirit. WHIT. page 669. Here is no
comparison between the Baptism, but the persons: for not John only, but not
Peter nor any Minister of the Gospel, can give the holy Ghost to those whom
they do baptize. Men give but the outward sign, it is Christ who gives the
Spirit. DVR. Why were they Act. 19 4.5. baptized again whom John had
baptized, if it be the same Baptism. WHIT. page 671. They were not rebaptised,
as Ambr^se says, de Spirit. Sanct. lib. 1. cap. 3. And the 5. verse. being S.
Paule^ words, they are to be understood not of those Ephesians, but of the
people whom John baptized. As if S. Paul had said. John taught those who came
to his Baptism to believe in Christ who was to come: and they when they heard
it, were baptized in the name of the lord Jesus. From this then can be gathered
no differenc^ of these two Baptismes.
same ceremony, the same doctrine, and the same grace. If there were any thing
unlike in these things, I refuse not to confess, that the Baptism of John and
Christ were diverse. Now John joined repentance, Mat. 3.2.1^. Luke 3.3.
which is the fruit of true regeneration, with his Baptism, and off^ed this
Baptism for the remission of sins. If the Baptism of John wanted not
repentance and remission of sins, I see not why it should be held so much
different from the Baptism of Christ. And what is the cause, DVR. Because that
Baptism did prepare men to regeneration, of which preparation Christ had no
need. WHIT. page 673. This is but your coined distinction, for the Fathers
speak and answer otherwise. Chrys^st. in 3. Matthew. not that he should receive
remission of sin by ^aptisme, but that be might leave sanctified waters for
those who should after be baptized. And August. in cat. ^ur. in 3. Matthew. Our
Savior would therefore be baptized, not that be might be sanctified, but
that he might sanctify the waters for us.
why the Fathers demand, wherefore Christ, who needed no regeneration, did come
to the Baptism of John, but because they judged that his Baptism had the
power of regeneration?

Concerning that which you annexe: If you have it, it is well: if you want it,
there is no hurt: believe, and you shall be saved before you be baptized; we
do not speak so loosely, as you imagine. For we will not have it to be in
any ones choice, to be baptized if he will, and to leave it if he will not.
Yet we do not think that Baptism is so DVR. What? If without Baptism
infants may obtain eternal life, is it not your judgments, that it is no
burt to them though they want Baptism? But Christ thought far ^therwise.
Ioh. 3.5. WHIT. page 675. It is a wicked and batbarou^ opinion to think that
they who die before they can come to Baptism, are damned. For who will say,
that the infants of the Jews, who died before the eight day did p^rish? And
when in former ages they deferred Baptism till the hour of death, did they
think it so absolute necessary? Will you say that an infant is not of the
number of the elect, because God will that he die before Baptism? if you will,
you shall be accounted bold, rash, and impious. As for the place of John.
Christ does not think that none can come into heaven, which wants the
outward Baptism. The thief was with Christ in Paradise, and yet was
unbaptized with the outward Baptism. But the truth is, by water Christ means
there the Spirit, as appears by conference of places. Matthew. 3.11. As there
fire, so here water signifies the power of the Spirit: and Ioh. 4.10.
simply necessary to salvation, that he that is not entered by Baptism, must
needs perish everlastingly. For the salvation of a Christian man consists in
the mercy of God, which is not so tied and bound to any Sacraments, DVR. God
has showed his will, Ioh. 3.5. And ^hen S. Paul makes all by nature the
Children of wrath: Ephesians. 2.3. If there be no remedy against this evil in the
Scripture, but Baptism, what can be, but that they who die without Baptism,
must needs die in the same condition? WHIT. 677. God in no place has showed
this to be his will; that they who die without Baptism, shall perish. Of the
words of Christ have ^in spoken, which if they be understood of Baptism, they
belong only to those who are of grown years. That by no other means we can
be freed from the miserable state of nature, but by Baptism, is very false.
For the Spirit of God does in and without the Sacrament, does communicate his
graces.
as that he cannot save those, whom he will not have perish, without them.
Where the opportunity of Baptism is not, Gods promise alone is abundantly
sufficient of it self. But whosoever either neglects Baptism through
heedlesnes, or boldly contemns it, him we condemn of very heinous sin. For
he does both diminish the Majesty of Christ, and also refuses his own
salvation. But he that commits neither, shall not answer for the fault of
another. Therefore very right was that judgment of Bernard, DVR. He speaks
not of infants, but of those who endued with true faith, were prevented by an
untimely death that they could not be baptized. WHIT. page 680. How truly you
speak we may judge out of the same Epistle. For he thus writes. Who is
ignorant that in former times they had other remedies against original sin;
besides Baptism? for to Abraham and his seed vt as the Sacrament of
Circumcision given to this end. But in other nations, so many as were found
faithful, we believe that they, who were of years, were sanctified by
faith and sacrifices: but the parents faith did profit their infants, yea and
was sufficient for them. If this was so before Christ, shall we think the
condition of infants is now worse?
not the want, but the contempt of Baptism is damnable. Bernard. in Epist. ad
Hugon.


In the rest that follow, as being small matters, you do but trisle. For
neither do you your self declare any thing of your own opinions, nor can you
reprove any thing in ours. But I long to know, what you think of the faith of
Infants. I suppose, you will grant that they have grace? For (say you) Baptism
conferreth grace. But will you not yield that they have faith? I wish therefore
you would teach me, to the end you may draw me wholly into your opinion, how
there can be any grace more ancient than faith. But (say you) how can they
believe, who do not yet understand whether they live or no? and do they
therefore not live, because they understand not that they live? It is absurd.
Wherefore if they live, although they do not understand they do so: DVR. But
speak plainly; if Infants have no faith, your new Evangelical doctrine,
teaching that the force of the Sacrament does depend upon the faith of the
receivers, must vanish. WHIT. page 681. I do no: think that Infants do
believe, there being neither reason nor Scripture for it. And I answer that is
not our doctrine you feign to be. We say, that to men of years without says
it is a Sacrament, but not a saving Sacrament: to children of believing
patents, though they cannot for their years believe, yet it is a saving
Sacrament, as Circumcision was to the Infants of the Jews. For we doubt not
but the Spirit of God is powerful unto them after a hidden and vvonderfull
manner. As in the examples of Jacob, Jeremy, John Baptist, and others.
happily also they do believe, albeit they perceive not that they believe.
That is hard (say you:) be it so. Nor do I speak these things, as if I were
wholly of that mind, but to the end I may fish out your mind, which our
University m^n doubtless make great account of. But let us hear Luthers
medicine: It is better (says he) to omit it, because except the Infant
believe, he is washed ^e^er a whit. But this medicine came out of your shop,
not out of Luthers. And indeed you have offered us many such like medicines,
very unsavory, and ill fauouredly seasoned: so that all your confections
seem to be corrupt. But Luther did never persuade that Baptism should be
omitted; and he was always earnest on that part, that Baptism should be given
to Infants: and therefore you are so much the more unjust in this place, in
that you would mar Luthers opinion with your medley. For these things are so
alleged by you, as if Luther said, it were better to omit Baptism. Therefore
let us hear Luther himself, and let Campians medicine alone. And yet (says
he) we deny not that Infants are to be baptized, Luther. aduers. Coc^laeum.
nor do we anow that they receive Baptism without faith: but we say, that at
Baptism they do believe by the power of the Word. He adds: Or otherwise
there would be mere and intolerable lies, when the Baptiser demands of the
Infant whether he do believe: as intending not to baptize, unless it be
answered in the child^ stead, I believe. Wherefore does the Minister ask
whether he do believe, if i^ be a certain thing that they do not believe, as
Cocleus maintains? Then he concludes thus: But we hold that Infants are not
to be Baptized, ^f it be true that they in Baptism do not believe. Luther then
maintains and determines, that little children do believe, and he reproves
the Papists, because they teach things contrary each to other, while they deny
that an Infant has faith and yet, to the end he may be baptized, they require
faith of him. Who sees not to what these things may be referred, so that he
must needs be a most malicious man, who makes Luther in these words a
perswader of so wicked an opinion?

And these things do they speak (say you) being doub^full in their own mind,
what to maintain positiuely. Howsoever some do doubt of the faith of infants,
yet we all determine clearly and positiuely that they are to be baptized.
Therefore there was no need that you should send for that Pacimentan^ dayesman,
who was always more enclining to your side than to ours. But why do you
object the Anabaptists to us, who hate us much more eagerly than you, and not
without cause? DVR. I know you do fight hotly against the Anabaptists, but
with what weapons? Calvin was glad to fly to the Tradition of the Church:
for be brought no place of Scripture against them, neither could be bring any.
WHIT. page 685. You betray the Scriptures that you may establish Traditions.
What can be spoken either more contumeliously against the Scriptures, or more
for the advantage of Anabaptists, then that this their heresy cannot be
confuted by Scripture? But are you ignorant that Calvin used Scripture to
refell this? And yet he produces these places. Genesis 17.4. Matthew. 19.13. and
28.19. which sufficiently overthrow the Anabaptists. And in the place you
allege, he rather renounceth Traditions, then flies to them for any
defense. Jast. lib. 4 cap. 16. sect. 8.
for we have both co^uicted them for heretics by our arguments, and also have
expulsed them as seditious and pernicious men out of our Commonwealths, who if
they dwelt not with you, could find no place to remain in through the
Christian world. You pass over the rest of the Sacraments, which I acknowledge
to be none at all: nor do I understand which is that beast of many heads,
whereof you make mention, unless perhaps you mean that threeheaded beast, of
which John writes many things in the Revelation.

Hitherto Campian, Of Manners.
you have examined certain opinions and positions of our men: in all which you
have found as yet never a Paradoxe. For either the things that you object are
such, as that nothing can be truer then they, or else they are craftily and
treacherously wrested by you into a perverse meaning. But now, as if you were
some new Censurer, and Master of the ancient discipline and severity, you make
search into our manners, not, I think, to make them better, but to make them
seem much worse than they be. Although he that reproves the manners of other,
it were meet that he should be without fault. And is there so great a change
made of Rome upon the sudden? is their life now such? are their manners
begun to be so goodly, that you being returned thence a Friar dare strive
with us about virtue, shamefastnes, and hon^stie? howsoever there be here many
things done which ought not to be, yet if you shall say that there is as great
impunity and licenciousnes of sins in England, as you your self have seen
at Rome, the very tower of your religion and kingdom, all men will judge you
to be too too impudent. Wherefore then do you propose to us those pieces of
faults in Luther, seeing among you not only some fragments of vices, but huge
bodies of the greatest crimes are plainly seen? surely as long as those
public stews and dens of whoores stand still in Rome, you could scarce
honestly make mention of manners. But what are these pieces of faults in
Luther? Is it for that you reprove some crime in his life? but that you neither
can do, nor go about to do. You object certain sayings caught out of his
books, and as you are wont torn from the rest of the body of the sentence;
which seem presently as soon as they be propounded by you, to make show of
some filthiness. About the most of which, seeing that you have had an answer
made you by him whom you name, Reverend Charke, I marvel that you have
returned them to us here again. There must needs be great lack of true
imputations, seeing that you have no variety at all of false ones. And seeing
that my fellow soldier and companion in Christ William Charke did labor
diligently in these things, those things which are largely enough confuted by
him, shall be run over now by me briefly and shortly. It shall be therefore
enough for me to cut in sunder these your pieces, which have been before so
broken in shiuers, as that they might seem able to hurt none.

Wherefore now spue out these your morsels of reproaches. And hear ye them: If
the wife will not, or cannot, let the maid come. A filthy and uncleanly
speech as it seems. Luther wrote a little book of marriage, in the second
part whereof he remembers three causes, whereby he thinks marriage may be
dissolved. The first is Impotencie: another is, Adultrie: the third is,
Desertion. Now he expoundes that to be desertion, when as the wilful and
obstinate wise can by no means be persuaded to perform the office of due
benouelence to the husband, for there are some such froward wives found, that
although the husband do fall ten times into whordome, yet they regard it never
a whit. Wherefore Luther thinks it fit for the husband, to fray his wife with
words, and to threaten her on this manner: If you will not, another will: If
the mistrisse will not, let the maid come. With whom if threats prevail not,
let him convent her before others, and bring the matter to the Church. But now
if she be neither moved with private threatenings, nor by the public reproves
of the Church, then, says Luther, divorce her and take Ester into Vashties
place. Only to propou^d these things in this manner, is a very evident
confutation of Campians reproach. For who does not mark what counsel Luther
gave to the husband? not that he should presently take his maid, but that he
should propose threats of divorce to his obstinate wife, and break her
stomach by that mean? Now as for this opinion of Luther about this kind of
divorce, though I do not defend, yet you cannot accuse it. DVR. You are
ignorant that with us only adultery is the cause of divorce. WHIT. page 688.
Nay you are ignorant of your own Canons, for to omit others, see what the
Tridentine Fathers decreed. If any shall say that the Church does err when
she decrees that for many causes diuo^ce from b^dde and cobabitation, may be
had either for a certain or unlimited time, let him be accursed. Do not you
now differ from your own Council, as al^o from the Apostle?
For among you there be infinite causes of divorce, so as in so great liberty
of divorce, it is marvel that any marriage stood in force. If Luther had at
any time written any such thing, as we read was written by Clement, whom you
brag to have been Pope of Rome, what tragedies would ye have raised? Hear
Campian, and I would have you mark whereto this speech tends: DVR. If you
had seen some old copies, or vvaighed the scope of the Epistle, you might
easily have seen that the place is corrupted. WHIT. page 689. I can be
content you should defend Clement, for I easily think that Clement would never
speak so dishonestly. But when you father Epistles upon ancient Bishops, such
as they never writ, God would show your perfidie by manifest demonstrations For
copies we have none whether old or new but from you; and many I have seen, and
they all have it. Yet remember that you here confess the Popes decretall
Epistles to be corrupted (why (...) forged?) which other where you
peremp^orily deny.
The common use of all things, Clement. Epist. 5.
that are in this world, ought to be to all men. But through men's naughtines
one said that this was his, and another that; and so there is a division made
between mortal men. Finally one of the wise men of the Grecians, knowing this
to be so, says, that all things among friends ought to be common. Now among
al things, without doubt are husbands and wives. You may think you hear some
Plato discoursing of the community of things: allege some like place of
Luthers. What the^ follows after in those patches of yours? For because the
carnal knowledge of the wife is as necessary to every one, as meat, and
drink, and sleep are. DVR. Tertul. de Monog. Hieron. lib. 1. contra Iouinian.
understand it only of those who are married, that they might lawfully keep
and have their wives still. WHIT page 690. That which Tertullian writ for the
heretic Montanus, that you greatly approve of. And he that knows not
Hierome to be further carried in the contempt of marriages, then the
Scriptures do allow of, he accounts the authority of Hieromes writings more
then of the Word of God. But the Apostle rejects this interpretation, for
when he commands that every man should have his wife to avoid fo^nication;
who sees not that this law concerns the vnma^ried, who are forbidden
fornication as well as the married? And after in the 9. verse he speaks to the
unmarried* If they cannot abstain, let them mar^^^: for it is better to marry
then to burn. Therefore he does not onli^ command that they who have vviues
keep them still; but that they vvh^^ have not, should marry, if they found it
necessary for them to avoid inconti^^^cie.
The Apostle commands, 1 Cor. 7.2.9
that every one for the au^iding of fornication, have his wife, and every woman
her own husband: and that they that cannot contain, should marry. They
therefore who have it not given to them by God, as that they can always be
without wives; to such it is necessary that they marry wives if they will be
honest and chaste. For I confess that marriage is not necessary for them who
may wallow without punishment in all manner of uncleanness and lust. But go
forward: Marriage is much better than Virginity, and against this, Christ and
Saint Paul persuaded Christian men. The same things do not agree to all men:
and that which is most profitable to some one, may be contrary to the
inclinations of others. Virginity is one of those indifferent things, which
are as they are used: for it is not simply good (for then it were unlawful at
all to think of marriage) but after a sort. DVR. What is this else but even
the same that Iouinian ans^vered unto Hierome and the rest of the ancient
Fathers? As Augustine shows De. Sancta Virginitate cap. 21.22.23.24. WHIT.
page 691. Whosoever will be single for this only end that he may live so much
the more (...) ^ase and in the more pleasure, and not be troubled with the
necessary cares of marriage, do deserve to be blamed with Iouinian. And this
sort of men it is that Augustine does justly reprove. For virginity is to be
desired, not simply for that end that we may ^idde and free our selves from
the necessary business and cares accompanying marriage, but to the end we may
with sitter opportunity and more conueniencie serve God, as also the Apostle
^peaketh; That you may so ^^vv that which is honest, and that you may cleave
fast unto the Lord without separation. 1. Co. 7.35. (...) DVR. Who sees not
that that is more excellent in it self, which is more difficult and hard? And
Christ says, that after this life there is no marrying at all. And S. Paul, He
that gives his virgin to marriage, does well: but he that gives her not to
marriage does better. 1. Cor. 7.38. WHIT. page 69^. I do not dispute against
holy virginity, which I acknowledge is both hard and excellent. But single life
must be distinguished from holy virginity. Very few attain this of that every
one may make choice of. But your reason is of no great force, for the hardest
things are not the most excellent. It is most hard for a man to live an hundred
years: shall we therefore think that they who live so long, are more excellent
then others? As for that in the kingdom of heaven there are no marriages, it
is not of force against us: for we speak of the state of this life, after
which, as there shall be no marriages, so no vows of virginity. In S. Paul,
better, is as much as si^^es and more commodious: for if it were su^plie
better, it were never lawful to do otherwise; which he allows. Therefore he
thus spoke not for the nature of the thing, but in respect of circumstances: as
you may see, verse. 26.28.32.35.
Thus therefore stands the matter: they that can preserve their chastity in
Virginity, they may be desirous of Virginity, and yet not absolutely, but by
reason of the troubles which for the most part accompany marriage: but they
that cannot live chaste, such must betake them to marriage, and that so as that
if they do otherwise, they infolde themselves in great sin. So that
Virginity is never, save only in some respect better than marriage, but g
marriage oftentimes is absolutely better than virginity. Surely we do think
honorably of both these estates of life: but among you virginity is
advanced, but marriage basely esteemed. Basil holds rightly, Let virginity
be honored, let not marriage be despised. I had rather you should approve
virginity by your deeds, than praise it with your words. Hieron. ad Furiam.
(...).
Why does the tongue sound out chastity, and the whole body show forth
uncleanness? For so do ye. Even as Epiphanius writes of the Origenists. You
refuse marriages, but not lust: it is not holiness, but hypocrisy that is in
honor among you. For neither did Christ nor Paul enjoin virginity to any one
that had not power to receive it. For (says Bernard) virginity is not
commanded, Bernard. de Virgin ser. 21. 1. Cor. 7.9.
but advised. Nay, they that cannot contain, are commanded to marry.
Wherefore the Apostle was not only of opinion that those ought not to keep
their virginity, but also he dissuaded them from it: nor would he have
dissuaded them from it, if Christ had persuaded them to it. Neither are these
positions proper to Luther: for all good men do both acknowledge and defend
them.

But let us hear the rest: DVR. Do you not think therefore that the devil
himself is nearest of all to grace? WHIT. page 6^6. It is devilish so to
dispute; Luther meant nothing else, but to stay men's consciences afflicted and
troubled with the greatness of sin, and to comfort them with the mercy of God
which, the greater sinner thou art, the greater is it on thee, when thou do
truly turn unto the Lord, as the Apostle says, where sin abounded, grace
abounded much more. Romans 5.20.
The more wicked that thou art, (says he) so much the nearer art thou unto
grace. The grace of Christ is sufficient not only for small sins, but also
for the greatest: nor are small offenders only invited by Christ to come to
him, but they also that are laden with the burden of their sins. Luther
exhorts thee not to go forward in sin, but that thou should not despair
of pardon. And certainly the DVR. Where learned you to call him a wicked man,
that is truly penitent for his sins? WHIT. page 697. Christ says, Luke 15.7
There shall be joy in heaven over one sinner that repents. Ask now, who
taught Christ to call him a sinner that repents him of his sins; or why do
you not quarrel with the Apostle, when he says, God justifies the ungodly.
Rom 4.5? For he that is ungodly is not justified.
more wicked that thou have been in thy life bypast, so much the more
abundant grace shall embrace thee, if thou be truly penitent for thy sins.
Romans 5.20.
For where sin has abounded, grace has ouerabounded. If you condemn
Luther, who will think that you let Paul pass free? For you have the same
action against both, since they be of one and the same judgment. What
follows? All good actions be sins; of God be severe in judgment, they are
damnable sins; if he be favorable, they be but small ones, DVR. The
Apostle S. Paul then said not truly; If thou take a wife thou sinnest not. 1
Cor. 7. Then S. Peter said not truly, 2. Pet. 1.10. For if ye do these things,
ye shall never fall. Neither said Sa^nt John truly, 1. Ioh 3.8. For this
purpose the Son of God appeared, that heo might loose the works of the
Devil. Neither did S. Paul well to compare good works to silver, gold, and
precious stones. 1. Cor. 3.12. Neither did the Prophets and Apostle^ well to
exhort us to good works. And if all our actions (though good) be sin, do
not you your selves sin vvhilest you believe to be justified by faith? For
faith is a work, seeing Christ says, This is the work of God, that you
believe. WHIT. page 698. That even our good actions are tainted with some
sin, no man can doubt, that either knows the Scriptures, or himself. As
Isay says 64.10. Now it even al our righteous actions be like unto a stinking
and filthy clout, they are surely tainted with some sin. The Prophet David
prays Psalm. 143.2. Wherefore no work, (though good) can deliver us from the
just judgment of God. And this is that which the Apostle Paul speaks Gal.
5.17. and Romans 7.21. also Job 9.2. Upon which place Gregory Moral. lib. 9.
cap. 1. thus writes. The holy man because he sees, that even all the merit of
our very virtue is sin, if by an inward judgment it be rightly judged of,
does well add etc. Here Gregory calls the merits of our virtue, that is,
our very best works, sins. And again the same Gregory cap. 14. As we have
often said, all humane righteousness is convinced to be v^righteousnes, if it be
rightly judged of. Now he that calls our rigeteousnes unrighteousness, what
says he else, then that which Luther said, That there is some sin in every
good work? This Paradoxe therefore Luther learned our of the Scriptures and
ancient Fathers. But to come to your slender reasons. If thou take a wife,
thou sinnest not. I answer here is a fallacy. For we say not to marry a
wise is sin, but that they who marry wives intermixe some sin in that
good action. And to the place of S. Peter. I say that there you use also a
fallacy: for to fall, in that place signifies to fall away wholly and
altogether from grace and salvation. For the place of S. John, we mean not
that good works are sins, but that they have some sin mixed with them. For
it follows not that silver is dross, because it has some dross mingled
with it. And Christ came not to the end there should be no sin left in his
Saints whilst they live here, but that he might take away the guilt of sin.
And what if S. Paul has compared our good works to silver, gold, or precious
stones? Know you not that even in the best metals, and in such stones there
may some dross be found? But the Apostle compares sound doctrine to these
things; than which there is nothing more precious if it be kept pure and
incorrupted. The Prophets and Apostles do well to exhort us to do good works:
but if they bid us do our duty, does it therefore follow, that we may not
commit some sin in doing thereof? Last of all touching your demand
concerning faith, you bewray your ignorance; for we are not justified by faith,
as it is a work or action of ours, for it is imperfect: but because it is as
the hand whereby we lay hold on Christ, and Christ calls faith a work either
by imitation, or because it is the work of the holy Ghost that kindles it in
our hearts.
Luther said this, and he said it truly. For in every action of a man, DVR.
Therefore no action can ever be either excellent or good. Well said Dionysius,
That that which is good, must n^edes come of a cause perfectly good. WHIT.
page 701. Is there any so dull, as to say that there is no health not soundnes
in the body at all, because there is only some thing in the body not so sound
as it should be? As for Dionysius, he speaks of that entire and perfect good
which we never attain to in this life. For as long as the flesh lusts
against the spirit, there can be no such entire good in us, proceeding from
entire and perfect causes.
though never so excellent, there is some fault, which may wholly mar the
action, and make it odious to God, if that which is done be weighed in the
balance of divine justice. But after that the Lord has received us wholly to
favor in Christ, those things which are but begun in us, and besprinkled with
some blots, DVR. What a monstrous speech is this? Is it possible that even
sins should please God? WHIT. page 702. Can you put no difference betvveene
the corruption of the action, and the action it self? A good father loves the
obedience and duty of his son, which he knovveth nevertheless is not such
as it ought to be, and how much more does God accept the slender and vveake
endeavors of his children?
yet they please him as if they were entire and pure, because he looks upon
our persons, and he does not make search into the worth and merit of the work.
These things spoke Luther and confirmed them by the sentences of sacred
Scriptures and holy Fathers: which you could much more easily pass by than
confute. Go forward. No man of himself thinks evil. This is maliciously
objected, as are all the rest. God does throw into no man an evil thought, he
compels the will of none to sin: yet nothing is done by chance or
fortune: and in the very sins of men the providence of God rules. Those
thoughts of men which are evil, spring out of a certain inbred naughtines
proper to every one: and yet the Lord can apply them to his own will. For so
Joseph answers his brethren: Ye thought evil against me, but the Lord turned
it to good. Genesis 50.20.


Now you add: DVR. Then why ansvvered Christ the young man in the Gospel
with this, keep the Commandments? And how do thieves and adulterers sin?
or how is it a sin now to omit the duties of the moral Law, more then to
omit offering up of sacrifices? WHIT. page 703. That which Christ ansvvered to
the young man Matthew. 19.17. may well be said unto you. For you seek
righteousness by the Law: wherefore keep the Law if you will enter into
life. But here you shall find no way to enter. Luther nor any of us, ever
denied that the Law pertains unto Christians. For the righteousness of the
Law is eternal, and every man ought with all endeavor to frame his life
according to the same. But it is one thing to be bound by the Law, and
another thing to conform and fr^me our lives by the rule of the Law. Wherefore
thieves do sin, and are justly punished; and much more they that establish
the ceremonies of Moses Law, which are wholy abrogated.
The decalogue belongs not to Christians. God does not care for our works.
Touching the decalogue and works, this answer I make you briefly. In the law
the old covenant is contained; Do this and live: Gal. 3.10. Deuteronomy. 27.26
DVR Moses denounces not the curse against the breaches of every small
precept, but to those only, which he there reckons up: which were
certainly very heinous sins. WHIT. page 708. If that curse be only proper to
those, who are guilty of the sins there numbered and set down, what shall
we then think of blasphemers, adulterers, and of other horrible malefactors?
are they free from this curse? if this be impious and absurd, then must it be
understood of all, even as many as do transgress the Law. And so S. Paul
interprets the place, who undoubtedly understood the meaning of Moses better
then all Jesuits. For he instructing the Galathians, as concerning the justice
of the Law, proves by this testimony, Gal. 3.10. that none can be justified
by the works of the Law, but he that continues in all things. Either then
deny that any law was written touching small offenses, or else confess that
that curse belongs to the least offenses. If the Apostle had understood it
as you do, the Galathians might have ansvvered him, that they were free from
those great sins, and so from the curse, and therefore might well hope to
be justified by the Law. Finally if Gal. 3.13. Christ has freed us from the
curse of the Law, shall we think that this is only, from the curse due to a
fevv grievous sinners? I hope by this time, you see the error of your
interpretation, which you have sucked from your corrupt masters.
Cursed is every one that continues not in all things which are written in the
book of the law to do them. The law promises life to them, which obey the Law
in all things: they that offend in any thing, to them it threatens death and
damnation. DVR. Yet Christ Math. 11.30. says, My youke is easy and my burden
light. And S. John. 1. Epist. 2.4. Ho that says, I know him and keeps not
his Commandments, is alayr. WHIT. page 705. S. Ioh. 1. Epist. 5.3.4.
expounds the speech of Christ, His Commandments are not grievous: For all
that is borne of God, overcomes the world: and this is the victory that
overcomes the world, even our faith. This yoke then to those who have faith
seameth not grievous, because they are inflamed with the love of Gods Law,
neither fear they the curse of it because they are ingrafted by faith into
Christans for the place of S. John, I answer; they are said to keep the
Commandement^, who do their best enendeuour to keep them. If any do think
that he so keeps them, that he is without all sin, that is, that he
perfectly keeps them, S. John calls him a liar, 1. Ioh. 1.8.
An hard condition, and which no man can ever satisfy. Christ does propose to
us another condition much easier: Mar. 16.16.
Believe and thou shall be saved. By this new Covenant the old DVR. If it be
abrogated, how are we not freed from the obedience of it? If God require only
that you believe; then by believing you fulfill the Law, and so have not only
an imputed, but an inherent righteousness. WHIT. page 614. I say not, that the
Law is simply abolished, but in some respect. Therefore it will not follovv
that we are freed from the obedience of it. Again, we say not, that faith
fulfilleth the Law, as if it did perform perfect obedience to it, but because
it lays hold on Christ, who is the end and perfection of the Law, and on
his righteousness. Therefore is it not an inherent, but an imputative justice.
is abrogated; so as whosoever believes the Gospel, is freed from the
condition of the Law. Gal. 5.18. Romans 6.14.
For they that DVR. Christ says not as you write, but He that believes and
is baptized shall be saved, Now they who are baptized, have received from God a
good will to keep the whole Law, which they determine afterward by the grace
of Christ to observe. WHIT. page 715. The words of Christ confirm as ^^ch as I
brought them for. For Baptism is not a work of the Law, but a wale of faith.
And Christ shows that our salvation consists only in faith. And though the
baptized frame theirliues according to the rule of the Law, and are endued with
new wills and new strength, yet they do it not with that mind to justify
themselves by their obedience before the Lord. Then should they lose the
righteousness of faith, which does not consist in our merits and good works,
but is such as the Apostle describes Romans 4.5.
believe are not under the Law, but under grace. What needs many words? DVR.
This is your new Divinity, that we should be freed from the curse of the
Law, which we cannot fully obey, when as Christ at the last shall
pronounce the curse against those who have not obered And Christ (as S. Paul
says) has freed us from the curse, because by his death be ^ath deserved
grace for us, whereby we may keep the Law. WHIT. page 713. This is your
ignorance in Divinity. For who is ignorant of that, which the Apostle affirms
plainly, Gal. 3.13. that Christ has freed us from the curse of the Law?
Though then we cannot fully keep the Law, yet being ingrafted into Christ, and
he communicating his righteousness unto us, we escape the curse of the Law.
At the last day it is no marvel if Christ pronounce the curse of the Law
against the reprobates, who never were freed from the cursle. And if Christ
by his death brought us grace to keep the Law, why might not the Galathians
have kept the Law, and obtained righteousness by it? But the Apostle shows
them, that Christ took the cursle, because he took both the sin and the
punishment upon him, and not that thereby he procured the^ grace to fulfill the
Law.
Christians are delivered from the curse of the law, but not from the obedience
of it. As for our works, surely God regards them: and if they be good, he
rewards them: if contrary, he judges them worthy of punishment: DVR. Jn
those who are justified, God much respects their works, as in Abraham Iam
2.21. and 1. Ioh. 3.7. And in Phinehas, Psalm. 106.31. his work imputed for
righteousness. WHIT. page 716. To the places of Saint James and Saint John you
have been ansvvered before. The fact of Phin^ha^ proceeded from faith, and so
the praise of it to be given to faith, not to the work. If you accounted of
Th^mas, as you make show of, your judgment would be sounder in these things.
For thus he vvriteth on Galat. 3. Works are not the cause that any one is
just before God. but they are aff^ctes and manifestations of righteousness.
Neither Luther, not any of us say any more.
but in justifying of us, God has no respect to our works: DVR. The Prophet
says not that a man is just, because be beleeneth, but that be who is just,
does live by his faith, that is, does uphold himself by his faith, and
sainteth not. It is as absurd to be just by another man's justice, as to live by
another man's life. WHIT. page 716. I could admit of your exposition, but that I
am persuaded the Apostle understood the Prophers mind beuer then you. For the
Apostle has used it to prove, that we are justified by faith, and not by the
works of the Law: no not by those which are wrought after faith; for thus he
reasons, Gal. 3.11. That (...) man is justified by the Law in the sight of
God, it is evident, for the just shall live by faith. And the Law is not of
faith. What has he concluded but that you demi? that is, that the Prophet has
said, that a man is justified, because he believes. So Chrysast in Gal. 3.
shows that says justifies by the testi^^^nie of the Prophet Abakuk. Which
if it were not, what concerns it the Galathians, who were endued with
faith, and joined their works with their faith. If it be absurd to be just
by another man's righteousness, I pray you tell me, how the Scripture calls
Christ both the curse and sin? As for us we had rather be absurd with the
holy Ghost, then wise with you.
for the just shall live, not by his works, but by his faith. Now go on. DVR.
Then where is your faith which assures you of the remission of your sins,
and quiteth all your troubled thoughts? But holy men diligently prepared
themselves, and so came to this Sacrament. having quiet minds, free from guilt
of sin. And in the Primitive times they who had fallen, were not admitted to
the Eucharist, but after confession and full satisfaction made for their sins.
And then a Deacon was wont to cry. Holy things are for holy men. WHIT. page
718. You have not tasted what true faith is, if you think all sorrows and
doubts are removed, so soon as faith is begotten. The Prophet often remembers
his sorrows, Psalm. 42.5.6. and 32.4. And this all the faithful have
experience of, and yet are vpheld by their faith. They are the best prepared
who have the greatest sorrows for their sins, and in the word and Sacrament
seek a salve for them. For wherefore was the supper ordained, but to
strengthen and confirm our faith. Therefore the best prepared have many
temptations and sorrows in themselves. The custom of the Church proves
nothing against this. For will you account them wicked and profane, whose
consciences are frighted with the sense and bitter sorrows for their sins?
So shall you wickedly condemn the most holy servants of God.
Only they do rightly receive the Lords Supper, who bring sorrowful, afflicted,
and confounded consciences. And so it is indeed, for they are no right
receivers, who trusting to their own merits come audaciously, but they who
heing opprested with the greatues of their sins, Psalm. 51.19.
do desire to be eased. For they which are whole desire not the Physician. A
contrite and broken heart is an acceptable sacrifice to God. wherefore they
which have greatest feeling of their sins and sorrow for them, to them that
heavenly food is wont to be most wholesome. Good Lord, who would ever think
it might come to pass, that any Christian should dislike these things! But is
there any thing else? DVR. Who knows not that the Nouatians were condemned
of the whole Church for denying this authority to the Priests? And that it
was an old custom of the Church, as Tertullian has it, that penitentials
were sent to none but to the Priests: to whom, as Ambrole, Hierome, and
Chrysostom writ, the keys and power of binding and loosing are committed.
WHIT. page 720. That you speak of the Nouatians and the custom of the Church
touches not Luther, for they admitted neither repentance not confession in the
Church: did Luther ever any such thing? or did he ever reprove the custom of
the Church, that they who had offended publicly, did publicly testiue their
repentance. It was a private auricular confession of all sins which he
reproved, which is without testimony either of Scripture of sincere
Antiquity: which made Nectarius Bishop of Constantinople put it out of the
Church for the offense of a Deacon. For the Fathers by which you would
establish your keys, we have against them Augustine in Joan. tract. 124. and
Theophil in Matthew. 18.
You may confess you sins, but to any body, DVR. What is then more
manifest then that he may give a Sacrament which never intended (...)? We
believe that Priests as Judges can absolve the guilty from their sins. WHIT
page 722. When as faith depends upon no man's will, and faith brings
remission of sins, another man's will cannot hinder, but that they who believe,
may have the pardon of their sins For that to the Centurion, Mat. 8.13. is to
eu^ry man* As thou beleeuest, so b^^t ^^to thee, and not as another will. If
absolution were then in the Ministers will, it should not be as men believe,
but as their Minister thinks: than which nothing can be more abs^^d. What
skilleth it, whether the Minister be in ^est or earnest? if I believe
seriously his jest shall not hurt me. And what is more mi^erable, then to ba^g
the dignity of the Sacrament upon the thought and intention of the Minister?
which if it were true of Sacraments, yet what is that to absolution, which
never was a Sacrament? whereas you say you believe that the Pries^^ do absolve
men, as Judges do, I do not find fault with it. And such ^u^ges are they, as
Priests under the Law were of diseases. The chief Pr^^st judged of the
Leprosy, which he neither inflicted nor cured. So the Minister does pronounce
and judge all believers to be absolved, and the contrary upon the wicked and
unbelievers.
who if he do absolve you but in jest, so as you believe, you are absolved. And
why not? for it is not need full, either to number sins by our fingers, or to
use a Priest or a Friar, such a one as your self. Iam. 1.16. 1. Ioh. 1.9.
We may confess our faults one to another, so as Friars may be idle hereafter.
And whosoever believes that his sins are forgiven him, him says it self
absolues, whether he be absolved in jest or in earnest.

Well, make haste. To read prayers by the hour, belongs not to Priests, but
to lay me^. What your Priests do, or what they think they ought to do, it
concerns me not. Let them read, let them pray, let them say Mass, let them
drink, let them play, and in a word, let them be always like themselves. It
behooves a Minister of the Gospel not to recite certain Collects by an
houre-glasse, and to make his walk in them certain spaces of hours, but to
give daily diligence unto reading, 1. Tim. 4.13
exhortation, and doctrine; which things your Priests have ever thought to be
far different from their office. But these same prayers by the hour albeit
they do not ill agree to your sacrificing priests, who unless they should
spend the time on this fashion, would never go out of Stews and Tauernes, yet
are they unworthy of a Christian man, because of their infinite DVR. Js it
superstition to sing Psalms unto God, to pray for remission of sins, and
other temporal and spiritual graces, and to perform other exercises of
religion? who knovveth not, that Christians had their night Psalms? that the
Hymns of Ambrose were at set times. In the Acts we read, that Peter and John
went into the Temple at the ninth hour of prayer. WHIT. page 726. These
things I reproved not as superstitious and impious, but that all the time,
which should be bestovved in instructing the people, should be spent in saying
their daily appointed hours, specially in that tongue which not the people,
and often times not the Priest himself does understand. No man is ignorant
that Christians had their night hours, but it was because they might not
assemble themselves in the day time: will you keep this custom, and not be
accounted superstitious? The Hymns of Ambrose are full of piety, and sarre
from superstitious chaunting As for the Apostles, they went not up to
sacrifice nor to keep Canonical hours, but to instruct the people who came
thither to the evening sacrifice in great multitudes.
superstition. Let us hear the rest. Christians are free from the laws of
men. That never came into Luthers mind, to pluck in pieces the authority of the
Magistrates, which he did always defend most diligently against the
Anabaptists. DVR. It they be bound to obey, how are their consciences free
from the religion of them? Jf was a humane law, Act. 15.20. touching,
strangled and blood. And Romans 13.2.5. and 1. Pet. 2.13.13. WHIT. page 730. To
the first I answer, that some things may be done, whereunto we are not bound
in conscience: we must ^bey humane and politic laws, because they are
necessary for peace and public tranquillity. Yet we must distinguish humane
laws from Divine. For the Laws of God must simply be obeyed without any
difference of time, place and circumstance: but the laws of men as he
circumstances require. For example, he that is a Roman and lives at Rome must
obey the Roman laws? If he go into Persia, he is not bound to keep there
the Roman lavvea upon any necessity. Then they bind not the conscience, for
then should they in all places bind alike. 2. That Law of the Apostles did not
simply bind the conscience, but in respect of the weak brother lest he
should be offended: whom the law of God binds not to offend. Again this
was the law, not of me^, but of the spirit of God. 3. For the places of S. Paul
and S. Peter, I answer, the Apostles does not ensnare the conscience with
every particular precept of the Magistrate, but they speak of his authority,
which is sacred and holy, and cannot with any good conscience be contemned. It
is the commandment of God, that we obey Magistrates, and this does bind the
conscience: in general therefore he is to be obeyed for conscience sake; but
his particular laws do not bind the conscience. Again, when we observe their
particular laws, we do not so stand upon the precepts, as if doing of them
would quiet the conscience and satisfy it: but we look to the end, that is,
the will of God, which commands obedience to honest and just laws.
Christians are free, not that they may obey no laws, and live only to
themselves, but that they may understand that their consciences and minds are
freed from making the laws of men to be religion. The Pope of Rome has bound
the consciences of Christian men with his Decrees and Canons, and thereby has
laid such a snare upon their minds, as that they might think they are no less
bound by the Popes Canons, then by Christ's precepts. Therefore Luther freeth
Christian liberty from those evil opinions wherein it had been infolded, and
brings it into that state in which Christ would have it to be, that we should
acknowledge him only to be the Lord of our conscience, and that we should obey
the laws of men with a free conscience. We are now at length come to the
bottom of this puddle, which although you have stirred with all your
diligence, yet you have not found so much as one paradoxe, or a piece of a
paradoxe of ours. But now if I would but a little make search into the most
filthy puddles of your writers, as to reckon up what they have affirmed, of
God, of the Providence of God, of Predestination, of the Person and Offices of
Christ, of Original sin, of the Law, of Righteousness, of the Sacraments, of
Purgatory, of the Pope of Rome, and of the rest of the greatest controversies
in Religion, how many Carts should I fill with paradoxes, horrible to be
spoken, or thought? But it is better not at this time to stir this common
Sewre: and otherwhere (I hope) occasion will be given to speak hereof. Now in
that you would join the Lutherans and Zwinglians together, therein surely you
have not offended us, for we both reverence Luther as a father, and we embrace
them as very dear brethren in Christ. And verily we hope it will come to
pass, that this controversy, which is between us being compounded, we shall
all with joint minds and studies set upon the common enemy. As for that you
say touching your self, I am easily persuaded to think it to be true, whether
it be that you speak it heartily or sainedly. For what (I beseech you) have you
alleged, for which we should not rather think you to be some Rhetorical
Actor upon a Stage, then a learned and experienced Divine? Campian, if you be
wise, be quiet, for (believe me) you cannot endure the force and violence of
this combat. Let those choice and old soldiers put themselves into the camp,
who are, if not more bold to provoke, yet more wary to avoid blows, and much
more skillful in all discipline of war. To enter combat with these, both the
Universities have many worthy men, and I trust there will never want excellent
Divines to wage perpetual war with the broken bands of Antichrist.

EDMUND CAMPIAN. The ninth Reason, which is the Adversaries Sophismes.
IT is an ancient Proverb, that a pore-blinde man may be a King amongst the
blind. Amongst the ignorant sort of people many times a colored argument
takes place, the which the Philosophers school does hiss at. The This is
false: you can produce none of our sophismes: and those you speak of are
yours, not ours
Adversary herein much offends, but namely in four kinds of fallaces he is
well practiced, which I had rather disclose in the University schools, then
in the common streets, whither only rude people do resort. The first fault is
called Schiamachia, Schiamachia.
which is a forcible striking of the air, and beating of shadows on this
sort, against those that are single and have Those oaths and vows are taken
and made against the scriptures.
sworn and solemnly vowed to live in Chastity, because Marriage is good, but
Virginity is better. They bring scriptures that speak very Marriage is
honorable in all conditions of men, therefore in Ministers.
honorably of Matrimony: 1. Cor. 7.
Whom do they pierce with their darts? Against the All he can do are his
duties, therefore there can be no merits.
merits of a Christian man dipped in Christ's blood, without the which there is
no merit at all. They recite testimonies, which command us to put our affiance
neither in nature nor in the law, but in the blood of Christ; whom do they
confute? Against those that honor Saints, as the most acceptable servants of
Christ, there are vouched whole pages of scripture, which prohibit the They
who worship many Saints, worship many Gods. Papists worship many Saints
ergo.
worshipping of many gods? Such Arguments as these, which I see swarm amongst
the Adversaries, cannot hurt us, well may they be loathsome unto you.

The second fault is Logomachia, Logomachia.
which is a leaning of the matter it self, and contentiously to strive about a
bare word. Find if thou can (say they) this word Missa, 1. Mass, or
Purgatorium. 1. Purgatory in the scripture. What if I cannot? Is there not a A
most foolish and unjust comparison.
Trinity, a consubstantiality, or the person of God to be proved out of the
Bible, because these words Trinitas 1. a trinity, Homoousios, 1. of the same
substance, Persona, 1. a person be not there found? Of great alliance to this
fault is Literarum aucupium, when neglecting the common usage and true meaning
of the speakers, which is the very life of the word, they cavil against the
bare letters. For thus they argue: Presbyter 1. a Priest, is nothing else in
Greek but Senior, 1. an Elder. Sacramentum 1. a Sacrament, signifies all kind
of mystery. But S. Thomas herein as in all other matters says most wisely,
that in words we must mark not so much from whence, as to what purpose they
are spoken. The third fault is Homonymia, Homonymia.
which they most commonly use, as when they say to what purpose was the order
of Here is no Homonymy, for there are now no Priests in a Christian Church.
Priesthood instituted, seeing that S. John has called us all Priests? Esaias.
48.
So has he also added this, We are all Kings and shall reign upon the earth.
Wherefore then were Kings ordained? Again, they say, the Prophet bids us
observe a spiritual feast, that is, that we should refrain from our old
sins: Farewell all Campian places fasting in the choice of meats, and
observation of days, which in mere Iudaisme.
change of meats, and prescript times of fasting. Is the matter so indeed?
Then Moses, David, Helias, S. John Baptist, and the Apostles were stark
fools, who ended their fasting from usual food after two days, three days,
and certain weeks, whereas their fast from sin should have endured so long
as they lived. What this fallacy is you have now seen, I have forward. The
fourth fault added to this, Circulatio.
is Circulatio, a going about the bush in this manner: Tell me (I say to one of
them) the true marks of the Church. He answers the word of God, and the
purest ministering of the Sacraments. Are these marks to be found amongst you,
say I? who doubts of that, says he? I utterly deny it. Then quoth he peruse
the word of God. I If you had consulted with the word of God, you should
easily have perceived that it was so: but you consult with the Church of Rome
and not with the word.
have already perused it, and I think worse of your side then I did before.
Tush, says he for all that the matter is most plain; prove me that, say I:
because (says he) we swerve not a finger breadth from the word of God. Where
is thy sharp wit thou braggest of? Will thou still for thy proof infer that
which is in controversy? How often have I blamed thee for this. Will thou not
awake out of thy dreams. Must thou have a torch lighted that thou may see to
speak? I tell thee once again, that thou do maliciously misco^strue the
word of God. I have for my witnesses fifteen hundred years. Stand to the
judgment, neither thine nor mine, but of these 1500. years. I will stand,
says he, to the judgment of the word of God. Job. 3.
The spirit does breath where he lists. Behold what roundabouts he fetches,
what round rings he treads. I know not to whom this iester and coyner of so
many waste words and foolish fallaces may be a terror; troublesome peradventure
he will be: may it please your wisdoms to tolerate his troublesomnesse; as
for the fear, the cause it self has already quite taken away.

WILLIAM WHITAKERS. The answer to the ninth Reason, which is the Adversaries
Sophismes.
IT is a goodly thing that Sophisters complain of fallacies, and that you, who
your selves are altogether compact of fraud, lies, and impostures, do vpbraid
us with Sophistry. All your Divinity, which ought to be honest and sincere
without deceit and fraud, has of late degenerated into a subtle fleight of
disputing like Schoole-boyes and Sophisters: for after that you had abandoned
true Divinity out of the Churches, and as it were exiled the light from men's
eyes, then you began at last to put forth curious questions in the Schools;
and so, as pore blind men, to be admired of those who saw nothing. Hence arose
that innumerable army of Sophisters, who confounded themselves with their
refined idle disputes, as with mutual wounds, in so much as who so could best
skill of counterfeit and captious trifling conclusions, he should be reputed as
some King or petie God over those blind and squint-eyed smatterers in
Divinity. And this hope of domineering amongst so many blind ones has egged
on you Jesuits thus diligently to dwell upon this craft, and to put down all
the ancient Sophisters for deceit and fraud, your selves being yet but
vpstarts: For if there were ever any kingdom of pore-blind men over the starck
blind, questionless it is now wholly descended unto you, to whom the ancienter
orders of Monks and Friars do willingly yield the garland, because they think*
you see something. Play your prizes now you noble Sophisters, and execute with
all diligence the Sophistical dominion which you have gotten, lest some
hereafter happily sleely dispossess you of this honor: for shortly some one or
other new family and sect of Sophisters will gather strength, which (if you
look not well about you) will at last shoulder and shuffle you violently out
of place, and enter upon this sovereignty over the school of Sophistry,
which now for some years you have possessed. For out of doubt, kingdoms
themselves entitled upon pety sleights and deceiptfull conueiances of words,
cannot long continue. Seeing therefore this your whole show of new learning
consists in furbushing up of untruths, and refining the former Sophistry,
verily I make no question, but as it is of yesterdayes building, so it will
shortly fall to ruin.

But for as much as you mention certain Sophismes as ours, and persuade your
favorites that we use very much sophistry; before I answer to these your
falsehoods which you lay to our charge, I will give the reader a taste of your
own most notorious false-grounded DVR. Our Ancestors, otherwise most wise
men, having not alvvaies to deal with wilful spirits, did not strictly stand
upon exact form of teaching. WHIT. page 734. The cause is the more desperate
when such wise me^ could find no better arguments to maintain it, but such as
even your self confess to be but weak: and both their hearers were then too
credulous to believe, and you are now ridiculous to defend such loose arguments.
disputations, and deceiptfull Elenches; that so, Pvralogismis and Elenchis.
whether you or we be more truly to be termed Sophisters, the School and
University it self may determine betwixt us, where you desire rather these
things should be discussed, then amongst the vulgar. I for my part do appeal
unto this school of Philosophers, and University of Divines; and I earnestly
beseech all men who have understanding in the principles either of Divinity or
Logic, and as many as ever tasted of any Schoole-learning, that they will
heedfully observe how current these your conclusions be, and examine them by
the rules of right and true disputation.

And indeed to choose, I will there begin, where you your self have made an
entrance. We maintain, that it is lawful for Ministers of the Gospel, and
for Deacons, to be married. You skorne the arguments whereby we make it good.
Wherefore let us consider what goodly stuff is brought on your side for the
contrary.

Pope Innocent, the second of that name, Distinct. 82 Proposuisti. Romans 8.8.
thus concludes (you must suppose) by divine inspiration against these
marriages: They which are in DVR. Pope Innocent spoke of Priests, who had vowed
single life of their own accord, but afterward yielded to lust. WHIT. page
735. Nay he spoke that of all Deacons and Priests, for he says further (
Distinct. 82. cap. proposuisti) It is not lawful to admit them to holy
offices, which use carnal company ^ith their wives, because it is written,
^^e ye holy, for (...) the Lord your God am holy: for then he esteemed
marriage duty to be an unholy thing in it self; not in respect of their vow,
of which he speaks not a word.
the flesh cannot please God: Tit. 1.15.
Unto the pure, al things are pure, but unto them that are defiled and
unbelieving, is nothing pure. Be ye holy, because I the Lord your God am holy.
And because S. Paul permits married people (by consent) to sleep apart for
a season, to the end they may more conveniently give themselves to fasting and
prayer; Distinct. 31. Tenere.
here hence the Pope gathers, that this is much more DVR. This argument is
good and can have no show of error. For, above all men, a Priest must be
chaste, says Origin, Homil. 6 4. in Leuit. Also Jerome and Ambrose, and
Epiphanius taught the same WHIT. page 736. Yea you er^e and mistake S. Paul in
theree things: 1. What he wrote to all Christians, you expound of Laymen only.
2. He speaks only of extraordinary fasts and prayer, but you apply it unto
all sorts thereof. That the Apostle speaks of extraordinary, appears, 1.
Because he has joined fasting with them, 1. Cor. 7.5.2. Because Christ and his
Apostle have commanded all to pray continually, and so all ought to l^ue a
single life. 3. From a short abstinence of Laymen, you childishly would prove
a perpetual single life to be necessary for Ministers. You abuse also Origens
words, (and play the heretic) as if chastity were contrary to matrimony;
whereas the Fathers of the Nicene Council, consented to Paphnutius, who said
openly, that society with a lavvfull wi^e, is chastity: Socrates lib. 1. cap.
11. Jerome indeed disputed too sophistically against matrimony, seeking victory
more then verity, as himself confessed. Ambr^se and Epiphanius dissuaded
Ministers only from second m^^riages, allowing their first.
to be done of Priests, whose office is to pray always, and to offer that
daily sacrifice. Distinct. 28 Decernimus
Last of al, seeing they must be a temple of the Lord, and an oratory of the
spirit, DVR. Tertullian used this same argument against second marriage. WHIT.
page 739. Tertullian therein erred with Montanus, (as all the learned know)
condemning second marriages, of uncleanness, not only in Ministers, but in all
Christians: yet he himself being a Priest, was married, and lived with his
wife, continuing his Ministry: so that he neither judged marriage to be
uncleanness, nor unlawful in Ministers, simply; but only second marriages.
they ought not to abase themselves with bed-pleasures and uncleannesses. Now
out of all these he concludes that which he propounded, that Deacons and
Priests are flatly forbidden to marry. Harding and Dorman and others.
If these things be absurdly disputed, let us hear others. Several Pastors
have rule over several flocks: DVR. The Pope challenges no Lordship over the
Churches, but professes himself the seueruant of Gods servants. WHIT. page
740. But his dee^s bewray his tyranny: for he prescribes, commands,
threatens, punishes, and does whatsoever any Lord can do. DVR. You can
dispro^e this consequent by no argument. WHIT. page 741. It is an absurd
argument, like these; Every several man has one head; therefore all men must
have one head: Every several flock has his shepherd; therefore all flocks
must have one to rule them. Again: no one man can possibly teach and feed the
whole Church with the Word and Sacrament as a faithful Pastor should, and may
do in a particular Church Christ only can thus feed al particular Churches,
which can never be made one visible body, and therefore can have none but
Christ the general head and Pastor over them. DVR. Jerome, Cyprian, and
Ireneus, have written the same we do. WHIT. page 742. Not one of them. First,
Jerome defends the superiority of one Pastor in the Church, not as a matter
of accessitie, but of conueniency, to prevent schisms: and says, that the
Church is founded upon all the Apostles alike, and that every one equally has
received the keys of the kingdom of heaven; even in that place where you
quote him: (against Iouinian, lib. 1.) Secondly, Cyprian concludes only, that
there should be but one Pastor in one Church and never thought upon the Popes
primacie; but says plainly, that every particular Bishop has all whatsoever
any one has by right; in the same book which you allege, of the Churches
unity. Lastly, Ireneus called the Roman, the chief Church, not for any
superiority, but because she excelled all others in constancy, largenes, fame,
and soundnes of faith.
therefore the Pope ought to have dominion over all Churches. Christ said to
Peter feed my sheep; DVR. It is manifest by this place, that Christ gave
greater authority of feeding to Peter, than to the other Apostles, and so made
him head of all his Church. WHIT. p. 744. It will not follow upon this place,
that Peter had greater authority to feed, or that he only must feed all: for
he said to them all alike, Matthew. 28.19. Go ye, teach all nations: and Job.
20 21. As the Father sent me, so I send you: Therefore he spoke so often then
to Peter, to confirm him after his grievous fall, that he might not doubt of
his Apostolical calling, as says Augustines treatise on John 123. so that it
no whit concerns the Pope.
therefore Peter is the chief and principal Pastor of the Church. The Lord
made two great lights, the Sun, DVR. The Pope uses this as a similitude to
amplify, not as an argument to prove by authority. WHIT. page 746. This is
an idle shift; a similitude is an argument, and Johannes Andraeas would prove
hereby, that the Pope excels the Emperor in dignity, seventy times seven
degrees.
and the Moon: therefore the Pope excels the Emperor in honor and
greatness. Here are two swords; therefore the DVR. We gather nothing hence, but
what Bernard did: saying, This sword ( of temporal power) is thine also,
happily at thy command, though not to be drawn with thy hand: speaking to the
Pope. WHIT. page 747. Duraeus is ashamed of this sophisme, bu^ yet he fathereth
it upon Bernard, which also Johannes a Capistrano (of the Pope and Councels, p
77.) and others of them have handled* and Pope Boniniface girt himself with a
sword in sign hereof: but this place speaks nothing at all for any such
power.
Pope must bear both swords. The servant is not above his master: therefore
DVR. What Catholic ever taught, or wrote thus? howbeit the Fathers of the
Sinuessan Council said. The chief seat is judged of no man. WHIT. page 749.
Thus you will make the Pope no Catholic who says ( Did. 40. si P^pa) The
Pope may be reproved of no mortal man, though he lead with him innumerable
people unto hell. And who knows not these two pillars of Popery; the Church
of Rome cannot err, whatsoever it teaches: and the Pope may not be accused
whatsoever ^e does? The Bishops of the Sinuessan Synod spoke to Marcellinus
the Pope, who had denied Christ, and committed Idolatry, and might be accused
by the Popes own laws, so that in citing that authority, you contradict both
your self and your laws.
it is lawful for no man to accuse or reprove the Pope. Christ prayed that
Peter's faith should not fail him: DVR. Christ made Peter his Vicar on earth,
and by his prayer obtained that his Vicars faith might not fail; by force
vvherof the Pope cannot err: as Augustine and Cyprian also perceived. WHIT
page 750. It is not true that Christ made Peter his Vicar, nor does it follow;
Peter's faith failed not, therefore no Popes faith has failed, who are his
successors: for Popes have done, and may fall into heresies, as you will
confess; and may err in faith, says Pope Boniface ( D^st 40. Papa:) which he
could not do it this argument of yours were true. Further Christ prayed for
all his Apostles, and the whole Church: shall we say Christ's prayer was less
effectual for the rest then for Peter? If it be not, then none of their
successors could err no more then Peter's: which I suppose you will not
affirm. And Augustine, and Cyprian never reasoned as you do; you abuse their
names.
therefore the Pope cannot err. The vulgar people comes seldom and
negligently to the Lords Supper: DVR. If you believed the Prophet Malachie, or
the Mass, you would confess this argument to be good. WHIT page 753. You can
never prove your Mass by the Prophet Malachie, who speaks of the prayers of
the godly, as Tertullian, Eusebius, and Jerome expound him: and if the Mass
were a sacrifice indeed, (as you call it) the peoples negligence, is no
sufficient cause to make it private, and yet to profit the people, yea though
they be absent: you may as well abuse the Word it self so; and say it is enough,
when it is in public, it the Priest handle it and hear it, and believe it
alone, yet the people being absent and not dreaming of any such thing, may be
saved by it.
therefore the Priest may celebrate private Mass. Christ admitted only his
Apostles to Suppe: therefore Priests alone must DVR. The people also receive
the whole Sacrament, under one kind. WHIT page 754. It is childish dotage to
say so; as though one part of a thing, were the whole; or, as if Christ
appointing both bread and wine, ordained more then a whole Sacrament: that Pope
was wiser, which said of certain heretics that refrained from the Cup, as
you do^, ( De council. did. 2. cap. Comperimus:) Let them either receive the
whole Sacrament, or refuse all. DVR. Christ's words, Drink ye all of this,
prove not that all Christians must do so. WHIT. page 755. They do prove it,
as those words, take eat, do prove that all must eat: and you may as well
keep both the elements from the people, as one, contrary to S. Paul, 1. Cor.
11.23. DVR. The Passover might be eaten without wine. WHIT. page 756. It
might, because God had not commanded wine, but Christ himself commands it
in his Supper, 1. Cor. 11.45. DVR. The common people are a^t bound to drink of
the Cap: for S. Paul says, As often as ye drink it, to signify they were not
commanded so to do. WHIT. So he says of the bread also, As of, as ye eat,
1. Cor. 11.26. so that, by your argument, neither is the bread commanded them.
receive the Sacrament; the people ought to be contented only with one part.
The title which Pilate fastened upon the Cross, was written in Hebrew, Greek,
and Latin: therefore DVR. No Catholic does so reason; we say, that title had
in it a mystery: and Augustine proves by it, that the word,
coessent^all,(...), may be used in the Creed. WHIT. page 757. Papists often
reason thus, as all men know which read their writings, though you be
ashamed of it. Tell us what mystery you mean, if it be worth the labor; as
for Augustine, he speaks no word that makes here for your cause, yet you
blush not to quote him.
prayers must be read in the Churches in no language, but either Hebrew, or
Greek, or Latin. Harding.
That which is holy must not be given to dogs: DVR. We say not, that all,
but that some of the people may not have the Scriptures committed to them.
WHIT. page 758. Who doubts but that wisdom is to be used in teaching the
people; and that they which show themselves dogs, and hogs, must be
barred from the Scriptures: but this is nothing to the present question;
whether this reason be good, which Papists sometimes use: and which here you
should have spoken to, and not thus wander.
therefore the vulgar people must be forbidden to read the Scriptures. This is
my body: therefore the DVR. Christ said it way his body. WHIT. page 759.
Christ by an usual phrase of Scripture, called the thing signifying by the
name of the thing signified, because of the sacramental joint receiving of
both, to wit, of the bread with the mouth, and of his body by faith. Again,
if that which was in Christ's hands were his real body, when he said so,
then was transubstantiation before (which you deny) and then he had two
bodies: but if it were bread, then is there a metonymie in his words, as we
truly say.
bread is turned into Christ's body. Fall down before his footestoole: DVR.
Ambrose and Augustine reasoned so from this Scripture. WHIT p. 761. That is
false: they teach only, that we must worship Christ in the mysteries and
Sacrament; not the my^teries and Sacrament themselves.
therefore the Sacrament must be worshipped. God is no respecter of persons:
Pighius.
DVR. That was Pighius his error: but the judgment of Catholic Universities
is, that foreseeing of merits is no cause of Predestination. WHIT. page 762.
Thus you fall from your champion Pighius in words, but indeed many of your
Schools defend him: saying, the kingdom of heaven is prepared for them which
have merited it by their good works.
therefore he chooses no man to life eternal, but with respect of merits. S.
James commands that sick persons should be anointed: DVR. The sick want
health now as well as then, and therefore must now have the same helping
remedy. WHIT. page 763. Anointing was a sign of healing in those times of
extraordinary gifts in the Church; your anointing heals nothing that
wants health; and so is frivolous.
therefore we must now ever and anon anoint the sick. This is a great
mystery: DVR. The Apostle speaks that properly of Matrimonte. WHIT. page
764. Nay, he himself expoundes it of the mystical union between Christ and
the Church.
therefore Matrimony is a Sacrament. Elias and John Baptist lived in the
wilderness: DVR. These men left a famous example of Monkish life. WHIT. page
765. The Monks life is not proved by their examples: for Elias was commanded
to go into the desert during peril; they do that without both precept and
peril: John Baptist indeed lived in the desert, but wherein men did dwell, to
whom also he preached; and there were many cities and towns in that desert,
Josh. 15.61. what is this to idle Monkish life?
therefore they invented the manner of life and discipline of Monks. There are
seven deadly sins: DVR. Name him that thus disputes. WHIT. page 766. It is
John L^d^vvicke, in a book entitled. The golden work of true contrition,
leaf 128. Where are abunuen sorts of men in the Church, etc.
therefore there are just seven Sacraments. God made man after his image: DVR.
Pope Adrian proves not the use of images by this place, but says it was
signified by it. WHIT. page 767. Then you confess he alleges that Scripture
to prove the use of images was signified by it, and who but a superstitious
doctor, would have done so?
therefore images must be set up in Churches. The chiefest of these is
charity: DVR. The chiefest gift must come from the chiefest virtue. WHIT. page
768. S. Paul 1. Cor. 13. does not in all things prefer charity before faith,
but only because it indureth in the life to come, when we shall not need
faith, as Chrysostom expoundes it: now faith only apprehends Christ our
righteousness, and therein excels charity. Lastly, you err grossly in
effect, ascribing our iust^fication to the merit of virtue in us; which only
is merited by Jesus Christ.
therefore we are justified more by charity than by faith. I will go, Osea.
5.15.
says the Lord, to my place, until they ponder in their heart, and seek my
face: (which indeed he spoke DVR. Do you think that God calls men to
repentace ironically. WHIT. page 799. No; but when men will not se^k God, being
called thereto by his bounty; no marvel though he withdraw it from them,
and (as it were) laugh at their madness: of which ironies there be many examples
in Scriptures.
ironically, and after the manner of men) therefore men may be converted unto
the Lord, by their own mere will and disposition. The Lord commands us to
do many things: DVR. Augustine denies that God has commanded impossible
thin^s. WHIT. page 770. He expounds his own meaning, that Adam before his
fall could, and that we in heaven shall be able to keep all Gods commandments;
but he often says, that no man in this life can fulfill the Law of God. DVR.
Men use not to make laws impossible to be kept. WHIT. We must not measure
Gods doing by man's: Again, when these laws were first given, man could
perform them, and we must not look that God should alter them to fit our
corruption. DVR* God could not justly punish lavvbreakers, if they could not
keep it. WHIT. page 771. Answer then Eusebius, (Evangelical demonst. lib. 1)
who says, that Moses Law was impossible to be kept of any man: And Thomas
Aquinas, upon Gal. 3. sect. 4. saying: Moses commanded many things, which no
man could fulfill.
therefore those things may be performed of us. Christ descended to the dead:
therefore he delivered DVR Tell me for what other cause Christ went into bell,
but to deliver the Fathers from Limbus? WHIT. page 772. Nay, first prove you
that he did go so to hell, as you think; for my part I believe it not, but that
his soul went presently to heaven. Again, you beg the question, saying, he
went to hell to deliver the Fathers. DVR. I prove it by these Scriptures: Zac.
9.11. Psalm 68.18. Heb. 9.8. WHIT. ^acharie speaks only of the Jews delivery
from the captivity of Babylon. David speaks of Christ's ascending into
heaven, and triumph over his enemies; and you childishly infer hereupon,
therefore he descended to hell to deliver the Patriarchs from Limbus: but most
ridiculously you abuse that place to the Hebrews, the true sense whereof is;
that we are not reconciled to God, by the Jewish sacrifices, but by Christ;
therefore you infer, that none of the Patriarchs went to heaven, until
Christ came out of hell, and opened heaven by his bodily ascension.
the Fathers out of Limbus. The Church discerns the Scriptures: DVR.
Catholics say not so. WHIT. page 773 But your false Church does so; for it
interprets Scriptures as it lists: and constrains all Christians to rest
therein, be it never so false, and contrary to the Scriptures; else it does
condemn him for an heretic.
therefore the authority of the Church is greater than the authority of the
Scriptures. Saint Paul commands the Thessalonians, 2 Thessalonians. 2.15
that they keep the ordinances which they had learned: therefore DVR. What
error find you in this argument? WHIT. page 774. I find in it a threefold false
consequent: first you cannot prove hence; that the things which S. Paul spoke
by word, were not the same in effect which he wrote to the^: secondly, if he
wrote not all to the^ which he had taught the^, it follows not that he
taught something which is not written in the Scriptures: thirdly; admit many
things were left unwritten, yet it follows not, that all things necessary to
salvation be not written: nor do the ancient Fathers say so.
all things are not written which are necessary to salvation. 2. Cor. 3, 15.
He himself shall be safe, yet as it were through fire: DVR. Sundry Fathers
expound this place of Purgatory fire. WHIT. page 776. But the place it self
shows that it cannot be meant of any such fire: for 1. S. Paul speaks of
the purging away that which is a fault: but in your Purga^orie faults are not
consumed, but (you say) punishments are s^ffred for f^u^^s. 2. S. Paul says
every man's work, be it gold or wood, shall be tried; but you cast nothing but
wood, hay, and stubble into your fained Purgatory. 3. S. Paul says every man's
work shall be manifest by this fire; but your Purgatory fire is obscure, and
never shows such light. 4. The word fire, is used by S. Paul Metaphorically,
as also are gold, silver, hay, wood etc. but you say your Purgatory fire, is
true fire. The fire which S. Paul heer^ means, is the holy Ghost, who proves
all doctrines, and seuereth the false from the true. Ambrose on Psalm. 118.
says, This fire is the word of Christ: Angustine indeed spoke doubtfully of
Purgatory, saying, ( Enchiridion, cap. 69.) it may be that there is some such
thing, but whether yea or no, it is a question; and in his book of the City
of God; he says, perhaps it is true: many others of the Fathers thought this
purging should be at Christ's coming to judgment; which much differs from
your Purgatory. Chrysostom in his Preface on Esaias, says; God at one instant
abolisheth sin, freeth from punishment, and gives righteousness; Tertullian in
his book of Baptism, says: Guilt and punishment are taken away together.
Hierome says, upon the 31. Psalm; the sin which is covered is not seen; that
which is not seen is not imputed; that which is not imputed shall not be
punished: so that nothing is left for your Purgatory, by these men's judgments.
therefore men pass through the fire of Purgatory to life eternal.

To what purpose should I rehearse innumerable others your disputations like
these? Now, Campian, let us hear a few of your own. Augustine wrote three
books of free will: therefore Augustine approved that man has free will.
Christ was ignorant of some thing: therefore Christ was not without sin. The
Fathers diligently searched the Scriptures: therefore it is never lawful to
dissent from the Fathers.

These your argumentations I have thus briefly collected: which what goodly
ones they be, our University students easily perceive. Do you acknowledge
them to be your own, Campian, so sophistical, so inconsequent, so full of
deceit and falsehoods? You were in a great strait if you could not deny it;
but if you confess it, you are quite overthrown: for all these are very
unlearnedly concluded; either by mistaking words of double signification; or by
wresting phrases figuratively spoken: or without any consequent; or from
ignorance of the Elenche; or (to conclude) altogethe trifling. It suffices
that I have touched these but lightly: now I come to those which you object
against us.

There be four chief heads of deceitful disputing, Sciamachia.
wherein you say our sophistry chiefly consists: to wit, Sciamachia, a
fighting with a shadow, Logomachia, a contention about words. Homonymia, a
mistaking of the sense of words: and Circulatio, a going about the bush. Let us
see how grossly we use to err in them. Sciamachia, or a fighting with ones
shadow, you first define, then you produce examples (of our supposed practice.)
I dislike not the definition, and hasten to those examples. Against those that
have vowed single life (say you) they allege Scriptures which speak
honorably of marriage; whom smite they with such weapons? Whom but your self,
Campian, and those so worthy Prelates on your side, which first imposed the
vow of perpetual virginity upon Ministers of the Gospel. For if the
Scriptures do indeed speak honorably of wedlock, then Pope Syricius, and
Innocent the second of that name, and such others your stout maintainers of
single life, can by no means be defended, who, as is well known, have spoken
many things basely, DVR. This is your impudency, for we say matrimony is so
holy, that it is even a Sacrament, yet not equal with Virginity. WHIT. page
778. All men know what Syricius and Jnnocentius wrote of Matrimony. By the
Scriptures it appears to be equally holy with virginity; if not, why bring
you no testimony to the contrary? And it is very absurd, that you account
virginity more holy, and yet will needs have matrimony to be a Sacrament:
virginity should rather be a Sacrament, seeing (by your opinion) it is the more
holy.
despitefully, and wickedly of matrimony. Consider well those speeches which
even now I produced, taken out of your law: deny, if you can for shame, that
they be dishonest in themselves, and egregiously injurious to wedlock.
Certainly if these Scriptures do indeed wound (the ancient heretics)
Saturninus, Seuerus, DVR. What Catholic ever esteemed marriage to be no
better than pollution, as those heretics did? WHIT. page 779. Pope Innocent in
effect, in that he dissuaded Deacons from it, because they must be holy, and
have nothing to do with pollutio^s, and bed-pleasures: than which Tatianus
himself could say nothing against marriage more impious.
Tatianus, the Encratites, and the Archontici, needs must they also most
sharply touch you to the quick, which commonly are wont to judge and speak
no whit more honorably of wedlock than they have done. For show me, Campian,
if you can, wherein those reproachful speeches may any whit more touch the
marriage of Ministers, than of other men. Thus then both you your selves have
apparently fled to the heretics holds; and also these Scriptures which do
speak so honorably of wedlock, do disprove your heresy, and give you a
very deadly wound. For thus I press our argument more effectually (than you:)
If wedlock be honorable in every degree of men, and the bed undefiled; then
in no degree ought they to be esteemed dishonest or impure: but the antecedent
is DVR. By this argument, you may as well condemn Saint Paul: for marriage is
honorable, eue^ in those widows, who yet have damnation (says he) because
they will marry. WHIT. page 779. S. Paul disalloweth such widows, not because
they would marry, but because they would reject their faith and Christian
profession, by waxing wanton, and marrying with Infidels.
true; therefore the consequent is necessarily true also. Hebr. 13.4.
What can you here disprove? or why has it not the force of a necessary
conclusion, out of which you shall never be able to wind your self? As for
your slight evasion, because of a former vow, I have already confuted it. Let
us now proceed unto your other examples.

Against the merits of a Christian man, dipped in Christ's blood (say you) they
recite testimonies, which command us to put our affiance neither in nature,
nor in the Law, but in the blood of Christ: whom do they confute with these
testimonies? Those arguments which are urged by our side against men's merits,
do most clearly confute you and strike you dead. Man's nature is corrupt; Genesis
6.5. ^^. Romans 4.15.
and the Law shows the disease, but does not cure it: therefore all our hope
of salvation consists in Christ's blood. But you have devised us a kind of
merit, forsooth, dipped in the blood of Christ, which may avail much to
deserve salvation. For so you maintain, that salvation does not wholly consist
in the blood of Christ, but that it much what depends upon your own merits;
yet so as that they be dipped with Christ's blood; lest you might be thought
down right Pelagians. To speak more plainly: this is that you teach, wherein
the whole sum (first and last) of your righteousness consists: namely,
That Christ has merited for us by his blood, that we might DVR. We teach
plainly, that all the merits of our good works, have their force and effect
only from Christ's blood. WHIT. page 780. Thus you detract salvation from
Christ's merits, and ascribe it to ou^ merits, dipped with his blood: which the
Scriptures no where teach, but utterly condemn, proving that all our good
works, are in something faulty, and so merit not eternal life. Again by
your doctrine, every man should be redeemed by his own works, and so not
by one only Mediator. 1. Tim. 2.5. Thirdly, Christ undertook to obtain for us
remission of sins by his own death, which he performed not perfectly, if it
be in part by our own works. Fourthly; so should we not trust in God only,
but also in our works dipped in Christ's blood, which were blasphemy. DVR. The
Scripture says, we are vvorthie the kingdom of God. WHIT. page 782. It says
we are worthy, not because of our own merits, but in that Christ's merits are
communicated unto us. DVR. Life eternal is often called a revvard in
Scriptures, and the Fathers. WHIT. page 78^. Reward does not always argue
merit, but is oftentimes freely given: and the Scriptures never mention any of
our merits.
merit salvation. This is that merit dipped with the blood of Christ, which you
speak of, Confute now our arguments, if you can, which usually are alleged
against it. Whatsoever is required as a DVR. The Angels have merited, and our
first parents might have merited blessedness before their fall, yet all that
they could do, was a due debt unto God. WHIT. page 785. If Christ say truly,
that they are unprofitable servants which do all that is commanded, and no
more; then neither may the Angels, nor might those out first parents ascribe
any thing to their own merits, but to Gods free mercy, seeing they could do
no more good then they ought, and was commanded them.
debte, that meriteth not: but whatsoever (good thing) we do, Romans 8.12. Luke
17.10. Romans 4.4.
is wholly a debt: therefore we have no merit at all of our own. And that you
may understand, that we ought to put confidence in the blood of Christ only,
and not in our own merits; I will thus reason from Saint Paul's doctrine. ^al.
2.21.
If righteousness be by the Law; then Christ died in vain: but if we be
justified by our DVR. VV^e are justified by the merits of our works, not done
by our own power, and help of the Law only, but by grace in Christ. WHIT.
page 786. Thus might the Galathians have answered S. Paul, whose faith was all
one with yours in this point; when be reproved them for joining the works of
the Law with grace to justification: but S. Paul shevved them, that the
inheritance is of promise only, and so merely of grace; and no whit of works;
which are ever of the Law, whether before or after faith.


merits, we are justified by the Law: therefore if we be justified by our
merits, Christ died in vain. What need I here mention innumerable other our
arguments, not one whereof, but it is concluded demonstratiuely, and
infallibly: whereas your own merits, alas, are very pitifully and shamelesly
defended by you, against the blood of Christ.

You add to these a third example (saying) Against those which honor saints,
as the most acceptable servants of Christ, there are vouched whole pages of
Scriptures, which prohibit the worshipping of many gods: where are they now?
Verily the Lord by his own authority reserueth unto himself, Psalm. 50.15.
that we invoke him alone: wherefore who so worshippeth and inuocateth DVR.
We worship not Saints as Gods, but as the friends and servants of God; and
Saint Paul himself desired to be helped by the prayers of sundry Christian
Churches: so that you cavil with us, as the heathen and heretics did of old
against the Fathers. WHIT. page 787. The honor of invocation may not be given
to any of Gods friends; for we must pray to none, but whom we may call, Father,
Luke 11.2. and in whom we may believe, Romans 10.14. therefore not to Saints at
all. As for Saint Paul, he craved the prayers of Saints for him, vvhilest they
lived* but he never either prayed to them living, or dead. Nor did the
Catholic Fathers worship, adore, or invoke Saints departed, as you do: For
Augustine Epist. 44. says to Maximus the Heathen, know you that no Catholic
Christian does worship any of the dead, and Jerome to Vigilantius, says, who
is so mad, as to worship any of the Martyrs?
Saints, he gives to them the honor due to God: for he both presupposes
that they can perform any thing whatsoever, and also that they be DVR. The
Saints hear our prayers, though they be absent. WHIT. page 790. Every one that
prays to Saints supposes the^ to be present, and to know eue^ his thoughts,
and so (in effect) makes them Gods: as Basil proves the holy Ghost to be
God, because he hears godly men's prayers whersoeuer.

DVR. The Saints are in many far distant places at once, though not every
where. WHIT page 791. Duraeus doteth to say so: for as well they might be in
all, as in many places at once: But Damascene, lib. 2. cap. 3. and A^^^nas,
quaest. 52. art. 2 say of the very Angels, that when they be in heaven, they
are not in earth.
present every where, both which are the peculiar properties of God only. So
that whatsoever is (truly) alleged against many gods, that is altogether
effectual against your Saints in heaven, whom both you worship more zealously
than God himself, and rob him of his due honor to adorn them. 1. Tim. 1.5.
Romans 8.34. Heb. 7.25.
There is (indeed) one mediator of God and men, the man Jesus Christ; he for
ever makes intercession for us; therefore they which bring in new
intercessors, and mediators, are DVR. Christ is the only Mediator of
Redemption; and Saints may be Mediators of Intercession, without injury to
him. WHIT. page 793. Christ alone is Mediator of both, as these Scriptures
prove plainly: and Christ himself says, no man comes to the Father but by
me, Job. 14.6. and, he will give you all things in my name, Ioh. 16.23. and 1
Ioh. 2.2. so that it is sacrilege against Christ's Priesthood, to make Saints
mediators to commend us to God.
injurious unto Christ. Tell me, Campian, have you any face to defend these
your sentences following? Duraeus excuses this, persuading himself the writer
meant no ill in it; though it be indeed intolerable, as are many other such
their usual speeches of the blessed Virgin: see Whit. page 794.
Command him by thy motherly authority; and those which are often chaunted
in the rude ryme of the Mass of the virgin Mary's conception, thus:

Tu spes certa miserorum, vere matter orphanorum,
Tu leuamen oppressorum, Medicamen infirmorum,
Omnibus es omnia?
That is to say, Thou (blessed Virgin Marie) art the infallible DVR. Saint Paul
calls the Thessalonians his hope, 1 Thessalonians. 2.19. WHIT. page 796. But he
never put his trust in, nor called upon them, as you do the Virgin Marie: he
called them his hope, because he received great hope and joy by his labors in
their conversion. You make the Virgin an instrument of our salvation, and
therefore you trust in her, but the Scriptures teach every where to trust in
God and Christ only. As Psalm. 71.3. Ier. 17.5.7. 1. Tim. 1.1. and 1. Pet. 1.21.
hope of such as are in misery, the true mother of Orphans; Thou art the
consolation of such as be oppressed, the medicine of such as be diseased, Thou
art all DVR. The sentence of the Catholic Church, has no where alloued this;
but if it had, it might be conveniently defended. WHIT page 797. Duraeus can
conveniently expound that, which most absurdly takes the office of re^e^ption
from Christ and gives it to the Virgin Mary.


in all to all men (or) in all necessities; and other such like abominable
speeches, and full of strange blasphemy? If happily you think our reproouing
of these things, be but some fighting with a shadow, then do you no more
respect the glory of God, than the shadow of an Ass.

The second error in disputation wherewith you charge us, Logomachia
is, that we often use Logomachia, which is when the sense is neglected, and
men contend about the word. I understand it well: but which be those our
faults committed in this kind? Can you find us (say they) the Mass, or
Purgatory in the Scriptures. And is not this our demand reasonable? For where
should these be found rather than in the Scriptures? There was nothing wont to
be accounted more holy than the Mass, and there could nothing be invented more
gainful than Purgatory: that neither of these now at last should be found in
the Scriptures, certainly it may well seem a very strange and unreasonable
thing. Belike then (say you) Trinitas, the Trinity; Homousios, coessentiall;
Persona, a person, are no where in the Bible, because these very terms are not
to be found there. Neither say we so, Campian, nor will it follow at all
hereupon; and these things be altogether unequally compared. For albeit these
very terms are not in Scriptures, Epiphan. contra Semiarian. l. 3(...).
yet the matter it self, and the sense, as Epiphanius writes, comes to hand
in all places, and is easily every where to be found. But your DVR. Did you
never read these words of Christ in his last Supper: this is my body? WHIT.
page 799. Yea; but Christ ordained then a Sacrament, not a sacrifice: he
offered himself a sacrifice only once upon the Cross, Heb 9 10. not in his
last Supper, except you will say, he died then also, which he must have done
to make it a sacrifice; but he was then alive, and it were most absurd to say
he was alive and dead at one time, which he needs must be, both then and in all
your Masses, if there be any sacrifice in the Mass at all. Again, external
sacrifices, as you say your Mass is, are subject to the sight and outward
senses, but no man ever saw Christ to be sacrificed, either in the Supper or in
the Mass. Therefore there is none, neither in the one nor in the other. DVR.
It was a sacrifice, for Christ was really contained under those former of
bread and wine: and so the Mass is now an unbloody sacrifice. WHIT. page
801. You cannot prove him to be so present there as you teach, by no
Scripture; and if he were, yet that was not therefore a sacrifice, except you
will have his real being in the Virgins womb also to be a sacrifice, in which
he was contained. As for your unbloody propitiatory sacrifice: first, it is
absurd, for to sacrifice kills a body, but your Transubstantiation makes a
body: secondly, it has no word of God for it: thirdly, it is needless,
Christ's sacrifice being perfect: fourthly, Christ ordained that supper in
memory of his sacrifice, not to be it self a sacrifice: WHIT. page ^03. DVR.
Many of the Fathers call the Eucharist by the name of sacrifice. WHIT. page 805.
Not because it is that same which Christ offered (as you teach) but because it
is a memorial and Sacrament of it. DVR. Purgatory is most plainly proved by
the fact of Judas Machabaeus, in the second book and 12. chapter. WHIT. page
806. Those books are not Canonical Scripture, neither does that act prove a
Purgatory by your own doctrine, who say those that die in deadly sin, (as
those did there mentioned) go to hell, and not to Purgatory.
Mass and Purgatory, are not in this manner in the Scriptures, seeing neither
the names nor the things themselves any where do appear: yea they are plainly
against the Scriptures. For what else is either the Mass, than as Bustum
coenae Dominica.
an empty sepulcher where is only the title of the Lords Supper? or what is
Purgatory more than a shameless merchandise of souls, and an intolerable
contempt against the blood of Christ? Wherefore this is not a trisling
contention about words, but a most weighty one about matters of moment; except
peradventure you make account of the Mass and Purgatory, not to be matters
of moment, but words of Art only. As for the name DVR. The office of a
Presbyter, or Elder, in the Gospel is the same that the Priests office was in
the Law. WHIT. page 807. It is not so: for if the office did remain; why
should the name be changed, for Elders are never called Priests in the new
Testament. And there be ruling Elders in the Church, which labor not in the
Ministry of the word and Sacraments, as the Priests did.


Presbyter, and Sacrament, it is appropriated from the common signification, to
some certain and particular things, as likewise many other names are; (to wit)
Ecclesia the Church, Episcopus a Bishop, Apostolus an Apostle, Dia^onus a
Deacon: and these names we willingly use, but so that we carefully shun
their impertinent significations. Neither was that indeed sufficient cause,
why you should register Matrimony in the catalogue of Sacraments, because S.
Paul wrote (thus) Sacramentum hoc magnum, Ephesians. 5.
This is a great mystery. For in that place, Sacramentum, is used in a large
signification for any mystery, not for that ceremony which may properly be
called a Sacrament. As for that counsel of Thomas Aquinas, we do very well
approve it.

The third head, Homonymia
or kind of deceitful disputation which you say we usually err in, is
Homonymia, equivocation, or a mistaking the sense of words: whereof you
propound two examples: For (say you) we both confound the order of Priests,
because S. John has termed us all Priests; and also abolish choice of meats,
and prescribed observation of days, Apoc. 5.
because the Prophet highly commends a spiritual fast. Esaias 48.
I will speak a few words both of the one and other, that I may clearly quit us
of this crime of Homonymie. Saint John alone has not named all DVR. By this
argument you may as well prove the Jews had no Priests; properly so called.
WHIT. page 809. Not so, for the Lord ordained such a Priesthood amongst them,
which he has not amongst Christians.
Christians Priests, 1. Pet. 2.5.9
but S. Peter also has termed them a holy, and a royal Priesthood: and this
name is in no place of the new Testament DVR. So the name, Sacrament, is never
given to Baptism, nor to the Eucharist in the New testament. WHIT. page 810.
But the substance of it, agrees to them both, and is there, whereas the name,
Sacerdos, a Priest, is not in the new Testament, nor does the thing it self
properly belong to any but Christ, since his death. DVR. Yea Christ instituted
a sacrifice in his Supper, and where a sacrifice is, there is a Priest also.
WHIT. page 810. Christ ordained the^ no sacrifice, but only a Sacrament of a
sacrifice. DVR. Esaias calls the M^nisters of the Gospel, Priests, cap. 6^.6.
and 66.21. WHIT. Esaias in the first place speaks of all Christians; and in the
second, of Ministers in the phrase of that time; whence also you may as well
say Deacons are Levites, which you will not say they are prope^ly. DVR
Ministers are needless, except they be Priects, and as mediators betwixt God
and men unto salvation: and your Ministers are but Laymen. WHIT. page 810.
^15. They must preach the Word, and administer the Sacraments, but not offer
sacrifice of mediation betwixt God and men, as you say, you do in the Mass: to
do these we have a calling ordained of Christ; for your sacrifice you have
none. DVR. The Apostles name them not Priests, because they are not of the
order of Aaron; but the Fathers call them Priests, who knevv the Apostles
m^a^ing: and you call them Priests in English. WHIT page 812. Christ only is a
Priest, after the order of Melchisedecke: Heb. 7.3. so then there be no Priests
at all, you confess: the Fathers call them so by custom, but not properly and
the Apostles of purpose abstaining from the name of Priests, might teach us
hereafter better vvisdome to do so also.
properly applied to the Ministers of the Gospel. For Christ being made an
high Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedech, has no copartners of
this DVR. True, for it is Christ that presents himself in the sacrifi^e, we
only are as ministers. WHIT. p. 814. If you be Ministers only, then are you
not properly Priests; and why then will you be so called? DVR. Yet we as
truly sacrifice, as baptize. WHIT. Thus you will be Ministers only, and no
Priests, nor be copa^tners in Christ's sacrifice; yet you will b^ termed
Priests, and truly sacrifice; these be contraries, and cannot stand together,
yea, mere madness and dotages.


Priesthood: therefore Christ has left unto his (Churches) a Ministry, and
not a new Priesthood. Neither does there remain to us DVR. Thus you strippe
the Gospel of all sacrifice and ^eligion. WHIT. page 816. 817. All your
religion by this your doctrine, is in your Mass, which we willingly have not;
but notwithstanding we have the sacrifice of Christ, which is perpetual and
inchangeable, Heb. 7 2^.28. and 10.14. your invisible sacrifice the Scripture
knows not.
any such sacrifice; for the administration whereof some special Priests must
needs be authorized. For that sacrifice of praise, and doing good, Hebr.
13.15.16.
which the Apostle mentions, and which now remains only; that (I say)
appertains indifferently to all Christians. Notwithstanding we permit none to
execute the administration of this ministry, which Christ would have to be
perpetual in his Church, but them whom it concerns, and who are by due order
DVR. Who called Luther, Calvin, Beza, etc. your Ministers? WHIT. page 820.
Luther, Zuinglius, Bucer, etc. were Priests of your own, and so had a calling
(except your order of Priesthood be no calling) and might call others by your
law. Again, God is not tied so to order, but that he may for the good of the
Church, call Ministers extraordinarily. And the Churches have lavvfull power
to choose Ministers (so that we need not to call any from you that service) as
says Cyprian. Epist. 68. Thus were Calui^ and Beza chosen.
called thereunto. Albeit then Christ have made us all both Kings, that we
might be able to subdue our sins; and Priests, that we might offer him
spiritual sacrifices: notwithstanding as it is not lawful for every man to
dream of a kingdom, so it is a thing detestable for any man to enter upon the
holy Ministry, who has not that function committed unto him by divine
authority. Wherefore I see not at all why you should charge us with any such
Homonymy (or falsehood from ambiguous signification) in this word. As for your
manner of fasting, that indeed is wholly in show, and has nothing in it of a
Christian fast, but the very name. For to make choice of meats, as a thing
more religious, and to prescribe certain, and perpetual set days, wherein we
must necessarily fast, the DVR. This sauoureth of Luthers spirit: but Pope Leo
says, that the holy Ghost taught the Apostles, the discipl^ne of fasting, for
one of the chief Sacraments of heavenly doctrine. WHIT. page 8^1. etc. We
allow Christian fasting; but what spirit taught Leo to say so of your solemn
superstitious fasts? the Scriptures speak no such thing, which we preferie
before all men's judgments.
one is witless, the other superstitious. For what man, which is not deprived
of judgment and all sense, will think that he fasteth, who (so that he
abstain DVR. No Catholic ever said, that the force of fasting consists in
only abstinence from flesh. WHIT. page 822. All men know that you call your
abstinence from flesh in Lent, in the Ember days, the Saint Eues etc. fasting:
and that he, who then eats ^^sh and other meat in abundance in not said
amongst you to violate his fast; but if one do but taste flesh, you esteem him
a grieeuous malefactor. DVR. But Elisha, Daniel, and John Baptist made
religious choice of meats, which you thus call madness: yea Daniel absteined
from flesh and wine to apprease Gods anger; whose example teaches us also to
abstain from daintier meats in time of fasting, as the Church has long
accustomed, WHIT. page 823. These holy men did not fast as you do, and teach:
for Elisha fed the Prophets with wild and bitter herbs, not for religion sake,
but in time of f^^mine, for want of other victual, 2. King. 4.39. and Daniel
absteined not from some only, but from all desirable meats, Dan. 10.3. not to
appease Gods anger, as you say, but that he might with more lively sense of
his brethrens misery, humble himself to God: as for John Baptists continual
diet, it was locusts and vvild honey, nothing like your fasting. It is mere
dorage and superstation to call abstinence only from some delicate meats,
fasting, though other as delicate be eaten, as you do; no Prophets, nor
ancient Christians in the Church ever fasted thus.
from flesh) may at his pleasure glut himself with all manner of dainties? Or
who can suppose that the Fridayes fast is holier then the Wednesdayes fast, but
he must too much savor of Iudaisme? If S. Paul reproved the Galathians, Gal.
4.10.
because they did observe days, and DVR. This is an ancient cavil of
heretics; long since ansevered by Jerome and Augustine: that we observe not
the same days that Jews and Gentiles did. WHIT. page 824. The Church in
their time did not bind men's consciences to the observation of days as you do
(and as did the Galathians) judging it necessary for Christians to fast at
your set times: which if it had done, yet the authority of men must not
prevail more than Scrip^ures.
months, and times, is it likely he would endure our Papists, which err more
grossly and shamefully? If he forewarned the Colossians, that they would not
be entangled with their superstition, Colos. 2.21.
which thought that some certain meats were not to be DVR. Saint Paul
reprooueth there, the practice of Jewish ceremonies. WHIT. page 8^6. True, and
all other like them, which are man's ordinances and doctrines, as he says
plamely, verse 22. of which sort yours are; else show us Scripture for them.
touched, not to be tasted, not to be handled, would he allow the papisticall
choice of meats? If he determined long since, 1. Tim. 4.2.3
that it was devilish and DVR. You sight against us with the Manichees
vveapo^s; whom Augustine a^svvered against Faust. lib. 30. cap. 5. That true
Christians abstain from certain meats and fruits, more or less, as they
please, and are able; to tame the body, and humble the soul against sin;
not as though th^se creatures were vnc^^^e. WHIT. page 817. Thus you make
Saint Paul a Manichee; but indeed he there condemns them, and all that forbid
to cate meats, under pain of damnation, which you do: and that place of
Augustine plainly shows how your fasts differ from the Christian fasts in
his time: first, they were to tame and humble men, yours do not so: secondly,
they thought no meats unclean, you say men are polluted by eating some
forbidden: thirdly, they abstained from since and fruits, as from flesh in
their fasts, you do not so: fourthly, they fasted as they thought good, and
could, but you make general laws of fastings, to bind men thereto.
hypocritical to abstain from certain meats, if he were now living, would
he change his doctrine, and command this abstinence to a Christian? We truly
for our parts do always and very highly commend a true fast, whether it be
private or public; neither do we commend them only, but also we use them, as
this year last past may most plentifully witness for us, during which,
public fasts were most religiously observed in very many places. As for those
fasts of Moses, and David, and Helias, and John Baptist, and the Apostles,
wherein were they any whit like unto yours? for if fasting do consist in choice
of meats, and in appointing set days, as you resolutely judge it does,
inform me (if you can) that they either at any time DVR. The ancient
observation of Lent, of Wednesday and Fridates fast, and of the Ember days
might have informed you hereof. WHIT. p. 828. 829. You play the Sophister here
in grain, for Moses, Elias, David, ^ohn Baptist, and the Apostles nouerkept
those fasts; neither did they nor any of the ancient Fathers prefer fish
before flesh in their^ fastings, as you do.

DVR. Aeriu^ was counted an heretic. who taught the same doctrine of fasting
which you do. Epiphan. haerel. 75. WHIT. page 829. 830. The ancient Church
disliked Euslathius his eagernes against Aerius in this point, as witnesses
Socrates, l. 2. c. 43. and Sozomen. l. 3. c. 13. Aerius might be an Arrian, and
so an heretic, but of fasting he taught the same with Augustine, Epist. 86.
that there were no certain times of fasting appointed by the Apostles: and
Tertullian (contra Psychico^) witnesses that in the ancient Christian church
me^ used to fast volu^tarily and freely, not by Cano^ or precept: and
Epiphanius defended Eustathius against ye churches judgment in this point
touching Aerius


preferred fish before flesh, or used enjoined and yearly set fasts. For John
Baptist used continually to fast in his manner, and the others fasted as the
times and present occasions required, in which their fasts, they absteined as
well from fish as from flesh. Therefore in one word to wipe away your
imputation of Homonymie, I deny that we use any. For in that, that we require
the spiritual fast, we dislike not the external, (...). Tim. 4.8.
howsoever this outward fast be nothing profitable without the spiritual. But
this deceitful argumentation, if there were any such here, is rather by
inferring a weak conseque^t, then by Homonymie, or equivocation; how beit,
what the truth is we have sufficiently ciscussed.

You haste forward and join unto these a fourth manner of deceiptfull
disputation, Circulatio.
named Circulation, which is, when one after a few words to no purpose
returns again to the same, and beggeth the question. I acknowledge it to be
a gross, and unsavory kind of sophistry so to do, but show me an example of
our so doing. You propound one example, namely, about the true notes of the
Church, for here, you say, we always make circuits and rounds, and use that
very same thing for an argument, wherein the question lies. But how prove you
that? forsooth because we say the notes of the Church be, the word of God, and
the Sacraments. And so we say truly, for they who have these, have a Church of
Christ; but they who altogether want these, are utterly without both the Church
and Christ. Let us contend about these notes, that it may be discerned whether
you or we have them. Tell me, in what Court shall we try this title? before
what Commissioner, before what Judge shall we commence our plea? I suppose the
word of God must be consulted with. But you say you have already consulted
with it, and you now favor our cause less then you did before. But I say,
Campian, we rest upon the word of God, and not on your judgment. Yea but (say
you) prove unto me that this is the word of God: nay it were more meet that
you should prove it is not. And I also require of you, that you will do the
same thing which you command me to do, namely, that you will prove your word
and Sacraments to be the very same, which Christ has commended unto his
Church. Wherefore this is no more our fault, then yours; the controversy is
about the word of God. You contend that you have it; I contrariwise defend that
we have it: if you like not my judgment, why may not I dislike yours? But you
say, we expound the word DVR. You do so, for you prove the sense of Scripture
which you allege, neither by authority of Fathers, nor by decrees of
Councels, nor by the rule of faith, that is, the common use and custom of
Christians. WHIT. page 831. The meaning of the Scriptures in matters necessary
to salvation is plainly taught in the Scriptures (as the Fathers themselves
confess) and may be found out by religious conferring of easier and harder
places, and such like means, and so we prove the true sense of them. The
Fathers expositions often err, and vary one from another, as their writings
witness, and you will confess: the ancient Councels expound little of the
Scriptures: as for the use and customs of the people, it is no rule of faith at
all, nor must we expound the Scriptures thereby.
amiss: I again avouch that it is false which you say. Whither are you now
come at last? go one foot further forward if you can. Why, say you, I have the
testimony of fifteen hundred years. This is naught else but a frivolous, a
foolish, and an insolent brag. You have not, I say, you have not Campian. You
are ever here deceived, and turn round again, as it were into a circle, and
are faulty in that same very thing, for which you reprove us. Touching the
Fathers, I have answered you already. In the questions of greatest weight,
they are wholly on our DVR. Jf it were so, you would not extenuate their
authority, nor refuse to stand to their judgment as you do. WHIT. page 833.
We give the Fathers their due, but rely more upon the Scriptures, which are
infallibly true. you are driven from the Scriptures, and rake up, even out of
the Fathers ouersights, whatsoever seems to favor your errors: neither does
it follow that the Fathers are not on our side in many and the greatest
controversies, because we say with Augustine, that all controversies of
religion must not be determined out of the Fathers, but only by the
Scriptures.


side; in those of smaller moment, their judgments are diverse, and they make
for you in very few, and those of least importance. How much better would it
stand with wisdom, that (as Augustine sometime wrote of Councels) neither you
should object Jerome against me, nor I Augustine against you, Aug. contra
Maximian. lib. 3. cap. 14
thereby to prejudice each side, but that matter might be tried with matter,
cause with cause, and reason with reason, by the authority of the Scriptures?
Aug. Epist. 111. ad Fortunatian.
For indeed, as the same Augustine has elsewhere taught us, we must not have
any men's disputations (howsoever otherwise they be me^ of sound judgment and
worthy praise) in like estimation as the DVR. No Catholic ever esteemed any
man's vvittings to be compared with the Scriptures. WHIT. page 834. But Papists
not only compare them with, but also prefer them before the Scriptures: for
they will not have controversies tried by the Scriptures, but by the Fathers,
and they sooner allow a sentence of one Father, than many Scriptures, so did
not Angustine nor Thomas Aquinas.
Canonical Scriptures. Such an understander (says he) am I in reading other
men's writings, such would I have other men to be of mine. And because you have
mentioned Thomas Aquinas, The. Aquinas 1. p. 1. q. 2. Art.
learn of him what manner arguments may be taken out of the Fathers writings.
Divinity, or holy learning, says he, uses authorities of Canonical Scripture
to prove or disprove a thing necessarily; but it uses the authorities of other
DVR. We say not that the judgment of one or two of the Fathers, but that the
common consent of the Pasters and Doctors of the Church is the strongest
argument to confute you. WHIT. 833.835. Augustine and Thomas spoke also of all
men, opposing only Scriptures unto them: so that apparently they taught, that
the consent of all Fathers and Doctors could be but a probable reason, and
that the Scriptures only yield necessary arguments, which no consent of men,
though never so learned Doctors and Pastors can confute. Further I say, page
854. that you have the common consent of all the Fathers in no one cause
against us; yea, that all the ancient Fathers, do together with us, with one
voice condemn your half Communion, Transubstantiation, real presence, sole
Communion, bread-vvorshipping, external real sacrifice, service in strange
language, your Popes absolute jurisdiction, and many other such like.
Doctors of the Church to dispute of a thing probably.

These, forsooth, o you truly learned University students are those so
notorious sophistical errors, which Campian could find worthy his censure in
our men's writings: I could wish you might have this so famons a Sophister to
canuas awhile at home in your Schools, then verily would it easily appear how
much truth excels falsehood, and how far sound learning prevails against
vain bragging words: for I know well such Sophisters as this is can neither
any whit affright, nor greatly perplex you.

EDMUND CAMPIAN. The tenth Reason, which is all manner of Witnesses.
THis shall be to you a direct path, so that the simplest that be, need not
wander out of it. For who is, Esaias. 35.
though he be but of the meaner sort of common people, so senseless (so that
he have an eye unto his souls health) that cannot see, (if he look but a
little about him) the path of the Church so plainly trodden, that cannot keep
it, if he dislike of by-ways that lead him through brambles and ragged roches,
and places that cannot be passed? These things shall be well known even of
those that be ignorant as Esaias has prophesied, and therefore most manifest
unto you. If you will, Campian brings nothing in this place, but a continual
begging of the question.
let us take a view of all things that are any where to be seen: let us
trauerse over every thing wheresoever it be. All things do minister matter fit
for our purpose. Let us ascend into heaven by imagination, there may we find
such as through martyrdom, Coelites.
are as ruddie as the red August. Sermon. 37. de Sanct.
rose, and also such as for their innocence while they lived do glister as
beautifully as the white Lilly. There may we see (I say) those Of which, not
one was a Papist.
three and thirty Bishops of Dam. in vit. Po^^. Romans
Rome, which for their faith were immediately murdered one after another.
There may we see such Pastors as throughout all nations upon the earth shed
their blood for the testimony of Christ's name. There may we see the stock of
faithful people that tread the steps of their Pastors. There may we see all
the Hiero. in cat. script.
saints of heaven that through their pure and virtuous conversation upon the
earth, gave a rare example unto all sorts of men. Thou shall find that they
both lived here, and died members of our Catholic Church. And that we may take
a taste of some few by name In Epist. ad Smyr.
on our side was Ignatius, that so earnestly thirsted after martyrdom, who in
ecclesiastical matters advanced a And we in those things which are proper to a
Bishop, make none equal to a Bishop.
Bishop even above a King, who penned also certain traditions of the Apostles,
whereof he himself was a witness, least they should be quite forgotten.
Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. 30. Dam. in vit. Telesp. To. 1. con. c. stat. d. 5.
On our side was that Anchorete Telesphorus, who commanded that the fast of
Lent which was before instituted by the Apostles shouldbe kept more strictly.
On our side was S. Ireneus, Lib. 3. c. 3.
who proved that the Apostolic faith descended unto us by the succession and
sea of Rome. On our side also was that high Bishop Eusebius. 5. hist. 24.
Victor, who by a general Proclamation This is false, for he could not subdue
it.
kept the whole Country of Asia in due obedience, which Proclamation, though
to some it seemed somewhat hard, but specially unto this most blessed man S.
Ireneus, no man yet attempted to deface as This is false, for many Bishops have
bitterly inueyed against Victor for this cause.
foreign authority. Polycarpus Eusebius. 4. hist. 14. Suidas.
was on our side that about the question of the keeping of Easter day, went and
conferred with the sea of Rome, whose relics after he was burned, the
faithful Christians at Smyrna gathered together, and gave due honor unto their
Bishop, by observing yearly the day of his death, as an high and solemn
feast. On our side were Eusebius. 7. Hist. 2.
S. Cornelius, and S. Cyprian, those golden pair of Martyrs, which were both
very worthy Prelates, but the former was the greater, who when he was Bishop of
Rome, abolished the Affrican errors. The latter also got great commendations
through his loyal obedience which he showed to his superior, and dearest
friend he had in the world. On our side was Sixtus, who when he song Mass at
the Altar was solemnly served with seven men of the Clergy. On our side was
S. Laurence, this man's Archdeacon, whom the adversaries cancel out of their
Calenders. To whom Prud. in Him. de. S. Laur. vi. Aug. ser. de S. I aur.
Ambros. lib. 1. off. cap. 4. lib. 2. off 28. Leo sermon. in die S. Laur.
Prudentius, a man that had been Consul in Rome about 1200. years ago prayed
in this wise: O most glorious servant of Christ, what power is given thee, and
what authority is granted unto thee in heaven, the great joy of the Romans
do sufficiently show upon the obteining of such requests as they make unto
thee. Amongst the which number, I beseech thee mercifully give ear to me thy
rude Poet that does confess unto thee my sinful thoughts, and also disclose
my wicked actions, hear benignly, I pray thee, me thy humble suppliant
Prudentius, that has highly offended Christ my Savior. On our side Metaph.
Ambros. ser. 90. tom. 3. and lib. 1. de Virg. Ado. Tae. in martyr. Eusebius. 8.
Hist. 27.
were those most blessed virgins, S. Cecilia, S. Agatha, S. Anastasia, S.
Barbara, S. Agnes, S. Lucia, S. Dorethy, and S. Katherine, who constantly kept
their vowed chastity against the tyranny both of men and devils. S. Helen was
on our side, who was most famous for the finding of the cross of Christ. S.
Monocha the mother of S. Augustine was on our side, who when she lay on her
deathbed most devoutly desired to be praid for after her death, Ruff. lib. 1.
cap. 8. Ex Aug. lib. 9. con. cap. 7. vsque ad 1^. Hiero^. in Epist. Paul.
Hiero^. in cap. Semp. Athanas. Ambros. in orat. fut. de Satyro Joan. Diacon.
Seu. S^lp. Metaph. Grae. lib. 2. Dial.
and to have the This was not the sacrifice of the Mass: read the answer.
sacrifice of the mass offered for her at Christ's altar. S. Paula was on our
side, who forsaking her fair palace situated within the city of Rome, and
her goodly farms abroad in the Country, went on pilgrimage by long iourneys
even unto to the cave of Bethelem, where Christ lay crying in his cradle, there
in solitariness to spend the residue of her time. On our side was S. Paulus,
S. Hilarion, S. Antony, who lived in solitariness till they were old men. On
our side was Satyrus, that was brother germain unto S. Ambrose, who carrying
about him in a stole that dreadful host, and being in present danger of
shipwreck, hoping assuredly that he would protect him, lept into the raging
sea and s^ome to land. On our side were S. Nicholas and S. Martin, who were
both Bishops much exercised in watchings, clothed altogether in haire-cloth,
and fed with fasting. On our side was S. Benet, who was father unto a great
number of Monks. Ten years were not long enough for me to recite this infinite
number of Saints, neither do I here make mention of them, whom before I placed
among the Doctors of the Church. I do not forget my promise, that I would pass
over things as briefly as I could conveniently: let him that would know more
hereof peruse not only the large histories of ancient writers, but also much
more rather the grave authors, which have almost every one of them written
special books of the lives of the Saints, for a remembrance to their
posterity: And you of al those, name me one Jesuit.
then let him tell me what his opinion is of those most ancient Christians,
Vide. 12. tom. Surij.
and most blessed, of whether religion were they, of the Catholics religion,
or of the Lutherans religion? After this manner Campian uses to dispute.
I call to witness the throne of God, and that his tribunal seat, before which
I shall stand to render an account of these my ten reasons, and of my said act
in making my challenge, that either there is no heaven at all, which I and my
adherents do detest, or that it belongs properly to such only as are of our
religion, which thing we for our parts hold for sound doctrine. Now on the
contrary side, if you think good let us look down into hell, Damnati.
where lie some burning in everlasting fire. Who? the Jews: what Church are
they against? ours. Who else? the heathen: What Church have they most cruelly
persecuted? ours, who besides these? the Turks: What Churches have the pulled
down? ours, who yet? the heretics: to what Church were they enemies? to ours.
The Catholic Church, of which your Church is no part.
Forwhat Church I pray you has always withstood the gates of hell, Matthew. 16.
Judai. Eusch. 4. Hist. 5. Hieron. in Epist. ad Paul. and in Epist. ^^d Marcel.
and passim in Epist.
but ours? When after the expulsion of the Jews under Vespatian, and Titus his
son, Christians increased at Jerusalem, O immortal God what coming of good
people was there to the holy places that were there! What wonderful devotion
was there among all sorts of people to see that City of Jerusalem! What zeal
to see Christ's Sepulcher, what desire to see the manger wherein Christ lay,
what thursting after the sight of the cross whereon Christ was nailed, what
longing to behold all sorts of monuments there, in which the holy Church
takes as much delight, as does a spouse in the garments laid off by her
husband! Upon this began that mortal hatred and implacable of the Jews
against us; for even at this day they But they complain without cause, for
they have. no reason why they should be angry with our ancestors.
complain, that our Ancestors were the cause of their Ancestors overthrow: as
for Simon Magus, and the Lutherans, Ethnici.
they received never ablow at their hands. Among the heathen there were many
tyrants, who during their reign for the space of 300. years, by fits at
diverse times, invented most bitter torments against Christians. Against what
manner of Christians I pray you? Leo sermon. de D. Laurent.
Truly against the Fathers of our faith and their Children. Mark well with
your selves the speeches of this tirant, that broiled S. Laure^ce on a
Gridyron: It now well appears, Prud. in him. de S. Laur.
that this is the order and fashion in your sacrifice. This doctrine you all
agree to, that Bishops must offer up their sacrifice in plate of gold, and the
people say, that the sacred blood smoketh out of your cups of silver, and that
ye have tapers burning on golden candlesticks, during all the time of your
night sacrifices. Also as common fame does testify, your brethren have a
special care to offer up thousands of pounds, though they sell their lands to
get the same, the lawful heir being thus disinherited and brought to beggary,
though his holy parents greatly complains for such shameful sale of lands,
as should by right descend to him from his grandfathers. This wealth lies hid
in some secret corners of your Churches, and you think it a great godly deed
to make your sweet babes go naked: fetch out these treasures which thou
hoordest up by thy crafty persuasions, and wicked witchcraft, the which I say
thou had in one dark hole or other: the commonweal, the Kings Eschecker,
and the common treasure have need thereof. That money being employed for
soldiers wages, the general lieutenant may be fully fraughted with soldiers.
I understand that this is an usual doctrine amongst you. Restore to every man
his own, behold the Emperor acknowledges his own physnomie stamped upon his
own coin. Give to Caesar that which thou know to be Caesar's. Truly I
demand nothing but that which is just. Thy God (except I be deceived) comes
no money, neither brought he with him at his coming into the earth any golden
gilderds, but ministered his commandments by word of mouth, being purslesse
himself. Perform faith fully that his doctrine which you openly preach
abroad, restore your money willingly, content your self to be rich in words.
Campian demonstrates his Church by the wealth and riches of it. A note of the
Popish Church.
What manner of man seems this to be? against whom does he thus rage? Whose
Churches, sacrifices, lights, ceremonies, and ornaments has he gone about to
abolish? What Churches, golden goblets, and chalices of silver and costly
gifts and rich stuff envied he at? This man undoubtedly does hold on Luthers
part. Genesis 10.
For what other color have our mighty The Pope of Rome is that Nimrod. the
mighty hunter of the Church.
Nimrods pretended to cover their theft withal, when they robbed 1441 0536 V 3
Gods houses, and made hanock of Christ's inheritance? On the contrary part, what
Church was it that Constantine the great, the very terror of Christ's enemies,
has brought to quietness, even that selfsame Church, over which the high
(...) Bishop Siluester was governor, Dam. in Syl. Zonaras.
whom the said Emperor called out of the mount Soract, where he lay secretly
for fear of persecution, that by the help of the said Siluester he might be
This is false, for Siluester was dead many years before Constantine was
baptized.
baptized with our Baptism: under what banner fought he, that he became so
great a co^queror? even under the banner of the Eusebius. lib. 2. de vita Con. c.
7.8.9 ^ozom. lib. 1. cap. 9.
Cross: who was his mother, that he attained ^o so great honor? even that
blessed woman Saim Helen: what fathers took he part with? with the Fathers for
sooth of the Nicene Council: what manner of men were they? namely they were S.
Siuester, S. Julius, S. Athanasius, S. Nicholas: to whose prayers did he
commend himself? to the prayers of Athan. in vita S. Aut.
S. Antony: what room exacted he in the Council? This is false, for it was
the chiefest and of beaten gold.
the very lowest of all. Oh how much more Princelike was he; when he sat in
this seat then they, that since that time ambitionsly have made sale for a
l^ttle, that is far unfit for a King! It were too long to declare every matter
in particular; but by these two Emperors, whereof the one was our deadly enemy,
the other was our most faith full friend, one may easily conjecture of every
other circumstance, which are like to these before spoken of. For as under the
Tyrant our Catholic Christians, had a trouble some increase, so under this
Emperor through Gods great mercy, they were brought to a most happy end. Let
us look a little into the Turks affairs: It is manifest that the Turks have
no less in creased by the help of the Pope, then by their own strength.
Mahomet and Sergius the Monk, that fell from his religion, by howling in the
deep pit of hell, oppressed both with their own sins, and the sins of
their posterity. This monstrous and outrageous beast, Vide Volat. Jouium.
Aemil. lib. 8 Blond. lib. 9. de. 1.
I mean the Saracens and Turks, if they had not bin quailed and driven back
heretofore by the orders of Knights, in our holy warfare and by the Princes and
people that take our part: as for Luther, He has good cause to be thankful
to the Pope of Rome.
to whom it is reported, that Solomon the great Turk, for this cause gave
great thanks by his letters, yea and as for the Lutheran Princes, to whom the
fortunate success of the Turks is but a laughing matter, as for them, I say,
this ^aging fury, and most mischievous to mortallmen, had before this time
destroyed and overthrown all Europe, and would have occupied himself, as
busily in pulling down of Altars and signs of Christ's Cross, as ever Calvin
was himself. Wherefore they are our peculiar enemies. Seeing that by our men's
industry, hitherto, they have been kept back from off Christian men's throats.

Let us take a view of heretics, Haretici. Clem. lib. 1. recog. Iren. lib. 1.
cap. 2. Cyp. Epist. ad Iubatam. and l. 4. Epist. 2. Theodo^o de fab. haeret.
and Aug. her 46. Epiph. haere 75. Socrat. lib. 2. c. 35. Hier. in Iou. and
Vigil. Aug. her. 82.
which are the very dregs and bellows, and fit food for hell fire. The
first that comes into my mind is Simon Magus: what did he? This is false,
read the answer.
he took from man freewill, he was still prating of faith only. The next that
I remember was Nouatian. What of him? he opposed himself to Cornelius the Pope
of Rome. He was an enemy to the Sacramets of Perance, and holy Unction.
Thirdly, I think of Manes the Persian, who taught that He taught that Baptism
did avail nothing at all.
Baptism was not a sufficient mean to work our salvation. After him there
started up Aerius and Arian, who condemned prayers for the only, and was
therefore forenamed the This was Aetius not Aetius.
Atheist as well as Lucian was. Then followed Vigilantius, which would not
permit men to pray unto Saints, and Iouinian, who maintained marriage to be as
excellent as virginity: Finally there came after all the whole rabble of
heretics, as Macedonius, Pelagius, Nestorius, Eutyches, Monothelites, Image
breakers, and others; to which number our posterity will add also Luther and
Calvin: what of all these? Every one of them like carrion Crows, hatched al of
one kind of egg, rebelled against the chief rulers of our Church, and by them
were confounded and brought to naught. Let us now leave speaking of hell, to
return to the earth again. Terrae. Seeds Apostolica. Ep. 162.
Whither soever I shall cast mine eyes, and incline my cogitation, whether I
behold the Patriarchs, and Seas Apostolic, or the Bishops of other countries,
or renowned Princes and Emperors, or the first entrance of Christian religion,
into every nation, or any monuments of antiquity, or the light of reason, or
the comely sight of honesty. Vide Tert. de praes^ Aug. lib. 2. de Doct.
Christ. cap. 8.
I find that all of them do dutiful service, and speak favorably for our
religion: witness hereof the Roman succession. In whose Church (that I may say
as does S. Augustine) While Augustine lived, the principaline of the Apostles
chair flourished in that Church. But that apostolic chair is long ago
overthrown.
the principality of the Apostolic chair, has ever been in force: witnesses
also hereunto, are the seas of the rest of the Apostles, to whom the name
Apostolic most excellently agrees. Because they were first erected by the
Apostles themselves, or by those that heard them preach. Witnesses also are the
Pastors of every Church throughout the wide world, who, Terra disiunctissima.
Hieron. in cat. scrip. eccl. and alij.
though their abode was in diverse places, yet our religion was common to them
also. As S. Ignatius, and S. Chrysostom lived at Antioch: S. Peter, Alexander,
Athanasius and Theophilus at Alexandria; Macarius and Cyril at Jerusalem,
Proculus at Constantinople. Gregory and Basil at Capadocia, Gregory surnamed
Tha^maturgus in Pontus: Polycarpus at Smyrna: Justinius at Athens, Dionysius at
Corinth. Another Gregory at Nissa: Methodius at Tyrus, Ephreenus in Syria,
Cyprian, Optatus, Augustine in Afric. Epiphanius in Cyprus, Andrew in Creet,
Ambrose, Paulinus, Gaudentius, Prosper, Faustus, Vigilius in Italy, I^encus,
Martyrus, Hilarious, Eucherius, Gregory of Toures, and Siluianus in France,
Vincentius, Orosins, Heldefonsus, Leander and Isidorus in Spain: Fugatius,
Damanus, Iustus Mellitus and Bid in England. Finally, lest I should seem
ambitious in reckoning so many names, what treatises or fragments of treatises
so ever be extant, of those as in the Primitive Church preached the Gospel,
though in countries far asunder, yet all of them do deliver unto us, one and
the selfsame faith This is most false.
which we Catholics do at this present profess; what cause (good Christ)
could I allege, before thee for my example, but that thou might justly
exclude me altogether from thy blessed company, if I should prefer a number of
hedge-creepers, both few in account, and also unlearned, divided amongst
themselves in opinions, and of a ^^so lo^^ before s^^^^y You ought not to hang
your soul upon men.
light ^^^^pes of the Church? Witnesses also are all Pri^^^s, Principes.
Kings, Emperors and all their C^^^^-weales, the godliness of which Princes
themselves, Vide C^p. To^. (...). de s^^ctis.
and also the people under their jurisdiction and their good government, both
in times of peace and of marres, have at the first grounded themselves upon
this sound rock of our Catholic doctrine. What famous men out of the East
might I here recite unto you that bear the name of Theodosius? what worthy
men out of the West, of the name of Charles? what Edwards out of England, what
Lewesses out of France, what Hermingildes out of Spain, what Henry's out of
Saxony, what Winceslaes out of Bohemia, what Leopaldes out of Austria? What
Steuens out of Hungary, what Iosephats out of Indie? And finally what noble
governors of many Empires, and Rulers of particular Countries, throughout the
whole world, who by their good example, by their force, by their laws, by
their continual care, by their charges, have maintained our Church? For so
has Esaias prophesied, Esaias. 48.
Kings shall be thy foster Fathers, and Queens shall be thy nurses. Give ear,
O Queen Elizabeth most mighty Princes, to your Majesty this great Prophet
tells this tale, he teaches you precisely, what you have to do. And I tell
you plain that one heaven cannot contain You tell us this thing most
foolishly.
Calvin and these Peers. Let your Majesty therefore take part with these
honorable Princes, that you may show your self a condign heir unto your
noble auncesters, answerable unto your excellent wit, correspo^dent to your
profound knowledge, worthy of high commendations, and finally fit for your
royal dignity. Only this I endeavor as touching your Majesty, and will
endeavor whatsoever become of me, against whom, as though I were your deadly
enemy, these fellows do so often threaten hanging on the gallows: o welcome
sweet cross to me, o welcome, I say, ten thousand times sweet cross of mine!
the day will come (most sovereign Lady and Queen Elizabeth) even that day I
say will come, which shall ^^^dently s^t before your Majesty's eyes whether of
the two have more sincerely loved you, the She has long ago and very
sufficiently perceived, yt how greatly your society has loved her. Fie away
varlates!
society of Jesuits or Luthers progeny. Nationes ad Chri^^^^ tra^^^^.
I go forward, there will witness with us all coasts and quarters of the
world, wherein the ^^angelicall trumpet has been sounded ever since Christ's
nativity. Was this, think you, an easy matter to shut the mouths of idols,
and to translate the kingdom of God unto the Gentiles. Luther speaks of
Christ, and we Catholics speak also of Christ. Is Christ then He is divided
by you.
divided? 1. Cor. 1.
no surely, but either we preach a wrong Christ, or else he. How then shall we
know who preaches Christ aright? I will tell thee. Let him be true Christ, and
on their side by whose bringing in Dagons necks were broken. 1. Reg. 5.
That Christ which is on our side was well content to use the service of men of
our Church, when he expelled out of the hearts of so many people, such a number
of Jupiters, Mercuries, Dianes, Phebades, and an horrible dark rabble and
lamentable hellishnes wherewith many in former time were oppressed. I have not
respit to fetch matter out of far Countries. Let us then consider of such as
either border upon us, or else are familiar with us at home. All these that
follow sucked into their breasts either no faith at all, or the self same
faith undoubtedly which we profess, that is, the Catholic faith; namely the
Irish men from S. Patrick, the Scots from Palladius, and the English men from
S. Austen, who were all consecrated Bishops at Rome, sent from Rome, and
always used great reverence toward Rome. Cumulus testium.
The matter is manifest; I run forward: witnesses hereof are all Universities,
witnesses all written laws, witnesses are the common manners of all people
every where in their own countries, witnesses are the fashions of choosing
Emperors, and the solemn ceremonies used in their Coronation, witness are
the ancient rites exercised in the anointing of Kings, witnesses are the
orders practiced in dubbing of Knights, and their very Cloakes,
cloakes. Also witnesses (...) the Church windows, Church windows, gates of
Cities, houses, all manner of things great and small, are wonderful
testimonies.
witnesses are the pieces of money, witnesses are the gates and houses of every
City, witnesses are the worthy works and virtuous lives of our au^^^st^rs;
finally, witnesses are all manner of things both great and small, and all kind
of orders, that never any other religion but our catholic religion that ever
took any deep root upon the face of the earth. When I saw my self guarded
with all these helps, and felt my self comforted with the consideration
thereof, I thought it a point of insolent folly, to forsake the great company
of all these good Christians, and to join fellowship with the veriest ra^^hels
that live: therefore I confess that I was greatly animated and urged unto this
scholasticall combat; wherein, unless the saints be driven out of heaven, and
proud Lucifer recover heaven again, I cannot take the fail. Wherefore I trust,
M. Chark, who has conceived so evil opiuio^ of me heretofore, will yet now
show me a more favorable countenance, in that I had rather commit in trust this
sinful soul of mine, which Christ has so dearly bought, to a safe and
certain way, and unto the Kings high way, then hang it upon the rocks and
bushes of Caluines devilish doctrine.

The Conclusion.
Here have you (most flourishing men of both the Universities) this my slender
gift, composed at vacant times as I traveled: I minded herein both to acquit
my self before you of arrogancy, and to answer your expectation, why I had
so great a trust in this cause, and in the mean while to give you a taste of
some reasons to find you eccupied until you may be invited to take my part in
the Schools, and to forsake the adversaries. If you judge it to be right and
reason, if you think it a safe thing for you, if you think it to be an honest
point that It is as meant that Luther and Calvin should be so accounted of, as
the Pope.
Luther and Calvin should be taken for the true Canon of Scripture, for the
true meaning of the holy ghost, for the rule of the Church, for a
Schoolmaster over all Councels and Fathers, and lastly for a God, and
therefore to be believed before all witnesses and ag^^. There is no cause then
at all why I should conceive any good hope of your indiffere^cie, either in
perusing of these my ten reasons, or else in giving ear unto me if I might be
allowed to dispute. But if you be such men as I have always persuaded my self
that you were, I means wise Philosophers, very circumspect, and embracers of
truth, simplicity and modesty, enemies to rashness, fables, and sophistical
cauilling; then I doubt not but you which now spy a little light at a narrow
chinek, will quickly see the day light in an open place: freely and franckly I
will let you understand of that which the love I bear you, the danger you
stand in, and the weightinesse of the cause requires. It is well known to the
devil that you shall see the truth of this cause, if ever you begin to cast up
your eyes. For what a senseless part were it to prefer such as Hanmer and
Charke before the antiquity of all Christendom? As though Popery had no
baits by which it intangleth the professors of it.
But there be certain pleasant baits in Luthers doctrine, wherewith he
inlargeth his kingdom, with which baits he being first caught himself, has
entangled as many of your coat, as bite at the same baits. For what are these
baits? forsooth gold, vaineglory, delicate fare, and Venus games. Despise them;
for what are they else but the very off-scumme of the earth, a loud blast of
wind, delicate worms meat, and fair dunghils* I say regard them not, for
Christ is rich, who will not fail, but find you all things necessary. Christ
is a King, and will adorn you. Christ is well stored with dainty fare, and
will satisfy your appetites. Christ is most beautiful, and will plentifully
bestow upon you great store of all felicities: adioyne your selves as soldiers
unto this Captain, that so gallantly goes on warfare, that like most learned
men indeed, and of most valor, with him at the last day you may triumph for
the victory which you have obtained. Fare you well. From the large City of
the wide word.

WILLIAM WHITAKERS. The answer to the tenth Reason, which is all manner of
Witnesses.
CAmpian, you are now low drawn and do plainly bewray your want and desperate
beggerie. Hitherto have you found no place of sure footing, and therefore now
you have resolved to wander and run thorough whatsoever is in the world. So
one while you fly alost into heaven, by and by you slip down to hell: after
you visit the Jews, Pagans, Turks, Heretics, Lands, Seas Apostolic, Nations
and Countries far remote, searching diligently for any monument of your
superstition. I am sorry and ashamed on your behalf, whom I see painefully
busied about mere trifles. For what a witles kind of reasoning is this; first
to reckon up the Saints in Heaven, and say, these are ours? Then to number up
the damned, Jews, Gentiles, Turks, Heretics, and affirm those are the
enemies of our Church? To rehearse those Countries that have been converted to
the faith of Christ, and conclude by and by, these are of our Religion? would
you take this man to be well in his wits, compassing Heaven, Earth and Hell so
childishly, DVR. Jf here he any thing ridiculous, then may you laugh at the
Prophet, who a^ speedily runs over the whole world. And S. Paul took a
testimony for a truth out of the beathen Poet, Act. 17.2^. WHIT. page 856. Who
knows not that God may be known by his creatures, and religion illustrated
by nature vncorrupt? but what nature, I pray you, has taught Campta^ thus to
judge of the heavenly spirits and the damned souls, and of the whole fr^me of
things? can he learn by nature that those who have professed the Popish
religion, do now enjoy heavenly happiness, and that they who dislike it are
tormented in hell? These weapons of Campian were those that impure Symmachus
opposed Christian religion withal, Ambros. Epist. 30. Prudent. contra
Symmachum.
ridiculouslie, and impertinently taking unto himself, what he likes, and
rejecting the rest? A worthy cauil, fit for none but Jesuits, which when a
man has by one negative discharged, can never be proved by their perverse sect
and whole society. These dreams of yours (Campian) are unworthy any answer,
one word of denial confutes this whole Chapter. I will not bestow much time in
answering this Sophisme, so vnhansomely framed, and patched together; it shall
suffice lightly to pass, and only touch every thing in a word. First therefore
you allege the prophecy of Esaias, of a straight way wherein the simple should
not err. DVR. You show your ignorance in the Prophet; for he speaks not of
the way to the Church, but of the Church it self, which is the high way to
heaven. WHIT. page 857. Howsoever you interpret the way, it makes neither much
for me, nor for you. The question is who shall find out that way and walk in
it, for it is not discerned of all, because it is a plain way, nor held of
all, because it is a right way: but he that has learned Christ is he that
walks in this way without any error, though he be but silly and unskillful.
DVR. Jf this be so, then can it not be the true Church, which contains
sinners and men polluted. And the Fathers by this place exclude only those who
are not cleansed by Baptism. WHIT. page 858. The Prophet speaks of the Church
of the elect and Saints, because he says verse. 8. The polluted shall not pass
by it: and verse. 20. the redeemed only, whose joy shall be everlasting: but the
visible Church contains those which are impure, whom Christ has not
redeemed, and whose joy shall perish. As for Baptism it purges none but such
as lay hold of the promise of free justification by Christ, as Tit. 3.5.


Here the Prophet describes the entrance into Christ's Church, viz. that it
should be ready, plain and easy. But this way brings us not to your Church: c
for of this way the Prophet reports, that no profane man, no Lion or cruel
beast shall be found in it; whereas all your ways are compassed with polluted
men, raging beasts, Lions, Bears, Leopards, Dragons, Devils; and in
conclusion, they lead miserably bewitched men, unto woeful destruction. As for
us, we tread that way, which Christ and his Apostles have traced out before
us, we avoid your erroneous and strange ways, because it is the way of
sinners, that you s^^^d in; which way whosoever tread^, Psalm. 1.1. Romans 3.17.
the way of pe^ce they have not known. First, understand the path well your
selves, and then direct the way unto us.

Let us (say you) as^^^d into heaven: I fear you Jesuits have no place there,
Heaven is for Christians, not Jesuits. But suppose your selves for the time to
be in heaven, what follows? Let us behold (say you) the Martyrs* 33. Bishops
of Rome slain together, the Universal Pastors, companies of the faithful,
all holy Saints. Well, survey (Campian) heaven it self, and all the heavenly
host, look well in all the parts, and coasts of it whiles you list, you shall
not find there (upon my word) one Jesuit not one Papist; for none shall stand
in Mount Zion with the Lamb, Apoc. 14.1.
that have received the mark of the beast, or belong unto Antichrist. But in
heaven are 33. Bishops of Rome, and many more, I doubt not; but of all these,
name me one, if you can, of your religion, whom you may justly claim as yours.
Those were holy and faithful Bishops which shed their blood for the name of
Christ. But your Popes for these many hundred years, what else have they done,
but persecuted Christ, and murdered his true servants? If those 33. Bishops be
in heaven (as doubtless they are) how many late Popes could I reckon up, which
possibly cannot be where they are, in all things they are so unlike them? You
pick out a few, let us see who these are: Ignatius, say you, was ours; why I
pray you? He thought no man equal to the Bishop in causes ecclesiastical, not
the King himself, and left in writing certain Apostolic traditions; neither
say we that any man is to be compared with the Bishop in such things as belong
to his office: DVR. If these be so proper to Bishops, that they cannot belong
to Kings, then, you being judge, the Queen cannot be the head of the English
Church. WHIT. page 160. We acknowledge no other head of the Church save Christ.
And Prince though they may not do any of th^se (...), yet they rule ouerthem,
who do and ought to command them, diligently to execute their offices; which
if they neglect, they ought to reprove, compel, and punish them, as we read
the good Kings of the Church Jewish and Christian have ever done: and the
reason has no force, Princes have no authority to preach, therefore they have
no authority to punish those who teach false doctrine to their people.
He only ought to ouersee holy things, viz. instruction of the people,
administration of the Sacraments, use of the keys of the kingdom of heaven.
These are matters of great weight, and exceed the kingly authority; yet are
Kings above Bishops in wealth, honor, government, majesty, and they may
lawfully both admonish them of their duty, and restrain them when they
offend. If Bishops herein would equal themselves with Kings it were too
intolerable. As for the Apostles traditions which Ignatius has left in
writing, we receive them so far as they agree with the Apostolical
Scripture: if they dissent from those, we refuse them. The Epistles of Ignatius
were most of them counterfeit, as every man may see: here you rehearse many,
and still the vndersong is, these are ours: Telesphorus (say you) Ireneus,
Victor, Polycarp, Cornelius, Cyprian, Sixtus, Laurentius, are ours. But I
affirm that all these do belong unto us: let us then consider how you will
persuade us they are yours.

Telesphorus enjoined a more strict observation of Lent fast, appointed by the
Apostles. DVR. But J prove it by these witnesses, Augustine, Hierome, Basil,
Ambrose, Epiphanius, Clemen^. WHIT. page 862. And I prove the contrary by the
Fathers. August. Epist. ^6. writes plainly that neither Christ not his
Apostles ordained any certain time for fastings. And so not Lent. Tertul.
aduer. Psychicos: In times past Christians indifferently fasted, of their own
free will, as every man's time and occasions required, and not by any command of
new government. Does not this overthrow the necessary observation of Lent?
Chryso. in Mat. hom 47. freely confesses that Christ did not command us to
imitate his fast. But what is Lent but an imitation of it? Further, Montanus
was the first who brought up set solemn days of fastings, Eusebius. lib. 5. cap.
17. Finally, Ireneus in Eusebius lib. 5. cap. 26. shows that in the Primitive
Church, there was great variety about the keeping of this fast, and that this
difference began not in his time only, but was long before. Therefore it is
false that Christ and his Apostles appointed the fast of Forty days.
I deny that the Apostles ordained any such Len^en fast, or that Telesphorus,
commanded a more precise observation thereof. The Apostles were far from
ordeining, and Telesph^rus from reviving so great superstition.

Clemens his Constitutions where this is reported, are not sufficient
authority. But if this fast were prescribed by the Apostles, I wonder how
afterward it was discontinued, so as it should be necessary for Telesphorus
to enioyn the keeping of it more precisely, especially seeing such strife was
in the Church about the celebration of Easter. The epistle of Telesphorus
wherein he commands the 7. weeks fast, has the same authority with the rest
of your decretall epistles of your Pope, which were not framed by the most holy
Bishops themselves, but coined since by the most impudent Parasites of the
church of Rome. Jren. lib. 4. cap. 43.
Ireneus (say you) declared the Apostolic faith from the succession and sea of
Rome. So he might well then: for as Ireneus elsewhere says, They retained with
the succession of Bishops, the gracious succession of truth: for succession is
nothing worth without truth. Your Chair and Sea has Bishoply succession; it
has not the succession of truth. Victor (say you) by his edict subdued Asia.
He endeavored it indeed (Campian) but failed of his purpose: for being a man
very passionate, he would needs excommunicate all such Churches of Asia as
refused to keep Easter according to the Roman custom. When he began thus
insolently to abuse his authority, DVR. Neither Ireneus nor any other denied to
Pope Victor this power to excommunicate the Churches of Asia. WHIT. page 863.
But Eusebius wri^eth lib. 5. cap. 25. that both Ireneus and many other
Catholic Bishops sharply reproved him for assuming that power.


Ireneus tamed and restrained him. As for the controversy about Easter, Victor
was so far from composing and ending it, that it continued unto the DVR By
the same reason you may say the Councils decree prevailed nothing to endi^^^
controversy. WHIT. page 864. The reason is good, and proves that when he
could prevail neither by examples, reasons, nor threatenings, that those
Churches did not account Pope Victor for the head of the Church. And though
after that Council of Nice, some Churches observed the Passover after another
manner, yet the most Churches followed the judgment and authority of the
Council. So the Council prevailed more then the Pope could do.
Council cell of Nice. You may see how well Victor subduer all Asia.

Polycarpe in the question about Easter went to Rome, Smyrna gathered his
relics. Wonderful reasons. Polycarpe went to Rome to consult with Anycetus
about Easter, and Smyrna gathered his relics; ergo Polycarpe is yours. Does
not the learned Universities make you ashamed of this childish sophistry? DVR.
Envy makes you forge an untruth. And whil. for eunie you pine away a^ the
honor which is given of Christians to the relics of Martyrs, you imitate the
Jews and the Devil. WHIT. page 865. I have spoken neither less nor more then
Eusebius has written who the^ lived* After we had gathered his banes being
more precious then pearls and gold, we buried them where it was thought sit.
And as for the relics of Sai^ns, I envy them not, the Saints themselves I
ever honorably remember. But that the relics of Saints were worshipped with
religi^us honor, as they are in your Church, you shall never be able to prove.
His bones indeed were gathered by the Church of Smyrna, not to worship them,
but to bury them, as Eusebius in the same place records. But why are
Cornelius and Cyprian yours? forsooth, because Cornelius abolished the i
African error, and Cyprian had him in great reverence. Oh wonderful
Jesuitical Logic DVR. His supreme authoritia appears in this, because he
decreed that controversy, being not the Bishop of Afric, but of Rome. WHIT.
page 866. Saint Paul confuted many errors of the Churches of Galatia, Co^inth,
Rome and diverse others, yet was he never supreme Bishop. So did Augustine:
But what error did he suppress? was it touching Baptism by heretics; that he
never could do, but Cyprian and the Bishops of Afric constantly held it:
which proved they never acknowledged that he had any such authority.
who can choose but be much moved with such strong reasons? But let us hear
another.

Sixtus is ours: and why so? Seven of the Clergy ministered unto him, while
he served at the altar. Seven Deacons helped Sixtus to celebrate the Lords
supper, ergo Sixtus is yours. If this reason be of force, let him be yours
hardly, I will not strive with you about him; but herein is nothing why he may
not as well be DVR. Pope Sixtus a Priest, offered up the body and blood of
Christ, Deacons assisting of him could not be a Caluinist, but on our side.
WHIT. page 868. As if we had no Deacons, who help the Minister when he
celebrateth the Lords Supper?
ours as yours. Does it become you (Campian) thus to trifle, thus to abuse our
patience? What follows? Laurence is yours: how so I pray you? Our adversaries
have cast him out of their Calouder. We remember him with reverence as a saint,
and a friend of Christ; though we worship him not as God. But Prudentine prayed
unto him a thousand years ago. Give leave (Campian) to a Poet, to use
poetical auersions, from whence yet no strong reason can be drawn. But if
Prudentius were something too superstitious, what is that to us? Now you reckon
up virgins, C^cilia, Agatha, and others: but what have they done why they
should not be ours? When the Tyrants examined them of their faith, they
professed themselves Christians: if they were Christians, they were ours. But
Helen, say you, was ours, who is every way famous for finding the cross of
Christ. That which Ambrose reports of Helen, is very suspicious, and Golasius
Bishop of Rome calls these things that were bruted of the invention of the
cross, Dill. 15. Sanct. Romana.
new revelations. But grant that Helen found the Cross, for it is not greatly
material: Did she adore it? for that is to the purpose. Hear what Ambrose
says: She found the style, Ambros. in Orat. suneb. Theodos.
she worshipped the King, not the wood certainly: for this is a heathenish
error, and a vanity of the wicked. Wherefore though she found the Cross, that
is no reason to prove her yours, seeing she worshipped not the cross, as you
do: for not finding, but adoring of the DVR. We give not Latria divine
worship to the Cross. WHIT page 868. The distinction will not excuse you, for
you reach that the Cross and the Image of Christ, is to be worshipped with
Latria or divine worship, Thom. 3. part. 25. q. act. 3. and 4. which is so
horrible and pernicious, that it exceeds all the superstition of old
Idolaters.
Cross makes a Papist.

Monica is ours, who at her death desired they should pray, and offer sacrifice
for her at Christ's altar. Monica desired not that the DVR. She desired to be
sacrificed for, and what other sacifice is there, but the sacrifice of the
Altar, to take away the hand a ritiue against us. WHIT. page 870. That I have
answered in Augustines (...) words, Confess. lib. 9. cap. 13. he only desired
to be remembered at the Altar. It was a custom in the Church to make honorable
mention of the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, the Virgin Mary, the Martyrs,
and Confessors, whom they never thought to be tormented in Purgatory; but your
Mass is offered for those, whom you think as yet not to be freed from that
fire, and to be in heavenly joys. And what a kind of sacrifice it was,
Augustine shows in the same place, saying: Thy hand maiden kuit her soul by
the bond of faith, to the Sacrament of that price of our redemption. He calls
then the Eucharist a sacrifice which takes away the handwriting against us,
because it is the Sacrament of that sacrifice.
sacrifice of the Mass should be offered for her, for the forgiveness and
expiation of her sins, neither did Augustine either pray or offer for his
mother in this manner. The desire of Monica was only this, that at the
celebration of the Eucharist there might always be a remembrance of her,
insomuch as she assured herself she was one of the heavenly society and
community of saints. Augustine indeed prayed for his mother, I deny not; but
this his fact proceeded more of affection to his mother then for any
necessity. And the custom of prayer for the dead, which prevailed in many
places, was not derived from the authority of the scriptures, but only from an
excessive kind of love and reverence of them that lived, toward their friends
that were dead. But that Augustine never believed his mother to be in
Purgatory, that his prayers might relieve her there, it is manifest; for thus
he says, Forgive her Lord, forgive her, I beseech thee, August. confess. lib.
9. cap. 13.
enter not into judgment with her o Lord, yea o Lord, I believe thou have
already granted that which I desire, but accept o Lord the freewill offerings
of my mouth. But if we should grant that both Augustine and his mother went a
little awry, you cannot here infer that either of them are yours, for so
much as we are not to give censure of the Fathers (in greatest causes) by one
particular judgment, but by their continual and constant opinion. You annex
hereunto Paula and Paulus, Hilarian and Authony. I could reckon six hundred
Monks like unto these, whereof not one was a Papist, none of them yours. All
these were Christians loving solitarines, that they might more quietly intend
the meditation of heavenly things. Compare not your Monks with these, which are
of an other sort, and sect of Monks. These were holy, painful, faithful,
full of good works: yours are impure, idle, idolatrous, deuourers, hogs,
oxen, asles: how are those like? But how shall it appear unto us that Satyrus
the brother of Ambrose was yours? Being in danger, he leaped into the sea and
swimming escaped by the strength of his faith. A goodly reason; he was a good
smimmer, ergo DVR But which of you did any such thing armed thing armed with
the Caluinist Supper? WHIT. page 872. And which of you armed with the Host,
durst cast himself into the sea, unless he had learned first to swim? And
at that time Satyrus was not only saved, but also others who had not the Host.
yours: other pretense you make none. Why Nicholas and Martinus should be
yours, you show no cause, for wearing haire-cloth, fasting and watching, are no
marks of your Bishops. Benedict (say you) was the founder and father of the
Monkish profession, therefore without doubt he must be yours. I could be
content to leave him, as too superstitious, yet can you not prove that he was
yours, or favored your religion in all or the most things. Here you say you
pass over thousands, Francis I think you mean, and Dominicke, and those huge
swarms of white Friars and black Friars: I freely bequeath them unto you, and
willingly suffer you to enjoy them, and all such as were like them. They were
not of that worth that we should need greatly to strive about them. You pass
over the Doctors in silence, which you formerly remembered; wherein I commend
your wisdom, seeing to them you can make no claim without doing them too
apparent wrong. You demand of all those before recited, whether they were
Catholics or Lutheranes; to which I will answer, when you have showed how
Lutheranisme dissenteth from true Catholic religion. Luther taught no new
doctrine, he restored and maintained the ancient Catholic faith. What though
he was unknown unto those ancient Fathers, as being himself of later years,
yet the doctrine he brought was Evangelical and Apostolic, which you had
welnigh extinguished, which he restored to his former beauty and perfection.
Answer me (Campian) this one thing; of all those you have named, what one was
a DVR. But all these did ever consent in faith and differed only in such things
which might be disputed without any hazard of faith. WHIT. page 873. Be it
granted, they did agree in matter of faith: why then do they not follow all
one rule? But S. Paul reproved the Corinthians agreeing in faith, because they
attributed to their Ministers more then was meet, vvhilest one had devoted
himself to S. Paul, another to S. Peter, another to Apollo. What then shall be
done to the Scotistes, Thom^stes and others? are the names of Scotus, Thomas,
Francis more holy and lawful names in their disciples, then the names of S.
Peter, S. Paul, and of Apollo? Besides the difference is very great, not in the
name, but in things also As thus Let the question be whether the Cross and
Image of Christ be to be worshipped with the same kind of worship that Christ
is adored withal? Does not this appertain to faith? But error in this will be
plain Idolatry. And yet you know some of the Schoolmen stand for it, some
against i^: what of that question, which has exercised al Churches and
Schools so long; Whether the Virgin Marie had original sin, or was ever
pure and without spot? And infinite such differences I omit, being matter of
faith.


Thomist, Scotist, Dominican, Franciscan, or Jesuit? when you have answered me
touching those, I will answer as touching Luther. You call the Throne of God
to witness, that if there be any heaven at all, it is proper to you. In any case
avouch this boldly and confidently; though he that looks into your lines may
well think there is no heaven at all. For neither will you enter into heaven
your selves, nor suffer those that would; and the lives of those of your side
are such, as are far fitter for hell then for heaven. I know not (Campian) what
heaven you dream of; if you mean the eternal habitation of God, and his
Saints, I take God to witness the maker of this palace, and all the heavenly
citizens, that there no place can be for you Papists, false Catholics,
Jesuits. As you have devised a new faith whereby you must enter thither, so
must you seek a new heaven; in this you may not be. God grant you may return
at length into the right way that leads into heaven.

Now being fallen from heaven, The damned.
you look into hell. I wish (Campian) you could seriously view those infernal
regions and places of the damned; for though I do willingly think nothing but
well of the dead; yet I fear you should find too too many of the^ that have
flourished in your Church, in those places. Certainly (to say nothing of the
rest) your later Popes, as those which were called by the names of Boniface,
Innocent, Siluester, Gregory, Calixt, Vrbane, Alexander, Adrian, Pius, Leo,
Paul, and almost all the rest; were such, as hardly can any man think they
could enter into heaven. And further, I call Christ the only teacher of
heavenly doctrine to record, that such is your faith and religion, that who so
maintains it fully and wholly, cannot reign with Christ, nor be partaker of
that heavenly life; and therefore not Jews only, Pagans, Turks, and notorious
Heretics are tormented in that fire that never goes out, but Papists also, of
all Heretics the most vile and odious. Infinite are the souls of Christian
men, which have been thrown headlong into this most woeful destruction these
many hundred years by that Antichrist of yours, who alone has more enlarged
that infernal kingdom, then all Jews, Nerves, Mahomets, Arians, Nestorians,
Macedonians, Eutychians, and the rest. To you (Campian) I wish that salvation
which consists in the true knowledge of God, and whom he has sent Jesus
Christ, and desire from my heart that now at length you will renounce that
Roman Antichrist, with whom you have conuersed, and return unto Christ the
only giver of eternal life, from whom too long you have banished your self.

But let us consider what these damned ones will further your cause. Jews.
The Jews you begin with, and here you reckon Jerusalem, holy places, our
Saviors Sepulcher, the Manger, Cross, and other (...) from all which you
cannot draw one argument for your purpose. I deny not, but great concourse of
people thronged unto the City, partly to hear and see the Apostles whiles
they lived, and also to behold those places, where Christ the Son of God had
conuersed; and at Jerusalem were many things, which might move and persuade men
to go thither, that were any thing curiously inclined. And although the Church
then was too much addicted to these observations, and as a Spouse exceedingly
delighted with any remembrance of her deceassed husband, yet was she then far
from those superstitious DVR. We do but imitate our fore fathers, who did
such things not of curiosity but religiously, Hier. Epist. ad Macel and Pailon.
August. Epist. ad Clerum and Pop. Hipp. WHIT. page 878. But Christ says, Joh.
4.21.23. If then I may worship God with great frui^e in mine own country, I
see not why I should go to Jerusalem or any other place on Pilgrimage. And if
I have the authority of the Scriptures, object not unto me Hierom, or
Augustine, or any other, who^ I cannot allow to speak without Scripture
against Scripture. And as for Fathers, know you not that Gregory Nyssen has
with pregnant reason confuted all superstitious peregrinations? w^it not
Bernard; Monks must search for the heavenly not earthly Jerusalem, which
they must go unto not by their feet, but by affections?


pilgrimages, and dotings on Images, which with you Papists is now usual.

Neither was this often recourse of Christians into those places the cause of
the Jews hatred unto the^, as you untruly surmise; but the Gospel was the
true cause of difference betwixt them and us. Romans 11.28
They urge Moses; we teach that Moses must give place to Christ; DVR. They
hate us not so much for our faith and profession, as because we have spoiled
them of their kingdom and Priesthood, and have cast them out of their
country. WHIT. page 877. But what Christian ever spoiled the Jews of their
kingdom, or thus expelled them? Did Caligula, Titus, or Adrian destroy the
Jews for the religion of Christ? And if they hated you, because you have
bereft them of their Priesthood, why not us for the Gospel, which teaches
that the Priesthood is translated from the posterity of Aaron unto Christ?
from hence only proceeds their hatred unto us: but you are odious unto the^ in
many respects; DVR Many Jews have become Catholics, but not Caluinists, as
Jeuer heard of. WHIT. page 878. We desire they might be made Christians not
Caluinists, as our Churches has many of them, I will (...) you one, of whom it
were strange you should not have heard, Emanuell Tre^^lius a Jew borne, being
brought to the religion of Christ, whom Calvin loved dearly, and his
Catechism he translated into the Hebrew tongue.
your manifold idolatries continually hindering them from receiving the Gospel
of Christ. Remove your idols, that we all that are called Christians, may
worship God in spirit and truth. The Jews then will join themselves unto us,
and will speedily in great multitudes betake themselves to the sheepfold of
Christ. The Jews complain they have been destroyed by your Ancestors; whom
mean you, the Romans who raced the City under the conduct of Titus? These
were enemies of the faith of Christ: will you be their posterity, or what
other Ancestors have you, that have been author of so great calamity unto the
Jews? They have, I grant, many things in their religion, which will ever
alienate them from you: yet in many respects the Jews are much beholding unto
you; so as unless they will incur the suspicion of great unthankfulness, they
must love you again deservedly. For you give them leave to use their ancient
Ceremonies, and that in Rome, and freely to utter their blasphemies against
Christ without blame; so they pay tribute, they have impunitie for all their
sacriledges and blasphemies. The Lutheranes (say you) never opposed themselves
against them, neither did they ever receive any damage from the Jesuits.
Heathens.
You proceed to Heathens, among whom you affirm those were most violent which
devised the most grievous torments for Christians. I will easily grant, that
those Tyrants that killed and murdered the Christians for the space of 300.
years, were violent and outrageous above measure. What of this? These (say
you) that were thus drawn unto all kinds of torment that could be devised,
These were the fathers and children of our faith. Nothing less (Campian:) this
should have bin soundly proved, not barely affirmed. No likeness or affinity of
faith or works can be found betwixt you and them, so far are they from being
your fathers, or you their children. For as our Savior said to the Jews, If
you were the children of Abraham, Ioh. 8.39.
you would do the works of Abraham; so if these had been your fathers (as you
say) and you their children, you should have resembled them as your fathers.
But beware (Campian) lest that which follows agree more fitly unto you; You
are of your father the Diu^ll. Joh. 8.88.
These holy Fathers if they were now living, would disclaim you from being
their offspring, so little you resemble them in any thing. Be ashamed at length
to call your selves their posterity, from whom you have so foully degenerated;
or if the name please you, endeavor that it may be proper unto you. But to what
purpose make you mention of that Tyrant that broyled Laurence on a Gridyroul
and why repeat you all these verses out of Prudentius? He speaks indeed of
gold and silver and torches; what of all this? Torches were needful in the
night season, at which time the Christians then used to meet, because they
durst not assemble on the day, but to DVR. Yet was this a most ancient
custom: as diverse do testify, and they were kindled then to show that the
sight of faith ought to be kindled in the mind. WHIT. page 879. That which was
done in the night, came in time to be done at noone day, I deny not: but I
inquire by what Scripture, or what reason: as for your invented mystery, I say
this is the way to fill all places with ^ignes, figures, and foolish mysteries.
But I can easily pardon you, whose ignorance and blindness of mind is so great,
that no light is sufficient for you.


light candles (as you do) at noone days, is mere madness. The accusation laid
against him by the Tyrant, of gold, silver, plate, and sums of money, was
DVR. Yea your answer is false and fained for it was true which the Tyrant
objected to Laurence. WHIT. page 880. Is it like that the Church being under
Tyrants could abound with such riches of silver and gold? But at the very same
time their poverty appears. For Gratian de Co^sp^^ra. Did. 1. c. v^s^.
brings in Boniface affirming that in time past they had golden Priests, and
wooden Chalices. And Xepherinus the sixteenth Bishop of Rome, did ordeine that
Mass should be celebrated in dishes made of glass. Pope Vrb^^e was the first
who made all the ministering dishes of silver, and so in this as in other
things, by success of time the glory of Churches increased.
forged. He had heard that the Christians had a great mass of gold and silver,
and concealed treasure, and being exceeding earnest after it, he sends for
Laurence, and commands him to bring him that money. But where (Campian) was
the plate of gold and silver which he brought unto the Tyrant? what Cups,
vessels or treasures did he bewray. The Church did not then abound in wealth,
neither had they then such plenty of golden basins, silver chalices, costly
hangings, or any other great and precious treasure. They had then wooden
dishes, but golden Bishops and Priests; but now (as Boniface said truly) we
(...) golden vessels, Bonifac. de Consc. did. 1. vasa.
wooden Priests; neither does he therein play the Lutheran^, as you play the
Papist, Campian. These Nimrods and Church-robbers came not out of Luthers
school; those that made greatest spoil of the Church came from you, not us.

Against this Tyrant you oppose Constantine, and make a needless digression in
his commendation, rather to fill up room, then frame a reason. For to what end
rehearse you these things; Constantine quieted the Church, was baptized by
Siluester Bishop of Rome, used the sign of the cross, had Helen to his
mother, joined himself to the Fathers of Nice, commended himself to the
prayers of Anthony, chose the lowest place in the Synod, ergo, what will you
infer? From this loose ware cannot you euince your Church to be the true
Church, unless you strain them very violently. Constantin^^ indeed brought
peace unto the Church in her most troublesome time, and adorned and honored it
with all the preferments and possessions he could, and since his time, as she
increased in wealth, so she decreased in piety. Whereas you say, that
Constantine sent for Siluester from Soracte, that he might be baptized by him
with our baptism, you might better have said, that Siluester was fetched from
heaven to baptize Constantine, for Siluester died many years before
Constantine was baptized, as is manifest out of DVR. You know the first of
your authors and vvitnesses was an Arian; and him the rest follovv. WHIT. page
881. It is incredible to think he would lie in so famous a thing, which might
so easily be proved to the contrary. And if he had been baptized at Rome, as
you say, it is like the other three would ha^^ come to the knowledge of it by
some means, and have preferred the credit of the thing, before the lie of
Eusebius. As for your witnesses they are not to be compared with these of ours.
Eusebius, Socrates, Theodorus, Z^zomen, Eusebius. lib. 4. de vita Constant.
Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 39. Theodoret. lib. 1. cap. 31 Sozom. lib. 3. cap. 34.
who have recorded the baptism of Constantine to have been not whiles he was
young, but in his age, not by Siluester of Rome, but by Eusebius of Nicomedia,
an Arian Bishop. Now Siluester was extreme old when Constantine was a young
man. He used the sign of the cross which he had seen in the air as an
Ensign, declaring himself thereby the soldier of Christ, and an enemy of
Tyrants. But that he worshipped or adored this cross, you shall never approve.
As concerning his DVR. What can be spoken more foolishlie? WHIT. page 881.
And yet what is my folly, which was not the folly of Eusebius and Sozomen:
for Eusebius who was present at the same Synod, writes that Constantine in the
first rank sat down in a golden chair. And Sozomen says there was a
throne prepared for him, and that a great one, and above all the other.
place in the Council it skilleth not greatly: for what if he chose the lowest
seat amongst the Bishops? Eusebius. lib. 3. de vita Constant. Sozom. lib. 2. cap.
19.
but you think he did it rather forced by necessary duty then moved by
voluntary humility: mark then what Eusebius writes. When he was come to the
chief place, he stood up in the midst of the assembly, and there, when a
little seat made of gold was brought for him, he sat down. Here you see
that Constantine sat in the highest place, a seat of gold, which was the
chiefest, and above all the rest, as Z^zomen relates. But these your proofs
are passing strange, they strengthen the cause of your Pope excellently well.

Now you pass forward unto the Turks, Turks.
wherein you do too manifestly bewray your ignorance in history. For the
Turkish government never less prevailed, then since Luther began to publish
the Gospel: Before he did ouer-run, and like a troublous sea break into all
Countries, with a furious and unresisted violence. But since Luther like a good
husbandman began to sow the seed of the Gospel, this raging sea has as it
were retired or stood still, and contained it self within his own bounds.
Vicuna was kept by the Lutheranes, and assaulted by Solomon, but he returned
with loss and with shame; and prove if you can, that ever the Christians
became weak, or the Turks stronger by their default. The Letters which you
pretend, as written from Solomon to Luther, might with better reason have bin
sent to the Pope: for the Turks are beholding to none more then your Pope, as
they well know; and unless they will be unthankful, they will ever
acknowledge it. For if as our Savior Christ says, a kingdom divided against
it self cannot stand, then the breaking of the strength of the Empire, and
weakening the power of Christians, and consequently strengthening the Turks, all
must be imputed to him which rent and divided the Roman and Christian Empires,
and of one kingdom made two: As long as the provinces and dominions of the
Empire were united, we were strong enough against the Turks; but after Pope Leo
the 3. divided the Empire, the Emperor of Constantinople which before had much
ado to resist the Turk, was now no longer able to sustain the burden,
wanting the greatest part of his Empire. There is then no reason why the Turk
should thank Luther, but the Pope rather, as he has good cause. It were too
long to rehearse all the intercourse which has passed betwixt the Pope and the
Turk: let us now hear the conclusion. They are (say you) only professed
enemies to us. Certainly they have infested them of the Greek church more
then the Latin. So that if they be the best Christians that are most
persecuted by the Turks, the Grecians must go before you. Whereas you add
something of Altars and Images, know you that the Idolatry of your Church is so
great, that the Turks themselves are ashamed, and therefore they break, and
evil entreat your Images and Idols wheresoever they find them.

Now you come to Heretics, the lees, bellows, Heretics.
and fuel of hell fire. As long as there wants no Papists this fire will want
no fuel. The first you meet with is Simon Magus. Indeed your Church is
something more indebted to this Simon then the other: but what of him? He
denied freewill unto man, and bragged of faith alone. Where find you that?
tell us Campian, for this is not affirmed by Ireneus or Clemens in the places
alleged; he thought that all things came to pass by destiny, and an
inevitable necessity, whereby he utterly abolished man's freewill: DVR. If you
be a Caluinist, then this must needs be your doctrine, when as Calvin had so
taken away all freedom, that he has brought a necessity greater then
Stoickes fate. WHIT. page 882. I am a Christian, you a Jesuit; Calvin, as you
well know, never took away the freedom of will, unless you reason thus: the
will of man is not free in good things, before it be regenerate by the spirit
of God, therefore there is no freedom of the will at all; which verily has no
strength of consequent in it.
We hold no such opinion. Neither did he boast of sole faith (as you say:) but
this was his opinion, that from the doctrine of Justification by grace and
faith, he let loose the raines to all impiety and dishonestie: where do we
defend any such things? Nouatianus would himself be Bishop of Rome, and
opposed himself to Cornelius the lawful Bishop, hoping by force to get the
Bishopric. What is this to us? But he was an enemy to the two Sacraments of
penance and extreme unction. DVR. It was not for this, but because he took
away the Sacrament of Penance, in which Priests do pardon sin. WHIT. page
882. Whether Penance was a Sacrament or no, was not the thing in question
betwixt Nouatus and the Catholics, but whether there was any place for
repentance left unto those that did sin, that the Minister might assure the^
of remission of sins, if they repented: we grant that this power is given to
the Ministers of the Gospel; therefore we are far from the error of Nouatus.
He denied pardon and repentance to them that fell in persecution. Herein he
was an enemy of repentance. Our case in far different, which exclude no true
penitent from hope of pardon. Manos wholly rejected baptism, as vnprofi^able
and not necessary. Do we affirm any such thing? We DVR. You take from
Baptism all power to remit sins and confirre grace as the Manic^es do. And
ye Caluinists deny that the deed done does confirre grace to them who
believe. WHIT. page 883. We believe and teach that in Baptism sins are
forgiven, which the Manichies usually deny. Therefore we differ much from them.
And as for the invention of the deed done we reject it, even in those who are
endued with faith, for what need have we of any such invention, that grace is
conferred and given by the deed done, if faith be not wanting?
deny (indeed) that baptism confers grace to the unbeliever by the work
wrought: he denied it to be profitable at all: are we like him? Austen and
Epiphanius account Aerius for an Heretic, so did few of the ancient Fathers
besides these. And if to condemn prayers for the dead, Hierou. ad Euag. and in
1. Tit.
and make equal a Priest with a Bishop be heretical, what shall be Catholic?
Hierome was altogether of Aerius his mind, about equality of Priests; for he
determines them to be equal with Bishops by Gods law. This was not that
Aerius, Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 35.
whom they usually called Atheist, but an other, Aetius; the likeness of the
names deceived you. To that you objected concerning Vigilantius and Iouinian,
an answer is formerly given; DVR. You speak vvit^ilie, but you must of
necessity do the one. WHIT. page 884. If they have defended any thing against
the Scriptures, they are heretics; but if not, they cannot be condemned by
the judgment of any Church.
for my part, I neither mean to defend them, nor can I greatly accuse them. If
they were heretics, convince them of some error they held against the
scriptures: Hieromes passions can make no man an heretic. Now you bring in the
swarm of heretics, Macedonians, Pelagia^s, Nestorians, Eutychians, the
M^^otholites, and Iconomachs. These first we hate as hell it self; those last
have committed nothing deserving the name of heretics. To set up and worship
Images is heretical, but not to overthrow them. What you judge touching Luther
and Caluin^ is nothing material: whiles they lived they nothing regarded you,
now they are dead they despise you, what will you conclude at length from this
heretical company? A^^ these (you say) forsook the government of your Church,
and were overthrown by them. Nay Campian, these were your forefathers, and you
their progeny and successors: for your monster of Popery has been hatched by
the impure commixtion of all heresies.

But you now appear out of hell, Lands.
and are come to land, and wheresoever you cast your eyes or thoughts, All is
your own (as you say) all subject themselves, and subscribe to your religion.
Me thinks I see that brainsick Merchant, who standing by the sea, and beholding
the ships, cried out, all he saw was his own; otherwise such senseless
dreams could not proceed, but from a wit and judgment exceedingly weakened.
Seeds Apostolica.
For (say you) the Roman succession witnesses, in which Church (as Austen
speaks) the Primacie of the Apostolic chair has always had the
preeminence. Many causes there were, why special account in times past should
be made of the church of Rome, especially for that Rome was the seat of the
Empire, as approved in the Council held at Constantinople. Council.
Constantinop. 1. cap. 5.
DVR. Why then may not he that is Bishop of this Church be over all other
Bishops, and so the Prince of Priests, the chief Priest, and supreme head of
the rest? WHIT. page 885. Because authority and dominion is not proper to them
who are more excellent then others; which may be showed by infinite examples.
Who can be ignorant that the tribe of Judah was the chief, the first and the
Prince of the other tribes? will it therefore follow that the head of the
principal family in this tribe had authority over all other tribes? Aristotle
was accounted the prince of Philosophers, Homer of Poets, Hippocrates of
Physicians, Apelles of Painters: did they therefore exercise authority over
all the rest of the same profession? So though for a long time together the
church of Rome for many respects was excellent among the rest, yet it never had
domination and rule over the rest of the Churches of Christ.
I grant therefore tha^ ^his Church was accounted the supreme, chief,
greatest, and the principal, preferred before other Churches. Trow you hence
to conclude, the Bishop of Rome is the chief and principal Bishop or head of
the Church? Council. Carthag. 3. cap. 26. Did. 99 prima sedis.
Austen himself forbid it in the Council of Carthage, viz. that the Bishop of
the chief Sea should not be called Prince of Priests, or any like title.
Although then the holy Fathers for diverse respects gave the pre-eminence to the
church of Rome, yet ^^d they never acknowledge DVR. This prohibition was given
by the Fathers, because they knew that a^ the sovereignty of the Apostolic
Chair did ever flourish in the Roman Church, so they did not doubt but the
manner of the chief Priest did appertain^ only to the Bishop of Rome. WHIT.
page 885. Nay, the proh^bition of the Council did as well concern the Bishop
of Rome, whom all acknowledge to be the Bishop of the chief seat, as the
Bishops of other Seas.

Therefore for the time he obeyed the decree of the Council, and was content
with his names and refused to be called the sovereign chief Priest.


that infinite p^^^^^^^ll authority which he now challenges, neither ^^d other
Apostolic Churches, whether they were founded by the Apostles themselves, or
by some of their scholars, yield any testimony of truth to the church of
Rome. Here you stick in a quagmire, and ^^e feign by entreaty to beg that
which by strong reason you should prove and cannot.

But you urge further, and recompt the Pastors of several countries, to wha^
end I pray you. The remainder^, say you, of the labors of all those that have
published the Gospel in all nations farrs and wide, all, present unto us this
same religion which Cathol^kes at this day profess. What could be affirmed
more weakly? for the Greeians are opposite unto you, which unto this time have
their succession of Bishops not interrupted. And further, the spye^ which you
send in your new found lands, have found in the furthest coasts thereof many
monuments of that faith which we maintain, Os^rius.
neither may you prefer us before them, at least before all, you ought to
prefer the truth, Aristot.
as the Philosopher says. But if you think your Popes and other glorious
titles more ancient then the Gospel, what can you allege why Christ should
not deny you to belong to him, seeing you value any thing more then him. Here
you tell us of Princes, Princes.
Kings, C^sars, Emperors, and make a goodly show of names, as your manner is.
At length you mention our noble Queen^ Elizabeth, and will needs teach her, her
duty. But she, Campian, needs no such Masters, ^say 48.
or instructiors. She knows her self to be the nursing mother of the Church,
and that by divine dispensation, and accordingly does she with all watchfulnes
and care procure the good thereof, and labors by all possible diligence to
prevent all dangers intended by you and your adherents. You say of Calvin and
these Princes, (...) you have spoken, th^^ (...) heaven can no^ contain the^.
But it passe^h your skill to pronounce certainly hereof, nay your Pope
himself cannot with all his might pull Calui^^ out of heaven, not any of them
whom Christ has made witnesses of his truth. As for you and your fellows, we
wish you not the gallows, but salvation. I desire to hope the best of you; and
I doubt not but you might attain to the knowledge of the truth in controversy
betwixt us, if for the time you could lay aside all preiudicate opinions, and
consult with the word of God, and the holy Fathers of the Church. As for the
society of Jesus, whereunto you are admitted, it braggeth that it is wholly at
the Popes dispensation, and loves Gregory the 13. too well, to love Queen
Elizabeth any thing at all, who is so far differing from him. Nations
converted to Christ.
You proceed, and produce the utmost coasts and countries of the world to
testify for you: you should distinguish ancient and later times. For grant
that the whole world had conspired with the Pope against Christ (which it has
not) that is no advantage to you, nor prejudice to us: DVR. You had spoken
better, if you had said that he forsakes the Gospel, who affirms that the
whole world conspire^ against Christ. O miserable Caluinists, who cannot defend
their says otherwise, than by bereauing Christ of his kingdom, and the whole
christian world of faith! WHIT. page 886. This is very true you say: but
Duraeus, did we ever speak after this manner? Will you keep your custom of
railing and slaundering* even to the last act? Nay rather, O miserable Duraeus,
who blinded with malice and ignorance, does not feel your own misery? Not
the whole world, but your Synagogue which is but a small part of the whole
world, has conspired against Christ. And is it to be feared, least Christ
should loose his kingdom, and the world faith, if your shaueling with his
whole rabble fall from the Gospel? Though you be perfidious and wicked, yet
God will remain always faithful and true.
whosoever forsakes the Gospel, he is necessarily divided from the Church. To
put to silence the oracles of the heathen Idols, and carry the name of Christ
unto the Gentiles, was no doubt a great work, and a divine work: but that is
none of your work, for you have filled the world with Idols, and as much as in
you lay, ouerturned the kingdom of Christ. The Idols of the he^^^en have been
o^e^^^owne, and the kingdom of God enlarged by the Apostles and Apostolic
men; ^^^e ^^e o^e Papist, or one Ies^ite amongst these. For the Jesuits, which
assay to make new kingdoms amongst the Indians, serve not Christ, but the
Pope: not do they enlarge the kingdom of Christ, but they prepare for the Pope
a kingdom far from the Lutheranes, where he may reign after he shall be
banished from these countries. DVR. You set upon our society, and say we have
divided Christ. Because certain men have chosen unto them this name above all
others, to be accounted of the society of Jesus; because they have consecrated
themselves wholly to advance this name, must they therefore of necessity divide
Christ? have not you Christ College in Oxford? WHIT. page 8^6. I will not
strive much with you about your society, of which I ^^^e very small account.
If you have for some special consideration dedicated your selves unto Christ,
what is that consideration? why do you not tell us what Jesus requires of
you, which all other Christians are not bound to do? If the order of your
profession require that you propagate honor, and magnify the name Jesus, if
for this all Christians ought not to labor, at least Bishops, and specially
your Pope: and if they be Ies^ites who do this, why ^re not all your Divines,
Bishops, Cardinals, and Popes Jesuits? It may be this care is ^arre from
them. Whereas then name^ are for distinguishing of things, they be needless
and vain, when there i^ no difference in the thing. Either show us what is the
proper and peculier duties of Jesuits, or confess that without any cause you
have app^opriated such a ^^me unto the^. In Cambridge as well ^s in Oxford we
have both Christ and Jesus College: but they that li^e in those Colleges are
called only Christians. Think you that because there are many Colledge^
different in names, there are many different Orders and professions of men? In
places distinctions of names are necessary and without danger, unless some
schism may happen betwixt y^ w^ls. Have you no other thing to say for your
sect and society?
You ask, is Christ divided? I answer, you Jesuits have divided him, else why
have you separated Jesus from Christ, and leaving the ancient ordinary names
of Christians, which you scorn as too common, you desire rather to be called
Jesuits, a new name of your own framing, then Christians? As though there
were some society of Jesus appropriated to one kind of men separated from
other Christians; If there be, then is Christ divided, if not, then you
Jesuits are too impudent to devise a new society.

You say either we or he preach a wrong Christ. This of necessity must be so.
But Luther preached the true Christ, storm the Pope never so much: look then
what Jesus, what Christ you have amongst you? the true Christ it is not. I
beseech you, Campian, for Christ's sake consider well whom you have forsaken,
to whom you have betaken you, into what danger you have cast your self. But
you will tell us who is the true Christ, I listen to hear it: let him b^ true
Christ, and on their side, by whose bringing in Dagons neck was broken. With a
good will. Christ by us preached, has within these few years thrown down an
infinite sort of your Dagons: for so soon as Christ accompanied with his
Gospel got footing in any place, your Dagons out of hand fell down, and had
not only their arms and legs broken, but necks also. Patrick in Ireland, and
Palladius in Scotland, what they were I mean not to search. We Englishmen, I
grant, received much good by Austen the Monk, and much evil also and
superstition which he brought in with him. It is plain that we had received
the Christian faith in Brittany many ages before his coming hither. How it was
by him increased or hindered, I will not say. But he lived six hundred years
after Christ; which as I judge was not the purest time of the Church, but as
others affirm, the age was most corrupt.

Now to conclude, because to prosecute all were infinite, you gather a heap of
witnesses together, the Universities, written laws, the common fashions of all
people, choice of Emperors, kingly rites, orders of Knighthood, habites,
church windows, coins, gates, houses, all things great and small, unto all
which I answer in a word, if an Angel from heaven should preach unto us an
other Gospel then that which Christ has taught, the Apostles published, our
Churches now profess, we would reject and detest it, much less do we stand
upon these toys of yours, and ma^^ers of ^o^om^nt. The flourishing
Vniuersitie^, ancient law^, and i^ all kinds, monuments of great antiquity,
all these afford unto us an open testimony of the truth we profess. Thus have
we heard your ten-fold Apollogy, wherein I perceive you have bestowed no small
diligence; how you have therein prevailed, I leave the judgment to others. If
you have satisfied none more therein then our University men, I can assure
you, you have lost your labor, and are disappointed of your hope. For my own
part though in this case I profess my self your adversary, yet your person
(Campian) I love as far as a Christian may love a Jesuit. And I pray God the
Father of Jesus Christ, that he would open the eyes of your mind, and direct
you in his ways, least you cast away that silly soul so dearly bought which
you desire to save. Therefore leave off to resist the truth, and wittingly to
^ick against the prick, you cannot by force stop the waves of the sea, you
cannot darken the beams of the sun, nor restrain the arm of God. Falsehood
driven back shall give place, and truth at the length (resist while you will)
shall have the victory.

The Conclusion unto the University men.
CAmpian (most worthy men) would present this gift of his unto you, which of
what worth it is you can best judge. I will not go about to turn or allenate
your affections from him, whom I know more firmly resolved, then that any such
slender reasons can any whit move you. He may (I grant) make some show, and
get some applause from the unlearned multitude; but that he should be able to
beguile you, or cast a mist before such and so great judgments, if I should
suspect it, I should be too in^^tio^s to the Universities. Therefore I a^ well
content that Campian have such place is your conceits and affections, as he
can procure, and refer the censure of the matter most willingly unto you.
This work he composed at vacant times us he traveled, if we may believe him
of his word. He would not seem to write any thing purposely and ^^^rately,
wherein he both apparently distrust his cause, and bewraies the vanity of his
disposition. For whereas before he had prepared it with great deliberation, and
brought it into England from Rome, he would seem to us to have penned it on a
sudden, at idle times in his travail, which plainly shows the badnes of
his cause, and argues more then ordinary arrogancy. But this is ordinary
with our Papists, to pretend all their writings are done of a sudden, and ex
tempore, hoping thereby to be easily excused in their errors: besides they will
hereby make us believe, that when they write more deliberately, and take
greater pains, then their writings shall be unanswerable. After Bishop Jewel
that famous preacher of the truth, had challenged all Papists, and called them
to the trial of antiquity, some years ago, certain books were published by
men of great name, Harding, Rastall, Dorman: but observe their notable policy.
When they had been full three years in preparing their answer, and at length
had finished somewhat, fearing they should be but lightly respected by the
learned and circumspect reader, they dissembled their intent, alleging that
they were written in have, not with purpose of publishing them, but only to
satisfy the particular request of some private friends, what could they have
fained more foolishly, or affirmed more featefullie? But Campian thought good
to follow their politic example, affirming this work of his was made by the
way (...) hours, when he at great leisure had prepared is beyond the seas. And
yet the matter of the book, the manner of his style, and his whole gift (as he
calls it) is such, as I easily believe it was rather done in great have, then
by mature deliberation. For what (...) these his ^en reasons, but a little
sum of slanders, laid, and drawn together out of the books and lectures of
Lindane, Sanders, Canisius, Melchior Canus, Bellarmine, in composing whereof,
Campian might easily make have, especially seeing his greatest care was not how
true, but how slanderous all things were that he should set down. For I doubt
not, but you that are the learned of the Universities, perceive by this time
that those things written in this book by Campian, are such, as for the matter
are most untrue, for the style, spiteful and malicious. I testify before God,
and I call heaven, earth, and whatsoever creatures in the world to witness, that
either there is no truth, or those things thus by Campian propounded are most
false. View it well, search it, and know it altogether, Campian is an
adversary, and deceiptfull, trust him not, he is deceived himself, and
labors to deceive you. By him none can be deceived, but such as willingly
will be entangled with error. Al things he has, are common, only his
audaciousnes, in affirming, and faining any thing, it is strange and
incredible. If it were fit that he should be respected more then Luther, then
Calvin, then Christ himself, the teacher of truth, then he had some cause to
hope: but seeing this is unmeet and unreasonable, he can prevail nothing at
all with you, by his reasons. Night remains till the day be light, but the
Sun rising darkness is dispelled; and the truth appearing, falsehood vanishes.

God the father of lights, the only teacher of heavenly wisdom, vouchsafe us
his spirit, that ignorance and deceiue^^^^ error being (...) we may harken to
the voice of that g^^^^ Shepherd, avoid the inti^^ments and b^^tes of
Antich^^^^, and may know God the Father in Christ Jesus, to whom with the holy
Spirit, be all praise and glory as^^^ed for ever.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page 29. li^^ ^1. put in, called. p. 42. in the note l. ^. read^ ^^cite. p.
43. l. 1. r. M^lito. p. 43. not^ l. 36. r. them. p. 53. the not^ should be
referred to page 54. p. 70. l. 1. r. Macari^s. p ^3. l. 41. r. 275. p. 83.
nota. l. 18. r. 294. p. 100. l. 11. r. the. ibid. l. 23. r. reserved. p. 104.
l. 17. r. words. ibid. l. 37. r. the. p. 1^^. l. 17.^^ Maslouius. p. 137. l. 5.
r. principle p. 148. no^^ l. ^.1. hold. p. 15^. nota l. 2^. r. d^^. p. 161. l.
2. the superiori ^, should be in p. 260. at forbids. p. 1^6. l. 32. r.
Orosius. p. 168. l. 20. r. Pope. p. 17^. l. 10. r. as though. p. 176. l. 29. r.
when. p. 186. l 21. r. lucre p. 18^ l. 13. r. ^^cking. p 235. l. 25. put in, of
hell p. 243. l. 10 r. meddling p. 253. l. 2^. ^^e superior ^, should be in l.
17. a^, belee^^. p. 260 l. (...) in, where are they now? p. ^61. l. 23. r.
fast. p. 266. l. 17 (...) p. 290. nota l. 13. r. your. p. 292. l. 10. r.
Siluister. p. 298. l. 17. r. world. p. 305. l. 1. r. 1^. p. 310. nota, l. 9. r.
Pauli. ibi. l. 14. r. ^7^.


