A GODLY Treatise, Entitled The View and Downfall of Pride. Wherein is
declared the cause of Babylons destruction, and Nabuchadnezzars subversion.

Set forth by William Wheatley Master of Art, and Preacher of Gods word.

Deuteronomy. 33.2. If I whet my glittering sword, and mine hand take hold on
judgment: I will execute vengeance on mine enemies, and will reward them that
hate me.

Imprinted at London by Thomas Creed, for John Deane and John Baily, and are to
be sold at his shop, at the door of the Office of the six Clerks in
Chancerie Lane. 1602.

TO THE HONOrable Robert Sackuill, the Noble son and heir apparent to the
right Honorable the Lord Buckhurst, Lord high Treasurer of England: and to the
right honorable and virtuous Lady, the Lady Anne Compton: Grace, mercy, and
peace from God the Father through Christ, be multiplied for ever.
THE bright beams of your Honors most gracious cou^tena^ce, showing me favor
not inferior to that of Ahasuerosh extended toward Queen Ester, when he held
out the golden scepter: and your honorable acceptance (together with the
undeserved thankfulness of those worshipful assemblies, accompanying your honors
several times at those spiritual bankets which your honors appointed me the
most unskillful of all other to set out; has caused other blossoms and fruit
from the tree of life to spring forth, which the cold of the winter had almost
killed. And furthermore, having many goodly plants in my vineyard (as other men
have in theirs) both fresh and green, and yet the fruit both bad and small
(though they have been pruned and trimmed a long time by other laborers, as by
my self): I much marvelled what might be the cause thereof. And digging for a
fountain to water my garden, I found a corrupt vain in the earth, that
poisoned my trees, and made the fruit naught. A handful whereof I have bound up
in paper (because it is straying) that as the Evangelist Luke dedicated of love
his book unto his dear Theophilus, so I might have something to present unto
your honors for a Newyears gift. Which might be Tanquam purae nec non mentis
gratissimae pro summis in me vestris accumulatis beneficijs indicium. And
though veritas odium parit, as the proverb is: yet because she cannot endure
to creep into a corner, (she greatly rejoicing of your love and countenance
toward her, and her children) intends to walk abroad. Yet for her better
safety under the covert of your horse. patronage and protection, unto whom for
just cause she chiefly commends her self: your noble honors being such as
fear God like Cornelius, with your household; and to all good learning more
gracious then ^^ecaenas: unto whom sin is so odious, and who are such godly
favorers of all that be virtuous. And thus craving pardon for this my
boldness, leaving these the first fruits of my poor labors public, as an
earnest of my loving duty, presented like the Widows mite, into the treasury
of your Honors favorable tuition, to be preserved from the spoyler: I humbly
take my leave: daily commending your honors unto the protection of God.
Framfield in Sussex. Anno. 1602.

Your Ho. right humble and loving Chaplain and servant for the Lord, to
command. William Wheatley.

TO THE READER.
The Author to his late loving Auditorie at Lewise, wishes true love among
themselves, and perfect unity in Religion.
Read here the true substance
of that thou have heard:
Of this from Pride learn thou
thy soul for to guard.
Be speedy dispatching
thy sin out of sight:
Else damned with devils
is lotted thy right.
Receive Gods word:
joy in the sword: and die
To live: live not to die
eternally.
Such things meditate,
As may sin abate.
Cry for repentance.
Keep off Gods vengeance.
Ever the poor pity.
View this with piety.
Judge, but with charity.
Live all in unity.
Love as Christ bids thee.
Emmanuel keep we. Amen.
Sicut lectorem meum nolo mihi esse deditu^^ ^ta correctorem nolo sibi.

Aug. in pro lib. 3. de Tre^. The Reader and Corrector must judge uprightly,
Without prejudicial partiality.
A GODLY TREAtise of the destruction of Babylon, and Nabuchadnezzar his fall,
through pride.
Isay 14.14.15. I will ascend above the Clouds, and I will be like the most
high.

But thou shall be brought down to the grave, to the sides of the pit.


CHAP. I. A brief exposition of the Text.
THe cause of Babilo^s destruction, and Nabuchadnezzar his subversion, is
Pride. Dan. 4.34 and 6.22.23
Who here stands as upon the Stage, vaunting her self, like Absolon upon the
battlements of his house, bewraying his sin without any shame. 2. Sam. 16.22.
And is at defiance with God, like Pharao Exo. 5.2.
or Rabshacheh, 2. King. 18.22.
speaking here by Nabuchadnezzar, as the devil did by the serpent, Genesis 3.1.
and thinks scorn to be equal with any creature. And therefore as you see,
she mounts her self above the clouds, and will be like God: as the Serpent
told Eua she should. Genesis 3.
Such is her shameless impudency, that she fears not to encounter with God,
as the devil did with Christ, Mat. 4.3
or the dragon with Michael. Re. 12 7.
But God lies as in a scout-watch, not as the Elders did to catch Susanna, but
as Israel did, to entrap their enemies. Iud. 7.
Or rather tells her to her teeth, as Elias did Ahab, 1. King. 1.18.
answering her with no less terror (if it be marked) then the handwriting
showed the destruction of Balthazar Da. 5.5
saying: Thou shall be brought down to the grave, to the sides of the pit.

Mark the text. I (says Pride) will ascend above the clouds. See her
insolency. And will be like the most high. Behold her impudency.

But (says God) there is a stop; thou, even Pride: shall, that's thy hope: be
brought down, it is thy fall: to the grave, that is thy honor: to the sides
of the pit, that is the end, not only of thee, but of all other sin, except
ye repent. Luk 13.3.


The division of the Text.
Here in order to help memory, I observe a double proposition: the first
shows the chief cause, of all men's fall, and here most certainly of the
King and Kingdom of Babylon: that is Pride: whose haughty humor is here
seen by two things.

First by a general contempt of all other in regard of her self, in these
words. I will ascend above the clouds.

And her wings to mount, may be first Disdain: second, Presumption: third
Rebellion: fourth Coffeehouse. Noted out of (I will).

Secondly, by a vain estimation of her self, to be like God. 1. In
propriety, as in seeking to be exalted alone. 2. In chalenging vengeance unto
her self. 3. In name, by usurping the glorious name of God.

The second proposition notes two things, first, the certainty of proud
Nabuchadnezzar his fall: where I note, 1. Who threatens. 2. What force the
threatening is of. 3. How it is effected. 4. What it is. viz. the grave.

Secondly, the utter destruction and final overthrow of Pride and proud men
impenitent in hell: whereof note 1. the true being and certainty of that place
for the damned.

Secondly, the torments thereof, wherein is 1. Most horrible pain. 2. Confused
woe. 3. An everlasting continuance of the same.

CHAP. II. A view of Pride.
SOme follow evil counsel to their own destruction; like Ahab, and Ahaziah.
1. King. 22.23.
Some men's wicked device turn to their own confusion; like the builders of the
Tower of Babell. Genesis 11.8.


Ede case boule to bouleusanti caciste, Evil counsel worst wringeth the
councellor himself.

Me thinks it is no wisdom to triumph before the conquest.

Benhadad King of Aram or Syria, sent and greatly threatened Ahab, king of
Israel (the effect of the Text is) to tread him and his people under his feet.
Ahab sent answer again saying. Tell him that girdeth his harness on, let him
not boast himself as he that puts it off. 1. King. 20.11.
Now a little you hear what Pride says, but she makes no reckning of her
end, but that will quail her.

Pride, what is that? why should thou ask? But indeed the Sun in his
brightness is not seen of him that does wink: neither does any truth
prevail with them that will not hear and believe. Pride is as common, as
corn is like to be plentiful. For this praise the Lord, o my soul, and all
that is within me praise his holy name: and pray that corn may be kept in the
Land for the comfort of the poor: For I fear the devil will Pride, though he
never want store. And because she strutteth in every street, I need not seek
far, as desirous to find her: but am ^^^^ing to speak to her, wishing to
reform her.

Lo she starts out of my Text in shape of a monster, as the devil did out of
the earth in Samuels likeness; 1. Sam. 28.13.15
and has as long a reach, as the devils kingdom is large. Math. 4 8.
She will ascend above the clouds, and she will be like God: it may be she
means as the devil was like Samuel: therefore she here says, I will, I will.
This is all her reason for it: she thinks this may serve. Stet pro ratione
voluntas. But her reason is as strong, as his foundation was firm, that laid
it upon the sand: Mat. 7.26.
both the buildings must down. From this her double desire, which to obtain,
she is as greedy as the Lion of his pray. I will make her known unto you by
this description.

Pride is an untamed lust of the heart, rebelling against God, in exalting that
which he would have cast down, even the Flesh: and in casting down that which
he would have exalted; that is the Spirit: Against which, God made a law,
specially for Princes, because they should be good examples to their people. 2.
Sam. 3 35.36.
and generally, for all other because the subject should not be proud: Number.
15.28.
saying. The King must have the law, read the law, and keep all the words of
this law, etc. that his heart be not lifted up above his brethren. That is,
the more higher of calling, the more humble in condition they should be. Deuteronomy.
17 20.
If Princes ought not to be proud, subjects ought not to adventure it.
Therefore the holy Ghost says to all. Be not high minded, but fear. To.
11.20.
Learn of me (says Christ) that am meek and lowly in heart, and ye shall
find rest unto your souls. Mat. 11 29.
As if he should say, if you be proud, you shall find no rest for your souls.
For cursed are all they that do err from thy commandments. Ps. 119 21.
If you would see further what Pride is, S. Augustine says. Amor excellentiae
superbia vocatur. Aug. de verb. domini. Ser. 54.
The love or desire of renown, or to be exalted, is called Pride. Who then is
not proud? who so touches pitch is defiled therewith. Eccl. 13.1.
Pride is like pitch. Therefore Augustine says, it is The head and cause of
all other sins. Aug in Psalm. 18.
Again he says, it is of all other sins, the Beginning, end, and cause.
Be^^^^^ it is not only a sin it self, but that there never has been, is,
or shall be any sin, Sine superbia, without Pride. Aug. ad Iulia. epist. 3
Nay further, it straineth even our good deeds, Act. 12.23.
and therefore says Augustine, Caetera vitia in malefactis valent, sola
superbia etiam in recte factis est cauenda, Aug. in Ps. 50. and lib. de natura
and gra.
all other sin in wicked deeds does appear, only Pride in our good deeds, we
ought to beware: for it is like the herb Coloquintida, where that is in the
pot, the broth is never good: and where Pride is, all our works are
abominable. And as for our wicked deeds, Aug. Ser. 54. de verb. domini
Prior est in vitijs superbia, in them, Pride first sets foot aboorde: for
Pride is the original of sin. Ecclesi. 10 14.
If you ask how it can be sin, the Apostle says, that of many,
Covetousness is the root of all evil. 1. Timo.
I will answer you from the ancient holy Father S. Aug. Aug. ad Iulia. Epist.
3.
Superbia and cupiditas in tantum est vnum malum, vt nec superbia sine
cupiditate, nec sine superbia possit cupidus inueniri. Pride and covetousness
are thus one evil, or do consent in one, that neither a proud man can be
found without covetousness, nor a covetous man without Pride. They are like
two ^^rlots, which make but one body. 1. Cor. 6
If you desire to hear of her any more, I will omit that Pride which is most
common, for it is sufficiently known: and I will speak of that which is least
suspected.

CHAP. III. Four kinds of proud men appealed.
SAint Augustine speaks of three sorts of proud men, Aug. in Ps. 93.
unto which from the Apostle, I will add a fourth. First they are proud, Quibus
parum est quod mala faciunt, sed and sua peccata defendere volunt, which make
small account of sinning, and will also have an excuse for their sin, like
Adam, Aron, Saul, and Jonas. Adam sinned, and cast the fault upon the woman,
and she sought to excuse her self by the Serpent, Genesis 3.12.
but all would not serve. Aron made a golden calfe to be worshipped, and when
he did see Moses his zeal and anger against it, he cast the fault upon the
people. Exodus 32 33.34.
Saul sinned against God, in lauing that which he was commanded to destroy.
And when he was reproved for it by the Prophet, he straight had his excuse
ready: Forsooth the people did it, to offer unto the Lord. 1. Sam. 15.21.
And Jonas sent to Niniuie, fled from the commandment of the Lord, and being
punished for it, yet he would excuse his sin. Jonas. 4.2
And thus do Usurers at this day, common swearers, blasphemers, prophaners of
the holy Saboath day, and infinite other sinners, which not only do such
things, but with as bad an excuse favor themselves in their own wickedness.
And here may be reproved non residents, dumb dogs, and Idle Pastors, thieves,
etc. But when Christ shall come with his Red ratione^, give account of thy
Stewardship, Mat. 25.31.32.
It is not Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy name, and in thy name
cast out devils, and done great works, that shall help; much less then any
of your excuses. The will of God must be done, or else it shall be said, I
never knew you, depart from me ye that work iniquity, into everlasting fire,
etc. Math. 7.21.22.23
It was not enough for Israel, neither could they escape Gods wrath by their
Templum a^trint, Templum domini; nor the Jews with Domine, domine, nor for the
Romanists, The Church, the Church; nor for us, The Gospel, the Gospel, the
Word, the Word; but we must do works worthy of the Word, worthy of the
Gospel, as says a learned Bishop. How many Kingdoms and Nations has God
cut off for their sin? and shall we escape that do not only commit sin,
even with greediness, but also will not stick to defend the doing of it? As
the Minister does such a thing, others do such, and such things, and why may
not I? Thus we our selves cause others to blaspheme the worthy calling
wherewith we be called: Romans 2.24.
And thus men heap one sin upon an other, Eccl. 3.29.
to make up the measure of their sins, Mat. 23.32.
and so hasten the wrath of God. But alas (dear brethren) it is written, Thou
shall not follow a multitude to do evil. Exodus 32.2.
That is thou must not take example to sin: which is, to feed thy self with
wind, in excusing thine own wickedness. Hos. 12.1
Nec enim exempla nobes simpliciter imi^anda deus proposuit, sed verbum suum
dedi^, adcuius regulam and consilia nostra, and aliorum exempla examinemus.
Gual. in Hos. cap. 12 Ser. 39.
For God has not simply set us examples to follow, but he has given us his
word, according to the true rule, and direct line whereof, we may examine both
our own devices, and the examples of other. If they swerve from the
commandments, go not after them, neither excuse thine own sin. Bind not
two sins together, for in one thou shall not be unpunished. Ecc. 7.8.
And as for them that give wicked example, it is written: Woe be to that man
by whom the offense comes. Mat. 18.6.
But if it were not for Pride, all this would soon be laid aside.

Secondly says Augustine, He is proud (Qui in confessione peccatorum non agit
penitentiam) which in the confession of his sins does not repent: like Kain,
Saul, Ahab, and Judas. Kain murdered his brother, he consessed his sin, but
could not repent. Genesis 4.13.
After Saul had sinned and was reproved, he said. I have sinned, I have
transgressed the commandments of the Lord, and thy words, because I feared
the people, and obeyed their voice. Now therefore I pray thee take away my
sin, etc. 1. Sam. 15.
Was not this much? yet all this was but like a sacrifice of swines flesh:
because this confession was not washed with tears, wroong out of the heart,
with grievous groans of the spirit, which cannot be expressed. Ahab hearing
Gods judgments denounced against him for his sins, He rent his clothes,
and put Sackcloath upon him, and fasted, and lay in Sackcloath, and went
barefooted; 1. King. 21.27.
yet he could not repent: for the eye of his soul was closed up, that he
could not behold the bright beams of the son of righteousness, appearing
with the spirit of regeneration; and so he sunk back to his sin again, as
appears in the chapter. As for Judas, he said: I have sinned betraying the
innocent blood: Math. 27.4.
and he brought again the silver pieces, and cast them down in the Temple,
and departed, but he could not wash his soul in the lauer of the innocent
blood, and take hold of the horns of the altar of Gods mercy. Therefore he
went and hanged himself; and has purchased a field with the reward of
iniquity, Act. 1.18.
even hell fire, by his evil gotten goods. Beware you bribe-mongers. Now at
this day, how many Kains, Saul's, Ahabs, and few so good as Judas have we? many
to confess, few to restore, none to repent, then all to be damned. Except ye
repent, ye shall all likewise perish. Luke 13.3.
And if any desire to know repentance, entending to live in it, I will borrow
so much time of my Text, as to describe it unto you, but the true and right use
thereof, every one must show forth in his own life and conversation, like
Vrim and Thummim on the breast of the Priest.

Repentance is an unfeigned grief and groaning of the heart, through sorrow for
sin committed, confessing and forsaking the same, 2. Cor. 7 10.11.
with turning unto God by newness of life, Act. 2.18.
apprehending the mercy of God by faith in Christ Jesus; Romans 3.21.22. etc.
Who of God, is made unto us Wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification,
and redemption. 1. Co. 1.30.
Where this is, that man's heart is filled with joy, John. 15.11. as the temple
was with the glory of the Lord. 2. Chro. 5.14.
This felt David and Peter, and therefore though their sins were great, yet
the guiltiness thereof was done (...) way: and so with confession seek we
repentance, and cast away Pride, the deadly enemy thereof.

Thirdly he is proud says Augustine. Qui illa ipsa pauca quae videtur habere
bona, sibi vult arrogare and derogat misericordiae dei. Such ( Paul says) are
proud, boasters, 2. Timo. 3.2.
which do arrogate or attribute unto themselves those few good things, which
they do but seem to have (for indeed they have none) To. 7.18
and so do diminish the mercy of God. Which is to rob God of his honor, as do
the Pelagians and Papists, who putting their trust in their works, as some put
their confidence in horses and chariots, never remembering the name of the Lord,
and grace of God in Christ, may have a name to live, but they are dead with the
Angel of the Church of Sardi, because they remember not how they have
received, and heard, and hold fast and repent: Re. 3.1
namely, that salvation is of the Lord Gal. 5.4.
and that there is no good thing in man, but that which is wrought by the holy
Ghost. Isay. 26.12.
Without me (says Christ) ye can do nothing. Paratur enim voluntas a domino.
For man's will is prepared of the Lord, Most excellent says Aug. Epist. 105.
Tom. 2 per tota.
to every good work. And now for the war betwixt the Papists and us about
this point: this peace I proclaim, as Ambassador from the Lord: That faith is
a supernatural knowledge, wrought by the holy Ghost in a regenerate man, by
which he is assured of eternal salvation through Christ, Ephe. 1.17.18.19
and good works do approve this knowledge to be sound and true. Iam. 2.17.20.22
If the tree be good, so is the fruit also, and the tree is known by his
fruit. Math. 12.33.
And thus as faith and works cannot be separated by the sun and his light,
fire and heat: so o Lord unite the Papists and all other Heretics to us, and
thy true Church militant, that we may all worship thee in one spirit and truth.
If this beam of Pride were once plucked out of men's eyes, the bright sun-light
of the truth of Religion would clearly appear, and all men would walk as in
the day time.

Fourthly, he is proud, that is furious like a mad man, or doteth like a
fool, (for so the Greek word signifies, about questions and strife of words,
not being content with the doctrine of the Gospel.) If any man teach
otherways, (says the blessed Apostle, having exhorted unto obedience)
Tetuphotai, he is proud, knowing nothing, Alla noson, but furiously doting
about questions and strife of words: whereof comes envy, strife, raylings,
evil surmisings, vain disputations of men of corrupt minds, etc. 1. Timo.
6.3.4.
Insani vocantur tales questionarij, vt qui sibi de quibuslibet rebus (etiam de
lana caprina) discertare, and per animi morbos conflictari indulgeant. Marl. ex
Iodo. Vilich in 1. Timot. 6.
Such be called mad, doting, or busy questionists, or disputors, as give
themselves to contend about every matter, (even of small moment, as of the Moon
shining in the water, or wearing of a comely Surples) and through Pride so to
trouble themselves. As many do about the orders of our Church, established
neither for superstition nor Idolatry, nor for the maintenance of any accident
adjoining unto them: ^ut to keep comeliness, uniformity, and order in the
Church: this satisfies my conscience, and what should I seek ^o alter the
decree of a whole Parliament? I know wherein to obey God rather then man: and I
know how to obey God by man: and I know how to obey God and man: and it is not
for every private man to know all the reasons why such and such things be
ordained for policy and order in a Commonwealth. Now then, if no offense be
justly given, if thy unbridled and untamed spirit, (whatsoever thou art)
unjustly take any, what is that to the Church? look thou to that, as the Jews
said to Judas: to his master and Lord as traitorous, Mat. 26
as you to your Princes good orders are malicious; and to her Majesty how
true, judge your selves, as Paul says to the Communicants. 2. Cor. 13.5.
I judge no man: I do command from the Lord, that you Give unto Caesar that
which is Caesar's. If you say, our blood is not too dear a sacrifice to be
offered in her Majesty's quarrel: no more then Isaac was to his father. Genesis 22
1.10.11.
I say again: And will you not then spare one affection to obey her? One says
out of Gregory: Probatio dilectionis est exhibitio operis. The trial of thy
love, is the showing of thy deed, or to show it by thy deeds. Ser. de temp. 100.
And Christ says: If ye love me, keep my commandments. Ioh. 14.15
How can you love your holy Prince, and do not her will? If you deny to do that
which is least, who may trust you in that which is most? Servants obey their
Masters, Mal. 1.6
the Ox knows his owner, Isay. 1.3
and subjects should their Prince. To. 13.1
Faith without good works, is dead in it self. Iam. 2.20.
And Judas his hail Master, with his kiss, was treason against the son of
God. Math. 26. And as David says: Good words in the mouth, and war in the
heart, is nothing better then plain hypocrisy. Therefore Christ called the
flattering Disciples of the Pharisees, and the Herodia^s hipocrites, Mat. 22 18.
which are a people or generation, pure in their own conceit: Prou. 30.12.
and it is a mighty Pride for one to conceive well of himself, where few or
none else does: and the worse, where there is no cause. Well, Christ says, He
that gathers not with us, scatters abroad. Math. 12.30.
S. Aug. says: Non est particeps diuinae charitatis qui hostis est vnitatis.
Aug. Epist. 50.
He is not beloved of God, which is an enemy to the unity of the Church. The
branch bears not fruit except it abide in the vine, Ioh. 15.4
and what life is in the body being torn asunder? If I were now to come to
the Papist and Puritan, I wot what to say; but others are before me (whose
shoes I am not worthy to bear) then here will I stay. A foul puddle the
more it is stirred, the more it stinketh. Only this I could wish, that our
busybodies would cease to lick up the vomit which others have cast, and
washed from them: as also to meddle with Callings, who, why, and how, such, and
such men have their calling lawful: and as for my brethren of my own calling,
to meddle with matters of state, my poor wisdom and learning guarded with
humility, councelleth and teaches me to behold and learn of King David, the
man after Gods own heart (and wiser then the most peevish schismaticke, or
opinionaries) who says: Lord, I do not exercise my self in great matters
which are too high for me, but I refrain my soul and keep it low. Ps. 131.
And to what end should a Country Pulpit meddle with matters of government in
Malam partem, except it were to teach the people to tread upon the Princes
lawful Scepter, and tread the Crown under their feet? What they have
intended, God has prevented: and because this their counsel or work is of
men, it comes to naught: as Gamaliel told the men of Israel theirs should, if
it were against God. Act. 5.34 38.
Admit some things might be amiss, the best way to amend them, is there to
speak of them where mends may be had, and not to keep a wrangling among such
as cannot help. No, no, (my dear brethren) if we look well about us, we
shall find no time wherein to omit speaking of the matters of faith, for men
will not believe: and to smite at sin and corruption among Officers at this
day. For though (perhaps) some one head of sin and corruption be wounded to
death, yet it recouereth the deadly wound; like the beast in the thirteenth of
the Revelation. And men return to their sin again like the dog to his
vomit, and the sow that was washed, to her ^allowing in the myer. 2. Pet. 2.22.
Nay though ^ne head of sin be cut off, yet there ^^iseth two in the room:
behold our Pride, which I may call our English Hydra. But (alas) I desire here
rather to lament, then to open the vanity of men's minds, and untamed
affections of this time: through which, who knows not the church of God to be
grievously rent, and the adversary to have got no small occasion for to
blaspheme? But to end with these kind of proud men, let them view Calvin, who
says it Math. 13.41. They which proposterously make haste to root out and
abolish whatsoever likes not, or displeases them, do prevent so much as in
them lies the judgment of Christ^ and do rashly usurp unto themselue^ the
power of Angels, and the office pertaining unto them. Therefore let us al^
embrace and hold fast the counsel o^ the holy Apostle. Seek peace and follow
after it, 1. Pet. 3.11.
and study to be quiet. 1 Thessalonians. 14.11.
For God is not the author of dissension, bu^ of peace: 1. Cor. 14.33.
and therefore build we (...) together the building of God: the day (...) are
evil, the end of all things is at hand^ and happy is he in whose work i^
found no guile.

Thus you hear of some that ar^ proud, other you know, and more will appear by
the rest that follows.

CHAP. IIII. Whither Pride will ascend.
NOw sir, Pride says she will ascend above the clouds, may one (think you)
believe her? let us see what may be meant by the clouds, and then how she does
clime.

Clouds have these five significations in the word of God. 1. They signify
those Meteors which are drawn up into the air out of the sea and moist
places, by the superior powers. These clouds we see daily the wind drives too
and fro. Such was that cloud which Elias his servant saw arise out of the sea
in bigness like a man's hand, and presently the heavens were black with clouds
and wind, and there was a great rain. 1. Reg. 18.44.45
2. Clouds signify a divine ordinance of GOD, supernatural, appointed for a
time to do his will. Such was that cloud, that led the children of Israel by
day, to escape from the Egyptians. And he, first God, went before them by day
in a pillar of a cloud Exodus 13 21.
3. They signify a multitude. We are compassed with so great a cloud of
witnesses, etc. Heb. 12.1.
4. They do signify the wicked and wretched worldlings which are without the
truth of good works: these the holy scriptures does call clouds without
rain. Proverb. 25.14.
5. Clouds do signify all those good men of godly conversation, whose lights
of righteousness do shine before men, whose good deeds do comfort the poor,
as rain from the clouds does moysten the earth. Of these Isay speaks,
saying. Let the clouds drop down righteousness. Isa. 45.8
Over the first the builders of Babell meant for to mount. To be above the
fourth, what credit is it for Pride, but to be counted the king or captain,
ringleader, and lord and master of all wickedness? but at the fifth it is
that she aymeth, and though they be as is in the third a multitude, yet
superiority you hear she proclaims: she will be above the clouds: she
will be above them, though she be none of them. The meaning is, that Pride
persuaded Nabuchadnezzar, as it does the Pope and Spaniard, that he should
overthrow Jerusalem the City of God, and place, which he had chosen to put
his name there, and as it were tread the people under his feet, drive them
away captive, and take his will and pleasure upon them: as I fear the rich do
by the poor, and therefore he says: I will ascend above the clouds, etc.

CHAP. V. How Pride does ascend.
NOw if you would know the steps by which Pride does clime, or the feathers of
her wings which make her to mount, (for she is a winged beast, look else on
many women's gowns, but theirs hang down as if they were broken in the flight.
It may be some of the wings of their faith are not sound, and that makes the
wings of their gowns be so ill favored, having more cost upon a pair, then
would make a poor child a coat, which they never remember.) Well, though they
be many, yet at this time I will speak bu^ of four, which I take to be the
foremost and strongest feathers of her wings And one is disdain, which mounts
h^^ aloft, by insulting over, dispising, an^ preferring her self before all
other^ scornfully contemning her betters, lik^ the Gentiles, who seeing that
God ha^ cut off the Jews, which were the natural branches, and had grafted
them in^ being but wild Olive branches, Romans 11 18.
these began to boast against them, despising them: as Hagar did her mistress^
Sarai. Genesis 16.4.
And so the most whom Go^ favors above their brethren, they insult over
them, and swell one against a^ other, like the Corinthians: 1. Co. 4.6.
setting one an other either altogether atnought or else lightly regarding
them, as the rich did the poor, among the same Corinthians. 1. Cor. 11 22
But S. Ambrose says o^ the rich, proud, and mighty men of the world. Ambr.
lib. de Nab. Iere. cap. 13
Quid enim superbis dives? quid dicis pauperi, noli me tangere? etc. Wherefore
o rich man, art thou so proud? why say thou to the poor man, come no^ near
me? your beginning and end are both alike: you came from the womb and shall to
the ground.

We read, that when the huge Philistine Goliath looked about and saw little
David, he disdained him. 1. Sam. 17, 42.
And you that be as Goliath, should not thus deal with the David's among you.
But behold further, the poor Publicane humble in spirit, (I speak of him
first, for he was the better man) and the rich Pharisie proud in heart, went
into the Temple for to pray. The Publican perceived how unmeet a thing it is
for a poor soul all to be smeared with sin, impudently to stare in the face
of the most holy God: therefore he durst not lift up so much as his eyes to
heaven, but smote his breast saying. O God be merciful unto me a sinner. Luke
18.13.
But the proud Pharisie stood (he would not bow: like our Puritanes when they
come to the Church, and holy Communion) and prayed thus with himself. O God I
thank thee, that I am not as other men, extortioners, unjust, adulterers,
(such then there were, though peradventure not half so bad as be now) or as
this Publican, etc. He said true, but not so well for himself, as he thought
he did. For (surely beloved) he was not like the Publican, for the Publican
was better then he: as S. Augustine well notes, saying: Ille superbus erat in
bonis factis, ille humilis in malis factis, videte fratres, magis placuit deo
humilitas in malis factis, quam superbia in bonis factis. Aug. in Ps. 93.
The meaning is, The Pharisie was proud in doing good deeds, the Publican meek
and lowly because of his evil deeds. Mark my brethren, God was better pleased
with the Publicans humility, though he had lived wickedly, then with the good
deeds of the Pharisie, because he was proud and disdainful. Which Christ
confirms, saying: I tell you (and he knew the truth) this man, even the
humble Publican, departed home to his house justified more then the other. Or
as some note, and not the other.

Again, you know the insolent boasting of the proud youth in the Gospel. Mat.
19.16. to. 23.
He said he had kept the commandments, (but he lied with those that say so)
and so thought to have eternal life. But when Christ came to search him by his
deeds, he found no such matter in him, but that when he thought best of
himself, and even preferred himself before other, then was he worst in the
sight of God. And Pharao king of Egypt disdained that there should be any God to
command him; therefore when Moses and Aaron came with commission from the
Lord, for Isreal's deliverance out of Egypt, the King answered. Quis est dominus
vt audiam vocem eius? Who is the Lord that I should hear his voice, Exodus 5.2
and let Israel go? I know not the Lord, neither will I let Israel go. Even
so in these days men make as little account of Gods word, and his Ambassadors:
and through Pride, by which they are overwhelmed, they disdain that God should
teach and command them to let their sin go, and this is the cause they
regard him no better, but eue^ say like Pharao, who is the Lord, that I should
hear his voice, and let my Pride, usury, extortion, oppression, or any my
pleasure go? I know not the Lord, neither will I let them go. Jesus Christ
says: Learn of me, take my yoke upon you, my yoke is easy, and my burden
is light. Math. 11.30.
But S. Augustine speaking of Pride, shows the cause why men will not,
saying. Propter hoc vitium, dedignantur subdere colla iugo Christi, obligati
arctius iugo peccati. Aug. in Ps. 18.
Because of Pride men disdain to yield their necks to the yoke of Christ,
and will rather gall them in the yoke of sin. But know you this, that
whosoever by this disdainful Pride, will endeavor to mount himself, the higher
he rises, the greater shall be his fall. And if you mean to ascend indeed,
the humble your selves under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in
due time. 1. Pet. 5.6
And let every man esteem others better then himself. Phil. 2.3
For he that humbles himself, shall be exalted. Luke 18.14.
As the examples of Job, Daniel, Sidrach, Misach, and Abednego, Christ,
Stephen, the thief upon the Cross, and the Centurion, with many other, do
plainly testify. The Centurion in the meekness of his humble mind, said to
Christ (who promised wh^ he did come to his house, to heal hi^ servant) Lord
(says he) I am not worth^ that thou should come under my roofe^ but speak
the word only, and my seruan^ shall be healed. Math. 8.78.
If he were not worthy that Christ should come under his roof, because of his
majesty and holiness, it is a shame for you to foster Pride in yours, as the
bawd does the hatlot, because of her filthiness. His humility Christ honored
with a great commendation: shall not your Pride be shamed in due condemnation?
but I return. The want of this humility, such height of haughty mind and
swelling with disdain, like bodies poisoned, caused Kain that he could not
abide to see Abels sacrifice accepted before his, therefore Kaine slew Abell
his brother. Genesis 4.8.
It made Joseph's brethren that they could not abide to think that their
brother should come to greater honor then they: therefore they made away with
him, and sold him into Egypt. Genesis 37
The Rebels, Corath, Dathan, and Abiram, having found this, they disdained
superiorie, like our pretended Presbitery, so they rebelled against Moses
their godly governor. Numb. 16.12.
It made Herod that blood-sucker, to seek to murder Christ: Math. 2 16.
and the Nobles of Babylon greatly to thirst after Daniels death. Dan. 6.4
Where disdain looks out at Prides window, as Iezabe^ did to see Iehu, 2.
Reg. 9.30.
there every one despise other, Luke 18.9
and justify themselves: Luke 16.15.
only because as Diotrephes loved the pre-eminence among men; Ioh. Epist. 3.9.
so they would have the highest rooms, Luke 14.7.
and disdain that any should get before the Thus much for disdain, a feather
of Prides wing: I will pluck at it no longer, for it will not come out. But
now to your selves, and yet I will spare you in hope you will amend.

The second feather of Prides wing may be presumption, two ways to be seen to
mount her up above the clouds. First, when men dwell in wickedness, and therein
delight, as the Owl in darkness, and say, Thou God carest not for it: tush I
shall never be cast down, there shall no harm happen unto me. Ps. 10.6.12.14.
And therefore of Pride presumptuously they determine with Synacharib the
subversion of Kingdoms, 2 Reg. 18.19.
and commit murder with Kaine, Genesis 4.8.19.
whordome with Lamech, the first founders thereof: extortion and oppression
with Rehoboam, 1. Reg. 12.14.
against the law of God, which says: Thou shall not oppress thy brother. Leu.
19.13.
Nay Pride in man's heart, makes him entend to do even what him list, and thinks
to go forward without any controlment, never so much as once making the blessed
God of their counsel: which the Apostle S. James sharply reproves. Iam. 4.13.
These, and such like, I take to be those of whom the Prophet of God speaks:
where he says. The ungodly is so proud, that he cares not for God, neither
is God in all his thoughts. Ps. 10.4
And therefore in distress think not that God will care for them. Pro. 1.28.
Will they yet run on?

The other kind of presumption is, when men will dwell and continue in sin,
and think to salve the matter with this plaster, God is merciful: 2. Cor.
1.3.
forgetting that he is just and true, Ps. 7.9. and 10.14. and 11.7.
and so repentance is deferred, sin is increased, God is blasphemed, and in
the end, thou thy self most like to be deceived, like one that ouer-sleepeth
the Tide, and then cannot take Ship: or like the 5. foolish Virgins, who sought
^yle when it was too late. Math. 25.10.
Of such almighty God complains by the Psalmist, saying. The plowers plowed
upon my back, and made long furrows. Ps. 129.3.
By which is meant, that to prolong thy sin, and to put off from day to day
thy amendment of life, still hoping on mercy, to have it at thy will, is to
plow or dig upon Gods back: but mark what follows. The righteous Lord
has cut the cords of the wicked, to wit, in pieces. Here is a cross bar,
or a double gate to stop thy way to presumption, even the justice of God, and
the execution thereof according unto truth. Ah fellow, art got up to plowe and
goare the back of God? he is just as well as merciful, and he will cut in
sunder the cords of thy presumption. First he will frustrate thy hope, by
which thou drawest on thy sins, as the Oxen do the plough by the chain. And
to assure thee of this, the holy Ghost uses the time past in this word, Has,
for the time to come, as that it shall so surely be performed, as if it were
past already. To confirm this, the word of God says: The person that does
ought presumptuously, whether he be borne in the Land, or a Stranger, the same
blasphemeth the Lord: Therefore that person shall be cut off from among his
people, because he has despised the word of the Lord, and has broken his
commandment, that person shall be utterly cut off: his iniquity shall be
upon him. Numb. 15.30.31
Paul also will have no man presume above that which is written. 1. Cor. 4.6.1.
And it is written, Put not off from day to day, for suddenly shall his wrath
come, and in the time of vengeance he shall destroy thee. This then expect,
except thou repent, etc.

Thirdly, rebellion is an other feather in Prides wing, by which she would
heave up her self in usurping and stretching her authority over men wthout
lawful right, or true commission: forcing them to obey her, and leading them
captive after her own will; as well against Gods word, as any ordinance of
his. And here to go from time to time, from one Commonwealth to an other,
and view the cause of treasons among subjects toward their Princes and
governors of wars and contentions, etc. we should find it to be Pride and
loftiness of mind, ambitiously desiring one an others kingdom, rising and
rebelling through immoderate greedines of glory. Which the holy Apostle Saint
James affirms, saying. From whence are wars and contentions among you? are
they not herehence even of your lusts that fight in your members? Iam. 4.1
Only of Pride (says wise Solomon) does man make contention. Prouer. 13.10.
Look in Genesis. 14. and the second book of the Kings. cap. 18. As in many
places more, and thou shall have examples to confirm this matter. And our
English Chronicles want no store, but Richard the third does make me tremble
to name any more. Therefore for this time I will keep me at home, and as I
speak to you, so I will speak of you: for you (beloved) I desire to be taught.
Will you give me leave in a word to tell some of you how you run after Pride
and rebel against God? if you will, I shall but only passing along by your
coats, costs I mean, pluck at here and there a weed, which hinders the
growing of better corn.

CHAP. VI. Two chains to tie up the branded beast Pride.
Necessity and comeliness for attite, firmly fastened to the strong pillar of
true humility, Eccl. 11 4.
ought to be the two chains to tie up the branded beast Pride: branded,
because she is of ^iuers colors of starch and trash, chan^ing her self like
the Camelion: and ^ltering her fashions like Proteus or Vertumnus, never
remembering that the ^id man which is in the heart should be without all
corruption. 1. Pet. 3.4.
But even as the false Prophets were schooled by the devil, to speak as the
King would have them: 1. Reg. 22.22.
so Pride contemns the spirit of God, and says, what have I to do with thee?
as the possessed with ^^uels said to Christ Math. 8 29.
teaching the flesh as she will have it. For the head ^^ust nod, the eyes must
roll, the bo^^e must iette, the tongue must trowle, ^^d all as Pride will have
them. Soft ^^iment (says Christ) is in Kings houses. As if there were the
fittest and most proper place for rich apparel to be, Math. 11.8.
because it belongs to such as are o^ the Kings Court. The rich glutton
(rich, so he might the more easily do it yet but a glutton, and therefore it
was no credit to him) was clothed in purple and fine linen, Luke 16 19.
or white Paul the Apostle of Christ, teaches 1. Cor. 11.6.11.
that it is a shame for men to wear long hair; and for women to pray
bareheaded. But as the poor man of the proud worldling is thrust to the
footestoole, (d) Iam. 2.3
so the counse^ of the holy Ghost is set at naught. Prouer. 1.30.
And men do wear long hair, women do go bareheaded with they hair
uncovered.

Come from the Court to the Country; in rich attire what wants the subject
of the Prince? view them with the poor, and you shall see of the poorer sort,
as proud as the rich, and the most of our common women, to excel those of the
better sort. For noueties, and change of fashions, and toies men and women are
as full, as a toade (...) of poison. Of whom I may speak, (...) S. Ambrose
does of the covetous. Laborant vt quaerant: vt inuenia^t laborant: quid habere
non norunt. Ambr. li. de Nab. Iere. ca. 13
They toil to get, and labor to find, but what they would have, they cannot
tell themselves. Come we to servants, (it is well we must stand to reprove
their Pride) these, though their wages be not great, yet their ruffes must be
as big and ill-favored, as their hearts, and the cloth as fine, as their proud
dames, with blew starch too. Lastly, behold our wanton and ruffinly mynions,
and see how without all shame they surmount their callings, and contemn God.
It grieueth me to speak that, which they be not ashamed to do.

But why do they so? Even as Christ says of the Pharisees: The hypocrites and
the Pharisees do their deeds to be seen of men: Math. 6.16. and 23.28.
And when are we most proud in apparel, but when we think most to be seen
of others? Then as Saul (whom God had cast off from favor, to keep a piece of
credit with the world, for with God he had none) said to Samuel, 1. Sam. 15.
Honor me before this people. So those that are proud in heart, say to their
ruffes, schoters, and hoopes, with their other implements of Pride, Honor me
before this people. But alas, they be so far from doing them any honor,
that in the sight of God, whom they should fear, Deuteronomy. 28 58.
and to all of an humble spirit, whom they should love without dissimulation,
Romans 12 9
and not offend. Mat. 18.6
For it is written: Whosoever shall offend one of these little ones, which
believe in me, it were better for him, that a millstone were hanged about his
neck, and that he were drowned in the depth of the Sea. And again the holy
Ghost says: Grieve not the holf spirit of God, by whom ye are sealed unto the
day of redemption. Ephe. 4.30.
To these I say their fond fashions make them as rydiculous, as they are
monstrous. Though they themselves be as much besotted with them: as is said
Narcissus was with his own shadow. Ovid. Meta. li. 3
And do delight to wallow in them as the sow in myr^ before the green grass:
preferring them, as a child does a trifle, as an apple before the best Gold.

You tell us indeed of a kind of straying vermin, is there such? how shall w^
know them?

How man? Heu quam difficile est crimen non prodere vultu? Answer.


How hard is it in outward show,
To keep thy sin from open view?
As S. Ambrose says, Amb. de li. de Nab. Iere. cap. 13
Quasi is cognitus esse non potest, cum sibi desiderat demonstrari. As though
he can be unknown which is desirous (like a fool) to show his coat. The
wise man says, A man's garment, laughter, and going, declare what he is. Eccl.
19 28.
And again: The whoredom of a woman may be known in the pride of her eyes,
and eyelids. Eccl. 26 9.
Thus the Lord God knew the daughters of Syon to be proud or haughty, because
they walked with stretched out necks, with rolling eyes, ietting or nodding.
and minsing as they did go: with costly apparel, sweet balls, bracelets and
bonnets: their head attire, head-bands, Tablets, Earings, Rings, Chrisping
pinnes, and such like. Isay. 3.16.17.18.19. etc.
And are you persuaded he knows not you? We read of one Athila, sometimes
King of Pannonia, now called Austria, whose Pride the people noted by his very
gesture. These be the words of Historiographers Paulus, Iouius, Charl. Steph.
Textor.
Erat Athila Rex Pannomae superbus successu, huc atque illuc oculos
circumferens, vt illata potentia in ipso corporis motu appareret. There was one
Athila king of Pannonia, proud in his very going, rolling his eyes hither and
thither, in so much that his mighty Pride did appear by the very motion of
his body. And by your leave, in these days many their proud going, and
speaking, and scornful looking, becomes the^ not, neither be they meet for
their persons: no more then pearls for swine, or holy things for dogs. King
David says: Lord I am not high minded, I have no proud looks. Ps. 131.1
And your elders in former times were not ashamed to be meek and humble,
Therefore as S. Ambrose says: Cave, ne in te erubescant tuorum merita maiorum.
Amb. li. de Nab. Iere. cap. 13.
Beware least thou think scorn of the modesty and good qualities of thy
predecessors. Which of them did ever wear either schoters for their ruffes, or
hoopes upon their hippes, or blew starch? How ugly were one, by natural
proportion so big about? What, do thou mean to mend or mar Gods
workmanship? or to make thy self so big that thou may not enter in at
heaven gate? thy grandmothers doubtless had never such imaginations. And I
hope they were more commendable before God and man, more meek and humble, and
better to the poor, then thou that use them. A grave matron and sober dame,
would be sore grieved that she should be once imagined to bend her self, or
desire to use the light gesture and behavior of a wanton: and me-thinketh it
is more shame to see a Puritan got within a hoope, and to be painted with
blew starch, but most shame for Prelates themselves and their second selves to
be thus spotted, neither do I commend any that use them, though they have small
fear of God in them. The Prophet of God was more bold with the dainty dames of
Syon. Isa. 3. But know we, though we seem holy, yet such things do show
those that use the^, to be but counterfeits, and do bewray their folly, like
Ierobohams wife, who disguised her self, that the Prophet of God should not
know her. 1. Reg. 14.2.
Nay when they have heaped on all their trinkets, it is most like they know not
themselves, but wondering at themselves, (who should be like unto the Image of
God) as the Jews did at Christ, when he came riding into Jerusalem: they say,
who is this? What, is it I? is it I? As the Disciples said, musing which of
them should betray Christ. Math. 21.10.
Well to be brief, (for time draws on) notwithstanding Ieroboams wife was
disguised, yet the holy Prophet knew her, and sent her home, with a burden of
heavy news, that she and all her posterity should be destroyed. 1. Reg.
14.10.11 12.
But I have better news for you, if you repent: but if you cannot know your
selves, being so far beyond comeliness disguised against the law: yet the
Prophets of the Lord that know how to discern spirits, wotteth what you be,
and fear not to tell you from the Lord, The Lord will destroy the house of
proud men. Prouer. 15.25.
And thus much for this: this then amend, and then come for more.

Now coffeehouse of mind I may add for the fourth feather of Prides wing,
which makes her to fly above the clouds: as the wind forces the fire for
to flame. Through this, the Angels (in happiness created to behold the
majesty of God in heaven) kept not their first estate, but left their own
habitation, whom God has reserved in everlasting chains under darkness, unto
the judgment of the great day. Jude. ver. 6.
Their Pride following the counsel of coffeehouse, as Rehoboam did of his
younglings, 1. Reg. 12.14.
did mount them thus high, that of Angels they became devils. Adam and the
woman could not be contented with their creation, therefore God thrust them out
of Paradise. Genesis 3.24.
This made Absolon thirst for his fathers kingdom, but he leapt short, and was
hanged in an Oak. 2. Sam. 15. and 18.
This, this, I suppose is that which makes our hotte-spurres and unstayed
cockbrained crew to wring at the Princes Scepter, and get it out of her hands,
(whose peaceable and heavenly government the world does admire: and if laws
were executed as her will is, what policy can appoint better? to convey it
unto a Presbytery. The Officers thereof, and their number, and what their
office should be in an established Commonwealth, cannot be proved by any
scripture: neither can our new reformers tell themselves. For they change
their opinions as the Camelion does his colors. Or as the wise man says, Like
a fool that changes as the Moon. Eccl. 27 11.
And their writings as well as their words, declare what these men have in their
heart. Eccl. 27.6.
Now name Pride, harnessed with coffeehouse, and thou have found the
soldiers that fight their battles, and their scoldings are grievous for to
hear, etc. Eccl. 27 15.
Furthermore you know that Haman could not be contented with all his promotion
being preserred by King Ahasuerus to be the chief man under him, in all the
Provinces of his dominion: but he obtained a Commission to kill all the Jews
(only of spite, vnderserued of any): but by Gods providence they were
delivered, and Hamans discontented Pride, was discharged by his own gallows.
Ester. 3. and 7.
This made Ahab he could not be quiet without Naboth his vineyard. 1. Reg.
21.15.16
Pride is never contented, like her sister Conetousnesse. I would our coat were
without this stain. But with Balaam (I am afraid) many follow the reward of
iniquity.

May we not pray that the Fullers soap might get this spot out of their
cloth? If they could, silks and veluets would not be in so great request, nor
the Country cloyed with so many singlesolde gentlefolke, carrying more upon
their backs needless at once, then would comfort the poor at their boordes a
whole month. And think you that you be none of these schismatickes of
Martins crew? If they were well looked unto, it may be you should find their
tables in their Farme-houses, as mouldie, as many Pulpets are full of copwebbes
for want of using? Does not this keep men's pity from the poor? ^ow they
lament I will not speak, but I would from God exhort the rich ^n time for to
take compassion on them. Gal. 6.10
And though of many their hearts ^re hardened, yet because the cry of ^he poor
is known to her Majesty, and to the wisdom of her Majesty's honorable
Council, doubt not beloved, but that speedy remedy and help is appointed.

Only this I say, that whole Countries and Nations by this sin of mind
malecontent, rise one against an other, few content with their own Patrimony:
only our dread sovereign, and most gracious Queen, does hold the garland
from them all, God save her life for ever, Amen. What needs further proof
where experience is plain? She ioyeth more (most renowned Queen) in saving
one drop of her subjects blood, then in winning of a whole Kingdom, and
therefore she is content with her own: long o Lord let her enjoy it, to the
great example of all other. O pray for the peace of Jerusalem, even little
England. Christ says, Learn of me: and if any would learn of her Majesty,
what need either joining of house to house, or laying of field to field, till
there be no place for the poor, that ye may be placed by your selves on the
midst of the earth? Esa. 5.8
Why should there be such racking of rents, such cold hospitality, dearth of
corn, and all other things, since there is plenty? But it is easy to show,
that where Pride once sets her foot upon coffeehouse, or ingrafteth this
feather into her wing; there God is forgotten, and few contented with that
which is Aequum and iustum, nor with their own, then away with equity, yea
and equality too, every churl must be a gentleman, Pride will be like God.
These be four sick feathers in Prides wings: under which, who so shrowdeth
himself, is covered from the favor of God. Away from him all ye workers of
iniquity. Goliath said: I defy the host of Israel this day. 1. Sam. 17.10.
But God does defy the house of Pride for ever that will not turn. For it is
written: He that has high looks and a proud stomach, does his soul
abhor. And wise Solomon says. These six things does the Lord hate, yea his
soul abhors seven: the haughty eyes, a lying tongue, etc. Lo Pride is the
first, as captain of the rest. Pro. 6.16.17.
And thus much of this matter.

But peradventure it may be thought that I have a grudge to some of you, as
Solomon had to Shimei, 1. Reg. 2.36. etc
because I tell you the truth so boldly and plainly.

Now beware you grudge not me, as as Saul did David. 1. Sam. 18.9.
I can wash my hands in innocence, and clear my self of this matter.
Innocentia est vbi non est nocendi voluntas. Amb. li. de bono Mor. ca. 1
That is innocence which is without desire to hurt. Augustine says: Duo sunt
genera persecutorum: vituperantium and adulantium; Nam plus persequitur lingua
adulatoris quam manus persequentis. Aug. in Ps. 69.
There are two kinds of hurting or persecuting enemies: that is, backbyters
and flatterers: for the tongue of the flatterer wounds or hurts more then
the hand of a sworn enemy: for so the meaning is. Again he says: Nemo
peritorum aut prudentium putet, etc. There is no man of understanding and
wisdom but sees more danger or harm to be by a lying and flattering rongue,
then by the hands of a murderer. Aug. ad Casul. 4. ad Demet. Ep. 14^.
For David still fled from Saul when he came to kill him, and so was saved. 1.
Sam. 18.11.
But Absalom by flattery caught his brother Ammon, and slew him. 2. Sam. 13.28
29
So Ioab murdered Abner, and Amasa. 2. Sam. 3.27.


Again, Augustine says that Flattery makes men cold in Religion. Aug. in
Ps. 69.
Therefore Jesus Christ says: Fear not them that kill the body. Math. 10.28.
And the Prophet Isay says: Fear not, cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy
voice like a Trumpet, and show my people their transgression. Isay. 43.1. and
51.1
And the holy Apostle S. Paul says: Rebuke not an Elder, but exhort him as a
father, and the younger men as brethren. 1. Timot. 5.1.
Put both together, and this lesson may be learned: not to do the work of the
Lord negligently, Ier. 48.10.
and yet patiently to rebuke, and to be instant in season and out of season,
but yet in love. 2. Timot. 4.2.
That we may be blameless and pure, as the sons of God without rebuke in
the midst of a noughtie and crooked Nation, in the which we shine as lights
in the world, holding forth the word of life, etc. Phil. 2.15.16.
Therefore I know what to do, I tell you the truth, why do you not believe
me? I cannot speak with glosing words of man's wisdom. 1. Cor. 1.17.19.
I preach Christ crucified, and teach you to crucify the old man and his
lusts. Be not you like the Gaderenes, who because their swine were gone,
desired Jesus to depart out of their coasts. Math. 8.34.
Be not like the Philistines and men of Asdod. Who, because their Idol Dagon
could not stand by the holy Arc, but still fell down and was broken, sent
away the Ark of God, to keep their Idol still. 1. Sam. 5 1. etc.
But forsake your sins, and keep Christ: Reave. 3.20.
burn your Idols of sin, and confess the Arc of Gods covenant. Let not
your sins flatter you and entice you; though they be as importunate upon you
to thrust you out of Gods favor, as Sampso^s wife was upon him, to get away
his strength as she did indeed: therefore he was overcome of the Philistines,
Judge. 16.15.16. to. 21.
and so shall you of the devil at his will But if God be God, go after him:
and if Baall, or Pride, or Usury, etc. be he then follow them. For no man ca^
serve two masters, you cannot seru^ God and Mammon. Math. 6.24.
Now then confess I envy none, I grieve at you^ sins. And the holy Prophet
of God teaches me, who says: Fret not (...) self because of the ungodly men,
neith^^ be thou envious against the evil dooers. Ps. 37.1.
Yet he says also: It grieueth me, becau^^ men keep not thy law. Ps. 119.158.
But m^^ should not grieve the holy spirit of God, by whom we have commission
as well to reprove your sin, as to instruct you in the truth of Gods holy
will: neither should you hate us because we tell you the truth; as the Jews
did Christ, Ioh. 8.40.
or as Herod did John the Baptist. Mat. 14 3.4.
If you do, The servant is not greater then his Lord and Master. Ioh. 15.20.
and 13 16.
And here withal, remember what the Master Christ Jesus says, comforting his
faithful servants against obstinate contemners of his word. Whosoever (as well
Princes, Potentates, Prelates, as people) shall be ashamed of me, and of my
words, among this adulterous and sinful generation, of him shall the son of
man be ashamed also, when he comes in the glory of his father, with his holy
Angels. Mar. 8.38.
And here I will rest for this time.

We see in Pride a contempt of all other, in regard of her self, and how she
does mount above the clouds, in desire to tread them under her feet: and she
cannot be content with this, but she will be like God; which is here the second
vanity of Pride.

CHAP. VII. How Pride would be like God.
Pride may be said to be like God either in some proprieties, or else in name.
First, her property is to exalt her self, and desire to be praised, and held
in honor as much, or rather more then God.

Secondly, she challenges vengeance to her felse to plague whom she list. In
Name she is like God, because she usurps or challenges to be called God.

OF the first we have heard something already, how Pride does seek to exalt
her self above the clouds: and being got up into this persuasion of her self,
then she looks that all should fear her, and extol her, and do (forsoothe)
all reverence and worship unto her, as the devil would have had Christ do unto
him. Math. 4.9.
And here the Pope steps in for his interest: but we will put him back
until anon, telling him and his nurse. Dame Pride, that when God shall come in
judgment against them. Then the Lord only shall be exalted in that day.
Isay. 2.11.17.
The Lord of Hoasts shall be exalted in judgment, the holy God shall be
exalted in justice. Isay. 5.16
For it is written: I will arise (says the Lord) now will I be exalted, now
will I lift up my self. Isay. 33.10.
Therefore the Psalmist in this respect remembering the promise of God, in which
the faithful patiently expect the fall of the proud, and their own
deliverance, sings: Not unto us o Lord, not unto us, but unto thy name give
thy glory, for thy loving mercy, and for thy truth sake. Ps. 115.1
Thus David so earnestly in his Psalms exhorts the childie^ of God to praise
the Lord, Ps. 106. and 136.
which subdueth our enemies under our feet. And the Evangelist Saint John saw
all the Angels fall before the Throne on their faces and worship God, saying
Amen, praise and glory, and wisdom, and thanks, and honor, and power, and
might be unto our God for evermore, Amen. Reu. 7.12.


And not only the Angels, but all the creatures which are in heaven, and in
the earth, and under the earth, and in the sea, and all that are in them heard
I say, (says John) praise, and honor, and glory, and power, be unto him that
sits upon the Throne, and unto the Lamb for evermore. Reu. 5.13.
And the Angel would not suffer John to worship him. Reu. 22.8.9.
But Pride (indeed she is none of Gods creatures) would have all to honor,
and worship, and praise, and fear her: she would be like God. Thus the
Samaritanes praised Simon Magus, Act. 8.10
and thus the people extolled Herod. Act. 12.22.
Thus Pride cries to the hearts of men, saying: Not unto God, not unto God,
but unto me give the glory. And this is the cause that we haunt so much, and
greedily gape, for to be praised of men, like the Pharisees; Math. 6.16.
to exclude Jesus Christ from his due honor, and glory, and praise, who is
ascended into the heavens, and led captivity captive. Pride brings out Simon
Magus, speaking to the holy Apostle S. Peter, saying: Do thou think thy
Christ to be therefore great because he ascended from the earth to heaven? (A
great piece of work) that can I do. And then he mounted into the air by the
help of his familiar devil. But he that carried him up let him tumble down
alone, and so he was crushed in pieces, with shame enough to all his former
coniurings: for he was condemned of all, and no doubt damned of God; there his
Pride had a filthy fall. See Niceph. lib. 5. cap. 16. Eccl. Hist.
Is not this Pride the poison of the beast, which all they that dwell upon the
face of the earth shall worship, whose names are not written in the Lambs
book of life, which was slain from the beginning of the world? And they
worshipped the beast, saying: Who is like unto the beast? who is able to war
with him? Re. 13.4


The holy Ghost says: Fear ye the Lord, all ye his Saints. And again: Tremble
thou earth at the presence of the Lord, at the presence of the mighty God of
Jacob. But now Pride will be regarded: this is an Idol set up in every corner,
and who does not flee unto it? How many do shun this Hydra or mighty
monster, choosing rather to be a doorekeeper in the house of the Lord, or to go
into the horte fiery furnace, and resuse to obey her commandment to cleave
fast unto the living God? In the Provinces of Babylon among the Nobles,
Princes, and Dukes, the Judges, the Receivers, the Counselors, the Officers,
and all the Governors of the people, we read but of three that worshipped the
Lord, and refused the commandment of Pride, to fall down and worship the
golden Image that Nabuchadnezzar the King had set up. Dan. 33.7.
In the old world there were but eight reserved, and in Sodom Lot, Gen 7. and
19.
that bowed not their knees to this Idol Pride and abomination. Happy are
our days that do not thus complain: yea blessed be the people that be in
better case. O my dear brethren, the sun dares not show her light, Mat. 27
45.
the mountains tremble, the earth does shake, the hills melt, and the devils
quake when God is angry, and at the presence of the Lord, even the mighty God
of Jacob. And dare thou, thou dunghill bird Pride, presume to be like God, or
get the praise from him, to exalt thy self and look to be magnified? this
indeed is thy desire. But to the nextt.

Secondly. Pride will be like God, in taking vengeance upon whom she list,
wringing the sword out of Gods hand, and those unto whom he has committed it.
Therefore the Pope sets himself against God and his Church, whereof Christ
Jesus is the head and savior of the whole body. 1. Proclaiming rebellion, and
encouraging subjects to treason against their Prince. 2. By rattling his
excommunications. 3. By dispearsing his Bulls to depose Princes. 4. By private
practicing to murder Princes. 5. By coniuring and poisoning, to effect these
devilish purposes. 6. To teach perjury to subjects, and dispense therewith by
the pardons of their Agnus Dei, etc. And this he does, only because his heart
says, being poisoned with Pride, Vengeance is mine. Come from him to Ahab the
king, let Elias reprove his sin, and Iezabel will vow his death. 1. Reg. 18.
Ahab told Iezabel all that Elias had done, and how he had slain all the
Prophets of Baal with the sword. Then Iezabel sent a messenger unto Elias,
saying: The Gods do so unto me: and more also, if I make not thy life like one
of their lives, by to morrow this time: As if she had said, the devil take me,
and all the devils in hell, if I be not revenged upon thee by taking away thy
life, as thou have done theirs, by to morrow this time. But she died
unrevenged, and the devils had their legacy. Learn then not to punish without
cause, neither let them handle the sword unto whom it does not belong, as
Zedikiah did, 1. Reg. 22.4.
and other. Likewise, if the man of God displease Jeroboam, then cries he, Lay
hold on him: 1. Reg. 13.4.
but men should suffer rebuke and that gladly, for open rebuke is better then
secret love (says Solomon). Prouer. 27.5.
Yet for all that, if Mardoche despise Hamans Pride, then Mardoche his blood
will not quench Hamans thirst, but his wrath will have the death of all the
Jews, Hest. 3.
like the Pope, etc. Pride slew Abell, Genesis 4.1.
and sent Micheah to the prison. So she dealt with the Prophet Jeremy, Ier. 20.
and sent John Baptist to the block. Math. 14
What should I speak of Jesus Christ and all his holy Martyrs, whose blood the
earth has kindly received, which bloody tyrants have cruelly shead? All which
do teach us, that vengeance fleeeth from Pride to destroy the Saints of God: as
the flood of water flowed out at the mouth of the Dragon, to overthrow the
woman that bare the man child. Reu. 12.15.
Only because she thinks vengeance is hers, to abuse it as she list, To turn
judgment into gall, and the fruit of righteousness into wormwood. Amos. 6.12.
Thus patience and long suffering at this day is turned into fury: and
Christian charity does suffer shipwreck, being driven upon the craggy rocks
of contentious trouble, by the boisterous storms, foming floods, and wandering
waves of every man's haughty humor. This is contrary to the commandment of
Christ, saying: Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them
that hate you, and pray for them that hurt you, that you may be the children of
your father which is in heaven. Math. 5.44.
Now then to conclude this point, remember that it is written: Vengeance is
mine, and I will recompense says the Lord. Deuteronomy. 32.35.
What Pride, thou have nothing to do with it, and therefore must not meddle,
vengeance to whom vengeance belongs, even as custom to whom custom is due:
that is to God and Caesar. Cannot the Pope and such like tyrants see this? They
might know, that as he which kills with the sword, 1. unjustly, shall perish
with the sword: so thou that love to take vengeance, shall drink of the cup
of Gods vengeance, and that in double measure. Reu. 18.6
Here is the patience and faith of the Saints. Reu. 13.10.
And thus much of the second propriety which Pride would filch or rather wring
from God.

Yet beloved Pride cannot be contented thus to be like God, (which is too bad
allowance of the devil for her) but she does often usurp most blasphemously,
the holy, glorious, and fearful name of God; which ought not so much as to be
thought upon without most high renerence and fear, Deuteronomy. 28 58.
though men, women, and children, so lightly regard it, and by horrible
blasphemy so much abuse it, by their usual swearing, contrary to Gods
commandment. Exodus 10 7.
But it is plain that Pride entering into man, as the devils did into ye heard
of swine, Mat. 8 31.
it carries him headlong into the red sea of sin, and makes man believe he
is a God, and so he suffers himself to be called. Thus Nabuchadnezzar was
called God of Olyfernes, saying: Who is God but Nabuchadnezzar? Judith. 6.2.
And the king himself said to Sydrach, Misach, and Abednego: Who is that God
that can deliver you out of my hands? Dan. 3.15.
When he meant to burn them, as the Papists do ye Christians, as if he were
God alone. And the Samaritanes said of Simon Magus: This man is the great power
of God. Act. 8.10
And we read that this Simon by his co^iuring miracles got himself such credit
about the City of Rome, that there was set up in the I Will Tyberina an Idolor
Image, betwixt two bridges (perhaps because none should pass by, but behold it
to his shame) in honor of him, with this inscriptio^. Symoni deo sancto. To
Simon the holy God. Riuius. li. 3. de my redemp. ex Iren. and Euse. Iustino.
And when he lived, he said himself that he was some great man. Act. 8 9.
But his end mard al, as we showed before. Like wise when Herod had made an
oration before the people, they cried, Vox dei and non hominis. It (...) ye
voice of God, and not of man. Act. 12.22.
And he was most proud of it. We find also that one Hanno of Carthage,
sometime brought up birds and taught them to whistle, Deus est Hanno. Hanno is
God, and so let them fly. Text. Offic.
And even much after this manner, came Mahomet the Turks God, into his first
favor and credit. Manes the heretic preached that he himself was borne of
a Virgin, Deitatisque numen sibi vindicabat: and challenged unto himself the
majesty of a God. Charl. Step. and Text. Eusebius.
Menecrates a Physician, would take nothing for his cures, but desired of his
Patients, Vt eius seruos esse fatea^tur, eumque Iouem dicerent, Text. Ibid.
That they would acknowledge themselves to be his servants, and call him their
Jupiter or God. And the heretic Manicheus called himself the holy Ghost. I
might show you how the Emperors, yet tyrants, have called themselves Gods, as
diverse other, but I will stay at the Pope, who is not behind any of them; Some
have called him an earthly God. Some disdaining that, have called him God
without an Epitheton. Some our Lord God the Pope. Others being besotted with
the spirit of Pride, are so wrapped, that they cannot tell what to make of him,
and do affirm that he is neither God nor man. It may be these cunningly
intend to inuest upon him, The man of sin, 2. These. 2.3.
as he is indeed. But to be brief, come to our own days, and their late
Champion D. Stapleton, in the Preface to his book, called Principiorum sidei
doctrinalium demonstratio: besides many false and blasphemous titles there
given to the Pope to grease his haughty humor, the more easily to fly into
his favor, as many do by bribes when their hearts are far (peradventure)
behind: he calls him Basim and fiundamentum, columnam and firmamentum totius
orthodoxae religionis. The root and foundation, the pillar and chief stay of
all right and true Religion. Omnium Ecclesiarum caput. The head of all
Churches. Supremum in terris numen. The highest godhead upon earth. And M.
Harding does allow him to be in some certain sense as he says: Terrenum
quendam deum. A certain earthly God. And we know their cloakes of Heads, and
Foundations, and Gods, not absolute, but Ministering, to cover their
blasphemies, as a plaster does a sore from the odious sight of men. But put
the Popes person, his blasphemous titles or names, his life or practices
against the members of Christ Jesus his body mystical, in a bundle together,
and lay them to the touchstone of Gods truth and sacred word: and they are of
so much force to confirm or approve their folly; 1. Reg. 18.26. Psalm. 82.1.6.
as the crying of Baals priests prevailed to obtain fire of their Idol. And
yet we know what governors are righteous Gods upon earth, that is, even such as
are noursing fathers and noursing mothers in the Church of Christ, like the
Queen of England. But as one says, God never called the Popes gods; his
godhead is base borne: and yet for all that, because the Popes Deity should
not be thought to be without power, as they have fained him a false name; so
they do counterfeit him as true authority, least he should be without
credit: as those which say and do not, are without honesty. Therefore they
say (but all untrue) that Christus beato Petro etc. commisit: Clem. li. 2. de
appel. pastor. distinct. 32.
Christ has committed to blessed Peter the key-bearer of eternal life, Iura
etc. the right or authority both of the earthly and heavenly Empire-dome: and
so they say. Papa totius orbis obtinet principium, the Pope hold; the
Princedome of the whole world. 1. Sam. 18 11. 2. Sam. 15.2.
Yet by their leave, it is but in will, it is neither indeed nor right, though
lie have as bad a mind to it, as Saul had to kill David, or Abso, lo^ to depose
his father. And yet with the Papists who but the Pope? Card. Cusau. ad Boh.
Epist. 2. and Epist. 3.
One of their Cardinals says, Veritas aahaeret Cathedrae Petri. And again the
same man says Dico nulla esse Christi praecepta nisiquae per Ecclesia^ pro
talibus accepta su^t. The truth cleaues to Peter's chair: (then burn the
chair, and where is their truth)? Nay I say (quoth he) there is no
commandment of Christ (he means of force) except it be allowed, and so go
for curra^t by the Church of Rome. An other says, A doctrina Romanae
Ecclesiae, Syl prier. co^tra Luthe. Dan. 3.16.18.
and Romani Pontificis sacra scriptura robur and authoritatem trahit: The
sacred scripture has her truth, or strength, and authority of the church and
Pope of Rome. Ah blasphemous liers. But who believe them? surely none that
tries them. And the scriptures of God may cry to the Pope, Who made thee a
Judge and Ruler over us? we will not obey thee; as the three children said to
Nabuchadnezzar: yet to blind the world, and to keep them from trying of
spirits, whether they be of God or no, they thunderout, Consil. To. cap. 3.5.12.
Praesul summus non iudicabitur, a quopiam. The highest Prelate. 1. The Pope
must not be judged of any body, (perhaps least the Pope be found a woman
again). He is like unto Pharao, that said: Who is the Lord that I should
hear his voice? Exodus 5.2.
And (beloved) this is the cloud that darkens all their light. Forsoothe the
Pope cannot err. And their fortress to withstand all gunshot, is, In matters
of faith: and yet in the chief point thereof, which is Justification, they
err heretically: and are infinitely overcome by the holy scriptures (though
they would overcome them) and writings of the ancient and learned Fathers. Yet
to keep their standing, some of them are not ashamed to tell the world, and to
accuse those (that reprove the heresy and tyranny of the Hope) of blasphemy
and sinning against the holy Ghost. R. Bristo in his Repl. to Full. and art. 35.
part 2. fol. 9. and Hard. to Jewel. 4. part. fol. 438. Printed. 1571.
But let God be true, and every man a liar, and he that is filthy, let him be
filthy still; if Gods judgment be such. Thus we see into what height of
wickedness Pride drives men, even because they would get them a name, like the
builders of the Tower of Babell. Genesis 11 4.
Now to come to our selves, I know not who would tread in this styrrope and
mount, except it be such as in their own conceit do say; Touch me not, I am
holyer then thou. But sir, God is coming down with the shout of an
Archangell: as he did to view the Ci ie and the Tower which the sons of men
builded: Genesis 11.5.
and to see whether they have done according to the cry which is come up into
his ears. And therefore to conclude this part, take the counsel of the
Apostle, those which thus in any point have lived, be ashamed of your former
conversation, as Adam was of his nakedness, To. 6.21
and hide your selves under the tree of life, Christ Jesus: take of the water
that he does give, and live for ever. Learn of him, for he is meek and
lowly, and you shall sinde rest unto yoursoules. And as S. Augustine says:
Erubescat homo esse superbus, propter quem factus est humilus deus. Let man be
ashamed for to be proud, for whose sake God so humbled himself. And deck
your selves inwardly with lowlynesse of mind. If you will not, hearken what
follows. 1. Pet. 5.5.
Thou shall be brought down to the grave, to the sides of the pit. 1. To hell,
as after you shall hear. And thus much for the first part or proposition. You
see how she will mount, and be like God. Now you shall hear how God does allow
it.

The second part of the text, opened likewise in the Chapter following.
Thou shall be brought down to the grave, The text. verse. 15.
to the sides of the pit. And as Saint Ierom translateth it, into the depth of
the pit, In profundum: Loci. 1. The bottom of hell.

Here I note two things. First, the fall of Pride. Secondly, the place whither
she shall fall.

In her fall I observe first who threatens her fall. Secondly, of what power
or strength the threatening is. Thirdly, how God effects his threatenings or
purpose upon the proud.

The place here appointed for the proud, is first the grave, and then the
sides of the pit.

CHAP. I. Who dares to tame those proud before spoken off?
He that here threatens to bring down the proud that rise up against Gods
Church, Dent. 28.58. 2. Esd. 8.21
etc. is the Lord God, whose throne is glorious and fearful. Whose name is
inestimable, and his glory is inco^prehensible; before whom the host of Angels
stand with trembling. And shall not his excellency make you afraid? Job.
13.11. Who after in this Chapter, as often in the scripture, is called the Lord
of Hoasts: Isay 1.9.24. and 10.26. Ier. 11.28. and 29.8.
because he has all things in heaven and in earth, and every where else, at
his commandment, as soldiers under him. And he says to one, go, and he
goes: to an other, come, and he comes: and to his servant, do this, and he
does it: as the Centurion told Christ he did. Mat. 8.9.
Now consider, if the commandment of man were of such force, the
commandment of God is greater. If the Centurion were to be believed, why
should not God? This God, the Lord of Hoastes that planted thee (o man) has
pronounced a plague against thee, Thou shall be brought down. Paul the
Apostle says: It is God that justifies, who shall condemn? And now it is God
that speaks, who dares to withstand? In the bat^^^^ betwixt Israel and
Ame-Iech, when Moses held up this hand, Israel had the better. And when God
takes the matter into his hands, he will prevail. For it is written, Who
shall be able to stand before him when he is angry? Even none at all. For at
thy ^ebuke (o God of Jacob) both the chariot and horse are falue. This the
proud Egyptians knew, in spightfull en^ie pursuing Israel. Therefore every one
said, I will fly from the face of Israel, for the Lord fights for them. And
will not Priae and all sin fly, now God is bent against them? When proud
Haman had made ready his gallows, and was come to the Kings Court, minding to
get and take Mardoche the Lords servant, that he might hang him, a contratie
wind to Hamans expectation, had hoyst up Mardoche to favor: Hest. 6.10 11.
and Haman in stead of a hangman to shut his breath, which he intended, became
Mardoches footman and hera^ld, to proclaim his honor; which he sore
disdained, and for which he was no less grieved, then Ahab was when he could
not get Naboth his vineyard. Ahab came into his house, heavy and in
displeasure. And even so Haman hasted home mourning and his head cou^red, and
told Zereth his wife, and all his friends, all that had befalne him. Then said
his wise men and his wife unto him, If Mard^che be of the seed of the Jews,
Hest. ^ 12 13.
before whom thou have begun to fall, thou shall not prevail against him,
but shall surely fall before him. And indeed no more he did. For Hamans head
was a button for his own hal^er, and his body became the clapper of his own
bell, to ring his soul to hell. To be plain, he was hanged upon his own
gallows. Now (beloved) if Hamans wife and his wife men knew that he should not
prevail against Mardoche, because he was of the seed of Israel: Shall Pride
think to rise and prevail against the Lord, which is the God of Israel? who
casts out the heathen before him, and brings the counsel of Princes to
naught, and makes the devises of the people to be of none effect, whose throne
is the heavens, and the earth his footstool, whose glory is over all the
earth, who fills all things with the power of his majesty even God in his
holy habitation? No, no. It is in vain for the pot to stri^e against the
Potter. When the King of Judah threatened war to the King of Israel, Romans 9.20.
the King of Israel returned this answer again: That it was but the Thistle
against the Cedar. So he made account of the King of Judah and of his strength,
2. Reg. 14.9.
but as of a thistle in regard of himself. But God is of greater strength
against the wicked to destroy them; then the Cedar is in respect of the thistle
to break it. There was a battle in heaven, Michael and his Angels fought
against the Dragon; and the Dragon fought and his angels. But they prevailed
not, neither was their place found any more in heaven. And the great dragon
that old serpent called the devil, Ephe. 5.5. Reu. 21.27.
and satan was cast out; and so shall Pride and proud men. The Psalmist says;
All the beasts of the forest are mecked and tamed by man: but the beasts of
Pride God will came.

Sequitur superbos victor a tergo deus. Sen. in Her furiente. Zeph. 2.11.
God will be upon the backs of them. He will take their matter into his own
hands: he will deal with them himself; whom none else can match, or dares
meddle with. Therefore says the holy Ghost, God resists the proud. And
again: 1. Pet. 5.5 Iam. 4.16.
The Lord will destroy she house of proud me^: that is their posterity. Though
Pride be so stout that she will not come down: like those rebels, Corath,
Dathan, and Abiram, which would not obey, but answered Moses saying: Number. 16.12.
We will not come up. Yet when God comes unto her as he did to the builders of
the Tower of Babel, or unto Sodom and Gomor, He will set her down with a
vengeance. For it is written, Deu. 32.35.
Vengeance is mine, and I will recompense says the Lord.

Then shall she hode that it is fearful thing to ^all into the hands of the
living God. For the Lord out God is even a consuming fire, and this is he that
says here in my text, to the spirit of Pride, Thou shall be brought down.

Thus we see it is God that threatens. Now behold the truth of his word, and
whether we may believe him. And this we shall see by ^^s infallible
assuredness of his word, firm for ever more. The word of the Lord endures
for ever. And because this point is so near of affinity with the former next
before, I will briefly strengthen this pesition with the testimony of the ho^y
scripture to assure you of the truth, and so proceed further.

Our Savior Christ says, Heaven and earth shall pass, but my word shall not
pass. And God says by his Prophet: My word shall stand. That which God
promised to Ahab and his house, to Nabuchadnezzar, and proud Balthazar, and
many other, came upon them truly. Because thus sai^th the Lord, Dominus locutus
est, the Lord has spoken it. And will he not be as good as his word to them
that are proud? Of them the Lord says by the Prophet Isay. I will visit the
fruit of the proud heart of the King of Assure, 1. Synacharib, and his glorious
and proud looks. And so he did, and slew him by the hands of his own sons.
Again: The high looks of man shall be humbled, and the loftiness of men
shall be abased. And again: The day of the Lord of Hoasts is upon all the
proud and haughty, and upon all that is exalted, and it shall be made low;
even the eyes of the proud shall be humbled. And Christ says: He that exalts
himself shall be brought low. And Solomon says: The pride of man shall
bring him low. Preprio gladio iugulabitur. Her own sword shall cut her
throat, as Judith did Olifernes with his own. Will you have any more? then
woe to the crown of Pride, Woe, is a kind of threatening against sin,
whereby the holy Prophets, Iustum dei iudicium exprimunt, quod omnes manet, qui
idem faciunt, do express the just judgment of God, whereof all shall be
partakers that continue in sin. And an other says, by woe, woe, Ingentes
calamitates indicantur; Horrible calamities are foretold. Gual. in Haba. 2.
Hom. 7.
Vae, autem malorum condemnationem proprie manifestat. Woe threatened, does
properly assure the wicked of their condemnation: unto which Corozin,
Bethsaida, and Capernaum, are come: against whom Christ denounced woe to be to
the Corozin, etc. Thus we see, that fearful are the threatenings, and strong
are the testimonies of holy scriptures, which denounce destruction to them that
be proud: and yet there be more. David says: Ps. 59.12 Job. 20.6.7
Let them be taken in their pride. They shall perish for ever like their own
dung, though their excellency mount up to heaven, and their head reach up to
the clouds. Job. 24.24
Again: They are exalted for a lule, but they are gone, and are brought low
as all ethers, they are destroyed, and cut off as the top of an ear of corn,
Isa. 3.16.
for the Lord has spoken it. And by the Prophet Ezechiel, Ezech. 12 25.28.
God says: I am the Lord: I will speak, and that thing that I shall speak,
shall come to pass, it shall no more be prolonged. Ier. 1.12.
For I will hasten my word to perform it.

And further also do you not know, that God said, Let there be light, Genesis 1.14
15.
and it was so? The laws of the Medes and Persians alter not: and shall Gods
truth fail?

Beloved, be not deceived, you see what God says against Pride. Ecech. 17.9.
Even I the Lord have spoken it, shall it then prosper? No, no, dear
brethren. And yet I fear, men do not believe these holy scriptures, etc. for
if they did, they could not seek sin, and follow after it with that
greediness as they do. But o Lord turn their hearts, and then shall they be
turned. Break thou the power of the ungodly, and malicious: take away his
ungodliness, and thou shall find none. And thus now I end, with that note
which is given and approved upon these words of our Savior Christ; Math. 7.26.
He that hears of me these sayings, and does them not, shall be likened
unto a foolish man that built his house upon the sands, etc. That is, he that
practices not Gods word, which he has heard, gives a plain testimony of
himself, that he does not believe, nor credit the word. And now for to end
this point, let me exhort you to pluck down your plumes of Pride, as the
Peacock casts down his train, beholding his black feet. Come home with
the prodigal son, saying: Luke 15.21
Father I have sinned against heaven and against thee, I am no more worthy to
be called thy son. Be ashamed of your sin, as Adam was of his nakedness.
And as Joel teaches; Turn unto the Lord with all your hearts. Joel. 2.
He cares not fot a piece, rent your hearts and not your garments, for they be
too much hacked already, because you will be contrary to the most high God.
Lament as Niniuie did, let every man turn from his evil way, and from the
wickedness that is in their hands. Then shall your light break forth as the
morning, and your just dealing as the noonday, and God will put away your
wickedness out of his remembrance, as he has promised by his holy Prophet.

But if you will not, then will he come against you, Genesis 18.21.
as he did against Sodom, and see whether you have done altogether according
to that cry which is come up unto him. If you have, then will he call and
muster his Hoasts together, encouraging and hastening them to the slaughter:
crying against Pride, as the children of Edom did in the day of Jerusalem:
Down with it, down with it, Ps. 137.7
even to the ground. Then his soldiers will answer coming to destroy, as it
is written of Christ, coming for to save; Lo I am come to do thy will o God.
Heb. 10.7
And they shall go forth in the strength of the Lord God, and in the power of
his might, and come unto all that are proud, as David did against Goliath, in
the name of the Lord of Hoasts, whom men have despised and blasphemed. And they
will not be careless in destroying, as Saul was, to destroy some, and save
some alive: but they will away with all that they are commanded to pull down:
both man and wife, sons and daughters, sheep, oxen, and asses, and all
things else, as Iosuae dealt with Acan. And yet if you will not believe, let us
see what experience has taught, and by what means God has brought many
down. And his arm is not shortened, but his hand is stretched out still. And
for shortness sake, I will speak but of six branches which he has used to
hang the wicked and abominable upon, 2. Sam. 18.9
as truly as Absolon upon the oak.

CHAP. II. How God overthrows, or subdueth the proud.
1. FIrst, here to omit the godly laws of this our land, made to suppress
Pride in every degree, I do lament the palpable contempt of Gods most sacred
word, by which Pride and all sin should be brought down and humbled, Act.
16.29.30.
and afraid to remember in what case they keep men, as the Iaylor was to keep
Paul and Silas. And men should, seeing their sins, with those in the 2. of
the Acts, being pricked in their hearts, cry out: Men and brethren what shall
we do? But seeing they will not be learned, nor understand, let the^ know,
Reave. 19.13.15.
that the word of God is a sharp sword, which seperateth between the marrow
and the bone: yea it does either separate sin from us, or us from the presence
and favor of God; so mighty it is in operation. All the beasts of the Forest
do tremble and quake at the roaring of the Lion: but the voice of the Lion of
the Tribe of Judah is not regarded of the beasts of Pride and silthy sin. Well
then, seeing the matter is so indeed, see what the holy Ghost says, most
fearful to be remembered. 2. These. 2.10.
Those that shall perish, receive not the word of truth, that they might be
saved. To such, Gods word is a savor of death unto death, spoken by his
messengers. Mark. 8.38. 2. These. 1.7.8.
Which who so despises, shall be despised and confounded. For it is written,
The Lord Jesus shall show himself from heaven with his mighty Angels, in
flaming fire, rendering vengeance unto the^ that do not know God, and which obey
not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. Whosoever likes this, Let him that is
filthy, be filthy still: and thus the Lord God will bring thee down. Ps. 68.1.2


2. God brings down otherways the Pride of men, even by confounding their
enterprises, and making their devises (as the Psalmist says) to be of none
effect. And this he does sometimes after one means, and sometimes after an
other. 1. By frustrating their counsel and pretense: as for example.

The builders of the Tower of Babel, Genesis 11.7
would build to prevent Gods vengeance, but he brought them down by confusion
of languages. Thus that which they thought should have been for their good, was
unto them an occasion of falling. Synacharib King of Assure, thought with the
proud Spaniard, by an innumerable band of men to overthrow and lay waste the
Lords vineyard: 2. Reg. 19.35.37.28 35. etc.
but his strength was overthrown by an Angel, and himself slain by his own
children: and thus came his Pride down. And we know how lately the Lord God
of heaven took the Spaniard, and did shake his sword at us, and held up his
rod against us, to win us from sin. And when he had done so, because God
knew the Spaniards dwelling, his going out, and coming in, and fury against
him: and because he raged, and his Pride came up into his ears, like the
Pride of Synacharib, therefore God put his hook into his nosthrills, and his
bridle into his lips, and drew him back out of our sight, and suffered him
not to do us any harm, but God cast them out as the dust before the wind,
and the Angel of the Lord scattered them, and their Pride was spoiled in the
sea, Ps. 35.5. Math. 8.32. 2. Sam. 17 14.23.
as the devils drowned the heard of swine. Again, God confounded the wicked
counsel of Achitophel, by the good advise and wisdom of Hushai. See the
place. And when Achitophel did perceive that his counsel was not regarded, he
went home and hanged himself. And his friends might be glad he had no worse an
end. Absolon in the Pride of his heart made war against his father David, and
thought to have slain him, and so to have got his kingdom. 2. Sam. 18.6.17.
But in the wood of Ephraim where the battle was fought, as he rid under an
oak, there God hanged him by his own hair: (see to what use God puts man's
long hair, and yet some of you will wear it in a bravery) then Ioab came and
thrust him through with a dart, and the soldiers threw him into a pit, and how
could it be otherwise, but that his guts were pressed out with that great
heap of stones which they cast in upon him? What Pride of any man does ever
mean to have such an end? But to be brief, how damnable and dangerous, as
diuillish and yet in vain, have been the counsels and enterprises of the Pope
and Spanyard against the joy of our peace, and light of our days, and most
joyful happiness of our time, Elizabeth our noble Queen and d^ead fou^raigne?
Yet they always confounded in the crafty wiliness they have imagined, the
only mighty providence of GOD preserving her gracious Ma^estie under the
covering of his wings: because they rebel against him, Psalm. 105.15. Psalm.
107.22. and 50.14. Psalm. 9.11
who only says; Touch not mine anointed. Therefore shall not we offer unto
the Lord the sac^ifice of praise, and tell out his works with gladness? Oh
beloved, for this cause specially, as all other generally, Sing praise unto the
Lord which dwells in Sion, and tell the people of his doings. Let us declare
his loving kindness early in the morning, Psalm. 92.2.
and his truth in the night season: and pray, that her days may be as the
days of heaven, peace within the walls of her Domimon, and plenteousnes
within her Palaces: the mighty God her only fortress, and she next under
him our chief happiness. Amen.

But to proceed, the book of God, and histories of many ages do show unto
us, how vilde and yet without effect, the pretenses of man has been against
the Church of God from time to time. Who is it, that desires not to be
ignorant, but knows the same? And therefore let neither the whore of Babylon,
Gog, and Magog, of Rome and Spain; nor Synacharib the Turk, that
uncircumcised Philistine, nor wicked Achitophels of Englands counsel, nor any
domestical and traitorous Absosolons think to prevail against God, and his
anointed: neither like wild Boores out of the wood to root up, nor like
wild beasts out of the forest of the devil, to spoil and lay waste the
Lords vineyard, whilst it does yield him good fruits of increase. For though
you go too and fro in the evening of your blindness, and bark like Dogs,
and go about the City of Gods people and his inheritance, bragging in your
talk, with swords in your mouths, Ps. 59 6.7.8.9.10.
and war in your heart: yet our trust is in the name of the Lord, who at his
pleasure will have you in derision, and laugh you to scorn: for he is strong.
Therefore we will wait upon him, for God is our defense, and a very present
help in trouble, and as his good pleasure is, he will let us see our desire
upon our enemies. Ps. 76.15
For he shall cut off the spirit of Princes: he is terrible to the Kings of
the earth. That is, to such as are earthly minded. Therefore be we strong, and
he will comfort our hearts. Thus lo we see how God casts out the counsel of
Princes, and makes the devices of the people to be of none effect, thus
bringing them down by confounding their enterprises, for there is no counsel
against the Lord, but it must come to naught.

3. Ps. 7.15
Again, God brings down the proud and wicked men, by driving them into the
pit they dig for others. That is, look what evil one man pretends against
an other, into such they shall fall themselves. For proof, the cruelty of
Chush, Saul's kinsman, was so great and outrageous against David, without any
just cause, that David was forced to cry unto God against him, saying: Ps. 7 9.
Pro. 26 27 Ps. 34.21 Job. 15.35 Ps. 7.14. Isay. 59 4.5. Ps. 7.16.
O let the malice of the wicked come to an end. An other place of holy
scripture says: Malice shall slay the wicked. Again it is said of them, They
conceive mischief, and bring forth vanity, and their belly has prepared
deceit, they do even hatch Cockatrice eggs. That is, they are altogether set
upon wickedness. But their mischief shall return upon their own head, and
their cruelty shall fall upon their own pate. So that any Saint, or soul of
the righteous, may in confident boldness say with the Psalmist: The Lord is my
refuge, Ps. 94.22 23.
and my God is the rock of my hope: and he will recompense them their
wickedness, and destroy them in their own malice; yea the Lord our God shall
destroy them. And again it is written: The wicked have drawn their sword, and
have bent their bow to cast down the poor and needy, and to slay such as be
of an upright conversation. But how shall they prosper? their sword shall enter
into their own heart, and their bows shall be broken. For the Lord shall help
them, and deliver them: he shall deliver them from the wicked, and shall save
the^, because they trust in him. And thus the Judge of all the world does exalt
himself, and render a reward to the proud. Proud Haman would have hanged meek
Mardoche, but he was hanged himself. Pharao with the Egiptians, pursuing the
Israelites through the red sea said: Exodus 15.9.19.
I will pursue, I will overtake them etc. my hand shall destroy them. But they
were destroyed themselves. The most valiant men in Nabuchadnezzars army, bound
and cast Sydrach, Misach, and ^bednego, the servants of the living God, into
the hot siery furnace, but these were preserved, and those were burned and
con^^med. After this, because Pride always enuieth superiority through her
ambition, like Corath, Dathan, and Abiram, and the Pope, I will spare the
Puritan. The Princes of Babylon (over whom Daniel was preferred by the King,
as Moses by God) got by subtlety a decree of the King, confirmed against
Daniel, and cast him into the Lions den: but Daniel by Gods providence was
delivered from the power of the Lions: and at the commandment of the King,
those men which had accused Daniel, were brought and cast into the den of
Lions, they, their children, and their wives, and the Lions had the masterie of
them, and brake all their bones in pieces or ever they came at the ground of
the d^^^^. Thus these that would have destroyed others, were themselves
destroyed of the destroyer. Then let us learn to believe, that he which
loves cursing, so shall it come unto him. And he that loves not blessing, so
shall it be far from him. And eue^ he that stops his ear at the crying of
the poor, so he shall cry himself (eue^ to God in his distress) and shall
not be heard. For it is written: With what measure you mete, it shall be
measured to you again, says Christ. Mat. 7.2.
Therefore when Adonibezecke was taken in war by the Israelites, they cut off
the thumbes of his hands and feet, as he had done by others. Then said
Adonibezecke: Seventy Kings having the thumbes of their hands and of their
feet cut off, gathered bread under my table: Judge. 17.
as I have done, so God has rewarded me.

Samuel in like manner used king Agag, 1. Sam. 15 37.
and said: As thy sword has made women childlesse, so shall thy mother be
childlesse among other women: And Samuel hewed Agag in pieces before the Lord
in Gilgal. This should terrify men from pretending hurt against their
neighbors. Therefore to end this point, I counsel you from wise Solomon:
Rob not the poor, because he is poor; neither oppress the afflicted in
judgment. For the Lord will defend their cause, and spoil the soul of those
that spoil them. And thus we see they shall be brought down.

4 Fourthly, almighty God often brings down the Pride of many, by spoiling
them of those things whereof they be proud; so sending the to shame, and making
them a derision unto the people. Job. 11.20.
Therefore holy Job says: The eyes of the wicked shall fail, and their refuge
shall perish, and their hope shall be sorrow of mind. Thus God promised (and
he was as good as his word) to pull down ye Pride of the daughters of Sion, and
bring the^ to shame. Thus thy pomp shall be brought down, as the worldling with
his wealth: for thy glory is but dung and worms, to day thou art set up, and
to morrow thou shall not be found. Therefore look to thy learning, thy
wisdom and wealth: be not proud of thy honor, beauty, or strength, as Paul
was of his revelations. 2. Cor. 12. For Inquinat egregios adiuncta superbia
mores. Pride staineth the best virtues. There says Saint Augustine, Sola
superbia etiam in recte factis est cauenda. Only Pride in our good deeds must
be avoided. This I take to be the cause (even for that we are proud of those
things we have) that holy Job and the Prophet Isay do say in effect. Many
rich, become poor: many strong, weak: the wise, foolish: and the beautiful
ugly, etc. Because God will bring down proud men and send them to shame and
confusion by that which is their glory, Isay 20.5. and whereof they be proud.
5. Fifthly, To humble men and bring them down. God does further not only whet
his sword, and bend his bow, and prepare infinite instruments of death; but
he has shot his arrows and wounded his persecutors, and proud rebels and
enemies, most terrible to remember: sometimes by the sword of one neighbor
against another. This was his promise against the Egiptians. Isay 19.2. 2.
Chro. 20.22.23.
This he dealt in judgment with the Ammonites, Moabites, and Idumeans. They
slew one an other, and every one helped to destroy an other. Such was his
vengeance upon the Midonites. Judge. 7.22. Isay 9.4. 2. Sam. 13 See Exodus
32.27.28
The Lord set every man's sword upon his neighbor. Absolon slew his brother
Ammon, and in the end of the world Amons enemies shall be those of his own
household. But good Lord defend us from civil war and domestical
blood-shead through one neighbor against an other: by which thou have promised
to destroy them, that tread thine inheritance under their feet, Isai 49.29
saying: I will feed them that spoil thee, with their own flesh, and they
shall be drunk with their own blood, as with sweet wine: and all flesh shall
know that I the Lord am thy Savior and thy Redeemer, the mighty one of Jacob.

If I should step to other histories, I could show you that it was said to
King Cyrus: Herodotus
Thou have thirsted after blood, and thou shall drink thy belly full of blood.
Calippus would have stabbed his friend Dion, but with the same dagger he was
stabbed in himself of his own friends.

This alas, is most lamentable, when almighty GOD to bring down our Pride,
does stir up one friend to destroy an other, to execute his fearce wrath upon
them that dwell on the face of the earth.

6 Lastly, when the Lord God has gone thus far with the children of men that
are abominable, he will not here rest, so filthy and vilde is Pride and
sin in his sight: but their memorial shall perish with them, their
posterity shall be cut off, and their name shall be clean put out. Therefore
says the Prophet David, Psalm. 34 16.
The face of the Lord is against them that do evil, to cut off the remembrance
of them from the earth. And Eliphash says in the book of Job of such men.
Their branch shall not be green, Job. 15.32. etc.
but shall be cut off before his day, God shall destroy him, etc. and the
congregation of hypocrites shall be desolate.

Again. Psalm. 37.28.35.36.
The seed of the wicked shall be cut off, says David. Thus the Lord dealt with
the house and posterity of Ieroboa^ and Baasha, and fulfilled the like
judgment upon wicked king Ahab and all his posterity, by the sword of
Hasaell, Iehu, and Eliza. And what is become of all the Tribes of Israel? Alas
they have drunk of the like cup of Gods heavy wrath and displeasure, though
they were the chosen and peculiar people of God. And has God dealt in truth of
judgment against them? Then thou which art but a wild Olive branch, Be not
high minded, but fear. But who ever thinks that it is for their sin and
wickedness, that God gives them no children, and again takes away those that
they have, because he will root out their remembrance from off the earth? But
nill they, will they (as men say) in spite of their teeth, thus God brings
man down, and lays their Pride in the dust like water that is powered upon
the earth, which cannot be gathered up again. 2. Sam. 14.14.

Then understand ye unwise among the people. Psalm. 94 8.
What need I tell you further of Gods infinite armies, which going forth at
his commandment, run very swiftly to execute his will? When he commanded,
the water obeyed and drowned the world. When he commanded, the fire hasted and
consumed Sodom. To destroy Synacharibs camp, he armed an Angel. To some he
sent Lions: to some fiery Serpents: to some he sent Bears, and to Herod
Worms, and all these destroyed without any pity, for God had so commanded.
Moreover, Some the earth swallowed, some the Sea drowned. Others laughter has
killed, as Sophocles and Dionisius, the Tyrant of Sicilia. Some died with
gluttony or surferting, as Valentinian, and Iouinian, the Emperors. Some have
died with drinking and bousing, as Anacreon, and Archesilaus. And many woefully
pined away with famine, in the siege of Jerusalem: In the siege of Casilinum:
and in that great famine of Sagunthus in Spain. Infinite are the diseases, and
extraordinary means, as David in some sort shows; whereby the Lord fights
his battles and destroys man. Mill modis miseros mors rapit vna homines. In
so much then as all the hoasts of men, never so proud and lofty, are not able
to withstand the least of Gods armies, even of silly worms, and such like
vermin, but they will prevail against us when God sends them forth. O fools
that we are, why will we not be wise? O we of uncircumcised hearts and ears,
let us not forget how God has cast some down, we know not what will become of
our selves, our sins call for vengeance, and the Lord is not slack in
coming, as some men count slacknesse. But enough of this point, Thou shall be
brought down. And how this promise is effected, it does plainly appear.

CHAP. III. Whither proud men shall be brought down.
The Text says: First to the grave, then to the side of the pit. Of death I
observe, 1. The division. 2. The description. 3. The necessity. 4. The
certainty. 5. Why some men do tremble and quake: Other do joy at the coming
of death. 6. Whether we are to mourn for our friends that be dead.

When Death has seized upon man, Ier. 16.3.4.
then the grave is a meet habitation for the carcass: Aug. de cura pro Mor.
Her l. ca. 3. and lib. 1. de de Ciuit. dei: cap. 12. etc.
And when this may not be had, it is a great plague of God: as it is a blessing
to attain unto Christian burial: which of duty those that live ought to
perform to the dead corpse, after the examples in these places of the word of
God, Genesis 23.19. and 25.8.9. and 50.13. with many other. And when Moses was
dead, Deu. 34.6 Iud. 9.
God sent an Angel and buried him. Thus his majesty regarded the burial of
the dead. And when wicked Iezabel died a most cursed death, 2. Reg. 9.34.35.36.
yet John said, Visit now yonder cursed woman, and bury her. And some went, but
before they came, the dogs had eat her. Lo though she were the cursed of
God, it was thought meet, that she should be buried. Then I condemn the light
opinions of those that say, It is no matter what becomes of the body being
dead; and I wish them to correct their folly, that deny to bury the dead: and
that they would not cease to do good to them that are dead. Well, to the grave
with Nabuchadnezzar, those that be proud must come. Which in my Text I take to
be spoken Nomine to scorn Pride, because she would be above the clouds, she
shall be brought under the earth. Insomuch that todes and serpents, and dogs,
and swine, and worms, and whatsoever is vilde, which she once disdained,
should touch her, shall now tread upon her. Yea stink and rottenness shall so
prevail against that body which was once so proud that none may abide it,
like Herod's and Antiochus: but all men ready to get her into the ground to
avoid her noy some smell, which once abounded with Pomanders and must-balls?

Thus we see a foul fall of filthy Pride, never thought upon before it come,
of the most: Like Dives, who never remembered hell until he was in it. Then he
cried. But if thou once be there, Luke 16.24
then never hope for help: for Ab inferno nulla est redemptic, thou shall
never come out. Amend then before death come. Ambr. lib. de bono Mortis. c. 2.
et in oratione de fide resur. Aug. in Io. Tract. 42. and lib. Q. 2.65. and 32.
Oreg. in Epist. ad Romans lib. 6.


Of death, the ancient and learned Fathers have gathered from the holy
scriptures, as the painful Bees does honey from the flowers, not only for
themselves, but for others: Sic vos non vobis fertis aratra boues? Therefore
because that which is written, is written for our learning, I have gathered
from them both, four kinds of death.

1 The death of sin general. 2 The death Mystical. 3 The death Natural. 4
The death Eternal.
1 The death of sin (as Saint Ambrose calls it) is the deprivation or loss,
or darkening of the Image of God in man: like unto which he was creared. Thus
Adam dyed, so soon as he had eaten of the forbidden fruit: as God promised
unto him he should. And in Adam All die; 1. Cor. 15.22.
like as the branches of a tree do wither when the root is dead.

Therefore the Apostle says; Romans 3.23.
All have sinned, and are deprived of the glory of God: Ephe. 2.3.
And were by nature the children of wrath, and were dead in our sins.

Of this death many places testify. As Let the dead bury the dead. Math. 8.22
Arise thou that sleep, stand up from the dead, etc. See Galathians 3.22.
Psalm. 14.1. Further search, and thou shall find.

2 Death Mystical, is to forsake sin, Quando quis peccato moritur, and deo
viuit. When one dies unto sin, and lives unto God. It is Qua a peccatis
moriuntur, whereby men die from sin.

Of this Paul speaks, saying; How shall we that are dead unto sin, yet
live therein? Again: Ye are dead to sin, but are alive to GOD in Jesus
Christ our Lord.

Of this death Christ speaks, saying: The hour is come, and now it is, when
the dead shall hear the voice of the son of GOD, and live. Thus Paul dyed.
And so should we; therefore he says; Mortify your earthly members.

3 Death Natural, S. Ambrose says, is Animae corporisque secessio, The
departing or seperating asunder of the body and the soul. Thus Adam dyed, and
all we must die. Only Elias, and those that shall be found alive at Christ's
coming to judgment, die not thus: but they shall be changed. Which shall be
in stead of death.

4. Death eternal, is the separation of the soul and body from God, and the
kingdom of heaven, and that for evermore. Quae and stipendium peccati
nominatur: Which is called the reward of sin.

This Christ remembers, saying: If a man keep my word, he shall never see
death. Which the Evangelist calls the Second death. 1. The lake that burns
with fire and brimstone. Into which the great Judge of all the world will send
all the wicked, saying: Go ye cursed into everlasting fire, Ioh. 8.51.
which is prepared for the devil and his angels.

Of these two last my text speaks for Nabuchadnezzar and all the proud and
abominable of the world. But know, that we all must to the first and third:
Math. 25 41.
and they that come not to the second, shall be sure of the fourth. For the
first, the King cared not: to the second he came not: to the third he was
forced: and in the fourth, he, with all such shall never have rest.
Cruciabuntur die ac nocte. They shall be tormented day and night, and that for
evermore. Now of these two last in order.

CHAP. IIII. What death is.
DEath natural is described of many in several manner, but the sense or
meaning is all one. One says, death is Metoicesis, tes psuches euthenthe eis
allon topon. A remoouing, Translatio, Abret. ex Plat. Act. 7.59. Chrysos. popu.
ad Antioch. Hom. 7. Aug. in John. Ambr. li. de bono mort. ca. 1 and 3.
or translating of the soul from hence to another place. An other: Depositio
sarcinae grauis. An easing or vnlading one of a heavy burden. S. Ambrose
says, death is, Spirandi munere priuari: To be deprived of the benefit of
breathing.

Again: Mors est absolutio animae and corporis, and quaedam hominis seperatio.
Death is an absolution or discharge of the soul from the body, and a certain
separation of man. It is like unto a bill of diuorcement betwixt man and wife,
seperating that which before was one flesh. Adultery is the cause of the one:
and the devil, sin, and thine own consent thereto, is the cause of the
other. But the most affirm, that Mors aliud non est, Aug. de co^so. mort. lib.
2. ca. 1.
quam animae seperatio a corpore. Death is nothing else but the separation of
the body and the soul. It is like envy that parts friends asunder.

Therefore Ambrose uses this saying of the Psalm; he speaking of death; Thou
have broken my bonds asunder. Abr. li. de bono Mortis. cap. 3.
Because death breaks open the prison of the soul. Augustine says: That
even as famine is the defect of food, thirst the want of drink, and darkness
the absence of light, etc. even so death is nothing else. Aug. contra Pelag.
Hyp. lib. 1.
Nisi Nomen recedente vita, But a name, the life being gone.

To be short, the Apostle Paul spoke of death, when he said: I desire to be
loosed. So did Jonas when he said: Take my life from me. And Job when he
desired To be cut off.

This loosing, taking away of life, or cutting off, is death. By which the
soul departing, Paulatim, (says Ambrose) by little and little, Ambr. de bono
Mor. cap. 2.
Soluat se vinculis carnis: and ore emissa, euolat tanquam carcereo corporis
huius exuta gurgustio; She loses her self from the bands of the flesh: and
being got out at the door of the mouth, (as the spies escaped through Rahabs
window) she mounteth, as being freed from the close dark dungion of the
body: as one bestirreth his heels that is broke out of prison. And this is
death, whither all must come. But I think some scarce believes it: and
therefore I will prove it unto them.

CHAP. V. That all men must die, and when.
THat all men must die, it is plain, for it is written: Iosuah. 2.15.
What man lives and shall not see death? and shall he deliver his soul from
the hand of the grave? The woman of Tekoah having a suit to king David, the
better to move him to grant her request; she put him in mind of his death,
saying: Omnes, We all must needs die, etc. for it is appointed unto men, that
they shall once die.

Ortus cuncta suos repetunt
Matremque requirunt.
The meaning is, All things must to their mother from whence they were taken.
Genesis 3.19. Adam is earthy, and therefore called Adam, and must to the earth,
Eccl. 41.10. Coru. Gal. Aug. in Euch. ad Laur. cap. 93. and de pecca. Meri.
libr. 2. cap. 34. Aug. in Ps. 38.
as the wise man says; All that is of the earth, shall turn to the earth
again. Thnascomen homos hapantes. Which the Poet does well express, saying:
Omnibus est eadem lethi via. All die alike, but several means bring men to
their end. Of this, thy very meat upon thy table, might put thee in mind. For
all things die for thy sustenance, and thou shall die for thy sin. The
labourer is worthy of his hyer; and the wages of sin, is death. Romans 6. Quo
cunque te verteris, incerta omnia, sola mors certa. Whatsoever thou shall
determine, all things are uncertain, only death is certain. All fly at the
sight of her whip, as the dust before the wind. She does ransacke as well the
palaces of Princes, as poor cottages. Both rich and poor, young and old; of
what degree soever, Ferentur, shall pack with her: there is no parlying about
the matter. But when she comes, as Iehu said to the messenger of Iehoram; so
will she to thee: Turn thee behind me. 2. Reg. 9.18
Follow thou me, as Christ said to Peter.

Heu, Heu, quam surda miseros auertitur aure, Boet.

Et flentes oculos, claudere saeua negat.
Which thus may be translated.

Alas, o woe, from woeful men, as deaf she turns her ear;
And though they cry, she does deny, any one of them to hear.
It is written of all Superiors: Ps. 82.6.7
I have said you are Gods, but a retreit is also sounded, You shall die like
men. 1. Reg. 2.2
Caesar, Hanniball, Alexander, Pompey, and many other the mighty Captains and
Monarkes of the world are dead. King David, though the man after Gods own
heart, said: I go the way of all the earth: 1. I die as all must. Nay Jesus
Christ was not exempted from this death. Look in the book of God, and you
shall find this the Period of life, as well to the holy Fathers, the
Patriarchs, and Prophet, as to young babes, Mortuus est, and he dyed, and the
child dyed. Thus we see what death is, and that all must die.

Now know this, that none shall die before their time appointed of God: but
even when their time is come, which they shall not pass.

This some of the vely Heathen did consesse, saying: Stat sua cuique dies breue
and irreparabile tempus omnibus est vitae.

The effect is, every man's time is appointed short, and vnrepaireable. But the
scriptures are plain, proouing the same. Holy Job says: Job. 14.
Are not his days determined? the number of his months are with thee: thou 1.
God have appointed his bounds, which he cannot pass. Which Calvin confesses,
writing upon the same place. As Joseph was cast into prison, and kept in the
stocks, yet when his time came, the King sent and loosed him: even so will God
do by thy soul. For as the Egiptians could not keep the Israelites in
bondage, after their time was come to be delivered: no more can the body the
soul, nor the grave the body, when God sends for their deiluerance.

Almighty God speaking by his Prophet of the destruction of the Egiptians,
says: They could not stand, Ier. 46.21
because the day of destruction was come upon them. And for the death and
destruction of all the enemies of Gods Church, Daniel says: (which also was
revealed unto the Evangelist John) There is a time appointed, Dan. 11.35.36.
the determination is made. You know many times the Jews sought to kill Jesus
Christ: but when they would they could not, as the Apostle says. No man laid
hands on him, for his hour was not yet come. And Solomon says: To all things
there is an appointed time, etc. A time to be borne, and a time to die. The
very minute or instant thereof thou shall not pass: as before is showed. And
this is the ordinance of the Lord over all flesh.

CHAP. VI. Whether any die before their time.
But here some will object, and say with David, Ps. 55.24 25
The bloody and deceitful men shall not live half their days. Again, God
added fifteen years unto the days of Hezechias. And Jonas preached to
Niniuie, Jonas. 3.4
saying: Yet forty days; and Niniuy shall be destroyed. Forty days came,
and Niniuy was not destroyed. Therefore to some their time is shortened for a
plague, and to some their days are prolonged for a blessing, as God has
promised. And the time of death, and certain end of man's life, is not
determined.

First to the threatenings, as also to the promises of the blessings of
almighty God, I answer, that both contain always a condition, sometimes
expressed in Deuteronomy. 28.2.15. Isa. 1.19.20. Ezech. 33.13.14.15. Sometimes not
expressed, as to Hezechiab. 2. Reg 20.1. To Niniuy. Jonas. 3. And infinite
other wicked people. Gal. 5.21. Reu. 21.8. 1. Cor. 6.9.10. And when God gives
grace to us to do his will, or leaves man to his sin: the condition is
observed or not observed. According unto which, the promise takes place,
whether it be of a curse, or of a blessing.

So that though we say commonly of them that kill themselves, they shorten
their days, or they die before their time; indeed it seems so to the opinion
of man. yet in the decree of God it is not so. But Gods judgment was so
determined upon such a man, and the like, with Job his children, Malum paenae.
before the world was. And his counsel shall stand for our instruction. 1.
Either to try or quicken our faith, and express our patience to the example of
other, Job. 1.22.
as he did with the holy man Job. 2. Or to express his own power, as he did
to him that was borne blind. The Disciples said to Christ: Master, who did
sin, this man, or his parents, that he was borne blind? Ioh. 9, 2.3
Jesus answered: Neitther has this man sinned, nor his parents, but that the
works of God should be showed on him. 3. Or else to show us his high
displeasure and punishment for sin, as he did against Nabuchadnezzar, and the
wicked of the world. And with the Lord there is no shadow of change. So that
through death, punishments come upon men, by means ordinary and
extraordinary, as David effectually confesses: yet the time, and hour, and
very instant thereof is certain, as is showed.

Now for Hezechias. The fifteen years are said to be added, not that his time
to die appointed from the beginning, was then come: for though the Prophet told
him Thou shall die and not live. It is true: yet he told him not when: and at
his repentance and contrition, those fifteen years were added as a blessing,
not to the definite time of his age, which was unchangeable, but to that time
of his sickness.

Then what use is there of physic?

1. Even to preserve health, and to prolong thy days in ease, which else
should be consumed in pain. For as thy end is appointed of God certain, so
are the means unto the same end, and they must not be despised.

2. To help nature, to overthrow that disease in short time, which she her
self will overcome, by good order and diet in the end. Therefore says the
wise man. Eccles. 38.4.7. Honor the Physician, with that honor which is due
unto him, because of necessity: For the Lord has created him, and the Lord
has created medicines of the earth, and he that is wise will not abhor
them. For with such does he heal men, and takes away their pains. In ipso
corpore alia praecipitur medicina ne bona valetudo amittatur, alia vero, vt
amissa recuperetur. Aug. lib. 80. Quest. q. 45. In man's body one medicine is
given to preserve health, an other to recover that which is lost.

But we see wicked men live long, a grievous burden to the poor, etc.

Their long life is to them a curse, and the same is their reward; the poor
must trust in God, for God will be their deliverer, if they fight firm in
faith.

Secondly, such wicked men have their pleasure in this world, to make them most
inexcusable, and their damnation sure in the life to come, with Dives.

CHAP. VII. Why we know not when we shall dye.
WEll, if our end be so certain, why is it not made known unto us when it
shall be? Why? Dixit dominus, the Lord has so determined, and that should
suffice thee. Deuteronomy. 28.66.
For he says, Thou shall have no assurance of thy life.

And to this end it is said, 1. These. 5.2
The day of the Lord shall come even as a thief in the night. Again: he
which has the seven spirits of GOD, says: I will come upon thee as a
thief, Reave. 3.3.
and thou shall not know what hour I will come upon thee. This then being
so, why should thou ask any more questions.

Secondly, for the knowledge of thy end, it is not opened in the word of God,
and therefore it appertains to his unrevealed will, and thou must not seek
further, and busy thy self in the secrets of God, as coniurers, and
figure-flingers, and starre-tooters do.

Therefore I answer thee, as Christ did his Disciples, enquiring of him to
know the like matter, saying: Act. 1.7.
It is not for you to know the times or the seasons which the Father has put
in his own power.

Thirdly, the knowledge of our last end is hidden from us, to the end men
should not encourage themselves to sin, and presume of repentance a little
before their end. Therefore well says Augustine: Aug. in Ps. 34. conc. 1
Diem nobis nouissinum mortis nostrae abscondit, ne nobis de futuro aliquid
promittamus.

The effect is, God has not revealed unto us the last hour of our death,
least we should sin of presumption.

Again he says: Ne de speveniae peius viuerent, Idem. in Ps. 101.
fecit diem mortis incertum. God has made to us, the day of death uncertain,
least upon hope of pardon we should live the worse.

Fourthly, it is most certain, that GOD has kept from us the knowledge of our
dying day, because we should continually watch, and be prepared for it with
the oil of good works in our Lamps of faith, clearly burning, to light in
the Bridegroom whenever he knocks. Therefore it is written: 1. Pet. 1.13
Math. 24.42.44. Luke 12.35. to. 47. 2. Pet. 3.1
Gird up the loins of your mind, awake, and be ye also ready with your
lights burning, and ye your selves like unto men that wait for their master.

And Peter the Apostle says: Seeing that all things must be dissolved, what
manner of persons ought we to be in holy conversation and righteousness?

Again: 1. Pet. 4.7 8.9.
The end of all things is at hand, be ye therefore sober and watching in
prayer, but above all things, have fervent love among you, (O some of you
cannot abide this) but love covers the multitude of sins. Be you harberous
one toward an other without grudging.

These and such like good works, done in and for Christ, are those garments
which we must keep. Our lights that must shine before men, to glorify our
father which is in heaven: and that same treasure which we must lay up for our
selves in heaven. And blessed shall that servant be whom his master when he
comes, shall find so doing.

Moses (doubtless) knowing this, he even reproouing the stubberne negligence
of the Jews: and being desirous that they should make right use of the
consideration of their own deaths, says: Deuteronomy. 32.29.
O that they were wise, then they would understand this, they would consider
their latter end. Even by it to be kept and guided from sin, as Israel was
from the sight of the Egiptians in the day time, by the pillar of a cloud.

Again, Moses knowing that to all those that be wise, and have any true
fear of God in them, the remembrance of death does effect the same thing, Ps.
90.12
he prays saying: O teach us to number our days, that we may apply our
hearts unto wisdom. Therefore, Aug. de discip. Christ.
Latet vltimus dies, vt obseruentur omnes dies. Sero parantur remedia, quum
mortis imminet periculum. Our last end or dying day, is kept secret from us,
because we should watch, and be ready every day. For the medicine comes too
late, when death is knocking at our gate.

This is that which the Apostle means, and would have us to do when he
says: Ephesians. 5.15.16.
Take heed therefore that ye walk circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise,
redeeming the time, for the days are evil.

And again: Gal. 4.5.
Walk wisely toward them that are without, and redeem the time.

So that Moses the man of God prays, that we may be taught to number our
days: And the holy Apostle of Jesus Christ, would have us To redeem the time.
That is, to remember and consider, how vainly we have spent yesterday, and to
day, to make amends for it, by walking in Holiness and righteousness before God
all the days of our life. To this the consideration of death should guide us.
And therefore it is compared of some to the stern of a ship, which though it be
in the hinder part of the ship, yet it guides the whole, whither soever the
lust of the Governor will, and so should death our life.

Therefore it is said: Ecclesiast. 7.36. Aug. lib. 2. de doctr. Christ.
Remember thy end, and thou shall never do amiss. And so Timor de futura morte
mentem necessario contulit, and quasi clauus carnis, omnes motus superbiae
ligno crucis affigit. The fear of death to come, of force fretteth or
disquieteth the mind, and as a nail of the flesh, it fasteneth or pinneth all
the motions of Pride to the stock or altar of the Cross. But the
forgetfulness of death, and that woe that follows, together with the
contempt of godly patience and long suffering, makes men forget, that the
bountifulness of God is to lead us unto amendment of life. And therefore with
the slothful beast, they are even fatted against the day of slaughter:
wallowing in their sin, as the sow in the myer: like the sluggard, who rowles
himself upon his bed, saying: Yet a little sleep, a little slumber, a little
foulding of the hands to sleep. In like manner those that be proud, with the
usurer, the whore-maister, the extortioner, and oppressor, etc. say with
themselves one day after an other; Yet a little more Pride, a little more
usury, whoredom, extortion, oppression, etc. yet a little more: nay a little
more yet. So they have never enough, like Hell which cannot be satisfied. And
as they thirst after sin, so Hell gapeth after them.

And (dear brethren, bought with the blood of the immaculate Lamb of GOD)
without repentance, destruction shall come upon them, and everlasting death
shall gnaw on them. Then shall they see what a fair thread they have spunne.
Nothing could content them, but Hell will contain them. Therefore aright
remember thy end, and let that move thee to apply thy heart unto wisdom.
Take the counsel of the holy Ghost, Walk whilst it is called to day. While
ye have the light, believe in the light, that ye may be the children of the
light. And behold now the accepted time, behold now the day of salvation: the
night comes when no man can walk. And these may be causes why the time of
death is not revealed.

CHAP. VIII. Of those that defer to repent, and think they shall not die yet.
But notwithstanding this, here is a certain fellow called (Shall) that all
this while lies lurking in the text, which carries along, a great deal of
filth: and still he is at all hands ready, and sets his foot before men, to
keep them from this resolution. And makes them think (yet it is but a sleight of the devil) that if they may have him their friend, if they may have that day
given them, then they will do bad enough. You think I should say well enough.
But read the second Chapter of Wisdom, and you shall see what these Atheists
both say and do. And surely this same presumptuous fellow (Shall) or some
other his bastard brother, undoubtedly brings men into some one, or into all
these wicked opinions.

1 With the foolish body to say in their heart, Psalm. 14.1
There is no God. 2. Or else never to remember or regard death, with the rich
man in the Gospel: who said to his soul, Luke 12.19
Soul, thou have much goods laid up for many years: live at ease, cate,
drink (the poor would if they had it) and be merry, or take thy pastime. 3. Or
else they think that after death, there is no woe. Wisd. 2.5.
And so they say desperately, Surely we will walk after our own
imaginations, and do every man after the stubbornness of his wicked heart,
and practice it, because our hand has power. 4. Or else they put far away
the evil day. I. They think they shall not die yet, and so approach to the
seat of iniquity. Thus showing themselves to be of the number of those
mockers, whereof S. Peter speaks, which say; Where is the promise of his
coming? Such things do they imagine, and go astray, for their own wickedness
has blinded them.

But to answer this fellow and your back friend (Shall), be ye well assured,
that he stands not in my Text, to note the deferring or prolonging of
judgment: but to show the certainty and necessity of an intolerable plague
to come upon Nabuchadnezzar, and all such that are proud. Therefore (o wicked
man) Be not deceived: that is, Gal. 6.7.
deceive not thy self, God is not mocked. 1. Thou can not mock with God,
but Whatsoever a man sows, that shall he reap.

This is true, Thou shall die: thy time is set, and it shall not tarry long,
though thou presume never so much upon this (Shall). Which for to prove, the
holy Scriptures are plain. And many men have written long and large
discourses hereof, and daily experience does manifest the same. And a short
Epitomie of all, thus briefly may be showed.

CHAP. IX. What time men may account off to live.
THe oldest men that ever lived in this world never saw a thousand years.
Genesis 5. Psalm. 90.4 2. Pet. 3.8.
And if they had, Athousand years with the Lord are but as yesterday: seeing
that is past as a watch in the night. In agnitione diuinae virtutis, Et
preterita, and presentia, Glos. ord. in Pet. ibid.
and futura aequaliter praesentia constant: With the Almighty, times past,
present, and to come, are all present alike. And therefore it is said only of
him, Reu. 22.13.
I am Alpha, and Omega, the beginning and the end, the first and the last.

And Christ says, Before Abraham was, I am. But come thou to thy self (o man)
look of what time thou can be assured, and of that thou may boast.

The time that is past, thou can not recall: of that which is to come, thou
must not presume: measure that, that is present, and take that for thine own.
And this is the very instant, and moment of time, shorter then can be spoken
of: and therefore a short time will serve for to measure it. But put all
together, and because thou should not be imboldened to sin, neither expect
by presumption any time to come, the most sacred word of God shows that it is
but short. Holy Job says: Job. 14.1.
Man that is borne of a woman, has but a short time to live. Which Paul
confirms, saying: 1. Cor. 7.29.
This I say brethren, because the time is short, etc. The shortness whereof,
is further made manifest by diverse Similitudes. For man's life is compared to a
Flower of the field. To a grass. To a shadow. To a vapore. A vapore vanishes,
a shadow fades, grass withers, the flower falls, all are soon gone: and
the days of man consume apace, and pass very swiftly. Therefore they be
compared unto a thought: To wind: To a Weauers shittle: To a post: To most
swift ships: and to an Eagle. Then which, what is swifter? and then man, what
is britler? Psalm. 39.5.
Wherefore he is called an earthen vessel, which is suddenly broken. Therefore
David measuring out manlife, he says: 2. Cor. 4.7
Thou. 1. God have made my days as an hand breadth, and my age is nothing in
respect of thee: Surely every man living is altogether vanity: yea lighter
then vanity it self. Now if I did show you, what great consideration the
very heathen have had of the shortness of man's life, and the condition
thereof: I should not speak it, without as great shame to those that do so
lightly regard it, as I may show it, to the praise of them that so truly
thought of it. Shall not they condemn thee? They made account and assurance of
it, but like a buble of water, which is suddenly up, and suddenly down.
Pindarus called man, the dream of a shadow. And what is that? Sophocles, a
breath, and a shadow only. Horace, Puluis and vmbra, dust and a shadow. That
this is true, thou can not deny: and yet thy wilful infidelity, thy deeds
do descrie. For men live as though there were no death: or as though they
cared not for any reckning to be had after death: as if there were neither God
to consume them in his wrath: nor devil or hell to torment them in the flame
with Dives. But thou may see that our time is short, which to the glory of
God should be spent. And no further assurance to be made of any time
temporal, but that which is present, and therein to prepare for the hour of
death. Which some doing, do joy at death coming: others omitting, do tremble
and quake. Now hear who these be, and why this is so.

CHAP. X. To whom death is fearful.
ALl those men which are the wicked and abominable, from every good work
reprobate, may think in soul and conscience that death comes upon them; as the
watchmen in the Tower of Iezarell did see Iehu hasting toward the City,
marching furiously, then they imagine with themselves, sure it brings no good
unto us: as Ahab said by the Prophet of God, I hate him, 1. Reg. 22 8.
for he does never prophecy good unto me, but evil. And when they see that
death is come indeed, then they say as the wicked King did to Elias; 1. Reg.
21.20. Math. 8.29. Exodus 10.
Art thou come to torment us before the time? As the devils said to Christ:
What have we to do with thee? Get thee from us, as Pharao said to Moses.
Moses then departed, but death will not, saying to the souls of such: 28.
Luke 4.35
Hold thy peace, and come out of him: As Christ said to the devil in one that
was possessed. Then they hang down their heads, their countenance is changed,
their thoughts are troubled, and happily their knees trembling, knock one
against an other for fear, like Balthazers, when he saw the hand writing upon
the wall against him. Therefore well says the wise man: Eccles. 41 1.
O death, how bitter is the remembrance of thee, to a man that lives at rest
in his own possessions.

CHAP. XI. Why is death bitter?
FIrst, because men doubt of their reconciliation to God, who in their
lifetime have contemned his counsel, and set his correction at naught. So that
neither the word of God preached, his mercy and long suffering offered, nor
his judgments powered upon them, have taken any effect in them. But they have
followed their own ways, and one after their own wicked imaginations,
willingly refusing to know, stopping their ears like the deaf Adder at the
voice of the wise charmer, spurning forward their soul to iniquity, as Balaam
did his Ass against the Lord. Numb. 22.25. Such men are condemned by the Ox
and the Ass. The Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his masters cribbe, but
Israel (what if I said England, nay Leweis) has not known, my people has not
understood. Isai. 1.3. The reason is, for they would not. O Jerusalem,
Jerusalem, (says Christ) which killest the Prophets, and stonest them that
are sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered thy children together as the
hen gathers her chickens under her wings, and ye would not. Luke 13.34.
Math. 23.34. That is, even when ye might, therefore ye shall not when ye would.
For it is written: I will laugh at your destruction (says God by Solomon) and
mock you when your fear comes: when your fear comes like sudden
desolation, and your destruction shall come like a whirlewinde, when affliction
and anguish shall come upon you: Then shall they ca^ upon me, but I will not
answer: they shall seek me early, but they shall not find me, because they
hated knowledge, and did not choose the fear of the Lord: They would none of my
counsel, but despised all my correction. Pro. 1.26. Therefore I will surely
consume the^, says the Lord. Ier. 8.13.

The consideration of this, is a wounding woe; which if thy conscience tell
thee cannot be helped, it forces thee to this outcry with Caine: Genesis 4.13
My sin is greater then can be forgiven. Then the devil will be ready to
persuade thy conscience, that thou art partaker of that great offense: which
is, if we sin willingly; that is, Gloss, ordin. Ibid.
Nobis in voluntate peccandi manentibus: We continuing in desire to sin, and
forsake Jesus Christ, as Judas, Saul, Arrius, and Julian the Apostate did.
Geneua note Ibid.
After we have received the knowledge of the truth, there remains no more
sacrifice for sins, but a fearful looking for of judgment, and violent
fire which shall devour the adversary. And this also know, that as the candle
stinketh more, being blown out, then if it had never been a light: so they
that once have had the truth, and wilfully reject and turn away from the
truth, shall have greater judgment, and are more odious in the sight of God,
then if they had never known the truth. For it is written: It had been better
for them, not to have known the way of righteousness, then after they have
known it to turn from the holy commandment given unto the^. 2. Pet. 2.21.
This doubtless does make men tremble and quake to remember death, when they
consider how far they have gone into sin, and can find no way out. Then
perhaps they begin to flee and to run, like the Egiptians pursuing the
Israe^es through the red sea: but the waters ouerwelmed them before they
could get out. Exodus 14.35.28. And so may death thee: for it is written; Thou
hole, this night will I fetch away thy soul from thee. Luke 12.20.

Then remember this (my dear brethren) and forget not, how plentiful Gods
word has been among you, and praise his name for it, with prayer to continue
it; and know how greatly it has been contemned. Whoredom is haunted, (and be
not some of those curres here, that do use to this carrion?) the Saboath is
polluted) the name of God is blasphemed, usury and envy, with such like
abomination, is used: and yet will you say Gods word is regarded? Be not
blind, but see how God has warned our Town by fire fearful to behold, with
the plague of pestilence beating at our doors, and the sharp sword of samine
and hunger, with many other diseases, one presently after an other. What have
these wrought in our hearts? where is any reformation of manners? Pride
increases, etc. Christ told the Jews, when an unclean spirit is gone out of
a man he walks through dry places, seeking rest, and finding none. Then he
says: (...) will return into mine house from whence I came: and when he is
come, he finds it empty, swept and garnished. The^ he goes and takes unto
him seven other spirits worse then himself, and they enter in and dwell there:
and the end of that man is worse the^ the beginning. Even so shall it be with
this wicked generation. Pharao his heart was hardened to his own destruction.
Is yours think you, to salvation? You should not forget that Esau, Heb. 12.17.
when he would have inherited the blessing, he was rejected: for he found no
place to repentance, though he sought the same with tears. But what may we
look for, among whom, I fear, for our sins, tears are as plentiful, as
snow in summer? There are none. Corazin, Bethsaida, Sodom, Math. 11.20.
and Gomor, with Tire, Sydon, and Capernaum, etc. are in the lake of torments
that burns with fire and brimstone, for contemning the word of God. Dives
would have had Abraham (when he could get no help for himself) to send
Lazarus to warn his brethren, Least (says he) they come into this place of
torments. But Abraham answered again, saying: Luke 16.23.
They have Moses and the Prophets, (with whom, we have Christ and his Apostles
also) let the^ hear them. As if he should say, if they will not hear the^,
for such is that place of torments and woe prepared. Peradventure thou do
think to have repentance at thy call, as the Centurion had his servants. Thou
see by Esau, thou may be deceived. Can an Ethiopian or Blackmoore change
his black skin, or the Leopard his spots? and can you do well, having learned
all the days of your life to do evil? Who can bow a full grown Oak? And
who can repent when himself list? What might be said here of this matter
without weariness? But I will only send you to one place more. Then consider
with your selves what cause wicked men have, to tremble at the sight or
remembrance of death, when they shall be plagued for abusing the time of
salvation, and repentance offered, and the counsel of the Lord, with his
loving correction. 1. Pet. 5 7
God at at all times carefully, as before calamity, specially called Israel
from their sins by his holy Prophets. And whatsoever is written, is written
for our learning. Zach. 7.11.
But they refused to hearken and obey; therefore God denied to hear and help
them, (though they cried) when destruction fell upon them. When thou think
that God will do so by thee: O how fearful will the rememembrance of death
be?

Secondly, as the remembrance of death is terrible unto us, when we think that
God will not hear us, 2. Chro. 24.20.
lying on our beds crying and howling: because we have despised to hear him,
when his holy majesty cried and called for us: so also to consider, that God
is true in his promises, that to them that cannot repent, he fulfilleth his
threatenings, that he therefore is just, that he is the God of vengeance, 1.
unto whom vengeance belongs: that as he is crowned with mercy, so he is
armed with justice; and in truth he will show himself to plead against us, and
to plague us. And when thou (O man) do call to mind upon thy bed of death,
that thy life has been spent in usury, extortion, oppression, Pride,
covetousness, whoredom, drunkenness, malice and envy, and such like sins,
for which the curse of God is due; this will make thee say of death, as Israel
did to Moses of God, saying: Let not God talk with us least we die. Exo. 20.19.
So thou, Let not death apprehend us, least we go to hell. Here now we may
see, even what the fear of death is, Ludelp. Sax. in Mat. 10. Idem Ex Chris.
ibid.
Non dolor exeundi de corpore, sed disperatio vitae post mortem timet. Idest
mortem qui non putat: se viuere post mortem. The fear of death is, not sorrow
to die, but the dispairing of life after death. That is; He fears death, that
cannot tell what will become of his soul after death. And so, Aug. de vera
innocen.
Qui malae conscientiae est, semper pucillanimis and timidus est, he that is
of an evil conscience, is always faint-harted and fearful of death: because
they tremble to think, Moriendo, quo ire rogantur, whither God in vengeance
will send them when they be dead. And believe me thereof is great cause. For
we read that Esdras prayed, Mat. 44.
as we are taught, saying: Let it not be thy will, to destroy them that have
lived like beasts, and worse then beasts. Esdr. 8.28.

Answer is made, I will not verily consider the works of them, before the
death, before the judgment, before destruction.

As if it were said; But then God will. Math. 13.29.41.42. These are they that
have their portion in this life, these are such like: as of whom Christ said:
Verily I say unto you, they have their reward: Math. 6.5. even pleasure in this
life, for pain in the life to come, Luke 16.
with Dives. Then woe be unto you. O ye ungodly, which have forsaken the law
of the most high God: For though you increase, yet shall ye perish: If ye be
borne, ye shall be borne to cursing: If ye die, the curse shall be your
portion. Ecclesiast. 41.8.9.

Know ye not, that the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom GOD? Be not
deceived, for neither fornicators, adulterers, unclean, wantons, Idolators,
Witches, they that live in hatred, debate, wrath, and envy, they that are
proud emulators, contentious, seditious, heretics, murderers, drunkards,
gluttons, Infidels, liars, buggerers, Thieves, covetous, raylers, extortioners,
backbyters, haters of GOD, dooers of wrong, proud, boasters, covenant
breakers, disobedient to parents, and such like, These Gods word says shall
not inherit the kingdom of GOD. Romans 1.29.30. 1. Cor. 6.9.10. Gal. 5.19.20.
Reu. 21.8.27. For they go the way that leads to destruction. Math. 7.13.

Thus we see the works of the flesh are manifest: And if ye live after the
flesh, ye shall die. To. 8.13. Then fear, for if the righteous scarcely shall
be saved, where shall the ungodly and the sinner appear? 1. Pet. 4.18. Whose
judgment long ago is not far off, and their damnation sleeps not. 2. Pet.
2.3. But every one shall receive according to his works: Psalm. 62 12. When it
shall be said: Depart from me, ye workers of iniquity. Luke 13.27. Ye cursed
into everlasting fire, which is prepared for the devil and his angels. Math.
25.41. Where indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish shall be upon the
soul of every man that does evil: of the Jew first, and also of the Gretian.
Reave. 2.9. O the fearful trembling that these and such like truths of Gods
holy word do bring to a desperate soul, at the remembrance of death: Of which
in their life time, though they have no feeling, yet at the day of death they
may bring a woeful griping.

Thirdly, I omit to speak of the insatiable care worldly men have to get,
their greedy desire to keep, and their loathsomenesse to depart from their
Mamonisme, worldly wealth, and pleasure. All which does make them sorry to see
death, and quake to think upon it. Ecclesi. 41.1. Mat. 19.21.
The worldling in the Gospel was loath, and sorrowful, yea more, he would not
leave his worldly pelf to walk with Jesus Christ, though he was promised
treasure in heaven. And how will those that be such grieve, when they see, they
must in spite of their teeth go with death, of whom they are persuaded, it
never brings good unto them, but evil: 1. Reg. 21.8.
as Ahab was by the holy Prophet or messenger of the Lord?

Fourthly, I would (if any of my pains could prevail with you, to wring sin
from you) show, what rear God may strike into the hearts of wicked men at the
remembrance of death, when they call to mind, 1. how they have caused many to
blaspheme, Romans 2.24 Mat. 18.7
and to commit sin, by their evil example: And 2. do know that therefore
their punishment shall be the greater: As 3. to consider that the fathers
wicked life shall be cast in their childrens teeth: as, Romans 18.8.
what was thy father, but an Usurer, Extortioner^^ Drunkard, Eccle. 41.7. Wisd.
4 6.
a whoremaster, or such like? Of which says the wise man, The Children
complain of an ungodly father, because they be reproached for his sake. Will
not these think you, with a thousand the like cogitations, drive terror and
fear into wicked men's hearts, at the sight of death?

Fifth and lastly, when such wicked men do call to mind how they have seen the
poor to be afflicted many and sundry ways, and have not comforted them: but
have rather sought diversely to vex them, and so have brought the curse of the
people upon them. And herewithall remember, how the poor shall be comforted,
Luc. 16.25. Pro. 10.7. Psalm. 37.2.9.10.
and themselves tormented: and that their name shall rotte, and their
remembrance shall be clean put out. And also do persuade themselves that they
be of the number of them, of whom it is said: Woe be to you that are full: for
ye shall hunger. Woe be to you that now laugh, for you shall wail and mourn.
Luke 6.25. Then they may turn their faces to the wall, with Hezechias, but
look for small comfort, and say; What has our Pride profited us? or what
profit has the pomp of our riches brought us? We sometimes have had many in
dirision, and in a parable of reproach. We fools, we counted their life
madness, and thought their end would be without honor: But they are reckoned
among the children of God, Wisd. 5.3.4.5.8.
and shall have their portion among the Saints. But with us it is not so: 1.
Psalm. 1.5.6. Wisd. 4.14
we are like the chafe which the wind drives away from the face of the earth,
therefore we shall not be able to stand in the judgments, neither in the
congregation of the righteous. O the consideration of these things to a
distressed soul, plunged in distrust, is just cause to sorrow and mourn. Of
such it may truly be said, Nasci miseria, viuere paena, mori angustia est: To
be borne is misery, to live is a plague, and for to die is anguish and woe.
And thus much to show you some causes why death is a terror unto the wicked
people of the world.

CHAP. XII. Who fear not death.
NOw there is an other sort of men, unto whom death is never terrible, but most
heartily welcome: And these are those spiritual minded men, the number whereof
is but small: Math. 7.14. which have the seal of the living God in their
foreheads. Reave. 7.3. Whose names are written in the Lambs book of life.
Which have made their long robes white in the blood of the Lamb. These have
the spirit of the living God, by which they are sealed unto the day of
redemption: and are not in the flesh, but in the spirit, because the spirit of
God dwells in them. Which spirit bears witness unto our spirits, Romans
8.9.16.
that we are the children of God, and heirs annexed with Christ: if so be
that we suffer with him, that we may also be glorified with him, or else not.
For after death, there is a separation of the soul from God into hell only,
Math. 7.23. Which the learned do call the death of the soul: and the
Evangelist John, Luke 16.26.
The second death. Quam omnes patiuntur, qui periculorum metu fidem abnegant,
and mundo sese conformes reddunt: Gualt. in Hos. 14. Hom. 44. Mat. 10. 1. Ioh.
2.15
Which all souls do fuffer, that for fear of dangers do deny the faith,
and fashion themselves like unto the world. But the Saints of God are free,
being justified by faith, and are at peace with God, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. And they do show forth their faith by their works, being borne anew,
not of mortal seed, but of immortal: by the word of God, who lives and
endures for ever. And these being strong in the Lord, and in the power of
his might, do cast away the works of darkness, and put upon them the armor
of light; even the whole armor of God, by which they are able to resist in the
evil day; and having finished all things they stand fast. For their heart (as
the Prophet says) believes in the Lord, and they are not afraid to meet with
their enemy in the gate. Therefore if death come, or the devil, or whatsoever,
they fear not. For who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? Romans
8.33.
It is God that justifies, who shall condemn? And so these are as willing to
welcome death, Luke 2.25.28. Colloss. 1.21. Psalm. 120.5
as Simeon was joyful to embrace Christ, because death is to them advantage.
Therefore the Princely Prophet David said: Woe is me that I am constrained to
dwell with Meshech, and to abide among the tents of Kedar. And again, Bring my
soul out of prison. Ps. 142.7. 1. Reg. 2.2.
And a little before his death, quietly he said: I go the way of all the
earth: that is, I know death is at hand. Job. 6.8.9. Ien. 4.3.
This holy Job wished for, and Jonas prayed, O Lord, take I beseech thee my
life from me; for it is better for me to die then to live? Paul knowing the
same, Romans 7.24.
said: O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this
death:

And writing to the Philippians, he says: Phil. 1.23.24.
To abide in the flesh was needful for them: but for himself, he shows his
mind, even that he desired to be loose hand to be with Christ, which is best
of all.

Thus holy men after they once begin with Henocke to walk with GOD, Wis.
4.10.
that is, in godliness to please God, as he did, they judge none blessed
before their death. Which the very Heathen confessed.

-- Dicique beatus,
Ante obitum nemo supremaque funera debet. Ouide. li. 3. Met.

The meaning is, to be accounted blessed, none should, before their last end,
The^ though the righteous be prevented with death, Wisd. 4.7. Luke 16 22 and
23.43. Luke 2.28.
yet shall he be at rest in Abraham's bosom, in Paradise with Christ: that is,
in the kingdom of heaven. Therefore when death comes, these do say, ioying
with Simeon, when he had seen Christ, Psalm. 4.8.
Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace, according to thy word. Or
with David, Psa. 116.7
I will late me down, and sleep in peace, for thou Lord only make me
dwell in safety: therefore return unto thy rest o my soul. Thus peaceably
and joyfully of such faithful men, death is lovingly embraced.

And every day the Apostles desire to be with Christ, How death is, and is
not, to be wished for.
is preferred to any worldly consolation or joy. Not as wishing the determinate
decree of God concerning our end, to be altered: (as those blasphemous people
do, who upon every occasion or cross, wish themselves out of the world, or
that they had never been borne, with such like like kind of cursed speaking)
but expressing our choice and love betwixt life temporal and death, 2. Cor.
5.8.
and therein submitting our selves under the mighty hand of God. Thus death is
embraced, and lovingly entertained of the children of God, for diverse
considerations.

CHAP. XIII. Why death is never feared of the godly.
FIrst because with that aged Father the Patriarch Jacob, Genesis 47.9. Heb.
11.13. 1. Cron. 29.15. Ps. 39.12. 1. Pe. 2.11 Genesis 15.13 and 47.4.
we make account, that our life is but as a pilgrimage: and our selves
strangers and Pilgrims, or soiourners on the earth, as the seed of Abraham
were in a land that was not theirs. Strangers continue not in a place: and we
look for a better home. For as the Tabernacles of the Israelites were to be
removed, even so are ours. Exo. 33.7 2. Cor. 5 5. Number. 15.2 2. Cor. 5.4.
Their abiding place hoped for, was the land of promise: and ours is the
kingdom of heaven figured by theirs: where mortality shall be swallowed up of
life. Therefore it is written, Heb. 13.14
Here we have no continuing city, but we seek one to come. For we know, that
if our earthly house of this Tabernacle be destroyed, we have a building given
of God, e^^ an house, not made with hands, but eternal life in the heavens. So
that whilst we are strangers in the body, 2. Cor. 5.1.6.
we are absent from the Lord. Therefore we forget that which is behind, Phil.
3.13 14.
and endeavor our selves unto that which is before, and follow hard toward
the mark, unto which death guides us, as is before showed. Therefore it is
called a Way, 1. Reg. 2 2. Job. 16 22. Aretius de Morte.
that brings us unto God. A quo in hunc mundum sumus peregrinatum missi, of
whom we are sent into the world, to abide there as strangers, until death
come. And then Anima ad caeleslia colligitur, corpus suis restituitur
elementis, ad suu^ vsque tempus, The soul is taken into the heavens, and the
body is dissolved into his elements until his appointed time. An other writer
says, that death Oslij instar est, Gualt. in Has. 13. Hom. 44.
aut viae, per quam nos ex hac vita mortali, in immortalitatem transire
oportet, is like unto a door, or a way, through which we must pass out of
this mortal life into immortality. And it may not amiss be compared unto the
star, Mat. 2.9 10.
that guided the wise men till they came to the stable where the blessed babe
Christ lay in the manger: and death brings us to behold Christ glorified in the
heavens, at the right hand of his father. Ioh. 20.20.
When they saw the star, they rejoiced with an exceeding great joy: like the
Disciples, which were glad when they had seen the Lord. And shall we be sorry
to mee^e with death, that brings us unto God? Christ healing one, lying upon
his bed sick of the palsy, Mat. 9.6.
said: Arise, take up thy bed, and go to thine house. Even so when death
comes, she may say to our souls in our bodies sick upon our beds: as the
Prophet of God did to Israel in an other matter; Arise and depart, for this is
not your rest. Mich. 2.10. He that had been sick arose, and departed to his
own house. And (beloved) why should not we at the commandment of God, when
he says by death, come: Love to remove out of the body, and to dwell with the
Lord? 2. Cor. 5.8. being here but strangers in a veil of misery? One says:
Vita quid est hominis nisi vallis plena malorum,
Principio, medio, fine dolenda suo.
What is man's life, but a veil of grief,
still tumbled in strife?
His springtime's woe, Autumn is so,
Winter has sorrow as rife.


And therefore Mors pro remedio data est, quasi finis malorum, Ambr. in orat de
fide resue. Chris. de popu. Antioch. Hom. 7.
Death is given us for a remedy, as the end of all troubles, it being A vitae
curis absolutio, The absolution from the cares of this life. And therefore
carefully to be expected, and willingly embraced, without any fear.

Secondly, we have great cause to rejoice at the coming of death, because by
it, we pass from infinite troubles, to the end of our faith, even the
salvation of our souls, long hoped for. Which is an inheritance immortal and
undefiled, that fades not away, reserved in heaven for us. 1. Pet. 1.9. etc.
Unto the hope whereof we are begotten by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from
the dead. So that we account of death, but as of an happy haven, wherein we do
arrive, and are at ease from infinite turbulent storms, which we have suffered
in the surging seas of this wicked world. Morborum vltimus medicus mors: Aret.
Stella. Chrysostom. vt ante.
tantum corporis tollit mala. Death is the last Physician or helper of our
paine^, which only riddeth away the griefs of the body. Portus est mortalibus
mors. Of Chrysostom it is called Tranquillus portus; Death a calm haven for
mortal men where they arrive, to behold the fair beauty of the Lord, and to
visit his Temple. In many places of holy scripture, Death is called a Sleep.
Because that even as sleep and quiet rest is to a painful honest laboring
man, at night most sweet and comfortable, so lkewise is Death to a faithful
soul, garnished with good works, like a Bride-chamber adorned, ending all
things with joy like a Comedy. And therefore why should she not be welcome?

Thirdly, death most willingly we embrace, because it being come, we attain
to that perfection of knowledge which we do desire, and which in this life we
cannot attain unto. All men desire to be expert in their science or
profession: and the Saints of God in the true knowledge of their salvation, and
when death is come, then this is obtained. Even then, when we shall all meet
together in the unity of the faith, and knowledge of the son of God unto a
perfect man, and unto the measure of the age of the fullness of Christ. Christ
says: This is life eternal, Ioh. 17.3.
that they know thee to be the only very God, and him whom thou have sent,
Jesus Christ. Now this knowledge we have, being in the body, and absent from
the Lord, by faith and not by sight. Through which, we all behold as in a
myrror or glass, the glory of the Lord, with open face. Marl. ex Call. in 1.
Cor. 13
Fides ergo nostra deum nunc intuetur tanquam absentem. Our faith therefore now
does see God, yet as being absent. For we know in part, and we prophecy in
part. But when that which is perfect is come, then Id est post mortem. After
death, that which is in part, shall be abolished.

Which Paul the Apostle proves by a double argument, one taken from the
example of himself, the other is a similitude. Which is thus much briefly: The
understanding of an Infant is far inferior to the understanding of a man: And
through a glass we cannot see so clearly as without. This life is like to
Infancy. Amb. ibid.
And the life to come is our perfect age, then our knowledge shall be made
perfect. The glass through which we now see God, is faith: which being done
away, we shall see clearly. Which does confirm this truth. That not now, but
after death we shall see God face to face. Marl. ex Pet. Mart. in 1. Cor. 13.
(O endless felicity) By which, Denotatur perspicuus, planus, atque
clarissimus diuinus aspectus, is noted a manifest, plain, and most clear
beholding of ye divine nature after death. Of face to face, see Aug. writing
profoundly. Epist. 3. and Epist. 6. Tome. 2.
Moses, as the glory of the Lord passed by him, saw his back parts darkly
and imperfectly. But after death we shall see evidently, Diuina^ essentiam, The
essence of God. For by the face of God Manifestatio eius intelligenda est, An
open manifestation of him, is to be understood. Which is the truth by Christ
himself expressed: who says, (speaking of Gods dear adopted children) See
that ye despise not one of these little ones: Math. 18.10. Th. Aquin. in Heb. 11
1. Lects prima.
for I say unto you, that in heaven, their Angels always behold the face of my
Father which is in heaven. Then we see that Vltimus finis simpliciter ipsius
fidei, quam intendimus ex fide, est beatitudo quae in aperta dei visione
consistit. The last end simply of faith, which we expect by faith, is the
blessedness, which consists in the open and plain sight of God. Aug. de
cinit dei. ibid.
Praemium itaque fidei nobis visio ista seruatur. This sight therefore the
reward of faith is kept for us. And we shall know as we are known of God. Note
by the way, that this word (As) Non importat aequalitatem cognitionis, sed
similitudinem tamen longinquam, Lyra. Pet. Mart. ibid.
does not import an equality of knowledge (betwixt God and us) but a certain
likeness, yet ours is far inferior to his. Marler. ex R. ibid.
Simplex ergo sensus est cognoscam sicut and cognitus sum, hoc est,
perfectissime and certissime. The true meaning of this, I shall know as I am
known, Ambr. ibid.
is most perfectly and truly, I shall see my self to be present with God where
Christ is. This is that which the Evangelist John has, saying: We shall see
him as he is. This Then know (beloved) that now in this life we have many
schoolemaisters to teach us this imperfect knowledge of God that we have. As.
1. Gods creatures. The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament
shows his handie work. Again, the Apostle Paul says: His eternal power
and godhead, are seen by the creation of the world, being considered in his
works. Psalm. 19.1. 2. His punishments, of the contempt whereof, God by Solomon
complains, saying: They have despised all my correction. Pro. 1.30. 3. The
holy scriptures. Therefore says Christ, Search the scriptures, for in them ye
think to have eternal life, and they are they which testify of me. John.
5.39. 4. Faith, of which says the holy Ghost, Faith is the ground of things
which are hoped for, and the evidence of things which are not seen: Heb. 11.1.
Now all these shall cease to teach us when death comes: like the ceremonies of
the law at the coming of Christ. Heb. 10.1.9. For what needs a candle in the
clear and open sun light? Then we shall not need to say one to an other,
know the Lord, for all shall know him, from the least unto the greatest.
Therefore welcome death, and come Lord Jesus, come quickly.

Fourthly, though death set upon thee as thine enemy, and do bring thee down
to the grave: yet shall thou not fear to buckle with her, because in the end
thou shall get the maistrie of her, as Michael did of the dragon. Reave. 12.9.
And triumph over her by the power of God, Romans 6.4. through faith in the death
of Christ. Who by his rising from death, has overcome these thy most mighty
enemies, Sin, Death, and Hell: Romans 8.32.33.34. and thereby assures thee of
the conquest over them, through him at the resurrection. 1. Cor. 15.12. For in
that he suffered and was tempted, he is able to succor them that are tempted.
Heb. 2.18. And that he will, the scriptures affirm plainly of Christ the
seeed of the woman, that he shall break the head of the serpent. Genesis 3.15.
He shall destroy death for ever. Isai. 25.8. And the Lord God says by the
Prophet Hoseas: I will redeem thee from the power of the grave, I will deliver
thee from death. O death, I will be thy death: O grave, I will be thy
destruction. And Paul says: Romans 6.9.
Christ being raised from the dead dies no more death has no more power over
him. Who has abolished death, and has brought life and immortality to light
through the Gospel. Again it is written: 2. Tim. 1.10.
For as much as the children were partakers of the flesh and blood, he also,
1. Christ himself likewise took part with them, that he might destroy through
death, him that had the power of death, that is, the devil. And that he might
deliver all them, which for fear of death; were all their life time subject
unto bondage. Heb. 2.14. Well therefore say the learned, Marl. ex Pet. Mart in
1. Cor. 15.17.
Ipse bellum nostrum pugnauit, and nos: victoriae illius per fidem redditi
sumus perticipes. He has fought our battle, and through faith we are made
partakers of his conquest. So that we may say, and not use the Apostles words
much amiss: We know that he which has raised up the Lord Jesus, shall raise
us up also. 2. Cor. 4.14. Even when Christ which is our head shall appear,
then shall we appear with him in glory. Collos. 3.4. Then Sciant fideles se ex
mundo migrare, Calu. in 1 Thessalonians. 4.
vt tandem colligantur in regnum dei. The faithful do know, that they depart
out of the world, that at the last they may be received into the kingdom of
God. And then God shall wipe away all tears from our eyes, and there shall be
no more death, neither sorrow, neither crying, neither shall there be any more
pain: for the first things are passed. Reave. 21.4. So that even in this world,
Insultare morti licet, Seb. May. in 1. Co. 15.
tanquam subactae, quia Christi victoria nostra est. We may triumph over death
as conquered, because the victory of Christ is ours. Then to end this, thanks
be unto God which has given us victory through our Lord lesus Christ.
Therefore (my dear brethren) be ye stadfast and immovable, and always rich
in the works of the Lord. Why should you tremble at the remembrance of death?

Further, there may be added a sift consideration, which may make death
comfortable unto us, and though it be here last in order, yet see thou too it,
as to one of the first and chief which must go before the rest. And this is,
in thy whole life time carefully to express the truth and soundness of thy
faith, by thy good works. Iam. 2.20. Which GOD has ordained that we should
walk in them: Ephe. 2.10. because the blood of Christ has purged our
conscience from dead works, to serve the living God. Heb. 9.14. Which service
of good works must be done, not as causes, but as fruits that follow
justification. Quia opera bona ex ipsius iustificatione operamur: Aug. de Gram.
Nobi Test. ad Honorat. ca. 30. Aug. ad Simpl. li. 1. Quest. 2.
because our good works do spring from our justification, as light from the
sun. And whatsoever is not of faith, is sin. And without faith it is
impossible to please God. But if thou have this oil in thy Lamps of faith, and
keep not thy conversation in the lusts of thy flesh, fulfilling the will of
the flesh, and of the mind: thou shall be redaie for the Bridegroom, with the
five wise Virgins, and death can do thee no harm. Nisi peccatum habueris non
est quod mortem timeas, Stella in Luke 12. Tom. 2. fol. 73.
etc. except thou have sin, thou need not fear death, but when thou do
transgress the commandment of the Lord, then do thou arm death, and make
it able and strong to fight against thy self. Stella in Luke 12. Tom. 2. fol.
37.
But Mors sinullum adsit peccatu^ imbecillis and inarmis venit: Death where
sin is absent, comes weak and unarmed: as I hope the Spaniard will, if we
have no Traitors at home. Well, Amb. de bono mort. cap. 5.
Qui vicerit non laedetur, a morte secunda. He that overcomes, (to wit, by
the blood of the Lamb) shall not be hurt of the second death. Therefore Quod
eam timeamus quae animae nocere non scleat: Why should we be afraid of her,
that uses not to hurt such a soul? Fear ye not them (says Christ) that kill
the body, but are not able to kill the soul. Can the Be hurt thee and have
lost her sting? And can death wound thy soul without thine own sin? The sting
of death is sin. Resist the devil, and he will fly from thee: and keep
death from thine own sword of sin, and she shall not hurt thee. The fire
flameth and fumeth like a tyrant, whilst it has matter: and the Devil has
great wrath, knowing that he has but a short time. But as God has set the sea
bounds, which it cannot pass, though it rage and swell horribly; and as the
strong wind may shake off the leaves from the greatest Oak, but the stock
stands firm: even so death, the devil, and the world, may a little trouble
nature, (experience herein has taught me something) but they cannot beat
down faith. As examples of many do teach: Of holy Job, Sydrach, Misach, and
Abednego, Daniel the Prophet, the Apostles, and holy Martyrs.

Therefore says the Apostle Paul, I am persuaded, Romans 8.38.39.
that neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor
things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other
creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ
Jesus our Lord. But fly thou from sin as from a Serpent, the matter of this
sire, the bait of the Devil, and the sting of death: by which thy soul is so
wonnded, that without the mighty work of God, thou can not be saved. Then
cease to do evil, learn to do well: Prove your own works, take the
breast plate of righteousness, the shield of faith, and helmet of salvation,
etc. and fight a good fight. None is crowned except he strive lawfully. Non
datur Nobilitati palma sed cursui. There is no respect of persons with God, he
sees not as man sees. Therefore so run that ye may obtain: do well, and
have well; For God rewards every man according to his works: not of due
debt, but of his loving and free mercy.

This is brief; One drop of the Sea does taste the saultnesse of the whole:
and by this thou may savor the truth. Which being not to be withstood:
what manner of men ought we to be, in holy conversation and righteousness? Why
do we not show forth our faith by our good works? Ambr. li. de Nab. Iezr. cap.
14.
Qui dines est in misericordia, dives est in deo. He that is rich in the works
of mercy, is rich in God: and this sacrifice pleases him. But he that has
this worlds goods, and sees his brother have need, and shuts up his
compassion from him, (as the mysers of the world do, that will not abate one
penny in a bushel of corn, to help the poor) how dwells the love of God
in them? Even as Christ abode among the Gargesens, he departed out of their
coasts. Therefore let not your Religion be in words, as of most it is: but in
deeds, as of all it should. For pure Religion and undefiled before God, even
the Father, is this: to visit the fatherless and the widow in their
adversity, and to keep himself unspotted of the world. This (beloved) is
Comes defunctorum, Ambrose.
A companion for the dead: Their works follow them. Even to testify before
the eternal Judge, how with Henoch they have walked and pleased God. If ye know
these things, blessed are you, if ye do them. Mat. 25.35. and 7.23.24. But the
contempt of thus doing, in dear years, do send up many grievous groans of
the poor members of Christ's body into the ears of God. And think you, that
the crying of the poor shall go for naught? No, no: He that made him, will
hear him. But I will lament, and pray for that which I cannot help. And
though the waters would now flow: yet I will stop their course: and end with
an excellent sentence of S. Ambrose, all one in effect with these of the holy
Ghost: Let us cast away the works of darkness: Ambr. li. de bea. Mort. c. 5.
that is, Sin that hangs on so fast. Abducamus nos a corporis nexu,
relinquamus omnia quae terrena sunt: vt cum venerit aduersarius nihil in nobis
inueniat suum. The meaning is: Let us withdraw our selves from the bondage of
the flesh let us forsake all things that are earthly and full of sin: that
when the adversary comes, he may find in us nothing of his own. This if we
do, then let death do what she may, she cannot hurt our souls. Aug. de
Ciuit. Dei lib. 1. ca. 11
So that Mala mors putanda non est, quam bona vita praecessit: Death it never
to be accounted evil to him that has lived well. And therefore no cause at
all, why the servants of God should once be afraid of it: though it be most
woeful to the rest. And thus much to teach you for what causes death should be
welcome unto you.

CHAP. XIIII. Whether Christians should mourn for their friends that are dead.
But now to correct a fault that may be seen among some: if death be so
joyfully to be accepted of, why should we mourn for them that are at rest?
nay, is it lawful to weep for them that be dead?

I answer, Genesis 23.2.
when Sarai was dead, Abraham mourned and wept for her. When the Patriarch
Jacob thought Joseph had been dead, Genesis 37.34.35.
he sorrowed and wept greatly. And when this aged Father had blessed his
children, Learn this you parents
and made an end of giving charge unto them to serve God, he plucked his feet
up into the bed, and gave up the ghoast. Then his loving child Joseph fell upon
his fathers face, Genesis 50.1.
and wept upon him, and kissed him. Number. 20.29.
When Aaron was dead, all Israel wept for him thirty days. And so they did
when Moses died. Deu. 34.8 1. Sam. 16.1.
I might show you, how Samuel mourned for Saul, and all Israel for Samuel.
David and those that were with him, for the death of Saul and Jonathan. 1. Sam.
25.1.
So did David for Absolon. So did the old Prophet for the man of God, 2. Sam.
1.11.12.
that was slain of the Lyo^. What need I tell you of Martha and Mary, 2. Sam.
18 33. and 19.1. 1. Reg. 13.30.
and our Savior Christ that wept for Lazarus being dead? And many other that
made lamentation for the blessed Martyr S. Stephen. As other widows, Ioh.
11.33.
that mourned for that godly woman Dorcas, with many other: which for briefnes,
Acts. 8.2.
as a thing needless here I omit. All which may seem to teach us to mourn
for the dead.

Now on the other side when Samuel wept for Saul, Cyril.
being cut off from the favor of God, 1. Sam. 16 1.
the Lord as being angry with him, reproved him for his sorrowing.

When King David perceived that his child was dead, (for which he fasted and
sorrowed greatly whilst it laic sick) he arose up, and mourned no longer.
The^ his servants marvelled, why he so sorrowed when it lived: and left off
when it was dead, and they asked him the cause. David answered: While the child
was yet alive, I fasted and wept: for I said, who can tell, whether God will have
mercy on me, that the child may live. But now, it being dead, wherefore should
I fast? Can I bring him again any more? I shall go to him, but he shall not
return again to me? And so he did not mourn for his dead. Christ comforting
the widow of Naim over her sons corpse, which she with her neighbors were
going for to bury, he said, Weep not. Luke 7.13. And Christ himself the
Lamb of God going to be offered a sweet smelling sacrifice for the sins of
the people, even to be crucified: there followed him a great multitude of
people and women, which women bewailed and lamented him, even because he was
going to death. But Jesus turned back unto them, and said, Daughters of
Jerusalem, weep not for me, but weep for your selves, and for your children.
Luk 23.27. S. Aug. says of Christ's mourning for Lazarus: Aug. de Cosol. mort.
lib. 1 cap. 4.
Fleuit plane and dominus Lazarum iam sepultum, non vtique vt flendi mortuos
formam daret, etc. (I know what Cyril says); The Lord wept indeed over Lazarus
that was buried, but not to teach us how to mourn for the dead. But either to
show by his tears, that he had a true humane body, or else he did lament of
sincere love to the Jews: Qui nec dei signo monstrato, Aug. ibid.
erant in cum credituri, which would not believe in him, though he showed them
the mighty power of God. And thus it seems that we should not mourn for
the dead.

Here now you see is a great controversy, what will you determine? Who think
you will have the foil? or what days men shall we find to end the
contention? Let us not go to law, for there the greediness of money will
defer our cause. And the Goose will scarce be left, whilst there is a
feather on her back: And in the end the country must try conscience.

To reconcile all, and keep peace, without any great loss or harm to either
party, our good neighbors at home, which are the holy scriptures, well
marking the matter, determine that in mourning for the dead there be two things
to be noted.

That in mourning for the dead, there be two things to be noted.

1. What is to be observed. 2. What is to be avoided.
That which must be observed, is, 1. Faith. 2. Charity.


Faith, to moderate us, Ne nimium doleamus sine spe resurrectionis, That we
mourn not too much, as men without hope of the resurruction. Therefore the
Apostle Paul instructs the Thessalonians, saying: 1. These. 4.13.
I would not (brethren) have you ignorant concerning them which are a sleep,
that ye sorrow not even as others which have no hope. That is, of the
immortality of the soul, and resurrection of the body, like Infidels. For we
look for the Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ: who shall change our vilde body,
that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body, according to the mighty
working, whereby he is able to subdue all things unto himself. Thus Faith is
first to be regarded.

The second thing is Charity, by which nature is forced to mourn and sorrow
for the departure of our near and dear faithful friend, a sound and good
Christian, for the Commonwealth profitable, and to the poor comfortable. This
love the Iewe^ thought, made Christ weep when Lazarus was dead: Therefore they
said, Behold how he loved him. And thus says S. Augustine. Contristamur ergo
nos, etc. We therefore are heavy for our dead, because of necessity we must
part from them: but yet with this hope, again for to see them. Inde angimur,
hinc consolamur: Ioh. 11.36.
inde infirmitas afficit, hinc fides reficit, inde dolet humana conditio, hinc
sanat diuina promissio. For that we are grieved, in this we are comforted: for
that weakness wears, in this faith reuiues us: for that, our frail nature
mourns: but in this, Gods promise does strengthen us. This love and
affection, together with faith, is not to be condemned, and it is lawful to
mourn with them that mourn. Romans 12.15.

That which must be avoided in Funerals, and mourning for the dead, is three
things.

1. Superstition. 2. Hypocrisy. 3. Immoderate sorrow.
Superstition was great among the Gentiles: it is little less among the
Papists: I know not who else do use it. Of which if thou will thou may see
Policanus, and Calvin, and the Gloss. ord. upon the 1 Thessalonians. 4.

And because this is mightily overthrown and condemned by many from the word
of God: and I so little cause to speak of it among you, I will (having been
long) please you, and ease my self; and make an end of this, with the opinion
of S. Augustine, who says: Pompa funeris, Aug. de verb. Apost. ser. 32
The pomp of burialls. Agmina exequiarum sumptuosa deligentia sepulturae,
monumentorum opulenta constructio viuorum sunt qualiacunque solatia non
adiutoria mortuorum. The train of solemn mourners, the costly preparation or
care of burial, and the rich building of Sepulchers, are some, (such as they
be) consolations or pleasures for them that are living, but no help os
comfort at all to the dead. Masse-mongers are ashamed to see this. Permittantur
itaque pia corda. Suffer therefore godly minds to sorrow for their dead, so
that it be without superstition.

Hypocrisy is most shameful and damnable in mourning for the dead. Thus Herod
mourned or seemed heavy, when John Baptist was to be beheaded. The text says:
The King was sorry. Math. 14.9. But it was but from the teeth outward. For the
truth is, he was glad that the mote was out of his eye, which would not suffer
him to enjoy his incest. Yet he could not for shame, but seem sorrowful for
him whom the rest loved. Therefore he is like to those wicked women and
children that would gladly have their husbands and fathers dead, because they
think them to be some lettes unto them to accomplish their wicked desiers.
Such feign themselves to weep, like Tekoah, 2 Samuel 14.2. but their stony
hearts, without an onyon in a napkie, can wring out as many tears from their
hypocritical eyes, as juice from a millstone, though they grumble much alike,
and I pray you is this commendable?

The third thing to be avoided in mourning for our dead, or when any cross is
laid upon us, is immoderate weeping and howling. This God reproved in Samuel,
sorrowing for king Saul, though he were not dead, but cast off from God,
saying: How long will thou mourn for Saul, seeing I have cast him away from
reigning over Israel? This was folly in old Jacob, who thus grievously mourning
for Joseph (whom he thought had been dead) utterly refused to be comforted of
his children, and so continued weeping. And David was greatly to be blamed, who
though he mourned not when his infant was dead, yet outragiously he lamented
and tormented himself for the death of the traitor Absolon, that sought to
depose him from his kingdom. 2. Sam. 18.33. This too too woeful lamenting for
the dead, Almighty God fo^bad in the time of the Law, and under the holy
Gospel it is not to be used. The Lord says: You shall not cut your flesh for
the dead, neither make any print of a mark upon you: I am the Lord. Leuit.
12.28. This some come very near unto, that pull themselves, and tear their
flesh, as howling in infidelity. From which the holy Apostle counsels:
Chrysostom disswadeth, which Cyril greatly disliketh: S. Ambrose reproves,
and S. Augustine sharply condemns. So then hypocrisy, superstition, and
excessive sorrow avoided, faith and charity observed: Funerals and mourning,
are commendable over the dead, and may lawfully be used, after the examples of
the Patriarchs, Prophets, holy men, Christ, his Apostles, and other the Saints
of God. Therefore well says Jesus Syrach, Let not them that weep be without
comfort, but mourn with them that mourn: Eccles. 7.34. For there is a time
for all things. Eccles. 3.1. But make small weeping for the dead, for he is at
rest. Yet use lamentation as he is worthy, and that a day or two, least thou be
evil spoken of, and then comfort thy self for thy heaviness. For of
heaviness comes death, and the heaviness of the heart breaks the
strength, and dries up the bones. Eccles. 38.17.18.

This Christ forbad not, when he said^ Weep not for me. Stella. ibid.
Luke 23. Non prohibet dominus compassione^ sed pudeat aliam luctus causam. The
Lord does not forbid their compassion, but foresheweth them a greater cause of
lamentatio^. Of which Jesus Christ spoke, when he said: Woe be to them, that
are with child, and to them that give suck in those days. Luke 21.23. He
meant because of the war and destruction that should come upon them, when they
should not be able to fly, or flying should have no comfort.

Again, S. Augustine reproving as well the hardness of man's heart, as
commending kind compassion and love, Aug. lib. 19. cap. 8. de ciuit. dei
says: Of whom we have had singular comfort and friendship in their lifetime,
how is it possible that for their departure we should not be sorrowful? And an
other says: Marl. ex Iod. Vilic. in ^. These. 4 Calu. ibid.
Quis vnquam? Who ever denied Ch^istians to mourn for their dead, except he
were a stock, or altogether a very stone? And Calvin says; This is the sum
of all, we must not mourn for our dead too immoderately: but the sorrow of the
godly must be mixed with comfort, which may guide them unto patience. And
therefore the holy Apostle says, We must not murmur against God. 1. Cor.
10.10. And so make a lawful thing unlawful and damnable. Then to conclude our
matters of the grave, let us have a due regard unto this that is spoken, and
use our health and sickness aright, so that it may be said of us, as it is of
holy Job in his heaviness. In all this did not Job offend, nor charge God
foolishly. And thus much for the downfall of Pride.

CHAP. XV. A brief note of Hell.
NOw to her destruction, to the sides of the ^it: that is, everlasting death
and damnation. Not that I counsel you to go thither, but that I fear many
will: and I would forewarne you of that place of torments. The God of heaven
give us grace to be warned whilst we have time: for it will be too late to
seek for help, as Dives did, when the gate of geace shall be shut against us.

The proud heart of Nabuchadnezzar persuaded it self to get above the clouds,
as the Spaniard spiteth us, and to be like the most high God, that is, he
determined to take Jerusalem, which the Lord had chosen to be an habitation for
himself, and of Pride he meant to tread down the people of God under his
feet, as the Pope did the Emperor. But he is brought down, (and so shall (I
trust) the Spaniard, if our Pride and sin hold him not up) to the grave, even
to the sides of the pit. By which is meant, that Pride shall have the greatest
torments and chiefest room in hell of all other sins, because on earth she
has been the foremost and chief ringleader of all other. Musc. in Isai. 14.15.
Qui similis esse volebas deo: pro coelo demersus es in tenebras inferni. Thou
which would be like unto God, in stead of heaven, thou art drowned or
plunged in the darkness of hell. It is even the same judgment which the son
of God Christ Jesus, denounced against proud Capernaum, saying: And thou
Capernaum, which art exalted to heaven, shall be thrust down to hell. Luke
10.15.

Hell is a place without the heaven, prepared of God, with unspeakable, most
horrible, confused, and everlasting torments for the damned. Of which, though
the extreme and full horror thereof, cannot of man be expressed, no not if a
damned soul were permitted to express what it could of the pain, it is not
able to describe that, which it most woefully feels: yet the holy scriptures
of God do speak plainly and sufficiently thereof, for our learning and
instruction, most wonderful to behold. Whereof many men have written
learnedly: the chief substance whereof, thou shall find collected by Parsons
in his Resolution, the ninth Chapter: unto which for this time I will send you.
1. Because of the truth of the argument, and the plain and easy manner of
handling it. 2. As also I must confess I cannot much amend it, neither now
stay to speak that which I would of it. 3. Because honor is to be given to
whom honor is due. The Idollators rob God of his honor: and he that takes an
other man's works without his name, is like a thief that steals an other
man's goods to enrich himself. As many do in these days, that cause the poor
to smart, as usurers, extortioners, oppressors, thieves, and the covetous, etc.
for whom is reserved the mist of darkness for ever, without repentance. And
thus for this time, I have finished that which I determined for the Lord,
being but able to rough-hewe my timber, and so leave it the more ready for a
better builder. God grant we may all build together the work of the Lord, to
the humble and perfect finishing of our faith, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

The Lord lives, and blessed be my strong helper: and praised be the God of my
salvation. Psalm. 18.47. Amen.

FINIS.
Si male quid dictu^ est hominem dixisse memento:
Si been quid dixi, gloria Christ tua est.
Is ought here past my pen humane?
that same is due to me:
But what is right, and true, O God,
that same I have of thee.
And thee do praise for all thy grace,
and knowledge of thy word.
O Father, Son, and holy Ghost,
one God, and mighty Lord.
Let us pray.

O Holy and eternal God, most mighty Lord, and merciful Father, whose truth
reaches unto the heavens, and righteousness unto the ends of the world, which
haste now taught us, that those which exalt themselves, shall be brought down
to the grave, to the sides of the pit, even to hell, give us grace, that we by
thy power may subdue the flesh unto the spirit, that we may be the habitation
of thine own holiness, and the place which thou have chosen to put thy name
there. So shall we be safe under thy protection, and our hearts shall be
filled with joy, as the Temple was with the glory of the Lord. And then as
Symeon rejoiced to embrace Christ, so shall we to receive death without
trembling through faith, being assured of deliverance from thy wrath. Hear us
o Lord for Jesus Christ's sake, our only Mediator and Advocate. To whom with
the Father, and the holy Ghost, be all thanks, and praise, and honor, and
power, and glory, and majesty ascribed, now, and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

