THE NEW BIRTH: OR, A TREATISE OF REGENERATION, DELIVERED IN CERTAIN Sermons;
and now published by WILLIAM WHATELY, PREACHER and Minister of Banbury in
Oxfordshiere.

1. COR. 5.17. If any man be in Christ, he is a new creature: old things are
passed away; behold, all things are become new.

LONDON, Imprinted by Felix Kingston, for Thomas Man, and are to be sold at his
shop in Paternoster Row, at the sign of the Talbot. 1618.

THE METHOD OF THE TREATISE.
The Doctrine concerning the necessity of Regeneration, is, 1. Propounded and
proved by Testimonies of Scripture. 2. Confirmed by four manifest Reasons,
taken from the 1. Sinfulness of Man's corrupt Nature. 2. Purity of Gods
Nature. 3. Tenor of the Covenant of Grace. 4. End of Christ's sufferings.
3. Explicated 1. By a Description of Regeneration from the Causes Efficient
Principal, the Holy Ghost. Isntrumental, the Word of God, chiefly preached.
Material, Holiness. Formal, Infusion. Final, Gods glory in the persons
salvation.
Subject, which is the whole Man.
2. By a Declaration of the degrees and order of working it, which are four.
1. By discovering to a man his natural sinfulness. 2. By stirring up in him a
settled desire of pardon, and of holiness. 3. By dropping into him the spirit
of Prayer, inabling him solemnly to beg the two forenamed things at the hand
of God. 4. By sealing him with the Spirit of Promise, which certifying him of
acceptance with God, imprints in his will a firm purpose of living to him
hereafter; and so he is a new creature.
3. By a declaration of the effects that follow, which are four, 1. A
Spiritual Combat with the Devil, the World, and the Flesh; where the combat
of flesh and spirit is distinguished from the combat of the light of
Conscience, and the corruption of the will, in five points. 1. In the things
that are at variance. 2. In the things about which they fight. 3. In the
motives inducing them to fight. 4. In the weapons by which they fight. 5. In
the success of the combat.
2. In a good conversation in both parts of it, 1. Leaving all evil Known
Grosser, so as not ordinarily to commit it. Less gross, so as not to allow,
excuse, defend it.
Suspected, so as to seek, and be willing to know it, and to leave it.
2. Doing good For extent, Of all sorts. Manner Out of conscience to God.
According to the direction of the Word.


3. A knowledge of his own being regenerate, unless in cases of 1. Infancy
and new coming on. 2. Strong tentations. 3. Spiritual sownes of sin.
4. Growth in Grace, whereof the Kinds are either in Quantity. Quality.
Manner is, though not without diverse (it may be) long stops, as in sickness,
yet by recovering out of all.

4. A Declaration of the principal graces of the new man in the 1. Chief
faculties 1. Understanding 1. Knowledge. 2. Faith in God. The Word of God.

2. Conscience 1. Peaceablenesse. 2. Wakefulnesse.
3. Will 1. Being carried after God. 2. Subjection to the will of God.

2. The inferior powers, 1. Memory. 2. Imagination. 3. Affections.


4. Applied, by making uses, 1. General to all, to try themselves. 2.
Special to the Unregenerate, to Terrify them. To exhort them to be regenerate
by 1. Desiring and begging for the spirit of regeneration. 2. Hiding the
Doctrine of the Law and Gospel in their hearts. 3. Constant hearing the word
of God preached, and meditating of it after hearing.

Regenerate, 1. To comfort them in the sight of their happiness. 2. To exhort
them to two things, 1. To cherish Grace in themselves, 1. By avoiding ill
company, and keeping good. 2. By avoiding things sinful, in resisting the
first motions. 3. By shunning excess in things indifferent. 4. By being
constant in religious exercises.
2. To propagate it to others, which concerns the Flock, and every private man,
and that in regard both of All, with whom he shall converse, and that by good
Life. Conference.
Especially those of his own family, both them of Age, by 1. Worshipping God
amongst them. 2. Catechizing them. 3. Bringing them to Church. 4. Praying for
their regeneration.
2. That are infants, by bringing them to Baptism with faithful and fervent
prayer.

Ministers, by constant and plain preaching of the Word of God to them.







Mayor, Aldermen and Burgesses, and the rest of the Inhabitants of the Town
and Parish of Banburie: the Author dedicateth the following Treatise, and
wishes all happiness.
Worshipful and well-beloved, I have (not long since) preached amongst you some
things, concerning the nature of the New Birth. I am glad to understand, that
in handling of them, I gave to some of you some good content. I am willing (you
see) to renew your content, by offering the same things now to your eyes, that
formerly to your ears; that the serious (and I hope) often reading, of what
you but once heard, may instruct you better, and ground you further, in this
necessary doctrine. And, Oh that the Lord of Heaven would please so
effectually to cooperate with his Word, that many of you may become partakers
of this happy and saving work of grace! My greatest covetousness is, that
your souls may be thus enriched; my greatest ambition, that they may be thus
advanced. To this end have I bent mine endeauours amongst you in the constant
employment of the talent lent me by God: which, how heartily do I wish and
pray, that it may be available for your renouation! For in truth, the whole
world is not worthy to stand in comparison, with this life of holiness. I say it
again, All the greatest aduancements, profits, pleasures (which this prick of
earth, this almost nothing, which we tread upon, is able to afford), are in no
sort to be esteemed desirable; if they be laid in the balance, against those
heavenly preferments, those infinite treasures, those unutterable comforts;
whereto this estate of grace does bring those that are brought unto it, even in
this present world in some good measure: but most fully in the upper region of
this world, the stately palace of heaven, the fairest room of this large
house, and the Presence Chamber of the King of Kings. Why then is any man,
especially why is any of you (to whom these things have been frequently
delivered, on whom they have been earnestly pressed, on whom they are
constantly inculcated; why (I say) is any of you) so worse then childish, yea,
then brutish, as to be careless of seeking that unspeakable felicity, from
which nothing can hinder you, but your own slothful negligence, or wilful
carelessness, in not vouchsafing to seek it? This small Treatise I am now bold
to dedicate unto you; both that it may witness to your own consciences, and
all that read it, that none of you does want grace for want of means to get
it, either on Christ's part, the King of your souls, or on my part, his
unworthy Ambassador: and also that it may be present with you at all times, to
provoke you to get that holiness, without which (you have learned, that) you
cannot be saved. Accept (I pray you) of this my labor, as a testimony of my
desire of your souls welfare; and make this one only sufficient recompense of
this, and all other my travel amongst you, in receiving the grace that God
offers; and striving to be such, as here you may find, that all the citizens
of heaven must be, even men regenerate. So with my most fervent prayers to God
for your prosperity, I kindly take my leave; resting (so long as the
ouer-weightinesse, and ouer-toylsomnesse of the place shall suffer) your Pastor,

WILLIAM WHATELY.
May 8. 1618.
THE CONTENTS OF THE BOOK.
CHAP. I. THe order of the word^, and the doctrine of them concerning the
necessity of regeneration. page 1. CHAP. II. The reasons of the point, in
number four. page 6. CHAP. III. The description of regeneration. page 13.
CHAP. IV. The order of working regeneration. page 26. CHAP. V. The effects of
regeneration. page 40. CHAP. VI. The principal graces, which by regeneration
are wrought in the soul. page 69. CHAP. VII. An exhortation to all to examine
themselves, whither they be regenerate, yea, or no. page 87. CHAP. VIII. A
terror to them that are unregenerate. page 95. CHAP. IX. An exhortation to the
seeking of regeneration, showing the means of attaining it. page 101 CHAP. X.
A comfort to the regenerate. page 115 CHAP. XI. An exhortation to the
regenerate, to cherish the life of grace, showing the means of cherishing it.
page 129. CHAP. XII. An exhortation to the regenerate to propagate grace to
others, showing the means of propagating it. page 139
THE NEW BIRTH: OR, A TREATISE OF REGENERATION, etc.
JOHN 3.3. Verily, verily, I say unto thee, unless a man be borne again, he
cannot see the kingdom of God.


CHAP. I. Showing the order of the words, and the doctrine of them.
AFter that the report of our Saviors many and great Miracles, had caused many
of the common people in great multitudes to follow after him; at length also a
man of better note and esteem (though commonly the men of most note in the
world, are most backward to the things of most use for the soul), bethinkes
himself of visiting, and conferring with him. This man, by Name, is called
Nicodemus; by Place, he was a Ruler of the Jews; by Degree, a Doctor; by Sect,
a Pharisie; a generation of men, not so glorious in the world, for their fair
outside, as loathsome to Christ for their soul inside. Now because the
carnal regard of his worldly credit (the maine block that many times lies in
the way of greatness, to hinder it from frequenting the poor and despised
School of Christ), made him unwilling to be seen, and accounted one of the
followers of the poor Carpenter of Nazareth: he therefore hides himself
under the curtain of darkness, and chooses the opportunity of the
Night-season; by benefit whereof, he might enjoy some private communication
with our blessed Savior, unobserved of his proud and spightfull
fellow-Pharisies. His first salutation to Christ is formerly set down, and
has in it a manifest demonstration of much respect and reverence borne unto
him; for he does acknowledge him to be a Teacher sent of God, and gives a just
reason of his such confession, from the great Miracles which he (...) wrought,
and did daily work amongst them, ^^yond all possibility, either of ignorance
or denial. So has our Savior gotten a new Scholar into his School, and
therefore enters him (as it was fit he should, though he were for other
learning a great Scholar) into the very A, B, C, of Christian Religion, and
begins to teach him the first principles and rudiments of the doctrine of
salvation. The points of doctrine, wherein our Lord instructs this Ruler and
Doctor are two; in themselves easy enough, yet the first and easiest of them
goes much above his carnal and shallow capacity. The first point is of the
persons that shall be saved; the second, is of the causes of salvation and
damnation. The former is in this verse propounded, and after to the thirteenth
in more words discussed, upon occasion of Nicodemus, his gross and
vn-Doctor-like objection: for which grossness, he being gently reprehended,
gives Christ leave to proceed in the second, without interruption, from the
thirteenth verse to the two and twentieth. So then the words read, contain the
very foundation and cornerstone, as I may term it, of the doctrine of
Christianity, which Christ seeks to lay fast, in the heart of the
honest-hearted, but (for all his great learning) ignorant Nicedemus. The words
themselves draw us to two considerable points in them; the proof; the doctrine
proved. The proof, Christ's authority and word, delivered in an
earnestly-doubled asseueration; Verily, verily, I (whom before thou did
confess to be a Teacher sent of God) ^^y unto thee. The doctrine proved, is
about the ^^biect of salvation, or the persons that may, or may ^^t attain
eternal life, laid down in a conditional proposition negatiuely, thus;
unless a man be (or if a man be not) borne again, he shall not see the
Kingdom of God. Of Christ's vehement and repeated asseueration I will say
nothing, but in that doctrine, whereof he sees cause to make so plain and
strong an affirmation, I will be bold to dwell a while; because the knowledge
of it is so exceedingly needful, that without it, in vain, and idle is all
else that we can possibly know concerning God, or Christ, or the doctrine of
the Scriptures. Mark then, I pray you, this most necessary instruction, and
learn you (if you have not hitherto learned) at this time, that which this
ancient Teacher in Israel was first set to learn, that No man can be saved,
unless he be regenerate. No person, be he Jew or Gentile, Christian or Pagan,
Pharisie or of other sect, Ruler or of inferior place, learned or unlettered,
Doctor or of lower degree; no person, I say, of what Nation, condition, wit,
knowledge, virtue or other excellency so ever he be, can possibly see (that
is, enjoy), the Kingdom of God (that is the blissful estate of heavenly
glory), if he be not borne again (that is made quite a new man, from that that
he was in his first birth): not (as Nicodemus too too grossly fancied) by a
carnal re-entring into his mothers belly; but by a spiritual renewing of his
whole man, in all the powers thereof. There is a total, and absolute
impossibility of any man's being admitted into the place and state of
celestial happiness, unless he be regenerate. Sooner may Angels tume devils;
men beasts; and beasts stones; and all the world just nothing; then that any
one unrenewed person, shall have entrance into heaven. Yea, as possible is it,
that God should cease to be God, as that any man, not made anew according to
the image of God, should be received into the blessed vision, possession,
fruition of God; and of all utterly impossible things, this is (if of such
things there might be any comparison) one of the most impossible; that there
should be any communion betwixt God and man (by Gods participating his favor
and blessedness unto man), so long as man remains in the estate of his
corrupted nature, not being created according to God, in righteousness and
true holiness. It neither is now, nor ever was, nor ever shall be found, that
any man should get within the gates of the kingdom of glory; unless he have
first entered into the kingdom of grace, through the Churches narrow womb of
regeneration. A new birth, is absolutely needful to an eternal life: and in a
word, regeneration of perfect necessity to salvation. It were a matter even
very superfluous,, to seek more proofs, after such a testimony, of such a
witness (or author rather) as Christ is. But the unbelieving spirit of man
does stand in need of ouer-abundant conviction, in truths of this strain.
Wherefore I will a while stand to make good this point, and then (after
explanation) proceed to apply it. First, we may read Ezechiel crying out to
the old Church, in these words, Make you a new heart, and a new spirit, Ezech.
18.31.
for why will you die, O house of Israel? What more evident, then that this
question does take it for granted, that the house of Israel, the seed of
Abraham, followers of the true God, professors of true religion, sealed with
circumcision, admitted unto the Altar, and participating of the sacrifices
according to the Law, and worshipping the God of heaven, after the external
manner prescribed by himself: that these I say, (and therefore questionless
none other) could not escape death, even eternal death; death of body, and
death of soul, if they got not a new heart, and a new spirit; that is, (the
same thing being expressed in diversity of phrases) were not borne again, as
our Savior pleases to term it. For this cause the same Prophet a little
after, and in one or two places more, calls upon them, Verse. 32.
saying, return and live ye: so that but by converting, there is no living,
and conversion and regeneration are always and altogether inseparable:
therefore life and regeneration must needs go together; have one, and have
both; miss one, and miss both. To the same purpose the author to the Hebrews
speaks, Chap. 12.14.
in these words, Without holiness, (and that no man has but by being borne
again: for the image of God lost in Adam, is not recovered but by the new
birth in Christ), I say, without holiness, no man shall see God.

CHAP. II. Showing the reasons of the point.
THree testimonies are plentifully sufficient to confirm any divine truth. But
(because it will help much to conceive of the point of regeneration, that we
do well understand the grounds of the impossibility of being saved without
it); we will therefore lay them down also for further proof of the point.
These are

First, the monstrous filthiness of man in his first birth.

Secondly, the infinite purity and perfection of Gods nature.

Thirdly, the tenor of the covenant of grace, wherein the salvation of lost
mankind is promised.

Fourthly, the fruit and end of Christ's death and obedience, whereby our
salvation is deserved. For the first of these reasons. Man in his first birth,
1. From man's natural filthiness.
(even every particular man, woman, and child, Christ Jesus alone excepted, who
was therefore conceived by the holy Ghost, that he might escape that
pollution) is conceived in sin, and borne in wickedness, Psalm. 51.
as David speaks of himself. First, by imputation of the sin of our first
parents, which is ours; because they did it in each of our steads, in whom,
each of us was then originally comprehended; and then by transfusion (because
we are branches of that bitter root), we are each of us become sons of
disobedience, subjects to the God of this world, slaves to sin, captives
under the dominion and power of lust, having our understandings darkened, and
hearts hardened: so that, we can neither conceive, nor receive the things of
God; but are led of Satan, at his pleasure, to do his will, according as he
does effectually work in us. In a word, we are enemies to God, heirs of
death, children of the devil, dead in sins and trespasses, doing the lusts
of the flesh and of the mind, and by nature sons of wrath and destruction,
one as well as another. A man in the state of corrupt nature, is nothing else
but a filthy dunghill of all abominable vices: he is a stinking rotten
carrion, become altogether unprofitable and good for nothing: his heart is the
devils storehouse, an heap of odious lusts; his tongue is a fountain of
cursing and bitterness, and rotten communication; his hand is a mischievous
instrument of filthiness, deceit, and violence; his eyes great thorowfares of
lust, pride, and vanity; his feet are swift engines, moving strongly to revenge,
wantonness and lucre; his life a long chain of sinful actions, every later
link being more wicked then the former: yea it is but (as it were) one
continued web of wickedness, spun out, and made up, by the hands of the devil
and the flesh, an evil spinner, and a worse weauer. He brings into the world
with him, the kernel of all impiety and injustice, even an aptness and
disposition to all the foulest acts, that lie within the possibility of his
natural strength and means to perform, either against the Lord, or against
his neighbor; and an utter unaptness and inability to do any thing (that in
the true judgment and estimation of God, who only can judge aright in this
case), is, or may be termed good, as answerable to his law. In his soul and
body there lies the spawne of all wickedness: of Atheism, of pride, of
unbelief, of hypocrisy, of rebellion, of impatiencie, of hatred and contempt
of God, and of his word, of indeuotion, of prophannesse, of ambition, of wrath,
of filthiness, of worldliness, of arrogancy, of selfe-conceitednesse, of
murders, of whoredoms, of thefts, of periuries, and whatsoever thing besides,
is hateful to God, and contrary to his most holy law. He is wholly darkness,
wholly flesh, wholly and totally opposite to the living God; to whose law, he
neither is subject, nor will, nor can be, till he be cast into an other, and a
fairer mould, by the working of his spirit. Such a thing as this (my brethren),
even just such a thing and none other, is a man, even every man; such an one am
I, are you, are all, and each of all, the sons of Adam, that have been, are,
or shall be, and that universally, without any exception, as witnesses the
Prophet, saying, Psalm. 14.
They are all gone out of the way, they are all become unprofitable, there is
none that does good, no not one. All these words, and more then all these, or
all that can be spoken by us, falls far short, of a full description of man's
natural sinfulnes. For if the tongue it self (one poor and little member)
may well be entitled, Iam. 3.6.
(as it is entitled by the pen of S. James) a world of wickedness; then alas,
how many, and how great worlds of wickedness, are included in this one little
world of man? Now how should so foul, so unclean, so polluted a creature, set
his foot within the portall of heaven? How should such an heap of hellish
lusts, and devilish vices, be received into that happy palace, and holy
mansion place, of Saints, and Angels? What was the reason that the devil could
not tarry in heaven, having once been there? was it not because he had infected
himself with sin? with which, seeing all mankind are wholly poisoned, and
covered over from head to foot, being of their father the devil, nothing else
but even little devils, differing from the great ones, not in substance and
parts of corruption, but alone in the degrees thereof, (as a child of four or
five years, from a man of thirty or forty): how can he possibly find any
place in the kingdom of heaven? Thus therefore we conclude our reason: Sin
can have no place, no dwelling, none intertainment in the kingdom of God. Man
unregenerate is nothing else, but a very compound, or bundle, of dirt and
sin. Wherefore man unregenerate, cannot possibly find a place in heaven. And
this is the first reason, from the sinfulness of man's nature.

From the purity of Gods nature.
The second follows, taken from the purity of Gods nature. The Lord is a God
of pure eyes, and can abide none iniquity, yea the wicked and the workers of
iniquity his soul hates. He is as contrary to sin, as heat to cold, as
light to darkness, as any two contrary things in the world can be imagined to
be contrary, and a great deal more too. For other things are contrary each to
other alone in regard of their qualities. But the very nature, substance, and
being of God, is contrary to sin. For sin is a taxie, disorder, confusion,
a not being; and God is order, perfection, holiness, an absolute, and a simple
being. For holiness in God is not an accident, but his very essence is
holiness, and he is after an inconceiueable and incomprehensible manner,
infinitely, and essentially, good, holy, and pure. Wherefore there can be no
reconciliation, nor union, betwixt him and the sinner, till the sinfulnes of
the sinner be removed, and the image of God be formed and imprinted in him a
fresh. Even as the poison of an Adder is contrary to the nature of a man, and
the venom of a Toade extremely opposite to his life: and therefore no force
can compel, no wages hire, no Rhetorique persuade, no persuasion induce him,
to lodge a Toade, or Serpent, in his bosom; so is it impossible that the most
holy, pure, righteous, perfect essence of God, should admit into a society of
grace and glory with him, the impure, filthy, loathsome, toadlike, serpentine
nature of man. For though the infinite perfection and excellency of Gods nature
be such, that he cannot receive any hurt or indamageme^t from sin; as a man is
hurt by the poison of a poysonfull creature: yet still withal, such is his
excellency, and the infinitnes of his power and goodness, that he cannot but
remove far and far from himself, al things whatsoever that are contrary
unto himself. What fellowship can there be betwixt light and darkness? God
and wickedness? How can things absolutely and essentially contrary, be joined
together in one? Seeing God is perfectly holy, and man (if we may use that
epithet in this matter) perfectly sinful; either God must become sinful like
to man, or man holy like to God, or else there can be no gracious union and
communion betwixt man and God. Now to imagine that God should become sinful,
is the most blasphemous and utterly impossible imagination in all the world.
Wherefore unless a man be made holy, (that is to say, be regenerate, or borne
again) he cannot see the kingdom of God.

In the third place let us peruse the covenant of grace, From the tenor of the
covenant of grace.
and we shall find that it runs along in these promises: Ezekiel. 36.26.
I will give you a new heart, and a new spirit will I put within you: I will
take away the stony heart out of your bodies, and give you an heart of flesh.
Hence it is easy to reason thus, Whosoever is a stranger to the covenant of
promise, is likewise a stranger from all happiness, and from eternal life.
Now until a man be regenerate he is a stranger to that covenant. For why, that
promises in the first place a new heart, and a new spirit: wherefore it must
needs follow, that until a man be regenerate, he cannot be saved.

Lastly, let us consider the end of our Savior Christ's From the end of Christ's
death.
was it only to purge us from the guilt of sin, and to save us from the pit
of hell? was it not also to redeem us from this present evil world? that we
being sanctified by his truth, might avoid the corruptions that are in the
world through lust, and become a peculiar people unto him, zealous of good
works. Doubtless had Christ gone about to ransom us upon other terms, he
must have lost his labor altogether. If Christ should come, and dye, for one
man, ten thousand times; all those deaths should profit that one man nothing at
all for his salvation, unless he be made a new creature. For the death of
Christ, though it be of force to reconcile mercy and justice in God, yet is
not of force enough to make God unjust, or to diminish any whit his infinite
righteousness; which should be diminished (yea annihilated), if he should open
the gates of heaven, to unholy, unsanctified, unregenerate persons: for then
should he be a lover of the wicked, then should fools dwell with him, then
should he have fellowship with the unrighteous, and communion with the darkest
darkness. Whereas the Scripture says that he is light, 1 John 1.5.
and in him is no darkness; and that if we walk in darkness, and say, we have
communion with him, we lie, and deal not truly. For all that are in heaven are
loved of God, and have communion with him. Wherefore such admittance of such
men into heaven, can no more stand with Gods justice, the^ it can stand with a
man's life to be cast into the bottom of the sea. For this cause, it was never
the meaning, or intention of our Savior, to open heaven to any, but to those
who^ he would sanctify, and by sanctification bring to salvation. And so we
conclude the point in this manner: Whosoever is without Christ, cannot possibly
come to heaven. For he is the way, the truth, and the life. Every unregenerate
man is without Christ, for all that are in him are new creatures, having
crucified the flesh, with the affections and lusts. Therefore no unregenerate
man, so continuing, can see the kingdom of God.

CHAP. III. Containing a description of Regeneration.
SO have we demonstrated the truth of this necessary principle of Christian
religion. Now we go forward to explicate the same, The explication of the
doctrine, by showing four things.
and will endeavor to lay it open so clearly, that every man may be able (if
he be willing to bestow the labor of trying) to discern of his own estate in
this behalf, and to say whether himself be regenerated yea or no. So will
there be a ready way made, to that application of the doctrine which hereafter
we intend. Now that this matter may be soundly conceived of by you, it shall be
requisite for me to enter into a discourse consisting of four heads. First, to
give a description of regeneration. Secondly, to show in what order, and in
what degrees, (as I may term them) it is wrought in the sons of men. Thirdly,
to declare what effects do follow upon it, there where it is wrought.
Fourthly, to set down the most eminent of those graces, that are to be found
in regenerate men. Of which four I pray you revive your attention to hear in
order.

For the first point Regeneration, 1. A description of regeneration.
(called also sanctification, and renouation, and conversion, and repentance,
having the three former names given it, in as much as it is Gods work in us;
the two latter, in as much as we also being moved by God, do work together
with him for the accomplishing and fulfilling thereof; and fitly called a
re-begetting, because in it we are restored to that image of God, wherein we
were at the first created: but now, by means of our corruption through the
fall, are altogether destitute of it in our first birth). This regeneration, I
say, seems to me conveniently described in these or the like terms: It is a
work of the spirit of God, by means of the word of God, infusing holiness
into the whole man, for the glory of God in his salvation. I call it a work,
because it is so called of God himself, for we are said to be his
workmanship, Ephesians. 2.10.
created in Christ, unto good works: and because to beget, is to do; to be
begotten, to suffer; in the plainest discourse of natural reason. Now this
work is in this description set out by all the causes, and by the subject
thereof. The causes are four, all briefly named in the description. The
efficient, formal, material, and final. The efficient is double, principal,
and isntrumental. The principal, the sole author (in whom remains all the
power of working, and to whom all the praise appertains) is the Spirit of
God, the Holy Ghost, the third Person in Trinity. The same Spirit by whom our
Savior Christ's Manhood was conceived in his Mothers womb, is the sole worker
of this conception of grace in the heart of Christians. So does our Lord
himself instruct Nicodemus in the words following, saying, verse. 6.
That that is borne of the spirit, is spirit: and before Saint John had told
us, that believers were borne, not of blood, cap. 1. verse. 13.
nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man; that is, not by any
natural power, virtue, or strength, which is naturally inherent in them; but of
God, that is, of the Spirit of God: wherefore in the New Covenant, the promise
is made on this wise, Ezekiel. 36.16.
I will put my spirit in your hearts: and in another place, I will pour forth
my spirit upon all flesh. The spirit of God that rests upon our Savior Christ,
does descend from him, unto those that shall be his members; at the same time
implanting them into him, and imprinting his image upon them. No Angel can
change man's heart, no Angel can quicken the dead soul, no creature can breath
into us the divine nature: but we are the workmanship of God, by his spirit
created unto good works. This is the anointing oil, that being poured upon
us, does consecrate us unto God. The holy Ghost himself (in a wonderful and
indiscernable fashion, as the wind that blows where it lusts) does
conueigh and insinuate himself into the man, whom he will beget again to a
new life, and becomes purifying water to cleanse him; and an holy fire,
coming down from heaven, to consume his corruptions, and refine him for the
Lords use. And yet the Spirit of God, that could work of himself, and without
means, pleases not so to do in this great work: but of his own free will,
makes choice for himself, of a fit and blessed instrument for that purpose;
even the Law of God, the whole doctrine of the Scriptures: which he has for
that end, made known to the sons of men by his holy Prophets; and which has
received this high commendation, from the Divine testimony left in writing by
David's pen, that it is perfect, Psalm. 19.
and conuerteth the soul. This doctrine has two maine heads; the Law, and the
Gospel: The former used by Gods Spirit, as a necessary preparatiue; the other,
as a proper and essential instrument in this business. Wherefore the Word is
called the incorruptible seed, which being sown in the heart, 1. Pet. 1.23.
does by little and little grow up to a new creature; and Peter tells us, that
by the precious promises, 2. Pet. 1.4.
we are made partakers of the divine nature; and to his Apostles our Savior
utters as much, saying, Now are you clean by the word that I have spoken
unto you. John 15.3.
There may be a question made, whither the Word of God read only, may become
effectual to regenerate? or whither it must want this efficacy, unless it
be preached, as well as read? To which question, me thinks that this should
be a true answer, that the isntrumental power of regenerating cannot be
denied to the Scriptures barely read, though preaching be not joined withal.
For why? seeing the doctrine of the Gospel is called, 2. Cor. 3.8.
the ministration of the Spirit, and it is the doctrine of the Gospel, when it
is offered to the understanding by bare reading; therefore it must follow, that
in such case also, it may become the power of God to salvation, and the
instrument of the spirit to regeneration. The same precepts, promises and
threats are by reading, delivered to the mind of the man that reads, or
hears the Word read; and why then should we think, that the Holy Ghost
either cannot, or will not, work together with them? Yea doubtless he can do
it when he will, and will do it then, whenever he does not (as often he
does not) afford to men a possibility of enjoying any other help then
reading. Unless the not being preached, could make the Word not to be the Law
of God: I see no reason that it should be thought unable to convert souls,
without being preached. But withal we must add this, that the Word of God is
made effectual by the Spirit, more often, more usually, more ordinarily, to
beget a new life, in the preaching (that is to say, the interpreting and
applying of it, by the mouth of a man, enabled and assigned to that work) then
in the bare reading: for the Lord has appointed in his Church, Pastors and
Teachers to be his Workmen, his Laborers, Dispensers of his heavenly
mysteries, and Fellow-workemen together with him; that by becoming his
instruments, to conueigh grace into men's hearts, they might become spiritual
Fathers unto them; and by attendance (not to reading alone, 1. Tim. 4 13.
but also) to doctrine or teaching, they might save themselves and their
hearers. And when Christ himself was pleased to raise up the dead world of the
Gentiles, unto the new life of godliness (and so to fulfill that which
himself had foretold, saying, John 5.25.
The dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and they that hear it
shall live). He commanded his Disciples to go and preach unto all Nations:
will any man make himself so simple, as to say, Matthew. 28.19.
he meant thus; Take the volume of the Law in your pockets, and draw it out,
and read a Chapter or two at a time unto them? Nay doubtless, he willed his
Disciples to do that, which they had so often seen and heard him doing; whose
custom was (as we may collect out of the fourth of Luke, where one instance
is recorded, to make us conceive his ordinary practice), when he had read, to
interpret the Scripture by him read, as there he did, saying, This day is this
Scripture fulfilled in your ears: and after to apply it to the hearers, as in
the same place, he falls into the reproof of their quarrelsomnesse against
him, that would vpbraide him with the Proverb of, Physician heal thy self;
Proverb.
amplifying his reproof, with allegation of the examples of the Widow of
Zarepta, and the Syrian Naaman. So the Apostles could not mistake his meaning,
when himself had by constant practice gone before you, in doing what he bad
them do. And therefore it will not at all follow, that because the word read,
is able to beget faith; either the ministers may content themselves usually to
read it, without preaching: or the people usually content themselves to hear
it so; and not be careful to seek for the preaching of it. For of such
absolute necessity, and of such excellent worth is regeneration, that it is
needful to seek it, (and sinful not to seek it) not only in some one of
the most easy means that may sometimes procure it; but also in all the means
(though never so painful) that God has appointed for it. Every man may read
himself, yea must read, if he can. This is a duty that might have been
performed, without establishing of any ministry in the Church. But the
Minister is, not only to read; but also to divide the word of truth aright,
to exhort, improve, rebuke, to speak to men's edification, exhortation and
comfort; that he may be truly called a fellow laborer with God, in ye work of
men's salvation. Shall we rest our selves satisfied in one thing, that may
convert? shall we think it enough to be constant in one exercise, that may
work grace? Doubtless if we do so, our own worldly wisdom and diligence
shall rise up in judgment, and condemn our spiritual folly and negligence.
Yea brethren, in things temporal, men stand thus affected: that as they will
neglect nothing, that may promise them any furtherance to their good success;
so they will show most care, and most earnestness, in that which they have
cause to think, will be most available for their purpose. Now without
question, the word preached is more usually, and more powerfully effectual to
regeneration, then the word read. The holy Ghost does more often, and more
mightily work by the word interpreted, and applied, then by it barely repeated
out of the book. I think him not worthy to be reasoned withal, that will
stand in denial of this matter. Read the stories of holy writ, and search and
see, if the examples of men by only reading regenerated, be not few, rare,
seldom; nay scarce any where at all to be found: but on the other side, the
examples of men by preaching made new, common, frequent, and usual. Therefore
be it again concluded, that he does far undervalue the gift of spiritual
life; which satisfying himself in the less usual, and less available means
of working it, because it is most easy; pretermitteth the more auailable, and
more usual, because he is not willing to undergo the pains, labor, or cost
that it will require. And thus you have the efficient causes of regeneration.
Gods spirit as the chief, the word principally preached, as his instrument.
The material cause is holiness, that is the thing, in the working of which
regeneration is conversant: Holiness (I say) the most admirable of all things
in all the world: as far surpassing wit, and learning, and riches, and other
earthly vanities; as learning surpasses ignorance, and wealth beggary. This is
(as it were) the character of Christ Jesus, the image of God, the beauty, the
riches, the strength, the life, the soul, of the soul and of the whole man:
It is a very beam of the divine light, called therefore by the Apostle, The
divine nature; it is the most excellent and worthy thing under heaven, or (of
things incident to creatures) in heaven. It is that, that distinguishes Angels
from devils; the Saints, from the damned Ghosts. Take away from a blessed
Angel his holiness, he will become a black fiend of hell. It is (in a word)
the best of all things that a creature can have; without which nothing is worth
the having; and with which the meanest condition is able to afford a man
happiness enough. This admirable thing, that can by no words be sufficiently
commended, is given by regeneration; and therefore we call it the matter of
regeneration. Now holiness is nothing else but this, a supernatural power of
withdrawing the faculties of the whole man from sinful and earthly objects,
and exercising the same upon God, and the things of God. This Adam had in his
first creation, and that in such perfection as God required at his hand. This
should he have propagated to his son; and his son, to his son, had he
continued in his innocence: so that to him the same thing was natural (and to
his innocent posterity should have been), which now to us is above the power
and course of nature to attain; and therefore need we to get it by a second
birth, because we cannot get it in our first birth. For the natural man does
not conceive in his mind (and consequently neither apply his will and
affections to receive) the things of God, 1. Cor. 2.14.
as the Apostle speaks: yea his mind is always bowing and bending, after
either bare earthly, or very hellish objects: but because these things must be
spiritually discerned, therefore the holy Ghost endues him with a new power of
raising himself up, from these base and filthy matters, unto his Creator, the
eternal fountain and first cause of being and of bliss, even unto the God of
heaven; in comparison of whom, all things are less and worse then nothing: and
likewise unto the things of God, remission of sins, the favor of God,
communion with Christ Jesus, increase of holiness; and the like to these,
which are by an excellency called the things of God: because they are the
chiefest of all those things, that he bestows upon the sons of men; and to
the seeking whereof, he directs them in his holy word, whereas else they would
never have sought them. This is the material cause of regeneration. The
formal is, infusion, as witnesses the Lord himself, saying; I will pour
upon the house of David, Zach. 12.10.
the spirit of grace And in another place, I will pour floods upon the dry
ground. And Paul says, 2. Tim. 1.7.
God has given us the spirit of a right mind. For whereas some qualities are
implanted in men by nature; some attained unto, by their own industry, and by
virtue of certain actions for that purpose performed; and some again are
wrought in the^, by a supernatural work of God: this gift of holiness, is
neither naturally descended unto them, (as it should have been, had their
parents been innocent); nor yet attained by their diligence and pains, or by
force and power, of any action done by them: but is put into them, by the
spirit of God, working above and beyond, either their power, or the power of
the acts that they shall do, for the attaining of it. Let us make the matter
more plainly understood by comparisons. The power of seeing, is naturally
bestowed upon all men in their very birth, and by the course of nature working
in their mothers womb. This power or use of this faculty is altogether denied
unto some men, and they are borne stark blind, as was he of whom we read in
the Gospel. Christ with spettle made cley, and having anointed his eyes, bade
him to wash, and he returned seeing. We say now that into this man, the power
or act of seeing was infused: for why by nature he could not see. The spettle,
cley, water, had no such natural force in them, as to work the power of
seeing in an eye, that through natural indisposition, wanted it. Wherefore it
must needs be infused, that is wrought in that person, by a supernatural
work of God. So again, Health is a quality; sickness (for example a burning
ague) takes away this quality of health. A man being so sick, of such a
disease consulteth with Physicians, receives potions from them, and recouereth
his health: this quality now was acquired, or gotten by pains and industry.
For by virtue of some inherent quality in the medicines received, was this
quality of health restored unto the body. But a man that was sick of an ague
in the time of Peter, sending to him receives a napkin from him, and by the
receiving of it is healed. This health was an infused health, for not any power
inherent in the cloth, or derived from the body of Peter; but a supernatural
work of God, did procure that health at the presence of such outward actions.
In like sort, Holiness was to Adam a natural power, or ability created in
him, and with him, and immediately accompanying his nature, or issuing from it.
But the devil robbed him of it, by taking that from him, and poisoning him
with the contrary natural impotencie of sin, (for I suppose we may well call
sin, I mean original sin, a natural impotencie, or a mischievous and
corrupt disorder in all the faculties). Wherefore it is requisite, that he
recover it again, if he shall be saved. Now the Lord of heaven pleases by
means of the word (as it were by the spettle of his mouth making cley, to
anoint his eyes) to re-beget or recreate, this quality of holiness in him;
not that the word has any natural inherent ability of working holiness, no
more then a napkin of curing an ague; but alone because the Lord sees it fit,
in and with that doctrine to work this work, by a power immediately and solely
derived from himself. So may a man by long study obtain the science of
natural Philosophy, which is a quality, and an habit; but the Lord did
please by his own immediate power, to derive this science into the mind of
Solomon: and therefore his knowledge was an infused knowledge, and more
excellent for measure and degree, then ever any man did, or could attain by
study. So the power of speaking and understanding any language, is a quality,
which by study, or custom of hearing and speaking, a man may work in
himself; and he that by much labor and reading gets, for example, his Latin
tongue, has wrought this quality in himself; but the Apostles had the
knowledge of speaking all, and by name the Latin tongue, put into them
suddenly, by the immediate operation of the holy Ghost, and by virtue of a
divine work, in an inconceivable manner working in their imaginations. So we
call holiness an infused quality, because the holy Ghost, by virtue of his
own hand, and by power immediately derived from himself, not by virtue of any
power naturally dwelling, either in man, or in the Word, does please, in and
with the word to work it in man. The spirit of life does breathe it into those
in whom it is, and they have it by the mere efficacy of his divine power, not
of the means in themselves, considered. Neither yet must we neglect those
exercises and ordinances, in and by which it pleases him to cooperate, and to
conueigh unto us this grace; but rather must with all diligence apply our
selves unto them; that by making our selves subject unto his blessed will, we
may likewise be capable of this excellent work of his. Though cley made of
spettle, and the water of Siloah, had no such virtue in them, as to make a
blind eye see, and to turn the natural impotencie back again into the
power of seeing; yet the man that was borne blind, was to use that washing,
and that cley: for else his disobedience to Christ, would have deprived him of
the divine virtue of Christ, which upon his obedience, showed it self in
healing him. So regeneration is not attaineable by virtue of any act or acts,
that we or any creature can do; but it comes from above, and is effected by
an inconceiueable power of Gods spirit, (for it must needs far surpass the
strength of a creature, to change the soul, and to cause a return, from so
miserable a privation or natural impotencie, as sin is, unto so glorious,
blessed and excellent an habit, or supernatural ability, as that holiness
is, into which we are transformed). But for all this, he that would have the
holy Ghost show his infinite power in making such a change in him; must
willingly submit himself to the doing of any actions whatsoever, wherewithal
the spirit of God shall manifest, that it is his pleasure to join, this his
happy and powerful working. And such is the formal cause of regeneration.
The final cause, or the end of it, is the glory of God, in the salvation of
the party regenerate. For to speak truth, it were a shame and reproach to the
God of heaven, to let a sinner (that is to say, his professed enemy) come into
heaven: for this would vpbraide him with falsehood, in regard of his word, and
with want of holiness and justice in his nature. Now the Lord cannot be so
weak, as to do any thing, that should give him just cause (to speak (as of
God we must needs speak) after the manner of men) of being ashamed thereof.
Wherefore that he may with glory, and honor, and praise, and the content of
his own most holy nature, take thither, so many of the corrupted sons of
Adam, as he pleases to make vessels of honor; it is his will and care, thus
to change their nature, and to renew them by his spirit: and so he obtains
the fullest fullness of glory that may be, in their happiness; being for ever
praised, by all his holy creatures, and (which more is) infinitely satisfying
himself in the beholding of the excellency of that great work of their
blessedness, and the most pure and holy and admirable means, that he has
ordained to bring them unto it. And these are the causes of regeneration. The
next thing mentioned in the description is the subject of it: which is the
whole man, in all the powers of the soul and of the body, according as the
Apostle prays for the Thessalonians, 1. These. 5.23.
that they might be sanctified throughout, and that their whole soul and body
might be kept blameless. And by this note it is differenced from all other
changes, that may carry any resemblance to it; they being all but partial
changes, either of the outside alone, and not the inside; or of some one power
alone, not of all the powers: because indeed they are not fruits of holiness,
but either of hollownesse, and self-love; or at best, of a bare and weak
work of illumination. And thus have I performed the first thing intended, in
describing regeneration; of which if any man demand what it is? we say it is
a change, that is, a bringing of a new and (here too of a) contrary quality,
in stead of the old that was before; if who makes the change? the holy Ghost:
if by what means? by the word: if in what manner? by infusion; that is, by the
working of a proper and immediate virtue derived from himself. If from what,
and to what this change is? from the sinfulness of a man (which he receives
from Adam successively) to holiness. If wherein? in the whole man, soul and
body, and all the powers of both: If to what end? to the glory of the worker,
and salvation of him in whom it is wrought. O happy work of an happy workman,
by an happy instrument! and thrice happy that man, in whom this blessed worker
shall vouchsafe to accomplish this his most worthy, and excellent, and only
blessed work, to so worthy and blessed a purpose.

CHAP. IIII. Showing the order of working Regeneration.
2. The order of regenerating in four acts.
NOw I proceed to declare, in what order the Spirit of God pleases to perform
this most admirable change: which is done in these four actions, which I shall
lay down. First, the spirit of God working, in and with the Law, (but tempered
with the Gospel) becomes a spirit of contrition, causing a man to see and
feel his extreme sinfulnes, 1. Showing a man his natural sinfulness.
and wretchedness, in so much that he is even wounded at the very heart
therewith, and his sinful and unhappy estate becomes a woeful bondage and
captivity unto him. The Lord does not alone raise up miserable terrors of
conscience in him, in regard of some one or more gross offenses that he has
actually committed, (although often he makes these very terrors, a means of
making himself a passage to enter in at), but he opens the eyes of the mind,
to see the very mud and filth of the soul, that lay at the bottom before
unseen and undiscerned. The Spirit conuinceth him of sin: It shows him that
general wickedness and sinfulnes of his nature, whereof we spoke before. Now he
feels his unbelief, pride, ignorance, hypocrisy, and other
heart-corruptions. He judges himself worthy to be destroyed, not alone
having a sight of his own inability to escape damnation: but likewise of the
justice of God in damning him, so that he does even stoop and yield himself
thereto. Whereas before he was alive without the Law, not having the true
knowledge of it, now the Law coming in the sound power and working of it,
through the strength of the holy Ghost; causes that he becomes dead in his
own sense, and apprehension: but sin becomes alive to his sense and feeling;
and he perceiving the strength, force, violence, and mischieuousnes of it,
more then ever before, now cries out with the Apostle, O miserable man that I
am! and now confesses that he is carnal and sold under sin, as the same
Apostle did, in the same sense of his natural wretchedness, which the coming
of the life of grace had brought with it. Thus the death of sin begins to be
changed into life, in that it is felt and discerned. For the very first working
of this new life, must needs be a feeling of the old death in sins and
trespasses: Not (I say) alone of his death in hell, in regard of his deserving
the torments thereof, but of his death in sins and trespasses, of his utter
inabilitie to do any good thing, of his utter emptines of all heavenly graces;
of his extreme slavery to ungodliness, and unrighteousness, and all the lusts
of the flesh; and of his perpetual and vehement pronenes to all abomination
and wickedness. There is often (I confess) a work, and a very terrible work, of
the Law and the natural conscience together, procuring most extreme and
hideously-bitter pangs, and hellish agonies in the soul of man; where the
spirit of regeneration neither is, nor ever shall be: this being alone a fruit
of the spirit of bondage, not of the spirit of grace. And oftentimes again,
the spirit of sanctification comes into ye soul, together with this spirit of
bondage, making a violent entry, and by maine force breaking open the heart;
formerly locked and barred against it; and so beginning this saving work of
holiness. But terrors of conscience, which may be in all unregenerate men,
(because they are already in all the damned, into whom no part nor piece of
regeneration can enter) is far different from this first degree of the work
of a new birth. The sanctifying spirit, lays the filthiness, not alone the
danger of sin, before the eyes of the mind. It causes a man, not alone to be
in extreme anguish, because he fears he must be damned: but even to loathe
and abhor himself, and to be very vile in his own eyes, because he knows
he has deserved to be damned: and that so foul a thing as sin, (wherewith
his Maker has due cause to be so much displeased) does not alone abide, but
reign and command in him. Wherefore he does even lie down at the foot of
the throne of Gods justice, and in a most ardent abhorring of himself, does
subscribe to the righteousness of God in his own feared destruction; having
nothing in the world to say for himself (as of himself), why he should not be
destroyed: and not so much as a tittle of a word to object against the perfect
and exact equity of the living God, if that he should destroy him. Sin, I
say sin, not alone the punishment of sin, but sin it self, is discovered
unto him: he sees its loathsomnes and vileness; he sees its strength and
violence; he sees his own total defilement; he perceiues himself thoroughly,
and thoroughly polluted with it: and cries out bitterly, Ah what shall I do! not
only, nor so much, because I shall be damned; but because I am so wicked, so
sinful, so contrary to God, so rebellious against him, so very a traitor unto
him, and so utterly unable to mend these woeful disorders of my soul. These be
his groans, these be his plaints, and his cryings out are of his wickedness
and iniquity, wherein he was conceived, wherein he was borne, wherein he
has lived; and whereof now he perceives not so much as one part of his heart,
or of his life, to be clean, and unspotted. This acknowledgement and sense of
our sinfulnes, is the very first beginning of holiness. The unregenerate often
sees and feels his damnation; the regenerate alone his sinfulnes, the
miserable deprauation of his nature; the utter, total, odious, pollution of
his whole man; being so loathsome, that he sees God cannot choose in justice
but detest him, and for any thing that is in himself, for ever reject him.
This apprehension of sinfulnes is mixed always at first (at least often) with
the fear of Gods wrath and vengeance: but it does so temper and allay that
fear, as the bitterness thereof, carries not the soul furiously to contend
against God, as else he could not choose but do. For his hatred is not stirred
now against God, whom in truth (by virtue of a secret, unfelt, and undiscerned
hope, that the spirit of God has created, and does uphold in him) he loves,
and honors, though he be more then half in doubt, lest he may destroy him:
but alone against himself, his wretched hateful self, that is so
intollerably wicked and naught, that he can see no cause, but that the Lord
should glorify his equity and justice, in damning him. And so much for this
first work of regeneration: the second follows it close at the heels, and is
nothing else, 2. An earnest de^^^e of ^^^^nesse with rem^^^ion of si^nes.
but an earnest desire of attaining holiness and virtue, together with remission
of sins, and the favor of God in Christ Jesus. For you must conceive the
party that is now in regenerating, to have a general knowledge of the
doctrine of the Gospel, and a general assent also to the truth of it: this
doctrine being (as I said before) an isntrumental cause of regeneration. But
now the general knowledge begins to be made special, and the man touched
with a sense of sin, is moved also with a most vehement longing after grace
and mercy; not alone to pardon his sin, but also to heal his soul of it,
as of a desperate wound, which he feels to be most smarting and mortal. So
he cries out, who shall deliver me from this body of death? No hungry man did
ever, with a more eager appetite, wish for meat; nor thirsty man for drink;
nor covetous man for money; nor ambitious man, for advancement, then he now
longs to be reconciled unto God in Christ; to have his foul nature made
clean, his woeful sins forgiven, his abominable corruptions removed, and
killed, and holiness planted in their room. Oh how feign he would be holy! O
how feign would he be humble, faithful, obedient! how feign he would believe
in, love, fear, serve God! but, ah wretch that he is, he cannot: Woe, woe,
unto him, he cannot. O, how shall he be able to prevail against these vile
disorders of his heart, and life? how shall he do to be less sinful, and
more righteous? These be his thoughts, these his wishes, these his groans: he
finds so great a miss of nothing, as of the pardon of his sin, and the
graces of the Spirit of God; and if he had that bestowed upon him, were he a
beggar, a prisoner, a slave, any thing; yet he should seem to himself an
happy man: and, ah Lord, (thinks he) that thou would be pleased, for Christ
his sake, to forgive my wickedness, and to heal my nature. Now the thirst that
he had after the things of this world, is wonderfully cooled; and, (as a man
in a burning fit of an ague, makes no reckoning of his fine clothes) he does
almost put off all those desires, and poor or not poor, esteemed or not
esteemed, it is no great matter; but that he might be accepted into the favor
of God, and have his sins pardoned and subdued, and his unholy nature made
holy, that is all in all within him. There is to be seen in unsanctified men,
in case of terrors of conscience, (which sometimes do lie long upon them) a
great desire to be free from the insufferable evils they see coming upon them.
For, who can make question, but that Judas would feign not have been damned?
or, that the damned in hell have not a wonderful desire get out of their
torments? this being one maine aggrauation of their pangs, that they cannot but
desire, to be delivered out of those evils, which they cannot escape. But they,
not having the supportation of the Spirit of God to underprop them with hope,
do vanish in these desires, and lose the fruit of them for lack of a kindly
working of them toward the Lord: for they be not lifted up to heauen-ward. But
the man that is now in framing a new, (being sustained with the forementioned
secret hope) has vehement and settled wishes, fixed and fastened in him;
whereby he thirsts after the grace of God, not alone to save, but also to
amend him. So the desires of the sanctified arising from the spirit, are
differenced from the desires of the unsanctified, that are mere fruits of
nature, (which would feign be well eased of an heavy burden) by these two
things: First, that they are directed unto God, whereas the other are rouing
and confused desires. Secondly, by their being set, always, as well (often as
much, sometimes more) upon holiness, as upon freedom from punishment: upon the
getting of virtue and goodness, as upon the getting of an heavenly kingdom;
whereas the heart of the unsanctified is so taken up, (when he must needs feel
it) with the sense of his misery and punishment, that he cannot have while to
settle any part of his longings, upon the renewing of his soul by grace; and
so far is the work of a new birth well proceeded. The poor dead man, being
so far awakened out of his senseless death in sin, that with great
disquietment he feels it, and with heartiest workings of his soul does covet
to come out of it: which last I take to be the hungring and thirsting after
righteousness; noted by our Savior as a blessed note of blessedness. 3. The
spirit of Prayer.
In the third place, there is dropped into him the spirit of grace and
supplications, by which he is at length imboldened to go unto God, and in
some solemn and express manner, to utter his confessions and petitions; which
before (perhaps) for some good space of time he could not dare to do. For the
former two works of grace do often (a great while together) show themselves
in sighs and groans, and sudden and strong eiaculations, and secret and
undissembled boylings up of desire, in deep wishes and longings, before the
poor sinner can take so much heart to himself, as to make a formed and settled
prayer unto God. But after the working of these motions some while, he puts
upon himself the resolution of the King of Nineueh, and says within himself,
Ionab. 3.
Let me cry mightily unto the Lord of heaven and earth; his mercies are
infinite, who can tell, but that be may have mercy upon me, that I perish not?
(so is his secret sustaining hope, now formed and fashioned into the right
proportion of a saving grace, and shows it self manifestly within him), he
says to himself, there is hope concerning this thing; and therefore I will
cry, and continue crying, and let the Lord do what he pleases unto me. Then
down upon his knees he falls, and with his hands and eyes lifted up to the
throne of grace (yet almost afraid and ashamed to look thither, and therefore
ready often to rise up, and start back again), he dares at last to pour
forth his lamentable confessions into Gods bosom; whom now he hopes he may
have leave to call Father, though (alack) he have been too too ungracious a
child. Thus he proceeds to arraigne and accuse himself; acknowledging (for
which he hates himself, because it is so plain that he cannot but know it),
that he has sinned in such and such, and such and such particulars; and that
he has a most filthy heart, as full of wicked inclinations and thoughts, he
thinks verily, as the sea it self is full of water. Wherefore he passes a
very sharp sentence upon himself, and that also very sharply; plainly
saying, with an inward assenting of his very soul, that he is fully worthy of
all those plagues and punishments, which the Lord has threatened in his word,
and will execute in hell; and that it should not be in the least degree
injurious, if God would not be merciful unto him: for ah! how unfit is he to
receive mercy? But yet withal, he takes heart in the most humble abasement of
himself, most earnestly to call, and cry, and beg for mercy, and forgiveness,
and for the work of grace, to change his nature from that loathsome
disposition which troubles him: now it may be, by the working of hope, having
his heart so much softened, that tears (before stopped up by that binding
force, that strong and secret sorrows show themselves to have in man's heart)
do even begin to flow forth from him, to add (if it might be) a greater
feruor unto his prayers. And if at first, second, third, fourth, and (it may
be) many more times, he seem to have cried in vain; because none answer
comes, but heaven it self seems strongly stopped up against him: yet he
goes again still to the same throne of grace, again reckoning up the same,
and (if he can also) new sins, again bewailing them bitterly, and heartily
imploring both pardon and help again. This is to come unto Christ Jesus heavy
laden, as our Savior comfortably inuiteth us; this is to seek God while he
may be found, and to call upon him while he is near, as the Prophet
exhorts us. Which having done, he knows not what to do more; and therefore
even casts himself upon Gods goodness through Jesus Christ; and knowing that
in him (the Son) the Father is well pleased, he strives to rest in him,
continuing to knock, continuing to seek, because his heart gives him, yt at
last he shall not fail to find acceptance. And this spirit of prayer seems to
me so proper to the regenerate, that it cannot any way befall the unregenerate:
who when he feels not his misery, does but multiply idle words in seeming to
pray, when he feels it is so wholly drowned and swallowed up thereby, that he
cannot run unto heaven for help. But with the regenerate, prayers and
supplications are always found, and a continuing therein also, how many bitter
repulses soever he suffers at Gods hand; as often he does very many, the Lord
either deferring or making more speed to answer, as he sees most behoofefull
for the profit of each of his servants; and proportioning the fruit of his
grace this way, to his knowledge of their ability and fitness to receive an
answer, or to brook delays. It must not be denied, but that the man that
never shall be regenerate (in the griping and twinges of his accusing
conscience, through the working of the law, and the bare illumination of the
spirit) may come so far, as to roar out his Lord have mercy upon me, very
often: yea, he may by persuasion and entreatie of friends, be brought to read
some good prayers out of a prayer-booke: yea, to be glad to have an other pray
for him, in his own hearing; and in some sense also, to join with him: yea
more, by frequent persuading, urging, teaching of some godly man, he may be
drawn to pray for himself; but yet still the spirit of prayer is absent, in
that he does not find himself by an inward moving of his own heart)
inclined (in the midst of his griefs and fears) to betake himself (to God
for help, by calling upon his name. And (which is a maine observation in this
matter) if he pray, he prays almost altogether for pardon, and for favor,
little for grace and holiness; whereas the Christian man, (by a secret drawing
of his own inward soul, wrought by this regenerating spirit) comes unto the
Lord with his requests, begging grace and holiness, with no less earnestness,
then remission and salvation. Yea, and having once begun this course, he finds
so much refreshing thereby, that he cannot but continue to do it, even
sometimes with much struggling against, of his own heart, through fears and
doubtings thereof. So it is one thing to be persuaded to pray by men, and to
do it for ease sake; another thing to be inclined unto it, by the private and
secret working of the Spirit. One thing to beg for pardon, not much minding
amendment; another thing to cry for the help of God to reform ones heart and
soul, as well as his free favor to pardon former offenses. An unsanctified
man, by benefit of Christian acquaintance, in long and heavy terrors, may
come to the one of these; to the other, alone the Spirit of sanctification can
lead one. To which pass, when the heart is once brought at length, 4. A
persuasion of mercy, bringing a resolution of obedience.
the fourth act of the Holy Ghost does plainly show it self; for it becomes a
spirit of adoption within him, the very earnest penny of salvation, sealing up
unto him the favor of God, the pardon of sin, the attaining of life; and by
a new (and in truth considering the difference of former times) a strange
work, persuading him, that God is reconciled unto him, and has accepted him
for his child. As it made him able to take unto him words, and go unto the
Lord, craving to be accepted graciously: so it brings him word again from
God, that he shall be, yea, that he is, accepted graciously; and answering him
(even as, one would say, with a sensible answer in the midst of his prayers
oft-times) so strongly and undoubtedly ^^^ures him of his being heard, that
he makes, for the time, no more question of it then whither he lives yea, or
no. From which assurance of spirit (having tasted the sweetness of Gods Grace,
and felt how good the consolations of his Word and Spirit are) he grows
resolute in his very soul, for the time to come, in all things, to please God,
and finds a new kind of disposition, inabling him to avoid evil, and do
good; so having put his neck under the gentle and easy yoke of Christ Jesus,
he finds rest unto his soul: and thus is Christ formed in him, and he
transformed into a new creature. For this firm purpose of will to please God
in all things, is so manifest, and evident, and sensible a work of grace; that
now we may say, this act of regeneration is grown to some good ripeness, and
even now perfected in him: before he was in making a new man; but now he is
made new: now he is begotten again, and become a son of God, and heir of
his kingdom, and fellow-heire of Christ. I know that it may befall an
hypocrite (lying under the burden of a terrified conscience, which may be
totally and perpetually separated from regeneration, and regeneration from it)
by the diligent inculcating of the comforts of the Gospel, and the earnest
labor of some Christian and godly men (that in such case would feign speak
peace), to be brought (because they are told, there is none other way of
comfort) to a purpose of never committing such and such gross sins, as they
are accused of in their own souls; and to some promise of amendment of life:
but this is rather a resolution forced upon them by striving of others,
hereupon promising comfort; then a thing growing in themselves, out of the
sense of the loving kindness of the Lord their God. Whereas a Christian finds
somewhat within him, inclining him, and making him to say within himself, and
even little less then to swear and vow with David, that he will surely keep
the righteous judgments of the Lord, and that in all things, and for ever, to
his dying day. And thus is the work of regeneration brought to some
perfection, thus does the holy Ghost mould the soul of a man into a new
fashion; thus does he stamp upon him a new image, and as you would say, the
very lineaments and proportion of God his Father, whom in a sweet likeness
(that makes him amiable to God and Angels), he begins to resemble. Only my
brethren understand you one thing for the better conceiving of all that has
been spoken. There are two sorts of regenerate men in the world. Some it
pleases God to call to himself, even very betimes, dropping piety and grace
into them, almost together with their mothers milk (by benefit of that great
favor of God, holy and Christian education), and that even in certain
insensible degrees; so that they cannot so easily name the beginning and
progression of this work. In these all the forenamed things are most
manifestly found (for in truth the working of them does not cease, till life
cease); and that so, as sometimes the one of these works of grace is more
strong then the other. Sometimes they find a more sensible abasement of
themselves within their own hearts, out of the apprehension of their
sinfulness; sometimes desires and prayers are more vehement; sometimes a
comfortable resolution of pleasing God, does more mightily stir in them: yet
because of the early working, and that they were wrought in a still manner by
very small degrees, the work did almost go beyond observation; and they
cannot so distinctly tell when they began to be abased, when to be raised up.
But there is another sort of men regenerate, who did live a long time in
vnregeneracie; yea perhaps also in profanenes, and notable and notorious
wickedness, (for often it falls out that the Pharisees and Scribes make less
haste to the kingdom of heaven, then the Publicans and sinners, I mean that
the gross offenders are sooner regenerated then the civil livers). Now for
such men, it pleases the holy Ghost many times, yea most times, to work these
four fore-rehearsed works, very distinctly; making as it were some evident
pause, betwixt each of them, and grace goes forward in them, even step after
step, in the manner that has been described. Most times, if not always, (the
difference of their former life, when they were but dead, making the matter
evident enough), they can name, when, and where, and by what means, the Lord
began first to lay them low, to pull them down; and (as they say, in nature
corruption and generation go together) to kill their old man by terrors; till
being so slain, he had in a calmer manner showed them the filthiness and
lothsomnesse of it. They can tell, what longings they felt before they durst
pray; and what ado they had to bring themselves to pray; and then, how long
they continued praying, before they were answered; and lastly, when that sweet
tidings came, that ravished their soul with joy, and made them so inamoured of
Gods goodness, that they even made a strong covenant with him, to walk in his
ways and keep his judgments. All these things (I say) they can tell well,
and nothing does them more good, then to recount with themselves, this mighty
act of the most high; whereby their fowls (with as great a miracle as once
Lazarus his body) were raised up from the rotten grave of sin, wherein they
lay (wrapped up in the winding sheet of hardness of heart, and blindness of
mind) stinking and putrefying; and (as a carcass crawleth with worms)
swarming with those noisome lusts, that are able to poison up an honest heart.

CHAP. V. Showing the effects of Regeneration.
ANd so have you (brethren) the order, and (so far as may be collected out of
scripture) the manner of the bringing to pass of this most excellent and
wonderful work, of a new begetting: by the most excellent and wonderful
begetter, the Spirit of truth: and by that excellent and wonderful seed of
life, the word of truth. 3. The effects of regeneration, which are four.
Now I will declare unto you (that which is the third thing I promised) the
effects that follow hereupon. Not every particular, (for who can name them? the
life of grace abounding in multiplicitie of actions and operations, (as it were
eating, drinking, breathing, grieuing, striving, smarting of the soul) as the
life of nature); but alone some principal, and most eminent; by the seeing of
which in it self, the soul of the newborn babe of Christ shall have cause
to receive much comfort. The principal effects therefore of regeneration are
these four. First, a spiritual combat. Secondly, a good life for all this
combat. Thirdly, a knowledge of that good estate, whereinto the regenerate is
translated. Fourthly, Spiritual growth in those graces, that at first were but
weak and feeble in the regenerate. For alack, an infant is a very tender
thing, and so are Gods infants.

For the first of these: 1. The spiritual combat with
No sooner does a Christian begin to draw the breath of this new life, but he
finds himself called to fighting even in the very cradle (as I may so speak,
and as they fabled of that renowned heathen man). He stands in a pitched field
of enemies, so soon as he can go upon the feet of his soul; and there he
must never cease giving and taking blows, till he cease to be in this lower
world. Although indeed there be some intermission, and relaxation of the
strength and fury of the encounter, as it pleases the Lord (that knows all
things) to temper them to his strength, and direct them to his good. 1. The
Devil.
First the devil begins to play his part with him; and finding him gained out
of his hands, and pulled from under his tyranny, musters up an army of
tentations, wherewith at least to annoy him; if he cannot (as he cannot)
prevail to bring him back again to his servitude and thraldom. For when the
strong man armed kept his house, all things were at quiet under him: but when
he feels himself bound, and cast out, and his house rifled by a stronger then
himself, then it must needs follow, that he will bestirre himself, and lay
about him with all the power that he can make. So now the poor Christian
(though perhaps but an infant in grace) is violently assailed by Satan,
(according to his nature) with extreme rage and subtlety. And if it have so
fallen out, that the Spirit of God was feign to batter down the height of his
heart, and make passage for himself, with horrible fears and terrors; then
Satan labors often to revive those terrors, and by infinite cauils and
objections, to make him even despair of his salvation. There is none end
almost of the devils striving in this case, but he will labor continually
with new doubts and objections, to call his salvation into question; and to
make him think, that he shall never enjoy the quiet possession of his
heavenly inheritance. Yet against all these, the Spirit of God so strengthens
him, that by virtue of the gracious promises of God, and by the power of
constant prayers and supplications, he supports himself, and still continues
to rest himself upon the free goodness of God in Christ, notwithstanding all
these objections and shakings. Neither yet will Satan rest here, but is further
troublesome unto him, by stirring up innumerable vile suggestions, to draw him
to the committing of some most notorious sins, perhaps worse then ever in all
his life before; and for his old corruptions, he cease not to provoke and
incense them, with all vehemence, that he may drive him into lewd and hateful
practices of sin. But against these suggestions also, he fights resolutely,
much indeed vexed and disquieted with them, but still rejecting and abhorring
the^, and beating them back by the word of God (which is his sword), and by
constant supplications; whereby still he settles his soul firm and fast in
his holy purposes of obedience. I confess, that the devil is a common enemy
to all mankind, both sanctified and unsanctified: and therefore the
unregenerate also are much molested with him oftentimes, when he grows
exorbitant, and seeks to pull them (by the strength of utter despair), as it
were quick into hell, and to make them kill themselves, or do some other most
gross and unnatural crime. But Satan is not willing to deal so roughly with
them, if he could choose; for he stands ever in most danger of losing them, when
he carries himself toward them, in so hard a fashion. Wherefore he rather
flatters, and faunes, endeavoring to rock them asleep still, if he can, in
the cradle of security and presumption. Neither will he storm thus, but when
he sees his advantage in regard of some bodily cross or distemper; or that he
sees the Lord will needs awaken their sleepie consciences. But for the poor
Christian, he would not give him rest, no not for a day or two, from the most
horrible fears, and from the foulest tentations, whereto his corruption gives
any passage, or from others more hideous; especially if he see him weak,
scrupulous, and iniudicious, then he makes use of such ignorance and
weakness; and will never find time to make an end of vexing him, but that the
Lord himself does please to sound a retraite. Indeed the Lord, by this means
to keep down his pride, and ouer-master his strong corruptions, does give
much way to Satan's rage: but so still, that he forgets not to refresh him, with
seasonable aid of his spirit of prayer, and with the strength and comfort of
his holy word and promises. And in these terms stands he with Satan, ever
(almost) assailed and encumbered by him. And besides this, the flesh also, 2. Of
the flesh.
as a more dangerous enemy, though not so violent, steps forth to encounter
him. For though by grace it be wounded and mortified, yet is it not quite and
clean taken away and removed. Wherefore the corruptions of his heart also grow
violent in him, lusting against the spirit, and with a kind of insinuating and
secret inclination, carrying him forward to all the former lusts of his
ignorance, and perhaps to some that are more loathsome and abominable. Now
unbelief, passion, lust, revenge, wantonness, worldlines, and all the old
distempers, will be moving in his soul: and he shall find himself ever and
anon, little less then ready to yield unto them, and to be quite overcome by
them. But the spirit, in this case, reuiueth it self also, and lusts against
the flesh; stirring up good motions against the bad, and holy desires against
the unholy, and virtuous wishes against the vicious, and hearty prayers and
requests to God against the sinful inclinations of the evil heart: so that at
length his godly purposes grow strong, and he remains resolute, not to work
wickedness, for all his earnest pronenesse thereunto. Thus the regenerate finds
himself strangely divided within and against himself: Sometimes he would be
sinful, and commit such and such wickedness; and yet again, having better
thought of the matter, he would not. At other times he would cast away all
sin, and feign perform all good duties with all constancy: but he finds
something within, resisting and rebelling, and he would not be so good. But
still in conclusion either sooner or later, the sanctified part gets the better
of the unsanctified; the desires and purposes of goodness, prevail against
the desires and purposes of evil; and he is settled in the holy determinations,
that the spirit of God does lead him unto. His heart is even a pitched field of
contrary desires; the bad often grow very strong and vehement, and able almost
to overthrow and chase away the good. But the good gather head again, and
beat back the bad; and by the spirit he mortifies the flesh, and by the word
of God and prayer subdueth and crucifies those carnal affections of his. I
confess there is a miserable stir, and a troublesome discord, in the soul
of an unsanctified man, betwixt the light of the conscience, and the corruption
of the will; this haling him forward to diverse wickednesses, and that drawing
back: but the difference betwixt the natural combat, and the spiritual, is
so manifest, that no good man, which has felt them both, can choose but see how
to distinguish them one from the other. The d fference betwixt the co^bat of
the fl sh and spirit, and the opposition of the conscience and the corrupted
will, in the unregenerate.
Indeed they are evidently distinguished in five things: 1. In the faculties
that oppose each other. 2. In the things about which they quarrel. 3. In the
motives of the opposition. 4. In the means of resistance. And fifthly, in the
issue thereof. First, in the unregenerate the will is wholly carried after sin,
alone the conscience makes a clamorous gainsaying, and suffers not the will to
go on in its evil courses uncontrolled. He would with all his heart commit
wickedness, but he dares not: not so the regenerate. In him not the conscience
alone stands out against sin, but the will it self is divided, in part
hanging one way, in part another. He would not do evil, not alone he dares
not; and the act of the will setting against its own corruption, by its own
holiness, is far different from the act of the conscience, opposing the will
that remains wholly corrupted. See it in a comparison: An hungry dog has a
strong appetite to be devouring some meat that stands before him: but at the
same time he sees a man standing by with a cudgel to strike him if he touch it.
Now his appetite is altogether to the meat, but he is feared and ouer-awed by
the sight of the man that is ready to strike him. So is it with the
unsanctified man, sin is his food, his will is wholly carried to it; but the
conscience holds as it were a cudgel over him, threatening to strike, if he
taste. Wherefore, what with a full desire he would do, he forbeareth in act to
perform, affrighted by those clamours. But now a man diseased, sees some food
to which his appetite inclines: but he knows it hurtful for his body, and
therefore, though his will, drawn by his senses, sometimes move him to be
tasting; yet the same will, informed by reason, does prevail in him to be
unwilling, and out of such unwillingness to forbear. So is it with the godly
man: His will stands to sin, for the pleasure or profits sake in some part:
but being better taught by Gods spirit, of the sinfulnes thereof, his own will
checks it self, and he sets up his resolution not to meddle with it. So is
this point of difference made plain; not to be willing to do is another
thing, then not to dare. In the former the will bridleth and holdeth-vnder its
own inward motions, and not alone the outward act: in the latter the motions
of the will have a free scope, but alone the outward act is restrained.
Further, in the things whereabout the stir is, they differ very much. For the
conscience of the unsanctified, makes resistance to their will, alone (unless
in case they be under terrors of conscience) in some more gross, notorious,
palpable, and unaccustomed sins; which are commonly joined with shame and
reproach in the world, and are not likely committed but by those that are
infamous amongst men: as in perjury, murder, adultery, theft, false witness
bearing, and such like. For smaller evils, and such as the world little
accounts of, though known and confessed to be sins, the natural conscience
is content to dispense, and dawbe, and daily, and give easy way to the doing
of them, upon a thousand fond shifts and pretenses: but now the regenerate man's
will (so far as it is regenerate) is in combat against its own vnsanctifiednes,
about every known evil, the little as well as the great; that that is allowed
in the common practice of the world, as well as that that is disallowed. For of
him it is truly said, that he works none iniquity. Thirdly, the natural
conscience uses the motives (or restraints rather) of fear, of shame, of
danger amongst men, at the best and most, of destruction and damnation from
God: and by threatening these things, (sometimes somewhat terribly) it
ouer-aweth the motions of the will, from consenting to act, though not to
desire. But in the regenerate will, the arguments of resistance are fetched from
God, and from Christ, from the love of God, from the death of Christ, from the
scandal of religion, from the dishonor of the name of God, from the Lords
being displeased with sin; and not only, barely, or chiefly, from the
punishment of sin. Fourthly, the conscience of the unsanctified drives him
not to prayer, to the word, to spiritual meditations, as weapons, whereby to
mortify evil lusts, and to restrain the will from consenting; only it
follows him with its own vehement checks and reluctations, in diverse
troublesome and confused thoughts. But the sanctification of the will opposes
its corruption, by prayers, by the word, by the blood of Christ Jesus, and by
the hopes of eternity. For having this hope, he purges himself as Christ is
pure. So the unsanctified man, when he would do evil and dares not, is tossed
and tumbled from place to place, now thinking of one thing, now of another,
wishing to follow his own inclinations, but wanting boldness; and if he do
any thing to help himself, it is to get him into some company, that perhaps
may ease him a while. But the sanctified, when he finds this distraction of
his will, usually seeks out some secret place; tells himself of Gods
commandment, of Gods love, of Christ's suffering for him; asks himself, if
he can find in his heart so much to offend so good a Father, so perfect a
Savior: and then falling down, tells the Lord how wicked he finds
himself, what foul desires are stirred in him, and how weak he is to make
resistance; he beseeches God to pull out this prick of his flesh, to
strengthen him against these wicked desires, and to establish his heart in a
sincere purpose of obedience, by his holy spirit, and so rises up confirmed.
Thus (I say) he does usually and ordinarily, though sometimes the suddenne^^^
of occasions hinders him that he cannot; and sometimes his own neglect of
duty has so estranged him, that he finds no power so to do: in which last
case he is often foiled, in the former not so often. Lastly, the conscience, if
it take the foil once or twice, is benumbed and silenced. Sometimes it suffers
its mouth to be clean stopped, by some idle shift and vain distinction, which
the wit (that in many men is too good for their conscience) has invented for
the justification of evil: and after some such paultry defense or apology, a
man is suffered to sin freely enough. But if the thing be never so
unjustifiable, yet after two or three times doing it, the heart is hardened,
the natural conscience put to silence; and a man's checkes grow faint, or none
at all, until some cross come, or some immediate hand of God to set it on
working again. For why? the unsanctified man, as he did not beg grace to hold
him up before his sin; so neither after, has any heart to go and confess
it, and crave the spirit of repentance; but either lets it pass, or falls to
extenuate and excuse it, unless (perhaps) it grow desperate, as in Judas. But
now the santification of the will, does still get the victory, though it may
receive a foil. It will not be put down; it will not be vanquished: yea
every latter time of offending, it is more vehement in its opposition then
before: at least so far as to make a man appear more vile and abominable to
himself. So it brings him into Gods presence again, sooner or later; and
makes him say, Lord I have done exceeding foolishly! but ah, do away the sin
of thy servant, for thy Sons sake; and Lord through thy grace help me, that
hereafter I may offend no more. Thus commonly he does quickly renew his
repentance, and the spirit wins the field of the flesh; though it were somewhat
disaduantaged, and made to recoyle back at first. For stronger is the spirit
that is in us, then that, that is in the world: grace is always in conclusion
more auailable then natural corruption. Yea, when Gods children are most
deeply cast (through presumption of sinning) into the sownes of deadness,
security, and inconsionableness; yet then still they hear a voice behind
them saying, This is the way, walk in it. Then the sanctification of the will
shows it self, in many motions and risings against the evils that they do,
and by renewing in them the purposes of amendment; though these purposes,
perhaps (in case of great prevailing of corruption) be so weak and feeble,
that they be not put in practice, any thing thoroughly, till God arise to
weaken corruption, and to strengthen grace: and then he weeps, and prays, and
recouers himself, resolving to sin so no more, and standing to his
resolutions. And so fares a poor Christian within himself. There is a civil
war in his very bosom, and his bowels be sometimes little less then rent
asunder with intestine discord, betwixt himself, and himself. He is no
longer one, but two men, the old, and the new; deadly enemies, dwelling both in
one room. He finds two laws in his heart, the law of his flesh, and the law
of the spirit; that drawing him captive to sin, and this helping him out of
that captivity. He serves God in one part of his will, and sin in the other;
not meaning this last of such a serving of sin as was before his new birth,
but some kind of serving, even a doing of that sometimes that sin does
persuade, though unwillingly and against the hair. Neither yet is this all;
for as within he is thus perplexed; 3. The world.
so can he not long be free from disquietment without. The third enemy stands
up quickly, and that is the world; and that hates him, malignes him, abhors
him, cannot away with him. When once some glimpse of Gods image shines in him,
then worldly men perceiving it, if they were his friends, turn foes. They
think and call him a fool; they say he is either proud, or stout, or mad, or
all. After a while also come slanders, as it were stronger and sharper weapons:
then (if the times will give leave) his enemies growing in rage, as he grows
in goodness, he meets often with loss of goods, banishment, and even death
it self. So the world tries, what she can do by violence, if that way seem
the fittest course of pulling him back again into her society: but if the
case be such, that that way seem not at first so plausible, the world
assaults him with strong allurements; his friends and neighbors will persuade
him to return to be himself again: he shall have large offers of
friendship, and of gain. Many entreaties, many promises, many assurances, and
many performances of good turns, as strong baits, are held out before him, to
divert him from the ways of godliness. And these fairer assaults often hurt
him much more, then the more violent; but yet still his faith is his victory,
by which he ouercomes the world. The assurance that he finds in himself of
Gods eternal love, and the sweet effects thereof makes him to disdain these
sugared allurements, and to stand strong against those bitter encounters;
flatter they, or frown they; do him good, or do him evil, still he holds
himself to this conclusion, he will not leave God, to cleave unto the world
again. Thus you see how the regenerate man is laid too, on every hand, within,
without, on every side. There is no day in a year, no hour in a day; nay
verily, scarce any minute in an hour, wherein some one or other of these his
back friends, does not strive to do him a spite. The worst enemy is within
himself, the next is the devil, and the world the least. These welcome him in
this manner, into the City of God. Thus they entertain him into the society of
Christ's mystical body. But in all these things he is an excellent conqueror,
yea verily more then a conqueror, through him that has loved him: for he is
out of all danger, of ever being quite overcome. Wherefore notwithstanding all
the trouble of this first effect of grace; 2. A good life.
the second will follow the first, and that is, a good conversation. A man
would imagine, that the forenamed encumbrances should so far discourage his
heart, to whom they befell; as to take from him all boldness, so much as to
attempt a good course. And indeed so it would, were he not continually led and
strengthened by the same spirit, that at first regenerated him. But by virtue
of that divine assistance, it comes to pass quite contrary: for those enemies
do but quicken and further his proceedings in goodness; and in spite of them
all, let earth and hell and his own heart, do the worst that ever they can,
he is able to live godly in Christ Jesus. He is enabled both to leave evil,
and to do good (for both these parts of a good life must be had, or else
indeed the life is not good); and that in a good measure and quantity, and
far better then ever he could do, in former times. Indeed he does never
satisfy himself in this matter, but always falls far shorter then his
own desires aspire unto: but were the former lusts of his ignorance, compared
to that his present behavior, a blind man might perceive the difference to be
exceeding great. For as to the first part of a good life, which stands in
leaving off wickedness, he comes so far; not, as to be quite free from
all sin (ah this life were a little heaven unto him, if he could once attain
to such freedom); but indeed he cannot attain it here, for in many things (ah
that word many is too true a word), I say in many things we sin all; and they
be quite besides their Christian wits, that imagine once repenting, to be
sufficient for a Christian man, in all his life: but yet so far he comes, as
to forsake the ordinary practice of gross sins, and the allowance of all
known and vehemently suspected sins. So soon as ever a Christian is truly
regenerate, so soon he cease to make a trade of sinning. He that is borne
of God sins not, neither can sin, in this manner. He may slip into faults of
gross nature, once, twice, many times, (sin cleaving so fast unto him as it
does), but still it is not his usual practice so to transgress. For in truth,
now sin is become unnatural to him, and as contrary to the life of grace
bestowed upon him, as poison is contrary to his natural life; and as bitter
things are to his taste, and harsh sounds unto his ear: wherefore his soul
rises against it, and he does much more frequently overcome the tentations by
resistance, then is overcome of them. Sins, I mean gross and grievous sins,
are to him as deadly wounds to his body; which sometimes (as a man in a
frenzy) he is drawn to give himself, but usually he does not so. And when
he does so, the manner is exceedingly different from his former course. Then
he committed it with greediness: now with great and continual reluctation.
Then he kept in himself a purpose of sinning, if he could for fear of shame
or danger: now his heart stands constantly resolute not to sin. Then he
followed after the occasions of sinning: now he flies far from them. Then
he shifted, and excused himself, having committed sin: now he becomes a
most bitter and severe censurer of himself for sin, if he do commit it.
Having fallen, he rises again, and with anger indites and arraignes himself
before the Lords tribunal. There he pours forth many bitter lamentations,
and could almost find in his heart to throw himself down to very hell for
it. He thunders out against his own heart, all the bitter curses and
threatenings of the Law; and is even almost willing, that God should even damn
him for it, but that he hops, for his mercy sake, he will not so do. And
such is his freedom from gross sins, that are against the plain light of
nature, or express words of the Law, and wherein the members of the body are
given as weapons of unrighteousness. He falls into them, if at all, yet seldom,
and seldomer and seldomer, with an horrible strife, with great anxietie, with
little or no content; and with a most vehement condemning of himself, before
the face of God, in secret, afterward. Thus unless (perhaps) he be cast
into a sown for a time, and cannot yet rise again: which if he be, he fares
all that while as a man that has a thorn in his eye, or wound in his sides,
never at rest, never quiet, filled with bitter and intolerable anguish, and
full of woeful and continual complaints. For still he hears the voice
behind him sounding in his cares, and saying, this is not the way. And still
the anointing that he has received does so preserve him, that he cannot sin,
meaning, give himself over to a settled resolution or practice of sin. And
yet further, for sins of a less grievous nature, evil motions, sudden
passions, dullness and distractions in good things, and the like: God knows,
and he knows, that he commits full many of them. But always he is so upright
with God, that he allows them not. He does not extenuate them, he does not
shift them off with a pish; he does not run over them as matters of nothing,
he does not let them pass unobserved and unregarded, as in former time, and
as it is with unsanctified men. But they be unto him matter of constant and
daily sorrow and shame and humiliation. He confesses them daily, he prays
against them daily, and he is continually in a quarrel with himself, because
he cannot be so free from them as he desires. So it comes to pass that he
purges himself as Christ is pure, so far prevailing against these sins,
that he commits fewer of them, and commits them seldomer, and sees them with
more dislike of himself, and grows by them more mean and base in his own
eyes, and is made by them more careful to sue unto the Lord Jesus, and to take
more steadfast hold of his merits. So he casts off the old man, as concerning
the conversation in time past, and that even out of his new nature; not moved
thereto by reward, or punishment; either alone or principally, but by a kind
of natural working of grace in him: but (indeed) it is a supernatural nature
poured into him from above; by which it comes to pass, that as S. John says,
he cannot sin, he knows not how to work wickedness, he cannot find in his
heart to be a slave to sin any longer. Company or no company, seen of men or
not seen, danger or no danger, shame or no shame, punishment or no punishment,
still he is auerse from sin in his regenerate part; he wills not to do it, he
shunneth it, he bewaileth it, one or both: that so it may be manifestly seen,
there is a contrariety betwixt his very soul and all sins, that he knows to
be sins. And for those that are not known to him; he is not ignorant of them,
because he will not know them, with neglect of the means of knowing, or with a
wilful resistance of them: but alone because he cannot know them, either for
want of means to know, or capacity to conceive of, or light to see the truth
offered. He does not wink with his eyes, he does not set himself to find
out shifts, to bury the light that begins to appear, and to hold down the
truth in unrighteousness; striving not to know sin, because he would not leave
it, and out of a purpose to practice it, for the profit or pleasure of it;
still laboring to have somewhat to say in its defense, and to elude and shift
off whatsoever may be said against it: but he is willing to know, desirous and
ready to yield, and when the light begins to shine within, he quickly opens his
eyes to behold the same; and if he suspect it, he looks more narrowly into it,
with a sincere purpose of being convinced, if the truth appear unto him. And
this is the first part of a good life. The second, and as necessary as the
first, is doing of good, wherein he is careful to exercise himself; and
though all be not alike fruitful, yet every regenerate man is fruitful in some
degree. The life of grace has its gracious effects, as well as the life of
nature its natural: and he that has the former, is as kindly and freely
carried to the one, as he that has the life of nature, to the other. By the
supernatural life of God that is in the sanctified man, it is natural to him,
to speak to God in prayer, to hear from God in the Word, to confer with God
in holy meditations. Wherefore these things he finds himself inwardly moved
unto, and he cannot choose but be constant in them. If at any time his wicked
flesh hinder him from them (as sickness makes a man sometimes that he cannot
eat his meat), then does he feel, as sensible a miss of them, even as of
his meals; and he could be as well without food, as without these exercises:
for in truth they are the food of his soul, and he relisheth them as food,
though sometimes less then at other times, as the diseases of his soul grow
more or less within him. Further, mercy, justice, liberality, truth,
diligence, and other virtues, are now natural unto him as well as religion. He
takes comfort in doing the duties thereof, and makes conscience of doing them,
as he has occasion. Indeed sometimes he finds a great loathnesse and
backwardness, as a man that is lame, limps and goes softly and with pain; but
yet he goes, and he must needs go, and for all the loathnesse, he cannot be
well unless he address himself unto them. Often he has little mind to pray,
and do other religious duties; but then alack, he finds himself (as we say
for the body) not well at case, and he has something within him, that puts
him forward, that presses and urges him, and causes that he must do them,
though with much weakness, and resistance of his fleshly heart; for in part it is
still fleshly. If he have neglected a work of mercy, he is not well after it, and
he is inwardly grieved for it, and resolves to take the opportunity better
next time. If he have not followed his calling diligently, he is vexed at heart
to think of it, and that day is a day of little comfort, that night a night of
little rest unto him. So, if he have omitted admonitions, exhortations, good
conference, or any other part of good life. Not alone one, but all good duties,
both of the first and second Table, so far as his knowledge extends, begin
to be to him natural and familiar. He takes a secret and a sweet delight in
doing them, and he finds himself exceedingly discontented with himself, if he
do them not; and therefore commonly though he come far short of what he
would and should, yet there is no day without a line; some or other good work
he does daily, herein indeed exceeding all that himself was able to do
before, or that unsanctified men can attain to; that, what he does, he does
it, because God would have him do it; and his heart does often actually
incline it self to the will of God, and move it self to the duties, with
minding it self of the good pleasure of God. It is not company; it is not
applause, nor credit, nor gain, which sweyes him; if all these things were
away; yea, if all these things were against him, yet he would do good: for he
knows, that Gods will is his guide, and that is the thing he desires to
accomplish in his very soul. And further, though he be like a young Artificer,
that uses his tools somewhat unskillfully, and does his business somewhat
bunglingly; yet the Scriptures, the Word of God, they be his line and his
level, and according to the direction, either special, or general, which he
receives from them, he strives to frame his life and actions. So is the true
Convert godly in life; gross sins usually he commits not; the smallest
known sins he ever dis-alloweth, condemns, confesses before God in secret;
and suspected sins he labors to know, and for fear auoideth; and unknown sins
he is ready and willing to know. Al and all manner of good duties (though some
he finds more hard and difficult, and himself more backward unto them; yet I
say, all, and all manner of good duties) he resolves to do, and strives to
do; and either does them, or is afterward very angry with himself, for not
having done them; so that his life is to his own feeling, but a very death, if
he find it to have bin unprofitable: and which is much to be marked, he is
heartily glad to see, that others can do the good that he cannot, or can do it
better then himself. 3. Knowledge of this good estate.
So you have the second effect of regeneration: the third follows, and that is
a knowledge of this his good estate. The man regenerate, understands himself to
be regenerate, as the man that lives and walks, that he lives and walks.
So S. John tells us plainly, 1. John 3.14.
We know that we are translated from death to life. Lo, I say, an assured word
of knowing, used by the Apostle. But how knows he it? even by a most
infallible knowledge, grounded upon the perceiving of the effects of a
spiritual life: as he knows, that he is a living man, and not a carcass, by
feeling in himself the manifest effects of this common life. For in very truth,
spiritual life can no more be hidden, then natural. Can that admirable
change, that cumbersome combat, that so far from former times differing, life
be found in a man, and he not know of it? Can a blind man become seeing, and he
not know it? Can a deaf man hear, a lame man go, a sick man become whole, a
dead man live, and not know of these alterations in themselves? It is utterly
impossible, that such things should be hidden from him in whom they be: and the
taking away of blindness, deafenes, dumbnes, lamenes, death, from the soul, is
to him in whom it is, no less manifest and evident, then the removing of these
bodily infirmities. And therefore S. John says, 1. John 2.13.
I write unto you babes, because you have known the Father, meaning with a
knowledge of acquaintance, whereby they conceive him to be their father; such
as little children (to whom he alludeth) have of their fathers and mothers that
they be theirs. In truth the Christian man finds in himself, something within
him, sealing him up to life: he has an earnest penny that makes the bargain
sure betwixt the Lord and his soul. He cannot but call God Father, and often
(though not always) in calling him so, he even feels him so also. He has an
inward and a sure certificate of his reconciliation with his displeased Lord.
And if doubts do arise (as I told you before that they would, and that right
often, and very troublesomly: for the devil will cast the^ in, thick and
threefold, and with great violence), these his very doubtings drive him to his
father to be resolved of his doubts; by which means it comes to pass, yt as a
truth is much cleared, by making and answering objections, so his assurance is
confirmed by these doubts. Indeed an infant at first, has not so much
knowledge, or use of reason, as to conceive of his own life: but when some
days are past, and himself becomes stronger, then does he well enough know
that he lives: so in the infancy of regeneration, the regenerate can scarce
tell that he is regenerate, but having a little grown forward in a good life,
he finds his case plain enough, and wants not this assurance, though he be
encumbered with many doubtings. Yea, when he stands at the weakest, and does
most complain for want of this assurance, yet even at that time, he neither
accounts it impossible, nor yet needless to have it; but desires it with the
strongest of his desires, and is troubled for want of it, more then for want of
any other thing: and the feeling that he has it not, serves but to quicken
his care of seeking it, and to make him seek soundly, that he may not be
deceived with false imaginations about it. Sometimes also it falls out, that a
fit of Melacholy possesses a grown man so strongly, that he imagines
himself no better then a dead man: but then the actions of life performed by
him, do put the matter out of question, amongst others that have life; and the
same actions at last, persuade himself also, that he lives. Even so a man
borne again, and well grown in the life of Grace, through strength of
tentation, may be so far troubled, as to make a great doubt, whither he live
the life of grace yea or no. But he by feeling the troublesomnes of this fear,
and by striving against it, at length does evidently find, that he judged
falsely of his own case, and so returns to enjoy his assurance again. Yea,
sometimes a living man by some wound received, or by some inward distemperature,
is cast into a deadly swoune, neither feeling life, nor giving any great signs
of it: but after a while, by rubbing and the like means, he is restored to the
use, and to the feeling of life. So a regenerate man being overcome by some
tentation, and having run into some sown, does lie almost like a man dead in
sins and trespasses; but after some checks of his own heart, and admonitions
of others, and corrections from the Lord, he is revived out of that sown, and
begins to show forth the effects of grace; and withal, with comfort to feel
and understand the same. Wherefore it is manifest, that the knowledge of a man's
being regenerate, is a necessary effect of regeneration, and which fails not,
out of the forenamed cases, and after some time to reveal it self. Hence it
is, that the regenerate man wonders at no kind of men more, then at them which
will needs hold, that the matter of ones being truly sanctified is so extremely
ambiguous, as that, by reason of the deceitfulness of man's heart, it should
be impossible for any man, infallibly to know himself to be in the state of
grace. He counts this is as absurd, as if a man should say, that because an
image may be made and painted so like a living man, and that withal, fits of
melancholy, and sownes are of so strong a working in men; therefore it should
be impossible for any man to know usually and infallibly, that himself is a
living man. He perceiues that such men speak thus, alone because they talk
of these points barely by roar (as they say) and by mere speculatio^. For he
having known the powerful working of Gods spirit, knows well enough that he
has found it; and knows that having it, it will make it self so evident,
that after a little while it will be known; and when he wants it, he finds
himself not driven to deny the possibility or necessity of knowing it; but
alone to be grieved, and to condemn himself that he does not get that, which
is both possible and necessary to be gotten. He finds also, that though, after
his committing of some kinds of sins, this his assurance that he is Gods
child, is very much enfeebled; yet there is a secret and strong work of
grace, inwardly moving him, inuiting him, leading him by the hand; and little
less then with a kind of sweet and gentle violence, drawing him to go to God
and confess his sin, craving mercy, purposing amendment, and casting
himself upon Christ for acceptance: that now he cannot but say within
himself, sure here is life, though before the matter were called into doubt.
Yea he finds the spirit of adoption, dictating unto him the name of Father,
in this case, and making him bold so to call God, and to cry unto him, till at
length he perceive by manifest signs, that he is indeed a Father unto him.
Yea verily, to the Christian man, this knowledge of God is so rich and precious
a jewel, that he makes more account of it then of a thousand worlds, and a
thousand lives. Wherefore of (almost) all errors concerning man's condition,
he can with least patience brook their (to him being made in case to discern
it) most palpable fancy, of which I spoke before, that think it impossible to
attain a sure knowledge and infallible, that one is the child of God, not know
himself to be Gods by regeneration, and adoption. Take away his life then,
take away his being. The world is worse then a prison and a dungeon to him, if
the light of this knowledge be taken away: he can have no quiet in himself,
no comfort in any thing else, without this knowledge; he perceiues that this is
the greatest confirmation of his soul, in an holy life, that he knows
himself to be begotten again by the seed of immortality, to a lively hope,
and to an immortal inheritance. This knowledge therefore is so necessary unto
him, that he cannot live without it: and hence it is that he no longer enioyes
himself then he retains it. And so much for the third effect of regeneration.
The fourth, and (of those that I purpose to speak of) the last effect
follows. That is growth. As a natural life, 4. Growing in grace.
so likewise a spiritual, by degrees increases and waxes stronger and
stronger, approaching nearer to perfection; and that with a proportionable and
suitable increase of every part and member, as I may call it, of the new man.
For though in some parts he may be weaker then in others; yet in those weaker
parts also, considering the weakness, there is a growth correspondent to the
growing of other parts. Ioh. 15.2.
All the branches that bring forth fruit in Christ the vine, the Father the
good husbandman purges, that they may bring forth more fruit; and in Christ
all the body having nourishment ministered, and knit together, Colos. 2.19.
increases with the increase of God; and that also according to the effectual
working of every part. A living branch, in a living tree, will draw sap, and
get growth. A living member, of a living body, cannot (by the course of nature)
but attract fit nouriture, and procure to it self a going forward in stature,
till the stature be full and perfect. Doubtless Christ is a living tree, his
mystical body a living body; wherefore the regenerate must needs be growing.
But this matter of growth does stand in need of a sound explanation. Understand
therefore that there is a double growth, one in greatness, the other in
goodness; one in quantity, the other in quality. So you may see a man from his
birth, to 24. or 25. years grow bigger and bigger, he is higher and thicker,
has larger lims, and stronger joints; but from these years upward he grows
wiser, sager, more stable, more sober and better settled also in his bodily
might. So an apple from Spring to Midsommer or after, grows larger and larger
in bigness; from thence to the time of its pulling, it grows pleasanter and
pleasanter in taste, and better and better relished. Thus it is with a
Christian man: For a good space of time, he does sensibly increase in knowing
and leaving more sins, and in knowing and doing more duties; this is to grow
in bigness: but after a good time spent in Christ's school, and that there be
but few new lessons (not above his form, as it were) to be learnt, he cons
over the old lessons again, and gets them more perfectly by heart, and better
understood. Those sins he leaves, he leaves with more sincerity, with more
rectified zeal, with more love to God, with more detestation of sin. Those
duties likewise which he performs, he performs more advisedly, more
resolutely, more humbly, more soundly, and with a more entire bending of his
soul to the glory of God in them, then before: This is his growing in
goodness and in ripeness. And always in this latter kind of growth a
Christian man stands so affected, that he does most of all quarrel with
himself for not growing, when he grows most of all. Yea his slippes into some
gross faults (and it may be also sometimes too too thick) do further this
his growth ordinarily; so that he never grows faster and better, then after
the time that some falls have discovered unto him his badnesse: for then he
grows in humility; in hatred of himself, in suspicion of his own frailty,
whereby he is made capable of a profitable growing in all virtues, till at
length this become his excellency, that the better he is, the meaner he is in
his own eyes; and the further he proceeds, the more he is acquainted with
his own defects, and becomes more sorrowful and ashamed for the slownesse of
his proceedings. But now it must be further conceived, that this growth has
his stops, stays, hindrances, intermissions; and those also sometimes even some
long space of time together, even for months and years, as is to be seen in
David, Solomon, Asa, Vzziah, and others. For as in natural life, the child may
grow till it be twenty, or more years old, and then fall into a dangerous fit
of sickness, as an ague, or the like; which shall cast him upon his bed, and
make his cheeks pale and wan, his legs quaking and feeble, his stomach
naught, and quite turned away from, almost all food, his whole body faint and
powerless; so that he can neither stand nor go, nor scarce speak or move
himself, but even lie at point of death: Even so also in the life of grace
there be Agues, there be diseases, there be sicknesses, into which a
Christian man (even now (it may be) come to so much ripenes, as this life will
bear) does suddenly sometimes, but most times by degrees fall headlong, and
almost dies, though quite to die it be impossible. Now if you speak of his
growing, he does but grow backward; even as a sick man grows weaker and
weaker, after sickness has ceized upon him. These diseases grow for the most
part from the coming in of promotion and wealth, and the pleasures and
vanities that most commonly come in with them; that we may see how dangerous
the goods and greatness of this world be to a Christian soul, that cannot
soundly digest and concoct them. Or else, they arise from the poysonfull
infection of some evil companion or other, to whom a man has by some occasion
foolishly linked himself in familiarity. In truth most times surfeting breeds
spiritual sickness. From the excessive love, and liking, and using, and
enjoying of earthly things, and from a conceit of ones own being better and
safer for their abundance, a man comes to be less satisfied in God, and in
holy duties; and to have less mind to think and muse of heaven, and the
graces of Gods Spirit, the practicing of which is the way to come to heaven. So
there is a stoppage and obstruction in the soul, and hence so sensible a decay
of spiritual strength, til a man fall to heap more then one or two gross
sins (and sometimes presumptuous), one upon the neck of another, and
sometimes to lie long in them, before he can see to reform them, or soundly
renew his repentance for them; the one hardening his heart, and blinding his
mind so, that the other following can scarce be seen or felt. Thus there is
wrought a strange decay of the power of godliness, even in a true regenerate
man, by the increase of his outward estate: for he was a sanctified man, Prou.
30.9.
that prayed God not to give him riches, lest himself being full, should deny
God, and say, Who is the Lord? And sometimes also on the contrary, even hard
and sharp afflictions do bring a decay of sanctification. The anguish of a
cross may breed impatiencie, distrust, lying, using of base shifts, and
twenty disorders in a regenerate man's life; in so much, that he may be drawn
to very gross and sinful practices. But when the poor Christian soul is
either of these ways diseased, or any other like to them; O, then he fares
like to a sick man indeed, he feels his disease with exceeding great pain.
It makes him groan, and cry out many a time, he is weary, full weary of such
an estate. No man is more tired with a burning fit of an ague, then he with
these fits. Rest, comfort, quiet he can get none. Indeed the devil and the
world in some cases, do as friends use to do in case of sickness. They bring
likely conserved Plums or Marmelade, or some such like sweet meat, which the
poor sick man takes indeed, because they will have it so that are about him:
but alas, they do but clamme his mouth, and he finds their very sweetness
bitter and troublesome: So the devil and the world, and the flesh, offer to
the Christian soul, the pleasures, and profits of this world, as it were sweet
meats, and he willing to find ease in any thing, seeks if there it may be
had: but alas he finds it not, he cannot relish these pleasures, he has small
comfort in these profits; this credit is a dry credit unto him, his heart will
not relish such things as these; but still he tosseth and tumbleth, finding no
rest in his estate, nor perhaps power to get out of it: for it may be, he
cannot bring himself to pray at all, Psalm. 32.3.
as David could not; for he says of himself, that he held his peace: or if he
do, it is too coldly and faintly to remove so mortal a sickness. But still as
the same David also confesses of himself, he roareth and cries out all the
day long (I cannot but be fully persuaded, that there he describes his estate
in the interim betwixt his sin, and his earnest repentance, for some feeble
offers to repentance perhaps he might have before), and so now his case is a
very restless and diseasefull case. Solomon (the man that of all Gods sick
children, I think, by surfeiting caught the so rest sickness) shall witness
this. He wanted no sweet meats, but they cloied him in stead of comforting
him; he professes of them al, that he found them mere vanity and vexation of
Spirit. So when a Christian lies under these spiritual diseases, all his
outward comforts are but even vexation of spirit unto him. When he has thus
almost wounded and killed himself, Oh how he smarts and bleedes, and is
troubled! Indeed he still perhaps is carried after the vanities of the world,
sin having now so very much prevailed against him, that he wants power to
withdraw himself, and to go back; but yet full many a time he sighs, and
groans, and looks toward God, and toward the spiritual rest of his former
life, and he finds a very bitter, bitter heart. He is in very great extremity,
and it is even a pang of death for him to remember, how the case stood with him
once, and how it is now. And in very truth, were he let alone in this case,
his soul would perish; the life of grace would die, and he would prove his
disease mortal. But, Ah he has a good Father, who is also a good Physician,
who finding his disease grow mortal (and that the admonitions of the Word in
public will not reform him, and that the voice of the spirit behind him, is
now too weak to be heard by him, though still it cease not to check him, and
to call upon him, and to make him sometimes purpose to return again from this
outstraying) does now like a good and wise practitioner, administer some such
physic as shall serve the turn. Some potion of a bitter cross, which the
spirit shall work withal to make it effectual, is put into his hand to
drink it: or some sore tentation of Satan, or some horrible fear of heart,
which opens these stoppages, purges out these humors, reuiueth his soul; and
then woefully most woefully, he cries out of himself, laments his exceeding
folly, goes to God, heartily confessing his sins, and with all rigor passing
sentence upon himself for the same, and so continues to mourn and cry, and
beg mercy till he find it; and then strives to make amends for his former not
growing, by growing so much the faster for it now. So he is recovered, and
continues to the end; for totally or finally fall away by sin, he cannot,
because the annoynting of the spirit preserves him: till he be raised up at
the last day, Christ will not cease keeping him: yea to salvation is he kept,
by the power of that great God that has adopted him to himself for a son:
and this spiritual life given in regeneration, indeed becomes an eternal
life; sick he may be, dye he cannot.

CHAP. VI. Showing the principal graces which by Regeneration are begotten in
the soul.
ANd so much for the fourth effect of regeneration, and for three of those
things, I promised to speak of: I go on now to the fourth and last point, 4.
The principal graces in regeneration bestowed on the regenerate.
viz. to make known unto you the principal graces that show themselves in the
regenerate man; and by having of which (seeing by nature he had them not) he
deserves to be entitled a new creature. These are in all the powers of his
soul. For as I said at first, holiness is infused into his whole man. First,
1. In his principal faculties.
in the principal faculties, understanding, conscience, and will. Secondly, in
the inferior powers, thinking-power, memory and affections; of which let us
speak in order but briefly, First then the understanding of the regenerate is
perfected with two most excellent and beautiful graces; 1. In his
understanding.
knowledge, and faith. Knowledge, I say, first of God, then of himself; out of
which springs humility as a proper effect of both. He perceives a new light
shining within him, inabling him to conceive with a very steadfast apprehension
(not with a wavering, wandering, doubtful confused fancy, as that was which he
had before) that there is a God, an eternal and infinite essence; his maker,
and the maker of all things, most wise, most mighty, most true, most righteous;
most merciful, most holy, hating sin with a perfect hatred, and fully bent to
punish the impenitent sinner with unutterable punishments; fully resolved with
all loving kindness to accept of the penitent. And in one word every way
inconceiueably excellent, as being indeed the fountain of all goodness, the
creator, preserver, governor of all things, the Father, the Son, the holy
Ghost, as he has revealed himself to his Church. The brightness of this light
discovers it self upon his soul so effectually, that now he stands
undoubtedly persuaded of these things; which is also a principal cause of all
other the good things, that are begun in him, and so is fulfilled in him the
word of God, Heb. 8.11.
saying, They shall all know me from the least to the most: Ioh. 17. last.
and again: righteous Father the world has not known thee, but these have
known that thou have sent me, and I have made known thy name unto them, and
will make it known. Job. 17.3.
So it begins to be to them, life eternal, to know the only true God, and him
whom he has sent Jesus Christ. Further, as it were a reflexe of this
knowledge, follows an apprehension of himself, as of a most mean, base, and
contemptible thing (compared to God) in his very creation; for he was made of
dust, and came of very nothing: but in this his corruption, which came
afterward, as a most loathsome vile and abominable creature; because he is
(now he finds it) full of wickedness and extremely sinful. So grows he more
and more to dis-esteme himself, and to have himself in no reputation; yea to
be vile and odious to himself, and loathsome in his own eyes; and by
acknowledging his infinite baseness in comparison of God, and Gods infinite
excellencies in comparison of him, he is made truly humble. Secondly, faith is
wrought in his mind (for this I conceive to be the seat of it, for it is the
understanding that must diduct particular conclusions from general; and so
make application of them, wherein consists the very essence of faith), faith (I
say) both in God, and in the word of God. Faith in God, whereby he is verily
persuaded that God is his God; being enabled in true and sound manner, to apply
to himself the sweet covenant of God, whereby the Lord has made himself one
with him, he ca^ say with assurance of heart, O Lord my God: and, the Lord is
my shepherd; and my Redeemer lives. For in truth, finding the lively
portraiture of the divine nature in him, how should he but know his father by
his image? and this assurance that God is his, and he Gods, is to him ye
sweetest thing in all the world; the^ to miss which, he had rather choose to
miss his very life and soul. The stronger it is, the more cheerful and happy
is he; the weaker it is (as sometimes it has its faintings), the less lively
is he. There is also faith in the word of God to be seen in him: out of an
experimental feeling, and certainty of the truth of it, he is undoubtedly
resolved that it is from God; and that so, as he is enabled to apply it to
himself in all the parts thereof. For having been to him, as Paul speaks,
in power, 1. These. 1.5.
it must needs also be in much assurance. Before the word of God does work so
mightily, to convert the soul, a man may have a confused opinion of its being
true, taken up upon trust (because in the places, and among the persons, where
he has received his education, it is so generally accounted); or else wrought
by a common grace of illumination, inabling the mind to give a light, weak,
and infirm assent unto it; but he cannot be thoroughly and infallibly resolved
of the truth thereof, nor that it is from God: and therefore it is said of the
stony ground, that they believed indeed, but withal that the seed had no root
in them: Luke 8.13.
they had a conceit, and a sudden flashing apprehension, that sure this
doctrine must needs be true; but they had no settled, well grounded, and
established assurance thereof. Only when the word sinketh thus into the
bottom of the soul, and a man has had so lively experience of its wonderful
and divine working; he makes no more question whether it be of God or no; then
whether the Sun shine, and whether that be food yt does daily nourish his
body. Wherefore by the inward operation of the spirit, and mighty efficacy of
the word, being most effectually co^uinced of its divinity and truth, he now
makes care to apply it in all parts to himself; he lays hold upon the
promises, threats, precepts, and makes particular use thereof to his own
heart, captiuating his reason, sense and all, to the infallible certainty and
verity thereof: for he knows that God is the author of it, seeing it has
begotten him again to be the child of God. So is his understanding beautified
with these two most admirable fruits of the spirit; by which also he attaineth
(as the Scripture calls it) a notable sharpness of wit, Prou. 1.4.
quickening him to the discerning of things spiritual and divine, in such
manner and measure, as a man of far better wit and more learning, but destitute
of the same help, could not attain unto. In the next place his conscience is
also quieted with peace, 2. In his conscience.
and in lived with conscionablenesse. Whether conscience be a distinct faculty
of the soul; or whether alone a particular act of the understanding reflecting
upon its self and its own actions, with immediate reference to God, I hold it
not very needful to dispute: but here we will speak of it, as of a special
faculty, by reason of the wonderful power, that it is perceived to have in all
the soul. First then, I say, the conscience of the regenerate proclaims
within him, an established peace betwixt God and him. For the kingdom of God
is peace, says the Apostle Paul, Romans 14.17.
and being justified by faith, (which in nature goes before this work of
regeneration, though in time they be conioined) we have peace with God. Then in
truth Christ fulfilleth his promise of leaving his peace with them; Job. 14.27.
even such a peace as the world cannot take away from them; and this peace that
passes all understanding, is even as a guard and a watch to keep their whole
souls in quietness and safety, though in the world they meet with many
troubles and disquietments. Their consciences by this most sweet grace
becomes an admirable friend unto them: It tells them from God, that he is
reconciled unto them; and being calmed from the former raging wherewith it was
tossed, it now makes unto the^ (even within to the care of the soul) the most
pleasing music, and the sweetest melody that is to be heard in all the world.
It acquitteth, it excuses, and in ye name and in the room of God, it
pronounces absolution. O unspeakable consolation! This is the peculiar
happiness of the sanctified, they have many times tranquillity in their souls
through this peace of their consciences, which with a quiet countenance, and a
still voice it does publish within in their hearts. And yet in the midst of
this peace their consciences are not dead and sleepy neither; but are ready in
a friendly and loving manner to check and control the^, if at any time, in
things known unto them to be evil, they shall offend: a good man is so
conscionable, that he can in no known thing swarne out of the way, but his
conscience will be telling him of it. Only this is done in fair terms, not
with outrageous bitterness driving him from God, as in former times; but with
kind and yet earnest expostulations, drawing him before God to confess and
seek pardon. 1. Sam. 24.5.
Thus David's heart, yt is, his conscience, smote him, when he had cut off the
lap of Saul's garment. Thus his heart also smote him after the numbering of the
people, and he went in before the Lord and said, I have done exceeding
foolishly, 1. Sam. 24.10.
but do away the sin of thy servant. And though the conscience (being too much
put to it by the servants of God in their folly) do wax somewhat sharp; yet
still it keeps this note of difference from the unpurged conscience, that it
draws them unto God. So a good conscience is both quiet, for it promises
forgiveness; and withal wakefull, for it calls for duty incessantly, and
steppeth out against every confessed evil, yea against suspected ones too. 3.
In his will.
In the third place, the will of the sanctified man shows it self to be holy,
by two graces also planted in it. First, it is carried up to Godward. It
longs and thirsts after the living God, so that it finds nothing in
heaven nor in earth comparable unto him. It does embrace him, and draw unto him
as unto the chief, and (in a manner) the only Good. The being, happiness, and
felicity of God, is the thing that above all things, yea above his own
happiness he desires; the favor, love, and grace of God next to that, above
all other things. Let him enjoy the light of Gods countenance, and let corn
and wine go which way they will; he is happy enough, in that God is happy and
is his Father. So David once, Psalm. 73 25.
Whom have I in heaven besides thee, and whom in earth with thee? and in an
other place, All my bones shall cry, Lord who is like unto thee! Now he has
learned to place his felicity in the living God. Now apprehending him as
goodness it self, he unites himself unto him by a fervent act of his will,
even panting after him. Secondly, his will becomes very flexible to the will
of God. It begins to be made one with Gods will, and to be (as it were) carried
therein, like a star in its proper orb; or even as a man in the chariot,
wherein he has seated himself. His will begins to be even swallowed up in
the will of God, and to be nothing but as God will have it; which is the
principal, and a most inconceiueable happiness which he finds in this world.
If it may appear unto him that God would have such a thing done, he resolves
to do it, say profit, pleasure, and credit what they can to the contrary.
Contrarily, if that he perceiues the Lord of his life would not have him to
do such a thing; his determination is that he will not do it, though he be
solicited with all the allurements of delight, commodity, and advancement. In
truth, this free and firm disposition of the will to do the good, and avoid
the evil, which God enioyneth him, for Gods sake; is the very heart and marrow
of regeneration: and therefore there is nothing which a Christian man more
misseth, then the work of his will this way, if it be hindered; and nothing in
himself which he does enjoy more, whilst the motions of it are uninterrupted.
An hearty and unfeigned desire to please God in all things, is the
characteristicall note (as I may term it) of the sanctified. It is the most
apparent, evident, sensible distinction betwixt him, and the falsly-seeming
sanctified, the hypocrite. Wherefore it is of much importance to find this
grace in ones self. And so are the superior powers of the soul framed to the
blessed Image of God. 2 In the inferiou^ powers.
The inferior powers must needs follow the temper of the superior, and in
them there rests the spirit of grace and glory, which adorneth them with the
brightness of excellent graces. First the thinking power (or imagination) is
raised up to God and the things of God. 1. The thinking power.
The Christian man finds, that as he is apt by nature to think of the King,
or of his parents, or friends, or such like thing; so by virtue of his new
nature, he is of himself moved to be taking occasion very many times to
entertain thoughts of God, and always thoughts tending to magnify him within
his soul. He is often stirring up in his own heart, motions tending to
discover unto himself the beauty and sweetness of God, his wisdom, his
power, his truth, his justice, and other attributes; and withal also the
admirable and inconceiueable excellency of heaven, and the surpassing glory and
felicity of an other life. There is some familiarity and loving acquaintance
betwixt God, and the kingdom of God, and his imagination; and it is a great
pleasure and content to him, to co^uerse (as it were) with these things, in the
cogitations of his mind, and to have the^ dwell within him. Before God was not
in all his thoughts, as the Psalmist speaks; Psalm. 10.4.
but now contrarily, as the same Psalmist affirms of himself, his meditation
of God is sweet: every thing almost that he sees, serves but to beget in him
new forms of apprehending Gods excellency, which in truth shines forth most
brightly in all these his works. A man that knows a rare secret and hidden
treasure, cannot but ever and a none have the cogitation of it reviving it
self within him: and the Christian having the eye of his mind opened to know
God, and to believe in him, sees such rich treasures of wisdom and goodness in
him; that his mind must needs be entertaining him within, by the imagination
of these things. Wherefore not in solitarines alone, but in company, the
motions of his mind are advanced toward heaven; and other things serve but
as ladders to raise his soul thitherward. He is often, even in the midst of
other businesses, digesting in his mind, the excellencies of God: and thinking
with himself how good, how great, how wise is the Lord God, who has done
this, and this, and this! how excellent is his name through all the earth! how
happy is he in the highest heavens, where he has founded the throne of his
glory! yea, how blessed a Crown has he laid up for the^ that fear him, and
how plentiful a reward is reserved for them! when he walks abroad, and sees
Gods works, and when he is employed in other occasions, he holds his inward
comfortable conference with himself about his God, and often has his soul
provoked to speak unto God, and to take him into part of this divine
conference; telling him, as it were with a reverent boldness, and wife-like
familiarity, how much good he knows by him, and how excellent he must needs
conceive him to be by such and such works of his. In one word, he minds
not only, not chiefly, the things that are below, as once he did; but the
things that are above, where Jesus Christ our savior sits at the right hand
of glory. His meditation is of God and his law and Kingdom continually. In
like sort his memory is hallowed to the remembering of God, 2. Memory.
and the things that pertain to God. He frequently minds himself, of that
all-seeing eye, which in all places attends him; and though the Lord as being
a spirit, be in a sort absent from his senses, yet by virtue of this sanctified
memory (which makes absent things present), he offers him unto his mind as
continually standing at his right hand: and beholds him in all places (even
then when he is far removed from all other company), as a narrow obseruer of
his secret actions, and an eie-witnes of all his most inward and retired
cogitations. He puts himself in mind still and still, saying, Lord whither
can I fly from thy presence? The Lords eyes behold me, his eielids ponder my
paths: to him nothing is secret, from him nothing can be concealed; thus (I
say) he minds himself of the Lords being hard by him, and represents him
often to his soul, as a witness and judge of his whole life, yea of his very
heart and conscience. And this excellent virtue of remembering God, does stand
betwixt him, and the tentations to sin, as it were strong barriers, that do
mightily restrain his forward flesh from committing it. For why? says he to
himself, does not the God of heaven see and know and understand? how then
shall I do this wickedness, and sin against him to his face? Further, his
memory serves his turn also for the things of God. The commandments, threats,
promises of the word, the works of God, either of mercy or justice, the
infinite and eternal reward of well doing, the intolerable and endless
punishment of irrepentant sinning, and the like, are always before his eyes,
and he makes none end of minding himself of such divine things, as may frame
him to holiness. There is a natural power of memory consisting in the ability
of retaining, and making repetition of things that one has heard or seen.
This ability as following the temperature of the body, the sanctified man
(perhaps) may want, (and if nature have not bestowed it upon him, he must want
it; for grace does not add a greater natural perfection to the powers of man's
soul, but alone makes the perfections it has strait and right, and guides
them to God ward): but that memory which God has given him, he can use for the
good of his soul to godly purposes, in all the sanctified performances of
memory. He can retain good things, according to that strength of retainement
which nature affords him: but that that he does retain (and here indeed he
shows his memory to be sanctified), he has at hand for the benefit of his
soul in due season: fruitfully recalling it, in the instant of tentation, in
the very time of need, when it may avail him to resist sinful suggestions of
Satan or the flesh, and to quicken him against his backwardnes and unwillingness
to duties commanded. So his memory becomes a principal instrument of order,
both to his heart and to his life: for example; A godly man and an
unregenerate, come both to one sermon. It is made against filthiness or
covetousness, or any vice, as it falls out. The unsanctified man may
(perhaps) be able to repeat ten times more, and more orderly, then the
sanctified, (this is a fruit of nature not of grace); but when some time is
past, and that both shall be tempted to covetousness or filthiness; all that,
that the unregenerate man could so readily repeat, is slipped quite out of his
mind (as a thing carelessly thrust into a corner, which a man cannot find when
he should use it), so that he follows the sin as much, as if he had never heard
that Sermon: but ye godly man, has those reasons and proofs of Scripture
which he was able to carry away, instantly in his mind repelling such thoughts
and saying, have I not heard what a sin this is? have I not been taught how
it displeases God? so by this his holy remembrance, the word of God is
available to keep him from sinning, or at least after to raise him up to the
renewing of his repentance. And so you see the holiness of a Christian man's
memory. 3 In his affections.
Thirdly his affections are also sanctified, and set in good order by the
virtues which the holy Ghost infuseth into him. The principal affections are,
love and hatred, fear and confidence, joy and sorrow: All these are enabled by
the spirit of God, with a new power of exercising themselves upon God, and the
things of God; and there are certain virtues which do rectify each of them
in their several workings. First for love, the motions and inclinations
thereof are ruled by (that King of virtues) charity, both toward God and
toward the children of God. A good man's heart is inclining it self still to
Godward, he finds in his soul that he has something within him bowing and
bending his heart to God, and making him even earne and melt after him
sometimes, and cleave and stick unto him, in an inexpressible manner: yea the
sweetness of that love wherewith he finds himself loved of God, is still
pulling him unto God, even then when (perhaps) he finds the Lord somewhat
displeased with him, and carrying himself toward him somewhat angerly; as a
wife comes toward her husband, with a kind of melting affection, submissiuely
but still lovingly, when she perceives that he is offended with her. In truth
the working of this affection rectified (as I said above) by charity, cannot be
well enough set out in words; he finds such a kind of clinging to God, and
such an uniting of his heart toward him, that he had rather be deprived of all
that is dear to him in the world, then of him: and his soul does so setledly,
steadfastly, solidly, irresistibly bend it self to be one with him, that this
inclination many times does ouerweigh and overrule all other inclinations in
him; and sometimes he cannot but even break forth into words, professing so
much to himself, as David, I love the Lord; and calling upon others, saying,
love ye the Lord, wishing with all the wishes of his soul, that himself and
all others might more and more love the Lord. A sanctified heart stands
affected toward God, even as the lover does to the person he loves; and he
has (though not so passionate, because the object is spiritual, yet) as true
and as perceiueable a working of his heart to God, as one lover has to the
other: and as to God, so he is likewise endued with charity to Gods people. The
liking of his heart is to them above all other men: he finds his heart moved
with good will to none, so much as to the Saints. If he perceive the beams of
Gods image shining, that is to him as good, and better then twenty years
acquaintance: yea it surpasses all names of blood and alliance; whom he sees
godly, him he priseth above all other men. In truth this charity does then
show its warmth, when almost the breath of grace is choked by vices of diverse
kinds. Though some particular breach may cause a little iarring of affections
between a godly man, and another whom he persuades himself to fear God
also, yet he cannot but feel his heart to stand toward him even in this
jar. Yea let a Christian man, be at the worst that ever he can be, and gone
as far back from his growth in godliness as he can be gone, yet he does not
(as the hypocrite when he falls off) fall on hating those that he sees to hold
out in piety; but even then he likes and loves them, and none so much as
them, unless it may be in some particular jar to some one: and so is his
love ruled. His hatred likewise is made a spiritual hatred, it is set on work
against sin and sinful men: It is as natural with him to hate wickedness
as poison, and he cannot but hate it, and find his soul as it were rising and
warring against it; and for those that love sin, he cannot but be out with
them. In truth, this hatred of sin does cleave so unto him, and does so
insinuatingly work within him, that he cannot but hate himself (against that
filthy self-love which he finds in himself) when he perceives the working
of sin in himself. And as for wicked men, though he would never so feign,
he cannot find his heart to be joined with them: he must be of David's mind,
and hate them that hate God; not meaning that he carries the habit of malice
against them, but this his affection (of disliking and of separating from any
thing) that he must needs find stirring in himself toward a wicked man, in
whom he sees not the image of God. Now for his affection of fear, that is also
rectified by the virtue of the fear of God: his soul is ouer-awed by a grace,
making him that he dares not sin against God, as a child does not dare to
offend his father; though he know well that God will do him no harm, yet he
cannot make himself bold against him; for why, he fears him, and does
apprehend the displeasing of him, to be so great an evil, that he even
shrinkes at the conceit of it, and finds his heart (as it were) falling down
at the thought thereof. Therefore though no man could punish for such and such
sins, yet he cannot adventure upon them (though he perceives something
within him provoking him, that is, his flesh), because he knows not how to
answer it to God, whom he counts it madness to be bold to make his enemy.
Yea, and this his fearing of God does sometimes work so mightily in him, that
it makes him fearelesse of those dangers which else would make him tremble;
because he apprehends them as matters of nothing in comparison of the
displeasure of God, which above all things he fears. Indeed, if God do
please to reveal himself any whit terribly, or to stir up the conscience,
the unsanctified man, trembles much at Gods presence; he cannot keep this
passion of fear from working, when there is present an object fit to move it;
but take away this, and he cease to fear: only the good man, has the fear
of God so habituated in him, that though he find not a shaking of his ioints at
all times, yet his very heart shakes and trembles to think of offending him,
and so he cannot be induced to do it: or if he have, this fear of his will
give him no peace, till he have attained reconciliation. So that it is a fear
mixed with love, making one careful not to offend, and to seek atonement: not
an astonishing fear joined with hatred, making a man to run desperately from
God when he has sinned, and nothing else but cry out against himself, and
his own misery. Now for confidence, here the Christian finds himself
confirmed with strength from above, to rest his heart upon God in Christ, for
the obtaining of all good things and escaping of all evil. His soul hangs to
Godward, Gods truth and Gods power are leand unto (when any thing assailes his
hopes), as the very pillars and foundations thereof: and if he have no friend
nor means to trust in, yet he gives not over hope; but as David, can comfort
himself in God, because his heart was fixed upon him. And though this his
confidence wants not its imperfections, yet he perceives himself to have
gotten a new strength by it, which he was never acquainted with before;
establishing and confirming him in and against all those shows of evil, that
are ready to offer themselves unto his mind. In like manner his joys are
taken-vp with God, and things heavenly many times. O how much good it does him,
to consider how glorious the Lord his God is in himself, and how gracious unto
him? and what an unutterable, and heart-rauishing pleasure it is to him
sometimes to meditate of his full inioying of God hereafter? These things
coming to his mind, do even sweetly enlarge his heart, and make his soul to
open it self to take contentment in them, sometimes even as sensibly as in the
things that are here below, and often times more. The virtue of joy of the
holy Ghost does rule his natural passion of joy, and causes it to be provoked
by things that are not subministred unto his fancy by his senses; but to his
understanding by his faith. Gods promises are sweet to him, the Kingdom of
heaven has a comfortable relish in his soul, and he finds a life indeed, in
knowing that his life is hid with Christ. Lastly, his sorrows are ordinated by
the virtue of godly sorrow, so that sometimes his griefs do even run
toward things spiritually evil. Always he maintains in himself a being
displeased against sin, but oftentimes it does even sting his soul to
consider how he has offended his God. And though he do know himself, out of
the danger of damnation; yet the loving of God breaks his heart, and he can
then with a still and quiet mourning, sigh and mourn, and weep for sin,
when he is far enough from having any fear of damnation: and though his
griefs this way be not every day alike in quantity nor insensiblenes; yet
usually no day passes him; wherein he does not seek to draw his heart to a
relenting remorse for his sins. Though his offenses be either unknown to the
world, or such as the world (if it do know) makes no reckoning of: yet his
heart is touched with them, it often does even ache and is troubled, when he
remembers his past or present transgressions: Yea, and he never remembers
them, but he would feign have it ache. Even as nature has framed him, so that
he cannot but grieve at natural inconveniences if they befall him (for the
passions are not simply at the command of the will in their working, but alone
in regard of the measure): so grace does in such sort rule his heart, that
spiritual inconveniences, and chiefly, sins cannot but be troublesome to
him. It is a voluntary sorrow that he has for sin; a sorrow not forced upon
him by crosses alone, but sought by him when he has no cross to grieve for,
often times: yea, he grieueth for this, that he cannot be better then he is; and
it is a trouble and anguish to his soul, that he finds in himself no
stronger and better growth in godliness. And thus (my brethren) is a regenerate
man's heart adorned in all the powers of it: understanding, will, conscience, the
principal; and imagination, memory and affections, the inferior. Not so
perfectly I confess, that the contrary vices do not often show themselves,
interrupting the working of these virtues, and obscuring and darkening their
luster: but so, as that still the Sun of holiness does break thorough the
mists of vices, when they be at the thickest; and shine out again, in spite
of such indarkening of them. In an unsanctified man, these graces are not to be
found at all, he does not perceive the working of them; he feels not their
weakness, he desires not their confirmation: but the child of God finds
them in himself, and often again finds the quite contrary; he perceives
them sometimes to be stronger sometimes weaker, and he is truly disquieted with
the vices that are opposite to these virtues, as with diseases of body; and
with the infirmity of these graces, as with weakness of his legs and arms,
when he should employ himself in any work or business. His knowledge of God,
is obscured with ignorance, and often assailed with objections, his faith in
God and in his word has its faintings, his conscience feels some pricks of
guiltines; his will is not without its rebellious motions, his thoughts are
dull to God often times; and his memory is turned to other things with the
neglecting of God: his love is cold, his fear is changed into a kind of
stupidity; his confidence is shaken, his joys weakened, and to his seeming
little less then dead; and his griefs are even stopped, and the stream of
his tears dried up or diuerted: but alack he finds this so to be, and is
vexed at it: he perceives it and discerns it with pain and dislike, and he
can tell well that sometimes it has been otherwise with him; and why is he
thus now? why is he so altered from himself? Indeed he has these graces
never so plentifully, but that he sees defects, and knows there should, and
desires there might be more: but yet when grace is a little weakened over that
it was, he finds it before long, and seeks to restore it again to its
former, and a stronger strength.

CHAP. VII. All to examine themselves whither they be regenerate, yea or no.
ANd so (brethren) have I done mine endeavor to explain this most necessary
doctrine of regeneration; without which our Savior, little less then swears,
that no man can be saved. Give me leave now (I pray you) to apply the point a
little closser to your consciences, without which the word will want much of
its efficacy to your good. 1. To all, that they inquire into themselves,
whether they be regenerate, yea or no.
And in this application I would address my speech, first, to all
indifferently; regenerate or not: then to the unregenerate; and lastly to the
regenerate specially, according to their different estates. Brethren you hear,
and I am persuaded you do believe that, yt our Savior speaks, verily, verily,
unless a man be borne again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God. Be you
therefore persuaded all of you to descend into your own souls, and well to
prosecute the examination of your own estates; whether you be as yet
regenerated yea or no. Tell me I say in the name of God, whosoever thou be
that stand here before the Lord, art thou regenerated yea or no? It is very
necessary to know, at least wise whither it be possible for us to be saved or
not. Seeing of this life we have no further assurance then for the present
moment, and that we know all, it must shortly have an end; can it be any other
then very madness, to remain uncertain whether there be a possibility of our
changing for a better; when change we must of necessity, either for a better or
worse? It pleases us not to hang in uncertainties about the things of this
world, which are but for the twinkling of an eye: will we make our selves so
foolish as to be content alone not to know, what ill may befall us hereafter?
An impossibility of entering into heaven, caries with it a certainty of falling
into hell: he that cannot enter into the former, cannot but be cast into the
latter. Wherefore again, and again I exhort you, seeing it is impossible to
be saved without regeneration; know you of your own estate so much, whether
you be regenerated yea or no. And (my brethren) take heed of satisfying your
selves here, in a matter of so much importance, with wandering conceits, and
uncertain probabilities: let it not suffice you to think you are borne
again: rest not seeking till ye have concluded upon the matter undoubtedly
one way or other, and can say without all question, either I am regenerated; or
I am not. In very truth, the unwillingness to enter into this inquisition,
gives occasion of vehement suspicion that one is not regenerated. It is a sore
presumption, that a man has not that grace, whereof he is not willing with any
seriousnes and diligence, to examine himself, if he have it yea or no. And
let that man, that is willing to put of this matter slightly; and to please
himself in idle imaginations, saying, I hope I have been regenerated, though
he have never bestowed pains to inquire into the grounds of this hope: let
that man I say, be even all most assured, that he is not as yet regenerated. A
sound and well grounded scholar fears not be examined in grounds of learning;
a sufficient workman in any trade is never unwilling to come into trial and
question about his skill: only bunglers, only dunces abhor from all search
and trial of their sufficiencies. A secret guiltines of wants, causes an
unwillingness of being hard pressed to show what one has; doubtless it is so
in the matters of the soul also. The regenerate is willing to search out his
estate, because the goodness thereof does more clearly appear, by how much it
is more often searched; but he that cannot away to stand asking and demanding
of himself, and call for infallible proofs of his being regenerate, is
therefore alone unwilling to put himself to the trouble of proouing it,
because he is destitute of sufficient proofs. I say therefore unto thee, thou
must follow this inquiry closse: thou must not believe every thought of thine
heart: thou must have good assurance, and good grounds of good assurance, before
thou be bold to call thy self a regenerate man. The heart of men (brethren) is
a very Sea of guile: Every son of Adam has a marvelous selfe-deceiuing
spirit. Self-love, I say, self-love, and a desire of all good to our selves,
makes us too too credulous of our own condition for the most part: because
nature works in us a desire of being happy, we are all too too willing to
believe that we have those things (I mean it of spiritual things), without
which we cannot be happy. In truth for things temporal, because our senses
(strong confut^rs) do refell all conceits of having that, which indeed we
have not, we are not here so apt to beguile our own selves: but because in
things spiritual, our understanding (without sense most times) must judge of
the truth or f^lsehood of our opinions, it comes to pass that we are very
ready to be deceived with ouer-louing opinions of our selves. Where almost
shall we find a man (not extremely and notoriously wicked in all manner of
shameful abominations), which will not say, that he hopes he is Gods child,
and to be Gods child, and to be regenerate? or almost one and the same thing,
they differ alone in some respects. Let our readiness to brag of being better
then in truth we be (a certain fruit of the blindness of our minds in the
matters of God), let this readiness I say, to be ouerwell conceited of our
selves, make us afraid to rest upon any over hasty answer to this question,
whether we be regenerate yea or no. Before thou do rest in the answer thou
have to make to this question, look well to the grounds of thine answer, and
see that thine answer be made out of knowledge and judgment; not out of the
folly and blindness of self-love. Verily (brethren) I would have you make a
true answer this way, and neither deny the work that God has wrought in you;
nor yet brag of a conceit of that work which never was: but yet let me freely
confess thus much, that I had much rather have you fear without a cause, then
hope without a cause. I would thou should answer truly of thine estate; but
I had rather thou should err in thinking thy self not regenerated, when
thou art; then on the other hand in deeming thy self regenerated when thou art
not: for indeed, the former, though it be a troublesome error, yet is nothing
dangerous; the latter though pleasing enough, is extremely perilous.
Daungerlesse fear, is better then fearelesse danger. If a man condemned to
dye, and leading to execution, think that he has a pardon and has none; he
may go pleasantly to the gallows out of this fancy; but he will scarce come
from it pleasantly: but if he that has a pardon, think he have none; his
heart is heavy in going, but he feels himself lighted quickly, when at the
instant the pardon is produced to save his life. Just so it is, in this case:
If any amongst you be strongly conceited that he is Gods child and is not, he
goes toward death with fewer fears, and is not much troubled at the
remembrance of his last hour: but in that hour and after that, O then how
terrible are his terrors, made by seeing himself disappointed! Shall a man,
think you, have any refreshing in hell, from the remembrance of his former
conceits, whereby he did account himself the child of God, which now all too
late he finds quite contrary? On the other side, if the child of God remain
fearful of his estate, and cannot tell what to affirm of himself, but
rather conceiueth he is not Gods child then otherwise; I confess he has many
needless fears, many causeless disquietments, and a life far more
uncomfortable then he need to have: but, when after death he shall be
received, into the inheritance of Gods children, then his former fears shall
no whit impeach his present glory, he is safe and happy for all his fear. Much
rather therefore would I so speak, that you might be fearful without cause,
then hopeful: for I wish your present disquietment without your future peril:
rather then your present case with your future destruction. This is the cause
that I dwell so much upon this point, that I urge it so hard, and strive to set
it so near unto thy soul, aduising thee, to ask thy self once; am I
regenerate? and not to believe thy self at first (because thou may perhaps
quickly say, I hope I am); but to demand the second time and say, yea, but
do I not deceive my self? am I so indeed? and is not my conceit of my self
groundless? and yet not to rest in the second answer, but to go about
again, and to inquire often, and often, saying, to thy self, what am I? a
child of God or not? begotten again or not? where be the reasons of my taking
my self for his child? what due proofs can I bring that I am regenerate?
what arguments soundly grounded, and gathered from the word of God can I
produce, to demonstrate to my soul, that I am translated from death to life?
It is good to be suspicious of the well known partiality of our own hearts;
it is good to be jealous of our too too palpable guilefulnes in this case: and
so shall a thing well done, be more then twice done; and a sound and and
thorough search, breed a sound and infallible assurance. Let me then undertake
the examination for every of your souls at this time; and know, that the
Minister standing in Christ's room, must make bold with your consciences, and
must speak unto you with authority, because he speaks with commission. Say
then, thou man or woman, of what age, place, rank, condition, so ever: Do
thou think it possible for thee to be saved, when thou dyest? and to pass
into Gods Kingdom, when thou passest out of this world? Tell me what thou
think of this matter. If thou answer, that thou have never greatly troubled
thine head with these thoughts, but taking thy salvation for granted, have
busied thy mind about other matters. The^ do condemn thee of monstrous folly
and blindness, and assure thee, that howsoever it go with other men, yet thou
(as yet) art in no case to come to heaven. But if thine answer be, that thou
hopest thou both may and shall be saved. Then I demand again; Have not
thou heard the words of our Savior? is he not peremptory and plain, with
great earnestness affirming, that unless thou be borne again, thou can
not see Gods kingdom? will thou impute falsehood to his speeches, yea or no?
if no, then tell me, thou that hopest to be saved: art thou regenerate yea or
no? Here lies the maine matter now, upon thine answer to this question all
thine hopes must depend, and therefore answer deliberately and truly; Art thou
regenerate, or art thou not? Like enough to this thou may say thou art. But I
reply upon thee, that it is not enough to say so: what will it avail to say
thou have riches, and have them not? to say thou art in health, and art deadly
sick? to say thou have a pardon of thy felony, and have none? Or to say thou
have been borne again, and have not? Wherefore I call thee again to thine
answer, to see if thou will stand to it? Art thou indeed regenerate, or is it
alone thy conceit without substance? Art thou assured of it, or do thou
alone go by guesses and conjectures? If thou rest upon poor and thin hopes,
may I not be bold to charge thee with extreme folly? I am sure thou would
call him fool, that should content himself with such simple evidences in the
matter of his lands, or living, or his temporal estate: how much more do
thou deserve the same name, that dalliest with thy self so fondly in matters,
whereupon thine eternal estate depends? but if thine hopes be well grounded,
show us the grounds of them, and bring them forth now in so due an hour,
before God and thine own conscience. Where is thine holiness? where is the
Image of God wrought in thee? show how the spirit, and the word of God have
wrought together, to change thee into a new man: when did thou see and
feel (I do not say, hell open before thee, ready to receive thee; for that
Judas saw and felt, and yet was never regenerated), but the filthiness of thy
nature, thine abominablenesse, sinfulness and wickedness? what fervent and
strong desires have thou found of being renewed and sanctified by the spirit of
God? Where be thy cries, thy groans, thy tears, begging reconciliation at
Gods hand, and earnestly seeking unto him to reform thy leaud nature? Where is
the firm purpose of thy soul out of the apprehension of his grace, to please
him in all things? Where is thy godly conversation, thy departing from all
wickedness, and exercising thy self constantly in that that is good? What
combats have thou made with sin and Satan, and with the unsanctified world?
Where is thy growth and proceeding in all godliness? Show me the virtues of
the inward man formerly declared. Show me thy love and fear of God; show me
thine hatred of sin, and sorrow for it: show me thy mindfulnesse of God, thy
thinking of him, thy believing and rejoicing in him, and in his word. Are these
things to be found in thee? Can thou approve before the living God and thine
own soul, that these matters are in thee? then stand to thine answer, then
confirm thy self in thy persuasion, and be thou more and more assured, that
the spirit and word of God have begotten thee again indeed: but if these
things be absent from thee, or if thou please thy self in certain shadows
and resemblances, and conceits of them; I say unto thee, thy conceits are
vain, thine answer false, and thou art so much the further off from being the
child of God, by how much thou do more peremptorily boast of thy being such.
Brethren, what should I say more? you see the necessity of this searching into
your selves: I have endeavored to go before you in it; continue you now
constantly, and never give your selves any rest, till by looking narrowly into
your hearts, you have attained a true and sure knowledge of your estates, and
be able to say and show that you are regenerated, yea or not.

CHAP. VIII. Containing an use of terror to them that are unregenerate.
ANd in the second place, let me turn my speech to all them (which are without
doubt the greater number) that if they will answer truly, 2. To the
unregenerate. 1. Terror because of their hard estate.
must answer negatiuely to this question; and must confess, if they will not
lie, that in very deed they are not regenerate. To which kind of men I have two
things to speak; the one, to show them their wretchedness, out of Christ's
own words; the other to beseech them, that they would be careful and willing
to come out of it. Come hither all ye unregenerate men, and see your hard
condition: you know you must not live in this world always: you see so many
dye before you, that you cannot but see, (though you refuse to consider of it)
that death must ceaze upon your persons also before long. And you have been wont
to flatter your selves with hopes of being saved, when you die. But now I
pronounce against you, that all these your hopes are lying hopes, and like a
broken reed, will but run into your arms if you rest upon them. Either out
Lord Jesus Christ did egregiously falsify, when he did so vehemently assure
Nicodemus, that a man cannot see the kingdom of God, unless he be borne
again: or else you have most egregiously deluded your own souls with vanity
and lies; when (being unregenerate) you have been bold to make your selves
believe, that you should be saved. Now for our Savior, we are sure he
affirms nothing but what he knows; his words be all pure words, tried in
the furnace seven times; he yt is the author of salvation, can well enough tell
to who^ he will grant it; you therefore, even all you yt have maintained
contrary hopes in your selves, have lied to your selves, have trusted in
vanity, have bin beguiled by sin and Satan, have flattered your selves
foolishly, and shall surely be disappointed of your goodly hopes, unless you
take a better course then heretofore. I say unto thee that art unregenerate:
Though thou live an honest and civil life; though thou cariest thy self
justly and truly toward thy neighbors in thy dealings; though thou give much
alms to the poor; though thou come to Church, and hear the Word, and receive
the Sacraments; though thou have been baptized, and professest to believe in
Christ; though thou read the Scriptures, and pray with thy family; yea though
thou have some fits of sorrow for some sins; yea though thou confessest and
leauest many sins, and seem to take much pleasure in the company of good
men, and be forward to the external exercises of religion and piety;
though thou do all these things (as al these things may be done), and yet
be not regenerat, thou can not for all that, have any admittance into the
kingdom of God. How miserable therefore is thy condition, that loosest all thy
pains and cost that thou bestowest in some good things, and can not be
saved by all that thou do? Doubtless even so stands it with all your souls
that are unregenerate, your best works are but gilded sins; and that that in
you seems fair and lovely to your selves, and to your neighbors; to God,
that searches the heart, and judges of all things by the heart, appears
exceeding loathsome and abominable. Acknowledge thy wretchedness therefore,
thou that art not regenerate: for to speak all in one word, Do what thou
can, so long as thou remainest in this estate, there is an utter
impossibility of thy coming to heaven. But you may (perhaps) say unto me; Who
be the men, whom I dare charge to be unregenerate, and in that name bar up
the Kingdom of God against them? I answer, Too too great a multitude, and
more by far then we do desire: even all those that boast of their own
virtues, and will needs make themselves believe, that they love God above all,
and with all their hearts, and their neighbor as themselves: that is in a
word, That they do more then ever any of all the Prophets and Apostles, or any
besides Christ (in the present World) since the first sin of Adam. All these
that find in themselves so great store of the love and fear of God, as that
they conceive, that they love him with all their hearts, and fear him with all
their hearts, and trust in him with all their hearts, and repent every day,
and believe in Christ as well as the best, and have done ever since they can
remember; these full men, these rich persons, these that have souls so
perfectly replenished with all graces, that they find no want of faith, or of
repentance, or of humility, or of the spirit of prayer, or of the love of God,
or almost any thing. These that have no faults in themselves, they were never
proud in all their lives, they know as much as any of them all can tell them;
and they have not brought up so many children, they trow, but that they can tell
how to be saved; that never wronged any in all their lives; and that hope in God
they shall be saved for their good lives and good meanings. All these ignorants
never understood, and therefore only boast of much; because wanting knowledge
totally, they cannot know their own wants. Wherefore if any amongst you be
such, and out of ignorance so well-conceited of himself, let him not pretend
to be regenerate. In vain he claims Gods Kingdom, if he be not changed and
become another man. Yea, all those, that though they have more knowledge then
to brag thus, yet never felt themselves to have been the children of wrath, nor
were never pained with the apprehension of their own sinfulness. These also I
affirm to be unregenerate; and so remaining, cannot be saved. Yea, all that
allow wicked thoughts in their hearts, and never take care to see, and lament
the evil conceits of their inward man; but rather serve sin in the lusts of
it, and please themselves in thinking of that, which for fear or shame they
do not dare to accomplish; those also have no part in Gods Kingdom, as the
case goes with them hitherto. Yea, all that makes no conscience of small sins,
which the world does not take notice of; but pass over such trespasses,
without making any matter of them, or troubling themselves to bewail them;
these have cause to fear^ that heaven is fast locked upon them. Yea, all that
allow themselves for gain, profit, or pleasure sake, in any one sinful
action, secret or open; excusing, and shifting, and turning themselves into all
shapes, to make themselves not to know it to be sinful, and laboring not to
be moved with the exhortations of the Word, and checks of their own
consciences: but holding still their resolution, that that thing they must
needs do, they cannot choose but do; though their consciences would willingly
check them for the same, were they not by them put to silence. All these are
to number themselves among the unregenerate: and such, as if God be, as he is
(most perfectly just), cannot be saved, whilst they abide such. But most of
all those that live in open gross sins, and yet flatter themselves with
hopes of doing well enough, because others live as bad as they; and because they
doubt not to ouer-entreate God, with the repentance of the last hour: these
are farthest off from regeneration, and remain in a dangerous and damnable
estate; so that I doubt not to proclaim unto them in the name of God, that (so
continuing) Christ shall profit them nothing; Christ shall never bring them to
heaven. Now therefore if any of you that hear me, do perceive your selves to
be such, I pray you lay aside all your conceits of going to heaven: I pray you
surcease to feed your selves with vanity, and wind; and to make your selves
secure, by making false promises to your souls of that they shall never
attain. Know thou whosoever, that art an ignorant boaster of thine own
goodness; or a man senseless of thine own badnesse, and must be dispensed with
all in some one darling sin, which feign (against the truth beginning to show
it self to thee) thou would not have to be counted a sin: know thou
whosoever that art a worker of iniquity, and put off repentance till the
time of sickness, that thou have no part nor portion in this inheritance; that
thou art the old Man, leauened with old leaven, and not renewed nor purged; and
therefore that it cannot possibly befall thee, to see Gods Kingdom, if Christ
be true, and God just, so long as thou abidest unchanged. What should one do,
to make dead men feel their death? If we could speak plainer to you, we would
(brethren): for why, we know, that at this very point, your whole happiness
must begin. The unregenerate can never become regenerate, till he first
perceive himself unregenerate. A child of Satan can never be made the child
of God, till he feel himself the child of Satan. Our spiritual felicity
begins in the sense of our spiritual misery; and therefore we take all this
pains to make you see your wretchedness, because it is upon none other
conditions auoidable. Open thine eyes therefore and see; open thine heart, and
feel thine vnregeneracie, thy being in the state of death, thine horrible
sinfulness, and thy being (as I have often said, and cannot too often say) no
better then the very son and daughter of the Prince of Darkness. Will you
not see? will you not feel? will you hood-winke your selves? will you harden
your hearts? will ye suffer the Devil to turn you from heeding your own
estate, till at last it be past recovery? I pray you do not so, be not so
great enemies to your own souls, I entreat you: But what should I go
forward with more words to you? I will turn my speech to God for you: And, O
thou Author of life and light, be pleased now to remember the end of thine own
ordinances, and make them fruitful for the purposes by thy self appointed. O,
open the eyes of some one of these blind men; inlighten the souls of some one
of them, at least with so much light, that they may perceive themselves
hitherto to have been void of light: put into them, at least, that first
motion of life, that they may feel themselves hitherto to have been but dead
men, and void of life: O let not thy word return empty, but make it
effectual to all, to which thou sendest it.

CHAP. IX. Containing an exhortation to seek regeneration.
AND now (brethren) in the next place, 2. Exhortation, that they seek to come
out of this hard estate.
if there be amongst you any, whose soul the Lord may have awakned to feel
their unregeneracy; to them let us further ad a word of exhortation. It were
(in truth) a poor comfort to know ones wound, if there were not a plaster
delivered withal to heal those wounds. But we come to entreat you to be made
the children of God, and to be begotten again: and withal, we come to
assure you, that you may be such, if you do not reject the present offer of
grace. I pray you therefore let these words sink into your minds, and be you
willing and desirous to be the children of our heavenly Father. I hope
(brethren) the request will not seem to you unreasonable, nor the motion
light, and not worth harkening to; when the God of heaven sues unto you, that
be his enemies, to be changed and become his adopted sons. Sure I am, that if
a Gentleman should, with the same good meaning, make the same offer to a poor
miserable beggar, either he would greedily accept the motion, or else all that
knew him, would esteem him mad. How much worse then mad art thou then, which
wilt reject the Lords own motion, offering to become thy Father, and
entreating thee to be willing to be made his child by adoption? you may
(perhaps) say unto me, that you do already wish and desire so to be with all
your hearts, but that all the difficulty lies in being made such as you desire
to be. And I answer, that if you do indeed and in truth long and desire to be
regenerate, with a settled and firm desire, and stable and confirmed wishing of
your hearts, that then the greatest impediment is removed, and the greatest
difficulty overcome, and your regeneration is now in a fair forwardness, yea
verily, it is already begun; and do you but cherish these motions, and it
shall be perfected. You may (perhaps) make another objection, and say, that it
is not in your power to regenerate your selves; and therefore it is an idle
attempt of me, to persuade you to become such as you cannot make your selves to
be: for the Spirit of God must regenerate, and who can command that to come
upon him? To which I answer, that indeed a man cannot possibly regenerate
himself, this is Gods act, not his, he is a mere patient in it. But yet I say
moreover, that the doctrine of the Gospel is the ministration of the Spirit;
and where that is preached, as now it is preached amongst you, there the holy
Ghost comes to regenerate; there he comes with his in-liuing virtues; there he
is present with his quickening power: and he that will not resist the motions and
exhortations, that the word and spirit of God do raise up within him, shall
surely be visited from on high, and shall have the spirit of God descending
upon him, to make him a new creature. Yea further I say to such an one, that
God has appointed certain things to be done by men, which they that will not
refuse to do, may do, and those that shall do, shall be regenerated. For
there is a common work of illumination, so making way for regeneration, that
it puts a power into man of doing that, which when he shall do, the spirit of
God will mightily work within him to his quickening and purging. All you
therefore that find your selves as yet not to be regenerate, but yet feign
would be (for to others it is in vain to speak, they be not yet so far
enlightened as to be capable of regeneration), but all you, hearken and
understand what it is that you must do, that you may be regenerate; and by
doing which, you shall not fail of receiving this wonderful blessing of a new
life, to be created in you: only yet with one prouiso, that you do not dampe
the present motions of the word and spirit of God with procrastinations and
delays, with putting off, and deferring till an other time. Nay, you must
accept of the offers of grace, whilst it is called to day; and know, that
nothing does more harden your hearts, and chase away the spirit of God from
them, then that foolish and slothful shifting off his persuasions, with a
purpose of settling about the work hereafter, but not yet. Thou must take Gods
time, and not bid him tarry thy time. It is no reason the King should wait
upon the traitor, till he were at leisure to receive a pardon. If thou will not
have while, when the Lord sees it fit to make thee a sweet promise of grace:
remember the terrible threatening of Wisdom, You shall seek me and not find
me, Prou. 1.24.28.
because I stretched out mine hands, and you would not hear me. O then venture
not to put off God till hereafter. Who can tell whether ever he will come so
near thee again, if at this time thine entertainment of him be no better,
then to shut up the doors of thine heart, and tell him the rooms are otherwise
filled, there is no place for him as yet? But now I say with prouiso, that you
will now begin without further deferring; I will show you the way of life, and
tell you that, which if you will be pleased to do, (and it shall be no such
hard matter nor impossible, but that your own souls shall confess there is
nothing to hinder you from doing it, but your own unwillingness, or
carelessness, or both) if, I say, you will be pleased to do, I testify unto
you in the name of the Lord, that you shall be regenerate; and that from the
time you begin to do them, you begin to be regenerate. Now these things are in
number three, (as I said before) neither impossible for you to do, Whe^eof the
means are three.
nor yet difficult; there lackes but a willing mind, and they be easily done;
only understand of them, that you must not satisfy your selves with having
done them once, but must do them continually; because they are means of
increasing holiness, as well as attaining it. The first is, 1. To desire and
pray for the spirit of regeneration.
so to nourish your apprehension of your own misery in not being regenerated,
and your earnest desire of being regenerated, for the escaping of this misery,
that it may break forth into requests and petitions unto God, for his spirit
of regeneration. Go thou and muse thus with thy self; Alas, I see most
evidently, that as yet I am but a son of old Adam! there is no thorough
change of mine heart, nor of my life, from sin to holiness; I am as I was
borne, and have not been altered by a new birth: and therefore I am in no
possibility of being saved. This night, if God should (as how know I, but he
may this night) take away my soul from me, O I perish; for out of heaven, the
blessed Savior of mankind has excluded me; for thither he tells us evidently,
that none must enter that are not borne again; and O miserable man, I that am
not yet capable of eternal life, and that stand in such terms with God to
this day, that he cannot both keep his own truth, and save my soul! What
shall I do? what course shall I take? O could I once obtain regeneration,
then I were safe, then I were sure; then if death should come immediately, I
need not fear it; then were the gates of heaven opened unto me, and then I
both might, and should enter in thereto. O that I were regenerate! O that I
were borne again! O that I were a new creature! O that once the image of
Christ Jesus were imprinted upon me! All the goods and honors of this world,
would not so much advantage me as holiness, if I could attain it. But what
do I stand wishing? I have been told that the spirit of God is he, who
regenerateth his people. Wherefore I will beg at his hand that mighty and saving
work of his spirit, and boldly I may do it: for Christ Jesus has promised to
all that thirst, that if they come, Isa. 55.1.
he will make them drink of the waters of life. Yea, he has told me, that if
we men who are evil, can yet give natural good things to our children that
ask them; God will much more give his spirit to them that ask it. For his
promise is, to pour waters upon the dry ground, and floods upon the thirsty
ground, and to pour out of his spirit upon all flesh. Well I am assured the
word of God is true, and these promises shall be performed to every one that
asks, that he may receive; and to every one that seeks, that he may find:
for the Lord is rich in grace, and gives to all that ask, and hits no man in
the teeth. And therefore I will take courage to call upon him, for that most
desirable gift of God, even the spirit of regeneration. Thus having enkindled
thy desires, bow thou the knees of thy body, and of thy soul too, unto the
king of heaven; and pour out thy requests in the most submissiue and earnest
manner thou can, saying, either in these words, or to this purpose: O Lord, I
am a lost sheep, I am a child of wrath by nature, I am most miserable, most
sinful, and I see that in me there dwells no good thing, and if I be not
renewed I must perish; I beseech thee have mercy upon me, that I perish not.
Send thy blessed spirit into mine heart to regenerate me; for so is thy promise
plainly made in thy word. Thou know that I cannot make my self new: O let
thy spirit come upon me, and make me to have a new heart, and a new spirit.
Lord Jesus Christ, send thy spirit into me, which may restore me from this
death of sin (which now at last thou have made me to feel) unto the life of
holiness. Thou toldest the woman of Samaria, (...) 4.
that if she would ask of thee, thou would give her the water of life. Now
Lord, I come and ask of thee that water, that living, that precious water of
the holy spirit. O give it unto me, that I may never thirst, but that it may
spring forth in my belly, and become a river of water. O Lord, I beg not money,
I beg not honor, I beg not health, I beg not natural wisdom; but I beg
that, which I have more need to receive, and shall have more benefit by
receiving; and which thou have more promised to give, and shall have more
honor by giving, then by any such temporary or external thing. O give me
therefore thy holy spirit to regenerate me, and make me to feel by experience
the truth of thy gracious promises. My brethren, I have put these prayers into
your mouths: learn you to pour them forth, before the throne of grace in
secret; forget not in some such manner of words to cry for this best of all
gifts, and beg earnestly, and if thou can not amplify, yet multiply; if thou
can not use variety of words, yet repeat the same request often, and again
and again; if thine invention serves not to say more, let thy desire force
thee to dwell upon this 20. times, and rather then fail, twice 20. times. O
Lord give unto me (a miserable sinner) thy spirit of life and grace to
regenerate me; for so have thou promised to them that ask; and I ask Lord,
and resolve to continue asking. I certify you all from God, and by this
authority of Christ Jesus committed to his Ministers, do verily assure you,
that he who so seeks regeneration, shall as certainly be regenerate, as God
is true of his word; and that is more certain then the Suns shining in the
heavens, and the earths keeping his own place. I know that Satan will step
forth to hinder you from following this counsel; he will strive to make you
careless of it all together, as if there were no need of begging so hard: but
I assure thee, that he does but beguile thee. Never any man was regenerate, nor
shall be (after years of ability to pray) unless he do pray for it: for the
gift of the spirit is promised to you that ask, and to none else: and by
telling thy self of thy misery in wanting regeneration, thou shall easily
shake thy self out of this carelesnes; and bring thy self to a care of
seeking that, which but by seeking thou can not get; and but by getting thou
can not be saved. Then will the Devil assail thee with more tentations, and
cast objections and doubts in thy way, as if it were in vain to pray; for sure
thou shall not be heard: but believe him not; he is a liar in going about to
make thee make God a liar; for is not the promise so universal, as no man is
excluded that does not exclude himself? does it not run thus, every one that
asks receives: every one that seeks finds, and therefore say thou to
thine own heart, if every one why not I? sure I will ask then, and will not
spare to speed, by sparing to speak to God. And that thou may yet more
imbolden thy self, know that God has tied thee by a kind of vow to seek to
him for the spirit of regeneration, and himself to give it unto thee, when
thou so seek. For, tell me, art thou not a man professing to be of the
Christian religion? Wast thou not baptized in the name of the Father, the
Son, and the holy Ghost? To what end was this washing; but to assure thee, of
the spirit of God working like water to thy regeneration? Wherefore urge thou
the Lord with his own seal, and say, O Lord! what better evidence can I wish?
Thou have given me the seal of regeneration. O make it to appear not to have
been an empty sign: Lord, baptize me with the Spirit, and with Water; even
wash me and cleanse me, by that pure Water of thy holy Spirit; which may
sanctify me throughout, and make me a new creature. If any doubt arise in
thine heart, look thus to the seal of the covenant and confirm thy faith:
and assure thy self that God will never falsify his bond and seal, he will
wash thee according to his covenant sealed up unto thee by Baptism. In very
deed (brethren) it is an absurdity to imagine, that all, that are baptized with
water are also infallibly regenerated: but yet it is sure, that all such might
be regenerated, if considering what this seal imports, they would duly and
earnestly seek unto the Lord for performance thereof. This is that I call upon
you now to do, if already any have not done it: Let the remembrance of thy
Baptism with water, cause thee to seek to him that can give the Baptism of
the spirit; and he knows not how to deny himself nor his covenant. But
(perhaps) still the Devil may be busy with thee, and cast some quiddity, and
subtle cavil in thy way; as sometimes he has done, telling thee, that if
thou be not, as thou find thy self not to be, regenerate: thy prayers
cannot be heard, because they be not of faith. Thou may answer him, that
that work of God in his word, which moves thee so to pray, is a beginning of
regeneration, which shall undoubtedly be perfected if thou continue to pray;
and therefore that thou will not be hindered by such cauils. For thou beleeuest
that God has said true, when he said, Ho every one that thirsts; and seeing
out of a persuasion of the truth of this general promise, thou addressest thy
self to perform the duty whereto the promise is made, thy prayer must needs
be of faith (though of a weak faith), and be no sin, but an acceptable
service unto God. Now therefore (brethren) be not discouraged for praying for
the spirit of life to breathe upon you, by any cauils or objections of Satan;
be not made careless of seeking so necessary a thing, by any fond imaginations
that he will put into your minds; be not diuerted from doing this duty, by any
worldly business that may come betwixt: but what ever thou do, now in thine
heart, and when thou come home, in thy closet, and in the solemnest manner
bow thy self to God, and cry unto him for the holy Ghost to regenerate thee.
And O thou blessed spirit, that art like the wind, and breathest even where
thou luste^^, breathe into the hearts of some of these that hear me this day,
and cause some of them to be inflamed with a desire of regeneration, and to be
encouraged to the begging of it, whereas yet it has not been wrought. And so
much for the first means to be used. 2. An hiding of the word of God in the
heart.
The second means is a diligent hiding of the word of God in the heart. For
seeing that is the seed of immortality, if it be closely laid up in the ground
of our souls, it will fructify to life. This law is pure, and it will
purify. It is perfect, and it will convert the soul, if like a plaster it be
laid unto it. Let it be ingraffed into you like a science, and it will change
the wild sap of your nature, and make you able to bring forth fruits of
holiness. A man then buries the seed of the word in his heart, when he does
ponder and muse upon it; when he sets himself seriously to consider the truth
of it, and to apply it unto his own soul, taking that, that is generally
delivered, as pertaining to himself in special. Now the whole word must be
thus whetted upon the heart; not the Law alone, for that of it self will breed
nothing but miserable terrors; not the Gospel alone, for that finding the
heart unprepared to receive it, in such ill ground, will bring forth nothing
but the stinking weeds of presumption: but both the Law and the Gospel, it so
being tempered together, and obtaining a joint work in the soul, by their
mutual forces, they may both produce the grace of sanctification. So then, if
one would be regenerate, he must take to himself the whole Word of God. He must
set himself al alone to muse of it, saying to himself, These commandments the
Law gives to al mankind, and among the rest to me; these curses it denounces
against the transgressers of it, of which seeing I cannot deny my self to be
one, the curses thereof belong unto me, and I, alas, I lie under them. But
the Word of God has showed me the way of escaping the curse: for Christ Jesus,
the Son of God, was in our stead accursed, that we might be free from the
curse and be partakers of that blessing, which was long since promised in him,
saying, In thy seed shall all the Nations of the earth be blessed. Also the
Word of God does plainly declare, concerning all the sons of men, Psalm. 14.
that they have done a corrupt and abominable deed, and that none of them do
good, no not one. It shuts them all under sin, and pronounces them all the
sons of wrath. But Jesus Christ is become the Savior of mankind, and in him
his Father is well pleased, and none that believe in him shall perish. Yea, in
him is preached remission of sins, and life everlasting to all that believe
in him, and rest upon his merits, as upon a perfect satisfaction; and he does
ratify all the sweet promises of the Law, to all that believe in him, and
strive to obey him; so that for his sake, they shall obtain all the good
things which the Law promises: but because we are all sinful, it cannot
bestow them on us. I am a sinful wretch, I am a cursed creature, I am under
Gods anger in my self; but Christ Jesus has satisfied for my sins, he has
performed a perfect righteousness for me. I will go out of my self, I will
renounce mine own righteousness and rest only in him, even upon him only;
in whom (O my soul), assure thou thy self to find full remission and perfect
salvation, only so be it, thou turn not the grace of God into wantonness;
but out of love to him, set thy self to keep his holy commandments; and take
upon thy neck that sweet and gentle yoke of his, the bearing of which is the
most comfortable liberty in the World. Certainly (men and brethren) he that
will often renew these meditations in his soul, and see the foulenes of sin in
the glass of the Law, and the sweetness and brightness of Gods free grace
shining forth in the doctrine of the Gospel, shall surely be translated into the
image of God from glory to glory. Therefore now resolve with your selves, that
you will find time constantly to meditate on the Word of God, and it shall not
fail to give light unto your eyes, and life unto your souls. So have you the
second means of attaining regeneration. T^ir^, constant (...) the Wor^
p^eached.
The third and last is to attend at the gates of Wisdom, to wait on her
posts, I mean, to be constant hearers of the Word of God preached. This is the
ordinance of God, which he will work by most effectually and most usually. The
mouth of the Minister is the Conduit pipe, whereby the Lord does please to
derive the sweet and wholesome waters of life into the souls of men; 1. Cor.
1.20.
It has pleased God by the foolishnes of preaching, to save the^ that believe.
The Lord has appointed his Ministers to be spiritual fathers, by their
labors in publishing his Word, to beget men unto him: and whosoever will not
seek regeneration and salvation here, where God has taken order, that he may
meet with them; he for his carelesnes or ignorance of Gods ordinance, shall
never be able elsewhere to attain them. I told you mine opinion before of
the Word barely read. I cannot esteem it quite deuoide of all power to
regenerate, where God does not give unto men a possibility of using other
help; I see not that he should be thought either unable or unwilling to work
by this: but where preaching with pains, or cost may be gotten, there he that
to save his labor, or to spare his purse, will neglect it, shall never be
borne again. Wherefore (beloved) you must make high account of this ordinance,
you must follow it, you must be constant in frequenting it; that the Lord by
the mouths of his faithful servants, may breathe the breath of life into you.
I confess that there is a kind of fine, neat, dainty preaching, consisting
in wel-sounding words, and streines of wit and humane learning, to set out the
skill and art of the speaker, and make the hearer applaud and commend him;
which a man may well doubt, whither God will ever bless to the winning of
souls. These selfe-preaching men, that make preaching little else, but an
ostentation of wit and reading, do put this sword of the Spirit into a velvet
scabbard, that it cannot prick and wound the heart; it cannot work life, by
working death first; it cannot quicken, by killing before it quicken. But the
plain and downright preaching of the Word, by laying it open in plain
terms, to the eyes of the mind; and laying it hard to the very consciences, by
exhortations, rebukes, and comforts, for which it is profitable; even this
foolish preaching, is that that must make you wise to salvation. Wherefore how
much were it to be desired, that all we Ministers would follow that, whereby
(with fetching less circuits, and taking less unprofitable, and
selfe-intended labor) we might do more good to men, and bring more glory to
God? and, Oh, how much are you to be called upon, to love the Word of God
preached, to be glad to have it plainly delivered unto you, and with
earnestness pressed upon you without all quirkes of wit, and gilded shows of
man's wisdom, and of gay words? In one word therefore I do you all to wit,
that this preaching is the instrument of God, I mean the chief and principal
instrument, by which he is pleased to regenerate men's souls. Wherefore I
command you all in the name of the Lord, to love it, honor it, frequent it, and
submit your selves to it, as you love your soules-health. But let me add one
necessary observation more in this point. They be but unclean beasts, that
do not chew the cud. If you will have the Word, which you hear, effectual,
to make you the sons of God: you must not be careless and forgetful
hearers; you must not let it slip from you, as soon as it is heard: but you
must join meditation with it, and after you have heard, consider with your
selves what you have heard; and ponder upon it, as upon a thing that much
concerns you, and lay the precepts, reproves, threats, promises, and
exhortations thereof, unto your souls; saying each to himself, I see this is
a duty; have not I omitted it? O yes, I have! and so fall a begging pardon for
former omissions, and strength for more careful performance hereafter, and so
in all the other parts of the Word that may be delivered unto you. And
(brethren) the Word thus heard in the Church, and thus ruminated, digested and
concocted at home, will be a Word of power unto you, to convert you to God from
the power of Satan. Thus I have showed you the means of being made the sons
and daughters of the living God. Be they not plain? be they not possible? be
they not easy? If any of you miss of a new birth, is it not because he cares
not for it; and in very truth, because he is not willing to accept it? I call
your own souls to witness, and that God, in whose name, and those Angels, in
whose presence I have spoken these things unto you, that God desires not your
death, he would have you saved; he offers salvation, he would have you
renewed; and he offers the spirit of renouation; and if you want it, it is
only merely wholly, because you regard it not, and because you will not take
his directions in seeking it. O thou therefore that art unregenerate! see thine
vnregeneracie; desire to be regenerate; call upon God for his Spirit of grace
to regenerate thee; ponder upon his Law and his Gospel, the seed of
regeneration. Hearken to his voice, speaking in his messengers; and meditate on
what thou shall hear from them, and thou shall be regenerate. But if thou will needs stand in thine own light, and out of a conceit of being already in
a good estate, keep thy self irrecouerably in an evil estate; or out of
sloathfull negligence, or profane carelessness, omit to follow the sound
directions, which have been given thee: be thou ever then the child of the
Devil; be thou ever the son of perdition; work out thine own destruction,
and thy blood be upon thine own head: the Lord is free; we are free, and of
thine own hand alone it shall be required.

CHAP. X. Comforting the Regenerate.
ANd so much be spoken to them that are not borne again. 3. Use to those that
are regenerate.
Now from the same point also we have something to say to those, that through
the grace of God, have been blessed with this greatest of al blessings, and
that both for comfort and exhortation. First then, 1. C^ns
let us lay open before the sanctified man, the riches of consolation, of which
the words of our Savior do put him in possession. This work of the Spirit of
God, does him more good, then all the wealth, strength, health, wit, learning,
beauty, credit, favor and grace, that could befall him in the world. For all
these things forenamed, a man may have in as great abundance, as this earth
could yield, and yet be no whit nearer to heavenly felicity; yea, be quite
out of all present possibility of attaining it. But so soon as ever the
Spirit of God from above, has visited the soul of a man, and has begotten in
him the image of Christ Jesus; so soon is he interessed into the glorious
Kingdom of God, and has that riches and honor of heaven appertaining unto
him, as an inheritance that cannot fall besides him. Every true Christian
therefore, be he of never so mean repute and parts, in the esteem of others,
or of himself, is yet a great, and a rich heir, and has a mighty and large
kingdom, by virtue of this birthright appertaining unto him: for the
excluding of all that are not borne again, from out of heaven, is a plain
admittance of all them into heaven, to whom this benefit of a new birth has
befalne. The one cannot but be saved as well, as the other cannot possibly be
saved. Seeing if the cause that hinders our entrance into Gods Kingdom be
removed, we need make no question, but that our passage afterward, shall be
found both certain and easy enough. O therefore that the children of God
could sufficiently understand their own bliss! that with hearty rejoicing
within themselves, and unfeigned thankfulness unto God, they might pass on
forward toward the fruition of it. Hope of great things in the world does fill
the soul with joy; and men before the attaining of good things, made sure and
certain unto them, do comfortably foresee, and expect the attainement. Let us
do so for things spiritual; consider with thy self, to what inheritance the
Lord of heaven has pleased to adopt thee. Represent unto thy self, the
unutterable joys which are laid up for thee, and which thou can no more be
deprived of, then God himself can fail of truth and al-sufficiencie: for he
that has promised is faithful, and will perform his promise. The children of
God, whilst they frame their affections according to their present estate in
the world, do walk heavily and discouragedly; at once wronging both God, that
has given them such excellent things to take comfort in, and themselves, that
have received so certain assurance of such things. Does it become thee, to
whom God has made over the royal inheritance of heaven, purchased with the
blood of his own Son, to wear out thine heart with coffeehouse, and to
mar thy face with carnal tears? Is not the fullness of celestial glory and
riches, able to counteruaile thy mean and afflicted estate here? Cannot
eternity outweigh this inch of time; and infinite blissefulnesse, the present
sleighthy afflictions? surely the balances are too too unequal, wherein
things of so great value, are not of sufficient weight, to pull down such
trifles. It is nothing in the world, but our being led by sense, rather then by
faith; which makes our hearts heavy, and our lives uncomfortable. Let us but
clear up our eyes, dimmed with excessive, and causeless tears; and we shall
find matter enough for glorious and unspeakable joys, even in these
tribulations, which feel most burdensome unto us. Be thou never so poor,
never so despised, wronged, troubled; yet being regenerate, God is thy Father,
Christ thine elder brother, heaven thine house and habitation, and the glory
thereof thine inheritance. Can he be poor, that has such riches? despised,
that has such honor? dejected, that has such comforts belonging unto him? To
every soul amongst you, that is able to approve his regeneration unto
himself, I am to speak in the name of the Lord, and to say unto him in this
wise; That he is not to lay the fault of his troublesome, and discontented life
upon his estate, but alone upon his unbelief and inconsideratenes: for God
has given cause and means enough, of being full of hearty comfort and joy,
in despite of all that the devil, and the world can do unto him. Do thou
not see, how frolic the foolish worldling is, if he have gotten a few
thousand pounds together? if he have built him a fair house, and purchased a
good living, or two, lying near about it: and yet in such terms stands his
soul with God, that if he should (as he may) decease to night, he were sure
to be roaring in Hell before morning. But thou, to whom Heaven is ascertained
by the most plain evidence, and strong assurance, that God can tell how to
make unto his creature of a future thing; if thou have an ill child, a froward
yoke fellow, a sickly body, a penurious and friendlesse estate; do spend
thy time in sullen coffeehouse, weeping, and wailing, and taking on, with
little less immoderatenesse of grief, then Rahel weeping for her children,
which would not be comforted, because they were not. I tell thee the truth in
the name of the Lord, this is a great sin of thine, and a soul shame for
thee. Is it not a sin to vnderprize heaven? is it not a sin to imbase Gods
richest gifts? is it not a sin to dis-esteeme these benefits, that pass all
the estimation of all men? and what is this but a dis-esteeming, imbasing,
vnderprising of heaven it self, to carry thy self as if the comfort and
felicity thereof, were not of worth enough, to keep thee from sinking under
the burden of sorrow, about earthly matters? Again, tell me, if thou
should hear of a man that had at the same time made two bargains, by the
one of which he should loose some four or five shillings (or pounds say); and
by the other he should gain so many hundredth thousand pounds: and upon the
former trifling loss, should sit weeping and sighing, and wringing his hands,
and crying out that he were undone; though he knew well enough what a rich
amends his second bargain had made him. If (I say) thou should hear of
such a person; what would thou say to him? would thou not cease pitying
him; and even break into laughter, at his so ridiculous and absurd folly, that
would needs torment himself without all cause, and would not enjoy the good
that God had offered him? In truth few men would find in their hearts, so much
as to take compassion of such a wilfully-miserable man. Hearken now then what I
say; Thou art this man forespoken of, and thy carriage is just his carriage: so
that what accusations of folly and absurdnesse thou would cast upon him, the
same do (in the truest application of things) appertain to thy self. Thou
have two lives, and two estates; a temporary, and an everlasting. For the
temporary, thou have indeed (let it be confessed) made but a sorry match: Thy
children are not so dutiful, thy yoke fellow not so loving, thy state not so
plentiful, thy friends not so faithful, as were to be wished. But for the
everlasting, thou have made a bargain above all imaginations gainful. For God
is to thee a most faithful friend and Father; Christ Jesus a most dear surety
and brother; heaven a rich inheritance, all Saints fellow-citizens, and all
Angels willing servants; and after this minute of time spent in affliction,
thou shall pass to a state of bliss that never shall have an end. In truth
the gaining of ten hundred thousand pounds, does not more exceed the loss of
two single pence, then these thy spiritual benefits exceed thy natural
crosses; and therefore (I say) it is most ignorantly and simply done of thee, to
pass away thy days in heaviness and sighing; which thou have so good and
sufficient cause to spend in all holy cheerfulness and rejoicing. Would
thou then be acquainted with the true cause of thine unquiet and uncomfortable
living? It is not the multitude nor greatness of thy crosses; it is not the
heaviness of those afflictions, that lie upon thee more hard then upon other
men (as thou art ready to imagine so, seeking to excuse thine own fault); but
it is thy carnalnesse of mind, thy being led all by sense, thy looking only to
things visible here before thine eyes, and not to things invisible, prepared
for thee above the clouds, and kept for thee by a strong and able friend,
Christ Jesus, that has also bought it, and paid dear for it. The children of
God do not take pains to make themselves understand their own inward
happiness; they will not find time enough to contemplate the beauty of that
goodly portion, which the Lord has allotted unto them; they will not bestow
their thoughts in heavenly meditations: hence their being overcome of carnal
sorrow; and well may they thank themselves for the want of comfort, seeing
they will not open their eyes to look abroad into the land of comfort. I am
sure if any of us were shut up in close prison, for the space of one whole
twelue-moneths; and should there be destitute of all good attendance, lodging,
fare, and other comforts; but withal were assured, that at the years end he
should surely come out of prison, and be made a great Prince for all the rest
of his life, which should endure for the space of forty or fifty years
after: he would scarce feel any trouble in that restraint, any grief in
those wants, any discontent in that bad usage: yea so much familiarity would
his thoughts have, with the wealth, and honor, wherein he should live so long a
time after his enlargement, that the imprisonment would seem nothing unto him;
and he would rather wish to lie in prison upon those terms, then to live in
his house without those hopes. My brethren, such, and none other is your
condition. This world is your present prison; and for some of Gods children it
cannot be denied, but that they do find in it somewhat course entertainment;
but it is certain, that after a little time (perhaps less then half a year,
it is (sure) not many years), they shall be enlarged; and after their
enlargement advanced to a kingdom so far excelling all earthly kingdoms, in
the honor, wealth, joys thereof, as gold excells dirt. And this kingdom they
shall be sure to enjoy; not for forty or fifty, nor for so many thousands or
millions of years: but even for all eternity world without end. What do you
then sowring and imbittering your hearts with thinking upon the tediousness of
your imprisonment, and refusing to take comfort to your selves in the
consideration of your kingdom? It is therefore (as I said above) long only
and merely of your carnalness^, in not pondering of the good yt God offers unto
your souls; which makes you lie mourning under the pressure of your
afflictions. Wherefore settle your selves to resist carnal sorrow, and to
embrace spiritual joys; you shall find your labors this way void of
difficulty, and full of success. When thy worldly heart would thrust thee
into the pit of worldly sorrow, by telling thee of thine hard fare, thy poor
house, thy little means, thy debts, thy wrongs, thine enemies. Stay thou thy
self up by opposing to all these, the consideration of thy new birth, whereby
thou art instated into an heavenly kingdom; wherein thou shall abound with all
fullness of joys for evermore; and wherein thou shall be more happy and
blessed, then thine own heart can possibly conceive of, and that for evermore:
And then propound the case unto thine own self indifferently, and say unto
thy soul; O my soul, look on both sides with an impartial eye: look to the
condition of my body, and estate, and take a view of the miseries that lie upon
me; but look withal to the condition of my soul, and ponder well upon the
happiness that I am admitted unto; and then be thou but an impartial judge
betwixt sorrow and joy, to whether rather thou ought to incline. I am
sickly, but I am regenerate and shall be saved: I am poor, but I am borne
again, and shall see the kingdom of God: I have few friends, but I am made
the child of God, and shall attain heaven. I have few friends, but I have
received the spirit of grace to beget me again to a kingdom immortal,
undefiled, and that fades not away. I have a froward husband, or wife, or a
stubborn son or a daughter; but I am Gods son or daughter, and have Christ
Jesus to be mine husband and yoke fellow. Have I these blessings to
counteruaile these miseries? and shall I pule, and whine, and look with a sad
countenance, and walk with a dead heart? Nay I ought not; nay I must not; nay
I will not yield to this extreme weakness of carnal lamentation. I have
cause to be glad, I have reason to be merry; and in spite of all that the
worst yoke fellow, or worst child, or worst estate can do to grieve me, I will
be merry, and I will be glad. O my soul rejoice in the Lord, be merry in thy
father, and shout for joy in Christ thy Redeemer. Thou art begotten again,
thou art made new, thou art regenerate: who should be lively, if not the
children of Kings? who should rejoice, if not the heirs of Crowns? I am Gods
heir, heaven is mine inheritance, and a crown of glory is laid up for me, and
I will be glad. Thus you must labor against the untowardly griefs of your
own hearts, and enjoy the wonderful blessing of regeneration. So must you
wipe away those unprofitable tears from your eyes, and clothe your selves with
the garments of gladness. For it is a wrong to your selves, a disgrace to the
good thing given, and an ingratitude to God the giver; if he bestow precious
benefits upon you, and you enjoy them not. See therefore that your hearts do
not droope, nor your faces look sad as in former time; but go you now out of
Gods house (refreshed with the sweetness of this comfort) unto your own
houses rejoicing, as once the man did that was healed of the palsy. And if
thine heart (after all this) object and say, Indeed if I were sure of my
regeneration, and so of my salvation, your speeches were to some purpose: but
alack! I want that assurance. Why then I answer thee, thou have other more
necessary work then to grieve for crosses or losses, for the unkindness of thy
yoke fellow, or death, or undutifulness, or afflictions of thy children; even
for this, that thou can not tell but that thou may be in hell (where thou
sh^lt meet with that, which is incomparably worse then all hard usage in the
world), and that within the space of 24. hours or less. Wherefore now turn
thy thoughts from striving to put away grief, and only labor to change the
object of it; that by grieuing for thy sins, and by considering thy
wickedness of nature, and of life, and sorrowful confession of the same to
God, with humble supplications for a redress of all, thou might at last
become a new creature, and be assured that thou art so; and then set thy self
to enjoy the forenamed consolation. Either (brethren) you be not certain of
your new birth, and then you have cause to grieve for things of a more
dangerous nature then outward crosses, and so to labor to know your selves
borne again; or else you be certain of your new birth, and then you have
reason even to scorn to be cast down at any outward evils, as much as a
great rich man will scorn to cry for the loss of a shilling. Wherefore if you
be not regenerate, your selves according to the former exhortation, to become
so; if you be, and know it not as yet certainly, settle your selves to search
into your hearts and lives, and to consider of the things formerly delivered,
whether you have found them in your souls yea or no, and so bring your selves
to certainty in this point: and if you be once certain of it, then apply your
selves, mangre earth and hell, to live with glad hearts, and cheerful
countenances. For once the word of David is a most true word. It becomes
upright men to rejoice. And (my brethren) that you may the better rejoice,
know, that you are to be frequent in practicing the duty of thanksgiving to
God, for this mercy of all mercies: I mean, to appear before him in your
secret closets, and there all alone (with hearts exalted to as much joy as can
be, and enlarged to as full an acknowledgement of indebtednesse as is
possible), to report before him the wonderfulnesse of his goodness toward
you, and to recount the vncountable number of his mercies, in that he has done
more for you, then if he had made you of base slaves, absolute Monarchs of
the world. The Lord (my brethren) is exceedingly well pleased with the
sacrifices of thanksgiving: no offering is better welcome unto him, then the
hearty offering up of the calves of our lips, speaking good of his name. It
does the Lord good (to speak after the manner of men) to hear his own
praises related by them that are dear unto him, and have best cause to know
his inconceiueable treasures of grace, because they have been plentifully
partakers thereof. Now the benefits of this present life are so mean,
worthless, contemptible, in comparison of those of a better life; and by name,
of this foundation of all the rest, (so it is in regard of possession and
enioyment) a new birth, as that they which want it, can but speak hollowly to
God, when they begin to speak of his mercies; and can be but very faint in
thanks, how earnest soever they may be in requests. But the child of God, that
has a right unto heaven, given him at the same time that he became Gods
child, he may most feelingly express his apprehensions of Gods goodness; and
upon occasion of this one mercy, magnify the name of the Lord his God, for all
the rest which become truly and indeed mercies, by means of this, and with
this. Wherefore I do again propound this matter unto you, as one of the most
pleasing and acceptable services, which in this present life you are able, any
of you, to perform unto the Lord; even to withdraw your selves from company
and worldly businesses, and with bended knees, and hands and eyes reared up to
heauen-ward, in the most solemn manner, to confess before the Lord his loving
kindness; and to amplify, as much as your hearts and heads will serve, the
exceeding greatness of that his undeserved grace, which he has showed in
making you new creatures, in making you his own children by adoption. This is
better then all riches, better then all nobility, better then all learning, and
better then all health. And the receiving of this one mercy alone (though one
should for all other things be as afflicted, as the world can make him or
imagine him) deserves more, and more fervent praises, then all the nobility,
wealth, wit in the world without it. Has God made thee his child? he has
done more for thee, then if he had set thee in Salomons Throne, without making
thee his child; and therefore discharge the payment of praise for so
incomparable a mercy; and that fully and without delays. Especially (brethren)
you are to do this, considering that it is (to which end we began to mention
it) a principal means of helping you to the enioyment of the comfort, which
we are about to distribute unto you. For the benefits of God then are made
truly comfortable to us, when we do turn the^ to the praise of God: but when
we forget to return him his deserved thanks, then does he justly punish us,
by taking away the pleasant relish of his benefits out of our mouths; and by
leaving the palate of our souls to such an vntastfulnesse, that we shall not
be able to find the sweetness of them: As a mouth that is out of taste,
feels no content in the most sauourie meat that is. Wherefore put together
the honor of God, and your own comfort; and (that you may have your souls so
truly ravished with the sense of his goodness, that above all carnal reason,
and almost against it, you may be glad and cheerful) set your selves (as I was
about to say) in the most solemn and hearty manner, to tender unto the Lord
this welcome present of thanksgiving. Say unto him, O Lord God of heaven, the
King of men and Angels, and ruler of all creatures, and Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ! infinite are the benefits, whereby thou have obliged my most
unworthy soul unto thee: For all that I have, I have from thee; and all that I
shall have, I must have from thee: thou art the only indefinite fountain of
goodness, from whence issue forth all good things to all that enjoy good. It
is thy wonderful goodness that I was borne a man, with use of my
understanding and se^ses: but yet Lord, far, far above all other things that in
this life I have received, or can receive, does this benefit of causing me to
be borne again, of water and of the holy Ghost, exceed. I was the son of
death, thou have made me the son of life: I was an heir of perdition, thou
have made me an heir of salvation: I was a slave to sin, thou have made me a
freeman from sins servitude, and a voluntary servant to holiness: I was under
the power of Satan, led by his tentations according to his will; I am now under
the dominion of Christ Jesus, led by his spirit, to do his will: I was the
child of the devil, and thou have made me thy child. O blessed change! O happy
alteration! I owe to thee my soul by many bonds, it is thine (Lord) many
ways: thou made it, thou have redeemed it, thou have regenerated it; and now
(Lord) accept it as an offering of a sweet savor, and accept with it all the
hearty praises, and unfeigned thanks, that a poor unworthy creature can breathe
forth unto thee. O Lord, this mercy can but be abased by words, thou have made
me thine own child by adoption, thy Son, O Lord, even thy Son, who art the
most rich, the most high, the most renouned, the most puissant Prince and King;
in comparison of whom all Princes are worse and less then very nothing. What
shall I render unto thee for all thy goodness? thou requirest thanks, thou
deseruest thanks, and thou acceptest thanks: and Lord, be thou blessed and
praised with all possible thanks. O thou art good, thou art gracious, thou art
full of compassion, mercy pleases thee: I feel, I feel that thy mercy is
over all thy works; and I have cause to say by experience, that thy mercy
endures for ever; for thou have made me thine own child by adoption, which
by nature was the child of wrath. O blessed be thy great and glorious name for
evermore. Brethren, open your mouths wide in thanksgiving, and God will fill
them full of comfort; and know that thou can not have a more sensible
assurance of thy new birth, then if thou can feel thy self heartily moved
to give praise to God for it: It shall witness to thee, that thou art a new
creature, if thou can give many thanks to him that made thee so, for having
so made thee. Rejoice therefore in thy blessedness that art borne again, and
be frequently and heartily thankful to him, by whose word and spirit thou
wast borne again; that so thou may comfortably enjoy this greatest of al
blessings, thy being borne again.

CHAP. XI. Exhorting the Regenerate to grow in Grace.
ANd this is the consolation of God we have to give you: O, all ye, his
sons and daughters; 2. Exhortation twofold:
hearken a little further (I pray you) to the exhortation that must ensue:
Seeing the Lord of Heaven has created a new life in you, learn you two things
for the necessity thereof to salvation; First, 1. To nourish this life of
grace in themselves.
to cherish it in your selves; secondly, so much as is possible, to propagate
it unto others. First (I say), make much of this life of grace; this new man
created in you according to God in righteousness, and true holiness; make
much of it: strive to confirm it; strengthen it, and increase it; so soon as
the life of nature is seen in a man, he is made (you know) desirous of
nourishment, that augmentation may follow generation: So be you also for your
souls, that you may at one time, both show your new birth, and confirm it. In
truth this I must tell you assuredly (for I know it to be as true, as the Lord
himself is to be trusted of his word), he that once has this life, shall never
see death. But I told you before, that he may feel sickness; and that if it
were not for the sick-making physic; which the Lord will give him for his
recovery, he might feel death. Now therefore I am to entreat you all, to save
the labor of taking physic, and that by seeking to prevent diseases, and to
grow in soundness of spiritual strength. You all know right well, what be
the chief things which impair natural strength, and procure diseases of
body, namely, poison, surfeiting, and staruing. It is even so likewise with the
soul: 1. By avoiding ill company and c^oosing g^od. 2. By avoiding things
sinful in resisting the first motions to ill.
first, by poison it inuenometh it self; secondly, by surfeiting it
distempereth it self; and lastly, by staruing it infeebleth it self. Beware
of rank poison: Sin, I say, sin; things unlawful and condemned; these are
very stark poison to the soul: Ratts-bane, and Hen-bane, and Mercury, and
Opium; yea, the very inward moisture of a Toade or Serpent, are no more
dangerous to the flesh, then this is to the spirit. And when a Christian man
begins to yield so much to the naughtiness of his own heart, that he takes
leave to allow some sin in himself, in some small degrees; then it cease
not to work woefully in his soul, till at last it have caused him to break
forth into the gross and foul practice of it, and then is he poisoned
indeed; and if the Lord should not come with his physic, he could not but be
damned: but howsoever, he languisheth and is sick, he leeseth the sense of
Gods favor; the desire of Gods service; the comforts of Gods Word; and the
love of the coming of Christ Jesus. Lust, revenge, deceit, love of money, love
of credit, love of pleasure, and all other corrupt affections lodging within
(if they once so far prevail, that a man is willing to follow them, in
thoughts and words agreeable to their wicked nature) do by little and little
even grieve the Spirit of God, and quench the graces of the holy Ghost, till
after a while, a man falls into some wicked act of some of these kinds: and,
Oh then, the burning, and shooting, and swelling of the body after the drinking
of Ratts-bane, is not more manifest in the body, then the miserable effects of
these sins are evident in the soul. The conscience begins to accuse; God is
alienated; the heart is hardened; the mind blinded; and sometimes a man lies long
(as it were) in a sown, before he can recover himself by repentance.
Wherefore the godly man's care must be, to oppose the first motions of sin, to
fly the occasions of evil doing, to be careful of restraining himself from
the very smallest degrees of wickedness: for a little sin allowed, will
bring in a greater; till that come accompanied with the greatest of all; and
that make a man little less then dead the second time. We must therefore cast
away the superfluity of maliciousness (that is, this allowing of sin, and
pleasing our selves in the occasions, and first degrees of it), if ever we
desire the spiritual health and welfare of our inner man. David's
conceitednesse begat idleness; idleness begat adultery; adultery, murder;
and all, a long lying, and deep sleep in sin. It is woeful to consider the
miserable ruins, that have been made in the souls of many of Gods servants,
by their carelesnes this way; how weak they have grown! how their
acquaintance with God, their delight in his Word, their comfort in prayer,
their desire of being dissolved, and their joy in a godly life, has been
interrupted! and how they have come to that pass, as scarce to show to others,
or find in themselves any sign of living! Perhaps this may be the very case of
some amongst you, that hear me at this time: O (if it be) get thee a
preservative; take thee a large quantity of godly sorrow; feed upon the
bitter (but wholesome) herbs of humiliation and grief; go and meditate on the
threatenings of the Law; on the death of Christ; on the lamentable effects that
others of Gods people have found upon their growing so naught: and recover thy
self again by hearty confession, and humble begging of pardon and of
strength. And now all you, that be (as yet) free from such woeful sicknesses,
be admonished by the miseries of others; and let not the deceitfulness of
sin so far prevail against you, that you should give any allowance unto
it, take any pleasure in the motions or occasions of it, or give your hearts
leave so much as to think or speak of it, but with detestation. Poison is
often sweet; but a wise man had rather deny to his taste the delight of
sweetness, then fill his stomach with deadly pangs and gripings. Sin is
honey in the mouth, but gravel in the belly. Hidden bread is pleasant, and
stolen waters are sweet: but, O the miserable agonies which must ensue, before
the soul can be clearly purged again, from the remainders of such poison!
It is a pleasing thing to dally, to revenge, to deceive, to play the glutton,
and the drunkard: but it must cost a man so much toil, so many sorrowful
confessions, so many heavy passages, before he can recover again the quiet
of his conscience, and his enioyment of the assurance of Gods favor; that at
last it shall appear a deare-bought contentment, and an evil pennyworth of
delight. No wise man will drink Wine and Sugar, if it have been first
impoysoned with some deadly thing: neither let any Christian so far forget
the rules of Christian wisdom, as for any paltry pleasure, or profit, or
credit (which lying, swearing, whoredom, drunkenness, idolatry, or any like
gross sin, may yield unto him) to venture the committing of them. Doubtless
if he do, his complaint shall be at last as those sons of the Prophets once
said; O man of God, death is in the pot! But to surfeit is little less
dangerous, 3 Taking heed of excess in things indifferent, and accustoming to
sparing and moderation.
then to feed on poison: to labor overmuch, and ouer-hard to the inflaming
of the blood; to drink when a man is hot, to eat and drink excessiuely;
these things do so exceedingly disquiet and ouer-charge the body, that many a
man dies of them. So in the soul, it is likewise found, that the
excessiveness of things lawful, and the unseasonableness of indifferent
actions, does sometimes little less annoy the souls welfare, then the
committing of things sinful. Especially if a man do mistake, and account that
thing lawful or indifferent, which is wicked and sinful; and hereupon out of
his erroneous judgment, lay the reins upon the neck of his carnal desires:
gross, known, confessed sins, do no more infeeble the soul, and overthrow
the quiet and strength of the inward man, then such licentiousness. The abuse
(I say) of things in themselves lawful, through the untimely and immoderate
doing of them, is exceeding perilous unto the soul; and often death is little
less, then ready to enter in at this window. The ouer-eager following of
worldly business, when a man, not out of obedience to Gods commandments, and
out of a desire to humble himself by just painfulness in his calling: but
out of a love of wealth, and a desire to grow rich and great in the world, does
set his thoughts and hands a work about the affairs of this life, so that he
can scarce think or speak (with any life or comfort) of any other thing, then
this earth; this greedy and continual pursuing of worldly businesses, though
in themselves lawful, honest, and commendable does vex the spirit, choke the
word, dis-hallow the soul, offend God, and wound the conscience, no less then
the committing of fornication would do: for this is to commit spiritual
whoredom with that grand harlot, the wicked world. Also the perpetual and
insatiable use of pleasures and pastimes (in themselves, it may be no way
sinful nor condemnable), yet still pursued with an ouer-vehement affection to
them, with an ouer-strong delight in them; when they be not used as means of
maintaining our health, or fitting our selves for the works of our calling,
and (indeed according as the name of recreations bears) for the refreshing
of the mind, and making it more lively and cheerful in better things; but are
followed for their own sakes, out of a love of pastime (which is a childish,
and too base a thing for a wise heart to be in love with), and when there is
no conscionable regard had, of that rich and precious jewel of time (which no
treasure ca^ redeem): I say, the most honest and lawful recreations in the
world, so inordinately followed, without regard of the due end thereof, and
without the practice of Christian moderation in them, is no less harmefull to
the soul, then it is to the body to be ouer-watched, or ouer-laboured. It
dulleth the heart, it clogs the conscience, it stops the mouth from praying,
it interrupteth all good meditations, and by little and little does steal away
the heart from God and godliness; till at the length gross sins and
presumptuous, do come in the neck of lawful liberties abused. The same be
spoken of the use of dainty fare, and soft raiment, and all other natural
comforts, when the heart begins to be engaged to them; when we only seek our
own satisfaction in them; when we forget to demonstrate in our manner of using
them, a denial of the world, and a crucifying of our selves to the world, and
the world to us: then they are dangerous to our souls, and do even little
less then kill up the new man in us. O I would that the experience of many a
Christian did not verify this! Learn therefore to temper your selves in
things indifferent; to be moderate in following your calling; moderate in using
recreations; moderate in meat and drink, and attire; and always rather to be
ouer-sparing to your selves in these things, then ouer-large; rather abridge
thy self of somewhat thou might have, then by venturing as far as ever
thou art able, to make thy self believe it is lawful, to bring thy self in
danger of going a step or two further, and falling into a f^at sinful abuse.
Show forth the virtues of Christ Jesus, and let it appear, that thou do not
love the world, nor the things thereof, by being content always to come a
little too short of thine allowance, then any whit at all exc^eding it. The
most wholesome diet is that, that is most sparing; and it is profitable for the
body somewhat to deny the appetite, and abridge the stomach. Even so it is
also for the soul; and no man shall ever be other then a dwarffe and
weakeling in godliness, that will not be drawn to deny himself somewhat of
his lawful liberty: for so slippery is our standing, so weak are our feet,
that if we venture to do all we think lawful in these kinds, we shall surely
do it unlawfully. I have told you (brethren), believe it as a sure truth,
which your experience shall justify, though your tongues may deny: You shall
not be confirmed in the inward man, if you do not keep your selves somewhat
short in outward liberties of the body, about profit, pleasure, food, attire,
and the rest of these bodily, and sensual matters. O prefer thy soul before
thy body; and make more account of inward strength, then of outward wealth,
credit, or merriment. But lastly, if a man do starve himself for want of
victual, 4. By being constant in religious exercises.
and pine his body, by neglecting his due meals, it is without all doubt, that
he shall have a weak and feeble body. So it is also for the soul. The Lord
that has ordained bread to make man's heart strong, has ordained also the
spiritual food of his soul, prayer, preaching, the sacraments, holy
meditations of the Word, and works of God. These are as requisite for the
souls increase in grace; as meat, and drink, and cloth, for the bodies
proceeding in strength. Now as it often falls out in the body, that there
grows upon it a certain kind of crazinesse and stomacklesnesse, which makes a
man to have no mind of his victuals; and then the longer he abstaineth, the
less mind he has to eat, the less ability to digest: so it comes to
pass likewise in the inward man; the soul begins to take little content in
prayer, in reading the Scriptures, in hearing the word preached, in the
receiving of the holy sacrament. These things are not desired, nor delighted
in, with half so much ardour and fervor, as in former time. When the case
stands thus with the soul (and likely the coming in of gain and preferment,
by diuerting the thoughts and affections from things heavenly, to things
earthly, do bring the soul to this case), then it grows weaker and weaker,
and often falls grossly and palpably. Yea, it comes to pass sometimes,
that afflictions lying hard upon a man, do even put his soul out of taste,
through the sowernesse and bitterness of carnal sorrow, that he finds no
appetite to holy exercises, (which are the repasts of the soul) nor any
co^tentment in them: then grace is in the wane also; then all virtues wither
and languish, and the soul fares like unto him that cannot eat is victuals,
whose very cheeks show it: so the outward behavior and carriage of such a
man, being far short of that heauenlinesse and fruitfulness, that once will
discover this languishing of his soul. Wherefore he that would be strong in
Christ Jesus, and in the power of his might, must stir up in himself the
Spirit of God which he has received, by constancy in holy meditations of God,
of his Kingdom, of his works, of his attributes; of himself, his mortality,
his sinfulness, the shortness of life, the vanity of earthly things, the
uncertainty of friends and wealth, and that last hour of his life, and that
great day of judgment. He must also revive the same grace of God in him, by
being fervent in prayer, and by provoking himself with all heartinesse of
desire, to beg good things at Gods hand, especially the increase of al heavenly
virtues. He must also labor to make his heart hot, with earnest and unfeigned
thanksgiving for all temporal and spiritual benefits; especially for the
death of Christ, and the kingdom of heaven by that dear price purchased for
him. He must gain all opportunities of hearing the Word preached; and not
suffer any idle objection, and foolish impediment to hinder him from
frequenting it. He must digest it by meditation, when he comes home. He must
carefully prepare for the Lords supper, by renewing his repentance and his
faith, before he come thither: And thus he must feed of all the delicates,
that God has provided for him. No so true sign of bodily health, nor so sure
means of outward strength, as a good stomach with good digestion: No so sure
token and certain means of spiritual strength and health, as a longing
desire to all holy exercises, public as well as private, and private as well
as public. By these Christ Jesus communicates his graces to us. The Word that
begat us, will nourish us. The spirit of prayer that obtained good things, will
obtain also increase of them, and so the soul must needs be well liking.
Brethren, you all are taught by nature the need of corporal food, know also
the need of spiritual; and if thou desire to have thy soul thrive in
strength and stature; forslake not thy meals, cut not off religious exercises
short, dispatch not Gods worship cursorily, turn not holy duties into matters
of fashion, and formalitie; but do them, and do them constantly, and do them
heartily, and content not thy self in doing them, unless thou find some life
and courage in doing them. And that thou may thus maintain in thee an
hungry appetite after the exercises of piety; dip thy morsels often in the
sharp sauce, and sower herbs of humiliation. Look back (so often as thou
find a kind of fullness of stomach, and spiritual satiety growing upon
thee), look back unto the former sins of thine ignorance, consider thy
natural misery and wretchedness, consider of thy most beloved corruption, and
address thy self to work some sensible apprehension of grief for these
things and cease not striving, though at first thou seem to strive in vain.
It is certain, that laboring with ones own heart, to find out his
corruptions that lie hidden, and to lament them being found out, will quicken
the souls appetite, and restore a man to some liveliness in holy duties; at
least will so far forth prevail, that if he recover not his appetite; he
shall remain sensible of this spiritual stomacklesnesse, and humbled under
it, and full of sighs and groans, because of it; which at length will cure him
without inconvenience. Now (brethren) let this word of exhortation sink into
your souls. If regeneration be necessary to salvation, then the growing in the
power of regeneration is also necessary. Weak things are often so obscured
with their contraries, that it remains uncertain, whither they be or no: but
that that is strong, will stir and show it self. Grace may be doubted of, so
long as it remains feeble and infant-like; add unto it growth and bigness,
and it will be out of question. No man can be assured of his salvation, without
edifying his inward man; more then be saved, without having the new man. If you
would enjoy your new birth, confirm it; if you would attain the comfort of
it, grow in it. Neglect not the grace of God that is given unto you: now that
you are in Christ, be strong men in Christ: and seeing the Lord has vouchsafed
you the work of his Spirit, give me leave to make use of the sweet
exhortation of Paul to his Thessalonians; and to entreat you (brethren) to
increase yet more and more.

CHAP. XII. Exhorting to propagate grace to others.
But our exhortation (if you remember) had an other member; 1. To propagate it
to others.
it is not enough for a good man to get more grace to himself, unless he do
his best also to help his neighbors unto grace. They that are begotten of
God, must do their utmost endeauours to beget others unto God. All things in
nature have an inclination to derive their own qualities unto other things,
and to assimilate or work like unto themselves, that that comes near unto
them. Fire makes al things hot, and water all things moist: and in nature,
nothing is more ingrafted, then the propagation of the kind. Surely this new
and divine nature must not be idle in this behalf; but they upon whom the Lord
has pleased, to bestow it, must labor to be his instruments, of conueying it
to others. And in truth, what more comfortable thing can there be in all the
world, then to be the instrument of making many to turn from the Kingdom of
Satan, to the Kingdom of heaven? Doubtless the point we have proved, does
necessarily lead me to this exhortation. Seeing without regeneration there is
no salvation, O let all that know the necessity, fruit, use, of a new birth,
labor to hasten the new birth of others also, that so they may be furtherances
to their salvation: to which if they have any degree of Christian charity, how
can they choose, but put to an helping hand; although (perhaps) their
endeauours that way be misconstrued, and they win no thanks, but rather hatred
for their labor? A mad man in his madness, is most outrageous against those,
that seek his recovery, and will needs force medicines, and good order, and
diet upon him: But no man after his return to his sound mind, is (I think) so
worse then mad, that then he does not thank such friends with all his heart,
and esteem himself much indebted to them for their pains: even so those that
are possessed (as all unregenerate men are) with a spiritual frenzy or
lunazie, may (perhaps) be distempered with choler against such as seek their
regeneration; that is to say, their bringing to a right mind: But if ever the
Lord show mercy unto them, and visit them with his heavenly gift, they will
glorify God for us in the day of their visitation. Understand, that it is a
great f^ult for a Christian man, not to be forward in seeking (according to his
place) to help others to the participation of the same grace with himself. It
discouers a want of zeal to Gods glory, and charity to men's souls; and it
shows, that a man has not well considered, either of the bond wherein God
has tied him to his neighbor; or of the service which he shall perform unto
God in such endeauours. See you not (brethren) how all heretics, and
schismatikes, and men of false religions, strive to draw others to their
opinions and practices? See you not, how even damned Atheism, and hellish
profaneness, and beastly epicurisme, are not ashamed to attempt the drawing of
companions? Shall Gods child alone be content to go solitary to heaven? and to
get out of Satan's clutches himself, though he lend an hand to pull out no man
else besides himself? Doubtless the readiness of wicked men to poison all
that come near them, with the poysonfull breath of their errors and
disorders, should enforce us to more forwardness and care, in seeking to be
Gods instruments, so far as in us lies, at least to prepare some to their
regeneration: unless we will be content, that they shall be truer servants
to the Devil, then we to God; and they more full of mischief, then we of
well-doing. But I am persuaded, that you are already persuaded, that this is a
duty, and that the consideration of the absolute necessity of a new birth to
life everlasting, does even necessarily enforce it upon you: for how can he say
he loves his neighbor, that will not put himself forward, to help him
forward in the way that leads to life. Wherefore that the exhortation may not
be fruitless, I will also give you some necessary directions in that behalf.
All men therefore considered as members of the same particular Church, are
either Pastors, or the flock committed to them. The Ministers are appointed by
God to make it their maine work and business, to beget men to life eternal,
and to nourish this life in them. It is their special calling, to apply
themselves unto this most profitable service to God, and the souls of men. Now
for private men, they are also to attend and heed this service with great care,
so far as it may lie in the way of their calling. Wherefore some rules must
be given to all men in general, some in particular to the Ministers. The duties
that are common to all men, are likewise of two kinds: some respecting all
those with whom they may have any occasion of dealing withal; some specially
respecting those that are under their government. In respect of al men, W^i^^
all must l^^. 1. To all. 1. (...) a g^dly (...).
they must shine forth in the clear light of an holy conversation: and
secondly, be abundant in godly exhortations and admonitions, looking first to
their actions, and then to their words. For the first: Those to whom God has
afforded this unspeakable benefit of a new life, must so carry themselves in
all their behavior, that they may adorn the Gospel of Christ Jesus; and make
others to perceive so much beauty and praise-worthinesse in their lives, that
they may be provoked, out of an holy emulation, to be like unto them;
therefore Christ Jesus has made us lively members of his body, that by
following him our head, we may draw others unto him. So Paul was bold to
propose his example to the Churches to imitate: so he tells the husband, who
has an unbelieving wife; and the wife, which has an unbelieving husband, that
they should dwell one with the husband, the other with the wife; 2 Cor. 7.16.
For why (says he), how can thou tell, but that thou may save thine
husband, or thy wife? And the way how, Saint Peter shows, saying, 1. Pet. 3.1.
that Those which will not be won by the Word, may be won by the Wife
without the Word, whilst (says he) they behold your good conversation. Lo,
how the virtuous conversation of a good wife has a singular efficacy to draw
the husband to God; and to allure him to the embracing of the same faith, which
has been so powerful and profitable to the amendment of her manners! And
albeit the woman, in regard of neerenes, and perpetuity of conuersing
together, has more opportunity to do her husband good this way; yet no
question but the like care of godly behavior, has the like power also to
work upon brethren, and neighbors and acquaintance, and is in that name
required of every Christian man. For in truth, the luster and shining of
virtue, has great force to stir up admiration in the beholders; and to
establish in them an high opinion of the person, in whom they see the same, and
to make them even wish to be found like unto them: and so at length to
condescend unto the using of the same means, by which they have perceived, so
wonderful effects to have been wrought in them. Indeed men desperately and
exorbitantly wicked, and withal so owle-eied, and so mischieuously minded,
that the shining of holiness does exceedingly offend them, and provoke in
them the sharpest hatred, and most vehement malice that can be. But for those
in whom the restraining spirit of God, has kept down corruption from such an
absolute prevailing; and some common work of grace, has planted some, either
beginnings, or appearances of some goodness; they cannot but wonder at the
image of God, and highly esteem him in whom it is; and be provoked with some
desire at least, to strive for the attainement of the same excellencies. Yea,
for those most notorious sinners, that are habituated so strongly in sins and
wickednesses, that virtue stirs up hatred and ill will in them: if ever any
cross befall them, or any trouble of mind, or the like accident, that somewhat
crusheth their corruptions, and abateth the power of their lusts; at that time,
they cannot but make known a secret estimation, that goodness wins upon
them, and even desire to seek some comfort of those, whom they think able to
afford it. Wherefore it is required of al those, whom the Lord has begotten
again to life everlasting, that they frame their conversation, as beseems
the Gospel of Christ, and agreeably to their high and excellent calling; that
men beholding it, may glorify their heavenly Father, and may be allured to a
liking of piety, which is the first step toward the working of it. They must
even shine as lights in the midst of a froward generation, being blameles and
sincere, and holding out the word of life among them: yea, they are expressly
commanded, to walk wisely toward them that are without, because their walking
may be a great furtherance to the others conversion. They must show forth the
virtues of him, that has called them from darkness to light, that their light
may help to enlighten others also. They must be patient in affliction, gentle
in bearing wrongs, painful in doing service, just in all their dealings, true
in all their speeches, pure in all their carriage, sober in all their lives,
and unspotted in their whole conversation. They must bear much, and suffer
long, and be plentiful in works of mercy, and cheerful in works of
kindness; and above all, shine forth in doing good against evil, and
ouercomming injuries with good turns. They must show themselves cheerful, and
amiable, peaceable, and heavenly minded; and that they do not serve themselves,
but seek the profit and good of their brethren, in charity. They must neither
be so licentious, as to be won by company of others, to things that are
unlawful; nor so over strict and scrupulous, as to be enemies to the lawful
use of lawful contents. And it is certain, that that man (which being
sanctified by the spirit, does show forth the fruits of the spirit (joy, love,
peace, temperance, goodness, meekness, and the rest), and that observes a
prudent mediocrity in all things, so that he neither ouerlash in unlawful
things, nor be too strait in lawful liberty), shall win to himself an
honorable estimation in the hearts of them that are not stark naught; and
shall make them ready to receive his exhortations, and to join with him in
good exercises, by which they may at length be made partakers of the grace of
God. Wherefore (my brethren) see that ye beautify the doctrine of God; see
that ye honor the name of Christ; see that ye be doers of the word, and not
hearers only, deceiving your own souls. Deny your selves, crucify your
lusts, serve not your own bellies, seek not your own things, but show your
holy conversation in the meekness of wisdom. Let those that are not yet
regenerate, behold in you that be, something that may affect them, that may
stir them to a good liking, to a care of following, and to a desire (at
least) of being found such as you are; and so by working out your own
salvation, be helpers also to the salvation of others. Secondly, let your
tongues be well ordered, 2. By good conference.
and your words gracious. Let your lips feed many, let your mouths be
wel-springs of life, and pleasant and fruitful trees; the words of which (as
it were leaves) may heal many. Although the preaching of the word by the
Minister, be the chief means of begetting again; yet there can be no doubt
made, but that good communication of private men, has bin, and may be, and (if
it were well used) would be effectual to the same purpose. The preaching that
first spread abroad the Gospel, was of men by private conference speaking to
those of their acquaintance, whom they found opportunity so to teach; as well
as by a more public preaching of Ministers, Apostles, Evangelists, and
Prophets, taking the advantage of public assemblies. And in this sense it is
said of all those, that were scattered abroad by the persecution of Saul; that
they preached the Gospel to such as they met: (not all indifferently, but
alone the Jews) until at length, some of them of Cyrene, began also to speak
unto the Gentiles. Now the words of a godly man, tending to convert others,
must be of two sorts, or rather three. First, instructions, I mean a plain
declaration of such necessary heads of Christian doctrine, as are most useful
to the working of grace, viz. of Adams fall, and the miserable estate of
mankind thereby; of the necessity and nature of repentance; of the death and
sufferings, and natures, and offices of Christ Jesus; of the exceeding great
danger of sinning, and of the endless torments of hell; of the certainty of
salvation to all believers, and of the nature of true faith, and such other
like. These a godly man should seek opportunity to fall in speech of; and
avoiding all iangling and frivolous disputes about unnecessary quirkes and
quiddities; and forbearing all opposition in matters of ceremony, and
disputable points in things external, (wherewith some do only take up the
time and trouble themselves, and the Church, without edification): I say
shunning, or slenderly and lightly passing over these, should bend himself to
a more plentiful and serious delivering of these points (which are so
necessary, that without them men cannot be saved), according as God has given
him utterance and ability; always remembering to observe the circumstances of
time, place, person: and not to speak in the ears of a scorner, that will
despise the wisdom of his heavenly speeches. O how happily might a private
man's lips spread abroad knowledge, if he would thus redeem the time to holy
conference! not as if it were not lawful to speak of other matters, either of
business, or for delight; but that the best things should not be quite
shouldred out, and utterly forgotten. Thus as men ride together by the way, as
they walk together in the field, as they sit together in their houses, they
might (without hinderance to their natural affairs) be busy in furthering
their own and other men's everlasting estate. And doubtless that man should be
wonderfully confirmed in knowledge himself, that would thus endeavor to
communicate his knowledge to his brethren. Other things are diminished by
participating; but knowledge is increased by making it common, with a most
happy and a gainful kind of increase, where both sides be gainers: and the
giver gets so much more to himself, by how much he gives more unto
another. Wherefore if those amongst you that have knowledge, do meet with
ignorant persons (as alas the store of them is so great, that you cannot choose
but meet with many), then open your lips with discretion, and let the law of
wisdom be under your tongue. Then slip gently into some one or other
necessary head of Christian doctrine, that may be most behoofefull; and from
one to an other, till your wholesome and profitable speeches, have helped to
open the eyes of the blind. Say to thy self, how can I tell but that God by my
means, may begin to make these simple ones understand wisdom; and these
ignorant learn that knowledge, which may in time procure their conversion?
then let thy love burn within thee, and strengthen thy desires so far, till
thou have broken thorough the bands of shamefastness, and fear, and other
carnal hindrances, that Satan will cast in thy way: till having made it
familiar to thy self to use good conference, thou be able to do it at all
seasons, and with all readiness. No soldier is hindered, either by
bashfulnesse or fear, if the company will give him hearing, to talk of war,
and the discipline of war. The drouer and grassier will be talking of sheep
and oxen. The husbandman cannot keep his tongue from the plough, and the
prices of his corn: Every tradesman is apt to fall in speech of the
commodities or works, that belong to his trade. Shall the Christian and
sanctified man alone, either fear or shame, to show forth the riches of his
mind, and to be telling of the wonderful mysteries of godliness? I pray you
lay aside carnal fear, and carnal shame, and resolve to approve the
goodness of your hearts, by the seasonable wisdom of your words; and
remember what David tells you in the Psalm; The mouth of the righteous speaks
wisdom, and his tongue talks judgment. Secondly, join loving and
wholesome exhortations, stirring up one another, and exhorting one another, as
the Apostle speaks. Persuade with the kindest and affablest words thou can
invent: persuade (I say) those, whom thou may hope will be persuaded by
thee, to read the Scriptures, to read other good books of good men; and if
thou think there be any hope that they will read the same, give them
withal some brief and good writing, that thou have found to thy self most
beneficial; especially persuade them to go and hear the word of God: say,
Come let us go up to the house of the Lord. Strive to bring them to a good
estimation of Gods ordinance of preaching, and to frequent it constantly, and
take advantage, of what thou know they have heard, to stir them up to
godly sorrow, and to mourning for sin, and to amendment of life. Do thy best
to draw them unto those duties, that have drawn thy self, and may draw them
to God. Great is the force of loving persuasion; it steals into the soul
before a man is aware, and takes footing before he can observe it. It leads
and guides men with a kind of gentle violence, to the things that they never
intended; and often times it alters even peremptory and stomackfull
resolutions. Forget not therefore by these goads, to prick men forward unto
all the good duties of piety, which thou have found effectual to thine own
new birth. And thirdly, let wholesome reproves or admonitions be intermingled.
How truly said he, that called these, Precious balmes? only let them be
delivered lovingly, and seasonably, in as much priuatenesse as may be, and with
as much gentleness. It is Saint Paul's precept, Admonish the unruly. Indeed we
must limit it with Salomons limitation, unless he have showed himself a
scorner: but otherwise he is, and must be more then ordinarily unruly, that
if he be gently taken aside and told of a fault, with kind words, shall not be
somewhat affected for the present, and more when he comes alone and thinks of
it. But chiefly, if a man do purposely betake himself to one with whom he
has some acquaintance, and some interest in him, having formerly prayed to God
for assistance and success; and there in mild and sorrowful manner, lay open
unto him the greatness of that evil course he can prove him to live in; the
danger of it, the dishonesty, the discreditfulnesse, the vengeance of God
against it, and such like; withal, beseeching the offender to remember
himself, and before it be too late, to reform himself. If a man (I say)
shall thus do, he must be a double scorner (even one that has settled
himself in the seat of the scornful), that shall not be somewhat wrought upon by
words so sweetly and wisely uttered. And thus must all regenerate persons (as
they have occasion) labor the regenerating of others by good life, and good
speeches. Now I show governors of families, how they should seek the
regenerating of those that are under their government. 2 To those of their
family, ^^^^r sh pping God with them.
Their care must extend it self, partly to those of years, partly to their
infants. For those of years: first, they must see God served in their own
families; learning of him that said, I and mine h^use will serve the Lord. Now
God is served in the family by reading of the Scriptures, and invocation of the
name of God: for seeing God has united them into the body of one family, and
made them a common body; therefore he does require a common service of them,
that they may all join in doing homage to him, to whom all are servants;
remembering, that even the families, as well as the kingdoms, are cursed, that
call not upon the name of God. Is the Master commanded to whet the Law of God
upon his children as he sits in his house? and must it not needs follow, that
he must join with them in calling upon that God, whose law that is? When
Daniel did pray in his house, it seems probable to me, that if it had been a
private prayer of himself alone, no man could have known it, his enemies
could not have found him at it. It was therefore rather an household prayer,
then a closet prayer; in regard of which those enemies of his did seek an
advantage against him. And seeing Hester took her maids with her in the
extraordinary prayers joined with fasting: we have little reason to think,
but that she took them to her also in her daily and ordinary prayers. Zachary
tells of them upon whom the spirit of grace and prayer should be poured, that
they should mourn (and this mourning was not without praying) every family
apart, and their wives apart. Behold an exercise of the family apart, from
other families; and of each member of the family (the wife put for the rest
synechdochically) apart from other members of it. So then, let every godly man
strive to propagate godliness, by performing these duties of godliness with
his people. Let him make them acquainted with the Scriptures, by an orderly and
constant reading it amongst them; Catechizing them.
and let him learn them, how to pray for themselves, by praying with them, and
for them all. Secondly, let him instruct them in the principles of religion,
teaching them some good Catechism, according to their capacity; at least
laboring to drive into their heads, the maine points of Christian doctrine;
and that in such familiar sort of questioning with them, that they may make him
perceive they know what they speak. Must not children be brought up in
information of the Lord? and how this should be, if they be not catechized, I
think no man can conceive. Is not knowledge as necessary for the soul, as
food for the body? Doubtless he must be void of knowledge that will deny it.
How then shall he not deserve to be called worse then an Infidel, that cares
not though his peoples souls be sterued? You all know, that the master is
enjoined to look that his servants break not the Sabbath. Assure your selves,
the law of God puts one part of his duty, for all parts of the same kind; so
that he must as well look to him, that he know God and his worship, as that
he do not profane his Sabbath. Salomons mother taught him when he was young.
She may be a president for all mothers: and the father should be ashamed to
be found negligent in that, wherein the mother must be forward. Abraham
commanded his servants to keep the law of God. How should he command them to
keep it, if he had not taught it them? God would have him that was bought with
money, circumcised. Doubtless then, he would have him also instructed in the
religion of the Jews, whereof that circumcision was a badge. In very deed, if
this, and the former duty be not done by the master, he shows himself little
to heed the salvation of his family. So that whosoever does make conscience of
helping his household to heaven, must lead them the way, by serving the Lord
with them, and teaching them his ways. Thirdly, Thirdly, bringing them to the
Church.
he must likewise bring them to the assembly of God, to hear his word
preached, and examine them what they have learnt and remembered. For if people
be at Church and attend not, little shall they get by the word: and if they be
never demanded what they have heard, they will not likely attend; but a desire
of not shaming themselves by silence to such questions, will make them bow
their ears and listen. Indeed herein the master must consider the capacity of
his servants, and encourage those of mean wits in the little they can do; and
rather draw them to remember something (who are less ready for that duty) by
loving persuasion, then by tartness of speech; and by commending to them the
necessity of remembering the word, rather then by speeches of disgrace. And if
they cannot remember any thing, yet he must not desist to examine, exhort,
admonish still; for why, this is the best means that he can do, to make them
mark and observe: and having done his own duty, he shall be blameless
before God, though they be negligent. And last of al, he must not forget to
pray unto God, for the regenerating of those under his roof in special. 4.
Praying for regeneration.
For if Paul did beg of God the salvation of the Jews (his countrymen); shall
a governor of a family forget those of his family, whom he daily sees, and
speaks with? In truth, of all requests that a man can make for his people,
this is the most behoofefull, and the most necessary. This the master that
does, shall find himself made loving, charitable, patient, courteous toward
his servants: for in exercising Christian charity toward them, he shall be
sure to find it increase. And if he make such particular prayers, either they
shall be heard to his great content; or at least they shall be accepted by
God, as fruits of his charity, as much as if they were heard. If God be
glorified by the conversion and salvation of our children and servants, as well
as our own; and his glory be (as it should be) dear unto us, as well as our
own salvation; why should we forget to beg at his hands so profitable a thing
for persons so near unto us? Wherefore if thou have formerly been behind hand
in mentioning thy wife, children, servants to God this way; now make it one of
thy daily and hearty petitions. O Lord be thou entreated to make these my
children thy children, and these my servants thy servants; and let thy spirit
work grace in the^, that they may be true members of thy family (the Church of
the sanctified), as well as of this my family. But there remains one peculiar
thing in behalf of Infants; Especially for Infants, to bring them to ^aptisme
in right manner.
that is, not alone to bring them to Baptism (which all do as a matter of
course), but to bring them to Baptism with an high esteem of ye ordinance,
and with fervent prayers to God for his blessing upon it, that it may be
effectual for their regeneration. Doubtless Baptism is the Sacrament of the
New birth: and look what efficacy the Lords Supper has to feed our souls;
the same (I must think, unless I could see a difference in the common nature
of these two Sacraments) has Baptism to the re-begetting. Wherefore it is a
most behoofefull duty of the parents (not with those public prayers alone
which are made, in, and by the congregation, being very well and fitly
prescribed in our Liturgy: but) with most urgent prayers at home, to beg of
God, that his Infant may be washed with the holy Ghost, as well as with water.
Is not a New birth worth asking, think we? thy child cannot ask; therefore it
is thy duty, as to bring him to be baptized, so to strive with God in earnest
prayers that his Baptism may become effectual. For my part (brethren), none
error seems to me more absurd, then to imagine that the spirit of
regeneration is included in water, as a medecin in a box; or so necessarily
joined to the water, as a sweet smell to something that is perfumed: that all
which are baptized, should also be inwardly and actually regenerated. But this
I hold, that we should beg the regeneration of each one that is baptized, and
presume him to be regenerate; because we see the seal of the new birth
stamped upon him. But among other causes of the in-efficacy of this Sacrament,
I think one chief, to be the parents little esteem of it; that rather do
it as a matter of course, then as a thing that shall be behoofefull for them,
and that they expect Gods blessing upon, for the sealing up of regeneration.
God is not (for the most part, he is not) importuned as he expects to be,
for his cooperation with this ordinance. Many, and many parents come to the
baptism of their children, or cause their children to be brought unto it,
without faith, without fervent prayer, without any care used to have it blessed
unto their children. Many a good man would be afraid to come to the Communion
himself, without some special calling upon God for his heavenly blessing,
without some special care of renewing his repentance; but ^uen of those, that
thus make account of the Sacrament of nourishment for themselves, there be,
that have made so little account of the Sacrament of begetting again; that
they scarce have made one prayer the more for it, or been any whit the more
careful to lament their own original corruption, and their childs, which it
has received from them. O how great a blessing is it to a Father, to have his
child regenerated even from his infancy! how great a blessing for the child to
be borne again, even so soon (almost) as ever he is first borne! Why should
not a man cry mightily to God for such a blessing? Has not the Lord bound us
to seek to his ordinance, and to bring our children to it? Doubtless
Circumcision was no more needful for Jewish Infants, then Baptism for ours.
Why then, why do not we seek to it according to the worth of it? and cry to
him also to be merciful to them and us, in washing them with his spirit, and
with water. Sure God has given thee good hope that thy child may be regenerate
there and then, by calling it to the seal of regeneration; wherefore do thou
thy best endeavor to procure that it may be regenerate, by begging the
performance of what the seal imports. Set a day (at least some good time)
apart to seek the face of God, to find out and confess thy sins, chiefly
thine original sin, which thou have derived to thine infant; lament it in
thy self, lament it in and for him; and with the most vehement prayers that
thou can put up, beseech the Lord to accept thee, to accept the fruit of thy
body, to bless his own institution to it, to wash it with the holy Ghost, and
to beget it to a new life, and to infuse into it that holiness now (by means
of Baptism), which he can as easily infuse into an Infant, as into a man of
years. I say again, pray for the regeneration of thy child, as well as for
thine own nourishing; to obtain the fruit of Baptism for it, as to obtain
the fruit of the Lords Supper for thy self. Both are Sacraments, both Gods
ordinances; but the efficacy of Baptism is more necessary then that of the
Lords supper: for if one be not borne anew he cannot be saved, he may be
saved without sensible confirmation. And Baptism cannot be reiterated, as may
the Lords Supper; wherefore what thou can do but once for thy child, that
thou must be careful to do this once in the best manner; that being well
done, it may be better then twice done. How strong and full hopes of his child's
salvation and regeneration might a parent have, if he would thus win them of
God by prayer? the fervent prayer of a righteous man prevails very much. Here
therefore, if in any thing; and at this time, if at any time; and for this
benefit, if for any benefit, see that you make your prayers most fervent. And
so much for those duties, which concern all men to use both toward all, and
toward those of their own families, both elder and infants. Now I come to
those that concern the Ministers of Gods Word especially: The Minister
principally, by constant and plain preaching.
In all the former duties they are bound, to abound above others: for their
calling affords them more knowledge, more opportunities, more authority. But
some things they must do, that others may not. They must administer the holy
Sacraments; they must offer up public prayers for, and with the Congregation:
they must preach the Word constantly in season, and out of season; following
Christ Jesus, whose custom it was to go into their synagogues upon the
Sabbath day; and so to speak, as all wondered at his gracious words. In truth,
God would not have ordained in his Church Pastors, that should live of the
Gospel, and whose maine work should be to study, and to grow in knowledge;
but that they should be careful to speak, as beseemed wholesome doctrine,
even to speak and exhort with all long suffering, and with all authority. I
do wonder in my very soul, how any man dare adventure to take upon him, the
weightiest office and burden that can be (even the care of men's souls), that
knows himself able to do no more for their salvation, then a schoole-boy of
a dozen years old might do; even fairly read them some prayers, and a
chapter or two! Is this the laboring in the Word and doctrine; for which
Ministers are specially accounted worthy double honor? Is this to be a
Worke-man, that needs not to be ashamed, dividing the Word of truth aright?
Who can hold up his face before God, and make answer to these questions; so as
it shall not enforce him to confess, that if he will be a pastor over souls,
he must be able to do more for the sheep, then many (perhaps most) of the
sheep are able to do for themselves. The conscience therefore of that pastor
must needs bear witness against him, that dares reap earthly things, when he
cannot sow spiritual? that dare challenge a place of double honor, when he
cannot perform a single work. Dare thou (whosoever thou art) for a liuing's
sake serve filthy lucre, in aduenturing on that calling which thou know thy
self utterly unable to fulfill? Doubtless the time will come, when thou shall
wish that thou had rather chosen to have lived any where then at the Altar,
not being able to do the service of the Altar; and then of the Gospel, not
being able to preach the Gospel. O then study day and night, and by continual
pains, and putting forth thy self to all laboriousnesse; make thy self able
to do that, which by paines-taking (with much prayer to God for a blessing)
thou may attain unto. I entreat thee to consider the words of our Savior
Christ; whosoever is a scribe, instructed for the kingdom of God (that is, a
good and fit Minister) must not alone have in his treasure, but as a good
householder, bring forth of his treasure, new things and old. Art thou not Gods
steward? art thou not Gods Ambassador? art thou not Gods fellow-workman? why
do thou not deliver thine embassage? why do thou not distribute Gods
food? why do thou not plant and water, that God may give the increase?
Consider what a weighty duty, what a great honor it is to be Gods instrument
for the regenerating others; to be a spiritual father, to have them our
spiritual sons in Christ, who are Gods adopted sons in Christ. Happy is he to
whom many men, some men, one man, owes his title of Gods child, and his
interest into Gods Kingdom.

FINIS.

