A REMEMBRAVNCE, OF THE worthy and well employed life, of the right honorable
Sir Nicholas Bacon Knight, Lord keeper of the great Seal of England, and one
of the Queens Majesty's most honorable Privy Counsel, who deceased, the 20
day of February 1578.

With an exhortation necessary for every estate.

The work of George VVhetstones Gentleman.

Formae Nulla fides.
Imprinted at London for Miles Iennyngs, dwelling at the sign of the Bible in
Paul's Church-yarde.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful Master Gilbert Gerrard, the Queens Majesty's
Attorney general, George Whetstons gent. wishes concontinuaunce of health
with increase of happiness.
SIr the renown, of the right honorable, the late Lord kepers virtues, and
the regard of my unableness to report them, stayed my endeavor (for a time) to
work a remembrance of his worthy and well employed life, and hindered my desire,
to commit my notes to your learned censure. But waiyng that wise men win
morality out of trifles, as Bees draine honey forth of weeds: and worthy
minds allow of every man's good will, as the chiefest garlande of courtesy.
I have performed my attempt, and adventured on your acceptance, beseching your
worshipp, in judgment to imprint, what I have left of his virtues vnreported,
and to pardon my own invention, not worthy your vewe, for sure I am to fail
in the one, whether I exceade or no, in the other. Appelles easily and lively
counterfetted Alexander, but learned Plutarke, hardly discovers his
conditions. Heracleotes perfectly painted Hellen, but Ovid erred in penning her
wanto^nesse. So difficulte a work it is to discourse, the lives both of the
good and bad, as (according to Senicaes opinion) it is ncessarie that the
virtuous report the one, and the vicious publishe the other. For that in these
causes, it is more needful, to have experience to judge, then wit to devise.
Phormio learnedly deuinyng of war, of Haniball was deamed unwise, for that
being a Philosopher, he undertook the charge of a soldier. The like may be
my check, that presume to pen the life of a grave Counselor, that of years am
grene, and of judgment incertaine: nevertheless I am the rather to be
pardoned, for that greater clerks have in this pointerred. (besides my good
will) the work instructes, and no way hurtes, which if it pass with your
favor, I hold my self fully satisfied, and my pains well i^mployed the 4.
day of March.

Your worships to command, George Whetstons.

A REMEMBRAVNCE of the worthy and well employed life, of the right honorable,
sir Nicholas Bacon Knight, Lord keeper of the great Seal of England, and of
the Queens Majesty's most honorable privy Counsel.
SOlon the sage, enacted this decree,
That only men, that lived and died well,
In written books, regestered should be.
His reason was, the leaude, which lived in hell.
Ought not in fame, among the good to dwell.
Yet least their lives, might so vnblamed pass,
In public vewe, he wrote their faults, in brass.
And truth to say, good deeds, and bad bread fame,
If once in books, about the world they pack:
And wicked men, to get them selves a name,
But little way, to work their countries wrack,
As he that did Dianaes Temple sack.
Therefore that such may lose their after hope,
Baffoule their names, and bane them with a rope.
Yet least my words, be construed from the sense,
Of wicked men, the ruin and the faule,
Briefly to write, I hold for no offense.
But rather fit, the climyng head to caul,
From such attemps, as after may him gaul,
But to the crime a couller for to use,
An other time, is cause of like abuse.
Of like abuse: may worse, if worse may be,
The naughty man, would little reake of law,
If he a cloak, could for his lewdness see,
Thus what was meant to keep ill men in awe.
In wrongs geues them, a light they never saw,
And therefore good, this mischief to forelet,
That naughty deeds, stark naked should be set.
Rain often does good, yet through a hurtful cause,
The Sun by kind, does nourishe with delight,
Even so to show, their scourge that breaks laws,
Does well, but how? the free from bands to fright.
When their sweet lives, at large for to recight,
Which liu'de, belou'de, and blameles scapeth deed
Maks men do well, on zeal and not through dreede.
But some will say, that carpe beyond their wit,
The Son sometimes a hurtful heat does send,
And nemo, sine crimine viuit.
I grant few live, but may some faults amend,
The fairest Rose, has prickels to offend.
The fruitful Be, that does sweet honnie bring,
The houswiues hand, somtymes does sharply styng
But what of this? the gain excedes the grief,
Besides the use, makes all things ill, or good,
Some men favor, where flattrie lackes relief,
Some do revenge, and never sheades their blood,
and some use both, as though their wits were wood,
But follow those, though sometimes they do sin,
Whose upright lives, both love and favor win.
Even one of those, sir Nicholas Bacon was,
Lord keeper late, keye of the common weal,
Whose death his joy, makes many sith alas,
Her Majesty, who knew his faithful zeal,
Her Counsel, when, in great affairs they deal.
His friends of course, their plaintes with tears do plant
But wro^ged men, may most be wail his want
His breatheles corse (but not begorde with blood,
Nor headles, as a Traitor) I present,
But numbryng him, among the perfect good,
I bring him forth, to pay the earth his rent,
Who there ingrau'd, to draw men from lament,
His virtuous deeds, which live in spite of death,
My willing muse, shall always keep in breath.
To blase his birthe, botelesse, or needelesse were,
Maioribus virtute prelux^i
Abides touch, with honor every where,
Whose nature, is, in act, not name to glory,
And yet this right, none can his house deny,
But by decent, a gentleman he was,
And by desarte, to honor he did pas.
First Cambridge did, with learning store head,
At Graies Inn, then the Law he did apply,
And as Sea men, with joy and comfort fead,
If in the Sun, no watrie sign they spy,
A boun courage, my mates, fair weather cry,
So they in youth, that did his sirmenesse see,
Deuinde in years, great would his fortune be.
His wit was quick, yet raisde with self conceight,
By rashness he, to rise did not assaie,
Fish sone are caught, that bight at every baight,
Like luck have they, that clime without a stay,
Which made him wright, His Pocey.
Mediocria firma,
The Snaile is slow, yet safely scales the Tower,
When fliyng birds, are scarred every hour.
He took his course, in wisdom like the Snaile,
He sought no means, but merit to aspire,
Who slowly creepes, but yet does never quail,
And even as heat, be wraieth hidden fire,
So virtue gives, in fine the good their hire,
Though Envy sekes, their benefit to thwarte,
Or they them selves, imprison their desarte.
Sufficient prose, He was Soliciter of the augmentation corte.
this good Lord keeper shows,
Whose wisdom him, with such a credit clad,
As every day, in great account he grows,
Who long a go, a worthy office had.
His counsel grave, did every creature glad,
He Speaker was, He was speaker of the parliament.
long of the Parliament,
And as he said the matter always went.
Signs of a worthy Magistrate.
And good cause why, he was, in speech repos'de
He still; deuis'de, before he did derecte,
He never with, his Prince, nor Country glos'de,
But ever did, the common weal respect,
He blamed faults, but sild the faulty checte,
He brideled wrath, and favor bleard him not,
Which rare good gifts, a matcheles fame him got.
He was in Religion a good protestant.
But which belonges, most to a Magistrate,
A Protestant, he was in zeal, as show,
Which heavenly grace, graft on his special gifts,
Within his mind, made, worthy thoughts to grow
And in the dark, as men a Diamonde know,
So by his deeds, the Queen foreknewe him just,
And in her realm, plaste him, in chiefest trust.
The Queens Magisty made him Lord keeper and of her honorable privy Counsel.
Her Counceler, and keeper of the Seal,
She made him both, of honor either charge,
Yea pillars of our happy Common weal,
And as through trust, she trusted him at large,
So he with truth, his duty did discharge,
His counsel was, both sound and quick, in need,
Yea all chaunst well, that his devise decreede.
Besides his faith, which most delights his soul,
Which holds his fame, until the world does end,
To foster wrong, he took no privy toule,
Neither letters, lord, nor all that help could lend,
Against the truth, should make, his consience bend,
The wronged man, how poor so were his plight,
Against the rich, he would restore to right.
His head was stayed, A necessary Judge, in causes of contience
before his tongue did walk,
His eyes did search, the simple suitors heart:
He trusted tears, far, more then filed talk,
For well he wist, they flow'de from poor men's smart,
And truth needs not, the aid of Retoricks art,
To hear complaints, one ear was still awake,
The other sleapt, till the defendaunt spoke.
He washed his hands, from doing any wrong,
He cloyd his heart, with care, for others ease,
He spoild his legs, in sittyng over long,
Between parties, foul discordes to appease,
For others help, he did his health disease,
Not much unlike, Licurgus king of the Lacedaemonians.
to good Licurgus course,
Who liu'de exild, to keep his laws in force.
One spetiall Grace, he used with graceless men,
With bitter tauntes, their hearts he hardened not,
But did his threats, with sweet intretie blen,
Platos opinion of an angry Judge.
By which fair means, to mende, he many got,
Where (Plato says) the Judge, whose words are whot
From all men does, regard of duty draw,
And duty gone, fear keeps few in awe.
To chearishe law, which made him first to rise,
In Grayes Inn, he, did build a Library,
From filchers hands, where law books chained lies,
The Law it self, is free for every eye,
One office eake, he made for the Chauncerie,
With other good deeds, learning to advance.
The which besides, my wortheles verse do glaunce.
And yet my words, which of his worth come short
Would gound wise clerks, into works to translate,
When he himself (as witnesses report)
In daiely acts, a far more credit gate
What would you more, he left but few his mate,
VVorthie therefore, of Abraham his blis:
Which swetely feel, both of himself, and his.
He lived long, A sweet blessyng.
and lack did never taste,
His toil in youth, brought honor to his age,
His wealth increast, how so his health did waste,
Yet sickness failde, his judgment to assuage.
The Proverb goes, once old, again a page,
But till he died, his grave advise did deal,
In works of worth, unto the common weal.
In wedlock bound, most virtuous was his wife
A blessyng great, which many great men mis,
By whom, he had (to joy his aged life,)
Of children store, whom Grace so well did blis,
As men deuin'de, his gifts did grow in his.
This hap, he had, this honor he obtainde,
And this good life, his honest merit gainde.
But mislyng drops, in time does marble pearce
Foul Canker ruste, in time does Iron freate:
Time bringes in time, proud princes to their hearce
Time, youth, strength, pride, and glorious po^pe does eat
Time strikes down, even with the low the great,
This time, that once gave him, what he could crave,
In fine deuis'de, to bring him to his grave.
But wisdom, which triumphs over time,
Foretold him often, how brittell was his state,
How man on earth, was naught but dirt and slime
How like a thief, Death creepes within the gate.
To stay whose stroke, how prayers come to late,
And therefore good (this tyrant to defy,)
He daiely liu'de, as he would howrely dye.
A necessary note for old men.
The huge great Oak, breaks with a little blaste,
If that through age, the root be worn away,
The gross man so, a qualme does ouercaste,
If years or greef, in Nature work decaie.
Sommons used for sickness.
Which peril he, did in himself forewaie,
Ear sommons came, who did his consience straight,
And for his Quietus est, on Death did weight.
Long before he died he caused his tomb to be made.
He built a house, to lodge his breathless corse,
And gasde thereon, which flesh does quake to hear
Which proves his mind, did bear a Phoenix force
To burn her self, who makes her self the fire.
Yet as her duste, a Phoenix new does rear,
So (well he wist) which joy does worldlyngs griue,
By Death, his soul, and body both should live.
O happy man, whom honors, could not blind,
Nor wealth hold back, from willyngnes to dye,
His consience clear, does prove his quiet mind,
That never shronke, when Death was in his eye.
Nay when he one his flesh, his forse did try,
For when that Death, by sickness pearst his heart,
He seamde as freashe, as if he fealt no smarte.
Of all my care, see here an end quoth he,
I count it care, which others comfort hold,
Both health, and wealth, from care are seldom free
(The cheifest joys, that in the world are sold)
Sweet is the name, but sour the use of gold,
From office and, from honors troubles come,
Nemo beatus, ante obitum.
O would that man, would way his wretched state
So long as he lives, in this sinful mase,
A very mase, this wicked world I rate,
Which does begile, with many a wanton gase.
Whose firmest joy, is like a fagots blase.
Yet for this joy, which fades as a flower,
The Devil by Death, does many a Soul deuowre.
O foolish man, thy worldly hauntes forget,
Whose beaten trakes, to hell the hye ways are,
The fairest glode, brynges woodcockes to the net,
The muse betraies, the Conie to the snare,
Even so the world, with pleasures every where,
Trains on the flesh, to satisfy his thought,
Till soul and all, in Satan's ginns be cought.
The Soul and flesh, impunges the other still,
The flesh desires, what, Death and chance does wast
The Soul couets what, none of these can kill,
Who (foilyng flesh) in Paradise is plaste,
Whose certain joy, is never sour in taste.
What worser match, can any man then make,
Then incerta, for certis thus to take.
These godly words, in greatest griefs he used
Which daiely he, in virtuous works did prove
And in this mind (whose might, but few abusde)
With every man, in charity and love,
Whom deadly panges, to passions could not move.
Senecas opinion of a good man's end.
Even in the place, where long he liu'de in peace,
By Natures course, he (happy) did decease.
His blessed Soul, his breathless corse thus left,
His counterfeit, the vewe deserves yeat,
But his good deeds (by Death which are not refte)
In Judges harte^s, are worthy to be writ,
A house for them (as gold for Diamonds) fit,
And on his tomb, for every eye to see,
his fame to show, this sweet record would be.
An Epitaphe aunswerable his honorable virtues.
HEre under lies, sir Nicholas Bacon Knight,
Lord keeper late, but not of Justice spare,
Whose office was, to give wronged men their right,
A right to use, which charge, was all his care,
Bribes coined no grace, whereas the cause was bare,
He lived beloved, and is lamented dead,
In men's good will, his gifts, this liking bread.
Exhortatio.
Unto the world (where he was well beloved)
I send this work, not philed like his fame,
Which with the test of true report approved,
I wish the best, but lived by the same,
But soft, fair words, for fear I purchase blame,
Ne vltra crepidam suter, be wise,
Most men, praise or blame, but feawe can advise.
The Proverb goes, he has a Crow to pull,
Which takes a task, the learned rules to show,
Neither his wit, nor judgment must be dull,
Least that the leaude, his lessons overthrow,
But what of this; the wise that sience know,
(Even as the Be, winns Honey from a weed)
In worthless books, morallitie will read:
Phillip king of macedon.
The wise and mighty King, of Macedon,
Gave charge a child, should wake him with his cry,
Phillip, Phillip, thy mortal state think on,
A morrall note, for such as look so hye,
As if foresight, were alwaie in their eye,
Sallomon.
When on man's wit (save one) has yet been such,
But small advise, might sometime aid him much,
King Ptolomi, the great Astronomer,
Took great delight, with Shepherds often to sit,
Whose notes he likte, of foul and fair weather,
Rude milo, taught, the Roman Senate wit,
That clemency, for conquered men was fit,
Even so my muse (perchance) may hit the mark,
That will content, or teach the learned clarke.
First since my pen, in hand, did take a taste,
To show his praise, that liu'de and died well,
The which performde (not as his worth does ask)
But even as far, as my good will, could tell,
Where self conceight, sends many unto hell,
I wish all men, by his example learn,
To use the world, as they may heaven yearne.
To trust the world, is to deceive our Soul,
To love his lust, works loss unto our health,
His youthful joys, lades crooked age with dole,
To take his prais, is to good fame a stealthe,
To sothe his Pride, consumes all our wealth.
His quaffyng cups, of vain delight to taste.
Upon the mind, does straight a Dropsy cast.
But if that man, did never taste his sour,
A slender time, his sweet, indures God wotte,
The fairest Rose, semes fresh not half an hour,
The life of man, is lickned to which lotte,
When Death does come, all pleasures go to pot
And then the leaude, to think upon their sin,
(That never ends) do feel their pains begin.
Stout Sampsons strength, king Alexanders might,
Salomons wit, Azaels runnyng swift.
Rich Craesus wealth, bold Hectors force in fight,
Haniballes wyles, Ackilles subtle drift.
Prothew, that could, his shape at pleasure shift,
Homers sweet tongue, nor Tullies learned art.
Could ward, the dent, of Atropos his darte.
The brightest son, with beat a substance makes,
That dims his light, and clads with clouds the air
(...)ride.
So pride a corse, much like the son that takes,
Works of him self, what does his state impair,
Proud Absalon, was strangled in his hear,
But wheather course, or kind does stop his breath,
At first or last, the prowdest veil to death.
(...)ouetousnes.
Let Midas moan, to mysers be a leache,
To gase on gold, who star^'d for lack of meat,
But what need I, them by examples teach,
Their care to get, their care to keep more great,
With hellishe greefes, does make the gredy sweat,
And all his care, tends to no other end.
But goods to save, for other men to spend.
Let Cesars faule (that laid the world a long) Envy.

Fore warn hie minds how they with Envy swell,
Worms profer force, against unkindly wrong,
Then man, that bears, of creatures all the bell.
Disdaines, to be, disdainde in doing well,
And he whose praise, by envy is forestoode,
Will seek revenge, upon his enemies blood.
The wrathful man, Wrath.
is sildome free from woe,
A proverb old, but daiely proved true,
The eger Cock, this fury right does show,
The which till death, does still his fight pursue.
Like fortune wrath, for angry men does brewe,
And yet revenge, a passion is so sweet,
As wit must stay, or will his foe will meet.
Of Sodom, Whoredom
and Gommorha, the ruin warnes,
All sorts of men, from wantonness to fly,
Poor Troie still, for Paris whoredom yernes,
Strong poisons close in golden cups do lie,
Crocodyles tears, intrappeth passers bye.
The like of lust, with love it lulls the fleashe,
Till from the bones, it does the marrowe threashe.
Gluttony, and drunkenes.
The headless corse, of Hollofernes wills,
Drunkenness and Gluttony to forbear,
The belchyng beast, that naught but belly fills,
Of honest men, is bauked every where,
And of excess, thus Plato does declare,
In peace more men, by surfeit catch their bane,
Then in the wars, by sword and shot are slain.
Desperation.
The last but not, of worldly euels the least,
When we have fed of vain delights our fill,
Death commes in fine, and does desolue the feast,
The sight of sin, then many a soul does kill,
Caul Judas forth, and thousands if you will,
And will them warn, us wretches by their faule,
That worldly joys, at death do turn to gaul.
Epilogus.
Se hear the joys, that worldlynges so desire,
Se how they haste, the death we feign would shun,
Se here saunce Grace, fagots for Satan's fire,
Se here with all, the race this Lord did run,
Se what a mean, from these extremes he won,
Se, se, at death, his consience well prepared,
And see the rest, through sin with sickness scared.
FINIS.

