LONDONS Return, After the decrease of the SICKNESS: In a Sermon (appointed for
the Cross) but preached in St. PAUL'S CHVRCH. January 8. 1637.

By O.W. P.

And when he was come near, he beheld the city, and wept over it, saying, etc.

Luke 19.41. LONDON, Printed by N. and I. Oaks; and are to be sold by Richard
Whitaker, at the sign of the Kings Arms in Saint Paul's Churchyard. 1637.

To the truly noble, and my much honored friend, John Puliney Esquire.
Sir,
I Have read of gratitude, in Birds, and Beasts; of a Lions thankfulness to a
Roman Captive; of a Storke which cast a precious Stone into the bosom of a
Maid, which had healed her of a wound: Which deeds of Nature do speak to me
that Gospel Luke 10.37. Vade and tu fac similiter, Go thou and do likewise.
Now if Solomon thought to shame the Sluggard into pains, by sending him to the
busy Ant; I Will think it, no disparagement, to learn in Natures School,
gratitude of a Bird. Those many favors of Love which your noble spirit has
heaped upon me, laid such a strickt siege to my thoughts, that I knew not how
to rescue my self, but by this public declaration; wherein, whilst I show my
duty, I proclaim my weakness; and deserve this censure (from the world) to
be a man guilty of gratitude: yet no matter, it is a less crime to commit an
error, then to forget a friend: and if Naaman did not remember his maid,
which told him of the Prophet, I dare say, his ingratitude was a fouler disease
then his leprosy. The last Summer, when Divine Justice had scattered us over
all the Land, your house was my noble Sanctuary; where I saw, as much Religion
practiced, as an Hypocrite can talk of; and such reverent conformity in your
private Chapel, that obedience might there safely stand for a Lecture; and
bending the knee (to the Jesus of men) would not loose a voice, but get a
blessing. And now, sir, for my royal entertainment, I present you with a
paper payment, this poor Sermon, which wear's no costly dress; preached in a
time of sadness, when sorrow is the best eloquence. To your hands I tender it,
and your religious Lady, who (to the glory of her Sex) sees her self oftener in
a Book then in a Glass, and is so enamored with saving knowledge, that she
resembles the Be, which lives in honey, or the Birds of the fortunate Islands,
which are nourished with perfumes. Now the good will of him that dwelt in the
Bush, preserve you both, and your virgin sister (second to none in Virtue) who
now increases the poor with Alms, Mrs. Mary Puliney.
as she will hereafter Heaven with a Saint: and the God of Jacob, give you the
blessing of Joseph, the precious things of Heaven, and the precious things of
the Earth; and grant, that what you sow beneath, you may reap above; God
Almighty lead you by the hands, from Grace to Glory; it is the prayer of him who
is, and ever will be

Your virtues bumble and devoted servant, O. WHITBIE.

Londons Return.
Text, Hosea 6. verse. 1. Come and let us return to the Lord, for he has torn
and he will heal us; he has broken, and he will bind us up.

Text, Hosea 6. verse. 2. After two days he will revive us; the third day he
will raise us up, and we shall live in his sight.


Here are a sort of good people met in my text, and I hope within mine eye
too; and though we are not all of one blood, yet we are all of one business;
they and we are now met, about a return to the Lord. And the time fitly
conspires with our purpose, for the year is now returned; the Sun begins to
return, and lengthens the day; after him the Spring, and Fowls will follow:
and most of you here are returned from your last years exile, to your own
houses, O stay not behind in the best and chief of all returns, your return
to the Lord.

Here is none in this, needs fear Solomon's Va soli, woe to him that is alone;
for if you will return, you shall have a whole Nation to be are you company;
the twelve Tribes are now ready to set forth: their way is our way, their case
our case, even smiting and tearing, and their Physician our Physician: oh then
let their voice be ours, and every one of us say to our neighbor, as they here
did, Venite and revertamur ad Dominum, etc.

The words are a story of the egresse, and regresse, of prodigal children, a
clear crystal glass, wherein may be seen the face, and perfect proportion
of penitent men's conversion.

Now as Travelers in a morning, will not stay at every man they meet, to
enquire the way, but having took good direction in their Inn, pass on with
speed. No more will I now stand to dispute with all expositors of these many
ways, which is the best, but lead you on like Ahimaaz by the way of the
plain, neither marching too furiously, like some Iehu's of Rome, who think to
win Heaven by their spurs, nor yet creeping a snailes pace with our lasie
Solifidians, who would get to heaven too when they dye, and yet live with their
arms a cross: but lead you fairly on, as Jacob did his wives children, and
in your way desire you to take notice of these observations.

First, Isreal's proposition. Secondly, their reasons.
The Proposition is revertamur ad Dominum, let us return to the Lord. In few
words they have spoke much.

Their reasons.

1. Drawn from Gods Justice, He has torn, and he has smitten us, ideo
revertamur, therefore let us return.

2. Drawn from Gods mercy, and the profit which shall redound to us, He will
heal, he will bind us up: He is a Chyrurgion that can heal all sores, a
Physician that can cure all diseases, ideo revertamur, therefore let us return.

3. Is drawn from Gods power and goodness, he can revive and raise us up;
though we are now dead in misery, yet he can revive us; though buried in the
graves of Assyrian bondage, he can raise us up: and this with as much speed as
power; after two days he will do it, and if not upon the second, yet he will
be sure to do it upon the third, and ideo revertamur, come therefore and let
us return.

Last of all, here is the happy estate we shall enjoy after our return, We
shall live in his sight: now we suffer a living death in the Assyrian land,
where they that hate us are Lords over us, but when once we return to the
Lord, we shall live in his sight.

In the proposition we have the Persons, Israel and Judah; their Act, a
return; their Object, to the Lord: Wherein they make: 1. An ingenuous
confession of their faults; they acknowledge, that they had gone astray,
because they desire to return. 2. Here Is their faith, in that they durst
return, had they not believed in Gods mercy, they would not have come back to
him. 3. Their charity, they would not steal to him in private, nor come alone
like Nicodemus by night, but all join together in the bands of love, with a
venite, Come, let us. 4. Here Is their humility, in that they confess, to the
glory of Gods justice, with Daniel, tibi Domine justitia, nobis confusio
facierum, to thee, O God, belongs justice, but to us smiting and tearing, as at
this day. 5. Here Is their hope, in Gods power and goodness, that as he can, so
he will revive, he will raise them up. 6. Here Is their patience, that they
would tarry the Lords leisure, not only to the second, but till the third day;
and blessed are all they that wait, Isaiah 30.


Last of all, which is the Crown of all, they should live in his sight, which
was, They should lead the life of Grace here, and that should conduct them to
the life of Glory hereafter.

And these parts are distillatio favi, the voluntary droppings of this
Honey-combe; which I intend to speak of with much plainness, the sadness of
this time, and subject, will admit no descant; sick men must sigh and groan
out their words, the whole may sing and be witty. I begin with the persons,
Israel and Judah, and their ingenuous confession, That they had gone astray,
inferred out of their venite and revertamur,

Come and let us return.
THis life is a journey to another, to a better life, it is man's way upon earth,
so said David, I am going the way of all the earth, 1. King. 2.2. and no long
way neither, it is but a short walk betwixt Cradle and a Grave: But as in a
Labyrinth, so here, many turnings there are, many aberrations, and therefore
the Scripture cries, cavete, take heed, for strait is the gate, and narrow is
the path which leads to life, and therefore the Prophet Isaiah, chapter 30.21.
tells us of a voice behind us, that cries, O all ye that pass on, turn
neither to your right hand nor your left: this is the way walk in it: The
Church is your way, the Priest your guide, follow them, and you shall find
rest to your souls.

But alas we are men, and while we carry about us these bodies of clay, we shall
either fall, as the most righteous man does, seven times a day, or else
forsake the right way, as Baalam did, who followed the wages of unrighteousnes,
2. Pet. 2. in many things we all offend, and who can say, that when pleasure
and profit have beckned to him, he has not been ready to say to God, as Elisha
did to his Master, 1. King. 19. Suffer me I pray thee to go kiss them, and I
will follow thee: this is our misery.

O but here is our comfort, the errors in our life are not like those in war,
for which all repentance comes too late, no, being out of the way we may get in
again; in the valley of Achor, there was the door of hope left open for us,
Hos. 2.15. and we have a Savior, that took compassion on them that were out
of the way, Heb. 5.2. who sent forth his Disciples to be guides and leaders to
all the World; who lift up their voices like Trumpets, who cry, heus vos, O all
ye that are out of your way, make haste back again, ye that have turned
aside, return, this is your way, walk in it.

But what is it that so makes us loose our way? O it is sin, and therefore it
is called transgressie from gressus, our going; and whereas it promises us a
nearer way and a fairer, as thieves do the true men, when they lead them into
a wood, yet alas it is mere deceit, and therefore called the deceitfulness of
sin, Heb. 3.13. It Is Gull, a trick which the grand Cheator put upon our
Mother in Paradise, who promised her the nearest way to Divinity, but she
found the clean contrary, Serpens seduxit, the Serpent has deceived me and
led me out of the way. In Hebrew the same word goes for sin and error,
because every sin is an error, a turning out of the way which God commands us
to walk in, nonne errant omnes, says Solomon, Proverbs 14. Do not all
sinners err? yes they do: we may see it in two places, 2. King, 21.9. where
wicked Manasseh, who drew Israel into heinous abominations, is said to have led
them out of the way; Gods way, and the way of life, into the Devils way, and
way of death: Manasseh led Israel out of the way: The second is in the 53.
Psalm 3. God looked down from heaven upon the children of men, to see if any
would understand and seek after God, but he finds, they are all gone out of
the way: some had bought Farms, and must go see them; some yoakes of Oxen,
and must go prove them, and some had married wives, and must go bed them;
that is, their affections, like Sisera were nailed to the earth, and the ways
of God not once thought on: yet let all worldly wanderers know that truth of
Solomon: There is a way that seems right to a man in his own eyes, yet the
end thereof is death: And though sin may set a man a chair, as it did the
scorner, in the 1. Psalm; or a stool, as it did in the 94. Psalm, yet they
must quickly be diseased of both, and lie in Hell, Psalm. 49. No Chair of
State, nor Stool of ease there.

There Is none of us I am sure that would endure that man, who in a strange place
(in foul weather) should purposely set us out of our way, especially we being
weary, our beasts tired; our Inn a great way off, and the night at hand;
surely if ever we met with that man again, our blood would rise at him, and we
should have somewhat to say, yet sin leads all out of the way, the way to
heaven, and who is angry who falls out with that?

It leads the old man out of his way, who should make haste home, death being
close at his heels; and it leads the young man out of his way, and betrays
him to thieves which wound his conscience, and rob him of his innocence; and
often time casts him into a pit, the pit of despair, from whence there is no
redemption.

And therefore, seeing young and old; seeing all of us, like sheep, have gone
astray, and have turned to our own ways, Isaiah 53.6. let us make haste back
again: and seeing, with the Prodigal, we have gone into a far Country
(every sinner goes far from heaven, and the God of it) our mouths being
filled with laughter, and our tongves with joy, let us come back by
Weeping-Crosse; and as travelers love good company, we have in my Text all the
Israel of God, who having, like us, traveled into the wilderness of Sin,
are now making haste back again, their way is our way; their home, our home:
let their faith be our faith too; and their voice our voice, we stirring up
one another as they here do, venite and revertamur, Come, let us return. So
much for the persons and their ingenuous confession: I come to the next thing,
the Act, which they resolve upon, revertamur,

Let us return.
But can a man return when he will? Has he power, as to sin, so to convert
himself from it? Are not the hearts of men in the hands of God, who turns
them like the rivers of water? Why then does not the Lord say, Egoreducam, I
will bring them back, but suffers them to take it out of his hands with a
venite, Come, let us return?

I answer, they are both true; and the second supposes the former; our
return, Gods preventing grace; by which being led, we freely go, and the Lord
brings us back to him, yet not without our selves; that is, God does so reduce
man to himself, that we are neither refractory nor idle, but contribute to our
own happiness, as Ionadab the son of Rechab did in the 1. of King. 10. when
Iehu called to him, give me thy hand, ascend my Chariot; so we must obey the
sweet motions of precious Grace, which some men resist to their own damnation.

It Is true, the Graces of God insinuate themselves by secret ways, and the
impressions of the will are extremely nice; all that past is, is a dream, and
the future a cloud where thunders murmr in the dark: and though the matter
be plain, to wit, no man comes to Christ, except the Father draw him, Ioh. 6.
yet the manner how, is most hidden and secret. God draws every man, yet not
violently by the head and shoulders; but rather by the ears, with sweet and
gracious persuasions. I let them with the cords of love, Hos. 11.4. God led,
but they followed; and leads by peaceful love, no rough violence: As the Sun,
who breaks neither doors nor windows to enter into houses, but penetrates
mildly with his gentle beams; so Grace finds a quiet passage into man's soul;
which like a chaste love, being fairly wooed, is most willing to be won.

Indeed, from the beginning it was not so; in our creation there was Gods hand,
faciamus hominem, Genesis 1. let us make man; but in our conversion there is (if I
may so say) but digitus Dei, the finger of God, no absolute irresistible power,
for then man might be saved without himself, and all the rewards of Virtue
would perish in the world. But redemption was not wrought to make men idle, and
therefore the Scripture divides the child, sometimes it gives it to Gods
grace, sometimes to man working by grace. I will draw them, says the Lord,
Chap. 11. and they shall seek me, in the verse. before my Text.

But to leave the dispute, and come to the practice: The Lord at this instant,
speaks to every one that hears me, to return; and offers grace sufficient,
to all that will go about it. Will you stand still as Lots wife did; and
think to be ravished to heaven by some fatal decree? fie no: though man's
soul be Gods spouse, as it is in the 2. Chap. ver. 19. sponsabo te mihi, yet
he must enjoy thy love by willing contract, not by ravishment.

And therefore lasie Faith adieu, let us acquit our selves like men, like
Christians, and use that Grace which is now offered, and which exercise will
improve; and seeing the gracious Lord of heaven and earth, knockes at the
doors of our hearts, to come back, let us answer him with David paratum est
cor meum Domine, My heart is ready, O God, my heart is ready; and seeing he
calls to us by his Prophet, Iere. 3.22. O ye disobedient children, return,
and I will heal your backslidings; let us take up that answer which the
Prophet made for them, Behold we come unto thee, for thou art the Lord our God.
Thus much for the Act revertamur: I come to the Object, to whom, that is, ad
Dominum: Let us return

To the Lord.
PEccantes recedunt a Deo, affectuum non locorum spatijs, says Saint Jerome,
Sinners wander from God, by the distance of affections, not of place; they may
go from his mercies, they can never go from his judgments the Prodigal
child, from his fathers house, went afar off; but as by sinning, we depart
from God; so by forsaking it, we come back again; neither can our conversion
be right, unless it end in him who is Alpha and Omega. If thou will return, O
Israel (says the Lord) return to me, Iere 4.1. some did return, but it was
not to the most High, in the 7. chap. of this Book. 16. ver. they returned
from one sin to another, as dogs to the vomit, or the sow that was washed, to
wallow in the mire: but these are the Devils returns, a malo ad pejus; ours
must be to the Lord: Turn ye unto him from whom ye have deeply revolted, Esaias
21. from whom we have strayed, to him we must go back: Against thee only
have I sinned, Psalm. 51. and therefore to thee only will I return, Esaias 44.

Well, these men did so, and to the honor of their faith be it first spoken,
that although they had sinned against heaven, and the Lord of it, and were of
sons become rebels, yet they knew, God remained unchangeable, and if they
would return, he would be still their father: though they had lost their way,
they had not as yet lost their faith, they believed God would be gracious,
though they had been sinners.

And this spark of faith did kindle in them a holy fire of Charity, which is
the next thing observeable in their friendly compellation, venite, come let us.

Though every man had gone after his own lusts, and scattered their ways to
strange gods, Ier. 3.13. yet now they will not only mend one, but one another,
such is their Charity, that they will not steal, no not to heaven, but stir
up all to go; you hear no lasie Solifidians credit, nor the Centurions Ite,
go thou, go he, but the Saints community, venite, come let us.

And this was that which proved their faith to be quick and legitimate: Faith
in God, neither ought, nor can be without charity to our neighbor: Faith is a
good huswife and lives by her work, she cries for them as Rachel did for
issue, give me children or I die. Non quaerit quae sunt suae, says St. Paul,
1. Cor. 13. She seeks not her own; she was not so nobly borne to be her own
center, and Divinity, but like the Sun, to do good to all.

St. Iren. calls it a present from heaven, the top and Zenith of all virtues, it
is the gate of the Sanctuary, which leads us to the vision of the Trinity,
it is the double spirit, which Elisha required, wherewith to love God and our
neighbor.

You are not much to afflict your selves to become perfect: (says St.
Augustine) Love God, and then do what you will: And if you would know whether
your love to God be real; mark how you love your neighbor; by how much the
lines draw nearer to one another, by so much the more they approach the Center:
by how much the nearer you approach to your neighbor in love, by so much the
nearer you are to God.

In the old Law the Jews were commanded to lift an Ox or an Ass out of the
Pit, into which they were fallen: Numquid Deo cura de Bobus? What, has God
care of Oxen? surely he has more of men, by how much man comes nearer to his
Nature, than does the Ox or the Ass: And it was our Saviors charge to St.
Peter Luke 22. Thou being converted, strengthen thy brethren: Peter, love
thou me? then feed my sheep.

We are members of that one body, whose head is Christ: and as in the
natural, so in this mystical body; one member has need of another member:
the head is to instruct the hand, and the hand to guard the head; the eye must
see for the foot, else they will both fall into the Ditch: And this St. Paul
calls the fulfilling of the Law, Romans 13.10. For the Law commands no more than
to love: And a more delicate war (says Chrysologus) was never heard of, than
to conquer all by love: and St. Cyprian observes, that all the volumes of the
Scriptures are to be found in this one word, Love, in this all religion has
her consummation.

Surely Charity is a sacred flame, kindled in our breasts by the God of Nature;
it is the soul and life of the whole World; it knows no more how to hide it
self, than fire does in straw; for as fire will bewray it self by light and
heat, so will Divine Charity; it gives light by holy examples, and heat by
pious admonition, teaching and admonishing one another, Col. 3.16.

The Donatists would to heaven alone, as we have some, who will allow
salvation to none, but them of their faction: whereas the blessed St. Paul
would have ventured to be accursed for the salvation of his brethren, and these
good men here judged it, in glorious piety, a piece of repentance, to be
repented of, to return to the Lord alone; fearing (perhaps) GOD would give
them that answer, which Joseph did the Patriarchs: Genesis 42. You shall not see
my face, unless you bring your brother with you: this made them move together
like the fingers of one hand, like the eyes of the same head; and in love, that
might invite the eyes of Angels, lock arm in arm, and as if they had had but
one soul, to say with one voice, venite, come let us.

Note again out of their venite, what we may think of those, who neither
return to God themselves, nor suffer others, but are as the Authors of their
Schism, so the hinderers of their conversion.

Truly we may fafely judge, that they are not of Christ's fold who mis-leade
his sheep: and it was a sin, which made Lucifer the Devil to draw the Angels
away from God; and they who on earth go about to divide Christ's seamlesse
coat, the Church; show that they are not members of his body.

Union builds Gods Church, but Schism pulls it down: and judge you, whether it
be not a greater sin then Idolatry, when it was punished with a greater
vengeance then Idolatry; the greatest Idolatry of Israel was to be punished
with the Sword, Ex. 32. but to destroy Church Rebels, the Lord did a new thing
on earth; and made that earth which fed the peaceful, devour the factious
Israelites, who went down quick into the grave, and because they were so
unworthy to live, the Lord scarce permitted them to dye: but gave them that
deadly vae of our Savior, Matthew. 11 7. Woe to them by whom offenses, come.

It was Ieroboams brand set upon him by God himself, that he made Israel to
sin, and brought that Schism into the Church, which rent 10 Tribes, not
only from the Scepter, but the God of Judah: As for himself, he lived to see
his Altars crack under the horror of his new religion, and his posterity were
so closely pursued by the wrath of God, that in the revolution of a short time,
there was not a handful of the dust of his house left alive upon the face of
the earth, and the miserable Tribes whom he seduced, were lost in foreign
captivity, and scattered as so much dust before the wind, or as so many strawes
upon a wrought sea.

And thus (in Eusebius) the famous Schismaticke Novatus, swore all his
Communicants upon the Sacrament, that they should adhere to his Sect, and never
more return to the Orthodox Cornelius.

The Church at unity with her children, is the fairest among women, but when
once torn in sunder, by several Factions, she prooves like the Levites
divided Concubine; the horror and detestation of every eye.

The speediest way to set a man at variance with God, is to be at opposition
with his brother; and what a shame is it, that Thieves and Murderers should go
more friendly to hell, than Christians do to he even.

O that our Novatian brood, they of the separation, would consider this, who
dispose Heaven to (...) but them of their brother and sisterhood; would they
would remember, That heaven was made for more then for themselves, though they
entitle God to a cruel Decree, and pass the sentence of Reprobation, upon all
that are not as mad as themselves: Yet maugre their malice, all are their
brethren that can say, Our Father; brethren by a threefold tie that is not
easily broken, by the same Father, God; by the same mother, the Church; by the
same Redeemer, Christ: And therefore I will beseech all Christians, in the
powerful words of an Apostle, 1. Cor. 1.10. by the Name of our Lord Jesus
Christ, that they would be perfectly joined together in the same judgment, and
the same mind, that ye all speak the same things.

And if ye now hope to reestablish your broken peace with God, The news
Carryer of Ipswich.
you must be at unity with his Church; Let the seditious man, who sowed his
tares by night, his Pamphlet in your streets, rail on, till the accuser of his
brethren (the Devil) who set him on work pay him his wages: as for our
selves, the way to recover our union with God, lies in the happy agreement with
one another, when you all say with one heart and one voice, what Israel here
did, venite and revertamur ad Dominum, come let us, etc. And so I pass from
the proposition, with its adjuncts, faith and charity, to the reasons, whereof
the first is drawn A Iustitia Dei, from Gods Justice.

For he has torn, and he has smitten us.
ANd this may seem a strange reason, that a man should return to him, by whom
he is sore wounded; and kiss that hand, to whose severity he owes the loss of
blood; as if David should embrace Saul for running at him with a javelin.

Yet such is the wholesome power of affliction, that whom fair words could not
return, rough blows will bring back again; and the Prodigal child did
more at the urgence of hunger and could, than at the tears, and oratory of his
Father.

Jonah in fair weather would be running from God, but the tempest and the
Whale brought him back again. Nay, a Dungeon freed Manasseh from the Pit of
Hell; had he not been chained in Babylon, he had gone on in sin, till he
had been bound hand and foot and cast into utter darkness.

This people, who in prosperity, (like Balaam) rode poast to sin, yet when
Divine vengeance drew upon them, as the Angel did upon him, then down upon
their faces, and cry, If it displease the Lord, we will go back again,
Numb. 22. These who before made the holy one of Israel to cease, yet now the
rod is upon them, sue to him without ceasing, and verify that which the Lord
spoke in the verse before, in angustijs mane requirent me, in their afflictions
they will seek me early.

Truly in this, men use God, as children do fruit trees, throw sticks at
them in fair weather, but when once a storm comes, run under them for
shelter.

The Lord could not otherwise scowre Israel, but with the file of afflictions;
they would not look toward their Maker, until the destroyer was come forth;
nor turn back, till judgment trod on their heels: this indeed prevailed
more with them, without speaking a word, than God, and all his Prophets could
with their passionate Sermons.

The Almighty threatened them two verses before this: I will be a Lion unto
Ephraim, and as a young Lion to the house of Judah; I will tear, even I, and
none shall rescue them: yet threatening would do no good, no news as yet of
their conversion; but when the wrath of God had brought the Assyrian troops
into their land, and they began to bathe their swords in their bowels, then
every man to his knees, O Israel! venite and revertamur, come, and let us
return to the Lord.

O how powerful is Justice to save, when grace comes with it: these, who
before forgot God and themselves; yet now in their miseries remember both:
they, who before sought after pleasures and profits, yet now when the Lord slew
them, then they sought him, Psalm. 78.

It Is true, Reprobates will not own God in his Judgments, unless extreme;
nothing can startle some but thunder; yet good natures will repent at the first
blow, and like gracious children, kneel to the mothers for mercy at one
whipping.

These men could discern the Lord through the thickest troops of the Assyrian
Armies, and in the midst of their swords, confess it was his hand, not King
Iareb, nor Salmanaser, nor chance, but Dominus rapuit, the Lord has smittenus.

And thus, as in Sampsons riddle, Out of the Eater came forth meat, when out
of this tearing Lion they could gather the honey of comfort, making Gods wrath
an argument of his love, and return they will, because he has smitten them.

Now their argument may be framed thus: It Is Gods Nature (say they) to punish
where he affects, and to chasten every son whom he loves: Now like a just
father, he has smitten us, but to break our stomachs, not our bones; though
he punishes our sins, yet he pitties our humanity; like a wise Chyrurgion he
has torn us, yet not to kill, but cure our festered sores: he is salus
Israel, Jer. 3. the health of Israel; therefore let us return.

And thus, like Job, they acknowledge affliction comes not out of the dust,
nor misery spring out of the earth; and therefore resolve with that Champion of
heaven, Though the Lord tears and slaies us, yet will we trust in him.

And happy are they who so kiss the son, when he is first angry, and fall
upon their knees, before his whole displeasure be arose; a tear may do that
with God in time, which afterward a shower of blood cannot.

But thrice miserable they, who when they feel the rod, yet will not see the
hand, but arm themselves with Past-boord against the murdering Canon, and
beg of the creature help against the Creator.

Thus Asa in his disease sought to the Physician, not the Lord: thus Jobs Wife
in her husbands misery, when he should have kneeled to Prayer, fell to cursing:
Thus wicked Ahaziah turned from the God of Israel, to seek help from
Baalzebub, the god of Eckron; but all these knocked at a wrong door, and took
great pains to go to hell: Thou turnest man to destruction: (says David)
Again thousai'st, come again ye children of men: And as Hannah sung, 1 of Sam.
2. It is the Lord that kills and makes alive, that brings down to the grave,
and lifts up again, ideo revertamur, cries Israel, therefore let us return:
and this is the first argument: the second is drawn, A misericordia dei, from
Gods mercy.

He will heal, he will bind us up.
A Metaphor taken from Physicians and Chyrurgeons: the Septuagint turns it,
alligabit sicut fascijs, he will bind us up as with swathes, as Chyrurgeons
do sores till they are whole: St. Jerome uses the word (...), linteola, Linen
rags put by a Chyrurgeon into wounds, to eat out the corrupt matter.

Indeed in Isreal's recovery the Lord used much Art, and played the skillful
Chyrurgeon: first he applied applied sharp corrosives to eat out the festered
corruption; judgment to eat out sin; then he suppled their broken spirits
with his mercy, and swathed them with a gracious pardon: so David: He forgives
thy sins and heales althy infirmities, Psalm. 103.

Their disease would admit no Physician but God, to him alone belong the issues
of life and death: the balmes of Gilead were antidotes too weak; for the oil
of the Scorpion must heal his own stinge, and the sight of the Brazen Serpent
expel the poison of the fiery Serpent.

In the chapter before, ver. 13. When Ephraim saw his sickness, and Judah his
wound, then went Ephraim to the Assyrian, and sent to King Iareb for help, yet
could he not heal, nor cure you of your wound.

No said Ier. 3. in vain is salvation hoped for from the Hills and mountains
(the Kings and great men of the earth.) God is the health of Israel, ver. 23.
so that now they conclude with Solomon, Proverbs 21. There is neither prudence,
nor council, nor wisdom against the Lord: What is the Physician over his
patient without God? but a busy Ant, striving to put life into a mountain.
There is no flying from him, but to him; from the hand of his justice, to the
arms of his mercy, and look how much the arm in length exceedes the hand; by
so much his mercy, to the penitent, is extended beyond his justice.

O! this is a safer Sanctuary, than was Ierusalems hallowed Temple: his favor
is a stronger protection, than ever were the horns of the Altar, and therefore
the Prophet calls them, the sure mercies of David: men's mercies are sometimes
cruel, always deceitful; but Gods are sure mercies, such as never failed any
soul that trusted in him.

And though the same Physic which helps an Ague, will not cure a Fever, yet
the same mercy which helps the soul of one sin, can cure it of all: Return
to me, (says the Lord) and I will heal all thy Rebellions, Jer. 3.22.

And therefore out of this book, let me take up one peeble, to throw against
the brow of the Giant Despair: though the Lord, like an enraged Lion, does
smite, and tear us with his judgments, yet we here learn, if we will
return, he will heal us, he will bind us up, and why will he? O, because
with him there are multitude of mercies, with him there is plenteous
redemption; and with this hope, Israel in captivity, did now even guild their
chains.

It was prophesied in the fourth of Malach. ver. the second: Unto them that
fear my name shall he come, with healing upon his wings: Who is (He) that
shall come? O it is Messiah the Savior of the World, he shall come with wings,
to show his speed, that he will even fly to be merciful.

Secondly, he shall come with infinite virtue, and unspeakable comfort, he
shall come with healing upon his Wings; and therefore never fear your sanabit,
but God will heal, and bind you up; and this is the second argument: The third
is drawn, A potentia, and bonitate Dei, from Gods power and goodness.

After two days he will revive us, the third day he will raise us up.
AMong many opinions, of these days, I will name but one, and that is of them,
who by two days, understand a short time, by the third, a long time, and both
of them uncertain, whose accomplishment they might not know, but ought to
expect, and blessed is he that waits, says the Prophet, Dan. 12. but cursed
is he that says with the King of Israel, Why should I wait upon the Lord any
longer, 2. King. 6.33. Now if two days be taken for a short time, then the
argument runs thus:

The time wherein we are to be afflicted, is no long time, therefore never
despair, it is but two days, no more, and therefore (O ye seed of Abraham)
bear your Cross with patient spirits, your afflictions are not everlasting
afflictions, though heaviness may endure for a night, yet joy will come in the
morning, and if not the first, yet sure enough upon the second, Post biduum,
after two days he will revive us.

But if the third day be taken for along time, then thus: The Lord can raise a
carcass, as well after three days, when it begins to smell and putrify, as
the first day and hour it dyed. Elishas Coffin raised a man that had been
many years dead, as easily as Elias did the child that had been so but a few
hours. Now if Prophets could do thus, surely the God of those Prophets could
do much more; and therefore, although three days (that is along time) we have
lain in the grave of our captivity, yet the Lord can raise us up.

Some have undertaken to show these three days in the Chapter before my Text,
at whose, 14. ver. the Lord said, He would be a Lion to Ephraim, and Judah, and
would tear them as a Lion does his prey, and sell them for nothing to the
Kings of Assyria and Babylon: and this may be the first day, Dies Crucis, and
Mortis, The day of their death.

Secondly, at the 15. ver. I will go says the Lord to mine own place, I will
wash mine hands of Israel, as a people that are dead, and buried; they shall
lie in desperate captivity without Prince, Priest, Ephod, and Teraphin, and
this is the second day, Dies sepulturae, The day of their burial.

Thirdly, the Lord says in that same ver. he would not forsake them for ever,
Donec, Until they acknowledged their faults, and sought him, no longer:
showing that after those days, of death, and burial, he would return, and
put new life into his people; which is to be understood, not carnally, but
spiritually; and respects not only their deliverance out of Babylon, but their
freedom from the slavery of sin, and hell, to be accomplished ere long by
Emmanuel, the Savior of the world. Now, out of their Vivificabit we may learn,
that man's best life comes from Gods grace: unless he revive us with his
Spirit, we are dead in sin, like the Widow in pleasure: 1 Timothy 5. She was
dead, though alive.

Secondly, these men buried in miseries; cry, Vivemus, We shall live; to teach,
that life is to be hoped for in the jaws of death; and though the Grave gapes
never so wide, yet it cannot devour the Article of our Resurrection. Wherefore
my spirit and flesh shall rest in hope; for though after my skin, worms
destroy this body, yet with these eyes I shall see God.

Thirdly, here are Gods children in the dark night of Captivity, raising
arguments of comfort, to help one another; teaching that man should never
despair of Gods goodness, or his own Salvation, but to believe in hope,
though against hope: He that is good to himself, need not fear that God will
be ill to him.

Would time permit, I might show you how this Text was verified upon Christ,
and how upon each Christian; how Christ had these three days of Death,
Burial, and Resurrection, upon whom God did let fly, like an enraged Lion, did
tear, and smite him in the day of his fierce wrath; and how each Christian
must drink after him in this bitter cup, and in this life pass through the
Jews purgatory.

But I hasten to the period of all, which like Jobs latter end, is better than
his beginning, which stands like a beloved harbor beyond a churlish sea; which
looks like a clear Heaven after a battle of clouds, and thunder; it is Visio
Dei after all these tearings, and smitings, deaths, and burials, Vivemus coram
eo.

We shall live in his sight.
ANd this is no mean happiness, to live in Gods sight; in the last Chapter,
the Lord turned his back upon them, and did what he threatened, Ier 7.15. I
will cast you out of my sight: And this Cain confessed to be no light
punishment, but one greater than he could bear. Genesis 4.14. Behold, thou have
driven me out this day from the face of the earth, and from thy face shall I
be bid; and it shall come to pass, that every one that finds me, shall slay
me. Some affirm, that wheresoever Caine set his foot, the earth trembled:
and Procopius adds a tradition, that he perpetually saw certain Specter with
swords of fire, which brought horrible affrightments upon him; the truth
whereof I know not.

Yet this I am sure of, no sword could be more fiery than that of his
conscience, which every moment, with hidden launches, did open his breast and
made him think every creature he met, owed him a murder.

And such is the estate of every one whom God turns his back upon; but now,
it was Isreal's comfort, that the Lords face was turned to them; his favor, and
protection; and though hitherto they had been cast out of both, yet now they
should live in his sight.

In a word, the life which the Prophet here means was primarily, a temporal
life, secondarily, an eternal life; absolutely the life of Grace, by
consequence, that of Glory: So the Chaldee para. renders my Text, vita donabit
nos in diebus consolationis qui venturi sunt, in die resurrectionis mortuoru^
suscitabit nos, and vivemus coram eo. That is, we shall lead a happy life
here, and a glorified life hereafter: these two following one another, like the
twins out of Rebecca's womb; the later laying hold upon the former, and more
then these two, no covetous Jew could desire.

I cannot stay to show you how this Prophecy was verified upon Israel and
Judah; whom the Lord, after seventy years captivity, raised from the graves of
Assyrian bondage, and brought them back to that Jerusalem, which they beheld
with as many tears of joy, as they remembered with sorrow, when they sat down
by the Waters of Babylon; where again they lived in Gods sight, until new
sins provoked a more consuming wrath, and the Romans, for crucifying their
innocent Messiah, made the Jews blood as cheap as their mothers tears.

The few sands which are yet behind, shall run forth in a short review of my
Text, by way of application; and so I Will commend you to God.

Come let us return to the Lord etc.
HAd Hosea uttered his Prophecy the last year, it would have been hard to
say, whether he meant Israel or England: the Scenes are the same, only the
Actors differ; both of us have beheld a Tragedy commenced in our own blood:
Jerusalem bore the first part, London the second. Lord how are we spoiled? said
the Prophet of them; and may not I say so of this place? A City undone, and no
man the richer: Above 1200 slain, and no sword seen; Lord how are we spoiled?
How is Jerusalem become a desolate widow? It was the Lamentation of Jeremiah,
and may it not be revived upon London? how was she forsaken, not only of her
children, but of her God, and many months sat, like Rachel, weeping for her
children and would not be comforted because they were not.

Your doors which were used to be opened to your friends, were shut up by
disease; and the very casements whereat you took the breath of life, did let
in death: so that we may cry with Israel, The Lord has torn, and the Lord
has smitten us, and as the Magicians said of the lice of Egypt, Exodus 8.16.
They were digitus Dei, the finger of God; We may of our Visitation, 'twas
manus Dei, the hand of God; and therefore we call it plaga, a stroke, a blow
from heaven.

Yet see the goodness of the most high; no sooner had we, by the appointment
of our most gracious Sovereign, run to the second of Joel, and proclaimed a
Fast; called a solemn assembly, and cried with Israel, venite and revertamur,
O come, let us return unto the Lord. But that power, who repented of making
us, did also repent of destroying us; and said, My Spirit shall not always
contend with man, least the souls which I have made, should fail before me.
Isai. 57.

And as Jeremiah cried, God is the health of Israel; Chap. 3. so may I, God is
become the health of London: it was not the Frost, nor the Snow, nor any of
natures colds, thrown down from those moving shops of Meteors, but Dominus
sanauit, the Lord has healed, the Lord has bound us up.

And now let me direct my speech to you, right Honorable, and the inhabitants
of this City, and say in the words of the Savior of the World; Art thou made
whole? sin no more, least a worse thing happen to thee: though ye have
escaped the last years contagion; yet there is a Tophet in Isaiah, where
plagues are eternal.

And therefore let every man begin a reformation at home, and as those cried
out, much more will I, every man to his tents, O Israel; to his conscience, O
London. Now look to thine own house David. I make no question, but much cost
and labor has been bestowed in ayring and cleansing your houses; but it is to
no purpose, unless you sweep out sin, which Solomon calls, the plague of
the heart, turn that out of your shops and consciences, it will prove a better
antidote, than all the Pitch, Rue, and Franckincense in the World.

Infect the air no more with your oaths and courteous equivocations; make not
your selves worse in belying your wares, that they are better: the most winning
eloquence a tradesman can speak, is truth, and the best way to thrive apace,
is to pray.

Look not upon the next life, as Mathematitions do at heaven, through a
cranney, or hole, out of a dark Chamber, which renders it poor and small; not
venture your hopes of heaven, like Cain, to build upon earth.

Raise not the walls of your houses with the ruin of Gods house, or your
neighbors; nor pay your Lecturers with your Parsons tithes: let not the
wrack't out blood of the Tenant cry against you, nor your workmens wages be
kept back.

Use not false lights, and a deceitful balance, wherein your souls are put
and found too light. And believe me, before it is too late, Godliness is great
gain, and there is no such policy in this World, as to be an honest man.

And you my Lord, and your brethren, to whom the government of this City is
committed, I know, you have taken all the courses, that wisdom can think of,
to stay the infection, when there is but one way to do it, that is, to make
your Citizens good: but you will say, it is God that must do this, you cannot;
it is true, your part is only to show them the way by a good example: and seeing
your spirit is the first wheel, whereunto all others are fastened; it is
necessary that you give a good motion; for it is held by some Astronomers, that
when the Sun stood still in the time of Ioshuah, the Moon and Stars kept
the like pause.

Now, if you that are Governors, would have the Plague a stranger in the City,
then see that in your Courts of Judicature, justice and mercy kiss each other:
Let justice run down like water, and righteousness as the river, Amos 5.24.
It will cleanse the City better, then all your Conduits let loose upon Sundays.

Suffer not the wicked Advocate, who plowes lies, and exchanges God for a
bribe, to put Truth upon the Rack, and stretch a Clients cause with delays,
as the Shoemaker does Leather with his teeth: these men are our Plagues in the
times of health, and it put Gods mercy to a stand, when in Jerusalem there was
not found a man that executed justice, Iet. 5. How shall I pardon thee for
this? (says the Lord, ver. 7.

But God has set you on high to no other purpose, then to punish vice beneath
you; and if you suffer that to rise, it will trample you under foot; and
therefore, continue my Lord, like a good Moses, to stand in the gap; plead
before God the cause of his people with your prayers; and before his people,
the cause of God with your sword.

And let me beseech all that hear me, that they would leave no sparks of
sin raked up in their consciences, least the fire of Gods wrath breaks out
again more furiously the next spring.

Verify the first part of my Text, Return to the Lord with all your hearts,
with all your souls; and he will verify the second, sanabit, he will heal,
he will bind us up.

And though for two days, you, and your shops, and your tradings have lain
dead, yet there is a third day, wherein God will raise you up, and make you live
in his sight, where Divine protection shall watch over you here, and keep all
Plagues from your bodies, as the Nurse does flies from the face of her sleeping
child, till you enter into the other vision of God, the sight of Glory; where
our miseries can have no beginning, nor our felicity any ending; where youth
shall not wax old, nor health impair, but these bodies, which are now the
shops of all diseases, shall become as impassible as Angels, as subtle as
rays of light, as radiant as the Sun, and as swift as the wings of thunder,
and we shall lead no other life than that of God; of the knowledge of God, of
the love of God; and that as long as God shall be God: and therefore, venite
and revertamur ad Dominum.

Come, and let us return to the Lord, for he has torn, and he will heal
us, he has broken, and he will bind us up.

After two days he will revive us, the third day he will raise us up, and we
shall live in his sight.

Which God of his mercy grant, etc.

FINIS.

