THE RIGHT EXCELlent and famous Historye, of Promos and Cassandra: Divided into
two Commicall Discourses.

In the first part is shown, the insufferable abuse, of a lewd Magistrate:
The virtuous behauiours of a chaste Lady: The vncontrowled leawdenes of a
favored Curtisan. And the undeserved estimation of a pernicious Parasyte.


In the second part is discoursed, the perfect magnanimitye of a noble King,
in checking Vice and fauouringe Virtue:

Wherein is shown, the Ruin and overthrow, of dishonest practices: with the
advancement of upright dealing.

The work of George Whetstones Gent.

Formae nulla fides. TO HIS WORSHIPFVLL friend, and Kinseman, William
Fleetewoode Esquier, Recorder of London.
Sir, (desirous, to acquit your tried frendships* with some token of good
will:) of late I perused diverse of my imperfect works, fully minded to bestow
on you, the travel of some of my forepassed time. But (resolved to accompanye,
the aduenturous Captain, Sir Humfrey Gylbert, in his honorable voiadge,) I
found my leisure too littel; to correct the errors in my said works. So that
(enforced) I left them disparsed, among my learned friends, at their
leisure, to polish, if I faild to return: spoiling (by this means) my studdy
of his necessary furnyture. Among other unregarded papers, I fownde this
Discource of Promos and Cassandra: which, for the rareness, (and the needeful
knowledge) of the necessary matter contained therein (to make the actions
appear more lively,) I divided the whole history into two Co^medies: for that,
Decorum used, it would not be conuayde in one. The effects of both, are good
and bad: virtue intermyxt with vice, unlawful desires (if it were posible)
queancht with chaste denyals: al needeful actions (I think) for public vewe.
For by the reward of the good, the good are encouraged in well doing: and with
the scowrge of the lewd, the lewd are feared from evil attempts:
mainetayning this my oppinion with Platoes auctority. Nawghtinesse, commes of
the corruption of nature, and not by readinge or hearing the lives of the good
or lewd (for such publication is necessary,) but goodness (says he) is
beawtifyed by either action. And to these ends: Menander, plautus, and
Terence, them selves many years since intombed, (by their Commedies) in
honor, live at this day. The ancient Romans, heald these shows of such
prise, that they not only allowde the public exercise of them, but the grave
Senators themselves countenaunced the Actors with their presence: who from
these trifles won morallytye, as the Be suckes honny from weeds. But the
advised devises of ancient Poets, discedited, with the tryfels of young,
unadvised, and rash witted writers, has brought this commendable exercise in
mislike. For at this day, the Italian is so lascivious in his co^medies, that
honest hearers are grieved at his actions: the Frenchman and Spaniarde folowes
the Italians humor: the German is too holy: for he presents on every
common Stage, what Preachers should pronounce in Pulpets. The Englishman in
this quallitie, is most vain, indiscreete, and out of order: he first grounds
his work, on impossibilities: then in three hours ronnes he throw the
world: marryes, gets Children, makes Children men, men to conquer kingdoms,
murder Monsters, and brings Gods from Heaven, and fetches Devils from Hell.
And (that which is worst) their ground is not so imperfect, as their workinge
indiscreete: not waying, so the people laugh, though they laugh them (for their
follyes) to scorn: Many times (to make mirthe) they make a Clown companion
with a King: in their grave Counsels, they allow the advice of fools: yea
they use one order of speech for all persons: a gross Indecorum, for a Crow,
will ill counterfeit the Nightingales sweet voice: even so, affected speech
does misbecome a Clown. For to work a Co^medie kindly, grave old men, should
instruct: young men, should show the imperfections of youth: Strumpets should
be lascivious: Boys unhappy: and Clownes, should speak disorderlye:
entermingling all these actions, in such sort, as the grave matter, may
instruct: and the pleasant, delight: for without this change, the attention,
would be small: and the likinge, less.

But leave I this rehearsal, of the use, and abuse of Commedies: least that, I
check that in others, which I cannot amend in my self. But this I am assured,
what actions so ever passes in this History, either merry, or morneful: grave,
or lascivious: the conclusion shows, the confusion of Vice, and the cherising
of Virtue. And sithe the end tends to this good, although the work (because of
euel handlinge) be unworthy your learned Censure, allow (I beseech you) of my
good will, until leisure serves me, to perfect, some labor of more worth.

No more, but that, almightye God be your protector, and preserve me from
dainger, in this voiadge, the xxix. of July. 1578. Your Kinsman to use, George
Whetstone

The Printer to the Reader.
GEntle Reader, this labor of Master Whetstons, came into my hands, in his
first copy, whose leisure was so little (being then ready to depart his
country) that he had no time to work it a new, nor to give apt instructions,
to prynte so difficult a work, being full of variety, both matter, speech,
and verse: for that every sundry Actor, has in all these a sundry grace: so
that, if I commit an error, without blaming the Auctor, amend my amiss: and if
by chauner, thou light of some speech that seems dark, consider of it with
judgment, before thou condemn the work: for in many places he is driven,
both to praise, and blame, with one breath, which in readinge will seem hard,
and in actio^, appear plain. Using this courtesy, I hold my pains well
satisfied, and Master Whetston vniniured: and for my own part, I will not
fail to procure such books, as may profit thee with delight.

Thy friend. R. I.

The Argument of the whole Historye.
IN the Cyttie of Iulia (sometimes under the dominion of Coruinus King of
Hungary, and Boemia) there was a law, that what man so ever committed Adultery,
should lose his head, and the woman offender, should wear some disguised
apparel, during her life, to make her infamouslye noted. This severe law, by
the favor of some merciful magistrate became little regarded, until the time
of Lord Promos auctority: who conuicting, a young Gentleman named Andrugio of
incontinency, condemned both him, and his minion to the execution of this
statute. Andrugio had a very virtuous, and beawtiful Gentlewoman to his Sister,
named Cassandra: Cassandra to enlarge her brothers life, submitted an humble
petition to the Lord Promos: Promos regarding her good behauiours, and
fantasyng her great beawtie, was much delighted with the sweet order of her
talk: and doing good, that evil might come thereof: for a time, he repryu'd
her brother: but wicked man, coming his liking unto unlawful lust, he set
down the spoil of her honor, ransom for her Brothers life: Chaste
Cassandra, abhorring both him and his suit, by no persuasion would yeald to
this ransom. But in fine, won with the importunitye of her brother
(pleading for life:) upon these conditions, she agreede to Promos. First that
he should pardon her brother, and after marry her. Promos as feareles in
promise, as careless in performance, with sollemne vow, sygned her
conditions: but worse then any Infydel, his will satisfied, he performed
neither the one nor the other: for to keep his aucthoritye, unspotted with
favor, and to prevent Cassandraes clamors, he commanded the Gayler secretly,
to present Cassandra with her brothers head. The Gayler, with the outcryes of
Andrugio, (abhorryng Promos lewdenes, by the providence of God, provided thus
for his safety. He presented Cassandra with a Felons head newly executed, who
(being mangled, knew it not from her brothers, by the Gayler, who was set at
liberty) was so agreeued at this trecherye, that at the point to kyl her
self, she spared that stroke, to be avenged of Promos. And deuisyng a way, she
concluded, to make her fortunes known unto the king. She (executinge this
resolution) was so highly favored of the King, that forth with he hasted to do
Justice on Promos: whose judgment was, to marrye Cassandra, to repair her
crased Honor: which done, for his heinous offense he should lose his head.
This mary age solempnised, Cassandra tied in the greatest bonds of affection
to her husband, became an earnest suter for his life: the King (tendringe the
general benefit of the common weal, before her special ease, although he
favored her much) would not grant her suit. Andrugio (disguised among the
company) ^ing the grief of his sister, bewrayde his safetye, and craved (...).
The King, to renown the virtues of Cassandra, pardoned both him, and Promos.
The circumstances of this rare Historye, in action lyuelye follows. ()

The History, of Promos and Cassandra.
Actus. 1.
Scena. 1.
Promos, Mayor, Shirife, Sword bearer: One with a bunche of keys: Phallax,
Promos man. YOu Officers which now in Iulio stay,
Know you our leadge, the King of Hungary:
Sent me Promos, to join with you in sway:
That still we may to Justice have an eye.
And now to show, my rule and power at lardge,
Attentively, his Letters Pattents hear:
Phallax, read out my Soueraines chardge.
Phal. As you command, I will: give heedefull ear.


Phallax reads the Kings Letters Patents, which must be fair written in
parchment, with some great counterfeat zeal. PRo. Lo, here you see what is
our Sovereigns will,
Lo, bear his wish, that right, not might, bear swaye:
Lo, hear his care, to weed from good the ill,
To scoorge the wights, good Laws that disobay.
Such zeal he bears, unto the Common weal,
(How so he byds, the ignorant to save)
As he commaundes, the lewd do rigor feel.
Such is his wish, such is my will to have:
And such a Judge, here Promos vows to be.
No wylfull wrong, sharp punishment shall mysse,
The simple thrall, shall be iudgde with mercy,
Each shall be doombde, even as his merit is:
Love shall not stay, Love hate and gain, the causes of Injustice.
nor hate revenge procure,
Ne yet shall Coin, corrupt or fester wrong:
I do protest, whylste that my charge endure,
For friend nor foe, to singe a partial song.
Thus have you heard, how my Commission goes,
He absent, I present our Sovereign still:
It aunsweres then, each one his duty shows,
To me, as him, what I command and will.

Ma. Worthy Deputy, at thy chardge we joy,
We do submit our selves, to work thy heast:
Receive the sword of Justice to destroy,
The wicked impes, and to defend the rest.

Shri. Our City keys, take wished Liftenaunt hear,
We do commit our safety to thy head:
Thy wise foresight, will keep us void of fear,
Yet will we be assistant still at need.

Pro. Both Swoorde and Keys, unto my Princes use,
I do receive and gladly take my chardge.
It rests now, for to reform abuse,
We point a time, of Council more at lardge,
To treat of which, a while we will depart.

Al speak, To work your will, we yield a wylling heart.

Exeunt. Actus. 1. Scena. 2.
Lamia, a Curtizane, enters synging. The Song.
AL a flaunt now vaunt it, brave wenche cast away care,
With Lays of Love chaunt it, for no cost see thou spare:
Since Nature has made thee, with bewty most brave,
Since Fortune does lade thee, with what thou would have.
Ere Pleasure does vade thee, thy self set to sale:
All wantons will trade thee, and stowpe to thy stale.
All a flaunt, Vt Supra.
Young Ruflers maintains thee, defends thee and thine,
Old Dottrels retains thee, thy Beuties so shine:
Though many disdaynes thee, yet none may thee tuch:
Thus Envy refraynes thee, thy countenance is such.
All a flaunt, Vt Supra:
She speaks. Triumph fair Lamia now, thy wanton flag advance,
Set forth thy self to brauest show, bost thou of happy chance:
Gyrle, account thou thy self the chief, of Lady Pleasures train,
Thy face is fair, thy form content, thy Fortunes both does strain.
Even as thou would, thy house does stand, thy furniture is gay,
Thy weeds are brave, thy face is fine, and who for this does pay?
Thou thy self no, the rushing Youths, ye bathe in wanton bliss,
Yea, old and dooting fools sometimes, do help to pay for this.
Free cost between them both I have, all this for my behoue,
I am the stern, yt gides their thoughts, look what I like, they love
Few of them stir, that I bid stay, if I bid go, they fly:
If I on foe pursue revenge, Alarm a hundred cry.
The brauest I their hearts, their hands, their purses hold at will,
Ioynde with the credit of the best, to bowlster me in ill.
But see where as my trusty man, does run, what news brings he?

Actus. 1. Scena. 3.
Rosko (Lamias man) Lamia. ROs. Good people, did none of you, my mistress
Lamia see?


La. Rosko, what news, that in such haste you come blowing?


Ros. Mistress, you must shut up your shops, and leave your occupying.


La. What so they be, foolish knave, tell me true?


Ros. Oh ill, for thirty? besides you.


La. For me good fellow, I pray thee why so?


Ros. Be patient Mistress, and you shall know,


La. Go too, say on:


Ros, Marry, right now at the Sessions I was,
And thirty must to Trussum cord go.
Among the which (I weep to show) alas:

La. Why, what is the matter man?


Ros. O Andrugio,
For loving too kindly, must loose his head,
And his sweet heart, must we are the shameful weeds:
Ordainde for Dames, that fall through fleshly deeds.

La. Is this offense, in question come again?
Tell, tell, no more, 'tys time this tale were done:
See, see, how soon, my triumph turns to pain.

Ros. Mistress, you promised to be quiet,
For Gods sake, for your own sake, be so

La. Alas poor Rosko, our dayntie diet,
Our bravery and all we must forgo.

Ros. I am sorry.


La. Yea, but out alas, sorrow will not serve:


Rosko, thou must needs provide thee else where,
My gaynes are past, yea, I my self might starve:
Save that, I did provide for a dear year.

Ros. They reward fair (their harvest in the stacke,)
When winter coms, that bid their servant pack.
Alas Mistress, if you turn me off now,
Better then a Roge, none will me allow.

La. Thou shall have a Pasporte,


Ros. Yea, but after what sort?


La. Why, that thou wart my man.


Ros. O the Judge, sylde shows the favor,
To let one thief, bail another:
Tush I know, ere long you so will slyp away,
As you, for your self, must seek some testimony
Of your good life.

La. Never fear: honestly
Lamia now means to live, even till she dye.

Ros. As iumpe as Apes, in vewe of Nuttes to dance,
Kytte will to kind, of custom, or by chance:
Well, how so you stand upon this holy point,
For the thing you know, you will ieobarde a joint.

La. Admit I would, my hazard were in vain.


Ros. Perhaps I know, to turn the same to gain.


La. Thou comforts me, good Rosko, tell me how?


Ros. You will be honest, 'twere fyn to hinder you.


La. I did but jest, good sweet servant tell me.


Ros. Sweet servant now, and late, pack sir, god bwy ye.


La. Tush, to try thy unwillingness. I did but jest.


Ros. And I do but try, how long you would be honest.


La. I thought thy talk was too sweet to be true.


Ros. Yea, but meant yon, to bid honesty adue?


La. No, I did so long since, but inforste by need,
To bid him welcome home again, I was decreede.

Ros. Very good, Mistress, I know your mind,
And for your ease, this remedy I find:
Prying abroad, for play fellows and such,
For you Mistress, I heard of one Phallax,
A man esteemde, of Promos very much:
Of whose Nature, I was so bold to axe.
And I smealt, he loved lase mutton well.

La. And what of this?


Ros. Marry of this, if you the way can tell
To towle him home, he of you will be feign:
Whose countenance, will so excuse your faults.
As none for life, dare of your life complain.

La. A good device, God grant us good success:
But I pray thee, what trade does he profess?

Ros. He is a paltrie petyfogger.


La. All the better, suspicion will be the less.
Well, go thy ways, and if thou him espy,
Tell him from me, that I a cause or two.
Would put to him, at leisure willingly.

Ros. Her case is so common, that small pleading will serve,
I go (nay run) your commandment to observe.

The scurge of law (and not zeal) keeps the lewd in awe.
La. Aye me alas, less Phallax help, poor wench undone I am:
My foes now in the wind, will lie to work my open shame:
Now envious eyes will pry abroad, offenders to entrap,
Of force now Lamia, must be chaste, to shun a more mishap.
And wanton girl, how will thou shift, for garments fine and gay?
For dainty fare, can crusts content? who shall thy houserent pay?
And that delights thee most of all, thou must thy daliaunce leave?
And can then the force of law, or death, thy mind of love bereave?
In good faith, no: the wight that once, has taste the fruits of love,
Until her dying day will long, Sir Chaucers jests to prove.

Actus. 1. Sce. 4.
Lamias maid, Lamia. MAy. Forsooth Mistress your thraule stays for you at home,


La. Were you borne in a myll, curtole? you prate so hye:


May. The gentelman, that came the last day with Captain Pry:


La. What young Hipolito?


May. Even he.


La. Least he be gone, home hye:
And will Dalia pop him in the nether room,
And keep the falling door close till I come
And tell my thraule his fortune will not stay?

Exet. May. Will you ought else?


La. Pratyng vixen away.
Gallants adue. I venture must Hipolito to see.
He is both young and welthy yet, the better spoil for me.
My hassard for his sake I true, Note
shall make him pray and pay:
He: he: shall pranck me in my plumes, and deck me brave and gay,
Of Curtisie, I pray you yet, if Phallax come this way,
Report to put a case with him, hear Lamia long did stay.

Exet. Actus. 2.
Scena. 1.
Cassandra, a Maid. CAss. Aye me, unhappy wenche that I must live the day,
To see Andrugio tymeles dye, my brother and my stay.
The only mean, God wot. that should our house advance,
Who in the hope of his good hap, must die through wanton chance:
O blind affectes in love, whose torments none can tell,
Yet wantous will hyde fire, and frost, yea hassard death, nay hell:
To taste thy sour sweet fruits, The force of love.
digested still with care,
Foul fall thee love, thy lightning joys, has blasted my welfare
Thou fyerst affection first, within my brothers breast.
Thou made Polina grant him (erst) even what he would request:
Thou made him crave and have, a proof of Venus meede,
For which foul act he is adiudgd, ear long to lose his head.
The law is so severe, in scourging fleshly sin,
As marriage to work after mends does seldom favor win.
A law first made of zeal, but wrested much amiss
Faults should be measured by desert, A good law ill executed,
but all is one in this,
The lecher fyerd with lust, is punished no more,
Then he which fell through force of love, whose marriage salues his sore:
So that poor I despair, of my Audrugios life,
O would my days might end with his, for to appease my strife.

Actus. 2. Scena. 2.
Andrugio in prison, Cassandra. AN. My good Sister Cassandra?


Cass. Who calls Cassandra?


An. Thy woeful brother Andrugio.


Cas. Andrugio, O dismal day, what greefes, do me assail?
Condemned wretch to see thee here, fast fettered now in Iayle,
Now haps thy wits were witched so, ye knowing death was meede
Thou would commit (to stay us both) this vile laciuious deed.

An. O good Cassandra, leave to check, and chide me thraule therefore
If late repentance, wrought me help I would do so no more.
But out alas, I wretch, too late, do sorrow my amys.
Unless Lord Promos grant me grace: in vain is hady wist,
Wherefore sweet sister, whylst in hope, my dampened life yet were,
Assault his heart, in my behalf, with battering tire of tears.
If thou by suit do save my life, it both our joys will be,
If not it may suffice thou soughst, to set thy brother free:
Wherefore speed to proroge my days, to morrow else I dye.

Cas. I will not fail to plead and pray, to purchase the mercy,
Farewell a while, God grant me well to speed.

An. Sister adieu, till thy return, I live, twene, hope, and breed.

Cas. Oh happy time, see where Lord Promos coms?
Now tongue address thy self, my mind to wray.
And yet least haste work waste, I hold it best,
In covert, for some advantage, to stay.

Actus. 2. Scena. 3.
Promos with the Shriefe and their Officers. PRo. It Is strange to think, what
swarms of unthrifts live,
Within this town, by rapine spoil and theft:
That were it not, that Justice often them grieve,
The just man's goods, by Ruflers should be reft.
At this our Syse, are thirty iudgde to dye,
Whose falls I see, their fellows smally fear:
So that the way, is by severity
Such wicked weeds, even by the roots to tear:
Wherefore Shriefe, execute with speedy pace,
The dampened wightes, to cut of hope of Grace.

Shriefe, It shall be done.

Cas. Cassandra to her self, O cruel words they make my heart to bleed,
Now, now, I must, this dome seek to revoke,
Least grace come short, when starued is the steed:
She kneeling speaks to Promos. Most mighty Lord, and worthy Judge, thy
judgment sharp abate,
Veil thou thine ears, to hear the plaint, that wretched I relate,
Behold the woeful Sister here, of poor Andrugio,
Whom though that law awardeth death, yet mercy do him show:
Way his young years, the force of love, which forced his amiss,
Way, way, that Marriage, works amends, for what committed is,
He has defilde no nuptial bed, nor forced rape has moved,
He fell through love, who never meant, but wiue ye wight he loved.
And wa^tons sure, to keep in awe, these statutes first were made,
Or none but lust full leachers, should, with rygrous law be paid.
And yet to add intent thereto, is far from my pretense,
I sue with tears, to win him grace, that sorrows his offense.
Wherefore herein, renowned Lord, Justice with pity payse:
Which two in equal balance waide, to heaven your fame will raise.

Pro. Cassandra, leave of thy bootlesse suit, by law he has been tried,
Law found his fault, Law iudgde him death:

Cas. Yet this may be replide,
That law a mischief often permits, to keep due form of law,
That law small faults, with greatest doomes, to keep men still in axe:
Yet Kings, or such as execute, regal authority:
If mends be made, may over rule, the force of law with mercy.
Here is no wylful murder wrought, which axeth blood again,
Andrugios fault may valued be, Marriage wipes out his stayne.

Pro. Fair Dame, I see ye natural zeal, thou bear to Andrugio,
And for thy sake (not his desert) this favor will I show:
I will repriue him yet a while, and on the matter pawse,
To morrow you shall license have, a fresh to plead his cause:
Shriefe execute my chardge, but stay Andrugio,
Until that you in this behalf, more of my pleasure know.

Shri. I will perform your will:


Cas. O most worthy Magistrate, my self thy thrall I find.
Even for this little lightning hope, which at thy hands I find.
Now will I go and comfort him, which hangs twixt death and life.

Exit. Pro. Happy is the man, that inioyes the love of such a wife,
I do protest, her modest words, has wrought in me a maze.
Though she be far, she is not deackt, with garish shows for gaze,
Her beauty lures, her looks cut off, fond suits with chaste disdain.
O God I feel a sudden change, that does my freedom chain.
What did thou say? fie Promos fie: of her avoid the thought,
And so I will, my other cares will cure what love has wrought,
Come away.

Exeunt. Actus. 2. Scena. 4.
Phallax, Promos offycer, Gripax, and Rapax Promoters. PHal. My trusty friends
about your business straight,
With simple shows, your subtle meanings bayte:
Promote all faults, up into my office,
Then turn me lose, the offenders to fleece.

Gri. Tush, to find law breakers let me alone,
I have eyes, will look into a Mylstone.

Phal. God a mercy Gripax.


Ra. And I am so subtle sighted I trow,
As I the very thoughts of men do know:

Gri. I faith Rapax, what thought thy wife when she,
To lie with the priest, by night stole from thee?

Ra. Marry she knew, you and I were at square,
And least we fell to blows, she did prepare.
To arm my head, to match thy horned browe.

Gri. Go and a knave with thee.


Ra. I stay for you:


Phal. No harm is done, here is but blow for blew,
Byrds of a fether, best fly together,
Then like partners, about your market go,
Marrowes adieu, God sent you fair wether.

Gri. Fare you well, for us take no care,
With us this broad speech sildome breeds square.

Exeunt. Phal. Marry sir, welfare an office, what some ever it be,
The very countenance, is great, though slender be the sea,
I thank my good Lord Promos now, I am an officer made,
In sooth more by hap then desert, in secret be it said:
No force for that, each shyft for one, for Phallax will do so,
Well fare a head can take his time nay watch for time I trow.
I smyle to think of my fell* was; how some brave it, some weight,
And think reward, there service just, with offered shifts will bayght
When they (poor souls) in troth do fall a mile upon account,
For flattery and fervent plesing, are means to make men mount:
I speak on proof, Lord Promos, I have pleased many a day,
Yet am I neither learned, true, nor honest any way.
What skyls for that, by wit or wyle, I have an office got,
By force whereof every license, warrant, pattent, pasport,
Leace, fine, fee, et cetera, pas and repas, through Phallax hands,
Disorored persons brybe me well, to escape from Justice bands,
And welthy churles for to promote, I now have set a work,
Such hungry lads, as soon will smell, where statute breakers lurk,
And if they come, within our Grype, we mean to stripe them so,
As (if they escape from open shame) their bags with us shall go.
And trust me this, we officers, of this mylde mould are wrought,
Agree with us, and sure your shame by us shall not be sought:
But soft a while, I see my Lord what makes him lowre so*
I will intrude into his sight, perhaps his grief to know.

Actus. 2. Scena. 4.
Phallax. Promos. PRo. Well met Phallax. I long have wysht to show.
A cause to thee which none but I yet know.

Phal. Say on my Lord, a happy man wear I:
If any way, your wish I could supply:

Pro. Feign would I speak, but oh, a chylling fear,
(The case is such) makes me from speech forbear.

Phal. These words my Lord (whom ever have been just)
Now makes, me think, that you my truth mistrust.
But cease suspect, my will with yours shall gree,
What so (or against whom) your dealing be.

Pro. Against a wight of small account it is,
And yet I fear, I shall my purpose mys:

Phal. Fear not my Lord, the old Proverb does say.
Faint hearts does steal fair Ladies seld away.

Pro. Fair Ladies O, no Lady is my love,
And yet the sure, as coye as they will prove.

Phal. I thought as much, love did torment you so.
But what is she that dare say Promos noe?

Pro. Do what one can. fire will break forth I see,
My words unawares, has showen what greeueth me:
My wound is such, as love must be my leache.
Which cure will brynging Gravity in speech,
For what may be, a folly of more note,
Then for to see, a man gray beard to dote.

Phal. No my Lord, Amor omnia vincit.
And Ovid says, Forma numen habet.
And for to prove, loves service seems the wise,
Set Sallomon and Sampson, before your eyes:
For wit, and strength, who won the cheifest prise.
And both lyu'd by the laws love did devise,
Which proves in love, a certain godhed lies.
And Gods rule yearly, by wisdom from the skies:
Whose wyls (think I) are wrought best by the wise.
In deed divine, I think loves working is,
From reasons use, in that my senses swerve,
In pleasure pain, in pain I find a bliss,
On woe I feed, in sight of food I stearue:
These strange effects, by love are lodgd in me,
My thoughts are bound, yet I my self am free.

Phal. Well my Good Lord, I axe (with pardon sought)
Who she may be, that has your thrauldome wrought?

Pro. The example is such, as I sygh to show,
Sister she is, to dampened Andrugio.

Phal. All the better for you the game does go.
The proverb says, that kyt will unto kind,
If it be true this comfort, then I find:
Cassandras flesh is as her brothers, frail,
Then will she stoop, (in chief) when Lords assail.

Pro. The contrary (through fear) does work my pain,
For in her face, such modesty does reign,
As cuttes of loving suits, with chaste disdain.

Phal. What love will not, necessity shall gain,
Her brothers life, will make her glad and feign.

Pro. What is it best, Andrugio free to set,
Ere I am sure, his systers love to get?

Phal. My loving Lord, your servant means not so.
But if you will, elsewhere in secret go:
To work your will assist I hope to show.

Pro. With right good will, for such my sickness is.
As I shall dye, if her good will I mys.

Exeunt. Actus. 2. Scena. 5.
The Hangman, with a great many ropes abought his neck. THe wynd is ill,
blows no man's gain, for cold I need not care,
Here is nine and twenty suits of apparel for my share:
And some berlady very good, for so stands the case,
As neither gentelman, nor other Lord, Promos shows Grace.
But I marvel much poor slaves, that they are hanged so soon,
They were wont, to stay a day or two, now scarce an after noone:
All the better for the hangman, I pardons dreaded sore,
Would cutters save, whose clothes are good, I never feared the poor:
Let me see, I must be dapper in this my faculty,
Hear are new ropes, how are my knots, I says fyr slippery.
At fast or loose, with my Giptian, I mean to have a cast:
Ten to one I read his fortune by the Marymas fast,
Serg. A way, what a stur is this, to see men go to hanging?

Han. Hark* god bwy ye, I must begone, the prisners are a coming.

Exit. Actus. 2. Scena. 6.
Six prisoners bound with cords, Two Hacksters, one Woman, one like a
Giptian, the rest poor Roges, a Preacher, with other Officers. They sing. WIth
heart and voice to thee O Lord,
At latter gasp, for grace we cry:
Unto our suits, good God accord,
Which thus appeal, to thy mercy.
Forsake us not, in this distress,
Which unto thee, our sins confess:
Forsake us not, in this distress,
Which unto thee, our sins confess.

HAc. (First Hackster.) Al sorts of men beware by us, whom present death
assaults,
Look in your conscience what you find, and sorrow for your faults:
Example take by our fresh harms, see here the fruits of pride,
I for my part deserved death, long ere my theft was spide.
O careless youth, lead, lead awrie, with every pleasing toy,
Note well my words, they are of worth, ye cause though my annoy.
Shun to be pranckt, in peacocks plumes, for gaze which only are.
Hate, hate, the dyce, even as the devil, of wanton Dames beware:
I was intist by lawles men, on theeuish spoils to feed.
And nusled once in wicked deeds, I feared not to offend,
From had, to worse, and worst I fell, I would at leisure mende.
But oh presuming over much, still to escape in hope,
My faults were found, and I adiudgde, to totter in a rope:
To which I go with these my mates, likewise for breach of laws.
For murder some, for theeuerie some, and some for little cause.

Second. nackster. Bewared are friend of quarelling, thirst spoil of no ma^s
breaths
Blood, areth blood, I sheeding blood, untimely catch: y death.

VVo. (A woman.) Maids and women, shun pride, and sloth, the roots of every
vice,
My death ere long, will show their ends, God grant it make you wise.

Ca. (A scoffing catch pole.) How now Giptian? All a mort knave, for want of
company?
Be crustie man, ye Hangman straight, will read Fortunes with thee.

Prea. (The preacher.) With this thy scoffing speech, good friend offend him
not,
His faults are scorged, thine escape (perhaps) that do deserve his lot?

Rog. (A poors Roge.) Jesus save me, I am cast, for a purse with three
halfepence.

Of. (A churlish officer.) Dispatch prating knave, and he hanged, yt we were
iogging hence.

They leysurablie depart synging. The Preacher whispering some one or other of
the Prisoners still in the care. They sing. Our secret thoughts, thou Christ
do know,
Whom the world, does hate in thrall.
Yet hope we that, thou will not so,
On whom alone, we thus do call.
Forsake us not, in this distress,
Which unto thee, our sins confess,
Forsake us not, etc.

Actus. 3.
Scena. 1.
Promos, alone. PRo. Do what I can, no reason cooles desire,
The more I strive, my fond affectes to fame:
The hotter (oh) I feel, a burning fire
Within my breast, vain thoughts to forge and frame.
O straying effects, of blind affected Love,
From wisdoms paths, which does astraye our wits:
Which makes us haunt, that which our harms does move,
A sickness like, the Fever Etticke fittes:
Which shakes with cold, when we do burn like fire.
Even so in Love, we freese, through chilling fear,
When as our hearts, does frye with hot desire:
What said I? like to Etticke fittes, nothing near:
In sowrest Love, some sweet is ever sucked.
The Lover finds peace, in wrangling strife,
So that if pain, were from his pleasure plucked,
There were no Heaven, like to the Lovers life.
But why stand I to plead, their joy or woe?
And rest unsure of her I wish to have.
I know not if Cassandra love, or no?
But yet admytte, she grant not what I crave,
If I benyce, to her brother life to give:
Her brothers life, too much will make her yield,
Might masters right.
A promise then, to let her brother live:
Has force enough, to make her fly the field.
Thus though suit fail, necessity shall wyn,
Of Lordly rule, the conquering power is such:
But (oh sweet sight) see where she enters in,
Both hope and dread, at once my heart does tuch.

Actus. 3. Scena. 2.
Cassandra, Promos. CAss. Cassandra Speaks to her self. I see two thralles,
sweet seems a little joy,
For fancies free, Andrugios breast has scope:
But least detract, does raise a new annoye,
I now will seek to turn, to hap his hope.
See, as I wished, Lord Promos is in place,
Now in my suts, God grant I may find grace.
She kneeling speaks to Promos. Renowned Lord, whylst life in me does last,
In homage bonds, I bind my self to thee:
And though I did thy goodness lately taste,
Yet once again, on knees I mercy seek:
In his behalf, that hanges twene death and life;
Who still is preast, if you the mendes do leeke:
His lawles love, to make his lawful wife.

Pro. Fair Dame, I well have wayd thy suit, and wish to do thee good,
But all in vain, al things conclude, to have thy brothers blood:
The stricknes of the law condempnes, an ignorant abuse,
Then wylfull faults are hardly helped, or cloked with excuse:
And what may be more wylfull, then a Maid to violate.

Cas. The force was small, when with her will, he wretch ye conquest gate.


Pro. Law ever at the worst, does conster evil intent.


Cas. And law even with the worst, awardes them punishment:
And since that rigorous law adiudgd him to dye,
Your glory will be much the more, in showing him mercy.
The world will think, how ye you do, but grant him grace on cause,
And where cause is, there mercy should abate the force of laws.

Pro. Cassandra in thy brothers half, thou have said what may be
And for thy sake, it is, if I do set Andrugio free:
Short tale to make, thy beauty has, surprysed me with love,
That maugre wit, I turn my thoughts, as blind affections move.
And quite subdude by Cupids might, need makes me sue for grace
To thee Cassandra, which do hold, my freedom in a lace.
Yield to my will, and then command, even what thou will of me,
Thy brothers life, and all that else, may with thy liking gree.

Cas. Cassa^dra to her self. And may it be, a Judge himself, the self same
fault should use:
For which he domes, an others death, O crime without excuse.
Renowned Lord, you use this speech (I hope) your thrall to try,
If otherwise, my brothers life, so dear I will not bye.

Pro. Fair Dame my outward looks, my inward thoughts bewray,
If you mistrust, to search my heart, would God you had a kaye.

Cas. If that you love (as so you say) the force of love you know,
Which fealt, in conscience you should, my brother favor show.

Pro. In doubtful war, one prisoner still, does set another free.

Cas. What so war seeks, love unto war, contrary is, you see.
Hate fostreth war, love cannot hate, then may it covet force.

Pro. The Lover often sues to his foe, and finds no remorse:
Then if he hap to have a help, to win his froward foe,
Too kind a fool, I will him hold, that lets such vantage go.

Cas. Well, to be short, my self will dye, ere I my honor stain,
You know my mind, leave off to tempt, your offers are in vain.

Pro. Bethink your self, at price enough I purchase sweet your love,
Andrugios life suffis'd alone, your straungenes to remove:
The which I grant, with any wealth that else you will require,
Who buyeth love at such a rate, pays well for his desire.

Cas. No Promos, no, honor never at value may be sold,
Honor far dearer is then life, which passes price of gold:

Pro. To bnie this Iuell at the full, my wife I may thee make:


Cas. For unsure hope, that peereles pearl, I never will forsake:


Pro. These suits seems strange at first I see, where modesty bears sway, To
himself.

I therefore will set down my will, and for her answer stay.
Fair Cassandra, the iuell of my joy,
How so in show, my tale, seems strange to thee:
The same well waide, thou need'st not be so coye,
Yet for to give thee respite to agree.
I will two days hope still of thy consent,
Which if thou grant (to clear my clouds of care)
Clothed like a Page (suspect for to prevent.)
Unto my Court, some night, sweet wenche repair.
Till then adue, thou these my words, in works performed shall find.

Cas. Farewell my Lord, but in this suit, you bootles wast your wind:
Cassandra, O most unhappy, subject to every woe,
What tongue can tell, what thought conceive, what pen thy grief can show?
Whom to scurge, Nature, heaven and earth, do heaps of thral ordain,
Whose words in waste, whose works are lost, whose wishes are in vain.
That which to others comfort yields, does cause my heavy cheer,
I mean my beauty breeds my bale, which many hold so dear.
I would to God that kind else where, bestowed had this blase,
My virtues then had wrought regard, my shape now gives ye gase:
This form so Promos fires with Love, as wisdom can not quench,
His hot desire, till he lust, in Venus seas has drencht.

At these words Ganio must be ready to speak. Actus 3. Scena. 3.
Ganio, And rugios boy. Cassandra. GA. Mistres Cassandra, my Master lo^gs to
hear of your good speed,


Cas. Poor Ganio his death-alas, fierce Fortune has decreed:


Ga. His death: God forbid, all his hope should turn to such success,
For Gods sake, go and comfort him, I sorrow his distress.

Cas. I needs must go, although with heavy cheer.


Ga. Sir, your sister Cassandra is here.


Exit. Actus. 3. Scena. 4.
Andrugio out of prison. Cassandra on the stage. AN. My Cassandra what news,
good sister show?


Cas. All things conclude thy death Andrugio:
Prepare thy self, to hope it ware in vain.

An. My death, alas what raised this new disdain?


Cas. Not Justice zeal, in wicked Promos sure:


An. Sweet, show the cause, I must this dome endure?


Cas. If thou do live I must my honor lose,
Thy ransom is, to Promos fleshly will
That I do yield: then which I rather chose,
With torments sharp, my self he first should kill:
Thus am I bent, thou see thy death at hand,
O would my life, would satisfy his ire,
Cassandra then, would cancel soon thy band.

An. And may it be a Judge of his account,
Can spot his mind, with lawles love or lust?
But more, may he doom any fault with death?
When in such fault, he finds himself iniust.
Sister, that wise men love we often see,
And where love rules, against thorns does reason spurn.
But who so loves, if he rejected be,
His passing love, to peevish hate will turn.
Dear sister then, note how my fortune stands,
That Promos love, the like is often in use:
And since he crave, this kindness, at your hands,
Think this, if you his pleasure do refuse.
I in his rage (poor wretch) shall sing Peccaui.
Here are two euyls, the best hard to digest,
But where as things are driven unto necessity,
There are we bid, of both euyls choose the least:

Cas. And of these evils, the least, I hold is death,
To shun whose dart, we can no mean devise,
Yet honor lives, when death tath done his worst,
Thus fame then life is of far more emprise:

An. Nay Cassandra, if thou thy self submyt,
To save my life, to Promos fleashly will,
Justice will say, thou do no crime commit:
For in forced faults is no intent of ill.

Cass. How so the intent, is construed in offense,
The Proverb says that ten good turns lie dead,
And one ill deed, ten times beyond pretense,
By envious tounges, report abroad does spread:
Andrugio so, my fame, shall vallewed be,
Dispite will blase my crime, but not the cause:
And thus although I feign would set thee free,
Poor wench I fear, the grype of slanders paws.

An. Nay sweet sister more slander would insawe,
Your spotles life, to reaue your brothers breath:
When you have power, for to enlarge the same,
Once in your hands, does lie my life, and death,
Way that I am, the self same flesh you are,
Think I once gone, our house will go to wrack:
Know forced faults, for slander need not care:
Look you for blame, if I quail through your lack.
Consider well, my great extremity,
If other wise, this doom I could revoke:
I would not spare, for any ieberdye:
To free thee wench, from this same heavy yoke.
But ah. I see, else, no way saues my life.
And yet his hope, may further thy consent,
He said, he may percase make thee his wife,
And it is likely, he can not be content
With one nights joy: if love he after seeks,
And I dischargd, if thou aloof then be,
Before be lose thy self, that so he leekes.
No dought but he, to marryage, will agree.

Cas. And shall I stick to stoop, to Promos will,
Since my brother inioyeth life thereby?
No, although it does my credit kill,
Ere that he should, my self would choose to dye.
My Andrugio, take comfort in distress,
Cassandra is won, thy faunsome great to pay,
Such care she has, thy thraldom to releace:
As she consentes, her honor for to slay.
Farewell, I must, my virgins weeds forsake:
And like a page, to Promos lewd repair.

Exit. An. My good sister to God I thee betake,
To whom I pray, that comfort change thy care.

Actus. 3. Scena. 5.
Phallax alone. PHal. It Is more then strange to see Lord Promos plight,
He fryskes abought, as birds ware in his breech.
Even now he seems (through hope) to taste delight,
And straight (through fear) where he claws it does not ytch.
He museth now, straight ways the man does sing.
(A sight in sooth, unseemly for his age:)
He longing looks, when any news shall bring,
To speak with him, without there waytes a page,
O worthy wit (fyt for a Judges head)
Unto a man to change a shiftles maid,
Wyncke not on me, it was his, and not my deed:
His, nay, his rule, this Metamorphos made,
But Holla tongue, no more of this I pray,
Non bonus est, ludere cum sanctis.
The quietest, and the thryftiest course they say,
Is, not to check, but praise great men's amys,
I find it true, for soothing Promos vain:
None like my self, is lykte in his conceyte,
While favor last, then good, I fist for gain:
(For Grace will not byte always at my bayte)
And as I wish, at hand, good Fortune, see:
Here coms Phallax, and Gripax, but what is this,
As good, as fair handsell, God grant it be:
The knaves bring a Woman, Coram nobis.

Actus. 3. Scena. 6.
Phallax, Gripax. Rapax, a Bedell, and one with a brown Byll, bring in Lamia,
and Rosko her man. LA. Tear not my clothes my friends, they cost more the^ you
are a ware,


Be. Tush, soon you shall have a blew gown. for these take you no care


To. If she took thy offer poor knave, thy wife would starve we cold:


Gri. Well sir, whipping shall keep you warm.


Phal. What means these knaves to scolde.


Ra. Master Phallax, we find you in good time,
A Woman here, we have brought before you:
One to be chargde with many a wanton crime.
Which trial will, with proof enough find true:
A knave of hirs, we have stayed likewise,
Both to be used, as you shall us advise.

Phal. What call you her name?


Ra. Lamia.


Phal. Fair Dame, hereto what do you say?


La. Worshipful Sir, my self I happy reake,
With patience that my answer you will hear:
These naughty men, these words on malice speak,
And for this cause, ill will to me they bear.
I scornde to keep, their minds with money play,
I mean to keep, my life from open shame,
Yea, if I lyu'd, as lewdlie as they say:
But I that knew, my self unworthy shame:
Shrunk not, to come unto my trial now.
My tale is told, conceive as lyketh you.

Phal. My friends, what proof have you against this dame?
Speak on sure ground, least that you reap the shame:
The wrong is great, and craves great recompense.
To touch her honest name, without offense.

Gri. All Iulio Sir does ryng of her lewd life:


Byl. In deed she is known for an idle huswife.


Ros. He lies, she is occupied day and night.


Phal. To swear against her is there any wight?


Ra. No, not present, but if you do detayne her.
There will be found by oath, some that will stayne her,

Phal. I see she is then on suspicion stayde:
Whose fawltes to search, upon my charge is laid,
From charge of her I therefore will set you free,
My self will search her faults if any be,
A Gods name you may depart.

2 or. 3. speak, God bwy Sir.

Gri. In such shares as this, henceforth I will begin,
For all is his, in his claws, that comes in.

Exeunt. Phal. Fair Lamia, since that we are alone,
I plainly will discourse to you my mind,
I think you not to be so chaste a one,
As that your life, this favor ought to find:
No force, for that, since that you scot free go,
Unpunished, whose life is judged ill:
Yet think (through love) this grace the Judge does show,
And love with love ought to be answered still.

La. Indeed I grant (although I could reprove,
Their lewd Complayntes, with goodness of my life)
Your curtesy, your detter does me prove,
In that you took* my honest fame in strife,)
My answer for discharge of their report:
For which good turn, I at your pleasure rest,
To work amends, in any honest sort:

Phal. Away with honesty your answer then in sooth,
Fyts me as iumpe as a pudding a Friars mouth,

Ros. He is a crafty child, dally, but do not.


La. Tush, I warrant thee, I am not so whot,
Your words are too hard Sir, for me to conster.

Phal. Then to be short, your rare beauty my heart has wounded so,
As (save your love, become my leach) I sure shall die with woe.

La. I see no sign of death, in your face to appear,
It Is but some usual qualme you have, pitiful Dames to fears.

Phal. Fair Lamia, trust me I feign not, betimes bestow some grace.


La. Well, I admit it so, only to argue in your case.
I am married, so that to set your love on me were vain:

Phal. It suffiseth me, that I may your secret friend remain.


Ros. A holy Hoode, makes not a Friar devout,
He will play at small game, or he sit out.

La. Though for pleasure, or to prove me, these profers you do move,
You are to wise, to hassarde life, upon my yielding love:
The man is painde with present death, that uses wanton pleasure.

Phal. To escape such pain, wise men, these joys, without suspect ca^ measure,
Furthermore, I have been (my Girl) a Lawier to too long:
If at a pinche, I cannot wrest the Law from right to wrong.

La. If law you do profess. I gladly crave,
In a cause or two, your advise to have.

Phal. To resolve you, you shall command my skyll,
Wherefore like friends, lets common in good will,

La. You are a merry man, but leave to jest,
To morrow night, if you will be my Geast:
At my poor house, you shall my causes know,
For good cause, which I mean not here to show.

Phal. Willingly, and for that, haste calls me hence,
My suit till then, shall remain in suspense:
Farewell Clyent, to morrow look for me:
Exit.
La. Your good welcome Sir, your best cheer will be.


Ros. I told you erst, the nature of Phallax,
Money, or fair Women, works him as wax:
And yet I must commend your sober cheer,
You told your tale, as if a Saint you were.

La. Well (in seereete, be it said) how so I seemd divine,
I feared once, a blew gown, would have been my shrine.
But now that pain is flead, and pleasure keeps his hold,
I know that Phallax will, my Fame henceforth uphold:
To entertain which Geast, I will some dayntie cheer prepare,
Yet ere I go, in pleasant Song, I mean to purge my care.
The Song.
A due poor care, adue,
Go, cloye some helples wretch:
My life, to make me rue,
Thy forces do not stretche.
Thy harbor, is the heart,
Whom wrong, has wrapped, in woe:
But wrong, does take my part,
With cloak of right in shoe.
My faults, inquiry escape,
At them the Judges wink:
Those for my fall that gape,
To show my lewdness shrink.
Then silly care go pack,
Thou art no Geast for me:
I have, and have, no lack,
And lack, is shrowde for thee.

Exeunt. Actus. 3. Scena. 7.
Cassandra, apparelled like a Page. CAs. Unhappy wretch, I blush my self to
see,
Apparelled thus monstrous to my kind:
But oh, my weeds, will with my fault agree,
When I have pleased, lewd Promos fleshly mind.
What shall I do, go proffer what he sought?
Or on more suit, shall I give my consent?
The best is sure, since this must needs be wrought:
I go, and show, need makes me to his bent.
My fluddes of tears, from true intent which floe.
May quench his lust, or open his musled eyes,
To see that I deserve to be his wife:
Though now constrainde to be his Concubine.
But so, or no, I must the vent er give,
No danger fears the wight, pricked forth by need:
And thus like one more glad to dye, then live,
I forewarde set, God grant me well to speed.

Exit. Actus 4.
Scena. 1.
Dalia, Lamias Maid, going to market. DA. With my Mistress, the world is
changed well,
She fearde of late, of whipping cheer to smell:
And now again, both gallant, fresh and gaye.
Who in Iulio flauntes it out, like Lamia?
A luckie friend (yea, one that bears swaye)
Is now become, a proppe, of such a stay*
To her good name, as who is he dare say:
That Lamia does offend, now any way?
This, her good friend, will be her Geast this night,
And that he may in his welcome delyght.
To market I. in haste, am sent to buy,
The best cheer, that, I fasten on my eye.

Exit. Actus. 4. Scena. 2.
Promos alone. PRo. By proof I find, no reason cooles desire,
Cassandraes suit, suffised to remove
My lewd request, but contrary, the fire,
Her tears inflamed, of lust, and filthy Love.
And having thus, the conquest in my hands,
No prayer seru'de to work restraint in me:
But needs I would untie the precious bands,
Of this fair Dames spotles Virginity.
The spoil was sweet, and won even as I would,
And yet vngainde, till I had given my trothe,
To marie her, and that her brother should
Be free from death, all which I bound with oathe:
It rests now (unless I wrong her much)
I keep my vow: and shall Andrugio live?
Such grace would me, with vnindifferencie tuch.
To pardon him, that did commit a Rape,
To set him free, I to Cassandra swear:
But no man else, is privy to the same,
And rage of Love, for thousand oaths nyll spare,
More then are kept, when gotten is the game.
Well, what I said, then Lover like I said,
Now reason says, unto thy credit look:
And having well, the circumstaunces wayde,
I find I must, vnsweare the oathe I took:
But double wrong, I so should do Cassandra.
No force for that, my might, commands right,
Her preuie manne, her open cries will stay:
Or if not so, my frowning will her fright,
And thus shall rule, conceal my filthy deed.
Now forthwith, I will to the Gayler send,
That secretelie Andrugio he behead,
Whose head he shall, with these same words commend.

(...)

(...)

Actus. 4. Scena. 5.
Gayler, Andrugio. GAy. Andrugio, as you love our lives, forthwith post you
away.
For Gods sake to no living friend, your safety yet bewraye:
The proverb says, two may keep counsel if that one be gone.

An. Assure thy self, most faithful friend, I wylbe known to none:
To none alas, I see my escape yeeldes me but small relief,
Cassandra, and Polina will destroy themselves, with grief:
Through thought yt I am dead: they dead, to live what helps me?

Gay. Leave of these plaints of small avail, thank God yt you are free,
For God it was, within my mind, that did your safety move,
And that same God, no doubt will work for your and their behoue:

An. Most faithful friend, I hope that God, will work as you do say,
And therefore, to some place unknown, I will my self conuaye.
Gayler, fare well: for thy good deed, I must remain thy debtor,
In mean while yet receive this gift, till fortune sends a better:

Gay. God bwy sir, but keep your money, your need you do not know.


An. I pas not now for fortuns threats, yea though her force she show
And therefore styck not to receive this small reward in part.

Gay. I will not sure, such proffers leave, tys time you do depart.


An. Since so thou will, I wylbe gone adue till fortune smile.


Exit. Gay. Sir, fare you well, I will not fail to pray for you the while.
Well. I am glad, that I have sent him gone,
For by my faith, I lyu'd in perlous fear:
And yet God wot, to see his bitter moan,
When he should dye, would force a man forbear,
From harming him, if pity might bear sway:
But see how God has wrought for his safety?
A dead man's head, that suffered the other day,
Makes him thou'ht dead, through out the city.
Such a just, good and righted is God is he:
Although awhyle he let the wicked raygne,
Yet he releeues the wretch in misery,
And in his pride, he throws the tyrant down.
I use these words, upon this only thought,
That Promos long his rod can not escape:
Who has in thought, a wylfull murder wrought,
Who has in act performd a wicked rape,
Gods will be done, who well Andrugio speed,
Once well I hope, to hear of his good luck,
For God thou know my conscience did this deed,
And no desire of any worldly muck,

Exit. Actus. 4. Scena. 6.
Dalia from Market. DA. In good sweet sooth, I fear I shall be shent,
It is so long: since I to market went,
But trust me, wyldfowle are such costly gear,
Specially, woodcoks, out of reason dear,
That this hour, I have the market bett,
To drive a bargayne to my most profyt:
And in the end I chaunst to light on one,
Hit me as pat as a pudding Pope Ione,
Other market maids* pay down for their meat,
But that I have bought, on my score is set.
Well fare credit when money runs low,
Marry yet, Butchers, the which do credit so.
(As much Good meat, as they kill) may perchance,
Be glad and feign at heryng cobs to dance.
What force I that? every man shyft for one,
For if I starve, let none my fortune moan,

She faynes to go out. Actus. 4. Scena. 7.
Grimball, Dalia, either of them a Basket. GRi. Soft Dalia, a word with you,
I pray.


Da. What friend, Grimbal, welcome as I may say:


Gri. Say thou me so, then kiss me for acquaintance.


Da. If I like your manhood, I may do so perchance.


She faynes to look in his basket. Gri. Bate me an ase, quoth Boulton, Tush,
your mind I know:
Ah sir, you would, be like, let my Cock Sparrowes go.

Da. I warrant thee Grimball.


She takes out a white pudding: Gri. Lay off hands Dalia.
You powte me, if that you got, my Pudding away:

Da. Nay good sweet, honny Grimball, this Pudding give me.


Gri. Iche were as good geete her, for she will hate, I see.
Well, my nown good heart root, I freely give thee this,
Upon condition, that thou give me a kys.

Da. Nay, but first wash your lips, with sweet water you shall,


Gri. Why ych was ryte now, for my Pudding, honey sweet Grimbal:
Well Dalia, you will floute so long, till (though I say)
With kindness you will cast a proper handsome man away,
Wherefore soote Conny, even a little spurte:

Da. Lay off hands Sir:


Gri Good do not byte, for ych mean thee no hurt:
Come off Pyggesnie, prefarre me not a jot,

Da. What would the good fool have,


Gri. Why, you woot whote.
Hark in your ear:

Da. You shall command, so proper a man ye are.
That for your sake, I will not stick to ware:
A blew Cassocke, during my life for soothe,
Mary for my sake, I would be very loathe:
So goodly a handsome man, should lose his head.

Gri. Nay, for my head, care not a Tinkers torde,
For so God judge me, and at one bare word:
Isle lose my death, yea, and my great brown Cow,
I love you so filthilie: law ye now.

Da. Thou say valiantly, now sing, as well too:
And thou shall quickly know, what I mean to do.

Gri. Yes by Gogs foot, to pleasure thee, ych shall,
Both sing, spring, fight and play, the dewl and all.

Da. O lustilie:


The Song.
Gri. Come smack me, come smack me, I long for a smouch,


Da. Go pack thee, go pack thee, thou filthy fine slouch.


GRi. Leard how I love thee,


Da. This can not move me:


Gri. Why pretty Pygsney, my heart, and my honny?


Da. Because goodman Hogsface, you woe without money.


Gri. I lack money, chy grant,


Da. Then Grimball auaunt.


Gri. Cham young sweet heart, and feate, come kiss me for love,


Da. Crokeshanke, your Iowle is to great, such lyking to move.


Gri. What mean you by this?


Da. To leave thee by gys.


Gri. First smack me, first smack, I dye for a smouch,

Da. Go pack thee, go pack thee, thou filthy fine slouch.


Exit. GRi. Dalia, art thou gone? what wolt serve me so?
O God, cham ready to raye my self for woe:
Be valiant Grimball, kill thy self man?
Nay, hum Lady, I will not by Saint Anne.
Ich have bearde my great Grandsier say:
Maid will say nay, and take it: and so she may,
And therefore chyll, to Mistress Lamia,
With these Puddings, and Cock Sparowes, by and by:
And in the dark, again, ych will her try.

Exit: Actus. 5.
Scena. 1.
Phallax alone. PHal. I marvel much what works so my Lord Promos unrest,
He fares as if a thousand Devils, were gnawing in his breast:
There is sure some worm of grief, that does his conscience nip,
For since Andrugio lost his head, he has hung down the lip.
And truth to say, his fault is such as well may grieve his mind,
The Devil himself could not have used, a practice more unkind.
This is once. I love a woman, for my life, as well as be,
But (fair dames) with her that loves me. I deal well with, trust me.
Well, leave I now my Lord Promos, his own deeds to answer,
Lamia I know looks, and double looks, when I come to supper:
I thought as much: see, to seek me, hear coms her Aple squier.

Actus. 5. Scena. 2.
Rosko Phallax. Ros. O that I could find Master Phallax. the meat burns at ye
fire:
And by your leave. Andrugios death, does make my mistress sweat.

Phal How now Rosko?


Ros. Is It you sir? my Mistress does entreat,
That with all speed, you worship will come away to supper:
The meat and all is ready to set upon the board sir.

Phal. Gramercy for thy pains, I was even. coming to her.


Ros. You are the welcomst man alive to her I know,
And trust me at your commandment ren: ayneth poor Rosko.

Phal. It is honestly said, but now tell me,
What quality have, that I may use thee?

Ros. I am a Harbor, and when you please sir,
Call (and spare not) for a cast of rose water.

Phal. But hear me, can thou heal a green wound well?


Ros. Yea, green and old.


Phal. Then thy best were to dwell,
In some usual place or street, where, through frayes,
Thou may be set a work with wounds always.

Ros. I thank my Mistress I have my hands full,
To trym gentelmen of her acquayntaunce:
And I trust Sir, if that your worship chance.
To have need of my help, I shall earne your money.
Before an other.

Phal. That thou shall truly:
But syrra, where dwells Lamia?

Ros. Even hear sir, enter I pray.


Phal. That I will sure, if that my way be clear.


Ros. Yes sir, her doors be open all the year.


Exeunt. Actus. 5. Scena. 3.
Polina, (the maid, that Andrugio loved) in a blew gown. PO. Polina cursed,
what dame a live has cause of grief like thee.
Who (won by love) have yield the spoil of thy virginity?
And he for to repair thy fame, to marry thee, that vowde,
Is done to death for first offense, the second mends not loud.
Great shame redounds to thee, O Love, in leaving us in thrall:
Andrugio and Polina both, in honoryng thee did fall.
Thou so dydst witch our wits, as we from reason strayed quight,
Prouockt by thee, we did refuse, no vauntage of delight:
Delight, what did I say? nay death, by rash and foul abuse,
Alas I shame to tell thus much, though love do work excuse,
So that (fair dames) from such consent, my accydents of barme,
Forewarneth you, to keep aloof though love your hearts do arm,
But ah Polina, whether runs thy words into advise,
When others harms, inforst by love, could never make thee wise.
The cause is plain, for that in love, no reason stands in stude,
And reason is the only mean, that others harms we dread.
Then, that the world hereafter may, to love infer my ill,
Andrugios Tomb with daily tears, Polina worship will.
And further more I vowde, whylst life in me does foster breath,
No one shall vaunt of conquered love, by my Andrugios death,
These shameful weeds, which forced I were that men my fault may know:
Whilst that I live, shall show I morn for my Andrugio,
I will not bide the sharp assaults, from sugared words I sent.
I will not trust to careless oaths, which often wyn consent:
I will cut off occasions all, which hope of mirth may move,
With ceaseles tears isle quench each cause, ye kindles coals of love:
And thus till death Polina will estraunge her self from joy,
Andrugio, to reward thy love which did thy life destroy.
Exit.
Act. 5. Scena. 4.
Rosko alone. ROs. A Sir, in faith, the case is altered quight,
My mistress late that lived in wretched plight:
Byds care adue and every cause of woe,
The fe^^e is fled, which made her sorrow so,
Mas^^^ Phallax so under props her fame,
As none for life dare now her lewdnes blame,
I fear (nay hope) she has bewicht him so,
As haulfe his brybes, unto her share will go:
No force for that, who others does deceive,
Deserves himself, like measure to receive.
Well, leave I Lamia, for her self to pray,
Better then I can show, who knows the way:
It stands me on, for my poor self to shyfte,
And I have found a help at a dead lift:
My old friend Grimbals purce, with pence is full,
And if I empty it not, Dalia wull.
The slauering fool, what he can rap and rend,
(He loves her so) upon the fylth will spend:
But bye your leave, isle bar her of this match,
My net and all is set, the fool to catch.
Forsooth before his amorous suit he move,
He must be trimd to make her more to love.
And in good sooth, the world shall hardly fall,
But that he shall be washed, pould, shau'd and all:
And see the luck, the fool is fast I know,
In that with Rowke he does so sadly go.

Scena. 5.
Grymball, Rowke, Rosko. GRym. God bores, as say, when somewhat handsome
ch'am,
I faith she will come off for very shame:

Row. Yea without doubt for I swear by saint Anne:
My self loves you, you are so clean a young man.

Grim. Nay, thou woult say so, when my face is fair washed,


Ros. Good luck a Gods name, the wodcocke is masht.


Row. And who Barbes ye Grimball.


Grim. A dapper knave, one Rosko.


Ros. Well letherface, we shall have you Ass ere you go.


Row. I know him not, is he a deaft barber?


Grim. O, yea, why he is Mistress Lamias powler.
And look syrra, yen is the little knave.
How do Rosko?

Ros. Whope, my eye sight God save,
What old Grimball, welcome, sit you down hear, Boy?

Boy. Anon.


Boy in the house. Ros. Bay leaves in warm water, quick, bring clean gear,


Boy. Straight.


Row. As thou sayd'st Grymball, this is a feate knave indeed.


Ros. How say'syr? ointments for a scab* do you need?


Row. Scab, scuruy Jack, i will set you a work Sir.


Grym. Nay gogs foot, good now, no more of this stur.


Row. I faith Barber, I will pyck your teeth straight.


Ros. Nay, to pick my purse, I fear thou do wayght,


Row. Yea, gogs heart,


Grym. Nay, gogs foot,


Ros. Now come Ruffen.


Grim. Leave, if you be men,
Hear ye me now? be friends, and by my trothe,
Chill spend a whole quarte of Ale on you both.

Ros. Well, mass Grimball, I little thought I wus,
You would a brought a knave, to vie me thus.

Grim. Why, know him not? why it is lusty Rowke.


Ros. A strong thief, I warrant him by his look.


Row. Go to Barber, no more, least Copper you catch.


Grim. What? wilt give thy nose away? beware that match.
For chy see no Copper, vnlest be theare.

Boy brings water. Boy. Master, here is delicate water, and clean gear.


Exit. Ros. Well, to quiet my house, and for Grimbals sake,
If it pleases you, as friends, we hands will shake.

Grim. I, I, do so:


Row. And for his sake I agree.


Grim. Well then, that we may drink, straight ways wash me.


Ros. Good sir, here is water as sweet as a Rose,
Now whiles I wash, your eyes hard you must close.

Grim. Thus?


Ros. Harder yet:


Grim. O, thus:


Ros. Yea marry, so.
How syrra, you know what you have to do:

Rowke cuttes Grimbals purse. Ros. Wink hard. Grimball.


Grim. Yes, yes, I shall.


Row. Heare's the tooth pick, and all.


Exit. Ros. Depart then till I call?
Very will sir, your face, is gayly clean,
Were your teeth now picked, you may kiss a queen.

Grim. Say thou me so? Good now dispatch and away?
I even fyssell, until I smouch Dalia.

Ros. O do you so? I am right glad you tell.
I else had thought, tad been your teethe did smell.

Grim. O Lord, gogs foot, you pick me to the quick:


Ros. Quiet your self, your teeth are furred thick.


Grim. O, oh no more, O God, I spattell blood.


Ros. I have done, spyt out, this does you much good: Boy?


Boy. Anon.


Boy within. Ros. Bring the drink in the Porringer.
To gargalis his teeth.

Boy. It is here sir.


Exit. Ros. Wash your feeth with this, good master Grimball.


Grim. I am poisoned, ah, it is bitter gall:


Ros. Eat these Comfyts, to sweeten your mouth with all.


Grim. Yea mary sir, these are gay sugared gear.


Ros. Their sweetness straight, will make you stink I fear:


Grim. Well now, what must I pay, that chy were gone?


Ros. What you will.


Grim. Say me so? O cham undone.


Ros. How now Grimball?


Grim. O Leard, my Purse is cut.


Ros. When? where?


Grim. Now, here.


Ros. Boy, let the door be shut,
If it be here, we will straight ways see,
Where Is he, that came with you?

Grim. I can not tell.


Ros. What is he?


Grim. I know not.


Ros. Where does he dwell?


Grim. O Leard, I ken not I.


Ros. You have done well.
This knave, your pence, in his pocket has purst:
Let Us seek him out.

Grim. Nay hark, I must neades first:
O Learde, Learde, cham sick, my belly aches, too, too:

Ros. Thou lookst ill: well, isle tell thee what to do.
Since thou art so sick, straight ways, get thee home,
To find this Jack, my self abroad will rome.
The rather, for that he playde the knave with me,

Gri. Cham sick in deed, and therefore ych thank thee:


Ros. I see sometime, the blind man hits a Crow,
He may thank me, that he is plagued so:

Gri. Well, well, Dalia, the Lone ych bare to thee,
Has made me sick, and picked my purse from me.

Exit. Ros. A, is he gone? a fool company him,
In good soothe Sir, this match fadged frim:
Well, I will trudge, to find my tellewe Rowke,
To share the price, that my devise has took.

Exit. Actus. 5. Scena. 6.
Cassandra, in black. CAs. The heavy chardge, that Nature binds me too,
I have performed, ingrau'd my Brother is:
O would to God (to ease, my ceaseles woo)
My wretched bones, intombed were with his.
But O in vain, this bootelesse wish, I use,
I, poor I must live in sorrow, ioynde with shame:
And shall he live? that did us both abuse?
And quench through rule, the coals of just revenge?
O: no, I will now hye me to the King:
To whom, I will, recount my wretched state,
Lewd Promos rape, my Brothers death and all:
And (though with shame, I may this tale relate)
To prove that force, enforced me to fall:
When I have shown, Lord Promos foul misdeedes,
This knife forthwith, shall end my woe and shame,
My gored heart, which at his feet then bleedes,
To scorge his faults, the King will more inflame.
In deeds to do, that I in words pretend,
I now advise, my journey, to the King:
Yet ere I go, as Swans sing at their end,
In solemn Song, I mean my knell to ryng.
Cassandraes Song.
Since fortune thwart, does cross my joys with care,
Since that my bliss, is chaungde to bale by fate:
Since froward chance, my days in woe does wear,
Since I alas, must moan without a mate.
I wretch have vowde, to sing both day and night,
O sorrow slaye, all motions of delight.
Come grisly grief, torment this heart of mine,
Come deep despair, and stop my loathed breath.
Come wretched woe, my thought of hope to pine:
Come cruel care, prefer my suit to death.
Death, end my woe, which sing both day and night,
O sorrow slaye, all motions of delight.

Exit. FINIS.
G. W.

The second part of the Famous History of Promos and Cassandra.
Set forth in a Comicall Discourse, by George Whetstone Gent.
Formae nulla fides.
The second part of the History of Promos and Cassandra.
Actus. 1.
Scena. 1.
Polina in a blewe Gown, shadowed with a black Sarcenet, going to the Temple
to pray, upon Andrugios Tomb. PRomise is debt, and I my vow have past,
Andrugios Tomb, to wash with daily tears:
Which Sacrifice (although God wot in waste)
I will perform, my Alter is of cares.
Of fuming sighs, my offering incense is,
My pittious playntes, in steed of Prayers are:
Yea, would to God in penance of my mys.
I with the rest, my loathed life might share.
But O in vain, I wish this welcomde end,
Death is to slow, to slaye the wretched wight:
And all to soon, he does his forces bend,
To wound their hearts, which wallowe in delight.
Yet in my care, still goes, my passing Bell,
So often as I. Andrugios death do mind:
So often as men, with poynted fingers tell,
Their friends, my faults, which by my weeds they find.
But O the cause, with Death, which threats me most,
I wysh to dye, I dye through wretched woe,
My dying heart, desires to yield the ghost,
My traunces strange, a present death foreshowe.
But as the reed does bow at every blast.
To break the same, when rowghest storms lackes might,
So wretched I, with every woe do waste,
Yet care wants force, to kill my heart out right.
O gracious God and is my gilt so great.
As you the same, with thousand deaths must wreake?
You will it so, else care I could entreat?
With half these woes, my thryd of life, to break.
But what meanst thou Polina, most accursed,
To muse, why God, this pennaunce ioynes thee to
Whose correction, although we take at worst,
To our great good he does the same bestow.
So that, sith grese can not relyue my friend,
Sith scorching syghes my sorrows cannot dry:
Sith care himself, lackes force my life to end.
Sith still I live that every hour do dye:
Sith mighty God appoyntes my pennaunce so,
In mornefull song I will my patience show,
Polinas Song.
A Myd my bale, the lightning joy, that pyning care does bring,
With patience cheares my heavy heart, as in my vvoes I sing,
I know my Gilt, I feel my scurge: my ease is death I see:
And care (I find) by peecemeale wears, my heart to set me free.
O care, my comfort and refuge, fear not to work thy will,
With patience I thy corfiues bide, feed on my life thy fill.
Thy appetyte with syghes and tears, I daily will procure.
And wretched I, will veil to death, throw when thou will thy Lure.

Exit, Polina, Actus. 1. Scena. 2.
Enter a Messenger from the King. I Have at length (though weery come in troth)
Obtaynd a fight of Iulios stately walls,
A Kings message, can not be done with floth:
Whom he bids go, must run through mire and dyrt,
And I am sent to Lord Promos in post.
To tell him that the king will see him straight.
But much I fear that Promos needs not bost:
Of any gain by his soueraygnes receyte,
But Holla tongue of lauysh speech beware,
Though subjects often in Princes meaning prye,
They must their words, and not their minds declare.
Unto which course I will my tongue apply,
Lord Promos shall my princes coming know.
My prince himself, the cause thereof shall show.

Exit. Actus. 1. Scena. 3.
Rosko Lamias man. ROs. Is It possible that my Mistress Lamia,
Over the shoes should b^yn love with Phallax?
Why by Ies^^ as she her self does say,)
With pure good ioyll, her heart does melt like wax:
And this I am sure, every hour they themselves,
By their sweet selves, or by their letters greet,
But the sport is to see the loving elues,
Byll together when they in secret meet.
She lowres, he lauffes she syghes threw pure love. The strumpets and
Crocodiles tears a like.

Nay, nay, says he (good pugges) no more of this:
Well, says she, and weeps, my grief you do not prove.
Then straight this storm is cheared with a kys,
And then a both sides, three words and a smouch:
Within her ear, then whispereth this slouch,
And by the way he stumbleth on her lyppes,
Thus either stryues most loving signs to show,
Much good do it them, sith they are both content,
Once I am sure, how so the game does go,
I have no cause their lyking to repent:
I syldome do between them message bear,
But that I have an Item in the hand,
Well, I must trudge to do a certain chare,
Which, take I time, cock for my gain does stand.

Actus. 1. Scena. 4.
Phallax. Dowson a Carpenter. PHal. Dispatch Dowson, up with the frame quickly,
So space your rooms, as the nine worthyes may,
Be so instauld, as best may please the eye.

Dow. Very good, I shall:


Phal. Nay soft Dowson, stay:
Let your man at saint Annes cross, out of hand,
Ereckt a stage, that the Wayghts in sight may stand.

Dow. Will you ought else?


Phal. Soft awhyle, let me see,
On Jesus gate, the four virtues I trow,
Appointed are to stand:

Dow. I sir, they are so.


Phal. Well, then about your charge, I will fore see,
The Confort of Music, well plast to be.

Dow. I am gone sir.


Exit. Actus 1. Scena. 5.
The Bedall of the Taylers, Phallax. BE. Hear you master Phallax?
The Wardens of the Marchantaylers are.
Where (with themselves) they shall their Pageaunt place?

Phal. With what strange shows, do they their Pageaunt graces


Be. They have Hercules, of Monsters conqueryng,
Huge great Grants, in a forest fighting,
With Lions, Bears, Wolves, Apes, Foxes, and Grayes,
Baiards, Brockes. etc.

Phal. O woudrons frayes,
Marry sir since they are provided thus,
Out of their ways, God keep Master Pediculus.

Be. You are plesaunt sir, but with speed I pray,
You answer me, I was charged not to stay.

Phal. Because I know, you have all things current,
They shall stand where they shall no viewers want:
How say you to the end of Ducke Alley?

Be. There all the beggars in the town will be.


Phal. O, most attendaunce is, where beggars are,
Farewell, away.

Be. I will your will declare.


Exit. Actus. 1. Scena. 6.
Phallax, Two men, apparrelled, like green men at the Mayors feast, with
clubbes of fire work. PHal. This gear fadgeth now, that these fellows pear,
Friends where weight you?

First. In Jesus street to keep a passadge clear,
That the King and his train, may pass with ease.

Phal. O, very good,


Second. Ought else Sir, do you please?


Phal. No, no: about your charge.


Both. We are gone:


Exeunt. Phal. A sir, hear is short knowledge, to entertayne a king,
But O, O, quid non pecunia? yea, at a days warning?
The king in provision that thought to take us tardy,
As if we had a year been warnd, shall by his welcome see:
I have yet one chare to do: but soft, hear is Rotko,
I must needs deliver him a messadge before I go.

Actus. 1. Scena. 7.
Rosko, Phallax. Ros. I says, I have noble news for Lamia,

Phal. Nay soft, friend Rosko, take mine in your way.

Ros. Master Phallax, Osyd I cry you mercy.


Phal. Rosko with speed tell thy Mistress from me,
The King straight ways will come to the City:
In whose great train there is a company,
Within her house with more shall merry be,
Therefore, for my sake, will her to foresee,
To welcome them, that nothing wanting be,
This is all I will, for want of leisure.
Exit.
Ros. I will not fail sir, to show your pleasure:
Mary, in faith, these news falls iumpe with the rest,
They shall be welcome and fare of the best:
But although they well fill their bodies thus,
Their purses will be driven to a non plus:
No force a whyt, each pleasure has his pain,
Better the purce then body starve of wayne.
Well, I will trudge, my welcome news to tell,
And then abroad, good company to smell.
Exit.
Actus. 1. Scena. 8.
Coruinus the King, Cassandra, two counselors. And Vaislao, a young noble man.
King. Cassandra, we draw near unto the Town.
So that I will that you from us depart:
Till further of our pleasure you do hear.
Yet rest assured, that wicked Promos,
Shall abide such punishment, as the world,
Shall hold me just, and clear thee of offense.

Cas. Dread sovereign, as you will, Cassandra goes hence.
Exit.
King. I plainly see, it tendes to great behoue,
That Princes often do veil their ears to hear,
The Misers playnt: for though they do appoint,
Such as they think will Justice execute,
Aucthority is such a commander,
As, where as men by office bears sway,
If they their rule by conscience measure not,
The poor man's right is overcome by might.
If love or hate from Justice lead the Judge,
Then money sure may over rule the case.
Thus one abuse is cause of many more:
And therefore none in Judges ought to be,
How Rulers wrong, few tales are told the King:
The reason is, their power keeps in awe
Such men as have great cause for to complain.
If Cassandra her goods, nay, life preferred,
Before revenge of Promos treachery:
I had not known, his detestable rape,
The which he forced to save her brothers life.
And furthermore, Andrugios ransom paid,
I had not known be put him unto death:
For when (good soul) she had this treason told.
Through very shame her honor so was spoyld:
She drew her knyfe to wound her self to death.
Whose pysious plyght, my heart prouockt to wrath,
At Promos wyles:
So that to use undifferency to both,
Even in the place where all these wrongs were none:
My self am come, to sit upon the cause.
But see where Promos and the Mayor weight,
To welcome me with great solemnity:
With cheereful show I shadow will the hate,
I bear to him for his insolency:
Perhaps I may learn more of his abuse,
Whereby the more his punishment may be.
Come my Lords to the Town haste we apace:

All speak. We all are pressed, to wayght upon your Grace:

Actus. 1. Scena. 9.
Promos, Mayor, three Aldermen, in red Gowns, with a Sword bearer, awayghtes
the Kings coming. Promos, his brief Oration. PRo. Renowned King, lo here
your faithful subjects preast to show
The loyal duty, which (in right) they to your highness owe.
Your presence, cheares all sorts of us: yet ten times more we joy,
You think us stoarde, our warning short, for to receive a Roye.
Our will, is such, as shall supply, I trust in us all want,
And where good will the welcome geues, provision syld is scant.
Lo, this is all: yea, for us all, that I in words bestow,
Your Majesty, our further zeal, in ready deeds shall know.
And first, dread King, I render you, the swoorde of Justice hear,
Which as your Liuetenant I trust, vprightlie I did hear.

The King delyuers the Sword, to one of his Counsel. KIng. Promos, the good
report, of your good government I hear,
Or at the least, the good conceyte, that toward you I bear.
To encourage you the more, in Justice to perseauer,
Is the chief cause. I did address, my Progress heather.

Pro. I thank your Highness.


The Mayor presents the King, with a fair Purse. MA. Renowned King, our ready
wylles to show,
In your behalf, our goods (nay lives) to spend:
In all our names, I freely here bestow
On your Highness, this Purse: unto this end,
To po^^ (...) your most Royal Majesty,
In all our wealth, thereto bound by duty.

Kin Your great good wyls, and gyfts with thanks I take:
But keep you still, your goods, to do you good.
It is enough, and all that I do crave,
If needs compels for your and our safety,
That you in part your proffers large perform:
And for this time as outward shows make proof,
It is enough (and all that I desire)
That your hearts and tongues (alyke) bid me welcome.

All. Lord preserve your Majesty.

Five or six, the one half men, the other women, near unto the Music,
singing on some stage, erected from the ground: During the first part of the
song, the King faineth to talk sadly with some of his Counsel. The Kings
Gentleman Usher. Forewards my Lords.


They all go out leysurablie while the rest of the Song is made an end.
Actus. 2.
Scena. 1.
Lamia the Curtizan. LA. The match goes hard, which rayseth no man's gain,
The virtue rare, that none to vice may wreast:
And sure, the Law, that made me late complain:
Allureth me, many a wanton geast:
Dames of my Trade, shut up their shoppes for fear,
Their stuff proved Contra formam Statuti,
Then I, which lycenst am, to sell fine ware:
Am like to be well customed perdy:
And now Time serves, least custom after fail,
At highest rate, my Toys I vallue must:
Let me alone, to set my Toys to sale:
Young Ruflers I, in faith, will serve of trust.
Who ways me not, him will I feign to love,
Who loves me once, is lymed to my heast:
My cullers some, and some shall wear my glove,
And he my heart, whose payment lykes me best.
And here at hand are customers I trow,
These are the friends, of Phallax, my sweet friend:
Now will I go, and set my wares to show,
But let them laugh, that wynneth in the end.

Exit. Actus. 2. Scena. 2.
Apio and Bruno. Two Gentlemen strangers, with Rosko. APio. Come on good
friend: where dwells Lady Lamia?


Ros. Even by Sir.


Apio. Well then, go thy way,

Show who sent us, and what our meaning is:
Least she not knowing us, do take amys.
That thus boldlye we come to visit her.

Ros. No bolder then welcome, I warrant you Sir.


Bruno. Well, thy Message do:


Ros. I go.


Exit. Four Women bravely apparelled, sitting singing in Lamia^s vvindowe,
with wrought Smockes, and Cawles, in their hands, as if they were a vvorking.
The Quyre. JF pleasure, be treasure,

Apio. Hark.

The Quyre. The golden world is here, the golden worlds is here.
Refuse you, or choose you:
But welcome who draws near, but welcome who draws near.

Bruno. They be the Muses sure,


Apio. Nay, Sirens lure.

First sings. Here lives delyght,

Second sin. Here dies despite:

These both. Desire here, has his will.

Third sin. Here Loves relief,

Fourth sin. Destroys grief:

Last two. Which careful hearts does kill.

Bruno. Attend them still.

Apio. That, as you will.

First sings. Here wysh in will, does care destroy,

Second sin. Play here your fill, we are not coye:

Third sin. Which breeds much ill, we purge annoy,

Fourth sin. Our lives here still, we lead in joy.

The Quyre. If pleasure, be treasure,
The golden world is here, the golden world is here:
Refuse you, or choose you,
But welcome, who coms near, but welcome, who coms near.

First. Wantons draw near.

Second. Taste of our cheer:

Both. Our Cates are fine and sweet.

Third. Come be not coye,

Fowrth. To work your joy:

The last two. We fall will at your feet.

Bruno. A, good kind worms:

Apio. Hark.

First. Lo, here we be, good will which move,

Second. We live you see, for your behoue:

Third. Come we agree, to let you prove.

Fowrth Without a fee, the fruits of Love.

The quire all. If pleasure, be treasure, the golden world is here, etc.

Bruno. Upon this large warrant, we may venture,
The door opes alone, come, let us enter.

Apio. Agreede.


Enter a Sergeaunt bearing a Mace, another Offycer, with a Paper, like a
Proclamation: and with them the Crier, OFficer. Crier, Make a noise.


Cry. O yes. And so thrice.


Off. All manner of persons, here present,


Cry. All manner of persons, here present.


Off. Be sylent, on pain, of imprisonment,


Cry. Be sylent, on pain, of imprisonment.


The Offycer reads the Proclamation. COruinus, the hye, and mighty King, of
Hungary, and Boemia:
Unto all his loving Subjects of Iulio, sends greeting. And therwithall,
gives knowledge, of his Princely favor, toward every sort of them.
First, if any person, Officer, or other: has wronged any of his true
subjects, by the corruption of brybes, affecting or not favoring, of the
person: through Usury, extortion, wrong imprisonment: or with any other unjust
practice: His Majesty wylles the party so grieved, to repair to Sir Vlrico,
one of his highness privy Counsel: who (finding his, or their injuries) is
commanded, to certify them, and their proof, unto the Kings majesty: where
incontinently, he will order the controversy, to the release of the party
grieved, and the punishment of the offenders.

Further, if any of his faithful subjects, can charge any person, Officer, or
other, with any notable or heinous offense as Treason, Murder, Sacrilege,
sedicion: or with any such notorious crime: for the safety of his Royal
person, benefyte and quiet of his Realm, and subjects. On Fridaye next, his
most excellent Majesty (with the advice of his honorable Counsel) will in open
Court sit, to hear and determine, all such offenses. Therefore he strayghtlie
charge all and every of his subjects, that know any such heinous
offenders: one the forenamed day, that he present, both the offender, and his
fault.

Dated at his Royal Court, in Iulio, the. 6. of February.
God save the King.


Exeunt. Actus. 2. Scena. 4.
Roske. ROs. See how we are croft: we thought the King for pleasure,
Came to visit us: when to his pain,
And our plagues, I fear he bestows his leisure.
To hear the wrongs, of such as will complain
Of any man: But the sport is to see
Us Officers, one look of another:
I at Lord Promos, Lord Promos at me,
The Lawiers, at the Shriefe and Mayor.
They gase as much on the ruling Lawier.
For to be plain, the clearest of all,
Peccaui sing, to hear the grievous call,
Against Usury, brybrie, and barrating,
Suborning, extorcion, and boulstring.
Some faults are heard, some by Proclamation stay,
Before the King, to be heard on Fridaye.
I yet have scapte, and hope to go scotfree:
But so, or no, whylst leisure serves me.
To have my a answers fresh if I be cauld,
Of merry mates, I have a meetyng stauld,
To whom my senses, to refresh I wend,
Who gets a pace as meryly may spend.

Exit. Actus. 2. Scena. 5.
Sir Virice, with diverse papers in his hand, two poor Citysens, soliting
complayntes. VL. As thou complaynst, against all equity,
Houldes Phallax thy house, by this extremity?

First. Yea sure, and he has bound me so subtylly,
As less you help, law yeeldes me no remidy.

Vl. Well, what say you? is Phallax money paid?


Se. Save five pound Sir:


VI. For which your bend is stayde.


Se. Nay mary, the same I would gladly pay,
But my bond for the forfeyt he does stay.

VI. Summum Ius, I see, is Summa Imuria:
So these wrongs must be salued some other way.

First. Yea, more then this, most men say:


VI. What?


First. To be plain, he keeps Mistress Lamia.


VI. Admyt be do, what help have you by this?


Se. Yes mary, it proves, a doudle knave he is:
A covetous churl, and a lecher too.

Vl. Well, well, honest men, for your witness go,
And as on proof, I find your injuries.
So I will move, the king for remedies.

Both. We thank your honor.


Exeunt. Vl. Tys more then strange, to see with honest show,
What foul deceytes, lewd officers can hyde:
In every case, their craft, they color so,
As still they have, stryckt law upon their side.
These cunning Thieves, with law, can Lordships steal,
When for a sheep, the ignorant are trust:
Yea, who more rough, with small offenders deal,
Then these false men, to make themselves seem just?
The tirant Phallaris, was praised in this,
When Perillus the brazen torment made:
He found the wretch, straight ways in some amys,
And made him first, the scourge thereof taste:
A just reward for such as do present
An others fault, himself, the guiltyest man.
Well, to our weal, our gracious king is bent,
To taste these thieves, to use what means he can.
But as at Cheastes, though skylfull players play,
Skyllesse vewers, may see, what they omyt:
So though our king, in searching Judgment may,
Guess at their faults, which secret wrongs commit:
Yet for to judge, by truth, and not by ame,
My self in chief, his highness does auctorise,
On proof for to return who meryts blame,
And as I find, so he himself will punish:
So that to use, my charge indyfferently,
My Clyents wrongs, I will with witness try.

As he is going out, Pimos, a young gentelman speaks to him. Actus. 2. Scena.
6.
PI. Sir Vlrico, I humbly crave to know,
What good success: my honest suit ensues?

VI. Master Pimos, in breete, the same to show,
I fear, you both, my order will refuse:
Lyros, that thinks he geues more then he should,
And you, for that, you have not, what you would,

Pi. It shall go hard, if that your award mistikes me.


VI. Well, go with me, and you the same shall see:


Pi. I weight on you.


Exeunt. Actus 3.
Scena. 1.
Phallax. PHal. My troubled heart with guiltynesse agreu'd,
Like fire does make my ears and cheeks to glow:
God Grant I escape this black day vnrepreu'd,
I care not how the game go to morrow.
Well, I will set a face of brass on it,
And with the rest, upon the King attend:
Who even anon will hear in Judgment sit,
To heaven or hell some officers to send.
But soft, a pryze, Gripax and Rapax I see,
A share of their venture belonges to me.

Actus. 3. Scena. 2.
Gripax, Rapax, Promoters, John Adroynes, A Clown, Phallax. JOhn. Nay, good
honest Promoters let me go.


Gri. Tush John Adroines, we must not leave you so:
What? an old hobclunch a wanton knave?
You shall to the King.

John. Marry John Adroynes God save:
The king? why he will not look of poor men.

Ra. Yes, yes, and will spy a knave in your face.


John. Will he so? then, good you he gone apace.


Gri. And why?


John. Least in my face, he spy you too,


Phal. Have you seen a dawe, bebob two crows so?


Ra. Well, come away sir patch.


John. Leave, or by God isle scratch.


They fawle a fightyng. Gri. What will thou so?


John. Yea, and byte too.


Gri. Help Rapax, play the man.


John. Nay, do both what you can.


Phal. If that in bobs, their bargayne be,
In faith they share alone for me.

Ra. What bytest thou hobclunch,


John. Yea, that chull, and punch.


Gri. O Lord God, my heart.


John. Knaves, i will make you fart.


Ra. Hold thy hands Lob,


John. First, take this bob.


Phal. To part this fraye, it is bye time, I can tell, My Promoters else of
the roste will smell.


Ra. O, my neck thou wylt break.


John. Yea, Gods ames, christ thou creake?


Phal. How now my friends? why what a stur is this?


Gri. Marry.


Phal. What?


John. Care they part, isle make them pys.


Phal. Houlde, no more blows.


John. Knaves, this honest man thank,
That you escape so well.

Phal. Friend be not to cranke,
I am an officer, and mean to know
The cause, why you brauld thus, before I go:
Your bobs show, that the same, you best can tell.

Ra. I would your worship, felt the same as well,
I then am sure, this blockhedded slave,
For both his faults, double punishment should have.

Phal. What faults?


Ra. Marry,


John. He will lie like a dog.


Phal. How now you churl, your tongue, would have a clog, Say on:


Ra. To show his first, and chiefest faughte:
His Fathers maid, and he are naught.

John. What I?


Ra. I.


John. By my Grandsires soul, you lie.


Phal. Peace: Friend, for this fault, thou must dye.


John. Dye, Learde save us: you sqawde know, isle (...) ye: For reforming a
lie, thus against me.


Phal. Tush, tush, it helps not: if they can prove this.


Gri. For some proof, I saw him and the Maid kys.


John. Can not foke kys: but they are naught by and by?


Phal. This presumption friend, will touch thee shrowdlie:
If thou escape with life, be thou sore of this,
Thou shall be terriblie whypped, for this kys.

John. Whypt, mary God shield, chy had rather be hangde^


Ra. Growte nowle, come to the King.


John. Art not well hangde.


Phal. Well, good fellows, lets take up this matter.


Gri. Nay, first John Adroines, shall be trust in a halter.


Phal. Why? helps it you, to see the poor man whypt?
I pray you friends, for this time let him go.

John. Stand still, and chull, whether they will or no:


Ra. Nay, but we charge him, in the Kings name, stay thee.


Phal. Hark honest man, I warrant thee set free?
Grease them well, in their hands, and speak them fair:

John. O Leard God, our tallowe pot is not here.


Phal. Tush, clawe them with money:


John. Why so my nails are sharp.


Phal. I see, for Clownes, Pans Pype, is meeter, the^ Apolles Harp. They can
skyll of no Music, but plain Song.


Gri. I pray lets go, we tryfle time too long:


Phal. Straight. Cocks soul knave, stop his mouth with money.


John. O, I ken you now sir, chy cry you mercy.


Ra. Come on slouch, wylt please you be iogging hence?


John. Here is all, ten shyllinges, and thyrtene pence.


Phal. Hark ye my friends.


Gri. We must not let him go.


Phal. Hark once more.


John. Give them the money.


Phal. It shall be so.


Ra. Well, although he deserves great punishment,
For your sake, for this time we are content:

John Adroines farewell, henceforth be honest,
And for this fault, will pass it ore in jest.

Exeunt. John Then gives our money.


Phal. Why?


John. Why, they did but jest:


Phal. Yea, but they took thy money in earnest.


Exit. John. Art gone, now the Dewle choke you all with it:
How chy kiss again, the knaves hae taught me wit.
But by Saint Anne, chy do see hur lady:
Men may do what them woll, that have money.
Ich surely had been whipped, but for my gold,
But chull no more, with smouches be so bold.
Yea, and ych wysh all Lovers to be wise,
There be learing knaves abroad, have Cattes eyes:
Why, by Gods bores, they can both see and mark,
If a man steal, but a smouch in the dark.
And now the world is grown, to such iollie spy:
As if foke do kiss, the'are naught by and by.
Well, ych will home, and tell my Father Droyne:
How that, two thieves robbed me of my Coin.

Exit. Enter the King, Promos, Mrico, Mayor, Gonsago, Phallax, with two other
attendantes. KIng Sir Gonsago, if that we henceforth hear,
With will, or wealth, you do our subjects wrong:
Look not again, this favor for to find,
We use thie grace, to win you to amend:
If not, our wrath shall fear you to offend.
God spade you.

Gousago, does reverence and departs. King. I see by proof, that true the
prouer be is,
Might masters right, wealth is such a canker,
As wounds the conscience, of his Master,
And deuoures the heart of his poor neighbor.
To cure which sore, Justice his pride must pyue,
Which Justice ought in Princes most to shine:
And sith subjects live by their princes law,
Whose laws in chief, the rytch should keep in awe:
The poor in wrouges, but sildome does delyght,
They have inuffe, for to desende their right:
It much behoues the maker of these laws,
(This money finds in them, so many flawes)
To see his laws, obser'd as they are meant:
Or else good laws, will turn to evil intent.
Well, ere I leave, my poorest subjects shall,
Both live, and like: and by the richest stawll.

Pro. Regarded and most mighty Prince, your clemency herein,
Those hearts, your rule, commands through fear to faithful love shall win.

Vl. Renowned king, I am for to complain,
Of Phallax, Lord Promos secondary,
Whose heinous wrouges many poor men does pain,
By me, who pray, your highness remedy.

King. My Lord Promise, it seems you rule at large,
When as your clerks are officers unjust.

Pro. Dread king, I think, he can these wrong discharge.

King. Do you but think sir: a sure spear to trust?
A dum death, and blind Judge, can do as much:
Well, well, God grant, your own life, bide the tutch.
Sir Vlrice, your complaynt continue:

Vl. Gracious King, his wrouges be these insew:
First Phallax, is a coumon Barriter,
In office, a lewd extortioner:
The crafty man, often puts these wrongs in ure,
If poor men have, that lykes his searching eye,
He shows gould, the needy souls to lure:
Which if they take, so taste he does them tie,
That by some bond, or covenant forfayted.
They are inforst (far beneath the vallew)
To let him have what his eye coueyted:
And for to prove, that this report is true,
I show no more, then witness proved by oath,
Whose names and hands, defends it hear as troth,

Vlrice delivers the King a writing with names at it. King. How now Promos? how
think you of your man?
Use both your wits, to clear him if you can.

Pro. Dread King, my heart to hear his faults does bleed.


King. How far'de it then, to suffer it indeed?
It did, I trow, or now you speak in jest:
Thy Master's mute Phallax, I hold it best
That thou speak, for thy self.

Phal. I humbly crave,
Of your grace, for answer, respyt to have.

King. Why? to devise a cloak to hyde a knave?
Friend, veritas non querit angulos,
And if your self, you on your truth repose,
You may be bold, these faults for to deny,
Some, lyttel care, upon their oaths to lie:
See if any in your behalf will swear.

Phal. O Lord God, is there no knights of the post hear?
Well, then of force, I must sing Peccaui.
And cry out right, to the king for mercy.
O King, I am, in fault, I must confess,
The which I will with repentance redress.

King. Thy confession, does meryt some favor,
But repentance pays not thy poor neighbor:
Wherefore, Sir Vlrico, his goods sease you,
And those, he wronged, restore you, to their due.

Vl. Look what he gettes, most think, he wastes straight way,
Upon a lewd harlot, named Lamia:
So that his goods, will scarce pay every wight.

King. Where naught is left, the king must lose his right.
Pay as you may, I hold it no offense,
If each pay somewhat for experience:
But by the way, you rule the city well,
That suffer, by your nose, such dames to dwell.
And now Phallax, thy further pennaunce is,
That forthwith, thou do resign thy office.
Vlrico, to his account likewise, see.

Vl. It shall be done.


King. Phallax, further hear me:
Because thou did, thy faults at first confess,
From punishment* thy person I release:

Phal. I most humbly, do thank your majesty.


Pro. Ah, out alas, Cassandra hear I see.


Cassandra in a blewe gown, shadowed with black. Cas. O would ye tears, might
tell my tale, I shame so much my fall,
Or else, Lord Promos lewdnes showen, would death would end my thrall.

Pro. Welcome my sweet Cassandra.


Cas. Murdrous varlet, away.
Renowned King, I pardon crave, for this my hold attempt,
In preasing thus so near your grace, my sorrow to present:
And least my foe, false Promos hear, do interrupt my tale,
Grant gracious King, that uncontrolled, I may report my bale,

King. How now Promos? how like you, of this song?
Say on fair dame, I long to hear thy wrong.

Cas. Then know dread sovereign, that he this doom did gene,
That my Brother, for wantonness should lose his head:
And that the maid, which sind, should ever after live
In some religious house, to sorrow her misdeede:
To save my brother iug'd to dye, with tears I sought to move
Lord Promos heart, to show him grace but he with lawles love,
Was fyred by and by* and knowing necessity,
To save my brothers life, would make me yield to much,
He cran'd this ransom, to have my virginity:
No tears could work restraynt, his wicked lust was such,
Two evils here were, one must I choose, though bad were very best,
To see my brother put to death, or grant his lewd request:
In fine, subdude with natural love, I did agree,
Upon these two points: that marry me he should,
And that from prison vile, he should my brother free.
All this with moustrous oaths, he promised he would.
But O this periurd Promos, when he had wrought his will,
First cast me of: and after causd the Gailer for to kill
My brother, raunsomde, with the spoil of my good name:
So that for companing, with such a hellish feende,
I have condemnde my self to wear these weeds of shame:
Whose cognizance does show, that I have (fleshly) sind.
Lo thus, hie and renowned king, Cassandra ends her tale,
And this is wicked Promos that has wrought her endless bale.

King. If this be true, so towle a deed, shall not unpunished go,
How say thou Promos, to her playnte? art giltye? yea, or not?
Why speakst thou not? a faulty heart, thy scilence sure does show.

Pro. My gilty heart commands my tongue. O king, to tell a truth,
I do confess this tale is true, and I deserve thy wrath.

King. And is it so? this wicked deed, thou shall ere long buy dear,
Cassandra, take comfort in care, be of good cheer:
Thy forced fault, was free from evil intent,
So long, no shame, can blot thee any way.
And though at full, I hardly can content thee,
Yet as I may, assure thy self I will.
Thou wicked man, might it not thee suffice,
By worse then force, to spoil her chastity,
But heaping sin on sin against thy oath,
Haste cruelly, her brother done to death.
This over proof, ne can but make me think,
That many ways thou have my subjects wronged:
For how can thou with Justice use thy swaie?
When thou thy self do make thy will a law?
Thy tyrranny made me, this progress make,
How so, for sport till now I colloured it
Unto this end, that I might learn at large,
What other wrongs by power, thou have wrought,
And here, I hear: the Ritche suppress the poor:
So that it seems, the best and thou art friends:
I plaste thee not, to be a partial Judge.
Thy Officers are covetous I find,
By whose reports, thou over culest suits.
Then who that geues, an Item in the hand,
In right, and wrong, is sure of good success.
Well, Varlet, well: too slow I hither came,
To scourge, thy faults, and salve the sores thou made:
On thee vile wretch, this sentence I pronounce.
That forth with, thou shall marry Cassandra,
For to repair her honor, thou dydst waste:
The next day thou shall lose thy hated life.
In penance, that thou made her Brother dye.

Pro. My faults were great, O King, yet grant me mercy,
That now with bloody sighs, lament my sins too late.

King. Hac facias alteri, quod tibi vis fieri:
Pity was no plee Sir, when you in judgment sat,
Prepare your self to dye, in vain you hope for life.
My Lords, bring him with me: Cassandra come you in like case*
My self will see, thy honor salu'd, in making thee his Wife,
The sooner to shorten his days.

All the company. We wait upon your Grace.

As the King is going out, a Poor man shall kneel in his way. King. Sir
Vlrico, I wyld, Commission should be made,
To Sir Anthony Alberto, and Justice Diron,
To hear and determine, all suits to be had
Between Master Prostro, and this poor man: is it done?

Vlrico. Renowned King, it is ready:


King. Repair to Sir Vlrico, for thy Commission:


All. God preserve your Majesty.


They all depart, save the Clown. Clow. Bones of me, a man were better speak
to great Lords chy see,
Then to our proud, Iustlers of peace, that been in the cuntry:
He that is rytch, as my dame says, goes away with the Hare.
This two year, they have hard my matter, and yet cham nere ye near.
And at first dash, a good fat Lord, God in heaven save his life.
Faith, for nothing, teld the King of Mas Prostros, and my strife.
O Leard, ych thought the King could not bide, on poor men to look,
But God save his Grace, at first dash, my Supplycation he took:
And you hard, how gently, he called me poor man, and wild me go,
For my Pasport, I kenne not what, to good sir Vlrico.
Well, chull go fort, and hope to be with Master Prostros to bring:
But ere ych go, chul my Ballat, of good King Coruine sing.
The Clownes Song.
YOu Barrons bold, and lusty Lads,
Prepare to welcome, our good King:
Whose coming so, his Subjects glads,
As they for joy, the Belles do ryng.
They fryske, and skippe, in every place,
And happy he, can see his face.
Who checks the rytch, that wrong by might,
And helps the poor, unto his right.
The love that rygour gettes through fear,
With grace and mercy, he does wyn:
For which we pray thus, every where,
Good Lord preserve, our King Coruin.
His favor reigns, in every place:
And happy he, can see his face.

Exit. Actus 4.
Scena. 1.
Gresco, a good substantial Offycer, Two Beadelles in blew Coats, with
Typestaues. Gresco. Come loytring knaves, speed about your business.
Fetch me in, all idle vacaboundes.

First. Yes sir yes:


Gres. Search Ducke alley, Cock lane, and Sc^uldes corner,
About your charge, lets see, how you can stir.

Sec. Yes, I have wings in my heels to flee.


First. Who gives two pence, a strange Monster to see.


Sec. What Monster?


First. A horned Beast, with wings upon his heels.


Sec. Out dronken dreule?


Gres. What? runs your heads a wheels?
Be packing both, and that betymes you are best.

First. We are gone Sir, we did but speak in jest.


Exeunt. Beadelles. Gres. The King, I says, has set us all a work,
To search odd holes, where idle varlettes lurk.
He so nypped, our Mayor for ill rule:
As ever since, he has been like to whule.
And in a rage, the man is now so whotte,
As lewd persons, tagge, and ragge, goes to pot.
But in chief, he storms, at fine Mistrisse Lamia.
She drinks, for all, come she once in his way.
And least she escape, my self forsooth he wylles,
Worshipfullie to fetch her, with forty Bylles.
Well, I must go, and work our Majors beast,
No force, for once, she will never be honest.

Exit. Actus. 4. Scena. 2.
Andrugio, as out of the vvooddes, with Bow and Arrows, and a Cony at his
gyrdle. AN. This savage life, were hard to brook, if hope no comfort gave:
But I (whose life, from Tyrants wrath, Gods providence did save,
Do take in worth this misery, as penance for my mys:
Still fed with hope to change this state, when Gods good pleasure is.
A hollow Cave for house, and bed, in worth Andrugio takes,
Such sorry food, as fortune sendes, he syldome now forsakes.
I am my self forsoothe, now Butcher, Cook, Cater and all:
Yea, often times I fall to sleep, with none, or supper small.
Then in my Den, I call to mind, the life I lyu'de in bliss:
And by the want I freedom judge, the greatest joy that is.
The freeman is in view of friends, to have release in need:
The exyle, though he have no lack, yet lives he still in dreede
That his mysdeedes, will hardly escape, the punishment of law:
And living, he were better dead, that lives in this awe,
Besides this fear, which never fayles, the banished man in want,
As often he is, is sure to find his succor's very scant.
Then who is he so mad, that friends, and freedom does enjoy?
That will adventure breach of law, to live in this annoye?
And not annoye to him alone, but to his friends and kyn:
Great be the cares, Cassandra, and Polina lives in.
Through thought, of me, whom long agone, beheaded they suppose,
For my offense, thus are they scorgde, yet dare I not disclose
My safety, for their help: but hark, who comes here?
This chance seems strange: God grant good news, I hope, and yet I fear.

John Adroynes a Clown, Andrugio. John. If che could find my Mare, che would
be rusty by the rood,
And cham sure the hoorechup, is peaking in this wood.
Thy will seek every corner, but che will find her.
He whistlyng looks up and down the stage.
An. This clown can hardly me bewray, and yet such dunghyll churles,
Such news, as is in market tounes, about the country whorles.
What seeks thou good fellow?

John. My sqawde Mare, do her know?


An. No.


John. Then scummer me not, in haste ych go,
Seek my Mare, to see the sport at Iulio.

An. What sport?


John. A lyttel sport.


An. What?


John. Nay skyl not a whit?


An. What means this Ass?


John. T'wyll teach the hoorecup wit.
H'yll hang, handsome young men for the foot sin of love,
When so his knavery, himself, a bawdy jack does prove.

An. His words seems strange, somewhat is a wry.


John. Well, chyll see his shoulders, from's iowle to fly.


An. Whose shoulders friend?


John. As though you did know.


An. Whom?


John. Lord Promos.


An. Yes: my most accursed foe: But what of him?


John. Thou kenst.


An. No.


John. Say not, yes,


An. Yes:


John. So,


An. But friend thou took'st my words amys,
I know nothing, in what state Promos is.

John. Thou know, and thou know not: out horson fool,
Leave stealing Cunnyes, and get thee to scoole,
Farewell.

An. Soft.


John. O to art no fool good thief:

Save my money take my life.

An. Tush be brief.
Some news, of lewd Lord Promos tell me,
And with life and money, isle set thee free.

John. I will thou know the King now at Iulio.


An. Very well.


John. Thou can tell as well as I.
Let me go:

An. Nay isle see if thou do lie.
If thou do isle whip thee, when thou have done.

John. Kissyng and lying, ich see is all one:
And chaue no money, chul tell true therefore.

An. Dispatch then.


John. Then, lying Promoter, this more:
Casgandra scusde, Promos of honesty:
And killyng Ramstrugio for baudry.

An. What more?


John. The king at Promos, great pleasure did take,
And Casgandra, an honest woman to make:
The King maunded him, her straight to marry,
And for killyng her brother, he must dye.

An. Is this true?


John. Why? how say you? do I lie?


An. Well, so or not, for thy news have this connie.


John. Gods boores, give it me, to be sweet, it is to cheap,
But Lady yet, till sunday it will keep:
Well, now god bwye, Mas lying Promoter,
Wees see at the soort.

An. I peradventure.


John. Since can not find my Mare, on foot chull go:
Ych think, each day a nowre, to be at Iulio.

Exit. An. Strange are the news, the Clown has shown to me:
Not strange a whyt, if they well scanned be.
For God we see, still throws the Tyrant down:
Even in the heyght, and pride of his renown,
Lord Promos rule, nay, tyranny in deed,
For Judges is a mirror, worthy heed.
The wretched man, with show of Justice zeal,
Thoroughly did, with poor offenders deal.
The wicked man, both, knew, and judged, abuse:
And none so much, as he her faults did use.
He fellons hanged, yet by extorcion, stoale:
He wantons plag'd, himself a doting fool.
He others checked, for suing for their right:
And he himself, mayntained wrongs by might.
But see the rule of mischief, in his pride:
He headlong falls, when least, he thought to slide.
Well, by his fall, I may perhaps arise:
Andrugio yet, in clyming be thou wise.
What? still unknown, shall I live in this wood?
Not so.
Go wraye these news, no doubt, unto my good.
Yet ere I go, I will my self disguise,
As in the Town, in spyte of Linxes eyes.
I will unknown, learn how the game does go,
But ere I go, sith eased is my woe:
My thanks to God, I first in song will shoe.
Andrugios Song.
TO thee O Lord, with heart, and voice I sing,
Whose mercy great, from moan to sweet delight*
From grief to joy, my troubled soul do bring,
Yea, more thy wrath, has foylde my foe in sight.
Who sought my life (which thou O God did save)
Thy scorge has brought, untimely to his grave.
Whose grief will gawle, a thousand Judges more,
And will them see, them selves, and sentence just:
When black reproach, this thundering shame shall shoe,
A Judge condemde for murder, theft, and lust.
This scorge, O God, the lewd in fear will bring,
The just for joy, thy praises loud will sing.

Exit. Gresco, with three other, with bylles, bringing in Lamia prisoner. GRes.
Come on fair Dame, since fair words, works no heed,
Now foul means shall: in you repentance breed.

La. Master Gresco, where you may help, hurt not.


Gres. And nothing but chastment, will help you to amend,
Well, I will not hurt you, your lewdnes to defend.

La. My lewdnes Sir: what is the difference,
Betwixt wantons, and hoorders of pence?

Gres. Thou have wind at will, but in thy eyes no water:
Though art full of Grace, how she blusheth at the matter.

La. How sample I, your wife and daughter Sir?


Gres. Are me, when whypping has chaung'd thy Nature.


La. What whypping? why? am I a Horse, or a Mare?


Gres. No, but a beast, that meetelie well will bare.


La. In deed (as) now, perforce, I bear this flowt:
But use me well, else I faith, get I out,
Look for quittaunce.

Byl. (First Bilm) Bind her to the Peace Sir,
So may your Worship be out of danger.

Gres. Bring her away, I know how to tame her.


La. Perhaps Sir, no: the worst is but shame her.


Byl. (Second Bilm) Come ye drab.


La. How now scab? bands of my Gown.


Byl. (Third Bil.) Care not for this, yuse have a blew one soon.


Exeunt. Cassandra. CAs. (Cassandra.) Unhappy Wench, the more I seek, for to
abandone grief,
The further off, I wretched find, both comfort and relief.
My Brother first, for wanton faults, condemned was to dye:
To save whose life, my suit, wrought hope of Grace, but haples I.
By such request, my honor spoyld, and gained not his breath:
For which deceyte, I have pursude, Lord Promos unto death.
Who is my Husband now become, it pleased our Sovereign so,
For to repair, my crased Fame: but that now works my woe.
This day, he must (oh) leese his head, my Brothers death to quite,
And therein Fortune has alas, shown me her greatest spyte.
Nature wyld me, my Brother love, now duty commands me,
To prefer before kyn, or friend, my Husbands safety.
But O, aye me, by Fortune, I, am made his chiefest foe:
It Was I als, even only I. that wrought his ouerthroe.
What shall I do, to work amends, for this my heinous deed?
The time is short, my power small, his succors axeth speed.
And shall I seek, to save his blood, that lately sought his life?
O, yea I then was sworn his foe: but now as faithful Wife,
I must and will, prefer his health, God send me good success:
For now unto the King I will, my changed mind to express.

Exit. PHal. (Phallax.) Was ever man, set more freer then I?
First went my goods, then my Office did fly?
But had the King, set me free from flattrie,
The next dear year, I might have starved, perdie.
But Lord Promos, has a far more freer chance:
He free from Lands, goods, and Office does dance:
And shall be free from life, ere long, with a Lance.
The Officers, and chief men of Iulio:
Vengeance lyberall, themselves likewise shoe.
Poor knaves, and queanes, that up and down do go,
These horesen kind crustes, in houses bestoe.
But yet, poor cheer, they have: marry for heat,
They whyp them, until very blood they sweat.
But see, their cost bestowde of fine Lamia,
To save her feet, from hard stones, and cold way,
Into a Carte, they did the queen conuaye.
Apparelled, in colors very gaye:
Both Hoode, and Gown, of green, and yellowe Say.
Her Guard wear Typstaues, all in blewe arraye.
Before her a noise of Basins did play.
In this triumph, she ryd well nigh a day.
Fie, fie, the City is so purged now:
As they of none, but honest men allow,
So that farewell my part, of thriuing there:
But the best is, flattrers live every where.
Set cock on hoope, Domini est terra.
If thou can not where thou would, live where thou may.
Yes, yes Phallax, knows whether to go:
Now, God bwy ye all, bonest men of Iulio
As the Deuilles lykes, the company of Friars,
So flattrers loves as life, to join with liars.

Actus. 5.
Scena. 1.
Andrugio, disguised in some long black Cloak. AN. These two days, I have
been in Court disguised:
Where I have learnd, the scorge that is devised,
For Promos fault, he my Sister spowsed has,
To salve her Fame, cracked by his breach of faith.
And shortly he, must lose his subtle head:
For murdring me, whom no man thinks but dead.
His will, was good: and therefore beshrewe me,
If (moved with ruthe) I seek, to set him free.
But softly, with some news, these fellows come:
I will stand close, and hear both all and some.

Actus 5. Scena. 2.
Enter Vlrico, Marshall. VL. Marshall, hear you warrant is: with speed,
The king commaundes, that Promos you behead.

Mar. Sir, his highness will, shall be forthwith done.


Exit. Marshall. Vl. The king welnye to pardon him was won,
His heavy wife, such storms of tears did shower,
As might, with rueth, have moist a stony heart.
But Promos guylt, did soon this grace devour.
Our gracious king, before her wretched smart,
Preferred, the health, of this our common weal:
But see again, to sue for him she comes,
Her ruthful looks, her grief, does force me feel.
With hope, I must, her sorrows needs delay:
Till Promos be dispacht out of the way.

Actus. 5. Scena. 3.
Cassandra. CAs. Sir Vlrico, if that my unknown grief,
May move good minds, to help me to relief,
Or bitter syghes, of comfort clean dismayde,
May move a man, a shiftlesse dame to aid:
Rue of my tears, from true intent which flow,
Unto the king, with me, yet once more go.
See if his grace, my husbands life will save,
If not, with his, death shall my corpse ingraue.

Vl. What shall I do, her sorrows to decreace?
Feed her, with hope: fair dame, this moan surcease,
I see the king to grace is somewhat bent,
We once again thy sorrows will present:
Come we will wayght for time, thy suit to show.

Cas. Good knight, for time, do not my suit foreslowe.
Whylst grass, does grow often sterues the seely steed.

Vl. Fear not, your Lord, shall not dye with such speed.


Exeunt. Enter Andrugio. An. Lord God, how am I tormented in thought?
My sisters woe, such rueth in me does grave:
As feign I would (if ought save death I caught)
Bewray my self, Lord Promos life to save.
But life is sweet, and naught but death I eye,
If that I should, my safety now disclose:
So that I choose, of both the euels, he dye:
Time will appease, no dought, Cassandras woes,
And shall, I thus acquit Cassandras love?
To work her joy? and shall I fear to dye?
Whylst, that she live, no comfort may remove
Care from her heart, if that her husband dye?
Then shall I stycke, to hasard lym? nay life?
To salve her grief, since in my cure it rests.
Nay first, I will be spoyld, with blooddy knife,
Before, I fail, her, plunged in distres.
Death, is but death, and all in fine shall dye
Thus (being dead) my fame, shall live always:
Well, to the king, Andrugio now will hye,
Hap life, hap death, his safety, to bewray.

Exit. Actus. 5. Scena. 4.
The Marshall, three or four with halbards, Leading Promos to execution. BYl.
(A Bylma^.) Room friends, what mean you thus to gase on us,
A comes behind, makes all the sport I wus.

Pro. Farewell, my friends, take warning by my fall,
Disdain my life, but lysten to my end,
Fresh harms, they say, the viewers so apall,
As often they win, the wicked to amend.
I need not hear, my faults at large resyte,
Untimely death, does witness what I was:
A wicked man, which made each wrong seem right,
Even as I would, was wrested every case.
And thus long time, I lived and rule by will,
Where as I loved, their faults, I would not see:
Those I did hate, ten times beyond there ill
I did pursue, vile wretch, with cruelty.
Yea daily I, from bad, to worse did slide,
The reason was, none durst, control my life:
But see the fall, of mischeeue, in his pride.
My faults, were known, and lo with bloddy Axe,
The headseman straight, my wrongs with death will quite:
The which, in worth I take, acknowledging,
The doom, was given, on cause, and not on spyte,
Wishing my end, might serve for a warning.
For such as rule, and make their will a law,
If to such good, my faynting tale might tend,
Wretched Promos, the same would longer draw:
But if that words prevail, my woeful end
From my huge faults, then ten times more will warn.
Forgiveness now, of all the world I crave,
Therewith that you, in zealous prayer, will
Beseech of God, that I the grace may have:
At latter gasp, the fear of death to kill.

Mar. Forwards my Lord, me thinks you fayntly go.


Pro. O sir, in my case, your self would be as slow.


Actus. 5. Scena. 5.
Enter Cassandra, Polina, and one maid. CAs. Aye me, alas: my hope is untimely.
Whether goes my good Lord?

Pro. Sweet wife, to dye.


Cas. O wretched wench, where may I first complain?
When heaven, and earth, agrees upon my pain?

Pro. This moan good wife, for Christ's sake, forsake:
I late resolved, through fear of death, now quake.
Not so much, for my heinous sins forepast:
As for the grief that present thou do taste.

Cas. Nay, I vile wretch, should most agreeued be,
Before thy time, thy death which hastened have:
But (O sweet husband) my fault forgive me.
And for amends, I Will help to fill thy grave:

Pro. Forgive thee, ab: nay, for my souls relief,
Forget sweet wife, this thy most guyltles grief.

Mar. My Lord Promos, these playntes, but move her moan,
And your more grief, it is best you ware gone:
Good Maddame way, by law, your Lord does dye,
Wherefore make virtue of necessity:
Delay, but works your sorrows, and our blames,
So that now, to the comfort of these dames:
And your wisdom, enforced, we leave you:
My Lord Promos, bid your wife and friends adieu.

Pro. Farewell, farewell, be of good cheer dear wife:
With joy for woe, I shall exchange this life.
Andrugios death, Polina forgive me:

Poli. I do, and pray the Lord, to relieve ye.


Cas. Yet ere we part, sweet husband let us kis,
O, at his lyppes, why fails not my breath?

Pro. Leave moan, sweet wife. I do deserve this death.
Farewell, farewell.

They all depart, save Polina, Cassandra, and her woman. CAs. My loving Lord,
farewell,
I hope ere long, my soul with thine shall dwell.

Po. Now, good Madame, leave of this bootelesse grief.


Cas. O Polina, sorrow is my relief.
Wherefore, sweet wenche, help me to rue my woe,
With me vile wretch, thy bitter plaintes bestow:
To hasten lyngring death, who wants might:
I see, alone, to sley, the wretched wight.

Po. Nay, first power forth your playnts, to the powers Divine,
When hate, does cloud, all worldly grace, whose mercies still do shine.

Cas. O, so or no, thy motion does well,
Swan like, in song, to towle my passing Bell.
The Song of Cassandra.
Dear Dames divorce, your minds from joy, help to bewail my woe,
Condole with me, whose heavy sights, the pangs of death do shoe;
Rend heairs, shed tears, poor we^ch distressed, to have the means to dye,
Whose joy, annoy: relief, whose grief, has spoyld with cruelty.
My brother slain, my husband ah, at point to lose his head,
Why live I then unhappy wench, my suckers being dead?
O time, O crime, O cause, O laws, that Iudgd them thus to dye:
I blame, you all, my shame, my thrall, you hate that harmless try.
This Tragidy they have begun, conclude I vvretched must,
O vvelcome care, consume the thread, thereto my life does trust:
Sound bell, my knell, away delaie, and give me leave to dye,
Les hope, have scope unto my heart, a fresh for aid to fly.

Enter Ganio sometime Andrugios Boy. GA. O sweet news, for Polina and
Cassandra. Andrugio lives:


Po. What does poor Ganie say?


Ga. Andrugio lives: and Promos is repriu'd.


Cas. Vain is thy hope, I saw Andrugio dead.


Ga. Well, then from death, he is again reuyu'd.
Even now, I saw him, in the market stead.

Po. His words are strange.


Cas. Too sweet, God wot, for true.


Ga. I pray you, who are these here in your view?


Cas. The King.


Ga. Who more?


Po. O. I see Andrugio.


Cas. And I my Lord Promos, adue sorrow.


Enter the King, Andrugio, Promos, Vlrico, the Marthall. PO. My good Andrugio?


An. My sweet Polina:


Cas. Lives Andrugio, welcome sweet brother.


An. Cassandra?


Cas. I.


An. How fare, my dear Sister?


King. Andrugio, you shall have more leisure.
To greet one another: it is our pleasure,
That you forthwith, your Fortunes here declare,
And by what means, you thus preserved wear.

An. My faull, through love, and judgment for my fault.
Lord Promos wrongs, unto my Sister done.
My death supposde, dread King, were vain to tell.
Cassandra hear, those dealinges all has shown.
The rest are these.
When I should dye, the Gayler moved to ruth,
Declard to me, what Promos pleasure was:
Amazde whereat, I told him all the truth,
What, between Cassandra, and him did pass.
He much agrieu'd, Lord Promos guylt to hear,
Was very loathe, me (woeful man) to harm:
At length, just God, to set me (wretched) clear,
With this defense, his wylling mind did arm.
Two days before, to death, were diverse done,
For several faults, by them committed:
So that of them, he took the head from one,
And to Cassandra, the same presented:
Affirming it, to be bir brothers head.
Which done, by night, he sent me post away,
None but supposed, that I in deed was dead:
When as in truth, in uncouth hauntes I lay.
In fine, a Clown, came peaking through the wood,
Wherein I lyu'd, your Graces being here:
And Promos death, by whom I understood,
Glad of which news, how so I lyud in fear.
I ventured to see his wretched fall:
To free suspect, yet stranger like arayde,
I hither came: but lo, the inward thrall
Of Cassandra, the hate, so sore dismayde.
Which I conceived against my brother Promos,
That lo, I chews'd, to yield my self to death,
To set him free: for otherwise I knew,
His death ere long, would sure have stopped her breath.
Lo gracious king, in brief I here have shown,
Such adventures, as wretched I have past:
Beseeching you with grace to think upon,
The wight that wayles, his follyes at the last.

King. A strange discourse, as straungely come to light,
Gods pleasure is, that thou should pardoned be:
To salve the fault, thou with Polina made,
But marry her, and hear I set thee free.

An. Most gracious Prince, thereto I gladly gree:


Poli. Polina, the happiest news of all for thee.


Cas. Most gracious King, with these my joy to match,
Vouchsafe, to give my dampened husband life.

King. If I do so, let him thank thee his Wife:
Cassandra, I have noted thy distress,
Thy virtues eke, from first, unto the last:
And glad I am, without offense it lies,
In me to ease, thy grief, and heaviness.
Andrugio saved, the iuell of thy joy,
And for thy sake, I pardon Promos fault.
Yea let them both, thy virtues rare commend:
In that their woes, with this delyght does end.

Company. God preserve your Majesty.


Pro. Cassandra, how shall I discharge thy due?


Cas. I did, but what a Wife, should do for you.


King. Well, fince all parts are pleased, as they would,
Before I part, yet Promos, this to thee:
Henceforth, forethinke, of thy forepassed faults,
And measure Grace, with Justice evermore.
Unto the poor, have evermore an eye,
And let not might, out countenance their right:
Thy Officers, trust not in every tale.
In chief, when they are means, in strifes and suits,
Though thou be just, yet coin may them corrupt.
And if by them, thou do injustice show,
Tys thou shall bear, the burden of their faults.
Be loving to good Cassandra, thy Wife:
And friendly to thy brother Andrugio,
Whom I command, as faithful for to be
To thee, as beseemes the duty of a brother.
And now again, thy government receive,
Inioye it so, as thou in Justice joy.
If thou be wise, thy fall may make thee rise.
The lost sheep found, for joy, the feast was made.
Well, here an end, of my advise I make,
As I have said, be good unto the poor.
And Justice join, with mercy enermore.

Pro. Most gracious King, I will not fail my best,
In these precepts, to follow your beheast.

FINIS.
G. Whetstone.

Imprinted at London by Richard Ihones, and are to be sold over against Saint
Sepulchers Church, without Newgate. August. 20. 1578.


