THE OIL OF GLADNESS. OR, Comfort for dejected sinners. First preached in the
Parish Church of Banbury in certain Sermons, And now published in this present
Treatise. By WILLIAM WHATELY Minister there.

LONDON, Printed by G M. for George Edwards, and are to he sold at his house in
Greene-Arbour, at the sign of the Angel 1637.

To all wearied sinners, all happiness here and hereafter be granted, and
this following Treatise be dedicated.
BEloved in our LORD. You know it was one part of John Baptists office, Isa.
40.4 and Luke 3.5.
to fill valleys, as was foretold of him. Valleys are dejected sinners, filling
the valleys, is, comforting of such sinners. This Work is both necessary and
difficult. For to what purpose is it to beat down a sinner, if he be not
raised up again? The demolishing of an old house does not afford habitation,
if a new building be not set up in its room: so neither does the casting down
of men's high thoughts, make them a fit dwelling for God; if the fair palace
of spiritual comfort be not also erected in them. Our souls are not united to
God in hearty love, nor subjected to him in sincere obedience, by bare terrors:
(nay, that bitter anguish, which flows from the sight of sin, and death
deserved by sin, will rather increase our enmity against God, and irritate our
rebellious nature, if it be not somewhat eased by hope.) It is the sweetness
of God (the taste whereof affords more content in him, then any thing could
give, which would allure us from him) that makes the heart to cleave to him,
and to his ways. Worldly businesses, are better dispatched, after
Sunne-rising, then at midnight; so men do make best speed in a journey, by
daylight: so does the journey of a godly conversation, and the whole work of
righteousness, go forward most prosperously, when the shining beams of
spiritual gladness, have enlightened the soul, as it were a quiet and light
morning after a dark and tempestuous night. How hard a thing it is to quiet
the troubled soul, they can best tell, that have been most employed in it.
The devil opposes the success of that labor with all his might, and craft;
for he finds inexperience, that the Lord has none so faithful and valiant
soldiers, in all his army as those whom he has first deeply wounded and
after soundly healed. Terrors are the sores of the very conscience, the
tenderest part of the whole soul, and therefore are not easily cured. Carnal
reason, the false guide of mankind, does always follow sense, which in this
case, does minister nothing but appearing arguments, of never bing comforted,
and a world of labor it will prove to withdraw a man from following this
guide. The truth is, none can rebuke these waves and storms, (saying to them
peace and be still, that a great calm may follow) but alone our Lord Jesus
Christ whom even the winds and the seas do obey. Yet the Prophet Isaias
tells us, Isa. 57.19
that God creates the fruit of the lips to be peace peace. Instructions,
exhortations, directions, comfortable spee-and persuasions of the godly,
cheefely the Ministers of the Gospel, that stand in Christ's stead, these be
the fruit of the lips, these are the means by which the Lord does stablish the
souls of his servants in assured quietness at last. I have endeavored to
contribute something, to the cheering up of spiritual weepers, in this
Treatise. This I offer to you burdened souls; as for others, I know how little
agreement such food holds with their pallates. But before you read, what I
have here written and published, take with you an advertisement or two. The
principal hindrances of comfort, are unfitness for it, and averseness from
it. Unfitness springs either from want of sincerity, in ones not being ready
to see and acknowledge some sin or sins, which God would have him see, but
he hangs back: or else from want of humility in that a man does not bring his
heart, to stoop so low to Gods justice, as to yield himself into his hand
without murmuring or quarreling. Till God have wrought us to his own bent (as
it were) in these two respects, there is no hope of comfort; Make haste
therefore to let the Lord have his will in these two points. Now averseness
from comfort, is a kind of spiritual pettishnesse, or peevishness (which was
sometimes in the Psalmist, Psalm. 77.2.
who says, My soul refused comfort) which makes men love to strive against
their own peace, taking great pains to thrust comfort away from them, and
giving over themselves, either still to renew the old or multiply new
objections against themselves, to study to have something to say against all
that may be alleged for them, never considering, nor observing how true and
reasonable the things are, which be spoken on their own behalf. The devil,
(a great wranglex, that labors still to darken truths of this kind and not to
clear them) suggesteth these cavils to the mind and the dazelling eye, is
ready to fix it self upon them, as if they were matters of some weight and
arguments or answers of good force. Be warned to forbear thus to abuse your
wits to your own hurt. Study to be able to defend your selves, and to learn
how to do it. What madness is it, to lay ones naked breast open to his enemies
weapon? Reject not the consolations of God, neither let them seem small unto
you. Know your selves tied in conscience, as to humble, and to purge, so
likewise to comfort your selves, without which the former is done in vain, and
the latter cannot be done at all. Be willing therefore to receive Gods
goodness, when it is made evident that you have interest thereunto. This is
all I have to say in this Epistle. Now I leave you to the book it self,
beseeching God to make you read joy and gladness, that your broken bones may
rejoice, April 20. 1637.
and so wilrest a well-wisher to you all

WILLIAM WHATELY.

Perlegi hunc tractatum in quo nihilreperio quo minus cum utilitate imprimatur.

THO: WEEKS. R. P.

Episc. Land. Cap. Domest.

THE OIL OF GLADNESS: OR Comfort for dejected Sinners.
2 SAMUEL 12 24, 25. And David comforter Bathsheba his wife and went in unto her
and lay with bar, and she hare a onne, and called his name Solomon and the Lord
loved him.

And he ent by the band of Nathan the Prophet, and be called his name Iedidiah
because of the Lord.


CHAP. I.
WHen agood chyrurgion meets with a festered sore: First, he applies
corrasives and cleansing things, to cate out the dead and proud flesh, and to
draw away the filth and putrefaction. This done, he lays healing playsters to
perfect the cure. So did the Lord proceed with David, his wounds did stink and
were putrified, as himself speaks in the Psalm. The Lord had used reproof
by Nathans mouth, and correction by his own hand. These sharper medicines had
wrought excellent well upon him, and brought him to a serious confession, and a
solemn fast of seven days continuance, (as in likely.) Now it was time to
give him some comfort, and make him to hear joy and gladness, that the broken
bones might rejoice. This is done in the verses which I have read. And here he
has, first comfort in his own mind, by which he was able to comfort
Bathsheba. For he should have been a poor comforter of her, unless he had
first comforted himself: secondly outward comfort, in giving him a son by her,
and giving that son two names, and that by the message of Nathan the Prophet,
one Shelomo, that is, peaceable or his peace, or the peace of the Lord, and the
second Iedidiah, the Lord will love him, because both God did love him, and he
was to be an instrument of abundance of prosperity and peace to Israel; yea
because God would love him with a constant love; for Iedidiah signifies the
Lord will make to love. And now the breach betwixt God and David is fully made
up. For in calling Solomon by that name, he would signify that he was now at
peace with David. And by calling him Iedidiah, he would signify that the Lord
did love him also. The words are plain enough, and the matter will be fuller
understood, if you read in 1 Chronicles. 22.9. where David tells Solomon, that God
tells him that a son should be borne unto him, whose name should be Solomon,
and that he would give him rest and peace; whence it is apparent, that even
before the child was borne, GOD sent to him to give him this name, and to let
him understand, that this son was he that was meant in the former prophecy
of Nathan, who must reign after him, and build the house of the Lord. Now this
could not but exceedingly rejoice David to make him assured that God was
reconciled to him, because he would choose a son of his, begotten of the same
woman, after the sin, to be King after him, to build him a house.

Now let us see what instructions we may gather out of these words.

CHAP. II.
. I.
DAavid becomes a comforter of Bathsheba, by which it is evident that he was in
good measure comforted himself.

We heard him confessing his sin, we saw him lying in the dust, clothed with
sackcloth, tumbling in ashes: Now you see him cheerful again speaking
cheerfully to Bathsheba, and striving to revive his drooping spirits, for
doubtless she was in fault as well as David, and when she heard of Nathans
reproof, and saw her childs sickness and death, she cried peccavi, and she
cast down her self as well as he.

Hence learn this lesson

. 2.
That the people of God, having humbled themselves after their sins, must then
labor also to take comfort.

When we have cast down our selves before the Lord, and confessed and
bewailed our offenses, be they what they will, then must we raise up our
selves, and strive to settle peace and quietness, and gladness in our hearts
again.

Consolation should follow mourning, and gladness should come after sadness.

If any Saint have fallen into some great sin, yet when he has renewed his
repentance for the sin, he should again take comfort in God,
notwithstanding that sin.

The Apostle Paul hearing of the incestuous Cortuths great grief, writes to
them to comfort him, and confirm their love to him, 2 Cor. 2.8, 9.
that he might not be swallowed up of too much sorrow. Lo there is a time when
a man must wade out of his griefs, for fear of being drowned in them.
Therefore you know our Savior promises to comfort them that mourn, Mat. 5.4.
and to give them the oil of gladness instead Isa. 61.3.
of the garments of sadness: It is not Gods purpose to make his people go
always in black, he would have them wear lightsomer colors after a time.

The Apostle Paul after he had seen the Lord in the way, Acts 9.19
was in very great heaviness, for three days and nights, but after, he was
baptized, and took comfort and began to preach Christ. The people Acts 2.37,
46. were pricked in heart, but we read after, that they did eat their meat
with gladness. The Iayler parted cheerfully with Paul and Silas, though he
had a lamentable meeting with them.

3.
Now there is great reason that the Saints should take comfort after they have
taken grief.

First, Reason.
because they have as good and sure grounds and causes of comfort as of sorrow.
Secondly, because they shall glorify God as much. Thirdly, because they shall
profit themselves as much by taking comfort as by their mourning.

First, I say a good man that has mourned, has as great cause to take comfort
as ever he had to mourn; for he has the promises of God to the penitent, as
well as his threats against the sinner. He has his mercy to the humble as well
as his justice against the transgressor. He has Christ's prayers, merits,
intercession to stand for him, as well as the cry and clamor of his sins to
stand against him. God has as plainly and as strongly tied himself, to
accept the repenting sinner, as to punish the unrepenting: and has as
carnestly required us to believe his promises as his threats, and is altogether
as true in his promises, and as careful to perform them, as to perform his
threats. And it is the office and work of the Spirit to be a Comforter, and to
convince of righteousness, as well as of sin. The Lord has as plainly
said, Ezekiel. 18.21, 24.
If the wicked man neturne from his wicked ways he shall live; as if the
righteous return from his righteousness, he shall die. He has promised
refreshing to all heavic laden, as well as threatened destruction to all wilful
and wicked transgressors, and to wound the hairy scalpe of such an one as goes
on in his trespasses. Psalm. 68.21.


Seeing the Lord offers himself graciously to them, therefore have they cause
to enjoy these consolations of his Word.

Yea the Apostle shows that the Word was written that through comfort of the
Scriptures we might have hope. Romans 15.4.
So that it may appear that Gods chief end in compiling the Scripture, was to
prepare comfort for the sons of men, if they humble themselves and become
capable of it.

Yea the Spirit of God is called the Comforter, and God is called the God of
all consolation, and the God that comfort the abject, all which grounds of
consolation being offered us, we are bound to receive them.

4.
Again, it is a work as truly honorable to God, and makes as much for his
glory, that his people do take the cup of consolation at his hands, as that
they drink the bitter cup of wormwood, yea and more too. For to grieve even
for sin, further then it tends to comfort, and ends in it, is nothing at all
to the glory of God of it self: for in hell they grieve enough, but that
grief is not in them a work tending to Gods glory, because it aims not at
comfort, but is a desperate forlorn and uncomfortable grief. For in grieving
for our sins, we give God the glory of his justice, acknowledging them to be
vile and loathsome and grievous. But in comforting our selves we give him the
glory of his mercy, acknowledging him to be more full of goodness, then our
selves be of badnesse, which is to do him the highest honor. For the Lord
delights in showing mercy, and therefore cannot but delight that men should
esteem and account him so ready to show mercy. For whosoever loves to do any
good and commendable thing, loves to be accounted ready and able to do that
thing.

And indeed God is not well pleased nor honored, as I said before, with his
Saints tears further then those tears be means of fitting them for, and
making them capeable of comfort: As the Chyrurgion delights not in the smart
of his patient further then it is a means of healing the sore: nor the
Physician in the bitter potions of his patient, or his sickness, further then
it procures health. Therefore (if we consider) in the old Law, Deuteronomy. 16.14.
he calls upon them to be sure that they do rejoice in their feasts. And
whereas he appointed one only solemn fast throughout the year, Levit. 26.19.
and that but one days continuance alone, he appointed three several most
solemn feasts in every year; and those also of seven days continuance each
of them. Exodus 23 14.
Whereby it is manifest that he takes far more content in their gladness
and solace, then in their ruth and lamentation. For indeed he likes their
griefs alone, as I said before, as a preparative to their Joy.

Now seeing our care must be to do that that may glorify and please God, and
our joys will glorify and please him, after we have been humbled, as well
as our humiliation before: it is needful for us to cheer up our hearts, as
well as to depresse them.

5.
Thirdly, this comfort is a thing altogether as profitable to our selves, and
as much availeable to our sanctification and good living, as grief: nay grief
will do at all no good to the working of holiness and beating down of sin,
further then it is so ordered and moderated, that it may conclude in
consolation. As a man is fittest to do any natural work, when he has his
limbs all at ease and rest: so to do any spiritual good thing, when he has
his mind at ease and rest. Nehem. 8.10.
The joy of the Lord is your strength, says that holy man to the people in
Nehemiah, which is the cause that God has confirmed his promise by oath, that
as the Apostle says, Heb. 6.18.
we might have strong consolation. The herbs and grass and corn do ripen
best in warm and fun-shine weather: so the sunshine of consolation, does
bring up the herb of virtues in our hearts. Carnal and earthly joys do
nothing further the growth of piety, but spiritual consolations, such as this
we entreat of do make it prosper and flourish exceedingly. Never is a
Christian man in better case to do any good duty, to bear any misery for Gods
sake, to love God, to pray, to hear the Word, to do works of mercy to the
afflicted, or to perform any other services, then when he can comfort himself
in God. Then the heart has more full communion with God, and therefore is in
best plight to do any thing well. I confess sorrow has its use, it is as
plowing, and as breaking of the clods, that make the ground ready for the seed:
It is as it were the sweeping and cleansing of the house, that makes it fit
for the Holy Ghost as for aguest to inhabit and to dwell in. But the very
proper confirmer and strengthener of the soul is comfort: that does minister
to it ability to work Gods works. As God loves, in matter of bounty, a
cheerful giver: so in all services a cheerful servant. And doubtless the
service will not be cheerful if the heart be not comforted: therefore in
heaven, where God has the best services, men have the most comfort. And in
Paradise, where God had the best service next to heaven, man had the most
comfort. And in the Thessalonians, 1 Thessalonians. 1 3, 6.
in whom Saint Paul did commend, the labor of love, the work of faith, the
patience of hope, and whom he praises, because their love and their faith did
grow exceedingly, he shows the foundation of this growth to have been,
because they received the Word with joy in the Holy Ghost.

Seeing well-grounded comfort is the most profitable thing that can be for our
souls, we must strive for it.

6.
Only brethren you must remember how we limited the point, viz. that after we
have humbled our selves we must then take comfort, and not before.

There is a time says Solomon to mourn and a time to laugh, we must take time
to rend our hearts and to turn to the Lord with mourning and contrition; and
then we must take time also to stir up, and to revive our hearts, and to
embrace the Lords mercies with all joyfullnesse: we must beware of making too
much have to comfort our selves, as also of being too slow to the work. If the
sore be not thoroughly drawn before it be healed, then the festered matter
will break out again, and the cure will not be well effected, and if it be
not healed after drawing, no soundness will come to the member affected. As
the body, so the soul must be healed soundly, and to the bottom, and not
skinned over with untimely and preposterous and ungrounded consoations.

I pray you to observe this caution and this limitation, that none of you may
abuse, and misapply the point to your own hurt, for nothing is more dangerous
then false comfort. Of the twain, it is much more safe, though it seem far
more troublesome, to be too much and too long in mourning, then to fetch in
comfort before we have at all mourned, or before we have mourned in due
measure: for to comfort ones self untimely, is to trust in a lie, and is the
surest way to cut off all sound and good comfort, and to keep a man's self
incapable of true comfort. Thus daubing with untempered mortar will never make
any good work, down will that daubing come, in the day when the storm and
wind shall blow upon it.

7.
If any man ask how he shall be sure not to take comfort too soon, I answer
him:

That he must not be bold to take any comfort, till he have gotten such a
measure of sorrow, and let sorrow continue so long in his heart, that it has
wrought him to a plain, and free, and full confession of his sins to God, and
to a firm and steadfast purpose and determination of will, to leave, forsake
and abandon them. And when he has brought himself to this, then must he mix
his sorrow with some comfort, and after a while he must bid his griefs adieu,
and feed constantly and principally upon comforts, renewing his griefs at fit
times and seasons (as it were dipping in some sharp sauce to keep him from
surfeting) always retaining an humbled heart in the sight of sin, but not
always a sad heart; for as the heart may be sad, and not humbled: so it may
be humbled and not sad.

CHAP. III.


1.
First, it gives cause of a gentle reprehension to many of Gods servants, that
keep on their garments of sorrow too long, and still feed on wormwood and
gall, almost refusing to be comforted, then, when comfort is due to them.
Though they have searched their hearts and confessed their sins, and brought
their hearts to a full purpose of amendment; yet they fail in that they do
not take some measure of comfort to themselves, and do not partake of the
consolations of God which he offers to them in his holy Word.

There are some that make too much haste to comfort themselves, and some that
do not make have enough. The Commoner, and the greater fault, is, to put away
sorrows too soon: yet that of putting away comfort too far and too long
from the soul is a fault also, and must not be denied where it is. Many of
Gods people I say are excessive in their mourning, even for their sins, in
that when they have true right to comfort, and God does speak peace unto them,
yet they do not give rest and peace unto their own souls, but surfit upon
wormwood and bitterness, and thrust comfort away from themselves through
unbelief. Sometimes men mourn too much and too long for crosses (that point
does not now come to be handled) and sometimes they mourn as those that have
no hope, in regard of sins, and that is the fault we have now to declare and
to reproove.

2.
Know then O ye servants of God, that when you do even torment your selves,
and keep your hearts still upon the rack as it were, you do greatly
dishonor God, in this unmeasurable mourning, and greatly hurt your selves too.
For what? is there not goodness in God as well as Justice? Is he made all of
anger? Are his mercies clean gone for ever? Has he shut up his tender
compassion in displeasure? It is a discredit to the master of the family if his
servants be always sad and whining: For if they had a good and merciful
Master, why should they be still languishing and complaining? See then, that ye
do offend in this case, by not acknowledging the infinite mercies and tender
compassions of your God. For in not comforting your selves, you do actually
deny him to be merciful. For if he be merciful, why do we not taste and
feel how good he is?

3.
And take notice that in not comforting your selves you be also injurious to
your own souls: You make your selves unfit to serve God, in any good duty,
unfit to pray, unfit to hear, unfit to live, unfit to die, by being still
heavy and discouraged. When the soul goes mourning and bowed down to the
ground, still in fear that God will not accept, and will not pardon, it lies
open to manifold temptations, to murmuring, to weariness of well-doing, to
impatiency, to frowardness, and cannot set it self resolutely, to do the
work of holiness, which God requires. Thou hindrest the growth of grace in
thy self, for want of fair weather as it were. Thou make the fruits of the
Spirit to be far less and fewer then they would be, because they have not
warmth enough to bring them up. Wherefore thou art to reprehend thy self and to
say, This is my weakness and infirmity, this is my fault verily, which I must
not excuse but acknowledge and blame in my self.

4.
Object.
If any say alas I would comfort my self if I could, I do not desire to go
languishing, but oh I cannot choose, the burden of sin is so pressing, and lies
so hard upon my soul.

Answ.
I answer, the thing that thou must be blamed for, is not because thou art not
actually comforted, for therein thou must be a patient and take it when it
comes, even when God will give it, but because thou do not set thy self to
enjoy comfort, that thou do not offer to thy mind the consolations of God,
and do not take pains to bind up thy broken and rent heart. I say thou do
not take pains to get comfort, but yeeldest unto sorrow, and hangest down
thine hands, and suffer thy knees to be feeble. Thou do not call to mind
the promises of God. Thou do not ponder upon the death of Christ. Thou do
not entertain such thoughts as are fit to bring comfort to thy soul, but
sellest over thy self to sadd and fearful and discouraging thoughts; still
still looking to the greatness and multitude of thy sins, and not raising
thine eyes to, and fixing thy thoughts upon the mercies and loving kindnesses
of God, not earnestly imploring and begging the help of his Spirit to comfort
thee, and this is thy fault, (arising from hence, that thou art too ready to
hearken to Satan, who does lie unto thee, and denies thine interest unto
comfort.) Now suffer a gentle and mild reproof for it, and know it to be a
fault; for why should thou not enjoy thine own portion and take that that God
gives thee. If thou answerest still, I cannot, I cannot. I answer still thou
can labor, strive, endeavor, and thy not laboring and endeavoring is that
that is blamed in thee.

5.
As in outward crosses we are often too peremptory mourners (and with Jacob
will not be comforted) and resolve, we will go mourning to the grave. So
sometimes in regard of sins, we will not be comforted. Sometimes this
arises from an error in Judgment, because we think not our selves to have
any interest unto comfort, when we have, and are afraid to take it, least it
should not belong to us. Many times Gods people think they have not cause to
take comfort, when they have, and therefore put comfort from themselves,
because they mistake their own estate.

6.
But tell me have thou not afflicted thy self? have thou not wept and mourned?
have thou not turned thy laughter into sorrow, and thy Joy into heaviness?
have thou not cast down thy self before the Lord? and found out and
acknowledged all thy faults against thy self, (so far as by searching thou
wast able to find them.)

If thy soul can say I have labored to see all my sins; and labored to
confess and weep for them, and complained of them, and shamed my self and
judged my self.

Quest. Then I ask again have thou not renounced thy self, and all thine
own merits?

Answ. Yes htat I have too.

Quest. Have thou not resolved to take Christ youake? have thou not made a
Covenant with God, to fight against thy sins, and to reform and amend thy
life, and make they heart and spirit new?

Answ. Yes that I have too, I have resolved, but alas I find little power.

I answer, upon thy resolution to obey after mourning and confessing, thou have
interest to comfort, and it must be comfort that must strengthen thy
resolutions, and confirm thee in obedience.

Now then see thy mistaking, and know thou art one to whom comfort is due, and
let not error over-shadow the sun of comfort from shining upon thee.

7.
Another cause of not being comforted is infidelity, the moourners cannot
believe that the comforts appertain to themselves: but this is a fault too.
For why? does not God call to him, all that be heavy laden with sin; and in
calling them to him, even bind them to take comfort?

Indeed the devil envies the comfort of the Saints, and seeks to hinder it
with multitude of objections. And some of Gods people be so weak, that they
suffer the devil to have his will on them this way, and hearken too much to
his leasenings. But now, see that this is a fault, that does even disgrace
piety to many, and make them think that godliness, and joy cannot dwell in
one heart, so that they refuse piety for fear of wanting joy, whereas no
companions will better agree then these two.

I have been long in this reproof, and yet as you see, mild and gentle
enough. It is a weakness, it is a frailty. It is a thing hurtful and
offensive, take notice of it, and reprehend thy self for it.

CHAP. IIII.
1.
David in the paths of consolation. You heard him confessing, you saw him in
ashes, now you see him cheerful again.

Have thou followed him in that heavy path? follow him in this gladness. Now
that the Lord pipeth to thee, see that thou dance. Now that God bids thee
take comfort, see that thou take it. Coe hither all ye Saints, that have long
been clad in black, and have rolled your selves in ashes, and have mingled
your drink with tears: Come hither and learn of David to comfort your
selves: O hear joy and gladness, and let your broken bones rejoice. You I say
that have sat in darkness, that have wept and wailed, that with bitter sighs
and salt tears have blamed and shamed your selves before God, come hither now,
and behold David, and follow him, put on thegarments of gladness and comfort
your selves in Gods mercy. It is as needful and as plain a duty to believe
Gods promises as his threats, to acknowledge his goodness as your own
badnesse. You have done the one, now do the other also, and let everlasting
joy be upon your heads. Does not Christ tell thee, that he came to comfort the
mourners? he is here now in his Ordinances to comfort thee: o let him not
comfort thee in vain.

Sitrre up thy self, and say, Iought to take comfort, and Lord through thine
help, I will take comfort to my self, and give thee the glory of the riches
of thy grace in Christ.

2.
If any say, but I can feel no comfort. I answer, Thou must believe it first,
and then thou must feel it after. First, thou must draw out of Gods book
happy condlusions of comfort. That thy sins are pardoned, that God is
reconciled, that thy soul shall be saved, and then must so press and urge
these conclusions upon thy soul, and bind thy self to consent to them, that
in time sense of comfort may follow after.

3.
Now that you may be able to comfort your selves against sins, and the fear
of Gods wrath and damnation for them, (for you see that the Text calls us to
minister that comfort, you must take notice of four things needful to further
men in comforting themselves when they be made fit for comfort. First, one
notable impediment to comfort whereof you must take heed. Secondly, the true
ground of comfort. Thirdly, the degrees by which comfort grows. Lastly, the
means of comforting your selves.

4.
1. For the first, if you will take comfort indeed, you must resolve to believe
neither the devil, not the flesh, neither to credit Satan nor your own
hearts, but only God, speaking in his holy Word.

The devil is a known, and wilful, and purposed liar, and always almost
frames his tale against turth.

If he meet with a sinner that feels not sin at all; he will flatter him
with false hopes, and make him (if he can) to believe that all is well, and
that God will show mercy to him, though he have no manner of right unto it. And
by his good will he would have men lulled a sleep, with these false and vain
and worthless comforts, even till their dying day. But when he cannot hold
them any longer in this sweet dream, but that they begin to see and to feel
sin, and to fear Gods judgments; then he will tell them a quite contrary
tale. That there is no hope, that the time is past, that God will not receive
them, taht their offenses afe unpardonable, that it is in vain to seek mercy,
that the date of grace is gone and past, that so if it were possible they might
be drowned in despaite, Wherefore whosoever would find comfort must stop his
ears against Satan, and resolve to believe nothing he says.

Thou foundest him a liar in his comforts, formerly, now know him a liar too in
his present terrors. He is equally false when he roares as when he sings.

5.
Again, believe not thy self, (thine own heart) for that is false and
deceitful and full of error. Thou must not conclude I have no interest unto
comfort, because I think I have none. Gods ways are not our ways, nor his
thoughts our thoughts: What we think, it matters nor, but what he says in
his Word. Thou may see the falsehood of thine own heart also by experience,
do thou not know well, that thy heart deceived thee heretofore, in telling
thee, that all was well with thee, when thy case was very miserable? Did it lie
then, in ministering to thee ungrounded and lying consolations? then know, that
it is as likely to lie at this time, in denying comfort to thee. So far as we
suffer our ears to be open to the suggestions of Satan, and to the conceits of
our own hearts, so far we hinder our selves of comfort. But we must say, I
will hear what God says, Psalm. 85.8.
he will speak peace. I will believe him and not the devil, not my self.
Well now thus the heart is set in way of taking ocmfort.

6.
Now in the second place, I will show you the ground and foundation of this
spiritual comfort, whereof we are now speaking. There is indeed, a comfort
against outward evils, and against other sorrows then those for sin,
concerning which, many things might well be spoken, but I have not to do with
them at this time. Alone I am to show the sole base and groundwork of
spiritual comfort, which is the steadfast and assured apprehension or
persuasion of the remission of our sins, and the love and favor of God in
Christ. Psalm 30.1
This David proves, saying, Blessed is the man whose sins are covered, whose
iniquity is pardoned, and to whom the Lord imputes no sin, And again,
having said Psalm. 51.8. Make me to hear joy and gladness that the bones
which thou have broken may rejoice, he adds immediately, Hide thy face from my
sins, ver. 9. The same our Savior declares plainly, saying to the poor
Palsy-man, Son be of good comfort thy sins be forgiven thee, Mat. 9.2.
and to that sorrowful weeping woman in the Gospel (who made her eyes as it
were a yewre to wash his feet) Daughter thy sins are forgiven. There is
nothing suffcient to bear up true comfort, but a true and well grounded
assurance, of this unspeakeable goodness of God, which is the foundation of
all other benefits. And as any man's soul has a more solid and steadfast and
well built persuasion of this mercy: so is he the more comfortable, at least
more capeable of comfort: as he has less firm or less true know-ledge of
this, so is he less fit and able to receive consolation. So then this
conclusion must be written in the heart, God has pardoned my sins, and
received me graciously in Christ, before it can be duly comforted, and so you
see the ground of the comfort we seek for.

7.
Thirdly, I will show you by what degrees this comfort grows in the heart
usually. When a man's sins lie most heavy upon his soul, and that the law
like a sword has ripped up and launced his very heart that it runs and bleeds
again; then he hears the doctrine of the Gospel, teaching remission of sins
by Jesus Christ, and does assent to the truth of it, as that it is an undoubted
verity, and then strives to apply it to himself, and has a secret persuasion
that it shall be performed even to himself, now this persuasion grows up in
three degrees.

First, the promise makes him think with himself, Assuredly my sins may be
pardoned: The righteousness of Christ is sufficient to justify me, and God
can accept and forgive me. This makes him run crying and praying to God for
pardon, and affoords a little glimmering of comfort, as when a sick man knows
his disease to be curable, and that the Physician can cure him, this is one
grain of faith.

Secondly, having continued to pray to God for aspace, he then conceives a
little stronger hope, and says in himself, I hope God will pardon me, which
makes him yet more warm in in his suit, and brings a little more
consolation, this is an other grain of faith.

Lastly, he begins to conclude, God has pardoned me; at first, making this
conclusion fearfully, (not without admixture of many doubts, which he
resists, and labors to reject) and at length with more strength and less
doubting, till he attain a very full assurance, that scarce finds any
wavering, and then has his soul a strong consolation, even a full weight of
comfort.

Thus I have showed you the third thing I intended, that no man may be
discomforted utterly, because he is not at first able perfectly to comfort
himself, as sometimes good people are, thinking that they have no faith
because they have not the highest degree thereof.

CHAP. V.
1.
NOw in the fourth place, I will tell you by what means you must strengthen
your faith, that it may afford you large and strong consolation: for though no
labor of man without the power of Gods Spirit can work this comfort, yet does
the Spirit of God beget it, by means of such holy labors and endeavors as
himself incites us to. These means are chiefly four: Meditation, Prayer,
Conference, and a due information of judgment concerning this matter of
remission of sins.

The first then is Meditation, and that principally of four things.

1. Of the perfect merits of Jesus Christ. 2. Of the infinite mercies of God.
3. Of the large and unlimited promises of the Word. 4. Of Gods gratiousnesse to
other sinners, out of all which sound consolation may be taken, by the most
broken heart that is or can be.

2.
The first thing then to be seriously pondered upon is, the perfection of
Christ's merits, for upon this foundation does comfort most depend. For our
selves it matters not what we have deserved, or can deserve, for it must be
confessed that our deserts extend to nothing but ruin and destruction. But our
Lord and surety Jesus Christ has made a full and perfect satisfaction to the
justice of God, and deserved full and perfect remission of sins for all that
seek unto him. For of him the Scripture bears witness, Mat. 3. ult.
That in him God is well pleased, and that by him all that believe, Act. 13.38,
39.
are justified from all things, from which they could not be justified by the
law of Moses. And him has God set forth to be a propitiation through faith in
his blood. Romans 3.25.
He has redeemed us from the curse of the law, Gal. 3 1
being made a curse for us. 1 Cor. 1.30.
Also He is our Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption. And in
Him we have redemption through his blood, Ephesians 1.7
the forgiveness of sins. And He has taken away the sins of the world.
Joh. 1.29
And His blood cleanses us from all sin. 1 Ioh 1 7
And He is able to the uttermost, Heb. 7.25.
to save those that come unto God by him. All these places do testify the
fulness and absolute perfection of his righteousness and satisfaction, that
as by the sin of one man, the first Adam, many have been made sinners, so by
the righteousness of one man the second Adam, Romans 5.9.
many be made righteous.

Now as it is in the case of a debtor and of his surety, so it is betwixt God
and us in this matter. Though the debtor being a mere banquerupt, cannot
possibly discharge his own debt, yet if his surety have already made payment
of all his debts, or fully discharged them, he is safe enough from danger: So,
though we be utterly destitute of all ability to satisfy for our sins, and
to deserve pardon of them; yet if our surety Jesus Christ have fully satisfied
for them, as he has, there is hope enough of our being pardoned. For our Lord
Jesus Christ was both God and man, a person infinitely more excellent then all
men, and therefore his sufferings and obedience are of such infinite worth and
value, that by him the wrath of God is fully appeased toward us. For it was a
great demonstration of Gods justice to punish him his only begotten Son for
our sins in such sort as he did, as if he had punished us to all eternity.
Suppose diverse debtors, one owing 10000 lb. another 5000 another 1000 another
100 lb. some more, some less, but each one more then his substance could
possibly satisfy: yet if some able person had laid down diverse Jewels of
far greater value then all their debts did amount unto, then were their debts
sufficiently answered for, neither need they be discouraged at the greatness
of them. Even so, when we have committed innumerable sins, deserving eternal
death, and can no way satisfy for our selves, yet so long as he has perfectly
fulfilled the law for us, being made under the law in our steed, and has
perfectly satisfied the justice of God by bearing the curse for us; our estate
is good enough in him, though never so irrecoverable in our selves. Wherefore
compare thy sins to Christ's merits, and think, is not he my Savior? has not
he discharged my debt? has not he answered for mine offenses? are not his
death, sufferings, and obedience, much more able to pacify Gods anger, then my
transgressions to provoke it? Doubtless it is so: no man that professes
Christian Religion will deny it, and therefore by his blood peace of conscience
may come unto the greatest sinner.

3.
If it be objected, Ah, J know his redemption is perfect and all-surficient,
but how can I tell that it shall be granted unto me? I answer, put off that
question a little, till thou have first answered some few questions which I
shall propound unto thee. Do not thou think that the blood of Christ is
sufficient to wash away all thy sins? is not his satisfaction full, complete
and of worth enough to answer for all thy transgressions, even though they were
more then they be? If thou say no, thou denyest the truth of the
fore-alledged Scriptures, and disparagest the merits of our blessed Savior,
which I hope thou will not dare to do: but if yea, as needs thou must say yea,
then hearken yet further a little, and for thine own interest into this
satisfaction, receive satisfaction by this reason: Our Savior Christ calls
unto him, all that travel and are heavy laden with sin, and promises
refreshing and rest unto their souls. Tell me, art not thou laden? art not
thou crushed? Do not thou confess thy sins to be a most insupportable
burden, and so heavy a load that they will surely press thee down to hell,
if he do not ease thee? if thou do not or do not desire so to do thou art
none of them whom I intend to comfort, if thou do, why then in Gods name, let
that loving invitation of our Lord satisfy thy forementioned doubt, and
conclude thou thus for thy self. Every one that being heavy laden will come
unto Christ, shall be refreshed, shall have rest to his soul, and therefore
shall have his merits bestowed upon him, without which there can be no rest to
his soul. Now I am heavy laden, and I will run to Christ (and so do J pray
thee, without doubting or fear any longer) and then thou must conclude
infallibly, I shall be refreshed, I shall have the merits of Christ to be mine,
according to the truth of his promise.

4.
And so you have the first meditation. The second must be of the infinite
mercies of God in Christ, who is graciously ready in him, the Son of his
loves, to accept of every sinner that renouncing himself, and all his own
righteousness, does fly wholly to him for refuge. For the Lord is a God, Exodus
14 6.
gracious and merciful, slow to anger, abundant in kindness and truth,
reserving mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity, transgression and sin. His
mercy is as high above us as heaven is above the earth. Psalm 103 11.
He will abundantly forgive, Isa. 55.7, 2, 9.
and his ways are not as our ways, nor his thoughts as our thoughts, for as
the heavens are higher then the earth, so are his ways higher then our ways,
and his thoughts above our thoughts. Yea he has multitude of tender
compassions, and is rich in mercy to all that call upon him, Romans 10 12.
and his mercy endures for ever. You see by these words of Scripture what
store of mercy there is in God, and what quantity of compassion poor sinners
that are humbled, must look to find with him. Now consider further, what is
this mercy and compassion of God? Doubtless it is a willingness, promptness,
readiness, forwardness, full resolution to accept of miserable sinners that
have made themselves most wretched by their sins, and to relieve their
miseries when they humbly stoop unto him. Mercy is not an ability to pardon
and help if one will, but a willingness to help and pardon when one is able.
We do not call him a merciful man, that could help a poor distressed person
if he would, but it is not his pleasure so to do, for so it may be with a most
cruel and hard hearted fellow. The most rigorous and exating rich Usurer,
could forgive his debtor (that is a banckerout and can pay him nothing) if he
would, but he will not though he can, and therefore does not deserve to be
called merciful. The most fierce and furious tyrant might forgive his subject,
if he would, that has offended, but because he is not willing, therefore no
man styles him pitiful and gracious. So neither were the God of heaven full of
grace, mercy and compassion, if only he were able to forgive humbled sinners,
and would not; that were not mercy I say, that were not compassion, but this is
grace, this is compassion. He is willing to receive the humbled wretch, he is
ready to forgive, and fully resolved with himself to blot out all his sins
from his remembrance, be they what they will for number or haighnousnes, when
once he converteth unto him. Now therefore that thou know the store of mercy
that is in God, and also what mercy is. Compare thy sins also to Gods mercy,
and see if they can be in any sort equal thereunto. For are not his mercies in
Christ infinite, endless, boundless, and therefore far surpassing all the
sins of all sinners, which be they, what they can be, for weight and number,
yet doubtless infinite they cannot be.

Thou see how great a thing this globe of earth and water seems to be to
them that walk upon it, yet in comparison of the heavenly sphere that does
incompasse it, what is it else, but a point, a prick, a center, a thing of
nothing, that holds no proportion to those higher regions, and know
assuredly, that there is no more proportion betwixt all the sins of all men,
and Gods mercies, then betwixt the point of earth, and the circumference of the
skies. He is willing to pardon more then all of them can commit, and therefore
only they be not pardoned, because they will not humble themselves to seek
pardon. Thus then must thou raise up thy falling heart, I have to do with a
most infinitely merciful and tender hearted Father, that does not desire the
death of him that dies, but is ten thousand thousand times more willing to
give me pardon then I am to crave or accept it. It pleases him more to bestow
forgiveness, then me to receive it. O do not so great an injury to God, as to
set any bounds and limits to his goodness, to diminish or detract from the
boundlesnesse of his compassion, to think that thou can possibly exceed his
goodness with thy badnesse, but go unto him and acknowledge, saying, O Lord,
the multitude of thy mercies do far surmount the multitude of my rebellions,
O therefore be gracious to me according to the multitude of thy mercies, and
so thou shall be safe.

But thou will say perhaps how can I tell that God will show mercy to me? I
answer, Art not thou one of those to whom he has sealed up mercy in baptism?
yea but thou will say, many are baptized that never find mercy. I answer, not
one that in sense of want of mercy, and in a persuasion that God can be
merciful to him, does seek to the throne of grace for it. And for a fuller
answer to this doubt, now proceed to the third meditation.

5.
This is of the wideness and largeness of Gods promises to sinners, which are
of such an unlimited extent, that they exclude no sinner for no sin, and in
no time of coming to him. For in all these respects, are his promises wondrous
large and of great extent. J say first they shut not out any sinner, but run
in this generality, Come unto me (All) that are heavy laden, even all, all
without any exception, so that whosoever he be that is heavy laden, he sees
the gate of Gods goodness standing open to him, and wide enough to receive
even him also among the rest of sinners; next he excepts not any sin, but
tells us thus, The blood of Christ purges us from all sin. 1 John 1.7
And again, if your sins were as red as scarlet they shall be as white as
snow. Isa. 1.18.
And again, Ezekiel. 18.22.
I will blot all his iniquities out of my remembrance, and he bids them pray
thus, Take away all iniquity, Hos. 14.2.
and allowed David to cry and say, Psalm. 51.9
Blot out all mine iniquities. Do you not hear how general these promises
be, not narrowed with any exception, but alone to be understood with this
qualification of the persons, if they be humbled for sin. And in like manner
for the time of coming lies not the promise, in the day that the sinner
turns? Ezekiel. 33.12.
meaning when so ever, sooner or later, first or last, so that he turn in
truth, you see no time excepted for the grant of pardon of sin. Indeed in
regard of crosses, it may fall out, that a man may seek to God for freedom of
them and not find it, but for pardon of sins, he that comes in truth, comes
never too late. And here now is the right use of those universal promises,
which are set down in Scripture. God would have no man perish, but would have
all men saved and come to the knowledge of the truth, 1 Timothy 2.4.
and He is a propitiation for the sins of the whole world, 1 Ioh. 2.2.
and He gave himself a ransom for all, 1 Timothy 2.6.
and He tasted death for every man. Heb. 2.9.
Which the Lord has of set purpose conceived in this ample form of words,
that there might be sure and certain ground and footing, for the faith of any
man whatsoever, that being tired with his sins, does run unto this grace of
God in Christ to find help in time of need. Seeing God has not excepted thy
person, or thy faults, or thy time of coming, do not thou except thy self,
make not the gate of Gods promises scanter, or narrower then it is. He has
opened both the leaves of these doors as wide as may be, and thinks it not
fit to cloze them up, against any humbled and confessing sinner, at any time: O
do no thou put a distrustful hand upon them, to shut them against thy self,
but let them stand wide open, and enter boldly, and ask mercy, and look for
mercy, and find it.

6.
Now follows the last meditation, which must be of the examples of Gods grace,
in performing these promises to other sinners, as bad, if not worse then any of
us can be. For the Lord has made good these words of his in his Son to as
great, heinous, wilful, presumptuous offenders, as any have been, are or can
be in the world, that will come unto him. No man can name, so great a sin or
sins, with so great aggravations, but that the Scriptures afford us examples
of as grievous sins pardoned, and as grievous sinners saved, if they have
framed themselves to humiliation and conversion. For what may thy sin be or
thine obstinacy in sin? Is it murder and adultery run into with fore-resolved
deliberation? continued in with great hardness and obduration? behold these
were David's faults, and thou see him pardoned and comforted, yea though he
ran unto them in old age after many benefits received, and after a long time of
forwardness in the true religion and service of God. Have thou been an
Idolater? a Buggerer? a Drunkard? a Rayler? an Extortioner? why such were some
of the Corinthians, (as Paul remembers them) and yet they were washed,
sanctified, justified, as he also tells them. Have thou besides Idolatry
followed Sorcerers and Witches? and practiced enchantments and sorceries? and
that with so much and so long obstinacy, as to kill those that should admonish
thee of these faults? Why so did Manasses too, and yet he is pardoned. Have
thou persecuted Christ? blasphemed him? made others to blaspheme? and put them
to death that would not? why so did Paul also, (and that after diverse years
spent in those places, where many wonders and miracles were wrought to confirm
the Gospel of Christ) and yet he is pardoned. Have thou been an harlot? so
was Rahab, and the sinful woman in the Gospel. Have thou been a thief? so
was he that defended Christ on the Cross. Have thou denied and foresworne
Christ? so did Peter also after he had been diverse years his disciple, and
yet all these are pardoned. Yea verily brethren, the first sin that ever was
committed, was in many respects the greatest of all particular acts of sin that
ever were committed since. It was virtually, radically, causally all sin, and
yet lo Adam and Evah that did commit it, they are saved. The smalnesse of the
matter makes the fault far greater, being a light and easy thing, propounded
merely for a trial, and as a sign and profession of their obedience, as if a
man should forbid his child a very slender thing, and that which he might
easily forbear, to testify his obedience unto him, he would be more offended
against him in this case, by how much he had made choice of a more trivial
matter to prove his obedience withal. Now for such persons at such a time, in
such a place, in such a state, on such motives to disobey their maker in such a
thing, so easy to be observed, and given to them only to prove their
obedience, surely a greater disobedience (and therefore a greater sin) can
hardly be named, and yet as I said before, this sin is pardoned, and those
sinners saved. And who now can be hopeless? who now can cast off comfort? Now
therefore stay and look upon those effects and proofs of Gods mercy and truth,
and say unto thy self, is not God the same God that of old? was not his
justice and anger against sin, as great then as now? and is not his mercy and
truth, as large and sure now as then? and why then should not J also take
heart, to seek unto the same God and rest upon him. And these be the most
comfortable meditations that I could propound, to the sorrowful and fearful
heart of the broken sinner, for the suppling of his wounds, and fitting his
soul for consolation.

CHAP. VI.
1.
NOw these meditations must be concluded and intermixed, with confessions and
supplications. The poor sinner must gather up his thoughts into petitions and
requests, and refusing to be hindered by any fears, doubts, or objections,
must take to himself boldness to fall down before the throne of grace, and
following the counsel of the Holy Ghost, must take to himself words, and say,
receive me graciously, and take away all iniquity. Address thy self unto the
God of heaven in the name of Christ his Son, and say, Lord behold here the
worst of sinners, appearing before thee, casting himself as low as hell,
desirons to be as full of shame and sorrow as is possible, and therefore
troubled, because he cannot be more grieved and more abased. I am Lord indeed a
vile and grievous sinner, and these and these evils have I done, but o for the
merits sake of Jesus Christ alone, thy dear and only begotten Son, accept
me, forgive, and according to the multitude of thy mercies, wash me thoroughly
from all my sins. Remember O Lord the thing that thou have promised and
sealed up to all that seek thee, even blot out all mine offenses out of thy
remembrance, and for my sins and iniquities, O Lord remember them no more. Be
not weary of making these requests, though thou seem to thy self to receive
none answer to them, but fly constantly, and run boldly to the throne of
grace, to attain mercy to help in time of need. If thy soul be vexed with
new fears, confirm thou it with new prayers, and resolve, if thou must be
damned to be damned praying, and if thou must needs perish, to perish with a
prayer in thy mouth, then thou can not be damned, then thou can not
perish. Call upon God in the day of thy trouble, make thy prayers to him in the
floods of great waters, and sure they shall not come near thee, for he will
fulfill his promise, and will grant thee all that thou beggest in the name of
his Son. Thus have you two helps to comfort, prayer and meditation.

2.
The third follows, and that is conference. Make thy case known to others of
Gods people, for wisdom lies not all in one breast, so that any one man should
be able for himself to answer all Satan's crafty cavills, especially the weak
Christian cannot, therefore must he show his case, and crave counsel; David
could comfort himself, Bathsheba could not. Wherefore devour not thy sorrows
all alone, but ask advice, seek abroad for comfort, and make an happy use of
the fellowship and communion of Saints. More easily can the devil over reach
one then many, communicate therefore thy griefs and fears, to some or other
of Gods faithful people or Ministers. Now is the time of hearkening to the
counsel of Saint James, who bids us, Confess our faults one to another, James
5.16.
and pray one for another that you may be healed, when men that are tormented
in spirit, suffer themselves to be stopped by shame or fear, from opening
their wounds, they multiply their own miseries, and increase the flames by
stifling them. Do not so therefore any longer, but make manifest thy terrors,
and acknowledge thy sins to some or other comforter. A man in a desperate
disease will run to the Chyrurgion. Be sure thou have not committed any so
grievous sins, but some or other of Gods children have committed as bad. Be
sure that no temptation cease upon thee, so foul and hideous, but the same
or as bad, has been found before in some or other of the Saints. J say
therefore again, make haste to seek advice, and discover thine whole soul
freely and fully to him whom thou take for thy Physician, and leave nothing,
no nothing unuttered that does trouble thee; and resolve to believe rather the
words of him that seeks to comfort thee, then thine own strong fancies, and
Satan's lying cavills against thee. It is evident that a sound man can easily
do that for a sick man, which he by no means is able to do for himself in
the time of his sickness. Therefore do the sick send for the whole, and the
whole come to the sick, and even so must the sick and comfortless soul do
likewise, only do this speedily, and put not off till thou be already
overwhelmed with griefs. As a bone out of joint, that is too long before it be
set, is far more hardly restored to his place, and is ever ready to be
slipping out again: so a distressed soul that defers to crave counsel, is
much more hardly comforted, and does much more easily fall again into his
wonted griefs. Speed is necessary therefore in the latter of these two cases
as well as the former, and great is the hurt of deferring. If thou have carried
thy griefs in silence long, that that is past cannot be remedied, and thou
must be sure it will be harder and longer before thou can be helped. But if
thou be one that now begins to faint, let nor Satan hinder thee from
revealing thy case, as he will endeavor. Two eyes see more then one, and one
man alone is easily cousened. Shame, shame, carnal shame hinders many a soul
from inward comfort; he is ashamed to tell to others what he finds in
himself, as not knowing that all men labor of the same disease of original
sin, which is an aptness to every sin. If a man have a foul disease and
be ashamed to show it, either he must be the better skilled in Surgery
himself, or else he dies for it, so it is for sins. Make speed therefore to
look abroad for comfort, if thou find not thy self ablt to deal with thine
own fears and objections.

3.
Do this also plainly and fully, without any reservation, stick not at any
thing that troubles thee, but clear thy mind fully, and wholly, and be not
like a child that holds out the wrong finger, and will not be known where
his worst pain is. If need be, thou may tie thy Physician to secrecy, by the
strongest bond of an oath, but be not thou in any one thing secret or reserved,
chiefly conceal not that sin sins or temptations that do most perplexe
thee, or any one aggravating circuemstance of them. All labor is lost till
this be done. Till the thorn be pulled out, that causes swelling, the
swelling will not be assuaged. The answering of all other objections will
avail nothing for thy comfort unless this be answered. Let nothing make thee
hold back any of thy griefs, more then stay too long before thou begin to
crave help. Fear not, squeame not to lay open the worst of thy sores, let the
very issue and leprosy be seen that should be healed. A man shall but bungle
in the cure that is not thoroughly informed of the sickness. And as sick men
do, so do thou; they believe their tender rather then their own eyes or
conceits: for sick men are exceeding apt to mistake things out of their bodily
distemper, and so are also troubled and distempered hearts. Gods words alone
can be the ground of comfort, man's may and must be the instrument of comfort,
that by believing man, we may be helped to believe in God. As a man must hope
above hope, so he must believe above belief. He must captivate his reason to
his comforter that seeles to a comforter, and say, what he concludes for me
out of Gods Word, I will credit, though I cannot feel it to be so, and will
rely more on his judgment then mine own. And why should not a wise and godly
Minister be rather credited, then a lying and malicious spirit, and a
distracted and disquieted heart? The sick man's palate deemeth sweet things
to be sower, his dimned eyes can see no light at noonetide, finding this he
credits those about him, that have better disposed senses, and judges of
things, not as himself thinks, but as others tell. In this virtuous
credulousnesse, must be the sick souls first beginnings of comfort, and he
that will thus betake himself to counsel, shall find that in the multitude
of counselors, there will be peace.

4.
And so much also for the third means of comfort. I will conclude with the
fourth and last, namely the right information of our judgments, that we may
be able to answer such objections as are brought against the remission of our
sins, and whereby the devil and the flesh would have us conclude, but the
conclusion is false, that our sins neither be, nor shall be pardoned. The
chief of these I will set down in order, with their answers so well as I am
able.

But before I speak of them, I will show you what be the only true arguments
to prove that a man's sins be not, nor (whilst he so continues) can be
pardoned.

First, the not feeling of sin to be a burden.

Secondly, the not confessing of sin plainly to God, and in cases needful to
man also.

Thirdly, the not resolving to leave it.

Fourthly, the not seeking for pardon in Christ, and in him alone.

These four do infallibly prove, that a man's sins are not pardoned, neither
shall be, so long as he does remain in that case. But if these four things
be done, viz. 1. That sin be felt with anguish and grief of heart. 2. That
it be plainly confessed to God and man, in case needful and of offense given.
3. That a man have steadfastly resolved to leave it. 4. That he seek and cry
for pardon in Christ, and in him only, none other argument that can be
alleged against the pardon of sin is of any sorce. Now I will set down the
chief objections, and show their invalidity. They are drawn likely from four
heads. 1. The greatness of ones sins. 2. The defects of his graces. 3. His
own feelings. And lastly, his horrible temptations.

5.
From greatness of sin there are three grand objections. First then, the
newly humbled sinner, looks back upon his life past, and finding his
out-strayings so many and so grievous, and withal, considering for how long a
space, with how much hardness and obstinacy, and against how many reproves
and checks, he continued to wallow in them, is ready to conclude, that there is
no possibility of pardon. This reason must be thus framed, He that has
committed many and foul offenses, persisted long in them, with much
wilfulness, and against many means, is sure unpardoned, and shall not be
pardoned. But alas alas, so have I done as mine affrighted conscience does
now bear witness against me: Therefore J neither am nor shall be pardoned.
To the which the answer is, that the first proposition of the argument upon
which the whole is built, is most apparently false. There is no Text of
Scripture that does say so, nor can it be confirmed by any part of the Word of
God, therefore as a false suggestion of the devil or of the guilty heart, it
must be utterly denied. Yea the Scripture does plainly declare the quite
contrary, and does make it most evident, that those in whom all the things
mentioned in that proposition, have been manifestly found, have yet been
pardoned or might have been. For did not Manasseh continue a most wilful
transgressour in most grievous kinds, and that against many admonitions of
Prophets sent unto him immediately from God, and that so that he slew and
murdered these Prophets, and that also, so long, till he was cast into the
dark dungeon and laden with chains of irons: Yet even then was he accepted,
upon his humble confessions, and supplications: Yea did not Paul proceed in
persecuting with great fury, and after that the Lord had sent his Apostles to
work many strange miracles, to inform him with the rest of the Jews that
Jesus was the Lord, yet went on to blaspheme that holy Name, and imprison them
that confessed it, and that all the time from Christ's resurrection, till the
hour that the Lord did meet him in the way and knock him down to the
ground: and yet did not God pardon him, and set forth him for an example of his
longsuffering to chief sinners. It must therefore be acknowledged for a
certain truth, that how heinous so ever amans sins have been, how long so
ever he have hardened himself in them, how many offers of grace so ever he
have refused, how many admonitions so ever he have heglected and despised, yet
if he now do turn unto the Lord, he shall be accepted. So says Jeremy,
Chap. 26.13. Therefore now amend your ways, and your works, and hear the
voice of the Lord your God, that the Lord may repent him of the plague that he
has pronounced against you. God had sent many Prophets, many years together,
rising early, and sending them, at this time also he had sent Jeremy with the
same message again, and now instead of hearing, they laid hands upon, and were
ready to kill him, yet even now he tells them, that if now they would turn,
the Lord would repent of he evil. Whatsoever therefore is gone and past, if in
the present time thou convert, lament, confess amend, thou shall be forgiven.
Sin may so harden the finners heart, that he cannot repent, it cannot so
harden Gods heart against him, that if he repent, the Lord will not pardon him.
O then believe not the lying devil. He tells thee, thy sins are so many
and so vile, that they cannot be forgiven, the Lord tells, as obstinate and as
grievous sinners as ever were, that if they now turn, he will repent him of
the evil, and consequently they shall be pardoned, will thou not give credit
to God rather then to the devil? This is the first doubt taken from sin.

6.
An other and a sorer follows. Ah I, since the time that I thought my self
called and converted, have yet again rushed into gross and grievous sins,
and that also willingly and upon deliberation, and what shall I do then, sure
I was but an hypocrite, and sure J cannot be pardoned, at least I am not. This
reason also must be cast into this form. Whosoever after his calling and
conversion commits great sins wilfully, was sure but an hypocrite, and is
not nor can be pardoned. But so have I done, therefore J am but an hypocrite,
I am not pardoned nor can be. To this I answer again, that the first part of
the argument is apparently false, and therefore such is also the conclusion. It
is false that he which has so sinned after calling was but an hypocrite, and
is not pardoned, for this was the verycase of David whose example we now are
handling. Did not he fall in the felfe same fort as thou have said, and yet
he was no hypocrite, but he was pardoned. I demand of the therefore, Have thou
renewed thy confessions and thy sorrows, and thy resolutions of amendment
since thy fall, and art thou returned to a form, purpose and endeavor of
walking before the Lord in uprightness. If thou have, then I assure thee by
warrant of David's example, that thou wast sincere before, and that thou art
pardoned. If thou have not, I require thee now, in Gods name, settle about
these things, and apply thy self seriously to renew thy repentance, and to
turn again to God, and thou shall be pardoned. So is the second doubt
answered taken from great sins.

7.
The third follows, and that is worse then both the former. Ah I have made
long defections from the covenant of grace, and revolted, backslided, apostated
from the ways of God, and in my backsliding vein have run into, I know not
how many and how grievous offenses. Since I found some good things working in
my soul, and had for a great space and with great forwardness, continued to
walk in the paths of piety. I have again broken forth and continued a long
time in my wanderings, without any care of returning, and therefore now I fear
that my case is desperate, and that J have committed the unpardonable sin.
This argument must be likewise cast into this form, whosoever has been
guilty of long and grievous defections and backslidings, has his sins
unpardoned, and has committed the unpardonable trespass, nor can be pardoned.
Now so I have done, as mine own heart is too sure a witness against me:
Therefore I neither am nor can be pardoned. Mine answer to this reason, is in
the same manner that the former. The first part of it must be denied, as being
evidently false and against the Word of God. For David in my Text did thus
backslide in some degree, but Solomon (whose birth is here mentioned, and who
is here graced with the name Iedidiah, because the Lord, not alone did but also
would love him) did make even such an Apostasy to the very full and yet he
recovered himself by repentance, he was upright before, and he was pardoned.
For has not the Lord promised Israel to heal her backslidings? Tell me then,
fince thy backsliding, have thou not recovered, and with much shame and remorse
craved pardon and returned to do or labors to do thy first works. If not,
thou art not the man I seek to comfort, unless thou shall now address thy
self to this reconversion, as I may so term it. If yea, why then know that
thy case is good enough, the disease that is healed does never kill, but to
thee appertain the promises made to backsliding Israel. And whereas thou
say, my sin is sure that unpardonable sin. Understand that the Scripture
never calls any sin unpardonable. Some sins indeed are never pardoned,
because the committer thereof does never repent; but that a sin repented of
should be uncapeable of pardon, it is more then the Word of God does ever
afsirme: but if there be any such sin, this sin of thine cannot be that
sin. For he that wholly falls away, after some degrees of grace received, it
is impossible that he should renew him again by repentance, but thou do
again renew thy self by repentance, for thou confessest, and lamentest thy
turning aside, and returnest again to crave pardon. Let thine heart return a
true answer; do thou not find it aching, and relenting for thine Apostafie,
longing, desirous to come on again, and careful to seek pardon for former
declinings? if so, then art thou renewed by repentance and therefore did not
wholly fall away. If backslidings shall breed in any man, either utter
hardness, or utter despair, so that either one is not sorry for them, or will
not seek forgiveness of them, that is a sore sign of utter relapsing, but
thou do come back again to the Lord, falling out with thy self, for
falling of from him, and casting down thy self before him, above and against
all hope, do crave mercy of him. I am certain therefore that thy case is
good, and thou art or shall be pardoned. And for this so terrible objection of
backsliding, let the Prophet fully satisfy thee. For to Israel that had plaide
the harlot from God and followed many lovers, the Lord says by his Prophet,
Yet return unto me, Chap. 3 ver. 1. and ver. 12. Jer. 3.
Return o backesliding Israel, and I will not cause mine anger to fall upon
thee, for I am merciful says the Lord, and will not keep anger for ever,
only acknowledge your iniquity, and so forth, and then after, Turn o
backsliding children, for I am married unto you, and I will take you, one of a
city, and so as it follows in the Prophet. Lo now the truth of God,
whatsoever fearful Apostasy thou have made, if thou return and acknowledge,
here is promise of acceptance, and this very turning, shows that thou have not
committed that never-to-be pardoned sin, for that offense is therefore only
never pardoned, because the man that has run into it, will never return,
either out of hardness, or despair, or both.

CHAP. VII.
1.
ANd these objections arise from the quality of sins committed, either before
or after calling. An other troop arise, from those many wants and defects
which the soul does find in it self. And first the soul finds fault with
it self for want of repentance, reasoning thus against it self. Alas I have
no repentance, and therefore I am not pardoned. To which I answer, that it must
be confessed for a truth, whosoever has not repented is not pardoned. But why
do thou say I have not repented? To answer this doubt, inform thy self
aright, what repentance is. It is a duty consisting of these four parts: 1.
Sorrow for sin. 2. Confession of it to God. 3. Earnest calling upon God in the
name of Christ for pardon and help. 4. A firm purpose and endeavor of
amendment. Consider, have thou not these things, do thou not perform these
actions, or endeavor to perform them? If thou do, then thou have the grace
of repentance, as sure as he is a man that has a soul and body. O but says
the fearful soul, I am not sorry enough for sins, I do not grieve for them
so much as I should, nor crave pardon of them so earnestly as I should, nor
mend them so well as I should. J answer, that is very true, But where has the
Lord said, that he which has not performed these duties so well as he should,
has not true repentance? This is no where found in Scripture, it is one of thy
false conceits, and a very false conceit it is, tanding to confound the Law,
and the Gospel; for the Law requires to do all things perfectly, and
rejects all works which a man does not perform so well as he should, but
the Gospel is a doctrine of grace, and accepts endeavors to perform duties,
though one fall far short of that measure of duty which he ought to attain.
Do not thou strive and endeavor to do these things more and better, and
blame thy self for defects and failings: If so, then do thou repent as well
as thou should, in the language of the Gospel. Yea but J do not lament
sin so much as others do, and as the Scriptures tell that some godly men
have done. I answer, but have thou not heretofore some time with plenty of
bitter tears, bewailed thine offenses, even almost as much as any the Word
speaks of; and if so, then understand that these large and great sorrows are
not always to continue; There must be a time of drying such floods of tears
from the eyes of the Saints. I answer again, that if thou have not lamented as
much as some of Gods Saints have done in Scripture, yet thou have lamented as
much as some others, Thou read not of such extreme lamentation in the
conversion of Abraham, or Zaccheus, and Matthew, and some others. The Word of
God has left us examples of some that have grieved very much, and of others
that have not grieved so much, if thou have not attained to the examples of one
of these, yet have thou followed the other: and again, I answer, that God does
not reject the sorrows of his people, because they be not so great as those
which others attain. It is no where said in Scripture, that he repents not
which grieveth not as much as others do or have done. And for the point of
grieving for sin, understand that not the quantity is so much to be respected
as the quality; if a man grieve never so much, and his grief carry him not to
confess and seek pardon and grace and help, and diligently to endeavor
amendment, they be nothing worth, and if they do bring forth these effects,
they be accepted, though they be not very great.

2.
Yea but says the heart yet again, J cannot ask pardon earnestly, and
heartily, nor at all pray unto God for it with any life or fervency. I answer,
why will thou say so? That which a man desires more then life, and more then
all the profits and pleasures of life, that he desires earnestly and heartily,
I trow, or else, who can be said to desire earnestly? Now tell me, would thou
not rather choose to have thy sins pardoned, and thy soul healed, then to
have long life, great riches, store of pleasures, and all worldly contents? if
this be true, as thou can not deny it, then thou do earnestly pray for
these things, denying that to be found in thee (as in temptation it is usual)
which any other man may manifestly see to be in thee.

3.
Yea but I want that last part of repentance, and that which is the perfection
of all, I do not amend, I do not amend, but J still slip into the same sins,
and cannot leave them. Why tell me what sins be they that thou can not
leave, Is it murder, blasphemy, whoredom, etc. O no, but I find deadness,
dullness, coldness in prayer, distractednesse and forgetfullnesse in hearing,
passionatenesse, impatiency, and a number like faults, still breaking forth in
me. J answer, what do thou make of God and of his mercy, when thou concludest
from hence that thy sins be not pardoned? Is not he ready to pass by such
weaknesses in his children and servants, as thou can easily pass by in
thine. Does not he call himself a Father, does not he tell us that he knows
that we be but dust. Does not the Scripture say, James 3.2
In many things we offend all, and who can say his heart is clean? Pro 20.9.
Sure if this were a good argument that ones sins were not pardoned, no sins
were pardoned to any sinner. For find me a man or woman under heaven, that
has not cause to complain thus. Assure thy self therefore that these
continual weaknesses are not contrary to remission of sins. Sanctification
must be true, else the soul is not justified, but it is not needful, nay nor
in this life possible that it should be perfect. And it is true, so long as
thou continuest to confess and lament, and strive against these imperfections,
though thou be still cumbred with them, else would not Saint Paul have said,
The flesh lusts against the spirit, Gal. 5.17.
so that ye cannot do the things that ye would. Away with this objection
therefore, it savours of pride, thou will not think thou art pardoned, unless
thou can bring to God some such measure of goodness, as might seem half,
or almost to deserve it. If thou will not believe thou art pardoned, till thou
find no such faults, thou shall never believe thou art pardoned.

4.
Yea but I feel not alone these common imperfections, but I feel also some
one or other corruption so strong and violent in me, that it does often even
again and again break forth, and that also too too palpably and grossly. I
answer, But do not thou feel in thine heart a perpetual warring against
these corruptions. Do thou not renew thy sorrowful confessions, and
resolutions of amendment, as often as thou sinnest and far oftener too? Do
thou not usually and ordinarily hold fast thy resolution not to sin, and art
overcome alone sometimes, but commonly keep under the sin from palpable
breaking forth? Do not thou fall seldomer and with less content, and more
reluctation, and rise sooner out of the sin: Yea is it not thy continual
prayer to be kept against it, and do not thou find that these endeavors
keep thee so, that thou offe^dest not by many degrees, so much and often, as
before thou did, and as else thou should do? I answer then, that where sin
has not dominion, there it is healed, and a man's soul is truly sanctified,
and himself in the state of grace; Romans 6.24.
For it is said, Sin shall not have dominion over you, because you are under
grace. Now it is certain, that where any sin is thus constantly and
conscionably resisted and opposed with these spiritual weapons (namely by the
consideration of Gods goodness in Christ, and of his commandme^ts, threats and
promises in his Word) it is subdued, and the dominion there of is broken: Such
an one does mortify the deeds of the flesh by the spirit, and is in killing
them, though they be not quite slain, that rules not that is perpetually
resisted, oppugned, fought against. Therefore though some such corruption be
very violent, and do both often and palpably break out, yet it is pardoned, for
he does not love and serve sin that does thus fight against it and resist it. O
but J do not repent in truth. J answer, do thou thus confess and lament and
resist every sin, one as well as an other, and that before God in secret? Then
surely thou repentest truly, for no man sets against all sin, and that before
God, but he does it in uprightness and sincerity of soul.

5.
Ah but I have no faith, I have no faith, and therefore I am not pardoned. I
answer first, thou may have it hereafter if thou have not yet attained it,
yea thou shall have it if thou continue to beg it: yea I answer again, this is
a false accusation, thou have faith. For he that does so acknowledge the
perfect righteousness of Christ, that he concludes, Christ can pardon me, and
therefore follows him with continual supplications for pardon, he has faith,
and a good measure of faith too. For how shall they call upon him in whom they
have not believed says the Apostle, and our Savior says to the blind men
that confessed he could help them, and ran crying after him for help,
according to your faith be it unto you. Well therefore thou do believe, and
though thy faith may be weak, yet some it is, and that so much as shall make
thee accepted, for weakness of faith cannot hinder remision of sins, seeing
the Apostles were pardoned, whom yet our Savior reprooveth, because they were
men of little faith. O but all graces are weak and feeble in me, even so weak,
that I cannot tell whither I have any or none. I answer, an infant is a very
weak thing, and has little and feeble limbs, and so small use of reason, that
one can hardly perceive him to have any at all, and yet he is a man, a
reasonable creature. Grace is as little at first as natural life and reason in
a newborn babe, but if it be true, all is well, then at last it shall be
strong, and true it is, if one find its own weakness, and be made little in
his own eyes because of its littleness, and mourn because it is so little,
and would feign have it more, and use the best means he can to increase it,
and by not finding so great an increase as he desires, is not driven to cast
off all means, but rather labors to use them more and better, that by them it
may at last attain its wished confirmation.

CHAP. VIII.
1.
SO have I answered those objectio^s which are taken from our own defects of
graces: now follow more, taken from want of feeling, yea from feeling of great
terrors even from God. First, I answer to that objection taken from want of
feeling. It may be thou think that thou have no feeling: but have thou not
sometimes when thou prayest earnestly some little kind of ease and refreshing
and hope? if thou have, why that is feeling though thou did not know it. And
I think scarce any Christian can say he has continued long to pray, but he
has had some such feeling. Secondly, I answer, if thou have had yet no
feeling, thou may have in due time, for thou take the right way to get it.
And again J answer, David had as little feeling as thou have, when he
complained, Psalm. 119.82, 83.
That his eyes failed in waiting for Gods salvation, and that he was become
like a bottle in the smoke. A man may feel no comfort in remission of his
sins, and yet have his sins pardoned: for a Christian as J said before, must
not live by feeling, but by faith, yea he must believe first, and feel after.
Sense will deceive in the judging of colors and quantities, how much more in
spiritual things that be above sense. Wherefore what conclusion may be duly
diducted out of Scripture, that is most true and certain, though a man have no
feeling of it, yea though he feel the contrary was this conclusion, I have my
sins pardoned, or shall have, may be diducted out of Scripture, (for such a man
as feels nothing but overwhelming griefs) thus. All that being heavy laden
come unto Christ shall be refreshed, but Jam heavy laden and come unto Christ,
therefore I shall be refreshed and find rest to my soul. For he comes to Christ
heavy laden, that in the sense of great anguish continues to cry and pray,
therefore must he labor to support himself with hope, that his case shall
be good, howsoever it be for the present, and so animate himself to continue
praying and crying.

2.
Yea but J find my self even weary of praying, and ready to faint and give
over. I answer, so did David too, Psalm. 69. when he said his eyes did fail and
he was weary of crying, and yet he cried still, and so do thou, which so long
as thou do, thou art in none other estate then he was, and therefore in a good
estate, only so that thou will be content, as I said to live by faith and not
by feeling. Yea but I am not alone void of all peace and comfort, but even
filled with fears and terrors. I answer so was David too, in diverse places, by
name Psalm. 69.1. where he says, that the waters were come unto his soul and
that he stuck fast in the mire. If any say this is meant alone of danger from
his outward enemies. J answer, believe that who can, I cannot. David was no
coward, that the apprehension of a mere natural death should drive him unto
such complaints, sure there was more in it then so, his soul also was well
near overwelmed with temptations and fears of Gods displeasure as well as
thine. So was he that made the 77. Psalm, he says, my soul refused comfort,
he neither could nor scarce would take comfort, yea complains, will the Lord
cast off for ever? showing that he had much ado to keep himself from sinking
under despair. So Heman the Ezrahite, Psalm. 88. says, ver. 16. Thy fierce
wrath goes over me, and thy terrors cut me off, but how behaved he himself in
these terrors? he cried unto the Lord, and said, that in the morning his
prayers should prevent him. I say then to thee, whither do thy terrors drive
thee, from God, or to God? If from God, let them do so no more, and thou shall
have comfort, if to God, do so still, and that will prove thy state good.

3.
And so are those objections answered, that arise from feelings. Now the last
sort spring from Satan's temptations. O J am laden and filled with temptations
to despair, to hurt my self, to blaspheme God, to deny God and his Word, and
other most execrable things, and J have long continued in this estate. J
answer, Have thou not sins of thine own to answer for, but that thou will also
charge thy self with the devils sins? understand therefore that this
temptation is grounded upon a mere false position, that he who is pursued and
molested with hellish temptations is not Gods child, nor has his sins
pardoned. And know that if Satan cast in the most vile temptations (for he can
cast in temptations, as it is said, he put it into the heart of Iud. is to
betray Christ) so long as those temptations be rejected and abhorred, they be
not the man's sins, but his trialls and afflictions only. For tell me, was not
Christ forty days in the wilderness tempted of the devil? Doubtless in all
that space he pursued him with all the most noisome temptations he could
invent, we read indeed of three alone, but we may be well assured, that they
were above 3000. even numberless. It may seem that those three are recorded,
because they were most crafty and subtle: when the devil had spent all his
skill and pains before to no purpose, he proceeds to these as his last and
maine assaults; for the two former were so subtly conveyed, that a man can
scarce see, that Christ had sinned, if he had yielded to them, for might not
he as well make bread of stones as wine of water? and leap from the temple,
as walk on the sea? But to work a miracle at the devils suggestion (either out
of doubting because he spoke against him, or of presuming because he spoke
for him) this had been a fault in Christ. And for the last it came so suddenly
and violently, that it would have even carried a man away before he was aware,
to give but one bow for such a reward. Now sure if Christ might be thus tempted
forty days, then any Christian maybe likewise tempted as many months, as many
years. Tell me therefore, do thou not oppose those temptations by the word of
God, and when thou can too, by prayers, at least by secret groans and inward
sighs? Are they not most bitter to thy soul, even more untastfull then gaul
and wormwood, and would thou not rather then any thing be rid of them? Can
thou then be so ill conceited of God as to fear that he will impute them to
thee, know that they be only thy miseries not thy sins, and this will be a good
means to rid thee of them. For tell me, had thou a child, which some wicked
fellow should lock into a room that he could not get out, and there should
tell thy child, thy father is a rascal, a villain, a knave, a thief, a
miscreant, curse him, wish him hanged, wish him damned, cut his throat, and the
like, but the child's heart and hair rises at the hearing of these words, he
abhors them, and him that utters them, and would if he could cut out his
tongue that uses them. What now would thou think of this child? specially
if thy self should have put them both together, merely to try how thy
child would behave himself in such a case, or for some other like purpose.
Surely thou would not love thy child one jot the worse; nay rather much more
for this trial. Now do but conceive that God is as just and merciful as thy
self would be, for this is thy case directly and none other; or think that
some filthy fellow had surprised thy wife in a room by her self, and there
should solicit her with shameful words and gestures, which she did repel
with disdain, crying out to thy self that wast within hearing to come and
help her, would thou account thy wife less honest for this? and not rather
commend her honesty the more for this. Even so it is betwixt thy self and
Satan, and therefore such and none other shall the Lords sentence be of thee.

4.
Yea but I have yielded to some of these vile thoughts, I have yielded to them,
and how then shall I do? I answer, the multitude and violence of them did
sometimes so tire thee, and put thee out of breath and strength as it were,
that thou could not give a loud and earnest, but alone a faint and
whispering, nay, and hereupon Satan has made thee believe that thou did
yield, but know that it is one thing to yield to a temptation, an other thing
to be overwearied and tired with it, that a man is not able to make such
sensible resistance as he did once. If a strong and sturdy fellow, full of lewd
desires, meeting with an honest but weak woman, should so long wrestle with
her, till she were quite out of breath and could scarce speak or stir any
longer, and in that her weariness should use some unfit gesture to her, were
she the less chaste wife for that, in the censure even of the most jealous
husband? So then, that that thou call yielding, was not yielding, but an
inability through faintness, to make resistance. 5. But say thou had styeelded
to some evil, even most loath some for a little time, being overtired with
resisting: Have thou not now recalled and recanted thine yielding, do not
thou now abhor thy self for yielding, crave pardon of it, and resolve never to
do it, nor yield to it hereafter any more? Sure if some varlet should by much
importunity, entice thy servant, to let him into thine house that he might rob
thee, or do thee hurt, and after many repulses at last, should be so overlaide
by importunity, that he should consent, and promise to do it; but so soon as
ever the fellow was gone, should abhor it, and refuse to put it in practice,
and with tears in his eyes, come tell thee what had passed, craving pardon,
would thou not forgive him? would thou cast him out of thine house? There
have been Princes so merciful, that when some have been inveigled to conspire
their death, but after have repented, and of their own accord revealing the
conspiracy, have submitted to their mercy, could and did show them mercy, and
will not God be more merciful then ever man was or can be? Be not therefore
disheartened because of thy long temptations, and sometimes sudden yeeldances.
This the Lord can and will pass by, and much more then this.

6.
So have I answered the chiefest of those temptations and objections which I
could meet with, that are used to hinder the Saints from comfort in persuasion
of the remission of their sins. It is your part that would be comforted, to
continue meditating, praying, conferring, laboring to inform your judgment
aright in these things, which in doing, you shall not loose your labor. He
that shall come, will come and will not tarry. The night shall pass, and the
day shll arise: If any say, J have long waited for comfort, and find it not. I
answer, so did David, as J said above, but resolve to wait still on Christ,
and to continue striving for comfort though you perceive Little good effect for
the time, for the more slowly it comes to you at the first, the more fully it
shall abound in you at thelast. If faith cannot comfort you, let hope. If you
cannot say God has pardoned me, yet say J hope he will, and so sustain your
selves. And that hope, which purges your hearts, drives you to prayer, sets
you at defiance with all sin, and makes you esteem highly of Christ, that
will support you, and bring grounded and plentiful comfort in the end. Those
of you brethren, therefore, that have thrown themselves down, pulled down
their proud hearts, and tumbled their faces in the dust before the Lord:
Irequire them to yield unto God the glory of his mercy, and to Christ the glory
of his merits, and to go away comforted, at least resolute to labor for
comfort, with assurance that they shall have it, for he that said, will
perform it, Blessed be they that mourn for they, shall be comforted.

FINIS.

