THE REDEMPTION of time, or A SERMON containing very good remedies for them
that have misspent their time: showing how they should redeem it comfortably.
By M.W. Master in Arts.

PSALM. 90.12. Lord teach us to number our days, that we may apply our hearts
unto wisdom.

LONDON: Printed by T. E. for Thomas Man, dwelling in Paternoster Row, at the
sign of the Talbot. 1606.

Ephesians. 5.16. Redeem the time, because the days are evil.


Whilst I bethought my self of a portion of holy writ to treat upon, that
might hold some agreement with the present season: this short sentence offered
it self unto my mind. At the first I rejected it as impertinent, but after a
second and more serious view, me thought it was the most fit Scripture that I
could make choice of on this occasion. For howbeit, it has pleased the common
sort of men, to style these festival days with the name of good times: yet by
reason of the gross abusage, to which the corruption of men has made them
subject, they may very well receive an alteration of their title, and in a
quite contrary phrase be termed evil days, yea, and (that in the highest
degree of all) the worst of days. Now in this time wherein time is so lauishly
misspent, I hope it cannot seem inconvenient or untimely, to give a brief
exhortation concerning the right use of time.

These words which I have read, lead us into that path: being part of an
exhortation begun in the former verse. There, in general he had exhorted them
to be most strictly careful of their ways, and to direct their course of
life in such respective sort, as they might deserve the name of wise, not
unwise men: commending herein unto them and us, that very strictness and
preciseness, wherewith the world has now long since picked a quarrel and
fallen out. And because this was but a general rule, he seconds it with some
particulars, by which we may be led on to the like instances in other
matters. The first of these specials is placed in the well disposing of time in
this verse. Where, having set down the duty of Christians in this behalf,
he backs it with a reason; which in it self and to a spiritual understanding,
is most sound and firm, but to the carnal judgment of a carnal man, is void
of all soundness and reason. The duty is, to buy out the time, to traffic
with it, as men do with wares, and when it is in other men's hands (as I may
say) to give something (yea any thing) that we may get it into our own hands,
for good uses. He means that we should use our greatest care and diligence
(even that which we would employ in matters most nearly concerning us) to win
all the time we possibly can, for the duties of Religion and Godliness. His
argument to confirm this exhortation, is taken from the contrary (if we look
on it with a carnal eye, it will seem in consequent, halting and not able to
bear up the conclusion) It is, because the days are evil. That is, the
customs and manners of the greatest part of men that live, are wicked and
lewd. Now because the number and route of the world is so strongly bent to all
manner of ungodliness, as that they have even tainted the time it self, and
corrupted the very days; the Apostle would therefore have the Ephesians, and
all other Christians, so much the more industrious, to take all seasons and
occasions for the bettering of themselves. Because other men are naught and
stark naught, therefore ought faithful Christians to be good, and very good,
and to turn all opportunities to this end and use, that they may be
furtherances to make them good.

The world would have framed a more crooked conclusion from this ground, and
have said: because men are so generally and extreemely bad, (for that is noted
in saying: the days are evil) we must therefore needs strain courtesy a
little, and not be too strict, least we should be overmuch different from
other men and incur the by-name of Singularists. But the Apostle tells us,
that because the ways of men are excessiuely disordered, and full of
naughtiness, we should bestow so much the more pains, that we might not be
carried down the violent stream and deluge of unsanctified living, and unto
this intent should earnestly watch and diligently take all good occasions of
getting and doing good. You see in part the meaning of this short sentence
which contains a few words indeed, but is stuffed full of worthy matter, which
according (as my weakness can attain) I shall strive to spread before your
eyes, unfolding it in such manner as that you may perceive the things that lay
therein closely wrapped up before.

The point which the words offer to our consideration at the first sight,
Doctrine.
is this; that all Christians ought to be very good husbands for their time.
Good hours and opportunities are merchandise of the highest rate, and price:
and whosoever will have his soul thrive, must not suffer any of these bargains
of time to pass him but must buy up, and buy out, all the minutes thereof. No
man of trade can be more careful to chaffer and deal in the most gainful
things that pertain to his occupation, then we should be to deal in this ware
of time, wherein every Christian is, or should be a well taught, and practiced
dealer. As such kind of men (if they can either make money themselves, or
borrow it of their friends, yea or else (such is the greediness of men) take
it up of the Usurer) will not let slip any commodity, wherein they have skill,
and are persuaded, that it will bring in large profit within a short time of
return: so should every good man use all diligence (for diligence is in stead
of money here, and care in stead in coin) to gain every day, every hour, and
every minute (so much as may be possible) from al unprofitable actions, and
ouer-worldly affairs, to beestow the same on the duties of Religion and
godliness. This being such a parcel of ware, as if it be wisely bestowed,
when it is heedfully gotten, will come in again with both hands full of profit
for recompense of ones pains taken in that behalf. This self same
exhortation, this same Apostle delivers in so many words unto the Collossians,
Col. 4.5.
when he says: Walk wisely toward them that are without, and redeem the
time. See how Paul, an old, beaten, and experienced dealer in these matters for
the soul, does neither forget, nor neglect to teach his apprentises (as I may
call them) the very secrets and mysteries of the trade of good living, whereof
this is one, even the thriftie laying out, and getting in of time: which being
repeted to the Collossians, as well as delivered to these Ephesians) comes with
a double charge upon our minds, to make us heedful in these bargains. And that
excellent petition of Moses the man of God, does mean nothing else but this,
when in other words he says: Psa. 90 12.
Teach me so to number my days that I may apply my heart to wisdom. For he
means that God would enable him with grace, so sereously to consider of the
shortness of this life, and the transitorinesse of this present world; as that
he might take all occasions, and use all means to bend his heart to the seeking
and obtaining of the true knowledge of God and himself, and so the true fear
of God, which is the beginning of wisdom. And the want of this husbandry
Christ does mournfully lament in the city of Jerusalem, setting out unto us
also, the grievous and dismal effects, and consequents of this heedlesnesse,
in regard of taking time, and using the fit opportunity, Luke 19.42
O (says he) if thou had even known, at the least in this thy day, those
things that pertain unto thy peace. But now are they hid from thine eyes. etc.
q.d. Hitherto thou have had the means to learn what made for thy good, and
what might have prevented thy ruin; and if thou had but even at this last
hour marked and considered them, thou might have escaped these fearful
judgments: but now that thou have been all this while wanting to god, he will
hereafter be wanting to thee, thou shall never have any true knowledge of these
things, nor ever avoid these miserable calamities. Because they did not use
time whilst time did serve, to repent, and turn to God, therefore after it was
too late, God would not hear them, nor help them. They that refuse the good
offer of a good bargain from God, shall not have this bargain offered again at
their pleasure, yea, God will not deal with them at their leisure, that would
not deal with him at his leisure. Pro. 1.24.25.26.
And wisdom in Salomons wise book of Proverbs, speaks to this effect of
ungodly men, that when their misery comes, she will laugh at them, because
when she gave her good instructions to prevent this misery, they laughed at
her. The neglect of taking the fit time and occasion to follow wisdoms
wholesome counsel and come to her when she calls: plungeth scornful men, into
such a depth of misery, as that there is no means of recovery. For when
wisdom laughes a man to scorn, whither shall he repair for succor? And to
this intent (of husbanding our time well) notable is the saying of the same
Apostle in an other place, bidding us: whilst we have time, do good to all.
Gal. 6.10.
As much as if he had told us: that time must so much the rather be bestowed
in doing good (and then it is redeemed) because we have no such great store of
it, as we do foolishly imagine. The vessel of time is not so full (as most men
dream) nay it will sone come to the bottom. It is then wisdom to spare
betime, and not in the very dregs and lees. All these places do in most plain
manner confirm the point. viz. that every good Christian must be very saving,
and thriftie of his time, that is, must convert all occasions to the good of
his soul, and furthering of his reckoning, not suffering by his will any hour,
or minute (more then needs must) to be laid out in any thing but matters that
may fit him for a better life. This is in truth to have ones conversation in
heaven, when one upon the least occasion is ready to make one step further
thitherwards: when one gives all his time to God, but so much as may be more
especially to religious exercises, and such things as do after a peculiar sort
make for a better life, not letting slip any means of furtherance that is
offered him this way.

Now for your better direction in this saving thrift, and for the more full
understanding of this point, and more easy practicing of this needful duty,
I purpose to stand some while in showing these two things. First, from what
time is to be redeemed. Secondly, what the time is which must be redeemed. For
the first, we must understand, that there be five hucksters of time, very
cormorants, and ingrosers of this precious ware, which, betwixt them (for the
most part) get up all the hours of men's lives, not suffering the soul to enjoy
so much as an hour for it own use, upon the best occasion to benefit it
self. These thieves, when I have told you their names. I will describe more at
large. They be, first, vain sports. Secondly, vain speeches. Thirdly,
immoderate sleeping or sluggishnes. Fourthly, vain thoughts. Lastly,
immoderate following of worldly business, and affairs, Play, Twatling,
Sleeping, foolish thinking, excessive rooting in the earth. Now for these fond
sports (amongst which I comprehe^d riotous feasting and belly-cheare, a
companion of gamming for the most part, and also that tiffling, and womannish
disease of curiousness in putting on apparel) for these, I say, it is easy
to prove that they do eat up these good hours, which otherwise would much
enrich the soul of man. Solomon the wisest of mere men that lived since Adam,
has set it down as a sure rule (that never fails, scarce ever admits
exception) That he which loves pastime shall be poor, Pro. 21.17.
and he that loves wine and oil shall not be rich. If this saying be understood
only of the body it is most true. For these things will make a man extreemly
needy in the midst of large possessions, and plentious revenues. But if we
apply it to the soul (as I see not cause why it may not be applied to both) it
is most universally true. He that is so wedded to his pleasures, and besotted
upon vain delights, as that the current of his life is carried that way, or
else too great a part of the stream is turned thither; shall be destitute of
understanding, shall have a naked, ragged, tottred, soul; and that comes
because he has not used his time well, by the right employment whereof he
might have got wealth for his better part, I mean unto his mind and heart. A
threadbare heart needy of knowledge comes from a voluptuous life stuffed with
pleasures. Isai. 5.12.
And the Prophet Isaiah cries out with a woeful and a bitter cry against these
which had the Timbrell, the Pipe, and the Harp in their feasts, but would not
regard the work of the Lord. All their days were taken up in eating and
drinking, in banqueting and feasting, in good cheer and merry making. So that
there was no time to meditate and think on these afflictions whereby God did
warn them to repentance and amendment, which is most contrary to this duty of
redeeming the time, for all this time is even lost and cast away. And had we
no other proof then our own experience in this behalf, would it not
manifestly convince, that he which desires to redeem the time, must fly these
vain delights and sports? For do we not plainly see what a canker it is in a
number of men's lives, when many days they bestow three or four hours
together, yea, half the day, if not the whole, in dicing, carding, bowling,
shouell-bord, or the like idle (if not wicked) exercises; does not this wast
and pour forth time over lauishly? Or can that man have so much rest and
quiet, or so much fitnes and opportunity to do good to his soul, as his wise
care in cutting of these needless recreations (or vexations rather) would have
afforded him? For these vain pleasures are not alone mischeeuous hinderers of
this thrift, in that they consume the very hours themselves; but as much, or
more also in that they dissettle the heart, and pull the affections out of
joint, so that a man is driven to take as much pains to set his heart to a
good exercise, as would well have dispatched the duty, had he not been thus
unfitted. Now what a miserable loss is it when a man is robbed of his time,
and of his heart both at once? And by both kept from reading, praying,
meditating, examining his heart, or any such good exercise for his souls
advantage. Wherefore if any man would so prevent these vain and foolish sports,
that they should not spoil him of his heart and hours: let him observe these
two rules in his sports, and then he shall do well in these respects.

First, (this being presupposed that he do not use any recreations but those
which he can prove to be in themselves lawful) first, I say, for the beginning
of recreation, let every man know, that recreation must follow labor, for the
most part, or if at any time it go before it, it must be very little, only to
fit one for labor. The Lord allows a man no sport, though never so lawful in
it self, until such time as his body or mind do stand in need of it, chiefly
when they have been busied in some such honest affairs, as by wearying them,
have made them unfit for further labor, so that they must again be fitted
thereto by recreation. Until paines-taking have made the body or mind, not so
well able to take pains, there is no allowance ordinarily for recreation. All
our sports and recreations, if we will use them well, (I speak of those which
are lawful) must be to our body or mind, as the mowers whet-stone or rifle
is to his sith, to sharpen it when it grows dull. He that when his sith is
dulled, will not (upon a desire to do more work) take time to whet it, shall
cut less, and with more pain, and more unhandsomely then he need to do: so
he that when his body or mind is tired or heavy, will not use some honest
refreshing, shall do less, and with less dexterity then he might. But on
the other side, if the mower should do nothing from morning to noone, or from
noone to night but whet, whet, whet, rubbing his sith, he would both mar the
sith, and be counted an idle worke-man also, for loosing his days work: so he
that will run after the most honest delights when neither the weariness of his
body, nor heaviness of his mind requires the same (but only upon a fond lust,
or longing after them) shall in time destroy his wit, and strength, and in the
mean season, maruailous vnthriftilie mis-spend his time. Therefore let not a
man begin the day with play, though never so lawful, unless his body or
mind require some necessary exercise to make it more apt for his calling. He
that sets into the day sportingly, shall be sure to go through it, either
lumpishly or sinfully, much more if he spend all the day from morning to night
in playing, let it be never so much holy day, or have he what other excuse he
will. This rule is for the beginning of sports.

The second is for the measure and continuance of them, where this is a
general and a firm direction: That it is not lawful for a man in an ordinary
course, to spend more time in any pastime upon any day, then in religious
exercises, I mean cheefely private religious exercises, I say, it is utterly
unlawful to bestow a larger time any day upon the most lawful delight, then
in private religious exercises, or at least in a customable course so to do.
This is plainly proved by that which Christ speaks to us, saying: First, Mat.
6.33.
seek the kingdom of God and the righteousness thereof. You see here
commanded to prefer the seeking of heaven before any other thing whatsoever, to
let that have the cheef place in our souls and in our lives. Now he that first
seeks the kingdom of heaven, cannot bestow more time in sports of any sort,
then in those things which do directly make for the obtaining of eternal
life, and that righteousness which will bring one thereunto, such as are
hearing and reading the word, praying, meditating, examining the heart,
conferring, and the like. And surely this is a most equal thing, that the most
needful duty should have the most time bestowed upon it. Yea, and it is a most
easy rule to all sorts of men, that have seasoned their hearts with the true
fear of God. For if a man's calling lie in bodily works, then the very
exercises of religion are a refreshing to his body, in that he does for the
space while they continue desist from his bodily labor (and his calling
affords sufficient stirring of the body for health) so that if he be
religiously minded, and have indeed set his delight on God, he may well give as
much time to these actions, as to any carnal sports. But if any man's calling
lie in study, or such like labor of the mind, first, the change is a great
refreshing, and variety a delight; and then there be religious exercises,
which will refresh the mind as well as any sports, and for so much exercise as
health requires, it is not long in using, because nature is here, as in other
matters content with a little, howsoever men seek excuses by belying her: so
that at the least, an equal portion of time must be allotted to God, and
religion, as to sports, and delights, even of students, if they will first seek
the kingdom of God. Therefore let a man measure out the time of sporting, and
recreating himself, by the time he takes to pray, to read, to meditate, to
sing Psalms, to confer of good things, or the like, and know that he has not
liberty from God, to employ ordinarily so much time, never to employ one
minute more, in the most vnoffensiue sports, then in these services of God. Now
let a man conform himself to these two rules. Begin not play till need of
body or mind exact it. Continue not sports longer then a man has or shall
continue some godly private exercise of religion, and he shall save his time
well from this first thief.

Now comes to be considered the next spender or rather robber of time, that
is, Idle twatling or babbling. And concerning this our Savior Christ deals
plainly with us saying: Mat. 12.36.
That of every idle word which men shall speak, they shall give account at the
day of judgment. Think well of this sentence and lay up every word. Thou must
not alone give account of thy work, but also of thy words: thou must not only
be called to a reckoning for moving of thy hand, foot or whole body, but of
thy tongue also, and that not alone for wicked words, sinful words, harmeful
words, speeches in themselves infectious and rotten; but for idle and wast
words; and not only for a number of idle words, for a whole throng or fleet
of them, but for every idle word. Now then if there be an account, to be given,
and a reckoning to be made for these rubbish speeches; judge if it be not a
want of redeeming the time, to lay it out in such a thing, as will bring a sore
and heavy burden afterward without repentance to cast it off; and judge if
he which makes much of time, had not need take much heed of this ill-spent
breath. Not alone then wicked speaking (when one belcheth forth lewd and filthy
words) nor slanderous and backbiting talk (when one whispers of his neighbors
faults behind his back, uttering perhaps also lying reports, and fathering
that upon him which he never did or meant) but even vain, needless, and
unprofitable words (which tend to no good or wholesome use for the soul or
body) are a mis-spending of time and contrary to this precept, and therefore
also to be shunned of him that is this way thriftily disposed. No man can
talk idly, but he casts himself upon a double damage, even the loss of a
word, and the loss of time, two great losses, what ever men imagine of them.
And therefore the Apostle Paul also finds fault with a certain sort of women
that were pratlers, which would go from house to house twatling and babbling
out frothy speech, that was good for nothing, which fault he condemns as a
matter something worse then idleness, or doing nothing, when one talks toys
or trifles, and speaks shadows or gawds that yield no profit. Such twatling
cuts out the heart of good time, for it has seldom any measure, it creepes by
little and little over a great part of the day and sometimes of the night. How
many winter nights do men suffer themselves to be robbed of by this childish
babbling? Ephesians. 5.4.
And in the fourth verse of this Chapter, the Apostle forbids foolish speaking
and jesting. The one is a rouing discourse, gathering together a great deal of
chaffie geere that will feed no man; a busy, but absurd prosecuting of a
headless and footlesse tale (as we may call it in our phrase.) The other is a
setting of ones self, and sharpning of his wit, to coin pretty and witty
scoffs and conceits that may move laughter, and for this end only. Both these
are condemned, as unlawful, and unbeseeming Christians. There must be a
difference made betwixt a smooth and pleasant uttering of ones mind in seemly
phrases, and good and delightful terms and manner: And this whetting of the
wit to bandie and toss sharp and brinish taunts and quirks.

Now this pleasantness of the most honest sort is not to be used as a
custom, but in the nature of a refreshing, when men are dulled, for better
matter. For laughter being a power of Gods creating, and wholesome to the body,
and therefore lawful, it cannot be unlawful in a seemly sort, harmlesly to
move laughter by words, but it must not be jesting, one must not give himself
to it, and make it his occupation for an hour or two together. Now none can be
ignorant, how great a hinderance this vain speech is to the well employing of
time. For do we not see that in many places whole days are cast away in the
deep gulf of rouing, and unprofitable runnagate babbling to no purpose? And
that whole meals are devoured in gibing, and jesting, if without taking the
sacred name of god in vain, and hurting ones brothers name (which is very
seldom) yet excessiuely, and not without thrusting out better matter, which is
a grievous fault. Wherefore that we may be well armed against this robber, let
us observe diligently these two rules.

First, let us make conscience of our words, and of the moving of our tongue,
knowing it to be a necessary duty that God has imposed upon us to have our
words always gracious, and seasoned with salt always good for the matter, and
tempered with wisdom for the manner. Which precept the Apostle ads presently
after this, Col. 4.5.
of redeeming the time (to the Collossians) as a notable part of it. The Law of
grace then, must be the bridle of our tongue, and wisdom must reign in our
mouths, so that we speak nothing but that which may be for some profit, to
our own or others soul or body, being fitly tempered to the present
circumstances of time, place, etc. where and when we speak. For the words are
gracious, not alone when they tend to the further edification of the soul in
some matter of religion, but also when they be busied about ones honest outward
affairs and lawful calling, this being a great furtherance to Godliness that
a man know how (and accordingly practice it) to follow his calling with
dexterity and wisdom. Now he that would not have unnecessary trifling words
steal into his heart and out of his mouth, and so spoil him of good seasons,
must set it down as a thing to which his conscience is bound (as well as not
to lie, swear or slander) not to speak one word, whereof he cannot give some
reason from the good that he does aim at in speaking of it. And every man must
know that having let slip such a word, he has committed such a fin, as makes
him liable to Gods judgment, and to the sentence of condemnation. The want of
resolving the heart thus, causes many to take liberty to their tongues, (and
harmefull liberty it is) and yet to think they have done no harm to
themselves in so doing. And therefore the common excuse of such twatlers is
this: I hope that it is no harm: yea, but what good was it? If it were not
directed to some good, it has done harm, for it has broken Gods commandment
and set thy self deeper in debt then thou wast before, thou have one trespass
more to answer for before Gods tribunal, no man shall ever avoid this
puddle, that will not be persuaded it is a damnable sin to step into it. First,
then labor to convince thine heart, and frame thy practice to this rule in all
speaking.

Secondly, for honest comely mirth in speech, (besides that it must not relish
of lust, nor savor of malice and profaneness, for then it is worse then idle
words) it ought to be bounded with this rule, namely, that it be used as a
means to quicken our selves or others against some natural heaviness or
deadness, by which the heart is made unapt for better conference and other
exercises of more profitable use; and when this effect is brought to pass,
that laughter has scattered the mist of dullness from of the heart and mind
(or if no such occasion be offered) then let mirth and natural laughter give
place to his betters, otherwise coming into a continued custom and should
ring out more needful communication, that takes the name and nature of
jesting, and is a thing much unbeseeming the staidness of a Christian. Thus
the tongue may be bound from dealing falsely with the heart, and cousening the
soul of good hours, and occasions.

Now follows the third deuourer of time, and that is immoderate sleeping or
sluggishnesse. The wise king Solomon, bare a great hatred to this thief, and
gives many warnings and caueats whereby men might learn to take heed of it.
The bed is as a very cunning, and slye cousenour, that uses a pleasing trick
to deceive a man, and robs him under show of friendship. Now Solomon has made
a most fit description of a sluggard caught by the wiles of sleep and sloth,
setting him out to the life. Pro. 6.9.10.11.
Prou. 6.9.10.11. Where he brings him in roming himself and rubbing his eyes
with an unwilling hand, uttering broken and sleepy sentences as one not half
awake. First, he calls him up (as it were) saying: How long will thou sleep,
when will thou rise out of thy sleep? As if he had said: Ho; sir, it is time
to get up, what not out of your bed yet? at this time of the day? Then mark the
drowsy, slumbring, and senseless answer: A little sleeps, a little slumbers
(For the original has the words in the plural number, well befitting a
sluggard) a little folding of the hands to sleep. See, how speaking of sleep,
all is in the littles, And though he names sleeps, yet it is but a little in
his conceit. He tells not when he will rise, but he cannot rise yet, and when
he has had enough and too much already, then he must have a little more,
begging for sleep as one would beg for bread. He asks a little, because he
would not be denied. First, he must have sleeps, and having slept, he must
have slumbers, and having slumbred, he must fold his hands, and rome and tumble
himself. Behold a sleeper in his colors. And mark what answer Solomon gives,
he spends no more time to call him up, but tells him his doom as he lies in
his bed. Therefore thy poverty comes as a trauailer, and thy necessity as an
armed man. As if he had said: well, be it so, if you will needs, sleep on,
take your bellie-full of sleep, but know that since you show such skill in
begging sleep, you must even become a beggar for it, since you will have your
fill of sleep, you shall have little enough of any wealth, poverty will
pursue you, and overtake you, it will follow you, and surprise you, it will
make have and strike home, you cannot run from it, nor resist it, it comes
with speed and with force, it will take you in bed where you cannot flee away
from it, nor drive it from you. And what he says of outward poverty, is most
certain of inward penury. A sluggard has so much the less grace, by how
much he has the more sleeps and slumbers. So the same wise king has set out
a sluggard in an other place saying: Pro. 26.14.
That a sluggard tumbles himself on his bed, as the door on the hinges. That
is, he is still there, and there must be such ado, before he can be removed
from off his cowch, as if one were to lift a door off the hooks, a man must
come with leauers to heave him off. Call him, waken him, bid him rise, etc. All
is little enough to rear him. This sluggish humor (you see) is condemned long
ago for a mispender of time. And surely it is not alone very dangerous in
regard of the quantity, and muchnesse of the time which it filcheth, but also
in regard of the quality and goodness. For it ordinarily feeds gluttonously
on the very fat of time, it eats the very flower of the day, and consumes the
first fruits of our hours: even the morning season. After sleep has made
strong what labor has weakened, after that nature has been well refreshed,
and the revived spirits come with a fresh supply of strength and nimblenesse to
serve the body and the mind: then for want of exercise all grows dull again,
as a band of Soldiers that grow effeminate by lying in garrison without
labor, all the summer. Thus it robs one of the principal and most seasonable
time, when the mind and body were both in the greatest fitnes to read, pray,
meditate, or to dispatch and cast any matter of ones calling, it is a thief
that robs one, not of his baggage stuff, but even of his Gold and Jewels. (For
some time is better then other, as much as some metal is better then others,
and this always for the most part takes away the most precious) yea, it has
one trick as much and more dangerous then the former. If a man give himself to
sluggishnesse, it will often follow him to Church, and close up his eyes and
ears, both of body and mind from hearing, and marking those most wholesome
exhortations, comforts, reproves and instructions, which like so many pearls,
Gods messenger with a liberal hand according to the pleasure of his Lord, does
scatter amongst men, that who so will may take them up. The time of preaching,
and expounding the word with applying it, is the time of harvest, it is Gods
market day, nay, it is his dole or princely congie, when he gives gifts
freely, and those of great worth too, unto those that will take them. Now can
it choose but be a great hinderance to a man's estate to sleep in harvest, and
to be in bed at such a time when so much wealth is bestowing. Therefore this
sleep, you see, is a most crafty and pernicious deceiuer, and does with much
cunning over reach a man, taking from him for the most part the morning time,
and the time of hearing, two the most profitable seasons, and the most worthy
to be redeemed of all others. Now against the deceit of this false companion,
a man may defend himself by following these two rules.

First, it is not lawful for any man upon pretense of leisure from business
to take more sleep then is required for the strengthening and refreshing of his
nature. The measure of ones sleep or lying in bed must not be according to
ones business, but so much as his nature requires, for the better enabling of
it to perform the duties of his calling, and of religion. In deed a man may
and ought to break his sleep, and mynte himself in this regard when
important business, either for the soul or body do press upon him, but no
man must take more sleep then is requisite for the sufficient refreshing of
nature upon vacation of necessary affairs. The reason of this is plain. It is
a sin to strain and stretch natural things for the serving of lust, beyond
that end for which they were created and ordained. Now sleep and lying in bed
was ordained for the strengthening of nature and for the repairing of the
spirits diminished by labor, wherefore it must not be drawn beyond this end
to the satisfiing of a sluggish humor. So, that as it were a fault for a man
to sit, and cram himself with meat, till his stomach would turn back the
morcels, because no business did call him from the table: so it is a sin to
give ones self to immoderate sleeping or slugging in bed (as our word is, to
sleep compass) because no urgent matter does call him up. This is to be on
the bed as a door on the hinges that one cannot rise till a leauer come, that
is, something even almost of necessity. It is wicked to surphet on sleep as
well as on meat. So then it shall be a great help against sluggishnesse, to
know that God allows not any man to be sluggish, and therefore to accustom
ones self to timely rising. For in this one thing custom has as much power
almost as in any thing, so that look what is ones use, that he shall hardly
refrain. He that does customably forsake his bed so soon as he feels his
nature fresh, and his spirits quickened, shall with ease keep on in so doing.
But he that takes liberty to laze himself and dull his spirits for lack of
use, shall find the more he sleeps, the more he shall be drowsy, till he
become a very slave to his bed, and make sleep his master. So a healthful
body by confessing it to be his duty, and (through custom though hard at
first) drawing it unto a nature may have the morning at command. And this is
the first rule.

Secondly, for the time of hearing the word, he that would not be troubled
with such sluggishnes then must look that he do use meat, and drink, and
sleep moderately in the fit season of it, and then strive to quicken himself
against carnal heaviness and sorrow, by prayer and meditation before hand,
which two things will keep a healthful body in such good temper that sleep
shall not ordinarily oppress it in this most sacred exercise.

Now follows the fourth thief to be arraigned, and that is idle thoughts.
Man's imaginations will be working, and tossing conceits up and down almost
continually. Now all men by nature are so tainted with the sickness of vanity
that their mind will run willingly after nothing else but that which vanity
begets. And for this cause men have taken up a proverb to dazzle their eyes (if
it might be) that this might not seem a fault. They say, that thought is free,
as though one should never answer for idle thoughts. And it is the common
excuse of men to say, they think no harm, as though it were enough, to hatch
no mischeeuous and harmefull conceits, notwithstanding they do exceed in idle
and unprofitable imaginations. Whereby it may be seen that men are so far
from reforming this fault, and avoiding this thief, that they will not take it
for a fault, nor esteem it as a thief of time. But this swallows up most of
our solitary hours, when men are in bed, or alone in the night season, and
cannot sleep, or when they be iournying and walking without company, they
cannot then possibly talk with others when no man is present. Yet their mind
does busy it self in idle talking with it self, casting a thousand fond
things before ones eyes, as what if this should be, or what if that should
come to pass, and much a do to little purpose. This rouing and frisking of
the fantasy, like a wanton calfe let loose from the stall, is a fretting
worm that eats out a great deal of most men's time, so that they cannot
redeem it, for the profit of their hearts. This puts by good meditations, and
suggests fethery light stuff that has no good substance in it, froth and
foame which is not nourishment to the mind, but rather poison, in that it fills
it full of wind. And a windy heart is no less burdensome then a windy
stomach. This casts out the cogitation of Gods benefits that one may not be
thankful for them; it shoulders away the thought of ones own sins that he
may not renew his Godly sorrow and repentance for them. It iussels out the
consideration of Gods graces that we cannot set our affections on fire to long
and labor after them. And in all these respects it takes away the benefit of
much good opportunity. For every time a man is alone separated from all
company and outward business, there is an excellent occasion of furthering his
own soul offered unto him. If any thing grieve him, he may freely disburden
his heart into Gods bosom. If he faulted any way he may have full and free
scope to confess and bewail it, if he want any good thing, there is leisure
and place as in effectual manner, and with as many words as one can to beg it
of the Lord. Thus great riches might come to the soul by a well-spent
solitariness. But vain cogitations do deprive a man of all this, and do so
blow up the mind with that which is nothing, as it grows swollen, like the
flesh of him which has the dropsy, so that it may well be called the dropsy
of the mind. Now a help against this vanity of the mind breaking forth in
idle thoughts and fancies; First, we must take the council of Solomon, Pro.
4.23.
to keep the heart with all diligence. The heart is that which must be
narrowly looked unto, that evil and unprofitable thoughts rise not up in it.
Here must be the special care to prevent first breeding and engendring of
sin in the most inward parts.

This thief will be still filching and stealing time continually, do what one
can. Wherefore a watchful and wary eye must be had thereunto, and a diligent
guard must be set before the heart, to keep out such imaginations from
entering, as be like rogues and vagrants worth nothing, and always come to
steal something. When a man makes conscience of his thoughts, and observes
them to what end they tend, this will be an excellent help to keep them from
wandering, whereas if one will follow the proverb, and esteem them as free,
they will never be kept from a busy fondness, like Ants in a molehill, that
run up and down hither and thither, and do nothing.

Then in the second plate we must labor to be provided before hand of some
profitable matter or subject, whereunto to bend the thoughts in solitariness.
Something that tends to the glory of God, and our own good, either in matters
of the soul, or the lawful affairs of the body, must be let into the soul
to take up the room, and the busy fancies may be the better stopped out. And
indeed the Lord has provided a Christian of good store of such matter, if he
be not wanting to himself. For there is nothing that offers it self to any
of our senses, which does not also offer to our mind (if it were not stark
blind) some glorious attribute of God to be seen and consired of. So that to
want occasion of good thoughts in this variety of matter, is to want light at
noonetide, that proceeds from nothing but from want of eyes. But this is a
great help to him that can see to set his soul a work first on the good
things. For if one have let his heart loose at first, he shall not (without
much pains and toil) catch it again, and have it within command. Thus
doing, a great part of vain cogitations shall be cut off.

Now comes to be handled the fifth and worst of all the five consumers of time,
which is so much the more dangerous, because it is in some honest reckning
among most men, and is esteemed as the right Lord and true owner of that time
which for the most part it holds by usurpation and injury. This is the
immoderate care of the world, and of things of this life, though in themselves
honest and lawful, when a man does wind himself into such a laborinth and
maze of affairs, as he can not get out at fit times to spiritual and
religious duties, at least not to those which are private, when the heart is so
surcharged with bargains, and purchases, and bying and selling, and building,
and such like, that God and goodness, Christ, and Salvation, heaven, and hell
come not into a man's mind once in a day, scarce once in a week, or at least,
if they come, they be quickly shut out, and have no long, nor quiet
entertainment there, when the soul is overwhelmed with the names of caring,
thinking, devising and striving how to grow great here, and is so tossed in the
gulf of earthly matters, that it cannot come to land (as it were) to settle it
self in any proportion to think how it may grow great in heaven, and how it
may get possession of the true treasure. This is a wondrous consumer of good
hours, digging them all into the dunghill of this world. Mat. 22.
Christ finds fault with this in the parable.

The men bidden to the feast had farms, and Oxen, and wives, and such matters
in hand (business forsooth of more importance then so) and therefore could not
come. Mat. 13.
And the thornie ground had so much carking and caring, how to live, that it
does even choke the word, the good seed could not grow thereby. And the Lord
complains of them of the captivity of Judah, Mag. 1.23.
that they could find time to build their own houses, yea and to seele them
too, but, they said, it was not time to build the house of God. So this sin
does ingrose all the time to it self, and will not give elbow room to any
good exercise, especially to any private exercise, without which the public
are but as meat without digestion. And yet it comes like an honest and
approueable thing, painted with the name of thriftinesse and pains in ones
lawful calling. To fence our selves against this ravenous and lurking fault,
we must bind our selves to these three rules, which all depend upon the rule
of Christ that bids us first seek the kingdom of God, Mat. 6.33.
first, in time, and first in affection. 20. ver.
And again, Lay up your treasure in heaven. Hence I say, three rules may be
collected, to which he that would not be spoiled of good occasions to the
soul by worldliness, must more and more frame himself and his life.

The first is, that no man suffer himself to enter upon so many businesses, or
any so egerly, as that his ordinary affairs should hinder himself or his
family from the performance of ordinary religious exercises. The common and
daily matters of this world in any man's calling whatsoever, should not draw him
or his family from common and daily duties of religion, such are reading,
praying, meditating, and religious observing of the Sabbath. For here a man
must take care for his household as well as for himself that he do not hinder
them from taking convenient time to pray, and read, etc. by forcing upon them
an over great burden of ordinary business. For if the soul be to be
preferred before the body, and heaven before earth, then those customable
matters that pertain to the saving of the soul, must be set before, must more
stand equal with the things that pertain to the body. Secondly, the
extraordinary works of our calling (if any fall out) must not bar us from
the extraordinary works of religion. As for example, harvest, and hay-time or
the like, are extraordinary times for the business for the body: so
preparation to the Sacrament, fasting (if need so require) and such like, are
extraordinary works for the soul. Now the care of inning ones corn or grass
must not keep him from taking time to prepare himself to the Sacrament, or to
fast at his need. So the receiving of the Lords Supper is matter of more then
ordinary use for the soul, and some needful journey stands in the like manner
for the body. But a man must rather defer his journey (if it may be put of
without over much hinderance to him) then omit the receiving of the Lords
supper. The same rule must be kept in all other particulars. For if the soul
be more worth, and must be more carefully atte^ded on the^ the body (as it is
no reason the hand-maide should take place of the mistrisse) then those things
which do after a peculiar manner concern the good and profit thereof, must
not be neglected for such as do more specially help the state of the body
outwardly. Lastly, if some outward duty of religion have been put of from the
time wherein it should be performed by some sudden and unexpected business
that required such have (as in such case ordinary duties of religion may be
deferred) then some ordinary business of less weight must in recompense give
place to that exercise afterward, and a man must find time for that, whether
it be reading, praying, or meditating, by leaving undone (for that space)
something that may be better spared. And thus you have heard what be those
special evils which lie in wait to cousin us of our good time, and how they
may be prevented. And so ye first point is handled, namely, from what time is
to be redeemed.

Now follows to show what it is that is to be redeemed, and so you shall fully
know wherein this duty consists. Now by time the Apostle means two things.
First, the very passing away of hours and minutes, the space and leisure of
any thing. And secondly, the good occasions or oportunities, that fall out in
this space. For the word in the original signifies not alone the very sliding
of minutes, but the space considered also with some special fitnes that it
has for some good, which we call the season of it. Now for the first, it shall
not be needful to say any more, being that every one knows, that every thing
must have some space wherein ^o be done. And he that will avoid the five
forenamed evils, shall never want time or the space wherein to do or get good.
But for the occasions and fit oportunities that fall out, now for this, now for
that, in this space, it is some more skill to find them out and make use of
them. Now these seasons are all of two sorts. First, such whereby a man may
more easily get some good to himself. Secondly, such whereby a man may with
more fitnes and ease do some good. Of the first sort, namely, seasonable
opportunities to get good, I will name three perticulars which are most
needful to be considered, and by proportion of which any man may come to the
knowledge of other like. The first, when God continues the Gospel, offering
daily the word and Sacraments, and calling to repentance and amendment of life.
This is the season of repenting, this is the harvest wherein we may reap
Christ, if we be not negligent. This is the acceptable year of the Lord in
which one shall be received if he return. Whilst wisdom lifts up her voice,
whilst her messengers come daily to inuit us, whilst her gates stand open, and
her dinner stands ready dressed, whilst her message is done unto us, all this
time, if a man will strive and endeavor to turn from his sin, to leave his
folly, and forsake his scorning, he shall be a welcome guest, she will accept
him, help him, and give him an increase of grace, till he be become strong with
her meats Whosoever lives under the preaching of the Gospel, has this
privilege annexed to the outward teaching, that if he will but strive and pray
to God to give him strength to repent and amend his ways and to turn to him,
God will (upon his promise) hear his prayers and assist him, but when the
Gospel is gone then the date is past, a man may call, and not be heard, and
cry, and not be regarded.

So then every man redeemes this season of the Gospel, when he gives himself
to consider sereously of those faults which he finds in himself, and hears
sharply reproved in the word, and hereupon resolves to forsake them, and does
alone do his own best endeavor, but earnestly calls upon God for his help,
without which his power is but weakness and ineffectuall, when he does also
duly ponder upon the holy commandments that he hears pressed, and those
exhortations that are daily sounded in his ears to move him to do such duties
as god requires, and hereupon concludes with himself to set about this work,
and craves the strength of God to bear him through in the same. And when he
does advisedly think of the promises that are generally proclaimed, and
labors to get some assurance that he is such a one to whom the right of these
promises appertain. Thus doing, I say, one redeemes the time wisely, and makes
his advantage of the Gospel while it continues, which is a thing that all men
should do, but so rare in the world as that it is wonder the Lord has so
patiently continued his loving voice, when men scoff at it and will not hear.
The Lord has and does send his prophets amongst us, as he did among the Jews,
rising up early, and sending them which with all earnestness do proclaim the
dangerous event that shall follow upon profaneness, neglect and contempt of
Gods word, breaking of his Sabbath, railing, wrathfulnesse, whordome,
wantonness, covetousness, the euing, oppressing, slandering, lying, and the
like. Yet how many run on in these evils presumtuously, rushing like the horse
into the battle with an unreasonable boldness not fearing any danger, and
shutting their ears against these reproves as the deaf Adder does, that they
may not be moved by them to amendment. Ah, how contrary is this to redeeming
the time. If any man have hitherto lost the season, let him now grow wise, and
even at this time turn to God, and beg power to forsake these sins. How often
and how earnestly are men exhorted to all good works by the continual voice of
God speaking unto the^ by his servants, to read the word of God daily, to pray
privately, to meditate upon the word, to watch over their days, and to call
themselves to a reckning every day for the faults committed in the day. Yet who
regards this voice, who marks these exhortations, where is one that has
enjoined himself to some constancy in praying, reading, and the forenamed
duties? This is to sleep in harvest, a most foolish practice and unwise,
wherefore whilst there is yet a little time left, whilst we have the light, let
us walk in it, that we be not overtaken with darkness. He that has not yet
begun, let him be sorry that he has put it off so late, and now set foot into
these ways of God whilst God sets out his word as a candle to direct him, and
as his hand to lead him by. The promises of God are in like sort published
amongst us. Happiness is held up as a reward of all true hearted christians, and
the crown of life is proposed to those which are sound and faithful members
of Jesus Christ. And yet as though all were sure to get it, or it were not worth
seeking by any, the most men flatter themselves in their sins, and will needs
promise these good things to themselves, when they have no assurance or proof
out of gods word, whereby to lay claim or title to them. This is a grievous and
a dangerous neglecting of time. And if any have not yet made sure work this
way, let him even now set about it whilst the world as a touchstone is before
him, by which he may try himself, and which will make him such a one as he
should be, if he will strive to follow it, and pray for ability to be ruled by
it. So then whilst God holds out his benefits and stands with his arms open to
accept us, let us take his benefis, and be persuaded to come unto him in good
earnest, let it be too late to travail when midnight shall come in stead of
noone day. This is the first and cheifest opportunity of getting good, namely,
to join with the gospel and follow it with our endeavors and prayers by which
it shall be made effectual unto us. The second opportunity of getting good is
in time of youth and health, whilst the vigor and strength of the body and mind
is fit for labor and capable of instruction. And Solomon in his book of
penance, viz. Ecclesiastes, Eccles. 12.1
bids remember the creator in the days of youth before the evil days come.
These days of youth and health are good days when he which will use them,
has his memory steadfast to call to mind his evil ways that he may bewail
them, and to treasure up good instructions and promises that may guide and
comfort him, when the lims will join with the mind, and the mind has the body
as a fit instrument to seek the kingdom of heaven, if a man will address
himself unto it, but the days of old age and sickness fail much of the
commodious fitnes for good. The memory is cracked, the head and understanding
is weak, and especially the time of sickness is so filled with pain, so shaken
with distractions, and encumbered with greefes and sorrows, that one is nothing
fit to repent, or pray, or hear, or to do any such thing. Now when a man in
the prime of his days and in the fullness of his health, will give himself to
seek heaven, will hear the word, and meditate upon it, and apply it to
himself, will confess his sins, and force himself to bewail them, will pray
to God for good things, and set the whole course of his life in a right frame,
he has well taken the opportunity, and he shall have rest in his latter
days, much quiet and contentment, at least, much strength and assistance in
his sickness, because he has something in store against the time of want. But
alas, how do the common sort of men beewray their monstrous folly in this
behalf? What more common then that sottish and brutish speech, at least such
ignorant and profane thoughts, men will repent when they be old, and cry God
mercy when they feel themselves sick, and amend all when they be ready to go
out of the world. And foolish man, thou know not whether thou shall dye
suddenly, whether thou shall have thy wits and senses, or whether thou shall
have power of heart to make the least color of repentance in those
extremities. How many have died suddenly? How many sottishly? And yet how do
men for all these warnings defer the best business, namely, the work of
repentance, and turning to God, which will require the whole strength of the
soul to the worst and most crasie time of sickness or old age? As if a
prisoner at what time a man was offering him a pardon, and calling upon him to
take it some good space before the Assizes, should say: Nay, let me alone, I
will not look after my pardon till immediately before I am to come before the
judge. This were a most fond part, especially, if it were so that thief knew
not whether or no the next day should be the day of his arraignement: so the
case stands betwixt the Lord and us. If any man therefore have been so little
careful of his own eternal good, as to put off repentance and conversion
till that dead time, or does foster any such harmefull conceit in his heart,
let him now cast it out, and now that he has his health and strength, upon
better deliberation take in hand this work. Be not so extreemely mad, as to
give more time to the devil, then to God, especially to give the principal
time. He were a foolish trauailer that would willingly gallop all the day quite
contrary to his way, and being told of it would answer, when it draws toward
Sunset, I will turn into the right way. Why be men thus blockish for their
souls, that knowing themselves to be out of the way to life, will yet of
purpose defer to set their feet into the right path till sickness or age,
when the sun of their life is at the point of setting. Ah, let our proverb
teach us more wit: Make hay while the Sun shines. Turn, turn, whilst thou
have health and strength, use all to get repentance and salvation. The last
cheef opportunity of getting good, is, when a man has company, and is in the
society of some godly wise man, able to give sound council and direction,
able to answer all doubts, objections, and scruples of ones mind; now there
is a fit opportunity to grow in wisdom, to be resolved of all doubts, and to
seek direction. So then a man ought not to suffer bashfulnes, or other foolish
matters to put by that good communication whereby he might enrich his soul. It
it a special favor of God that any man can come where his servants are, that
have excellent gifts, and he does deprive himself of much good that will not
seek to benefit himself by them. When the woman of Samaria perceived Christ
to be a Prophet, she proposed her doubt unto him albeit he was a stranger. When
John Baptist might be come to, the Publicans and sinners came and asked what
they should do. Whilst the Iayler had Paul in his keeping, he came to ask that
needful question: What shall I do to be saved? So if there be any man whose
heart is perplexed with some doubt, or ouerburdened with some temptation, or
ouermastered by some sin, it is a part of good discretion for such a one to go
and seek the advice of some able Christian or wise man, before that either
himself be too far gone, or he want the opportunity of such a councellor or
helper. These be three special occasions of obtaining good to a man's own soul
from things without him. In all which to take the time is a most commendable
point of wisdom, but to be negligent is such folly as Solomon reproues when
he says: That a fool has a price in his hand to get wisdom, but he wants a
heart. Oh that men would beware of this hartlesnesse, and take heed of loosing
their price by which they might get wisdom.

Now I come to speak of the occasions of doing good. And these are either in
others or in out selves. First, in others, and that for their soul and body.
Sometimes a man shall find a kind of tractablenesse in those with whom he
has to deal that their ears stand open, and they are ready to drink in an
exhortation or reproof by reason of some affliction that is upon them, or some
need they have of our help, or such like occasion. Here is time for a kind and
sound admonition, then a man ought in all love, and yet with all plainness to
follow the occasion, striking (as our proverb is) whilst the iron is hot,
speaking when he sees him in the melting vain, ready to take all well, and in
good part. And so Elihn notes, that when a man is bought to his death bed, and
to abhor all worldly delights, then his ears are bored, and then there is work
for an interpreter. Before the bones clattered, and the mourners looked for the
funeral, an interpreter was despised, but now his words are observed. Thus a
man may do much good to his neighbors or servants soul, if he wait for a
time when he is fit to receive admonition, and then give it him, as the
husbandman in dry weather waits for a shower of rain, and then sets in his
plow. Again, for the body, sometimes one shall meet with one that has true
need, that is in distress for his bodily estate, and does indeed want relief.
This is an occasion and fit time to show liberality. Now a man must open his
purse, and be ready to give freely, I mean not, that every time a man meets a
beggar he should be giving (for to those a man should not give, but in the very
extremity of necessity) but if our brother has been afflicted by any loss
through fire, or such like (that he do not make himself needy by idleness,
but it comes upon him by some hand of God) here is an object fit for mercy, and
here one may by seasonably liberal, here is an altar, offer the Sacrifice of
alms upon it, which is a thing wherewith God is well pleased. Some other time,
sparing may be more fit, but now is a season to be more free of gift and open
handed. There is an occasion of doing good offered in others wherein I have
named these two particulars that every man might accordingly take notice of
other like. The^ there is also occasion of doing good offered in ones self,
whether by some outward thing, that befalls him, or by some inward stirring of
the mind and affections As outwardly when a time comes in, wherein we have
received some more special benefit, this should provoke us to more thankfulness
by remembrance of the benefit. Thus this time of Christ's nativity should (if
any way) be celebrated, that it might turn to an occasion of more hearty
thanksgiving, and more true obedience unto Christ that gave himself for our
sins, and took our nature upon him that in it he might bear our iniquities.
So when we be in the enjoying of gods creatures, whilst we be eating and
drinking or such like, here is a special season to lift up the heart to God,
and to kindle a flame of praise by this fuel, that our thanks might be so
much the more earnest, by how much we have a more present feeling of Gods
mercy, and do even taste how good he is. On the other side a man is sometimes
pressed with a sore cross and affliction that pincheth his soul, here is a
very fit occasion of humbling ones self, and examining ones heart. For in
these afflictions god calls to humiliation for the most part, which duty being
performed after a man may rejoice in his affliction. But whiles the burden of
the cross is heavy here is a notable means to further one in the work of
humiliation, and if one can take the time when God smites he may (at least he
ought) cause his heart to stoup before him with more ease, then when he was at
more ease, for his body. Again, sometimes a man has a more inward stirring of
his affections which he cannot have at an other time. This must be followed
greedily taken, sometimes at the sermon, or upon some other occasion, a man
hearing or thinking of his sin, and the punishment due thereunto, have a kind
of pricking in his heart, and some touch of remorse within him, his conscience
begins to tell him that all is not well, and he grows to some orderly
conclusion: Sure I will now be sorry for this fault, and amend it. Now if one
will follow this motion, and go after god when he calls (for this is one of his
inward callings) and not shoulder it out with fond mirth, but nourish it by a
plain confession of his sin to God, and an hearty begging of grace and strength
from him to do that which he now sees he should do; this will come to godly
sorrow, and so to repentance, but else if he choke it and quench it, it will
vanish, and the heart will be more hard frozen in the dregs of sin. So that if
there be any whose heart at this time at the speaking of these words, whose
soul smites him for his swearing, lying, sabbath breaking, whordome,
dru^kennes, gameming, covetousness, railing, or the like sin, let him when he is
gone out of the Chruch, cast himself down in the presence of God, confess
this his sin or sins freely without dissembling, labor to be more sorrowful
for them then ever he was, and pray to god to pull him out of this mire. This
if he do, he shall take the time, he shall be a convert, the Lord will receive
him, as the unthrifty prodigal son was received, and by redeeming the time he
shall find redemption to his soul. But if he despise this admoniton of God,
his soul shall be more seared then before, his heart shall be delivered to a
greater of hardness and sencelesnes then ever before, and so be further of from
repentance and life. But alas, the frantic dealing of men in this case is too
palpable, and to be straunged at, when Gods word strikes upon them, when they
feel the keenness of it, when the threatenings have cut, so that they smart
for it; then they run to dicing, carding, drinking, dancing, etc. as it were of
set purpose to drive away the spirit of God that was coming toward them to
heal their soul. None is so mad to take such courses for his body, that when
he feels the sore to smart, then to run from the Physician, and cover it over
with a clout, or strive to forget it, yet for their fowls a number deal so
sencelesly in this thing as much as in any other, verifying that name which the
holy Ghost has given unto him, when he terms mad men. For it is a property
peculiar to a mad man that feeling pain he will hate the Physician and run
away from him that would help. Oh, that those of us which have hitherto been
so mad would return now to our right minds, and to God to be healed. Again,
sometimes a man's heart is stirred up with an inward and secret rejoicing or
gladness. Then says S. James. James. 5.13
If any man be merry let him sing Psalms. Now he shall do it with a cheerful
courage indeed. And therefore David would in such a case rise at midnight to
sing a Psalm rather then he would loose the season when it would relish with
him so well. Sometimes also, a man or a woman shall feel a secret pensiveness
growing over his heart, so that it even melts as the ground that thawes after a
frost, and he could even weep abundantly, tears offer themselves in a full
measure. Here is an excellent occasion of renewing ones repentance. Now whateuer
be ones company, whateuer be the matter in hand, except it be of absolute
necessity, let him leave it of, and betake him to his chamber or some secret,
now let him fall on his knees, now let him open his mouth and acknowledge his
sins against himself, giving vent to his grief, and turning all to Godly
sorrow, whatsoever the occasion was at first. Thus if any body do, his
repentance shall receive a notable increase. But if he pass it over, his heart
will not answer his desire an other time. Furthermore sometimes a man's heart
is earnestly moved with some hungry desire to enjoy some grace of God, and
great longing after some christian virtue. Now let him in the heat and flame of
his desire address himself to prayer. Then one shall send up such peircing
cries, and give such aloud knock against the gates of Christ's mercy, that he
can not choose but hear, and send one back with an alms, as it were. Thus he
redeems the time. But else his desires will be so cold and chil at an other
time that he shall searce thrust a petition out of his lips, and then these
drop down at his feet, and do him little good. And thus in every other through
the turning of our affections we must follow gods spirit, yea, or nature when
it leads us, wisely turning all to spiritual uses. And thus you may perceive
what it is to redeem the time, and how it may be attained. Now let us come to
some breife application of the point.

First, Use.
this point thus explaned meets with a number of imperfections even in the
best, and him that is most careful of his ways, of which we are now to take
notice, and purpose ame^dme^t, if we have not hitherto considered of them. For
this is a fault to which a man (even in a good measure spiritual) is subject
for want of redeeming the time, that he comes to that lazy pass now and then
as he has nothing to do, nothing where about to settle himself. It is a
carnal vnsetlednes in a christian to be so negligent of his time, as that he
should have any minute of time which he knows not how to bestow upon some good
and profitable use. The Lord offers such a multitude of occasions to do and
receive good that if we could with wisdom take the^, there is no hour passes
us, in which we might not do or get some good. And if there be nothing else yet
this is something where about he has good occasion to be busied even to fall
out with himself, because he has nothing (I mean he sees nothing that he
has) to do. Sometimes if men see their servants standing idle and vnbusied,
they can ask the^ with a kind of indignation; what? Can you find you nothing
to do? And sure the Lord might come with this question diverse times to us, and
say as it is in the parable: Why stand you all the day idle? asking whether the
world were so empty of occasions, and our selves so perfectly well, as that we
can find nothing to do? But there is no hour passes us which we should not
find fit for some good thing, if we could catch the opportunity before it be
turned, and did not harm our selves for want of diligent redeeming the time.
Yet there are other faults of which christians are to be warned. As to begin
with the last first: How many be there that are so stuffed with worldly
businesses, and yet are greedy of more, as that they cannot find leisure one
hour in a day, nay scarce in a week, to bestow upon reading, praying,
meditating or co^ferring. Yea, as though time were made for nothing but to
seek wealth and transitory things so this the cheifest of their care. It
appears that such labor not for conscience but for gain, because they cannot
break of ordinary labors so long, as well to perform ordinary duties of
religion. Many may say (with greef enough if they did well) that their hands are
so full of the world as that they can scarce through the week take the Bible
into their hands to read any thing therein, unless perhaps it be in the church
at some public meeting. Thus men which are born to a better inheritance are
content to wear out themselves in the earth, as if they were to perish in the
earth with other baser creatures. Here is one fault to be amended then, let no
christian bestow so much time in the world, as that he can not find sufficient
to seek heaven and the things thereof. Then for the matter of sports, me thinks
some christians should even shrink before the word of reproof comes to them,
when they may think of so many hours spent such a day at bowels, so many, it
may be, the next day in shooting, so many the third day in shouell board, or the
like exercises, happily in themselves not unlawful, and when they come to
reckning for religious exercises, the count comes in very slowly, by the
minutes or quarters, some half quarter of an hour or there abouts bestowed
such a day in praying alone, and some three or four days after about a
quarter of an hour in reading, and (it may be) the next week, some half
quarter more in meditation. And thus if the expenses of time were written in
our bebt books, as they be in Gods, we might even blush to read, so many
items, for pleasure and sport, and scarce one or two in a side for private
religious exercises. Then for our words: May we not hang down our heads with
shame to think that god made our tongues, and we speak scarce one word in an
hundred to his glory. Idle words: Even many of those whom we are to regard as
christians count them no faults, never come to repent for them. It was but a
word out of the way, say they. But this power to speak (being a gift peculiar
to men above all beasts) ought to be more preciously regarded, then that that
it should be abused for base trifles. Then for idle thoughts; who makes
question of them almost? Alas, we do not remember that God has searching eyes
and feirce, which pierce into the depth of one soul. We dream that thoughts
are not so much, and spare our selves in our unthriftiness when we should deal
more religiously with our selves. Lastly, some might be reproved for too long
lying in bed, and spending more hours in slugging or sleeping, then health and
strength do repuire. Many perhaps will think that it is left to their own
pleasure, and that the Preacher is too busy, if he take upon him to teach them
when to rise, as though it were no fault to ouer-sleepe themselves. In deed
some old and sickly men's bodies must take it when they may, but for the
greatest part of men, if they knew what good the first half hour of the early
morning spent in religious exercises would, bring them, they would not love
sleep so well, as for it to neglect them. It is well said: He that seeks me
early shall find me, and it may well be literally understood. Therefore
brethren, there is none but may see a fault in himself in these respects, some
or al of them, and happy is he that resolves to mend it. Therefore if you will
take good counsel, do thus when you come home. Think, alas, if time must
be reckned for, and should be redeemed; How far am I behind hand with God,
that (what for sleep, what for play, what for idle babbling, what for vain
thoughts, and excessive worldliness) I cannot make a good account of the
fourtith, yea, of the hundredth part of my time? And then grieve because thou
have been such an unthrift of time, and now begin carefully to spare before
all be gone. But now here is a reproof more sharp for some others that are not
willing to hear of that ear, tell them they must not spend a whole day, or a
whole night in playing and sporting. What not at Christmas, (say they?) why you
are too precise: well, but yet vouchsafe to consider a little what God speaks.
Thou say: this is too much precisenes, and so says the world; but the
Apostle bids to walk precisely or warily, redeeming the time. And he that
will take time to card or dice, and to use lawful recreations immoderately (I
mean so as to be at his play the greater part of the day, and it may be some,
if not the most of the night too) shall pay full dearly for it. Either he must
repent, and undo this with much greef and sorrow of heart or else he must smart
for it hereafter worse in hell. I would not deal over sharply with thee: but
take Gods loving admoniton, and let him have one tenth part of the four and
twenty hours, yea more a good deal then so, now that thou have more leisure
then ordinary.

And here is yet a kind of people that are to be more rigorously handled, such
as are all gamesters, that spend no one hour waking but upon pleasure. The
world calls them scatter-goods, and the Lord will call them scatter-houres, that
do misspend both goods and hours. Such (let them think of themselves how they
will) as do make gameing the greatest part (if not all) of their occupation,
must be content to hear that they have no portion in heaven, as they can
keep no portion in earth. How can one have treasure in heaven, that never laid
up any there. If God hate a gamester, so that he will not give him good cloths
to his back (now he has threatened that he shall be clothed with rags) he will
much less afford them a seat in heaven. And howsoever for a time they may
ruffle it out, and be clad better then their more laborious neighbors, yet this
trade will surely undo them. For they have brought this peril upon themselves,
that either God must not be true, or they must not be rich, he must for faite
his truth, or they their goods, besides their name and soul: wherefore let
such as have hitherto given their days to such an unsanctified, and inordinate
course, surcease from the practice of their lewdnes, and both in conscience for
their souls sake, and in discretion for their goods sake, resolve to become
better husbands of time, least their gameing on earth bring beggary to their
latter days, and damnation to their souls for ever. Lastly, let all good
Christians be admonished to make precious account of their time, and with much
carfulness to take the seasons and opportunities of God, according as they
have heard it is their duty. Christians either indeed purpose to learn, or
else make a show of such a purpose when they come to church, Ah, that we might
all learn this thrift, and practice it as we have heard. Begin to day, and
hold on still, now is a time of remembering the most admirable work of Christ's
incarnation, when he was made flesh of the Virgin, to purge us from sin, and
save us from wrath by the shedding of his blood, and sufferings which he endured
in his flesh. Give not all (ah, why should we give any of it?) this time to
play, chiefly to bezelling, surpheting, or wantonness, but take some space to
consider of the greatness of this benefit, and to be thankful proportionablie
thereunto. I would I might hope to prevail with any by this exhortation, but
howsoever it is needful to be spoken, that none may have occasion to pretend
ignorance, you see or might see your duties in this beehalfe, and in practicing
the same shall find the benefit of it. But fools will scorn admonition, and
those that have abandoned themselves to lust, will not be entreated to pull
their necks from out their hard yoke, and to serve a better Master. Nay, so
foolish are a number, that they think to do Christ great honor in spending
the day, whereon they imagine that he was borne, and some few that follow it
in more then ordinary riot and sinful excess: as though he were a God that
loved iniquity; and were delighted with drinking and swilling, and gameing,
and swearing, and surpheting, and all disorder. But those that know Christ,
know full well that he is not pleased with such pranks. Wherefore if we will
spend a day to Christ, spend it more religiously, and soberly then all other
days, not more profanely and luxuriously. We should never forget his birth,
but when we observe some special time of remembering it, show that we
remember his goodness by doing good, more honor to his name, not by
committing more rebellion against him. And to conclude, as at this time, so at
all times let all men that would have their souls well furnished with inward
substance, play the good husbands in taking time and opportunity whenever
we find any fit occasion of getting or doing good, in our selves or others,
let it not slip, but lay hold upon it, and use it. It is joyful to think (if
we could think of it seriously) what commodity this thrift would bring, how
much knowledge and godliness might he get that would keep his tongue and
heart carefully to good matters? What a large treasure of good works might he
have, that would be ready whenever his neighbors necessity called for
help, to stretch out his hand for his relief? And when he saw him fit for an
admonition would wisely bestow it upon him? How full of grace should his old
age and sickness be, that would give his health to God, and his first years
to the service of his soul? How great acquaintance might he get in the
palace of wisdom, that would come to her at her first call, and enter so
soon as the doors were set open? How many sins might a man leave, and how
much power should he get over all sin that when his heart smites him, would
turn to God by prayer and confession? What great grace would affliction bring,
if a man would settle himself to humiliation, and gaging his heart in time of
affliction? How much thankfulness might he have that would lift up his heart
to God in the fruition of every blessing? How many fervent prayers might be
store up in heaven, that would not fore-slow time, when he feels his desires
earnest? How comfortably might we weep over Christ, and how plentifully, that
would take the tide of tears, and turn all pensiveness to this use? And how
many sweet and cheerful Psames might a Christian sing, if he would turn
all his mirth into a Psalm, and offer it up to God? Oh, what a large increase
of grace would this care bring, how should his soul thrive that would be thus
husbandly? Surely as the common speech has commended a little land well
tilled, before much more ground that is carelessly dressed: so the weaker
means with this care, would be more available to enrich the heart, then are
the strongest without it. It is not the greatness of ones living that makes
one rich, but the good employing, and wary husbanding of it. So it is not the
greatness of the means, but the diligent redeeming of time, to make use of
the means that makes the soul wealthy. But if great means join with great
care, the increase will be so much the more large, as a large living with good
husbandry. But alas, hence comes it that some in the store of all good means
of Salvation are very beggars and bankrupts, because of their negligence to
take the time and fit season. They let pass all good opportunities, and care
not for any occasion for the soul, and how can their soul thrive? Wherefore
let every true hearted Christian learn this wisdom and practice it, as ever
he desires to store his soul with that wealth which will make him glorious in
the eyes of God, and much set by even in heaven among the Angels. And thus much
for this time, and this duty of redeeming the time.

FINIS.

