Two Sermons; THE FORMER DELIVERED AT PAVLS CROSS THE FOUR AND TWENtieth of
March, 1615. being the anniuersarie commemoration of the Kings most happy
succession in the Crown of England. THE LATTER AT THE Spittle on Monday in
Easter week, 1613. By JOHN WHITE D.D.

My Son, fear thou God and the King, and meddle not with them that are given
to change.

Prou. 24.21. printer's device of Richard Field, featuring an anchor suspended
by a hand from the clouds (McKerrow 192) ANCHORA SPEI


Imprinted at London by Richard Field for William Barret. 1615.

TO THE RIGHT VIRTUOUS AND NOBLE Lady, the Lady Crofts, wife to my worthy
Patron, Sir John Crofts of Saxham: all comfort in the mercies and grace of God.
GOod Madam, I send you what I preached, not long since, in a solemn and
devout audience, upon special occasion. For such is either the curiosity or
religion of Hearers, that sometime they will have us preach in print. He that
could do it well, in one sense, were a man fit for this age; though in my
sense, it is fitter for many then for my self: who knowing mine own
imperfections, and the different operation of a moving voice and breathless
letters, am therefore naturally timorous of public censures; and had kept my
lines within doors if either importunity had not enticed them abroad, or I
had not feared their stealing out at a back door. Now, as they are, I commend
them to your Ladyship, it having been, time out of mind, a courtesy allowed
the Press, to take up the Pass where it best affects. When I lived far
remote, Sir John Crofts, your husband, my worthy and loving Patron, having
never seen me, sent and called me to the place I have: since which time it
has pleased both Him and you self, and your Noble children, and my Honorable
LADY CHEANY (with whom you lived in the straitest band of love until God, by
a blessed death, in her ripe age, took her to his mercy) so much to favor
me, that thereby I have been the better both encouraged and enabled to my
studies, which were falling to the ground for want of means. And if that were
not, yet what I have seen since, in the course of your life, and the order of
your family, were enough to bind all good minds, that honor Virtue, unto you;
whose zeal to Religion, and love to Learning, and continual exercise therein
both by reading and practice, joined with such promptnes of memory and
modesty in speaking, gives you interest in all either Learned, or Godly, and
makes you worthy of more then my poor words can attribute. Saint Jerome
commends a Lady because she made her daughters and gentlewomen that were about
her daily to read and learn somewhat out of the Scripture: a kind of
commendation now worn out of fashion, like a suit of apparel of the old make:
yet your Ladyship has not refused it; that he who has seen your children and
attendants about you, private, at work, has doubted which were the work; the
Reading of some, while others were working, or the working of others while some
were reading. Which parts men observing in persons of your rank, have taken
liberty, without all fear, and freely, to speak thereof; and the wisest that
have been, such as Ignatius, Chrysostom, Jerome, Basil, Nazianzen, Saint Paul
himself and the holy Evangelists, have mentioned them; and more then mentioned
them; left us those memorials of them that the Church of God could not have
spared: as may be seen by their affectionate writing of, and to, the Mary's,
Lydia, Lois, Eunice, Cassobolites, Olympias, Laeta, Demetrias, Paula,
Eustochium, Celantia, Saluina, and diverse more; whose virtues therein mentioned
are a great part of that which has taught and given example to noble women in
all ages since. For coniugal love, motherly piety, matronly gravity,
wisdom, bounty, humility, hospitality, virtue, shall be both registered,
and commended, and imitated, and honored, when the contrary shall be contemned
in the greatest, and, now and then, sent down to the grave with a peale of
satyrs. Go forward then and maintain what God has given you; and as these
things are yours in an eminent manner, so hold them fast, and value them above
your husbands state, or your patronage: much more above glittering apparel and
worldly pleasures, and those vanities and excesses where with so many please
themselves and no body else. And as here they yield you honor and respect, so
in Death (which determines all our actions, and lays the pleasures of sin
upon Gods cold earth) you shall taste the benefit thereof: for the delights of
the flesh, and the pride of life, will poison the grave; but the fear of God
shall be recompensed with Honor, and Peace, and Eternal life: which things are
daily behight unto you, your godly husband, and virtuous children, in his
prayers to God,

By him that is at your Ladyships service IO. WHITE.

A SERMON PREACHED AT PAVLES CROSS upon the four and twentieth of March,
1615. being the anniuersarie commemoration of the Kings most happy succession
in the Crown of England.
1. TIM. 2.1. I exhort therefore, that first of all, supplications, prayer,
intercession, and giving of thanks, be made for all men: for Kings, and for
all that are in authority: that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all
godliness, and honesty.


AND is it true, that all these things are so indeed as they seem unto us? are
we not deceived? do we certainly see one another indeed, that we dream not of
that which is but a fancy and beguiles us? are we out of our beds, waking, and
moving, and truly understanding what befalles us? is it daylight? are our eyes
open? is not sleep still upon us, or waking dreams, presenting us with
imaginations? are they not shadows that are about us? Is it credible that a
sinful Nation, so ill deserving at the hands of God; so watched by enemies in
our bosom, the most cruel and merciless that ever were; and threatened by him
and his that think they have power to shut up heaven, and restrain the
influence of every creature; that waited for nothing, as this day, but
confusion and every mischief to fall upon us that their wrath could procure:
is it, I say, possible that a people in such danger of shipwreck, in
good-earnest without dreaming, should, notwithstanding, live and breathe the
same life we did, enjoy the same mercies of our God, the same security, the
same peace, both of State and Church; and they lie at our feet like the five
Kings of Canaan, Ios. 10.24.
that meant to have devoured us? and this day, which they prophesied should
have been the dismallest that ever rose upon the kingdom, assemble also
together in joy and triumph, men, women and little children, to celebrate our
peace, ringing and singing, and rejoicing before the Lord our maker?

Parsons, the Jesuit, a man well known to our State, and by his own, thought
a great Statesman himself, and wise (but he was a cab of dung, 2. Reg. 6.25.
an Asses head sold to the Pope for 80. siluerlings, and his friends rose up in
a misty morning when a sheep seemed to them as big as an ox) in the late
Queens days, published in print, that Answer to the libel of Engl just. page
176. and 185.
By the uncertainty of the next heir, our Country was in the most dreadful
and desperate case, in the greatest misery and most dangerous terms, that
ever it was since or before the Conquest: and in far worse then any Country
of Christendom; by the certainty of most bloody, civil, and foreign wars:
all our wealth and felicity whatsoever depending upon a few uncertain days
of Queen Elizabeth's life; and such as hoped otherwise he calls, common
persons and thriftlesse yonkers. And this was the general cry and expectation
of them all: that what we now see to the contrary, through Gods infinite
mercy, against their conspiracies, may seem a dream; and our meeting this
day, to celebrate this mercy, may seem a fancy or delusion of our senses.
And indeed for men to be thus mistaken in their sleep it is ordinary. For,
Esaias 29. 8. A hungry man dreams, and behold he eats; a thirsty man dreams,
and lo he is drinking: and yet when they wake their soul is empty. Chrysostom.
For such is the nature of dreaming: ((...)) it is full of deceit, and will set
us a playing with monsters.

2 But that which we are about is neither dream nor delusion, nor are you
asleep, but waking, and you really enjoy under your hands all that you think
on; and see a wonder beyond any ever dreamt of: and it is day, even clear
daylight, one of the lightsomest that ever shined on our nation; the Sun is
up, and has showed us the unspeakable mercies of our God. Psalm. 118.24.
This is the day which the Lord has made, we will rejoice and be glad therein.
And long may this day endure; like the day of Iosuah when the Sun stood still
in Gibeon, and the Moon in the valley of Aialon: Let the tender mercies of God
evermore enlighten it with the dayspring from above: let eternity embrace it
and claspe it round about, that it may be joined with the days of heaven, and
measured together with eternity: let clouds nor mists, nor storms, nor
tempest, nor the smoke of the bottomless pit, ever ouershadow it; nor the
dark night tread upon it: let it show the paths of righteousness, and the
ways of God to all people: in the light thereof let us see long peace, and the
continuance of true religion, the amendment of our lives, and the downfall of
Antichrist. Write this day, as Ep. ad Magnes.
Ignatius says of another day; the Lady and mistress of all other days: the
blessed day which the Lord has made, therein to show the riches of his mercies
to the unworthiest nation that ever was; God grant we may be able to rejoice
Tertul. apol.
Conscientia non lasciuia: not lasciuiously but righteously; Euthym. in Psalm.
117.
vt celebrem Deo ac splendidam solemnitatem agamus: that we may make our
solemnity such as the goodness and greatness of God requires.

3 To which purpose the words of my text do fully instruct us. They are an
admonition touching the matter of prayer, wherein the Apostle requires that,
without limitation, we pray and give thanks for all men: but namely for Kings
and public Magistrates, and such as are eminent in the State, that the Gospel
may be propagated, peace, virtue and justice, may be maintained. For, Prou. 29.
When good men are in authority, the people shall rejoice; but when the wicked
bear rule, the land mournes: And Esaias 49. Kings shall be thy nourishers, and
Queens thy nurses; when God will put his Church into the hands of the
Magistrate as it were to nurse, let thanks be rendered to him for his
ordinance, and supplication, and prayers, and intercession, be made for their
continuance in well doing; that the State under them may be in peace, and be
governed justly and religiously. He complains immediately before, of some
that, lately by their apostacy from their religion, had hindered the Gospel,
and in dammaged the Church: had there been a Christian zealous Emperor, a
Constantine, a Theodosius, a Iouinian, a John Frederick, this either had not
fallen out, or had not done so much hurt; now, in this want, all that could be
done was to excommunicate; which being too little for the removing of so great
a mischief, he exhorts and requires, that principally above all things a care
be had in the Church, that prayer and thanksgiving be made for all men, that no
man fall from faith and a good conscience: and namely for Kings and
Magistrates, that such as fall being suppressed by the secular power, the peace
and quietness, the piety and honesty, of Church and State may be preserved.
This is the sense and connection of the text.

4 Wherein our Apostle affirms three things. First, the exercise that he would
have used. Secondly, the matter of this exercise. Thirdly, the end why we
should thus exercise. The exercise is prayer. The matter of this prayer, for
all men, and namely for Kings and Magistrates. The end why, that we may lead a
quiet and calm life, in godliness and honesty. In handling whereof you will
soon perceive me to omit many points that are incident: but I must attend upon
the time, and will aim only at the occasion.

5 First, the exercise commended is prayer and thanksgiving. For, 2. Cor. 10.4.
the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty: where Saint
Chrysostom notes upon that place, not our wealth, or power, or flattering of
our selves can save us, but the power of God. This duty is expressed in four
terms: supplication, prayer, intercession, thanksgiving. The stream of
Doctors, and expositors, old and new, commonly distinguish these as four
several kinds of prayer, albeit they scarce agree in defining the^. The most
received distinction is, that supplications are for the pardon of our sins.
Prayers, the vow and promise, that we make to God, touching the amendment of
our life. Intercession when we pray for others. Thanksgiving, when we praise
his Name, for the graces he bestows upon us. Others, who seem to come nearer
the point, expound them thus: when we pray God to turn away evil, this is
supplication: when to give us the good we need, this is prayer: when we simply
crave any thing whatsoever, this is intercession: when we bless God for his
mercies, this is thanksgiving. For my own part, I think it more probable and
easier to defend, that the Apostle intends no such division, in regard of the
matter of Prayer; but only to commend the same thing in diverse words,
according to the custom of the Scripture; for howsoever prayer and
thanksgiving may be distinguished; yet the rest either cannot, by reason they
do all of them essentially include each other; or are not, in this place, by
reason the definitions assigned will not so aptly suit with the Text. I will
therefore follow In Psalm. 140.
Hilary, who applies them to the several motions of the mind wherewith we
ought to pray: for in all prayer it is necessary that the mind be lift up to
God by charity, humility, and faith: our charity desires the good of others
as well as our own; our humility prays with all submission to God, and
acknowledges what we receive of his mercy: our faith makes us fly to God
alone, and in his goodness to repose our confidence. According to which
exposition, this distinction of words is not founded on the matter of prayer,
so much as on the several habits and motions of the mind whence true prayer
proceeds, and wherewith it is informed. For every moral action is specified
by the intention of the doer: and therefore the intentions or motions of the
mind being diverse, the same prayer has also diverse appellations.

6 Which things thus expounded, we may perceive what the thing is that is, most
effectual and auailable to the prosperity of a kingdom, that Kings and
Rulers may succeed and hold out, to the comfort and happiness of their people,
our Apostle bidding make prayer and supplication, and give thanks for these
things. Not that policy, or strength, and counsel may be neglected, for that
were tempting of God, and contemning the means which he has appointed; but
because it is God alone that gives motion to these things, and the influxe of
his providence makes them effectual: By him Kings reign, and Princes rule,
and all the Nobles and Judges of the earth, says Solomon, Prou. 8. and Job 12.
He leads Counselors away spoiled, and makes the Judges fools: he loses the
collar of Kings, and guirdeth their loins with a girdle: he powers contempt
upon Princes, and weakeneth the strength of the mighty. If his help and
mercy be wanting, the sinews of a State will shrink, and the wisdom of the
wise will be infatuated; policy will be no better then lunacy, glory will turn
into misery, and armies of men will but help to make the fall heavier.
Pachymer.
(...) For what God will have come to pass will outworke all humane
consideration; and then, as Nazianzen speaks, Tandem submergetur nauis quae
multos ad portum foeliciter appulit: hope which uses to bring the most
miserable to the shore, it self shall sink and perish. Thus the mightiest
States have been dissolved, and all worldly power, when God abandons it, falls
to the ground. That, as Sidonius speaks, Lib. 1. ep. 7.
the most potent and politic man that lives, may lie, veluti vomitu Fortunae
nauseautis exputus: as if Fortune from her loathing stomach had vomited him
up, and spit him upon the ground: to prevent which danger, and to save from
enemies, the prayers and religion of the subject have always been the best
means. Exo. 17.
When Amalek fought against Israel, Moses, by his prayer, assured the victory.
2 Chro. 20.
When Iosaphat was in danger, he prayed to God with his people: We know not
what to do, but our eyes are upon thee. And this remedy has never failed the
people that have used it. Saint Ambrose De obit. Theod.
reports of Theodosius, that in a fought field against the tyrant Eugenius,
when he had almost lost the day, alighting from his horse, and stepping before
his army, in the face of the enemy, he only kneeled down and cried to God,
Vbi est Deus Theodosij, Where is Theodosius his God? and won the day. Just.
apol. 2.
When Marcus Aurelius, in the field against 970000. enemies, was in distress
for want of water, the prayers of the Christians relieved him: cum ipsa
oratione affuit Deus, says Justin Martyr, so soon as they had prayed God was
with them; and he received the prayers of the Church as a garriso^ into his
Empire. The Macabees had their name of this, that in their colors, when they
went into the field, they had five letters, (...), every better signifying a
word, Mi cha Elohim be Iisrael: Who is like to God in Israel: all their
confidence was in God, on whom they called and depended. This is so well known
and ratified by experience, that I never read of any State, Christian or
Gentile, but they have acknowledged it. That not the Church alone, but infidels
in their idolatry, and heretics in their schism, have had recourse thereto.
What more solemn with the ancient Greeks, Romans, Carthaginians, or the
Turks and Barbarian at this day, then to enjoin prayer and religious service
to their idols, for the security of their State? The only error among
Christians, being, either the performing of this exercise without cleansing
their life, or the forgetting or neglecting thereof, or the casting it behind
strength and policy, which ought to follow it. Your Bishops and Preachers
honor and affect the outward policy of the State as much as nay in the
kingdom do, and take as much comfort in the strength of our nation, the wealth
of the subject, the vigilancie and circumspection of the Counceller, the
courage and skill of the martial man, and will be as sorry to see them decay:
yet will we never cease to cry in your ears, Psalm. 33.17.
A horse is but a vain thing to save. The SPANISH ARMADA, and POWDER TREASON,
and ALL THE TREASONS that have been plotted beside, have taught us, that not
the policy or counsel, or strength of our nation, but the mercy of God, the
infinite, tender, saving mercy of our God, hearing the prayer of his people,
was it that rescued, when strength lay asleep on Dalilahs knees, and policy
was blind, and all humane wit foresaw no danger: the which may teach us for
ever not to boast too loud of great Britains strength, but to remember PRAYER,
and by maintaining RELIGION, and leading the subject forward to DEVOTION, and
by suppressing that which has poisoned the prayers of thousands among us, to
procure that God every where, by lifting up pure hands, be called upon, and
blessed for his merciful providence over the State.

7 And we must not only be mindful of the duty, but careful also that we
discharge it well; by reason that as true prayer rightly informed will
preserve, so that which is otherwise will do no good: therefore, as Saint
Chrysostom says: Not only the flowers, whereof the garland is made, must be
fresh and lovely, but the hands also of him that makes the garland must be
clean. For Saint James Iac. 4.3.
says, You ask and receive not, because you ask not as you should. We must
join three things with prayer, if we will be heard. First, the hands lift up
must be pure, that we live not in sin. Esaias, 1. When ye multiply your
prayers I will not hear you, for your hands are full of blood, in which case,
Vit. Mos. lib 3.
says Philo, (...): Sacrifice is abominable, service unholy, and prayer
ominous: For Pro. 28.9.
he that turns his ear from hearing and obeying the word, even his prayer
shall be abominable. Next, we must persevere without weariness, praying daily,
and waiting patiently, if any thing be amiss, and daily giving thanks; So the
Scripture teaches: Col. 4.2.
Continue in prayer, and watch thereunto. For the State has her daily charge,
and daily enemies, and daily dangers: as a ship by sea in a long voyage; where
perseverance, every man in his charge, is it that makes a prosperous journey.
Thirdly, the mind must be lift up to God by the purity and the devotion
thereof: there must be faith and confidence, that God will hear us; reverence
of his Name, meekensse of spirit, love to one another; and, as our Apostle
says in the eight verse: holy hands without wrath or doubting. And in the
point of Thanksgiving, there must not only be in the understanding an
apprehension of the mercies of God received, but in the will such a spiritual
joy therein, and love to God therefore, that the mind thereby be revoked from
rejoicing in any thing else, but only in God that saues us. This is the prayer
that pierces heaven: Praeteruolat montes and nubes, penetrat coelum, and
implet mundum, ecce quousque volat vox clamantis animae: It flies higher then
mountains or the clouds: it fills the world and pierces heaven, when the
soul cries to God with an earnest voice. When Arius infested the Church, the
saying was, that Athanasius resisted him with his learning, but Alexander the
devout Bishop vanquished him with his prayers. Socrates tells that when a
terrible fire in Constantinople, fastened on a great part of the city, and
took hold of the Church, the Bishop thereof went to the altar, and falling
down upon his knees, would not rise from thence till the fire, blasing in the
windows, and flashing at every door to come in, was vanquished, and the Church
preserved: with the floods of his devotion, he slaked the fury of the
threatening element. The same shall be the force of our prayers for his Majesty
and the State, if we be faithful therein: heresy may rage, treason conspire,
and enemies cast firebrarnds; but we will trust in him that never forsakes
such as call upon his name.

8 The next thing mentioned in the text, is the matter of our prayers,
containing the Persons and the thing to be prayed for: touching the Persons, he
enioynes that we pray, first, generally, for all men: and then particularly,
for Kings and all in authority. First, for all men, the reason whereof is
yielded, verse the fourth, because God wills that all men be saved, and come to
the knowledge of the truth: and Christ the Redeemer, in some true manner or
other, gave himself a ransom for all. Our devotion must attend Gods will,
that what he wills we pray for, that so his will may be done in earth as it is
in heaven. There were no difficulty in this point if by, ALL MEN, no more were
meant the^ All the elect, or All that profess Christ, and are true members of
the Church. For in these the mercy of God, and the effect of our prayers
infallibly and apparently show themselves: for, Romans 8. Whom he predestined,
them he calls, and whom he calls those he iustifies, and whom he iustifies
them he also glorifies. But when we see with our eyes innumerable companies,
and whole nations, to be Barbarians, Infidels, Jews, Idolaters, Heretics,
Atheists, Profane, Excommunicate, Enemies; and when we certainly know by the
Scripture, and without controversy believe, no small part of mankind, in Gods
decree and eternal purpose, to stand reprobate and rejected from salvation,
and all the effects of election, (whether in the mass of sin or not, and
whether upon the foresight of their unbelief or otherwise, all is one to the
point of this difficulty:) when, I say, it is of all hands yielded that there
be so many reprobates, denied the grace of election, and from all eternity,
prepared, or (...) Rom 9.22. fitted, made up, finished.
finished, as the Scripture speaks, to destruction (for what God executes in
time he wills in eternity,) what shall we say to Prayer and Thanksgiving for
these? or what benefit can either they or we receive thereby? Mark my answer.
Touching the former the case is not difficult, such being the extent of the
grace of God, that there is Act. 10.34.
no respect of person with him; but either Jew or Gentile, or Barbarian or
Scythian, or idolater or heretic, may reap the benefit of our prayers, if
it be no more but the outward comforts of this life; which God by his own
example, Mat. 5.45.
making the Sun to shine upon the just and unjust, will have us vow and wish
them. And abstracting from reprobation, which is hid from us, and considering
no more in them but what we can infalliblie see, God can or may also give the
means, that they may be called to the truth and be saved. For so we see the
riches of Gods mercy to extend it self to the sinfullest and wofullest
persons that ever were. Gentiles in some ages have bin converted; idolaters,
Atheists, heretics in all ages have been reclaimed and joined to the Church;
and if they be not, yet we to whom God has no imparted his secret purposes,
see nothing in them but we may desire it: Nay the more misery and infidelity
we see them drowned in, the more does Christian piety bind us to pity their
state, and desire their conversion. Therefore Liturg. Jacob. and alioru^.
in the ancient Liturgies of the Church we often read, (...); Lord remember
and have mercy upon All men: And Celestin, a godly Bishop of the ancient
Church: Ep. ad epise. Gall.
Apud diuinam clementiam, sanctarum sedium praesides humani generis
aguntcausam; vt legem credendi lex statuat supplicandi: The Bishops of the
Church, says he, commend to God the cause of all mankind, and Not that, as we
pray for all men, so God will save all men; but that as we pray for All, so we
believe it to be his will we pray for all, and that God in all estates of men
will save whom he pleases.
by their prayers show what we are to believe. They entreat God to give
Infidels faith, Idolaters truth, Jews light, heretics repentance,
Schismatickes humility. But touching the reprobate there is more to be added.
For albeit no man pray God to save them whom he, in his secret counsel, knows
to be reprobate, that is to say, to change or abrogate his eternal decree: yet
four things are certain touching them, which I will lay down in so many
conclusions. First, We pray not God to SAVE those whom we believe he has
reprobated from all eternity: the reason is, for no man prays for that which
God has made no promise to grant, as there is no promise that he will save him
or those whom he has rejected from election, but the contrary; an express
revelation that he will condemn them. Secondly, it is unknown to all men who
in particular are reprobate. For albeit a man may discern violent signs of
reprobation in some, as in a Turk or a Jew; yet, speaking precizely, the
reprobation of this or that man is a secret laid up in Gods own bosom, and he
that guesses at it may be deceived, in as much as Gods works of grace are
secret, To. 11.23.
that he who to day is a wild olive, to morrow in an instant may be graffed
in. Yea he that most strongly thinks himself a reprobate, as Spira of Padua
did, may suddenly be prevented by the grace of God, and brought to his
justification, for any thing that we know. Thirdly, the commandment of prayer
no where distinguishes between elect and reprobate, but generally binds to
pray for all men. There is a distinction, and God that made it, knows it; but
we must do our own work, and let God alone with his. For, Deuteronomy. 29. Secret
things belong to the Lord thy God, but things which are revealed, to us, that
we may do the words of the Law. And, to authorize us to pray for any man, it is
sufficient that, all things considered, it is morally possible he may be saved:
which moral possibility may be had, touching the salvation of any man alive,
if God, by revelation, or some other certain way, show not the contrary. I
call it moral possibility which, in our understanding, may be so, by reason
there are many things which, for any thing we know, may fall out to effect it,
albeit absolutely, in Gods knowledge, it shall never be. Metaphysicall
possibility, having no ingredience into our moral actions, is not enough no
give this warrant: and therefore how vehement soever the conjectures and
likelihoods of any man's reprobation be, yet still we have five things that
overcome such conjectures, and make the possibility of his salvation moral to
us. First, the general promises of the Gospel offered to all. Secondly, the
efficacy of Gods grace when it comes. Thirdly, the possibility that it may
come. Fourthly, the commandment to pray that it may come. Fifthly, the examples
of diverse in desperate state, to whom it has come. All which being put
together and well considered, make it morally possible that he may be called;
and overcome the most violent conjectures and presumptions to the contrary, in
as much as when they are at the highest, yet they never exceed the latitude or
dimensions of a conjecture. Fourthly, though in the sense of my first
conclusion we do not pray that all men generally, including the reprobate, may
be saved; nor can give thanks for the salvation of those whom God saues not;
yet for the temporal good of reprobates and all, whether spiritual or
concerning their outward state, we may both pray and give thanks. The reason
is, for God gives such temporal things to the reprobate, and for his Churches
good, to glorify his Name, magnify his liberality, make them without excuse,
and benefit his children: which being ends belonging to the sanctification of
Gods name in the wicked, we justly pray for all that which may advance them.

9 Touching prayer for our enemies, there lies no question; our Savior so
expressly including it in the commandment touching prayer, and by his own
blessed example and the example of his dearest servants commending it to us.
Romans 12.21. Be not overcome of evil, but overcome evil with good. Philo,
discoursing of Aarons Ephod which he put on when he went to pray, says it was
(...): A representation of the whole world: having in it all colors to
represent all states of people whatsoever. And in very deed we err more grossly
in nothing then in bearing malice, and wiping men's names out of our prayers, as
if our private affection were the calendar of every man's salvation, when no man
can rent himself from his brother, but first he must rent himself from
Christ, who is the root whereon both he and his brother grow; as a branch on a
tree, cannot separate it self from the rest of the branches, but first it must
depart from the tree it self whereupon both it and all the other branches
grow. And therefore Ephiph. ep. ad Joan. Hierosol.
the Patriarch of Jerusalem was unwise to quarrel with Epiphanius because he
prayed for him; for Ephphanius answered, he would never be so out of charity
with any man, that he would set him at naught, whom God had made: Lib. 1. de
Cain and Abel. cap. 9.
And Saint Ambrose gives a good reason: Quia singuli orant pro omnibus, etiam
omnes orant pro singulis: When every man prays for all men, by this means all
men pray for every man.

10 But the special persons for whom particularly and namely we must pray, are
Kings and all in authority: for Kings are Gods anointed: and as Tertullian Ad
Scap. cap. 2.
speaks, Homines a Deo secundi, and solo Deo minores: Next unto God, and
second to none but God. The King, Ad pop. Antioch. hom. 1.
says Chrysostom, has no Peer upon earth, but is (...): the head and top of
all men that live. Our neighbors of Rome now say otherwise; that the Pope is
the man: and Kings are but his officers, and vassals, to hold his stirrup, to
bear his canopie, to hold him the basin and ewre when he washes, to be used or
deposed at pleasure, as he shall see cause. This is that which the late
Council of Lateran in Rome called Regale Pontificium Romanorum genus: The
royal race of our Roman Bishops. They call him that now is Paulus Quintus,
Vice-deus, Reipub. Christianae Monarcha, Pontificiae omnipotentiae assertor
inuictissimus. The vice-God and Monarch of the Christian world, and the
invincible defender of the Papal omnipotency. But let them alone; he is
Antichrist for his labor, whom Saint Paul says, we shall know by this, that
he will exalt himself, (...): Beyond all Augusteity and them that are called
Gods; as Kings, by Gods own mouth are. S. Paul affirms that to be the highest
power which bears the sword. Romans 12. and therefore himself Act. 25.11.
appealed to it. Optatus, against the Donatists, Lib. 3. contr. Parmen.
says, Super Imperatorem non est nisi Deus, qui fecit Imperatorem, there is
none above the King but God that made the King. And with Kings must be joined
all that are in authority; Peeers, Judges, Magistrates, Councillors of State,
Captains of war: (...). All that are eminent, or have any stroke in the
government. For they also may do good or hurt: for Genesis 41.43.
Joseph was the King of Egypts right hand: and they cried in the streets
Abrech, for he was Pater patriae, A tender father to his country, and
preserved it in time of extremity. Though Achitophel, and Shebnah, and
Symmachus, and Stephen Gardener, were not such. For though good Kings never so
willingly, as the Sun, yield their light and comfort to the State, yet bad
persons about and under them, not loving the Gospel nor justice, but aiming at
their own private ends, like clouds or malignant stars, may come between
and hinder the influence. Besides, their example draws like Adamant; and their
integrity is so needful, that under the best Princes that ever were, that
part of the State has always droopt and withered that bad officers have meddled
with. As on the contrary, the virtue of the inferior Magistrate has
oftentimes qualified the errors and distempers of violent tyrants: as we may
perceive in the government of Iehoash of Judah, 2. Reg. 12.2
of whom it is said, that He did that which was right in the sight of the Lord
all the days wherein Iehoiadah the Priest instructed him. This is the reason
why the Church must pray for Kings and all in authority under them.

11 Learn here, that government and eminency is of God, by his own
ordinance, for the benefit of mankind, and maintenance of civil society:
else the Apostle would not have tied us to pray for them. Yea he says
expressly, Romans 13.1. There is no power but of God, the powers that be are
ordained of God; therefore God gives them his own names and titles, and sets
them in a throne like himself: And Mat. 4.
the Devil, making an offer to Christ, that he would give him All the
kingdoms of the world, promised more then he had either right or power to
perform. But here we must distinguish. There are four things in a King and
every one that is in authority. First, his person, wherein he partakes in the
common nature of all other men, and lives and dies like them. Secondly, his
power and royal dignity. This is of God, whosoever he be that has it,
whether a good Prince or a Tyrant: a Nero or a Constantine, one or other.
Thirdly, his coming to his power. This also is of God, when it is by lawful
means, without usurpation, else not. For he that ordaines the power, allows
not the usurpation of it. Fourthly, the use of this power, which being just,
and godly, and right, is also of God: but the abuse of it by tyranny or
idolatry, or injustice, for example, is not so; for God allows no power to
ouerrule his own Law. Our Anabaptists therefore, and such as are enemies to
Monarchy, and all conspirators, Assasines, rebels, and turbulent persons,
are beasts, and enemies to Gods ordinance and to nature. For, says Philo, He
that lives under a law is a citizen of the world: the reason whereof he gives,
(...): He rules his actions according to the rule of nature. For albeit the
Magistrate sometimes step into his place and use it unlawfully, yet still the
place is of divine ordinance, and the means to reform what is amiss, is
still to pray for Kings and all in authority. And not only the King himself
is of God, but all the eminency and distinction of authority that is under
him, his Nobles, his Councellers, his Judges, his Magistrates, his Officers,
his Courts, are all of God; to maintain his State and royalty, and to manage
the affairs of the Commonwealth, which one man cannot do: and it is but a
savage and popular humor to backbite or despise this eminency in whom soever.
Those rhymes, When Adam delued and Eve span, etc. were liker to be made in Wat
Tylers camp, then any where else; and the practice of Libelling against
Magistrates and great persons, at this day, that neither the living can walk,
nor the dead sleep, cannot be justified. If any thing be amiss, there is
cause rather of sorrow then laughter, and it is fitter to pray, then to lay our
heads together at a scurrilous Pasquill: which tending to nothing but the
bringing of authority into contempt and disgrace, the end may be the overthrow
of all at the last, when nothing is more dangerous in a State, then for
Statesmen to lose their reputation: and the Stage and Poet, with ieastes and
Satyrs to deride sin, which by the Bishops and Pastors of the Church is
gravely and severely to be reproved. It is true indeed that among the Greeks,
in veteri Comoedia the persons of men were taxed: but they were Barbarians whom
Christians must not imitate; and the Magistrates thereby were disgraced, and
the rude people armed against them to the ruin of the best men, as we have
examples in Socrates and others, and therefore the best States put them all
down.

12 I come now to the last point of my text: which is, the thing prayed for, or
the end why we pray for Kings, That we may lead a quiet and peaccable life in
all godliness and honesty. In which words he names the thing with the
conditions thereof. The thing is peace, the conditions are peace with
godliness, peace with honesty, in their latitude: All godliness, all
honesty. For peace without these things is no good or durable peace, but will
deceive the State that trusts to it. Is it peace? 2. Reg. 9.22
says Iehoram; but Iehu answered, What peace so long as the whoredoms of
Iezabel and her witch-crafts remain? We must therefore pray for peace with
godliness and honesty. This peace has two degrees in the text: the first is
(...), Public quietness, when the State is secured; neither wars nor
garboiles, nor faction, nor conspiracies, troubling it. (...), says Varinus:
Quietness is the security of the State from fear. The next is, peace and
tranquillity of every man's private state, when no storm beating the public,
he lives at rest in his private, and has Vsum fructum communis pacis, The use
and profit of the public peace. An image whereof we have in the days of
Solomon: 1. Reg. 4.25
They dwelt confidently every man under his vine, and under his figtree, from
Dan to Beershebah. The want whereof gave occasion to a servant of the Emperor
Adrians, when he died, to write upon his grave stones; Here he lies that died
an old man and yet lived but seven years; because after he was out of his
infancy, all the rest of his life was beaten with labor and unquietness. The
godliness mentioned is the true faith, and right service and worship of God by
true religion, when the same is nourished in the State: as in the days of
those Kings that put down the groves and altars built to Baal. Honesty
supposes every virtue that maintains civil society, and gouerns the outward
life of the subject: the contrary whereof is riot, disorder, vnseemlinesse in
manners. These are the things to be aimed at in government: and for the
obtaining whereof we must pray and give thanks for Kings and all in authority.

13 Note first, that the best and principallest things that can betide any
people, is, the maintenance of true religion and godliness, and the
preservation of peace and outward honesty in the State: the Apostle requiring
that we pray for these things first of all; as that which all men mut procure
to the uttermost of their power: and which being obtained, God in this life,
gives no greater blessing. Our nation therefore possessing these things in so
ample manner, must confess that God has inricht it with his greatest mercies,
and made it most happy, and given unto in all that for the which he first
ordained government: of which point I shall say more in that which follows.

14 Note again, how the Magistrate, and others of eminency, must advance
these things and procure them. First in their own persons, and by their own
example, themselves living gravely, religiously and honestly. For if the end of
prayer be that this may be in the State, how much more are the Statesmen bound
to advance it in themselves? It is a thing that great men and well borne, may
be fitly take notice of, this day, as any day in the year; that the using of
their pleasures moderately and discreetly, and the composing of their manners
and carriages, their studies and example, to the maintenance of religion and
honesty, will be very grateful, this day, and well accord with the prayers of
the Church. There is a fault this way, I will touch it, but softly: Many
gentlemen and eminent persons, specially of the younger sort, too much neglect
that godliness and government which, by their means, another day, when they
are in authority, they should see maintained in others. Lightness of
carriage, want of learning, ignorance in the laws, customs and government of
the country, slacknesse, or possible, averseness in religion, abandoning
themselves over to spending and sensuality: and for one particular, immoderate
drinking: are evil dispositions to eminency, and will make them both unable
to maintain the public good, and unfit to govern others. Nostine hos, says
Pliny, qui omnium libidinum serui, eos puniunt quos imitantur? Have you not
seen those who being the servants of every sin, yet punish that in others,
which themselves imitate? Mendacia fallax Damnat, and in moechos gladium
distringit adulter, was the complaint of Prosper: that is to say; when liers
were to be censured by deceivers, and adulterers to be punished by wantons. It
was but a hard shift that a city in Spain was glad to use for the redressing of
such a like matter. Ludouicus Viues makes the report. The young Nobles and
gentlemen, diverse of them, were fallen from the gravity and honor of their
ancestors: they followed prodigality and lightness; they were unlearned in
the laws, and knew little Art, or military discipline; every one had his
mistress, and spend his time in courting her: bankets, revels, dancing,
amarousnesse, was their study. Great gallants they were, and that was all:
which the ancient Magistrates observing, thought, what will become of the
country which these must govern when we are dead? They dealt with the women,
on whom they saw they depended; their daughters, the Ladies, all the young
gentlewomen; and showing them the inconvenience, required their help, and gave
them instruction: which they following effectually, recovered the gentlemen.
They repelled from their favor all that were fantastical, sent them to their
books; advised them to Arms, gravity, sobriety, nobleness: and favoring
none that were vain, they wrought wonders, and secured the State; that these
men proved as honorable and serviceable in the same, as any of their ancestors
that were before them. I told you this was but a hard shift, yet was it the
best they had; and would we had Ladies and gentlewomen to do as much for us,
when Bishops and Preachers, and sage examples of our State cannot do it.

15 Secondly, the Magistrates must maintain civil honesty in others also
that live under them. For, Romans 13. such as do evil are threatened; for the
Magistrate bears not the sword in vain, but is Gods minister to take
vengeance on them. I need not stand to prove that which no man denies: only
they which know they should do it, either do it negligently, or are outfaced
that they dare not do it. Who sees not that whoredom, drinking, swearing,
quarrelling, and roaring (pity we shoud be enforced to name such things in
this place) are so common, that scarce is there left in the streets, either
religion, or honesty, godliness or civility? But drinking is now so taken up
through the whole kingdom, that the Germans, I hear, are like to lose their
Charter? There was in Rome a street called Vicus Sobrius: The Sober street,
because there was never an alehouse in it; which is hard to be said of any
street in England. I heard my self, not long since, the principal Magistrate
of this City, that then was, in an open speech touching the bleeding sins,
and swelling sores, (so, as I remember, he called them of the City) and so
tenderly exhort to amendment, that I well perceived many things to be
discovered that could not so easily be reformed. And yet the Magistrate must
not be weary for all that, when the prayers of the Church continually attend
upon him; and if, by all endeavor possible, this one sin of drinking could be
put down, the public honesty of our nation would the easilier be maintained.
Now, all over the land, the Justice of peace is mild, and the drunkard merry,
which two, you know, will amend no sin. I will tell you a story in Athenaeus
of an alehouse that came to be called The sign of the gally, upon this
occasion. The roaring-boyes meeting at a house, drank so long that their
brains being overwhelmed, they thought all that was about them to be sea, and
the room where they sat a Gally, so tossed with waves that they feared
drowning; and therefore, as men in danger of shipwreck, they threw all things
that came to hand out of the window into the street, pots, plate and
furniture, to lighten the ship: which being taken up and carried away by such
as came by, the Magistrate next morning comes to punish them for the disorder:
but they, having not yet slept out their drink, answered him, That it was
better to cast all into the sea, then the Gally, wherein they were, should be
sunk, and so many brave gentlemen be cast away; and while the Magistrate
wondered at their drunken imagination, another, creeping from under the table
where he had lien all the night, replied, thinking the Magistrates to have been
gods of the sea; And I, o ye Tritons, for fear laid me down under the
hatches: which distemper of theirs the officers perceiving, went their way, and
forgiving them, bad, Do so no more: to who^ they all gave this thanks; If ever
we escape this storm, and get safe to land, we vow you statues, and will set
up your images in our country as to our saviors. This story is a pattern of
the behavior which our drunkards use, and the manner how it is punished abroad
in the country; when they are presented, they answer for themselves some
flegmaticke conceit of swimming in the sea, that relishes of the broth; and the
Magistrate bids, Do no more so: and so the drunkard in honor of the Justice,
makes his image for saving him, and writes upon it, Good-ale never wanted a
friend upon the bench.

16 There is as much to be said of drinking healths, but I want time, nor
greatly care I what any man can plead for it: one Saint Ambrose is more to me;
and one discourse of his, De potu ad aequales calices, Touching drinking
healths, more moves me, then all the health maintainers in this City: whom I
do most earnestly entreat to read over and over, the 13. and 17. Chapters of
his book, called De Elia and Ieiunio: where he shall not only see the very
image of our times; Bibamus etiam pro salute Imperatoris: Let us drink Health
to the Emperor, but hear the holy Bishop so inueigh against it, that the
gravity and bended brows of so great a Prelate were able to make the cup fall
out of the greatest Barons hand in England. Auent.
The Emperor Aurelian was ill troubled to find out one Bonosus to quaffe with
the German Ambassador, who yet was derided for his labor, and commonly
called, Not a man, but a drunken pitcher filled with wine. Our time affoords
store of these, whom no exercise can please without drinking, like the German
mentioned by Pontanus, who hearing a solemn Tilting at the Court applauded by
the company, cried out, O valiant ludi quibus nemo bibit: Farewell the game
where there is no drinking. Let all men remember their end, and the terrible
account they shall, one day, make to him that has said it: Es. 5.22. Habb. 2.15.
Woe be to them that are strong to drink, and give their companions drink
that they may see their nakedness.

17 Let me insist upon a word more that is in my text: Godliness of religion.
Wherein no doubt, our Apostle desires Gods blessing upon Kings for this cause
principally, that the true faith of Christ may be maintained, and heresy
suppressed. This is agreed upon at all hands, that I need not spend time in
proving it. Gal. 5.12. He wishes they were cut off that trouble the Church:
and Irenaeus reports the preciseness of the Apostles, and the Christians of
those times, to have bin such, Vt ne verbo tenus communicarent alicui eorum qui
adulterauerat veritatem: That they would not so much as talk, or in words
communicate with any that had violated the truth. For, him that is an heretic
avoid, says our Apostle, Tit. 3.10. Our countrymen Romanized and Iesuited,
have filled the world with outcries against our State, for supressing them,
and making laws against their religion. What they say, and how they exclaim,
and what they conspire about this matter, I cannot now stand to rehearse; but
if their herisie and superstition be not expelled, how shall your faith stand?
What security shall Sarah and her son Isaak have in the house, if Hagar and
her brat be not beaten out of doors? I will play at short weapons with the^,
and come to the point. PAPISTRY CAN STAND NEITHER WITH PEACE NOR PIETY: THE
STATE THEREFORE THAT WOULD HAVE THESE THINGS, HAD JUST CAUSE TO SVPPRESSE IT.
Touching our Peace, it has not been violated in our State these many years,
but by them: nor scarce in any State Christian, since Charles the Great his
time, but the Pope and his ministers have had a hand in it. Pet. de Vin. lib.
1. ep. 31.
It was the complaint of the noble Frederick the second, Reuera Imperialis
authoritas Papali semper impugnatur inuida: The Papal envy has always blasted
the authority of Kings. And I challenge all the Jesuits this day in England,
let them give an instance of any kingdom in the Christian world these eight
hundred years that has not complained of the Pope intermedling, and crossing
their peace. But I will show them that a great part of the most grievous
tragedies that ever fell out in any kingdom, whether the combustion, or the
overthrow of the State, or the murder of the king, have been contrived by them;
and so long as there is a book to be sold in this Churchyard, or we can keep
our libraries from their purging, it will be justified by due record. Niceph.
Gregor.
He was a great King that put one to death for but wearing his Crown in his
own presence: he was going in his barge, and his Crown falling into the
water, the barge man swom after it, and only put it on his head as he swam
till he recovered the barge: the King gave him a talent for saving it, but cut
off his head for wearing it. Would God these men had done no more but reached
at the crown to save it, but we know they have endeavored to steal it: and if
authority cut them not shorter, they will whenever occasion serves, sink and
destroy it.

18 I will say nothing of their private turbulencie, nor what good neighbors
they are at home in the country where they rule the house that harbors them,
and specially the goodwife or Lady thereof. I will only touch their sauciness
with the Crown, that which our State droops and bleeds under. Who is such a
stranger in our State, that he knows not their refusal of an oath only for
allegiance and civil obedience? their suing for dispensation, and their open
contestations with his Majesty and the State about it, the Pope with his
College and Consistory maintaining them? Saint Austin says, We distinguish
between the eternal God, and the temporal Lord; yet we obey the temporal
Lord for his sake that is the eternal God. And all Antiquity confessed (I use
the very words of Chrysostom, Theodoret, Oecumenius, and Theophylact) that
were he an Apostle, a Prophet, an Evangelist, a Bishop, a Priest, a Monk: Sieve
quisquis tandem fuerit, of what cloth soever his Coat be made, the King is
above him. Strabo tells of a High priest in Pontus, that ware a Crown, whose
subjects were called Hieroduli, whom he ruled with Kingly authority; but he was
a Pagan, and still the King was his Lord. The Pope affects this prehemience,
and would have all the world to be his Hieroduli: he and his crew will be
Pagans, Donatists, Anabaptists, what you will so they be no subjects. Luc.
22.25.
Christ told his Disciples, Peter and all, The Kings of the Gentiles exercise
Lordship over them, but it shall not be so among you: The Pope and Papists will
exercise it, and turn the text, Kings exercise Lordship over their subjects,
and you shall exercise it over Kings, and not be subject. This point of
subjection lies in their bones. Ph. Camer.
There was sometime in Gaunt, as diverse of the Magistrates were sitting on a
bench in the street, a Beggar, who passing by craved their alms, and
complained, that he had a secret disease lying in his bones, and running all
over his body, which he might not for shame discover to them; they moved with
pity, gave him each of them somewhat, and he departed. One more curious then
the rest, bad his man follow him, and learn, if he could, what that secret
disease should be: who coming to him, and seeing nothing outwardly upon him,
but well to look at; Forsooth, quoth the Beggar, that which pains me you see
not, I have a disease lying in my bones, and all my parts, that I cannot work:
some call it Sloth and some Idleness. Our Iesuited Papists have a disease that
holds them much like this of the Beggar; they cannot be subject; to look at
outwardly you shall discern nothing, for they are close: but there creeps all
over their body, through every joint, and is settled in the marrow, a Lordly
humor, that they cannot obey, nor understand themselves to be the Kings
subjects any longer then the Pope will have them. Some Physicians extenuate the
nature and danger of the disease, but the beggar of Gaunt was not so bad, nor
so hard to cure; and we see, when Physicians have done the uttermost, it turns
at last to treason and rebellion; that he which desires the Kings safety, must
pray for stronger physic then yet has been given, to purge this humor:
though for my own part I think, the physic strong enough if the sturdy
beggars were made to drink it and, law were backed with execution.

19 What woeful treasons did they contriue against that blessed Lady our
gracious Elizabeth that now is gone? what rebellions and invasions did they
kindle? what mischief had they in their heads against her? And now she is gone
(Ah the sacred name of Christian piety where art thou buried, that we might
visit thy monument!) how barbarously have these sepulcrorum effossores raked
and dug into her grave, and railed upon her royal name? whom strangers have
come from far to see, as she of Saba did to see Solomon? forreiners reverenced,
subjects doted upon, all Princes living admired, themselves openly flattered,
and for the time fawned upon? Ah blessed Lady how did God, by thy hands, that
which the potentest Princes in the world could hardly reach to? Honor held her
State within thy Crown, Majesty sprang in thy breast, thy heart was filled with
piety, thy hands with pity, thy lap with plenty, thy throne with justice:
thou lie not buried in the cold earth, but in the living hearts of all that
knew thee; that which the peerlesse Ladies of the former world had severally,
thou had alone: Placida, Pulcheria, Galla, Theodelind, Eudocia, Palaelogina;
of whom Niceph. Gregot.
it is said, that with the bounty and admiration of her sex, as with a net she
fisht, and caught, and drew unto her the opinions of all men; and yet there is
found a generation that curse thy name: as there was a people that had a daily
ceremony, to go out of doors, and with their face into the East to curse the
Sun that gave them light, and by his influence preserved them.

20. His gracious Majesty speeds no better; let their cursed writings, and base
speeches of him, and all other practifes against him, be laid aside: and
remember but the POWDER TREASON, the uttermost point of all villainy, beyond
which it is terra incognita, no man can devise what should be between Hell and
it. The Hermit of the Legend, hearing all the devils in Hell, as he thought,
together on the other side of the wall, lifting, and blowing, and groaning, as
if they had been removing the world, desired God to let him see what they were
doing; and they were but lifting at a feather: had not the Hermit come in.
they would have feathered such an arrow, as should have struck through the
heart of the child yet unborn. They say there is a bird, that, when men are at
sacrifice, takes fire from the altar, and burns their houses; these are the
birds of that feather, that can find no fire to burn our State but what is
kindled on their very altars, and the dearest ceremonies of their religion.
Religion, sacraments, prayer, the holiest things they have, and God himself,
are applied to execute the devil and his Vicars cursed will. Thuanus writes
that the Pope caused the massacre of Paris (what time, in diverse parts of
France were murdered above 60000 persons) to be painted in his palace; it
should seem, Ad perpetuam rei memoriam; lest so extreme wickedness should be
forgotten. So no doubt should this Powder work have been painted by it, if it
had not miscarried: save that no Art could have imitated the confusion, no
color have represented so barbarous cruelty. What stain could shadow the
blood of so royal Princes? what red were sufficient to paint the blood of so
many and noble Christians? what black, the darkness of that day? what azure
the unmercifulness of the fire? what device, what invention could have
expressed the woeful cry of the innocent, and the infernal noise of the blow?
If they were men, why did they work like devils? if christian men, let me
speak to them in the words of Saint Cyprian: Quid facit in pectore Christiano
Luporum feritas, canum rabies, saeuitia bestiarum, venenum lethale serpentum?
How came into the breast of Christians the rage of Wolves, the madness of
dogs, the cruelty of beasts, the deadly poison of venomous serpents? Cum sitis
impij, crudeles, homicidae, inhumani, non amplius eritis Christiani: says
Lucifer Calazitanus, of the Arians: When you are become impious, cruel,
murderers, without humanity, you shall no longer be called Christians. Yet
these men are made our ghostly fathers, and hearken a little; and take the
measure of them that cry themselves, as loud as oister-women in the streets,
The Apostles successors. Over and besides that I have already said, and all
the rest, they have violated our Churches, threatened the Statesman, assaulted
the officer, rescued the malefactor, broken the prisons, slaughtered our
cattle; these fifty years together traveled of nothing but the destruction
of their dearest country that bred and bare them. O earth, earth, earth, cover
not this impiety, and let their wickedness find no place; o heavens above
reveal it; o heaven and earth, and all you creatures, were it possible you had
any sense of our complaint, bear witness of it: Priests are turned into
hangmen, massing into massacring, ghostly fathers into bloudly murderers,
Colleges of Friars into dens of Assasines. Alas for the infamy of our age
to bear the date of such impieties. But thou o blessed Trinity, the sole
infuser of grace, who have kindled the feeling of all this wickedness, as a
fire in my bones, move the hearts of our seduced countrymen, open their eyes,
and lead them into the ways of peace and godliness: and as for Rome that
works nothing but the ruin of thy Church and Gospel; Remember O Lord the
children of Edom in the day of Jerusalem, how they have cried against thy
Sanctuary, Down with it, down with it, even to the foundation, O daughter
Babylon, who one day shall be wasted and destroyed; happy shall he be that
rewards thee as thou have served us.

21 There is much to be said touching their religion; their turbulencie
troubles peace no more then their heresies corrupt religion: no time now to
insist upon the point: this must be tried by our public writings and
disputations, if any man will do it exactly. If the several points of their
faith, and the articles of their NEW CREED were ever taught or believed in the
ancient Church, or otherwise came into the world then by the strength of humane
wit, fer the advancing of the Pope and his Clergies greatness, why have they
purged so many ancient books, coined so many writings, and allowed nothing to be
authentical but what the Pope agrees to? and Regula infailibilis ad firmandum
vnam fidem, est fummus Pontisex Romanus: and omnes atticuli fidei vlti
materesolvuntur in ipsam Albertin. Corol. page 251.
made him the sole rule of all men's faith and conscience? And I greatly care
not what any man persuades himself to the contrary. Our Church at this day,
and ever since the reformation of religion, has had as learned Divines able to
judge of these things, as the Pope and his abettors in all their nations have
any to oppose against them: and which is Gods special favor to us, we have a
King who with his own mouth and pen can justify as much as his laws
maintain, against the best of them all. Yet it lies not all on the point of
learning neither: Sauanarola truly De Ord. scient. lib. 3.
says, Veritas Scripturae puritate cordis and diuina illustratione magis
addiscitor quam vi ingenij aut studij humani exercitio: The truth of the
Scripture is sooner learned by pure hearts enlightened from above, then by the
strength of wit or exercise of humane study. What it is that draws so many to
papistry, and filles the land with so many Seminary Priests, we know well
enough: the Friar long since discovered it to his nouice, when he told him the
advantage that ghostly fathers had over the lay people: We keep their
counsel, they keep none of ours: we have part of their lands, they have none
of ours: we have charity toward their wives, they toward none of ours: they
bring up our children, we none of theirs. A Marquess of Brandenberg was wont
to say, that he had three Monasteries in his country that were so many
miracles. One of the Dominicans, who had abundance of corn, and yet had no
land to sow: Another of the Franciscans, who were full of money, and yet
received no rents: The third of Saint Thomas, whose Monks had many children,
and yet had no wives, These speeches were in their time pleasantly uttered, but
all the world knows the moral to be true: and so I leave them and will end my
text, and entreat you to retire to our public gratulation.

22 If our Apostle would have Prayer and thanksgiving for Kings and all in
authority, then when Nero was Emperor, such a tyrant and monster that See
Hieron in Dan. 11. Sever. Sulp. sacr hist. lib. 2. August. De Ciuit. lib. 20.
cap. 19.
diverse held him to be Antichrist; and every Magistrate then living was a
deadly persecutor of the Gospel; how deeply are we bound to give God thanks
for our times, wherein we enjoy so gracious a Governor? I speak of one of the
best and greatest Princes that the Church of God has lightly had, and this
land, yet, never had any greater: and therefore my self being of so small
faculty and strait conceit, I must entreat you, in the phrase of Philo, To
behold the image of a great mountain in a small ring: To conceive the worth of
a good King in the narrow words of an unskillful speaker; when the mercies of
God bestowed on us, in, and by him, I freely confess, are higher and greater
then I can measure. Were I a Pacatus, a Claudian, a Mamertinus, that so nobly
sounded out the praise of their Emperors: had I the reputation and faculty of
an Eusebius, an Amberose, a Nazianzen, a Chrysostom, I would say as much of
his Majesty as they said of Constantine, Theodosius, or Valentinian. For,
Cassiod. var. lib. 9. ep. 25.
Stipendium and Tyranno penditur, praedicatio non nisi bono Principi: Men pay
tribute to Tyrants, but commendations are due to good Princes, and the least
reward we can yield them. He is unthankful that is unmindful of a benefit,
unthankful that requites it not; unthankful that denies it; but most
unthankful that dissembles it. Though we cannot requite the mercy of God, yet
we will neither forget nor dissemble it.

23 It was Gods own immediate doing to anoint him over us, when the sins of
our nation rather cried for vengeance then deserved so happy government; and
the uttermost that the wit of enemies and malice of Satan could do, was not
wanting to make diuersion. The manifold dangers from which God has delivered
him, even from his cradle, are so many pledges of his love to us: for they
shall not miscarrie whom God protects. David was grievously persecuted: Ioash
his life sought by his own grandmother Athaliah. Phot. biblioth. page 30.
Constantine being a youth in Dioclesians Court, by the craft of Maximinus, was
trained to combat with a Lion. Euagr. lib. 5. cap. 21.
When Mauritius was an infant, his mother saw a Faerie oftentimes to pull him
out of his cradle, and offer to devour him. Queen Elizabeth's dangers you all
know. So that what we have is Gods entire mercy against the malice of men and
evil angels. That day right was given to the succession, which is no small
blessing: For, Wisd. 4.3.
Bastard plants take no rooting. Two mighty nations that sprang out of one
womb, but had been divided ever since they were borre, which is 2500. years,
were united: the benefit whereof, if it be well pursued, will be simply the
greatest that can belong to both the states, if, as brothers they will abstain
from injuries, and strive which shall overcome other in piety and brotherly
offices. There was nothing of that we had before, but by his Majesty we have
it either enlarged or confirmed to us, and by hope of succession in his issue,
to our children after us: Peace, Religion, Honor, Security: the best things
and all that a State can desire. The inconvenience is, that by long enjoying
them we disccrne not their price: as the Barbarians abounding with gold and
pearl, trucke them for pinnes and glasses. Had we lived a while as Iud. 6.
Israel did under the Madianites, in holes and caves of the earth for sear,
had we tasted the times of our Barons war here in England: lived a while in
Flanders under the D. of Alua; or in France the time of their civil wars,
and tasted their massacres: or under the Spaniard in the West Indies: or a
while under the Turk in Natolia where he breeds his soldiers: or but at home
under a Boner, and a Winchester, or a Spanish Inquisition: our taste would
return unto us, and we should better know what we have.

24 Touching Religion, and the government of our Church, established by his
Highness, there be many complaints made by our Brownists and their favorers:
(...), Simocatt. Hist.
for discontented minds are always whining, and upon small occasions use to
multiply mountains of complaints: and fill the world with their importunity. A
contemptible generation they, are and unworthy answer: yet I will say no more
then is true; Religion is as purely taught and maintained in England this day,
as in any Church or nation in Europe, and as much liberty allowed to preach it:
and touching the Ecclesiastical government by Bishops which they so vellicate,
I protest before God and man, it amaseth me to see such as can read either the
Scripture or Antiquity to carpe at it, when the Christian world, for 1400
years after Christ, never saw any other government. I will flatter

(...) times over: thrice with his weight in silver, twice in gold, once in
pearl, and unions, and yet could not obtain it. Oh that there had been but
one dram of his Highness clemency in those hearts that were so inexorable:
who has saved, and pardoned more then (possible) has stood with his own
safety. What can I speak of his Learning, Eloquence, and gifts of Nature
worthy of the same! wherein I presume his greatest adversaries will not deny
him to parallel, if not exceed, all Princes living, and to be equal to the
learned that have gone before him. We have heard him heretofore, and saw him
now lately in our Universities, in the midst of the learned in all
Professions, speaking and discoursing with no less judgment and readiness of
utterance and conceit, then if it had been his ordinary Profession. How much
ado had many to refrain very tears for joy to see a mighty and potent
King, and Gods vicegerent upon earth, to bring al his State and Roialty with
him into the schools of the Prophets, and there with such humility and
meekness to sit him down among his poor subjects, and converse with them in
their own faculty? Never was there in the world a greater Patron to Learning
and learned men; there being few that excel in Learning and zeal for the
Gospel, even in foreign parts, but he has some way made them beholding to
him: his own writings of all sorts, but principally in the cause of Religion
against Antichrist, are such as have ennobled his Kingdom for ever and have
given more life and courage to us all, then I may well with modesty express:
and time shall show, those writings will work scuh effects against the enemies
of the truth, that the ages to come shall him Blessed. And for his constancy in
the maintenance and propagation of religion, both at home and abroad, I am not
the word and sacrament? that scarce any private man hears more Sermons then
himself: that, in this respect, as much may be said of his Court, as was said
of the Court of Theodosius, that it was turned into an Oratorie for the daily
service of God. And to assure us of his entire heart, he has given the dearest
pledges that he possibly could: against the Pope and his band he has exposed
his Crown, dignity, children, life; all he has: what would we more? We know
well enough how he has been labored at home and abroad for toleration of
Papistry: and how the Recusants and their Patrons have negotiated the
business: yet could they never nor shall they ever stir him. That day he
gave the Noble Princess, that gracious Lady his daughter to the Palatine, he
sealed us an instrument of his hand to testify his love to religion; and make
his affection thereunto known to all men. Go we yet forward to the rest. How
religiously and virtuously has he caused the Prince his son to be brought
up, whose education is such, that I make a question whether any Bishop in our
kingdom be so religious and careful in the education of his child? This we
are sure of; his Majesty cannot, in all that is under his hands, more gratify
the State, and the Church of God, and his poor subjects therein, then in this
one thing, if the consequence thereof be well considered and compared with the
contrary. Let carping spirits and meddling tongues, that hold it their chiefest
liberty to scan Kings and take into their actions, contain themselves: these
his virtues, and this love which he has showed to State and Church, shall bind
all godly hearts unto him, and make them the tabernacle of his honor; when
Papists and factions have spet out their venime: whom I could charm well enough
if they were not deaffe Adder. David commended Saul: the Spirit of God David:
the ancient Church could never satisfy it self in extolling Constantine,
Theodosius, Valentinian, Gratian; and yet, if I listed, I could pick quarrels
to the best of them: and charge every one of them with some particulars that
his Majesty cannot be touched with.

26 Let us have an eye to the text. When God, by his gouernent, vpholds unto us
Peace, Tranquillity, Religion, Godliness: praise God for the King, and ye
praise him for all these things: Love and serve the King, and ye love and serve
God that has given you all. Let us sing a song of thanksgiving to God for his
mercies: Holy, holy, Lord God of hoasts; heaven and earth are full of thy
goodness: thou have visited thy people, and showed them thy salvation: thy
bounty and thy mercy has crowned them with gladness, and turned away the
punishment of their sins: and let us say, with the people at the inauguration
of Solomon, 1 Reg. 139.
God save the King: that under him we and our posterity may lead a quiet and
peaceable life in all godliness and honesty. Unto whom our God, one glorious,
gracious, and immortal God, the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, be
rendered again and again all honor and glory now and evermore. Amen.

A SERMON PREACHED AT THE SPITTLE in London, upon Easter Monday, 1613.
1. TIM. 6.17. Charge them that are rich in this world, that they be not high
minded, nor trust in uncertain riches, but in the living God who gives us
richly all things to enjoy: That they do good, that they be rich in good
works, ready to Distribute, willing to Communicate: Laying up in store for
themselves a good foundation against the time to come, that they may lay hold
on eternal life.


IN which words the blessed Apostle instructs Timothy, the Bishop of Ephesus,
how to preach to great and wealthy men, and how to exhort them touching the use
of their riches, that they may be saved. For it is to be supposed, that as the
poor embraced the Gospel, so many rich alst. For, Act. 2.45. we read of
diverse that had fair possessions and much wealth; and 19.31. of some that were
of the chiefest of Asia, that believed: for Ephesus, and all Asia were full of
wealth: and if there had been none then, yet afterward, when the fulness of the
Gentiles should come in, there would be many both great, and noble, and rich,
and wealthy, that God would call into his Church, in all ages, and therefore he
leaves this Scripture for them: to admonish and direct them in the use of their
riches, and teach the^ how to carry themselves, that, with their greatness,
they might also enjoy the hope of eternal life; without which hope all worldly
wealth and greatness were nothing worth. For, What shall it profit a man to
win the whole world, if he lose his soul? says our Savior. Mat. 16.26. And
as at a funeral dinner there are many guests and great cheer, but no mirth,
because he is dead that should make it: so in the state of riches there is
great plenty and much abundance of outward things, but no fecuritie of mind, if
they be not well used; because that is wanting that should give it, the hope of
salvation, and assurance of eternal life in the world to come. He had said, a
little before, verse the ninth, that Such as will be rich fall into temptation
and snares, and lusts, that plonge them into destruction; and that the desire
of money should be avoided as the root of all evil: The which doctrine, lest
it should be mistaken, he expounds in this place; that his meaning is not
simply to condemn the state of rich men, as some do, but only to forewarne
them of the danger: that they possess their riches, and use them with that
humility of mind, and thankfulness to God, and readiness to do good, that
they may make them a means to prefer themselves thereby to the undoubted
hope of eternal life.

2 I know well, this doctrine, and very likely this text too, is often handled
in this place, but that is no matter; the audience and occasion will scarce
admit any other. The Priests must walk, with the same Arc upon their
shoulders, every day once, about the walls of Jericho for six days together;
and the seventh day seven times: Ios. 6.3. The King of Israel beat the ground
thrice, and the Prophet was angry that he beat it no oftener. 2. Reg. 13.18.
The Sun rises daily, yet no man is weary of it. The body is nourished, and
diseases cured, not so much with the variety of meats and physic, as with
their goodness and finnesse. If it please God to give me strength, and you
patience, the Text will serve well enough.

3 It contains a threefold admonition for the rich. First, touching their
mind, what to avoid: Not to be high minded, not to trust in their riches, but
in God. Secondly, then touching the use of their wealth: That they do good,
that they be rich in good works, ready to distribute, willing to communicate.
Thirdly, touching the end why they must do this: That they may lay up in store,
for themselves, a good foundation against the time to come, that they may lay
hold on eternal life. They may possess their riches, but their riches must
not possess their mind. Then again, they must not possess their riches
alone, but, as Gods stewards put in trust, they must faithfully impart them to
others. Then lastly, they must so store up riches, that they store up withal a
good conscience, and so lay hold on these earthly things, that they lose not
the hold of better things in the life to come. These are the particulars of the
whole.

4 But first let it be noted how he propounds this doctrine: Charge them that
are rich in this world. He condemns not riches, nor disallowes their use, but
only bids Timothy admonish such as have them to be humble minded. He binds no
man to renounce them, but to use them well, and to join the riches of Gods
grace with them. There have been humors exceeding busy with riches and
greatness, and all property and dominion; that every thing might be in common.
The Council of Diospolis charges Pelagius with this opinion, and made him
recant it. But he was not the first. Niceph. lib. 9. cap. 16. says of
Eustathius and his sectaries, Quod locupletes extorres prorsus regno coeloru^
esse duxerunt: They held no wealthy man could be saved. In our times the
Anabaptists plied this conceit: they made a book, called Opus restitutionis,
wherein they taught it violently. Hortensius, in his story, tells strange
practices of theirs this way. But it is an absurd humor, fit for none but
banktouts and rebels: when possessions are given of God, and property is
founded in the law of Nature: and against it Saint Austine, Ep. 89. q. 4.
wittily observed, that Lazarus a poor man, sat in heaven, in Abraham's bosom,
that was a rich man. Solomon says, The rich and the poor meet together, and
the Lord made them both. Prou. 22.2.

Note again how the Apostle will have Timothy, and, by his example, the
Ministers of the Church, to to preach to the rich also, and the greatest that
live; and so to preach, that they be not flattered and let alone in bad
courses: but charged and admonished, if they should chance to be high minded or
unthankful to God; for they are a portion of the flock, over which the holy
Ghost has made us overseers, and unto whom the will of God must be revealed as
well as the poor. And though they be greater then the Preacher, in this world,
yet they are not greater then he that sends the Preacher to them. Ier. 1.7.
Whatsoever I command thee thou shall speak. Be not afraid, I have put my words
into thy mouth. I have set thee over nation; and kingdoms: And Apo. 10. vlt.
Thou must prophecy among the Nations, and to many Kings. In the which respect
Nazianz. says of the Emperor himself, (...): The Law of God has subjected
you to our Pulpits. Saint Chrysostom says, Sieve quis Dux militiae sit, five
Praefectus, sieve Princeps diademate coronatus, maiorem illo potestatem habes:
Whosoever he be thou art above him: thou art the keeper of the flock, suffer
none to defile the sountaine of water whereof the Sheep should drink, but
repel them.

6 The rich and the mighty must note this, and Preachers must observe it, that
both sides keep even quarters. Great men have always been hard to deal with.
Pride the rich man's cousin (so Bernard styles it) fills them with stoutnes and
presumption. Ier. 22.21 I spoke to thee in thy prosperity, but thou would not
hear me, this has been thy manner. Whereby it comes to pas, that many times
the Preacher by doing but his duty, by charging them that are Rich, falls into
much trouble: not that the Poorer sort are much better: for we find as much
Pride and Presumption among them as with the Rich; but they want teeth and
horns; The Sons of Zeruiah are too strong for us. All the Prophets, Apostles,
and Pastors of the Church in all ages have found this by experience. And if the
upholding of Christ's kingdom against the world and sin, and the salvation of
our souls, lay not upon it, it were better for us never to have to do with a
great man. The Shepherd having lost a lamb out of his slock, made a vow to
God, that if he might find the thief, hewould sacrifice a Ram. But when in
the pursuit he found a Lion preying upon it, he made another vow, that if God
would deliver him from the Lions fury, he

(...) not give way to Gods authority, but so unthankfully draw pride from
that which should draw them to humble themselves to God the more; it is just
with God to leave them in the hands of unprofitable teachers. An unworthy
thing no doubt, and ill befitting the majesty of the Pulpit, for a Preacher to
flatter any man, to trifle in his Sermons, or private exhortations, to sow his
seed in the ear, to hunt after his own credit: not to deal, as far as his
faculty reaches, thoroughly: and yet the holy Ghost complains of such all over
the Scripture. That a man may say of their preaching as a good writer does of
Irish Harpes, Oculos pascunt, aures onerant: It is better to see them then
hear them. There is much delight to see their nimble fingring, how they run
in and out, and touch double and treble; but the melody is not much worth. And
yet, they say, Saint Keywins Harpc is kept for a great relicke, as flattering
and verbal Preachers are now and then great relickes with worldly men. Quae
otiosorum auribus placent, aegrotorum animis non prosunt, says Saluianus: That
which most tickles delicate ears, least helps diseased souls. Let no man
therefore, how great soever, carry that mind, to have the Preacher conceal
any part of this charge: If you cannot amend your sin so soon as you should,
o yet suffer us to rebuke it, to touch it, to smite it: our doctrine and plain
dealing, in time, may be a means to help and heal you. You give the
Physician leave to tell you any disease that is in you body: your Lawier leave
to show you any flaw that is in your state; your horsekeeper tells ye the
surfets of your horse: your huntsman the surrances of your dogs: and must we
only dissemble, and conceal from you the sins of your soul? We will not do
it: we will love you, and pray for you, and honor your greatness; but your
sins we will reprove, and what God has bidden us, we will charge you with.
And this little book that we hold in our hand, shall give us more true comfort
then the following and fawning upon all the greatness of the world. Hitherto
of the charge in general.

8 Now I come to the particulars, and first he admonishes them touching their
mind. The foundation of all well-doing must be laid in the heart; for, Prou.
4.23. thereout the whole life proceeds. And Mat. 12.33. first, Make the tree
good. This is the reason why the light of the Moon is variable and unconstant,
sometime more, and sometime less, and sometime none at all, because it is but
borrowed; and this will make great men unconstant in their well-doing, if the
heart be not stablished with grace, in it self; therefore Gods charge unto
them is, to begin with the heart. This charge is set down, first negatiuely:
Not to be high minded: not to trust in riches. The reason: For they are
uncertain. The^ affirmatively: But in the living God. The reasons are two.
First, he is the living God. Next, He gives us richly all things to enjoy.
Where four degrees of Gods bounty and mercy are mentioned. First, he gives
generally: All things. Next abundantly: All things richly. Then freely: He
gives all things. Lastly effectually: To enjoy. It is impossible the things of
this world should come to our hands with better conditions.

9 First, charge them That they be not high minded. It is the nature of
greatness, when it comes, to blow up the heart, as a bladder is blown with a
quill. And our Apostle said in the ninth verse: The rich fall into lusts and
temptations. Societ as quaedamest, etiam nominis, vitijs and diuitijs, says
Sidonius: Wealth and wickedness begin both with a letter, and are seldom
asunder. And as he that drinks wine shall feel it fume into his head, though
he be never so sober; so riches and all worldly greatness are a cup of fuming
wine, which the best man that lives shall feel suming in his heart, and some
are made stark drunken withal. Es. 29.9. They are drunk, but not with wine.
And as worms breed in the heart of trees, and they tell of toades and serpents
that have been found in the midst of a great stone; so pride the worm of
wealth, (so Saint Austine calls it) commonly breeds in the spirit of rich
men. And this is the reason why the Apostle in the first place gives warning of
it. This high mindeduesse, if I may stand a little to expound it, thus works
in those that have it. First, he values and esteems himself about that he is.
His understanding being corrupted and blinded, he apprehends great matters in
himself, that he is rich, that he is great, that he is wise, that he is able:
whereupon he affects himself in his will, and delights in his own
imagination. Ier. 22.23. I dwell in Libanon, and make my nest in the high
Cedars. This thought makes the action of pride complete; and it is not
necessary that a man in good earnest and formally think thus, but it is the
complete action of a high mind to have the passions of it. The errors of this
passion are two. First, that he forgets God to be the Author of that he has.
Next, that he sees not the imperfections, and misery, and wants attending that
he has. But is like a country man, that comes into a shop, and having no
skill, buys at a dear rate, and holds in great account, mingled and
counterfeit wares, because he has no skill: so his own heart beguileth him.
This is the first working of a high mind. Then secondly, upon this apprehension
he preferres himself before others, as good, or better then himself: yea he
despises others. Luke 18.11. God, I thank thee, I am not as other men; or as
this Publican. 1. Sam. 25.10. Who is David, and what is the son of Ishai?
Thirdly, he thinks himself worthy of any thing he desires, and thereupon
inordinately intrudes himself into all greatness and promotion, as if of
right it were due to him. Like the Spider that being but a poyson-full vermin,
yet climes to the rooffe of the Kings palace. Pro. 30.28: And the thistle that
Iehoash the King of Israel tells of. 2. Reg. 14.9. that sent to the Cedar of
Libanon to give him his daughter to be his sons wife. Fourthly, he makes his
own corrupt will and judgment the rule of his actions, thinking so well of
his own doings, that he grows insolent and incorrigible, and will abide no
teaching; like Caine, Genesis 4.9. Am I my brothers keeper? He thought God did him
wrong to question with him about his brother; his brother was old enough to
look to himself. Fifthly, he shows his spirit in outward behavior, in words,
in gesture, in apparel, in building, in furniture, in excess of meat and
drink. Esa. 3.16. The daughters of Sion are hauty, and walk with their necks
stretched out, and wandering eyes, minsing as they go: Their head tires, and
rings, and mufflers. Finally, in his heart, he refuses all obedience to God,
thinking it a base thing to be subject to his word, or ordinances. Job 21.15.
Who is the Almighty, that we should serve him? and what should we get by
praying to him? These are the characters of a high mind, whose secret thoughts
are noted by the holy Ghost; that we may see the pestilencie of that which the
Apostle, here, gives warning of. Apoc. 18.7. I sit a Queen. Dan. 4.27. Is not
this great Babel, that I have built by the might of my power? Obad. ver. 4.
Thou exaltest thy self as an Eagle, and make thy nest among the stars. But
it is a better way to hear what God says, Ier. 9.23. Let not the wise man
glory in his wisdom, nor the strong man glory in his strength, nor the rich
man glory in his riches: but let him that glories, glory in this, that he
understand and know me; says the Lord.

10 I have now showed what it is that rich men must avoid, but I must add,
that poor men, and mean persons, must avoid it too. For it is a venime that
poisons the basest also. Hagar Abraham's bondwoman, was no such goodly stuff,
and yet Genesis 16.4. Sarah her mistress was despised in her eyes. And 1. Sam. 10.
we read how the refuse of the people despised the Magistrate. Thus it fares at
this day among us; servants despise their masters, the people reverence not the
Magistrate, the grave Magistrates of this very City receive not the pledges of
respect. Job says, when he was a Magistrate, and walked through the street,
the young men saw him and hid themselves, the aged rose and stood up: the ear
that heard him blessed him, and the eye that saw him gave witness to him, Job.
29.7. Now young man, Prentices, servants, the common sort, are so far from
hiding themselves, or rising up, that I have often seen the Magistrate faced,
and almost brow-beaten, as he has gone by: but that due observance and honor,
that, by baring the head, bowing the knee, showing awful respect, they should
yield to so public Magistrates in so honorable a City, I have seldom seen.
The reason is, that Presumption and arrogance follows youth and baseness, as
well as wealth. A paltrie cottage will send out as much smoke as a great house.
A rotten log that is all sap, will yield as much saw dust, as sound timber. The
best motive I can propound to all young people and servants, is this; so to
carry themselves toward their masters, as they would their own servants
another day should carry themselves toward them: and so to honor their
Magistrate, as themselves would look to be honored, when by their weldoing,
God should heareafter advance them to the like place.

11. In the second place again Negatiuely: Charge them not to trust in riches.
The companion of pride is confidence in that which a man has: the Prophet Hab.
1.16. says, They sacrifice to their net, and burn incense to their yarne: the
meaning is, that the same confidence which by sacrifice and incense we protest
to God, they put in their wealth. And Job 31.24. it is noted to be a passion in
the covetous rich man, to make gold his hope, and to say to the wedge of gold;
Thou art my confidence: where the Septuagint translate, If I have wedded my
self to gold, because they dote upon it as a man does on the beauty of his
wife: and therefore he adds, If I beheld the Sun when it shined, or the Moon
walking in her beauty. If my heart did flatter me in secret, or if my mouth
have kissed my hand. For these are the passions of the wealthy, to delight in
the beauty of riches, and secreetly, in their heart to kiss them, and flatter
themselves in their abundance, as if gold were their Sun by day, and silure
their Moon by night. So Pro. 10.15. The rich man's goods are his strong city.
And Ecclesi. 40.25. Gold and silver fasten the feet: that is to say, The
Covetous man thinks he stands firm on no ground but paued with gold. As Luke.
12.19. I will say to my soul; Soul, thou have much wealth laid up for many
years: live at ease, and take thy pleasure. This is the confidence that rich
men put in their riches.

12 But the Apostle gives a reason against this: They are uncertain. Which is
a good reason; for Hope and Trust should be planted upon that which is firm
and certain, lest it deceive us. The Greek word here used, (...), means that
it is not apparently manifest, that our riches are that we take them for; we
presume of their goodness, but we may be deceived: as Mat. 13.22. they are
called Deceivable riches. This uncertainty of riches and al worldly
greatness is threefold. First, they are not sure to abide with him that has
them in most abundance. Pro. 23.5. Will thou cast thine eye upon that which is
nothing? for riches betakes her to her wings, and as an Eagle flies away into
the heavens. And as a bird shut up in a cage, will away suddenly whenever she
spies a hole open; so worldly wealth slides away through a hundred holes. Ier.
5.27. As a cage full of birds, so are their houses full of riches: and 17.11.
As the Partrich gathers her young, so is he that gets riches unjustly. They
write of the Partrich, that she will steal the eggs of other birds, and call
their young ones that she never hatched; but when they are flig and can fly,
they all leave her again mourning and calling when they are gone, and she that
had many running after her for a time, by and by has none at all. So, says
the holy Ghost, it shall be with him that trusts in his riches. Job. 5.3. I saw
him well rooted like a tree, and suddenly I cursed his habita^tion: that is to
say, I abhorred the uncertainty of his state, and in my mind presaged the
ruin of it. The experience of all times and persons confirms this. And the
very Gentiles confessed it more then many Christians do. Zonaras, page 32. Tom.
2. writes, that the manner was among the Romans, When any triumphed, that an
Officer stood behind him, and bad him, (...), Look what was behind him: and
there he saw a whip and a bell, to admonish him, that, for all his present
greatness, yet in time he might fall into the lashes of misery, that as a bell
it should sound, and all his friends should hear it. Thus fell Job and
Nebuchadnezzar: thus Belisarius, that having sometime been the most honorable,
wealthy, and powerful in the Empire, in his old age begged from door to
door, and being blind, was led by a boy begging in the streets, Belisario
obolum date. Paulus Aemilius tells of a great man, that boasting of his
prosperity, as if nothing could shake it, was admonished by his friend, Solam
ir am Numinis procul abesse, a tam secundis rebus non posse: Gods anger could
not long forbear so great prosperity: and shortly after fell into that woeful
misery, that greater has not bin heard of. The most renowned Emperor
Frederick lost all, and sued to be made but the Sexton of a Church. How many
great Merchants have suddenly lost all? how many Noblemen have spent all? how
many wealthy persons have come to extreme poverty? All stories divine and
humane show this to be true. Few Sondayes come over our head, but decayed
householders, or shipwrackt merchants, are gathered for. The wealth therefore of
this world is compard to a tree that casts his leaves, and is soon blown
down. Psa. 37.35.

(...) nesse untrusty. This kind of uncertainty is properly in being
occasions of sin, as our Apostle teaches in the ninth verse. They puff up
the heart, they entice to security, they are bauds to wantonness; and when they
leave a man, they fill his heart with discontent and murmuring. Quantum, cum
habentur, haeret amor, tantum cum subtrahuntur vrit dolor: We love them not so
well when we have them, but we sorrow as much after them when they are gone. He
that has most is never satisfied, if once he fall to love them. A sponge is
holden to be a living creature, but it has no parts. It is all belly to suck
in and digest, nothing else: so is it with a covetous man, he is all belly,
whatsoever he does tends to getting. But of all other temptations that follow
riches, none like the strange alteration they make in the mind of man upon
their coming; that he which before was loving, and humble, and patient, and
contented, and religious, and zealous, and chaste, and sober, and mortified,
now grows so altered into the contrary, that he is not himself. They write of
one of Euripides Tragedies, so acted by the Players, that it made such an
impression in the beholders, that they all went home in a passion of frenzy,
pronouncing Iambicks, and grew into such a vein of tragedy-playing, pacing and
acting it in the streets as they went, with the lovely words of Perseus to his
Andromeda, that it was long ere their distemper could be swaged again. This
Tragedy made the spectatours no madder, then, in our time we have seen,
worldly greatness to do many men; who have gone to the Theater sober enough:
but when wealth and riches, and worldly greatness have presented themselves,
upon the Stage, unto them, and with their lovely aspect a little enchanted
them; there has been nothing with them but vanity and presumption. We have
heard much of the efficacy of music, what passions and alterations it will
work in the mind of man, and how it will put him into fits, beside himself:
but I will tell you a story in Saxo Grammaticus. There was in the King of
Denmarks Court one that played on a Harp so exquisitly, that it was said he
could put men into what passion he listed, though it were into fury and
madness. One desirous to make the trial, would hear him, but so that diverse
gentlemen, standing aloof off out of the hearing, should be ready to come in,
and stay the music, if, they saw him in any distemper. Things thus ordered,
the Musician began to play: and first he struck so deep and sweet a note,
that he put the man into dumps, that he stood like one forlorn with care, his
hat in his eyes, his arms wreathed, sighing and lamenting. Then the Musician
began a new note, and played nothing but mirth and devices, that the man began
to leave his dumps, and fall a dancing. But in the third place he so varied his
notes, and by degrees wrought upon the man, according as he saw him incline,
that from dancing he brought him to showting until he grew frantic, and slew
four that came in to stay him. If riches be not used the wiselier, they do the
same that this Harper did. First, in the beginning, when a man is gathering
them together, they fill him with care and restlesnesse, that nothing is more
miserable then a man carking after the world. Then, in the second place, when
he has tasted their sweetness, and is gotten through his travel, when he
comes to be a master, he falls a dancing, and shows the vanity and
surquedry of his mind: he speaks proudly, his behavior vain, his apparel
excessive. And in this fit his wife also dances with him. But when this fit
is over, the third passion is Phrensy, killing and slaying: he becomes a
griping usurer, and cuts the throat of many a man; and is so strong and
violent in whatsoever he takes in hand that no man with safety may come within
him. Ita animorum habitus inflectit modorum varietas: Thus riches make every
man dance after their pipe. Sic vitijs vt diuitijs incubantes, says Sidonius:
They foster their sins as well as their riches that love their riches. This is
the uncertainty of riches, and the reason yielded by the Apostle why no man
should trust in them.

15 The next part of the charge is Affirmatively: But to trust in the living
God, who gives richly and things to enjoy. In which words there are two reasons
assigned why they should trust in God. First, he is the living God: who lives
himself by his own perfection, and gives life to all other things. The life
of God is his eternal nature, when, by the immanent operation of his
understanding and will, as by his own form, he moves himself, and gives
motion and virtue to all inferiors causes; being himself the center, and
first beginning of all motion, not determined by any thing out of himself.
This life of God is Anima mundi: the soul of the world. Act. 17.25. In him we
live, and move, and have our being. And our Apostle mentions it to give rich
men to understand that if they have never so much, yet there is no life or
virtue in it, but as it shall please God to infuse: and if a man have nothing,
yet trusting in God he can give him life and liuelyhood, when all outward means
lie dead. This is it our Savior means, Luc. 12.15. Though a man have
abundance, yet his life stands not in his wealth. How then? The Prophet David
says, Psalm. 145.15. The eyes of all wait upon thee: And thou give them
their meat in due season: thou fillest all things living (not with bread, but)
with thy good pleasure. Note here, touching the life of God, first, that all
second causes, as riches, meat, apparel, comfort, are uncertain and vain, if
God forsake them. Next, when a man has all things at hand that he can desire,
yet God by infusing of his life into them, gives us the fruition. Mat. 4.4. Man
lives not by bread only, but by every word that comes out of the mouth of God.
And therefore David says, Psalm. 20.7. Some put their trust in chariots, and
horses, but we will remember the name of Jehovah our God. As if he should say,
All the power in the world is nothing, if God with hold his life from it. And
thus we see, many times, death, and misery, and want, and weakness, to be in
the midst of abundance; when life, and comfort, and peace, and strength, are
found in poverty. Thus the poor man's child grows up, and many a one straightened
and scanted with want, yet lives in much peace; when issue fails, and
posterity misproues among the rich, and their houses, ever anon, are
overthrown. This is the the first reason why To trust in God.

16 The next is, He gives us, richly, all things to enjoy. Where, as I noted in
the beginning, four conditions of the gift of God are affirmed. First, that he
gives us all things, generally either that we have, or that we shall need, or
can desire. In this great variety and plenty that we see, all things come from
him: and in this great necessity wherein we need so many things, he denies
nothing. He gives the king his Royalty, the Nobleman his Honor, the Captain
his strength, the rich man his wealth. He gives us health, and pleasure, and
deliverance in the time of danger; and as Nathan said to David, 2. Sam. 12.8.
If all this were too little, he would yet give us more. He gives all things.
Next, he gives abundantly: richly, as becomes the greatness of a King. Earthly
Princes, and the greatest that live, are feign to measure their gifts, because
their store is not infinite; but, Ephesians. 2.4. God is rich in mercy. We read of a
Duke of Millan, that marrying his daughter to a son of England, he made a
dinner of thirty courses, and, at every course, gave so many gifts, to every
guest at the table, as there were dishes in the course. This was rich and
royal entertainment; but God gives more richly. Thirdly, he gives freely: he
exchanges not with us for any thing that he receives at our hand again, but he
gives, that is to say, without any desert in us, he conferres freely: for He
will have mercy upon whom he will have mercy, and will show compassion upon
whom he will show compassion. Exo. 33.19. Therefore wicked and unworthy men are
rich, and great, and honorable; and the heathen that have not known his Name,
enjoy great abundance. No man does so; but he that gives most can yet scarce be
said to do it freely, because though he receive nothing again in the same
kind, yet he has thanks, and enioyes love and pleasure from him he
gratifies; which God, in many does not; and if any be thankful and love him,
that also is his gift whereby he prevented and stirred him up. Amor Dei facit
nos amabiles: Gods love infused into us makes us such as he can love. Fourthly,
he gives effectually, to enjoy, that no malice or envy, of the devil or man,
can take away the benefit of his gift from us. He gives it, and so gives it,
that he vpholds it to us against loss and decay; and then gives us comfort in
it, and strength to it, to serve our turn. He gives strength to our bread,
warmnes to our clothes, cheerfulness to our health, and security to our
plenty. But there are yet two things more intended in the words. First, he
gives us all things to use and occupy, and do good with, to our selves and
others: not to hourd and lock up, and live beside it in baseness and penury;
as if our house should be like the den of a Wolf, nothing but to cram and hide
therein whatsoever we lay hold on: for Solomon says, Eccles. 9.7. Go eat thy
bread and drink thy wine with joy: that is, as the Chaldee Paraphrast
expounds, Taste thy bread, thy self, chearefully, and help the poor. Job
says, 31.18. He eat not his meat alone, but the poor grew up with him, and
the fleece of his sheep warmed him. This man was more then the Iailor of his
wealth to carry the keys. Next, the meaning is, to enjoy that we have well,
and use it lawfully; not to bestow it as we list our selus, according to the
corrupt lusts of our hearts, upon the vanities and excesses of the world, but
as becomes the stewards of Gods gifts. For the rich man, in the Gospel, Luke
16.19. was no miser of his goods, but spent freely; yet for so much as he did
it upon excess in apparel, and meat, and pleasures, he went to hell for it.

17 I cannot leave this point thus, but must needs spend a little more time
about it; and therefore I humbly beseech this honorable Audience to give me
leave to deal freely and really. When God bestowed this abundance of wealth
upon the land, he never intended that it should be so abused, in prodigality
and excess: Drinking, and dicing, and gaming, and apparel, consume the most
part of many a man's estate; to say nothing of whordome, and suites at law, and
other actions of prodigality. Many hundreds sell their land, which God gave
them to enjoy, and destroy their estates to maintain these things: this is it
that makes our gallants trudge so fast between the Broker and the Usurer. The
excess of apparel is such, both in men and women, from the Lady to the
milkmaide, that it should seem they imagine, God gave them their riches for
nothing but to deck themselves. The walls of old Babylon might have been kept
in repair with as little cost as our women are; and a Ladies head is sometime
as rich as her husbands rent day. There is as much, possible, to be said of
men. I have little hope to control it. When Luther began to preach against the
Popes pardons, a friend of his came to him, and gave him this counsel: As good
hold your tongue; the custom is so strong you will do no good; go into your
study and pray, Domine miserere nostri; and get you no anger. The same you may
say to me, for any hope of reformation that I see. And if some little restraint
were intended, I make a question whether our Ladies, and citizens wives, and
some Preachers wives among them too, would forbear to do as the Dames of Rome
did, when a motion was made to abridge them a little of their jewels and
coaches: they flocked together, and suffered no man to go into the Senate
house, till they had let him see their resolution. Cato might say his mind,
but the women would have their will. But the will and resolution of the best
subject in this land, be they women or men, shall not bear them out against
the Almighty: who in his word has controlled this excess, and by the Pastors
of his Church in all ages condemned it even to hell, their painting, their
nakedness, their inconstancy in all fashions, their (...): the instruments of
dissoluteness: their (...): as Nazianzen speaks: The sophistry of their
locks, turning their head into a stage for men to look at. But this is
nothing. Fear they not him that has made heaven and earth, and has thrown
into sudden misery, and knocked down, before their eyes, as gallant as
themselves, in the top of their pride? Fear they not sickness, disgrace, a
loathsome age? O why art thou proud o dust and vanity? vile earth, stinch
lapped up in silk, magnified dongue, gilded rottenness, golden damnation? Do
you not consider (I will yet once more urge the point, if paraduenture any
piety, any remorse, any grace, any memory of Gods love be left among us) do
you not consider what havoc ye make of Gods good gifts, that should be spent
to better purposes; relieuing the poor, keeping house, paying of debts,
bringing up your children? Do you never call to mind the pretiousnesse of the
time spent about these things, when scarce one hour in twenty four and
twenties is bestowed in humble prayer and true repentance upon your knees, in
your closet, unto God? see you not what a banner you display of a vain mind,
that minds nothing but these trifles? how you confound all order and states, by
going beyond your calling? what occasions of sin and uncleanness you offer
to your selves and others? how you deface Gods workmanship, your bodies, as if
he made them imperfect, and you would mend them? Non cogitat vanitatem
vniuersi, qui vniuersas vanitates cogit in cutem suam: Such as hang upon their
skin the vanity of all things, little remember the vanity of every thing.
And so I come to the second principal part of my text.

18 Wherein the Apostle charges them touching the use of their riches, To do
good, to be rich in good works, ready to distribute, willing to communicate.
He admouisheth them of three points. First, the substance: to do good.
Secondly, the quantity, to be rich in doing good. Thirdly, the quality, to be
ready and willing to do this. Touching the first point, it is to be observed,
that our Apostle does not particularly express and name any thing, as alms,
or lending, or contributing this or that way; which yet they are bound unto in
express terms elsewhere; but only in general he bids them not withhold
their riches, but communicate and distribute them, to all good purposes, and be
good and godly as well as rich, yea abound in godliness as much as they do in
wealth and prosperity. The substance is, do good, distribute, communicate,
every way: the first word imports all good, whatsoever belongs to a Christian
life, piety, holiness, justice, integrity, religion, all godliness. The
other two, distribute, and communicate, that good which properly is expected
from rich men, that none else can do. The proper good of fire is to warm, the
good of water is to wash and cleanse, the good of meat to feed, the good of
Physic to cure; and the proper and special good of rich men is to help and
relieve by communicating and distributing, where there is want, either among
the poor, or in the Church, or in the Common wealth. The which goodness our
Apostle most wisely opposes against the manifold evil that they may do. For a
great man with his riches may do much hurt: he may oppress the State wherein
he lives twenty ways; by engrossing, by inhansing, by monopolies, by usury: he
may oppress his enemy: pervert justice: give bad example: hinder religion:
support heresy: bear out himself in any wickedness (for, A gift in the
bosom prospers which way soever it goes.) This is it that has filled this
City, and all the world with oppression, and bloodshed, and whordome, and
Atheism, and Papistrie, and blasphemy, that a great man may do what he list;
because his riches afford him the means, and are a bush at his back. This is
it that makes the name of riches so odious in the Scripture, and rich folk so
suspected in the world. And this is it that causes many a man to seek after
greatness, and authority, and place, and promotion, that he might be able to
execute the lusts of his heart; as many love to be mending the fire, not
because they care for mending it, but because they would warm their fingers.
From all this the Apostle reuokes us to the doing of good. This is the
substance.

19 The quantity is, rich in good: the quality, ready and willing. In which
words he teaches how to conditionate our distribution; there must be Plenty
and cheerfulness. First, they must be rich and plentiful, as God has been
to them. He gives richly all things, and expects that we should distribute
richly again. This is done, when first we cast our eyes upon all sorts of good
that is to be done: the poor, in extremity must be helped: orphans and aged
must be provided for: our poor friends that are behind hand: prisoners, and
distressed householders: young tradesmen that want stocks: must be thought on. We
must be ready to help forward any public good, Churches, highwaies, bridges,

(...) feed the hungry, to cloathe the naked, to provide for the miserable?
Many a poor child is cast naked, by death and poverty of friends, upon the
world; it weeps in want, and yet knows not it own misery: many a young man
and woman in their want, are ready to fall into desperate courses: many an
honest householder does all he is able, and yet ouercharged cannot rescue
himself from secret want, pinching debts, heavy sighs. O happy hand that
helps here, and happy abundance that supplies all this want: a poor child by
this means becomes an honest man, and sometimes a great ornament to his
country: and the distressed are enabled either to overcome, or comfortably to
bear their affliction. Make the picture of this Mercy in a table, and hang it
in your houses: let it be a virgin fair and lovely: her garments green and
orient: a crown of gold upon her head, the tears of compassion bolting at her
eyes, pity and ruth sitting in her face. Let her paths be milk where she sets
her foot: let plenty lie in her lap, and multitudes of people draw their
breath from her. Let her give sight to the blind, and feet to the lame, and
strength and comfort to the miserable. Let the earth give her all his riches,
and the heavens their influence. Let her make the Sun to shine, the day to
rise, the clouds to rain, the earth to be fruitful. At her right hand place
the Angels of heaven protecting, at her left hand all Gods mercies attending.
Under her feet the devil and covetousness. Let pride follow her in bands;
let oppression, and envy, and selfeloue, and unlawful gains, fly from her
presence: and write upon her breast, in golden letters, O bona Charitas, alumna
coeli, corona soli, haeres vitae, medicina mortis, o bona Charitas.

21 Let me yet put you in mind of some things that possible might be mended.
The common prisons of this City, they say, are the dens of much mischief:
some that have long lien in them set up a school of wickedness, and teach the
rest impudency. So that which is Gods ordinance for reformation, becomes a
means to bring them to further naughtiness. It were a work inferior to no
other, if they were continually and ordinarily visited by godly Preachers
appointed thereunto, that should preach unto them, catechize them, and see their
order, and make relation thereof to the Magistrate. Besides, such prisons as
have Jesuits and Romish Seminaries in them, are daily visited by Recusants,
who bring their friends with them for conference. And so by that means they
are seduced, and others confirmed in papistrie: Popish books are scattered
abroad, and more hurt is done in the prison (notwithstanding the care of the
Magistrate) then abroad. They which are in authority can tell how to order
them better then I; but it were much good to Religion if that generation were a
little more restrained. The King of Meth, sometime in Ireland, upon an occasion
not much unlike this, asked one how certain noisome birds that came flying
into the realm, and bred there, might be destroyed; who answered him, Nidos
eorum vbique destruendos: The way to be rid of them, was to destroy their
nests. If you will show any zeal in rooting out papistry, and desire to rid
the City of it, the nests and cages where the Jesuits and Mass priests and
shut up, and breed, must be looked unto: both private houses, and the common
prisons, where these unclean birds are better entertained, then honester men,
and truer subjects.

22 And whereas subsidies, and loanes of money, and other taxations when need
is, are part of those duties whereby the goods and wealth of the subject is
communicated to the State; let me say something of that too. It is a thing that
we should readily yield to. A good King is no burden to his State, if it be
considered that whatsoever the stomach receives from the mouth, is for the
benefit of the whole body. The Magigistrate is eyes to the blind, feet to the
lame, father to the poor, watchman to the common wealth, Job. 29.15. whiles
private men sit in rest, without care or fear of the enemy; which he cannot
be, without these things. It is reported that the principal cause of the loss
of the Greek Empire, by the late conquest which the Turk made of the famous
Constantinople, was the churlishness of the subject toward their Emperor: the
siege was foresene, and motions were made for contribution toward the repair
of the walls, and certain military charges, but the subject drew back, and
pleaded want, until it was too late, and the City lost: what time the Turk
entering, and finding so much wealth in private men's houses, amazed, lift up his
hands to heaven, and asked what they meant that had so much wealth, to suffer
themselves to be thus destroyed, only for want of using it. When I remember
the benefits that God gave us when he brought his Majesty in, and his rare
constancy in maintaining Religion, and exposing himself and his children to
the fury of the devil and his Agents, for our sakes; and when I think upon
the liberty that the Gospel and Justice obtain under him; and when I read,
now and then, in my books, of the vast and woeful confusion that many a people
lives in, in comparison of us, I wish that in lieu hereof his gracious Highness,
as long as he lives might receive all contentement from us again. For all wise
men know that the welfare of kingdoms flows from the goodness of the King. And
therefore his Majesty is worthy of all he has, and more, and we may with
comfort contribute to his charges that we do, and if it were more. And so I
come to the last part.

23 Wherein he admonishes touching the end why rich men must do all this, and
the state whereto they shall rise thereby: That they may lay up in store, for
themselves, a good foundation against the time to come: that they may lay hold
upon eternal life. The meaning is, that this is the way to bring themselves to
eternal happiness: for God is righteous, and will reward unto every man that
he well does. Genesis 4. If thou do well, shall thou not be rewarded? He would
have no man think that God will recompense evil for weldoing, or forget
mercy and compassion. Deus reddit bona pro bonis, quia bonus est: mala pro
malis, quia iustus est; bona pro malis, quia bonus and iustus est; tantum non
reddit mala pro bonis, quia iniustus non est: says Augustine. God renders good
things for good, for he is good; evil things for evil, for he is just; good
things for evil because he is good, and just: only he rewards not evil for
good, because he is not unjust. And the way to recover this reward is to be
rich in the work of the Lord 1. Cor. 15. For by this means an entrance into
the everlasting kingdom shall be richly ministered unto us. (...). In steed of
these riches we shall be rewarded according to Gods riches. Aeterna aeternus
tribuit, mortalia co^fert mortalis; diuina Deus, peritura caducus: says
Prudentius.

24 This promise auouches three things. First, that there is a time to come, an
eternal life. For many rich are so besotted with the present time of this
life, that they think there is no other, or if there be, yet they desire it
not, but abandon themselves over to the present. Thus the rich man, Luke 12. I
will say to my soul, Thou have much goods laid up for many years: live at
ease, take thy pleasure: and Psalm. 17. David mentions some whose Portion is
in this life; that is, which look no further: but our Apostle propounds unto
them the time to come, whereof it stands every man in hand to have regard: for
as the tree falls so it lies, says Solomon, Eccle. 11. Secondly, he affirms
the foundation of eternity to be laid here, that all such as will enjoy the
life to come, lay hold upon it in this life. There is no question of this
point. For Abraham tells the rich man, being in hell torments: Remember that
thou, in thy life time, receiuedst thy pleasures; and likewise Lazarus pain:
therefore he is glorified, and thou tormented. And the Apostle requiring them
to lay a good foundation, implies that the state of the next life follows the
state of this, as the upper building follows the foundation. If we live well,
that is a good foundation, if wickedly and disobediently, that is a bad
foundation. For, Job 4. They that plow iniquity, and sow wickedness, shall
reap the same. This life is the field wherein he must sow that will reap: the
vineyard wherein he must labor that will receive wages: the race wherein he
must run that will be crowned: the mart time wherein he must occupy his
talent that will be a gainer: the warfare wherein he must fight valiantly that
will be rewarded. John 9. The night approches wherein no man can work. Thirdly
he affirms, that as there is a time and a life to come, the foundation whereof
is to be laid in this life: so humility of mind, and mercy, and goodness,
and readiness in distributing, is the way to apprehend it, and come unto it:
and all rich men thereby have ready and infallible way unto salvation. So
says S. John, 1. Epist. 3.14. By this we know, we are translated from death to
life, if we love our brethren. And therefore our Savior, Luke 16. bids, Make
you friends with your riches, that they (your friends by exhibiting your alms)
may receive (and make way for you to enter) into everlasting habitations. But,
of all other, the 25 of Matthew shows this most plainly: where our blessed
Savior shall say at the day of judgment, to the godly, Come ye blessed, etc.
And this is the reason why alms, and mercy, and all good works, are so
commended in the Scripture, and in the Fathers, and have those high titles
given unto them, because they are the things which God has appointed us to
walk in for the working out of our salvation.

25 For the better understanding of which point, and that you may see the
venime which the Church of Rome has put into the doctrine of Alms, and all
Good works: you must note that for the bringing man to heaven and happiness,
two things must be done: First, Gods justice must be satisfied, and the price
be paid which man, through his sin, owes to God. For God having given the
Law for man to keep entirely, in thought, word, and deed; and man having
broken this law, by his sin; the justice of God is such, that he cannot, now,
be saved, till the price be paid for this sin: and a just and full
satisfaction be made to God for the breach of this law: the which no man can do
by alms, or prayers, or any good works; but by faith in Christ, whose death
and obedience alone justifies from the law. But then, secondly, when Christ
our Savior has reconciled us to his Father, and elevated us into a new state,
that our sins are pardoned; and obtained for us the gift of eternal life:
yet still we must perform the conditions, and walk the way prescribed in the
Gospel. As if the King freely, without desert of mine, at the mediation of
another, give me a place about him, and never so much right unto it; yet I am
bound, if I will enjoy it, to come unto him, and do the things that the place
requires: and if he give me a tree growing in his forest, this his gift ties
me to be at cost to cut it down, and bring it home, if I will have it: and
when I have done, I cannot brag that by my coming and service, I merited the
place; or by my cost in carrying the tree, made my self worthy of the tree; as
the Jesuits speak of their works: but only my deed is the way that leads
to the fruition of that which is freely given me. And there cannot be produced
a place in all the Scripture, nor a sentence in all the Fathers, which extend
our works any further, or make them exceed the latitude of a mere condition,
or way, whereby we walk to that, which, not themselves, but the blood of
Christ, has deserved. The Prophet David was a holy man, and merciful to the
poor, yet when he comes to the point of meriting, Psalm 143. he desires God
Not to enter into judgment with him; for no flesh is righteous in his sight.
And, that which might give an end to this controversy for ever; Apoc. 4.10. we
read the four and twenty Elders had crowns upon their heads, but yet when
they came into the presence of God, to worship him, They cast them down before
his Throne, and cried, Thou alone art worthy. Again, within the same latitude
of our works, the Apostle says, that thereby We lay hold upon eternal life;
because as they are the way, so they give confidence and assurance to the
conscience, and lay, through hope, the ground of salvation in our mind. For as
he that keeps the way, is sure to come to the end; so he that perseueres in
the way of a good life, is sure to come to eternal life, and has confidence,
not because he thinks his works are worthy, or deserve it, but because he
knows they are the way. 1. Ioh. 3. If our heart condemn us not, we have
confidence toward God. Saint Jerome writes of Hilario, a holy man, that when he
died, and felt a motion of fear, he checked himself, Egredere anima mea,
egredere; quid times? Septuaginta prope annis servisti Christo, and iam times?
March on my soul, and set forward willingly: why fear thou? these seventy
years thou have served God, and will thou be now afraid? For as in a clock,
the finger makes not the clock to go, but the clock it: and yet it shows how
the clock goes within. So our works. And as, after a long sickness, when a
man feels his stomach come, his strength, and sleep to amend, and his sits
to abate; he begins to conceive certain hope of life: even so our works
are the signs of our election; and the forerunners of salvation, whereby we
lay hold on it by hope and faith, and walk toward it. This is the Apostles
meaning.

26 Let us come to some application of it, and so end. When the foundation of
eternal happiness is to be laid in this world, by living godly; and such as
will enjoy heaven must lay hold upon it in this life; they much forget
themselves, that, by living in sin and wickedness, lay the foundation of
their own destruction. For Job says of every wicked man, 20.11. that His
bones shall be filled with his sin, and it shall couch down with him in the
dust, and 1. Ioh. 3.8. Let no man deceive you with vain words; he that does
wickedly is a wicked man, and of the devil. Every man thinks to have eternal
life, and yet few lay any foundation for it. If ever it were a time to cry out
of sin, this is it, wherein the Preachers may say with the Angel in Zach. 1.
We have gone through the world, and behold all the world sits still, and is
at rest. And it cannot be said of us, as it was of the Amorites, that Their
wickedness is not yet complete: Genesis 15. For we see sin to be of that
elevation, that there is scarce left any room for the mercy of God to help
us. There are four things that show sin to be complete, and nothing wanting
but the terrible judgments of God to be daily looked for. First, when the
sins are great, like the sins of the Gentiles, Atheism, whoredom,
Sodomie, bloodshed, oppression. These are crying sins, and there are no
greater. Secondly, when they are so general that all sorts are wrapped in them.
In Sodom there were not Ten good men, Genesis 18. but round about, from the young
to the old, they followed wickedness, Genesis 19. and Genesis 6.12. All flesh had
corrupted their way upon the earth. Thirdly, when it is done openly without
shame or fear. Esaias 3.9. Their countenance testifies against them; they show
their sins like Sodom, they hide them not; like Absolon that Lay with his
fathers concubines in the sight of all Israel. 2. Sam. 16.22. Fourthly, when it
refuses all admonition and reformation, and no Preaching can beat it down:
like the old world, that an hundred years together, all the while the Arc was
in making, despised the preaching of Noah: and like Babylon. Ier. 51.9. We
would have cured Babel, but she could not be healed. The sinners of England
are of this size. Let it be written with a pen of iron, and the point of a
diamond. Ier. 17.1. No sin so great but it is among us; and that which is
greater then the greatest, the greatest sins are, many times, either least
punished, or not at all. And the course of sin is so general, that he begins
to be counted very precise that will not swear and swagger with the worst. But
if any man cleave, a little more then ordinary, to Religion, that scarce suits
with the civility of our time. And our sins are so open that I must say with
Bernard, They are become the fable of the world: that if we should not speak
of them, every man might call us the grossest dissemblers of the world. Would
God the Noah's of our time had left us any piece of a garment to cover them.
Neither will they endure reproof, but are justified, and affront the Pulpit,
that the greatest Bishop in the kingdom shall be censured if he deal with
them. Yea the torrent of these things is so strong, that it seems manifestly to
tend to the dissolution of all humane society. Three things maintain society,
Religion, Justice, and Order. Religion is pitifully violated by Atheism,
blasphemy, heresy, horrible profanenes. The Stages now in this city, woe is me
that I should live to see it, toss the Scripture phrase as commonly, as they
do their Tobacco in their bawdy houses. Justice is destroyed by oppression,
rapine, briberie, extortion, partiality. That of the Prophet, Esaias 59. is
verified: Judgment is turned backward, and Justice stands aloof: for truth is
fallen in the street, and equity cannot go. O the pity of God! If truth had
fallen in the desert, it had been no marvel: but that it shall fall in the
street, where so many go up and down, and none to help it up; and be so
wounded with the fall that it should be lamed, no uprightness, no plain
dealing, no truth among men; this is lamentable. Government and order is
profaned by contention, by contemning the Magistrate, by whoredom, incest, so
domy, pride, drunkenness. These things are too manifest: and all that are
guilty must make account, when they have run their race, that there is a
heaven and a God, whom it will be a woeful thing to lose for the base pleasures
of this world. And in this passage I value all men alike, of what cloth soever
his coat be made: he that lays the foundation with firework, must look, in
the end, to be blown up. The great Nobleman, that thinks God has made him
greater then others, for no purpose but that he might be bolder to sin, then
others: the wealthy Gentleman that turns towns into sheep walks; sell
Benefices for ready money: contriue hospitality into the narrow room of a poor
lodging taken up in the City: that subvert the strength of the land by
unreasonable renting the tenants: the Judge that takes bribes, that judges for
favor, that upon the bench makes laws, and justice, and religion, stoop to
his lust: the Lawyer that pleads against the right, leads Jury into perjury:
spends Sabbath after Sabbath among clients, openly defying God to his face
thereby, and protesting that he loves his fee better then Gods ordinance: the
sharking Officer that receives bribes, and spares neither the King nor the
subject, but sucks from them both what he can; and the Clergy man too that
fails, either in life or teaching: or labors not effectually to feed the
flock whereof the holy Ghost has made him Ouerseer: for all that are such as
these, and all whatsoever that lay the foundation of sin, must needs build
upon condemnation. And albeit my words may work no great impression, yet before
any man can deny this to be true, he must turn Atheist, and be certain that
my Text, and all Scripture, is false; and that there is no God, nor heaven, nor
hell torments. A hard point to settle in the mind; yet if it be not so, all
that live in this ungodly sort shall perish eternally. For God in the Scripture
has said it, and all the holy men, from the beginning of the world to this
day, have believed it.

27. The servants of Christ, who by their obedience glorify his name, shall do
otherwise: whom again and again I exhort to go forward in laying hold upon
this eternity: let no tediousness of time or labor weary you; let not the
snares of this present world entrap you, but looking on Jesus Christ the author
and captain of our faith, run with patience the race that is set before you,
that the sense and love of this present world rob you not of the hope of the
world to come. Look upon those, who, in all ages, have taken this course: the
Prophets and Patriarchs, Apostles, and Christians in times past, and as wise
and noble spirits as ever lived; whom this world could never deceive, the
pleasures thereof could not surprise them, nor all the greatness therein
transport them; they only attended upon God and the good which he set before
their eyes: they trampled under their feet all that, whatsoever it were, that
could not be used with godliness. They lived justly, soberly, charitably,
chastely, uprightly among all men: they called upon God, were zealous for his
word, sought not themselves but the common good of Church and State, and only
inquired how they might glorify his name that so mercifuly redeemed them with
his blood. Me thinks I see them mounting themselves above the clouds, and
trampling under their feet, all the vanities of this world; and with their
hands wafting us toward them, and calling alowd upon us to follow them, and
hasten away, that the love of riches, and pleasure, and case, and security,
intercept us not. They are gone before us, and being crowned live in the
joyful society of holy Angels and the blessed Trinity, where the chief of
their joy is, that they are delivered from this wretched world. O happy life
that shall never see death, nor hear any more the temptations of this wicked
world: that shall lay all these things at our feet, and show us him that has
conquered them: where all this riches, and power, and greatness, and abundance,
and pleasure, and every worldly joy, shall have no use; but God himself shall
be all in all; and such as have renounced these things, or converted them to
the service of God, shall for gold have immortality, and for the pleasure of
sin reap joy and eternity with God for ever: and that happiness which the
soul of man either most desires, or is most capable of. The fruition of God
shall be their meat and drink: the glory conferred upon them shall be their
apparel; their delight, the society of men and Angels; the joy of their heart,
the depth of eternity. And now o Lord our God the merciful Father of all that
seek thee, inspire our hearts, put back the world, the devil, and the flesh
from us. Join us to thy self now in this life by grace, and then in that life
by glory for Christ's sake; to whom with the holy Ghost, in the unity of the
Trinity, three persons, and one immortal God, be rendered all honor, and
glory, and thanksgiving now and for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

