An Heptameron of Civil Discourses.

Containing: The Christmasse Exercise of sundry well Courted Gentlemen and
Gentlewomen.

In whose behauiours, the better sort, may see, a represe^tation of their own
Virtues: And the Inferior, may learn such Rules of Civil Government, as will
raze out the Blemish of their baseness: Wherein, is Renowned, the Virtues, of a
most Honorable and brave minded Gentleman.

And herein, also, [as it were in a Mirrour] the Unmarried may see the Defectes
which Eclipse the Glory of MARRIAGE: And the well Married, as in a Table of
Household Laws, may cull out needful Precepts to establysh their good
Fortune.

A Work, intercoursed with Ciuyll Pleasure, to reaue tediousness from the
Reader: and garnished with Moral Noates to make it profitable, to the Regarder.

The Report, of George Whetstone. Gent.

Formae, nulla fides.

AT LONDON.

Printed by Richard Jones, at the Sign of the Rose and the Crown, near
Holburne Bridge. 3. Feb. 1582.

Ad Mecoenatem, in laudem Aucthoris: CARMEN HEROICVM.
MEcoenas proceres inter celeberrime nostros,
Et Clario dilecte deo, castisque Camaenis:
Accipe Pierios tibi quos sacrauit honores,
Troianouantaei vocalis Musa Georgij.
Non Apinas Tricasue canit, sed conscia laudis
Musa vacat studijs grauioribus: arctaque iunctae
Condition pari commendat foedera vitae;
Coniugijque refert incommoda disparis Aucthor.
Nec solum haec: sed vera ducis praeconia magni
Pandit, and Aonio tollit super aethera plectro.
Diuisitque operis seriem per tempora, miro
Ordine, iuditioque pari: septemque dierum
(Iudice me) certant cum Castilione labores.
Et quae tam paruo descripsit Nymphia libro,
(Creed mihi) tanto non sunt indigna Patrono.
JOAN: BOTREVICVS.

To the right Honorable, Sir Christopher Hatton, Knight, Captain of the
Queens Majesty's Guard: Vizchamberlaine to her Highness, and of her Majesty's
most Honorable Privy Connsell: GEORGE WHETSTONE, wissheth long continuance
of Honor, Health and Happiness.
RIght Honorable, in the Interpretation of the wise: PARRHASIVS, in painting
of INGRATITVDE and ENVY, like Feends: rather performed a work of Judgment,
then Art: for so soyled with infamy are these passions as hell ought to be
their harbor, and not the heart of man. All other defeactes of the mind have
their cause of nature, or color from reason. PRIDE proceeds from man's
ouerweening, of his own excellency: the Sourse of AMBITION, is the glory and
reverence given unto Authority. ANGER, and revenge, grows from the injury
of others. But these two yokefellowes INGRATITVDE and ENVY, do degenerate
from kind, and mask without visard of excuse. The other pursue their enemies
and seek to break but the bars of their aduaunceme^t: but the one of these
wounds his friend, whom he ought to honor, and the other reprocheth virtue,
who^ the wicked reverence: And least, Time, the true exposer of Secrets,
reproach me, as a Fosterer of both these dampnable vices. Of Ingratitude, in
not acknowledging, many received favors, of a Right noble Italian Gentleman.
Of Envy, in smouldring his most clear virtues: who with a zealous affection,
oftentimes in my hearing, made his tongue, an honorable Trumpet to sound the
bright renown of her Majesty's excellency (as he said, and I believe upon
earth) the fountain of grace and goodness: who used her sacred name, with such
a reverent regard, as in his behavior, I noted the full consideration of a
dutiful subject, denized by the eternal fame, of her Highness divine Grace.

So that desirous to erect some Memorial Monument of his worthiness, I have
taken upon me to be the Secretary of a few, of many his precious virtues:
Which I humbly present unto your honor, with a hand ready to do you effectual
service: and a tongue confessing, that you shall herein behold, the least part
of those glorious gifts, which eternize your name, and bind the general
multitude, to honor your Counterfeit, for whose benefit, I have likewise
committed to memory, the civil disputations, and speeches of sundry well
Courted Gentlemen, and Gentlewomen, his Guestes, during the time of my
intertainment, with Segnior Phyloxenus (for so covertly I name him, least in
giving him his true honorable Tytles in England, I should make a passage for
Envy, to injury him in Italy) whose exercises, if my pen has not maimed
them in the reporting, may be a president of behauiours to the indifferent well
qualited Gentleman and Gentlewoman: Besides, a true Anatomy of the
inconveniences, which eclypse, and of the virtues which express the glory of
Marriage: an estate both honorable and divine: honorable, in that, she is
embraced of all men: divine, because in the last year of their life she (in
dispite of death) makes men to live a new term, in their children and
posterity: not unlike to a leaf fallen Rose, which in his stalk has many
tender buddes: Which bare report of mine: I reverently protect under the Guard,
of your honors regarded virtues: A bare report, I Christen it: for, whatsoever
is praise worthy in this Book, belongs to Segnior Phyloxenus and his Courtly
favorers: and what is worthless, is the blame of my imperfect judgment: So
that, besides the protection, I am humbly to crave, that your Honor will
receive whatsome-euer is due to them, with a favorable countenance, and to
pardon the insufficiency of their Trowchman: with an imagination, that his
Present, is the testimony of a duetiful affection: Who zealously prays, that
your virtues may have as full power over Envy, as they have Authority to
command the willing minds of the best inclined dispositions: Of which number,
it may please you of favor, though not of merit, to account me.

Your Honors most bounden, GEORGE WHETSTONS.

Unto the friendly Reader, Wealth and welfare.
FRiendly Reader, I present thee here (as I think) a profitable, vnpolyshed
labor: For, he that is the Troucheman of a Strangers Tongue, may well declare
his meaning, but yet shall mar the Grace of his Tale: And, therefore,
Themistocles, the noble Captain and Philosopher of Athens, compares such
forced Speeches, to Tapistrie Hangings rolled up: which, being open, appear
beautiful: and fowlded, reserve their Virtue, but lose their show: But I
expect (somewhat) better event, then may an Interpreter, that is bownd to a
present Report: for my Respit, has been sufficient to consider of Segnior
Phyloxenus, and his honorable companies virtues: and (least by rash acquitall
of their favors, I should do injury, to their reputation) I have, with well
advised Judgment, bethought me, of such memorable Questions and Devices, as
I heard and saw presented, in this most noble Italian Gentleman's Palace, the
Christmas tweluemoneths past: and aunswerable to my weak capassitie, have
exposed yt same, in such sort, as if thou art not too curious, may delight, and
content thee: and if not too careless, may direct, and benefit thee: And to
satisfy thee, wherein: I give thee friendly knowledge, that Segnior Philoxenus
reverent regard of the Queens Majesty's high Uertues, is a President for thee:
with a dutiful, and unfeigned heart, to love, fear, and obey her Highness,
from whom, next under God, thou receiuest such sweet blessings: as through
the whole world, her excellency is renowned, and thy prosperity envied. By
this noble Gentleman's civil intertainment of strangers, thou may perceive
with what Garland, Courtisie, is principally crowned: By the civil behauiours,
of Soranso, Dondolo, Bergetto, and other Gentlemen herein named, thou haste a
President of government, which will commend thee: and by well regarding their
speeches, thou shall find a discreet method of talk, meet for a Gentleman.
The like benefit, shall Gentlewomen receive, in Imitating, of Madona Aurelia
(Queen of yt Christmas pleasures) Maria Belochi, Lucia Bella, Franceschina
Santa, and the rest of the well qualited Gentlewomen. Besides, a number of other
Moral documentes, needful reprehensions, and witty sayings, to perfect the
commendation, both of a Gentleman, and Gentlewoma^. (Courteous Reader) thou
haste hear, the honorable institution of Marriage, so perfectly Anatomed, as a
very weak Judgment, may see the causes, which make Household quarrelles, to
resemble Hell. Again, the man, which is willing to live happily, may here
learn such directions, and laws, as will change his private house, into a
Paradise on earth. If civil and Moral pleasures, withal these benefits, may
make thee intertaine this book and report well of the Aucthor. I assure thee
thou shall be pleased, and I satisfied. But if thou make thy tongue, enemy
to thy own reputation, thou may detract, but not reproach the work:
Iniure, but not hurt the writer, for both will live, and laugh such
Callumniators to scorn, when either are ready to do the discrete Reader
service. Some will (perchance more of envy to hear a stranger commended,
then of pity to bemone my hard fortune, or foul usage) say, I have as just
cause to complain, of injuries received at Roane, Rome, and Naples, as to
commend the virtues and good intertainment, of Signior Philoxenus: But to give
such Suggestioners a double good example, both of patience and thankfulness:
I hear protest, that as these injuries begun, with my hard fortune, so they
ended, no ways in my discredit: And as I forgive the causes of my mishaps, so
scorn I, to recount them, to receive amends, in a little pity. But, for
that they, and all such as view my Report, may learn of me to be grateful for
received benefits: I make it known: That this travel, is Segnior Philoxenus
due: And I still his debtor, and so shall remain during my life: reserving a
good affection, to bestow on such as receive his Uertues: and my pains to
profit and commend them selves. And in my opinion, it is just they do so:
Wherefore, to give a disgrace to ceremonies, gentle Reader I end: as I hope to
find thee mine.

Thine assured friend, George Whetston.

T. W. Esquier, In the commendation of the Aucthor, and his needful BOOK.
Even as the fruictfull Be, does from a thousand Flowers,
Sweet Honey draine, and lays it up, to make the profit ours
So, Moral Whetstone, to his Country does impart,
A Work of worth, culd from yt wise, with Judgment, wit and art
No Stage Toy, he sets forth, or thundering of an Host,
But his rare Muse, a passage makes, twixt burning fire and frost
Such Uertues as beseem, the worthy Gentles breast,
In proper colors he does blaze, by followyng of the best:
The Virtue is but rare, and Uice not yet in use,
That modestly he not commends, or mildely shows the abuse
Such matter in good words, these few leaves do reveal,
Unforst, or strainde, as yt it seems, a natural common weal.
Of forced Marriage, he does show the foul event,
When Parents join, the Childrens hands, before their hearts
And how these fortunes eke, in wedlock seeldom prove, (consent
Unequal choice, in birth, in years: and Childrens hasty love.
Yet he with learned prooffes, this sacred state does raise,
(As it deserves) above the Skies, in words of modest praise.
More, every Page, here does present, the Readers eyes,
With such regardes, as help the weak, and do confirm ye wise.
Which needelesse were, to blase, in praises to allure:
The holy Bush, may well be sparde, where as the Wine is pure.
Verses translated out of Latin, and delivered by VRANIE, with a Silver Pen,
to ISMARITO, in a Device, contained in the seventh days Exercise: placed in
this Forefront, for the excellency of PANDORA.
THe mighty JOVE beholding from above,
The mistes of sin. which from the earth arose,
In angry mood, sent IRIS down to move,
Throughout the world, the exercise of foes,
With vengeance armde: who poured down her Ire,
And with debates, set Monarchies a fire.
Whole Countries burnde, did dim the Sun with smoke
The Cannon noise, the Air with Thunder rent:
The wounded men, with shrikes the Heavens shoke;
The Temples spoyld: the'Townes to ruin went:
Unwilling yet, to work the worlds decay,
JOVE, CYLLEN sent, in part his wrath to stay.
Who hastes his charge, with wings as swift as wind,
But coming to, the Region next the ground,
He could no way, for clowdie darkness find:
And fearing, in the Ocean to be drownde:
He houered till, in fine, he did epsy,
A PHAROS light, which was a PHOENIX eye.
Led by this Star, amain he comes down,
And footing sets, upon a fruitful I Will:
Where lived a Queen, crowned with the worlds renown
Upon whose rule, Grace, Peace, and Wealth did smyle.
Her Senate, grave, her Cities, Mansions wear,
For such as fled, for persecutions fear.
To whom he gave the tokens that were sent,
Fair PALLAS form, and VENUS lovely face:
Sweet PITHOS tongue, and DIANS chaste consent:
And of these gifts, PANDORA named her Grace:
And ioynes with all, JOVE'S blessings to the same,
To make her live, in everlasting fame.
These monsters fell, which public order break,
Dissension, Wrath, and Tyranny, he bound:
This office done [he thought as JOVE would leake]
To Heaven he hyes, and blessed leaves the ground:
Where this good Queen, and Subjects quiet live,
When civil wars, her neighbor kingdoms grieve.
Even this is she, whose sacred fame is known,
Through out the world, in Envy, Fear, and Love,
Enui'd, because, she reigns in peace alone:
Feared, in that, she shielded, is by JOVE:
Loved, for desarte, whose virtues shine as bright,
As twincking Stars, do in the from night.
This Silver Pen, meet for a Virgins praise,
VRANIE here, does ISMARITO give:
With charmed charge, this Queens renown to raise:
As she in spite of Death, and Time may live:
Which right is hers, the labor is but thine,
Then [Iudging] write, as she may seem deuyne.
Vaticinium VRANIES.
A brief Summarie of the principal Arguments handled, in these seven Days
Pleasures.
1 OF the difference between the Married state and the single life. 2 Of the
inconveniences of forced Marriages. 3 Of the inconveniences of rash Marriages.
4 Of diverse special points concerning Marriage, in general. 5 Of the
inconveniences of over loftye, and too base Love, in the choice, of either
Husband or Wife. 6 Of the inconveniences of Marriages: where there are
inequalytie of years. 7 Of the excellency of Marriage: with many sound
Laws and lawdable directions, to continue Love between the Married.
All which Principles, are largely intercoursed, with other Moral Conclusions
of necessary regard.

FINIS.
The first Days exercise.
Chiefly containing: A civil Contention, whyther, the married or single life,
is the more worthy: And after many good Reasons, alleged on either part,
Sentence is given in the behalf of Marriage.
AT what time, the Earth dismantled A description of the dead of Winter.
of her brave Attire, lamented the absence of Dame aestas company, and that
fair Phoebus in his Retrogradatio^, entering the Tropique of Capricorn, and
mounting in the Zodiac, licensed naked Hyemps, to power down her wrath, upon
the face of the whole world: through dread of whose boisterous storms, every
living creature, by the direction of Nature retired himself unto his safest
succor, as the Bird to his Nest, the Beast to his Covert, the Be to his
hyue, the Serpent to his hole: only Man excepted, who (being Man by reason
inlargeth the bounds of Nature, within whose lymites every other creture
lives.
beautified with a divine spirit, and armed with reason, far above the
reach of Nature) scorneth to be chayned unto any place, through the violence
or injury of Time:

In this dead season, such were my Affairs, that Necessytie sent me into a
Country far from home, where as I was no less unacquainted with the people,
then ignorant of the ways: And having trauayled the great part of a Christmas
Eve in a desert Forest, strayed out of This was the Forest of Rauenna in
Italye, (for the most part) of pine Apple trees.
knowledge, I took me to a deep beaten way, which promised a likelihood to
find out some spedie Harbor: And after I had iornyed the space of an hour,
in a sweet Groaue of Pyne Apple trees, mine eye fastened upon a stately
Palace, ye brightness whereof, glimmered through the Branches of the younger
woodde, not unlike the This Palace was. 10. miles from Rauenna toward the
River of Poo.
Beams of the Son through the Crannelles of a wall, assuryng then my
self, too receive best Instructions, of the better sort of people: such was my
haste, as I soon arrtued at this sumptuous place: but according to ye
condition of time, in Christmas, sooner to find a friend The custom of
Christmas.
feasting in the Hall, then walkinge in the Feelde: other then a few of
ignorant peysauntes, I could perceive no person. The delight I took to
behold the situation, and curious workmanship of this Palace, made me so
long forget the cause of my arrival there, as in the end one of the well
qualyted Servant (having knowledge of my being without) in a seruisable
order, came and presented me with his Lords courteous welcome, and reverently
requested me to alight, and enter the Palace: I which imagined this
entertainment to be but an Italion courtesy, after thanks given, by a modest
excuse, refused so great a favor, and only craved, to be directed the rediest
way to Rauenna: the Servant cunninglye replied, that I could not be received
into the City without his Lords Bollytyne, and at this time he sealed no
man's BOLLYTINE, a warrant of health without which, no man may travel in Italy.
safecundit, without knowledge, that his affairs required great haste: in so
much, as one with his importunities, and overcome with weariness of Travel,
I committed my Horse, to the orderinge of my man, and accompanied this
officious Servant, toward the Palace, and by the way, over a lardge
entrance into a fair court, I might read these two breefes in Italion. Pisano
e Forresterio.
Entrate, e ben venuto. A liberal welcome.



Which general inuyting, imboldned me so far, as I hardely marched toward
the great Hall, the Skreene whereof, was curiously fronted with clowdy Marble,
supported on every side the passadges, with stately Pillars of Geate: and over
the three Portalles, stood the Images of Welcome and Bounty, the Porters.
two men: the one of Allablaster Marble, bare headed, representing the virtue
of welcome: the other of blewe Marble, attyred like a Cook, and by him were
artifycially painted, Pheasants, Partriges, Capons, and other costly Cates, as
the Figure of Bounty: At the entry of this stately Hall, I was received by the
Lord of the Palace, accompanied with diverse Gentlemen of good quallytie, with
so ciulll and friendly intertaynment, as his behavior blazoned the true
knowledge of Courtesy: before we past any further, I began to recount the
Adventure which brought me thither, and craved his honorable favor for my
dispatch: Why? then (quoth Segnior Phyloxenus) for so (for some cause) I name
ye Lord of ye Palace, I thank your hard Fortune for arriuyng you here, to do
me this honor: No hard, but happy Fortune (quoth I) if I may live to honouryou
with my effectual service:

Well (quoth he) after your weerie travail, it is more needeful to provide for
your repose, then for a further Journey, and so lead me the way into a fair
great Chamber, richly hung with Tapistrie: ye Roof whereof, was Allablaster
plaster, embost with many curious devises in gold, and in sundry places in
proper colors was ingraued his devise, which was A Holly Tree, full of red
Beries: and in the same, a sluttering MAVIS fast limed to the bows, with this
posie in french, Qui me nourit, me destruit: And, in very deed, the beries of
the tree feeds this Bird, and the bark makes Lime to fetter her. But I
afterward learned, Segnior Philoxenus used this Ensign A covert description
of desire.
as a covert description of desire: whose sweet torments nourishes the mind,
but consumes the body to the grave. In this bewtifull place, I embraced the
salutations of such a brave troop of Gentlemen, and Gentlewomen, as the honor
of the householde might well give envy unto some Princes Court. And least, at
my first coming, I might be abashed through small acquantance, A civil
foresight meet for a Gentleman,
Segnior Philoxenus, emboldened me with a familiar communication, and in the
end upon a convenient occasion, demanded of me the name of my Country? I
answered him, I was a Gentleman of England, voluntarily exiled with a burning
desire, to see the Monuments of other Countries, the order of their government,
A necessary regard for Trauelers.
and manners of the people. And are you of that blessed I Will (quoth he?) where
the people live in peace and prosperytie, under the rule of a Maiden Queen,
crowned with such divine virtues, as the whole world may hardly contain The
virtues of the Queens Majesty, makes the Island of Eng land famous through
out the whole World.
her fame. Sir (quoth I) your good testimony of her worthynesse, being a
Stranger, takes all occasion from me (her dutiful subject) to inlardge her
renown. O (quoth he) if Envy durst detract her openly, as she secretlye
conspireth her overthrow, in these parts you should be driven to stop your
ears, or endure a torment (to a faithful subject) more violent then Death.
But the virtue of her Shield, I mean her grave Senate, has returned the
Virtue stops the mou th of Envy, But fyreth her heart with mallyce,
Darts of Envy so thick upon her Soldiers, as she has no power to eclips her
bright renown, whose virtue shines in Enuies dispight as a Diamo^d in an
obscure place, or as the Sun through small passadges, into the bowels of the
earth: so that happy and thrice happy are you, the Subjects of the good
Queen of England, whose gracious government, fills your Coffers with
wealth, seals your doors with peace, and planteth quietness in your
Conscience: so that (blessed above other Nations) you live abroad, without
suspicion of danger at home: and at home fearelesse of enemies abroad.
Wherefore, in honor of your Sovereign, whose fame armeth al true knights,
with an earnest desire to do her service. I am glad of the mean, to bestow on
you, or any of her nation, ye affection of a friend. Sir (quod I) the virtue of
these honorable thoughts blaseth ye true magnanimity of a noble mind, which,
measures not your favor by the desert of others, but with the ryaltie of your
heart, and so bind thousands in recognisance The true Blazon of a noble mind.
of service: among which debtors I desire to be enrolled, although I can
discharge but little. After we had bestowed a small time in these like speches,
he commanded some of his servants to direct me unto a lodging (if I pleased)
to be dispoiled of my riding attire: who straight ways brought me into a Bed
Chamber, so well accommodated with every necessary pleasure, as might have
served for the repose of Cupid and his lover Ciches: having a fair prospect
into a goodly Garden, beautified, with such rare devises, as deserved to be
compared with the earthly Paradise Tiuoly. 12. miles from Rome, where the
Cardinal of Esta has a most rare Garden.
of Tiuoly. And to be brief, this Palace, with all her conueiances, as well
necessary, as of pleasure, fully mached the statelynesse of Cardinal
Furnesaes Palace, builded and beautified, with the ruinous Monumentes of Rome,
in her pride: so that the curiousness there of, was of power to have
inchaunted my eyes with an immodest gase, had I not remembered, that it
belongs unto a Gentleman Cardenal Fur nesaes palace in Rome.
to see, and not to stare upon the straungest Novel that is: for bace is his
mind, whose spirit hourly beholds not greater matters then either beauty,
buylding or bravery. And certertenly, at this instant, I delighted more A
necessary observation for a Gentleman.
to contemplate of Segnior Phyloxenus virtues: then to regard his sumptuous
buyldings, who (as I learned of one of the Servants) all the year opened his
doors to every civil Gentleman, and at Christmas, invited all A worthy
Custom.
comers, as a customarie duty: so large was the prescription of his courtesy.
But, which shined above the rest, he was in his youth, brought up in the French
Court, where, by the grace of God, and labor of some good friend (as his
behauyours could not but win many) he learned to serve God, with pureness of
heart, and not with painted ceremonies, as his superstitious Country me^ do:
He was a Pro testant.
which was one chief cause, why he spoke so reverently of the Queens majesty,
whose virtues make her enemies dumb, for malice will not let them say well,
and shame forbids them to speak amiss, of her sacred life: by yt time I had
talked awhile, with one of the servants, and put my self in a more civil
order, then was necessary for travel, Supper was in a readiness: which
although it exceeded the common order of fasts, yet it passed not far the
bounds of ancient custom: for my place at the Table, I had the pryueledge of
a Stranger, set above my degree, and with the same intertainment, were
Frenchmen, Almain, Duch men and other Gentlemen, Strangers, entreated. The
Other straun gers arrived by the like adventure.
Grand Master of the feast, in words gave us one welcome for all, but not so
few as a thousand in affable countenaunces. Supper being ended, according to
the custom of the place, a Cake was cut in pieces, to the number of the
Gentlemen and Gentlewomen present, and if the marked piece were allotted unto a
man, he should be King, if A custom ge neraly vesd in France, and in some
places of Italy.
to a woman, she should be Queen of the Christmas pleasures: for it was
agreede, there should be but one to command, and all to obey. Madona Aurelia,
Sister to the Lord of the Palace, was crowned with the Lot, whose worthynesse
was such, as herein it seemed Fortune obayed desert: for there was no
Gentlewoman in the trowpe, that Aurelia excelled not in beauty, and
singularity of wit, nor no Gentleman, that her virtues inchaunted not, with
more admiraion, then the Sirens sweet songs, the wether weried Sayler, so
that of the one she was crowned with Envy, and of the other with Honor. But in
as much, as this was but the first night of her reign, she referred the
Proclamation of her laws until the next day, and so dismissed the at tendaunce
of her subjects for that night, which (in sooth) lasted me but a sleep, so
soundly after travel, I embraced mine ease.

The next Day no sooner appeared, but the Trumpets sounded the honor of
Christmas ^vppon which Sommons, the Company rose, and (attired in their most
sump tuous weeds) in the great Chamber attended their Queen Aurelia, who
about Service time, (with the Majesty of a Goddess) presented her self: on
whom, all the Trowpe waighted unto the Chapel, wheare the Service was not so
ceremonious, as in other Churches of Italy, and yet more then agreed with
Segnior Phyloxenus conscience, only to give no offense, to the superstitious
reale of others. The Service ended, against the return of the company, the
Tables were covered in a most stately Order, and with the sownd of Trumpettes,
were furnished with so many several dainty Disshes, as the ^ialtie of the
Feast, might have pleased Heliogabalus:

After Queen Aurelia was set, the rest took their accustomed places: but (God
knows) the eyes of the greater Heliogabalus a most volup tuous Emperor of Rome.
part, were more hungrye, then their stomachs: for their appetites were
dulled, with the ouerplentie ^eates, and their desires quickened, with the
regard of the fair Gentlewomen.

The Dinner and every solemn service ended, Seg. Phyloxenus committed the
company, to the good intertainment of his Sister Aunelia, and (with a special
suit) recomended me unto her favor: After ^ewe was taken of the Attendantes,
certain Gentlemen and Gentlewomen (by the appoinctment of queen Aurelia) were
addopted with the names of their Fortunes, as occasion will manifest hereafter:
and for that I was a Traueler, she calde me C^liero Ismarito, in English, The
wanding Knight: whereupon, Madam (quoth (...)) ^ou have christened ^ee with
the true name of my fortune: for I was but late out of my way, and now am
straied out of my self: where are you then quoth Aurelia; at your only
direction (quoth I:) well (quoth she) since so cunningly you prefer your self,
I admit you my servant, and as you deserve so will I reward: and Madam quoth
I, if I be not loyal, let me not live: well (quoth she) I except the best.
The rest of the affairs set in good order, the Harold proclaimed the laws,
whereunto the Gentlemen and Gentlewomen were bound, with the penallties for
the breach of them.

The Laws of Queen Aurelia.
FIrst, every Gentleman, and Gentlewoman, were coniured faithfully to execute
all the charges, and offices assigned by their Queen Aurelia, and that they
should be attendant of her pleasure.

Item every Gentleman was bound, to serve some one Misterisse, before the next
day at noone, upon pain, to be turned into the great Hall, among the
Country Trulles ye whole Christmas. And every Gentlewoman yt had not a
Servant, was judged unworthy, to be courted for one week: for his merit was
holden very small, that could be entertained of none, and her conditions very
crooked that was beloved of none.

Item every Gentleman, was bound to give his own Mistress the honor of his
seruise, and the chief place in his commendations, upon pain, to lose her
service, and to be entertained of no other. For he that was dissoyall to one,
could not be holden faithful unto an other.

Item every Gentlewoman, was bound to imploye her own Servant upon pain to
be reputed simple. For she that affyed not in her own Servant, had no reason
to trust an others.

Item every Gentleman was bound, to defend the honor of his Misterisse, both
with word and sword, upon pain to be reputed a Coward, and not to were her
glove. For he was holden very insufficient, that prysed not his Misterisse
honor above his own life.

Item eurey Gentlewoman was bound, to incouradge her Servant with Good
countenances, and upon the execution of any worthy service to reward him,
with the kissing of her hand, upon pain to be deemed, unworthy to be served.
For she of all the world is acounted to rigorous a Dame, that with scorn,
receives dutiful service.

Item every Gentleman was bound to Court his misterisse with Civil speeches,
upon pain to be forbidden, to talk of love for three days. For he was
accounted bace mannered, or very gross witted, that could not pleasantlye
intertaine time with a civil discourse.

Item every Gentleman was bound, either by some exercise of value, or by some
show of excellency of wit, to approve him self worthy of his Mistrisse: upon
pain, to be spoiled of his Arms, and the whole Christmas to attend with the
Pages for he was holden unworthy the society of men, or the affection of
women, that was neither valiant nor wise.

These Laws proclaimed, Queen Aurelia appointed an elderly Courtier named
Fabritio, and a well spoken Gentlewoman, called Donna Isabella, to be Judges of
the controuersyes, in disputation: and to attend her in her affairs of
pleasure, she chused Segnior Soranso, a Gentleman Italion, of Wit quick and
sharp, and for his devices, sweet and pleasant: Don Dondolo, a Napolitan,
haughty and proud in his conceits. Monsier Bargetto a Frenchman, amourous and
light headed. Doctor Mossenigo, a German, so called, for the plain
discovery of his mind. Segnior Faliero a Scot, subtle and cunnyng in his
deuyces: Courtisie unto strangers, is a mark of Gentilytie.
and my self Caualiero Ismarito, an English man, in which name hereafter, I
will present those actions that touch my self.

This wise, choice she made to priueldge the Strangers with the highest favor.

Of Gentlewomen, she chused Maria Belochy, a Damsel whose eye was able to fire
a mountain of Ice. Lucia Bella, for fairness and sweet behavior an Angel.
Hellena Dulce, a loving and affable Gentlewoman. Franceschina sancta, so called
for her modest and lowlye countenance: Katherina Trista, a ^owre and testy
Dame: Aluisa Vechio, who although she were in the wayne of her years, yet was
she in the pride of young desires.

This done, Queen Aurelia, by consent, divided the exercises of every day,
into these times: the forenoone to be A division of their pleasurs
bestowed in the service of God: after dinner, two hours to be entertained in
ciuell discourse, and disputation: the rest till Supper at pleasure: and after
supper to spend a time in daunsing, maskinge, or in other like pastimes as
occasion presented.

The greater part of Christmas day, was spent in esta blishing these orders,
the rest was overcome in sol^pne Music, for, among the better forte, that day
is honored, with no light mirth.

THe next day by nine a Clock, according to one of the charges in the
Proclamation, you might see the young Gentlemen and Gentlewomen, coupled
together like fowls on Saint Valentines day morninge.

But Cauiliero Ismarito, having the eyes of his heart setteled upon his
Mistress beauty, with careless regard, beheld the rest of the company: and
leanyng by a door, through which she should pass, he awayghted Queen Aurelias
coming. Who at her accustomed hour, presented her self with an advantage of
bravery, whom the whole trowpe reverently saluted, and honorably accompanied
unto the Chapel.

After Service, Dinner, and all were solempnlye ended: Queen Aurelia with a
chosen company, retired her self, into a pleasant drawing Chamber, to execute
the reported Music refreshes the wits
ordenaunce. But to quicken the Spirits of the company, before they entered
into discourse, she commanded a fair Eunucke Boy, to singe some one song, as
he thought good, who obaying her commandment, with a heavenly note, unto the
Lute sunge this loving Lay.

NO joy comes near the heavenly joy of love,
When we embrace, the wish of our desire.
All pleasures else, that kind or Art may move,
To love, are like, the heat of painted fire.
Love is the root, whereon sweet thoughts do grow,
Love is the sowrce, from whence content does flow.
When I behold my Mistress in the face,
Love from her eyes, a thousand Graces throws.
But when in arms, Idoe her self embrace.
One smyling look exileth all my woes.
Then straight our lips prepare them selves to fight
And on each kys, Love seals a new delight.
What would you more? I wish me in my grave,
Were but my soul with half these pleasures crownde:
And hear on earth to be my Misterisse slave,
I hold me free, and others to be bound.
Wherefore, I sing which I in sollace prove,
There is no heaven, to life bestowed in love.
The sweet delivery of this sonet, so enchanted ye hearts of ye hearers, as for
a space, their senses gave place to the contemplatio^ of their souls. In the
end, Madona Isabella by this motion, made ye whole company a passadge for
speech.

If Love be so sweet a passion (quoth she) I muse from what cause proceeds
the complaints of Lovers, who with showering tears, bedeweth the earth: with
misty fights, dimmeth the air, and with shril outcries pearceth the heavens

The cause quoth Soranso, proceeds of our fleshly imperfections, which
corruptes ye nature of good things, and not of any defect in love: for love is
a simple divine virtue, and has his being in ye soul, whose motions are
heavenly. Love simplye is good.


I have read (quod Isabella) that there be sundry kinds of love. The use of
love, are diverse quod Soranso, as in zeal toward God, in duty toward our
Country, in obedience toward our parents, and in affection toward our friends
The distinctions of love.
All which motions proceeds forth of one love, although some are more vehement
then ye other, even as many Rivers do run out of one Spring, whereof some have
a more swift course then the other. But of that passion which we ordinarily
call love, the wish either tends to Marriage or wanto^nesse. There is matter of
disputation in Marriage (quod Franceschina,) because yt estate is honorable,
and yet subject to cross fortunes: But touching your conclusion of wa^to^nes,
Known evils are not to be defeuded.
it deserves to die in silence, for known evils are to be chastened, without
allowing their defenses. Madame (quod Faliero) unless you revoke this
sentence, we will have you indicted at Rome as an heretic, for by the Popes
Ca^nons, Priests may not marry: and they have a custom among them selves, not
to live chaste. Well (quod Franceschina, if the Pope for this opinion, burn me
as an heretic, good men will cannonise me for a virtuous Uirgin.

Thease Digressions (quoth Queen Aurelia,) are the means (rather) to work a
confusion of our memories, A necessary note.
then to conclude any beneficial matter for our instruction And therefore, I
hold it to greater purpose (substantially) to handle one Argument, then
(slightly) to ouerrunne many causes, where ye doubts we leave unresolved, will
be more dangerous unto the hearer, then the Counselles we use, profitable unto
the follower.

Madame, (quoth Fabritio) I hold it good, we obey your direction. And for that
Marriage, is the most honorable event of Love: and that a Single life, is the
greatest testimanie of Chastytie: A civil Contention, to prove which A
contention whether Marriage or the single life, is the worthyer.
is the most worthy of the two, would conclude much contentment: For, as Iron
and Flynt, beat together, have the virtue to smite fire: so, men's wit^s,
encountryng in doutful questions, opens a passage for imprisoned Truth.

Queen Aurelia, and the rest of the company, lyked very Argument decideth
doubts.
well of the Subieat: and studing, who wear the fittest to deal in this
Controversy, Aurelia (with a glaunsinge eye) beheld, that her servant
Ifmarito, witsafed no greater Token, that he took delight in thease actions
then (sometime) Wise scilence works mor regard then foolish talk.
the secret bestowyng of a modest smile: whereupon she forethought, that as
Floods, when they are most highest, makes least noise: even so (perchance) his
still tongue, was governed by a flowyng wit^; and desirous to sound his
sufficiency, she quickened him with this cross surmise.

Servant (quoth she) your sober looks, promises a hope that you will
undertake Dianaes quarrel: but (which will serve in this question) I fear me,
you co^n^aund Love, so much, as you contempne Marriage: And the greater is my
suspicion, in that you are a T^auayleri ye nature of which A fault in many
travelers.
sort of people, is to swell, with a (...) ^isdayne of Marriage? The reason is
(say they) their Affections are poyioned, with the knowledge of women's so
heinous euyls, as the^ dare not venture of that vocation: But my opinion is,
they ^learned so many ^lties to de^ (...) less w^, as dandled with the ^ments
of sundry Loves, they forswear Marriage, who binds them to one only wife: And
if you be infected with the humor of thease sort of Trauailers, you may well
undertake this charge: Al unmarried, pass under the name of chaste.
for Venus, though she love not Diana, yet is she the sworn enemy of Juno. And
if you be sound from this infirmity, the little haste you make to marry,
witnesses, you honor Hymen, with no great devotion, and therefore, I command
you too use all your possible proofs, in the Defense of a Single life: and for
your Assistaunce, I do appoin^t you, Lucia Bella, whom, this Charge can not
mislyke, because (as I understand) she means to be a professed Nun: You are to
encounter the opinions of many, and therefore, arm your selves, with as good
reasons, as you may.

Madame (quoth Ismarito) I am so deeply bound unto your commandment, as I am
driven to leave your suggestions not answered, and my own inne^ency,
vnexcused, and only attend ye encounter of him, yt will maintain Marriage, to
be more worthy then a syngle life: which vocation of Marriage, though I
reverently honor, yet I so zealously affect the other, as I hope (where the
Judges are indifferent) to make the glory thereof to shine as the fair white,
above every other color.

Sir, quoth Soranso, though white be a fair color, yet Defenses of Marriage
are the choice of all other colors, more rich and glorious: so, though
Virginity (which is the fairest flower of a single life) be precious, in the
sight of God, and in the opinion of men, yet is Marriage more precious, in
that, it is a sacred institution of God, and more honored of men: the Married
are reverently entertained, when the unmarried are but familiarly saluted. The
Married in assemblies, are honored with the highest places, the unmarried
humble them selves unto the lowest. To be short, Virginity is the handmayde of
Marriage. Then, by how much the Master is greater then the servant, by so much
Marriage is more worthy then is single life.

I confess quoth Ismarito, Marriage is an honorable Defenses of a single life.
e^ate, instituted of God, and embraced of men, but whereon had she her
beginning? upon this cause, to keep men from a greater inconvenience: as the
Law was founded upon this reason, to punish the trespasses of men. But if no
offense had been given, the Law had not needed So if man had lived within
bounds of reason (which before any commandment given; was unto him a Law)
Marriage might have been spared: and therefore in the highest degree, is but a
virtue upon necessity: where Chastity, is a divine virtue, governed by the
motions of the soul, which is immortal, and perticypating of the same virtue,
is always fresh and green. The euerspringing Baye, is the Metamorphos of
chaste Daphne, whom Appollo, although he wear a soueraign GOD, could not allure
to Mariadge: which proves Chastity, a true spark of Divinity, whose
twinkling reflections, so daseleth the eyes of imagined Gods (whose powers must
needs be more great then the greatest of men) as they cannot see an end of
their incontinent desires: where as the beauty of Marriadge, is many times
blasted by fortune, or the frailty of the Married.

Therefore (think I) by how much deuyne things are of greater emprise then
earthlye; by so much the Single life, is more worthy then then*the married.

And in advantage, [quod Lucia Bella] where Soranso says, that there is great
honor done unto the married, and to the Single is given light regard, I pray
you whether are Baccus minions or the Muses, most reuerensed? Among men, whose
places are hyer then the Cleargies? and among women, whose greater then the
religious Dames?

They have not this pre-eminence [quod Faliero] because Defenses of Mariadge.
they profess a Single life, but because their function is more sacred then
other men's, who if their prayers to GOD be no more zealous, then their vows
to chastytie The cause why the Clea gie are reue^ensed.
are steadfast, you fly to the authority of a company as spotted as Labans
Sheep. But where Sir Ismarito says, yt Marriage is but a verfue upon
necessytie, to restrain man from a greater evil: I approve it an estate, set
down by Nature, and that man has but amplified it, with certain Ceremonies,
to make perfect the determination of nature: For we daily see, in unreasonable
Creatures, Marriage is (in a sort) worship ped: Fowls of the Air (I mean)
the he and the she, cupple together, fly together, feed together, and neast
together. The Turtle is never merry after the death of her Mate: and in many
brute Beasts, the like Constancy is fownd: But (generally) there is never
jar nor mislykyng between the Male and Female, of vnpollitique creatures: and
among the most barbarous people that ever Vnpollitick creatures reverence
mariadge,
lived, by the Impression of Nature, Marriage has (evermore) ben reverenced and
honored: Much more, civil people, ought to affecte this holy estate: And
where Ismarito, attributes such Glory unto a Single life, because that Daphne
was metamorphosed into a Bay Tree, whose Branches are always green: In my
opnion, his reason is fair like the Bay Tree: for the Bay Tree is barren of
pleasant fruict, and his plesing words of weighty matter.

Furthermore, what remembrance is theare of fair Sirinx coyness, refusing to
be God Pans wife? other then that she was metamorphosed into a few
unprofitable Reeds: Or of Anaxaretes chaste cruelty toward Iphis, over then
that she remains an Image of Stone in Samarin.

Many other such like naked Monumentes remain, of nice contempners of
Marriage.

But in the behalf of Marriage, thousa^ds have been changed into Olyue,
Pomegranate, Mulberie, and other fruictfull-trees, sweet flowers, Stars, and
precious Stones, by whom, the world is beautified, directed and noorished.

In many well governed commen wealths, Sterylitie has been reputed so vile, as
the Aged was of no man honored, ye had not children of his own, [to do him
reverence.

Then, by how much those things, which noorish with increase, are more
necessary then those things, which but simply please the eye: by so much, the
married, is more worthy then the single life.

Sir, quoth Ismarito, it seems that you have read a Defenses of a single life,
Leaf more then Saint Katherynes Nun: for she (simply) tried all things, and
you (subtly) use, but what serves your own turn: you reproach a Single
life, with Barrenness, and commend the fertilytie of Marriage: But had you
showen the weeds with ye Corn, bare pasture would have returned as great a
benefit, as your harvest. The Monsters, Serpents, and loathsome Creatures,
mentioned by Ouide, in his Metamorphosis, were they not I pray you the fruicts
of Marriage? as well as the blessings, which you so affectedlye reported?
Oedippus was glad to scratch out his eyes, because he could not endure to
behold the vices of his Children. The good Emperor Marcus Aurelius in his aged
days, never rose that he sighthed not: never dyned that he fretted not: nor
never went to bed, that he weeped not: to hear, see, and consider, the
mounstrous euylls of his Children. Admit the Married, have virtuous Children,
they may dye when they are young, then the goodness of their lives, increases
sorrows, by their deaths: and where the comfort is so doubtful, it is not
amiss to refuse the hazard of the grief: neither dies Virtuous fame, is an
other life.
there any of Dianas band, but that their virtues reuiueth them as the ashes of
the Phoenix, tourneth into an other Phoenix.

It is for some Phoenix sake, quoth Queen Aurelia, that you thus stoutly defend
a Single life.

I do but your commandment, quoth Ismarito. You (quoth she) it is at my
commandment, but yet for some others merit.

Alvisa vechio, fearing that Marriage would receive some disgrace, if that Queen
Aurelia favored the Defense The impatiencie of women, will not be hid.
of a Single life, could not longer suppress her affections, but with a woman's
Impatiencie, blamed the rigor of Diana, who conde^pned Acteon to be devoured
of his own Howndes: who caused sweet* Addonis to be slain by a wild Boar:
with many other cruel parts, vnseemyng the natural pity of a woman: but
(which might have saved a great deal of Argument, or at the least, which will
now soon end the Controversy:) compare [quod she] Juno and Diana together,
and by their callings, you may easily judge who is the worthyer. Diana (poor
soul) is but a Goddess here on earth, and Juno is Queen of Heaven: Dianaes
force, is in her Bow and Arrows, Juno bestows Thunderbolts, upon her
enemies: Diana, is attyred with green leaves, and Juno with glorious Stars:
Diana, feeds on raw Fruictes, and drinks cold water: Iunoes Feasts, are
of Manna, and her Bowls are filled with Nectar: Dianes Music, is no better then
the voices of a few Nymphs: Juno is recreated with the Harmony of Angels:
Dianaes pastime, is (a foot) to chase the fearful Roe, where Juno (in
Phaetons wynged Chariot) pursues a thousand several pleasures: then, by how
much the pomp of Juno, exceeds the naked Triumphs of Diana: by so much,
Marriage must needs be more worthy then the Single life.

Lucia Bella, that should have answered Alvisa Vechio, (not unlike the
Marygoulde, that cloaseth her Beauty, when Phoebus is attyred with his
brightest Rays) so admyred the glory of Juno, yt, as an inchaunted creature,
her Vain glorious shows bewicheth women.
tongue forgot her natural office: the reason was, her heart was suddenly
surprised with an ambitious desire of honor.

Which change, Ismarito perceived, with the first: and least, her scilence
should conclude a yealding: Al is not gold Contentme^t neither follows the
greatest, nor scorneth the meanest.
[quod he] that glistereth, nor every thing counterfeit that is not curiously
garnished: a smyling countenance is no full testimony of a merry heart, nor
costly Garments, of a rich Purse: And (perchance) the grief of Iunoes secret
discontentmentes, is greatter then the delight of her glorious pomp: where
Diana, who (as a Diamond in the darcke, shines of her self) needs not the
Ornaments of Juno.

And as she is (symplye) of a pure substance, so her thoughts, must needs
be sweet, and quiet.

Sir [quod Maria Belochy] our soundest judgments, are of those things that we
our selves see: therefore, if the apparaunce of Marriage, be worthier then the
apparaunce of the single life: if sentence be truly pronounced, it must be in
the behalf of Juno.

Queen Aurelia perceiving the increase of Ismaritos adversaries, (for who can
stop a stream? measure the fire? weygh the wind? or hinder Fancyes passage?)
and withal considering how that the controuercy was sufficiently debated,
commanded the contenders, to keep scilence: and referred ye qustio^, to be
Judged by Fabritio, and Isabella.

Who having advisedly considered, the reasons on both sides, agreed that a
single chaste life pleased God, because, Chastity is pure: and also delights
man, because, she quieteth the mind: but a chaste married life, both
pleases, and honors God: because Marriage, howrely, presents the world,
with the Image of himself: pleases, and profits man, because, she gives
him a companyon, by affection, changed into his own disposition: of whom he
has children, who in dispight of death, preserves him alive. And therefore,
the sentence of them both, was pronounsed by Fabritio, in the behalf of
Marriage: who with Sentence given, in the be half of Marriage.
all, enlarged her praises, with the report of many sweet Blessings, which
she liberallye bestows, upon her Subjects.

But least the company, should have been fyred with too hasty a desire of
Marriage, he cooled their affections, with such caueats, as they that had their
voices ready tuned, to sing the praises of God Himen, were of the suddayne, as
mute as a fish: by reason whereof, Fabritio, had free passage: for his
counsellinge report: who, after many words, to either purpose delivered,
concluded with the opinion of Plato, That Marriage, was a Parradice on earth,
if her Laws be observed: and a Hell in the House, Platoes opinion of Marriage.
where her Satutes are broken.

The Gentlewomen wist not what to say, to Fabririos bittersweete commendation
of Marriage, until Bargetto Pleasant tal^ is good physic for sorrow.
quickened their tongues, by this pleasant suggestion.

If (quoth he) Platoes opinion be law, by the same reason, women are either
Angels, or Devils.

And why not men, as well as women (quoth Isabella) whose disposition bears
the greatest swaye in this vocation.

I will show you a reason, quoth Doctor Mossenigo, men with a mean, can
temper their passions: when a The extreme passions of (...) woman.
woman has no measure in her love, nor mercy in her hate: no rule in her
pity, nor piety in her revenge: no Judgment to speak nor patience to
dissemble: and therefore she is lykened unto the Sea, which (one while) is so A
GVNDELO, is a little Boat like a wherie.
mylde, as a small Gundelo indureth her might, and anon, with outrage, she over
whelmeth the taullest ship.

Ah Master Doctor, quoth Katharina Trista, I fear me you are so learned, as
like the Hyen, you change your self HIEN, sometimes a man, and sometimes a woman.
sometimes into the shape of a woman: but yet, of this malicious purpose, to
learn their dispositions: only to reproach their kind: but had any of us the
cunning, to become a man but a while, I imagine, we should ever after, love the
better to be a woman.

You have rather cause (quoth Dondolo) to let Master Doctor kiss your hand,
(for comme^ding your kind) then to blame him, by a surmise, of iniurye,
offered unto women, for if there be a few good, they cover ye faults of a
number that are evil: as a little gold, guildeth a great quantity of iron:
and for anything he said, you have as general an interest in virtue, as in
vice.

Yea, but [quod Queen Aurelia] he is to be blamed for his intent, which was
evil, and deserves not to be praised The intent of evil, is to be punished.
for the good which came of it, which was our meryt.

Madame (quod the Doctor) so much greater is the good, you receive by my
Trespass, as thereby you are honored with the virtue, to forgive.

Yea, but (quoth she) remission is to be used in ignorant offenses, and not in
wilful. Pardon is to be used in ignorance and not in wilful faults.


My Habit (quoth he) is a testionie that I spoke not of malice.

So much [quod she] ye greater is your fault, in that it proceeded upon
pleasure: and where you think to privilege your self by: your Habyt: for
Example sake, you shall at The punishment of great offenders does most good in
example.
(open) Supper, both renounce your Heresy and make satisfaction, or abide the
Judgment of these Gentlewome^.

If there be no remedy [quod he] I must obey.

The Doctor thus taken tardie, gave occasion of laughter unto the whole company.

Which, blown over, [quod Soranso] we have travailed this day to an
unfortunate end: for that now, toward night, we are entered into an open
Champion, wheare we find many broad ways to Hell, and but one cross Path to
Heaven.

Well (quod Queen Aurelia) we will take other times, to beat out the true
passage: And (least we be lated) we will no further too day.

Whereupon, after a Courtly reverence don: Queen Aurelia, with her Attendantes,
showed her self in ye great Chamber, where she might repose her mind with the
choice of sundry pleasures: For his, or her disposition was very strange, that
in that company, could not find both a Companion and sport, that pleased his
humor.

FINIS.
The first Nights Pastime.
AMong wise men, these Orders, have evermore ben observed, or allowed: In the
Church, to be devout: in place of Justice, to be grave: at home to be affable,
and at meals to be merry: for in the Church Devotion.
we talk with God, who sees our hearts and hates Hypocrysie: in Justice, we
sit to chasten light demeanours, Gravity.
then, great were the shame, that our countenaunces should condemn our selves:

At home we rule and command, then were it Tyranny, Affability.
to use seuerytie, there, where, is no resistaunce.

At meals to be merry, disgesteth meat, and refreshes the wit: then is
he an enemy unto himself, that contemns the rule of health, and the helper
of knowledge. Myrthe.
Howsoever the three first precepts were observed, Segnior Philoxenus and his
honorable guestes duly executed the last, who in the midst of supper hearing
of Doctor mossenigos pennaunce, hasted the execution.

The Doctor seeing there was no remedy, openly confessed that he had praised
women against his will, for which he was condemned to singe Ab re nuntio, and
to make satisfaction by some other means: And as he thought the contrary was
the amends of every trespass, and therefore, where as he had praised them
against his will, he was ready to dispraise them with his will. Subtlety bea
teth true mea ning with his own sword.


Queen Aurelia, would have taken exceptions to these words, but that the
company cried, The Doctor speaks Law, which she could not with Justice
violate, whereupon Mossenigo, reported as follows.

DOCTOR MOSSENIGO HIS Satisfaction, for praising women against his will.
IN the famous City of Viena, in Austria, sometimes dwelled a simple Sadler,
named Borrihauder, who was married to an old crabbed shrew, called Ophella:
the agreement of this couple was so notable, as the Emperor Charles the fifth,
commanded his Paynter Parmenio, to draw their counterfeats, as a Monument of
fury: Parmenio, coming to do the Emperors commanndement, found Borrihauder
weeping with the agony of his wives stripes, and Ophellas cheeks as red as fire
with the heat of her tongue: which strange sight, changed his determination,
into a pleasant conceit, and in place of their Counterfets, in a fair table,
he drew an Element troubled with lightnyng, and vnderwrit Ophella, and in
another Table fastened to the same, he likewise drew an Element darkened with
rain, and under wright, Borihauder. Parmenio presented this travel unto the
Emperor. The Emperor seeing the two names, and not the shape of those, he
commanded to be drawn, demanded the Paynters meaning herein, who pleasantly
answered, that he could not take the view of Ophellas face, for fear of being
fyered with the lightning of her tongue, and that Borihauder was drowned with
tears, which as showers of Rain followed the thunder claps, of his wives
Fistes: But in good time (had she died) this Demideuill Orphella fell so
extremely sick, as in every man's judgment, it was needful to give Physic to
her soul, but bootelesse to bestow any of her body: Borihauder seeing her, as
he thought at a good pass, was so accustomed to sorrow, as he determined to
toule her passing bell, with this counterfeit moan. Ah dear God (quod he) how
unhappy am I to lose my loving wife, my good wife, my sweet wife? O how happy
were I, that as we have lived together, that we might now dye together. This
pittyous sound of her husband, so melted

the dying heart of Ophella, that like a Candle consumed, that leaves a little
smoke in the week, she lay both speech les, and senceles, save that the panges
of death, sometimes threw a weak breath out of her mouth: but like unto
wild fire, that burns in water, the Corsiue, that would have killed the
devil, in her case, recovered her to health, which was her husband, out of
fear of her life, in dispight of the injury of time past, fell to kiss and
coll his Maid, which watched his gasping wife, before he took order with the
Clarke, to ring her knell: which Ophella, as dim as her sight was, perceived,
and Fury, which was the last motion, that accompanied her in life, like a
whirl wind, yt with a sudden violence, draws things into the air, so fired
her heart with malice, to see her husband in this iolity with her maid, as
madness, gave her the strength to cry. Ah, ah, Traitor, I am not yet dead, ah
villain, villain, I am not yet dead: and through this passion, choler so
dried her Catar, as shortly after, she perfectly received her health: and so
canuassed her husband Borrihauder, as by the motions of sorrow, and pain, he
hung himself in a Crabtree:

O quoth Katherina Trista, it was great damage that Thymon of Athens was not
in the town, to show al malicious men that tree. The devil might have put in
their minds, to have hanged themselves.

This suddayne answer of Katherina Trista, tickled A cunning answer,
takes away the grace of a shrewd tale.
all the company with a laughter, a good part whereof, were reddy to scandal
women, with a froward nature, being by this example, more fostered with
dyspight, then good usage: who, now for fear of their own reproach,
amplyfied not Master Doctors tale, with any other spightfull authorityes.

For the History of Thymon of Athens dogged nature, was so well known to
every Gentleman, as the THYMON of Athens was the swor^ enemy of humanity.
remembrance of his name, assured them, that there never lived woman of so
fcowarde a condityon: neither is it possible, that ever any man again, should
be so great an enemy to Humanity.

And there upon [quod Falerio] Thymon of Athens was without heir or successor,
and therefore is no able example, to blame us.

Neither had Ophela (for any thing we hear) either heir or successor, (quoth
Aluisa Vechio:) then, by your own reason, is of no authority to slander our
sex.

This one quip for an other (although more myldelye handled of the Gentle women
side, according to their natural modesty) quieted either part. In so much
as Doctor Mossenigo humbly desired to to be received, into the grace of women
again.

Nay, [quod Queen Aurelia] you deserve to be euereuermore banyshed the
presences of women.

Alas good Madam, (quoth he) I did but your commandment, and thereupon I
appeal to the report of the company.

Yea, but (quoth she) my meaning was otherwise. A dutiful sub iect is bound to
obey his Princes words, and not linger upon the effect.


O Madame (quoth he) Subjects, are bound to execute their Sovereigns words,
and are not priueledged, to interpret their charge, to their own fancy.

I see well, [quod Queen Aurelia] that there is no dealyng with a Lawyer, for
they can defend their own trespasses, with the same sword, they punish other
men's offenses, and therefore better to have you a feigned friend, (being so
dangerous) then an open enemy: wherefore, A feigned friend is better then a
dan gerous open enemy.
we pardon you.

By this time, Supper, and every service of the Table ended. Whereupon,
Queen Aurelia, and the whole company rose, and saluting one an other, with a
civil reverence. The Music sommoned the young Gentelmen, and Gentlewomen, to
daunsinge: for (this night) they expected no other pastime, unless it were
dicing, carding, or such like unthrifty sports. And therefore as the night grew
on, or they waxed weary, until the next morning they committed one an other,
a dio.

FINIS.
The second Days EXERCIE.
Containing (with many other necessary Questions,) a large Discovery, of the
inconveniences of forced Marriadges.
AVrora had no sooner forsaken her Husband Tithons bed, but that Phoebus A
Description of the Sun risinge.
ashamed of his over drowsy sleeping, in the dark Caves of Tartessus: hastily
harnesed up his Horses, and in his fiery Chariot, clymed the Mountain Oeta,
the painful travel whereof made brighte, Pyrois and sparklinge Phlegon,
breathe flambes like the burninge Pyrois and Phlegon fained to be two of the
Suns Coche horses
Furnace, wherein Vulcan forgeth the Thunderboltes of Iubiter: In so much as
Phoebus golden rays (which beautifieth the Heavens, and comfort the earth)
pierced through every small passadge, into Segnior Philoxenus Palace* and
glimmering in the young Gentlemen's faces, wakened them, with an imagination, of
their Mistresses The Bed resemhleth the Grave.
beauties (who scorning their Beds, as Graves which buried the one half of
their pleasures, and the Cannapies, as Clouds, that shadowed the brightness
of their Load Stars) now started up, to honor and salute the Images, of
their hearts delighte: and to waken the Ladies and Gentlewomen (who of the
sudden, could not be attyred) the tingling of a small Bell, gave them warning
of a Sermon. In so much, as by nine of the Clock, Queen Aurelia, and her
stately Attendants entered the Chapel, in such Equipage, as I think, the
Preacher, Friar Bugiardo, i^agined our Lady was come from Loretto, to honor
Segnior Phyloxenus Altar: and therefore to welcome Laureta, com monly called
Loreto, the great pilgrimage of Italy where is a small Chapel, sometimes
made, by the cunning of certain Friars, and the consent of some of the
Citizens of RACANATI: only, to bring Traffic to their City, destroyed by
the Goathes, and Vandals: and in the night, stole it out of the Town: and
spread a rumoure, that our Lady by Aungells, had brought it out of IVRY: the
mansion House, wherein she there lived: which Fable, an number hold for a truth.
her the more, he so extolled our Ladies virtues, and the good and pitiful
works of our Cannonyzed Matrons, and Uirgins: as if the Crown of Heaven, had
stood upon our Ladies head, and that the earth (cheefely Italy) was blessed for
pittyfull women's sakes: of which, they could have no greater testimony, then
that our Lady by miracle, had possessed them, with her earthlye Mansion: which
she daily visits, with a thousand blessings. And therefore, quod he, repair
her Churches, cherish her Priests, pray before her Aulters, and your sins,
whatsoever, shallbe forgeuen: O she is pitiful, as a woman: and can rule her
son, as a Mother: and with such like owld tales, and Tapers, he lighted the
people, as they thought, to Heaven: but in very truth, into blind Ignorance
Cave; Ignorance Cave, the hye way to Hell.
from whence, the devil carried them to Hell.

Ismarito smiled, to hear the subtlety of the Friar, and sorrowed to see the
simplicity of the people, in causes that appertain unto the soul, who in the
affairs of the flesh, are as wylye as Serpents: whose countenance, when
Italians, a most subtyle kind of people.
Philoxenus beheld, he pleasauntly demanded, how Ismarito lyked Friar Bugiardo
his sermon.

Ismarito merely aunsweared, it was pity that Judas had not hard the like,
after he had betrayed his Master Christ: it might have been, upon these large
promyses of forgiveness, he would not so desperately have hanged ^self.

Then quoth Philoxenus, these pleasing sermons be not unnecessary in this
country, where sin is so gross: for were not the people in hope, that our
Lady, of pity, would Sin cannot endure to here of Gods Justice
pardon them, a number would follow Judas in despair: with fear, that Gods
Justice would condemn them.

It seems reason (quoth Ismarito) that the people believe what is said in the
Pulpit: for they understand not what is read in the Church.

In this especial case (quoth Philoxenus) all our crosses, A tyranny ten times
more Cruel then Dennis Bull.
are curses. So that our first restraint from reading the Scriptures, could not
but come from as accursed a spirit as his, that first invented the Turks
Alcaron, for by the pain of the Alcaron, a Law that for byddes the Turks to
dispute, of Mahomet. A divine bles singe.
one, Mahomets Idolatry, is vnreprehended, and through our ignorance in the
other, the Popes blaspheamye, is in us vnespyed, and thereby, both God is
dishonored, and many a Soull distroyed: so that happy, and thryse happy,
are you of England, that have the sacred Bible, and the hard passages of
Scripture, expounded in vulgar Language: that your common sort, howesoeuer
your Prealates live, understand wheather they err or no in their Doctrine.

And since the Subjects of the Emperor, Alexander Seuerus, honored their
Soueraygnes virtues, with these acclamations.

NOble Allexaunder, we pray the Gods, that A token of louinge Subjects.
they have no less care of your Majesty, then you have of us: most happy
be we, that we have you among us. Noble Alexander: The Gods preserve you,
the Gods defend you: proceed forth in your purpose: we ought to love you,
as our Father, too honor you as our Lord, and to admyre you as a God, hear
among us. And thereunto added: Noble Emperor, take what you will of our
Treasure and substance to accomplish your Purpose, (only) for buylding of three
Hospitalles, to succor the sick bodies of the poor:

By how much more zeal ought you, the good Queen of Englandes Subjects, add
to this Prerogative? Do (gracious Queen Elizabeth) what shall seem to you
good: for your most blessed nature cannot err, or do any thing amiss that you
purpose, who by divine inspiration, has unlocked the fountain of grace: so
that the thirstye souls both of her rich and poor subjects, may freelye
drink the water of life.

Segnior PHILOXENVS, so affected this speech, as ISMARITO could not, but
imagyne, his heart adjudged him, a stranger to Grace, and unworthy life, that
was her vassaile and said not thereunto, Amen. The end of Friar Buiardos
clawing Sermon, broke off this Reconciliatio^ may take away revenge, but not
grudge from enemies hearts
private talk, and the Gentlewomen, proud of the commendation, of their
pytifull sex, now wisshed, that Doctor Mossenigo had been unpardoned his
yesternightes trespass toward women: that the holy Friar, might have cited
him before our Lady of Loretto: who, the greatter part of Dinner time, left
his victuelles to enlarge his Fe minine praises.

In the end, tasting ye goodness of the meat, he fownd prating very
unsavory: and therefore, to recover his losses, his lips laid on load:
which Falerio, and some other of the pleasant company perceiving, assayed to
reward the Friar for his good Sermon, with Tantalus dinner, and to that end,
busied him with many questions, which he ever aunsweared in a monisillable, so
that his tongue hyndred Questions answered by Monisillable.
not his feeding: As, (quod Fale^io) a question or two, Master Friar I pray?
say, quoth he: who strikes with the sharpest rod? God: of all other, who is
must evil? Devil: in distress, who deserves most rueth? Truth: who is
charged with most crime? Time: what houlds the world in most imprice? ^ice:
who is the greatest liar? Friar: Desire: without flame, what makes the
greatest fire? Ire: what sin is most accursed? Lust: what bread is best to eat?
Wheat: what drink is worst for the eyne? Wine: When they could devise no talk,
to put life in yt Friars tongue, doctor Mossenigo demanded, why he was so
brief, in his aunsweares? O (quoth he) Pauca sapienti: Then (quod the Doctor)
it is good taking away, this plenty of meat, for cloying Friar Buiardoes wit.
The hole company, hearing the Friar beaten with his own sentence, turned into
a coutrary sense, burst out into such an immoderate laughter, as choler that
rose to the very throat of ye Friar would not suffer him to swallowe, one bitt
more of meat: in so much, as the board was taken a^aye, and the Friar driven to
say Benedicite, with an emptye stomach: an intertaynment, as fit for a
flatterer, as a reward for a faithful servant. A good reward for Flaterie.


The office of courteous reverence, fully discharged: the company retired
toward the fire, to pause a little after their dinner, observing therein an
old health rule. After dynner, talk a while,
After supper, walk a mile.


Where the pitiful Gentlewomen, moaned the dysgrace of their praise Master,
the Friar, but murmured more that he was crossed (without a blessing) by their
enemy, the Doctor. And to put them out of this matter, Bargetto said merrily,
that the Friar had taught him such a cunning way to woo, as to melt a woman
into pity, he would wish, but the opportunity of three hours: two to love,
and one to praise the thing they like. Yea (quoth Franceschina Santa, his
Mistres, since women are so merciful, it is necessary to bridle the subtilty
of men: and to give example, I enjoin you, these three days to speak no more
of love: And questionless, this pain set upon Bargettos head, was no greater
then his oversight deserved: for in doing of these three things, is great
danger, and small discression: to play with fire: to strive with water: and to
give a woman knowledge of our power: therefore, A profitable Note.
he that will discover his own secreat advantage, is worthy to have his heir
cut wtth Sampson.

Queen Aurelia, by this time was reddy to walk into the drawing chamber, to
continue her established exercise: and for the execution thereof, she called
certain of her chosen Attenda^ts, (whose appearance being made,) to observe
her former course: for ancient customs profitable, are better then new laws
incertaine, she commanded the Eunuk, to set their wits in an order, by the
virtue of some sweet harmony, who; taking his Lu^e, after a dutiful
obaysaunce, played, and sunge, this followinge S^nnet, in Italon.

TO realish Love, I taste a sowrie sweet,
I find Repose, in Fancies fetters bound:
Amyd the Skies, my wysh I often meet:
And yet I lie, fast staked to the grownde:
My eye sees Joy, my heart is grypde with pain,
I know my hurt, and yet my good refrain.
But how thease hang, the faithful Lover knows,
And yet can geeue, no reason for the cause:
The power of Love, man's reach so far out goes,
As bownd [perfore] he yealdes to Cupids Laws,
And yet we find, this Liberty in Love,
As bard from Joy, Hope does our griefs remove.
Then Love sit crowned, as Sovereign of my thought,
And Fancy see, thou other motions chase,
To do whose will, Desire in me has wrought,
A strength to run, in Gyues, sweet Pelops race,
And those to charm, that study me to stay,
It may suffice: the wisest paaste my way.
The double effects of this Sonet, made them freshly to remember the doubts,
they left yesterday unresolved. And to avoyde degression, which rayseth many
difficulties, and resolves few: Queen Aurelia, caused a Repeticion of Platoes
opinion of Marriage: which was: She was a Paradise on earth, where her Statutes
were kept: and a Hell in the House, where her laws were broken.

Whereupon (quod Dondolo with the liberty of Queen Aurelias favor) I
demand the cause? why that the Male, and Female, of brute and wild
creatures love, cherish and take comfort, in one another company, only by
the Impression of nature: and man and woman, that are be^tified both with the
virtues of nature and reason, many times matched together, make a hell, of
this hotie institution.

By Queen Aurelias commandment, to answer. Reason gives man souerainty
over al creatures.


Sir (quod Faliero) The advantage of reason, with which you have preuiledged
man and woman, is the only cause thereof no man will deny, but that there is
a difference of conditions, in creatures of every kind: some horst, There is
diversity of co^ dition ineuery kind.
an unskillful horseman, can hardly disorder; and some in disspite of his rider
will have a radish trick. Some Hawk though she be evil served, will not
stragle forth: and some, do the Faulkener what he can, will continually fly
at (...): same hound by no means will be rated from riote, and some will never
forsake, his undertaken game: even so some man will filch if his hands be fast
bound, and some having the advantage of a ^ootie, will rather stearue, then
steal: some woman, with an hours liberty will offend, and ten years
loving suit can not overcome Reason finds out the imperfection of nature.
some other. But the vice, and virtue in every creature, by the opinions of
many sage Philosophers, proceeds from the pureness, or the imperfection of
nature: which is not to be found, but by reason: and the use of reason only
belongs to man: Now, if by oversight in Cause of misliking in manage. Causes
of comfort in marriage.
choice, the married, are divided in desire, differ in life, and delight in
neithers love: Reason that finds out this contrariety, sows contention
between the unfortunate couple in Matrimony thus matched. Again, when
between the married there is equality, of bryth, years, and manners, no
difference in love, nor suspicion of others behavior: Reason that delights
in ^itie, makes the Joys of Marriage innumerable.

Therefore (think I) the opinion of Plato may be embraced as a sound
judgment.

The whole assemblye, allowed Falierees reason: And Dondolo himself was
reasonably well satisfied, But quoth he, since Marriage brings with her
unspeakable Joy, or incurable sorrow: How may a man assure himself of the one
or avoid the (...) when a woman's unsearchable heart, is the only harbor both
of her good and evil conditions: and (once) in appearance, the honorable, and
the dishonest, the virtuous, and the vicious: and in brief, every sort of
Women, are naturally beautifyed with modesty. If the good repulse dishonest
request with chaste disdain, the badde with counterfeit sobry^e; will blush at
incontinent suits: If the good uses ^ence as a virtue, the bad with well
ordered speech, will be as highly esteemed: If the good with the beauty and
benefits of Nature, delighte: the bad with the flori^h of Art, will no less
be fantasied. So that, at the first face; the cunningest Clarke ni^y be
deceived, in iudgi^ge who best desorueth.

The greatest Clarke (quod Faliero) proves not always the wisest man, and none
more apt to be beguiled then he He valueth all, that glistereth, Gold: he
esteems fair words, as friendly deeds and thinks that lovely
countenaunces, d^ spring from a loving ^ndition. When experience Experience is
the best Judge.
knowing the contrary, will try them all by the test.

The corruptest Canker, bloometh like the sweetest Eglantine: the bitter
Bullice, resembles the pleasant Damson, and the sour Crab, the sauorie
Pippin. Even so good and bad, fair and foul, chaste and inconstant, The
form deceives, but the qualytie shows the creature.
Women are made of one moulde, framde of one form, and naturaly graced, with a
shamfast blufhing, but as in smell the Cankar, in taste the Bullice, and the
Crab in relysh, bewray their imperfections, even so with cunning usage, the
subtillest woman, will show her unnatural conditions: counterfeits will to
linde: Copper holds print, but not touch with Gold: Fire hid in Ashes, will
break foo^th in heat: water courses stopped, find out new passages: even so the
impatient woman, throwly moved, discloseth her passions: the proud with
sufferaunce, exceeds in pampe, and the wanton sore charged, will fall to
folly.

Well (quod Dondolo,) notwithstanding your directions be good, yet the pathe to
heaven, is so difficult to find, as the ignorant passenger without direction,
is like to follow the beaten way to Hell, and the surest guide is Experience:

So that the direction of the Parents, is to be embraced The foresight of
Parents.
of the Children in this behalf.

Parents with regard, foresee the evils that negligent Children, feel ere
they withstand: Parents provide living, to mainetaine their Childrens love.

Children often times by matching with beggars, diminish their parents
inheritance.

Parents labor for necessaries to support an househoulde.

Children only seek for silken rags, to uphold their pride.

Parents have care to match their Children with those of virtuous condition:
and Children lightly regard no more then their loouers amiable countenance.

I confess with you (quod Faliero) the ouersights of young A reprehen sion of
forced Marriage.
men in their choice, but I cry out upon forcement in Marriage, as the
extremest bondage that is: for that the ransom of liberty is ye death of
the one or ye other of the married. The father thinks he has a happy
purchase, if he get a rich young Ward to match with his daughter: But God he
knows, and the unfortunate couple often feel, that he byeth sorrow to his
Child, slander to himself, and perchance, the ruin of an ancient
Gentleman's house, by the riot of the son in Law, not loouing his wife.

But admit there be no disagreement between the parties, which is rather
fortune then foresight in parents, who regard that the lands and goods be
great, but smally way, whether the beauty and behauiours please or no: yet
love enforste, takes knowledge neither of friends, Love will not be
constrained.
favor, form, goods nor good bringing up.

Delicate meat, hardely forces an appetite unto the sick. Pleasure yieldes
no sollace to the sorrowful, no more can forcement enforce the free to fancy.
The Lion with gentleness may be tamed, but with curstnes never conquered: much
more lordly is Love, for as Petrarke deuyneth.

The Prince, the Peer, the Subject and the slave,
Love gives with care, to him they make their moan
And if by chance, he grant the grace they crave,
It comes of ruthe, by force he yeeldes to none.
I could report many examples of large authority, to The evil of rediousnes.
prove this inconvenience, but to a needelesse end: for tediousnes duls the
remembrance of the hearer, and tyres the tongue of the Reporter. In daily
action, you may view the liberty of Love, his contempt to be constrained, and
the great compassion he uses when he is with courtesy acquired, which account,
enforced Marriage is sildome considered. There is procurement of friends before
plightme^t of faith: safety for liuinges before assurance of love, and
clapping of hands before knitting of hearts: an occasion that the sorrowful
parties morn when they are Married, and rejoice when by death they are severed.

Dondolo replied, that when there is no remedy Reason will drive them to Love.

But Faliero maintained, that Reason and Love, Reason and Love, are enemies.
are at deadely food: Reason byds thee love, but where thou art lyked, and
Love byds thee fancy where thou art hated: Reason directes for thy benefit,
and Love allures to thy detryment: and to conclude, the office of Reason is to
appease old greefes, and the nature of Love is to raise new debates.

Tush, tush, (quod Bargetto,) among the married, quarrels in the day, are
qualified with kisses in the night: whereupon grows this Adage. The iangling
words, that Lovers use in rage:
Gives Love a grace, when anger does assuage.


A witness that Unkindness inlargeth Love, as the wrack of Winter does the
beauty of Summer: then, although the Parents match at first, be without the
fancy of the Children, a reconciliation (in fine) will double their comfort.

Sir (quod Soranso, favoring Falieros opinion) you wrest: An other
reprehension of forcement in marriage
the Adage is to a contrary meaning: for it is to be used but where there has
been sometime perfect love, and where a grounded leave is, although the Married
menace with their tunges, they malice not with their hearts: on the contrary
part: look what rule the Lover uses in love, the Enemy observes in revenge.

Therefore if the Married abhor before Marriage, they may well desemble with
their tounges, but will never be delighted in their hearts: and where there is
such a division in the desires of the Married, fair, fained semblaunce, will
soon turn to flat foul falling out: their thrift goes forward as the
carriage drawn by two Oxen, tail to tail: the Husband will have no delight
to get, nor the Wife desire to save: Servants with negligence will waste, and
hyrelinges, with proloyning, will win: and (which is worst) the continuance
of malice, will custom them with mortal hatred: hatred between the Married,
breeds co^tencion betwixt the parents, co^tencion betwixt the parents,
raises quarrels among the kindred, and quarrels among the kindred, occupies
all the neighbors with slander: so yt for the most part, these forced
Marriages, engendereth sorrows for the Married, disquietnesse to both their
friends and kind^ed: but which still renueth grief, the scandal of enemies,
ends in neither of their wretchedness.

This being said, little auayled the further prooffes, of the contrary part,
so full was the cry: Fie of forcement in Marriage, so that to paint out, the
inconveniences thereof in his proper colors, Queen Aurelia commanded
Faliero, to confirm his sufficient reasons, with the discourse of some rare
History. Whose commandment he willingly satisfied, and reported as follows.

The History in the reproach offorced Marriage, reported by Faliero.
IN the famous City of Cirene, in Afric, dwelled sometimes a rich
Merchant named Tryfo. This Tryfo had a wealthy neighbor called Clearches, who
of long time entertained one an other with a neighborly affection Tryfo to
inherit all his livings, had but one only son, named Sicheus: and Clearches
one only Daughter called Elisa. The Parents to establish (as they imagined) an
everlasting amity, between their houses, concluded a Marriage for their
unfortunate Children: making no doubt, but that they would as well inherit
their affections, as their livings: of which there was hope enough, if the
order had been as good to establish their Love, as the haste great, to
sollemnize the Marriage: for that in their persons, appeered no sign of
disagreement, nor in their abilyties cause of exception: but love (that
behouldeth no more quickness in a Dyamond, then in a dim Saphyre) though he
take impression by sight, rooteth in contemplation: Love rooteth by
Contemplation.
which divine exercise of the soul, smally delights green Youth, who
intertaine their thoughts with a thousand vain fancies: but to my purpose. The
Marriage day drew near: and as at the very push of Battle, the wise Captain
animateth his Soldiers, with some plausible Oration, even so the night before
the Marriage, Tr^fo scheeled his son Sicheus, with this following
advertisement.

My good son quod he, so great are the follyes of men, Advise to a booteles
purpose.
and so cunning the deceits of women, as the most (especially the younger sort)
will credit their looks, without looking into their lives: believe their
words, and lightly regard their works: delyght to recount, their
entertainements, and disdain to reclion their shrewde payments. For as the
sick pacient, comforted with the Physicians words, leaves to examine the
quallities of his receites: Bue^ so, the wretched Lover, cured with the
yielding of his Love yields neither to wit, strength nor learning.
beautiful Mistrisse, with negligence, both over looks his own benefit, and
her behavior. Solomon was deceived, Sampson subdued, Aristotle derided, and
Hercules murdered, by the illusions of errant honest women.

King Demetrius, notwithstanding he was both wise An exstreame affection.
and valiant, was so bewitched with the wyles of the notorious strumpet Lamia,
as in open Schools, he raised disputations, whether the love he bare Lamia, or
the Jewels he bestowed upon her, were the greater: or whether her merit
exceeded them both or not. Yea when she died he caused her to be Intombed
under his Bed Chamber window, to the end, that with daily tears he might
worship her engraued bones, who (living) was of him entirely belooued.

If the wisest, and the worthyest, be thus overtaken in their affections, what
easy baits may beguile thee, who in years art young, of substance delicate
and lusty, and therefore apt to love: reddy in conceyt, and of consideration
imperfect: whot in desire, and in discretion cold: My son, by experience I
know, and to prevent thy ouerlikely mischaunce in choice: I have chosen thee a
wife, fair to please theae, ritche to continue love, her Parents my assured
friends, and she thy affected loouer: love her well, bear with her in small
faults, as a woman and the weaker, and bridle thy own evil affections as a
man, her head and governor: and in thus doing, God will multiply his
blessings upon you, and make your aged Parents to dye in peace, to see you live
in prosperity. Young Sicheus regarded his Fathers tale, as Scholars do their
Tutors, who giving them leave to play, admonishes them with all, to keep
good rule, which they promise, and perform the contrary. With the like
affection, Sicheus embraced Marriage. He was not so soon weary of dallying
with his Wife, as he was ready to entertayne a Harlot: so that in short space,
he became a common Lover, and a careless Husband: and withal, grew as
arrogant in defending his liberty, as dissolute in his actions and behavior:
If his friends did gently advise him, he was of age The title of Marriage,
makes youth arrogant.
to counsel himself: if his Parents did sharply reprehend him, he would
impudently answer, he was past correction: if his Wife found her self
agreeued with his hard usage, she might well complain, but he would take no
time to amend: so that his daily actions of evil, took away all after hope of
weldeeing: in so much as he became odious unto his friends, that beheld his
lewd inclination: and a plague unto his Wife, who was daily oppressed, with
his monstrous vices. So that, the ouercharge of sorrow made her many times
passage, for these and such like passions.

O unhappy and over hasty Marriage, which in the pride of my youth, with
discontentments, make me resemble a fair Fig Tree, blasted with the after
cold, of an untimely Spring: but why blame I Marriage, which is Abuse of good
things, work evil effects.
honorable? alas, because the abuse of good things, work evil effects:
Roses unadvisedly gathered, pryck our hands: Bees ungently used stinge our
faces, yet the one pleasant, and the other profitable: so that if their come
any evil of that which is good, our folly or fortune is cause thereof: Aye me,
when I was married, I was to young to be a wife, and therefore have no reason
to exclayme on folly. But Fortune, foul fall thee, which crossest me with
cursses, in possessing me with those things, which others That which is
blessing to one, may be a curse to an other.
hold for blessings: Wealth, that bestows pleasures on many, is the
orriginall of my woe. Marriage, which gives lybertye to many, inlargeth my
Fetters, and demands death for my ransom: Beauty that aduaunseth many, is
to me a disgrace: for that, inioying her form, I am of Sicheus not fantasied,
of whom every foul Carlesnesse of the husband breeds hate in the wife.
and common Trull is belooued: But therein, Fortune, thou do me no wrong,
for my hate toward him ouer^ayseth his light regard of me. O but my heart is
continually afflicted with his evil, and his finger never aches with my
malice. Yea: but Forberaunce edgeth the sword Choler, is soon quited, but
Forberaunce increases malice.
of Revenge, when Choler, though it often strikes, it wounds not much. Rain
falls every where, yet beats but the leaves, the thunder Bowlt lights in
one place, but yet teareth up the roots: so though I dissemble till
opportunity, Sicheus shall feel my hate to death: and though I endure a space,
I will redeem my dying life: and perseuering in this resolution, Elisaes
thoughts, that were lately drowned in sorrow, now flamed with desire of
Revenge: and the Devil who is the Executioner of Vengeance, presented her
forthwith this ungracious The Diucll is the Executioner of vengeasice.
mean.

A Young Gentleman, named Chion, among a troop of other Ladies and
Gentlewomen, beheld fair Elisae, with such a burning affection, as he
forthwith dispossessed his own heart, to make his bosom the seat of her
imagined Image: so that his soul, that continually eyed her beauty, and his
heart, at the direction of his Mistress, gave such a heat to his desire, that
had he been sure to have received Ixions torments, for his ambitious
attempting of Iunoes love, he could neither have left to love, nor An extreme
passion of Love.
have forborne to seek for grace: so that follow what would, he forthwith
presented his affections, in this ensuing Letter.

Chions Letter to Elisae.
Fair Mistress, had I virtue to persuade you to ruthe, as you have power to
make me love: the discovery of my blasing affections, would melt you, (were
you a Mountain of Ice) to pity. But for that Love is more vehement in the
heart, then in the tongue, I appeal to your own motions for grace, if you
have ever loved: if not, I hope for such justice at Venus hands, as you shall
love: and yet thus much I say, although I affye nothing in my perswations,
because they be but words. I presume of my endeavors, for that I have vowed my
life, to death, to do you service: of which you can have no better assurance,
then imployement, nor I a hyer favor, then to be employed.

Good Madame, martyr me not, with ordinary doubts, in that my affections are
not ordinary. For as your beautye excels all other Dames, as the fair Rose
each Garden Flower, even so the full power of love, has made me in the estate
of flaming flax, that is, presently to receive grace, or in a moment to
perish. Thus longing for your sweet answer, I somewhat succor my torments,
with the imagination, that I kiss your gracious hand.

No more his own Chion.


This Letter sealed, and subscribed, was delivered to so cunning a Messenger as
needed no instructions in Chions behalf. The Letter presented, and advisedly
read by Elysa, surprised her with an unmeasurable joy: not so much for that
she had purchased her self a faithful Loouer, as procured her Husband a
mortal enemy: of which Chions Letter gave her not so great assurance, as the
disposition of his countenaunces, in a former regard: and thervppon A natural
fear in a woman, suppresseth many of their evil affections.
pursuing Sicheus with more hate, then minding Chion with affection, she mused
upon an number of mischeefes, invented by desire to be revenged, and
suppressed by fear to be defamed.

In fine, remembering, that she had read: Love quickens a man's wit, although
it burieth Reason: To try, if he could define, what Service she desired: she
returned Chion a Brief, wherein he had a light to mischief, and yet might be
read, without bleamysh of her honor: the Effect whereof, was this. While
CICHEVS does live:
ELISA can not love.


CHION, received this Scrowle: But yet before he presumed to read the
Contents, he kissed and rekissed the same: houldyng an opinion, that coming
from his Mistresses hands, it deserved such honor (although it contained
Sentence of his death: not unlike the foolish An example, for Christian
Subjects.
Mahometians: who upon their Emperors Commandments, are ready Executioners
of their own lives:

But to my purpose: when Chion had thoroughly perused this strange Answer:
wear it Cicheus his heavy Craft has many times his will, with an opinion of
honesty.
Destiny, or a just Scourge, for his fore trespasses: (accursed that he was)
he became too just an Executioner of Elisaes wicked will: but yet with this
interpretation, that the love she bare her Husband, directed her in this answer.

In so much, as, ouercom with a furious hate toward Cicheus, as the Bar of
his welfare, like a Lion that bites the Iron grate, which houlds him from his
pray: suddenly with this salutation, he sheathed his Sword in Cicheus intrayles.
CICHEVS shall not live,
To hinder CHIONS love.


The fact, was so foul, and withal so public, as the Wilful faults deserve
no pardon.
Officers of Justice, immediately seized upon Chion: and for yt his bloody
sword, was a witness of the trespass, there was no Plea to save him: for wilful
faults may be pitied, but deserves no pardon: and to say truth, neither did
he desire to live, because ELISA, the virtue of his life, by the charge of
Law, was bownd to sue him to death: who followed the process, with an
appearance of sorrow, such as if her Conscience had been without scruple of
guiltiness, or her heart a thowsande degrees from joy: when God knows, she
was puffed with the one, and the other, so that the wonder, at her
dissimulation, equalled the reproach of her notorious hatred.

To be short, this was the Judges sentence: Chyon A favor evil bestowed.
should be beheaded, as amends for Cicheus death, and the Widow should be
endowed with his goods, for the damage done unto her: but God which knows
our seacret faults (when Judges though they rule as Gods, know, but what they
hear and see as men) not willing This Judge is not parciall, for favor, gain
or fear.
to hide such an heinous offense: First, amassed all the hearers, with an unknow
voice, Elisaes heart, is as Gyltie, as Chions hand: and therewithal, thundered
this following vengeance, upon the cleared malefactor. The Infant in Eysaes
womb, as it were engendered of the Parents malice, at the very instaunt, not
obeying the course of Nature, so tyrannised her Intrailes, as with very agony
she dyed, and with all remains an opinyon, that the Husband, Wife, and Son,
by the appointment of the Gods, were Metamorphosed into Vipers, which venomous
Beasts are thrall to these curses. The female after she has engendered,
murdreth the Male, because she will not be The curses given unto a Viper.
ruled as an inferior: and the young eat themselves, forth of their Dams
Intrailes: because they will not be bound to the obedience of Nature.

Well quoth Soranso) though your Metamorphos be vnlykly, yet is it not
vnnecessarilye applied. For, for the most part, those which are forced to
Marriage, agree little better then Uipers. But it seems to me (Segnior
Faliero) you have too favorably reported this History in Elysaes behalf,
considering the mortal venyme she tempered in her heart. Brevity is best in
passionate matters, and effectatio^, in pleasant.


O (quoth Faliero) long foul ways, both tyreth the Horse, and wearieth his
Ryder, where both the one, and the other, overcomes the length of fair
passages, with pleasure: Even so, in a ruthful History, over plenty of
words, both greeueth the reporter, and gives means for a thousand sighs to
break from the hearer, where affected circumstances give a grace to a pleasant
tale. Sorrow Sorrows (...) seth scilence.
to hear their kind thus stained with crueltye, locked up the tongues of the
poor Gentlewome^ a pretty while. In the end (quod Aluisa Vechio, a dame more
old, and bold then the rest,) meseemeth that Faliero has but little favored
Elysa, We are bound to show as well the cause as to punnish the evil.
for he has showen her evil, and the scourge of her evil: and in charity,
he was bound to show the cause of her evil: I would quoth (Doctor
Mossenigo) that Friar Bugiardo, had heard this disputation, it might have been
the breaking down of the Altar, whereupon he but lately Good morralitie, is
better then evil doctrine.
committed blasphemy, would have more reformed him, then his pleasing Sermon,
could have confirmed us. These advantages the Doctor took to cross the
Gentlewomen, his late open enemies, and but now his fained friends: There is
no trustinge of a reconcyled enemy.
not unlike a sneaking dog, that never barks but bites withal. And to spite
them the more, quoth he, Monsier Bergetto, since your are bound from speaking
of love. you have both cause and opportunity to talk of women's hate. The
example of a naughtye nature.


Pardon me (quoth Bergetto) for this penance was but a due pain for my
presumption, which I hope to overcome with patient suffering: and sure in this
mild answer: Bergetto showed a moral virtue, and Doctor Mossenigo, A
necessary note.
by his malicious question, a canckred nature: for simply to offend proceeds
of frailty, but to perceauer in evil is a noate of wilful frowardness.

Well, notwithstanding Bergettos temperaunce, a Caueler caught hold upon this
question, as a Mastiue upon an old dry Mariebone, and to prove a woman's
hatred more A Caueller, has colors for every question.
greater then her love: he avouched many cruel authorities. But Faliero, who
had done them some injury in reporting the late history made them part of
amends, and put their adversary to silence in proving the contrary: his reason
was, that their hate, in the extremest degree, stretched, but to the death of
another, and their love many times; has done wilful murder upon them selves.

Then it follows, by how much we pryse our selves Weme^s love, is more great
the^ their hate
above an other, by so much, their love is greater then their hatred.

Yea (quoth the Doctor) but their love and hatred, are Weme^ do amiss, but men
are the cause.
both violents: and every violent is an evil.

Yea Master Doctor (quoth Maria Belochy) their evils are the greater for men,
for by their flattering enchauntments, women love immoderately, and stung with
men's Beauty overcomes the wisest.
vnsusserable injuries, they hate mortally.

The Doctor replied, there was more power in her looks, then authority in her
words: but least he should be subdued by the one, he would not contend with
the other.

Why (quoth Queen Aurelia) beauty works no more impression, in a Doctors eye,
then does poison, in Mineruas sheelde, for he by Philosophy can subdue
affection.

Madame (quoth he) you may well compare beauty and poison together, for their
operations, are a like: save that EVRIPIDES comparison, between Beauty and
Love.
beauty is the more extreme, in that she infertes with her looks, and poison
not, unless we taste it: or when it is most strong, not unless we touch it:
yea, Euripides, compares her inchauntement, with the inticementes of a
kingdom, whereas he says.

IN these two things, a Kingdom to obtain,
Or else to work the fair to their will,
(So sweetly tastes the grace of either gain,
As) men ne dread, their friends with foes to kill:
The reason is, controulment shrinkes the place,
Whereas a King, as sovereign Judge does sit,
In love, because that reason lackes his grace,
For to restrain, the self conceyghtes of wit,
So that God knows, in danger stands his life:
That is a King, or has a fair wife.
To deal in Princes affairs, the company was too green: but in Beauties
behalf, there was neither Gentleman, nor Gentlewoman, that was not desirous to
boe revenged of the Doctors detractyon: for he that has a slanderous tongue
iniurieth many, and is himself hated of all men: but for that it was now to
late, too decide any sclaunder is generally hated.
other great question, Queen Aurelia adiorned the ending of any centrouersie,
until the next day.

The Device of the second Nights Mask.
BY a secreate foreknowledge of a Mask, with which Soranso, Bargetto,
Ismarito, and others, purposed to honor Segnior Phyloxenus, and his company
Supper, was hastened, and soon ended: and after the one had saluted the other,
with an accustomed reverence: while the rest of the Gentlemen interteined Time,
with dancing, or devising with their Mistresses, the Maskers withdrew
themselves, and about nine of the clock, in this disguise, presented
themselves again.

A Consort of sweet Musycke, sounded the knowledge of their coming: yt
Musicians, in Gyppons and Venetians, of Russet and Black Taffata, bended with
A Gentleman is not to shoe his passions, by his attire.
Murrey, and thereon imbroadered this Posie. Spero, Timeo, Taceo: expressing
thereby, the sundry passions of Love: and before them two Torchbearers,
apparelled, in Yallowe Taffata Sarcenet: the General apparel of the Maskers,
was short Millaine Cloaks, Dublet and hose, of Grene Satin: bordered with
Silver: Green Silcke stocks: White Scarpines: Rapiers and Daggers syluered:
Black Velvet Cappes, and white Feathers. They agreed to be thus attyred, to
show themselves free. in the eye of Men in many cases are to be priuileadged,
for an others merrite.
the world, and covertly bound unto their Mistresses.

Ismarito for courtisy sake, because he was a stranger, and withal, in that his
Mistres was the most honorable, had the leading of this Mask, who lighted
with a torch, by his Page, apparelled in Blue Carnation, and white Ventoie, a
Fan.
Taffata: the colors of his Mistres: entered with a Ventoy in his hand, made
like an Ashe-tree: wrethed about with Iuye: expressing this posye:
Testantevirebo: with which, upon fit opportunity, he presented Queen Aurelia,
his Mistress: within which, wear (covertly hid these verses in English
Italion.

TWo Sovereign Dames, Beauty and Honesty,
Long mortal foes, accorded are of late.
And now the one, dwells in my Mistress eye,
And in her heart the other keeps her state,
Where both to show the virtue of this peace,
To garnysh her, make riot of their Grace:
In her fair eye, Dame Beauty does increace,
A thousand Gleames, that do become her face.
And with her heart, thus does the other deal,
She lowly seems, and mountes throw chaste disdain,
So that her thrales do serve with honest zeal,
Or fearing blame, do yield unto their pain.
The heavenly souls, enuies the earthes renown:
Such gifts divine, in humayne shape to see,
And Jove still moves, a Goddess her to crown:
Which is decred, when Nature shall agree.
Thus happy I [in Fortunes frowns long whyrld]
A Goddess serve, and sovereign of the world.
BARGETTO, lighted by a Page, apparayled in his Mistress colors, Green,
Carnation and White, followed Ismarito, having the mouth of his Mask closed
with a small Golden Lock, as a witness of the true execution of his Mistress
Commandment: and upon his fist he carried a Parrate to pratle to his
Mistress, upon pausing between every solemn Almayne, and couertlye under
the Parrats winge, was hidden this passion.

HEnce burning sighs, which sparckle from desire,
To pity melt my Mistress frosen Heart:
Her frosen heart, that Fancy cannot fire,
Nor true intent, persuade to rue my smart.
Haste, haste, I pray, the Icye passage break,
And plead for him, that is forbid to speak.
What though at first, you fail to calm her rage,
Yet as the Sun, from earth does draw the Rain,
Your virtues so, the storms of scorn may swage,
Or feed Desire, with showers of disdain.
For even as drink, does make the Dropsey dry,
So cold disdain, compels Desire to frye.
Her will be done; but I have sworn to love,
And with this vow, will nourish my delight:
Her scorn, my woe, nay, time may not remove,
A faithful zeal out of my troubled spright.
Yea more then all, I Will Sacrifice my blood,
And fire my bones, to do my Mistress Good.
SORANSO, lighted by a Page, in Orange Tawny, Watchod and Green, was the next
that presented him self: who upon his left side, had a Heart, of Crymson
Granado Silk, so artificyally made and fastened to his du^let, as if his body
had opened, and his heart appeered, which fell down at his Mistress feet,
upon such a Fortune, as she was bound to take it up, which opened, she might
behold the Picture of her self, reading this submission.

EVEN as the Heart, a deadly wound, that has
Retires him self, with sighs to solace grief:
And with warm tears, his gored sides does bath,
But finding moan, to render small relief:
Impatient Beast, he gives a heavy Bray,
And hasts the Death, that many would delay.
So I whose Love, beyond my hap does mount,
Whose thoughts as Thorns, yet prick me with Desire:
Whose suit and zeal, return's with no account:
Whose hope is dry, set in a heart of Fire:
Hold this for ease, forthwith to spoil the eye,
That lookte and lou'de, then in despair to dye.
A happy Doom, if it for Law might stand,
But men condemd, them selves may not dispatch.
Their lives and deaths, are in their Sovereigns hand
So mine in hers, whose Looks did me attache:
And therefore I, to pardon or to kill,
Must yeald my self, the Prisoner of her will.
L'ENVOY.
THen Lady fair, receive what longes to thee,
A fettred thralle, attyred with disgrace,
And at thy feet, his wounded heart here see,
And in the same, the Image of thy face? [mone,
Which bleding fresh, with throbs throws forth his
Rueth, rueth, dear Dame for that I am your own.
DONDOLO, lighted by his Page, apparayled in Tawnie, Blew and Black Taffata,
was the fourth: who upon his Breast, bare a Myrrour, set the outeside inward,
and yet fastened so slope as it might receive light, with an Imagination, that
he showed his Heart, the Beauty of his Mistress, and in yt thought, he wrote
upon the out side: Basta che spero: within which glass, this sonet was
coningly co^uated: which upon a fit-oportunitie he presented unto his
Mistress, Lucia Bella.

FRom shore to sea, from dales to mountains hie,
From meddowes fair, amid the craggie rock,
Love does me lead, I know not whether I,
But evermore a passage does unlock.
Now do I fight, now weep, now death I fear,
In all these storms, yet love the healme does steare.
In desert woods I wander to and fro,
Where I wild beasts, and fiery Serpents meet.
Yet safe I pass, Love does direct me so.
In tempests rough, my bark does always fleet,
Yea, when Sun, Moon, and stars forsake the sky,
Love gives me light, from my fair Mistress eye.
I mount to heaven, I know not with what wings:
I sink to hell, yet drown not in distress:
Twixt Ice and flame, Love me in safety bringes,
But to what end? in sooth I cannot guess:
Yet hap what shall, Love gives me this scope,
In dangers mouth, to live always in hope.
FALIERO lighted by a Page, attired in Peach color, yellow, and popeniay
green Taffeta, was the fifte and last that entered: who (as if she were
climbing up his Arm) carried a whyght Turtle, so artifyciallye made, as it
deceived, no less, then Parrhasius painted Table Clothe: In whose Beak, were
fynely rolled these Uerses.

IF on firm Faith, one Heart vncharg'd with frawd,
One langour sweet, one wish desire does move:
If honest Zeal, a gentle breast does lawde.
If wanderyng long, in the Laborinth of Love,
If wan pale cheeks, are witnesses of woe.
If reaking sightes, thrown from a burning heart:
If all these, and thousand sorrows more:
May charm Mistrust, and make you rue my smart.
Fair Mistress, look but in my Meagre face,
And you shall read, that I have need of Grace.
In this order, and with these devises, the Maskers entered, and after they had
saluted Queen Aurelia, and the honorable of the company, they placed
themselves, some of the one side, of the great Chamber, and some of the other,
observing therein a more discreate order then the ordynary Maskers: who at
their first entrance, either dance with them selves, or rudelye sease upon
the Gentlewomen: but these Maskers, entertained a small Time, with their Music,
while they had leisure to look about, and epsy who were the worthyest among
the Ladies.

In the end, Ismarito kyssing his hand, with a Countenance abased, humbly
desired Queen Aurelia, to do him the grace, to daun^ with him. Next, Bergetto
made choice of Franceschina Santa: after him, Soranso, chewsed, Maria Belochi:
Dondolo, raised Lucia Bella: and last of all, Faliero, took his Mistress
Catharina Trista: and thus, they observed in their choice, the same course they
kept in their entrance.

After this Company had performed all the civil Services of Maskers, leauyng
behind them, their Mistresses honored, and the whole company much contented:
they departed in the good order they entered: sa^yng that their Mistresses were
possessed with their several Devices.

Which done, the Gentlemen and Gentlewomen began to shrinck out of the great
Chamber, as the Stars seem to shoot the Sky, toward the Break of Day.

FINIS.
The third Days Exercise
Containing: sundry Moral Precepts: With a large Discovery, of the
inconveniences of Rash Marriages.
THE Aucthorytie, is daily Experience, that proves, how that the bitterest
worldly Sorrow, soon ends, either by Benefit of Fortune, or violence of death:
The uncertainty ofworldly things.
neither is the firmest worldly pleasure, ye of more continuance, then an
Imagynation, which is straight crossed with a contrary Suggestion.

What difference was there between the Fortunes of Caesar and Pompey, when their
ends were both violent? Both POMPEY and CAESAR, died violently
save that I hold Cesars to be the harder: for that, he was murdered in the
Arms of Prosperytie, and Pompey, at the feet of Disgrace: but being both
dead, unto their Monumentes, Writers add this Opinion. Caesar, in his life, was
more fortunate then Pompey: and Pompey, more honest then Caesar.



A proof, that some Disgrace, is the ground of Good Report: and some good
Fortune, the Trumpe of Infamy: therefore, let no man yield to Adversity, nor
affie too much in Pomp and painted Prosperytie: for the one, is but vexation,
the other vanity, and both in short time vanish.

A sudden alteration (as me thought) made me to contemplate of these causes:
for that (coming out of my lodgyng, somewhat tymely) I entered the great
Chamber, with as strange a regard, as he yt comes out of a House full of
Torch and Taperlights, into a dark and obscure Corner: knowing that at
midnight (about which time, I forsook my company) I left the place, attyred
like a second Paradise: the earthly Goddesses, in brightness, resembled
Heavenly Creatures, whose Beauties daseled men's eyes more then the Beams of
the Sun:

The sweet Music recorded the Harmony of Angels, the strange and curteus
devices in Maskers, seemed as fygures of divine Mysteries.

And to be short, the place was a very Sympathy, of an imagined Paradise. And
in the space of one slumbering sleep, to be left like a desert wilderness,
without any creature, save sundry sauadge Beasts, portrayed in the Tapestrie
hanginges, impressed such a heavy passion in my mind, as for the time, I fared
as one, whose senses had forgot how to do their bounden offices: In the end,
to recomfort my throbbing heart, I took my Citterne, and to a solemn Note,
sung this following Sonet, which I a little before, composed upon a quiet
thought, I possessed after my reading of Boetrus of the consolation of
Philosophy, translated into Italion, by Cosimo Bartoli.

FArewell, bright Gold, thou glory of the world,
Fair is thy show, but some thou make the soul:
Farewell, proud Mind, in thousand Fancies twirld:
Thy pomp, is like the Stone, that still does roll. SISIPHVS.

Farewell, sweet Love, thou wish of worldly joy,
Thy wanton Cups, are spiste with mortal sin:
Farewell, dyre Hate, thou do thy self annoy;
Therefore my heart, no place to harbor in.
Envy, farewell, to all the world a foe,
Like DENNIS BVLL, a torture to thy self:
Disdain, farewell, though hye thy thoughts do flow,
Death comes, and throws, thy Stern upon a shelfe.
Flattery, farewell, thy Fortune does not last.
Thy smoothest tales, concludes with thy shame:
Suspect, farewell, thy thoughts, thy intrayles wast, (blame
And fear to wound, the wight thou feign woul'dst
Sclaunder, farewell, which pryest with LYNX his eyes,
And can not see, thy spots, when all are done:
Care, Care, farewell, which like the Cockatrice:
Do make the Grave, that al men fame would shun.
And farewell world, since naught in thee I find
But vanytie, my soul in Hell to drown:
And welcombe Philosophy, who the mind
Do with content, and heavenly knowledge crown.
During the time, that my thoughts swounded with the charm of my passionate
Music. The Sun decked in his most gorgious Rays, gave a bon Giorno, to the
whole troop: and so many as were, within the sownde of my Instrument, were
drawn, with no less virtue, then the Steel unto the Addamant. In so much, of
the sudden, to behold the statelynesse of the presence, I was driven forth
of my muse, with a starklyng admyration, not unlike unto him, that sleeping
over a dying brand, is hastelye wakened with the lightening of a thousand
sparcles.

The offices of Courtesy discharged on every part, Segnior Soranfo fayed: the
Poets feigned not without reason, that Amphions Harp gave fence unto stone
Walls. For A commendation of Mu sick.
so divine (quoth he) are the operations, and virtues of Music. As he that
shall be bound, to declare her particular Graces, shall be no less troubled
then the Paynter Zeuxes was in the countersettinge of Cupid: Who after much
travel, was driven to draw him blind, for otherwise, he had under taken
Sisiphus task, because the twinkling reflections of Cupids eyes, threw a
thousand Beauties upon his face, and shadowed the work of the A fayning how
CUPID came to be called blind.
Paynter.

Thus through Ignorance, Cupid has ever since bin reputed blind, and for his
own perfection, is honored with ye title of the God of Love. The name of Love
gave a large occasion of discourse: but for that an other time was appointed
for those disputations, and the morninge was wholly dedicated, unto the service
of God: the question drowned in Soransos ^nggestion, and the whole company
scylent, in such affairs, attended Queen Aurelias coming: who, in change of
gorgious, and rich apparel, kept her accustomed hour, to go unto the
Chapel. By that time service was ended, and every man's devotion done, dinner
was ready to be set upon the Tables, with such choice of delicate Uiandes, as
unto the bounty of the Feast, there might nothing be added.

After that Queen Aurelia and the rest, had taken their ordinarye places,
every one helped the disgestion of their meat, either in inuenting some civil
merriment, or in hearing it reported by an other.

Bergetto all this while, was neither heard to speak, nor seen to smyle.

Which, perceived by Franceschina Sancta his Mistres, she (moved with the
spirit of compassion) studied, how with Justice, she might revoke her
sentence, and vnstring her servants tougue: and to that end, she demanded,
how three good turns, might be vnrewarde^d, A question to try a quick wit.
three offenses pardened, three iniuryes leaft unrevenged, and in every of
these; Justice preserved? This question passed through the table: and returned
without his true resolution.

In the end (quoth Segnior Philoxenus) Monsier Bergetto, what is your opinion?

Sir [quod Bergetto) my Mistress has locked the tongue, that should pronounce
it.

Why (quoth Franceschina) these be no questions of love, and therefore you have
liberty to speak.

No Lady (quoth Bergetto) but his virtue may appear in the aunsweare.

Well (quoth his Mystresse) if you can clear your trespass, by one of these
questions, I must do no injury to Justice, and therefore, say your pleasure.

Upon this warrant (quoth Bergetto) to your first three, I aunsweare. A
Captain may betray his charge, which is a benefit to the enemy: but the
betrayer, is not Three good turns, may be received, vnre warded.
to be received as a friend: for he that will sell his countryman, may not be
held assured, to a stranger. Secondly, a Thief that peacheth his fellows,
does good to the Common wealth: and yet, deserves no reward: for he that may
preuileadg his own theft, in bewraying other men's, will evermore steal upon
presumption. Thirdly, to win a man's money, is a good turn, and yet the loser
is not to be recompensed: for his intent, was to win the winners. Three
offenses, may with Justice be par doned.


To your second three questions, a man may offend through ignorance, which
is excused without a pardon: for ignorance, is without intent of evil:
therefore to be suffered, though not to be cherished: A man may offend, through
necessity, which commends Justice, with the virtue to forgive: for
necessity, is bound unto no law, and therefore, deserves not to be punnished
with the rigor of law: To the third, a man may offend through rashness, and
make amends with repentance: which Justice may pardon, without prejudice to equity:
and herein (fair Mistres) I have showen my trespass, and the reparation of my
trespass. Three injuries, may pas unrevenged.


To your third three questions, a man may hurt his friend against his will,
which is an injury: yet, ought not to be revenged: for revenge, can but
afflict ye trespasser, and the misfortune, greeueth him: Before the husband, a
man may kiss the wife, by mistaking: which is an injury, not to be revenged:
for the wife may wipe away the wrong with her hand, and the husband by revenge,
may make work for the Surgeon: And to ye last, a man must be content to
take good words of a beggarly debtor: which is an injury not to be revenged:
for a man can have of a Cat but her shin, and of a beggar, but his scrip: unless
he will sell ye Appotherm y the grease of ye one, and the dice maker, ye bones of
the other.

The whole company gave a verdict, yt Bergetto, had erpou^ded his Mistres
doubts Without blemish to Justice: and therefore were ernest suitors for his
remission. Whom she pardoned, with this prouiso, that he should behave himself
honorably toward women heareafter. For his liberty, Bargetto reverently
kissed his Mistresses hand, and thus all unkindness pacified.

Queen Aurelia mouyng alitle, raisde the company, from the Table, who a
pretty time after dinner, had respyt, to prepare their wits, for the aceustomed
exercise.

The Clorke had no sooner sounded the disputation hour: But Queen Aurelia,
and her Ladies were ready in the drawinge Chamber, and upon warnyng, the chosen
Gentilmen gave their attendaunce: who having taken their places. The Eunuck
(knowing his charge) unto the Lute sung this Sonet,

TO thee I send, thou fairest of the fair,
The Vows and Rites, of an unfeigned heart:
Who with my plaintes, do pearce the subtle Air.
That Beauty thou, may hear and see my smart.
Who sues, but that thy Deputy on earth,
May take in gree, my off'ringes of good will,
And in account return my Love in worth,
With charge thy priests, my bones to Ashes burn:
And with the same, thy Aulters all to meal,
That I may make [to serve, each Lovers turne]
The peace offering, with Sacrisice of zeal.
This Sonet in Beauties behalf, put the whole company in remembrance of
Doctor Mossenigoes last nights lavish speech of Beauty, and the scandalous
comparyng of her to Poison, or, which is worse, a more subtle infection: And
therefore, to be resolved of his wrong, or her gyltines, Queen Aurelia,
appointed Monsier Bargetto to be her Champion, and to assist him, (for it was
agreed that free choice of Marriage, should (this day) be disputed: whose
affection for the most proceeds from the virtue of Beauty,) she lycensed
every one that favored her cause: which done, shewilled ye Doctor and his
favorers to spit their venym.

Maddame (quod the Doctor,) it neither beseems the stayednes Old men are
bound by their gravity, to say no more then they will stand to.
of my years, nor agrees with the grauetie of my profession, in such an
assembly, to speak the thing I dare not avouch, and therefore since it comes
to this issue, that I must, hazard upon a charge, or shrink away with shame:
though my enemies be many, my cause is just: upon which warrant I am
feareles of my foes, and resolute in mine opinion.

Bergetto likewise glad of this favor, protested before Queen Aurelia and the
whole company, that in the faithful execution of his charge, the prodygall
spoil of his life, should give contempt to death,

The Doctor, that had given as many deep wounds The dashe of a Pen, is more
grievous then the counterbuse of a Lance.
with his Pen, as ever he had done with his Lance, shronke no more at these
threats, then an Oak at the Helue of an Are, but coldely wylled him, to use
his pleasure, he was ready to defend (or to die, in) his oppinion.

Whereupon Bergetto, to strengthen himself the better, made this remembrance,
of the yesterdayes report.

It is (quod he) already approved, if the married in forced Marriages, could as
well finish with the Church, as they Free choice in Marriage defended.
can account with their consciences: their joy to be Married was not so cold,
as their desire to be deuorsed would be whot: therefore by this awkeward
success in forcement: a free choice in Marriage, can not choose, but continue
(as I think) as much love between the Married, as the other sowed debate.

Rashness and constraint (quod the Doctor) are both violents Reproof, etc.
and every violent is a vice, then how can a vicious attempt have a virtuous
success: Men do evil (quod Bergetto) Defense, etc.
that good may come of it, and it is allowed.

And men do good (quod the Doctor) that evil may come Reproof, etc.
of it, and it is forbidden: for it is the intent both in good and evil, that
commends or condemns: and what good intent has the foolish young man,
that by his rashness in Marriage, robs his parents of their comfort, and him
self of his credit.

He satisfies his fancy (quod Bergetto) a special regard in Marriage: and
where there is a sweet accord between the married, the parents cannot but
rejoice, and the neighbors are bound to speak well: and beauty in his wives
face, will feed his heart with a thousand delights: so that he shall sustain
want with little grief, and labor to get wealth with a great desire: for
where unity is, small things grows to great.

Such may be the unity (quoth the Doctor) as small Reproof, etc.
greefes may grow to great sorrows: when the wind is in the neck of a
stooping Tree, it falls down right: and when the unthriftiness of the
Husband, agreeeth with the evil huswiferie of the Wife, Sorrow strives to be
in the married man's bosom, before the married be in his wives bead: and what
other expectation may there be, either of the one or the other, when he
satisfyeth his fancy, before he considers of the duties of Marriage: and she
in taking an husband, that is ignorant in the affairs of husbandry, and in
offices of Marriage: It is the office of the married, to be advised ere he love,
and loving to be reposed in Duties before Marriage.
his choice: It is the office of the married to provide for an Household,
before he take possession of his hearts delight: and it is the office of the
married, to examine the conditions of his Mistress, before he enter into any
covenant of Marriage. And how can he be advised, that marries without the
priuitie of his Parents? and how can he supporte an household, that marryeth
with his Parents displeasure, upon whose devotion he lives? and how can he
judge of his Mistress conditions, that wants discretion to consider of his
own estate? And where you allege, the beauty of his wives face, will feed
the husband with delight: his delight will starve his body, without other
supplies: so that when charge shall increase, and his wealth diminish, let the
foolish young married man, impose him self upon this fortune, that he cannot
so often kiss the sweet lips of his beautiful wife, as he shall be driven to
fetch bitter sighs, from his sorrowful heart.

Sir (quoth Soranso, taking Bergettos part:) of two Defense, etc.
evils the least is to be chosen: and it is less evil for a man, to live a
while hardly, and satisfye his own fancy, then to live ever discontented and
please his friends. The good behavior of the married, may win the Parents to
consent, and amend their exhibition: or death may come, and put them in
possession of their Parents living.

If either of these chance, as one is shortly like to happen, the penance
that they endured, will season their prosperity, and counsel the Married to
keep within their teacher, to leap within their latchet, and live within
their compass: The loving advise of the husband, will reform the disposition
of evil in the wife. For (as No man nor woman, but in some point deserve to be
blamed, and in some other to be praised.
Plato says,) there is no woman so perfect good, but in some one point may be
reprehended: nor no man so faultlesse, but that somewhat in him may be amended:
so that if the Husband gently reprehend the fault of his Wife, and the Wife
patiently suffer the offense of her Husband, the abylytie of their estate will
sustain a househould, and their love and agreement will be an especial comfort
unto them selves, and a commendable example unto all the neighbors.

The best of both your evils (quoth Doctor Mossenigo) is stark naught: but
our question was not, to choose Reproof, etc.
the least of euyls, but that which is simply good: notwithstanding, to answer
to the sequel of this rashenesse in Marriage, you say, their good behauiours
may recover their Parents good will, but I Prophecy, that their evil
demeanures, are more likely to extinguish the affection of a Father: for
necessity will accustom the Husband with dishonest shyftes, and keeps his
fair Wife from being idle: for want must be supplied, what shame so ever
ensue. Then is it lykely, that the Parents which did shut their Pursses in
the beginning, to punish the contempt of their Children, will now fast lock
them, to be revenged of their infamy. And where you gave them a hope, by their
parents death. I say no man dines worse, then hoping Tantalus, nor none are
more wetshod, then they which expect dead Their pennaunce is great that live
in incertaine hope.
men's shoes, and when they fall, the souls (perhaps) will be worn: I mean the
Father in his life time, may take order to dye even with the world, or at
least, leave his living maimed, and the most of his substance wasted: for in
a tempest at Sea, what Pylote has any care of goods, that sees the ship, at
the point to syncke: even so what parents can have any joy of worldly wealth
(more An ungodly child makes an unthrifty Father.
then to defend necessytye) when he sees, the heir both of his labor, and
living, out of hope of weldooing: so that through this rashness many sons,
during their fathers lives, with hard shifts, shift of necessity, and after
their deaths live disinherited: and not altogether* so much for their own
contempt, as for their wives incontinencye: and truly in the first, although
the parents may be thought The several pains of offenses.
cruel, yet are they not to be reputed unnatural, for that every offense has
his proper scourge: restitution is the true pain for robbery: an eye is
revenge for an eye, a hand for a hand, death challenges death, and
disobedience in the son, deserves disinheritaunce, by the father. Touching
the dishonesty of the daughter in law (as it is great hazard but that
necessity, thus bestowed, will bend her a little:) the severity is
sufferable, if her husbands Incontinency slaundereth an honest man's house.
father shut her forth of his doors, for that the honor of a man's house is so
delicate, as it can away with no stain: and (reseruyng your favors virtuous
dames) where a strumpet enters, she stuffeth the house with slander, as
carraine infecteth the air with stincke, yea the occasion is just: if the
father spare to get, and the mother cease to save, nay if they spend that
which they have, for it wear great pity, that there should be any thing
leafte either of their living or labor, to support a harlots pride. O how
innumerable are the inconveniences, of this timeritye in Marriage? The wise by
conjecture and daily experience seeeth, and the foolish (with sorrow in their
own entrails) feels: and therefore as a heinous offense: the ancient
Philosophers (which without partiallitie, checked Vice and cherrished Virtue)
punished this contempt of Chiloren. Plutarke says, the son that marryeth
Pains for timerity in Marriage.
without his Parents consent, among the Greeks was publicly whipped: among
the Lacedaemonians dishearited, and among the Theabanes both disinhearited, and
of his Parents openly accursed.

The younger company, began to fear a restraint of Freeloues liberty, and
their Goddess Beauties disgrace: The Doctor gave Captain Bergetto such
cross blows, who though he fainted in his opinion, yet (like a Cock, that
has one of his eyes stricken out, and his head bared to the brains, yet
strikes until he dies) he assailed the Doctor with this one more reason.

Master Doctor (quod he) they go far that never return, Defense, etc.
and the battle is very cruel where none escapes: what although a number
speed ill in making of their own choice, many have prospered well. In matches
of the best foresight, good Fortune has not always been found, and yet
foresight is not to be blamed, nor the other adventure to be dispitefully
condemned. Ovid says, that Forma numen habet, then by virtue of her
Divinity, it is like she will sustain them in adversity, that in prosperity
became her vowed Servant: neither does this stayne of the wives behavior
often follow, for where Beauty, Love, and Free choice, makes the Marriage,
they may be crossed by Fortune, and yet continue faithful. Piramus and
Thisbie. Romeus and Juliet, Arn^lt and Amicla, and diverse others at the point
to possess their loves, were dispossessed of their lives, but yet unstained with
dishonesty. This want with which you threaten them, what is it in respect of
the pleasures these Lovers possess? Wealth which is the contrary, A
discriptio^ of wealth abused.
what is it, being ill used? a beauty in the Chest, a bondage to the mind,
and a blot in the soul: but a couple united by this affection, for a little
Fleabiting of worldly pennury, suck Nectar between their lips, Cram Manna
The joy of true love.
into their Bowels, and possess Heaven in their hearts. How far Master
Doctor argues from the opinion of ancient Philosophers, and famous
Schoolmen, these authorities witnesses: Ovid, Nigidius, Samocratius,
Petrarke, and others in their life time, addored Beauty, with their books
honored her, and by their deaths eternized her glory. But for that her
virtues be Divine, and Master Doctor is soyled with slander, blasphemy and
malice, he is unworthy to be perfected, with one thought of her excellency,
which ignorance makes him so obstinate. The younger company began to take
heart, in hearing of this Tale, so that the Gentlewomen strengthened Bergetto
with good countenaunces, for (for modesties sake) they were silent, and the
Gentlemen succored him with their best reasons. But all this hope proved but
a lyghtning joy: for Doctor Mos^enigo, dubble enraged, partly for the check he
received, partly for the countenance the company gave his adversary: but
cheefely for to behold a new Dye, set upon a stained matter, so sharply
refuted Bergetto, as he had no delyght to reply, nor his supporter desire to
succor him. (Quod he) Ovid dreamed of a divinity in Beauty, but never tasted
other then a sweet venim, to proceed from her: He loved Iulia, Augustus
Daughter, and enjoyed her: but with what fortune? marry, he was stripped of his
living, and spoiled of his liberty, for her sake. Nigidius, an ancient
Roman, Sundry famous Philosophers and Poets punished for their loves.
and in great favor with the people, for this folly, tasted of Ouids fortune,
which was, to dye in exile. Samocratius was in youth, so prodigal of his
Love, as in age hated of his friends, he dyed in Prison, with famine. And as
for frantic Petrarke, I fear me Madonna Laura smyled more often in reading of
his follyes, then he himself did, with the sweet recompenses of his fancies.
All these were men learned, wise, and in their other actions (for their
gravity) were admyred, and only for their lightness in love, live to this
day defamed: For your other authorities, your own remembrance of their
deaths, show a vengeance sufficient, for the contempt of the Children. But
where you say Beauty, Love, and Free choice, lade the Married with such
pleasures, that they endure poverty, as a Fleabiting. In deed, want will so
quicken them, as the Husband will leap at a Cruste, and the Wife trot for her
Dinner. But suppose the best, thus married (whose loves are indifferent) with
patience do endure the afflictions of Fortune: their agreement is no general
warrant. The greater number of these Marriages, Cause of rash Marriages.
are not solempnyzed, through equaltye of love, but through inequaltye of
living. The coueitous Merchant, with no more delight heereth the passing bell
of his rich neighbor, which promyseth him the first loppe of his sons
living, then the poor gentleman eyeth the able heir, with desire to match him
(perhaps) with his fair proud Daughter. Then as pleasant baytes baineth
Fyshe, as counterfeit Calls beguileth Fowls, and as Crocadyles tears,
intrappeth Fools: to like destruction, lures are thrown to lime this gallant:
freendly usage shall inty^e him, good words shall welcome him, curtesy shall
cheer him, Beauty shall bewitch him, and fair promises, shall altogether
beguile him. New Uessels are apt for any licquor, and young heads (empty of
experyence) are seduced, with easey subtiltyes, to be short, he shall be
betrothed by cunning: his An unfortunate Marriage.
promise once past (for that in delay, is danger) the Marriage must be in
post haste, and the mislikyng at leisure: but in most of these matches, the
sorrow begins, before the solemnitye of the Marriage ends. The father
hearing of the indiscression of his son, galleth his heart with grief: the
mother, spoyleth her eyes with tears, and the friend occupyeth his tongue, in
b^moning of his kynsemans follye. There is yet a further sorrow, bitter to the
father and vnbenefyciall to the son. The father that thought to bestow his
daughter with the Marryage money of his son, is forced to diminishe his
inheritance, for her advancement. And by this means, the joy which begun
in the beauty of his Wife, is like to end in the beggary of himself: and
since these unsavory effects, grow from the virtue of Beauties Divinity,
let Mounsier Bergetto burn in his Heresy.

But Doctor Mossenigo will hold himself happy, never to be warmed by her
fire.

Bergetto had not a word more to say, but angerly A Gentleman in his revenge
ought not to offend a civil company.
looked upon his Sword, with a countenance that promised vengeance upon the
Doctors blasphemous tongue, had he not been stayed with a reverent
consideration of the company.

In the end, because Master Doctor should not be too proud of his conquest,
nor Bergetto overmuch appalled with his defeat, quod Signior Fabritio, Judge
of the controversies: in a single controversy the argument of the one, is to
be allowed as truth, and the cauiling of the other, to be rejected as error:
but for that this has been a double contention, as in defense and reproof,
both of Beauty and Free choice of Marriage, Madona Isabella, and I, pronounce
sentence with Bergetto, in the behalf of Beauty, for Beauty is a blessing,
and if she work evil effects in some, their naughty disposition, and not
Beauty is to be blamed: and with Doctor Mossenigo we like wise give judgment
in reproof of rashenesse in Marriage.

This judgment pleased Queen Aurelia and the whole company, who were glad
that they were thus forewarned of the inconveniences of Free choice in Love,
which they a little favored, but yet were more glad of the Triumph of
Beauty, whom they all affectedly honored: and therefore quoth Queen Aurelia,
good Wine need no Iuie Bushe, fine Marchaundise are Virtue commends her
self.
sold without a Sign, and Beauty is sufficiently commended by her own
excellency, and therefore we will spare Bergettos ready service, until
opportunity, present further employment. But for yt your Tryumphe shall have
his full right, we ^cence you to tell some one History to confirm your reaso^n

The Doctor glad of this liberty, who (although he had received no Disgrace,
yet he repined that he had not the whole honor of the Disputation, determined
in his History, a little more to nettle the favorers of Beauty: with which
intent, upon Queen Aurelias commaund^mente, he reported as follows.

The History in reproof of rash Marriages, reported by Doctor Mossenigo.
BEsides Capo Verdo, in times past, the capital City, within the kingdom of
Naples, sometime dwelled a forward young Gentleman called Marco Malipiero: the
son and heir of Caualiero Antonio Malipiero, in his youth renowned, for
many valiant services. This young Gentleman in the pride of his youth, became
inamoured Beauty, h^lfe a ^owrie in a woman.
of a most fair Gentlewoman named Felice, the Daughter of Philippo Prouolo, an
ancient Gentleman, by hard adventure decayed. But yet in dispight of fortunes
injury, who disabled him with many losses, and thereby, of small wealth to
advance his Daughter: Felice her self was enriched with such perfections of
of nature, that the friends lamented, but could not blame the affection of
young Malipiero: which in very deed, grew so great, as it contemned the
duty of a child, and scorned the advice of a Father: Felice alone governed
him, and none but Felice he obeyed.

Prouolo intertayned Malipiero, with the curtisie of a friend, as the good
parts he possessed: as for the possibility The poor eke th to match with
wealthy.
of living he stood in, who (striking the iron while it was whote) secretly
fianced Malipiero to his fair Daughter. The old Knight stormed at these news,
and not withstanding this known contract, if by any persuasions he could have
revoked his sons consent, (...) would have caused the Pope to have dispensed
with his conscience: and to that effect, her caused sundry of his friends to
deal with him in these affairs. And among many an ancient Gentleman, his
Governor, and sometimes his Schoolemaister (whose granetie, Malipiero
reuerensed) in a mylde order commoned with him, and among other questions
demanded, with what reason he could iustifye his light affections, and
condemn the sound aduyte of friends.

Malipiero, resolute in his love, boldly answered, that A rash answer.
Felices divine beauty, was a sufficient warrant for either.

This wise Governor would not harden his heart with The words shows the wit
of the ^eporter, but his gesture causes atten tion in the hearer.
obstinacy, in a sharp reprehension of his public arrogant answer, but with
an affable countenance, coniured him to lysten unto his grave sayings.

O (quoth he) is she beautiful? then you have work enough to watch her, and
mischance sufficient to suspect her.

Is she beautiful? then her rashness in consent, shows that she is
indisereet: so that the diversity of quallities will soon find out a
division in your desires.

Is she beautiful? then it is like (by her quick agreement) that she is poor,
then is her Love fastened on your riches: so that when you lack money to
maintain her pomp, she leaves, to make much of your person.

Is she beautiful? then she is withal (lightly) proud, and the pride of a
woman (says Per^ander) is like unto a The nature of Pride.
Dropsey: for a drink increases the drouth of the one, se (says he) Cost
enlarges the expense of the other: then if your Purse be not open to feed her
folly, she will pawn her honor to please her fancy.

Is she beautiful? then her indiscreation, in this hastiness, shows her but
a slender huswife, so that the charge of your house, shall eat and consume
your gains ab^e. Is she beautiful? then your dispense, must be in her
disposition, or else her looks will little repose you: if she ^der your goods,
her expenses will be great, and her ge^ ^ges small, your house shall be stored
with costlye (...), and your servants starued with lack of meat: she will go
like a Pecock, and you like a meacock: what follows? in her bravery, she must
be seen: if she take the lyberty to walk, she gives other occasion to
speak, and your self to sigh. A fair picture set in the Market place, moves
many to gase: if the counterfeit gives content meant, the creature must needs
delight: and if any view your wife with unlawful affection, his practices will
be many to win his desire. Take heed, you undertake an intisinge course, which
without good order, will make you breathless before the midst of your race:
you enter into great charge, see means to support it. Your Father lives, and
must maintain his accustomed reputation: if he spare to sustain you, it is
much: to defraye the charge, of your Wife and household, he cannot: therefore
so love, that this dispense may be shared between you, and your wives Parents:
and as far forth as I can see, Felices Father has much add, to keep rain
out of his house top: then if with difficultis he lies dry in his Bed, it is
impossible he should have any great cheer at his Boorde: what reckonyng can
you make, to be supported by him that has it not? and how can you dare
presume, to be supplied by your own Father? when the timeritie of your
marriadge displeases him to death. Look into these mischeeues, before you
feel the miseries they presage: look before you leap, least you be wet,
before you be a ware: your friends has a comfort, but you the benefit of
weldooing.

The Schoolemaister gave Malipiero this advice, with such a temperate gesture:
that (although good counsel prevailed not, yet) he reverently told him, that
his experience Love enioyneth us to: do what we kno is amiss.
knew more, then his green imagination could contain: and therefore, he
would meditate of his loving admonition, and proceed no further without his
priuitie. But ah, these wear but sweet words so betraye himself, and to
blind his friend. For upon the first oportunytie Malipiero speeds unto
PHILIPPO PROVOLO, and recountes the importunyties of his Friends, with a
desire to have the Marriage preuilie solemnised, since that he could not obtain
the open consent of his parents.

Prouolo, fearing the danger of delay, was as ready to satisfy, as Malipiero
was earnest to request: insomuch as early in a morning, Marco Malipiero, was
set in possession of his hearts delight: and before night, was dispossessed Au
early marriage, works a late repentance.
of his whole bodies welfare: For his sorrowful Father, and heavy friends,
hearing of this sudden Marriage, after they had a while bemoned, the rashness
of Maliperio, with the Affection of Parents, menaced to punish his oversight
(in not regarding him) as Strangers.

Prouolo, on the other side, to give knowledge to his Son in Laws friends,
that although Fortune had The reward of pride, is poverty.
crossed him, she had not wholly consumed him: set out his abylytie to the most
Advantage: much like unto a Market Merchant, that on a Newyears Day morning,
exposes his painted tokens, to the ritchest show: His Son (in law) was
accomodated with the Attire and furnyture of a Gentleman, and his Wife was set
forth, with the show, of rich Malipieroes Heirs Espouse, and not as poor
Prouoloes Daughter: Insomuch, as the common The common sort Judge as they
affect.
sort, blinded with shows, judged after their eyes affection, and reputed old
Malipiero a cruel covetous Charle, for dealing with Prouolo so frowardly, that
had entreated his Son so honorably. But these murmurings, little moved the good
ancient Knight: for well he wist, this bravery was but a blase, as soon
ended as the flame of a dry Faggot. And which should avenge him, this pride
promised a change, attyred with as much pennurie as the other with pomp.

The following effect, confirmed old Malipieros opinion: for Prouolo spent so
largely at the beginning, in hope with this florishe; to make accord between
the Son and the Father: As now his Table was furnished with empty Platters,
and his Audit Bags with The miserye of want.
a set of Counters. So that want, that will make a toothlesse woman to bite at
Brazen Walls, entered into Prouolos House, and swore both him and his whole
householde unto the statutes of necessity: whose laws were so strait, that
although they all had great occasion of sorrow, they had no leisure for
shifting to supply their wantes: In so much as in short time, there was no
neighbor, that Prouolo was not in his debt or danger, and no good natured
youth there aboutes, that Marco Malipiero had not boorded or coosoned.

And what should fair Felice do in this extremity? live upon her husbands
travel, and be idle her self? that were no good Huswiferie: and yet poor
Malipiero loved her so dearly, that he would have ventured upon a thousand
infamies, to maintain her in the state of an honest Gentlewoman: but although
his shifts helped, they defrayed not her desire to be brave. A Diamond has
not his grace but in gold, nor a fair Woman, her full commendation but in the
ornaments of bravery. Brave rye belongs to Beauty.
So that attyred to her best advantage, fair Felice would many times walk,
unto the Piatso Richio, a place where the brauest Gentlemen assembled, and
where the fynest PIATSO, a market place, or a place of, assembly.
devices were sold: she taking this liberty to walk, bound the gallant young
Gentlemen, in courtesy to Court her: curtuous service, is to be accepted with
thanks: acceptance of service, inlargeth acquaintance acquaintance ingendreth
familiarytie: and famylia^ie, sets al Felies abroach: So that, let other
Married men take warnyng, A necessary note.
by Malipieroes hard fortune: for, if their wives love gadding, like fair
Felice, and be inconstant, do want, or find in their Husbands, miscontentment:
Twenty to one, they will pawn their honors, to please their fancies.

Well, Felice lost nothing by these Iorneyes: for some one Gallant, would
present her with a Ventoie, to cool her self: some other, with a Mirror, to
behold her self: and some, with Lawnes, Ruffes, Coyfes, and such
necessaries, Courtesy don with an evil intent.
to set out her self: and yet upon no dishonorable condition, but (by your
leave) with hope of an after favor.

This trafique, fair Felice used, until (among a number, that temperately
affected her,) Marino Giorgio, the rich Orphant of Capo Verdo immoderately
loved her, and withal; the honors of courtisie served her: But
notwithstanding, his lusty personage, might please: his lovely countenance,
might intyce: and his rare wit, passing through a sweet tongue, might bewitch a
woman in love: for that Malipiero, was inritched with these perfections:
Felice, regarded Marino Georgio, but with an ordinary Disdain haunteth desire.
grace: and had it not ben for that Archinchaunter, Gold (perhaps) would
never have been inconstant.

This light account of Felice, enlarged the affection of The fire of Love.
Marino: for as drink increases the dropsies drowth, s^ disdain, heapeth
coals upon desire: whereof Marino, (Test se ipso) has leaft an infallible
authority: whose torments were so grievous, as the fire: which of al flames,
burns most, and appears least, burst out of his mouth, the smoke of such
surious sighs, that where he was but late, of a pure Sanguine Complexion, he
seemed now, nothing, but Choler adust: So that, his friends mourned, and
many moved his strange alteration: who counsayled him to take the Physicians
aduire: But neither Galen, Hipocrates, nor their Enemy, Panacelsus, could skyl
of his cure: so that he was in danger to have consumed to Cinders, had not
Macrello, the Physician of Love, undertaken his health, who comforted him with
many sweet words of hope: but, Marino, continually afflicted himself
Physic cures not love.
in recounting an impossibilytie of favor.

Why (quoth Macrello,) is not your parsonage seemly? Yes: but it does not
please. Is not your face lovely? Yes: but it does not allure. Is not your wit
quick and good? Yes: but it can not persuade. Is not Felice, a woman? Yes: and
more, an Angel.

Well, then (quoth Macrello,) be of good comfort, Angels be not cruel, nor
steely hearted.

O (quoth Marino,) but Felice, is constant, and true to her husband, who to
continue her affection, is graced with these and many more perfections.

Yea (quoth Macrello) but he wants one of your theefest beauties.

What one is that (quoth Marino^) Even that, that opened the double locked
doors of Acrisius brazen Tower, The force of Goulde,
and put Iubiter in possession of his daughter Danais love. And think you this
Goulden Beauty, will not make a passage in^o poor Malipieros Bed Camber? I
warrant you yeas: you have Goulde more at commandment then I, but I know the
virtue better then you.

This short tale quickened dying Marrino, as the flashe of Rose water does a
sullen swounding Child.

Whereupon (quoth he) Macrello, if your Medicine be of no less virtue to
restore my life, then your words to give me hope: the fortune, shall be your
profit, as well as my pleasure.

Well (quoth Macrello) sustain your self with hope, Hope comfort but Love
cures the Lover.
and for that your invention is delicate, devise you some curious rich Iuell,
and let me alone (quoth he) both to charm and to present it: and so with a
remembrance in the hand, he lest Marino, to contemplate of his love, and to
consider how to recover his life: who in the end, concluded to send fair
Felice, the Image of himself in Goulde, inameled black, his face meager and
pale, and by a device, the black mantell thrown aside, for to appear, the
bared Carcass of Death, with the intrayles Marinos Present to his Mistrisse.
consumed, and in the seat of his life, to place Felice, attyred with
Diamonds, Rubyes, Emrodes, and other precious Stones, looking upon his smoking
heart, whervppon, was written these two breefes. Love only gives me health,
Not Medicine nor wealth.


This Image made unto his fancye, he wrote this sollowing Letter.

Marino Georgios letter, to Felice the fair.
Fair Mistress, if I enjoyed any health, I would wish you part: but what I
do possess, I acknowledge to be yours, and my self to be, but your steward.
And for this service, because it is duty, I crave nothing, but leave my merit
wholly to your consideration. Yet, least my scylence, should rob the glory of
your pity, and my death, reaue you of a faithful Servant: more of zeal, to
do you long service: then of any desire I have to live. I hear present you my
consumed self, only kept alive, by the life of fair Felice, who sits
crowned, in the Palace of my heart: which bleeding at her feet, shows the
means of my cure: which if you witsafe, I live: if not, you see my death. And
thus, doubtful between both, until I kiss your sweet aunsweare, I remain.

Unto my latter Gasp, Your faithful MARINO GEORGIO.


THis letter Sealed, and Subscribed, To the hands of the most fair Felice:
Macrello was sent for: to whom Marino delivered, both the Iuell, and the
letter, with out instructions to do his message: for Protheus could not chainge
himself into more shapes then Macrello: as well, to avoid suspicion, as to
compass his purpose: who behaved himself so cunningly, in Marinoes errande,
as (to be short, virtuous Dames) after many persuasions, Felice returned him
with this Answer.

FELICES Answer, to Marino Georgio.
IAm not cruel, although with difficulty, I consent too love: and for that
your passions are so extreme, I keep your Picture in my Bosom: But, with what
thought, I blush to write, though Pity be my warrant: so that I leave the
event of our Love, to your Consideration: and my yealding, to Macrelloes
Report: who, in bewraying your passions, let fall more tears, then I could
dry up with a thousand sighs.: So that ouercom with rueth, to see your
Affection so great, and your passion so dangerous, I can not but commyt my
love, my honor, my self and all, to the Affection and wise government of
Marino Georgio.

FELICE.


THis Letter, was subscribed: Life, to MARINO GEORGIO: and delivered to the
faithful Macrello: with charge, that he should make known, his great
Importunities, before Felice would grant so hye a favor: which Prouiso,
might have been spared: for Macrello, (partly for his glory, but chiefly, for
his own benefit) upon delyuerie of this Letter, willed Marino, to receive it,
as a Conquest as hardly gotten, as Hercules labors: and if (quoth he) I had
not endured your torments (by Imagination) it had not ben impossible to have
moved Felice to rueth: Marino, heard these circumstances, with no better
remembrance, then if he had been in an Ecstasy: The Subscription: Life to
Marino: overcame him with Sudden joy or sorrow dull leth our senses.
such a sudden passion of Joy, who read, and a hundred times over read this
Life letter: and for that it came from Felices sweet hand, he a thousand times
kissed the Paper.

Which done, by the direction of Macrello, this Conqueror Gowlde, made such a
passage, into a reputed honest Cytizens House, as, without suspicion, Marino
Georgio, and fair Felice, theare (many times) met, but to what purpose, I
leave to your constructions: and yet, thus much Gold makes passage into
difficulte places.
I say: this Fortune followed: Marino, in short space, recovered his former
Complexion: and it was not long, before Felice was richer, then either Father
or Husband.

But, O that Fury Jealousy, envying this Accord, sent sly Suspicion, to
infect Malipieroes heart: who pryinge with Lynx his eyes, presented him a
thousand causes The venomous nature of Ielosye.
of mistrust, which love strait suppressed with as many contrary imaginations
of his Wives good behavior: inso much, that with the sharp encounter of Love,
and mystrust, poor man, he was continually afflicted.

In conclusion, seeing his Wife to exceed in bravery, A shrewde sus pition.
and knowing himself, to declyne with poverty, he resolved upon this
certentie: this cost, could not come from the empty Coffers of her undone
Parents: and then proceedinge from others, it was impossible to be the
favors of honest courtesy: so that armed with fury, he deferred revenge, but
to entrap the friend of his wives follyes, Suspect is more cunnyng, then Argus
was, wary.
and the enymie both of her honor, and his delyght.

In fine, as heedefull, as these Lovers were in their dealinges, Ielosye
directed suspecte, to Marino Georgio: and moreover, made him an eye witness of
the injuries done unto Malipiero: which when he assuredly knew, he
Neapolitans, are most seueare in, revenge.
studied a while of a torture, equal to this treachery: for who has not hard
the Neapolitan to be the seuerest revenger of dishonor in the world, To be
breese, his bait was this: he feigned a iournay far from home, and furnished him
self, with such an appearance of truth, as took a way all color of
suspicion: which done, with a dissembling kiss, he committed his wife to
God, and the charge A Judas kiss
of his house, to her good government: and so set forward toward Rome.

Malipiero was no sooner a mile on his way, then Macrello certified Marino of
this wished opportunity: and Love made both him and Felice so boulde, as in his
own house they determined the followinge night, to exercise upon Malipiero
their wonted injury: but about mydnyght when mistrust was at repose, Malipiero
entered A fit time, to deceive mistrust.
the house with such a sudden violence, as these two unfortunate friends,
were surprysed amids their imbraceme^ts, before they had warnyng to shift: I
sowrrow to tell the rest, but truth will have passage.

Malipiero, in his revenge like a Lion hungring after his pray: with his Rapier
and these bitter words nailed Marino unto the Bed. Death is too easy a
scurge, for a disloyal wife.
Thou Couche [quod he] soyled with dishonor, wash out thy staynes, with the
Adulterers blood. But holding death too easy a scurge for his wives trespass,
he condemned her to this torture, more extreme then death: He made an Anotomy
of her well-beloved Marino, and set him in a fair Chamber, within which, he
enclosed his wife, without doing her any bodily injury, save the cutting of her
hair: and to say truth, this beautiful ornament of hair, beseems not an
Adultresse head. And to punish her the more, Malipiero caused her every dinner
and supper to take her accustomed place, yt at meals she might be tormented
Hair, the ornaments of Chastytie.
with the sight of her lyuinge enemy, and all the day with the bones, of her
martired friend: neither could she quench her thirst, but out of a Mazar,
made of Marrinoes skull. But (to tell her virtue, with her vice) The bounde^
office of a Writer.
her patience was such, as she was never hard to complain of this cruelty:
and yet her penitent sorrow so great, as ye plenty of her tears, sometimes
moved her injured Husband to pity.

But least he should be overcome with compassion, many Justice, must not yeald
to the tears of Trespassers.
times from dinner, he commanded her to her prison: who after an humble
reverence, went behind the Tapestrie Hanginges, and so unto her solitary
Chamber, barred from other company, then the ghastly bones of unfortunate
Marino: which pennaunce she patientlye endured, until GOD, who saw yt her
repentance was unfeigned, sent Segnior Cornaro to be a peace maker God
regards repentance.
between her Husbands injury, and her offense: who (when Supper was set
upon the Boorde) seeing from behind the Tapistrie Hanginges, a fair
Gentlewoman to appear, somewhat pale with sorrow, her head bare, both of
attire and Hair, apparrelled all in black, and in her hand, her drynking Bowl
of Marinoes scul, and saying never a word, with a sober reverence sitting down in
ye cheifest place: was stricken with such a maze, as on the suddayne he wist not
what to say.

Dinner being ended, which was longer, then pleasant, either to husband, wife,
or friend: Felice, as she entered so departed. W^, notwithstanding, leaft part
of her sorrow behind in Cornaros heart, whose cheareles countenance, when
Malipiero perceived (quoth he) let not the martyrdom of this Woman afflicte
you: for her fault deserves this vengeance, and so recounted the reported
adventure: And in advantage, showed him her prison and the Annotomie of her
dishonor? and withal licensed him A honorable favor.
to talk with Felice, to hear what plee she had for her discharge. Upon
which warrant, quoth Cornaro, Madame, if your patience be equal with your
torment, I hold you the most happy Woman of the world. Felice with a
countenance abased, and Cheakes dewed with tears told him in humble words,
that her trespass was ten times greater, then the torment which the Lord of
the House, whom she was not ^worthie to call The true ensign of sorrow.
husband, had appointed her. And therewithal, the sorrow of her heart, took
away the use of her tongue. Whereupon Malipiero, led the Gentleman away,
who rendered him affected thanks, in that, besides his good intertaynment, he
witsafed him the honor to know so great a secreasie: withal, moved with
compassion, he effectually entreated Malipiero, to accept Felices sorrow the
true witness of grace and amendment, as satisfaction of her True repentance,
is to be receued in satisfaction of offenses.
offense, which proceeded of frayltie, and withal importuned him, with such
earnest reasons as Malipiero was content to send both for her and his own
friends. To be partly ruled, and partly advised by them in her behalf.
Perfect love, cannot be so iniuried, but it will alwais retain some affection.


The parents and friends of every side seeing the humility, sorrow, and
patience, of poor Felice, were all earnest suitors for her remission.

The root of ancient love not altogether dead in Malipiero, was comforted
with their intercessions, and quickened with the hope of amendment: in so
much, as upon sollemne promise to be henceforth of good behavior, he
received her to grace: and to repair her crased honor, A reparation of
dishonor.
with the favor of both their parents, he new married fair Felice, in
which holy estate, they lived, loved, and agreed many happy years afterward
together: And with the Bones of Marino Georgio buried the remem* brance of
former injuries.

Master Doctor, quoth Fabritio, you have reported a very necessary History:
for it contains many heedeful notes, both of Amonition, and advise. Besides
the due punishment of rashness in Marriage. For therein we may see how
hungersterued want, compels the best natured man to deceive his friend, and
yield unto his own slander. Again, how that monster, Gold, conquereth the
honor of the fairest. Yea, quoth Isabella, and corrupts the conscience of
the wisest: so that this is no example of any honor to you men, because Gold
intised Felice, to be disloyal to her Husband, for it draws many of you,
both from the fear and love of God.

Well, quoth Soranso, let it pass, Felice in her repentance, has made a
large amends of her trespass, and I fear me, if every like offense were so
sharply punnished, we should have Mazers of men's Sculles, more ordinarye then
Silver Boules, and powled Women more common then baulde men.

Not so, quoth Queen Aurelia: for a few of these examples Fear of
correction, bride leth the affex cions of the e uill.
would bridle the incontinent affections both of man and woman, if not for the
love of virtue, for the fear of correction. After these and a few other
Morrall notes were culled out of Doctor Mossenigos History.

Maddam, quoth Don Dolo, if we continue this course, What hurts one,
instu^eth the other.
it will be a good while, before, we do find out the Parradice, Plato
speaks of.

Be it so, quoth Queen Aurelia, but if we still continue the way to his House
Hell, our error will instruct others: and since we have yet long respyte, it
shall not be amiss every day to take a sundry hie way, until we find out
the true passage: And for that our Question is concluded, and our Hour Glass
run: we will (for this Day, make here an end.

The Question that arose, by behouldyng, the MOWNTIBANKES, in the third
Nights Pastime.
AT the accustomed Hour, Supper was served in with many daintye Dishes:
which were saused, with sundry short civil, and pleasant euentes of the
Gentlemen, and Gentlewomens wits: For he, or she, was held of weak
capacity, that either of forestuddie, or, upon offered occasion, could say
nothing of good regard.

In the end, when Supper was done, and Queen AVRELIA, and the most Honorable
of the company had taken their places upon a Scaffolde made for Brevity, is
best, for Table talk.
the nonce, there mounted, a Mountebanke, his neck bechayned with live Adders,
Snakes* Eau'ts, and twenty sundry kind of venomous vermines, whose mortal
Mountiba^ks of Italy, are in a manner, as Englysh Pedlers.
stinges were taken away by Art, and with him a Zanni, and other Actors of
pleasure: who presented themselves only with a single desire, to recreate
Segnior Philoxenus, and his worthy company: and not with the intent of common
Mountebanckers, to deceyne the people with some unprofitable Merchandise.

In the midst of this pastime, an ancient Gentleman (of the general
Society) seeinge these Uiperous Beasts, by cunninge usage, to be made so
Domesticke and affable, whether it were upon an impression of his own grief
or of the experience he had of an other man's Plague, I know not; but sure I am,
he burst into these passions.

O GOD, (quoth he) of what mettell is a Woman's tongue, which correction cannot
chastise, nor lenity quiet, The strange nature of a Woman's tongue.
when these dumb Serpents, by the one or the other are tamed?

Marie (quoth a pleasant Companion) it is made of the same mettle, that Virgils
Brazen Flayle was off, which struck both his friends and foes.

But (quoth the Gentleman) Virgyll knew, and taught others how to pacify this
engine.

It is (true quoth the other:) but in teaching the secret unto his Servant,
cost him his own life. So a woman knows how to hold her Tongue, by having
of her will, but if a man think to stay it, he must beat her to death.

A young Youth named Phrisio, thinking to win the Spurs, by building a
Fortress for women, who have Defenses, for a chiding wife.
no weapons but their tongues, to defend, and offend, took upon him, to
prove a chiding wife, though she be a little unpleasant, both profitable
and necessary: his reasons were these.

Unsauerie receytes turn to wholesome effects: The strongest Poison is
pleasant in taste, and the remedy for the poisoned, offends the mouth with
tartness: Nettles that stinges the Hand, makes Pottage to comfort the
heart: the blood of the Scorpion cures the biting of the Uiper. If poisoned,
unpleasant, and bitter things retaynd a virtue for the benefit of man: in my
imagination (quoth he) an unquiet wife is not unprofitable though she be a
little unpleasant:

Her anger keeps Servants in awe, and her quickness ouerseeth their
negligence: If her tongue run at riot, where she huntes, there is store of
abuse, which must be chased either with blows or words: If the furye of her
speech offend her Husband, it is like, that) her outrage, grows from his
fault: And where an injury is offered, it is sufferable, if the wrong be
blamed: but which makes a full amends, for her furious mood: as the clowdy
and raynie day, lightly clears toward night: even so, though she bitterly
scowld at boorde, she will be sure, to kiss sweetly a bed.

The ancient Gentlemen, commending the quick wit In blaming, mildnes is to be
used.
of this young Gentleman, used this circumstaunce before he refelled his error.

Ah (quoth he) if wit were as advised in Judgment, as he is ready in
censeight: his imaginations, would turn to wonderful effects: but as fairest
colors soonest stain, as sweetest flowers are blasted with a breath: as
beautyful creatures, are blemished with a little care, as ye brightest Sun
threateneth sudden rain: yea, as every mortal thing has his imperfection:
even so, wit being Wit simply is imperfect.
mortal, and assigned by Nature, to make man glorious, above other creatures,
by rashness, corrupts the ripenes of his conseightes: and to good purpose, his
pride is thus abated: for otherwise, man which enjoys wit, to worship his
Creator, and to live content, with the liberties of the sea, and to keep him
with in the limits of the earth, would search the secreats of heaven: and I
think, dispossess Pluto of hell.

Young Gentleman (quoth he) I use not this ceremony to repress your liberty of
speech: for the error of your rashness, I will refell with reason and
experience: but least heareafter you should be as arrogant in opinion, as you
are ripe in conseight: I have thought good, friendlye, and breefelye to
signify your imperfection: and now to answer your late suggestion.

I affirm that Nature has created nothing to a needless purpose: but
notwithstanding, our abuse, or mischance, changes hurtefull things, into
occasions of our healpe: Surfit, and Sickness only, commends Medicine: and as
you affirm, the blood of a Scorpion, cures the biting of the Viper.

But take away the cause, which proceeds from our grief, and you shall find
medicine, an enemy to health: and the stinge of a Scorpion, no better then
death: and trust me, he is to be reckened a fool, and his misfortune to pass
vnreleeued, that wilfully indammageth his health in hope of remedy. In like
sort let him live vnpittyed, to ouersee the slacknesse of his servant, who
will marry a wife, whose tongue shall overrule himself. But more perticularly
to discribe the properties of an unquiet wife, and more largely to discourse
the displeasures of her unfortunate husband: I will approve her lowringe, as
unprofitable, as his life is unpleasant: you say her quickness ouerseeth the
negligence of servant: but I affirm, that her curstness makes them as
swift to run away, as they were slow to serve her: and common use avowes,
that often shyfte is neither beneficyall for Master nor Shift, is
unprofitable, for Master and Servant.
Servant: for proof, as the rolling Stone gathers no Moss, and want of use
canckereth Iron, in likewise thrifte flies the fleeting Servant, and
idleness consumes his abylytie of service. Now touching the evil reckening
of those which are served: their wanderyng servants not only charge their
common accountes, with double wages, but with secret pylferyng, they set
their Masters in more deep arrerages. The Gretians that in times paste
neither used medicyne for sycknesse, nor patience in aduersitye, but upon
every great veration, poisoned them selves with venomous Cienta. In their
Histories Cienta, a venomous Herb, one sort whereof is supposed to be Hemlocke.
remember more, that have voluntarily died, through the violence of their Wyfes
tounges, then of any other calamitye. Diogenes being demanded the diuersitye
in evil, between a Scoulde and a Harlot? answered: They differ as the Uiper
does from the ^rockaril: for the Scoulde, says he, with outrage destroys
her Husband, and the other with dissemblyng love, consumes him to death. And
so concluded them both enemies to life, and quiet living of man. Phrisio,
being both modestly warned, A needful regard for young Gentlemen.
and thoroughly aunsweared, with a ^shefull grace replied: that the grauetye of
his person, and the sound reason in his words, had taken from him, all
occasion of further Question, unless that Women were his Judges. This witty
shift moved such as were within the hearing An ill cause asks a partial
Judge.
to smyle, for where the cause is ill, it is necessary to seelte a Judge that
is partial, and which commended Phrisios government, upon a small check he
left to contend, with this ancient Gentleman: for young men, although their
wits be good, are not Privileged to Dispute with the grauer sort, without
license, entreaty, or great reverence.

By this time the Mountibanck, with discribing the quallities of his ^ermin,
and the Zanni in showing the ^tsh conditions of his Master, had wasted a good
part of the night, and wearyed the most part of the company, so that desire of
repose, sommoned them unto their lodgeings.

FINIS.
The fourth Days exercise:
Containing: variety of necessary Discourse, and yet withal, the greater
part appertaining to the general argument of Marriage.
SO deep are the impressions of Sorrow, The great impression.
as the ^ayning of Poets, may be held for Morrall truths, where as they
affirm, that the bitter moan of Orpheus tongue, together, with the passionate
sound of his Instrument, moved such (...) in infernal creatures, as while he
was a futer to Pluto, for the restitution of his Wife Euridice, his plaints so
Charmed the torments of Hell, as for the time, the Gripe forbear to tear upon
Titius growing heart. Tantalus endeavored not to drink: Danaes Daughters, left
filling of their bryncklesse Tub: toyling Sisiphus, sat and eased himself
upon his rolling Stone: yea and Pluto ouercharged with pity, made restitution
of Euridice. This sorrow to hear, that Queen Aurelia by some distemperature,
was ^ick, and kept her Chamber, wrought such greefes in the hearts of the
whole company, that they hounge their heads in disgrace, like Garden Flowers:
which (seeming as tears) are eloyed with she dew of a foul missing day,
Among the rest Isinatito, although he True sorrovve is ^novvsne rather by
sighs then words.
used not so many words of lament, as some other did, yet, with the tears of
his heart, he solemnized the true ^ites of a Mourner: and to say truth, where
the tongue has free passage to talk, the heart is occup^ed with no great
grief.

Segnior Phyloxenus, seeing Ismarito in this passion, and that occasion
entertained him with no other business: while the rest of the company were
hearing of a little superstitious service, lead him into a very beautiful
Gallerie, where the Mappes of the world were so artificially set forth in
Painting, as I doubt the Popes Microcosmos The Pope has begun, and not yet
finished a most rare Gallerie. Beautiful attires for a Gallerie.
at Latteran, which has been this sixteen years a making, wylbe ended with
no more perfection. In this Gallerie were the Pictures of all Christian
Princes: and in an other place by themselves, the Pictures of certain Heathen
Rulers: and in an other rank, the Pictures of so many learned men and grave
Magistrates, as he could through freendship or reward obtain.

After much discourse of the especial Monuments, wherewith this pleasant
Gallerie was attyred, Segnior Phyloxenus brought Ismarito (...) fair book,
wherein were diverse rare devises, and (directing him to Pensils, Colers An
espetiall Book of devises.
and other necessaries of H^rowldry) requested that he would help to beautify
the said Book, with some ingenious remembrance.

Sir (quod Ismarito) I have already recorded your good favors in the Table of
my heart: and I beseech you that this fair Book may not be blemished by me,
or remain a witness to you of my indiscression.

This niceness (quod Philoxenus) professes more then ordinary knowledge, and
therefore I conjure you, by the affection you bear me, to satisfye my request.

Ismarito upon this importunity, because he would not leave a suspicion, that
his curiosity grew rather of simplicity then discression: and missing among
the Modern Ismaritos devise, Pharos, a Lantern or light, devised by King
Prolome, surnamed Philadelphus, for the benefit of Navigations in those parts,
which cost 800. Tallents.
Monuments, their Pictures, the virtues of whose Fame, are blazed in the
Capitols of the whole world: he took a Pensill, and with the same drew an
Ileland, and over the midst thereof, made a Pharos, which shyned like the
Sun, and therein a Phoenix, bathing of her self, whose gleaming reflections,
shined over all Loegria, Cambria, and the greatest part of Albania, and
extended unto a great part of the Continent, espetially unto that part that
lay between the Occean, the Mediterrane, and the great Sea called Euxinus
Pontus, and underneath writ.

Pharos Europae, non Africae.
Phyloxenus advisedly regarded this devise, before he would either require
Ismaritos intent, or give his own judgment. In the end, deuining what should
be the secret meaning of this Simbole or Ensign: quoth he, Segnior Ismarito,
this Cognizance of your quick wit, pleases me much, and withal remembers me
of a neglected courtesy, which (I think) will show you the Image of your
Phoenix, and blason the secrecy of your whole devise: and thereuppon he lead
Ismarito into a most curious privy Gallerie, where (drawing a fair Curtain,
and reverently kissing his hand) he showed Ismarito the Picture of a An
honorable favor.
Royal Princess, most ritchly and lively set forth, with which a Merchant
of Venice, who traffiqued toward the Western Islands, presented him: which
Ismarito beheld, with a regard so duetifull, as their needed no gloss, to
expound the zealous affection of his heart. And by her was stalled a goodly
Gentleman, Crowned with a Scepter, whom Ismarito knew not, other wise the^ by
imagination, in beholding his Arms, who bare Gu. an Eagle displaied Crowned Ar.

And (quod Phyloxenus,) when I followed the French Court, I admyred a young
Prince of rare towardliness, whose counterfeit at my departure I brought with
me, and there withal showed Ismarito a Picture, which he very well knew, and
in it were written in Charracters, these three words: Hercules Franciscus
valesius. And by this Prince stood an other counterfeit, whose Arms Ismarito
forgot, but well he remembered his Posie was, Ie le meintiendray. The
counterfeits of other Potentates there were, which Philoxenus placed in the
rank of these Princes, for some regarded virtues, known unto himself. And by
his own testimony, he prised these counfeits, abooue all the Monuments
(ancient or Modern) which beautified his Palace.

Upon which warrant, Sir, quod Ismarito, the Honorable A regard in strangers,
to teach Subjects their duty.
regard that you have of these Princes shadows, being a strainger,
prescribes rules of duty, unto their Subjects, humbly to reverence their
sacred Persons.

In d^e quoth he, it is but just, their tongues cry, God save their Highness,
and their hearts answer, So be it.

After Segnior Philoxenus and Ismarito had had some conference, as well
touching the meaning of this Pharos, as of some other devises figured in
Philoxenus Book: the Trumpets sound, gave knowledge of Dinner: so that this
private conference was adiorned, till Segnior Philoxenus pleasure should renew
it. When Ismarito entered into the great Chamber, and among so many fair
Flowers, missing the glorious Rose, his countenance well showed, The Rose is
the most glorious of Flovvers.
that his mornings sorrow had been but a sleep, which new awakened, streaked
with the increase of passion, yea such was the pensiveness of the whole
company, as the first service, represented rather a Funeral Dinner, then a
Christmas feast. But in the mydest of a storm, as Phoebus An unexpected good
nevves, is double vvelcome.
sometimes behouldeth the Earth, with a cheerful countenance, so in the
deapth of this heaviness, there was news brought of Queen Aurelias amendment,
who commanded the chosen company, after Dinner, to attend her coming, in the
chamber of pleasure. This knowledge so quickened the duiled spyrytes of the
Gentlemen, and Gentlewomen, as they agreed, for one day (if Queen Aurelia
pleased) to alter the sollemne course in their ordenarie exercise: for where
the malladie is not mortal, mirth Myrthe cures as much as Medicine, where
the malladie is not mortal.
cures as much as medicine, and boulding this determynacion, they, the rest of
Dinner, in actions of pleasure, fully avenged themselves of the injury of
former sorrow. After Dinner was ended, and the company had a while pawsed, to
set themselves in good order: upon a new sommons, the appointed number,
martched into this Chamber of Pleasures, which was hanged with a ritche
Tapistrie of voluntary devise, every Tree, Flower, Bird, A sumptuous
Tapistrie.
Beast, or what someuer was therein resembled, in his proper colors of
Silk, was portrayed. The Sheeue with their Fleeces fryzeled, the Beasts
curiously raised with raw Silk, like unto their natural heayre, the Trees
beautified with proper leaves and fruit, the Rose with his Buds, Sprigs, and
other attire: and to be brief, every other Flower was counterfaited with such
Art, as they seemed to be natural. Yea a man might have Men may be deceived
with out the slander of simplycitie.
been indifferently wise enough, in other ordinary matter, and yet have
adventured to have gathered a Flower, or have plucked an Apple, in these
hangings, and who so was best acquainted, could not weary his eyes in the
beholding of them: so that the very attire of this Chamber walls, had an
intertaining virtue, were there no other Curious sights, please more then
uncivil people.
creature in the place.

Queen Aurelia attended with the Ladies and Gentlewomen, presented her self,
before the young Gentlemen had half gazed their will. The company saluted
their Sovereign with a reverent courtesy, whose cheeks, some what more bleake
then ordinary, with this A little sickness makes an alteration in beauty.
distemperature, resembled in colloure the perfect white Gilliflowre, a little
streaked with Carnation.

After some private talk between her, and one or two of her favored
Servant, she took her place where she pleased, and the rest as they were
accustomed, which done, the Eunick with a well tuned voice, unto the Lute,
Song this following, Care away.

CAre, Care, go pack, thou art no mate for me,
thy thornie thoughts, the heart to death does wou^d
Thou make the fair, seem like a blasted Tree,
by thee green years with hoarie hears are grownd.
Which makes me singe, to solace mine annoy:
Care, Care, adewe, my heart does hope for joy.
Care, Care, adewe, thou rival of delight,
return into, the Cave of deep Despair:
Thou art no Gueste, to harbor near my spright,
whose poisoned syghtes, infect the very Air.
Wherefore I singe, to sollace mine annoye:
Care, Care, adewe, my heart does hop for joy.
Care, Care, adewe, and welcome pleasure now,
thou wish of joy, and ease of sorrow both:
To wear thy weed, I make a sollemne vow,
let Time, or Chance, be pleased, or be wroth.
And therefore singe, to sollace mine annoy:
Care, Care, a dew, my heart does hop for joy.
The note of this Song, was far better then the Ditty, but for that it
answered the determination of the company, it passed for current: whereupon,
Maddame (quoth Fabritio) if it be your pleasure, we will this day varrie from
our wonted course, and according to our Theme, begin with some myrthe, to
sharpen our wits: for grauer discourses, we have time enough besides, to
beat out One square breaks no custom.
the passage to Platoes Paradise.

Use your discressions quoth Queen Aurelia, and by her commandment Bergetto
was appointed to begin the exercise, who obaying, reported this following
adventure, of Friar Inganno.

The adventure of Friar Inganno, reported by Mounsier Bergetto.
IN a little Village among the Appenine Mountains not far from the place,
where S. Fraunces lies in^ombed, There sometimes dwelled a fair young
countery woman named Farina: and for that her house was in the hye way, to S.
Fraunces holy relykes, she was many times visyted with Friars of his order, who
were intertayned. rather for their habyt, then their honesty: for the poor
ignorant people, reverenced Saint Fraunces, as a second Christ, for whose
sake, they hold his Disciples, not inferior to Saints: among many that
visited Farinas house, Friar Inganno, a smugge Chapleine, ever sealed his
blessings, upon his dames lips, and yet, without suspicion of the husband,
or* dishonest intent of the wife: It is said, S. Frances subdued incontinent
desires, by tumbling naked in frost and Snow.
for such greeting was ever taken for a holly favor.

Upon a time, after Friar Inganno, had well beaked himself, with a warm fire,
and a good breakefast, the spirit that saint Fraunces, was driven to conjure
down, by tumbling naked in the frost and snow, tempted his Disciple with
such sweet motions, as he was minded wilfully to abjure heaven, rather then
to deal so roughly A premiditated sin.
with the devil. And taking advantage, of the good opinion, the ignorant,
heald of his holiness: and was so bold, with saicte Fraunces (his Master) as
to make a The trick of a knauish Servant.
wanton match in his name: so that after he had a while considered, of his
persuasion, upon a quiet opportunity: Blessed art thou (quod he) among the
Appenine countreywemen, for Saint Fraunces, from Heaven, has beheld A gentle
persuasion.
thy charitable usage of his Disciples, and the last Night after, I had prayed
with great devotion, before his Image, I beheld him in the Majesty of an
Angel, fair young, lusty, and in every proportion like my self, and nothing
at all, like his meagre Cripple Image: So that I was in doubt, of being
transfourmed out of my self, till with a meek voice, he said: Be not
dismayde, I am thy Master, Inganno, and am come, to bestow my blessings upon
the good Appenine dames, that for my sake cherish you, my Disciples: But with
an especial Affection, I will visit the good Dame Farina: And for that, her
Feminine weakness, can not endure my Heavenly presence, I will many times
borrowe thy earthly shape: and in my name, go salute Farina, and show her,
that this night, in that her Husband is from home, I mean to visit her: will
her to leave open the Doors, because I purpose to come as Friar Inganno, and
not as Saint Fraunces.

This is his message, therefore, as I began, I end: blessed Igno^aunce hears
every tale as truth.
art thou among the Appenine country Dames: The poor woman, as apparent as
this treachery was, had not the power to mistrust, but gave the Friar a good
alms Flattery eats the bread of the Just.
for his news, and said she would attend Saint Fraunces blessed will.

Away goes the Friar, with a light heart and a heavy Cowle: but God, to punish
his lewd intent, and to preserve her from sinnyng through ignorance, so
tyckled her heart with joy, of this blessinge at hand, as to welcome Saint A
note of little secreacy in a woman.
Fraunces she must needs have the Belles roonge: The Priest of the Parrishe
hearing the cause, smelt out the Friars counning, and was glad to take one of
those Beggars in a Pitfall that with glorious lies, had robbed him Envy sets
hatred between fellows of every vocation.
of his Parishioners devotions, and withal, persuaded her with such reasons,
as she was fully resolved of the Friars deceit: And to be adnenged, by the
Parsons direction, she caused Leayda to lie in her Bed, a Maid so ougly,
sluttish and deformed, as thorough the Parish, she was called, the Fury of
Lothsomnesse. About ten of the Clock, finding the Doors open, Friar Inganno
mountes into Farinas Chamber, and without light or leave, leaps into her bed:
but he had not blessed Leaydaes lyppes, before the Priest, Farina, and others,
entered with An unwelcome salutation.
Taper and Torchlighte, singing Salve Saint Francisce: And kneeling about his
Bed sides, sung, Sancte Francisce, ora pro nobis.

The poor Friar, like a For in a grin, being both intrapt, and imbraste by a
Hag of Hell, cried from his heart: Pleasure in o there is increases sorrow in the
afflicted.
A dolor inferni, libera me Domine.


After the Priest and the rest of the company, were wearye of laughinge: and
the Friar almost dead with weeping: It is an office of Charity (quoth the
Priest) to put Saint Frances again in his Tumbe: for it is so long since he
was in the World, that he has forgot the way Envy, and rude people, are not
passifyed with prayers of the afflicted.
back, into Heaven.

The Friar learing like the Thief, that honge on the left side of Christ,
took all with patience: for well he wist, Prayer booted not.

Well, for that night, they bound and stripped him, like a dead Coarse: and in
stead of sweet Flowers, laid him Rude people extreme revengers.
in a bundell of Nettles.

The next morning, the rude Country people (who in revenge are without
ciuyllytie or order) cruelly scourged the poor Friar. And (setting him the
forenoone naked in the Sun) anointed his body with Honey: so that the
Hornets, Waspes and Flies, tormented him with the pains of Hell.

In the afternoon, with a hundred Torches, Tapers, and other waxen lyghtes:
this rustic multitude, carried second Saint Fraunces unto his Tumbe: and had
not other Friars used mylde and plawsible requests, in his behalf, The best way
to win the communaltie.
they would surely have buried him alive: for threatening, increases a tumult:
when fair words, may peradventure stay it.

The poor Friar discharged from the hands of these ungentle people, learned
afterward to be more wary: but for all this punishment, was nothing the
honester. For among men of his Habit, remains an opynion, that the faults,
which the World seeeth not, GOD punnisheth not.

After the Company had well laughed at Friar Ingannoes, pennaunce, Queen
Aurelia axed master Doctor, the Archedetracter of Women, how many such
stories he had read of the religious Dames?

None (quoth he) that has been so sorely punished, but of an number that
have as hyghly trespassed.

What (quoth Helena Dulce) by such subtle practices? Men offend subtly,
and women simply,


No (quod the Doctor) but through simple affection.

Well (quoth Aluisa Vechio, their euyls are written in their foreheades, that
slanderous men's tongues may Was euyls are w^yt in their forheds.
read and enlarge them. And your great evils are buried in the bottom of your
hearts that unless the Devil mean to shame you, the world knows not how
to Men's faults, lie hid in their hearts.
blame you.

This was the Gentlewomens day, wherefore the civil Gentlemen, would not offer
to cross them much: so that following their advantage, Madam (quoth Isabella,)
with your favor and patience, I will report an History, that shall open
such a heinous treachery done by a A civil courtesy in a Gen telman.
man, as shall take away all possibilytie from a woman to commit so impious an
Act.

Queen Aurelia, willed her to proceed, and the whole company seemed to be
attentive: whereupon Isabella reported as follows.

The rare History of Promos and Cassandra, reported by Madam ISABELLA.
AT what time CORVINVS the scourge of This History for rarenes thereof, is
lively set out in a Co^medie, by the Reporter of the whole work, but yet never
presented upon stage.
the Turks, rayned as King of Bohemia: for to well govern the free Cities of
his ^ealme, he sent diverse worthy Maiestrates. Among the rest, he gave the
Lord Promos the ^auntship of (...): who in the beginning of his government,
purged the City of many ancient vices, and severely punished new offenders.

In this City, there was an old custom (by the suffering of some
Maiestrates, grown out of use) that what man so ever committed ^e, should lose
his head: And ye woman offender should ever after be infamously noted, by the
wearing of some disguised apparel: For the man was held to be the greatest
offender, and therefore had A hard Law for^ncontinent persons.
the seuerest punishment.

Lord Promos, with a rough execution, revived this Statute, and in the hyess
degree of injury, brake it himself, as shall appear by the sequel of
Andrugioes adventures.

This Andrugio by the yielding favor of fair Polina, trespassed against this
ordinance, who through envy, was accused, and by Lord Promos condemned, to
suffer execution.

The woeful Cassandra, Andrugioes Sister, prostrates her self at Lord Promos
Feet, and with more tears then words, thus pleaded for her Brothers lyse.

Most noble Lord, and worthy Judge, voutchsafe, me the favor to speak,
whose case is so desperate, as unless you behold me with the eyes of mercy,
the frail trespass, of condemned Andrugio my Brother, will be the death of
sorrowful Cassandra, his innocent Sister. I will not presume, to excuse his
offense, or reproach the Law of rigor: for in the general construction, he
has done most evil, and the Law has judged but what is right: But (reverent
Judge, pardon yt necessity makes me here tell, Law adiudgeth, by the
general offense.
that your wisdom already knows.) The most Sovereign Justice, is crowned
with Laurel, although she be gyrt with a Sword: And this privilege she
gives unto her Administrators: that they shall mitigate the seueretie of the
Law according to ye quallyty of the offense. Justice, ismo^s renowned by
lenytie, then severity.
Then, that Justice be not robbed of her gracious pity, listen Good Lord
Promos, to the nature of my Brothers offense, and his able means to repair
the injury. He has defiled, no Nuptial Bed, the stayne whereof dishonors
the guy^lesse Husband: He has committed no violent Rape. In which Act the
iniuried Maid can have no amends. But with yielding consent of his Mistress,
Andrugio has only sinned through Love, and never meant but with Marriage to
make amends.

I humbly beseech you to accept his satisfaction, and A good cause to move
pytie.
by this Example, you shall be as much beloved for your clemencye, as feared
for your severity. Andrugio shall be well warned, and he with his Sister woeful
Cassandra, shall ever remain, your Lordships true Servants.

Promos ears were not so attentive, to hear Cassandras ruethful tale, as his
eyes were settled to regard her excellent Beauty. And Love, that was the
appoincted Love, favors no degree
Headsman of Andrugio, became now the Sovereign of his Judges thought. But
because he would seem to bridle his passions, he answered: fair Damsel,
have patience, you importune me with an impossybylytie: he is condemned by
Law, then without injury to Law, he can not be saved. Princes Prerogative,
are above Law.


Princes and their Deputies Prerogatives (quoth she) are above ye Law,
Besides, Law, truly construed, is but the amends of Injury: and where, the
fault may be The true intent of the Law.
valued, and amends had, the Breach of Law is sufficiently repaired.

^uoth Lord Promos, your passions moves more then your proofs: and for your
sake, I will repriue Andrugio, A good turn upon an evil cause.
and study how to do you ease, without apparent breach of Law.

Cassandra, recomforted, with humble thanks received his favor, and in great
haste goes too participate Aucthorytie, in evil Maiestrates, is a^ Scourge
unto the good.
this hope, with her dying Brother: But oh, that Aucthorytie, should have
power, to make the virtuous to (...) amiss, as well, as through Correction,
to enforce the vicious to fall unto goodness.

Promos, is a witness of this Privilege: who not able to subdue his incontinent
love, and (withal) resolved, that Cassandra would never be over come, with
fair words, large promises, or rich rewards: demanded the spoil A
monstrous request.
of her Uirginitie, for ransom of her Brothers liberty.

Cassandra, ymagyned at the first, that Lord Promos, used this speech, but to
try her behavior: Answered him so wisely, as if he had not ben the Ryuall of
Virtue, V^lesse they be reprobate, good Examples, may refourme the wicked.
he could not but have suppressed his lewve Affection, and have subscribed to
her just petition: But to leave circumstaunces, Promos was fiered with a
vicious desire, which must be quenched with Cassandraes yeldyng love, or
Andrugio must dye.

Cassandra, moved with a chaste disdain, departed, with the resolution,
rather to dye her self, then to stayne her honor: And with this heavy news,
greeted her condemned Brother: poor man, alas, what should he do? Life was
sweet: but to be redeemed with his Sisters Infamy, could not, but be always
unsavory.

To persuade her to consent, was unnatural: too yealde to Death, was more
greenous.

To choose the least of these euylles, was difficult: to A hard choice of two
euyls.
study long was dangerous.

Feign would he live, but Shame cloased his mouth, when he attempted to
persuade his Sister.

But Necessytie, that maistereth both Shame and fear, brake a passadge for his
imprisoned intent.

Sweet Cassandra, (quoth he) that men love, is usual, but to subdue
Affection, is impossyble: and so thornie are the motions of incontinent Desire,
as to find ease, the The force of Necessytie.
tongue is only occupied to persuade. The Purse, is ever open to entice, and
wheare neither words nor Gifts can corrupt (with the mighty) force shall
constrayne, or dispight, The force of Love.
avenge. That Promos do love, is but just, thy Beauty commaundes him. That
Promos be refused, is more just, because Consent is thy Shame.

Thou maiste refuse and live: but he being rejected, I die: For wantyng his
will in thee, he will wreake his teene on me.

This is my hard estate: My life, lies in thy Infamy, and thy honor in my
death. Which of these euylles be least, I leave for thee to judge.

The woeful Cassandra, answered: that Death, was A hard Fortune,
the least: whose Darte, we can not shun: when Honor, in Deaths dispight,
outlyueth time.

It is true (quoth Andrugio,) but thy Trespass, will be in the least degree
of blame: For, in forced Faults, Death is to be preferred, before dishon^rable
life.
Justice says, there is no intent of evil.

Oh Andrugio, (quoth she) Intent, is now adays, little considred: thou art not
condemned by the intent, but by the strickt word of the Law: so shall my crime
be reproched, and the forced cause pass vnexcused: and such is yt venom The
venomous nature of Envy.
of Envy, one evil deed shall disgrace ten good turns: and in this
yielding, so shall I be valued: Envy, Disdain, Spite, Malice, Sclaunder,
and many more furies The virtuous are assured of many enemies, and incertaine of
any friends.
will endeavor to shame me, and the meanest virtue, ^uyll blush to help to
support my honor: so that I see no liberty for thee but Drath, nor no ease
for me but to hasten my end.

O yes (quoth Andrugio, for if this offense be known, thy fame will be
enlarged, because it will likewise be known, that thou receauedst dishonor to
give thy Brother A cause that may excuse the breach of honor.
life: If it be secreat, thy Conscience will be without scruple of guiltiness.
Thus, known, or unknown, thou shall be deflowred, but not dishonested, and
for amends we both shall live.

This further hope remains, that as the Gilliflower, both pleases the eye
and feeds the sense: even so the virtue of thy chaste behavior may so grace
thy bewty, as Promos silthie lust, may be turned into faithful love: A faint
hope.
and so move him, to salve thy honor in making thee his wife. Or for
conscience, forbear to do so heinous an injury.

Sovereign Maddame, and you fair Gentlewomen, (quoth Isabella) I entreat you
in Cassandras behalf, these reasons well wayed, to judge her yielding a
constrainte, and no consent: who werie of her own life, and tender over her
brothers, with the tears of her lovely eyes, bathed his Cheeks, with this
comfortable sentence.

Live Andrugio, and make much of this kiss, which breaths my honor into thy
bowels: and draws the infamy of thy first trespass into my bosom. A loving
kys


The sharp incounters between life and death, so occupied Andrugio senses,
that his tongue had not the virtue, to bid her fare well. To grieve you with
the hearing of Cassandras secreate plaints, were an injury: virtuous Ladies,
for they concluded with their good fortune, and everlasting fame: But for that
her offense grew neither of frayltie, free will, or any motion of a Woman, but
by ye A good consideration in Cassandra.
mere inforcement of a man, because she would not stain the modest weeds of
her kind, she attired her self in the habit of a Page, and with the bashful
grace of a pure Virgin, she presented wicked. Promos, Andrugioes precious
ransom.

This Devil, in human shape, more vicious then Hyliogabalus of Rome: and
withal, as cruel as Denis A damnabl^ offense.
of Sicyll: received this Iuell with a thousand protestations of favor. But
what should I say? In the beginning of his love, Promos was metamorphosed into
Priapus: and of a Feende what may we expect? but vengeance heaped upon
villainy. And therefore, let it not seem strange, that after this Helhound,
had dishonored Cassandra, he sent his warrant, to the Gayler pryuely, to
execute Andrugio, and with his head crowned with these two Breefes, in Promos
name, to present Cassandra: A villainous Ingratitude.
Fair Cassandra, as Promos promised thee:
From Prison lo, he sendes thy Brother free.


This was his Charge, whose cursed will had been executed, had not God by an
especial providence, at the hour of his Death, possessed Andrugio with the
virtues An especial providence of God.
of the two brave Romans, Marcus Crassus, and Marius, the one of which, by
the force of his tongue, and the other by the motions of his eyes, caused the
Axe to fall out of the Headsmans hand, and mollyfyed his cruel mind.

With like compassion, the Gayler (in hearing Andrugios hard adventure) left
his resolution: And upon a solemn oath, to live unknown, yea to his dear
Sister, he gave him life, and in the dead of the night, betook him to God, and
to good fortune: which done this good Gayler A sign of an honest nature
took the head of a young man new executed, who somewhat resembled Andrugio:
and according to lewd Promos commandment made a present thereof to
Cassandra. How unwelcome this Present was, the testimony of her former sorrows
somewhat discover: but to give her present passion a true grace, were the task
of Prometheus, An unwelcome present
or such a one as has had experience of the anguishes of hell.

O quoth she, sweet Andrugio, whether shall I first lament thy death?
exclaim of Promos injury? or bemone my own estate, deprived of honor? and
which is worse, cannot die, but by the violence of my own hands. Alas, the
least of these greefes, are to heavy a burden for a man, then all joined in
one poor woman's heart, can not be eased but by death: and to be avenged of
injurious Fortune, I will forthwith cut my Fillet of life. But so shall Promos
lewdness escape unpunished: what remedy? I am not of power to revenge: to
complain, I express my own infamy, but withal, proclaim his vilanie: and
to hear his lewdnes reproved, would take away the bitterness of my death. I
will go unto the King, who is just and merciful, he shall hear the ruthful
events of Promos Tyrrannie: and to give him example of vengeance, I will seal
my complaints with my dearest blood.

Continuing this determination, Cassandra buried her imagined brothers head,
and with speed iornyed unto King Coruinus Court: Before whose presence when
she arrived, her mourninge Attire, but especially her modest countenance
moved him to behold her with an especial regard.

Cassandra (upon the grant of audience) with her eyes ouercharged with
tears, reported, the already discoursed A mischief well prevented.
Accidents, with such an apparaunce of grief, as the King and his Attendants
were astonished to hear her: and sure had she not been happily prevented, she
had concluded her determination, with chaste Lucretias destiny. The King
comforted her with many gracious words and promised to take such order, yt
(although he could not A noble ffauour.
be revived) her brothers death should fully be revenged, and her crased
honor, repaired, without blemysh of her former reputation.

Cassandra, upon these comfortable words, a little succored her afflicted
heart, and with patience, attended the Justice of ye King: who with a chosen
company, made a Progress to Iulio, and entered the Town, with a semblaunce A
necessary pollye
of great favor toward Promos: by that color, to learn what other corrupt
Maiestrates, ruled in the City: for well he knew, that Birds of a feather,
would fly together, and wicked men would join in Affection to boulster each
others evil.

After this gracious King, had by heedfull intelligence understood the
factions of the people, unlooked for of the Magisrates, he caused a
proclamation to be published: in which was a clause, that if any person could
charge any Magistrate or Officer, with any notable or heinous offense,
Treason, Murder, Rape, Sedition, or with any A Ryal grace
such notorious Crime: where they were the Judges of the multitude, he would
himself be the Judge of them, and do justice unto the meanest.

Upon this Proclamation it was a hell to hear, the exclamations of the poor,
and the festered consciences of The clamors of the poor, and the consciences
of the rich, like Hell.
the rich, appeared as loathsome, as the River of Stix.

Among many that complained, and received judgment of comfort, Cassandras
Process was presented, who lead between sorrow and shame, accused Promos to
his face.

The evidence was so plain, as the horror of a guilty conscience reaued
Promos of all motions of excuse: so Sorrow and Shame, the Attendantes of
Cassandra.
that holding up his hand, among the worst degree of thieves, the little hope
that was least, moved him to confess the crime, and with repentance so sue for
mercy.

O (quoth the King) such espetial mercy were tyranny An unusual place for a
Judge.
to a common wealth. No Promos no, Hoc facias alteri, quod tibi vis fieri: You
shall be measured with the grace you bestowed on Andrugio.

O God (quoth he) if men durst bark as Dogs, many a Judge in the world
would be bewrayed for a thief: A necessary regard in a Prince,
It behooves a Prince to know to whom he commits Authority, least the
Sword of Justice, appointed to chasten the lewd, wound the good: and where
good subjects are Princes beres the blamr or evil Officsrr extortion.
wronged, evil Officers receive the benefit, and their Sovereigns bears the
blame.

Well, wicked Promos, to scourge thy impious offenses, I here give sentence,
that thou forthwith marry Cas sandra, to repair her honor by thee violated',
and that the next day thou lose thy head, to make satisfaction for her A just
Judgment.
Brothers death.

This just Judgment of the good King, in the first point, was forthwith
executed: But sacred is the Authority, that the virtues of the good, are a
Sheelde unto the The good protect the lewd
lewd: So sweet Cassandra, who (simply) by virtue overcame the spite of
Fortune: In this marriadge was charged with a new assault of sorrow: and
preferring the duty of a wife, before the natural zeal of a Sister, where
The duty of a wife, truly showen.
she before prosecuted, the revenge of her Brothers death, she now was an
humble suter to the King for her Husbands life.

The gracious King, sought to appease her with good words, but he could not
do her this private favor, without The common weal, is to be regarded before
private a^ our.
injury unto the publyke weal: for though (quoth he) your suit be just, and
the bounden duty of a wife, yet I in fulfillyng the same should do iniustly,
and (generally) iniure my Subjects: and therefore, good Gentlewoman, have
patience, and no doubt virtue in the end will give you power over all your
afflictions.

There was no remedy, Cassandra must depart, out of hope, to obtain her
suit. But as the experience, is in daily use, the dooinges of Princes post
through the world Sieve bonum, five malum, Fama est.
on PEGASVS back: And as their actions are good or badde, so is their fame.
With the like speed, the Kings Justice, and PROMOS execution was spread
abroad: and by the song of a Clown, was blown into Andrugioes eats, who
till then lived like an Outlawe in the Desert wooddes.

But upon these News, covertly, in the Habyt of an Good motions, pro^ fi^ the
(...) and eu^ the flesh.
Hermyt, by the Divine motion of the soul, who directes us in things that be
good, and the Flesh in Actions of evil, Andrugio, goes to see the Death of
his Capital enemy: But on the other part, regardyng the sorrow of his
Sister, he wisshed him life, as a friend.

To conclude, as well to give terror to the lewd, as comfort to his good
Subjects, the kyng^ (personally) came to see the execution of Promos,: who,
guarded with Officers, and strengthened with the comfortable persuasions of his
Ghostly Fathers: Among whom, Andrugio was, meekely offered his life, as a
satisfaction for his offenses, which were many more, then the Law took
knowledge A grateful part.
of: And yet, to say the truth, such was his Repentance, as the multitude did
both forgive and pity him: yea, the King wondered that his life was governed
with no more virtue, considering the grace he showed at his death.

Andrugio, behouldyng this ruethfull Spectackle, was so overcome with love
toward his Sister, as to give her comfort, he franckly consented anew to
emperill his own life: And followinge this Resolution, in his Hermyts weed,
upon his knees, he humblye desired the King too give him leave to speak. The
King (graciously) granted him Audience. Whereupon (quoth he) regarded
Sovereign, if Law may (possibly be satisfied: Promos true Repentance,
meritteth pardon.

Good Father (quoth the King) he can not live, and the Law satisfied, unless
(by Miracle) Andrugio be reuined. Murder asks death, and no other
Satisfaction.


Then (quoth the Hermyt, if Andrugio live, the Law is satisfied, and Promos
discharged.

I (quoth the King,) if your Prayer can revive the one, my mercy shall acquit
the other.

I humbly thank your Majesty (quoth Andrugio) and discoueryng himself,
showed the Providence of God and the mean of his escape: and tendering his
Sisters comfort, above his own safety, he prostrated him self at his
Majesty's Feet: humblye to obey the sentence of his pleasure. The King upon
the report of this strange Adventure: after good deliberation, pardoned
Promos, to keep his word, and withal, houldyng Princes are bound to their
word.
an opinyon, that it was more benefitiall for the Citezens, to be ruled by
their old evil governor, new reformed, then to adventure upon an new,
whose behauiours were unknown: And to perfect Cassandras joy, O^ two, the
least evil is least dangerous.
he pardoned her Brother Andrugio, with condition, that he should marry
Polina. Thus, from between ye teethe of danger, euerypartie was preserved,
and in the end establyshed in their hearts dessre.

Madam (quoth Soranso) your good conclusion, has likewise Ruthfull^ tales,
raises remorce in the hearers.
preserved us from a great danger: for had you ended with the sorrow you
began, we had been all like to have been drowned in tears.

Indeed (quoth Katharina Trista) you men had, had cause sufficient of sorrow,
by hearing your kind reproched with such monstrous evils: and we women free
passage to lament, in behoulding none but cross fortunes to By example of
evil, the evil are feared.
succeed the good endeavors of a virtuous Lady.

It is true (quoth Fabritio) but to participate of their joy, we men have
learned out of Promos example of evil, By example of the good, the good are
strengthened.
for fear of his likely punishment of evil, to do well: and you Women, by
example of Polinas vice, and Cassandras virtue, are both warned and encouraged
to weldooing.

Indeed (quoth Queen Aurelia, there are many Moral precepts in either
History, to be considered: which I Good order is to be kept among such as
^aue been la^e sick.
hope the company have so regarded, as there needs no repetition. And
further, because I will not be to bold of the victory, over my late
distemperature: we will hear end: And therewith she rose, and retired into her
Chamber: with charge that the company should attend her, in the same place,
until Supper, who obaying, entertained time, every one with their special
fancy.

The Question that arose at Supper upon the fourth Days exercise.
MAny pretty nyps, passed (between the retired Company) this Night at
Supper, as (...) Gentlewomens part, as of the Gentlemen's. (...) as presumyng
upon this Days honor (when the (...) was ready to be taken away.)

Aluisa vechio, took upon her, to mayntaine a woman, to be a creature every
way, as execellent and perfe^ ^
Man. For natural shape (quoth she) they are more (...) tifull, of a better
temperature, and complexion then (...) In valiant exploytes, what difference
was there (...) tweene Semiramis and her Husband Ninus? betw^ the Amazon women
and Alexender. For constantnesse of mind, did not Loadice embrace death, with
less fear, ^ men.
then Mithridates her Husband, Asdruballes Wife, then Asdrubal himself. And
what man has kept a constant resolution of death, so long as Lucretia. In
Moral virtues, you men that read Histories and Cronicles of all ages, shall
find Women, renowned for learning, Government, and pollycie. In Mecanycall
Arts, there are Women, likewise experienced. In the virtue of Deuining, what
man has come near the Sibels? To be short, what Man has been so perfect in
any virtue: but Histories make mention of a woman as perfect?

Yea (quoth Dondolo) but there be so few of these women, as an easy wit may
remember them. Cauclers never answer directly.


But it will cumber your Tongue to report them (quoth Katharina Trista.

The other Gentlemen although they were willlinge to give place unto the
Gentlewome^ in small matters, yet A disgrace in honor, a Gentleman may not
bear with.
this comparison of equal sovereignty, netteled them a lytil. In as much, as
Soranso answered. Madam Aluisa, you have made a bold comparison, and but a
bare proof: Where you vaunte, to be more excellent in shape, and more delicate
in substance then men. It is an over ruled question, that Women receive
perfection by men, and men imperfection by Women: then by how much the virtue
is of more emprise, that is simplye Aristotle's pro bleames.
of it self, then that which is compounde of an other: by so far we exceed
you in this perfection.

Your honor of valyantnes, died with your examples, and although there has
been Women learned, and experienced in Mecanicall crafts, yet to hear a Woman
Extraordinary things, are not to be compared with ordinary.
plead at the Bar, preach in a Pulpit, or to see her build a House, is a
wonder and no example in use. How short your deuinyng Sybels, come of the
credit, of the Prophets in the old Testament, is no question disputable: For
your constancy at death, you know not how precious Life is precious.
life is, which makes you rash and not constant: and in truth, what you have
frowardely determined, you will not be forbidden.

As she that had her Tongue cut, for calling of her Husband Thief, would yet
notwithstanding, make the sign of the Gallowse.

Well sir (quoth Queen Aurelia) Epicarias o^ynary, Epicaria, in the trembling
passage of death, was con stant.
who endured to be rent in pieces, before she would confess the conspyracie
against NERO, would have been holde^ for a Virtue of staidness in a man.

And what say you of Leena, that byt off her tongue, and spit it in the Tirant
Hippias face, because she would not PLIN. lib. 34 Cap, 2.
bewraye a conspiracy against him.

Madame (with your favor, quoth the Doctor) had she not had this foresight, it
had been like the Athenians should have been driven to have made a brazen Bell,
as a Monument of her talk: rather then a tongueles Lioness, as ^n envious
Suggestion.
they did in honor of her silence, for had she not mistrusted her
imperfection, she would never have committed that tirannie upon her self.

Had her tongue been venomed with your malice, it is like (quoth Queen
Aurelia) that the Athenians had veryfied your slanderous opinion: here with
she looked a skause, upon her favored servant, as who would say. I check
the omission of your duty, in not defending of my right. Upon which warning,
and espetially, for the excellency A man may praise a Woman without reproching
a man.
of this sex, quoth Ismarito, a man may do justice unto an other, without
injury to himself: and sure without the reproach of men, a man may commend
the excellency of Women: in whose behalf (although I will not condemn Sir
Soransos reasons, yet in my opinion, he erred in the first Article, where he
touches the perfection of Men, and the imperfection of Women: for neither of
themselves are perfect, nor may have essential substance without the other:
But to dispute of this secret in nature at Chaste talk, ought espetially to be
used in the presence of Women. Aris. Prob.
large, were unpleasing to their chaste ears, and too breefely to mystical,
for their understandings. But who so is so curious in search, let him read
the Philosophers Probleames, with an impartial indgement, and he shall find
them in substance every way as perfect as man. And in the opinion of the eye,
of all the senses, who is the most perfect Judge, they far excel man in
pureness of complexion: Where exception is taken to the few in number, of
singulerly well qualyfed Women, I affirm that it is The quallity and not the
quantity commends.
not the quantity, but the quallity that commends: a little Salt, relisheth
more then a great deal of Sugar. Iudeth with her own hands, achieved a more
honorable conquest, then all the Cilisions besides.

Alexandra, the wife of Alexander, King of the Jews, (when the uncivil
multitude, were ready for his tiranie) to make the intrailes of Dogs, a
Sepulture for his dead body: yea and to be further avenged, to murder his two
Sons: by her sweet behavior, so mollified their cruel hearts, as losing
their resolutions, they gave her husband an honorable burial, and prostrated
themselves, at her Childrens feet: which pacification, the strength nor wisdom
of her counsel could not obtain. By what instrument did God first show the
vigor of his vengeance? by Eaue.
a Woman. And by what instrument did he show the virtue of his mercy by a
Woman. Sovereign Virtue is Feminine, and (I ^sh to ^ll it,) Y^ some Vice is
Our Lady.
Masculine The Ladies ^ed out ^ight, to ^eer (...) ^s differenco. But Soranso
^fe angry, answered, that if Ismaritos countrymen, were of his mind, they
might be ashamed that they were so effeminate.

Pardon me; quoth Ismarito, it is their commendation to (...) to Women and to
co^r Men* Where an injury in words, may be revenged in words, a Gentleman is
not bound, to his sword


Tu^ (...) (quoth ^ergetto) to ni^ himself by the nose* Ismarito is to be
pardoned: for his ^ine S. George* is shackl^ in a Woman's (...)

It is true (quoth Ismarito) but thus fettered, he has many times chased S.
Michael to his Mount.

Fabritio, fearing that these crosses would turn to the Devils blessing
studied how to accord this contention, and with that intent, quoth he,
Ismarito, you have well Discreet standers by pacifieth contentions.
deserved to kiss these Ladies hands, for your honorable commendation of
their sex: But where you say Virtue is the Feminine, and Vice the Masculine,
both Men and Women, are understood in either. The old Divines, took Virtue to
be God, and Vice the Diuill, and either to Virtue and vice, both Feminine, and
Masculine.
be both Feminine and Masculine. Orpheus said, that Jupiter and Pluto, were
both Male and Female. It is also read in Scripture: That God fashioned both
Man and Woman to his own likeness. Moreover this word Homo, signifies both
kinds: so that since Man and Woman, are not simply of themselves, but
compounded one of an other, I blame this unnatural contention, for
excellency, for neither can obtain Sovereign victory, without doing
injury unto themselves: The head among some is taken for the Man, and the
heart for the woman, Note.
(for both are of an indifferent gender) and all the other members
indifferently at their commandment.

Queen Aurelia, with a smiling countenance, answered, that she was content,
that a Man should govern as the head, and women direct as the heart, and
because we will not do injury, unto our natural virtue of Modesty, we will
give place to you, i^ contention for Souerainetyes, Modesty an natural virtue
in a Woman.
and bind you to s^rue us for our ^es and therewithal in rising, she broke of
this controversy.

After Supper, there was a little time bestowed in the hearing of sweet
Music, but for that Queen Aurelias late distemprature, grew of over
watching: the company this night, went unto their lodging in a good hour.

FINIS.
The fifth Days Exercise:
Containing a brief discourse, touching the excellency of Man: and a large
discovery of the inconveniences of over lofty, and too base Love: with other
Moral notes, needful to be regarded.
THE last nights good hour of repose, was the cause of the companies this
days early rising: who by nine of the Clock, entered the great Chamber, armed
for any lawdable exercise. And after an accustomed duty of salutation
discharged, every man be thought himself of some pleasing matter, to
entertain the present time. Soranso and Ismarito were severed from the rest of
the company, upon private discourse: which being ended, Soranso, casting his
eye aside, beheld in the hangings, the picture of Ixion, heardled to his
tormenting Wheel. See yonder, quoth he, the worthy scourge The Fable of Ixion.
of Ambition, and withal reported the Fable, of his presumptuous making of
love to Juno.

Nay quoth Ismarito, Ixion is rather the example of Vain Glory punished: for
Jupiter, so well allowed of Ixions hie mind (in that he represented his Image)
as he To be proud in virtues, is commendable.
raised him from Earth to Heaven, and because he should not perish in his
affection, he satisfied his desire with the embracement of a counterfeit Juno,
and so sent him back unto the Earth: where vain glorious Ixion Proclaimed,
that he was the Minion of Juno, and had Acteoned Jupiter: The scorge of vain
glory.
for which arrogancy, Jupiter threw him to Hell, with this pictured vengeance.

Questionless, quoth Soranso, this imagination of the Heathen Poet, could not
but be the travel of a Divine spirit, it exposes such needful matter, for
Christians to contemplate of.

You need not doubt of your opinion, quoth Ismarito, The soul traueleth to
bring forth Divine monuments in the heathen.
for after God had created Adam after his own Image, he scattered the seed of
Adam upon the face of the whole world, and where some ever the essential
form of Adam was, there was also the Image of God, which in the most
barberous and Heathen creature, labors to bring out, hye and excellent
things.

I beseech you, quoth Soranso, to enlarge this discourse. I am not so simple
to believe, that we are like the Image of God, in our outward shape: yet my
knowledge is not perfect, in what virtues we resemble the Image of God.

Referring you, for your better knowledge, to grauer A discreet exordium, for
young men that argue.
judgments (quoth Ismarito) I will only to satisfye your request, say what I
have read, and what in my oppynyon, stands with reason.

In our exterior body, to say we resemble God, were a gross ignorance: but in
that our soul is closed within our The excellency of man through the virtue
of the soul.
body, and gives life, and moving, to the whole body: it is no obsurdity to
conclude the less within the greater, to show how the soul resembles God:
who consists in a Trinity. Notwithstanding she is but one, yet she
comprehends in her three dignities, to wit, Intendment, Wit, and Memory.
Three dignities of the soul.
And as the son, is ingendered of the Father, and the holy Ghost proceeds
from both: even so Will is engendered of Intendment, and Memory proceeds
from both: and as the three persons of the Trinity, are but one God, so the
three powers of the soul, are but one soul: and in that man is created in
this sort, according to the image of God, because he should resemble his
creator in excellency, he is formed straight and not curbed: to behold the
earth, not thereby to Man is formed straight, because he should behold heaven,
and co^template one great matters.
show a dyfference between him and other brute Beasts, but only because he
should raise his spirit, and heave his eyes to heaven, his original, to
contemplate of divine and dureable things, and not of earthly and such as
peryshe. And sure the monuments, that to this day renown heathen Alexander,
Julius Caesar, Scipio, Haniball, and many other stout warriors, Plato,
Pithagoras, Socrates, Solon, and many thousand grave Philosophers wear the
(...) of the soul, who in her function is always occupied, to make (...)
shine like Angels. And doubtless, the exploits of man, would be wonderful, and
glorious, were not the passages of the three powers of the soul, Intendment,
Will, and Memory stopped, Three evils or defects of the body.
with these three evils or defects of ye body. Ignorance of that which is good,
Covetousness, of that which is evil, and the Infirmity, and langor of the
body. These be the euilles, that eclipseth the excellency of many who
otherwise would appear more glorious then the Son, Moon, Stars, and
Chrstall Firmament, into whose motions, reuolutions, and influences, his
knowledge foreseeth: or the earth with all her fair furniture which he
governs, and therefore he is called Microcosmos, for that in excellency, he
egalleth the beauty of the whole world.

Sir quoth Soranso, you have inchauhted my Ears with such a pleasing regard,
as if you were as tedious in discourse, as I would be attentive in hearing, we
should both lose our dinner, without any great repining: but in advantage I
beseeth you, what may be the remedy of these three evils, which thus obscure
the excellency of man.

Three sovereign remedies quoth Ismarito, to wit Wisdom, Virtue, and
Necessity, which to chase the other Three remedies against the three evils of
the body
three evils, are thus ordered: Wisdom against Ignorance: Virtue against
Vice, and Necessity against Infirmity. Wisdom is to be understood according
to the condition of the things, wherein we be ignorant. Virtue is an habit of
the soul, which without great difficulty cannot be shaken out of his place
and subject: By Necessity, absolutely is intended, a supply against those
wants, with which Infirmity The original of all Arts and Sciences.
has charged us, as if we be lame, to have Horse to ride: if we be sick to
have medicine: if our bodies be weak, (...) have nourishing meats, etc. And
by these three re^dyes, all Arts and Disciplines have been muented, to
acquine Wisdom: Theorique, which is centemplatiue and consists Theorique.
in these three parts, Theology, Physic, and Mathematique, was found, for
Virtue. Practice, which is active, and divided, Practice.
into Solitary Private and Public, was put in use. And for Necessity, all
Me^nicall crafts were invented. These Mecanicall crafts.
three virtues if we embrace them, will chase the other three euilles both out
of our body, soul, and remembrance. You have given me a short sweet reason
quoth Soranso. And a long remembrance of my weak understanding quoth
Ismarito: but for that I have made this Sermon, upon your importunity, your
curtesy I hope will pardon me, as well as your wisdom will correct my errors.

I had thought Ceremonies had been in disgrace, among Courtesy is commendable,
but super fluous savors of flatterrie.
you Englishmen, quoth Soranso, but I find you superstitious in courtesy, and
therefore will take no example by you: but let it suffice, I am your friend,
and will deserve this favor, in any reasonable service.

By this time, Dinner was ready to be set upon the boarde, and Queen Aurelia
came again unto the open view, whose presence was as welcome unto the
general company, as the clear Sun (after roughe storms) to the wether
weried Sayler: Aften she had acquitted the courteous salutations of the whole
troupe^ she ^yrste take her plate, and then the rest as they pleased, or were
accustomed. At this Dinner there passed much pleasant Table talk, impertinent
for this report: which being done, at the accustomed hour. Quee^e Aurelia
sent for the chosen company, who placed in the (...) Chamber, the Eunuck (...)
his charge, tuned his Lute, and song this following S^.

WHo prickels fears, to pluck the lovely Rose,
By my consent, shall to a Nettle smell:
Or though fainte heart, who does a Lady lose,
A droyle I wish, or to lead Apes in Hell.
On Thorns, no Grapes, but sour Slowes do grow:
So from base love, a base delight does flow.
Then mind crown thou, my thoughts above the sky,
For easy gaynde, the Conquest is not sweet:
My fancy swift, with Icarus wings does fly.
Yet fastined so, as fire and Froste may meet.
For pleased am I, if hope return but this:
Grace is obtaynde, thy Mistrisse hand to kiss.
A Grace indeed, far passing all the joy,
Of egall love, that offers wish in will:
For though her scorn, and light regard annoy,
Despair of grace, my fancy can not kill.
For why this joy, all passions sets in rest:
I daily see, my Mistress in my breast.
Who so invented this sonet quod Queen Aurelia, deserves to be well favored
of his Mistress, in that he kept her so carefully in his bosom.

Nay quod Dondolo, if his eyes were so subtle, as absent, he could see her
behauior, his affection were more dangerous then his service necessary.

We give you to know (quod Isabella) that we way not though our husbands, a
hundred miles of, know our behauiours at home.

I think so quoth the plain Doctor, for so far off they may (sighe at their
one mischau^ce, but) not chaste^ your amiss. Perchance they should not be
charged with such injury, as this company should be (quoth Maria Belochy) if
we would offer to answer your envious sugiestions.

Laides I speak not with intent (quod Soranso) to make a question of your
behauiors, but admit you of all creatures the most perfect: yet for that you
have motions, as well bad, as good, you may many times make show of evil,
and yet not do amysse, which if your husbands be so quick sighted, as to
perceive, they will judge by their own eyes, and not by your hearts, and so
from shadows may grow evil effects.

If there sight be so quick, quod Franceschina Santa, then

If their sight be so quick (quoth Franceschina Sancta) then, though by a
negligent trespass, their wives sometime give them cause to sigh, with a
number of loving vsadges, they will give them daily occasion of reioysinge.

I grant as much (quoth Soranso) but this will follow, The evil of Jealousy.
the Husband will turn his own mistruste, to his Wives sorrow, and receive
her good usage to his own pryuate comfort.

Indeed (quoth Aluisa Vechio) the love of a ielous husband, is sawced with
such froward motions, as I had rather be matched with him, that regards me
not at al, then with him that loves me too much: for of the one, though I am
not beloved, yet I shall not be much crossed: of the other, I being too much
beloved, I shall never be in quiet.

I am not of your mind (quoth Helena Dulce) I had Hard is the difference, be
tweene a care less and a ielous Husband.
rather have my Husband ielous, then careless: for being careless, no good
usage will reconcile him: and being Ielous, the Wife may study out how to
please him.

Yea, but (quoth Katharina Trista) Men are so easy conceited, that if they
perceive a woman studdieth how to please them, they straight ways, imagine,
she will likewise studdie how to deceive them: and therefore, God sheelde me
from a Ielous Housbande. I have heard, the whightstreaked Carnation Giliflower,
was the Metamorphos of a Fair Gentlewoman, beheaded by her husband, upon this
Ielous thought, that his wife being so fair, could not but be beloved of the
Gods, although he Ovid. Meta. lib. 10.
had no cause to suspect men. And where have ye a larger Example of Love, then
the Adventure of Orpheus, who by extreme sorrow and suit, recovered his Wife
out of Eurydice.
Hell, and by over Ielous Love sent her thither again.

Doctor Mossenigo was smyling out a scoff, upon this Prevent a Scoffer, and he
becomes a Sotte.
tale, which Queen Aurelia intercepted, by ending of the Gentlewomens
contention. By your talk of Hell (quoth she) I see we are out of the way to
Platoes Parradice: and therefore, good, we turn back again.

In deed Madame (quoth Fabritio,) if we travel still, to choose the least of
Euylles, it will be long before we come to the Fountain of Goodness.

Me thinks (quoth Isabella,) the Sonet, which moved the late Question,
directes a fair way to happiness in Marriage: for it commends lofty Love:
And if, according to the oulde Proverb: The best, is best cheap: this
Adventure, gives Hope, and promises good Fortune. A Commendatio^ of lofty
Love.


It is true (quoth Soranso,) and I dare undertake to approve it, the happiest
estate in Marriage.

Dondolo, because he would not be disgraced, by mariyng a Burgoys fair
Daughter of Rauenna, offered to prove the contrary.

Queen Aurelia, licensed them to show their reasons.

Whereupon, quoth Soranso: to give great Ladies and Gentlewomen of calling,
their true right and honor, who lightly, marry not their Inferiors in
reputation, but for some especial Virtue, that does commend their choice, and
clears the Bleamish of their Husbands baseness? I must confess, that he
which rayseth his thought so hye, undertakes (no doubt) a tedious suit: his
delays will be greeuons, and his Solliciters will be well rewarded, in what
sort so ever he be regarded. But what of this? Quo quid difficilius, eo
pulchrius: Perryll makes honor perfect: the styngyng of the Be, mendes the
sweetenes of Honey: Roses best refreshes our Senses, when we prick our hands
to reach them: He that crackes the Nut, thinks the Kernel sweetest. The
reason is, not for that the goodness of a thing, is the better, for the evil
thereunto The evil of a thing, com mendeth the goodness,
belonging: but, for that the remembrance of yt evil, makes us hold the good
in more reputation: especially, in love. The Affection, which is forced with
tears, won with sighs, gaind with expense, and compassed with sorrow, is
held most pleasant, most perfect and of longest continuance. Again, easy
gotten good will, becomes in a while loathsome: the cause is, as I conceive,
for yt the pleasure was never seasoned with pain. Once, a man, in loving his
better, to increase his passion, shall lack no occasion, both to seek, sue,
sigh and serve: and yet, to feed his hope, he shall want, neither fair looks,
good words, nor possybilytie of favor. For, for to obtain a great Lady,
acquireth many circumstaunces, not for that she is precise to love, but for
that she is wise, (or would be so thought) in herproceedinges. But whether
she love or no: Ovid says, there is no woman, but will endure the demand: she
is contented with service to be courted: and in recompense, rewards with good
countenance. But, which most sustaineth hope, Love spares no degree*
the example is in continual use: that love spares no degree, transgresses
every law, and brings yt mightiest in bondage to the meanest. King Cofetua,
the Affrican, became enamoured of a Beggar: fair Venus, espoused ill favored
Vulcan: Pigmalion doted upon an Image: Narcissus was drowned in imbrasing his
own shadow: and mighty Jove, many times, cast aside his divinity, to dally
with simple country trulles: then, why should the affected (how bace so ever his
estate be) despair to attempt a great Lady, when his warrant is signed with
so large Aucthoryties? But whether he speed or fail: be accepted or rejected:
well entertained, or ill entreated: the ymagination, that time will inuest his
desire with delight, is to the Affected, a Paradise, Hope to com pass great
matters com forteth more then the possession of tryfles.
far exellyug the possession of equal love: But if in the end, her
affection, or his good fortune, concludes his wish in desire: her love, which
can not choose but be great: in that she marieth beneth her calling: And her
Abylytie, which allured at the first, with his inhabylytie: to realysh both,
can not but make the Husband fortunate, and the Wife well pleased: for that in
recompense of this advancement, she may presume, somewhat, to rule her Head:
but, which most contents, she shall have the satisfaction of Reproof of lofty
Love
her fancy a bed.

If a House, were as soon bilded, as the Plot is drawn (quoth Dondolo)
Shepherds would disdain to live in Co, rages: eue^ so, if every man could as
soon compass a Lady for himself, as he can report the fortune of other:
there must be an Act to make Ladies, or Lords must be glad of mean Women. But
admit, by the example of other men's Aduauncements, that the meanest may be
raised, by the yielding fancye of the mighty: I prophecy that such an
vpstarte, had more need of ten Eyes, to ward the malice of his Wives
kindred, then one tongue to move her to kindness. A woman cannot myslike
affectionated profers, because they proceed of love: But her kindred
disdaineth his attempt, for that the conclusion, tends both to their and her
dishonor: A woman seeing her servant passions, cannot but sustain him with
pity, her Kindred One kinsman has an Interest in an others honor.
seeinge him in good way to be beloved, will lie in wait for his life: For
though she may dispose of her affection, her kindred has an interrest in her
honor, which if she consent to stain, or deminishe, she does injury to her
whole house.

The Cardinal of Aragon, aduenged the base choice of An inhumain part.
his Sister, the Duchess of Malfy, with the death of her self, her Children,
and her Husband: and alleged in defense, that he had done no injury to
Nature, but purged his House of dishonor: for Nature (quoth he) is perfect,
and who blemisheth her is a monster in Nature, whose head, without wrong to
Nature may be cut off.

Yea (quoth Soranso) but, this Cardinal, for all his habit, and gloss of
Justice, is for this Act, so often regestred Defense. etc.
for a Tirant, as I fear me he will never come among ye number of Saints, But
the example of these Marriages are usual, and such ensuing vengeance is ^ut
rare, and besides her espetiall contentment, a woman loses none of Reproof.
etc.
her general titles of dignity by matching with her inferior.

In deed (quoth Dondolo) in common courtesy she enjoys A woman that abaseth
her self in Marriage, in Law loses her reputation, but not in courtesy.
them, but in the strickt construction of the Law, she is degraded. And by this
mean is bound to intertaine the meaner, with familyaritie, least, they (being
proud, or reputing her scornfully) do cross her over the thumbes with ye
follyes of her fancy. But admit ye mean servant, marry his Mistress, and
escapes the malice of her friends: which success, one among ten such
Suitors hardly attaineth. Let him yield to pay this rent for his good fortune:
To suffer his Wife, to rule, to direct, and to The natural desires of a woman.
command his own determynations.

And where she orders: The uncontrolled Wife, desires to be served with
pomp, and to be set forth with pride: which the ruling Husband would
repress, as well for saving his wives honor, as for sparing his own pursse.

The uncontrolled wife desires to walk at liberty, and to be visited of
many: of which the ruling Husband, would bar her: as well to preserve his
mind from mistruste, as to keep his Chimney from being fyred.

The uncontrolled wife disdayneth the Country and desires the City: which
the rulyng Husband would mislyke, for that in the Country, the exercise of
huswiuerie inlargeth his Wives estimation, and in the City, Idleness
hazardeth her reputation.

The uncontrolled Wife, desires without check to pratle, and without
discreation to govern: which the rulyng Husband in no wise would allow, for
that many words is a bleamish to his wives modesty, and the rule of his
Wife, is warrant sufficient, for the wise to over rule him for a Woodcocke.

Many other vanities, follow the desires of Women: which a man thus aduaunst,
must forbear to chasten, least he expose himself to a thousand dangers:
for the wife taking pepper in the nose, will suffer him, (yea perchance, agree
to make him) a pray, to the displeasure of his enemies: I mean her able
Friends and kindred: which bondage is not within the Paradise, Plato speaks
off: For according to the opinion of sundry Philosophers, as Nature will not
be controuled, for that she creates: as Fortune is won with no prayers,
because ^hee is blind, and shoots at adventure: no more does Marriage allow
of inequallitie, because her will is to divide her benyfites, and blessing
among the married with indifferency.

To this end Marriage is lykened to Sienes grafted in a stock of contrary
quality: for as by grows and good order, they both become of one nature,
even so, man and woman united in this honorable estate, with good Judgment in
repoofof lofty love.
usage, become of one disposition. Again, as Sienes thus grafted without
special Husbandry, while they be tender, come to no proof: even so man and
woman, thus joined in Matrimony: unless in the prime of their Marriage, with
equal care, they love and cherrish one an other, in the waine of their years,
the sweet Fruits of wedlock, will be blasted with repentance.

Segnior Fabritio, to conclude Don Dolos opinion, with his own Judgment,
said in truth, that Marriage could not away with such servitude: as the
Husband, who is wise and the chief, should obey the wife, who in common
construction, is simple, weak and the inferior. And where a Rich woman (as
Don Dolo has said) Marieth her poor Servant, because she is the cause of his
advancement, she will look to govern: which if she do, her indiscression,
will move others to speak, and her Husband to sorrow: and if he challenge the
preuiledge of a husband to direct, he shall be bound to a life more bitter
then Death. Not, but yt in respect of his former estate, he may endure these
crossinges of his wife, but because, as he is grown in estimation: so is he
grown in hautinesse of mind, and can now wurse brook an unkind word, then in
times past, an injurious deed. And therefore in Don Dolos behalf, I do judge
Soranso to be in an error.

I will not dispute, against the Authority of your judgment (quod Soranso) but
at adventure if younger Brethren er in Men must have regard how they blame,
least they byte themselves.
Marriage, God send the^ to stumble upon no worser fortune.

Queen Aurelia, who regarded, that Dondolo was somewhat to lavish, in painting
out, of the natural dessires of a woman, knew as well, how to set forth his
follyes and oversight: and therefore to take a modest revenge (quod she.) I
happiness in Mari^ge consists so much in the Lordly rule of the Husband,
then where a man maryeth his inferriour in reputation, there is a lykelyhood of
good agreement: Wherefore Segnior Dondolo, because I think you married your
wife, with the same Judgment, with which you manyfested the inconveniences of
loftye Love: I beseech you, show us the blessings of this inferior choice.

Soranso, and the rest began to smyle, to hear this com maundement: for well
they knew Dondolo, was intrapt with a slander of his own reputatito^: but
Dondolo, although, he were a little gauled, set a reasonable flourish, upon his
bace fancy: and therefore (quod he) as it is already adjudged, if a man
marry above his calling, he must bear with his Wife in folly, as much as she
was blinded in Defense of bace love.
fancying of him: which bondage, Marriage can hardly endure: Then if he match
with his inferior, if contraries have contrary qualyties, per consequence:
she will be as lowly, as the other is lofty: as patient, as the other is
proud: and as dutiful, as yt other is disdainful: if the other prodigally
spend, because her portion is large, shewil with huswiuerie spare, because her
substance was small: If the other presume, because of her Gentry, she will
seek reputation, with her good conditions: And if the other bolster her
faults, with the countenance of her able Friends, she doing amiss, will
cry her Husband mercy, because A rich Dowry with a woman.
she lackes succourers, to sustain her evil: a course, as Plato says, that
makes the dowry of the poor virgin of greater vallue then the possessions of
a rich Lady.

You are nothing deceived in the course (quoth Faliero) Reproof. etc
but much mistaken in the creature. As touching your Contraries, I mislike your
Consequent: For Fire and Water have contrary woorkynge, and vnorderlye used,
both hurtful, Prodigallytie, and Coueitusnesse, are contraries, and neither
necessary: even so, ye courtly dame, and the Country Droyle, as they
contrary, in calling, so are they contrary in conditions: and so they may be
matched, neither profitable.

A Diamond is blemished, by the setting in Brass, and a Flynt, not the
beautyfuller, for being garnishte with Gold: even so, the honor of a woman,
is Eclipst, in matchyng with her Servant, her slave, or her Inferior: for
that Strangers will valewe her by her Fortune, although her haughty nature,
will not lose the name of her reputation: Neither is the estimation of a
Kitchynstuffe enlarged, by marriyng with a Courtier: for that the Best will
disdain her Baseness, not so much for her birth, as her bringing up: Yet,
presumyng on her Husbands calling: in Pride, she will perch with the highest:
which Sovereignty, in the one, and saucines in the other, separats Kytte will
to kind.
pleasantness from their Husbands, and quietness, both from themselves and
their Houshouldes: where, as if the Gentlewoman, marry with a Gentleman, and a
Kitchen stuff with a Cook: the one with duetifull regard of her Husband, may
hold her reputation, and the other shall not be driven, to dissemble with their
kind.

Well, let this suffice, to refell their Suggestions, that think pleasantly to
spend their days, by marrying either their better or inferior.

Now, touching the general disposition, of such women, as from the Cart, are
raised unto this account: they will use the better sort with straingenesse,
because they lack the order of honest courtesy to entertain the^, and with the
basest will be famyliar, because the rudenes of the one answers the ignorance
of the other: So that, it is more requisite for him that is thus married, to
watch his wives going into the Stable, for fear of his Horsekeeper, then in
her Parlour, to eye her behavior, in entertayning the Gallant.

Examine King Astolphus, what constancy he found in his three halpenie Iuell,
whom he had turned out of Sheep, Russet, into Cloth of Silver: In such
honors, had no otherwise altered her manners, but that she thought the Lyppes
of a Captain was as sweet as a Kings, and therefore in all her bravery, she
fell to her kind. The fall of Maria Bianca is written by the Aucthor in his
Book, intituld, The Rock of R^ guard.


If this suffice not, hear the usage of Bianca Maria, Daughter and only Heir
of Giaccomo Scapardon, a no table Userer of Baetta, Biancas beauty, made her
sufficiently known, but her Fathers Bags, made her wonderfully desiered: so
that both joined together, aduaunst her, from a Shop Maid, first, to be the
wife of Vicount Hermes: after whose death, clyming up to further honor, and
declyning in honesty, she espoused the Count of Zelande. Long after the
second Marriage, she dallyed not with her disposition, which was rather in an
open Shop, to be courted with men, then in a secreat Chamber to be accompanied
with waiting women: so that following her immodest fancy, with a few Prentices,
she fled from her Husband to Padua, where she set up for her self: and thus
she unworthily raised to be a Countess, wickedly, and wilfully fell to be a
Courtisan.

Andrea Zeno, a Gentleman of Vennice, was as slutishly served with via a Cooks
Daughter, who upon her Ma riadge day, made an easy way for her Husband, with
no better man, then a Carpenter.

If you coueit more Authorities, to approve so common a mischief, read Ovid
Metamorphosis in Latin, Segnior Lodouicus Regester, in Italian. Amadis de
Gaul, in French, and the Palace of pleasure, in English, where you
Aucthoryties for amorous Histories.
shall find store of Histories to the like purpose.

Sir (quoth Dondolo) without offense, either to your person or your proofs
(for that the one I love, and the other I allow) to confirm my oppinion I can
likewise, Defense*
summon women as base as these in birthe, and as hie as these in fortune, which
with their good behauiours, gave a grace to their reputacion, Chaste Epethia,
the well-beloved wife of Hanno Prince of Carthage, was a Sailers daugh ter. The
virtuous Virginia, espoused to Sextillius a worthy Senator of Rome, was a
Laundresse. Both these were beautified with such singular virtues, as while
they lived, their honest lives instructed the greatest Lady, in poincts of
honor: and being ded, the remembrance of their worthiness is a special
co^me^dation to ye whole sex of weme^.

Sir (quoth Faliero) as the Proverb goes: One or two Swallows, proves not
Su^mer: two or three, may thrive Reproof. etc
by Dice, yet is dicyng ill Husbandry: because for the inrichyng of a few, it
beggereth many: so, though two or three worthy Parsonages were well wiued out of
worthles parentages: a thousand, following the same course, have had a contrary
fortune: and where the knowledge of evil, is more then the possibility of good:
virtue, warrants not the venture: In war, the miraculous escape of two or
three rash persons, is no safecundit, for every man to ron upon ye pikes: yet I
grant yt in war, desperate men are nedeful, for the safety of the discreate,
and so are homely women, necessary for their service: but if you will use
either to your benefit, encourage ye one with great pay, and the other with good
wages: for if you commit a charge to a harebraine Souldior his timeritie in one
hour, will hinder more, the^ his years hazard did further. And as I have said,
if you make of your Kitchen maid, a companion, her pride in one days liberty
will anoy more, then her seven years love will comfort

Seeing the company begin to smyle, I am satisfied quoth Doudolo.

But how? quoth Aluisa Vechio? do you repent you of of your bargain, or
disalow of Falieros proofs?

Neither quod Dondolo: For in general choice, this course is out of the way, to
Platos Paradise: but for that my especial Fortune is good, I am pleased.

Yea, quod Soranso, or if ye contrary had happened, this might have comforted
you, yt your wife should not have been ye A confession is a pretty Judgment.
only blamed woman in the Parish, nor you ye sole unfortunate man.

Well, quod Fabritio, and Isabella: There needs no further judgment in this
Question, then Dondolos confession and his yealding, to Falieros proofs.

We have in this exercise taken three sundry ways, (quoth Queen Aurelia) and
yet never a one the right way to our Paradise: and now it is too late to
traiuel any further. Therefore we will: refreash our spirits with a little
Music, and so adiourne our further controueruersies until too Morrow: but as
the Eunuke was a tuning his voice, to have fulfilled his Ladies commandment,
Knowledge was given of certain honorable Personages ariual: by occasion
whereof, the company left their determination to furnish the great Chamber.

The witty device of Segnior Philoxenus, to give certain Comedians a Theme,
to present some pastime in action, the fifth night, after Supper.
BY that time, Supper was done, certain Comedians of Rauenna, presented their
service to Segnior Philoxenus, and his honorable company, who are not tide to
a written device, as our English Players are, but having certain grounds or
principles of their own, will, Extempore, make a pleasannt show of other men's
fantasies: So that to try the quicknes of the Gentlemen, and Gentlewomens
wits, to give the Comedians a Theme, Segnior Philoxenus, demanded the
meaning of certain Questions.

Segnior Soranso, quoth he: What passion is that, that tormenteth a man most,
and has least power to overcome? 1. Inconstancy.


To think of a Woman's Inconstancy, quod Soranso: which greeueth every man,
and cannot be subdued by women themselves.

Madame Aurelia, (quod Philoxenus:) What thing is that, which most delights,
and most deceives a Women?

A man's dissimulation. (quod Queen Aurelia:) Which 2. Dissimulation.
has such a sweet passage, through his Tongue, as it delights like the
Sirens Songs, and yet turns to as deceitefull a conclusion, as the
Crocadiles Tears.

This yet, was but quid pro quo: so that neither one part, nor the other was
displeased.

The modest laughter being ceased, Segnior Philoxenus demanded of Ismarito,
what was the cause of most Devotion? and yet the greatest replenisher of Hell.

Ignorance [quod Soranso] which causes men to worship Stones, and dishonor
God. 3. Ignorance.


Madam Maria, what is that (quoth Segnior Philoxenus) yt of men is least
esteemed, and of God most regarded?

Chastity [quod Maria Belochy] which is precious before God, and a laughing
stock among men. 4. Chastytie.


Doctor Mossenigo [quod Segnior Philoxenus] among men who is the most cruel?

A Dycer [quod the Doctor] for he teareth God in pieces. 5. A Dicer.
This answer, was both true, and moved new laughter: Although it were
propounded to discover the nature of the Envious, who murthereth the living,
and the fame of 6. Envy.
the dead.

Madam Lucia [quod Segnior Philoxenus] wherein does a man please a woman best,
and displease himself most?

The modest Gentlewoman began to blush, and with great difficulty resolved
this Question.

In the end, by the tongue of Alvisa Vechio (quoth she) In giving of her, her
Will. 7. Will.


It is true (quoth the Doctor) for her delight is to govern, wherein her
discretion, gives others cause to laugh, and her Husband to hang the Lyp.

Segnior Dondolo [quod Segnior Philoxenus] what is the greatest freende to men
at liberty, and the most enemy to such as are condemned?

Hope [quod Don dolo,] which incourageth men at liberty, to attempt great
matters, and makes such as are 8. Hope.
condemned, unprepared for death.

Madam Helena [quod Segnior Philoxenus] what is that which wounds the heart,
and yet is worshipped of the eye?

Beauty (quoth Helena Dulce) for it pleases a man's eye, and pearceth his
heart. 9. Beauty.


Segnior Bergetto, (quod Segnior Philoxenus) What is that which owes most and
pays least, and of all evils is the worst.

Ingratitude: (quoth Bargetto:) For that Monster receives 10. Ingratitude.
good turns, and pays vengeance.

Madame Franceschina, (quoth Segnior Phyloxenus:) What is that, which in
loving too much, baneth with Hate?

Jealousy: [quod Franceschina Sancta:] which, by ouermuche loving, raises
Suspicion: Suspicion moves Con 11. Ielosie.
tention, and Contention tourneth to mortal hatred.

Segnior Faliero: I demand [quod Phyloxenus:] who he is, that profits his
friends, but by Death? is a Steward, for other men: and makes his Account
(only) with God?

A Coueitous man [quod Faliero:] who, while he lives, is enemy unto himself,
and therefore. unlikely, to be 12. Couotousnesse.
friend to others: also is but a Steward of the goods he gathers, for he
spares for others, and spends little or nothing upon himself: and at the
judgment day, before God, must make account of all his deceit.

Madam Katherina, quoth Segnior Philoxenus: what is that, which is could
clad in Friese, and warmest attyred in precious Stones?

Pride, quoth Katherina Trista, which has no grace, 13. Pride.
but in bravery.

Lovely Guestes, quoth Segnior Philoxenus, you have so lively deuined my
meaning in your sharp answers: as I expecte wonders, of your daily
disputation.

Sir, quoth Fabritio, we hitherto, have but exposed, and refelled errors.

If you have done so much (quod Philox.) you have made a fair passage for the
glory of Truth, which by the refelling of Error, you shall find: for every
virtue is commended Virtue is commended by vice.
by his contrary. A Diamond seems the fairer, for his foil. Black best
sets forth White: Good is most praised in the reprehension of Evil: and
Truth is the highest degree is renowned by the refelling of error: and therefore
follow your purpose, the conclusion, cannot, but be profitable.

Here Segnior Philoxenus stopped his digression, and commanded the Comedians,
to bethink themselves of some action, that should lyuelie express the nature
of Inconstancy, Dissimulation, Ignorance, and the rest of the passions,
before named: Which charge being given, while the Actors, were attiring
themselves, for the stage, Queen Aurelia, and her Attendaunts, took their
places, with such advantage, as every Gentleman, had lyberty, to devise with
his Mistress.

After the Comedians had put themselves in order, they patched a Comedy
together, and under the resited names, showed some matter of Morallytie, but a
great deal of mirth: who with their pastime, kept the company up so long, as
drowsy sleep, which delights in nothing but scilence, arrested ye greater
part of them, and carried them close prisoners, unto their Chambers.

FINIS.
The syxt Days Exercise,
Contayninge: Many needful regardes, for a Gentleman: with a Discovery of
the inconveniences of Marriages, where there are great inequality of years.
THe cheerful Sun, which comfort every earthlye Creature, as the
Lantern of broad day, so lightened every Chamber of Segnior Phyloxenus
Palace: as ye Gentlemen and Gentlewomen, to be avenged of the injury of
Night, (who being the Mother of confusion, had separated them, from their
companions of pleasure) hastily rose and attired themselves: and (like unto
Partryges, that how so ever they are seauered, know (and retire unto) their
meetyng places) presented them selves, in the great Chamber. The office of
civil courtesy discharged, such as were coupled, entertained Time, with ye
device of their especial fancyes: others, contemplated of their private
affairs: and Ismarito among the rest, in a quiet place, was reading in Peter
Mesiere his Cronicle of Memorable things: The Tamberlaine the Great, in the
beginni^g a Pesaunt.
rare History of Tamberlaine the Great, surnamed Flagellum Dei, where he much
admired, the virtues of the man, who of a laboring Pesaunt, or (in the best
degree) of a poor Soldier, by his virtues and Invincible valor, became a
great Monarch: Yea, and while Tamberlayne liliued, was as much feared as
Alexander. But Ismarito, more lamented, that so mighty a Monarchy, erected by
the Father, should end, by the envy, and civil dissension of the Children.

Segnior Philoxenus (after he had given a Bon giorno, to the company, seeing
Ismarito, not chained to a company on, determined to give his solytarinesse, a
disgrace, by con uersing with him, in some Gentlemanly Discourse: but He is not
alone that has good Books.
finding him accompanied with so sweet a companion, as Mesires Cronicles, Seg.
Ismarito, (quod he) you have deceived my imagination, which persuaded me yt
you were solita rye, and therefore, bound me (in courtesye) to visit you.
But, seeing the great personages, with whom you devise, A Gentleman took
advantage of a word to praise the good, as to check the evil.
I envy your happy contemplation.

But your Envy (quoth Ismarito) is like that of Mutius Seauola, desirous to
excel the better sort in virtue, as you exceed the rascal multitude in
courtesy.

This encounter, and a little other pryuate talk ended: Segnior Philoxenus,
lead Ismarito, into a fair Lybrarie, beautified with such a number of goodly
Books, of all Sciences, Laws, Customs, Gouernmentes, and A most famous
library in the Dukes Palace at Florence lest by Cosmos de Medicis.
memorial Momuments, as well ancient as Modern, as it came very near in
excellency, to ye famous Lybrarie of Cosmos de Medicis in Florence: who
imitated in his Monument, Ptolomey, surnamed Philodelphus: who had yt seventy
Interpreters of the Jews, to translate the Sacred Bible, into the Egiptian
Language: and with great dilligence, sought to have the several Coppyes of
all Books.

After Ismarito had well regarded, the orderly sortinge of these (Books, and
how, by a short Kallender, a Man without great pain, might turn unto any
hard Question, in any Science, and have large resolutions) and had taken a
note of the title of certain Books that he had not seen, and yet necessary
to be read.

Segnior Philoxenus led him into his own private It belongs to a Gentleman
to be seen in many things.
study which was furnished with Summaries, or Abridgementes of all Sciences,
which he studied, with such a judgment, as there was no Art, wherein he had
not a special knowledge, which in argument, he exposed, with so good a wit
and memorieas, many times, he grounded Masters in that science. And for that
in all his actions he was ye true pattern for a Gentleman to imitate. In honor
of his worthiness and for the benefit of such Gentlemen, as will follow his
example, in Virtue, I am bound to set briefly down, the chiefest course of
his Study.

First and principally, for the comfort both of his body Divinity.
and soul. In Theology, he read those books, that cleared the mistes of
Ignorance, and unmasked the deceiptes of the superstitious Monks, Friars.
etc. And contemplated in the sweet comfort of those Aucthors, that expounded
the hard passages of the Scripture.

And for that Health, is the most precious Iuell of the Phisyck.
world, knowing the Constitution of his own body, he studied so much in
Physic, as without the direction of Doctors, he knew, what meat and
Medicine, agreede with his nature.

To minister Justice, unto the Ignorant multitude, and to keep himself out of
the Forfaites of Law, he Law*
studied the civil Law, and specially, the Statutes of his Country: And
(questionless) the Gentleman, that is ignorant in the Laws of his Country,
is an enemy to himself, and a Cipher in the common weal.

In Military Knowledge, he was experienced, as well, by service in the Field,
as in readyng Vegetius and other Art Military
Aucthors in his Study. And some travel in this Art, is needful, as well
as comendable for a Gentleman: for it is not enough for him, to be Togatus, as
a Romayne Dratour, nor Paliatus, as a Gretian Philosopher: in that he must as
well in the field, look his enemy in the face, as embrace his friend in the
house: and therefore, though he bare a Pen in his ear, to write his own
Commentaries) he is bound to wear a Sword by his side, to do his Country
service.

For Government, and Civil behauiours, he read Plutarches Moralles: Gueuaraes
Dial of Princes: the Courtier of Count Baldazar, Castillio: and others. And (in
Morality.
truth,) it is not so necessary, to be well borne, as to be well quallyted
and of good behavior: wherefore, the study of Morallytie, is very needful
for a Gentleman.

He (likewise) studied Cosmographie, and had therein commendable knowledge:
which study, can not, but much please and commend a brave minded Gentleman:
For Cosmographie.
by the virtue thereof, he shall be, in his Study, able to sur^aye the whole
world: and with an agreeable Discourse, shall bound out a Stranger his own
Country.

He was a good Hystorigrapher, and had read many rare Chronicles. How pleasing
this study is to a Gentleman, is lively expressed in his own nature, greedy
of Hystoriografie.
news. And where may he have better intilligence, then Cronicles? in which,
quietly in his own Study, he may receive knowledge, of Acts done throughout
the whole world.

He was a good Harrolde, and had read much in Annorie: An Art most needful,
for a Gentleman, in that it is Armorie.
the Cognisaunce of himself. And in my opinion, he that is not able to blason
his own Arms, is not worthy to bear them.

These Gentlemanly studies he used, intermedled with others of more pleasure,
which I had not leisure to regard, nor memory to bear away: but in all his
actions, and behauiours, he exposed a Gentleman so perfect, as in Segnior
Philoxenus a perfect Cour (...).
regarding of him, but one half year, a man might have noted down a
Courtier, not inferriour to that of Count Baldezar.

By that time Segnior Philoxenus had sufficiently fed Ismaritos eyes, with this
honorable favor: the sound of the Trumpet, gave knowledge of dinner, so that
Ismarito, was driven to leave, that earthly Paradise, to attend honorable
Philoxenus, into the great Chamber: against whose coming, the Table stood
furnished with many dainty Dishes. And Dueene Aurelia, and the rest of the
Company, were ready to salute him: which curtesye performed, she took her
appointed place and the rest, as they pleased.

Toward the latter end of this dinner, a mean fellow, guarded between, two
Furies of the Kitchen, was brought coram nobis: for some petty piylfering in
the Scullerie.

Segnior Philoxenus, referred his pain to the Judgment, of the Gentlemen, and
Gentlewomen there present. Some of the Gentlemen, appointed him some pleasant
pain, in the office, where he did the trespass: some other of the
Gentlewome^ overcome, with a natural pity, accepted his tears in satisfaction,
and so discharged him: But the Doctor more rougher then the rest, took him up
so short, as the poor fellow was driven to say, Sir, where you may We^en are
to pitiful to be Judges.
help, hurt not: The Doctor, to satisfy his request, and to keep his first
determination, answered, to help hang a Thief, is no hurt, to the common
weal, your petition shall be signed. The rascal Thief, hearing this severe
Judgment (as the Italians are naturally quick witted) replied: If chief
Maiestrates should set their hands to A scoffer is many times smiten with his
own (...) pon.
this Justice, There would be more Lawyers hanged, for stealing of Houses,
then Roges for robbinge of Headges. The answer of the Doctor, and the replye
of the poor Fellow, made yt company so merry, that for the pastime, the
trespasser had made them, they remitted the punishment of his offense.

The laughter quieted: in the commendation of his Countriemans capassitie
(quoth Soranso) Master Doctor, this poor Snake, spoke true Italian.

Yea (quoth the Doctor, but he lackes the virtues of the ancient Romans:
covertly expressing thereby, yt their Italions are wise, but eui^ condicioned.
wits were good, but their conditions were evil.

Bargetto envying the favors, Ismarito received, and for some pryuate grudge,
about crossing in Argument) sought by some pleasant scoff, to raise an unkind
quarrel: And with that intent (quoth he) Segnior Ismarito, I drink unto you,
with a better affection, than I bare you in my sleep, for I dreamed, with my
Rapire drawn, I chased Envy evermore quarre leth, with those that are favored.
you, to your Chamber.

Ismarito, quickly answered, I pleadge you (Segnior Bergetto) but with less
fear then you supposed to be in me, when you were asleep: for men after
they are awake, expound dreams by contraries. Quarrelers seek their own
mischief.


Bergetto, deceived of his expectation, was driven by patience, to salve the
wound, he had given himself. But Segnior Philoxenus: to take away the cause
of after unkindness, reaued the company, of leisure, to judge of Bergettos
quarrilynge dream, or of Ismaritoes cross A wise foresight in a Gentleman.
exposition, by keeping of them exercised with a new device.

In deed (quoth he) Dreams are incertaine, and therefore, not to be regarded,
but there is a true kind of divination, Palmestrie a pretye idle quallitie,
for a Gentleman
in Palmestrie, and so in looking in Maria Belochi's hand, he used certain
names of Art, and gave a voluntary pleasing Judgment: which fired all the
Ladies and Gentlewomen, with an earnest desire, to know their fortune: and by
this means, the remembrannce, of former questions was taken away. Wherein
Segnior Philoxenus wisdom, may be a president, for other Gentlemen, that hear
quarrels a breedinge, to smoulder them in the A necessary note for a Gentleman,
shell: for men that be angry, are bound to their passion, when such as are
not moved, have liberty, to pacifye, with discreation.

Thus, with their spirits well pleased, Queen Aurelia, and the rest of the
company, rose from the table, and after ordenarie courtesy ended, they paused
a time by the Fire, to put their wits in order, for the following disputation:
who at the ordinary hour, entered the drawing Chamber, where the Eunuke ready
to discharge his duty, unto the Lute sung this following Sonet.

Regard my love, but not my frostie hairs,
Although fair Dame, the least may move content:
For Love, Faith, Zeal, stands firm in aged years,
When light green youth, is fickle in intent.
The aged knows, the leaves and fruit of youth,
The leaves they leave, and with the fruit do love:
The sayings of old Age, are judged truth.
Let love and truth, mislyking then remove.
What though my chin, be clothed all in white,
Whight in your cheeks, the chiefest color is:
Which fair dye, does make you seem so bright,
As men hold you, the source of beauties bliss.
Sweet Mistress then, of all the fair, the Flower,
Let not condemn, what does your self comend:
Ruthe seems your face, let rigor not devour,
His love, and life, that lives and dies your friend.
This Sonet, moved ye company to smile, not because the invention was
vnwittie, but in that, it was the fruits of Doctor Mossenigoes Muse, who to
revenge upon himself all the injury, which he had done to the sex of Women,
became inamoured of Katharina Trista, the waspissest Damosel, among the whole
troop of Gentlewomen: But knowing the Doctors Phylosophie, could not so subdue
his affection: but that time would make them all sport and him smarte, they
dissembled their knowledge of his folly, as deeply as he covered the passions
of his fancy: notwithstanding to raise some speech, and to set the Doctor a
work with hope.

[Quoth Aluisa Vechio] this Sonet prophesies a hapie life to a young woman,
and much comfort to an old man if their fortunes be so good, as to be marted
together. And if I had as good a passage, for my opinyon, as I have Reason to
maintain the same: I would think to prove this couple, worthy of a place
in PLATOES Paradise.

Among so many good Drators [quoth Queen Aurelia] you cannot want an Advocate.

Whereupon Katharina Trista, with a false eye, coniured the Doctor, in this
question, to maintain his Love: who thus enjoined, took upon him to maintain
Aluisa Vechioes opinion.

Queen Aurelia licensed him, and no adversary appeared to discourage him:
whereupon (quoth he) where an old man marieth a young woman, the contentment
seems too be much, and the comfort more: my reason is, the oulde Defenses
where an old man marries a young woman.
man has not only chosen a Wife, to recreate him as a companyon, but a Cook
to prepare chosen meats for his impaired appetite, and a Staff to sustain
his Age. The young wife also may hold her self happy in this fortune: for she
hathchosen one, whom she may not only rule, but command: and for a little
pains, who will leave her possessed of a great deal of living. And this is most
certain, that cruel and wild Creatures do most hurt, where their will is most
resisted: and hau^ great compassion, where they find no proffer of repulse:
The Lion in his greatest hunger, hurts not yt wounded sheep: yt Crocadile with
tears wassheth the blood from a murthred man, and the raging Sea refressheth
the yealding Reed: much more, a woman (that by nature is beautified with
pity) if she rule without check, will glory in the good usage of her
Husband: and this is in daily use, that the old man, in assemblies, finds
his young wife, modest in her speech, basshefull in her looks, and nice, in
occasion of suspicion: and whyther this behavior proceeds of desire to be
praised, or of fear to be blamed, I conclude the cause with her commendation:
for that to do well in hope of praise, co^mes of the encouragement of virtue:
and to do well for fear of reprehensio^, is the sign of a good inclination.

By Sainet Anne Sir (quoth Soranso,) you well deserve a Fee, (especially, of
the young wife) in that you so connyngly have colored her oversight, and so
Clarckely Reproof. etc
have commended her good usage of her old Husband: but your Suggestion tends
to as small effect, as the Fortune is evil, of a couple thus unequally
matched: for that common reason will refute your weak opinion, and daily
experience records the miseries of the other.

What likelihood of continuance, has the House, whose ground work is rotten,
although the prospect be beautiful and strong, God, wotte the feebleness of
the Foundation, will overthrow the firmness of the vpperframe.

Compare this vneqaull estate in Marriage, with this oversight in building, and
you shall find the discord as great between the one, as the ruin and decay,
speedy in the other. The good and able Government of the Husband, is the
foundation and ground work of Marriage: and the Beauty of the Wife, the
blessing in having of Children: and the benefit of possessyng lyuinges, are
the outward buyldinges of Marriage: And as they are pleasant in the eye of the
world, even so, they greatly please the minds of the married, and give a
singular Grace to this honorable vocation. But, if the Government of the
Husband, be enabled, with Age: (as in truth) Old Age is no other then a
second Infancy.

In whose desire, direction, discrescion and delight, there, are imperfections.
The Beauty of the wife, will be blasted with sorrow: for the insufficiencte
of her Husband: evil Education will accurse their blessyng in having of
Children, and negligence will waste their benefits of living. (You hold a
young wife, a Companion to recreate an old man, but he shall find her a
Corsiue that will consume him to death. A young man concludes, the sweetest
sollace in love with sighs: it is then, like, an old man ends it with
tears: And God, he knows, he often weepeth, more of desire, to please his
wife, then of any Devotion he has to wanto^nesse: yet is al his pains to a
fruitless purpose, for that the Game finissheth in his grief, and neither
began nor ends in his wives contentment.

You are too quick, in Advantage, Segnior Soranso, (quoth the Doctor) Oulde
Wine, though it be dead in the Defense. etc.
mouth, yet is it warm in the Stomachs, when the New, fumes in the Head,
but comfort not the heart. Dry woodde, makes a bright Fire, where green
Bows consume half away in Fume and Somake.

The Son rises watrishlye, and is long before it gives heat, where, in
the After noone, it scorcheth the face: So, a Young man deuideth his Love, into
a hundredth Affections, and every fancy pleased, there will but a little fall
to his wives share: where an Old man's Love is settled, and his fancy is fixed
upon one: And as the resighted Examples, in Age, are in best heart: so to prove
an old man's sufficiency, there is a common Proverb: Gray Hairs are
nourished, with green thoughts.

Now, to content his young wife, she shall have no cause to suspect his Affection
abroad, and shall not lack to be belooued at home.

Moreover, which delights a young woman, (who naturallye, is Ambitious) she
shall take her place, according to the gravity of her Husband, and not as her
young years requires.

And to conclude, to give her an honorable name, the most precious Iuell, with
which, a woman may be beautified, she shall receive grave Directions from her
Husband: and through the sweet delight, she takes in hearing her good
Government commended, she will put them in Execution.

Doctor Mossenigo, replied not with this vehemency, for any delight he had to
commend this unequal estate in Marriage, but to flatter Katharina Trista, with
an Ambitious Hope, of great Reputation, in matchyng with his aged self: but she
(that knew a leg of a Lark, was better then the whole Carcass of a Kyte)
would none God thank him.

And to make him horn wood (if he perseuered in his opinion,) in Soransoes
behalf (quoth Bergetto his ancient crosser:) Master Doctor, theare is more
pride in your words, then Substance in your proofs: your hearty old Wine,
must be drawn out, when it is broached: your dry woodde is but a blaze, and
your hot Sun, does but sweat, for sorrow, that he is going to cowche in the
dark Caves of Tartessus. But as touching Old men, they may Reproof, etc
well be sufficient in green thoughts, as you term them, but I am assured,
that in deeds, they are weak, and wythered: And therefore, a man cannot
speak too much evil, of this excess in dotage: withered Flowers, are more
fit for a Dunghill, then meet to deck a house: old rotten Trees, are
needful for the fire, but unnecessary to stand in an Orchad: even so, old
decayed creatures, are comely in the Church, but unseemly by a young woman's
side.

The old man, which marries a young Wife, is sure The mischaunces of an oulde
man yongly married.
of this sour sauce, to relish his sweet Imaginations: his beloved wife (how
so ever she dissembleth) disdayneth him: his neighbors al to be flouteth him,
and soothing Parisites, beguileth him: common opinion will counterfeit him like
Acteon, not so much for the fickleness, they see in his wife, as for the
infirmities, they know in himself. And breefely, to conclude his joy: he may
(perchance) A young wife is death. to an old (...).
live two years, with his fair wife: but the mischaunce of his Children, will
remember his infamy, for ever: Green Iuy, which catches an old Tree, makes
quick work for the fire: and the imbracements of a fair Woman, hastneth an
old man to his Grave. And although it be a heinous wrong, causeless to
condemn the Wife: An honest woman is lightly slauudered, by the imperfections
of her Husband.
yet this will be the opinyon, she killed her Husband with thought, to hear
and see, how she trespassed, both against, his and her own honor.

Foul fall, such a Marriadge (quoth Maria Belochy) where the virtuous Wife,
shall be slaundered, through the imperfections of her Husband.

It is some wrong (quod Fabritio) but she might have foreseen Repentan^ to
late.
the mischief, while she was free.

Well (quoth Queen Aurelia) upon this knowledge of michaunce, our company,
are sufficiently warned. Proceed The wife are warned by the mischaun ces of
other.
in Judgment, as you allow eithers opinion.

Whereupon, Fabritio with Isabella, with one accord, gave sentence, against
D^ctor Mossenigo, in these words. An old man amourous, of a young Woman, is an
enemy, both to his health and reputation, for the causes aforesaid.

The rest of the company, smyled to here this judgment: but the Doctor,
brake forth many a secret sigh, not for the disgace he took in his pleading
(for he defended an ill matter, with color sufficient) but in that he knew
this verdict would always be a bar in his suit.

While the Doctor and Soranso argued: Queen Aurelia, espied in the Cloth of
Arras: a Beast fourmed like an Unicorne, save that he bare his Horn in his
nose: which beast, sleeping, laid his murdering Horn in a young Maidens A
Rhinocerot
lap: and after the question was decided, she demanded, what that Beast was?
and what the mystery signyfyed: but the meaning was as strannge, as the sight,
to most of the company. The Metamorphose of Rinautus, a Gentleman of Naples.


In the end (quoth Ismarito) Madam, I have read of a gallant young Gentleman of
Naples named Rinautus, that was Metamorphosed into such a Beast, by this
adventure: passing through the Island Circe^u^ [that Homer speaks off] which
is now annexed unto the Continent: he was espied of Circes, who inhabited that
Island. This wrincled, ill favored Witch, at the first sight, was surprised in
Love, with the goodly shape and beauty of this seemly Gentleman: but for all
her charms, and Inchauntments, her Art failed, either to force him to Love,
or to free her self from loving: for, notwithstanding, she was a Goddess,
he disdained her over worn, soul and wythered visage: and she presumyng of
her Sorcerie, powered fresh Coals, upon her kyndled desire, in hope that
necessity would force him to consent, to the request, freewill contemned: but
Cupid (to whom such power only belongs) to scourge her presumption, in such
sort hardened Rinautus heart, that all Circes Suit and Sorceries tended unto a
fruitless success. In so much, as in her rage she turned him into a
Rhinocerot, a Beast of unconquerable force, who in his nose, bears a borne,
much like to the Unicorne: But notwithstanding he was thus transfourmed (as
King Nahucadonizer, in the form of an Ox, retained the spirit of a man) so
he in his altered shape, nourished his ancient disdain of ill favored
Circes: and so be fully avenged, with all his force, pursues old Creatures:
and such as he ouertaketh, he goreth to death: yet is he by this polycie
subdued: Place a fair. Maid, in his walk, and forth with he will with a
louinge countenance, repair unto her, and in her bosom, gently bestow his
murdering Horn: and sodainlye, (as one ravished with contentment) he fauleth
a sleep, by which means he is slain before he recouereth the use of his
force.

The Company laughed well, to hear this strange Metamorphosis.

In the end (quod Queen Aurelia) I would Master Doctor had hard this
History, when he so inuayed against Beauty, perhaps, he would have been
affraide of her vengeance, seeing her power able to conquer savage and wild
Beasts.

But the Doctor, glad of this advantage, not unlike the Evil men care not for
the conscience, so they have a color for their offenses.
tu^ning Lawier, that buyeth Robin hoodes penniworthes, and yet with some nice
forfaitures, threatens the seller, with continual bondage: and many times,
brings back his money, and keeps his bargen: not caring for his Concience,
so that he have a color for his offense: or as the wysest sort of Atheistes,
that (live as though, they hoped neither after heaven, nor feared Hell) yet
confess God with their mouth, hecause the contrary would make them hated of
men: so he by this tale, found out both a warrant, to maintain his former
Blasphemy, and to excuse his present Folly in Love: And to Aucthorize either:
Madame (quoth he,) the inchaunted Beast, approoueth mine opinion of Beauties
power, and his Death is a greater witness of her cruelty, then is Doctor
Mossenigo, who confesses that The force of Beauty.
men, in vain prescribe Remedies for the Affected, or Receites, to preserve
men from the Infections of Beauty.

You are welcome under our Lee [quod Aluisa Vechio.]

But, to take away all hope of good intertaynment: (quoth Katharina Trista)
no, no, Master Doctor, you No Affliction, but has his remedy.
deceive your self: Beauty, neither retains the power, nor poison, which
you speak of, and with you, Ovid and all the amorous Poets are mistaken: who
say, Affection, rises from Beauty, and not of the free will of man: But say
yon all what you please: good foresight will contrary your opinions. There is
no sore, but has his salve: no grief, but has his remedy: nor no danger,
but may be forstoode, either by prayer or good endeavor.

In deed (quoth Faliero) Socrates ^altred his inclination, by the Study of
Phylosophie: The Nyniuites preserved Examples to be regarded.
their City by prayer: and Virbius dubled his life, by mastering of his
disposission.

Floradin, bewitched with the love of fair Persida, his Idleness ^oorisheth and
exercise remedieth love
dear friend Pericles Wife, wrote in a table Book: fie Floradin, fie, she is
thy friend Pericles Wife: and so often as idleness presented him with this
passion, he read his written remembrance: and by some honest exercise,
removed his imagination.

This is not your day Master Doctor (quoth Soranso) I believe, there is some
unkindness between Saturn and Venus, by the envious aspeckt of some other
Plannet this hour.

It may be (quoth the Doctor) by the flattery of Mercury, Flattery, the
enemies of prueth.
who is evermore enemy to the plainnes of truth.

Well (quoth Queen Aurelia) let us leave this bye matter, and consider better
of Ismaritos Metamorphosis: me thinks it prophesies much mischaunce to an
Dulde Wydowe, which marteth a Young man, and no great pleasure to the young
married Bacheler.

O good Madam, say not so (quoth Soranso) for in this Marriage com mended
between an old woman and a young man. Reproof. etc
fortune, lies a younger Brothers welfare: and the cause that makes happiness
accompany old women to their Grave.

It may well be to their Grave (quoth the Doctor) but it brings sorrow into
their House, and makes their life more unpleasant then death: and if Soranso
follow this Course, perhaps his day will be no better then Doctor Mossenigos.

Queen Aurelia smilinge, said, she feared this c^ntention would bring the
company to hell gates. Yet quoth she, In that I imagine the way will be
pleasant, I license you to persevere in your purpose.

Upon which warrant (quoth Soranso) to maintain Defense. etc.
that to be true, which I have already alleged in the commendation of this
estate in marriage. This further reason (in my conceit) you will neither
disalowe, nor the married couple shall have cause to mislike: which is where a
fresh young Gentleman, either of small living, or far spent with lustiness,
lights of a rich old widow, for that both their desires in this fortune shall
be satisfied. A good exchan^ of Marchandice.
He shall have plenty of Coin, the only Grace he lacked, and she the
possession of a goodly Parsonage, the cheifest Jewel she loves: which
exchange of Merchandise can not choose, but continue their liking and raise
much coutentment.

Clean contrary (quod the Doctor) for ye follies of a young man is
sufficiently punished, by marrying an old woman: (...) ye sins of an old
widow, ar fully plagued, in matching with a young man: for that (contrary to
your suggestion) neither can inioye, the cause of their Marriage, without
annoyance to their minds: for his lyking, is fastened on her riches, which she
will not, but by necessity leave: and her love is settled on his person, which
for her pleasure, he disdaineth to The euylles in an old wydowe.
punish. The unfortunate yongman, knows not what grief he ioynes to his
gain, in matchinge with an old widow, till that experience breaks them
forth in sighs: If his wife be ritche, she will look to govern, if she be
poor, he is plagued, both with beggary, and bondage: If she be proud, she
will hide her abylytie, to maintain her pomp: If she be testie, he is forced
to patience: If she be Ielous, he can hardlye endure her rages. And to
conclude, if the old doting widow be free from one of th^se faults, she is
tied to forty evils of less suf^ce: for if her* Husband command her will,
she straight ways says her other Husband was more kind: If he chance to
dine from home, she wyls him to ^up with his harlots: if he spend beyond her
allowance, thus she reuiles him:

A Beggar I fownd thee, and so thou wylt leave me.

To chastise her talk, sets an edge of her tongue: to suffer her in her
rage, makes her raylynges irreuocable.

By your words, Master Doctor [quod Lucia Bella,] the wife is the greatest
cause of this contention, and yet in common opinion, the Husband is most blamed.

Madame, you are too hasty in an advantage, I meant no such parciallytie
(quoth the Doctor.

Yea Madame, (quoth Bargetto) M. Doctor is now so conquered, as his tongue is the
Trumpet of your pleasure.

It is so (quoth the Doctor) to sound out those things which are true: and in
truth, the young Husband often times, makes the euilles, good in deeds,
which the old PLATOES Hell in Marriage.
wife uses but in words: for no longer then she feeds him with Coin, shall
she enjoy his company: If she rob not her Children to enrich him, she shall
lack no froward looks, nor foul usage: If she put him in possession of her
living, he straight ways dispossesseth her of his love: for having, what he
sought, he will else where be enamoured. And, uprightly to speak, she lacks
neither occasion too lament, nor cause to be enraged: for who is so patient, as
can dissemble her insufferable passions? both, to be spoiled of her living, and
to be exyled from that she loves: And, in very truth, so egall are their
euilles, as it were a hard matter to judge, who deserves least blame, or
most excuse: She reproacheth him, of Beggerie, Hooredome, Unthriftinesse, ill
usage: and of the ruin, both of her self and her Children. He blames her of
Old Age, Jealousy, curstness, scowldyng: and for hidyng of her goods, which
he has bought, with doing Injury unto his person. If she be determined to be
merry, he (scornfully) tells her, that it is as sightly, for a toothelesse
Mare to eat Marchpane, as for such a wrinckled Mumpes to fawle a bylling. If
he come in well disposed, and affably entreats her, she calls him
dissembling Hipocrite, and says, he saluteth her with his tongue, but his heart
imagines of his minions abroad: she runs to ye neighbors to complain: In
the mean while he sends her corn to the Market, and her cattle to the
Fair. If the friends, of good will, or neighbors, of charytie, labor to accord
their contention (as she imagines to shame him) she thundreth out a thousand
Injuries that he does her: for her own praise, she says, that of pure love
she married him with nothing: and to reproach him, she swears, he has spent her
substance, and hates her person: To show her own good* Huswiferie, she tells
that she works al day at her Distaffe: and to blase his unthriftiness, she
shows how he^ plaieth away her gains at Dice: She cries out, that (perfore)
he takes what he openly finds, and privily steals, what she secretly
hides

These, and many more complaints, she prefers against her Husband, with the
vehemency of a woman's passion.

Her Husband, yt knows how to be reue^ged in deeds, (for his own credit) is
more mild in words: he lays al these blames upon her own crooked
disposition: who though she be so old, as a man can hardly love her, yet with a
cankred ielous froward nature, she would force a man to hate her: But what
remedy, since his fortune was so hard? he would starve her with patience: and
only add this Suffrage to his Letanie: A praua muliere, good Lord, deliver me.

These dry scoffs, sets her heart in a light fire, and (save that she has not
so many colors like) unto Iris, thu^dreth out the venom of her cankred Spirit
in reuylings, and raylyngs against her Husband: And (to say truth) her case
is to be pitied, as much as her tongue is to be blamed: for Injury is not so
grievous unto a man, as to see his Adversary soothe his trespass with an
honest shoe.

But, to my purpose, her Husband crosses her with a quiet Answer: yon may
see friends, says he, wyld fire A great cause of Impatie^ce.
will burn in water, Drink will make the Dropsy dry, and mildnesin me,
moves madness in my wife: by her example here, you see my life at home, as
tedious as Hell: then (perhaps) some flowting Marcha^t, says: like ynuffe, and
the she Devil wears the horns.

Thus with their own micheefes, they grieve their friends, delight their foes,
and weary their Neighbors, in according their debates: and if they be in the
morning quieted, and go home in peace, at Noone like enemies they are ready to
throw the house out at the window: a slut like the fury of lothsomenes, shall
bring in dinner, because the Ielious wife, dare not trust her husband with any
maid that is hansome: the husband offended, throws the Platters at her
head, and axeth if she mean to poison him: the Wife takes pepper in the nose,
and says, if he had not married her, he would have been glade of the worst
morsel there.

The Husband replieth that if he had not been so mad, the devil would not
have married her.

Then begins the old Musik, tuned perchance with a rap or two of the lips,
and when they have brawled their fill, she runs and bemoneth her self at
her neighbors, and he goes and makes himself merry with his Mistrisses.

In sooth, master Doctor, it seems to me (quoth Sir Soranso) that you have
very substancially proved my opinion: Defense. etc.
for Marriage equallye deuideth her blessings, and mischaunces, between the
married: and as far as I can see, neither of these knows, who has the
better or worser bargen: there is raylinges and unquietness of both sides: but
what of that, pleasure is best seasoned with pain: and though they sometimes
jar at home, they agree well when they are separated among their neighbors.
And although you have streatched their debates, upon the rack of vengeance:
yet at adventure, I wish my self no worse bestowed, then marry an to old
welthy Widow. I do not think, but by good usage, to continue her first
affection geeuen, even unto her very Grave.

You will kill her with kindness, (quoth Maria Belochye.

Yea, Madam, (quod Soranso) if her nature be so froward, as to die with good
usage.

In deed Ladies quoth the Doctor, there are some men, that entertain their
old wives, with such a fair show of flattering love, as they bewitche them
even to their latter gasp. But at what rate does she purchase this
kindness? O even with the undoing of her self and Children: yea, and which
is worse, it is the policy A most wicked pollysie.
of Father in laws, to dandle the infancy of their wives Children, in the lap
of Ignorance, to this end, that being of lawful age, they may with less
fetches beguyle them of their living: so that the unfortunate child, knows
not whether he may more bemone his loss of living, or lack of good bringing
up: and in my judgment, Senecas opinion that Children were better to be dead
borne then ignorant of good letters.
of both the evils: want of education is the greatest: for learning and virtue
purchases living, and living corrupts, but coyneth not good conditions: and
as Seneca says, liberty without learning is a bondage to the mind: and
further, the Child were better to be dead borne, then barren of good Letters,
for that Ignorance is a grave which buryeth life.

Master Doctor (quoth Queen Aurelia) me thinks your words do too much
wrong to the wife, though they cannot sufficiently blame the husband. I grant
that father in laws, esteem their own profiets, before their wives Chyldrens
preferments: but yet (I suppose) Nature does direct the natural Mother, to
eye their good bringing up, who with much sorrow brought them forth: For
(as the Proverb goes) things that are Things that are beast esteemed.
dearly bought, are of us entirely belooued, and nothing is more dearly
purchased, then what is (...) the hazard of life, which venture the Mother
(...) she is assured of her Child: then this cru^ (...) her Children, to
satisfye the will of her se^ (...), will make indifferent men hold her an vn^
^ther, whether her husband esteem her a due^ ^e or no.

Oh good Madame quoth the Doctor, how (...) the Reproof, etc.
Hen succor her Chickens, when she her self is at the merey of the ^ite? how
can the Conny preserve her Rabets, when the Ferret is in possession of her
Burrowe? and how may the unfortunate Mother, Foster her shiftlesse Children,
either as she should or would, when her fancy or folly has enthralled her to
a second Husband, whose power is to direct, and displeased, to check? This
severity of Father in laws, has bred much division in Marriage: but still
the quarrels are concluded, with the detryment of the Children: for the
unhappy wife, is bound to one of these two evils, either to agree to the
tyrannizing of her entrayles, or to yield to her own A hard extremity.
continual sorrow and unquietness: And where the case is so desperate, it may
be lamented, but not wondered at, that necessity break the bounds of nature.

To stay this mischief (quoth Helena Dulce) Honorable is the custom of
Spain, where the virtuous An honorable custom of Spain.
Dame holds the second Marriage, a retrograding of her reputation, and a wrong
to her deceased husband: for by this stayednesse, she is in possession of her
liberty, and has the disposing of her living.

I hold this precise custom (quoth Dondolo) more profitable then necessary:
for the penance were to hard, yea, impossible to be endured, that the lusty
young Widdowe should be constrained to a Uirgins chastytie, for as Ovid
deuineth.

I that some times of Nuptial rites,
Have taste the pleasant toys:
Now cannot choose, but call to mind,
Dame Venus sugared joys.
But if the aged widow, could live within this law, it would bring honor to
her years, and happiness to the end of her life. What better husbands may
she have, then her own Children, whom she may both command Meet husbands
for aged widows.
and control, whose duties are to labor in her causes, and to unburden her
heart of cares? and when she departs this life, where may she better dispose
her living, then upon her own Children, whom to relieve, she is coniured by
nature, and to bring up in good nurture, bound in conscience: But from the
beginning so rife has been the dotage of Widows, that when their feeble
legs, faintely supporteth their consumed bodies, when at hie noone, their
mistie eyes hardly discerns the hye way, and when (forste) thorough lack of
teethe, they swallowe their meat, their lips notwithstanding, take delight
in kisses, and their minds thirst after wantonness.

Men's follyes are as great as Women's simplicities, in this oversight in dotage
(quoth Queen Aurelia) but I think it necessary, that here we stay our
journey, least we enter into Hell, before we be aware: and therefore Segnior
Fabritio, I pray you let us have your sentence, to over rule this question.

Madam (quoth Fabritio) the evil of this inequallitie Experience is a judge
meant it self.
in Marriage, is both so ancient and so common in use, as there needs no
other judgment, then experience of our neighbors mischaunces, but to succor
the injured children, I would that one of Laertius laws, were common to ye
whole world: which is, where the Tennau^t sued his A worthy law, made by
Laertius.
Lord, the Servant his Master, or the Child his Parents, that Judges
themselves, should forthwith look into the Process, and determine the same,
for it is vehemently to be supposed, that these suits are foreced upon vehement
injuries, otherwise the Servant would fear to sue his Master, who has power
moderately to chasten him: the Tennant would quake to unquiet his Lord, who
has many means to cross him, and without whose grace he may never live in
peace. Shame and duty (in any sufferable matter) would make the child
forbear to molest his Parents, for (but where his cause is known) Report like
a two edged Knife, would (besides his injury) wound him with blame, and
omission of duty. Therefore, where the least of two dangerous evils, foreceth
the above said to sue, it is much to be lamented, that delay, countenance of
friends, corruption with bribes, and other supporters, which the rich has,
should torment the poor complaynant, more then his original injury.

Your reason is but just, quoth Queen Aurelia, and the rest of the company:
who weary with the multitude of the resited mischaunces, here broke of the
Disputation, and went and reposed themselves in the great Chamber.

The speech which passed the sixth night at Supper, between Segnior
Phyloxenus, and his Honorable Guestes.
ACcording to the order of Merchaunts, who at the latter end of the year,
survey their accounts, to see what fortune and mischaunce they have received
thorough the whole year past. Segnior Philoxenus (toward the latter end of
Supper) smilelingly, demanded an account of the benefit of the chosen
companies six days Disputation.

Sir (quoth Soranso, with a modest merry countenance) we are like to present
you a Eanckrupts reckoning, who the longer he occupies, the worse he thriueth:
It is no st^iung against the stream.
so we these six days, have travailed to find out a way, to the Parradise in
Marriage, and every day we have been further and further off, of our
determination, one day we thought that the wealthy matches of Parents, would
have speeded our journey, but there, lack of love in the Children, cast us
behind hand: an other day, we imagined that free choice in the Children, would
have directed us to happiness in Marriage: but want of (...) and frowardnes in
the parents, marred this marth. In lofty love we found dainger: in base love
sothesom^esse and inconstancy: and where there is inequality of years, fume
and smoke of Hell: so that now we shall be driven to renounce our profession:
and run away with the Banck^owt, least (if he stay, as he is chopped up in
prison so) we, if we proceed any further be drowned in the river Stix.

If you travail with as much pleasure, as you report your adventures with
ease, quoth Signior Philoxenus, I wonder but a little though error carried you
to Hell gates: but to encourage you to persevere in your first purpose, let this
comfort you: that things when they are at the worst, begin again to amend. The
Fever gives place to health, when he has brought the pacyent to deaths
door. The Be, when he has left his stinge in your hand without dainger may
play with your eye lidde: so, when all the inconveniences of Marriage, are in
your ears, you may very well receive her into your heart: and to conclude your
benifytte with your own example, there The thriuing unthrift proves the the
best husband.
is no such husband as the unthrift, when he fasteneth upon ^e world: for in
spending of other men's goods he learned how to spare his own, when he
gettes them: so in the pleasant beating out of these inconveniences, you know
what makes Marriage bitter, and the grief known, the remedy is easy.

With your favor, Sir, quoth Dondolo, to be sick is common to all men, but to
restore to health, under God, is the office of the Physician: so we all know
by our own travail, the infirmities of Marriage, but to find out the
blessings, must proceed from your sound directions which favor to obtain
we are all earnest suitors.

Your request is so just quoth Segnior Philoxenus, that if I were able (as I
am not) to better your i^gementes, I would not be daintye in this pleasure: but
for that the more the opinions are, in the end, the more profound the sentence
is: I will too morrow (in part, to satisfy your demand) join with you in
your ordinary sweet exercise. Perchance you have ended all the
inconveniences in the old year, and I may begin the New year, in helping to
bloome the blessings of Marriage.

Queen Aurelia and the rest of the company, affectionately thanked Signior
Philoxenus for this hye favor: and so rose from the Table, who after a little
pawsing, daunsing and devising: at their pleasures, went unto their lodginges.

FINIS.
The. vii. Days Exercise:
Containing: a Discourse of the excellency of Marriage: with many sound Laws
and directions, to continue love between the married: with the rare History
of Pyrigeus and Pieria, reported by Segnior Phyloxenus: And other good notes of
regard.
LIke as when the royal Army, lies encamped before a Town of war, the
sound of Trumpets, noise of Drums, and neying of Horses, does awake the
Soldiers and Citizens, before Aurora be willing to leave the sweet
embracements of her husband Tithon: so, even with the departure of the day
Star, in honor of the New year, the Trumpets, Dru^mes and Flutes, sounded
through every small passage, into the lodgings of Segnior Philoxenus Palace,
such shrill salutations, as the company envying the confusion of night: broad
waking, attended the Mornings light, to apparel themselves: who in their most
brave and sumptuous array, by nine of the clock, made the great Chamber
resemble a fair Garden in May. In the imbroderies of whose Garments, Flowers
and fancies, were so naturally and artificially wrought: some of Pearl, some
of gold, some of Bugle, every one according to their one humor: More over,
every Gentleman's head was armed with his Mistrisses favor, and every
Gentlewomans heart, was warmed with her servant affection.

In the most sovereign place of the great Chamber. Ianus, God of Time (as the
Poets feign) was hung up, in the likeness of a Serpent, winding his body into a
circkle and holding his tail in his mouth, expressing under this figure his
revolution, who through his continual The year ends and begins in it
self.
motions enu^oning and compasing the world, retourneth into himself, and
ends and begins in himself: and in joyful token of the new year, he
was garnished with many sweet flowers, garlandes, and devices: some
artificial liuelely counterfeited. Segnior Philoxenus although he hated
superstitious Ceremonies, and shund Ancient customs are to be kept.
them, yet he honored ancient lawdable customs, and kept them: who according
to the custom of the country, presented every one of his guests, with a rich
new years gift, which explayned some morrall virtue. Among the The virtues of
the mind are more glorious then any outward garment. Custom in Italye in
giving of new years gifts, contrary to the custom of England. The original
of new years gifts.
rest he gave his sister Queen Aurelia, a fair plain tablet, which opened,
represented the picture of a fair Lady garnished with many precious stones:
covertly, expressing thereby, that gorgeous apparel was but base and
counterfeit, in respect of the brave virtues of the mind. This order the
Italians use, the best gives new years gifts to his inferior friends, and
in England clean contrary. The Tennaunt gives his Lord: the mean Gentlemen,
to Knights: Knights to Barrons: Barrons to Earls: Earls, Marquises: and
Dukes, to their sovereign Prince: but it seems the Englishmen, observe this
custom more near the original then the Italians: for the fou^ders thereof
were the ancient Romans, who bound their Knights, the first day of
January, in the Capitole, to present their Newyeares gifts, to Caesar
Augustus, were he absent, or present: but so many Countries, so many customs.
And (to my purpose) Segnior Philoxenus, thus bountifully solemnized the use of
his own Country. This memorable courtesy performed, Segnior Phyloxenus, with
some of the grauer company, went before unto the Chapel, and Queen Aurelia
and her attendantes, followed with such a glyttering show, as the Preests
needed no other Tapers to see to say service by, then the (...) ^ons of the
Gentlewomens eyes, and the (...) ^nes they wore in their Jewels; and in my
(...) God was better pleased, and more honored, with the Bravery of the
company, then with the babbling and Ceremonies of the Priest: who in the honor
of the New year, sets forth his relikes to the best show: By that time
Service was ended, and the company returned: the Tables were furnished with
many dainty Disshes: to wreake her hunger of some few whereof, Queen Aurelia,
took her Royal place, and the rest of the company, as they pleased. This
Dinner was spent in Discourse of certain Ceremonies and old Rites used in
times past, in the celebrating of God Ianus Feast, too tedious, and (withal
impertinent for this Discourse. When Dinner, and a little other pausyng talk
was ended, the company arose: and Queen Aurelia. with the reverent
Salutations of the whole troop, retired into her own Chamber, till the hour
of Disputation sownded:

About which time, she, with Segnior Phyloxenus, and the rest of her
Attendauntes, entered into a most delycate Banquetinge House, where, upon the
Walls, in so good order, and representation of Nature: were painted, Segnior
Philoxenus ban queting house
all mane^ of Frui^es, Flowers, Uines, A^ors, and causes of Pleasure, either in
Dr^haed or Garden: as a man (without blushing) might have adue^tured, to gather
upon the bare Walls, a Pomegranate, a Cluster of Grapes, a Gyllyflower, or
such like: had not the dead of Winter, reaued the likelyhoode, that they
should be p^fect.

After Queen Aurelia, and the rest of the company, had taken their places, in
this earthly Paradic^: Segnior Phy loxenus (secretly) wylled ye Eunuke, to
chaunt out the pray ses of Hymen: who obaying this Charge, tuned his Lu^e, and
to a sweet Noate, sung this following ^net.

EVen as the Vine, that clasps the tender Elm, (bear
Among green leaves, his purpled Grapes does
When [wanting props] himself does onerwhelme,
And for the fire his Branches does prepare.
So^ in one, with Hymen's ^tes fast bound,
Of their sweet love, live always in the seed:
When Death, or time, the single does confound:
Which ruin of fame, the barren thought does breed
Sweet Hymen then, thy Godhead Indore,
And (...) my self, by thee to be controlde:
In foulded Arms, my Spouse my eyes before:
Yields more content, then Dymonds, Pearl, and Gold
In quiet home, unchecked, to rule, and ^e,
What life (...) sweet? what hearts ^ase like to this?
Or through ^e; my mind when ^are does green
What Medicine, is better then ^kysse?
At ^s ^en by ^ouyng wife,
O none, nor state, like to the married life.
This (...) ended, and well considered: Sir (quoth Queen Aurelia to S^nion
^xenus) to be revenged of the iniuri^, of our (...) ^tions who have painted
Among the just, promise is kept.
Marriage wi^ and i^nueniences, I beseech you, and bind you, by your promise,
to blazon the blessings and excellency of this ^ed Institution: that she who
is (...) may ^e her (...) ^ayses, and we that are igno^t, may know how to
(...) her benefits, and with the same to honor her. To praise, or blame, is
qua litie of wit, but to direct is a work of judgment.


Madame, (quoth Seg^ Philoxenus) you charge me, beyond my promise, and ^de me
to an impossibility: I promised but to join with this quick witted Company in
opinion, which I (...) to accomplish.

To blaze the excellency of Marriage, is a work of no great diffcultie,
because her virtues illustreth the same through the whole world, but to direct
the married, is a la^or of Ar^, wit, and experience* in the first, whereof, I am
ignorant, in the second imperfect, and to the third a Strainger: so that, as
I am sorry to injury your expectation, so am I loath to expose my insufficient
judgment.

Sir (quoth Queen Aurelia) if we were not assured of a lyberal contentment,
in conte^plating of your weighty We have interest in an other man's virtues.
Censure, we would receive your modest refusal, for just excuse. But for that
we have all an intrest in your virtues, and you should be enemy, to your own
honorable commendation, in keeping of them close prisoners in your Princes
commandments must be obey ed.
br^t (although you be Lord of the Palace) yet I, as ^oue reign of the Civil
Pleasures, command you to give Ceremonies a disgrace, and sincerely to obey my
will.

Madam (quoth Segnior Philoxenus) so stricht is your charge, as I must
adventure, of this weighty labor, hoping, that as by authority you command
my opinion, Of the exelencie of marriage.
so by ye motion, of some one of your virtues, you will pardon my errors.

Upon which encouragement, to obey your will, I say, and approve, by sacred
Authority, that this holy Institution Marriage instituted before the fall of
Adam, by God in the earthly Paradise.
of Marriage, was erected by God, in the earthly, Paradise, before the
transgression of Adam, when he joined him to Eve, with these words of
blessing, Increase multiply, and replenish the earth. Again, after Adams fall,
and the deluge: to strengthen his first institution, God commanded, the good
Patriarcke Noe, to increase and multiply the earth a new. Moreover, God would
have no more women, then men, in his Ark, to show there should A confirmation
of the first institution by God.
be a Sympathy in number, as well as agreement in love between man, and wife:
for if the one might lawfullye have many Wives, and the other, many Husbands:
how should this express Commandment of God be unviolated? You shall be two
bodies in one flesh, and no more. Man and wife are two bodies and but one flesh.


Compare the Joy, honor and reverence, given unto Marriage, by the delight,
that proceeds from any other cause, and you shall see her gleame, like a
blasyng Comet, and the other, but twinckle as an ordinary Star. The joy of
of marriage shines above al other delights.


Gorgeous and rich Apparayle, delights the Gasers eye: and (perhaps)
offends the wearers heart: where Marriage, in homely Attire, is every where
honored, and reaueth unquiet wandering thoughts, from the Married to abound in
riches, is a glorious fortune, but they charge men with a dubble care, extreme
in the getting, and Children are the most rich Iuelles in the world.
fearful in the keeping: the married, has as great, or greater riches, in
their children.

When the stately Dames of Rome, bragged of their Iuelles, Cornelia boasted
that hers, excelled them all. A Lady of the company, seeing her, set forth
with none, that was precious, demanded where her Iuelles were? Yonder quoth
Cornelia, and poynted to her children.

When certain most rare, and precious Iuelles, of King Darius, and his wives,
were presented to Olympia, This Iuell, was her son Alexander.
Mother of Alexander the great, she bestowed them upon her Ladies, as to low
prised for her wearing, who was continually, adorned with a Iuell, in value, as
rich as Asia, Africa, and Europa. And sure Queen Olympia, and Lady
Cornelia, gloried not in their Iuelles, without The blessing of Children, is a
duble life
reason: for gold, and precious stones, set but a gloss, upon beauty, when
virtuous children, gives a new life unto their parents.

The administration of Justice, and authority, in a Offices of Ius tice
apartaine to the married
common weal, are the proper offices of the married: for that the care of
wife, and children, presupposes them to be settled: when the unmarried, though
their wits be good, rayseth a suspicion in the wise, that their thoughts,
are The sweet Sympathy be tweene the married.
vagrant. The unmarried, has no agreeable Companion, to participate of his
pleasure; or to lessen his sorrow. The Married, has a Companion of his own
flesh, of his own will, and of his own Spyryt, so wrought to his Love to our
Parents, ^ue rent.
own Affection: that between them, there is seen two bodies, and but one
thought, perceived: The Married joy alike, sorrow alike: are of one substance,
one concord, one wealth, Love to our Brethren, natural.
one poverty, Companions at one Boorde and in one Bed. The love we bear unto
our Parents, is (or ought to be) reverent and duetifull, because, they gave us
life: Unto our Breetherne, natural, because of the priuitie in blood: Love to
our Friends, affectionated.
To our friends, affectionate, by certain Motions and consents of the mind:
Notwithstanding, that these Loves be thus great, yet are there diverse causes
too lessen them.

But between the married, no mischaunce, or infirm Fortune, is cause
sufficient of hatred: for none, governed Love between the married irreuocable.
by reason, is so inhumaine, as to malice his own flesh: Compare their
several affections, by sorrow, and you shall see the weakness of the one, in
regard of the strength of the other. The greatest moan we make, for the death
of our Father, Brother, or friend, appears in sighs, or A good mean to try
the love of the married.
(most vehement) in tears: whereas if we our selves, are but a little
wounded, we cry outright: so that by how much we exceed, in sorrowing our
own mischaunces, above another man's: by the same reason, so much we love our
selves, more then another. The Ring that is given The ring, a trial of the
love between the married.
by the Husband, and put on the Wives finger, ought to be of Gould, to witness,
that as gould is the most precious of Mettalles, so the love of the married,
exceeds all other loves.

To which effect, Propertius says, Omnis amor magnus, sed aperto in coniuge
mayor: moreover, the close Joining An other sygure of the ring.
of the ringe, is a figure of true unity of the married: between whom, there
should be no division in desire, no^ difference in behavior. To honor this
holy institution Christ was borne of a married woman.
of God, God would have his only begotten son, to be borne of a Wife,
perfectly married, save that she was not Carnally soyled.

Licurgus, the good King of the Lacedaemonians, so reverenced this sacred
estate, as he made a Law, that what Licurgus law for the unmarried.
Lacedemonian soever were unmarried, after the age, of thyrtie and eight
years, should be chased and hissed out of all public plays, and assemblies,
as one, unworthy to be seen: and that, in the cold winter, he should (naked)
endure the reproaches of the people: and withal, was bound to confess, how he
justly suffered yt punishment, as a Mispriser of Religion, a contemner of Laws,
and an enemy to nature. The Romans were not so severe: but yet the The Law
of the Romans, for the vnmar ried.
Aged, unmarried, were condemned (according to their abylytie (to pay unto the
Treasurer, for public use, a good Su^me of Money.

Plato, in his Laws, enacted: that the Unmaried, should execute, no honorable
Office, Estate, nor dignytie, in the Platos laws for the vnma ried.
Common wealth?

The good Emperor, Alexander Seuerus, although he married, rather, to give end
to his Mother, Mammeas, Importunyties: then (as he thought) to begin a more
happy life: yet fair Memmia, his wife, so naturally accorded with his
disposition, as when she died, he would often renew his Sorrow, and remember
her Uertues, in these words. So great a Treasure, as I have lost, a man
seldom finds: Death were gentle, if he took nothing Alexander Seuerus love
to Memmia his wife.
but that which offends: but, oh, he has reaued the better part of my
self.

How wonderfully, was the Love of Paulina, sage Senecaes Wife, who opened her
Uaines, not only, with an Paulinas rare love, to her Husband Seneca.
intent to accompany him to death, but also, with a desire to feel her
Husbands manner of death.

Quintus Curtius, resiteth, that King Darius, with an vnapauled Spirit, took
his Overthrows, by Alexander the Great, the ruin of his kingdom, and the
danger The precious love of king Darius to his wife.
of his royal parson: But having knowledge of his wives death, he wept
bitterly, showing by this sorrow, that he l^ his Queen, far abone his Crown.

King Admetus, being sore sick, received this answer from the Oracle: that if
he lived, his best friend must dye: The divine love of king Admetus. Wife.
which when the good Queen heard, she presently slew her self, and in the
trembling passage of Death, constantly said: To give King Admetus life, his
Queen and dearest friend does die. The exceeding love of Tiberius Graccus,
toward his wife.


Tiberius Graccus, finding two Serpents, in his chamber, went to the Angurers,
to know what they deuyned: who answered, that he was bound to kill the one of
these two Serpents, if he slew the Male, he should die himself: if he killed
the Female, he should lose his wife: who (murderer of himself) slew the Male,
and saved his wife: and so by his rare love, raised a question, whether his
Wife were more fortunate in having such a Husband, or unhappy in loosing of
him. One of the seven wonders of the world, is an eternal testimony of the
love which The wonder full love, of Queen Arti mesia, toward her husband
Mausolus.
Queen Artemesia bare to her Husband Mausolus, who for to engraue his dead
coarse, erected a Sepulcher, so ^oy all and sumptuous, as took away the glory
of all princely Tumbes, before her time, and left no possibility, for any (in
time to come) to excel the same: but holding this too bace a Mansion, for his
Kingly heart, she dried the same One of the seven wonders of the world.
to powder, and spising her wine there with, she buried it in her own bowels:
and to crown his fame, with an everlasting memory, for that the ruin of his
Sepulcher was subject to the injury of time, with great rewards she
encouraged Theopompus, Teodectes, Naucrites, and Isocrates four of the most
famous Orators of Greece, to renown his virtues. A^l. Gel. in lib de nocti*
atti.


Among whom, Theopompus (as we read) received the triumph of victory, in that
learned skirmish.

I could report many other Authoryties, of inseparable Love between the
Married: the least of a hundred whereof, would equal, the friendshippes of
TITUS and GISIPPVS: Or of DAMON and PITHIAS, the two woonders of men's
affections. But for that I know, the able wits here present, can cloth my
naked prooffes, of the excellency of Marriage, and of the deuyne Love,
between the Married, with many other sound reasons, I will give place Madam,
that you, and the rest of your Ingenious Company, may do better service to
the one, and Justice to the other, desiring that, that which to said, may
discharge my premisse, though not sattisfy your expectation.

Sir (quoth Queen Aurelia) if you give us good laws to preserve Love among
the married as you have with precious authorities set forth the excellency of
Marriage, and the divine operations of her blessings, with a full performance of
your promise, you shall bind us al to be your Debtors.

Madame (quoth Phyloxenus) you set me to a very hard task: the Rose, is
Hostess, as well for the Butterfly as the Be: the Sun shines, both upon
the good and bad: yea, Christ him self, was (as well) Master to a Thief, as
to a true Disciple: Even so, divine Marriage, can not have, but some Deuillysh
Subjects, whom Examples will not fear: much less, may Laws, keep in unity.

I grant (quoth Queen Aurelia:) the evil are fearelesse of the Law, until
they be scourged with the vengeance The Law is a scourge to the evil, and
comfort to the good.
thereof: but the good embrace Laws, as their Directors in Virtue, and
Defenders from danger: for whose Benefit, I entreat you now, with as large a
power, as I lately commanded you: that (in this behalf) you will commyt, some
counsaylyng Laws, to our attentive Memories.

Madame (quoth Segnior Phyloxenus,) to show that your Uertues, have as great
power to command me, as your Aucthorytie to enjoin me: I will set down my
own Imagynations, to preserve (and multiplye) Love, peace, wealth, and Joy,
among the Married: leauyng the same to be pefected, by the hearers better
Judgments.

Householde Laws, to keep the Married, in Love, Peace, and Amytie: Reported,
by Segnior Phyloxenus.
THE Satisfaction of Fancy, is the Sowrce of Joy in Marriage: But, there be
many means too damn up the Course of Delight, between the Married, if the
Match be not made, as well, by foresight, as free choice:

The Office of Foresight, is to prevent, following Mischaunces: Marriage con
sistes as well in foresight, as free choice
and (advisedly to consider, if present Abylytie, will support an Househoulde,
and (according to their calling) leave a Portion, to their Posterytie.

In this point, the experyence of the Parents, is to be prefe^red (...) the
rash imaginations of the son: for the aged Married, by proof know, that in
time many accidents of mischaunce, will hinder the endeavors of the best
husbands.

The office of foresight, is likewise to consider, of the equallitie Equallity
in years.
in years, least the one growing, and the other declining in perfection, after
a while, repent, when remedy comes too late: the Rose full blown, seems
fair for a time, but withers much sooner then the tender Bud.

It is the office of foresight, to consider of the equallitie Equallity in
manners.
of bringing up, least a diversity in manners, between the married, make a
division of desires: for Spannyels and Curres, hardly live together without
snarling.

And it is the office of foresight, to see that there be a Consent in religion.
consent in Religion, between the married, for if their love be not grafted in
their souls, it is like their Marriage will be infyrmed, with the defects of
the body.

The office of Free choice, is the root or foundation of Free choice in
satisfaction of Fancy.
Marriage, which consists only in the satisfaction of fancy: for where the
fancy is not pleased, all the perfections of the world, cannot force love,
and where the fancy delights, many defects are perfected, or tolerated
among the Married.

When Marriage is solemnized, there are many things to be observed one the
part both of the husband and the Wife.

The Husband is to consider, his house is a petty Common A man's house is a
petty common weal.
wealth, whereof himself is chief, and his Servant Subjects: therefore, for
the welfare both of himself and householde, it is needful, that he set
down such ^rders, as God may be gloryfied, himself profitably served, the
good servant well rewarded, the evil chastened, and the neighbor pleased:
And as it is the Husbands office, to set down these orders, so it is the Wives
duty The office of the Wife.
to see them executed.

The charge of the Husband, is to get abroad for the The husbands care
apperraineth to things abroad.
provision of his householde: and the Wife is bound to spare at home, toward
the maintenance of her children.

The office of the Husband, is to see his ground Tilled, his Cattle cherished,
his fences sound, his laborers work, and their wages paid.

The duty of the wife is to see her Garden weeded, her The wives chatge is
huswiuery within door.
Uines cut, and in her Orcharde her fruit Trees pruned: within doors her
house well ordered, her Maidens busied, her Children instructed, the friend
entertained, and the Tables well furnished. And in this Oeconmie, many women
have so excelled, as Socrates affirms: that he Moral Philosophit to be
learned by women.
learned of Women more Morrall Philosophy, then natural reason of Anaxagoras
and Archelaus: wherein Socrates testifyeth no more then their worthy sex
deserves: for many Women govern their Families with such Prudence,
Temperance, Piety, and other commendable virtues, as may well instruct the
wisest.

The Husband ought to beware, that in the presence Laciuious talk to be
shunned of the husband
of his wife, he uses no filthy lascivious talk: for besides the witness of
his own indiscression, he makes her a passage for many an unhappy thought.

The Wife ought to be nice, in occasion of suspicion, for The wife ought to be
nice in cause of suspicion.
her husband that see'th open cause of mistrust, cannot but fear, that in
secret, he receives injury: and Ielowsie though she proceeds from exceeding
love, yet is she the greatest enemy of the Married.

The Husband is bound to keep his wife in civil and comely apparel, as well
to make her ^eeme beautiful Comelye apparel the husband should give his wife.
unto himself, as to prevent the reproach of the neighbor: for this has
been an ancient custom among the Romans, and it is to be feared, that if
the Husband break, it to spare his Purse, the Wife will repair it, though she
gage her person.

The Wife that will please her Husband, and make a Clean lynnen commendable in
a wife.
great show of a little, though her Gowns be plain, in her lynnen she must
be curtous and fine: for otherwise, were she attyred all in Silk: if her
sleeves, Partlet and other Linen be coorse, torn, or sluttishly washed, she
shall neither be praised of strangers, nor delight her Husband.

The Husband, after householde iarres, if the Wife The husband must bevvare of
sollomnes.
seem to be sorry, he ought not to be sullen: for if she perceive him of a
froward nature, it is like in other such squares, she will be negligent to
please him.

The Wife, if she offend her husband, by some ignorant The wife must be
amyable toward her husband
trespass, she must please him with a loving countenance: least if he find
her of a crooked condition, he will take delight to cross her with continual
foul usage.

The old Husband, is to accompany his young Wife A law for a young vvomans
old husband.
with grave Matrons, and to set her forth with costly civil attire, that
seeing the reverence and honor that is given her for her Husbands gravity,
she will studdie how to please him, though she displease her own disposition.

The young Wife that has an old Husband, is A regard for an old man's young
wife.
bound to make much of him at home: for the reputation she receaueth in his
life, and for the wealth she is like to have by his death: and abroad must be
sober in her behauiours, discreet in her talk, and no harkener to young men's
tales, least her own lightness, make her openly infamed, where her Husbands
imperfections, could cause her but to be secreatly suspected.

The young Husband is too bear with his old Wife, A regard for an old
vvomans young husband.
in her will, as well for the reverence due to her years, as for the
advancement, the love brings to himself: least the neighbors term his
Wife an unfortunate old Woman, and himself, a naughty, froward, vile natured
young man.

Theolde Wife, to give excuse to her dotage, must A regard for a young man's
old wife.
in open assemblies, commend her young Husband of modest and stayed
government: and secreatly, to be lovingly used, must kiss him: with Midas
lips for, if she fill not his Purse by fair means, with foul entreaty he
will be his own Caruer: if she complain, she joins but scorn to her own
mischaunce.

Generally, the Husband ought not to forbid his Wife, Modest familiarity not
to be forbidden the Wife.
in assemblyes modestly, to intertaine time, in devising with the better
sort: for in such ielous restraint, he shall leave a suspicion, that he
inioyneth her this open pennaunce, for some secret trespass, and so both
slander himself, and injury his wife.

The Wife should have an especial care, to shun the Light company to be
shunned of the Wife.
company of light Women: for the multitude, though they can charge her with no
misdemeanour, yet they well condemn her honor, by the known evils of her
companions.

Many other needful directions, may be given to preserve unity in Marriage
(quoth Segnior Phyloxenus) too cumbersome for me to report, and too tedious
for this honorable company to here, whose patience I have already injured too
much: but finding my error, I end my tale, and remain ready to make
satisfaction in some other service.

Sir (quoth Fabritio) the end of your Tale, puts us in remembrance of our
duty and your right, which is for this honorable favor, to remain your
indebted Servant, to embrace your counsels, and to commend (and submit our
reasons, to) your learned Censure.

It is your favor and not my merit (quoth Segnior Phyloxenus.)

Sir, (quoth Queen Aurelia) I will bear the blame of this days importuning
of you, and you alone shall have the honor, in granting of my requests, who
to the former joins this one more favor, which is, that you conclude this
your worthy exercise, with some rare History at large.

Madam (quoth Segnior Philoxenus) this is the least of your commandments,
considering that Histories make mention of thousands, who in their inseparable
looues, have sounded the excellency of Marriage, wherefore I o^ey your pleasure.

The worthy History of Phrigius and Pieria. Reported by Segnior Phyloxenus.
IN the Register of Fame, wherein the Monuments of the virtuous are Cronicled,
as presedents for their posterity, I read, that in the famous City of
Miletum in Ionia, as sovereign Prince and governor, there reigned a worthy
Duke, called Nebeus, who to comfort and supporte his aged years, had to his
son and only heayre, Phrigius, a young Gentleman of such rare towardlines,
as it may be a question, whether he wear more beholding to Nature for the
perfections of his body, to Virtue for the qualities of his mind, or to
Fortune in suffering him to be so nobly borne.

In Myos, a neighbor City to Miletum, there was also a Prince of much
renown, named Pythes, whose Daughter and heir, was fair Pieria, by whose
virtues all Ionia was renowned. The ancient envy between the Citizens of
Miletum and Myos, was turned into amity: and the open war between Duke
Nebeus and the noble Pithes, was peaceably and honorably ended: All such
happy events, succeeded this following adventure. Upon the Feastiuall day of
Diana, the Citizens of Myos, with out the injury of Soldiers, might lawfully
repair to Miletum, to sacrifice to Diana, upon which safe conduct, with many
other Ladies and Gentlewomen of Myos, fair Pieria waighted on her Mother to
Dianas Temple, whose rare beauty was such, as dazeled the eyes of the
behoulders, like the reflections of a Myrror, placed against the Sun.

Among many that looued, and few or none that saw possibility of grace, such
was the renown of her chasse disdain, young Phrigius beheld Pieria with such
a settled eye, as Dianas Temple sheelded him not against the Arrows of Love:
but as a wounded Stag, at the first seems little dismayde: so Phrigius with
an unappalled cheer, returned to the Dukes Palace, and as pledge of truce, he
sent his heart to Myos. The Ceremonies and Sacrifices of Diana ended, the
Wars renewed, the wonted Massacres, Murders, Rapines, and outrageous
cruelties practiced by the Soldiers of either part: in so much as Law gave
place to Arms, equity to violence, and all public order was perverted, and
upon the point to be destroyed. The Captains of Myos encouraged their
Soldiers of yt one part: but yt Soldiers of Miletum, were driven to comfort
their Captain with a threatening of disgrace. But ah poor Phrigius, what
answer should thou make? To see thy Soldiers slain, and thy Cities
spoiled, without proffers of rescue were dishonorable: to bend thy forces
against thy own heart, were unnatural: to make the best choice of these two
euilles, required leisure: and judgment. And therefore advisedly to consider
of his estate, at this time Phrigius satisfied his Soldiers with hope of some
speedy venturous exployte, and daungered not his enemies, with the proffer of
any violence: so that either power kept their trenches peaceably, but yet with
this indifferent perryll, that they attended opportunity, to make the one
Conquerors, and the other Captives: for the long Civil contention, had now
made the estate of either as desperate, as the fortunes of two that have their
substance upon the chance of Dice, the one to have all, the other to be
undone.

When Phrigius had with slender hope thus quieted the acclamations of the
people, he retired himself into a solitary Chamber, to be the sole companion
of his outrageous passions, with whom he thus devised.

Ah traiterous eyes, betrayers of my whole body, the scourge of Miletum, and
enymies of my honor: the vengeance of Oedippus is too gentle for your
injuries: what do thou say? oh blasphemous tongue, rival of humanity,
callumner of Beauty, and hinderer of thy countries peace: thou reprocher of
virtue, and Phrigius welfare: know to thy shame, the perfection of my eyes have
constantly beheld Pieria, whose divine beauties, emblemed in human shape,
dazeleth the youngest sight in Ionia: Then to revile them thus, thou
tyrannisiest nature: to demand why I love and serve Beauty, thy question is
blind, and deserves a double answer: But aye me, though my eyes, and Love,
have done but what is just, Fortune has dealt too rigourously with me, to
render my heart Captive to his Daughter, who is the rival of my father: what
hope may I give to my afflictions? when possibility of comfort is taken away:
the Parents are ready to sheath their Swords in one an others entrayles: is it
then like, the Children shall embrace a mutual affection? O no: for though
mylde Venus consent that they love, wrathful Mars will sever their affection.
O cruel War, thou art not improperly called The vengeance of War.
the scourge of God, for in thee is contained a greater vengeance then might
be imagined by man: thou armest the Son against the Father, the Uncle against
the Nephew, the Subject against his Sovereign: Thy Drink is blood, thy food
the flesh of men: thy Fires are flaming Cities: thy pleasures, spoiling of
Widows, rauishment of Uirgins, subuertion of Laws and public benefit: thy
Judges, Tyranny and Injustice: and where thou remaynest, her known enemy is
not so dangerous, as the feigned friend.

But why exclaim I of War, who double Crowned Alexander with the riches of
Asia and Africa? who honored Caesar, with imperial triumphs? and rewarded
Hanniball, for the travails of his life, with renown after death? by whom
Millions of men, are regystred in the life Book of Fame: and thorough whom,
Phrigius gives expectation of benefit unto his Country, comfort to his aged
Father, and honor to his posterity.

I received my wound in the time of peace, nay in the Temple of Diana: shall I
then exclayme of Peace, and vpbrayde Chastity: foul fall the heart that
should move, and shame worm the tongue that pronounces such blasphemy: O
blessed Peace, thou fast chainest Treason, Tirannie, Murder, Theft, and
Wrath, with all disturbers of common tranquillity, and in the highest
dignities, placest Justice, Piety, Temperaunce, Concord and Love, with many
other Morrall virtues, by The blessings of peace.
whom the lewd are chastened, the good are cherished, and Commonweals
prosper and flourish. O Chastity, thy divine virtues deserve a better Trumpet,
then my injurious tongue: thy excellency is written in the browe of Pieria.
And is Pieria the Deputy of Diana? O yes: and Phrigius the servant of Venus?
too true: it is then impossible they should agree in affection? yea sure. O
unfortunate Phrigius, through Peace, which receiuedst thy wound, before Dianas
Altar, and by cruel War art separated from the Surgion that should cure
thee. These sundry conflictes Phrigius had with his bitter passions, which
pursued their advantage, with such thorny fears, as if he had not been
suddenly succored, by the advice and comfort of Lord Miletus, a favored
Counselor to Duke Nebeus, and an assured friend to his son Phrigius, he had
been like to have yielded to Despair. Miletus was glad to see him thus
affected, and sorry to behold him so dangerously afflicted: for in this loo^e
he foresawe an end, of the ancient envy and enmity, between the Citizens
of Miletum, and Myos: whose civil Fraies, had buried more young men in the
Fields, then aged in the Churches and Churchyardes. Therefore to confirm his
affection, and to comfort him with hope: Lord Phrigius quoth he, to blame your
affection were cruelty and no sound counsel: for you love Pieria, the Parragon
of the world, to discomfort you with an impossibility of her favor, were
clean against the possibility of your fortune: for besides that, your person
alluringly pleases, your authorities command: yea Piches cannot but rejoice,
Pieria consent, and all Myos desire is to solemnize this Marriage.

My self, and the grauer sort of the counsel, will motion the matter to the
Duke your father, who I trust will hold the affection of his son, rather to
proceed from the justice of Diana, then the injury of Cupid. Who regarding
the zealous offeringes of Pieria, agreed that you should be wounded, that
Pieria might have the honor to cure you, in whose virtues, all Ionia hops to
be blessed. Therefore, to make your affection known, in some pleasing Letter,
to Pieria commend your service, and to deal with both your fathers, refer the
care to me: How sweet the smallest hope of grace is to a condemned man? or
the least word of comfort, from the Physician, to the infirmed patient: the
soden change of Phrigius moan, truly manifests: who now began to look
cheerfully, and with hope appeased his passions: so that imbrasing Miletus, he
committed his life to the fortune of his discresion: and while his passion was
quick, he presented both love and service to Pieria, in this following letter.

Phrigius Letter to Pieria.
Fair PIERIA, since it is a common thing to love: and a miracle to subdue
affection, let it not seem strange, that I am slave to your beauty, nor
wounder though I sue for grace. The wounded Lion, prostrateth himself at the
feet of a man: the sick, complayneth, to the Physician: and (charged with
more torments) the lover, is enforced to seek comfort of his Mistress. To
prove that I love, needs no other testimony, the^ the witness of your rare
perfectio^s, and to give me life is the only work of your pity. Wherefore
[Madame] since the Virtue of your eye, has drawn away my heart, as the
Adamant does the steel, I beseech you that my hartlesse body may so live by
your ruth, as I may have strength (as well as will) to do you service: and let
it suffice for more honor of your triumph, that by the power of beutie, your
virtues have achiued, a more glorious conquest, then might the whole strength
of MYOS, and which is more, of a puissant enemy, you have made so perfect a
friend, as Phrygius, shall hold him self in no fortune, so happy, as to
encounter with the oportunytie, to do Pieria, and her favorers service, or
their enemies damage: If which amends, may repair all Injuries past, I shall
hold, the Safecundict blessed, that licensed you to enter Myletum: If greater
ransom be demanded, it must be my life: which [if it be your wyl] shall forth
with be sacrificed, notwithstanding, in such cruelty. Dianas Temple shall be
profaned, before whose Altar, I received my wound from the eyes of fair
Pieria: but houldynge it impossible, that a stony heart, may be enemy to so
many Graces as live in your face: I Balm my wounds, with hope that I kiss
your gracious hand: and that your Answer will return an acceptaunce of
service.

He, whose heart waighteth on your beauty. PHRIOIVS.


THis Letter sealed and subscribed: To fair Pieria, Triumph after victory:
was delivered unto a trusty Mes senger: who (having Safecunduict, to pass
through both the Armies) in good hour, arrived at Prince Pythes, Palace: and
in the presence of her Mother and other friends reverently kissyng the same,
delivered Pieria, with Phrygius loving commendations, his letter. Who so in ye
Spryngtime, in one Moment had seen rain and Sunshine, might again behold
the like change in Pierias troubled countenance: who found no less Joy in
reading the Letter, then cause of wonder, in beholding the superscriptio^, who
(by the consent of Diana, to bring peace into Myletu^) was by love, with the
self same Arrowe, and at one instant wounded in as deep Affection, as
Phrygius: notwithstanding, bound to no desire so much, as to the Direction
of her Parents, she showed them this Letter: who weerie of the wars: and
embracing this mean of peace. After they had advisedly considered the
Contents: to comfort Phrygius, without injury to Pieriaes chaste behavior
in her name, they returned this Answer.

PIERIAS Answer to PHRIGIVS Letter.
SIR PHRIGIVS, I received your Letter, and as I con fesse, that your praises,
so far pass my meryt, as I wun der at the error of your Judgment: so, I
doubt whither so honorable a personage, as your Lordship, can yield your
service, to so mean a Lady: or if love were of that power, whether you would
obey, to be Seruante to her, whose Fathers ryuall, your parents, and you are:
but on the other part: I entertayne a faint hope, that you are not so much
enemy to your honor, as to leave in your Adversaries possession, a Monument of
Dissimulation: Upon which warant, and your free offer of service: I bind you,
by a curtuousrequest, to endeavor to conclude a speedy peace: that I may
without danger of Hostliyty repair to Dianas Temple: In co^passyng of which
gracious League, you shall receive great glory: the countreymuch quiet, and I,
whom you wysh such welfare, shall be bownd to do you any honorable favor.

PIERIA of MYOS.


This answer sealed, and subscribed, To my Lord Phrygius: delivered by the
hands, and blessed with the loving countenance of Pieria, was returned to
Phrigius, by his own messenger: who, after he had read and reread this Letter
(not for that, the Contents, gave him any assurance of Love: but for because,
they commanded an employment of Service) he comforted his Spirit, with hope,
that his endeavor in this charge, should, both reaue all doubt, of
dissimulation, by him, and smoothe Pierias Browe, of Chaste disdain: and to
further a happy end of the Countries calamity. In the beginning of Phrigius
contentment, Lord Miletus had so dealt in these affairs, as in short time
Duke Nebeus, and Prince Pythes came to parle of peace: and while the Counsels
of either part, considered upon the Articles of agreement: Safecundit of
Trafick, was given to the Inhabitants of either City.

How sweet the friendly incounters, of these aunciente enemies were: is the
office of him, that has been scourged with wars: who, though they were but
in the estate of repriued men, yet the hope of assured peace lightened their
hearts of former sorrow, and replenished the The virtue of Peace.
place with gladness.

Fair Pieria, now safely repaired to the Aulters of Diana: and Phrygius, more
of desire, to salute his Mistress, then of zeal to sacrifice, to Chastetie:
feigned many Devotions, to visit her Temple: where these Lovers, for the
reverence they bare to the place, forbear to encounter in any speech of Love:
Yet if Diana, would have publyshed their thoughts, she should have confessed,
that the most deuotionate of them both, in their hearts, honored Juno, in the
eye of her own Image and Aulters. But Diana, though she be the Sovereign of
single Nymphs: yet is she friend to Juno, and ye Chaste Married: and only
enemy, to Venus and the wanton sort: so that she took in worth, this light
trespass: yea, held her self honored, that her sacred Temple, should be the
original cause of Myletum and Myos, peace and amytie: and the end of their
ancient envy, and enmity. Wherefore, to conclude, the begun agreement, she
sent Concord and Charity, to chain up Grudge, and Dissension.

Duke Nebeus and Prince Pythes, freed from the vexation of these furies, with
affable and friendly intertainment, reasoned of their affairs: and while the
Parents parled of their common profit: the Children, upon lawful
oportunities, devised of their pryuate Loves: but yet with such a dutiful
regard, of their friends consent, that although their hearts were lynked
together, by free choice, the clapping of hands was referred to the forsight of
Parents: who burying former injuries, in the Cave of Oblivion, made an Edict
of Amyty, sealed, and strengthened, with the Marriage of Phrygius and Pieria,
Heirs of eithers renown and dignytie. Behold here the work of The power of
virtuous Love.
Love, grafted in the honorable hearts of the virtuous. The wrath and storms
of war, is turned to calm and temporate peace: yt blossoms of enmytie are
altered into fruts of amyty: and the root of malice, grown to ye tree of
pity. The Nobles in honor of this Marriage, lauisht out their treasure, in all
their triumphs and shows to be in good equipage. The meaner Gentlemen, by
exceeding cost, lear ned by experience, how afterward to spare. The Citizens
with gifts of great Empress, presented their dutiful affections. The learned
eternised this marriage peace, in Tables of Memory. The Clergy song Himnes of
joy, The common people ronge the Belles, and every sort showed some token of
delight. So that Phrigius and Preria, after the deaths of their aged fathers,
were crowned with the dignities of Myletum and Myos, and all their happy life,
were honored with these acclamations of their subjects. Live, blessed
Princes: the appeasers of Jupiters wrath, by whom War, the Monster of
humanity, is fast chayned: And peace the sovereign of moral virtues,
Triumphs in the Capitals of IONIA Live blessed princes, and long enjoy the
hearts of your subjects. In your virtues who have multiplied wealth: and to
do you service are ready to spend their lives.

This zeal and reverence of their subjects, Phrigius and Pieria, many years
possessed, between whom there was such equallitie in disposition, as fortune
knew not, by any accident of joy, or mischance, how to sever their desires.
And when the time came, that the heavens (envying the glory of the earth, in
possessing this divine cupple charged nature, to render their right. Who
obaying the will of Jove, sent sickness to summon both Phrigius, and Pieria,
and licensed death to do his worst. And (as there yet remains an opinion in
Miletum) as their loves began in one hour, is their lives ended in one
momente: whose spirits Metamorphosed, into white Turtles, took their flight,
toward that heavenly Para dise. Where I wish all faithful lovers, and this
lovely company, abiding places.

Segnior Philoxenus, by the virtue of this days exercise, the only travel of
his learned wit, so raised the hearts of the company, with the desire of
Marriage, that Lucia Bella, who, in the beginning of Christmasse, was determined
to have been a vestall Nun, now confessed that they were enemies to Nature,
and not worthy the society of men, which scandylised, or scorned this sacred
Institution. The rest of this honorable company, by plawsible speeches,
confirmed Lucia Bellas opinion, or by silence showed a willing consent. And to
conclude the exercise, (quod Queen Aurelia,) Segnior Philoxenus, your sweet
virtues, have described so deuyne a Paradise, as our souls cannot, but long,
after this holy Institution, and our hearts honor your perfections, by whose
bounty this company is not only highly entertained, but by your most precious
treasures richly enriched. Madam (quod he) yt virtue you speak of, belongs
to Marriage: yt benifit to this gracious assembly: and the bare words, to
Phyloxenus. Such bare words (quod Fabritio) deserve to be registered among the
life deeds of Memory. Upon this Judgment, Queen Aurelia, arose, and the
company performyng the office of reverent curtesy, returned into the great
Chamber to salute some other of the New years Pleasures.

The Device of a Stately Show, and Mask, the seventh Night, by Segnior
PHILOXENVS, to honor Queen AVRELIA, and the other Ladies and Gentlewomen.
Upon New years day at Night, about nine of the Clock, in an enclosed
place in the great Hall: after Queen Aurelia, and her chosen attendants, had
daunced certain solemn Almaynes, appeared a hye Mountain, the Farestery
whereof, was of fair Bay Trees, Pomgranate, Lymons, Orenges, Date Trees, and
other fruits of most pleasure: among the Mossy Rocks appeared Snailes,
Lysards, Moles, Frogs, Greshoppers, and such like vnuenymus vermin, and by the
fountains, which run aslant the side of ye Mountain, Lions, Unicorns,
Elepha^ts, Camelio^s, Camels and other beasts of honor: as if they were
appointed by Nature, to guard those sacred streams, from being troubled with the
rascal multitude of Cattle, which domestical desert, was perfected with such
art, as nature confessed her ex cellent cunning, to be vanquished by man's
industry. This Mauntaine which resembled, some wilderness in Arabia, dewed with
yt pleasant springes of Africa, by a still motion, removed toward yt upper end
of ye hall, into yt full presence of Queen Aurelia, and the most statly
company. In ye mydst of this Mountain was an Arbor of sweet Eglentine,
intercoursed with Roses, and fully shadowed with the spreadinge Branches, of ye
purpled Vine: in which, upon a statly throne sat Diana attired all in white,
and at her feet wear the nine Muses, clothed in several colors, according
to their several qualyties, sounding heavenly harmony, both with voice and
instrument: out of this arbor sprang a Bay Tree, in which was the Hyen, which
at pleasure being both Male and Female, expressed ye full power of virtue: who
though she has yt form and habit of a woman, yet is her essential substance
compounded of both kinds: At the foot of this Hill, was ye Monster Envy armed
with fire and sword, to hinder their passage, which adue^tred to clime yt Mount:
a forest Nymph clad all in flowers, in a short speech, declared, yt Diana, and
ye Muses, who in the golden age, had their Palaces, in the Forests,
Mountains, and rivers of pleasure, through out yt whole world: now by ye
injury of time, were driven to their sanctuary of Parnassus: at yt foot whereof
the Monster Envy kept, to hinder yt passages of such as attempted with their
renown, to set those Ladies at lyberty: who hering by fame, ye glory of this
honorable company, were arrived by hope, yt ye virtue of some of ye troop,
should redeem the^ from captiuytie, and therefore, she su^moned ye Knights
present, to make trial of their valors, and ye Ladies of their virtues:
which said, she retired back into ye Mountain: The Gentlemen and Ladies,
having a cunning foreknowlege of ye intent of this show aruied themselves, with
sundry attempts to overcome this Monster. Soranso, Dondolo, Ismarito, and
Faliero, drew their rapiers, and assailed Envy, but dry blows auailed not: so
yt they were conquered, and committed to ye gayle of Tediusnesse. Maria
Belochy, Franceschina Sancta, Lucia Bella, Helena Dulce, and other Ladies, and
Damsels, endeavored to charm him, with the sweet sounds, and Heavenly
impressions of Music. But Envy more wary then Argus, and less: pitiful then
ye Tormenters of Hell: the first whereof, was overcome with Inachus Oten Pipe:
the other moved to ruthe with Orpheus passionate Music (to show himself
composed of all the vennom of Hell) could not he conquered, by the sharp
swords of the Knights, nor would not be entreated with the sugared Harmony of
the faier Ladies: But amidst this Monsters Triumphs, there was a voice heard
in the Mowntayne: Non vi, sed virtute: Whereupon, Queen Aurelia, with a
Myrrour, devised by Segnior Philoxenus, peaceably, made toward Envy: which
Monster, presumyng of his force, lifted his Club against this virtuous Dame:
who, by the reflections of the Concaue Superficies, of this Myrrour, daunted
with the fear of his own weapon, imagining that he stroke him self, recoyled
back with such haste, as he fell down: Whereupon, Segnior Phyloxenus, seasyng
on his Club, and laying him on, therewith, said: As Phallaris, did Envy is
murdered with his own wepon.
to Perillus: die with the weapon, thou preparst for other.

In Trumph of this glorious Uictorie, Diana sent down the Nymphe Chlora, to
salute Queen Aurelia, with this Present: which was a Shield, wherein was
quartred, four several Honors.

The first. VERT: A lookyng Glass of Crystal.

The second. AZVRE: a pair of Balance, Argent.

The third. OR: a Pyller of Porphier.

The fourth. Argent: a standing Cup of Ruby Rock.

The Muses them selves, came also down, and crowned her with a Garland of
Roses, parted, perpale, ARGENT, and GVLIS: and electing her for their
Soueraign, to comfort the five Knights that were disco^forted by ENVY, two and
two leading a Knight, between the^, daun ced a statly Almain, of XV. which
ended: they bestowed a favor, and certain Latin verses, upon every one of the
Knights: and returned unto their Mount. The Silver Pen, and Verses delivered by
VRANIE to ISMARITO, stand in the forefrunt of this Book: the rest, for that
they were proper unto them selves, and impertinent for this matter, I omit: By
this time, the Cock was ready to sing his midnight song: and the company (fully
satisfied with pleasure) departed unto their lodgings, to spend the rest of
the night in Contemplation and sleep.

FINIS.

