THE WAY TO THE TRVE CHVRCH: wherein The principal Motives persuading to
Romanisme; and Questions touching the nature and authority of the Church and
Scriptures, are familiarly disputed, and driven to their issues, where, this
day they stick between the Papists and us:

Contrived into an Answer to a Popish Discourse, concerning the Rule of Faith
and the marks of the Church. And published to admonish such as decline to
Papistrie of the weak and uncertain grounds, whereupon they have ventured
their souls.

Directed to all that seek for resolution: and especially to his loving
countrymen of Lancashire.

By JOHN WHITE Minister of Gods word at Eccles.

For the finding out of the matter and questions handled, there are three
Tables: two in the beginning, and one in the end of the Book.

De hoc inter nos Quaestio versatur, vtrum apud Nos, an apud Illos vera
Ecclesia sit. August. de unit. Eccles. cap. 2. LONDON, Printed for JOHN BILL
and WILLIAM BARRET. 1608.

TO THE MOST REVEREND FATHERS IN GOD, TOBIE, THE LORD ARCHBISHOP OF YORK HIS
GRACE, Primate and Metropolitan of England: and to GEORGE, Lord Bishop of
Chester: his very good Lords.
WHen I first pe^ned this Treatise, which now I offer to your Lordships, I did
it for mine own private exercise, and the satisfying of certain friends that
desired it. Afterward seeing some hope that it might do good abroad,
principally in the country where I dwell: and desirous, if it were possible,
to do any thing that might help the seduced out of their errors, and confirm
the rest in the truth, I was easily persuaded to put it forth; and the rather
for that the questions handled, touching THE AVTHORITIE AND SENSE OF THE
SCRIPTVRE, and SIGNS OF THE CHVRCH, are the profitablest that can be stood
upon, and such as I have always observed our people commonliest use, and most
desire to look into; not being able to apprehend the difference, or judge of
the reasons in other questions; but presuming that if by certain marks they
could find which is the true Church, there would remain little difficulty in
the rest, for so much as therein they should find the truth in every controversy.

2 The proper cause why our adversaries put this device into the peoples heads,
was to dazzle their eyes, and delude their senses with the name of THE CHVRCH;
that when they should find the word of God, and all discourse against their
opinions, yet that name should amaze them, while they might believe nothing
until they were persuaded, by other marks, that it came from the CHVRCH. And
no doubt this is the Apollodor. Bibliothec. li. 2.
Gorgons head that inchanteth and oppresses them, even the learned of them
all, and holds them in bondage to their errors, having a conceit that they
will hear nothing against the Church: which they presuming to be the Papacy
(though it be but AN IMPOSTVME BRED IN THE CHVRCH, or A DISEASE GROWING TO IT)
will go no further. All their speech is of the Church: no mention of the
Scriptures, or God their Father, but their MOTHER THE CHVRCH. Much like as
Solin. poly. hist. c. 33.
they write of certain Aethiopians, that by reason they use no marriage, but
promiscuously company together, it comes that the children only follow the
mother: the fathers name is in no request, but the mother goes away with all
the reputation. Let their talk be listened, and their books perused, and it
will appear, this authority of their Church is at the end of every question,
and strikes the stroke: as Philostrat. in imaginib.
one says pleasantly of Aesops Fables, that therein the Fox is the chief
stickler of all the company. The beasts seldom meet but he is among them, and
bears his part with the busiest.

3 This matter is handled in this Book between my adversary and me. For
though others have done the same before me, yet I have done it in mine own
method. The water is all one, but the vessel wherein I have brought it, is my
own. And it was the judgment of Trinit. l. 1. c. 3. and de Mendacio. c. 6.
Saint Austine, that In places infected with heresy, all men should write that
had any faculty therein, though it were but the same things in other words;
that all sorts of people, among many books, might light upon some, and the
enemy, in all places, might find some to encounter him. The Jesuits, which
are the Popes Ianizaries that guard his person, and were brought in now at the
last cast, when the state of the Papacy was at a dead lift, to support the
weight of the maine battle, have pestered the land with their writings, and
filled the hands and pockets of all sorts of people with their papers; yea
fannes and feathers are lapped up in them; wherein it is admirable to see how
presumptuously they take upon them, in disgracing our persons, belying our
doctrine, and coining and defending strange opinions of their own, never heard
of before; as if Chrysippus school had bred them, Diog. Laert. in Chrysip.
who used to make his boast, that many times he wanted opinions to advance, but
if once he had the opinion, he never wanted arguments to defend it: whose
writings, seeing they cannot be suppressed, pity but they were effectually
answered. The applause that ignorant and unsettled minds give them, and the
conquest that of late years they have made of a few Libertines and
discontented persons, has so fleshed them, that it is incredible how they brag
and sing, like Auentin. Annal. lib. 2.
the clownes of Germany, when they had expelled the Franks: Mill Francos,
mill Sarmatas semel occidimus:
Mill, mill, mill, mill, mill Persas quaerimus.
But I dare boldly say it, that if the manner how they have prevailed be looked
into, Praescript:
Tertullians speech will fall out to be true, It is the weakness of some that
gives them the victory, being able to do nothing when they encounter an able
faith. Discontent and vanity of mind, void of the knowledge and faithful
practice of religion, are good dispositions to heresy. They live Gentiles,
says Cyprian, and die heretics. (...). Dio^ Laer^. in Epicur.
Epicurus, in his time, with teaching pleasure and liberty, filled the most
houses and cities with his friends. But if we look what the motives were that
led them away, and what the Jesuits said against us, I presume three verses in
P^^^^ol.
Plautus will answer them: Quid ait? quid narrat? quaeso quid dicit tibi?
Nugas theatri, verba quae in comoedijs
Solent lenoni dici, quae pueri sciunt.


4 A singular misery no doubt, and above all other to be lamented, that man's
mind so free, so ready, so able, with those helps that God has left him, to
search out the truth, yet should not be satisfied, nor rest contented with
heaven and earth, or any other thing that God has revealed for the finding
thereof: but suffers it self to fall into opinions, and with the conceits
thereof, as it were with irons and fetters, like a prisoner to be shut up in
the bottom of a loathsome dungeon, where they can find nothing but the crawling
of blind error, and unsettled opinions, and irksome uncertainties, as vermin
creeping round about them. If ever any thing deserved Agathias hist. lib. 1.
(...)
pity, it is to see ignorant men and women, that know nothing themselves, thus
to be imprisoned in the iayle of opinions, by the deceit of cunning seducers,
The Quodlibets make full demonstra^^^ of all this: besides that which we see
with our eyes.
that seek nothing hereby but to rob and spoil them, possessing the wives,
leading the children, using the goods, to swagger and serve their own
luxuriousness: that since the Harpyes were chased away, and Bell was
overthrown, never was there such a greedy and ravenous idol as the Seminary;
with his back and belly sinking and drowning all that entertain him. I never
think hereof, but Moloch the idol of the Ammonites comes into my mind: Paul.
Pagius. paraphr. Chaldaic. in Leuit. 18.21.
It was an Image hollow, and had seven chambers or ambries in it: they opened
the first and offered meal into it: in the second they put pigeons; the third
received a sheep, the fourth a ram, the fifth a calfe, the sixth an ox: and
if any man would offer his son or daughter, the seventh was ready for him;
his face was like a calfe, and his hands altogether framed to receive gifts of
the standers by; the lively portraiture of these seducers, if we please but a
little to compare the shape and conditions of the one with the other.

5 And would to God they had made our land, their native country, but a stage
for these fooleries, and not turned it into a theater of their tragedies and
Vide pater si tunica filij tui sit an no^? apud Math. Westminster. page 71.
vnpriestly practices: or had planted their superstition in the heart of the
subject, so as a little more room had bin left for loyalty to the magistrate.
For what conclusions are these to be brought into a kingdom? Posseuin.
Biblioth select. page 17.
It is judged that no Christian monarch has his crown wholly given him from
heaven, unless it receive firmness and strength also from Christ's Vicar the
Pope. And Roderic. Sancius Episco. Zamorensis. alleged and followed by
Carerius, de potest. Romans Pont. page 131.
again, It is to be holden, according to the Natural, Moral, and Divine law,
with the right faith, that the Lordship of the Roman Bishop is the true and
only immediate Lordship of all the world, not as concerning spiritual things
only, but also as concerning temporal things: and that the imperial Lordship
of Kings depends upon it, and owes service and attendance thereunto, as a
means, minister, and instrument; and that by him it receives institution and
ordination, and at the commandment of the Papal Lordship it may be removed,
revoked, corrected, punished. In the government of the world, the secular
Lordship is not necessary either of pure, or mere, or expedient necessity;
but when the Church cannot. Resolving this article therefore, we say, that in
all the world there is but one Lordship, and therefore there must be but one
universal and supreme Prince and Monarch; who is Christ's Vicar, according to
that of Dan. 7.14.
Daniel: He gave him dominion, and honor, and kingdom, and all people and
languages shall serve him. In him therefore is the fountain and original of
all Lordship, and from him the other powers flow. All their religion is full of
this doctrine, and hence proceed the monsters of conspiracies against our
State. Whereby it appears, IT IS NOT RELIGION THEY STRIVE FOR, BUT
SOVERAIGNTIE: and not the consciences of men, yielding to their ceremonies and
superstitions, will satisfy them, unless they may also have their wills in
ouerruling all, and the Crowns of Princes, and the Scepters and subjects of
the Kings of the world be at their devotion. Whereby they have branded
themselves for ever with the indeleble character of the Ministers of
Antichrist: that being but Priests, and confined to their books, and having
Mat. 16.19. and ibi Ferus. Tertio obseruandum and illud quod signanter dicit.
no other commission but TO PREACH AND TEACH, yet thus they creep into
thrones, filling the world with Anarchy and confusion; and whose souls they
should win to God by ministering the word and sacraments, their blood they
sacrifice to the devil, by stirring them up to treason and rebellion, and
canonize them for MARTYRS when they have done. We think it lamentable that is
Anton. Magin geograph. page 168.
written of the great Turk, how at Constantinople, in the place that sometime
was the palace of Constantine, now he keeps fierce Elephants, and a thousand
other cruel beasts: and in a stately Church near to adjoining, where God was
wont to be honored, he feeds savage monsters, and to every pillar thereof
tieth Lions, Bears, Wolves, Tigers. Witness the murders of the infant of
Spain, the Prince of Orange, the French King, King John of England, the Irish
wars, the English rebellion in the North, the French massacres, the infinite
treasons against Qu. Elizabeth and his Majesty and above all other the Powder
treason in Nouemb. 1605.
This is the practice of the Man of Rome: in the palace of Constantine, where
formerly of old, godly Bishops had wont to be entertained, he stalleth up
purpled Machiavellians, and unreasonable beasts to prey upon Constantines
successors, and devour the Princes of the earth: and to every pillar of our
Churches welnigh in Europe, he chaineth Wolves and Libards to fly at our
throats, whenever we come within their reach. And those herds that we see
of Friars, Seminaries, Mass Priests, Jesuits, pretending to be the Pastors of
our souls, be nothing else but so many Bears and bloody Tigers, chained to
the pillars of our Churches, the fatal enemies of Princes and their people, to
suck their blood: save that the Turks lions at Constantinople with feeding and
familiarity of their keepers become tame and gentle; but the Popes savages of
Rome by no forbearance or mercy showed them can be mollified: no gentle usage
can tame their nature; no clemency will reconcile them, no diet will swage
their thirst of blood; no benefits, no patience, no endurance can alter their
hearts from practicing against their mercifullest Prince, and dearest country.
Alas for our people, that have made choice of such masters. I remember Q.
Curt. l. 6. Sequidem gratulari quod in numerum deorum receptus esset Alexander;
caeterum misereri eorum quibus viuendum esset sub eo qui modum hominis
excederet.
the speech of Philotas touching Alexander, what time he would be made a god:
That he was glad Alexander was received into the number of the gods:
nevertheless he could not but pity their state who must live under him that
would exceed the degree of a man. The Popes Deity therefore makes them in a
miserable case that live under him, that disdains the place that God has
allotted him. The alliance they have with the Church of Rome, will not let them
see this, though the former ages Sigeb. ann. 1088.
counted it nouelty and heresy, and Anna Caesarissa hist (...). Refert Illyric.
with passion cried out of it. For adultery is a foul sin, yet Cael.
Rhodigin. l. 10. c. 35.
among the old Arabians no man was reputed an adulterer if he were sib to the
woman: which is the reason why nothing is amiss among our adversaries, because
the men that do it are sib to the Roman Church.

6 There is but one way to prevent the danger that may he feared from this
generation and their practices: and that is, that sin be severely punished,
and a preaching ministry settled, as much as is possible, in all places of the
land, and painful preaching effectually maintained against the manifold
discouragements of this iron age, whereby the subject may be taught obedience,
and ignorance and superstition (the root of disloyalty) may be expelled; that
sly Papists, specially those of the better sort, be met with, and not suffered
with cunning and friendship to slide through the fingers of the Magistrate:
that besides all other courses used to bridle them, they be revoked to
continual conference with such persons as are every way fit to encounter the
reputed learning of their Seminaries, and to lay the vain rumor of it: that
finally his Majesty and the State, upon all occasions, be encouraged against
the manifold dangers and troubles, which (to the exceeding grief of all good
subjects) their gracious care over the Church, and Zeal against false
religion, brings upon them; and that by deuoting our selves to their
obedience, and expressing our contentment in their government, they be
encouraged to proceed and take heart for ever in the faith and profession which
the sacred laws of our land and the mercy of God have hitherto vpholden to us,
and under which we have lived so happily, and obtained such strange
deliverances against all our enemies. The persons that must do this, are your
Lordships, and the rest of your place, the Fathers of the Church, whose seats
were first erected, even from the beginning, for such very purposes. No
contradiction nor contention must weary you, no peace must make you secure, no
opposition dismay you. The chief magistrates of our state are properly in your
hands, to frame their conscience, to direct their proceedings, to stir them
to action: the inferior sort of the Clergy meddle not with this charge; it is
your Lordships, to whom the cure belongs. The vigilance, Zeal and courage of
the Primitive Bishops (to say nothing of our Grindals, Jewels, Pilkintons, and
other famous Prelates of our time, your Lordships predecessors) was admirable in
these businesses: after God once blessed them with an orthodoxal magistrate to
support them, there could no heresy harbor under them, but they drove it out.
They were faithful Fathers to the Church, and Tutors to Emperors, and by
their Zeal and courage made the names of METROPOLITAN and BISHOP the most
grateful and honorable titles in the world; that every tongue pronounced them
with joy, and every heart affected them with contentment; when the negligence
and security of some that succeeded in after times, gave the first occasion to
quarrel at it, and deprave it.

7 If this be wanting, that God be not pleased, but sin increase, and so much
superstition remain still in the land unreformed, (...). Georg. Pachymer.
NO HVMANE WISDOM CAN KEEP OVT GODS IVDGEMENTS, BUT THEY VVIL COME AT THE
LAST UPON US. We have bin often threatened, and the world about us, amazed at
our dangers, wondreth how we have escaped. Cedren. hist. page 542.
When Nicephorus Phocas had built a mighty wall about his palace, for his
security, in the night he heard a voice, crying, (...): Though he built as
high as the clouds, yet the city might easily be taken, the sin within would
mar all. If the devil had employed any wit against us, but THE FRIARS, our
fear should have bin the less: but all ages, and this beyond all, shows
their practices to have bin of extraordinary ascendencie. It is not much less
then 500. years since Wickliffe. in T^ialog. pa. 143.
a Bishop of Lincoln gave the Friar this definition: Est cadauer mortuum, de
sepulcro egressum, pannis funebribus inuolutum, a diabolo inter homines
agitatum. There is nothing about him, but it relisheth of the grave and
destruction; and God deliver us from him.

8 There is a generation that thinks there is no difference between the two
religions, but they may be reconciled, and all this ado needs not. Two sorts
of people say thus. The first are certain POLITIC ROMANISTS, to extenuate the
foulness of Popery, and to hold men's conceits toward it in the mean time till
opportunity serve to set it wholly up; what time they will change their dittie,
and say, the difference is so great, that they which hold our part must be
burned at a stake. The second are IGNORANT, AND UNDERSTAND NOTHING, but living
void of the knowledge and conscience of all religion, are possible of his mind
that Turonensis Greg. Tu^on. hist. Franc. li. 5. c. 43. If both the one and the
other were followed: neither were is any hurt if going between the altars of
the Gentiles and the Church of God, a man should give honor to both.
writes of, who said it was best of al, si and illa and illa colantur; neque
esse noxium si inter Gentilium aras and Dei Ecclesiam quis transiens, vtraque
veneretur. Whom God in his judgment gives over to this opinion, to plague
their sloth; who minding nothing but Epicurisme and earthly things, and not
enduring the pains and conscience to make trial of that which should save
their souls, are seduced by this persuasion, and plunged into Atheism, to
think the just defense of our faith to be nothing but the maintenance of
contention. Wherein, at one breath, they have not only censured our State
restraining Papistry, and all the Churches throughout the world, insisting upon
the difference; and the Church of Rome too that proclaims it and pursues it:
but they have also condemned the Primitive Church and all the Doctors thereof,
who would never yield, I will not say in an opinion, but not so much as in a
form of speech, or in the change of a letter, sounding against the orthodoxal
faith. The difference between the Council of Nice and Arius was but in (...).
and (...).
a letter. Georg. Pachymer. hist. l. 5.
The controversy whereupon the Latin and Greek Churches brake, touching the
proceeding of the holy Ghost, depe^ded but upon two prepositions, (...) and
(...). The monstrous heresy of Nesto^^^s, lay but in the change of (...) for
(...).
one poor letter; and Council. Ephesin. Graec. p. 10. (...).
Cyril would have him even in that to gratify the Church: and when he would
not, Dalmat. apolog. in Council. Ephesin.
six thousand Bishops rose up against him for it; so religious were they that
had religion, that THEY VVOVLD NOT EXCHANGE (...) Basil. apud Theodorit. l. 4.
c. 19.
A LETTER OR A SYLLABLE OF THE FAITH, VVHEREVVITH OUR SAVIOVR HAD ^VT THEM IN
TRUST. Which is our just defense that write in the controversies against all
our censurers. (...); Epist. ad Cleric. Constantinopol. in Council. Ephesians. p. 72.
says Cyril, (...): Are we enemies to peace? no: we rather will pull it to us
with violence, so that the true faith withal may be confessed. But when it
cannot be obtained, we clear the truth, and by expelling their errors, labor
to pluck the seduced out of the fire, and bring them to knowledge, that their
souls may be saved, and their life reformed, and the State secured wherein
they live.

9 And this my poor endeavor in this kind I humbly present to your Lordships,
under whose jurisdiction I exercise my ministry; not in affiance of any thing
therein worthy your reading, whom our Church has long since known to be the
same that Eunapius says of two other in his time, (...), and (...); nor in
hope to escape the disgraceful censures of intermedlers; but in zeal to my
country, and assurance that it may do good therein, going under so HONORABLE
protection. I am so mean a man, and obscure every way, that I feared the truth
would sustain loss, and be contemned for my obscurity, if some extraordinary
favor did not lead it forth. And let it go forward indeed, and show it self
abroad, having THE TRVTH to support it, and so acceptable an inscription to go
before, and the name of so WORTHY PATRONS to lead it forth.

And so desiring pardon for this my boldness, I humbly commit your Lordships
to the merciful protection of Almighty God, who long continue your prosperous
estate, and make you happy instruments of much good unto his CHVRCH. October.
29. 1608.

Your Lordships in all duty JOHN WHITE.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER, TOUCHING THE present controversies between us and
the Romish Church.
IT is not as some think touching the questions between the Church of Rome and
us, that there is no real difference. Would to God it were so. But they that
examine the points shall find it far otherwise. 1. Concerning the Scriptures
the Church of Rome teaches, that Can. loc. page 251.
Many things appertain to faith and Christian doctrine, which, neither openly
nor obscurely, are contained in holy writ. Totalis enim and adaequata regula,
est Scriptura, and Traditio simul. Deinde Traditio parem authoritatem habet cum
Scriptura. Becan. circul. Calvin. p. 278.
For the total and full rule of our faith is Scripture and Tradition both
together: Tradition being of equal authority with the Scripture. This
assertion is directly against the doctrine of our Church, and leads men into
pernicious errors pretended to be delivered by Tradition, and withdraws them
from the obedience of only Scripture, to the following of uncertain
authority. 2. Concerning the justification of a sinner, Viguer. Institut.
theol. p. 286
whereby of a wicked, unjust, and unclean person, he is made clean, holy, and
simply just: it teaches that this is done, by the habit of our own inherent
righteousness, and not by Christ's. Bellarmine, expounding the Council of
Trent, says, De Iustif. l. 2. p. 1032. c.
Our own inherent justice is the formal cause of absolute justification, not
the justice of Christ imputed to us: and Page 1071. d.
besides the merits of Christ imputed to us for our satisfaction, there is in
us an inherent justice, which is the true and absolute righteousness
whereunto, by the just judgment of God, not punishment, but glory is due.
This opinion contains so real a difference from the truth, that S. Paul
Gal. 5.4.
says of it: Ye are abolished from Christ, ye are fallen from grace, whosoever
are justified by the Law. 3. Concerning the merit of our works it holds,
Mich. Bai. de merit. oper. p. 12
that when men having conuersed godlily and righteously in this mortal life to
the end, obtain eternal life: this is not to be deputed to the purpose of
Gods grace, but to the ordinance of nature, appointed presently in the
beginning, when man was created. Neither, in this retribution of good things,
is it looked to the merit of Christ, but only to the first institution of
mankind, wherein by a natural law it was set down, that, by the just
judgment of God the keeping of the commandments should be rewarded with life,
as the breaking of them is punished with eternal death. Whereby we see that
there is a plain difference between the Church of Rome, and us, in the
principal article of our faith, touching the salvation of our souls; we
believing steadfastly that it is to be ascribed to the merits of Christ, they
expecting it for the merit also of their own works. 4. Concerning Images,
Council. Trid. sess. 25
it practices the having and worshipping of them: yea Azor. Instit. tom. 1. p.
737.
the Divines of that Church hold that every Image is to be honored with the
same honor, wherewith they worship the samplar. No man can be so simple but he
may see a substantial difference in these points: and the like may be showed
in above two hundred questions controuerted between us, though I will not
deny that in many things the heat of the contenders has devised differences
where there are none, and to discredit one another they have wrested that which
might be well understood.

2 Besides the Church of Rome not only requires us to profess her faith, but
also to do it Bell. de laic. c 19. p. 19; 9 c.
with subjection to the Pope: and teaches, Turrecr. quaest ex S. Tho. q. 13.
that this is absolutely necessary to salvation. A point so fully opposite to
the government of our Church that it can no way be reconciled, for so much as we
know the same to be a mere pretense to hide their tyranny.

3 And as the difference is real, and of long continuance, so is there no hope
to reconcile it. The Papacy, that stands in opposition against us, was
brought in by Satan at the first, and is still continued, only to seduce the
world: and 2. Cor. 6.14.
what fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness? what communion has
light with darkness? or what concord has Christ with Belial? or the temple of
God with idols? It is in vain therefore to hope for reconciliation of things
so far unlike, unless our adversaries would wholly renounce their parts, and
embrace the truth, which 2 Thessalonians. 2.11.
they will never do, Many means have been used, but never any could prevail.
The Emperors, Ferdinand, and Maximilian, traveled painfully herein, and by
their appointment Cassander, a great learned Papist, drew Consult. de Artic.
controu. ad I^app.
a project, to show his judgment. And in the time of Charles the fifth, it was
much labored in Germany to accord the sides, both by Papists and Protestants.
And it is Act colloqu. Ratisbon. an. 2^41. Lindan. L de querela pacis. Praefat.
reported, that, at a meeting at Regenspurge, there was an agreement made of
many weighty points, touching Free will, Original sin, Justification, Faith,
Merits, Traditions, the Mass, etc. but this held not; neither indeed can the
wit of man avoid that 1. Cor. 11.19 2 Thessalonians. 2.8. and inde.
which God will have, for the trial of his Church, and manifesting of his
truth. There is in our adversaries that refractarie frowardness, that they
seek nothing but to be contrary unto us, and even hate the name of peace.
This opinion, De Great. and lib. Arb l 5. c. 1.
says Bellarmine, we embrace and defend so much the more willingly, by how
much it displeases our adversaries, and especially Calvin. Maldon. comment. in
Ioh. 6.
Another, expounding a place of Scripture, says: Though I have no author for
my exposition, yet I allow it rather then that of Austin and others, though it
be most probable; because this of mine more crosses the sense of the
Caluinists.

4 Having therefore to do with adversaries so contentious, with doctrine so
pernicious, with a Church so diseased; it is a better way to examine the
questions and betake our selves to the true part, then to hope for that which
will not be. And this was the course that the Christians took when the Church
in ancient times was vexed with Arianisme and Pelagianisme. They were not
indifferent which side prevailed, but they claue fast to the truth: they did
not neutralize between both; they did not idly sit, and deride those that
contended for the truth; they made not the questions of religion the matter of
their quarrels, and rude discourse in Tauernes and streets, and every base
company; but with godly affection they lamented the Churches trouble, and with
zealous consciences, and earnest prayer, and religious endeavor they sought the
faith. This is the way that all men should take, now when the rumor of the
contention grows so great: 1. with HVMILITIE to crave at Gods hand the
direction of his Spirit: 2. then with DILIGENCE to read and learn the
Scripture, whereby to judge: 3. and so with LOVE to the persons of the men, and
with a mind prepared to yield to the truth, to travel through the questions.
The want of which no doubt is the true cause why contentions grow, and
questions multiply, and all things are uncertain. For the preachings and
writings of learned men are licentiously censured before they be understood: the
most people making the same only a matter to cavil at; never considering with
what religious hands they ought to touch the questions of faith, wherein
whosoever erreth, loses no less then his soul thereby. The questions of
faith, and all matters of religion, require in such as will profitably exercise
themselves therein, three things: Humility of mind, because they concern the
holy things of God: Diligence in attending, because they are spiritually
discerned: and strength of judgment, because enemies and seducers are
exceeding cunning to beguile a slothful examiner, and deceive him that
considers not attentively.

5 Our adversaries that manage the Papacy, if ever any, have expressed this
cunning and skill in persuading and setting forth their heresy, so far that
it cannot be denied, they have omitted no art that might set it forth, nor no
diligence that might adorn it. We read strange things of certain painters,
how admirably they cast and shadowed their works; but the skilfullest painters
that ever were are our Jesuits and Schoolmen, and others, the workmen for the
Church of Rome. Not the famous Zeuxis ( Plin. l. 35 c. 9.
who wrote under his table, when he had drawn it, that men should sooner envy
then imitate him) was to be compared to these painters: not the ancient
Polignotus, nor Parrhasius, not Mycon, Timanthes, Bularchus, Phidias, did ever
bestow such pains on their images, as these have done on their idol the
Papacy: specially the Jesuit, who, as Pliny Lib. 35. c. 10.
notes of Parthasius, is soecundus artifex, sed quo nemo insolentius and
arrogantius sit vsus gloria artis: a workman full of device, but no man uses
the reputation of his skill more proudly and arrogantly then he. Zeuxis being to
make the image of Juno, to hang up in her temple, chose out certain virgins, to
put the several beauty of them all into his picture: so have these painters
made choice of the exquisitest devices that all the heresy in the world could
yield, to put the same into their religion; no policy in Machiauell, nor
Sophistry in Aristotle, nor eloquence in Rhetoric, but they have contrived it
into their Image, that, save truth and sincerity, there is nothing wanting.
Tertullian says, As the Gentiles with their hands, so heretics with their
words, are the makers of idols: for every lie that they speak of God, is a
kind of idolatry. The Prophet Esaias C. 44. v. 12.
sets down a lively description of this matter. The Smith takes an
instrument, and works in the coals, and fasteneth it with hammers, and
works it with the strength of his arms: the Carpenter stretches out a line,
he fashioneeh it with a thread, and plaineth it, and pourtrayeth it with the
compass, and makes it after the figure of a man, and according to the beauty
of a man, that it may remain in a house. He heweth him down Cedars, and Pine
trees, and Oaks, and he takes thereof and burns it, and warmeth himself,
and baketh his bread: yet he makes a god and worshippeth it, an idol and
boweth down before it: he burns the half of it in the fire, and upon the
half of it he eats his meat; he rosteth it, and is satisfied: also he
warmeth himself, and says Aha, I am warm, I have bin at the fire; and the
residue thereof he makes a god, even his idol; whereto he boweth, yea he
worshippeth and prays unto it saying, Deliver me, for thou art my god. In
which words the God of heaven deriding the Gentile, does very fitly show us the
idolatry of Rome, and the manner how the idol religion thereof was framed and set
on foot. At the first it was but a rude block, and ragged trunk, rough hewne
by bungling workmen that were not their crafts masters, till the Smith, the
Carpenter, and the painter came, every one in his place, and showed his skill.
First the Canonists like blacksmiths blew with the bellows of their Decrees,
and hammered, and heat it in the coals of the Popes Constitutions: these
smithes were Gratian, Pope John, Gregory, and Boniface, with their prentises
that served them, Hostiensis, Innocent, Panormitane, and the rest of that
profession. Next, the Carpenters that took it in hand were the Friars and
Schoolmen, which stretched their line over it, and brought it into better
shape. Thomas, and Scot, and Alexander fashioned it with line and leuel, they
stretched out the line of Method over it, and with the thread of a Distinction
they plained it where it was rough, and with the compasses of their Logic and
Philosophy made it in the fashion of a man. After that the great Lateran
Council, about the year 1215. had polished it, and given it strong joints to
stand upon: not long after the Councels of Constance, Basil, and another
Lateran hewed it over again, and altered the fashion in certain points touching
the Popes authority. There some Cardinals, Senensis and Cusanus, thought the
head stood too high above the shoulders, and would have had it bowed down a
little lower. At last they brought it to Trent, into the hands of their best
workmen, as Absolutissima Trident. Synod. Posseuin biblioth. select. page 18. A.
they say, who mended it from top to toe, and set it up again when the worms
had welnigh consumed it: since which time the third sort of workmen the
Painters have taken it in hand; the Jesuits and their fellows, who never cease
to paint it day and night. There is no color but they have tried it to make it
beautiful. Some with varnish and plaster stop up the crackes, which the Sun
shining upon it, has made, that they might not be seen Bellarmine and his
associates in that kind, stir all colors together, and varnish over the
smokie and dustie places so skilfully, that a man can scarce tell what the
color is. Surius and Baronius with other colors, ground by Legendaries, cast
a shadow over it for seeming too youthful, but they have painted a gray beard
to a green head: the rest stand by, such as are Sixtus Senensis, Lindan,
Staphylus, Posseuine, like Censors, commending the workmanship, and flattering
the workmen, and extolling the idol against them they call Lutherans and
Caluinists. Thus at the last have they polished their Dagon, and set it up
before the Lord's Ark: save that it may not be forgotten that with some of it
they warm themselves, and roast their meat; as Pardons, the Mass, and
Purgatory; and laugh in their sleeves at such as turn the spit: Ah I am
warm, I have bin at the fire.

6 This is the labor and workmanship that our adversaries have bestowed on
their religion, to set it forth: whereby they have made their Church so seeming
Catholic. And indeed we have always observed that there be two principal
things which draw men's conceits to Papistrie. The first is the Name and report
that goes of the Church of Rome, while men persuade themselves that a Church
so ancient, and renowned in all ages, cannot but be the true Church of God. The
second is the rumor and opinion of our adversaries learning, as if it were
impossible so learned men should be deceived, and their writings could be
answered. Nevertheless it is easy enough to see the truth through all this,
if men will consider of things attentively. For touching the name and show of
the ROMAN CHVRCH, it is but an empty sound of words and titles: this present
Roman being wholly departed, in the questions controuerted, from the ancient,
and retaining nothing but the title. This should deceive no man. For the true,
ancient, and Apostolic Church of Rome, so much commended by the Fathers, and
sought to by the world, professed another kind of faith then this does, and the
same that now we defend against them; whereas this is fallen from it; and yet
skilfully retaining still the same Seat and Title, imposes maruellously upon
the world hereby. Isidorus Pelusiota L. 3. Epist. 408.
has a saying that shows the likelihood of this: In the days of the
Apostles, and afterward, when the Church flourished, and labored as yet of no
disease, the divine graces of God went, as it were in a ring, round about it;
the holy Ghost administering all things, and all the Bishops thereof inciting
and turning it toward heaven: afterward it grew diseased, and was troubled
with faction, and then all those things flew away. Thus the Church is like a
woman fallen from her ancient happiness, and retaining only some signs
thereof. She has the sheathes and caskets where her ornaments lay, but the
goods themselves she is spoiled of. Not through his carelessness and negligence
that first enriched her, but through their naughtiness that governed not
things as they should have done. This Doctor well perceived that a Church may
lose the faith, and yet retain her name still: and he saw that, in his time,
things fell to decay, and the faith of Christ began to be altered. To what
purpose then should any man respect the name of the Roman Church, when the
true faith is changed? or what do the prerogatives and royalties of the ancient
Church concern this that is turned to another religion? or who regards a
house of stately building, and honorable title, or anticke memory since John of
Gaunt, when the plague has infected it, and thieves possess it? Besides, when
it was at the best, in the Apostles time and after, yet other Churches were
commended as well, and counted as good, as it. Meditat. and Respons. in iute
Graecoroman. tom. 1. p. 449.
These are the words of Balsamon: The five Patriarchs (of Rome, Alexandria,
Constantinople, Jerusalem, and Antioch) had identitie of honor: (...).
and obtained the room of one head over the body, that is, the holy Churches
of God. And Nicephorus the Patriarch of Constantinople, Council. Ephesin page
307.
in an Epistle to Leo, the Bishop of Rome, says, And we also, who have
obtained the name of new Rome, being built upon one and the same foundation of
faith, the Prophets and Apostles, where Christ our Savior and God is the
corner stone: (...).
in the matter of faith are nothing behind the elder Romans. For in the
Church of God there is nothing to be reckoned before the rest. Wherefore let
Saint Paul glory and rejoice in us also, and joining new things with old, and
comparing us in doctrines and preaching, let him glory in us both alike. For
we, as well as they, following his doctrines, and institutions, wherein we are
rooted, are confirmed in the confession of our faith, wherein we stand and
rejoice, etc. So that the Greek Churches in the East thought themselves equal
with Rome, and the commendations of the Apostle to belong to them as well as to
the Church of Rome; whereby we may judge how indiscreet a part it is to be
carried away with the name of a Church before we have enquired whether it keep
the ancient faith: or so to be conceited of one Church that we will look
toward no other but it.

7 The second point that deceives many, is the rumor and opinion that goes
of our adversaries learning: which is as weak a motive to build on, as the
former; when the greatest heretics that ever were have wanted no learning,
and we may be sure, this of our adversaries is not commended with the least.
Themselves are unmeasurable, and more then odious in extolling their own
faculty, and their people as ridiculous and irksome in reporting it It is
nothing beseeming Christians to leave the cause, and to fall a boasting. Let
our books be viewed, and the disputations between us weighed, and it will
appear they have no such vantage, no not in Art and learning: and, but that
unsettled brains are given vainly to admire novelties, our Church at home here
in England (to say nothing of those abroad, who have made our proudest enemies
feel the edge of their learning) has brought forth, and at this day yields,
as learned as our adversaries ever had any. And that the Reader may have some
trial of this, I will give an example or two wherein he shall see, and by that
judge of the rest, how learnedly they carry themselves now and then against
us, and how great their skill is to help them when they are a little urged.

8 They have a solemn tradition among them concerning the Assumption of the
Virgin Marie, the story whereof you may read in the Act. 1.14.
Rhemish Testament, to this effect: Now at the time of her death all the
Apostles, then dispersed into diverse nations, to preach the Gospel, were
miraculously brought together (saving S. Thomas, who came the third day after)
to Jerusalem, to honor her divine departure and funeral: where before her
death, and after for three days, not only the Apostles and other holy men
present, but the Angels also and powers of heaven did sing most melodiously.
They buried her body in Gethseman^: but for S. Thomas sake, who desired to see
and reverence it, they opened the sepulcher the third day, and finding it void
of the holy body, but exceedingly fragrant, they returned, assuredly deeming
that her body was assumpted into heaven, as the Church holds, and therefore
celebrateth most solemnly the day of her Assumption. And Anton. chron. part.
1. p. 147. Suar. tom. 2. p. 200.
some add, that companies of Saints and Angels, and Christ himself (for how
else should he have fulfilled the commandment, Honor thy father and thy
mother) met her, and with great glory and joy placed her in her throne. This is
the Legend; and that no man should mistrust they could not defend it, Fe^ard.
in Hest. page 616. Rhem. act. 1.14 Bristo. mot 32.
most bitterly they rail upon all that deny it, persuading men Baron. an 48.
nu. 17. and 24.
that it is the judgment of the universal Church: Cathar. opusc. de concept.
yea a point of faith. The ground whereupon they stand, is the Testimony of
many authors: a certain writing of John the Evangelist. Dionysius Areopagita,
Melito, Athanasius, Jerome, Austine, Damascene, Bernard, Andreas Cretensis,
Nicephorus, Metaphrastes, Glycas, etc. Who would not think but here were a
learned defense of that they say? But mark the issue: First we have showed
them, and it is the truth, that whatsoever the later writers Damascene,
Bernard, Andreas, Metaphrastes, Nicephorus, Glycas and others of those times,
have written touching this matter, is borrowed from the former authors,
Dionysius, Melito, the writing of S. John, Athanasius, Jerome, and Austin: and
can have no more credit then the said authors have from whom it is borrowed.
Now these authors we prove to be all forged, and our adversaries, in the
pursuit of the matter, confess it. D. 15. sancta Romana. Sixth. Senens. p. 104.
The book going under the name of S. John is bored through the ear by the
Pope himself in a Council, and so is Melito, as An. 48. n. 12.
Baronius acknowledges, who calls him an idle companion, full of dotages and
fooleries unworthy of Christian audience. The same censure he gives Nu. 13.
and inde.
of Sophronius, and Jerome, to Paul and Eustoch. and Nu. 20. and inde
of Athanasius, confessing them to be forged in their names, and full of lies
and impostures. And Nu. 17.
of that which goes under the name of Austine, as the Divines of Louan have
done before him. Dionysius is he that, when all is done, must bear the burden.
But he also is acknowledged by Erasm. declar. ad Censur. Parisiens. theol. p.
180. Caietan. and Valla annot. in Act. 17.
right skillful Papists, to be a counterfeit. And if the Rhemists In Act. 1.14.
say true, that the blessed Virgin lived but 63. years, then, by She bare
Christ at 15. years. Christ died at 33 then she was 48. whereto if you add
15. more, it makes them 63 and that year falls into the year of Christ 48.
computation of times, she died in the eight and fortieth year after Christ's
birth, what time Dionysius could not (as the book going under his name
pretends) be present. For the same Rhemists Table of Saint Paul. p. 375.
say, he was not converted till an. 51, and Baronius An. 52. nu. 1.
not till an. 52, which was three or four years after her death. Besides
Baronius Nu. 19.
is driven to confess her sepulcher was not found, or known in Ieromes time:
but when at the length, not much before the days of Iuuenalis the Bishop of
Jerusalem, it was found, and that without the body, by occasion hereof the
argument of writing concerning the assuming of her body into heaven, was
exhibited for before that time none had writ so. Let this be noted. If her
sepulcher was not known, nor her body missed out of it, nor no man writ of her
assumption till Iuuenalis time; how can Dionysius that lived so long before,
mention it? Again, let the book be Dionysius his own, and legitimate: yet
the words thereof convince not this Assumption. He says no more but thus: De
Divine. nomin. p. 281. graec
When we also, as you know, and your self, and many of our holy brethren came
together to behold the body which the Prince of life was in, and which received
God; where James the brother of our Lord also was present, and Peter the
highest and ancientest top of the Divines: then, after we had beheld, it
pleased all the Bishops, as every one was able, to praise the almighty
goodness of his infirmity that was the beginning of life unto us Where
Ierotheus, as you know, excelled all the other holy Bishops, except the
Apostles, being wholly rapt out of himself. In which words he mentions no
more but (...).
THE BEHOLDING OF THE BODY WHICH THE AVTHOR OF LIFE WAS IN, AND WHICH RECEIEVED
GOD: and the PRAISING OF CHRIST'S GOODNESS: which speech is so obscure and
uncertain, that Baronius An. 48. n. 6. and 3.
observes, some have expounded it of the Sepulcher which received the body of
Christ, and some of John the Evangelists house which entertained the holy
Virgin, and some of the flesh of Christ wherein the Divinity dwelt. But
supposing the body of ye virgin Mary be meant, which they came to see, yet how
follows it that this was at her death, and funeral, and assumption, and all
the rest that the Rhemists tell? where is the learning that should prove this?
Moreover we show them how vain and uncertain all things touching this matter
are. The Authors are insufficient. No man can tell either when she died, or
where the sepulcher should be, or when she was assumed. Touching her age when
she died, whereupon depends the credit of Dionysius, Suar. tom. 2. p. 197.
Baro. an. 48. n. 24.
they say it is uncertain and unknown. The time of her assumption is noted by
Suar. p. 200.
some to have bin the same day she died by Rhem. act. 1.14.
others, 3 days, by Beleth. explic. divine. offic. page 559. Durand. rational.
p. 447.
others 40. days after. Baron. Nu. 4.
says there is monstrous diversity among writers touching these things. And
concerning the sepulcher, you see the Rhemists say confidently it was in
Gethsemani: but the counterfeit Ep. ad Paul. and Eustoch.
Ierom says, in the valley of Iehosaphat. Baronius thinks it is unknown. But
how is the matter then defended, after they have so gravely related it, and so
reviled the Protestants for not believing it? as in many more questions, so in
this, when they have flourished awhile, and spent a few vain brags, their blood
cools, and the swelling swageth. Durand. vbi supra.
One says: The truth is, she was taken up in soul, but whether her body
remained on the earth it is uncertain. And better it is piously to doubt, then
rashly to define any thing touching the matter. Yet it is piously to be
thought, she was totally assumed. Suar. vbi supra.
Another says: the opinion is now so generally received that it cannot,
without rashness, be denied: yet there is neither Scripture nor sufficient
tradition to make the faith hereof infallible. Baronius says, Nu. 9.
the things pertaining to this history are strengthened neither by the
Scriptures nor the testimonies of the ancient fathers. If their learning could
have justified their fable, they would not first rail at the Protestants for
refusing it, and then in the end themselves h^lfe mistrust it, laying it upon
bare tradition, and entreating the world to receive it as a godly opinion,
though there be no testimony in antiquity to prove it.

9 Another example to show what little cause we have to fear or regard their
learning, shall be this that follows. When the second Nicene Council had
brought in the worship of images, the Emperor Charles assembled another
Council at Frankford, and condemned it again, and rejected the Nicene:
whereby it appears that images were brought in at that time, and that the
Church of Rome, in confirming the said Nicene Council, changed the ancient
faith. Our adversaries have had time enough to think upon this, and to frame
their answer. But they know not what to say, the best learned among them
confuting one another in the point. First Suar tom. 1. p. 800. c. Vazq. adorat.
p. 303. Bin. tom. 3. council. p. 427.
they endeavor to prove, that this of Frankford was but a provincial Council;
and feign they would have it so, that they might say it erred, and must give
place to the Nicene which was general. But we show this to be false: for
Visperg. page 187. Rhegin p. 30.
the stories report it to have been a general Council of three hundred
Bishops, assembled out of all the provinces of the Empire, the Popes own
Legates also being present: and therefore Ouand breuiloq. in 4 sent. page 52
Baron. an 794. nu. 1.
other Papists let go this answer, granting it was a full Council, and cannot
be rejected as a provincial: and that it did condemn the Nicene Council, but
this, they say, was erroneously; being deceived by those that penned the book
of Charles against Images, and thinking it had decreed they should be
worshipped with Latria, divine honor, which was the reason why they rejected
the Nicene Council. Bozi de Sign. eccl tom. 2. page 270. Genebrard chron. an.
794. Bellar. de imag. c. 14 Baron. an. 794. n. 31. and inde.
Many of the learnedest fly to this answer: but we reply, that besides that it
is against Council. Basil. epist Synod. R^spons. de authorit. Council.
a principle of their own, that a general Council cannot err, it is
manifestly against the truth. For the mind of the Nicene Council was well
enough known, and the same Popes Legates that were at the one, were at the
other: and the contrary cannot be showed out of Charles his book, whereupon
other Papists perceiving this answer cannot be defended, give it over, and
confute it, and betake themselves to a worse. Alan. Cope. p. 570. Sand. visib.
monarc. p. 480. Sur. comment. p. 445. and council tom. 3. p. 428. Alp^on. contra
haer. p. 139. Catharin. de sanct. glor. p. 67. Suar. tom. 1. p. 802. Vazq.
adorat. p. 302. Binn. council. tom. 3. page 429.
They say, that in the Synod of Frankford, the Nicene Council was not
condemned, not any thing attempted against it, but the Council of
Constantinople under Constantinus Copronymus which had condemned Images: yea it
ratified and confirmed the Nicene Council, and decreed the worship of Images,
as it had done. A strange assertion; yet Baronius An. 794 n. 26.
says It is the answer of very many good Catholics; as it is indeed: but
note what De imag. c 14.
Bellarmine says of it, I wish this were true, but I doubt it is false. For
mark into what desperate straits they have brought themselves that hold it.
First, they of the former opinion confute them. Next, we produce the universal
consent of the Church stories against them. The book of Charles the great
Praefat. circa med.
says, There was brought forth the question touching the late Synod of the
Grecians, which they made at Con^^^^tinople concerning the adoring of Images,
wherein it was written, that they should be cursed which did not give the same
service and adoration to the images of Saints, which is given to the divine
Trinity. This our most holy Fathers (of Frankford) despised, and with one
consent condemned. To this agree diverse other authors: Hincmarus, Ado,
Vrspergensis, Rhegino, Aimon, Auentin, etc. But they answer: Hincmarus (though
he were Archbishop of Rhemes, and lived at the same time) his authority is
nothing. Cope. p. 582. Vazq. p. 309.
The words are forged, or he was deceived: the rest that followed him, are all
either corrupted, or mistaken. An. 794. n. 33.
Baronius says, the books of Charles deceived them. Suarez, Tom 1. p. 804
that either they erred, or their books are corrupted, or they speak not of
the second Nicene Council. Vasquez, De adorat. p. 309.
that they were all manifestly deceived by Hincmarus, as Hincmarus was by the
books of Charles. And thus all the blame is laid on that book, the authority
whereof notwithstanding they cannot infringe, though Ala. Cope. p. 566. Bellar.
de Council. l. 2. c 8. Suar. tom. 1. p. 803. Vazqu 277 Baron. an. 794. n. 30.
they do their uttermost, to prove that Charles wrote it not. For first it
bears his title, as all other books do theirs. Bell. de imag. c. 14. Baron.
n. 31
Secondly it contains the acts of the Synod of Frankford, and the Council
therein confuted is the second Nicene. Thirdly Cope. p. 568. Vazqu. p. 277.
Baron. n. 31.
it was written in the time of Charles. Fourthly Baron. ibid.
it was sent by Charles to Pope Adrian. Fifthly, one chapter thereof Baron. n.
32. and 46.
is confessed to be the work of Charles himself. Sixthly, and at the worst,
Hadrian. Ep. ad Carol. tom. 3 council. p. 263.
it was written by such as were near about Charles. This is a brief sum of
all that long discourse between us touching the Council of Frankford; which I
have observed, that the Reader may perceive what is to be thought of our
adversaries learning, so much bragged of: for were it able to do that which is
boasted, they would never suffer themselves thus to be distracted, and driven
to these beggarly shifts, and foxed out of one hole into another, that they
know not where to set their foot. Let them speak directly, and go forward
with the point in any controversy, and we fear not their learning. 1 Reg.
20.11.
Let not him that girdeth on his harness, boast himself as he that puts it
off. Pro. 21.30.
There is no wisdom, nor understanding, nor counsel against the Lord.

10 This opinion that they have of their own learning is it that puffs them
up, and makes them more then idle, even base and ridiculous in their own
commendations; and (which ill beseems the Ministers of Christ) fills their
mouths with contumelious and stagelike speeches against us; such as these are:
Rhem. 1. Tim 1.7.
In the sight of the learned they are most ignorant of the word of God, not
knowing the very principles of Divinity, even to the admiration truly of the
learned that read their books, or hear them preach. Caluinotur. cism. p. 360.
Their unlearned and beggarly Ministers: Brist. mot. 31.
Look to their Universities, and see whether there be any appointed public
Readers or Teachers of such matters (the mysteries of Divinity) any that
privately make them their study: whether they do not all in manner study
nothing but the art of speaking, or else but certain new books of common
places for a few points of their new doctrine, and them so lightly, that the
common sort of Catholics are able to answer all their arguments, and to say
also more for them then they can say for themselves. Brist. reply. p. 364.
More declamatio^s in Greek in one common school of the Jesuits, then in both
your Universities ( This shows they dare say any thing.
I dare say) being joined together: and better masters of Arts of two or three
years teaching through all logic and philosophy, then with you in seven
years. No, no, regnum Gra^maticorum is past date, all are not children as they
were when this gear began: your tongues will not now serve, no nor your study
of Divinity it self in Caluins School. Come once to the Catholic Schools,
and you will be ashamed of your self, as many a one already is, that thought
himself, and was thought of others, at home a jolly fellow. Hard. confut.
Apol. page 279. And Stapleton says worse in his Counter bl. p. 481.
Your Ministers be Tinkers and Tapsters, Fiddlers and Pipers, it is incredible
to hear their vein in this kind, and how they vaunt of themselves withal, as
if they were playing upon a stage the first Act and Scaene of Plautus his Miles
gloriosus. A lively picture of our adversaries impotent brags.
Braggadochio. But it is a base course and cannot be pursued without lying and
ostentation; and therefore the Gentiles themselves deriding it, (...). Phurnut.
de not. Deorum p. 42.
Sacrificed an Ass to Mars the God of wars, because the noise and braying of
the one agreed fitly with the tumult and confusion of the other the other. And
yet it were the easiest matter of a thousand to requite them with testimonies
of their own writers. For Theodoricke of Niem L. 2. c. 12. de Schism.
says, Many are created Bishops to day, which yesterday like iesters and
stageplayers, and prodigals, did nothing but run up and down the streets and
tauernes, and suspected places. And Clemangis De corrupt. statu. eccl. p. 15.
writes, how innumerable Parish Priests came to their benefices, not from the
Schools, and their study, but from the plow, and servile occupations, which
could neither read nor understand Latin, nor know b from a battledoore. Yea
the Bishops themselves, Page 30.
says he, have neither read, nor heard, nor learned the sacred letters, nor so
much as touched the Bible, unless peradventure it were the hilling thereof.
Ignorant and unlettered persons hold the rooms of Bishops. I could easily
produce many of their own authors (if our selves had known or seen nothing
in their old Priests and young Seminaries:) to discover as much in their own
Clergy as they revile us with, whether it be our Maxima haereticorum pars
nimis mature, ex scholis ad pulpita aliosue gradus, euocatur. Alan. Apol. p.
106.
youth, or conditions, or vnlearnednesse, if I would imitate their vanity.
Their Sixth. Sen. p. 245.
Mus that preached at twelve years old: their Baron. ann. 1033. n. 6.
Bennet that was Pope being under ten years old, and Baron. ann. 955. nu. 1. 2.
John not above sixteen: their Baron. ann. 925. n. 9.
Archbishop of Rhemes at five years old: their See D. Reyn. apol. these. p. 292.
Cardinals under 12. years old: their Baron. an. 925. n 11.
youths and nephews thrust into Bishopric; their Sa. apho. page 208.
idiots allowed to minister. These and such like practices of their Church will
show what small cause there is why they should disdain us, supposing we had
less learning then we have. Irenaeus L. 2. c. 45.
has a saying which I commend unto them when they think they have so much
vantage of learning against us: It is better and more profitable to be simple
and of small knowledge, and by love to approach near God, then to think
themselves to know much, and to be of high experience, and in the mean while
to be found blasphemers against God.

11 We know no cause therefore why we should not constantly and cheerfully go
forward with our profession, and confirm our selves daily more and more
therein, against all the premises and oppositions of the Roman Church
whatsoever. First, we have the Scripture in manifest places free from all
ambiguitie, on our side; secondly, we have the principles of religion,
contained in the Lords prayers, the Creed, and the ten Commandments, that
directly leads to every point of our faith. Which is the true reason why the
Church of Rome forbids the reading and exercise of these things to the
people, lest they should see so much. Thirdly, we have the ancient fathers in
express terms, in all things that they held constantly and certainly, with
one consent I do not deny but our adversaries in some smaller points, as
Purgatory, and prayer for the dead, may make show of some particular opinions
in the fathers: but upon trial it will fall out they held the^ waueringly and
doubtfully, that no certainty can be set down touching their resolute
judgment. Whereas in the principal points touching the Scriptures,
justification, merit of works, images, and all the rest, they write most
clearly with us. Fourthly, and which may persuade any man not drunken with his
own prejudice, we have the mercies of God to plead for us, whereby our Church
has been miraculously vpholden: when they threatened, God defended us; when
they practiced and expected our utter ruin, God disappointed them; when they
wrought all manner of treasons, yet God delivered us. Fifthly, and this is our
further assurance, that we have done nothing against the Church of Rome, but
innumerable people in all ages wished it long ago. What ceremony? what
doctrine? what custom? what one parcel of their superstition have we refused,
but the world long since complained of it? yea the learned men that were
groned under the very burdens that we have have shaken off. Evetusto quo^am
libro refert Illyric. catolog. test. tom. 2. p. 805.
It is written of Gerson the Chauncellor of Paris, who lived about one hundred
years before Luther, that the Sorbonists expulsed him the University, and in
his old age deprived him of all his d gnities^: because, as it is like, he
misliked diverse errors in the Church of Rome. What time he betook himself to
teaching of school, wherein his manner was daily to cause all his scholars,
the little children, to join with him in this short prayer; My God, my maker,
have mercy upon thy miserable servant Gerson. It should seem by this, that he
took small comfort in those times, when forsaking all confidence in the glory
of his Church, he would call for mercy at the hands of God, rather in the
company of a few poor children, then in the society of such as were reputed
the Doctors of the world. And it may easily be thought, Gerson saw more then he
either loved or liked, because the modern Papists reject his judgment, and
Resp. Card. Bellar. ad resolut Io. Gerson.
confute his writings: and Fra. Victoria. relect. 4. p. 138.
say, This Doctor in all things was an enemy to the Popes authority, and,
with his heresy infected many others. His opinion touching this matter little
different from schism. Yea at this day they see more errors then they will
reform. O God, says Naucler page 499.
one of their Historiographers, what will become of our age when our vices are
grown to that, that they have scarce left us any place with God for mercy. What
covetousness is therein Priests? what lust, what ambition, what idleness, what
pomp, what ignorance both of themselves and of Christian doctrine? how little
religion, and fained rather then true? God have mercy on us.

12 And h^^^, omitting the way that is by trial of arguments, I offer certain
external marks, and sensible tokens whereby the falsehood of the Roman Church
may be discovered, and the most resolute Papist that lives moved to misdoubt
his own religion: for it is impossible that these things following should be
found in the true Church, or practiced by men of the right faith. The first is,
their enmity with the sacred Scriptures, the word of God: whereof I have
spoken in the 22. Digression of this book. For the words Esa. 8.20.
of the Prophet are clear: To the Law, to the Testimony: if they speak not
according to that word, it is because there is no light in them. And one of
their practices against it whereby they have deprived it from being the total
rule; has left the^ utterly void of all means to secure their faith by, and
to find the truth. For the Church, the fathers the Councels, the Pope, which is
all they can pretend, are yielded by themselves to be subject to error. And how
can that give them assurance of their faith, which it self is not assured from
error? The second is the very face and outward state, and government of their
Church, clean contrary to the first antiquity. How unlike is their Pope to
Peter? their Cardinals to the Apostles? their Prelates to the ancient Bishops;
in state, in ambition, in intermedling? This is noted at large by many among
themselves. Zabarella, Cusanus, Marsilius, Occham, Duarenus. How unlike is
their private Mass, half Communion, Latin Service, Image worship, to the
ancient Service of the Church of God? If it were the true Church, no
continuance of time could thus have altered it: age changes the color of a
man's hair, and the sound of his voice, but not his complexion or the shape of
his body. The third is, that THERE IS NO POINT OF OUR FAITH BUT MANY LEARNED
IN THEIR OWN CHVRCH HOLD IT WITH US, AND NO POINT OF PAPISTRIE THAT WE HAVE
REJECTED, BUT SOME OF THEMSELVES HAVE MISLIKED IT AS WELL AS WE. And this may
be demonstrated in all the questions that are between us, and they know it,
and for that cause have purged and razed the principal books of the elder
Papists, and some of them they have utterly forbidden. In the books of latter
Catholics also, Index librorum prohib. p. 25.. 3.
says the Index, which were written since the year 1515. if that which
needs correcting can be amended by taking away or adding of a few things, let
the correctors see it be done: but otherwise let it be wholly razed out. The
fourth is, that the most points of Papistrie are directly and at the first
sight absurd and against common sense, and the law of nature. For who can
conceive that it should be the Popes right to Lord it thus over the Scriptures,
Fathers, Councels, Church, and all the world? What possibility is there that
the kingdoms of the world should be subject to him? What likelihood is there
that Images should be worshipped? our works should merit heaven? the cup
should not be allowed to the people? the Service should be in a language
unknown? the Body of Christ should be in ten thousand places at once? the
Priest should have judicial power to forgive sins? the Saints in heaven
should be made mediators for us to God. He that will indifferently compare
these and many points more shall find them manifestly against the principles
of religion, and the light of nature. What man can think it to be the true
Church that teaches to equivocate, to murder the King, to pay no debts, to
BLOW UP THE PARLIAMENT, to dispense with murder and whoredom? The fifth is,
their intemperate and unchristian proceeding against us. For if they were of
the truth, they would not defend themselves, and confute us with gross lying,
uncharitable railing, and irreconcilable malice, which are the weapons of
darkness; but with gravity and sincerity as becomes Christ's Gospel. Who
will believe that any can be so impious, that holds there is a God, as to
make him the author of sin? and yet Posseuin. bibl. select. p. 533.
they shame not to say we do it. Who can think that any man is so absurd as to
deny the necessity of good works, and a godly life? and yet they say our
Church does it. There is very little of our doctrine but maliciously they
traduce and misreport it. That we have need to put them in mind of Philoxenus
the Poet, Hesych. Illust. vit. philosoph. in Arcesilao.
who hearing certain Potters singing his verses indecently, brake their pots:
For, says he, I break your pots, and you mar my verses. What truth or
sincerity is it to publish abroad to the world, that in England, Catholics
(so they call themselves untruly) are so cruelly persecuted? Nonnullae de
castissimis virginib vestris in Lupanaria aliaque loca inhonesta
(praeclarissima in hoc Agnetis, Luciaeque virginum exempla secutae) protrusae
sunt. Alan. consolat. page 159.
That young women, which are found to be of that religion, are put into the
stews: and such like untruths mentioned thick and threefold in their
Concert. eccl Cathol.
writings. Aquiponta. de Antichristo. p. 110. post Sander. visib. monarch l. 7.
p. 664
That ten thousand Churches and above are overthrown: more then two hundred
Martyrs slain, an infinite multitude of all sorts, and sexes, imprisoned,
banished, and bereaved of their goods. One Cardinal, three Archbishops,
eighteen Bishops, one Abbot, four Priours, four whose Couents, thirteen
Deanes, fourteen Archdeacons, six hundred Priests, seventy seven Doctors,
one Queen, eight Earls, ten Barons, six and twenty Knights, four hundred
Gentlemen. What could they have said more if Queen Elizabeth had been as
cruel as Queen Marie was against us in her time? Yea their hatred against us
is such, that they hold us to be See Lindan. de suga idol.
possesse^ (not simply seduced but even possessed by the devil) and thereupon,
when any of us reuolteth to the Papacy, and is reconciled to them, they have
an order to exorcize the party, Pontifical. Romans page 206.
who kneeling upon his knees the Bishop says: I conjure thee, unclean spirit,
by the name of God, that thou depart out of this servant of God, who^ he has
vouchsafed to deliver from thy errors, and to bring back to his holy Church:
he commands thee thou cursed and damned spirit, who suffered for the
salvation of man, etc. Besides, their malicious Staplet. promptuar. moral.
aestiu. page 493. Answer to the libel of Engl. Just. page 170. and inde.
threatening of the peace of our Land, even then when it had the happiest time,
and unnatural treasons against us, show the true sanctification of Gods spirit
not to be among them, which teaches meekness and forbearance, not rankor,
and impatience, and rebellion. Save that having said, Id.
They were but thriftlesse yonkers, vulgar readers, common persons, that would
not be persuaded our country and state to be in the greatest, and most
dangerous terms (in the Queens time) that ever it was, since or before the
conquest, and in far worse then any country in Christendom: it pleased God by
the coming of his Majesty to deride these their Prophecies; and in scorn
thereof, at this day we enjoy the very same peace and liberty that we then had.

13 The sixth is the prodigious ignorance whereinto they fall that live in
Papistry. For as their Church commends it, so their people follow it most
desperately, even in the chiefest things touching their salvation. I will not
speak how unable they are to render account of the faith, to understand the
points of the Catechism, to judge of things lawful and unlawful, and such
like: I will only mention what I saw and learned, dwelling among them,
concerning the saying of their prayers: for what man is he whose heart
trembles not to see simple people so far seduced, that they know not how to
pronounce or say their daily prayers? or so to pray, as all that hear them
shall be filled with laughter? And while superstitiously they refuse to pray in
their own language with understanding, they speak that which their leaders
may blush to hear. These examples I have observed from the common people. The
manner how the vulgar sort of people, addicted to Papistry, say their prayers:
the which I have observed by living and conuersing with them: and set down for
no other purpose but to note the pitiful ignorance and confusion whereinto the
Church of Rome plungeth her children. Non verenda reteg^, sed inuerecu^da
resuto: vtinam nobis reliquerint moderni Noc, vnde a nobis possent aliquaten
operiti. Bern. ep. 42.
The Creed: Creezum zuum patrum onitentem creatorum eius anicum Dominum nostrum
qui cum sops, virigini Mariae: crixus fixus, Ponchi Pilati audubitiers, morti
by sunday, father a fernes, sclerest un iudicarum, finis a mortibus. Creezum
spirituum santum, ecli Catholi, remissurum, peccaturum, communiorum obliutorum,
hitam and turnam again.

The little Creed.

Little Creed, can I need,
Kneel before our Ladies knee:
Candle light, candles burn,
Our Lady prayed to her dear Son,
That we might all to heaven come.
Little Creed, Amen.
This that follows, they call the White Pater noster.

White Pater noster, Saint Peter's brother,
What have in the the one hand? white book leaves.
What have in the the other hand? heaven yate keys.
Open heaven yates, and Shut.
steike hell yates:
And let every crysom child creep to it own mother:
White Pater noster, Amen.
Another Prayer.

I bless me with God and the rood,
With his sweet flesh and precious blood:
With his Cross and his Creed,
With his length and his breed,
From my toe to my crown,
And all my body up and down,
From my back to my breast,
My five wits be my rest:
God let never ill come at ill,
But through Jesus own will,
Sweet Jesus Lord, Amen.
Many also use to wear Veruein against blasts: and when they gather it for
this purpose, first they cross the herb with their hand, and then they bless
it, thus: Hallowed be thou Veruein, as thou growest on the ground,
For in the mount of Caluary there thou was first found:
Thou healedst our Savior Jesus Christ, and stanchedst his bleeding wound:
In the name of the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, I take thee from the
around.
And so they pluck it up, and wear it. Their prayers and traditions of this
sort are infinite, and the ceremonies they use in all their actions are nothing
inferior to the Gentiles in number and strangeness. Which any man may easily
observe that conuerseth with them: the Which I have noted in this place, not to
disgrace the persons of any, but to show the pitiful barbarousnesse wherein
they live that refuse to hear the Gospel, and whom our Seminaries have
trained up, boasting that there is no religion, or knowledge, or devotion among
us, but in these people. And let any man judge how it can possibly be the
Church of Christ, that nourishes this barbarous, and more then brutish
ignorance and superstition among the people. And it cannot be answered, that
these are the customs of a few simple people: for this that I say, is general
throughout the country, the whole body of the common people practicing nothing
else, until it please God by the ministry of his Gospel to convert them. Yea
the most men and women addicted to Papistry, though well borne and brought up
for civil qualities, and of good place in the country, yet lie plunged in
this ignorance, being persuaded that what they have learned by long custom and
continuance in their old religion (so they style it) they should not give over.
Yea this sore is so foul and grievous, that it may not endure to be looked
into.

14 This brutish condition of their people may the better be credited, and is
the less to be wondered at, because the open practice of their Church gives
them example, and encourages them by their idolatry and superstition toward
the Saints departed. For how can that people discern their ignorance, whose
Pastors even before their eyes, in their open Service and printed books, serve
the Saints and worship them with the same service that they give to Christ?
This I offer for the seventh motive, to induce any Papist to suspect his own
religion: for it cannot be the faith of Christ, that takes his honor and
gives it to another. In their Service and prayers the virgin Marie is made an
intercessor for sin, 1. Tim. 2.5.
as if Christ were not the sole Mediator, unless the merits and mediation of
another did come between. Let these forms be an example.

Offic. Mar. page 13.
By the prayers AND MERITS of the ever blessed virgin Mary, and of all Saints,
our Lord bring us to the kingdom of heaven. Amen. Again: Ibid. page 27.
All hail o Queen, mother of mercy: OUR LIFE, sweetness and HOPE, all hail.
We exiled, the sons of Eve, do cry to thee. To thee we sigh, groaning and
weeping in this vale of tears. Therefore o thou our ADVOCATE, turn those thy
merciful eyes unto us: and show us after this exile blessed Jesus the fruit
of thy womb. O clement, o pitiful, o sweet virgin Marie: pray for us o holy
mother of God. Again: Ib. page 33.
Marie that mother art of GRACE,
Of MERCY mother also art,
SAVE and defend us from our so,
Receive us when we hence depart.
Ib. page 47.
The guiltless bands UNBIND,
Blind men their sight ASSVRE:
Ill things from us expel,
All good for us procure.
A mother show thy self,
He takes our plaints by thee,
That being for us borne,
Vouchsafed thy son to be.
Grant that our life be pure,
Make safe for us the way,
That while we Jesus see,
Our joy may last for ay.
Again: Missal. Sarisb. 8. Septe^b. All celeste.
O Virgin, the only chaste mother, loosing our sins, give the kingdom where the
blessed companies do reign: for thou as Queen of the world, art able to do
all things, and WITH THY SON DISPOSEST ALL RIGHTS. Again: Antidotar. animae.
p. 101.
O Marie, the star of the sea, the haven of health to such as suffer
shipwreck, the godly guide, the sweetest patron of the miserable, the
learned ADVOCATE of the guilty, the only HOPE of the desperate, the SAVIOVR
of sinners: I beseech thee at my last day enlighten me with the beams of thy
most clear face. Then there is no other hope but thou. SAVE ME O SAVIORESSE:
REDEEM ME O REDEEMER: my sins load me, the flesh defiles me, the devil
lies in wait, etc. Hist. chor. August. co^memor. virgin. Mariae.
Thou calledst thy self the Handmaid of Jesus Christ, but as Gods law teaches,
thou art HIS LADY mistress: for right and reason wills that the MOTHER BE
ABOVE THE SON. Therefore pray him humbly, and COMMAVND HIM FROM ABOVE that he
lead us to his kingdom at the worlds end. It is impossible to excuse this
kind of praying from formal idolatry, wherein the same titles are given to the
Saints, and the same things by the same merits asked of them, that appertain
to Christ alone. And yet Suar. tom. 2. disp. 23. per totum. Bellar. de Sa^ct.
beatit. c. 17
the Jesuits at this day excuse it, and will not suffer it to be reformed. Yea
we find in the writings of the most learned Papists that are, things touching
the virgin Mary as bad, and worse then all this. Dodechinus Append. ad Maria.
Scot. pa. 470.
writes, that an infant lying in the cradle, saw the virgin Mary standing
before the tribunal seat of Christ, and making most earnest intercession for
the world. Biel In Cano. lect. 8. p. 233.
says, We fly principally to the blessed Virgin, the Queen of heaven, which
is signified in Hester the Queen, who coming to appease king Assuerus, he said
unto her, It shall be given thee, though thou ask the half of my kingdom. So
the Father of heaven having his justice and his mercy as the chiefest goods of
his kingdom, keeping his justice to himself, surrendered his mercy to the
Virgin mother. And Specul. exempl. d. 7. n. 41.
they tell a vision, how Christ preparing to judge the world, there were two
ladders set that reached to heaven: the one red, at the top whereof Christ
sat: the other white, at the top whereof the virgin Marie sat: and when the
Friars could not get up by the red ladder of Christ, but evermore fell down,
Saint Francis called them to the white ladder of our Lady, and there they were
received. Bern. Senens. ser. 51. c. 3.
Another says, that Christ was incarnate more for the redemption of the
blessed virgin then for all mankind besides. Bozius De sign. eccl. tom. 1.
page 679. and 681.
says, The victory obtained over the devil, is to be ascribed altogether to
Christ himself: but by Christ it must also principally be ascribed to the
virgin Mary. Seeing the blessed Virgin is the most noble part of the Church,
it is chiefly referred to her to be Heuab, which signifies the mother of the
living: namely because by the virtue of Christ, Marie principally gives
eternal life to mankind, and through her we increase in the faith, and are
multiplied in charity, and replenish heaven. By the two Cherubins upon the
Arc, were signified Christ and Marie, through whom God is merciful, and
hears our prayers. There must needs be something in the Church to answer
those old ceremonies. Wherefore in the Church there must needs be some woman,
who being blessed with Christ's gift and merits, may bear all men to God, and
by whom God may be merciful to us. But this that Galatinus writes, deserves
the noting: he says, De Arcan. Cathol. verit. page 489.
that FOR THE LOVE OF JESUS AND MARY, GOD CREATED THE WORLD. For the love of
the undefiled Virgin, who is the wisdom of the world, God made heaven and
earth: and it was not only made for her love, but also preserved: for it could
no way stand, our deeds are so evil, BUT THAT SHE BY PRAYING FOR US MERCIFVLLY
VPHOLDETH IT. Page 515.
Adam following sin incurred death, but the glorious Virgin and her Son
being no partakers of Adams sin, and altogether free from original sin, of
right were to be impassible and immortal. But for so much as the death of Christ
was needful for the redemption of mankind, therefore it was necessary that the
body of Christ should be passible and mortal: and so likewise the immaculate
Virgin being to bear a Son passible and mortal, which was to be one flesh
with her, and that could not naturally be if she were impassible and immortal,
therefore she was also necessarily mortal; and so both the mother and the
son died. THE DEATH AND PASSION OF CHRIST AND THE HOLY VIRGIN, WAS FOR THE
REDEMPTION OF MANKIND. It was impossible she should have died before the passion
of her Son. The second reason is, that SHE ALSO MIGHT COME BETWEEN (God and
us) FOR THE REMISSION OF SIN, seeing all things must come between for the
remission, that came between when Adam did it. Thus they join the virgin
Marie with Christ, in the very work of our redemption, and ascribe to her, no
less then to him the execution of all Gods mercies toward us. Brigit in her
revelations Page 21.
says. the virgin Mary told her, that AS ADAM AND EVE SOLD THE WORLD FOR ONE
APPLE, Filius meus and ego redemimus mundum quasi cum vno cord.
SO HER SON AND SHE REDEEMED THE WORLD WITH ONE HEART. Thus they have joined
a creature with Christ, and given his honor to another; yea that honor of
redeeming and sustaining the Church, which no creature is capable of. And this
idolatry they have committed not with the blessed Virgin alone, (who is
blessed and honorable, though not to be worshipped, but her self worshipped
him that was borne of her flesh, Lib. 3.
says Epiphanius) but even with the basest of their Saints, that we may know
in what vile account they hold Christ the Savior. Lib. Conform. Francis. pa.
304.
They say, he imprinted his five wounds upon Francis of Assise the Friar; as if
he also were to suffer for the world, and redeem mankind: and market Posseuin.
bibl. select. p. 295.
the verses of Tursellinus the Jesuit, concerning the same: Exue Franciscum
tunica laceroque cucullo,
Qui Franciscus erat iam tibi Christus erit:
Francisci exuuiis, (si qua licet) indue Christum
Iam Franciscus erit qui modo Christus erat.
Strip Francis from his coat and cowle, all naked, and you shall see,
He that even Saint Francis was, to Christ will turned be:
Again, put Francis coat and cowle on Christ (and mark the lier)
He that even now was Jesus Christ, will Francis be (the Friar.)
The same conceit, or a worse, Boz. de sign. eccles. tom. 2. page 200.
is thus expressed by another Jesuit, Fr. Bencius. Sancte patrum, spirans
Christi exspirantis imago
Tempore quam nullo deleat vlla dies:
Quas etenim fers ipse manus, fers ipse pedesque,
Has tulit ille manus, has tulit ille pedes.
Nec minus and teli transfixum cuspide pectus,
Quale tibi patulo pectore vulnus biat:
Cuncta estis similes: illum qui forte verentur
Reddere, te saltem cur imitentur habent.
O holy Francis that of Christ, dying upon the tree,
The very breathing image art, for ever so to be:
What hands thou bear, what feet thou have, such hands such feet had he,
And such a wound wide in his breast, as in thy breast we see.
In all things you are both alike, that he which is ashamed,
Him, t'imitate, may follow him at least, and not be blamed.
Out of all this, the Reader must observe what the Church of Rome ascribes to
Saints, and how far they intrude them into the office of Christ: and then
take a scantling thereby of the religion, and judge whether it be the Church of
God that offers this injury to his Son.

15 Let people therefore open their eyes and view the Papacy a title better,
how it has incroched upon heaven and earth; that not the God of heaven, or the
states of the world, or the consciences of men have escaped the malice thereof,
but it is busily doing with them all; the which, me thinks, should move them
if no other thing could be objected. For what tyranny and usurpation is it
thus to load the world with their traditions? and fill the Church with more
then Jewish idolatry and superstition? Moreover, what had the Council of Trent
to do, now after 1500. years, to make a new Creed and profession of faith,
which, even the people of their own Church were never bound to before? This is
a point worth the looking at, that the Bishop of Rome should take upon him to
add twelve more articles to the Creed, and to bind men by oath and confession
to receive them. This shows him to be the same 2 Thessalonians. 2.4.
that sits in the Temple of God, exalting himself above all that is God,
and his people to be in a miserable state, that must have the matter of their
faith increased, diminished, and changed at his devotion. I will let down this
new Creed word for word, that such as have not seen it may consider thereof,
and see the new faith which the Pope has taught his children. Thus it lies in
the Popes Bulla Pij 4. super forma iuramenti professionis fidei.
Bull, which calls it THE PVBLICKE PROFESSION OF THE ORTHODOXAL FAITH, TO BE
UNIFORMLY OBSERVED AND PROFESSED. THE NEW CREED OF THE CHVRCH OF ROME.
I. N. do with firm faith believe and profess all and singular things
contained in the Creed which the Roman Church uses: namely, I believe in one
God the Father almighty, maker of heaven and earth, and of all things visible
and invisible. And in one Lord Jesus Christ the only begotten Son of God,
borne of his Father before all worlds, God of God, light of light, very God of
very God, begotten not made, being consubstantiall with the Father, by whom all
things were made: who for us men and for our salvation came down from heaven,
and was incarnate by the holy Ghost of the Virgin Mary, and was made man:
crucified also for us under Pontius Pilate, suffered, and was buried, and rose
again the third day according to the Scriptures, and ascended into heaven, and
sits at the right hand of his Father, and shall come again with glory to
judge the quick and the dead, whose kingdom shall have no end: and in the
holy Ghost the Lord and giver of life, who proceeds from the Father and the
Son, who with the Father and the Son is worshipped and glorified, who spoke
by the Prophets. And I believe one Holy, Catholic, and Apostolic Church. J
believe one Baptism for the remission of sins, and I look for the
resurrection of the dead, and the life of the world to come. Amen. TRADITIONS,
and other obseruances and constitutions of that Church do I firmly admit and
embrace. Also the sacred Scripture, THAT SENSE WHICH OUR MOTHER THE CHVRCH HAS
HOLDEN AND DOES HOLD (whose right it is to judge of the true sense and
interpretation of holy Scriptures) do I admit. Neither will I ever receive and
expound it but according to the uniform consent of the Fathers. I do SEVEN
SACRAMENTS of the new law, instituted by our Lord Jesus Christ, and necessary
to the salvation of mankind, though all be not for every man: that is to say,
Baptism, Confirmation, the Eucharist, Penance, extreme Unction, Order, and
Marriage: and that they confer grace, and that among these Baptism,
Confirmation and Order cannot be reiterated without sacrilege. Also the
received and approved rites of the Catholic Church used in the solemn
administration of all the aforesaid Sacraments, I receive ORIGINAL SIN and
JUSTIFICATION, were defined and declared in the holy Council of Trent, MASS
is offered to God a true, proper, and propitiatory sacrifice for the quick and
the dead: and that in the holy is truly, really, and substantially the body and
blood, with the soul and Divinity of our Lord Jesus Christ; and that there is
made a conversion of the whole substance of the bread into his body, and of the
whole substance of the wine into his blood; which conversion the Catholic
Church calls TRANSVBSTANTIATION. I confess also that under ONE KIND ONLY,
all and whole Christ, and the PVRGATORY, and the souls detained there are
help by the suffrages of the faithful. And likewise that SAINTS reigning with
Christ, are to be worshipped and prayed unto. And that RELICS are to be
worshipped. And most firmly I avouch that the IMAGES of Christ, and the Mother
of God always a Virgin, and other Saints, are to be had and retained, and that
to them INDVLGENCES was left by Christ in the Church; and I affirm the use
thereof to be most wholesome ROMAN CHVRCH is the mother and mistress of all
Churches, I acknowledge: and I vow and swear true obedience to the Bishop of
Rome, the successor of S. Peter the Prince of the Apostles AL OTHER things
likewise do I vndoubtingly receive and confess which are delivered, defined
and declared by the sacred canons, and general Councels, and especially the
holy Council of Trident: and withal I condemn, reject, and accurse all things
that are contrary hereunto, and all heresies whatsoever, condemned, rejected
and accursed by the Church: and that I will be careful this true Catholic
faith (out of the which no man can be saved, which at this time I willingly
profess and truly hold) be constantly (with Gods help) retained and
confessed, whole and inuiolate to the last gasp, and by those that are under
me, or such as I shall have charge over in my calling, holden, taught and
preached, to the uttermost of my power: I the said N. promise, vow, and swear,
so God me help, and his holy Gospels. The Schoolmen and Lawyers were long ago
in hand with this question, whether the Pope had authority to make a new
Creed? And because they were long tempering with it, and the affirmative seemed
a strange position, we marvelled what they would make of it. But now we see
they meant in good earnest indeed, and this belike was the Creed whereof the
Pope was with child, and all his Church must receive it. This is a strange
presumption, that taking upon them to bring new matter of faith into the
Church, and to make that necessary to be believed for salvation, which before
was not so: yet their people should be so blind as not observe it. Suarez the
Jesuit, Tom. 2. p. 30.
The matter may come to that pass, that without any new and explicate
revelation, the Church may have sufficient motives for the defining of this (or
that) verity, by the infolded and still revelation of God: for this manner of
defining (whereby that which was not before, is now made an article of faith)
it is sufficient, that any supernatural verity be infoldedly contained in
tradition or Scripture; that the common consent of the Church, (by which the
holy Ghost often explicates traditions and declares Scripture) increasing, the
Church at the length may bring in her determination; which has the force of a
certain divine revelation, in respect of us. This consent of the Church may so
increase, that at the length she may simply and absolutely define it. This
shows plainly that they think the Pope has power to make a new Creed; and
hereby the world may see that under pretense of things lying hidden in the
Church, and the common consent of the Church increasing, the Pope may multiply
the matters of faith, and so fit in the conscience as he pleases.

16 It is no small grief to all that are well minded, to see this more then
Egyptian bondage, whererein so many people live; but yet if any man look
attentively upon it, the matter will not seem so strange. First, their custom
and long continuance in blindness binds them in, there being nothing harder
then to break an ignorant man of his custom. De Doctrine. Christ. l. 4. c. 24.
Saint Austin coming to Caesarea, where the people had an ancient custom once
a year, for certain days together, to divide themselves into parts, and
throw stones one at another, whereby many were slain: found it an exceeding
hard matter to dissuade them from it. Then the society and alliance, whereby
they are linked one to another, restrains them; being ashamed to depart with
their acquaintaince, and the things which long continuance of friends has
inured them to. This is noted by S. Basil in the vulgar of his time, seduced by
Arius: There is, Ep. 70.
says he, small hope of reducing them to the truth, who are linked to
heretics, with the band of long amity. And Saint Austin yields the same
reason why the Donatists could so hardly be reclaimed. How many, Ep. 48. ad
Vincent.
says he, being moved with the truth, would even presently have been good
Catholics, and yet deferred it daily, fearing the offense of their friends?
How many did, not the truth, but the heavy band of obdurate custom, hold
together; who thought the Church to be with Donatus, because their security
made them slothful and lazy in searching the truth? How many were hindered by
the rumors and slanders that went of us? How many stuck to Donatus, because
there they were borne, and no man constrained them to depart thence, and go to
the Catholic Church? Finally, they are in the hands of skillful workmen and
wary leaders, that know how to entertain and hold them, and with fair words
to deceive the simple: whose first work, when they seize upon a Proselite,
always is to teach him four conclusions, before he go any further: and I wonder
their drift therein is not espied. First that the Protestants are heretics,
and their Church come up but lately, and therefore he must never hear any
Protestant or regard what he says in the matter of religion. Next, that the
Roman Church is the true Church, wherein only salvation is to be found: and
this Church can err and teach false, in nothing. Thirdly, that the Scriptures
are obscure, imperfect, troublesome, and therefore it is not for simple men to
meddle with them, or once to hope that they ca^ thereby come to any certain
resolution. And then lastly, that in all things he must refer himself to his
mother the Church, and his ghostly father, to whose cure God has committed
him, whose directions if he will follow resolutely, he may be careless in all
the rest. When silly creatures have drunk in these principles, (which a wise
man will examine before he believe) what marvel is it if they be hardly
converted? and when their teachers have thus hedged them in, and taken away
their eyes, their ears, their understanding, it is no wonder if they be easily
trained into any thing.

17 Who are again and again to be admonished that they look into these
things, because no less then the salvation of their souls lies upon it: and
it is the foolishest thing in world in matters of such consequence to rely on
the persons of men, or our own affection. For which cause, and for whose
sakes, I have penned this book, to show the full trial of such motives as
they seem to stand upon. And whosoever will read it attentively, shall find
therein a just and complete answer to the principallest things that are
objected against our Church. Yea he shall reap this benefit by reading it, that
he shall see the very point where diverse questions stick, that are much talked
of, but little understood by many. I have done it moderately, and with all the
respect of my adversary that I could. I have meddled with the persons of no
man, but only debated the cause, and followed the argument as it led me. And I
will freely confess that my adversaries kind of writing, which I much liked,
allured me to answer him, because as it is schollerlike performed, so it
brings aboard the best questions and reasons that are ordinarily discoursed.
His writing is borrowed wholly from Gregory of Valentia his Analysis fidei, and
tract. de obiecto fidei: who is as acute an adversary as any this day
disputes against us. In my answer I hold this course throughout, to lay the
argument, or question plainly down, and then to answer it directly and
perspicuously, that the reader may understand what is said. And because the
judgment of the ancient Church is much objected against us, I have endeavored
to clear that point also, by showing in every question, as the cause
requires, the practice of the Primitive Church, and the opinions of the
fathers, concercerning the points. And although in their time they knew not of
our questions (the Papacy being risen since their days) whereby they might
speak directly as witnesses between us; yet teaching the truth of the
Gospel, which the Papists have corrupted, they show who be the innouators; and
to this day strike the Church of Rome as if they lived and saw it: wherein we
are so well assured, that we embrace that kind of trial, which is by
antiquity, most contentedly, and daily find our adversaries to be galled
thereby. Sim. Metaphrast. vit. Epiphan.
The Legend tells, that Epiphanius being dead, as he lay on the ground, and
one looking curiously at him, gave him such a blow with his foot, that he
struck the wind out of his belly. Thus the Fathers dead in their graves, yet
strike our adversaries to the ground with their feet, that if the Pope were
not made interpreter to help at a dead lift, they could not stand an hour.
Which is such a jest that no doubt themselves smile at it. For if the Fathers
rule the questions of faith, and the Pope rule the Fathers, and the Church of
Rome the Pope; this will be like Plutarck.
the merry conceit of a little boy in Athens, the son of Themistocles: that
pl^ying among his companions would tell them he could rule all Athens: For,
says he, my father can rule Athens, and my mother can rule my father, and I
can rule my mother.

18. Again, in all the questions handled I have confirmed our own doctrine
and expositions, and confuted our adversaries, by the authority and
testimonies of the Papists themselves: which course I dare undertake may be
maintained in all the questions between us: and I have observed it
principally, to make it appear, that the Romish faith came in by the faction
of some particular persons, and was always resisted as it grew, and contradicted
by learned men; and that our adversaries mouths may be stopped when they shall
see some learned man or other in their own Church to hold the same things that
we do. Refert sed ipsa nosse quae messemnecant Zizaniorum se mina Prud.
apotheos.
The Church of God has always thought this a fit course. Dionysius Alexandrinus
Niceph. l. 6. c. 8.
said of himself, that he used sometime to be occupied in reading the writings
and treatises of heretics, though it something polluted his mind with
touching their unclean opinions; because he reaped this profit thereby, that he
might the easilier refell them, and the more execrate and detest them. If any
will take upon him to confute me, the laws of Christian conference, specially
in the points of faith, bind him, 1. to do it temperately, abstaining from
railing and reproaching. 2. perspicuously, that I may certainly know his
meaning 3. honestly, that what I say be faithfully set down, and what I prove
my sayings by, be not dissembled. For I affirm nothing that concerns the
cause, but I prove it, either in the text by reason, or in the margent by
authority, which I would not have dissembled, or (according to an usual trade
taken up of late among them) traduced with taunts and outcries, as if it were
false alleged, until it appear to be so indeed. Which if he perform, I
shall think my lot the better to have met with so profitable an adversary.
And so wishing the good Reader that with love to all men, and reverence to Gods
truth, and care to lead a sanctified life, he would pursue the cause of
religion: I take my leave, beseeching our Lord Christ by the power of his
spirit, to make way for the truth in all our hearts. Amen.

A Table of the several matters and questions handled and disputed in this
Book. The first number signifies the Section, noted with this mark.. The
other, following the first, signifies the numbers of that Section. Where the
number is but one, there the whole Section is meant.
THe true faith is absolutely necessary to salvation. 1. 1. No part of our
faith stands upon tradition. 1. 2. Infolded faith is not sufficient without
knowledge. 2. 1. 7. There is a Rule whereby the true faith may be known. 3. 1.
This Rule is not visible and known to all men without exception. 3. 2. The
properties belonging to the rule of faith. 4. The Scriptures translated into
English are the rule of faith, and how. 5. The true reason why Papists deny the
Scriptures to be the rule. 5. 7. 8. The Scripture ought to be translated into
the mother tongue, that the people may read it. 5. 9. Touching the certainty
and truth of our translations, and how we know it. 6. The last resolution of
our faith is into the authority of the Scripture. 6. 9. 10. Our English
translation is purer then that which the Papists use. 6. 11. The obscurity of
the Scripture disableth it not from being the rule. 7. 1. All matters needful
are plainly laid down in the Scripture. 7. 3. Why the Papists pretend the
obscurity of the Scripture. 7. 7. Whence it is that the Scripture is obscure.
8. 1. The Scripture is understood by it self, and how. 8. 1, 2, 3. How we are
assured of the true sense of the Scripture, which is it among many senses 8. 7,
8. The true cause why men err in expounding the Scripture. 8. 13. Our faith is
built on the Scripture, not on the Church. 8. 17. The Scripture is perfect,
containing all things. 9. How I know this Scripture to be the very word of God.
9. 5. All things needful are fully comprehended in the Scripture. 9. 9. The
Papists hold that the sense of the Scripture varieth with the time. 9. 11.
Again touching the errors of men in expounding the Scripture. 10. The place of
2. Tim. 3.16. proves the all-sufficiencie of the Scripture. 11. How private men
and private companies may see the truth against a multitude. 12. By the Church
the Papists mean nothing but the Pope. 13. 2. Whether, and how the Church of
God may err. 14. 1. Tim. 3.15. expounded, how the Church is the pillar of
truth. 15. The Protestants do not say yt ye true Church at any time failed and
was not. 17. 1. The state of the question touching the visiblenesse of the
Church. 17. 2. The Protestants say no more touching the inuisiblenesse of the
Church, then the Papists themselves in effect do. 17. 3. The arguments are
answered whereby the Church is proved to be always visible. 18. and inde. The
true faith is a sufficient mark of the Church. 24. 2. The arguments against
this are answered. 26. to 31. 1. Ioh. 4.1. proves that it is lawful to
examine the teaching of the Church. 31. One, Holy, Catholic, and Apostolic,
are not the marks of the Church. 32. What the unity of the Church properly is.
33. 1. The Protestant Churches want not true unity. 33. 2. Gods true Church in
all ages has had some contentions. 33. 4. and inde. The Protestant Churches
have the true means of unity. 34. 1. What kind of unity the Papists have.
34. 1. 2. The Church of Rome uses the Scriptures most despitefully five ways.
35. 3. The present Roman Church is departed from the ancient primitive faith.
35. 9. The Church of Rome wants unity, and lives in manifest contention,
demonstrated. 35. 16. The Popes authority was not received of old as the
foundation of unity. 36. 2. The very Papists themselves do not yield to the
Popes determinations. 36. 5. The Popes supremacy is no sufficient means to
preserve unity. 36. 10. The places of Mat. 16.18. Luke 22.32. Ioh. 21.15
handled at large, and showed to make nothing toward the Popes authority over
the Church. 36. 11. and inde. The Primitive Church acknowledged not the Popes
supremacy: four experiences. 36. 26. The Pope may err, even iudicially, and
be an heretic. 36. 32. It is impossible to prove that the hope is S. Peter's
true successor. 36. 36. No certainty among the Papists how the Popes supremacy
is proved. 36. 39. A place of Cyprian alleged for the supremacy, answered.
37. 1, 2. The Protestants Church is truly holy, and how. 38. 1. Certain words
of M. Luther expounded. 38. 2. Outward holiness no proper and essential mark
of the Church. 38. 3. The vnholines and wickedness of the Roman Church
demo^strated. 38. 4. and inde. What Saints the Protestants have in their
Church. 39. 1. Canonization of Saints by the Pope, a ridiculous conceit. 39. 2.
3. The doctrine of the Protestants induces not to liberty. 40. 1. and inde.
Fasting how the Protestants, and how the Papists use it. 40. 2. Auricular
confession or shrift, justly rejected. 40. 6. Necessity of good works taught
and defended by the Protestants. 40. 11. Touching the merit of works. 40. 12.
Touching man's power in keeping the commandments. 40. 18. Whether all the good
works we do be sin. 40. 22. The distinction of sin into mortal and
venial. 40. 26. Satisfaction how taught by the Protestants, and how by the
Papists. 40. 28. A short view of long Pardons. 40. 35. The doctrine of
Justification by Faith only, expounded and defended. 40. 37. Predestination how
holden by the Protestants. 40. 43. What is the root of Contingencie. 40. 44.
Freewill and Gods decree, how reconciled together. 40. 45. Touching Freewil,
and the determination th^reof by Gods providence. 40. 46 Predestination not for
works foreseen 40. 49. God is not the author of sin. The Papists in this
point go as far as the Protestants. 40. 50. Again touching Freewil, at large
showing all the questions in that point. 40. 52. and inde. Wherein true
holiness stands. 41. 1. How good works become an infallible sign of true
holiness. 41. Touching the certainty of grace and salvation, the point
explicated. 41. 5. The miracles of the ancient Church do the Papists at this
day no good. 42. 1. The ancient Monks were not like the modern. 42. 3.
Touching miracles, objected by the Papists, an answer. 42. 4. and inde.
Incredible miracles and ridiculous reported 42. 8. The abuses of Monks and
Monasteries detected. 42. 10. A proof that the Protestants doctrine excludes
liberty of the flesh. 43. 2. The Roman doctrine is an occasion of their
sinful lives. 43. 3. Some points of Papistry named that inuit men to
liberty. 43. 5. and inde. The Roman faith a mere device invented to maintain
ambition and covetousness. 43. 7. The universality of the Protestants Church
is showed and expounded. 44. 1. and inde. Touching the ancient Fathers, their
authority and usage with us and the Papists compared. 44. 4. and inde. Who are
Fathers with the Papists, and who All the Fathers. 44. 9. The Pope vshers the
Fathers. 44. 11. The Papists are notorious for contemning all the ancient
writers: exemplified. 44. 12. and inde. The Protestants answer to them, that
bid them show their Church in all ages. 45. 1. and inde. The Papists have not
the Church Catholic either in time or place. 46. The Roman Church has
forsaken her ancient faith. 47. and inde. Transubstantiation a late device. 47.
8. 9. The present Roman Church has converted no countries to the true faith.
48. 1. and inde. The Indies knew the true faith before the Papists came there.
48. 3. Touching the conversion of England by Austin the Monk. 49. How the
Roman Church has converted the Indies. Spanish massacres. 49. 5. and inde. The
question, When did the faith fail in the Roman Church, answered and disputed.
50. 4. and inde. The time and manner of the coming in of some points in
Papistry. 50. 8. and inde. The resistance made in former times against the
Papacy, with a catalogue. 50 18. and inde. An answer to some things objected
against the former catalogue. 50. 40. Papistry came in secretly, and by little
and little, expounded. 51. 2. 3. Images notoriously resisted when they came in.
51. 5. The Papists worship stocks and stones as well as the Gentiles. 51. 6.
and inde. Touching adoration of the Sacrament. 51. 9. The manner of Christ's
presence in ye Sacrament explicated, as we hold it 51. 10. The Papists have
written most spitefully against the honor of the blessed Sacrament. 51. 11.
Succession is in our Church, and of what kind it is. 52. 1. The callings of
Luther and our Bishops justified and declared. 52. 5. The Fathers commending
the succession of the Roman church in their time, does not help it now. 53.
The places produced out of them are answered. 53. 5. Ephesians. 4.11. alleged to
prove outward succession, answered. 54. 2. 3. External succession of persons
in one place, is neither only in the Roman Church, nor there at all. 55. 2.
Seven things objected against the succession of Popes, to show it has been
grossly interrupted. 55. 4. and inde. Touching the credit of Anastasius book of
the Popes lives. 55. 7. It is not known who succeeded Peter. 55. 5. The sea of
Rome has been long void. 55. 6. A woman was Pope. 55. 7. Heretics have been
Popes, and intruders, and boys. 55. 8. 9. Popes have bin made, and cast out
again at the willl of famous whores. 55. 9. Popes for wickedness more then
monstrous. 55. 9. Many Popes at one time, and the right Pope not known. 55.
10. The Fathers commendation of the Roman Church expounded. 56. Imputations
laid upon the Protestants, as if they had forsaken the Church, answered. 57. 1,
2. Luther defended touching his departure from the Pope: his writings, his
life, his marriage, and his death. 57. 3. and inde. Monsters of lies devised
against Luther. 57. 7. Luther an honester man then any Pope in his time and
many more. 57. 9. Again, the calling of our Ministers is defended. 58.
Touching the power of a Priest in remitting sin, and the sacrament of
Penance. 58. 4. and inde. Miracles not concurring with all extraordinary
calling. 59. 1. Extraordinary callings distinguished. 59. 2. Luther needed no
miracles, and why. 59. 3. All men have not been in love with Papistry. 60. The
objection that Luther made to himself when he departed from the Pope. 61. 1.
The Protestants have not forsaken the high-beaten-way of the Catholic Church.
61. 2. Touching the salvation of our ancestors under the Papacy. 61. 4. The
Scriptuies are surer tokens of the truth then the Popish miracles. 62. A brief
exhortation of the Author to his countrymen. 63.
A Table of the Digressions contained in this Book, with their Titles. The
number set before, signifies the number of the Digression. The number
following, signifies the. under which it stands.
1. Proving that the Papists grounding the doctrine of faith on traditions,
make them equal to the written word. 1. 2. Showing the infolded faith of the
Papists, and confuting the same as not entire. 2. 3. Wherein, by the
Scriptures, Fathers, and reason, and the Papists own confession, it is showed
that the Scripture is the rule of faith. 5. 4. Containing the very cause why
the Papists disable the Scripture so, from being the rule. 5. 5. Wherein,
against the Jesuits conceit, secretly implied in his first conclusion, it is
showed that the Scriptures ought to be translated into ye mother tongue, and so
read indifferently by the lay people of all sorts. 5. 6. Declaring how the
assurance of our faith is not built on the Churches authority, but on the
illumination of Gods Spirit shining in the Scripture it self. 6. 7. Wherein
the Trent-vulgar-Latine and our English translation are briefly compared
together. 6. 8. Showing that the Scriptures are not so obscure, but that they
plainly determine all appoints of faith. 7. 9. Declaring that the Papists have
reason to hold the Scriptures be obscure, because the articles of their
religion be hardly or not at all to be found therein. 7. 10. Assigning the true
cause of men's errors in expounding the Scriptures. 8. 11. Proving that the
Scripture it self has that outward authority whereupon our faith is built,
and not the Church. 8. 12. Wherein it is showed that the Scripture proves it
self to be the very word of God, and receives not authority from the Church.
9. 13. Showing, against the Jesuits assumption, that all substantial points of
our faith are sufficiently determined in the Scriptures: and the reason why the
Papist call so fast for the authority of the Church. 9. 14. Containing a
discourse of Saint Austins, about men's errors against the Scriptures. 10. 15.
Showing that private and particular companies may sometime be assured of the
truth against a pretended Catholic company. 12. 16. Showing how the Papists
pretending at every word the Catholic Church, yet mean nothing thereby but
the Popes determination. 13. 17. Wherein it is showed is what manner the Church
is said to be invisible, and that the Papists say no less concerning this
matter then we do. 17. 18. Proving the true faith or doctrine contained in the
Scripture, to be a good mark to know the Church by. 24. 19. Touching the place
of Saint Austin, contra Epist. Fundam. cap. 5. and the matter which the Papists
gather from it. 28. 20. Concerning the proceeding of the Trent Council in
determining the matters of faith. 31. 21. Showing that Gods true Church in all
ages has now and then bin troubled with contentions as great as are now among
us. 33. 22. Obiecting the behavior of Papists toward the divine Scriptures,
thereby to show their varying from that which in former times the primitive
Church of Rome believed. 35. 23. Wherein by five examples it is showed that the
modern Church of Rome is varied in points of faith from that which it believed
formerly, and since the time also that it began to be the seat of Antichrist.
35. 24. Touching the contentions among the learned Papists of the Church of
Rome, and how the Papists live not in that unity that is pretended. 35. 25.
Whererein it is showed, that in the Primitive Church the Popes determination
was not thought an infallible truth; neither did the Christians, for the
maintenance of unity, submit themselves thereunto. 36. 26. Showing that the
Papists themselves do not so constantly and uniformly submit themselves to the
Popes judgment, nor believe his infallible authority, as is pretended. 36.
27. Showing that the Primitive Church acknowledged not the Popes supremacy. 36.
28. Showing that the Pope is not of infallible judgment, but may err, and
fall into heresy, as any other man may. 36. 29. Declaring the Pope not to be
Saint Peter's successor. 36. 30. Wherein it is showed that the Papists are not
agreed among themselves to this day, how Peter's supposed primacie is proved, or
what it contains: but they are altogether uncertain in expounding the maine
texts of Scripture, whereupon they build it. 36. 31. Containing many complaints
made by the Papists themselves against their own Church and people; whereby it
appears their lives are worse then can be said of the Protestants. 38. 32.
Touching fasting, and how we differ from the Papists therein: and whether the
doctrine of our Church be against it, as the Papists charge us. 40. 33.
Concerning Auricular confession, or Shrift to a Priest, showing the
needlesnesse thereof, and how it is an occasion rather then a remedy of sin.
40. 34. Concerning the necessity or requisite condition of good works for our
salvation: showing that the Protestants hold it. 40. 35. Touching the merit of
our works, and what is to be holden thereof. 40. 36. Answering those that
accuse the Protestants for holding that no man can keep Gods commandments:
and showing what is to be holden concerning that matter. 40. 37. Whether the
Protestants think whatsoever we do is sin. 40. 38. Against the distinction
of sin into Mortal and Venial. 40. 39. Touching the satisfaction that men
are bound unto for their sins. 40. 40. Wherein the doctrine of Justification,
by faith only, is expounded and defended. 40. 41 Entreating of Predestination
and Freewill, as the Protestants hold them, and showing that their doctrine
concerning these points, does neither make God the author of sin, nor lead
men to be careless of there lives, nor infer any absolute necessity
constraining us that we cannot do otherwise then we do. 40. 42. Again touching
Freewill, wherein the doctrine of our Church is methodically propounded, and,
in every point, compared with that which the Papists hold: that the several
questions, between them and us, and the manner how and where they rise, may be
seen distinctly set down. 40. 43. Proving that Gods children, without
miracles, or extraordinary revelation, may be, and are, infallibly assured that
they have grace and shall be saved. 41. 44. Answering that which the Papists
object touching the miracles of their Church and Saints therein. 42. 45.
Touching Monks and religious orders holden among the Papists, which they say
we have rejected and forsaken. 42. 46. Naming certain points of the Papists
faith which directly tend to the maintenance of open sin and liberty of life.
43. 47. Of the authority of the ancient Fathers in matters of our faith and
religion, wherein it is showed what we ascribe unto them, and how farforth we
depend upon them, and the practice of our adversaries in contemning, cluding,
and refusing both them and their own writers, is plainly discovered. 44. 48
Containing a brief and direct answer to our adversaries when they say we
cannot assign a visible company professing the same faith, in every point,
that we do, ever since Christ till now, without intterruption. 45. 49.
Obiecting eight points for example, wherein the Church of Rome holds contrary
to that which formerly was holden: The conception of the virgin Mary, Latin
Service, Reading the Scriptures, Priests marriage, Images, Supremacy, Communion
in one kind, Transubstantion. 47. 50. Of the conversion of the Indies to the
Roman faith, by the Jesuits. 49. 51. Naming seven points of the Popish
religion, with the time when, and manner how they gate into the Church: thereby
to show that there is sufficient record to detect the nouelty of the present
Roman faith. 50. 52. Showing that the present religion of the Roman Church
was observed and resisted in all ages, as it came in, and increased: naming
withal, the persons that made the resistance, and the points wherein, and the
time when, from fifty years to fifty throughout all ages since Christ:
compendiously observed out of history for the satisfying of their error that so
much conceit the antiquity of Papistry, and think it was never controlled til
Luthers time. 50. 53. Obiecting seven things against the outward succession of
Popes in the Sea of Rome. Whereby the same is clearly demonstrated to have
been interrupted, and not to be any certain, or infallible succession. 55. 54.
Containing a brief narration touching the life and death of Martin Luther,
with the incredible reports thereof made by his adversaries; and showing how
sundry Popes, in the Church of Rome, have lived and died worse then he, though
it were granted all reports made of him were true. 57, 55. Showing how
uncertain and contrary the Papists are among themselves touching the power of
their Priesthood in remitting sins: and concerning the first institution of
Shrift where it began.
De Iudice fidei, admonitio Catholica ad Lectorem.
PVrus ab impuro number differt sanguine sanguis?
Differt: iudicium laudo (Galene) tuum.
Ritibus in sacris secernitur hoedus ab agno?
Vox tua secreti regula (Pastor) erit.
Roma suis, and magna suis Brittannia normam
Pandit; in incertum ne rapiare cave.
Consilium Medici, Pastoris consule vocem:
Iudicium certum PAGINA SACRA dabit.
Le. Asshaw. ar.

A BRIEF DISCOVRSE CONCERNING FAITH, BY WHICH IS evidently declared, how every
one that has a desire to please God, and a care to save his soul, the which
should be the chief desire and care of every Christian man, ought to resolve
and settle himself in all points, questions and controversies of faith.
The Answer.
IF the Discourse had performed what the Title promises, you had been
beholding to the man that bestowed it on you: the rather because the
controversies of the present time have changed the sweet Spring of our Church
into a stormy Winter. But seeing the author thereof, under color of directing
you in the controversies, goes about to make another Eve of you, by seducing
your mind from the simplicity that is in Christ, you have little cause to
thank him, and Deuteronomy. 27.18:
he less to rejoice in his labor. For his reasons, whereby he thinks to
declare his matter so evidently, all tend to persuade you that the Pope of
Rome, Gregorius decimus tertius filiorum ecclesiae pater amantissimus. Camp.
rat. 5. apud Posseu. bibl. l. 7. c. 21.
his fast friend, Nomine Ecclesiae intelligimus eius caput. id est, Romanum
Pontifice^. Gregor. de Valent. in Thom. tom. 3. page 24. Venet.
is this very Rule that must resolve you in these points, questions, and
controversies of faith. An unreasonable position, void of all indifferency;
when common sense teaches, that he which is a party cannot be judge: and
Niceph. Gregor. hist. lib 10. cap. vlt. (...).
that which it self is a thing wavering and inconstant, cannot be the Rule to
discern the right by. What father, Luc. 11.11.
says Christ, if his son ask him bread, will give him a stone? or if he
ask a fish, will give him a serpent? yet thus the Jesuit has dealt with you.
But Epicharm.
the heathen man's counsel is good, Be sober and suspicious: and 1. These. 5.21.
the Apostles better, Try all things, and stick to that which is good.
Neither must you hope to learn truth in the school of lies: for they that
seek Christ among heretics shall lose him.

. 1. First it is to be suppo^ed and set down for a certain ground, that there
is but one faith, which whosoever wants cannot possibly please God, nor
consequently be saved: since none are saved which do not please God. This is
proved out of S. Paul, who in one place says, Vna fides. Ethes. 4 and in
another. Sine fide impossible est placere Deo. Heb 11. The which two places
make this sense in English, Faith is but one, and without faith it is
impossible to please God Secondly this one faith, without which we cannot
please God, must be infallible and most certain, because faith is the credit
and inward assent of mind, which we give to the word of God; the prime and
first verity, which neither can deceive, nor be deceived. Fides, says the
same S. Paul, Romans 10, ex auditu, auditus per verbum Dei. The sense of which
words be, that faith is bred in us by hearing and yielding assent to the word
of Christ who is of God.

The Answer.
1 Both these conclusions be true, and you shall grant them to be as himself
calls them, certain grounds wherein we all agree: that there is but one
faith wherein we can be saved, and this faith must be infallible or certain,
that is, free from error, and such as cannot deceive us, believing nothing that
false is. And this later is well proved, Because faith is the assent of the
mind that we give to the word of God, which word being the first truth, neither
can deceive us, nor be deceived it self. This confirmation, I say, will serve,
meaning by the word of God, the holy Scriptures: for Cyrill. Hiero. fol. cat. 4.
the security of our faith arises from the demonstration of the divine
Scriptures, 1. Cor. 4.6.
that no man presume above that which is written.

2 But if by the word of God, which cannot deceive nor be deceived, he mean
also the Constitutions of his Church, and the Popes Decrees, which they call
Traditions, then his confirmation is naught, and we reject it: because the
words thereof will be resolved into this sense, That our faith, or religion, to
this end that it may be infallible, must be grounded partly on Traditions, and
partly on the Scriptures, and the certainty thereof depends no less on the
former then on the later; a point which no wise man will grant, considering
that such Traditions are so far from securing our faith, that directly they
lead it into a very sea of errors and uncertainties; and being once admitted,
every Friars dream, and base custom of the Romish Church shall be thrust upon
you for an article of religion necessary to eternal life. And I dare
undertake, the Jesuit in this place, by the word of God and of Christ, means
these very Traditions so far, that put him to it, and before he will forgo
them, or hazard the least of his Papal Decrees, you shall see him Vide as
qua^ti ponderis sit ipsa traditio, vt ex ipsa noui testamenti scripta omnia
authoritatem acceperint: quam qui non admi^tunt ab ipsis etiam canonicis
scriptis excidat necesse est. Traditio est scripturarum fundamentum. In eo
scripturas excellunt quod illae, nisi traditione firmentur, non subsistant, hae
vero, etiam sine scriptis, sua^ obtineant firmitatem. Caes. Baron. annal. tom.
1. an. 53. nu. 11.
very strangely speak of the Scriptures: as the Demades. Eras. apop.
man of Athens, that thought his countrymen should not, by striving for
heaven, in the mean time venture to lose the earth.

Digression. 1. Proving that the Papists grounding the doctrine of faith on
Traditions, make them equal to the written word.
3 For the Trent Council Sess. 4. decret. 1.
decreed, they should be received with the same reverence and affection,
wherewith we receive the Scripture it self. Canus Loc. l. 3. c. 3.
says, Many things belong to Christian faith which are contained in the
Scripture neither openly, nor obscurely. Confess. Petric. c. 92.
Hosius says, the greatest part of the Gospel is come to us by tradition,
very little of it is committed to writing. De Purgat. cap. 11.
Peltanus, that many verities lie hidden in the Church, which if she would
reveal, we were bound to believe with the same faith wherewith we believe the
things revealed in the Scriptures. Vaux and Canisius English catech. c. 1.
The Popish Catechismes teach, that Faith is a certain light, wherewith
whosoever is enlightened, he firmly agrees to all such things as God has set
forth, by his Church, to be learn^d of us, whether they be written or not
written. Doctor Standish, in Cap. 6. probat. 3.
his book against English Bibles, cries out, Take from them the English
damnable translations, and let them learn the mysteries of God reverently by
heart, and learn to give as much credit to that which is not expressed, as to
that which is expressed in the Scripture. D. 40. Si Papa in Annot. margin.
The Canon law newly set out by Pope Gregory the thirteenth, says, that Men
do with such reverence respect the Apostolical seat of Rome, that they rather
desire to know the ancient institution of Christian religion from the Popes
mouth, then from the holy Scripture: and they only inquire what is his
pleasure, and according to it they order their life and conversation. So that
you see howsoever the Jesuit say, our faith cannot apprehend a falsehood,
because it assenteth only to the word of God, yet by the word of God he
means Romish Traditions as well as the Scripture, and so makes those things
of equal truth with it, and then bears you in hand, that the certainty of
your faith and religion depends on their infallibility as much as on the
infallibility of the Scripture: a point which I would easily grant him if the
question were of the Romish faith: for I confess it depends upon Traditions
more then on the written word; so far forth that, as Andrad. Orthodox.
explicat. lib. 2. quam traditionum authoritatem si tollas, nutare iam and
vacillare videbuntur. page 80.
a Doctor of his own side speaks, Many points thereof would reele and totter,
if they were not supported with the help of Traditions. But against this let
the judgment of Regul. contract. 95. (...). page 502.
Basil be noted by the way, It is necessary and consonant to reason, that every
man learn that which is needful out of the Scriptures, both for the fullness
of godliness, and lest they inure themselves to humane Traditions.

2. Thirdly the one and infallible faith without which we cannot please God,
must be also entire, whole, and sound, in all points, and it is not sufficient
to salvation to believe steadfastly some points, and not other some. So says
Athanasius his Creed, received of all: Quicunque vult saluus esse, etc.
Whosoever will be saved, before all things it is needful that he hold the
catholic faith, which unless every one keep entire and inuiolate, without
doubt he shall perish everlastingly. Again, to believe some points of faith
and to deny others, is heresy, as not to believe any point of faith at all,
is absolute infidelity. But it is certain, even out of Scripture, that neither
infidel nor heretic shall be saved. For our Savior has absolutely
pronounced, Qui non crediderit condemnabitur. Marc. 16. And the Apostle S.
Paul, Gal. 5. puts heresies among the works of the flesh, saying:
Manifesta sunt opera carnis, quae sunt fornicatio and fictae, (...), which is
in English, heresies; of all which he says, Qui talia agunt, regnum Dei non
consequentur. Moreover the reason why any one point of faith is under pain of
damnation to be believed, by Christian, divine, and infallible faith, is,
because God almighty has revealed it, and by his Church has proposed it unto
us, and commanded it to be believed: for otherwise they be not points of faith
but of opinion, or of some other kind of knowledge. Therefore all points of
faith are under pain of damnation to be believed.

The Answer.
1 This third conclusion touches a second property required in saving faith,
and it must be granted him with the confirmation thereof in a true sense;
namely that we are bound to believe the points of salvation, by obtaining a
particular distinct knowledge of the same in our selves, and so assenting to
them: that our faith may include an apprehension also and knowledge of the
things believed, as well as an assent to the proposition thereof. If this be
the Jesuits meaning in this place, then I embrace it as the truth.

2 But peradventure his mind runs upon a further matter, which his Church
teaches about infolded faith, and then you may note the gross heresy that he
thrusts upon you in his smooth words. For Implicita f^des est credere secu^dum
quod ecclesia credit. Vnde no^ omnis Christianus teneturillos (articulos fidei)
scire explicit, sed tantum clerici. Jacob. de Graf. decis. lib. 2. ca. 8. nu.
16.
the Jesuits and Schoolmen teach, how the lay people are not bound to know
what the matters of their faith be, Fides melius per ignorantia^, quam per
notitiam definitur. Bellar. de just. l. 1. c. 7.
ignorance is better: it suffices if they consent to the Churches faith,
whatsoever it be; assuring themselves it believes and knows all things
necessary, but what those things are, they need not enquire: thus excluding
knowledge from the nature of religion, and placing it in assent only, as
sufficient to make it whole and entire. This being a sottish conceit, devised
for the nonce to suppress knowledge, yet mark how boldly these men press it
on us with the style of an entire faith: which I manifest further in the
Digression following.

Digression. 2. Showing the infolded faith of the Papists, and confuting the
same as not entire.
3 For howsoever the Church of Rome pretend this whole and complete faith, yet
when the matter comes to scanning, she utterly refuses knowledge, and sends
her children to school to the Collier, of him to learn to believe as the
Church believes. For first, whereas Mat. 22.29. Chrysostom ho 3. in Laz. and prol.
hom. in Romans
the ignorance of the Scriptures is the root of all error, and the cause of
unbelief; Index lib. prohib. Reg. 4.
the Church of Rome forbids the reading of them among the people, Franc.
Ouan. Mogol. breuilo. in 4. sent. D. 13. prop. 3.
pretending the vulgar translations to be one principal cause of heresies: and
therefore Linwood. in constitut prouinc. l. 5. titul. de magistris. cap. Quia.
when the law was in their own hand, they utterly forbad them. Mart. Peers. de
trad page 44.
One of them says, he thinks verily it was the devils invention to permit
the people to read the Bible. Thy^rae. de Demoniac. cap. 21. th. 257.
Another writes, that he knew certain men to be possessed of a devil,
because, being but husbandmen, they were able to discourse of the Scriptures.
Thus thieves put out the candle that discouers them.

4 Next, Nauarr. Manual. cap. 11. nu. 16. Jacob. de Graff. decis. l. 4. cap. 24
nu. 23.
they make it heresy for a lay man to dispute in a point of faith, and Magin.
Geograph page 104. Linwood. lib. 5. tit. de Magist. c. periculosa.
suffer no books among them that examine their religion. Annot. on Act. 17. v.
11.
The Rhemists say, the hearers must not try and judge whether their teachers
doctrine be true or no: neither may they reject that which they find not in the
Scripture. And this is also commonly defended by Hosius de express. Dei verb.
Andrad. defens. Trident. l. 2.
others. And whereas Prolegom. cont. Petrum a Sot. Et Confess. Wittenber. cap.
de sacr. scriptur.
Brentius had written no less godly then truly, that in the matters of our
salvation we might not so cleave to another man's opinion, that we should
embrace it without the approofe of our own judgment: and it belongs to every
private man to judge of the doctrine of religion, and to discern the truth
from falsehood: Bellarm. de verb. Dei. lib. 3. c. 3.
the Jesuits very scornefully reject his saying.

5 Thirdly they extol ignorance to the skies, and encourage their people to
it. Rhem. annot. ^n 1. Cor. 14. and on Luke 12. v. 11.
They require no knowledge of the things we pray for, but prefer ignorance:
nor yet ability to profess the particulars of our faith, when possible we are
to die in the defense of the same: far contrary to that which 1. Pet. 3.15.
the scripture so plainly teaches. And the rather to hearten the people in
this blindness, Rhem. upon 1. Ioh. 2. v. 20.
they promise them a part in other men's gifts and graces, which have knowledge.
Conf. Petrie. cap. 14. page 18.
Hosius says, To know nothing is to know all things, and ignorance in most
things is best of all.

6 This is the whole entire faith mentioned here in the Jesuits discourse;
whereby nothing is meant but the Colliars faith, whereof Apology transtated by
Staplet. part. 1. page 53.
I spoke, and Staphylus writes thus: The Colliar being at the point of death,
and tempted of the devil what his faith was, answered, I believe and die in
the faith of Christ's Church: being again demanded what the faith of Christ's
Church was; that faith, said he, that I believe in. Thus the devil getting no
other answer, was overcome and put to flight. By this faith of the Colliar,
every unlearned man may try the spirits of men, whether they be of God or no:
by this faith he may resist the devil, and judge the true interpretation from
the false, and discern the Catholic from the heretical minister, the true
doctrine from the forged. I could scarce believe this to be their doctrine of
entire faith upon the report of so base a companion as Staphylus; but when I
saw the same conceit as gravely set forth by Hosius contra proleg. Brentij.
lib. 3. page 146. Pigh. hierarch. lib. 1. cap. 5. Jacob. de Graffijs decision.
part. 1. lib. 1. cap. 26. nu. 34. Antonin. part. 1. tit. 5. c. 2.. 1.
skilfuller clearkes then he, then I perceived the Colliars faith was canonized
for the Papists creed, and the proverb true, that Like to like were the devil
and the colliar: save that it has brought such a flood of ignorance upon their
people, that Imman. Sa. aphor. verbo Parochus. page 298.
a Doctor of their own cries out upon all the clergy for it: Woe to our Parish
Priests, woe to our Bishops, woe to our Prelates.

7 And woe to them indeed from him that so plentifully in Es. 53.11. Ioh. 17.3.
To. 10.14.17 Col. 3.16. Heb. 5.11.
the Scriptures has condemned this ignorance: and in vain did Christ Ioh 5.39.
command the people to search the Scriptures, and Romans 15.4. Ioh 20.31.
Paul and John teach, that whatsoever things are written, were written for our
learning, and that we might believe, if to assent to the Church, without any
knowledge thereof, were a sound, whole, and an entire faith. Enarrat. in Psalm.
118.
Hilary says, Many think the simplicity of their faith shall suffice to
accomplish their hope of eternal life: as if the study of innocence,
according to the judgment of the world, needed not the precepts of heavenly
doctrine. It is written of 2 Timothy 3.15.
Timothy and Basil. Aschet. prolog. de iudic. Dei Et epis. 75. ad Neocaesar.
Basil, that of children they were trained up in the knowledge of the mysteries
of religion. And in the Primitive Church, Just. Martyr, apolog. 2. Euse.
demonstrat. euang. l. 1. c. 6. Theod. de curand. Graecoru^ affect. l. 5.
the doctrines and several points of religion were known, and discoursed by
the meanest of the people, and Chrysos. hom. 3. in Lazarum. Orig in Number. hom.
27.
the Bishops exhorted them thereunto: which practice declares manifestly
enough, that in those days knowledge of the things believed, was thought
necessary to an entire faith, though now the case be altered in the Church of
Rome, and the Jesuits own reasons prove as much: for Thom. 22. qu. 1. art.
10. 3.
Athanasius creed is a rule of faith, and therefore shows we are bound both
to believe and know the things contained in it; else he might as well have
pointed down the Colliars creed. Again, to what purpose should God propound
all the points of our faith, one as well as another, unless his will were that
we should learn them all; according to Deuteronomy. 29.29.
that of Moses, Secret things belong to the Lord our God, but the things
revealed belong to us and to our children, that we may do all the words of the
law. In Ioh. tract. 21.
Austins saying is to be noted, Some may object, we do rashly in discussing and
searching out the words of God: but why are they uttered, if they may not be
known? why have they sounded, if they may not be heard? and why are they
heard, but that we should understand them?

. 3. Fourthly, as this one, infallible, entire faith is necessary to the
salvation of every one, as well the unlearned as the learned, so we must say
that Almighty God, Qui vult omnes homines saluos fieri, and ad cognitionem
veritatis venire 1. Tim. 2. has for proof that this for his part is a true
will, provided some certain and infallible rule and means, whereby every man,
learned and unlearned, may sufficiently, in all points, questions, or doubts of
faith, be infallibly instructed what is to be holden for true faith: and that
the only cause why a man misseth of the true faith is, that he does not seek
and find this infallible rule; or having found it, will not with an obedient
mind captiuate his understanding, selfe-iudgement, and contrary opinion, in
obsequium Christi, for the service of Christ, and in all points yield
infallible assent unto it, as every Christian ought. Credamus Deo, says S.
Chrysostom, hom. 83. in Matthew. nec repugnemus etiamsi sensui and cogitationi
nostrae absurdum videatur quod dicit. Let us believe God without repugnance,
although that which he says seem absurd to our sense and thought. This I
prove. For unless there were such an infallible rule provided, it were
impossible for any man, especially for any unlearned man, in all points,
infallibly to learn and hold the true faith: and since it is impossible, it is
no way to be thought but that almighty God, who is so desirous that all men
should come to the knowledge of the truth, and consequently to salvation; did
provide that infallible rule or means sufficient to instruct every one in all
points, by which it might be possible for the^ to attain to the true knowledge
of infallible faith, and by that to salvation.

The Answer.
1 This fourth conclusion contains two members. First, that God has left in
the world some certain rule and means, whereby we may infallibly be instructed
what is to be holden for true faith: this you may freely grant him, with that
which he infers thereupon, that the only cause why a man misseth the truth,
is either because he does not find this rule, or having found it, he will not
obey it. The second is, that this rule is left to all men indifferently, so
that every man, without exception, of what estate or faculty soever, may have
access unto it, and be instructed. This member includes 2. senses. First, that
the rule is of that nature, that it is able to direct any man, be he never so
simple; yea the most unlearned alive may conceive and understand it
sufficiently for his salvation. This you shall also yield him, as an undoubted
truth. Next, that all men at all times, may have access unto it, as being a
thing concealed from none, but visible, and revealed to all places, ages, and
persons. And this to be a part of the Jesuits meaning, I gather by the words of
his eighteenth section, where he concludes the Church to be the rule, and
always visible, Because otherwise men sometimes, viz. when it were invisible,
should want a rule to instruct them, contrary to that of Paul, that God would
have all men to be saved, and come to the knowledge of his truth: this he could
not have said, if his meaning in this place (the ground of his speech there)
were not that the rule of faith is evermore, and in all places, visible and
manifested to all men indifferently: a point merely false and smelling of
Pelagianisme.

2 For before Christ it was revealed only to the Jews, and not to the
Gentiles, except some particular persons, as appears plainly both by
observation and Psalm. 76.1. and 103.7. and 147.19 Mat. 10.5. Act. 14 16. and
16.6. Romans 3.2.
the text. And experience shows how at this day the Lord has concealed the
means of salvation from the Turk and infinite other barbarous gentiles: of
whom it cannot be said that he has left unto them this entire rule, but that
in his judgment many times secret, but always just, he has denied it them,
seeing as Romans 1.16.
the Apostle speaks, the Gospel of Christ is the power of God unto salvation
both to Jew and Gentile, 1. Cor. 1.21.
and when the world by wisdom knew not God in the wisdom of God, it pleased
God by the foolishness of preaching to save the^ that believe. And Epist. 107.
ad Vital. circa med.
Austin says, It is a most manifest truth, that many cannot be saved, not
because themselves will not, but because God will not: and the contrary he
confuteth as Pelagianisme. But if I mistake the Jesuit, and he mean the words
in the first sense, it is well, and we both agree. To the place of Timothy,
concerning Gods willing all men to be saved, Deus vult omnes homines saluos
fieri, id est omnes homines qui salua^tur, saluos sieri: nullus enim nisi eo
volente saluatur. Vel sit distributio, non pro singulis generum, sed pro
generibus singuloru^: quia de quolibet genere, and statu hominum vult aliquos
saluos fieri. Greg. Arimin. page 165. l. 1.
I shall answer in the 18. section, nu. 6.

. 4. Fifthly, this infallible rule provided by almighty God, as sufficient to
instruct every one, as well learned as unlearned, in all points of faith, must
have three properties or conditions. First it must be infallible, and most
undoubted sure. For otherwise faith grounded and built upon it cannot be
infallible, certain and sure. Secondly it must be such as may be easily and
plainly known to all sorts, learned and unlearned. For otherwise be it never
so certain and sure in it self, yet if it be unknown, or uncertainly known
unto them, it cannot be to them a rule or infallible mean whereby they may
attain to the infallible knowledge of the true faith. Thirdly it must be most
universal, that it may not only make us know certainly what is the true faith
in some one, or two, or more points, but absolutely in all points of faith. For
otherwise it is not a sufficient rule whereby we may attain to an entire
faith; which integrity of faith is necessary to salvation, as has been
proved.

The Answer.
1 To these three properties of the rule of faith, we must add two more, if we
will show all the nature thereof. First, that it be not partial, addicted more
to one side then another. Secondly, that it be of power and authority, able to
convince the conscience of such as use it, and from the which there can be no
appeal. For neither can it be a rule of the truth, which it self is crooked
with affection, neither may we safely rely upon it, if either it dismiss our
conscience wavering, or admit a superior rule whereto we may appeal. And the
reason is, because our faith and knowledge must be Col. 2.2. Basil. Reg.
contract. qu. 95.
with full assurance and persuasion; the which we cannot obtain unless the
rule give it us; and nothing can give it but that which has a coactiue power
to bind the conscience and to stay it at his own tribunal.

2 Next the second property must be expou^nded; that the rule be easy and
plain to all sorts of men learned and unlearned, to wit, which use the means,
and are diligent in attending it, and be enlightened by the spirit of God. To
all such it is plain be they never so unlearned: to the rest it is not;
neither is it a necessary condition of the rule so to be. Not because it self
is obscure at any time, but for that sometimes men have not eyes to see into
it. For all means and rules are vain, unless God give eyes to see: as Genesis
21.19.
he opened Hagars eyes to see the well of water: according to that of David,
Psalm. 119.18.
open mine eyes, that I may see the wonders of thy law: and Esa. 29.10. Pro. 14
6. Luc. 8.10. Ioh. 8.43.47. 1. Cor. 2.14. 2. Cor. 3.14. and 4.3.
the Scripture teaches the point manifestly. So says In. Ioh. lib. 1. cap. 4.
Cyril, that even those things which are very easy, yet to heretics be hard
to understand. And In Anchor.
Epiphanius: If a man be not taught of God to believe the truth, all things to
him are uneven, and crooked, which yet are strait and not to be excepted
against, to such as have obtained learning and understanding. Austin having in
his books of Christan doctrine propounded the rule of faith, whereby all
matters of faith must be determined, yet notwithstanding thus concludes.
Prolog. in lib. de doctrine. Christ.
To such as understand not what I write, I answer, they must not blame me if
they conceive not these things; as if I showed them with my finger the moon or
a star, which they would see, being not very clear, and they have not eyes to
see my finger, much less a star, they must not be offended at me if they see
it not: so they who understanding these my precepts, cannot yet see the things
which in the Scripture be dark, let them cease to blame me, and rather pray
God to give them eye sight. For I may point with my finger, but I cannot give
them eyes to see the things I point to.

. 5. All these being set down for certain grounds, the question is, what in
particular may be assigned, as an infallible rule sufficient in it self to
instruct all sorts of men, in all points of faith? This question I resolve, by
putting down and proving these four conclusions. Diligens, attenta,
frequensque lectio, tum meditatio and collatio ^cripturarum, omnium summa
regula ad intelligendum, mihi semper est visa. Acosta. apud Possen. l. 2. c. 15.
The first conclusion is, that the Scriptures alone, especially as translated
into the English tongue, cannot be this rule. This I prove.

The Answer.
1 This conclusion has two parts. First, that the Scripture is not the rule
which God has left to instruct us in the points of faith. Next that if
possible it were, yet, as we have it translated into English, it cannot.
Whereto I answer, that the doctrine of our Church is, Artic. 6. cap. The
doctrine of holy Scripture. Jewel. apol part. 2. cap 9. diuis. 1.
that the Scriptures comprehended in the canonical books of the old and new
Testament, is the rule of faith so far that whatsoever is not read therein, or
cannot be proved thereby, is not to be accepted as any point of faith, or
needful to be followed; but by it all doctrines taught, and the Churches
practice must be examined, and that rejected which is contrary to it, under
what title or pretense soever it come unto us.

2 And as for translations, we say that the divine truth which is the
infallible word of God, is alike contained in all translations, as the means
to show it us, and the vessels wherein it is presented to us: yet with this
difference, that the same is perfectly, immediately, and most absolutely, in the
original Hebrew and Greek; all other translations being to be tried by them.
And therefore Sacrae Scripturae infallibilis per omnia authoritas, and
integerrima in omnibus veritas, non pendet ex omnimoda incorruptibilitate
alicuius editionis, sed eius incorruptibilitas omnimoda in cord Ecclesiae ita
conseruatur, vt cum opus suerit opportune prouideat, ipsosque codices corrigat
and emendet. Dom. Bann. in 1. part. Tho. page 72.
we rely upon translations but in a certain manner and degree; namely with
this caution, that we try them by the original, and finding them to agree in
the matter, we hold the translation to be the same canonical Scripture that
the Greek and Hebrew is. Thus we say, that every translation consenting with
the original is canonical Scripture, because the matter of it is the pure
doctrine of the holy Ghost, and this doctrine contained in it, is the rule we
seek for. Otherwise, in the rigor of speech, we cannot call the English
translation the rule, no not yet the Greek and Hebrew; because all language
and writing is but a symbol or declaration of the rule, and a certain form,
or manner, or means, whereby it comes to us, as things are contained in their
words. And so to conclude, because the doctrine and matter of the text is not
made known to me but by the words and language, therefore I say the scripture
translated into English, is the rule of faith: whereupon I relying, have not a
humane but a divine authority. For even as I believe a divine truth, although
by humane voice in preaching it be conveyed to me; so I enjoy the infallible
doctrine of the Scriptures, immediately inspired by the holy Ghost, though by a
humane translation it be manifested to me. And this is our meaning when we call
the Scriptures translated into English, the rule. Which being explaned, I will
put the Reader in mind of three points to be noted about this conclusion, which
I will handle in the three next Digressions one after another.

Digression. 3. Wherein, by the Scriptures, Fathers, Reason, and the Papists
own confessions, it is showed, that the Scripture is the rule of faith.
3 And first let any man judge by that which follows, if this conclusion be
not contrary to the clear evidence of truth and Divinity. For the text in
plain words free from ambiguitie, says, 2. Tim. 3.15.
The Scriptures are able to make us wise to salvation through the faith that is
in Christ Jesus; and are profitable to teach, to improve, to correct, to
instruct in righteousness, that the man of God may be absolute and perfect to
every good work: or as Solomon Pro. 2.1.9.
speaks, They will make a man understand righteousness and judgment, and
equity, and every good path. Esa. 8.20.
We must repair to the law, to the testimony, if any speak not according to
that word, there is no light in them. Mal. 4.4. Lu. 16.29.
Remember the law of Moses my servant, which I commanded him in Horeb for all
Israel, with the statutes and judgments. 2. Pet 1.19.
We have a more sure word of the Prophets, whereunto we must take heed as to a
light that shines in a dark place till the day star arise in our hearts.
Luc. 1.4. Ioh. 5.39. and 20.31.
These things are written that we might have the certainty of that whereof we
are instructed, and that we might believe in Jesus, and in believing, have life
eternal. 1. Cor. 4 6.
We may not presume above that which is written. Luc. 10.26.
And when one asked Christ what he might do to be saved, he referred him to the
Scripture for his direction. And so Luc. 16 29.
did Abraham answer the rich glutton, They have Moses and the Prophets. And
Deuteronomy. 12.8.32. Pro. 30.5. Mat. 22.29. Gal. 1.8. Ephesians 2.20. Heb. 4.12. Ap. 22.18.
infinite more testimonies be there to the same effect. Now, shall the
Scripture be able to inform us to every good work, to teach us Christ
crucified, ( 1. Cor. 2.2.
and Paul desired to know no more) to give us light in darkness, to beget our
faith? Shall we be revoked from al other teachers to the^? and finally is there
no council, no comfort, no doctrine, no resolution needful for us, but there
it may be found, and yet it cannot be the rule? it is impious to think it, and
blasphemous to say it. The primitive Church spoke far otherwise.

4 And consider how the Jesuit can answer the places without tergiuersatio^.
Ep. 80. ^d Eustat. medicu^. (...). p. 334
Basil says: Let the holy Scripture be arbitrator between us, and whosoever
hold opinions consonant to those heavenly oracles, let the truth be adjudged on
their side. Optatus disputing against a Donatist, thus presses him. Cont.
Parme^. lib 5.
We are, says he, to enquire out some to be judges between us in these
controversies: the Christians cannot, because both sides cannot yield them, and
by parts taking the truth shall be hindered. The judge must be had from without
our selves. If a Pagan, he knows not the mysteries of Christianity; if a Jew,
he is an enemy to baptism; therefore upon the earth no judgment concerning
this matter can be found; De coelo quaerendus est iudex: et qui in tumulo
quiescit, tacitis de tabulis loquitur viuus: volu^tas eius velut in testamento
sic in Euangelio inquiratur.
the judge must be had from heaven: but to what end should we knock at heaven,
when here we have one in the Gospel? Contra Hermog.
Tertullia^ calls the Scriptures the rule of faith. And Hom. 13. in 2. Cor.
Chrysostom a most exquisite rule and exact squire and balance to try all
things by. And Orat. de iis qui adeu^t Hicrosol: (...)
Gregory Nyssen, a strait and inflexible rule. Austin De bono viduit. c. 1.
tom. 4.
says, the Scripture pitcheth down the rule of our faith. And again he De.
Nupt. and concup. ad Valor. l 2. c. 33.
says: This controversy depending between us requires a judge: let Christ
therefore judge, and let the Apostle Paul judge with him, because Christ also
speaks in his Apostle. And Ep. 112. ad Paulin.
again: If a matter be grounded on the clear authority of the holy Scripture,
such I mean as the Church calls canoniall, it is to be believed without all
doubt: but as for other witnesses and testimonies, upon whose credit any thing
may be urged unto us to believe it, it is lawful for thee either to credit or
not to credit them, according as thou shall perceive them of weight to deserve
or not to deserve credit. De Error. profan. relig. Arcana Prophetaru^ veneranda
pa^dantur; ad sistat nobis sanctorum oraculorum fides page 61
Julius Firmicus; Let the mysteries of the Prophets be opened, let the credit
of the holy oracles stand by us. Ho. 1. in Ier.
Origin, We must of necessity call the Scriptures to witness, for our senses
and interpretations without them, are of no credit. De doctr. Christ. lib. 2.
c. 9
Austin, All points which concern faith and good life are found in those
things which are plainly set down in Scripture. Ibid. c. 42.
And whatsoever thing it be that a man learn out of the Scripture, if it be
hurtful, there it is condemned, if it be profitable, there it is found.
Catech. 4 (...). page 15.
Cyril the Bishop of Jerusalem, Concerning the holy and heavenly mysteries of
faith, we must not deliver any thing though never so small, without the holy
Scripture, neither may we be led away with probabilities and show of words:
neither yet believe me barely saying these things unto you, unless thou also
receive the demonstration thereof from the Scripture. For the security of our
faith arises from the demostration of the holy Scripture. Theod. ^^it. lib. 1.
c. 7. page 2^4.
The Empereur Constantine, in his speech to the Bishops of the Nicen Council
has this memorable saying: (...). etc.
We have the teaching of the holy Ghost written. For the Evangelical and
Apostolic books, and the decrees of the old Prophets do evidently teach us
the things that are needful to be known concerning God. Therefore l^ying
aside all contention, let us out of the diuine-inspired Scripture take the
resolution of those things we seek for. Thus the ancient Church would never
have spoken, if it had been of the Jesuits mind, that the Scriptures alone
cannot be the rule to direct our faith.

5 And very common sense may confirm their judgment. For if the written word
be granted to be the rule in one point, as August de Trinit lib. 15. cap. vltim.
in the Trinity for example, who may deny it to be the rule in another, seeing
the rule is but one for all, and the nature thereof is to be perfect, as the
Jesuit himself requires? Again, what father? what council? or Churches
judgment is so absolute? what doctrine or exposition so likely, Act 17.11.
Ioh. 5.39.
but it is examined by the Scriptures? And when the Papists have said what they
can, they are constrained to grant, that all other authority is finally
resolved into the authority of the Scripture: these are the words of Gregory
of Valence: Comment. Theolog. in Thom. tom. 3. disp. 1 qu. 1. punct 1. page 31.
If a man be asked why he believes, for example that God is one in nature and
three in person? let him answer because God has revealed it: If again he be
demanded, how he knows that God has revealed it? let him answer, that indeed
he knows it not evidently, but believes it infallibly by faith, and that
upon no other revelation: been tamen ob insallib^lem propositionem Ecclesiae,
tanquam conditionem.
but yet the infallible proposition of the Church, as a condition requisite for
the believing it, does well move him theru^to. Sirursus vnde cognoscat
propositionem Ecclesiae esse infallibilems fimiliter dicat, se clare no^ nosse,
credere tamen fide infallibili ob reuelatione^ Scripturae, testimonio
perhibentis Ecclesiae: cui reuelationi no^ credit ob aliam reuelationem, sed ob
seipsam.
If again you ask: And how does he know the proposition of the Church to be
infallible? let him likewise say, he knows it not evidently, but believes it
infallibly, because the Scripture has revealed it giving testimony to the
Church, which revelation he believes not upon the credit of any other
revelation, but for it self, though hereunto the proposition of the Church, as
a requisite condition, be needful. Let this speech of the Jesuit be well
noted.

6 Finally the evidence of this truth is such, that it conuinceth the Papists
themselves, many of them. Thomas of Aquin Lect. 1. in 1. Tim. 6.
says, The doctrine of the Apostles and Prophets is called canonical, because
it is the rule of our understanding. And again, 1. qu. art. 8.
Our faith rests, and stays it self upon the revelation given to the
Apostles and Prophets, which writ the canonical books, and not upon
revelation, if any such have been made to other Doctors. Antoninus the
Archbishop of Florence Sum. part. 3. tit. 18. c. 3.. 3.
writes expressly, that God has spoken but once, and that in the holy
Scripture, and that so plentifully, to meet with all temptations and all cases
that may fall out, and all good works: that, as Gregory in the two and
twentieth book of his Morals expounds it, he needs no more speak unto us
concerning any necessary matter, seeing all things are found in the Scripture.
Gerson, Trithem. catal. Script. eccl.
the great man of the Council of Constance, De Commun. sub vtraque specie.
says, the Scripture is the rule of our faith, which being well understood, no
authority of men is to be admitted against it. Durand Praefat. in Sentent.
says, that generally in the things that touch our faith, we must speak to
that which the scripture delivers; lest any man fall into that which the
Apostle notes, 1. Cor. 8. If he think he knows something, yet he knows
nothing as he ought to know; for the manner of our knowledge, Sacra Scriptura
mensuram fidei exprimit.
must be, not to exceed the measure of faith, and the holy Scripture expresses
the measure of faith. Alliaco the Cardinal 1. Sent. q. 1. art. 3.1. Coroll.
lit. H. quoniam ad ipsas fit vltimata resolutio theologici discursus.
says, The verities themselves of the sacred Canon, be the principles of
Divinity: and the final resolution of Theological discourse is made into
the^, and originally from them is drawn every conclusion of Divinity.
Conradus Clingius Locorum l. 3. cap. 29. page 298. Norma. vlna. Index.
says, The Scripture is the infallible rule of truth, yea the measure and
judge of the truth. Iac. Peers. a valdiu. de ratio. Con. l. 2. c. 19.
Peresius the Divinity reader at Barcilona in Spain, says, The authority of
no Saint is of infallible truth, for Saint Austin gives that honor only to the
sacred Scriptures. That only is the rule which is of infallible truth: but the
Scripture only is of infallible truth: therefore the Scripture only is the
rule. Finally Bellarmine himself, one of the two that have won the garland,
says Biblioth. select. lib. 7. cap. 2 page 458. q De Verb. Dei. l. 1. c. 2
Posseuinus, acknowledges as much as I say against the Jesuits conclusion,
let his words be excused how they can: for thus he De verb. Dei. lib. 1. cap. 2.
writes, The rule of faith must be certain and known: for if it be not
certain, it is no rule at all; if it be not known, it is no rule to us: but
nothing is more certain, nothing better known then the sacred Scripture
contained in the writings of the Prophets and Apostles. Sacr. Scriptura regula
crede^di. certissima tutissimaque per corporales literas, quas and cerneremus
and legeremus, erudire nos voluit Deus.
Wherefore the sacred Scripture is the rule of faith, most certain and most
safe: and God has taught us by corporal letters, which we might see and
read, what he would have us believe concerning him. This he writes against
Swinkfield and the Libertines, relying upon revelations; whereby you may freely
judge whether the truth have not constrained him to renounce the Jesuits
conclusion. Shall the Libertines be recalled from their blind revelations to
the written text; and shall not the Papists be revoked from their uncertain
traditions to the same rule? Is nothing more known, nothing more infallible
then the Scripture, by the Jesuits own confession, and yet shall our Priests
reject it from being the rule, as not sufficient to preserve from error, not
universal enough, not known enough, not infallible enough? I pray you
consider well how far our adversaries deal against their own conscience in
this point: the same Jesuit says De notis Eccl. c. 2.
in another place, The Scripture is better known then the Church in some
cases, as namely where it is received, and speaks plainly, and the question
is of the Church. Now we admit the Scriptures on all hands, and all the
question between us is about the Church: and therefore let them do us justice,
and allow us the Scripture to be rule and judge, because it is better known
then the Church: and let the Jesuit recant his conclusions, and yield either to
the evident testimonies of the text against him, or to the judgment of the
Fathers, or at the least to the confession of his own Doctors, whose
testimony he may not by 2. q. 7. c. Si haereticus. Sin aute^ orthodoxus contra
haereticum litiget, pro orthodoxo quidem haeretici testimonium valeat: contra
orthodoxum autem solius orthodoxi testimonium valeat.
the law refuse, because they are of his own church: or if he will not, then
the next book that he writes, let him send us word by whom he will be tried,
and he shall be provided for.

Digression. 4. containing the very cause why the Papists disable the Scripture
so, from being the rule.
7 Secondly, the causes why the Papists disable the Scriptures from being the
rule, and strive so for their Churches authority, are especially two. First,
that so they may make themselves judges in their own cause. For who sees not,
that if the Church be the rule of faith, and theirs be the Church, which way
the verdict will go? chiefly when they shall behold the Pope with his infall^ble
judgment, mounted upon the tribunal, and made interpreter of all the evidence
that shall be brought in? when Scriptures, Fathers, Councels, and Church must
all be expounded by his judgment? For Thom. opusc. contra error. Graecoru^.
Turrecre n. Sum. de eccl. l. 3. c. 23. S^mm Syluest. verb. Fides. nu. 2. Alua^.
Pelag. de planct. eccl. lib. 1. art. 6. Bellarm. de Christ. l. 2. c. 28. Greg.
de Valent. analys. fidei.
this they require, that so we might return them Campians conceit: Ratio. 2.
apud Posseuin. biblioth. select. lib. 7. c. 18.
In fine so they order their matters, that you shall have no trial pass,
unless you be resolved to stand to the award of themselves that are arraigned.

8 Next for that they know and confess the most and greatest points of their
religion, even welnigh all wherein they dissent from us, have no foundation on
the Scriptures, but as Andradius Orthod. explic. l. 2.
speaks, would reele and stagger if tradition supported them not: whereupon
Can. locorum l. 3. c. 3.
they admonish one another, that there is more strength to confute heretics
in traditions then in the Scripture, yea all disputations with them must be
determined by traditions: so little hope have they of receiving any vantage by
the Scripture. Therefore Bristow dealt surely and circumspectly for his Roman
faith, Mot. vltim.
where, teaching his scholar how to deal with a Protestant, he bids him,
first get the proud heretic out of his weak and false castle of only
Scripture, into the plain field of traditions, miracles, Councels and Fathers,
and then like cowards they shall not stand. For I dare undertake on a Papists
behalf, that put the Scripture to silence, and set the Pope as judge, and give
him authority to make and repeal laws, to use traditions, approve Councels,
expound Fathers and Scriptures, declare the Churches mind, Papa dicitur
coeleste habere arbitrium: sententiam quae nulla est facit aliquam. De
translat. episco. C. Quanto. in Glossa.
make something of that which is nothing, and to use his will for a lawful
reason: and finally as Stapleton Princip. doctr. fidei. in praefat.
speaks, let us imagine that we hear God himself speaking in him, and
therefore upon his authority teaching us, the foundation of our religion must
be laid: and as Bristow wisely foreseeth, the Protestants shall be proved to be
cowardly convicted heretics indeed. Save that he did not foresee, how by
confessing so much of his religion to rely only on tradition and the credit of
his Church, he has debarred himself and all Papists for alleging the text
for it; and any man of mean capacity will easily conceive what small comfort
can be in that religion which is thus acknowledged to have no warrant from the
Scripture. And we Protestants cannot but note their conscience, and smile at
their confidence, which are so loud in alleging texts for that which they know
and grant cannot be proved but by tradition: and D. Saunders, was but in an
Irish fit when he cried out so vehemently, Rock of the Church pa. 193.
How unhappy are men now a days, that having most plain Scriptures (not such
as possible needs the Churches declaration, but most plain and express
Scripture, not in some, which Multoque maxima pars euangelij peruenit ad nos
traditione, perexigua literis est mandara. Hosius confess. c. 92. vide Eck.
ench. c. 4. de scriptur.
other Papists could have been c^ntent with, but) in all points for the
Catholic faith, and none at all against the same, yet they pretend by the
very Scriptures to overcome the Catholics. If this had been true, traditions
should have been in less account then now they are, and the Scriptures more
allowed.

Digress. 5. Wherein, against the Jesuits conceit, secretly implied in his first
conclusion, it is showed that the Scriptures ought to be translated into the
mother tongue, and so read indifferently by the lay people of all sorts.
9 If the Jesuit by his general exception against our English translation,
meant also to gird at the reading of the Scriptures in the mother tongues, and
the permission thereof to the common people, according to the conceit of
Bellarm. de verbo Dei. l. 2. c. 15. Rhem. praefat. Staphy. apol. Petes. de
tradit. part 2. assert. 3. page 43. Ouand. breuilo. in 4. did 13. prop. 13. l.
edesima. etc.
such as very odiously exclaim against it, for that the translated Bibles be
in the hands of every husbandman, artificer, prentise, boy, girl, mistress,
maid, man, etc: you have at hand wherewith to answer him. For in vain were the
Scriptures given us Mat. 4 4.7, 10. Ephesians 6.17.
to be our armor against Satan, if we might not be exercised in them: in vain
are we commanded Deuteronomy. 6.7. and 13.12. Ios. 1.8. Ioh. 5.39.
to search them, if they may not be translated for our understanding: in vain
are we taught Col. 3.16. 2. Cor. 8.7. 2. Pet. 1.5. Heb. 5.12.
to abound in knowledge and understanding, if the Scripture, Psa. 19.7. Prou.
1.2. 2. Tim. 3.15.
the means thereof be holden from us: and in vain have the words of Christ
and his Church called them Digress. 3.
the Rule, if we may not use them; or if as Duraeus Confut. resp. Whitak. 1.
^at. 5. page 148.
writes, God had left us, not the books of the Scriptures, but Pastors and
doctors: or as Apolo part 2. transl. by Stapl. page 76.
Staphylus counsels, a Portesse containing, I know not what parcels, were
sufficient: or if Hosius the Cardinal lie not, that De sacr. Vernac. legend.
ignorance of the things we believe, is worthy not only of forgiveness, but
also of reward: and De express. Dei verbo, page 91.
it is fitter for women to meddle with their distaffe then Gods word.

10 But whatsoever the conceit of these men may be, certain it is, and the
Ecclesiastical stories make it clear, that in the Primitive church the word
of God was not only permitted the lay people to read, but also for that cause
translations were provided, and they called upon to be diligent in them, of
what estate soever they were. (...). Socrat. l. 4. c. 33.
Vlphilas a Bishop of the Goths, translated the Scriptures into their language,
that so the barbarians might learn the words of God, says Socrates.
Auentinus, Annal. l. 4.
says that Methodius translated them into the Slauonian tongue. Homil. 1. in
Ioh.
Chrysostom mentions Syrian, Egyptian, Indian, Persian and Ethiopian
translations, yea others innumerable. De Curand. Graecorum affect. l. 5
Theodoret says, the Bible was turned into all languages used in the world
Greek, Latin, Egyptian, Persian, Indian, Armenian, Scythian, Sarmatian: which
is also proved by this, that diverse books and fragments of them are extant to
this day. And concerning our own nation, Eccles. hist. gent. Angl. l. 1. c. 1.
Bid shows, that of old it had the Scriptures in all the languages thereof.
And finally Rhem. praefac.
the Papists themselves cannot deny, but this was the use of those ancient
times. Let the testimony of Austine be noted for the clearing of the point: De
doctrine. Christian. l. 2. c. 5.
It is come to pass that the Scripture, wherewith so many diseases of men's will
are helped, proceeding from one tongue which fitly might be dispersed through
the world, being spread far and wide by means of the diverse languages
whereunto it is translated, is thus made known to nations for their salvation:
the which when they read, they desire nothing else but to attain to the mind
of him that wrote it, and so to the will of God, according to the which we
believe such men spoke. And what is more common with Chrysos. hom. 3. de Laz.
and ho. 9. ad Coloss. and hom. 2. and 5. in Matthew. and hom. 29. in Genesis
the Fathers, then to call upon the people to get them Bibles, to read them,
to examine that they hear by the^, and sharply to rebuke the negligence of
such as did it not.

11 It is a common reproach laid upon our people, that they read the Scriptures
in their houses, and the translations thereof be nothing else but profanations
of the Bible: and this graceless conceit, like blasphemous Atheists, they urge
as Nunc haec Scripturarum profanatio verius quam translatio, non solu^
zona^ios, bouilos, pistores, saitores, sutores, verum etia^ zonarias, bouilas,
pistrices, sattrices, sutrices, facit nobis apostolas, prophetissas, doctrices.
Hos de sacro vernac. legend. page 162.
rudely: exclaiming withal, Alphons. Castrens. de punit. haeret. l. 3. c. 6.
Ouand breuil. in 4. d. 13. prop. 13.
that this is a principal cause to increase heresy, and such like: all which
being compared with the practice of the Primitive and Apostolic Church, you
may freely judge how truly the Jesuit says.
afterward, his Roman church never altered any one point of religion. For thus
writes De curand. Graecorum affect. l. 5.
Theodoret of his times: You shall every where see these points of our faith to
be known and understood, not only by such as are teachers in the Church, but
even of cobblers, and smithes, and websters, and all kind of artificers: yea all
our women, not they only which are booke-learned, but they also that get their
living with their needle; yea maidseruants and waiting women: and not citizens
only, but husbandmen of the country are very skillful in these things: yea
you may hear among us ditchers, and neat-heards, and woodsetters discoursing
of the Trinity and the creation, etc. The like is reported by others. And what
marvel? for the laity was accustomed to the text of the Bible as well as the
learned, young children and women as well as others: and Hosius de expres. Dei
verbo.
his doctrine that was president in the Trent conspiracy, that a distaffe was
fitter for women then the Bible, was not yet hatched. Socrat. l. 5. c. 8 Nicep.
l. 12. c. 12.
Nectarius of a Judge was made Bishop of Constantinople: and Socrat. l. 4. c.
30. Nicep. l. 11. c. 32.
Ambrose of a Deputy, Bishop of Millan: Photius epist. ad Nicol. Pap. apud
Baron. to. 10. an. 862. nu. 47.
Gregory the father of Nazianzene, and Thalassius the Bishop of Caesarea, of
lay men were made Bishops: which shows how diligent lay men were in the word
of God, that they could be able to sustain the office of a Bishop. Eusebius. lib.
6. c. 3.
Origin from his childhood was taught the Scriptures, and gat them without
book, and questioned with his father Leonides a holy martyr, who rejoiced in
it, about the difficult senses thereof. So Basil. epist. 74.
Macrina, Basils nurse, taught him the Scripture of a child, after the example
of Timothy; and Georg. Laodic. apud Sozom. l. 3. c. 6.
Emesenus from his infancy was used to the word of God. Niceph. Callist. l. 8.
c. 14.
Many lay men, among whom was the famous Paphnutius, being very learned came to
the Nicene council. Nazianz. orat. funeb. in Gorgon.
Gorgonia, the sister of Nazianzene, was well learned. Hierom Epitaph. Paulae.
writes of Paula a gentlewoman, how she set her maids to learn the Scripture:
and many of his writings are directed to women, commending their labor in the
Scripture, and encouraging them thereto: as to Paula, Eustochium, Saluina,
Celantia, etc. which he would not have done if he had been a Papist. Cyril.
Alexand. contra Julian. lib. 6.
It was the reproach that Julian the apostata laid on the Christians, that their
women were medlers with the Scriptures: and from him the Papists have borrowed
it. But Col. 3.16.
the Apostles counsel is rather to be followed, Let the word of Christ dwell
in you plentifully in all wisdom, teaching and admonishing your selves. Upon
which place says Hierom, Hence we see that lay men must have the knowledge of
the Scriptures, and teach one another, not only sufficiently, but also
abundantly: And the Greek scholiast, Christ will have his doctrine dwell in us
very plentifully, and that by searching the Scripture.

. 6. First because they fail in the first condition, which I said before was
requisite. For thee translations are not infallible, as the rule of faith must
be. For neither were the Scriptures immediately written by the holy Ghost in
this language; neither were the translators assisted by the same Spirit
infallibly: infallibly I say, that is, in such sort as it were impossible they
should err in any point. Since therefore the translator, as being but a man,
may err, to say nothing of that which by Gregory Martin is proved, and by the
often change, and variable translations, is showed, that some have erred: how
can a man, and especially an unlearned man, who has not sufficient learning,
means, nor leisure to compare the translation with the prime authentical
(...), or original, be infallibly sure that this particular translation which
I have, or you have, do not err? And if in some places it err, how can I he
infallibly sure that in there places which do seem to favor your side; it
does not err, unless you will admit an infallible authority in the Church,
to assure us that such or such a translation does not err? of which authority
I shall say more hereafter.

The Answer.
1 This section contains the Jesuits first argument, to prove that the
Scriptures translated into English cannot be the rule of faith: and thus it may
be concluded:

The rule is infallible and free from error.

But the English translation is not infallible and free from error.

Therefore the English translation is not the rule.

Whereunto I briefly answer two things: the first is, that the conclusion may
be granted; for we do not think this or that translation to be the rule and
judge, but only that it is a means whereby the divine truth, which is the
rule, is made known to us: for we put a difference between the doctrine
taught in the Scripture, and the means whereby the doctrine is uttered to our
capacity, as between things and words. The former is the rule, the latter the
vessel wherein the rule is presented to us, which in the original is perfect,
but in all translations defective more or less. See my answer to. 5. nu. 1. 2.

2 Next, to the argument, that our translations are not infallible, I answer,
An edition or transl^tion of the Scripture may be erroneous many ways, and one
way is in respect of the words only and not of the sense: for so it may be
corrupt, that is to say, not altogether so perfect as it should be. Now this
does nothing hinder the truth of the matter, or the integrity of the text.
This distinction is Relect. princip. doctrine. contriou 5. q. 3. art. 3. page
525.
D. Stapletons, and therefore the Jesuit must admit it, and it is the truth:
for no translation can fully express the idiom or property of the original
language, and words and phrases may be defective, and all secondary causes have
their impediments, all which may in their kind be truly called errors: and we
deny not but our English translation, and the Latin vulgar too, is subject to
them; but this hinders not the truth of the matter, nor the perfection of the
text, says D. Stapleton.

3 And therefore that which the Jesuit urges against our translations, is of
no force, because it proves no error in matter but inwards only, as I have
said before: for we grant as he says, the Scripture was not written
immediately in English, neither was the translator assisted by the holy Ghost in
such sort that he could not err in any point, but being a man be might err:
for he might err in his own work which he did himself, viz. in words and
proprieties; but in the matter contained, which is Gods work, he could not,
holding him to the original Hebrew and Greek, which our translator did; or at
the least it was not impossible but he might truly and faithfully translate
without any new inspiration, though he were a man otherwise subject to error:
because the original might lead him, and many other means might direct and
admonish him, and discover his error; else what will the Jesuit say when an
ordinary Pastor preaches Gods word to the people? For that which he
delivers may be free from error, and yet his voice is a humane work, and
himself has no immediate or infallible inspiration. The very same reason is
there of translations: for a divine work propounded by a humane means may be
free from error; which I further prove by Bellarmines own confession, who
speaking of the vulgar Latin, Admittimus enim interpretem non esse prophetam,
and errare potuisse, tamen dicimus eum no^ errasse in illa versione quam
ecclesia proba^it. De verbo Dei. l. 2. c. 11.
says, He admits the translator was no Prophet, but subject to error, yet
he could not err in that translation which the Church allowed: where he
grants that some translatio^s done by a man subject to error, may yet be free
if the Church allow it. Now the Church has allowed our English, and we say
ours is the true Church; and therefore the translator, though he were but a
man, did not err. Again, thus I reason: if the Latin translator were freed
from erring, that is to say, might err, but yet did not; then our English
translator may be freed likewise, because he has the same means: for if the
approbatio^ of the church exempted him, ours also has the same approbation:
but that could not exempt him, for it was extant, and therefore was free from
error, if ever it were so at al, It began to be received about the time of
Gregory the great (who entered his Papacy in the year 590) says Baron. annal.
to^. 2. an. 231. nu 47. but was never declared to be authentical till the
Council of Trent. Sess. 4. anno 1546.
a thousand years, or at the least some time before the Church either allowed
it for authentical, or could take notice of it. And when the Council of Trent
did approve it, it put no other truth into it then was there before, but only
declared it to be true. It follows therefore, that the translator was
preserved from error by no other means: and why might not the same direct ours
also; as namely the infallible and perpetual verity of the doctrine it self
translated, the direction of Gods spirit, his own diligence, means, skill,
faithfulness, and the Churches careful oversight?

4 The sum of all is this, that our English Bible contains two things: the
Doctrine, and the Translation. 1. Tim 3.16. 2. Pet. 2.20.
The Doctrine was inspired of God and written by men infallibly assisted by the
holy Ghost, and therefore is free from error, and so consequently the Scripture
translated into English, in respect of the matter, is infallibly true, because
it was done by the immediate inspiration of the spirit of God. The translation
was done by the ministry of the Church, and industry of certain men: who
though they had no supernatural inspiration, or privilege from error, yet we
know infallibly they have not erred in the matter, by the same means whereby
we know other truths, and discern other articles of Christian faith: namely by
the light of the doctrine translated, the testimony of the spirit, the
ministry of the word, the rules of art, the knowledge of the tongues, and such
like.

5 To that which the Jesuit faith out of Gregory Martin, I answer, that Martin
has said something against our translations, but proved nothing. Doctor Fulkes
confutation of his discovery lies yet unanswered, and long must do. Martin
cannot give one instance of the sense corrupted: his exceptions are childish,
if you read his book, But as De opt. genesis interpret. ad Pammach.
Jerome said of some that vnskillfully reproved his translations, so I may
answer Martin and the Jesuit, These and such like toys are scored up for our
heinous faults. Martin missed it far, as Treatise of Renuntiat. p. 156.
some of his fellows charge him, producing the Council of Trent against him,
when he allowed Recusants to go to Church with a Protestation. He that was so
short in his proofs at home, might be as wide in his discoueries abroad. And
if the Palaephat. de Fabul. non credent.
Lamia would have plucked his eyes out of his box and used them at home, as
well as he did abroad, he might have seen some errors also in his own vulgar
Latin: whereof I will say something in the seventh digression.

6 His next reason is, that the often change and variable translations do show
that some have erred. Whereto I answer two things, First, though it be granted
that some have erred, yet hence it follows not that all have, which is the
point he must prove: else he were as gond say nothing. For we defend the
Scriptures well and faithfully translated; not this or that man's edition,
whereof our Church takes no notice whether it be pure or no. It is sufficient
for the verity of our assertion, that in the Church there be some translations
faithful, and agreeing with the original.

7 Secondly, we do not deny but our translations vary and have been altered,
according to Posseuin. biblioth. select. l. 2. cap. 8. and inde. Sixth. Senens.
biblioth. Sanct. lib. 8. haeres. 13. Bellar. de verb. Dei. l. 2. cap. 8.
Caesar. Baron. tom. 2. an. 231. Aug. de doctr. Christ. lib. 2. cap. 11.
the example of the primitive Church before us. But this variety has bin in
the words and style, and not in any material point of the sense. For we know
the divine doctrine to be one and the same in all translations; immediately in
the original, and more obscurely in the translations: and therefore we so use
them, as that we examine all by the original, approving the best, and not
hindering the mending of it, if need require. But this change implies no such
error in the matter. For one true sense may be uttered diversely, and though
things be always one and the same, yet words be diverse. In which sense our
translations are of different sort, and yet no material error. As for example,
some playner, or in phrase liker the original then othersome. One translation
is in verse, another in prose: one word for word, another sense for sense: one
has a higher and obscurer phrase, another a lower and playner: yet how can it
be inferred hereupon, that therefore they be erroneous, when they all yield the
same divine sense? Therefore Austins judgment is more to be preferred, who
says, De doctrine. Christ. lib. 2. c. 12. and 14.
the variety and multitude of translations does not hinder us from
understanding the text, but very much help us, specially if we shall
diligently compare them one with another. And what shall become of the popish
Authentical vulgar, if change and variety be a sign of error, which so often
was changed before it came to that it is, and since the Trent approbation has
so many different copies? Yea what shall become of their Missals, Portesses,
and Service books that so many times have bin reformed, and more should be,
but that the Service of the Church would be altered so far: that scarce any
show of the ancient Religion would be remaining in it, Loc. lib. 11. cap. 5.
says Canus a Popish Doctor.

8 But the Jesuit obiecteth further, that seeing the translatour, being but a
man, may err, how shall an unlearned man be infallibly sure that this or that
translation erreth not? or if it err in on point, that it does not in another,
unless the Churches authority be admitted to assure us? Whereto I answer,
Psalm. 119 105. Prou. 6.23. 2. Pet. 1.19.
that the doctrine contained in the Scripture, is a light, and so abides into
what language soever it be translated, and therefore the children of light know
it and discern it. For Ioh. 10.4. 1. Cor. 2.15. 1. Ioh. 2 20. Ioh. 7.17 and
14.16.17.
God directs them by the holy Ghost, who opens their hearts, that they know
his voice from all others, and that the light of his truth may shine unto the^.
Which light is of this nature, that it gives testimony to it self, and
receives authority from no other, as the Sun is not seen by any light but
his own, and we discern sweet from sour by it own taste. And for the opening
of our eyes to see this light, whereby our conscience may be assured, we have
diverse means: some private, as skill in the tongues, learning, labor, prayer,
conference, etc. Some public, as the ministry of the word, which is the
ordinance of God to beget this assurance: which act of the Church is not
authority to secure me, but ministry to show me that which shall secure me:
which ministry is founded on the Scripture it self, in that from thence it
fetches the reasons that may persuade me, and shows the light that does
infallibly assure me. And thus we know our translations to be true.

Digression. 6. Declaring how the assurance of our faith is not built on the
Churches authority, but on the illumination of Gods spirit shining in the
Scripture it self.
9 So then the unlearned man is secured, not upon the Churches credit and
authority, but by her ministry which teaches him, he is directed to the
light it self: and this ministry we have and use for our translations: but
they that obey it, know the translation; and so proportionably all other
articles of faith to be infallible, because the matter thereof appears unto
them, as a candle in a lantern, showing it self in it own light. And that
you may see the difference between these two, the Churches teaching, and the
illumination of the spirit, in assuring us: the spirit of God is an inward
means, the teaching of the Church an outward; the spirit secureth us by his
own authority, the Church directs us by her ministry; the spirit has
light in it self, the Church borrows hers from the Scriptures; the spirit
can secure us alone, the Church never can without the spirit. But nothing can
be playner to this purpose then the saying of Constantine the great in his
epistle to the Persian: (...). Theod. hist. lib. 1. cap. 25.
Marking the divine faith, I obtain the light of truth, and following the
light of truth, I acknowledge the divine faith. We need then a more certain
authority then the voice of the Church, that may prostrate our mind with a
lightning from heaven, and stand upon his own ground; not drawing his
resolution from any thing out of it self.

10 This is not far from that which the learned of the Papists be driven to
acknowledge, through the necessity of the truth. For thus writes Princip.
doctrinal. lib. 8. cap. 22.
Stapleton in that book where he most defends the Churches authority: The
godly are brought to faith by the voice of the Church, but being once brought,
and enlightened with the light of divine inspiration, then they believe no more
for the Churches voice, but because of the heavenly light. And yet more
plainly in Triplicat. inchoata aduers. Gulielm. Whittak. in admonit ad Whitak.
the last book that ever he wrote, that one would wonder the Jesuit should
see no authority to secure us but the Churches: The inward persuasion of the
holy Ghost is so necessary, and effectual for the believing of every object of
faith, Nec absque illa quicquam a quoquam credi possit, etsi millies Ecclesia
attestetur: and per illam solam persuasi^nem, quodlibet credendu^ credi queat,
t^cente prorsus, vel no^ audita Ecclesia.
that without it neither can any thing by any man be believed, though the
Church testified with it a thousand times; and by it alone any matter may be
believed, though the Church held her peace, or never were heard. Where is he
then that says we cannot be infallibly sure that this or that is doctrine of
faith, free from error, unless we admit an infallible authority in the Church
to assure us?

Digression. 7. Wherein the Trent vulgar Latin, and our English translation are
briefly compared together.
11 Which authority if we did admit, supposing the Church were like theirs,
might we not speed possible as the Papists have done in their authentical
vulgar, and be assured of that which were stark naught. For I think the Sun
never saw any thing more defective and maimed then the vulgar Latin, and yet
Council. Trid. sess. 4.
their Church has canonized it for good, and preferred it before the original
Greek and Hebrew, which Andrad. defens. Trident. fid lib. 4. Joan. Isaac.
defens. veritatis. Hebr. aduers. Lindan. Molina in 1. Tho. q 27. art. 1. disp.
3. p. 399. Alponsus Mendoz. cont^ou. Theol. qu. 7 pa. 514. Sixth. Senens. bib.
l. 8. haer. 2. page 318. Do. Barn. part. 1. page 73.
themselves cannot deny to be pure from all corruption, and therefore in all
sense it were likely we should have the better translation, which so
religiously follow the original. I omit to produce examples of the several
additions, detractions, falsifications, deprauations, and intolerable
barbarismes of that vulgar Latin: others have done it sufficiently; and the
learned Papists complain upon it bitterly, if they could tell how to help it;
but who may lift up the heel against the Trent brat? Thus writes de optim.
gen interpret. l. 3. c. 1. 2. 4. 6. Idem Sixth. Senen bib. sanc. l. 8. in sine
page 365. and late Dom. Bann. in. 1. part Tho. qu. 1 page 67. and inde.
Lindan their own Bishop; It has monstrous corruptions of all sorts, scarce
one copy can be found that has one book of Scripture undefiled and whole.
Many points are translated too intricately, and darkely; some improperly and
abusiuely, some not so fully, nor so well and truly, sundry places thrust out
from their plain and natural sense: the translator possible was no Latinist
but a smattering Grecian. So that if our translation were as bad as the
Jesuit, or Gregory Martin could have said, yet were we in as good a case as
themselves. For when they talk such wonders of their vulgar, as for example,
Bibl. Com. plut. in praefat.
that it hangs between the Greek and Hebrew, as Christ did between two
thieves: or as Posseuinus Bibliothec. select. lib. 2. ca. 10.
speaks, It stands as the pillar of truth, and the haven whereunto we must
betake our selves from the waves of so many different translations: I say,
these and such like maruels are told of it, but to bring me^ asleep; for many
learned Papists can see no such thing in it.

. 7. Secondly they fail in the second condition. Aliqui existima^t Scripturas
difficiliores esse, quam vt debeant laicoru^ manibus conteri. Sed aliter visum
est patribus veteris and noui testamenti. Claud. Espe^c com. Tit. 2. and 2.
Tim. 3.
For the Scriptures of themselves alone be obscure, and unknown, at least to
unlearned men, who cannot read them, and therefore they alone, in themselves,
cannot be a sufficient rule to instruct them in all points of faith, as is
plain. For lock up an vnliterate man and a Bible together for a time in a
study; and he will come forth as ignorant in matters of faith as he went in,
if we add no other means but the bare written word, which he cannot read, to
instruct him: and yet unlearned men may be saved; and saved they cannot be
without an entire infallible faith, and this they cannot have, unless there be
some rule and infallible means provided by almighty God accommodate to their
capacity, to teach them this faith; The Apostles and Prophets made their
writings so plain and evident to al me^, that every man of himself only by
reading may learn the things spoken therein. Chrysostom. hom. 3. de Laz.
and Scripture alone, as is now proved, cannot be a rule of it self
accommodate to the capacity of the unlearned men, or apt to instruct them
sufficiently in all points of faith.

The Answer.
1 Unlearned men may be saved, and saved they cannot be but by the true faith,
and this faith they cannot have without the rule to teach it them: all this is
true; but still the Scripture, yea only Scripture is that rule, for any thing
the Jesuit has said in this place, Pro. 1.4.
giving sharpness of wit to the simple, and to the child knowledge and
understanding.

2 For his reason to prove it above the capacity of the unlearned, because
they cannot read them, nor profit by them without other helps joined, is a
very shift and an idle cavil, concluding as much against himself as us, in
that the determination of his Roman church, without some other means added,
will prove as obscure as the text of Scripture. Therefore I answer, there be
certain helps to enable us to understand; the necessity and requisite
condition whereof hinder not the plainness and easiness of the rule, as I
showed when 4. nu. 2.
I handled the properties thereof. For the word of God 2. Pet. 1.19.
is a light to our ways, and Heb. 12.5.
speaks to us as to children, in all points of faith and manners, easily,
plainly, familiarly; but yet there is a necessary condition required, that we
hear and know this voice, which the Jesuits man locked up in a study does
not. And will the Jesuit himself, because a man never hearing of the Churches
determination, abides still in ignorance, give me leave to infer hereupon,
that therefore the Church is not the rule? and yet the reason is all one.
Again, there be certain impediments, some natural, as infancy,
vnlearnednesse; some sinful, as ignorance, pride, frowardness; which must be
removed before we can hear the Scriptures, as they must also before we can hear
the Church; for which cause the Lord has given us Romans 10 14. Ephesians. 4.11.
the ministry of his Pastors, and other means: so that if a man being locked
up with a Bible, return forth as ignorant as he went in, this proves not that
the Scripture is obscure, but that the man heard it not, and to him that
hears not, plain and obscure is all one. For the Law of our land is the rule
of Society, yet lock up an unlettered man and the Law book for a time
together in a study, and he will come forth again as ignorant in matters of law
as he went in, if we admit no other means: but let the book be opened and the
text read, and then (as Hom. 3. de Laz.
Chrysostom speaks) the most unlearned man that is, shall understand. The
Carpenters squire is the rule to measure by, yet a child can do nothing with
it. The Sun is our comfortable light to see by, yet we must open our eyes,
and apply the means. In all arts, as in the Mathematics, Law, or Physic,
the precepts are the rule whereby the truth of every question may be tried; yet
the books must be opened, and time must be spent in learning them. And though
the Jesuit do all he can to have his Church the rule, yet he must needs grant
the determination thereof is neither known nor agreed upon without much
labor: and when it speaks most plainly, yet infants, deaf men, and infidels
hear it not.

Digression. 8. Showing that the Scriptures are not so obscure, but that they
plainly determine all points of faith.
3 And because the Jesuit, according to the common heresy of his Roman
church, makes the matter of the Scriptures obscurity so dangerous, I will
demand of him by the way how our reasons to the contrary may be satisfied. For
first, the Scripture it self in evident places calls us to it, Ioh. 5.39.
Esa. 8.20.
bidding us search it and seek to it, and 2. Pet. 1.19.
compares it to a light shining in a dark place, yea Hebr. 12.5.
to the voice of a father speaking to his children: and when men understand it
not, 2. Cor. 3.15.
it says, a veil is laid over their hearts, not over the scriptures: and
Christ Ioh. 10.27.
says, his sheep hear his voice; and Luc. 16.29.
the rich glutton was told, that his brethren, if they would escape damnation,
should hear Moses and the Prophets, which had bin to no purpose if they could
not have understood them when they heard them.

4 Secondly, he can name no one necessary article of our faith, but the word
teaches it as plainly as himself can: as that there is one God, three
persons, a general resurrection and judgment, that Jesus is the Savior of
mankind, etc. Bellarmine Illa omnia scripta esse, quae sunt omnibus necessaria.
De verbo Dei. l. 4. c. 11.
says, All those things are written that are necessary to be known of all
men: Scripturis nihil notius. Ibid. l. 1. c. 2.
neither is there any thing better known then the Scriptures: so says Rock.
pa. 193. Et Contaren. de potest. Pont. page 227. Luce me^idiana illustrius
ostensum puto ex diuinae sapientiae vocibus.
Saunders, We have most plain Scripture in all points for the Catholic
faith. And in all controversies the Papists with whom we deal, cry, plain,
evident, manifest Scripture.

5 Thirdly, all other questions at the last are determined by the Scripture,
the Fathers expositions are examined by it, and Greg. Val. to. 3. disp. 1. q.
1. punct. 1.
the Church receives testimony from it: so that the final resolution of all
things depends upon it: which could not be, if of all other things it were
not the best known; for things are not tried by that which is obscurer, but by
that which is plainer.

6 Last of al, what meant the Fathers of the Primitive church so much to report
this perspicuitie? for (...). Protrept. page 25.
Clemens Alexandrinus says, The word is not hid from any, it is a common light
that shines to all men, there is no obscurity in it: hear it you that be far
off, and hear it you that be nigh. Austin En arrat. in Psalm. 8.
says, God has bowed down the Scriptures even to the capacity of babes and
sucklings, that when proud men will not speak to their capacity, yet himself
might. Chrysostom (and his scholar Lib. 2. ep. 5.
Isidorus Pelusiota writes the same) Homil. 1. in Mat.
says, The Scriptures are easy to understand, and exposed to the capacity of
every servant and plowman, and widow, and boy, and him that is most unwise:
Hom. 3. de Laz.
therefore God penned the Scriptures by the hands of Publicans, (...).
fishermen, tent-makers, shepherds, neatheards, and unlearned men, that none
of the simple people might have any excuse to keep them from reading, and that
so they might be easy to be understood of all men, the artificer, the
householder, and widow woman, and him that is most unlearned: yea the Apostles
and Prophets, as schoolemasters to all the world, made their writings plain
and evident to all men, so that every man of himself only, by reading them
might learn the things spoken therein. Iustine Martyr Dialog. cum Tryphon.
page 213. grae. commel.
says, Hear the words of the Scriptures, which be so easy that it needs no
exposition, but only to be rehearsed. This was the perpetual and constant
judgment of the ancient Church, far from the Jesuits paradoxe, that the
Scriptures be so obscure and beyond the peoples capacity, that they can reap
no instruction by them: for the Fathers with one consent teach the contrary;
and yet you see the confidence of these new Roman divines: It is evident in it
self ( Bristo. Mot. 48.
says one of them) to any man not quite forsaken of God, that the ancient
Fathers make most plainly for us, etc. The field is won ( Campian. rat. 5.
apud Posse^. biblioth. select. l. 7. c. 21.
says another) if once we come to the Fathers: they are ours as fully as Pope
Gregory the thirteenth. Their prisoners they may be, but not their patrons,
either to erect them Seminaries, as Surius comment. rerum in Orb. gest. anno
1572.
did Gregory the thirteenth, or to maintain the doctrine which in those
seminaries they learn and teach.

Digression. 9. Declaring that the Papists have reason to hold the Scriptures
be obscure and hard, because the articles of their religion be hardly or not at
all to be found therein.
7 And withal the Reader may here very opportunely be put in mind, that these
men have good reason to bear the world in hand the Scriptures be very obscure,
because indeed the Popish religion is obscurely or not at all found therein:
that not the unlearned only, but the skilfullest clearkes of their church have
much ado to find some points thereof, and some they confess cannot be found
there at all. And have not these men good cause then to challenge it lustily of
insufficiency and obscurity? I have touched already the confession of
Andradius, that many points of their faith would reele and stagger, if
traditions stayed them not. And that you may know the meaning of this
confession to be not only that they have no express Scripture for them, but
also no collection from the Scripture, Eckius Enchirid. c. 4.
writes, The Lutherans are dolts, which will have nothing believed but that
which is express Scripture, or can be proved out of the Scripture. And
Costerus the Jesuit Enchird. c. 1.
having divided Gods word into three parts: that which himself writ, as the
tables of the law; that which he commanded others to write, as the old and new
Testament; and that which he neither writ himself, nor rehearsed to others,
but left it to them to do themselves, as traditions, the decrees of Popes and
Councels, etc. concludes that many things of faith are wanting in the two
former, neither would Christ have his Church depend upon them; this latter,
says he, is the best Scripture, the judge of controversies, the expositor of
the Bible, and that whereupon we must wholly depend: just as Staphylus 2. nu. 6.
said before of the Colliars faith.

8 Thus they stick not to name diverse maine articles: as for example, Tho. 3.
q 25. art. 4. Canis. catech. titul. de praecep. eccles. nu. 5.
the worship of images, Canis. ibid.
fasting days, Lent, prayer and oblations for the dead, the whole Service of
the Mass, Mart. Peers. de tradit. Lindan. panopl. lib. 4. ca. 100. Petr. a
Soto conta Brent. l. 2. c. 68. and others.
Purgatory, Peter's being at Rome, the Popes supremacy, Real presence, the
sacrifice of the Mass, Consecration of water and oil in baptism, the
Communion in one kind, Adoration and reservation of the sacrament, private
Mass, Shrift, Pardons, single life of Votaries, Invocation of saints, the
merit of works, and finally their five base sacraments, Confirmation, Unction,
Marriage, Orders and Penance: whereunto many more may be added, whereof they
grant there is no mention in the scripture.

9 And some points which they pretend scripture for, yet they confess be
hardly wroong thereout: as for example Transubstantiation, whereof De Euchar.
l. 3. c. 23.
Bellarmine writes, that it may justly be doubted whether the text be clear
enough to enforce it, seeing men sharp and learned, such as Scotus was, have
thought the contrary, as indeed Scot. 4. d. 11. qu. 3.
he did: and Ibid. d. 10. q. 1.
adds further, that it is but a new doctrine: as Lect. in Cant. 41. vide Fr.
Suarez in 3. Thom. to. 3. disp. 50. sect. 1.
Biel also holds. Yea 4. d. 11. q 3. lit. F.
Scotus and Quaest. in 4. qu. 6. art. 2 dit. F. page 265.
Cameracensis think that opinion which holds the substance of bread and wine
remains, the more probable and reasonable opinion, yea and in all appearance
more agreeable to the words of institution. And concerning a greater point then
this, they have no such evidence of Scripture as they would pretend: for Can
loc. l. 12. c. 12. page 412. Suarez. tom. 3. disp 74. sect. 2.
Cornelius a great Bishop and zealous Papist in the Council of Trent, and Ex
Catholicis quidam negarunt Christum scipsum, in extrema coena, sub specie panis
and vini, obtulisse incruente. Azorius instit. moral. lib. 10. ca. 8.
with him others, defended that Christ at his last supper offered no sacrifice.
A dangerous assertion, considering the action of Christ at that time, is all
the foundation we have for any thing to be done in the sacrament. By all which
we see the Scripture is obscure indeed, and beyond the reach of unlearned men,
for the teaching of Popery, when the learned that are find so little of it in
them, either expressly, or by discourse to be gathered.

. 8. But what speak I of unlearned men, Nihil perinde Scripturam mihi videtur
aperite atque ipsa Scriptura. Itaque diligens, attenta, frequensque lectio tum
meditatio, and collatio Scripturarum, omnium summa regula adintelligendum mihi
semper est visa Nam ex alijs Scripturis aliae optime intelliguntur. Obscuram
aperta, dubiam certa interpretatur. Ios. Acosta. de Christo reuelat apud
Posseu. bibl. select. l. 2. c. 15.
since also learned men cannot by only reading be infallibly sure that they
rightly understand them? For while they understand one way, they ought perhaps
to understand another way; that which they understand plainly and literally,
ought perhaps to be understood figuratively and mystically: and contrarily,
that which they understand figuratively, ought perhaps to be understood
properly. And since it is certain that of the reading of the same words of the
Scripture, diverse understand and expound diversely, that all cannot expound
right; since ones exposition is contrary to another: how shall one be
infallibly sure that he only expounds right, having nothing to assure him
but the seeming of his own sense, or reason, which is as uncertain and
fallible as the judgment and persuasion of other men; who seem to themselves
to have attained as well as he, to the right interpretation or sense? Moreover
there be many things required to the perfect understanding of the Scripture
which are found but in very few; and those also wherein those gifts are, be
not always infallibly sure that they have those gifts and that they are so
infallibly guided, but they and others may prudently doubt lest sometimes in
their private expositions, as men, they err, and consequently their
expositions cannot be that rule of faith which we seek; which must be on the
one fide, determinately and plainly understood and known, and on the other,
infallible, certain, and such as cannot err.

The Answer.
1 Now he proceeds to show how difficult the Scripture is to learned men
also, that so every way he might disable it for being the rule of faith. His
reason is, because by only reading they cannot be sure they rightly understand
it. Whereto I answer three things. First, that we deny not the Scripture to be
obscure and difficult, or how the Jesuit will, in two cases. First to all
such, learned or unlearned, as are not disposed and prepared by the holy Ghost
to understand them: but this kind of obscurity may stand with the nature of the
rule, as 4 nu. 2.
I have showed; neither can the Jesuit offer us any so absolutely known, no
not his Church, but to these kind of men it shall be obscure. Secondly, when
the means which God has appointed for the bringing us to understanding, are
not used. In this case the Scripture is obscure I grant, but the fault is in
our selves that neglect the means.

2 Secondly, though by only reading we cannot be sure we understand it, yet
this obscurity is not proved hereby: because there are other means besides
only reading, which concurring, the obscurity is done away, and all made
plain and easy, and we have infallible assurance of the true understanding.
These means are the ministry of the Church, and all kind of diligence, which
the holy Ghost uses for the opening of our understanding. And therefore that
is not obscure which by ordinary means may be apprehended, but that is so
which either has no means at all to open it, or only has such as are not
ordinary. And two subalternall things be not contrary but subordinate, the
facility of the text, and the means whereby that facility is induced.

3 Thirdly, if by only reading the Jesuit mean only the Scriptures
themselves, that a learned man cannot, using the means, find the true
understanding out of the Scriptures only: then he says not true; for Neh. 8.8.
(...)
the Priests read in the book of the Law distinctly, and gave the sense, and
caused the people to understand out of the Scripture it self. And if there be
sufficient written to bring us to eternal life, as See.. nu.
there is, then the true sense of the text is contained in it, because that is
absolutely necessary to eternal life. And Prolog. in Epist. ad Romans and hom.
3. de Laz. (...).
Chrysostom says, that contrary to the Jesuit, Every man of himself, only
by reading, may understand: ye need nothing else but to read. A truth so
manifest that the Jesuits themselves are constrained to yield it. For Anal.
fid. page 100.
Gregory of Valence writes, that such verities concerning our faith, as are
absolutely and necessarily to be known and believed of all men, are Perspicue
fere.
plainly taught in the Scriptures themselves. And Did. 37. Relatum.
the Canon law says, When the law of God is read, it must not be read or
taught according to the power and knowledge of our own wit. For many words
there be in the Scripture, which may be drawn to that sense, which every one
for the nonce will frame to himself. But it should not be so. For Non enim
sensum extrin. secus alienum, and extraneum, sed ex ipsis Scripturis sensum
capere veritatis oportet.
you must not from without them seek a foreign and strange sense, that so you
may, as you can, confirm it with the authority of the text; but we must out
of the Scriptures themselves receive the meaning of the truth. For the divine
Scriptures contain Integram and sumam regula^ veritatis.
the whole and firm rule of faith.

4 Against this that I have answered, the Jesuit has couched together diverse
objections. And first, that learned men many times mistake the sense of places,
expounding that one way which is meant another, as for example that
figuratively which is meant literally: whereto I answer three things. First,
this proves not the pretended difficulty of the Scripture, but only the
weakness and ignorance, or possible the frowardness and prejudice of some
men. And so a wrong cause is assigned; for the Scripture is not the cause of
these men's erroneous expositions, as I will show in the tenth Digression.

5 Next this argument conuinceth not all the Scripture of obscurity, but only
some of it: which we grant. But then what gains the Jesuit? For he must
prove that all the Scripture, and specially that which contains the
principles of our faith, which we call the rule, to be obscure and intricate:
which he can never do. For Aug. de doctr. Christ. li. 2. c. 9. Chrysostom. hom. 3.
in 2 Thessalonians.
those things which concern our faith and conversation, yea all things
necessary, are plainly and manifestly set down: the which cannot be made
uncertain by the obscurity of other places. Therefore the diversity of men's
judgments shows the learned men that are 1. Cor. 13.11.
to know but in part, and the Scripture in some part to be obscure; but not
that all is obscure, or that which is so, is too obscure to be the rule. See
Digression 10.

6 Thirdly, though the proper interpretation be sometime mistaken, yet the
truth is not always thereby obscured. For hear what De doct. l. 2. cap. 36.
Austin says: He erres not perniciously, neither does he altogether say
untruly, who sometime expounds otherwise then the text means, if so his
exposition further charity, the end of the commandment. He is indeed deceived,
but yet so, as when a man losing his way, through a by-field comes whither the
way leads. His meaning is, that in many cases wrong expositions hinder not
the determinate and plain judgment of the text.

7 But seeing experience shows that diverse expound diversely, yea one contrary
to another, how may one be infallibly sure that he only expounds right,
having nothing to assure him but the seeming of his own reason: which reason
others think they have as well as he. Whereto I answer three things. First,
this infallible certainty befalls not all men. For God in his judgment
leaves many to be seduced by their own seeming sense and reason, and deceived
in their own opinions, as Psalm 119.18. Ioh. 7.17. and 8.43.47. and 14 16.17.
1. Cor. 2.14. 2 Th 2.11. 2. Pet. 3.16.
the Scripture teaches manifestly: neither is there any external means left
by God in the world, effectual to convince those whom he has given over, and
which want his spirit, as already. 4. nu. 2.
I have showed. For though the Spirit speak evidently in the text, and
plentifully, to meet with all doubts and cases, as Part. 3. Tit. 18. c. 3.. 3.
Antoninus speaks, yet the wicked have no ears to hear it: their own
prejudice hinders them. For what can be playner then this, that Jesus is the
Messiah, the sacrifice of Aaron is ceased, the blood of Christ does away our
sins? yet the Jew believes it not, and the reason is given by Saint Paul, 2.
Cor. 3.14.
because the veil of Moses is laid over his heart: therefore Austin prays,
Cons. l. 11. c. 3.
Thee o my God I beseech pardon my sin, and which causedst thy servant Moses
to speak the truth, cause me also to understand it. If this be a defect in our
rule, they which make the determination of the Roman Church the rule, incur
the same inconvenience. For Princip. Doctrine. fid. lib. 8. c. 1. and 2.
Triplic. inchoat. in admonit. ad Guil. Whytak.
Doctor Stapleton acknowledges, The inward persuasion of the spirit is so
necessary, that without it no man can believe any thing, though the Church give
testimony a thousand times. And Relect. controu. 4.
again he complains: This is the beginning of our calamity, that an
heretic hears not the Churches voice. The same say we, this is the spring
of an heretics confusion, that he hears not the voice and definitive
sentence of the Scripture.

8 Secondly, to the point of his demand, the truth contained in the Scripture
is a light, and is discerned by the sons of light: 1. Ioh. 2.20. Ioh. 8.31.32.
the inward witness to assure them, is the anointing of the holy Ghost, Luc.
1.4. Act. 17.11. 2. Pet. 1.19.
the outward witness is the Scripture it self, which by it own light
persuades us, and in all cases, doubts questions, and controversies clearly
testifies with us, or against us. Which light is ordinarily attained to by
using the means, some private, as reading, prayer, conference of places,
consent of the godly, helps of learning and reason sanctified: some public, as
the ministry of the Church; which ministry, as all other means, is founded
on the authority of the Scripture it self. And this is something to assure us
more then the seeming of our own sense and reason.

9 Thirdly, the Churches word and authority, neither does, nor can assure us:
that is to say, we are not infallibly certain, this or that is the right
meaning of the text, because the Church has decreed it so to be; but by the
Churches ministry ordinarily we are instructed: as I show more at large in the
11. Digression, and have touched already in the sixth.

10 But many things are required for the perfect understanding of the
Scripture, which are but in few: and they which have the^ be not sure either
that they have them, or that they err not in using them. Therefore the
Scripture is too obscure to be the rule: whereto I answer three things,
according to the three parts of his argument. First, I grant certain things
are required as necessary conditions to the understanding of the Scriptures,
but those things are always present in the Church, and the children of God
partake them. The spirit of God is necessary, Ioh. 3.8.
which breaths where it lists: and the ordinary means of learning and
diligence be necessary; but proves not the obscurity pretended. For the
Mathematics be the rule of measures, proportions, and numbers, and yet many
things are required to understand them. And the Jesuit thinks his Church is
the rule, yet Relect. contro. 1. qu. 3. pa. 30.
Stapleton writes, that sometime it is not seen so easily, but only by such
as are very circumspect and skillful.

11 Secondly, though more gifts of learning and art be needful to such as
teach others yet that is rather to search out and utter the sense, which the
Scripture it self yields, then to bring any to it which was not there before.
And is not the touchstone it whereby we try gold, though some labor be
needful to find it out? And yet they want no gifts for the understanding of
the text, that have and use the text it self, in that all exposition is to be
setched out of it; which inuincibly proves it to be the rule: and I have often
showed that whatsoever the rule be, yet of necessity there must be certain
conditions observed for the using it, and this necessity argues it not of
obscurity.

12 Lastly I say, they which have the means to understand the Scripture, know
infallibly, both that they have them, and that they use them right: in the same
manner that Arist. de anima. l. 3. c 2.
the Philosopher proves, that with the same sense we see, and are assured we
see. For supposing I have the means that brings understanding, it were a
most absurd thing to imagine those very means could not assure my conscience
of the function or use of them.

Digression. 10. Assigning the true cause of men's errors in expounding the
Scriptures.
13 The Scripture in it self is a light, as it is every where called; but men
do not always rightly understand it, by reason of some defect in themselves,
that hinders them from comprehending so great majesty. For who is able to
behold the Sun in his brightness, but his eyes will dazzle? yet that is the
chief light whereby we see it self and all things else. The means whereby we
attain to the understanding, is inwardly, the spirit of God opening our
judgment; outwardly, the Scripture it self, which in plainer places opens
the obscurer, and gives light to that which is more difficult. The want of
which means is the true cause that men run into error, not understanding the
Scriptures.

14 Our Savior says, Io. 8.3 c. 3.2.
we cannot know the truth, till we continue in his words: and the Apostle, 1.
Pet. 2.1.
for our growing up in the word of God, requires that first we lay by all
affection; and then as newborn babes desire the sincere milk thereof, that
we may live and grow thereby. He is the best reader, says De Trinit. lib. 1.
Hilary, who rather expects the understanding of things from the things
themselves, then from himself imposes it upon them: who takes the exposition
from thence, rather then brings it thither; and inforceth not the sense upon
the words, which before his reading he presumed. Epiphanius Haer. 69 (...).
says, All things in the Scripture be manifest to such as repair to them with
a religious mind. Oecumenius Upon 2 Cor. 4 (...).
says, If many believe not, this is not our fault, neither is it the
obscurity of the Gospel, but the cause is their own blindness and
condemnation. The cause of this dissension, says De causis dis^en^. Eccles. p.
2. (...).
Nilus, is not the sublimitie of the matter, as if it exceeded the capacity of
man's mind; and much less is the speech of the Scripture the cause, as if it
were so concise that it spoke nothing plainly of the points in question: for it
is all one to accuse God, and to challenge the Scriptures. Saint Austin in a
Epist. 3. ad Volus.
certain epistle, shows what is plain, and what obscure, and the reason
why; that the Jesuit may see there is no place left for his shifts: thus he
writes. The manner of speaking whereby the Scripture is knit together, (whereto
all may approach, though few can enter) En quae aperta continet, quasi amicus
familiaris, sine fuco ad corloquitur indoctorum atque doctorum. Ea vero quae in
mysterijs occul tar, nec ipsa eloquio supe^ho e^^it, quo non aude ataccedere
men's t^t diuscula and incrudit^, quasi pauper addiuitem; sed inuitat omnes
humili sermon, quos no^ solu^ manifesta pascat, sed etia^ secreta exe^ceat
veritate; hoc in promptis quod in reconditis. habens.
like a familiar friend speaks those plain things which it contains,
without glozing, to the heart of learned and unlearned. And as for those which
it hides in mysteries, it lifts them not up with stately speech, that a dull
and unlearned mind should not presume to come near, as a poor man to a rich;
but with lowly speech it inuiteth all men, that it may not only feed them with
manifest, but also exercise them with obscure truth, having the same in
manifest that it has in obscure places. But lest manifest things should be
loathed, the same again are obscurely spoken that they may be desired, and
being desired, may after a certain manner be renewed, and being renewed, they
may be delightfully intimated to us. Herby both froward wits are wholesomely
corrected, and weak wits cherished, and great wits delighted.

15 So that to expound figuratively that which should be meant literally or
contrary, argues no such obscurity in the text, but ignorance or leuity, or
partiality in the man: as when Anton. 3. par. tit. 18. c. 5.. 3.
the Popish Doctors teach, all texts in preaching, may be turned to Allegories:
whereof Inno. Gentillet. Exam. Council. Trident. lib. 4. nu. 26. sess. 22.
we have a pleasant example in the Council of Trent it self: where Tyrabosco,
the Patriarcke of Venice, preaching on the miracle of the loaves and fishes,
would prove the seven Sacraments thereby. The creation of the world, says he,
was ended the seventh day, and Christ satisfied the people with five loaves and
two fishes, which make seven. But how shall the Council have bread, that the
people may eat and be filled? even by appointing seven sacraments: for that
which Philip said, two hundred pennyworth of bread will not suffice, has this
meaning, that all the mysteries of the old and new testament are not enough to
enlighten the people, so blind and ignorant are their minds. But that which
Andrew said, There is a boy here which has five loaves and two fishes, must be
understood of the rank of Saint Peter's successors: and that which is added,
make the people sit down signifies that salvation must be offered them by
teaching them the seven sacraments.

16 And whereas the Jesuit urges so diligently, that somethings are hard to
be understood, yet this proves not that the truth therefore cannot be tried by
only Scripture, because one place thereof expounds another: which if the
Jesuit will deny, he must be disputed with, as he that holds the fire has
no heat in it: for against such an absurd assertion we use no reasons, but
only bid the man that holds it, put his finger into the fire, and he shall
presently see whether his opinion be true or no. So let trial be made, and the
Jesuit shall soon see whether the Scripture be so obscure that one place
thereof cannot interpret another. De Doctrine. Christian. lib. 2. c. 6.
Austin says, There is almost nothing among these obscurities, but in other
places one may find it most plainly delivered. Hom. 9. in. 2. Cor.
Chrysostom says, The Scripture every where, when it speaks any thing
obscurely, interprets it self again in another place. Comment. in Esa. c.
19.
Hierome says, It is the manner of the Scripture after things obscure to set
down things manifest, and that which they have first spoken in parables, to
deliver afterward in plain terms. Regul. contract. qu. 267.
Basil says, The things which are doubtful, and in some places of Scripture
seem to be spoken obscurely, are made plain by those things which are evident
in other places. And finally In Genesis ca. 2.
Steuchius a Popish Bishop confesses: God was never so inhumane, as to suffer
the world in all ages to be tormented with the ignorance of this matter, the
sense of the Scripture seeing he has not suffered one place to be in all the
Scripture, but if we consider it well, we may interpret it. For as Theodoret
says, the Scripture uses when it teaches us any such high matter, to expound
it self, and not suffer us to run into error.

Digression. 11. Proving that the Scripture it self has that outward
authority whereupon our faith is built, and not the Church.
17 The Canon law Did. 37. c Relatum.
says expressly, The divine Scriptures contain the whole and firm rule of the
truth, and out of themselves the meaning thereof must be taken. So that well may
the Church by her ministry commend the rule to us, and instruct us how to
secure our consciences out of the Scripture, but by it authority it cannot
assure us. Our faith must resolve it self into the authority of the
Scripture. For the authority of the Church, in respect of us, depends on the
authority of the Scriptures, and is examined thereby. The Church by her
authority cannot persuade all men which hear it, but the spirit of God in the
Scriptures always does. The Scriptures always had their authority even
before the Churches came to them: the words of the Scripture are Luc. 8.11. 1.
Pet. 1.23.
an immortal seed: 1. Cor. 2.4.
the demonstration of the spirit and power: Heb. 4.12.
that which is lively and powerful: Luc. 24.32.
making our hearts to burn within us: Ioh. 5.36.39.
it gives greater testimony to Christ then John Baptist could: 2. Pet. 1.18, 19
a voice from heaven is not so sure as it: 1. Ioh. 5.6.
it is the spirit that bears witness to the truth thereof: 1. Ioh. 5 9.
and if we receive the witness of men, the witness of God is greater. Finally
our Savior Ioh. 5.47.
says, They which believe not Moses writings, will not believe him: and is the
Churches authority greater then Christ's? Ioh. 5.39.
The Scriptures testify of Christ, Ioh. 20.31.
being written that we might believe in him: 1. Ioh. 5.10.
and he that believes in him has a witness in himself: 2. Cor. 1.22.
The earnest of the spirit is in his own heart, wherewith God has sealed him:
Ephesians. 2.20.
We are all built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Christ
himself being the head corner stone, in whom all the building is coupled
together by the spirit. (...). Basil. in psa. 1^5.
In all humane arts there be certain principles which are known of
themselves, and believed for themselves, without any further demonstration. The
Scripture contains the principles of our faith, and shall not we believe
them? or cannot we know them infallibly of themselves, without we let in the
authority of the Church?

18 Where then is the Jesuits credamus Deo, in the captiuating of our
judgment in obsequium Christi? Yea the very Magist. 3. did 23. Scot. 3. did.
23. q vnica. Ock^^ 3. q. 8. art. 3. Gabr 3. d. 23. q 2. lit. g. h.
schoolmen say, that faith is either Acquisita and suasa, gotten by discourse
of reason and testimony of the Church; or Infusa and inspirata, immediately put
into our hearts by the holy Ghost, enforcing the mind without further
testimony to yield obedience. Now Deuteronomy. 29 4. Mat. 16 17.
the faith we have of the points in Scripture is of the latter kind, and so
consequently not relying on the testimony of the Church, whose authority is
but a created thing, distinct from the first verity, Princip. fid. doctrine.
lib. 8. cap. 20.
says D. Stapleton. Alexander Hales Part. 1. q. 1. memb. 1. fides suasa,
inspirata.
says, Faith persuaded arises from the probability of reason, and faith
inspired believes the first truth for it self, and this faith is above all
knowledge; Et ad hanc disponit accept^o doctrinae sacrae.
and the acceptance of the holy doctrine disposes us to it. So that our
conscience stays it self Sed vt vere and plene credat, necesse habet soli
veritati primae, purae and nudae, penitus inhaerere, nulla^ certitudinem
extrinsecam requirendo. Altisiod Sum. li. 2. page 71. quem vide latius. l. 1.
praef.
only upon this divine authority, being of greater efficacy to persuade and
hold us, then either the Church Gal. 1.8.
or an Angel from heaven.

19 Let God himself ( Lib. 5. ep. 31.
says Ambrose) teach me the mystery of heaven, which made it, not man who
knows not himself: whom may I believe in the things of God better then God
himself? So also says Saluianus, De prouid. l. 3.
All that men say, needs reasons and witnesses, but Gods word is witness to it
self, because it follows necessarily, that whatsoever the incorrupt truth
speaks, must needs be an incorrupt witness of it self. Finally, let these
words of Confess. l. 11. c. 3. Ecclesiam esse regulam infallibile^ proponendi
and explican. li veritates fidei, non potest reduci ad authoritate^ ipsius
Ecclesiae. Hoc enim esset idem per idem confirmare: sed necesse est reducere
hunc assensum ad testimonium Spiritus sancti in ^linantis per ^umen fidei ^d
^oc credibile, ^ccle^ia non ^otest errate. Dom. Ban 22. q. 1. art. 1 page 17.
Austin be well considered: Moses that writ these things, O God, is gone to
thee, if he were now before me, I would desire him to open them to me, and I
would hear him: if he spoke Hebrew, I could not understand him: if he spoke
Latin, I could know what he said; but how should I know whether he spoke the
truth? And if I did know it, could I know it from him? For within me in the
inner parlour of my thought there is neither Hebrew, nor Latin, ^or Barbarian
truth that could say, Moses says true, that I should presently, being certain
and confident, say to him thy servant, thou say the truth. Therefore seeing
I cannot ask him, I ask thee the truth, by whose fullness he spoke the truth:
thee O my God I beseech pardon my sin; and which gave him power to speak
these things, give me also power to understand them. Austine would never have
enquired thus, how he should know whether Moses spoke the truth, if he had
thought the testimony of the Church could secure us; he could not believe the
Scripture upon Moses word, then much less could he believe it on the Churches.
Yea his words do wholly exclude the authority of Moses both total and partial.

20 The Papists therefore are the patrons of Atheism, Bellarm de effect.
Sacram. l. 2. c. 25.
who teach, that if we take away the authority of the present Church, and of
the Council of Trent, then the whole Christian faith may be called in
question: for the truth of all ancient Councels, and of all points of faith,
depend upon the authority of the present Church of Rome. How much better said
De doctrine. Christian. l. 1. c. 37.
Austin, Our faith shall reele and totter if the authority of the Scriptures
stand not fast. Let these assertions of Papistry be well noted.

. 9. Thirdly they err in the third condition. For the Scriptures are not so
universal as the rule of faith had need to be. For this rule ought to be so
universal, that it may absolutely resolve and determine all points, questions,
and doubts of faith, which either have been, or may hereafter fall in
controversy. But the Scriptures alone are not thus universal. Non inficiamur
praecipua illa fidei dogmata, ad salute^ omnibus necessaria, perspicue satis
comprehendi in Scriptura. Coster. ench. c. 1.
For there be diverse questions of faith, and those also touching very
substantial points, which are not expressly set down, and determined in the
Scripture. As namely, that those books which are generally holden for
Scripture, are every one the true word of God. For this in particular of every
book holden for Scripture we shall not find expressly written in any part of
the Scripture. This part therefore, whereupon depends the certainty of every
other point proved out of Scripture, cannot be made infallibly sure unto our
understanding or belief, unless we put some other infallible rule, whereupon
we may ground an infallible belief: which infallible rule if we admit to
assure us that there is at all any Scripture, and that those books, and no
other, are canonical Scripture; why should we not as well admit it to assure us
infallibly which is the true sense and meaning, in all points, of the same
Scripture?

The Answer.
1 The Jesuits first exception against the Scripture was, that it was too
difficult: now follows his next, that it contains not all things needful
to be known. Thus his argument may be concluded: The rule must be universal,
containing all points of faith.

But such is not the Scripture: for many substantial points are not expressly
set down therein.

Therefore it is not the rule.

Whereto I answer, denying the assumption: for every point of faith, and
whatsoever else is needful either to be known or done, is contained in the
scripture, so far forth that there is no point, question or doubt concerning
faith, but by the scriptures alone it may absolutely be determined. For 2. Tim.
3.15.
it is profitable to teach, to reprove, to correct, and to instruct in all
righteousness, that the child of God may be absolute, being made perfect to
all good works.

2 But the Jesuit says, there be diverse things not expressly set down or
determined: reserving this word expressly, for a starting hole to creep out at,
because they be not written word for word in so many syllables. But I answer
him three things: first that the Popish divinity is, that many points are
contained in the Scripture, neither thus expressly, nor yet at all to be
concluded thence by collection: for else why make they that opposition between
the scripture and tradition? Secondly, if this be his mind, then he has put
more into the assumption then was in the proposition: for the rule is not bound
to contain all things thus expressly. Thirdly, that is expressly in the
scripture which is there set down, either plainly in so many words, as De
doctrine. Christian. l. 2. c. 9.
Austine says, All things are that concern our faith and manners: or by
analogy when it is necessarily implied in the text. For Alliaco 1. sen. qu. 1.
art. 3.
every such conclusion is a theological discourse, and has his warrant from
the text: and so still the scripture contains all things needful.

3 Against this the Jesuit has one argument, that it is no where written, that
these books of scripture that we have, are the true word of God. Whereto I
answer: first though this were granted, yet would it not follow that all points
of faith are not contained in the scripture; because in every profession, the
principles are indemonstrable, assented to without discourse: and the
scriptures are the principles of religion, and therefore first we must grant
them to be the very word of God, and then say, they are such as contain all
points needful to be known. This then which the Jesuit requires to be
showed out of the text it self, is first to be supposed, yea believed, that it
is the true word of God, whereto we are persuaded by the heavenly light it
self. Secondly, I wonder at the Jesuits confidence, that dares so boldly
say, that of every book holden for scripture, we find it not expressly written
that they are the true word of God: for Saint Paul 2. Tim. 3.16.
says expressly, All Scripture is given by inspiration of God: and Saint Peter
2. Pet 1.20. Luc. 1.70.
says, No prophecy in the Scripture is of private interpretation, but the
holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost. Now to be inspired
of God, and to be the true word of God, is all one. The former is written, we
see, expressly of all Scripture, therefore of every book, and therefore the
latter is also written.

4 If the Jesuit reply, but where is it written that these books which we
have, be the same of whom it is said, they are inspired of God? or, how know
you the Scripture, that tells you so, is the word of God? I answer, this is
nothing to the purpose: for he desires only to know where it is written, that
these books be the word of God, and I answer him by naming the places out of
the books themselves.

Digression. 12. Wherein it is showed, that the Scripture proves it self to
be the very word of God, and receives not authority from the Church.
5 It is another question, how I know this Scripture, that says so of it
self, to be the word of God? for this is known first and principally by the
illumination of Gods spirit, as by the inward means, 1. Cor. 12.7.11
and is given to every man to profit withal, which works all things in all
men: and then by the testimony of the scriptures themselves, which is the
outward means which opens the eyes of the godly: the testimony of the
Apostles and Prophets that penned them as Gods secretaries, and the ministry
of the Church inducing us to assent. These three latter being only the
instruments, every one in his own order, whereby God does enlighten us.

6 So that the certainty of the Scripture is not written indeed with letters
in any particular place or book thereof; but See Scot. prolog. in sent. q. 2.
Cameracens. 1. q. 1. art. 2. part. 2. council. 1.
the virtue and power that shows it self in every line and leaf of the
Bible, proclaims it to be the word of the eternal God, and the sheep of
Christ discern the voice and light thereof, as men discern light from
darkness, sweet from sour, (...). Basil. epist. 1. ad Naz.
and know children by their favor resembling the parents: the purity and
perfection of the matter, the majesty of the dispensation, Non mouent, non
persuade^t sacrae literae; sed cogunt, agitant, vim inferunt. Legis rudia verba
and agrestia, sed viua, sed animata, flammea, aculeata, ad imum spiritum
penetrantia, hominem totum potestate mirabili transforma^tia. Joan. fr. Pic.
Mirand. exam. van. doctr. gent. li. 2. cap. 2. Which speech of Picus is
reported and commended by Posseuinus. in Ciceron. c. 11.
the majesty of the speech, the power that it has over the conscience, the
certain prophecies, the strange miracles contained in it, the great antiquity
beyond all books, the admirable preservation of it against time and tyrants,
the sweet harmony of every part with other, the devils rage against them that
follow it, the vengeance that has pursued all such as have not obeyed it, the
success of the faith contained in it, the readiness of so many millions of
men to confirm it with their blood, the testimony of adversaries and strangers
for it, the simplicity of the writers: all this and much more shining to us
out of the Scripture it self, I hope is another manner of assurance then the
Church of Romes lying traditions.

7 Therefore the Jesuits collection is idle, if we must needs admit some other
rule beside the Scripture to assure us that there is any Scripture at all, why
should we not admit the same to assure us which is the true sense? for we admit
both alike, that is to say, as we reject the Church from being the rule of
exposition, so do we also disclaim the authority thereof in canonization. But
the Jesuit is of another mind, holding possible that unless the authority of
the Church did teach us that this Scripture is canonical, it should be of small
credit with him, as Lib. 3. de authorit. Scripturae.
Hosius speaks: or, All the authority which the Scripture has with us,
depends of necessity on the Churches, as says Hier. l. 1. c. 2.
Pighius: or as Epist. Synod. respons. de authoritate Concilij. page 700. Crab.
the Council of Basil says, That is called the holy Scripture which the
Church declares to be holy; not only the decrees and opinions of the Church
be authen^icke, and such as we must without contradiction stand unto, but also
her deeds and customs must be unto us Instar habea^t sanctarum scripturarum.
in steed of the Scriptures: for the Scripture and the Churches custom both
require the same affection and fashion: or as Wolfangus Hermannus said, and Vbi
supra.
Hosius defends his saying as good, The Scripture is of no more authority
then Aesops Fables, but that the Church and Popes approve it. All which if the
Jesuit hold too, then you may see what he requires when he says, we must put
some other rule then the Scriptures to assure us both of the Scripture and of
the true sense.

8 But in what a miserable case are these men, thus presumptuously to tell
their followers that, which at another time, when they are out of the heat of
their disputations, they dare not stand to, but utterly renounce? for Catech.
cap. de praecep. eccl. nu. 16.
Canisius says, We believe, adhere, and give the greatest authority to the
Scripture, for the testimonies sake of the holy Ghost speaking in it. De verb.
Dei. lib. 1. cap. 2.
Bellarmine says, Other means may deceive me, but nothing is more known,
nothing more certain then the Scripture, that it were the greatest madness in
the world not to believe them: the Christian world and consent of all nations,
with whom they have been in credit so many ages, can witness they contain not
men's inventions, but heavenly oracles. 3. did. 25. dub. 3.
Biel says, The Catholic verities without any approofe of the Church, of
their own nature are unchangeable, and unchangeably true, and so are to be
reputed unchangeably Catholic. Comment. in Tho. tom. 3. p 2. 31. Venet.
Gregory of Valence says, The revelation of the Scripture is believed, not
upon the credit of any other revelation, but for it self. D. Stapleton
confesses two things concerning this matter, which bewray the weakness of the
Jesuits assertion: Defens. Eccl. authorit. aduer. Whitak. l. 1. c. 9
first, that all the former writings of the Bible may be assured to us by the
latter: as for example, the old Testament by the authority of the new.
Triplicat. inchoat. aduers. Whitak. in admonit.
Secondly, that the inward testimony of the spirit is so effectual for the
believing of any point of faith, that by it alone any matter may be believed,
though the Church hold her peace, or never be heard. Now if the former may
receive authority from the latter, then we may be assured of them otherwise
then by the Church; and those latter also are certain to us, else could they
not make the other so: and why is the Churches authority so absolutely urged
here by the Jesuit, when yet in so many cases it may be spared? That is not the
sole thing that must assure us without which we may otherwise be secured.

Digression. 13. Showing against the Jesuits assumption, that all substantial
points of our faith are sufficiently determined in the Scripture: and the
reason why the Papists call for the Churches authority.
9 Whereas the Jesuit obiecteth against the Scripture, that many substantial
points of faith are not expressly contained in the Scriptures: this is true of
his Popish faith, which is in them neither expressly nor by analogy, save that
they have an answer ready, Hosius de express. Dei verb. page 38.
That which pleases the Church of Rome, is Gods express word. But of the true
faith of Christ, De doctrine. Christ. l. 2. c. 42.
Austin says, Whatsoever a man learneth from without the Bible, if it be
hurtful, there it is condemned; if it be profitable, there it is found: all
things which may be learned elsewhere, are found there more abundantly. Regul.
contract. q. 95.
Basil says, It is necessary and consonant to reason, that every man learn
that which is needful out of the holy Scripture, both for the fullness of
godliness, and lest they inure themselves to humane traditions: which words
says Non videtur author harum quaestionum admittere traditiones non scriptas.
Bellar. de amiss. great. lib. 1. c. 13
a Jesuit, seem to debar traditions; and the Church of Rome authorizeth the
scripture but by tradition. In Mat. hom. 41.
Chrysostom says, Whatsoever is required to salvation, is all accomplished in
the Scripture, neither is there any thing wanting there that is needful for
man's salvation. Isidorus Pelusiota, his scholar, Lib. 1. epi. 369.
bids we should refuse whatsoever is taught, unless it be contained in the
volume of the Bible. Lib. 12. in Ioh. in illud; ^^ec aute^ scripta sunt vt
credatis.
Cyril: Such things as the Apostles saw sufficient for our faith and manners,
are written, that shining in true faith and good manners, we might come to
heaven by Christ. Comment. in Hagg. c. 2.
Hierome: Whatsoever things man find and feign without the authority and
testimony of the Scripture, as if they were from Apostolical tradition, are
smitten by the sword of God. Lib. 3. c. 1.
Irenaeus: We have not known the order of our salvation by means of any but
those through whom the Gospel is come to us; the which Gospel they then
preached, and afterward by the will of God delivered to us in the Scripture,
to be the foundation and pillar of our faith. These places of the Fathers,
Bellarm. de verb. Dei, lib. 4. cap. 11. Gregor. de Valent. anal. fid.
by the confession of the Jesuits themselves, show that all things are written
which be necessary for the salvation of all men. And so you see the Jesuits
rashness. For if many substantial points of faith be not set down, then some
things necessary are wanting; for every substantial point is necessary for all
men.

10 But yield the Jesuit that the Church shall be the rule we speak of to
assure our conscience; and then ask him, who shall be this Church? whereto he
will answer, none but the Pope and his crew of Cardinals; nay none but the Pope
himself, as I have showed already, and shall declare hereafter: who, if he
lead thousands of people by troops to hell, eternally to be damned with
himself there, yet no man might presume to reprove him, because he is judged
of no man, Did. 40. c. Si Papa.
says the Canon law, which the Jesuit will kindly take too, if ye put him to
it.

11 And how will this Church expound the Scripture when you have yielded your
self unto her? for no doubt she will discharge the office faithfully, which she
labors for so eagerly. Let Cusanus the Cardinal tell you how: (for I hope
he never recanted this point, as Stapl. counterbl. l. 3. c. 36. page 358.
they say he did another, of greater truth:) thus he writes, Epist. 2 page 833.
The Scripture is fitted to the time, and variably understood; so that at one
time it is expounded according to the fashion of the Church; and when that
fashion is changed, the sense of the Scripture is also changed. Epist. 3 page
838.
Again, when the Church changes her judgment, God also changes his. Epist.
7. page 857.
And no marvel, seeing the letter of the Scripture is not of the essence of
the Church, if the practice of the Church at one time interpret the Scripture
of this fashion, and another time on that. And let the Popes lawyers tell you,
that say De translat. episcopi. c. Quanto. in Gloss. Pu^i.
The Pope has a heavenly judgment, and makes that to be the meaning which is
none; because in those things that he pleases to have go forward, his will is
a law: neither may any man say, why do you so? for he may dispense above all
law. So that this is the plain English, wherinto all the Jesuits doctrine,
concerning the authority of the Church, is resolved: and whatsoever any of
them say, yet their halting in the end comes all to it; and good reason, for
the Pope is a fast friend to the Roman Church. etc.

. 10. Fourthly this rule of faith which we seek for, must be such, that
whosoever do find it, and having found it, will diligently attend unto it,
obediently, in all that it teaches, yield assent unto it; shall sufficiently,
in all points, be instructed as touching matters of faith, in such sort, that
none that yields this obedient assent in all points to the teaching thereof,
can fall into error of faith. But there be many that having found the
Scripture, do with an obedient mind diligently read it, and yield assent to
every sentence and word written in it: acknowledging whatsoever it says to be
the word of God, and yet are not sufficiently instructed; but may and do
sometimes grossly and obstinately err in matters of faith: as it is most
evident, since men of contrary minds in religion do in manner aforesaid read
the Scriptures, acknowledging them to be the word of God, and yet continue
opposite in opinion, and so one of them in error. Therefore the Scripture
alone is not that rule sufficient of it self to instruct every one in all
points of faith.

The Answer.
1 This is the Jesuits third argument against the scriptures: and it is thus
framed: That which does not instruct such as find it and obey it, in all points
of faith, and preserve them from error, is not the rule.

But the Scripture does not instruct such as find it and obey it, in all points
of faith, and preserve them from error: as appears in that many thus using
it, do notwithstanding err.

Therefore the Scripture alone is not the rule.

For answer to this argument, you must not forget in what sense 4 nu. 2.
I have showed the Scriptures alone to be the rule. For when we say alone, we
exclude not the subordinate means and dispositions, whereby we are enabled to
use them; but the authority of all other things, either to supply their
supposed imperfection, or to give the sense: and therefore granting the
proposition, I deny the minor with the confirmation thereof being merely
false. For all such as finding the scripture, do obey and yield assent unto it,
are thereby sufficiently preserved from error, and instructed in the truth. And
the reason why some using it (as the Jesuit and his Church, for example) do
notwithstanding err, is because either they understand it not, or will yield
no assent unto it. For there is no cause so absolute, but the effect thereof
may, from without, be hindered, when a stop comes between. See Digression
10. where all this argument is answered.

2 So that when men using the Scriptures do notwithstanding remain in error,
the let is in themselves. For though possible they confess them to be Gods
word, yet all obedience to them consists not in that: but it is further
required that the blindness of their heart be done away, and that curiosity,
prejudice, and other impedime^ts be removed: as we may see by this, that there
is nothing more clearly defined by the Church, the^ that there is but one God,
and three persons which made all things, that Christ is the son of God, borne
of the virgin Marie: yet these th ngs we see are in controversy among them
that use the Scriptures. So then it must not be granted the Jesuit that every
one, or any, that grossly erreth in matters of faith, yields obedience to the
Scripture in all that it teaches; for if they did so, they could not err.

Digression. 14. Containing a Discourse of Saint Austin about men's errors
against the Scripture.
3 This point is well spoken to by Austin. You see, Contra Faust. manich. lib.
12. cap. 19. 6. tom.
says he to the Manichees, this is your endeavor to take away from among us
the authority of the Scriptures, and that every ones mind might be his author
what to allow, what to disallow, in every text; and so he is not for his faith
made subject to the Scripture, but makes the Scriptures subject to himself,
and that which he holds does not therefore please him, because it is found
written in so high authority, but therefore he thinks it written truly,
because it pleases him. Whither now do thou venture thy self miserable
soul, weak, and wrapped in carnal mists, whither do thou venture thy self?
Here Austin shows a reason why many having the Scriptures, are not yet
instructed thereby: but does he therefore conclude they cannot be the rule? and
thereupon send them after the Jesuit to borrow his rule? inquire if he do: for
thus he proceeds a little after: Why do thou not rather submit thy self
to the Evangelical authority, so steadfast, so stable, so renowned, and by
certain succession commended from the Apostles to our times, that thou may
believe, that thou may behold, that thou may learn all those things which
hinder thee from doing it, through thine own vain and perverse opinion? Here
Austin thinks men's errors remain by reason of their own frowardness, and
not through any obscurity in the Scripture. Concerning which he writes thus
De doctrine. Christ. lib. 1. c. 6
in another place, that some things being darkly spoken, a thick mist being
about us, deceive those that rashly reading take one thing for another; all
which I doubt not was provided by God to tame our pride with labor, and to
revoke our understanding from loathing. Therefore has the holy Ghost tempered
the Scriptures thus loftily and wholesomely, that by plainer places he might
satisfy our hunger, and by obscurer put away our fullness. For nothing, in a
manner is picked forth of those obscurities, which may not be found most
plainly spoken elsewhere.

. 11. Neither do I see what you can object against this conclusion, but that
place of S. Paul, 2. Tim. 3. Omnis Scriptura diuinitus inspirata vtilis est ad
docendum, and vt perfectus sit homo, etc. But this place proves nothing
against that which I have said. In Scripturis sacris tanta est disciplina,
qua^ta sat est cuique crudiendo. Euang. Bosius. Theorem. 10. apud Posseu. bibl.
select. lib. 2. cap. 15.
For it says not, the Scripture alone is sufficient to instruct a man to
perfection, but that it is profitable for this purpose, as it is indeed: and
the rather because it commends to us the authority of the Church; which, as
I shall show after, is sufficient to instruct us in all points of faith.

The Answer.
1 Whatsoever may be said against the Jesuits conclusion over and besides, yet
this place is one of those texts which we object against it. And thus we reason.

That which by Divine inspiration, 1. is able to make a man wise to salvation,
2. through the faith of Christ, 3. which is profitable to instruct in
righteousness, 4. to teach, to reprove, to correct, 5. that he may be absolute
and perfect to every good work: that alone is sufficient, and contains all
things needful to be known.

But such is the Scripture, that it is able to make a man wise, etc.

Therefore it alone is sufficient.

Every word in the text is an argument. But the Jesuit answers two things.

2 First, that the Apostle says not the Scripture alone is sufficient to
instruct us to perfection, but profitable. Whereto I reply, that the Apostle
says not simply, they are profitable, but they are profitable to teach, to
reprove, to correct, and to instruct in all righteousness; that the man of God
may be absolute, being made perfect to all good works: whence I draw two
arguments to show it to be sufficient alone. First, because a man by using it
may be made perfect to every good work: now that is sufficient that can make
me perfect and absolute to every work. Secondly, because the duties whereunto
the Scripture is profitable, contain a sufficient doctrine of salvation. We do
not say, the Scripture is profitable, therefore sufficient; but it is profitable
to every thing, therefore sufficient. Thus I reason.

They teach, they reprove, they instruct, they correct.

Ex his autem contingit alicui vt integer sit. Occumen.
But this is sufficient and contains all things: all that we need to
salvation, is either to be taught, or reproved, or instructed, or corrected.
Ergo.

Again: That is sufficient which makes him absolute and perfect to every good
work.

But such are the Scriptures.

Therefore they are sufficient.

Moreover, that must needs be granted sufficient, which can make a man wise to
salvation, and teach him the faith of Christ: and this, the Apostle says, the
Scriptures are able to do. By which word Able, the other word Profitable, must
be expounded. For the Apostle, to manifest their ability, produces their
profitablenesse, which were no good argument if their profitablenesse were not
complete. Besides, it cannot be denied but all sufficient things are
profitable, and therefore hence it follows by the rule of conversion, that
therefore some profitable things are sufficient. And so may the scripture be
sufficient.

3 Secondly, he answers, They be profitable and sufficient because they
commend unto us the Churches authority, which is sufficient. But this is a
shift. For 1. then they are not s^fficient, in that they commend no such
authority to us. 2. If this be a good answer, the^ so many books of the Bible
be superfluous. For this one place, or Hold the traditions.
the fifteenth verse of the second chapter of the second Epistle to the
Thessalonians, for example, were sufficient, because, according to the Jesuits
exposition, it commends to us the authority of the Church which is able to
instruct us. 3. The text is evident, that the profitablenesse thereof stands
in teaching, reproving, correcting, and instructing: now if it stand in this
wholly, then the Jesuits conceit is excluded; if but in part, then let him show
what we need more for our salvation then doctrine, reproof, correction, and
instruction. 4. There was never any Papist in the world that durst allege this
text for the authority of the Church: and yet granting the Jesuits
exposition, it should prove it inuincibly. 5. The Church it self, whereunto he
says the Scripture sends us for our sufficient instruction, receives her
doctrine out of the Scriptures. The Church, says Tract. 3. in 1. epist. Ioh.
Austin, is our mother, her breasts are the two testaments of the Scripture
whence she gives her children milk. Therefore they contain a sufficient
doctrine, because the Church gives her children no other. 6. Yea the Apostle
says, they are able to make the man of God perfect: that is, the Pastor
himself, the Pope, and Council, and all. Now the Jesuit will not say, they
make these perfect by sending them to the Church, because themselves are the
Church, yea the head and mouth of it. 7. Finally it were intolerable folly to
say, that man teaches me all good learning, that I might be absolute and
perfect, yea makes me wise to knowledge; which only as I go, shows me the
school where I learn these things: yet the speech were as proper as the
Apostles in this place, supposing the Jesuits exposition to be true.

4 The fathers, and certain Papists also, the truth constraining them, expound
the place otherwise, and say as we do, Hom. 9.
Chrysostom writing on this place, says: If any thing be needful for us to
learn, or to be ignorant of, there, in the Scripture, we may have it: and he
adds, that in these words, Paul tells Timothy, Thou have the Scriptures to
teach thee in steed of me; if thou desire to know any thing, there thou may
learn it. Which he could not have said, if he had not thought Timothy might
learn as much out of the Scripture, as Paul could teach him. De ration. stud.
theolog. lib. 1. cap. 3.
Villavincentius a Papist confesses, The Scriptures, and they alone, are able
to teach us to salvation, as the Apostle in the third chapter of his second
Epistle to Timothy affirms, saying, all Scripture is inspired of God, etc. In
which words the Apostle comprehends all things that are needful to the
salvation of man. Sum part. 3. tit. 18. c. 3.. 3.
Antoninus the Archbishop of Florence says, God has spoken but once, and that
in the holy Scripture, so fully to all doubts and cases, and to all good
works, that he needs speak no more. Comment in 2. Tim. c. 3 in v. 15.16.
Espencaeus writes, That if any thing be needful either to be known or done,
the Scriptures teach the truth, reprove the false, reclaim from evil,
persuade to good. Neither yet do they make a man good in some sort, but
perfect: yea they can teach a man to salvation and Sufficienter doctum reddere.
make him learned sufficiently.

. 12. The second conclusion is, that no man's natural wit and learning, neither
any company of men never so learned, only as they are learned men, not
infallibly assisted by the holy Spirit; can, either by interpreting Scripture,
or otherwise, be this infallible rule of Faith: and consequently those that for
matters of faith, rely either upon their own interpretation of Scripture, or
upon the interpretation of other learned not assisted infallibly by the holy
Ghost, cannot have an infallible faith. This I prove. Because all this wit and
learning is humane, natural, and fallible, and therefore cannot be a rule or
foundation whereupon to build a divine, supernatural, and infallible faith.
The third conclusion: that no private man, who persuades him self to be
especially instructed by the Spirit, can be this infallible rule of faith; at
least so far forth as he teaches or believes contrary to the received
doctrine of the catholic Church; this I prove, first because S. Paul Gal. 1.
says, Si quis vobis euangelizauerit praeter id quod accepistis, anathema sit.
Pronouncing generally, that whosoever teaches contrary to the received
doctrine of the catholic Church, should be held anathematized or accursed.
Secondly I prove the same, because the rule of faith must be infallible,
plainly known, and universal, as before has been proved. But this private
spirit is not such. For neither the party himself, and much less any other,
can be infallibly sure, that he in particular is taught by the holy Ghost. For
neither is there any promise in Scripture to assure that he in particular is
thus taught by the holy Ghost; neither is his particular persuasion, be it
never so seeming strong, able to give infallible assurance thereof, since
diverse now adays persuade themselves to be thus taught by the Spirit, and yet
one of them teaching contrary to another: and therefore some, in these their
persuasions must needs be deceived. And therefore who, without testimony of
true miracle, or some other infallible proof, dare arrogantly affirm, that he
only is not deceived, since others that persuade themselves in the same manner
that he does, are in this their persuasion sometime deceived? Moreover, suppose
one assure himself to be taught by Gods Spirit immediately in all things what
is the true faith, as it is not the manner of Almighty God to teach men
immediately by himself, but rather as the Scripture tells us, Fides ex
auditu, Romans 10. and it is to be required ex ore sacerdotis, and must be
learned of Pastors and Doctors, whom God has put in his Church, vt non
circumferamur omni vento doctrinae. But suppose, I say, one in private think
himself to be immediately taught of God, how should he, without testimony of
miracle, give assurance to others that he is thus taught? especially in such
sort to make them forsake the teaching of the catholic Church, which by plain
proofs and testimonies of Scripture they do know to be taught of God? Nay they
ought not in any sort to believe him, but rather to esteem him as one of
those of whom it is said, Ezech. 13. Vae Prophetis insipientibus qui sequuntur
spiritum suum, and nihil vident: dicunt, ait Dominus, cum ego non sum locutus.
Neither is it sufficient that these men allege words of Scripture for that
which they say, because every sect-maister alleges Scripture for his opinion;
yea the devil himself for his purpose brings words of Scripture, Math. 4.

The Answer.
1 These two conclusions might easily be granted without further examination,
if the Jesuit had not a further reach in them the^ the words pretend. For what
Protestant thinks, that any private man, or any company of men, how learned
soever, or any man's natural wit and learning is the rule of faith? which
honor we give to the spirit of God in the Scriptures only. But the Jesuit
aims at those which in comparison of the rest of the world, being but private
men, and particular Churches, have examined and refused the Roman faith; as
Wicklieffe, Hus, Luther, and the Churches of England, Scotland, and Germany
have done: that so, having in his former conclusion plucked the Scriptures from
you, he might also in these two, bereave you of such faithful Pastors as God
has stirred up from time to time to instruct you, and when he has done, in
his last conclusion, obtrude upon you his Papal consistory. If he meant
Private men, wits, learning, and companies, as they are opposed to divine and
spiritual, he said well; for no such private men, wits, learning, or companies
may be heard against the present doctrine; and this is well proved in the
Jesuits discourse: but using it in that sense as it is opposed to common and
usual, Priuatum accipio vt opponitur communi spiritui. Mart. Peers. de Tradit.
part. 2 assert. 4. page 48.
which the Papists always do, his conclusions are untrue: viz. that nothing may
be received which private men or particular companies, teach against that which
is surmized to be the Catholic Church. For in matters of religion it makes
no matter whether the teachers be many or few, public or private persons, as
long as they teach the faith, and expound the Scriptures truly. For a true
exposition is public, though the company that give it be private; and a
false exposition is private, though the Church that urge it be never so
public, yea though it came from a general Council. And so this is to be
holden concerning private men and companies, that they may sometime be
infallibly assured of the truth against a public multitude, as the Roman
Church for example; and having the Scripture for their foundation, may teach
and believe against it: in which case, though their persons, and wit, and
natural learning, be not the rule, yet as long as they follow the Scripture,
which is the rule, we are bound to hear them. This being all that we hold, and
that which the Jesuit in these conclusions girdeth at, now I come to examine
his arguments against it.

2 First he says, all men's wit and learning is humane, natural, and fallible:
therefore no man's wit or learning can be the rule which must sustain our faith,
divine, supernatural and infallible. Whereto I answer, granting the whole
argument: for we say not, any man's learning is the rule, or any company of men
the foundation of our faith, but the contrary, as I have said: only we hold
they may be so assisted by the holy Ghost, that they may interpret the
Scriptures truly and infallibly against a company as big as the Roman Church.
And this is a full answer to the second conclusion.

3 Next, in his third conclusion he says, No private man can be this rule, at
least when he teaches contrary to the received doctrine of the Catholic
Church: because Saint Paul says, If any preach any other Gospel then then
which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed. This text is Rhem. upon
Gal. 1.8.
commonly urged against Luther and Calvin, for preaching otherwise then the
Romish Church believes; whereby you may see what the Jesuit drives at in
these two conclusions. But I answer, though this text prove that no private man
is the rule of faith, and that no teaching may be received against the
Scriptures; yet there is nothing in it against such as resist a false Church,
though they be men never so private. For Saint Paul speaks of the doctrine
which he had taught, not which every Church, calling it self Catholic, may
possible hold; and of it he says, Let him be accursed that preaches
otherwise. Now Phil. 3.1. Iren. l. 3. ca. 1. Niceph. Callist. l. 2. c. 34.
all that the Apostle preached, is written in the Scriptures, and so he
accurseth none but such as teach against them: forbidding all men to preach
against the Churches doctrine consenting with the word. But when any thing
deflecteth from that, it may and must be excepted against, even by private men,
else this very text accurseth them for consenting to it. Thus Contra lit.
Petilia^. Donat. l. 3. c. 6. and de Vnitate Eccles. cap. 11.
Austin expounds the place, If we or an Angel from heaven declare unto you,
either concerning Christ or his Church, or any other matter belonging to our
faith or life, any thing but that which you have received in the writings of
the Law and the Gospel, let him be accursed. See Austine preferring the
Scripture above all things, expounds the place against such as teach any
thing concerning faith and manners (let the Jesuit mark this) but that which is
contained in the Scripture; and the Jesuit, begging the question, talks
idly of his Roman Church.

4 His second argument to prove his third conclusion is, that the private
spirit is not infallible and plainly known. Whereto I answer, that this is
false, meaning private as the Jesuit does, and I have distinguished it: for a
small company holding against a multitude, as 1. Reg. 22. 23.
Michaiah did against 400. Prophets, may be directed by the spirit of God in
the Scriptures, which are infallible and plainly known. But neither themselves
nor any other can be sure they are thus taught. I answer, this is untrue: for
the Scripture is a light, and known by the sons of light, and by it they may
be assured. Now they that be thus assured, are infallibly sure they are taught
by the holy Ghost: for 2. Tim. 3.16.
All Scripture is inspired of God, and contains the teaching of the holy
Ghost. But there is no promise in the Scripture to assure him he is thus
taught. Yes; for the Scripture promises, that every doctrine is of God that
consents with it: and this consent a man may infallibly know; or else in
vain had Act. 17.11.
the Beraeans searched the Scriptures, to see whether those things were so as
Paul and Silas preached: and in vain did Isa. 8.20.
the Prophet send the people to the law and to the testimony, if thereby one
could not be secured. But many persuade themselves they are taught by the
spirit, and yet are deceived: and this may be such a persuasion. I answer,
Greg. de Vale^. tom. 3. disput. theol. disp. 1. q. 1. punct. 1. Stapl. princip.
doctr. l. 8. c. 22. and Triplic. in admonit. ad Whitak.
the Papists cannot deny but there is a heavenly light, which assures the
children of God of it self: and Saint Luke Luc. 1.4.
says, the writing of his Gospel was able to give the certainty of those
things whereof Theophilus was instructed: and Col. 2.2.
Saint Paul was exceeding careful that the Laodiceans might have the full
assurance of understanding to know the mystery of God. Now will the Jesuit
deny all this assurance, and call it but a persuasion, which is concluded from
the testimony of the word? Will he reject the light of the Scripture and
witness of the holy Ghost, which works all things in all men, 1. Ioh. 5.10.
Ioh. 7.17.
that they may see it, 2. Cor. 4.4.
whose eyes the God of this world has not blinded? But some are deceived.
True, 2 Thessalonians. 2.11.
such as have strong delusions to believe lies; 2. Cor. 3.14.
or a veil over their heart in reading: but how follows this, some are
deceived, therefore all? But who, without testimony of miracle, or some other
infallible proof, dare arrogantly affirm that he only is not deceived? I
answer, the trial maybe made without miracles, which His book against the
transt. of the Scripture. cap. 3.
D. Standish a Papist says, were given but for a time, as Austine in his days
did witness, saying, he that would look for a miracle then, was a miracle to
the world himself. But without some other infallible proof it cannot; which
proof is the Scripture it self, more infallible then either Luc. 16.31.
miracles or 2. Pet. 1.19.
visions; and to rely upon it, is no arrogancy but obedience: which some men
doing against the Romish heresies, not they only saw the truth, but more saw
it with them, whom 1. Reg. 29.18.
God reserved to himself in all countries, though the Jesuit and his
partakers were none of them.

5 His third argument follows. No man, teaching against the Catholic Church,
can assure others that he is taught of God, unless he have the testimony of
miracles: therefore no private man can be this infallible rule of faith. I
answer, granting the conclusion, that no private man is the rule of faith: yet
a private man, as I have distinguished, teaching against the Romish church,
falsely termed Catholic, may give infallible assurance of his teaching without
miracle, as I have said already, and here will declare further by answering the
Jesuits confused discourse more particularly.

6 First he says, It is not Gods manner to teach men immediately by himself,
but by means of his Church and Pastors. Whereto I answer, that neither do we
say these private men, of whom the question is, were taught immediately by
inspiration; but had their knowledge, by means of the scripture truly taught,
in the Church, according to the manner touched in Romans 10.17. Mal. 2.7. Ephesians. 4
12.
the three texts alleged: only we say, the Papacy was not this Church, nor
the Priests thereof those pastors and doctors whom God had put in his Church,
that from their lips the faith might be required; but they were degenerate into
ravening wolves, and Antichristian heretics: and such these private men, both
Pastors and people, proved them to be by the Scriptures: as when the Pharisees
Math 5.20. and 15.3. and 16.6, 12. and 23.13.
had generally corrupted the law, Marc. 14.64. Ioh. 7.48. and 8.13. and 9.22,
42.
denying Jesus to be Christ, Ioh. 5.39.
he reproved them by the Scriptures. But suppose one think himself to be
immediately taught of God, how should he give assurance to others that he is so
taught, unless he had miracles? I answer, assurance of immediate teaching he
can give none, neither is it needful: for I know no particular man or Church
of the Protestants that pretends immediate teaching; but we all confess and
prove the Scriptures and Pastors of Christ's true Church have taught us; and
hereof we daily give assurance to those that have hearts to believe. But how
can private men be assured without miracles? This is answered already. Hom. 3.
de Laz.
Chrysostom says, God has left us the Scriptures, more firm then any
miracle. And to them Austine reuoketh us from miracles: De Unit. eccl. c. 16
Say not these things are so, because such a one did such and such maruels, but
let them prove their Church by the canonical books of the Scripture, and by
nothing else: these are the demonstration of our cause, these are our
foundation, these are our grounds whereupon we build. But no man can give
assurance he teaches true, that teaches men to forsake the Catholic Church
that is taught of God. I answer, the Jesuit says true in this, and Mat.
28.20. Ioh 14.16. and 16.13.
the texts alleged prove well that Christ abides with this Catholic Church
for ever. But he should have remembered that these private men taught us to
forsake nothing but the Papacy, proving the same to be the kingdom of
Antichrist. And as for the Catholic Church, it consists in these men alone
whom the Jesuit calls private, though he and his fellows very foolishly
have arrogated the name to themselves. For they are Catholics which be of
sound faith and good life, says Qu. in Mat^. c. 11.
Austine; not they Apoc. 2.2.
which say they are Apostles, and are not, but are found liers; or verse 9.
calling themselves Jews, are the synagogue of Satan.

7 Therefore also the Jesuit may preach his text of vae prophetis, Ezech.
13.3. to his Clergy at home, Did. 40. Si Papa.
who are bound to the Popes spirit, though he lead them to hell. For to follow
the Scripture, and Gods spirit speaking publicly in the same, is not to follow
a man's own spirit, which the Prophet condemns. And whereas he concludes,
that it is not sufficient to allege words of Scripture, because every
sectmaster, yea the devil alleges Scripture for his opinion: I answer, that
neither do we think it enough to allege words of Scripture, but the Scripture
truly applied, which neither the devil, nor sectaries, nor Papists can do. But
what a loose kind of reasoning is this, the devil alleges Scripture,
therefore the Scripture is no sufficient warrant? For did not our Savior
confute the devil by only Scripture rightly understood, though he alleged the
words thereof absurdly wrested? The sheep therefore casts not away her
fleece, though the wolf sometime put it on: else the Jesuit must renounce the
authority of his Church also, because sectmasters sometime allege it. But
even as he will say, they allege it indeed, but yet either not the true
Church, or the true Church not truly: so I say, sectmasters allege the
scripture indeed, but either not the true Scripture, or the Scripture not
truly. And let the Jesuit remember that Defense of the censure against Chark.
page 166.
a good friend of his excuses the blasphemous comparison of those that liken
the Scripture to Ce^sur. Colon. page 112. Pigh. hierarch. l. 3. c. 3 p. 103.
and others.
a nose of wax, by this, that heretics wrest and detort it, as a nose of
wax is bowed into many forms.

Digression 15. Against the two former conclusions, showing that private and
particular companies may sometime be assured of the truth against a pretended
Catholic company.
8 Because the Jesuit pleads so for his Catholic multitude, let him
consider, the Scripture 1. These. 5.21. 1. Ioh. 4.1.
bids all men try what they are taught, Act. 17.11.
commending them that examined even the Apostles teaching, and Math. 7.15. and
24.4. Esa. 8.20. Ier. 23.16. Romans 16.17
commanding to beware of false Prophets, and Ios. 1.18. Ioh. 5.39.
to search the Scriptures, Heb. 5.14.
that we might have our wits exercised to discern good and evil: all which
were to no purpose, if when we had done, we neither could by reading attain to
any certainty, or having attained, might not hold it against a multitude, but
were still bound to refer the matter to them which are suspected, and whose
judgment is the very thing to be examined. Again, 1. Reg. 22.15.
one Michaiah defended the truth against 400. Prophets: Niceph. lib. 8. cap. 19.
one Paphnutius directed the whole Council of Nice: Christ and his Apostles
withstood the whole Jewish synagogue: and Job 32.6.
Elihu one young man, rebuked the ancients.

9 Saint Chrysostom has a discourse about this point, which I thought fit to
be propounded: A Gentile ( Homil. 33. in Act.
says he) comes and says, I would be a Christian, but I know not which side
to cleave unto; many dissentions are among you, and I cannot tell which opinion
to hold: every one says, I speak the truth; and the Scriptures on both sides
are pretended, so that I know not whom to believe: to this Chrysostom
replieth, Truly (says he) this makes much for us: for well might you be
troubled if we should say we rely upon reason; but seeing we take the
Scriptures which are so true and plain, it will be an easy matter for you to
judge: and tell me, have thou any wit or judgment? for it is not the part of a
man barely to receive whatsoever he hears, but if thou mark the meaning, thou
may thoroughly know that which is good. When thou buyest a garment, though
thou have no skill in weauing, yet thou satst not, I cannot buy it, they
deceive me, but thou do all things that thou may learn how to know it: say
not then I am a scholar and wilb^ no judge, I can condemn no opinion: for
this is but a shift and a cavil, and let us not use it, for all these things
are easy. To the same effect says Comment. in Nah. c. 2. in fine
Hierome: It is always the devils endeavor to bring the waking soul asleep:
therefore at the coming of Christ, and his word, and the Churches doctrine:
and when Nineueh, that sometime was so beautiful a whore, shall have her end,
the people which before was lulled asleep under their teachers, shall be lifted
up, and hasten toward the mountains of the Scriptures, the mountains Moses
and the Prophets, and the Apostles, and the Evangelists, which are the
mountains of the new Testament: and when they come to these mountains, and
shall be occupied in the reading thereof, if they find none to teach them,
then their endeavors shall be approved, because they flew to the mountains, and
the slothfulness of their teachers shall be detested. Did Hierome in these
words expound a Prophet, or Prophecy himself concerning these later times?
wherein the whore of Babylon drew toward her end, and the profound sleep of the
Romish teachers was such that men were feign to fly to the Scriptures, whereby
they directed both the slothfulness of their labor, and the coruption of their
doctrine. And why not? when in many cases the peoples ears are holyer then the
Priests heart? as the same Hierome says in Ad Pa^mach. ad^e erro. Ioh.
Hierosolym.
another place.

10 Moreover let the Jesuit consider, that the learned of his own side have
left written as much as we say, in defense of private men; that so it may
appear what truth there is in his conclusion, when his own Doctors confute
it. For thus writes Part. 1. de Elect. and elect. potest. cap. significasti.
In concernentibus fidem, etiam dictum vnius priuati esset praeferendum dicto
Papae, si ille move retur melioribus. etc.
Panormitan, One faithful man, though private, is more to be believed then the
Pope or a whole Council, if he have better reason on his side, and authority
of the old and new Testament. De exam. doctrine. part. 1. consid. 5.
And Gerson more fully: The examination and trial of doctrines concerning
faith, belongs not only to the Pope and Council, but to every one also that
is sufficiently seen in the holy Scripture: because every one is a fit judge
of that he knows. And again, some lay man not authorized, may yet be so
excellently learned in the Scripture, that his assertion shall be more to be
credited then the Popes definitive sentence. For the Gospel is more to be
credited the^ the Pope. Therefore if such a lay man, though he be private,
teach a truth contained in the Gospel, and the Pope either know it not, or
will not know it, yet it is evident, that his judgment is to be preferred. And
yet if the Pope never so little anger the^, they write as much at this day. Non
saluat Christian. quod pontifex consta^ter affirmat praeceptum suu^ esse
iustum; sed oportet illud examinare, and se iuxta regula^ superius datam
dirigere tract. de interdict. composit. a Theolog. Venet. prop. 13.
I know not what these men would have writ if they had now lived in the Popes
Seminaries, but this you see they writ before Luther was borne, or Seminaries
were erected, that the Scriptures be the rule to try al things by; and the
priuatest man that is, may by them judge, yea convince and refuse the Pope and
his Councels. Which is all that we say for private men, that having the
Scripture for their foundation, they taught and believed against the Romish
multitude; and though their persons were not the rule, yet when they followed
that which is the rule, we believed them.

. 13. The fourth and last conclusion of this question is, that this infallible
rule which we ought obediently to follow in all points of faith, is the
doctrine and teaching, faith and belief of the true Church. This I prove:
Because to this agree all the conditions which I said to be requisite in the
rule of faith. First this is a thing infallible, as shall be proved. Secondly it
is a thing easy to be known. Thirdly it is such a thing as may universally
resolve and determine us in all questions and doubts, and instruct all sorts of
men in all points of faith. And consequently, whosoever will obediently yield
assent to this rule in all points, as we all profess in our Creed, saying,
Credo Ecclesiam catholicam, shall not err in any point. That these three
conditions of the rule of faith agree to the doctrine and teaching of the
universal or catholic Church, I prove.

The Answer.
1 We would not stand with the Jesuit about this conclusion, but freely grant
it, if no more were meant thereby then the words make show of: that the
doctrine, and faith of the universal Church, is the rule of faith. For that
doctrine is only the contents of the Scripture, which we yield to be the rule.
For In 1. Ep. Ioh. tract. 3.
Austin says, Our mother the Church gives her children milk out of her two
breasts, the old and new Testament. But he has a further reach, and means a
higher matter. First, that the Churches word and authority is the rule,
without referring the same to the Scripture. Secondly, that the Church of Rome
is this true and universal Church. Thirdly, that all the authority and
efficacy thereof is in the Pope alone. This is the plain English of the
conclusion, howsoever the words be fair and cleanely, and the Jesuit
defending it, must show all the properties of the rule to appertain to the
present Church and Pope of Rome, or else he does but trifle and spend time.

Digression. 16. Showing how the Papists pretending, at every word the
Catholic Church, mean nothing thereby but the Popes determination.
2 First, howsoever these words be tolerable, the doctrine, teaching, faith,
and belief of the true Church is the infallible rule, in all points to be
followed: yet the Popish meaning is absurd, that whatsoever the Church
teaches, though it be not contained in the Bible, must be accepted as matter
of faith, and that upon her own authority. Yet thus they hold, as I have
Digress. 1. c. 6.9.
showed, and may further be perceived by the Jesuits words in this section;
Whosoever will yield assent to the Church in all points, as we profess in our
Creed, saying, I believe the Catholic Church, shall not err in any point.
Which words of the Creed, meaning no more, but Ruffin. expos. Symbo.
that we believe there is one holy, Catholic Church, whereof our selves are
members; he expounds of yielding assent in all points to it: which exposition
may be further understood by that which Staplet. def. eccles. potest. adu.
Whitak. l. 1. cap 9. Rhem. annot. 1. Tim. 3.15. Bristo. them. 44.
other Papists say more fully, I believe the Catholic Church, the literal
sense whereof is, that thou beleeuest whatsoever the Catholic Church holds
and teaches are to be believed. Which exposition is a gloss beside the text.
And yet this is tolerable in comparison of the next.

3 For having deuolued all power over to the Church, in the next place they
define this Church to be the Roman company. For Mot. 12. in marg.
Bristo says, The Roman Church is the Catholic Church: and Annot. Romans 1 8.
idem. B. ro^. Annal. tom. 1. an. 58. nu 49. See Posseu. bibl select. lib. 4. c.
13. ^. Interdum quoque ^aud s^^i^.
the Rhemists, The Catholic and Roman faith is all one. Wherein their
meaning is to win authority to the Romish faction, persuading men there is no
salvation but in that religion, and making room for themselves in all those
places of Scripture which commend unto us the Catholic Church of Christ.
Which is a jest so gross, that it deserves to be smiled at rather then
confuted. And yet it stays not here neither, but goes a degree further,
which me thinks is a note above ela.

4 For as they take all authority and sufficiency from the Scripture, and give
it the Church; so all the Churches authority they give to the Pope. So says
Gregory of Valence: Dispu^ theo. tom. 3 ^isp. 1. ^u. 1. punct. 1. p. 24. Item.
Cater. 22 q. 1. art. 9. and 10. and Dom. Ban ibid. apud D. Tho nam. Pro eodem
omnino reputatur authoritas Ecclesiae vniuersalis and authoritas concilij, and
authoritas sum mi pontificis.
By the Church we mean her head, that is to say, the Roman Bishop: Analys.
fidei. page 136.
In whom resideth that full authority of the Church, when he pleases to
determine matters of faith, whether he do it with a Council, or without.
Thomas says, 22. q 1. art. 10.
The making of a new Creed belongs to the Pope, as all other things do which
belong to the whole Church. 22. qu 1 ^. art. 2.3.
Yea the whole authority of the universal Church abides in him. Defens. fid.
Tri^ent. lib. 2.
Andradius says, All power to interpret the Scripture, and reveal the hidden
mysteries of our religion, is given from heaven to the Popes and their
Councels. Yea Decis. aur. cas. part. 2 l. 2. c 7 nu. 40
says Graffius, The common opinion is, he may do it without them. And so De
Christ. l. 2 c. 28.
says Bellarmine, Himself, without any Council, may decree matters of faith.
And Sum Syluest. verbo fides. nu. 2.
Syluester,; The power of the Catholic Church remains all in him. And De
Planctu Eccl. lib. 1. artic 6.
Aluarus Pelagius, We are bound to stand to his judgment alone, rather then to
the judgment of all the world beside. And the canon Law says, In Sext. extt.
Ioh. 22 tit. 14 c. cum inter. in gloss.
It were heresy to think our Lord God the Pope might not decree as he does.
Did. 19. in Canonicis and glos. ibid.
Yea his rescripts and decretall Epistles are canonical Scripture. Stapleton
Praefat. Princip fidei. doctrinal.
says, The foundation of our religion is, of necessity, placed upon the
authority of this man's teaching, in which we hear God himself speaking. And
finally the Jesuit himself.
hereafter says, All Catholic men must necessarily submit their judgment
and opinions, either in expounding the Scripture, or otherwise, to the censure
of the Apostolic seat, and God has bound his Church to hear the chief
Pastor in all points. By all which we see what is meant by those importunate
bragges of the Catholic Church, and why the Papists rely so much upon it:
Audito Ecclesiae nomin^ hostis expalluit. Campian. tat. 3. apud Posseu. bibl.
select. lib. 7. c. 19.
they make their vaunts, that the very name of the Church appalleth us: and
good reason, if the Pope be it, Gods enemy and ours: But in the mean time
themselves might blush thus to tell the ignorant a tale of the Church, and will
the foolish Protestants be wiser then the Catholic Church? Nomen callide
retinuit, tem ipsam funditus desini^ndo fustulit. Camp. vbi supra.
and yet this Church, when things come to the reckoning, is nothing else but
the Pope.

. 14. And first that the doctrine of the universal Church in all points is
infallible, thus I reason: If our Savior Christ have promised to any company
of men the assistance of himself and of his holy Spirit for this special
purpose, to teach and instruct them in every truth, giving withal peculiar
commission to them to teach all nations, and warrant and commandment to all to
hear them, and to do in all things according to their saying: and further,
threatening that he that will not hear them, and do in all things according to
their saying should be accounted as an Ethnicke and Publican then certainly the
doctrine and the teaching of this company of men is in all points infallible,
and most true. For look what he promises must needs be performed, and
whatsoever he warranteth or commands to be done, may safely and without
danger of error be done; nay must of necessity be done, especially when he
threateneth those that will not do it; and consequently if he promise to send
his holy Spirit to teach any company of men all truth, it is not to be
doubted but that he sends this his Spirit, and by him teaches them all
truth. And since the teaching of this Spirit is infallible; we have not to
doubt but that this company to which this promise should be made, should in
all points be infallibly taught the truth. If also the same our Savior gave
warrant and commandment that we should hear and do in all points according to
the saying of this company of men, being thus infallibly taught, and having
commission to teach, we may not likewise doubt but that they shall infallibly
teach us the truth in all points. For otherwise, by this his commandment, we
should sometimes be bound to hear and believe that which were not true, and to
do that which were not right and good; which without blasphemy to Christ's
verity and goodness can no way be taught. But so it is that Christ our
Savior has in holy Scripture promised, given commission, warranted,
commanded, and threatened in manner aforesaid: therefore we have not to doubt,
but that a certain company of men there be, to wit, that company which is
called the true catholic Church, which both is in all points taught infallibly
by the holy Spirit, and is in like manner to teach us all truth. The promise we
have Mat. vltim. Ego vobiscum sum omnibus diebus vsque ad consummationem
seculi: I am with you all the days unto the end of the world. In which words
is promised the continual presence of Christ himself, the master of truth,
with his holy Church: not for a while then, nor for a while now, but all the
days unto the end of the world. Also we have another promise Ioh. 14. Ego
rogabo Patrem meum, and alium paracletum dabit vobis, Spiritum veritatis, vt
maneat vobiscum in aeternum: I will ask my Father, and he will give you
another paraclete, that he may remain with you not only for six hundred
years, but for ever. And to show us for what purpose he would have his holy
Spirit to remain with us for ever, he says again, Cum autem venerit ille
Spiritus veritatis, docebit vos omnem veritatem, Job. 16. And when the Spirit
of truth shall come, he shall teach you all truth. The commission we have Mat.
vltim. Euntes docete omnes gentes. The warrant also we have Luc. 10. Qui vos
audit me audit. By which words appears plainly that our Savior Christ would
have us to hear and give credit to his Church no less then to himself. The
commandment we have Mat. 23. Super cathedram Mosis sedent Scribae and
Pharisaei, omnia ergo quaecunque dixerint vobis, seruate and facite. Out of
which words we may gather, that we are commanded in all points to do according
to the doctrine of the Prelates of the catholic Church, though it should
happen that their lives should not be commendable or good. For though in this
place our Savior do only speak of the chair of Moses in which the priests
of the old law did sit, yet it must be understood a fortiori of the chair of
S. Peter, in which the Priests of the new law do succeed. So did the ancient
Fathers understand, and especially S Austin Epist. 165. who says thus: In
illum ordinem Episcoporum qui ducitur ab ipso Petro ad Anastasium qui nunc in
eadem cathedra sedet, etiamsi quisquam traditor per illa tempora subrepsisset,
nihil praeiudicaret Ecclesiae and innocentibus Christianis, quibus Dominus
prouidens ait, de praepositis malis, quae dicunt facite, quae faciunt facere
nolite. Into the order of Bishops which is derived from S. Peter himself unto
Anastasius who now sits upon the same chair, although some traitor had
crept in for the time, he should nothing hurt or prejudice the Church of the
innocent Christians, unto whom our Lord providing says of evil Prelates, what
they say, do; what they do, do not. The threats we may gather out of Luc. 10.
where our Savior says, Qui vos spernit me spernit, He that despises you
despises me: signifying what sin it were not to hear, but to despise the
preaching of our Savior Christ himself; that we should account it the same
sin, to despise and not to give heed and credit to his catholic Church:
insinuating thereby a threat of like punishment for the said contempt. Also
Mat. 18. the same our Savior says, Si Ecclesiam non audierit, sit tibi sicut
Ethnicus and Publicanus. Thus you see our Savior Christ has promised unto his
Church the continual assistance of himself and of his holy Spirit to teach us
all truth. Moreover that he has given commission to it to teach us; yea and
has warranted and commanded us, in all points, to hear and to do according to
the saying of his Church; and has threatened greatly those that will not hear
the Church: which proves, that it pertains to this Church to instruct us in
all points of faith; and that we ought to learn of it, in all matters of
religion, the infallible truth.

The Answer.
1 The drift of all this section is to prove, that the doctrine of the
universal Church, in all things, is infallible: which if it were granted, yet
were it too short to prove, that therefore this Church were the rule of faith.
For every infallible thing, whose teaching is most true, is not yet in the
ordinance of God set apart to instruct us. As the Angels of heaven, for
example, are not the rule of our faith, though Fr. Suarez. in Tho. to. 1. disp.
42. sect. 1.
they have all the graces and glory that a creature can have, and consequently
the grace of infallibility. Let this be noted in the first place.

2 But yet the doctrine and teaching of the Church is not, in all points,
infallible and most true neither; meaning this doctrine not of the Scriptures,
but of the Churches ministry in propounding and following the same: for in her
ministry and manners, she may and does err: as shall appear in my answer to
the Jesuits reasons throughout this section. But first the question must be
made plain. For to say as he does here and every where in this question, that
the teaching of the universal Catholic Church is infallible, not subject to
error, is an improper speech, not incide^t to the question: because that Church
comprehends all the triumphant Church in heaven, which neither can be used,
neither do we charge it with error: but confess it to be Ephesians. 5.27.
glorious, not having spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing. All the question is
of that part of the Catholic Church which dwells here on earth, professing
the name of Christ, and living in warfare against the world and Satan, called
the Church militant. Which so distinguished, we hold to be subject to error
both in manners and doctrine. And the Jesuit of necessity, by the universal
Church must understand only this part thereof, because this part only is apt
to teach us, and has ministry in her hands: or else he disputes confusedly,
not distinguishing the terms of the question.

3 This being noted, now I come to the discourse: which may all be concluded in
this syllogism, that we may the better judge of it.

That 1. unto which Christ has promised his own presence, and the presence of
his spirit, for ever to the worlds end: 2. which has commission from God to
teach all nations: 3. which all men are commanded to hear in all things: 4.
they that hear it are warranted as if they heard Christ himself. 5. they that
hear it not, are threatened as if they despised Christ himself: that is free
from error, and the doctrine thereof, in all things, is infallible.

But such is the Church, that concerning it Christ has 1. promised, 2. given
commission, 3. commanded, 4. warranted, and 5. threatened, as is aforesaid.

Therefore the Church is free from error, and the doctrine thereof, in all
things, is infallible.

This is the sum of all this section: whereto I answer by denying both
propositions; and the reason is for that they consist of Scripture falsely
expounded and applied: and this my answer I set down more particularly in that
which follows, wherein I will examine every text as it is alleged, and make
it plain, that never a one of them proves the conclusion.

4 The first place is Mat. 28.20. Lo I am with you always to the worlds end. But
I answer: 1. this was a personal promise made only to the Apostles, and so
cannot be extended to all the Church, if we will speak of the words properly,
according to their immediate sense. 2. To whomsoever it belongs, the meaning
is, Iansen. concord. E^ang. cap. 149.
that howsoever his bodily presence ceased, yet his providence should never
fail to preserve and comfort them in all their troubles, and help them in all
their actions: and by degrees so enlighten them also, that they should not
perish in their ignorance, but be led forward to more perfection. This must
needs be granted to be all that is meant. First, because Christ is not absent
from his people every time they fall into an error, but remains with them
still for all that, either forgiving it, or reforming it. Secondly, this
promise notwithstanding, yet afterward, Gal 2.11. vide August. de Baptism cont.
Donat. l. 2. c. 1. and de agon. Christian. c. 30. Thom. in ep. ad Gal. c. 3.
lect. 3.
Peter, one to whom the promise was made, erred against the truth of the
Gospel, and was therefore by Paul rebuked, and resisted to his face: which
thing could not have fallen out, if this promise had exempted the Church from
all error. Thirdly, if it privilege the whole Church from error because it is
made to it, then consequently it priuiledgeth the particular Churches, Pastors,
and believers therein, because it is made to them likewise: but experience
shows these latter may err: and therefore the meaning must needs be as I
have said. Fourthly, See..
it is a ruled case among the Papists, that the Pope may err; which could not
be if these words of Christ meant the Church of Rome, and that infallible
judgment which the Jesuit talks of. As for his gloss upon the words that
Christ in them should promise his continual presence, not for a while then,
nor for a while now, but for ever, it is altogether either idle and inept. For
he can name no Protestant that ever thought Christ was at any time absent, but
we all constantly believe he always was, is, and shall be with his Church to the
end.

5 The second and third places are much like the first. John 14.16. I will pray
the Father (says Christ) and he shall give you another comforter, that he may
abide with you for ever. And John 16.13. When he is come which is the Spirit of
truth, he will lead you into all truth. But I answer two things. First these
words are properly extended to the Apostles, promising Act. 2.4.
that which was performed immediately after Christ's ascension, and ought not to
be stretched any further. Which being so, they conclude somewhat for them, but
little for the Church: because every grace belongs not to the Church in all
ages that was given the Apostles. Secondly, applying them to the Church also,
the meaning is, that the holy Ghost should never forsake it, but persevere in
teaching it all truh, which is simply necessary to save it, according as the
Church is able to learn it, which he does by means of the Scripture: though
not at all times alike perfectly, but so as he endueth it with all holiness, and
yet many sins are found in it. This interpretation must needs be allowed for
three causes, first, the Apostle says, of himself and the Church, 1. Cor.
13.9.
Now we know but in part, and prophecy in part. Which were not true, if these
words of Christ had secured the Church in all things and in every truth: for
the part comes short of the whole. Secondly, this promise belongs as well to
one Apostle as another, yea 1. Ioh 2.20.
to all the faithful as well as to the Apostles, if it reach to the Church: so
that if that be the sense which the Jesuit sets down, then all the
Apostles had equal privileges from error with Peter, and particular Churches
and men should be as infallible as the whole Church it self, which I am sure
the Jesuit will not grant. Thirdly, Saint Austine Tract. 96. in Ioh. tom. 9.
expounds the words as I do: He shall teach or lead you into all truth:]
this I think cannot be fulfilled in any man's mind in this life: for who is he
living in this body so corrupt, and loading the soul, that can know all
truth, when the Apostle says, we know but in part? But forasmuch as by the
holy Ghost it comes to pass, whose earnest we have received, that hereafter
we may come to the fullness it self, whereof the same Apostle says, then shall
we see him face to face; and now I know but in part, but then I shall know as I
am known, not that which shall be in this l^fe only, but all that which shall
befall us till the perfection come: the Lord by the love of his spirit has
promised, saying, He shall teach you all truth. As for the Jesuits exposition,
that he may remain with you for ever, not only for six hundred years, it
smells either of his malice, or ignorance. For which of us ever yet said, the
holy Ghost departed from the Church after six hundred years? Let the Papists
deal sincerely, and leave their coining.

6 The fourth place is Math. 28.19. Go teach all nations. Whereto I answer,
first, these words were spoken to the Apostles only, and not to that which the
Jesuit calls the Catholic Church. Now I grant their teaching was
infallible, and all men were bound to hear it; for they taught that which
afterward they writ in the Scripture: yet so they taught, and with such
commission, that Act 17.11.
the people are commended which examined their teaching by the Scriptures.
Secondly, we grant the Pastors of the Church in all ages have commission to
teach likewise, but that proves not all their teaching to be always infallible,
because natural corruption hanging on them, they may fail in that which is
committed to them. Neither is this any inconvenience, binding us sometime to
believe that which is false: for the bond has a limitatio^, that we hear them
so far as they teach agreeable with the scriptures, and no further: and by
those scriptures we may relieve our selves if they chance to teach falsely.

7 The fifth place is Luke 10.16. He that hears you, hears me. Which words
were spoken to the Apostles, all whose teaching and writing was true
infallibly: and therefore were sufficient warrant to the hearers to accept it.
But being applied to the Church and ordinary Pastors therein, Ferus lib. 3 in
Math. cap. 23.
they must be understood with this caution, if they hold them to the
instructions that Christ gives them, if they come in the name of Christ,
delivering his words truly and consonant to the scripture; for such are to be
heard as Christ himself: else 1. Ioh. 4.1. 1. Cor. 14.32.
we must try the spirits, and judge of the Prophets. This place therefore
being to be understood conditionally, proves not that which the Jesuit
concludes absolutely and universally.

8 The sixth place is Math. 23.2. The Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses chair:
all therefore whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe and do. Which words
I grant must be understood of the Ministers of the Gospel that succeed the
Apostles, as well as of the Pharisees that sat in Moses chair: therefore I
answer three things: 1. I mislike it not that he compares the Priests and
Bishops of his Church to the Scribes and Pharisees. 2. By Moses chair is meant
neither outward succession, nor judicial authority, but the profession of
Moses law. 3. Si quae cu^que dixerint nobis ea facere iubemur, cur alio loco
Christus cauere voluit a fe^mento Pharisaeorum? cur rursum eorum traditiones
exemplo etiam proprio co^temnere docuit? aliquid ergo doctrinae propriae
puritati euangelij admiscere possunt, in quo non solum non sunt audiendi, sed
sunt etiam refutandi. Id ergo prae cauit Christus ne plebs malis docentium
exemplis ad contemptionem verae doctrinae inducatur. Nunc ergo quae dixetint
nobis Pharisaei, eadem facere iubet Christus, cum super Cathediam Mosis
federint, hoc est, legem enarrauerint, docucrint, proposuerint. Can. loc. l. 5.
c. 4.
Our Savior does not simply command the people to obey the Pharisees in all
points of their doctrine, or teach them that their local succession did
privilege them from error; but only that they should not for their evil life
be offended at that which they might at any time teach well: because though
their life were wicked, yet that which they taught out of Moses chair, that is
to say, according to Moses law, must be followed. Now this was far from
enioyning them in all points to do according to the doctrine of the Scribes and
Pharisees, as I prove by four reasons: first Iansen. concord. euang. cap. 120.
Em. Sa. notat. in Math. 23. v. 3.
the Popish expositors say, this place binds us not to obey them if they
teach that which is evil, for that is to teach against the chair. Which
exposition grants we are not bound to hear them in all points without
limitation, as Ecce sine limitatione aliqua. Martin. Peers. de tradit part. 3.
page 328.
a Popish Bishop speaks with the Jesuit, and supposes they may teach
untruly in some points. Secondly, if I may refuse them in some points, then
hence it follows unanswerably, that there is another rule, whereby I may be
directed in hearing: for else how should a man be able to distinguish those
points wherein he must follow his teachers, from those wherein he must not?
Thirdly, the Pharisees taught many errors and blasphemies, both Math. 5.20. and
25.3. and 23.13.
against the law of Moses, and Marc. 14.64. Ioh 7.48. and 8 13. and 9.22.24.
and 19.7.15.
against the divinity of Christ; in which regard our Savior bad his disciples
Mat. 26.6.12.
to beware of the leaven of the Pharisees, which was their doctrine. Wherein he
had gainsaid himself, if by Moses chair he had meant any thing but the
prescript of the law, or by those words had commanded us in all points to do
according to the Prelates doctrine: for then the Jews must not have honored
parents, nor loved their enemies, nor believed in Christ, because the Pharisees
taught against these things. Lastly, Gloss. in Mat. 23.2 Nicol. Gorr. ibid.
Arias M^nt^n. elucid. ibid.
the Papists themselves expounding the place, write, that to sit in Moses
chair, is to teach according to the doctrine and rule of Moses law, and to
command things agreeable thereunto; that is to say, true doctrine, and the
same that Moses taught: wherein only they might be followed, and no further.
Lib. 3 in Mat. cap. 23.
Ferus says, that Christ's commandment, Observe and do whatsoever they bid
you, bound them not to observe all the decrees of the Pharisees, but so far
forth as they agreed with the law: in like sort he said to the Apostles and
their successors, He that hears you hears me, and he that despises you
despises me: but Matthew had set down before, that he charged them to preach
the Gospel; whereby it appears, that the Apostles must be heard but so far
forth as they be Apostles, that is, as they do Christ's message, and teach the
things which Christ commands; but if they teach other things, or contrary to
Christ, then are they no more Apostles, but seducers, and not to be heard.
Which exposition of Ferus a Papist, excludes (you see) the Jesuits collection
for the infalliblenesse of all the Prelates doctrine, and gives the people
liberty to examine it by the Gospel.

9 Neither did any of the ancient Fathers understand the place otherwise: for
Austine in Ep. 165. ad Generos.
the place alleged, only affirms two things: first, that in the Church of
Rome there had been a continual succession of Bishops, from Peter to
Anastasius who then lived; which he says, because the Donatist (in his epistle
to Generosus) had pretended a certain succession of Bishops, from Donatus the
beginner of that sect: and to satisfy him, that if succession were to be stood
upon, then there might a succession of better likelihood be brought against
him. Secondly he affirms, that in all this Roman succession there had been
never a Donatist: and though there had, yet should the people of God incur no
danger thereby, because Christ has forewarned them of evil overseers, that
they follow their teaching and not their doing. In all which discourse what one
word is there, whereby it may be gathered that Austine thought as the Jesuit
does, that in all points we must do according to the doctrine of the Prelates,
or that the Church and Bishops of Rome can err in nothing? for the succession
mentioned, implies no such matter, for any thing that Austine says. And the
other words, Our Lord has provided for his Church, by saying of evil
Prelates, Do what they say, but not what they do; can show no other meaning in
him then was in Christ: and how Christ meant them, I have already set down;
the sum whereof is, that no Christian man forsake the unity of the Church
for the Pastors evil life, but that still they hear them and follow them, as
long as they teach out of the chair, that is, according to the doctrine of
Moses and Peter, from which the Romish Church is departed long ago. So that
those words, Do what they teach, being referred to the former, they sit in
Moses chair, must be expounded jointly with them, Do what they teach out of
the chair; which being granted, how follows it from hence, that therefore
the teachers can err in nothing?

10 The last place is Math. 18.17. If he refuse to hear the Church, let him be
unto thee as a heathen and a publican. Which words, the Jesuit says, contain
a threatening against such as do not in all things follow the Church: Bellarm.
de verbo Dei. l. 3. c. 5. Eman. Sa. Not. Mat. 18.17
meaning the Pastors of the Church. Whereunto I answer two things: first it
follows not, that the Church cannot err, because we are bidden to hear it:
for so we are commanded to Romans 13.1.
obey magistrates, and yet they may command things unlawful, and Act. 4.19.
Dan. 3.18. and 6.10.
in such a case they must not be obeyed. It was a law to the Jews, that Deuteronomy.
17.8.
in matters of weight they should repair to the Priest, and do according to
that which he should judge, without declining from it; yet Vriah, and Annas,
and Caiaphas, were not of infallible judgment. Therefore the meaning is, that
we must obediently hear the Church, and yield unto it, not simply in all
things, but conditionally, as long as it speaks things agreeable to the word
of God, as was answered to the former places. Secondly, the things properly
which Christ here mentions, and wherein he bids us hear the Church, are
not determinations of faith, but Church Censures and admonitions: wherein it is
clear, the true Church of Christ may sometime miss it, and be admonished by
her children, notwithstanding this threatening of Christ; as when Ioh. 9.3 4.
the Jews excommunicated him that was borne blind; and Niceph. l. 12. c. 33.
the East and West Churches censured one another about the keeping of Easter.
For Hieron. comment. in Math. c. 16.
ignorant Bishops and Elders, sometimes take up the severity of Pharisees,
condemning the innocent, and acquiting the guilty. Pope Innocent says in
Decretal. Greg. lib. 5. de sententia excom. cap. 28. A nobis est saepe.
the Canon law, Gods judgment always leans upon the truth, which neither
deceives us, nor is deceived it self. But the Churches judgment oftentimes
follows opinion, which many times falls out both to deceive us, and to be
deceived it self. Whereby it comes to pass sometime, that he is loosed in
the Church who is bound with God, and he loosed with God who is wrapped in the
Churches censure. Upon which words Super 5. de sententia excom. a Nobis. 2.
Panormitane writing says, A general Council representing the whole Church,
may very well err in excommunicating him that should not be excommunicate.
Whereby we see the Church may err in her censures, notwithstanding these words
of Christ. And if in censures, then let the Jesuit yield a sound reason, why
not as well in points of faith? or else confess the words of Christ to be meant
as I have said.

. 15. Worthily therefore does S. Paul call this Church Columna and firmamentum
veritatis. 1. Tim. 3. the pillar and ground of truth. Also S. Austin in lib.
contra Cresc. gives this general advice: Quisquis falli metuit huius
obscuritate quaestionis, Ecclesiam de illa consulat, quam sine vlla ambiguitate
Scriptura sancta demonstrat. Whosoever is afraid to be deceived with the
obscurity of this question, let him require the judgment of the Church, which
without ambiguitie the holy Scripture does demonstrate. By which words he
shows us, that the way not to be deceived in an obscure question, is to ask
and follow the judgment of the Church.

The Answer.
1 There is no man denies but it is a good way not to be deceived in an
obscure question, to ask and follow the judgment of the Church, so it be the
true Church, which the Roman company is not. But yet neither is it the only
way, as I have touched already; nor if it be, does it hence follow, that
therefore it self is the rule and free from all blemish of error, because the
ministry thereof may be a condition subordinate for the obtaining of that
which is the rule. As Ioh. 4.29.39.
the woman of Samaria was a good means to bring her countrymen to Christ that
knew him not, and yet their belief was not built on her, ver. 42.
but on that which she revealed to them. And Ier. 6.16.
God bids us by his Prophet, Stand by the ways, and behold, and ask for
the old way, which is the good way; though in the mean time the persons to be
asked are our direction no further then while they point to the old way. And
the Prophet bids, Hag. 2.12.
Ask the Priests concerning the law: and says, Mal. 2.7.
The Priests lips should preserve knowledge, and they should seek the law at
his mouth, for he is the Angel of the Lord of hoasts; yet these Priests many
times spoke untruly, being deceived themselves, and deceiving others. And so
may it happen to the Pastors of the Church.

2 All which notwithstanding, the Church abides still the same that Saint Paul
calls it, the pillar and ground of truth, in that the truth is no where else
to be found. Which that I may show the beter, it is to be noted, that Iul. Pol.
Onomast. lib. 8. page 454. Scol. Aristoph. Nub. Rosin. antiq. Romans l. 8, c. 2.
Alex. ab Alexand. genial. dierum. l. 6. c. 23.
in old time the Gentiles used to write their laws in tables, and so hang them
up on pillars of stone, that the people might read them, as Proclamations are
nailed to posts in market towns: and sometime Phauorin. and Hesych. Lexic.
verbo (...).
they whited the pillar, and so wrote the laws upon it. Lexic. december Rhet.
Harpocration says, they reared up straight pillars of stone, and so wrote
their laws upon them. And it was also an ordinary thing that they had other
pillars, like the Pasquill in Rome, Eustach. Il. l. Suid. verbo (...).
whereupon whosoever listed hung their Epigrams or libels that they would have
known. Now the Apostle describing the Church, likeneth it to one of these
pillars, whose use was no more but to show that which hung thereon, it self
not being the law, but that whereupon the law was hung. For so the true faith,
written in the tables of the Scripture, whereunto the world will give no
testimony, is fastened to the Church, as to a stately pillar and strong
supporter, that there it may be seen, and holden out unto us. Hence the
Jesuit can challenge no more but that the Church is unto us a witness and
vpholder of the faith, and always preserves it; which we deny not; but in the
mean time he forgets, that it is one thing to hold out the rule, and
another to be the rule it self: and he that says the Church is the supporter
of truth, does not say withal that the Pastors can never err or fail in
delivering any part thereof. The Apostle says the former, but the Jesuit
only beside the text, affirms the latter.

3 This exposition must needs be granted for four reasons: first, it is called
the pillar of truth in no other sense then Ephesians. 5.27.
elsewhere it is called glorious, without spot, or blemish, or blame: but it is
certain that the purity there mentioned, is mingled with some imperfection;
therefore it is also certain, this upholding of the truth is not free from all
error. Secondly, Paul in this place, sends not Timothy to learn of the
Church, which he should do if the Jesuits conceit were sound, but verse. 14.15.
wishes him to teach the Church out of the Scriptures, that so it might be the
pillar of truth. Thirdly, that which the Apostle says in these words, is true
of every particular Church: but of every particular church it is not true that
it cannot err; for we see they may, as did Act. 20.30. Apoc. 2.4.
this of Ephesus, concerning which the Apostle says here, it is the pillar and
ground of truth. Fourthly, if this place prove that the Church cannot err in
any thing, but of it all men must learn the infallible truth: then seeing
Bellar. de verbo Dei. l. 3. c. 5. Greg. de Vale^t. comment. Theo. tom. 3. disp.
1. q. 1. assert. 3.
the Papists hold their Prelates and Pastors to be the Church, I demand what is
that which must teach them? for the Church does not, seeing they are the Church
themselves?

4 Or if the Jesuit dote upon his own exposition, then let him call to mind
how other Papists have expounded before him, Staphyl. Apol. part. 1. and S^apl.
his translat. page 50.
who say, The Apostle calls the Church the pillar and ground of truth;
signifying by the word ground, the largeness of Christendom: by the word
pillar, the continual, smooth, and not interrupted succession of the Apostles
and their scholars, upon who^ all truth is builded. Which exposition differing
from this of the Jesuits, may give him occasion to look better into the text,
and at least mistrust his collections therfrom, till he have conferred with his
fellows. For upon the reckoning it will fall out, that until the Friars and
Jesuits of late began to hammer the Scriptures, there was never any that out
of them would deliver his conclusion, but the contrary. The Apostles writings
are the pillars and supporters of our faith: says Lib. 3. c. 1.
Irenaeus. The Gospel is the gound and stay of the Church, says Lib. 3 c. 11.
the same Irenaeus. The truth is the pillar and ground of the Church, says
Hom. in hunc loc.
Chrysostom. The divine Scriptures must teach who has the true Church. These
are the proofs, these are the foundations, these are the grounds of our cause,
says De unit. Eccl. cap. 16.
Austin.

5 The words of Austin, alleged by the Jesuit, are good: but they had been
better if he had not left out the beginning, for thus they lie: Contra.
Crescon. gram. lib. 1. cap. 33.
For so much as the holy Scripture cannot deceive us, let him who fears lest
the obscurity of this question (concerning the baptism of the Donatists)
should deceive him, enquire that Churches judgment of it, which the holy
Scripture without all doubtfulnes does demo^strate. Wherein Aust. says not the
church is the rule, or the Church cannot err; but only as the Jesuit
himself notes, that the judgment thereof should be inquired. His meaning is,
that in the question of rebaptizing, because in Cresconius his suppositio^, the
Scripture said nothing of it, such as were doubtful might ask the judgment of
the true Church, and there they should learn Cresconius to be in an error.
Wherein the Jesuit shall find us to consent with Austin: for does he think we
allow not the Church her ministry? or that we silence her from bearing
witness to the truth? or that we turn away the people from going and
enquiring to her? Nay rather we advise all people, desirous of the truth, to
follow Austins counsel, howsoever such as the Jesuit is, to make us odious,
give out the contrary. For, Austin first attributes the perfection of truth to
the Scripture only. Secondly, then he allows us to go to no Church but that
which from the Scripture is demonstrated to be a true Church. Thirdly, he says
never a word that the Church should be the rule, or free from all error; but
only that they should enquire her judgment, which in that question, at that
time, he knew to be sound: though possible he were not ignorant that Eusebius.
hist. l. 7. c. 5. (...), etc.
many famous Churches formerly had not been so, but had decreed the very error
that he now confuted. Lastly, Aduer. Cresc. l. 2. c. 21.
within five leaves of the place alleged he has these words: The Church is
subject to Christ, and therefore may not prefer her self before him: for he
always judges rightly, but Ecclesiastical judges, being but men, for the most
part are deceived. Let the Jesuit yield us thus much, and he shall find
himself a great deal short of that he reckons for the certainty of his
Churches teaching, and that Austin makes not the Church the rule, as he would
have it, but a means to direct us, in things obscure, by the Scriptures; whose
judgment is to be followed upon their authority, and only so long as she
determines according to them. Which point I fear the Jesuit will mislike.

6 Yet thus the Church it self teaches us. For what Bishops, what Pastors,
what Councels, what men, what Churches have not erred, though Mal. 2.7. Ephesians. 4
11. Heb. 13.17.
God have bidden us enquire their judgment and seek unto them? The Papists
will say, particular Churches may err; but how did the Councels of Ephesus,
Seleucia, and Remino miss it, The Bishops at Ephesus were 132. at Selculeucia
16^. at Ariminum 400 whereof above 300. were Catholic Bishops.
where the flower of all the Christian Pastors of the world were assembled?
whereof Dial. aduer. Lucifer.
Jerome complained, The whole world groned and wondered to see it self Arrian.
Which imperfection has hung so fast upon all Councels and Churches, that Ep.
ad Proco.
Nazianzen writing to a friend of his, says, He never saw any council have a
good end. And Adu. profan^ nou. c. 4.
Vincentius confesses, that not only some portion of the Church, but the
whole Church it self is blotted with some new contagion. So that the very
Papists themselves, some of them, convinced by experience and the Churches own
confession, are driven in the point to come home unto us. For thus writes
Turrecrem. sum. de. Eccl l. 2 c. 91. and l. 3. c. 60
a learned Cardinal: That which we say, the Church cannot err in faith or
manners, must thus be taken, according to the doctrine of the fathers, that God
does so assist his Church to the end of the world, that the true faith shall
never fail out of the same. For, to the worlds end, there shall be no time
wherein some, though not all, shall not have true faith working by love. Does
not the Jesuit see here, that though all of them lay down the conclusion,
that the Church cannot err, yet some of them expound it so that they come
roundly home to us, and do as good as deny it again? Therefore let the Jesuit
jar no more about this matter, but submit himself to the Cardinals
exposition: and so we will both sit down friendly together at his feet,
awaiting till either he, or some other speak Protestant again, and so agree
us in the rest of the questions that are depending.

. 16. The first condition therefore of the rule of faith, to wit, to be
infallible, agrees to the teaching of the Church. Now that the doctrine and
teaching of the Church has the other conditions, to wit, that it is such as
may be easily known to all sorts of men, and such as may universally teach
them in all points, will easily be seen after I shall set down and prove that
this Church is always visible: and further what particular company of men be
those which be this true Church. For having by this means assigned a
particular company of men, who according as I have proved, are in all points
taught by the holy Ghost, and are by God his appointment, in stead of Christ,
in all points to teach us the infallible truth, there will no doubt remain,
but that their teaching is such as may be understood of all (since they are
living men, that can conform their teaching to the capacity of all sorts:)
and such as may sufficiently in all points instruct us in the right faith, that
the appointment and ordinance of God, by which, as I have proved, they are
ordained to teach us in all points, may not be in vain and frustrate of the
effect intended by him. Let us therefore first see whether the Church or
company of faithful men, of which I have already spoken, be always visible or
not.

The Answer.
1 The first condition of the rule of faith, to be infallible, agreeeth not to
the teaching of the Church: because the Jesuit by the Church means See
Digress. 16. nu. 4
only the Pope, and all Papists hold, Propterea enim seeds Apostolica, seu
Romana Ecclesia infallibilis dicitur, quia is qui prae est illi, authoritate^
habet per se infallibilem. Gr. de Val. comment. Theol tom. 3. p. 247. D.
the infalliblnes thereof consists in his authority that cannot err, and
nothing else. Neither can he assign any company or state of men, whereby she
may be supposed to manifest her teaching, but the same may be subject to error,
and in experience has erred; as we see in Councels, and Doctors, and all other
means which she has used in teaching us, except that of the Scriptures only,
as I have showed.

2 Next, though it were granted to be infallible, and the next also yielded,
which the Jesuit now begins to take so much pains to prove, that it were
both easy to be known, and could teach us universally in all points; yet were
it not proved thereby to be the rule; because there is more required to the
rule then this, as I have showed: and this it borrows from the Scripture, as
the Moon does her light from the Sun: which shows, against all exception,
that the Scripture it self is the rule, and of greater authority then the
Church, in that these things are originally in the Scripture, from whence the
Church but borrows whatsoever she partaketh thereof, though Igitur quicquid
habet boni a^ perficit Scriptura, quicquid pleni ac solidi, id habet ab
Ecclesia quae implet eum qui implet omnia. page 434. Ecclesia, a^unt,
co^stituta est vt tertimonium exhibeat diuinis libris. quis hoc ferat^ page 440.
Tho. Bozius de signis Ecc. tom. 2. l. 16. c. vlt.
such as the Jesuit is, can ill digest this saying.

3 And to set on foot the question of the visiblenesse of the Church for the
proving hereof, me thinks is game fair and far off. For when he has
assigned a state of the Church perpetual, visible, which he can never do: yet
will there remain a doubt, whether all the teaching thereof have the
conditions mentioned. For this visible company, though living men that can
conform their teaching to the capacity of al sorts, may yet be subject to
error, or want immediate authority to assure men's consciences, but what it
borrows from the Scriptures: or may have commssion to teach no further then
is written: or may over see now and then some points of faith which the holy
Ghost teaches, as well as it does some points of manners: in which cases who
sees not that it may both fail in teaching some truths sometime, and the best
teaching will not be so easy or certain to understand and believe, as the
Jesuit pretends. So that the visibilitie of the Church argues the easiness
and universality thereof in teaching but sortly; and were a question not
greatly needful for this place, but that Papists have a humor to be
discoursing thereof, and love to make their people believe it troubles us ill:
as Upon 1. Tom. 3 15.
the Rhemists say, This place pincheth all heretics wonderfully: and e
Gregory of Valence, Comment. Theolog. Tom. 3. page 142.
The property of the Church to be always visible, makes heretics in ill
case. And therefore let him go on, and see what he will make of it, and always
mark his reach, that still he pleads for the Roman Church; showing hereby
the unhappy condition wherein it stands, that at every trial passing
between us, her miserable children are enforced to beg from door to door: Of
your charity give our mother leave to be judge herself in the trial, that
she be not overthrown.

. 17. This question I decide by this only conclusion, that the Church of
Christ must needs always be from Christ his time to the end of the world, and
being, it must needs be always visible. This conclusion has two parts. The
first whereof, to wit, that Christ his true Church must be always without
interruption to the end of the world, needs no other proof then those
promises of our Savior before mentioned; wherein is declared, that Christ and
his holy Spirit shall be with his Church continually unto the worlds end.
Matthew. vlt. Omnibus diebus vsque ad consummationem seculi: which promise is not
fulfilled unless the Church without interruption be continually all the days
until the end of the world. For if the Church for any time, days, or
months, or years, do cease to be, for those years, months, and days,
Christ cannot be said to be with the Church, and consequently cannot be truly
said to have fulfilled the promise wherein he said he will be with the Church
all the days unto the end of the world.

The Answer.
1 The first part of this conclusion, with the confirmation thereof, might well
have been spared. For we confess the Church never ceasseth to be, but
continues always without interruption to the worlds end: and against all
Papists whatsoever we make it good, that the very faith we now profess has
successively continued in all ages since Christ, and was never interrupted so
much as one year, month, or day: and confess Dan. 7.27. Psalm. 102.26. Mat.
16.18. Luc. 1.33.
the contrary were sufficient to prove us no part of the Church of God: yet the
Jesuit, you see, very soberly stands upon the matter, showing that the
Church cannot be extinguished; which is a trick of his own, thereby to make
his friend believe that we think it may. So Ann. upon 1. Tim. 3 15. and Ap. 12
6.
the Rhemists write as if we held it is fallen from Christ these many ages,
being known neither to friend nor foe. And Reinolds Caluinoture. l. 1. c. 10.
p. 106. and 107 Lutheranide toto orb terrarum Ecclesia^ periisse mentiuntur.
Posseu. bibl. select. l. 6. c. 4. p. 445.
reports we should say, The Church of Christ was utterly fallen for a thousand
years together: yea all that time there was no Church at all: whereas we hold
the very contrary. And if our testy adversaries will not be satisfied with this
our profession, but continue their ordinary practice in charging us with
opinions which we never held, then let them hearken what Bellarmin de Eccl.
mil. lib. 3. cap. 13.
a friend of their own tells them: They do but trifle away the time, which
stand proving that the Church cannot absolutely fail, because the Protestants
grant it cannot. The question therefore is only of the outward state of the
Church, whether it be always visible to the world or not; that in every age
those congregations may evidently be discerned and pointed to, which are the
true Church? for we say not. Wherein though the Jesuit will reason against us
in the sections following, and the Papists generally censure us; yet the truth
is, themselves, when the matter comes to a just trial, in effect say as much
as we, and the very same of their Church that we do of ours, but that of very
frowardness they will not receive the word invisible.

Digression. 17. Wherein it is showed in what manner the Church is said to be
invisible: and that the Papists say no less concerning this matter then we do.
2 Indeed they set down enough in the question, Bellar. de Eccl. l. 3. c. 13.
that God has at all times a Church consisting not of a few people, but a
great multitude, as conspicuous as any earthly kingdom: Idem de To. Pout. l.
4. c. 4.
part whereof, and always the head, shall be visible at Rome, and the rest of
it wheresoever, is visibly subject to the Bishop of Rome: and Greg. de Valent.
tom. 3. p. 142. C^ster. Enchitid. c. 2. Bell. de Eccl. l. 3 c. 2. Atque hoc
interest.
that this company perpetually holds a visible succession of Pastors and
people as sensibly as any other society of men, so that at any time one may
point with his finger and say, this is the Church: Rhem. upon Act. 11.24.
of the Protestants invisible Church they hear not one word. Thus they enlarge
their sense when they will set forth their wealth to beguile the poor widow;
whereas at other times they are content to let down a great deal of this
reckoning, and to confess as much of their own Church as we say of ours.

3 For when we say the Church is sometime invisible, the meaning is not, that
it is extinguished, or that it is always invisible, or that none of the
faithful can see any part thereof, or that it is as much hidden from the
faithful as it is from the world: but we mean three other things. First,
although it abide always upon the earth, holding the whole faith without
change, and containing a certain number that constantly profess it: yet this
number may be very small, and their profession so secret among themselves, that
the world and such as love not the truth, shall not see them, they remaining so
hidden as if they were not at all. This point concerning the smalnes of the
number, is confessed by Alexan. part. 3. qu. vlt. nu. 5. art. 2. Dur. ration.
l. 6. c. 72. nu. 25. Panorm. de elect. and electi potest. c. significasti. Tur
recrem. de Co^secr. d. 2. semel Christus. nu. 4.
the^ that hold that about the time of Christ's passion, the true faith remained
in none but only the virgin Mary: and by Refert Fr. Suarez tom. 2. dif^. 54.
sect. 6. page 649.
such Catholic writers as say, that in the times of Antichrist, the true
faith shall perish throughout the whole world. And the secretnesse of their
profession is acknowledged by Pererius the Jesuit, who In Daniel. page 714.
writes, that in the time of Antichrist there shall be no sacrament in public
places, neither shall any public honor be given it, but privately and
privily shall it be kept and honored. And Ouandus the Friar, Breuiloqu. in 4.
Sent d. 18. prop. 3. p. 602.
who thinks the Mass at that time shall be celebrated but in very few places,
so that it shall seem to be ceased. Secondly, all the external government
thereof may come to decay, in that the local and personal succession of the
Pastors may be interrupted, the discipline hindered, the preachers scattered,
and all the outward exercise of government and religion suspended: whereby it
shall come to pass that in all the world you cannot see any one particular
Church publicly professing the true faith whereto you may safely join your
self; by reason persecution and heresies shall have ouerflowed all Churches as
Genesis 7.18.
Noes flood did the world, or obscured their light as the Sun is eclipsed, or
corrupted the sincerity of religion, as a leprosy or scab sometime grows
over the whole body of man, and hides every member, till by little and little
it fall off again. Thus, in effect, say the Papists. Acosta De Temp. Nouiss.
l. 2. c. 15.
says, All the light and reputation of Ecclesiastical order lies worn out
and buried in the time of Antichrist: the Priests lamenting, the Church doors
destroyed, the altars forsaken, the Church empty, because there are none to
come to the Lambs solemnity. And Upon 2. The. 2 3.
the Rhemists: It is very like (be it spoken under the correction of Gods
Church and all learned Catholics) that this great defection or revolt shall
not be only from the Roman Empire, but specially from the Roman Church, and
withal from most points of Christian religion. For that near to the time of
Antichrist, and the consummation of the world, there is like to be a great
revolt of kingdoms, people, and Provinces, from the external open obedience
and communion thereof. For the few days of Antichrists reign, the external
state of the Roman Church, and public intercourse of the faithful with the
same, may cease. Aquipontan. contra S^hn. de Antich. page 23. Tho. Boz. de
Sign. Eccl tom. 3 l. 24 cap. 9.10
Others think, that then the sacrifice of the Eucharist shall be taken away:
And Dom. a Soto. 4. d. 46. qu 1. art. 1.
some affirm, The departure and revolt of the whole world from the sea of Rome
shall be a sign of the end of the world; the faith being extinguished by
reason of this revolt. Thirdly, Apo. 13. and 17.
that which the world and the kingdoms thereof follows as the Church, may
fall out to be the synagogue of Antichrist, whose doctrine is poison, whose
Pastors be Wolves in sheep clothing, and whose people be the bastards of the
whore of Babylon: that none can discern the true believers but such as are
specially enlightened by Gods Spirit thereunto. Thus writes Gregory of
Valence: When we say the Church is always co^spicuous, Annal. fid. l 6. c. 4 and
comment. Theol. tom. 3. page 145.
says he, this must not be taken as if we thought it might at every season be
discerned alike easily. For we know that sometimes it is so tossed with the
waves of errors, schisms, and persecutions, that to such as are unskillful and
do not discreetly enough weigh the circumstances of times and things, it shall
be very hard to be known. Which then specially fell out, what time the
falsehood of the Arrians bare rule almost over all the world: therefore we deny
not but that it will be harder to discern the Church at some times then at
other some: yet this we avouch, that it always might be discerned by such as
could wisely esteem things. To the same effect Relect. contro^. 1. q 3 page 30.
writes D. Stapleton.

4 Whereby it appears, that if our adversaries would set contention aside,
the matter of the visible and invisible Church were at an end: for themselves
think it may be driven into the same straits that we complain of, as will
appear by examining the places alleged. And no doubt they could have been
contented to have called it the invisible Church too, as we do, bu^ that, as in
all other matters, so in this, it was their luck to come after us, and we by
evil hap used the term before them, and so matred See Rhem. upon 1. Tim.
6.20. and 2. Tim. 1.13.
the Catholic phrase, that now it cannot relish in their mouths. But in the
mean time let the Jesuit speak indifferently, what fault we have made that
our Church must be condemned for no Church, because it was sometime obscured;
and yet his be the Roman Catholic Church, though it be subject to the very
same inconveniences? For though he say, their Church is never thus obscured but
in the times of Antichrist, yet this grants as much as we say, that it may be
hidden: and then we reply, that all those days of the Churches inuisibilitie,
were the days of Antichrist.

. 18. The second part, to wit, that Christ's Church must as long as it is, be
always visible, I prove. First because Christ our Savior ordained this his
Church to be the light of the world, according to these words Matthew. 5. Vos est
is lux mundi, and to be a rule or mean by which all men at all times may come
to an entire and infallible knowledge of the true faith, as has been already
proved: but how can it be the light of the world, if it self be invisible? or
how can it be a mean by which at all times the infallible truth in all points
of faith should be made known to all sorts of men, if it self at any time
could not be known of men? Or if you say, that sometime it could neither it
self be known, nor be a means by which the true faith might be made known;
then since (as I proved) it is a necessary means, and so necessary that
without it, according to the ordinary course, there is not sufficient means
to instruct all men infallibly in all points of faith, then, I say, men that
lived at that time wanted necessary means whereby they might attain to the
knowledge of true faith; and consequently whereby they might come to salvation.
Which if it were so, how is it universally true, that Deus vult omnes homines
saluos fieri, and ad agnitionem veritatis venire. 1. Tim. 2. God would have all
men saved, and to come to the knowledge of true faith, and thereby, by degrees
to salvation? For without these means provided, he knows it impossible for
them to attain to salvation; and knowing it impossible, he cannot be said to
will it, since no wise man wills that which he knows impossible: and much
less almighty God whose wisdom is infinite, and whose will is always
joyfully joined with some work or effect by which that which he wills, at
least, is made possible to be done.

The Answer.
1 Here the Jesuit has laid down two arguments to prove the Church to be
always visible: the first is, because our Savior ordained it to be the light
of the world, and nothing can be such a light which it self is invisible. Thus
it must be concluded.

That which Christ ordained to be the light of the world, is always visible.

But Christ ordained the Church to be the light of the world, Math. 5.14.

Ergo the Church is always visible.

In which argument neither of the parts are true. For first it is not true,
that every light is always visible: so that granting the Church to be the light
of the world, which it is, yet is it not proved thereby to be always visible for
two causes. First because Genesis 1.16. Psalm. 136.8.
the Sun and Moon were ordained to be great lights, for the governing of day
and night, and yet we see them darkened, and suffer strange eclipses. So the
Church, though it be ordained to enlighten the world by ministering the doctrine
of the Scriptures, sometime may fail out of men's sight, as 1. Reg. 19.10.
in the days of Elias. Therefore Apo. 12.1.5.6.
it is compared to a woman, which one while is as visible as any thing can be,
clothed with the Sun, the Moon under her feet, and upon her head a crown
of twelve stars; and yet at another time she is driven into the wilderness,
out of the sight of men, yea taken up as it were into heaven, there to abide
1260. days. And concerning the Pastors, Micah 3.6.
the Prophet threatens, that Night shall be to the people for a vision, and
darkness for a divination: the Sun shall go down upon the Prophets, and the
day shall be dark over them. Secondly, though it be a light, yet such as walk
in darkness, and love it better then the light, because their deeds are evil,
and know not the servants of the light, do not always see it, but want either
will or eyes thereto, as 2. Reg. 6 16.
the king of Arams soldiers saw not the mountain full of horses and chariots
of fire that were round about Elisha, nor knew that they were in the midst of
Samaria till their eyes were opened; or possible with the mist of their own
errors, or smoke of persecution they may obscure it: according to that of the
Revelation, Apoc. 9.1.
where it is showed, that a star falling from heaven, the bottomless pit was
opened, and there arose out of it a smoke, wherewith the Sun and the air was
darkened. So Saint Austine Ep. 80. ad Hesych. prope fin. and epist. 48. ad
Vincent.
speaks, When the Sun shall he darkened, and the Moon shall not give her
light, and the stars shall fall from heaven, then the Church shall not
appear, by reason ungodly persecutors shall rage out of measure.

2 So then where the Church is called a light, the meaning is not that it is
always visible, or that the external appearance thereof is plain to every eye,
and at all times; for thus the Papists grant their own Church is not visible:
but that as the Sun, so it has in it self all light of truth and glory,
whereby the children of God are enlightened, and the dark ways of the ungodly
detected: and except heresies or persecutions come between, this inward light
does also show it self forth to the world by outward profession and
government, so as no temporal state is more glorious or conspicuous. Which
difference between the inward and outward light, being rightly expounded and
observed, the Jesuit may find how it may be the light of the world, though
sometime by eclipse it become invisible: for at all times, and to all men, and
of it own nature, it is not so.

3 Next, the other proposition fails likewise: for though the light of the
Church be granted, yet it is not true that Christ our Savior ordained it to
be always the light of the world, according to these words, Math. 5. Vos estis
lux mundi, You are the light of the world: for those words were spoken by
Christ to his disciples; and his purpose therein was not to teach what the
state of the Church should always be, but to provoke them to constancy and
holiness, for so much as they should be in every man's eye, and therefore if they
chanced to do otherwise then well, it could be concealed no more then the light
of the Sun. Now this is nothing to the Churches visiblenesse. For the
Apostles being set over all the world, to enlighten it with their teaching as
it were Sun, might be in the view thereof, and yet the Church afterward, with
the Pastors therein, be suppressed from the sight of her enemies. This
therefore is a common error of the Papists, that whatsoever things in the
Scriptures are personally affirmed of some particular times and persons, they
will stretch generally to all.

4 His second argument to prove the Church always visible, is, because Christ
ordained it to be a rule or means, by which men may come to knowledge of the
faith: wherein he beggeth the question, or as Rat. 9.
Campian the Jesuit tells us, Eccum quos gyros, quas rotas fabricat.
Turns the wheel. For being to prove that the Church is the rule of faith,
16.
he said he would do it, by showing the teaching thereof to be infallibly easy
and universal; and this he would do by proving it to be always visible: and now
he says it is visible, because it is the rule or means whereby to find the
truth: which is the question, and would not have bin assumed, but proved.
Nevertheless his reason shall be examined and considered of: for thus it
stands: That which Christ appointed to be the rule whereby all men at all
times may come to the true faith, must be always visible to all sorts of men.

But Christ appointed the Church to be the rule whereby all men at all times
may come to the true faith.

Ergo the Church must be always visible to all sorts of men.

This argument is faulty two ways: first in the assumption: for the Church is
not this rule, as Digr. 3. and 14 per totum.
I have showed at large: neither has the Jesuit already proved it, but only
said it, as here he beggeth it to prove that which before he brought to prove
this.

5 But yet it is a subordinate means for the bringing men to salvation, in
that God teaches his elect by the ministry thereof; Ad ipsam salutem ac
aeternam vitam nemo peruenit nisi qui habet caput Christu^: habere autem caput
Christu^ nemo poterit, nisi qui in eius corpore fuerit, quod est ecclesia. Aug.
de unit. eccl. c. 16.
neither can any man be made the child of God, except first he be conceived in
the womb of the Church. But hence it follows not, that the Church is
therefore visible or known to all sorts of men, because visiblenesse and
inuisiblenesse are but differences of the Catholic Churches outward state
here upon earth: and the elect may partake her ministry in either of these
estates, that is to say, he may be effectually joined to the Catholic Church,
though it do not visibly appear in outward show, by the ditection of Gods word
and spirit, and by the teaching of a few faithful Christians that lie hid in
the world as wheat does in his chafe; and so consequently Gods elect never
want necessary means of knowledge and salvation, because some part of the
Church or other, first or last, though hidden from the world, is manifested to
them.

6 As for the reprobate, I grant that many times the Church is neither known
to them, nor yields them any means whereby the faith may be known. And I
add further, that this is Gods very ordinance whereby he uses to punish their
obstinacy. For as sometime Esa. 6.9. Ioh. 12.40.
he takes away their heart, and sometime 2 Thessalonians. 2.11.
gives them over to strong delusions to believe lies: so sometime he sends
Amos 8.12.
a famine of the word of God, that they shall wander from sea to sea, and from
the North to the East, they shall run to and fro to seek the word of the
Lord, and shall not find it: and sometime Apoca. 2.5. compared with 1.20.
takes away the candlestick, which is the visible Church, as I have touched
3. nu. 2.
before. All which notwithstanding, it is true that God would have all men
saved, and come to the knowledge of the true faith. This I say is true, not
universally in every sense, but as the Apostle meant it, whose sense is
declared by Enchir. c. 103. and cont. Julian. l. 4. c 8. and de praedest sanct.
c. 8. and de corrept. and great. c. 14
Austine thus: No man is saved but whom he will save: not that there is no man
whom he would not have saved, but that none is saved but whom he wills, and
therefore is to be entreated that he would, because what he wills, of
necessity must be done. And by De incarnat. and great. c. 31.
Fulgentius thus: By all these men whom God would have come to salvation, is
meant not altogether all mankind, but the university of all that shall be
saved: who therefore are called All men, because them all the goodness of God
saves out of the number of All: and that out of every nation, condition, age,
language and province. The same exposition is also given by Aug. vbi supra.
Haymo and Anselm in 1. Tim. 2 Mag. 1. d. 46.
others, and commended by Alliac. c. 1. q. 14. art. 1. ad 1. page 206. Durand.
1. d. 46. qu. 1. ad 2. p. 134. Greg. de Valent. tom. 1. p. 325. and tom. 2 p.
894 Biel. lect. 68. lit. f. pa. 189. Vocabul. theol. verbo voluntas Dei
anteced. Greg. Arimin. 1. d. 40. art. 2. ad 4.
learned Papists. But Thomas prefers it before all others, and Lect. 1. in
2. c. 1. ep. ad Timot.
says, it agrees best with the Apostles intent. And Emmanuel Sa is of the
same mind, God (says Notat. in 1. Tim. 2 4
he) would all men be saved: he would All men, that is All kind of men, not
every man: for if he would absolutely, then he would do it. Which being so, the
Jesuit may see there is no such necessity that God should provide the means
of a visible Church to instruct all men universally, forasmuch as he never
willed absolutely that all men universally should be saved, but as Saint
Austine Ep. 107. ad Vital. post medium.
speaks, It is even by children manifest that many be not saved, not because
themselves, but because God will not, confuting the contrary as Pelagianisme.
And it is no absurdity to say of such, that they wanted, Mat. 10.5 Act. 14.16.
and 16.6. and 17.30.
through Gods judgment, many times secret, but always just, Romans 1.16. 1. Cor.
1.21. Romans 10.14. Act. 2.47.
necessary means whereby they should attain to faith and salvation: God
willing the means no otherwise then he does the end, that is, by no absolute
will formally abiding in himself, but only conditionally. Whereas his will
concerning the elect, being his absolute purpose to give them eternal life, is
always joined with such works as make it not only possible or conditional, but
also certain to be effected. And if nothing else can teach the Jesuit thus
much, yet he might have learned it of his own words. For if God will nothing
which he knows impossible; then does he not will the salvation of such as he
knows to be Romans 9.22. 1. Pet. 2.8. Jude verse. 4.
the vessels of wrath, prepared to destruction. And if the Jesuit think yet
to answer and unfold the matter by applying Magist. 1. d. 46 and 47. and ibi
Scolast. communiter omnes. Damascen. l. 2. orthod. fid. c. 29.
the school distinction of will antecedent and consequent, then let him open
his eyes and consider that this Antecedent will, taking it as Voluntas Dei
antecedens est qua dat alicui naturalia, vel aliqua bona antecedentia quibus
potest aliquid consequi. Ocka^. and Camerac. 1. q. 14. art. 1. and so the rest.
it is described, Quod vult Deus voluntate antecedente solum, non simpliciter
vult. Dur. 1.46.1.2.
neither is any will simply, properly and formally, as the Apostle says God
wills, in the place alleged: neither does it necessarily include the
certain publishing of the Gospel or revelation of the Church. But Interna
vocatio Gentibus nunqua^ defuit: nam iuxta opinionem Scoti, per opera moraliter
bona, and per influxum naturae communem potuissent gratiam Dei efficacem
promereri de congruo. Primo habuerunt lumen naturae, deinde in illis erat etiam
voluntas aliquo modo propensa ad honesta. Ad gratiam efficacem prouocantia haec
sunt praesidia: moraliter opera bona, studia, conatus honesti, studiam legendi
and audiendi, precationes, cleemosynae, iciunia: hisce natuae, virtutis, ac
gratuitorum Dei bonorum adminiculis, si vsi fuissent Gentiles, absque dubio
Deus omnes cum Cornelio ad notitiam fidei, gratiam efficacem, and reliqua dona
necessaria ad salutem perduxisset. Joan. Paul. Wind. de efficac. mortis
Christi. page 173. Syllog. Gods will whereby he would all men to be saved,
which the Papists call his Antecedent will, binds him to no more then for
example, he did to the Gentiles. But his willing the Gentiles to be saved was
such, that yet he provided not the means of the visible Church to instruct
them. Therefore his willing all men to be saved, is such, that yet it binds
him not to provide the means of the visible Church to instruct them.
there may be such a will where these things are not so manifested; and
consequently God may will their salvation and faith by antecedence, though he
provide not that they have these means, but know they shall not attain
salvation, as we see in the Gentiles, who so far as we know, had not the
outward calling or means of the Church and Gospel.

. 19. Secondly, if the universal Church were invisible and such as could no
way be known, then the universal Church should fail to profess outwardly
that faith which in heart it did believe. For if it did outwardly profess, how
should it not by this profession be made visible and known? But if the
universal Church should fail to profess the faith, hell gates should
mightily prevail against it, contrary to Christ his promise Matthew. 16. Portae
inferi non praeualebunt aduersus eam For were it not a mighty prevailing, that
the whole Church should fail in a thing so necessary to salvation as we know
outward profession of the faith to be, both by that of our Savior Matthew. 10.
Qui negauerit me coram hominibus, ego negabo illum coram Patre meo: and by
that, Qui me erubuerit, and meos sermones, hunc filius hominis erubescet, Luc.
9. He that shall be ashamed of me, and of my words, him the son of man will
be ashamed of. And by that of S. Paul, Cord creditur ad iustitiam, ore fit
confessio ad salutem, Romans 10 Which place learned men interpret to signify,
that profession of faith is necessary to salvation.

The Answer.
1 The Church, according to the texts alleged, neither fails to profess
outwardly the faith which in heart it believes, nor yet is made visible and
known to all by this profession. The reason is, because the children of the
Church professing among themselves, when persecution will not suffer them to do
it openly, this is outward profession, and satisfies the Scripture alleged:
which requires no more at our hand, but first that we profess openly to the
world, as long as the same will suffer us, and be ready to seal the faith
thus professed with our blood, when by necessary circumstance of time and
place, we shall be called thereunto. Secondly, that when persecution or any
other impediment hinders us from this, yet we profess one to another, and
maintain the faith, wheresoever or how few soever we be together. Which latter
degree of confessing, of the believers among themselves, first is outward, in
that it is a sensible exercise of that which the heart believes, and so many
as live together know one another thereby. Next the Scripture requires no
more; for our Savior Mat. 10.23.
bids, when they persecute us in one city, fly to another, and Apoc.
12.6.14
promises to prepare a place in the wilderness, where he will feed the woman,
which signifies the Church, and keep her from the presence of the Serpent:
which cannot be but by leaving the open confession which all men see, and
flying to that which is privately outward among themselves. And lastly it is
not sufficient to make the Church visible to all: for there was a Church in
Israel of seven thousand that never bowed the knee to Baal 1. Reg. 19.10.18.
Romans 10.3.
, yet were they not made known by this profession. And 1. Cor. 10.6.11
the things that befell the Israelites, are examples to show what may befall
us. Neither does the Jesuit and his company discover themselves by their
outward profession in all places where they are restrained; would the
profession and practice of other matters did not discover them more. But as the
Sun which never cease to yield forth light, but always shines above,
though some thing coming between sometime intercept the light from us, or men
be blind, and cannot see it: or as a house shut up and restrained, that the
persons therein cannot come abroad, nor the town see that which the family
does within: so the Church never ceasseth to profess and make her faith
known to some, though she do it not to othersome, and some have no eyes to see
it.

. 20. Thirdly, if the Church were not visible, we could not fulfill the
commandment of our Savior, Dic Ecclesiae, Matthew. 18. For how can we tell the
Church any thing, when we cannot tell where to seek it; neither if we meet
it by chance, could we know which is it?

The Answer.
1 We do not hold, as the Jesuit uses to speak in all this question, the
universal Church is invisible, such as can no way be known: we cannot tell
where to seek it, neither if we meet it by chance, can we know which is it:
it may cease to be: these are shadows of his own making, and confuting them,
he struggleth with a cloud Palaeph. de fab. Scholiast. Hom. Il. a.
like Ixion, and begets a monster, and commits Primum viti^^ sciomachia
est, quae auras and vmbras magno conatu diuerberat. Camp. rat. 9.
that fault which the Papists so importunately charge us withal. But let our
position be faithfully delivered, as Digress. 17. nu. 3.
I have laid it down; that the Church may be hid, or become invisible
sometime, so that the world cannot see it, and the state thereof is not always
so conspicuous, that it shall make any open show in the sight of men.

2 Against this there is nothing in the words of Christ, Tell the Church. For
this commandment only concerns the children of the Church, living within
any part of the same where Ecclesiastical discipline is exercised, and not the
world that hates it and despises Christian government. Which shows, that
how visible soever it be, yet by virtue of these words it is so to no more but
to the professors that live in it, because to them and to no more the order is
given Tell the Church. Besides, this speech is like that of Cap. 2. v. ^.
Malachie, The Priests lips shall preserve knowledge, and the people shall
seek the law at his mouth: whereas notwithstanding Mat. 5.21. and inde. Ioh.
11.50.
sometime they had no Priest to ask, and f otherwhiles such as they had wanted
knowledge, and delivered that which was not law. But the meaning was, that this
order should be observed for the peoples instruction to preserve them in
obedience if they did not fall from it. So, to tell the Church, is a rule
prescribed to be used when the Church enjoys her liberty and outward
government; but when the external state thereof, and public intercourse of
the faithful with the same shall cease; when the communion of the faithful
shall be in secret, and all Ecclesiastical order lie buried, the altars
forsaken, the Church empty; then it binds not, because the means fail.
Neither does it imply any such perpetual visiblenesse as the Jesuit would tie
the Church to. For it was a law, that men should come to Jerusalem and worship
there, yet this implied not any perpetual glory to that city: it was also a
law, that every male child should be circumcised the eight day, and yet upon
necessity it was omitted forty years. And the Papists confessing that
sometimes none can discern the Church but such as very wisely esteem of
things, hereby grant that all men at all times cannot tell the Church:
specially if you add another point, Ema. Sa. not. in Math. 18.17. Fr. Victor
relect 2. parum ante finem.
that by the Church is meant the Pastors only; for they may be scattered or
hidden that we cannot have them ready to tell them every time a brother
trespasseth. Lastly, this commandment may be fulfilled by the faithful among
themselves, in the same manner as I said before of confession. For Math. 18.20.
where the true professors are, there is the Church, either all or a part; and
they, so many as live together, see and know one another, and can tell the
Church, though the world hear not their voice.

. 21. Fourthly, it is certain that once the Church was visible, to wit, when
it first began in Jerusalem, in the Apostles and Disciples of our Savior
Christ, and that company which by their preaching were converted to the faith.
But there can no reason of difference be showed, why it should be visible then
and not now.

The Answer.
1 He might as well say, it is certain that once the Sun was visible, but
there can no reason be given why it should not be so always: for as reasons
may be given why the Sun though sometime clear, yet sometime may be eclipsed
or departed out of our horizon; so may there as evident differences be yielded,
why the Church afterward, and the Church at Jerusalem were not alike visible.
Esa. 2.3. Mic. 4.2.
First, the Church of the new Testament was then to begin, and therefore it was
meet the Pastors and people thereof should appear to the world. Next,
persecutions were not then so grievous as afterward they were. Thirdly, the
apostasy foretold by Saint Paul was not then begun, but ensued long after:
which Apostasy was the cloud that hid the Church. And yet if another conceit
of the Papists be true, Alexand. p 3. qu. vlt. nu. 5. art 2. Panorm. de elect.
and electi po^c significasti Durand. ^at. l. 6. c. 72 nu. 25. Turrecre^. sum.
l. 3. c. 61.
that about the time of Christ's passion, the true faith remained in none but
the virgin Marie; the Jesuits argument here will fall, and our Church at the
worst, has always been as visible as then it was. For as for this present time
and age, we think it Hem fieri potuit vt tot Germani, Angli, Scoti, Bohemi,
Vngari, Dani, Succi, Gotthi, No^uegienses, Prusli, Lithuam Liuonij eo
caecitatis pe^uenerint? Tho. Boz. de Sign. Eccl. l. 19 c. 1. page 606.
as visible, all over the world, as the Church of Rome is. And if the Jesuit
think we hold otherwise, he is deceived.

. 22. Fifthly, the only reason and ground by which heretics hold the Church
to be invisible is, because they imagine the Church to consist only of the
elect, or at least of the good But this is a false ground: for it is evident
that the Church militant consists of the good and bad, as is signified by
those parables wherein it is compared to a floor wherein are mixed wheat and
chafe, Mat. 3. and to a net, wherein are gathered all sorts of fishes good and
bad, Mat. 13. and to a marriage, to which came good and bad, Matthew. 22. and to
ten virgins, whereof five were foolish and excluded from the celestial
marriage, Mat. 25. This also is gathered out of S. Paul, who 1. Cor. 5.
commands them to expel an incestuous person out of the Church: and therefore
it does not consist of those only which be good.

The Answer.
1 Here the Jesuit grossly bewrays either his ignorance or malice, in that he
says, this is the only ground whereupon heretics hold the invisible Church,
because it consists of the elect only. For the question between us now is
about the inuisiblenesse, not of the universal Church, but of the militant as
he himself acknowledges. And let him if he can, for the credit of his word,
show where any one of those, whom he calls heretics, makes the mixture of
good and badde in the Church militant, the reason why it is sometime hidden
from the world. For our proper grounds are these, Luc. 18.8. ^. These. 2.3. Apoc
9.1 and 12.6. and 13 3.7.
the Prophecies and 1. Reg. 19.2. Reg. 2.2. Chro^. 15.3. and 28.20. 24.2. Reg.
21.
examples of the Scripture, the experience of times and events showing it, the
blindness of the world, the nature and necessity of the Church: all which
convince it to be true that we say. Whereas the mixture of evil men is so far
from holding us in the point, that we confess hypocrites may also in secret
profess with true, believers, and so be part of this invisible Church. Let him
therefore recall his oversight, and forbear these forgeries; which tend to
nothing but the stealing away of their affections that know not how things
stand between us.

2 Indeed another position of ours, that says the Catholic Church is
invisible, that is to say, the Church mentioned in the creed, every member
whereof is saved, is invisible, and consists not of any external assembly
that we see; is grounded on this, that it contains none but the elect: but
not as the Jesuit untruly says, on this alone: we have other grounds beside.
First, because the triumphant Church is part of the Catholic, which being in
heaven, no earthly eye sees or knows. Next no man knows Gods elect, yet
none but they are the very Catholic Church. Thirdly, all the persons and
companies in the world professing Christ, were never assembled into one place,
so that they might all of them be seen. Fourthly, we use this reason also,
that in the visible assemblies many badde are mingled with the good, and
therefore of necessity we must allow another Church whereto they properly
belong, which can be none but an invisible Church. But the Jesuit auouching
the mixture of good and badde in the militant Church, which we grant, to prove
the Catholic Church consists of all sorts, reasons to no purpose. For the
militant and Catholic Churches are not all one, by reason whereof that may be
in one, which is not in another. Neither can any thing be concluded for the
later out of those Scriptures which speak only of the former. And let him
know that this ground of ours is so true, which he calls a false ground, that
many learned Papists confess it with us. Many grant, de Eccl. mild. 3. c. 9.
says Bellarmine, that evil men are no true members, neither simply of the
body of the Church, but only Secundum quid, and aequiuoce^.
in some respect and equiuocally. So says Ioannes de Turcremata proving it out
of Alexander, Hales, Hugh, and Saint Thomas. The same also is taught by Petrus
a Soto, Canus, and others. Now that which is so equiuocally (...). Arist.
Categ. c. 1. Phauorin. Lexic.
, is not so in deed, but in name or likeness only. As a painted man is called
a man.

. 23. Lastly, the testimony of the Fathers proves the same. Origenes homilia
30. in Mat Ecclesia (says he) plena ^st fulgore ab Orient vsque ad Occidentem
Cyprian. lib. de Vnitate Ecclesiae, Ecclesia, inquit, Domini luce perfusae
radios suos per orbem terrarum spargit. Chrysostom. hom. 4. in cap 6. Esaiae,
Facilius est, inquit, Solemn extingui quam Ecclesiam obscurari. August lib. 3.
contra Epist. Parmeniani cap. 5. Nulla, inquit, est securitas vnitatis nisi ex
promissi^ Dei Ecclesiae declaratis, quae supra montem, vt dictum est,
constituta, abscondi non potest. Tract. 1. in Epist Joan. Nunquid digito
ostendemus Ecclesiam fratres mei? nonne aperta est? Et tract. 2. Quid amplius
dicturus sum quam caeco^ qui tam magnum montem non vident, qui contra lucernam
in candelabro positam oculos claudunt? By which places of the Fathers does
evidently appear, how that they did suppose as certain that the Church was
visible, and such as might be clearly seen, and could not be hidden.

The Answer.
1 The judgment and teaching of the fathers we acknowledge Ephesians. 4.1^
must reverently be accounted of and followed as they follow the truth: from
which as other later Pastors in Gods Church, so they have swarued sometime so
manifestly, that Canus a Papist himself, whose judgment is commended by Qua
de rectu^^te mihi scrip^i^ie videtur Canus lib. ^ de locis Theologicis. c 3.
tom 3 cap. 239.
Gregory of Valence, Loc. Theol^. 7. c. 3. concl. 2.
writes, The Canonical authors indeed as being from above, heavenly, di^^^e,
do always hold a perpetual and stable constancy in their writings; but other
holy writers are inferior and humane, failing sometimes, and now and then
contrary to the course of nature they bring forth a monster. Which being
granted, then their testimony proves not always, but only shows what they
supposed. And the common distinction of the Papists here applied, that Greg
Valent. tom. 3. p. 290.
it is infallibly true which they deliver with one consent, though it seem
reasonable, yet sometime it is but a stale to deceive. For this consent cannot
ever be known, and they that keep such a stir with it Quod si per
sententiam doctoru^ aliqua fidei controuersia non satis commode co^poni posset,
(eo quod illorum consensu ^on aperte constaret) sua tunc const^^ authoritas pon
^fici. page 293. lit. B.
themselves place it at the length in the Popes sole authority. More shall be
said of this matter Digress 47. nu. 5. ad. 12.
hereafter, but here I touch it that it might appear the Scripture only is
judge.

2 But allow them what authority you will, yet by the places alleged it
appears neither evidently nor at all, that they thought any thing against our
assertion, but they speak either of the inward light of the Church, consisting
in truth and obedience, or of the outward estate as it was in their time, or as
the godly that live therein at all times see it: as will appear by examining
their particular words.

3 Origin (whom yet I marvel that he would allege, seeing they Baron. An.
232. nu. 10. tom. 3.
count him an heretic, and An. 256. nu. 40 ibid
reprove all that speak for him) says, The Church is full of brightness from
the East to the West. But this brightness was not meant of the outward estate
or appearance thereof, but of the truth professed (which we say may be done in
secret) as his words in the beginning of that homily declare: We must
understand that the brightness of truth appears out of every place of
Scripture, and going out from the East, that is from the birth of Christ, it
appears until the accomplishment of his passion, wherein is his Sunsetting.
And though this brightness were clear to the world also, when Origin wrote
this, yet hence it follows not that it should always be so; a cloud of
Apostasy might, after his time, come and obscure it. Cyprian says, The Lords
Church being environed with his light, reaches his beams over all the world.
Which words, being in all points like Origens, receive the same answer. For by
this light, he means the unity of the Church, as appears by his next
words: This light is one which is spread every where, and the unity of the
body is not separated: now this unity, as all other inward graces and
ornaments of the Church, may with her self be spread all over the world, and
yet not visibly to the view of all therein, but by being retained in the hearts
of her children scattered all over the world. Yet I deny not but the Church was
openly known in Cyprians time, though very poor and persecuted, but that
proves not it should always be so. Chrysostom says, The Sun shall sooner be
put out, then the Church obscured: but by obscuring he means not the hiding
of it for a time out of the sight of her enemies, but the total extinguishing
and utter abolishing of it. Which will easily appear if the greek word used
for obscuring, be looked; now that may be hidden for a time which is not
extinguished, as we see in the Sun wherewith Chrysostom compares the Church.
Again it is never obscured from those that live in it, which profess the
faith; and yet the world may be ignorant of it, as a blind man sees not the
Sun, which yields light to others that have eyes to see. And that
Chrysostom thought the Church might sometime be invisible, appears by the
49. homily upon Matthew: where he says, That since the time that heresies have
invaded the Church, it can no way be known which is the true Church of Christ,
but by the Scriptures only. In this confusion it can no ways else be known.
Austin says, There is no certainty of unity but through the promises of God
declared to his Church, which being set upon a hill, cannot be hid. My
brethren, shall I show you the Church with my finger? is it not manifest? what
shall I say more but that they are blind which see not so great a hill, which
shut their eyes against a light set upon a candlestick? In which words he
speaks against a conceit of the Donatists, who boasted, as the Papists now
do, that the Church was no where but among them; affirming them to be blind
that could not see it all over Affricke, seeing it was at that time as plain
as a mountain, or a candle lighted; which we grant, and against the Papists
affirm of our own Church at this day. But his words implie not that this
visible estate thereof so manifest in his time, could no time be hid. For
cities built upon a hill are not visible at every time, as in a great mist, or
in the night; neither is the Sun always alike clear, or in one horizon;
neither could 2. Reg. 6.16
the Aramites see the hill it self where the Prophet of God was, and horses,
and chariots of fire round about him. Therefore Austins words must be
understood of that particular time, and not stretched to all times alike. For
he is blind which at noone days cannot see the Sun light, but the Sun may
set or be eclipsed, and then they are not all blind that see it not: as
himself speaks plainly in other places, which being compared with these,
will give us their true meaning: Epist. 48. ad Vincent.
The Church, says he, shall be obscured sometimes, and the clouds of offenses
may shadow it: Ep. 80. ad Hesych.
it shall not appear by reason of the unmeasurable rage of ungodly
persecutors: En^rrat. in Psalm. 10.
It is like the Moon and may be hid. Yea De Baptism. contra Donat. lib. 6.
c. 4.
so obscured, that the members thereof shall not know one another. This he
thought might befall the Church sometime, whatsoever the light or greatness of
it were when he wrote thus against the Donatists: in which distress she
abides not always, but finds deliverance again when the time of her
liberty is come, as her self speaks in the Prophet Cap. 7. v. 8.
Michaiah, Rejoice not o mine enemy that I am fallen, for I shall rise again,
and though I sit in darkness, yet the Lord will be my light.

. 24. Now it remains that we enquire how we should know which company in
particular, of those diverse sorts of men that visibly profess the faith of
Christ, is the true Church; of which, as has been said, in all points we must
learn the true faith. To this question I answer: First, that it is not a good
mark to know which is the true Church, to say, that is the true Church which
teaches the true faith.

The Answer.
1 The question propounded in this place, concerning the marks or notes of the
Church, is not only exceeding profitable, but even necessary, for all those
that desire to be satisfied whether we or the Papists have the right Church.
Therefore we for our parts answer it thus, that the true doctrine of faith and
lawful use of the sacraments, are the proper and infallible marks whereby it
must be judged which is the true Church. This the Jesuit misliketh, and
reasons against in the seven next sections: but mark his drift: Quis erit
sinis contende^di nisi author^tas Ecclesiae a iunde cognita, ta^. quam iudex in
doctrinae quaestionibus interponatur? Greg. Valent. tom 3. p. 149. lit. D.
that the Roman Church being set at liberty from the trial of the Scriptures,
and her authority advanced by other means, she might be received as chief
judge in all questions of faith and doctrine. This is the reach that Papists
have in denying the true faith and doctrine of the Scriptures to be a
sufficient mark of the Church: and I blame them not if they venture hard for
it, the booty would recompense the charges, if they could bring it in.

Digression. 18. Proving the true faith, or doctrine contained in the
Scriptures, to be a good mark to know the true Church by.
2 The which whiles the Jesuit denies, me thinks he deals exceeding
rashly: for first, he should have consulted with his fellows to see whether
they also had been of his mind herein; that so the unity so much commended in
his discourse, might appear the better. Which if he had done, he should have
found some of his seniors against him, who think true doctrine to be a note of
the Church, and a good note too. The Divines of Collen, Enchir. Christianae
institut. in Synod. Col. p 22.. Tertio haec nosce.
in a provincial Council determined, that no man denies but there ought to
be sincere, Evangelical, and Apostolic doctrine in the Church: and this is
the chief note of the Church, according to that of Christ, My sheep hear my
voice: and that in Saint Paul, if any man preach any other Gospel let him be
accursed. And Antididagm. cap. de Cathol. Eccl. p. 34.
in another book they write, The sacraments are certain marks and signs
whereby the Catholic Church is discerned. There are four marks whereby the
true Church is certainly known, which are gathered out of the scripture. The
first is the wholesome doctrine of Christ according to the general sense of
Apostolic and Catholic tradition. The next is the right and uniform use of
the sacraments. Villauincentius De rat. stud. Theol. praefat.
says, It is confessed that the Church, as being a thing visible, is specially
known and seen by the ministry of the word, and the right dispensation of
the sacraments, and by the open confession of the faith, and communion of
charity, as it were by signs engraven and perpetually cleaning to it. Hosius
Confess. Petrico. c. 20. p 26.
says, There are which will have no more notes of the Church but two, viz.
sincere doctrine, and the right use of the sacraments: and it cannot be denied
but they are notes of the Church indeed. Stapleton Princip. doct. l. 1. c. 22.
says, the preaching of the Gospel is the proper, and a very clear note of
the Catholic Church, so it be done by lawful ministers. These men think,
(and others more may be added to them) the teaching of the true faith is not,
possible, all the marks of the Church; but none of them says, as the Jesuit
does, it is no good mark, they say the contrary; it is a mark indeed, a
chief mark, a proper and very clear note of the Church, a note engraven, and
perpetually cleaving to it. Let him therefore be well advised how he cross his
fellows, lest his so doing impair the credit of his Churches unity, and make
his reader suspect that he is laboring to confute a matter which his own
conscience tells him is most true.

3 For our Savior says in the Ioh. 10.27.
Gospel, My sheep hear my voice. Which teaches us, even by Bellarm. de not.
Eccl. c. 2.
the confession of our adversaries, that wheresoever the voice of Christ, which
is the true faith, sounds, there consequently are the elect, his sheep, that
hear it. And if his sheep be known to be there by this, then is the Church
also known hereby: for wheresoever the sheep of Christ live, there is the
Church, in as much as these two are never divided. The true faith, and doctrine
of the Scriptures then being notes to teach us where the elect be, are proved
hereby to be a sufficient mark of the Church, because wheresoever the elect
live, there is the Church of God. Again, Christ mat. 18.20.
says, Where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the
midst of them. This teaches us two things, by Bellarm. de notis Eccl. c. 2.
the Papists own confession. First, that the true faith is a sign where
Christ is: which is all one as if they had said, it is a sign where Christ's
church is: for Christ and his church are never asunder, but Mat. 28.20.
he abides with it for ever. Next that it is a note of the Church, if such
teach it as are gathered together by lawful ordination and succession; which
is as much as we desire: for it is never taught by any other: and it quite
overthrows the Jesuits conceit; for he thinks his Roman Churchmen to
have lawful ordination and succession, and yet denies the faith they preach to
be a mark of the Church; wherein he cannot reconcile himself with his
fellows. The same is further confirmed by diverse other places of Deuteronomy 4.6.
Psalm. 147.19. Esa. 2.2.3. Act. 2.42. Ioh. 8.31. Romans 10.14. 2. pet. 1.19.
Scripture, whither I refer the reader.

4 And surely plain reason shows it. For it must needs be granted to be an
undoubted note of the Church, which makes us know it when we seek it, and
distinguishes it from the false Churches of the heretics. Now this the true
faith, which is according to the Scriptures, does; in that every church
pretending it self to be the Church of Christ, is examined thereby, and that
allowed to be the true Church indeed which agrees therewith, according to that
of Saint Paul, Gal. 6.26.
As many as walk according to this rule, peace shall be upon them, and mercy,
and upon the Israel of God. And our Savior in the Gospel Mat. 7 16.
says, Ye shall know the false Prophets by their fruits, Iansen. harm. cap. 43.
Rhem. annot. in cu^ loc. Stapl. princip. doctr. l. 10. c. 1.
that is, by their doctrine. So that if the men which profess themselves to be
the Church, are first to be tried by the Scriptures, it follows necessarily,
that the doctrine contained in the Scriptures is the note of the Church. In
which regard the Apostle Ephesians. 2.19.
says of the Church, that it is the household of God, built upon the foundation
of the Apostles and Prophets. And Epiphanius speaking of an heretic, (...),
Tom. 1 l. 2. haer. 4^.
says, This man is found altogether differing from the holy Scriptures, as it
will appear to all them that read attentively; if then he be dissenting from
them, he is altogether an alien from the holy Catholic Church. And me thinks
if we said no more to this point, the very confession of our adversaries might
put it out of doubt, who say expressly, Reynol. Caluinoturc. l. 4. c. 9 page 859.
These two, the true Church and the true faith, are so knit and infolded
together, that the one infers and concludes the other: from the true Church
is concluded the true faith, and from the true faith the true Church is
inferred. And Bellar. de not. eccl. c. 2.
when the question is concerning the Church, then the Scripture is better
known then the Church. Now between us and the Papists, the question is
concerning the Church, and therefore the Scriptures are the best mark to know
it by. Moreover the doctrine of the Scripture declares what be the notes of
the Church, as the Jesuit himself speaks, and all Papists are constrained
by the Scriptures to prove those marks which they assign: and who then sees
not that the doctrine it self must needs be the best note of al, when it is
first and best known? This is his own reason, who in his discourse following,
hereby would prove the Church to be better known then the doctrine, because it
shows the doctrine, and brings it to our view. Again, Canis. catec. magn.
page 131. Reynol. Caluinoturc. pa. 860. Staplet. princip. doctrine. l. 4. prooem.
the learned among them maintain sundry of their notes of the Church to be
true notes, because (as they say) the Church is defined by them: and why then
shall true doctrine and faith be debarred, which are the efficient cause, and
very difference of the Church, wherein it differs principally from all false
assemblies, and therefore to be put in the definition thereof? Finally, 2. Pet.
1.19. Apoc. 2.5.
the Scripture calls it self and the faith thereof a light shining in the
Church, as in a candlestick or lantern; which proves it sufficient to show us
where the Church is, as a light in a dark night directs the sayler to his
haven. And whereas the Jesuits marks, unity, antiquity, and universality,
agree to other assemblies as well as to the Church of God, and by Bellar. de
not. eccl. c. 3.
their own confession are no proofs of evident truth; this of the True faith,
can be found in none but the Church of Christ, whereunto it is proper every
way, even to all the Church, at all times, and to it alone, and so cannot
deceive such as follow it.

5 In the last place I desire the Reader to mark the judgment of two ancient
fathers, Chrysostom and Augustine, and to compare the same with the Jesuits
conclusion, and then freely to say whether the Church of Rome have all
antiquity on her side or not: In this time ( Op. imperf. hom. 49.
says Chrysostom) since heresy has taken hold of the Church, there can be
no trial of true Christianity, nor any other refuge for Christians desirous
to know the true faith, but the holy Scriptures: formerly it might many ways
be showed which was the Church of Christ, and which Gentilisme: but now they
that will know which is the true Church of Christ, can know it no ways but
only by the Scriptures; because all those things which belong to Christ in
truth, the heresies also have in schism. Therefore if any man would know which
is the true Church of Christ, how shall he know it in so great confusion of
likeness, but by the Scriptures only? For this cause the Lord knowing the
confusion of things that should happen in the latter days, commands that
such Christians as will receive assurance of faith, shall fly to no other
thing but to the Scriptures: else if they look to other matters, they shall be
offended, and they shall perish, not knowing which is the true Church. Again
upon these words, By their fruits ye shall know them, In c. 7. Math.
he says, A man's fruit is the confession of faith, and his works are the
conversation of his life: therefore if thou see a Christian man, straightway
consider, that if his confession agree with the Scripture, then he is a true
Christian: but if it be not as Christ commanded, then is he a false Christian:
for Christ has referred the trial of a Christian, not to the name, but to the
confession, etc. Saint Austin has left written an excellent book against the
Donatists, who pretended, as the Papists now do, that the Church was only
among them; wherein he handles this question at large, how the true Church may
be known, and by what marks? Thus he writes in Liber con t^ Petilianu^
Donatist. Epistol. seu de vnitate Ecclesiae c. 2.
that book: The question between us and the Donatists is, where is the
Church? What therefore shall we do? shall we seek it in our own words, or in
the words of her head our Lord Jesus Christ? I think we ought to seek it
rather in his words who is the truth, and best knows his own body. Cap. 3.
Let not these speeches be heard among us, This I say, and this thou say,
but let us hear, These things says the Lord. There are certain books of
God, unto whose authority we both consent, we both believe, we both stand:
there let us seek the Church, there let us try our cause. Let those things
therefore be removed from us which we bring one against another, not out of the
holy Canonical books, but aliunde. Because I will not have the holy Church
demonstrated by man's teaching, but by the holy oracles of God: Cap. 16.
therefore setting aside all such matters, let them show forth the Church if
they can; not by the speeches and rumors of the Africans, not in the Councels
of their Bishops, not in the writings of every disputer, not in signs and
false miracles, because Gods word has prepared and made us ready against
these things: but let them declare it out of the prescript of the law, the
prediction of the Prophets, the songs of the Psalms, the words of the Pastor
himself. I enquire the Church it self where it should be, which hearing the
words of Christ and doing them, builds upon the rock, let him then show me
the Church, and let him so show it that he say not, this is true because I say
it, or because my fellows have said it, or those our Bishops, or this is true
because Donatus, or Pontius, or some other has done such or such miracles, or
because men pray and are heard at the monuments of our dead, or because such
and such things have happened there, or because such a brother, or such a
sister of ours has seen such a vision, or had such a dream: let these things
be removed either as the devices of liars, or as no better then the miracles of
deceitful spirits; for either they are not true which are reported, or if
heretics have any wonders done among them, it stands us in hand to beware
the more. But whether they have the Church or not, let them declare only by
the Canonical books of the holy Scriptures. These be the instructions, these
be the foundations, these be the supporters of our cause. By all which
discourse it appears that Austin thought the true faith was the note of the
true Church, or else to what purpose should he so earnestly revoke the
Donatists from all other courses to the trial of the canonical Scriptures, if
he had not been of mind that the faith alone consenting with them had been the
infallible sign of the Church? as he speaks also in Epist. 166.
another place, In the Scriptures have we learned Christ, in the Scriptures
have we learned the Church.

. 25. I prove it, because by true faith either is meant true faith only in
some points, or in all: it is not a good mark to say that is the true Church
which teaches the true faith in some points only; for all heretics teach
truth in some points: and though it be proper to the true Church to be so
guided by the holy Ghost, that it teach the infallible truth in all points, as
before has been proved, yet this is not a good mark whereby all sorts of men
may and ought to come to know which is the true Church, of which, if they will
be saved, they must needs learn an infallible faith.

The Answer.
1 We do not think every company to be the true Church, that holds only some
points of the true faith, for all heretics teach the truth in some things,
and yet we deny them to be the Church of God: but Act. 4.12. 1. Cor. 3.11. Ephesians.
2.19.
it is requisite that the foundation be holden, that is to say, all such truths
delivered as are necessary for all men's salvation, and such heresies avoided as
destroy the foundation: which kind of teaching is an infallible note whereby
all Churches and professions may be tried, and we mean it, when we say the
faith is a mark of the Church.

2 Neither yet do we think, as the Jesuit speaks, that any visible church
teaches this truth so infallibly that it erreth in nothing; we think, and.
14. and 15.
I have showed the contrary: for this befalls the Church, that it may be
ignorant of many truths for a time; it may hold the faith sometime more,
sometime less purely, it may build hay and wood upon the foundation, it may be
infected with the errors and heresies of some therein: and some articles lying
in the very foundation, may be believed not so clearly* as Mark. 16 14. Luc.
24 5.11.12.21.25.37. Ioh. 20.25.
the resurrection of Christ was, for a time, not well understood: which things
though they befall the Church, the holy Ghost teaching it but by degrees, yet
is not the faith thereby taken from it, but abides ^ufficient to give
testimony of salvation to all that will follow it. And this is confirmed by the
confession of our adversaries themselves, who say, Bell. de Not. Eccl. c. 2.
that to err, and yet to be ready to learn, and when you have learned, to be
as ready to obey, is one thing: but neither to be willing to learn, nor when
you hear the truth, to be satisfied therewith, is another. The first of these
may befall the particular Church, etc.

. 26. Because a mark, whereby a thing may and must be known, must be more
apparent and easy to be known, to all those men which should by that mark
seek out and find that thing, then the thing it self: otherwise there should
come no help by the mark to the knowledge of the thing. But to know which is
the true faith in all points, at least to some sorts of men, to wit, the
unlearned, is more hard then to know and assign which company of men be the
true Church. For to know which is the true faith in all particular points
requires learning, whereby one may understand the terms and state of the
question: besides judgment to discuss and weigh prudently the sufficiency of
the authorities and reasons o^ both parts, that upon this pondering of reasons,
they may prudently conclude which is the better part. Moreover they must have a
supernatural light of God his Spirit, whereby they may discern and see those
things which be above all natural rules and reasons. Ad haec quis idoneus? Who
can say that he is sufficiently furnished with these helps? or who can be
infallibly sure that he has all these in such sort as is requisite, for
obtaining, by his own industry, an infallible faith in all points? And as for
the unlearned, they must needs confess, that in diverse mysteries of faith
they do not so much as understand the terms and state of the question; and
much less are they able sufficiently to examine the worth of every reason;
neither are all such as can persuade themselves that they are singularly
illuminated and immediately taught of God his Spirit, neither if they did thus
persuade themselves, could they be infallibly sure that in this their
persuasion they were not deceived; since it is certain that some, that most
strongly in their own conceit persuade themselves to be thus enlightened, are
in this their persuasion deceived. Now for to know which is the true Church,
and by giving credit to it consequently which is the true faith, there are not
so many things required; nor any great difficulty, as shall be declared. For
this is the direct way which Esaias as did foretell, cap. 35. should be in the
time of Messiah, which he said should be so direct that even fools, to wit
simple and unlearned men, should not err in it. Haec erit vobis directa via
(says he) ita vt stulti non errent per eam.

The Answer.
1 This is his first argument, the sum whereof is concluded in this
Syllogism.

That which is the mark whereby to know a thing, must be more apparent, and
easier to be known then the thing it self: otherwise it helps us not in
finding out the thing.

But the true faith is not more apparent, or easier to be known then the
Church: but contrary, the Church is easier to be known then the true faith:
for to know the true faith, there is required learning, judgment, and
supernatural illumination, which no man sufficiently has; but to know which
is the true Church, these things are not required, for the Church is the direct
way. Esa. 35.8.

Therefore the true faith is not the mark of the Church.

To this I answer, denying the second proposition, and the confirmation
thereof, that it is harder to know which is the true faith, then to assign
which company of men be the Church. For faith is the cause of the Church, that
is to say, this is the thing that makes a people to be the Church of God, when
they believe the word of God: and every cause as it goes before his effect, so
is it more apparent to our understanding, and better known to our judgment
then the effect. Aristotle says, Analy. Post. cap. 2.
Causes are both before their effects, and better known: and Ibid. and Metaph.
l. 1. c. 2. and l. 2. c. 2. and Plato in Thraet.
the true knowledge of things arises from the knowledge of their causes: yea
those things are simply first and best known which are furthest from our sense
and nearest our understanding: and so the doctrine and belief of the Church
must needs be easier to know then the Church it self, because it comes first
to my understanding, and of necessity I must see it before I can tell whether
the Church be there or not. For though that company which is offered to me as
the Church, be more apparent to my sense, yet have I no certainty that it is
the Church or a company so qualified, until I know the faith thereof to be
true. I see indeed a company of men, and hear much of their greatness, but I
am not sure they are the Church, unless I know they hold the true faith, and
so the knowledge of this leads me to the knowledge of that, and the faith is
easilier discerned then the Church.

2 The Papists themselves have a saying, which if this Jesuit would receive,
might determine this matter: We see indeed that company of men which is the
Church, Lib. 3. de eccl. c. 15.
says Bellarmine, but we do not see that this company is the true Church of
Christ, we believe it. For that is the true Church which pr^fesseth the faith
of Christ: but who does evidently know this faith to be the faith of Christ? we
rather believe this by a firm and most assured faith. In which words this
Jesuits assumption is thus disproued: That whereupon I believe the Church so
to be, is more apparent and easier to be known, and sooner to be seen then
the church it self. But upon knowledge of the Churches faith, I believe it to
be the Church: therefore the Churches faith is more apparent, and sooner known
then the Church it self. Again, By faith we believe this to be the true
Church, and the profession thereof to be the truth: but Romans 10.17.
all faith comes by hearing the word of God: therefore by the means of
hearing Gods word I believe this to be the true Church; and so consequently the
knowledge of Gods word comes sooner and easilier to my understanding then the
knowledge of the Church.

3 And though it were granted that in some cases the Church were easier to know
then the faith; yet as things depend between the Papists and us, the faith is
easier to know then the Church: for the question between them and us, is, who
has the true Church? In which trial it is the greatest folly in the world for
either of us to offer our selves to the world as the true Churches of Christ,
till first we have proved our selves so to be by the doctrine that we profess;
and in vain shall we attempt this, if, as the case stands, this doctrine be
not easier and plainer then the Church. This is the confession of the Jesuits:
Bellar. de n^^. eccl. c. 2.
When the question is concerning the Church, which it is, and the Scripture is
admitted on both hands, then the Scripture is more apparent and easier to know
then the Church. So that the Papists do but spend time, and mock the world, in
obiecting to us the authority and dignity of their Church: they may do it as
they list one to another, but in their controversies with us they may not; not
only because we reject it, but principally for as much as the doctrine of the
Scripture, by their own verdict, is easier and plainer.

4 Neither are the Jesuits reasons to the contrary of any value. For I grant,
that to the finding out of the true faith, we have need of learning, judgment
and illumination as the means. Yea the doctrine hereof is so hard to natural
men, as we are all till God have regenerate us Ioh. 7.17. and 8.31.43. and 14
17. 1 Cor. 2.14. 2. Cor. 3.14. Mat. 16.17. Job 32.8.
, that it goes beyond the capacity of flesh and blood. But he should have
remembered, the ministry of the Church and light of Gods spirit helps our
infirmities: the doctrine it self is a light shining through all these
encumbrances. These means are not such but the simple may attain to a
sufficient portion thereof: and his Ad haec quis idoneus, with that which
follows, is denied as an idle conceit, and. 7. and 8.
already confuted. And let the impediments be what they will, yet shall the
Jesuit find them in the way of his own Church, and let him if he can free
his own notes from them. For is his Catholic Roman, which so eagerly he
puts to his friend, such a Church as needs neither learning, nor
judgment, nor the light of heaven to discern it? If it be, I am content he
enjoy it himself, neither will I ever persuade my friends to communicate with
that company which is so famous, that the very wind will blow a man into it.
And yet Staple. relect. controu. 1. q. 3. Greg de Vale^t. commen. theol. tom.
3. page 145.
some of the Jesuits own side will say sometime, that they had need both of
wisdom and skill that shall always discern the Church.

5 The text of Esaias speaks of the ministry of the Gospel, and it means
that it shall infallibly guide the meanest people that live therein to eternal
life; which it does by propounding to them the word of God, that thereby they
may know it to be the true Church, and be drawn to walk in the paths thereof.
And though the Prophet call it a direct way, yet I am sure he means not that
any can walk in it, till he have found it, or any can find it Esa. 35.5.
till his eyes be opened Ioh. 12.40. Act. 26.18. 2. Cor. 4.4.
, which is done no way but by the doctrine of the Church. Or if he think the
way of the Church so easy, because the holy Prophet calls it a direct way
that fools may walk in it; let him say unfeignedly, if his affection to the
Roman Helena have not blinded h s eyes, (...). Theocr. Bucoliast.
as lovers are blind, and besotted his conscience that he cannot see the
doctrine of the Scriptures to be as easy, seeing it is called Psalm. 19.8. Pro.
1.4.
a sure law, giving wisdom to the simple, and light to the eyes, sharpening
the wit of the simple, and giving knowledge and discretion to children. And
Austine says, Enar. in psa. 8.
The Scripture is bowed down to the capacity of babes and sucklings. And
Chrysostom affirms, Hom. 1. in Mat.
They are so easy to understand, that the capacity of every servant,
plowman, widow, and boy may reach unto them: Hom. 3. de Laz.
yea the most simple that is, of himself only by reading, may understand
them. In which sayings we see as much affirmed of the doctrine of the
Scripture, as the Jesuit can say is affirmed in the place of Esaias concerning
the Church, and yet possible he will turn him in a narrow room before he will
yield, and keep possession still in his Church Porch against all the pulpits
in England that speak for the Scriptures.

. 27. Secondly I prove the same, because when we seek for the true Church, we
seek for it principally for this end, that by it as a necessary and
infallible means, we may hear and learn and perfectly know the true faith in
all points, which otherwise is in it self hidden, obscure, and unknown to us;
according to that of S. Paul, Animalis homo non percipit ea quae sunt
Spiriritus Dei. 1. Cor. 2. For as no man by the only power of nature can
attain this supernatural knowledge of divine mysteries which we believe by
our faith, so neither does the Spirit of God, who does as the principal cause
infuse this gift of faith into our souls, ordinarily instruct any man in the
knowledge of true faith immediately by himself alone, but requires as a
necessary condition, the preaching and expounding of matters of faith to be
made by the true Church, according as S. Paul says Romans 10. Quomodo credent ei
que^ non audierunt? quomodo audient sine praedicante? quomodo vero praedicabunt
nisi mittantur? Therefore the true Church is rather a mark whereby we must
know the true faith, then contrary the true faith to know the true Church.

The Answer.
1 This is the second argument, and is concluded in this Syllogism.

That is no mark or means to know the Church by, which it self is unknown to
us till the Church teach it; and is learned by the means and ministry of the
Church.

But such is the true faith, that we cannot know it til the Church teach it us,
and it self is learned by the means and ministry of the Church: for God
instructs no man immediately, but by the preaching of the Church, as Saint
Paul says, Romans 10.

Therefore the true faith is not a sufficient mark to find the Church by.

For answer to this argument, it will easily be granted, that the ministry of
the Church is the ordinary means whereby we learn the faith of Christ, and
that no man of himself can attain to the knowledge thereof, but as the Church
teaches him. This I say is granted, so it be well understood. For the spirit
of God in the Scripture is the principal schoolmaster, from whom all truth
comes, and which opens the heart to believe; and the Church is it which by
her ministry holds this truth before us: and therefore, except in some
extraordinary cases, the preaching thereof is required as a necessary
condition, as the text of Saint Paul speaks.

2 But hence it follows not, that therefore the Church is rather a mark of
the faith, then the faith a mark of the Church: for these two, the true Church
and the true faith, are like relatiues inseparably united together by a
certain order and respect either to other; as a schoolmaster and his
teaching: so that the one proves and declares the other, as causes and
effects use to do. In which kind of proving, the order is, that first the
effect shows the cause, it being ordinary that a cause cannot be assured so
to be, but by the effect which it produces and offers unto us: as a
schoolmasters is not known certainly so to be but by his teaching. And if
among many bad, you would find a good one, to whom you might commit your
children; this cannot be done but by hearing and examining his manner of
teaching: in which case though the man be a necessary means whereby you
learn his teaching, yet the teaching it self is the mark whereby you know
him to be such a man, and distinguish him from all others. And even as the tree
bears his fruit, and we seek the tree principally for this end, that by it
as by a necessary means we may find the fruit; and yet the fruit it shows
us is the only mark that it is such a tree; and if it be denied or doubted,
the tasting of the fruit will prove it, and distinguish it from all the trees
in the ground beside. So likewise as he says, the Church expounds the faith
unto us, and we seek the Church principally for this end, that by it, as by
the means, we may learn the truth: and yet this truth which it shows us,
may be the mark to assure us it is such a Church, and to distinguish it from
all other Churches in the world. Therefore for the Church to teach the faith,
and the faith to be a note of the Church, are not opposite, but only diverse,
and so may both be true: as a light upon a watchtower in the dark night may
be the only mark whereby to find the tower, and yet the tower it self holds
out the light, and shows it, and is the means that the traveler sees it.

. 28. Thirdly, true faith is a thing included in the true Church, and as it
were enclosed in her belly: as S. August speak^th Psalm. 57. upon these words,
Errauerunt ab vtero, loquuti sunt falsa.] In ventre Ecclesiae (says he)
veritas manet; quisquis ab hoc ventre separatus fuerit, necesse est vt falsa
loquatur. Therefore like as if a man had gold in his belly, we must first find
the man, before we can come to the gold it self; so we must first, by other
marks, find out the true Church, which has this gold of true faith hidden in
her belly, before we come to see this gold in it self; since especially we
cannot see it, unless she open her mouth and deliver it: neither can we, being
borne spiritually blind, cert^nly know it to be true and not counterfetted
gold, but by giving credit to her testimony of it: according as S. Augustine
says: Euangelio non crederem nisi me Ecclesiae authoritas commoueret. lib. 9.
Epist and cap. 3. For if we had not the testimony of the Church, h^w should we
be infallibly sure that there were any Gospel at all? or how could we know
that those books which bear title of the Gospel according to S Matthew,
Mark, Luke, John, were true canonical Scriptures rather then those of
Nicodemus and S. Thomas, bearing the same name and title of the Gospel?

The Answer.
1 This is his third reason, and may be concluded thus: That which is included
in the Church, is no mark of the Church.

But the true faith is included in the Church. Ergo.

The second proposition whereof, that faith is a thing included in the Church,
and as it were enclosed in her belly, is true, and he has well affirmed it out
of Austine: but yet it is worth the enquiring, to demand how he will reconcile
himself herein with his fellows? For Bellar. de not. ^ccl. c 2.
a Jesuit writes, that true doctrine and pure from all error, may be in the
false Church: for if this be so, then is he not certain that the true faith is
enclosed in the true Church, and he must needs speak untruths, which is
divided from the belly of the Church. For mine own part I think that
Bellarmine lies, but yet it becomes not the Jesuit thus to cross him, and
then in. 35.
the next discourse so highly to extol their unity.

2 But the first proposition, that because it is included in the Church, and
the Church teaches it, therefore it can be no mark of the Church, is denied:
because true faith is enclosed in the Church, not obscurely as gold is in a
man's belly, so as Joseph. de bello Iud. l. 6. c. 15.
we read the Jews used to swallow it, thereby to hide it from their enemies;
but as a candle in a lantern, or a light in his watchtower, discovering both
it self and the place that holds it, which gold in a man's belly cannot do.
And therefore as a light standing in the window in a dark night, is a good
mark to find the house, though otherwise it be included in the hou^^: so the
true faith being included in the bosom of the Church, not as gold that is
buried in a man's bowels, but as a candle standing in a lantern, by it own
light can guide us infallibly to the Church, 1. Tim. 3.15. Apoc. 1.20. Pro.
6.23.
which is Gods house, enlightened by his truth. Neither did S. Austine in the
words alleged, think the contrary, as may appear by that which follows
within twenty lines after, By the face of truth I know Christ the truth it
self, by the face of truth I know the Church, partaker of the truth. Which
words show plainly, that S. Austine thought the Church was to be known by the
truth which it contained, as by it own favor and proper countenance, as
children are known one from another by their own countenance and complexion
which shines in their faces. And though the Church by opening her mouth
deliver us this truth, yet is she found by no mark but by this truth it self;
as a dark house is found by no means but by the light contained therein,
though it self by opening the window, deliver us this light: and the firmament
is seen by the light of the Sun, though it self hold out the Sun unto us.

3 Thus far then we agree, that the Church contains the light of the truth in
her bosom, and that she opens her mouth and delivers this truth unto us:
but that by other marks we must find out the Church before we can see this
truth, is the Jesuits conceit. And so is the rest that follows concerning
our knowledge of the Gospel upon the Churches testimony: for I have showed.
9. Digr. 12.
before, that the Scriptures and the Sun are both known by their own light:
and the Church teaches the Gospel by her ministry, but proves it not by her
authority. Neither did S. Austine mean otherwise Lib. contra epist. fundam.
c. 5
when he said, I would not believe the Gospel unless the authority of the
Church did move me. For though the testimony of the Church, by reason of men's
infirmity before they believe, be requisite to draw them on to consent to the
Scriptures, as children before they can go hold themselves by the side of a
stool, and so learn to go; yet is not the credit of the Church, or authority
of men, the thing whereby we know and distinguish the Scripture from other
writings, but the authority of Gods spirit is it that by the help of the
Church works faith in us.

Digression. 19. Touching the place of S. August. cont. epist. fundam. cap. 5.
and the matter which the Papists gather from it.
4 The Papists have a principle among them, that the Scriptures receive all
their authority from the Church, meaning thereby, Rhem. Gal. 6.2.
that they are not known to be true, neither are Christians bound to receive
them without the attestation of the Church. Joan. de Turrecr. super did. 9.
Noli meis. nu. 4.
Which testimony declares unto us which be the Scriptures, and which not:
Baron. annal. tom. 1. an. 53. nu. 11.
so that by the tradition of the Church, all the Gospel receives his authority
and is built thereupon as upon a foundation, and cannot subsist without it. Yea
Bosius de sign. eccl. tom. 2 page 439.
some of them write, that the Scripture is not to be reckoned among such
Principia.
principles as before all things are to be credited; but it is proved and
confirmed by the church, Quasi per quoddam principium.
as by a certain principle, which has authority to reject and allow Scripture.
And D. Standish Treat. of the Script. c. 6. probat. 3.
a countriman of ours has left written, that in three points the authority of
the Church is above the authority of the Scripture. The second is, for that
the Church received the Gospel of Luke and Mark, and did reject the Gospels
made by his high Apostles Thomas and Bartlemew. The which speeches of theirs,
when the Papists have expounded how they can, yet this will be the vpshot, that
in all discourses concerning religion, the last resolution of our faith shall
be into the Churches authority.

5 For confirmation whereof, they bring (you see) this of Austine, I would not
have believed the Gospel unless the Churches authority moved me. In which
words he speaks of the time past before he was converted, and according to the
phrase of his country, puts the preterimperfect tense for the
preterpluperfect tense, meaning thus, I had not now believed the Gospel and
been a Christian, but that the Church by her reasons persuaded me thereunto:
speaking only of the practice of Christians, who by their persuasions convert
many to the Gospel. And that he speaks of the time p^st, when he was an
unbeliever, it is plain not only by viewing the place, but by the testimony
of a learned Papist, Can loc. l. 2. c. 8. page 34.
who says, Austine had to do with a Manichee, who would have a certain
Gospel of his own without controversy admitted therefore Austine asks what
they will do, if they chance to meet with one Qui ne Euangelio quidem credat.
which believes not the Gospel, and by what arguments they will draw him into
their opinion? Certe se affirmat non aliter potuisse adduci vt Euangeli^m
amplect^ret^^, quam Ecclesiae authoritate victum.
Verily he affirms that ^e for his part could not otherwise be drawn to
embrace the Gospel, but being overcome with the authorie of the Church:
therefore he does not teach that the credit of the Gospel is founded on the
Churches authority. Whereby it is plain that Austine propounds himself as
an instance of one that believes not, which he could not be when he wrote
this, but by speaking of the time past. And though it were thoroughly proved
that he spoke of himself being a Christian, and in that estate said, he would
not believe the Gospel unless the authority of the Church moved him; yet
were it not proved hereby that he meant the present Church, as it runs from
time to time, or the Church of Rome, or any other place, as it now stands.
For if some Papists miss it not, he meant the Church which was in the Apostles
times, which saw Christ's miracles, and heard his preaching. Durand 3. d. 24. q.
1. in litera o.
says, That which is spoken concerning the approbation of the Scripture by the
Church, is meant only of that Church which was in the Apostles time. Of the
same mind are Dried de var. dogm. l. 4. c. 4. Gers de vita anima. Occham dial.
l. 1. part. 1. c 4.
others, whereby he may see that Austine gives a kind of authority to the
Church, but it is not that Church which should serve his turn. Neither is the
authority given large enough to reach the Popish conceit, or the Jesuits
conclusion; if we had not the testimony of the Church, we could not be
infallibly sure that there were any Gospel at all, nor know these books to be
Scripture: for Canus a Doctor of his own Vbi supra.
confesses, I do not believe that the Evangelist says true because the Church
tells me he says true, but because God has revealed it. And Triplicat incho
(...) uers. Whitak. in Admon.
Stapleton: The inward testimony of the spirit is so effectual for the
believing of any point of faith, that by it alone any matter may be believed,
though the Church hold her peace or be never heard. And Comment. theol. tom. 3.
page 31
Gregory of Valence: The revelation of the Scripture is believed, not upon the
credit of any other revelation, but for it self. And q^^ Sent. 1 q. 1. art 3.
page 50. li^eta C. ^^ce Greg. Arimin. prolog. n sent. q. 1. art. 3. page 4.
Cardinal Cameracensis: The verities contained in the Canon of the Bible
only, are the principles and foundation of Divinity, and receive not their
authority by other things whereby they may be demonstrated. And therefore this
testimony of Austine proves not that he believed the Gospel through the
Churches authority, as by a Theological principle whereby the Gospel might be
proved true, but only as it were by a cause moving him to credit it: as if he
should say, I would not believe the Gospel unless the holiness of the Church
or Christ's miracles did move me. In which saying, though some cause of his
believing the Gosp ll be assigned, yet Compare this w^^ the place of Bozius
alleged in the beginning of this Digress. letter, a.
no former principle is touched, whose credit might be the cause why the
Gospel should be believed. These speeches of our very adversaries, which the
truth it self has wroong from them, deserve to be observed the more, because
the Jesuit so confidently bears his friend in hand, that the Gospels of the
four Evangelists cannot be known to be true Scripture more then those of
Thomas and Nicodemus, but by the authority of his Church. Wherein possible he
has also the same meaning that Doctor Standish utters in the place alleged
In the letter b.
a little before: that those counterfeit Gospels bearing the titles of Thomas,
Nicodemus, and Bartholomew, were written by them in deed; but his Church, to
show her authority that this she can do, has repealed them. A fat conceit,
yet some men's stomachs belike can digest it. But if the Jesuit cannot
conceive how the Scripture may be discerned from other writings, unless we
allow him the Churches authority, let him hearken and learn of a rare man of
his own side, Picus of Mirandula, who speaking of the Scriptures Refert
Posseu. bibl. in Cicero. c. 11.
has this memorable saying: They do not move, they do not persuade, but they
enforce us, they drive us forward, they violently constrain us. Thou read
words rude and homely, but such as are quick, lively, flaming, stinging,
piercing to the bottom of the spirit, and by their admirable power
transforming the whole man. This admirable light shining in the Scripture it
self shall assure us it is the word of God better, I hope, then that Church
whose tongue is sold to speak nothing but the Popes will.

. 29. Fourthly, if to have an entire faith in all particular points, must be
foreknowne, as a mark whereby to know the true Church, then, contrary to that
which has been already proved, the authority of the Church should not be a
necessary means whereby men must come to the infallible knowledge of true
faith: for if before we come to know which is the true Church we might by other
means have known which is the true faith in all points, what need then is
there for getting the true faith already had, to use, or bring the authority
of the Church?

The Answer.
1 Because this reason is the same with that which goes before, therefore it
shall receive the same answer: That although we need the ministry of the
Church to teach us the faith, and this faith is not ordinarily known till the
Church, or some member thereof reveal it to us; yet may it be a mark whereby
to know the Church, as the effect is a mark of the cause that produces it:
the fruit of the tree, the teaching of the schoolemaister. In which case the
revelation of the true faith, whereby we come to know it, is an effect or work
of the Church, and so able and fit to assure us that it is the Church. Neither
does this suppose or imply, that the faith is already had and known by other
means before we use the Church, but only that when the Church teaches, the
faith thereof, in the order of my understanding, is first known: that is to
say, the Church and the faith being inseparably joined together, yet the faith
first comes to my knowledge. This I further explicate by a similitude. For
music is the mark of a Musician, whereby to know him, and to distinguish him
from all other professions. And though I must first be assured it is good
music that he shows, before I can be certain he is a Musician; yet were it
folly to reason, as the Jesuit does, what need then is there for the getting
of the music already had, to use the ministry of the Musician? for the
music is not already had, but only by his playing it comes in order before
himself into my understanding, and then I know him thereby. So 1. Reg. 3.16.
two women laid claim both to one child, and both pretended themselves to be
true mother thereunto, as the Church of Rome this day strives with us,
pleading for her self, that she is our holy mother the Church, and the child
is hers: in this contention we must find out the Church by the same marks that
Solomon found out the true mother, which was her tender compassion enclosed in
her bowels and discovered by her words, that she had rather part with her child
then have it cut in sunder. And if the Jesuit should reason against Salomons
judgment, that he had followed a wrong mark, which was enclosed in the woman
heart, and needed great judgment, yea divine illumination, to find it: the
woman her self, by her speech and behavior, made it known to him: and if
piety and pity were the note of a true mother, whereby to know her, then
contrary to that which has been already proved, the speech and behavior of
the mother should not be a necessary means whereby Solomon must come to the
knowledge of this piety, etc. If, I say, he should thus argue against Solomon,
he might do it with the same reason that he uses against us, and possible with
as good success; V. vltim.
the spirit of God, and the judgment of all Israel, in both alike equally
condemning his sophistry. For was not the woman's pity toward the child known
to Salomons wisdom before he knew her to be the mother, and yet her self was
the instrument that made it known? So true faith is the mark of the Church,
and known to me before the Church, but yet by no other means but by the
Church, whose ministry is needful for the getting it; as the cause is needful
for the obtaining of the effect, and afterward it self is proved by the same
effect. Now the teaching of the truth is an effect of the true Church.

. 30. Fifthly, if before we give absolute, infallible, and undoubted credit to
the true Church, we must examine and judge whether every particular point which
it teaches be the truth, with authority to accept that which we like, or
which in our conceit seems right and conformable to Gods word, and to reject
whatsoever we dislike, or which in our private judgment seems not so right
or conformable; then we make our selves examiners, and judges over the Church,
and consequently prefer our liking or disliking, our judgment and censure of
the sense of Scripture, before the judgment, definition, and censure of the
true Church: But it is absurd both in reason and religion, to prefer the
judgment of any private man, be he never so witty or learned, or never so
strongly persuaded in his own conceit, that he is taught by the Spirit, before
the sentence of Gods Catholic Church, which is a company of men, many of
which both are, and have bin most virtuous, wise, and learned; and which is
chief, is such a company as, according to the absolute and infallible
promises of Scripture, has Christ himself and his holy Spirit continually
among them, guiding them, and teaching them all truth, and not permitting them
to err. Matthew. vlt. 10.14. and 16. vt supra.

The Answer.
1 This is his last argument, wherein, he reasons thus: that if the faith be
a note of the Church, then it must first be examined whether it be true or no.
But to examine the Churches faith, he says, is absurd, and thus he proves it.

They which examine the particulars taught by the Church, whether they be the
truth or not, with authority to accept or reject; make themselves examiners,
and judges over the Church, and prefer their own liking and censure before
the judgment, definition and censure of the Church.

But this later is absurd: considering the Catholic Church is a company of
men wise, learned, and free from error. Mat. 28.20. John. 14.16. and 16.13.

Ergo the former is also.

For answer to this argument, we do not hold that we have authority to accept
that which we like, or which in our conceit seems right, and to reject
whatsoever we dislike, or which in our private judgment seems not
conformable: neither do we admit any private conceit of any man, as the Jesuit
untruly suggesteth, but all authority thus expounded we disclaim and
renounce. And here I affirm against his odious suggestion, that not we but
himself and his Pope are guilty of this presumption, of whom they write,
Sacr. Cerem. lib. 1. tit 7.
that all power is given him in heaven and earth. Innocent. 3. de Concess.
praebendae. c. proposuit.
And of the fullness of this power he may by right dispense beyond all right.
Gloss. ibid.. supra ius.
Even against the Apostles and their Canons, and the old Testament, and in
vows and oaths. Sum. Angel. voce Papa. nu. 1
And against all the commandments of the old Testament and the new. For
otherwise it might seem that God had not been a provident father in his
family: neither could it be said, that the Pope is Gods general Commissary
assumed unto him into the fullness of power. Finally, De translatione Episc. c.
quanto in gl.
He is said to have a heavenly judgment, that can make something of nothing,
and that to be the sense which is no sense, because in such things as he will,
his will is instead of a law. Whence it comes to pass, that Cusan. ep. 2.
page 833.
the Scripture is fitted to the time, and the sense thereof altered as the time
alters, Id. ep. 7. page 857.
so that sometime it is expounded one way, and sometime another. Alu. Pelag. de
planct. Eccles. l. 1. art. 6. ex Hostieni.
Neither may any Council judge the Pope, for that if in any matter the whole
world should judge against him, yet his opinion were to be received. They that
attribute all this, and a great deal more, to their Pope, whom alone they make
judge of all, in my mind may very ill vpbraid others with assuming authority
to judge, etc.

2 But this we say, that it is lawful and necessary for every particular man
1 Thessalonians. 5.21.
to try all things, and hold that which is good, and by the Scriptures to
examine and judge of the things which the Church teaches him, Luc. 1.4. Col.
2.2.
that he may have the full knowledge and assurance of the things wherein he is
taught. The which trial because it is made by the Scriptures, is no private
judgment, but the public censure of Gods spirit that speaks openly in the
Scripture to all men. And when a man, in this manner, rejects the teaching of
a Church, as great and good as the Roman Catholic, his conceit herein is not
private, as private is opposed to spiritual, but only as it is opposed
against that which is common among others: and so a private man may judge. For
our Savior says, Ioh. 7.17. (...).
If any man will do the will of God, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it
be of God, or whether I speak of my self. Act. 17.11.
And the men of Beroea when they received the word of Paul and Silas, searched
the Scriptures daily whether those things were so. And yet the teaching of the
Apostles was more certain and infallible then the doctrine of any Church
since, and their persons more holy and wise then any that have lived after them.

3 Therefore the true manner, how the Churches teaching may be examined, being
thus expounded, the proposition of the Jesuits argument is false, wherein he
says: They which examine whether the particular points which the Church
teaches, be true, make themselves judges over the Church, preferring their
private conceits before the definitions of the Church, etc. For they examine
and judge not by their own private humors, but by the public word of God,
Ioh. 12 48.
which in the Scripture speaks openly to all the world, though the children
of God only know and believe it, by reason Ioh. 12 40.
the unbelievers have their eyes and hearts blinded that they should not
understand. And thus it is lawful for all men to judge the Churches teaching,
because else they cannot be certain they live in the true Church, or have true
faith, Col. 2.2.
which is joined with the full assurance of understanding to know the mystery
of God. Chrysostom answering the objection of such as pretended they could not
tell what religion to be of, there were so many opinions, In Act. hom. 33.
says: That seeing we take the Scriptures, which are so true and plain, it
will be an easy matter for you to judge: and tell me, have thou any wit or
judgment? for it is not a man's part barely to receive whatsoever he hears.
Say not, I am a scholar and may be no judge, I can condemn no opinion; for
this is but a shift, etc. Basil says, Ethic. definit. 72. page 432. (...).
It behooves the hearers that are learned in the Scriptures to try those
things which are said by their teachers, and receiving that which agrees with
the Scriptures, to reject the contrary. And Gerson, one of his own side De
exam. doctr. part. 1. con^ess. 5.
writes, The examination and trial of doctrines concerning faith, belongs
not only to the Council and Pope, but also to eueryone that is sufficiently
learned in the Scriptures, because every man is a sufficient judge of that he
knows.

4 And, in all this hitherto, there is no wrong offered to the Church, but
only that put in practice which was never misliked, till a Church arose, whose
silver being dross, and milk poison, might not endure the trial. And whereas
he says, it is a great absurdity to prefer a private man's judgment, be he
never so witty, or strongly conceited of himself, before the judgment of Gods
Church: herein he says excellent well: but will he expound the light and
evidence of the Scripture to be nothing else but wit and conceit? and will he
leave no room for the full assurance of understanding in the heart of man? or
is it absurd for a private man to prefer the truth of Gods word before the
teaching of all the world? I would not have him say so. For Ioh. 5.39.
our Savior himself refused not to have his doctrine tried, though he were
better then the Church: neither is it impossible for a private man to espy an
error in the teaching of the best Church that is; in which case he may judge
the Church, and his judgment is to be preferred, as Panormit. and Gerson.
whose words you have Digress. 15. nu. 10.
some Papists themselves deny not. And out of question I think the most
learned and discreet Papists to be wholly of this mind; in that many of them
have called in question again things already determined by their Church;
thinking the same that we do, that it is not sufficient to make an end of
questions, unless we be also sure the end is good. For it is an ordinary
thing with the Jesuits and schoolmen of these days, to expound the decrees
of their Councels clean against the original meaning thereof; which shows
they mislike that which was decreed, and help themselves with the favor of
the gloss against the text. So the Councels of Lateran and Trent have
determined against the communion in both kinds, forbidding the cup: yet
Ouandus, a late Friar, Breuiloqu. in 4. d. 9. prop. 6. page 221.
writes, that all things duly considered that may fall out, it were better to
permit the cup then deny it, and more grace is given in both kinds then in one.
And Refert. Bell de iustifica. l. 3. c. 3.
Catharinus the Bishop of Compsa maintains against the Trent Council, that a
man by faith may be assured of the pardon of his sins, whereas that Council
Sess. 6. cap. 9.
determined the contrary. And Sixtus Senensis, a great clearke, Bibl. l. 1. p.
33.
has rejected as Apocrypha the seven last chapters of Hester, Sess. 4.
which the Council of Trent approved for canonical. Which these men would
never have done, if they had thought it any injury to their Church to examine
her teaching.

5 And whereas he obiecteth further, that the Church is a company of men, wise,
learned, virtuous, and guided by the spirit of God, and therefore it is
rashness to judge of their teaching; I answer, that this ill befits him and
his cause: for Digress. 16. nu. 4.
I have showed that his Church consists rather in the Popes sole person the^
in any great company, and the definitions thereof follow not the learning or
virtue of any company, but the Popes bare will; who, by the confession of all
learned Papists may both err, and be as vicious, foolish, and unlearned as any
other. And therefore the Church with her prerogatives can do a Papist no good,
until they be taken from the Pope and given the Church again Next, though the
company which is the Church, be wise and learned, etc. yet are they no wiser
then Christ and his Apostles, whose teaching was examined; neither can we know
them for such till we have tried their teaching. For Job 32 6.9.
wise men see not all things at all times, and the child with reverence may
admonish even his father. And though our Savior have promised the assistance
of his spirit to his Church to lead it into all truth; yet in what sense that
is,. 14. nu. 4. and 5.
I have declared already: and the Jesuit may know it is not in his sense by
this sign, that the very persons and particular Churches to whom Christ meant
those words, had their errors for all that. But supposing the Churches
doctrine, by virtue of some such promise, be indeed absolutely exempted from
all error, yet may the same be examined and judged of, because till that be
done, it cannot of us be known to be so. For no man says, we must prove
things already certain, but that we must not believe them to be certain till
we have proved them. And if the true Church cannot err in any point, then it
stands all men in hand to examine which is the true Church, that so they may
betake themselves unto it: and let him give you a sound distinction, and say
directly, what presumption it is against the Church, and why an injury, to
examine her doctrine, more then it is to try her unity, sanctity, antiquity,
and succession? Or if it be no wrong to make trial of these things, which yet
she has by virtue of Christ's promises; why should it be amiss to make trial
of the former, which he dares not, for his life, say is hers any properlier or
fullier then they?

. 31. But you may perhaps object, that in Scripture we are willed not to
believe every spirit, but to examine and try the spirits whether they be of
God or no; and that therefore we must examine and try the spirit of the
Church. I answer, that S. John does not mean that it appertains to every
man to try all spirits, but in general would not have the Church to accept of
every one that boasts himself to have the Spirit, but wills that they
should try those spirits: not that every simple man should take upon him thus
to try them, but that those of the Church should try them to whom the office
of trying the spirits does appertain; to wit, the Doctors and Pastors of the
Church, which almighty God has put of purpose in the Church, Vt non
circumferamur omni vent^ doctrinae, Ephesians. 4. and that we may not like little
ones, waver with every blast of those that boast they have the Spirit. So that
this trying of spirits is only meant of those spirits which men may doubt
whether they be of God or no: and then also this trial belongs to the
Pastors of the Church. But when it is once certain that the spirit is of God,
we neither need nor ought doubtfully to examine, nor presumptuously judge or
it any more, but obediently submitting the judgment of our own sense and
reason, we must believe the teaching of it in every point. Now it is most
certain, that the spirit of the true Church is of God, as out of holy
Scripture has been most evidently declared: and therefore our only care
should be to seek out those marks and properties by which all men may easily
know which particular company of men is the true Church, which we ought not to
examine and try, but in all points obediently believe.

The Answer.
1 The words of the Apostle are, Dearly beloved, believe not every spirit, but
try the spirits whether they be of God, 1. Ioh. 4.1. Whence we gather, that it
is the duty of every man to examine the doctrine that is taught him. But the
Jesuit answers two things: first, that Saint John bids not every man do
this, but only the Pastors. Whereto I answer, the words are plain enough that
he speaks indifferently to all men, that every man for himself, though not
by himself, but by the rule of Gods word, should try the spirits. For he
directs his Epistle not to the clergy, but to the people. And the reason
added why they should try the spirits, makes it plain who the parties be
that should try them: for many false Prophets are gone out: they must try the
spirits that are in danger to be seduced by false Prophets, and such are the
people, and therefore they must examine them, as Christ says, Math. 7.15.
Beware of false Prophets; by their fruits, that is, by their doctrine, ye
shall know them, and yet they cannot be known by their doctrine unless it be
first examined. And Saint Basil Eth. definit. 72. page 432. Graec. Bas.
says, It behooves the hearers which are learned in the Scriptures, to examine
the things which are spoken by their teachers; and receiving those things which
are consonant with the Scriptures, to refuse the contrary.

2 And whereas the Jesuit avouches his conceit by a text of Ephesians. 4.11.
wherein it is said, that Christ has left to his Church Pastors and Doctors,
that henceforth we be no more children, wavering and carried about with every
wind of doctrine: the Apostle says not, that our Pastors were given us that
henceforth we should no more try the spirits; but for the work of the
ministry, for the gathering together of the Saints, for the building of the
body of Christ: all which duty of theirs is much furthered when the people
under them try all things, and hold that which is good, and by examining their
teaching, find them to be Doctors of the truth. And if Saint Paul had misliked
this, then the men of Beroea had not been Act. 17.11.
commended by the spirit of God for examining his doctrine; neither would he
have Heb. 5.14.
warned the Hebrews, that through long custom they should have their wits
exercised to discern both good and evil. And to reply, that they discern it
because the Church tells them what it is, is too gross: for they cannot tell
whether the Church say true or no, till they have examined what it says.

3 In the second place he answers, that the spirits which must be tried, are
not the spirits of the Church which are of God, but only such spirits of which
we may doubt whether they be of God or no; then the which he could have spoken
nothing more unadvisedly, because if it be lawful to try such spirits as are
suspicious or false, then is it also lawful to prove the true: for two
contrary spirits be relatiues, so that we cannot prove the one to be false, but
we must needs withal prove the other to be true. Again, when we doubt whether
the spirit be of God, then we are not certain; and if the false spirit be not
certainly false, then neither is the true spirit certainly true, in my
understanding till I have tried it. Moreover, there is nothing so true in it
self, but it may be doubtful to us till we have tried it; and therefore the
purest spirits are not exempt from examination: specially considering that it
is no injury to the truth, which loves to be sifted, if ye prove it by his
word Ioh. 18.37.
that was borne to bear witness to the truth, and the more ye try it, the
clearer it is: neither can it be grieuance to the spirit of God, who 1 Thessalonians.
5.21.
calls upon us to try all things, and hold that which is good; and bids
us have our wits exercised to discern between good and evil.

4 And his conclusion, that when it is certain the spirit is of God, then we
must no longer doubtfully examine it, but obediently accept it, says very
well: for 2. Tim. 3.7.
the Apostle rebukes such as are always learning, and never come to the
knowledge of the truth: but he forgets that so it never is, till we have
tried it, and therefore we may first examine it, that afterward we may be
certain and obedient. And though it be most certain, that the spirit of the
true Church is of God, yet hence it follows not that we must seek this
Church by other marks, and not by her teaching: for those other marks which
the Jesuit means, are of God too as well as the teaching is, and yet he will
allow them to be examined. And first to examine and try, and then obediently
to believe, are not contrary but subordinate, and the one the way to the other.
And Christ was of God, yet Ioh 5.39.
he bad men search the Scripture for his trial: and all we being naturally the
heirs of unbelief, cannot have this certainty in our selves till the
discourse of Gods word have created it in us. And if there were nothing else to
lead us, yet the experience which we have had of the Church of Romes dealing,
were sufficient to warn us, that we never give over Saint John's lesson,
Believe not every spirit, but try them whether they be of God.

Digression 20. Concerning the proceeding of the Council of Trent in the
determining matters of faith.
5 For the Papists Bone Deu^, quae gentium varietas, qui delectus episcoporum
totius orbis, qui regu^ and rerum publicarum spl^ndor, quae medulla
theologorum, quae sanctitas, quae lacrymae, quae ici^ni^, qui flores academici,
quae linguae, quan^a subtilitas, quantus labor, quam insinita lectio, quantae
virtuta^ and studiorum diuit^ t, aug ^stu^ ill^d sacra^ium impleuerunt^
Posseuin. biblioth. page 4^2
commend their Trent Council to the skies, persuading themselves this very
Church was there, whose bare authority should lead us; and yet mark what
course it took in the trial of religion. For first, none was admitted to have
any voice there, but only such as were fast to the Papacy: and not all such
neither, if they were not pliable enough in every matter to the Popes mind, for
some were removed out of the Council, and sent away, because they began to
speak something freely; and to make sure work, there were more Bishops of
Italy then of all the world beside, who might overrule the rest if need
required: of which matter Claud. Espencae. in epist. ad Tit. c. 1.
a Popish Bishop confesses, This is that Helena which of late ruled all at
Trident: besides Innocen. Gen tillet. examen. Council. Triden. page 32. Nota
quod holy multi sunt Episcopi sine administratione episcopatuum, vt sunt isti
qui vulgariter appellantur Nullatenenses. Panor. de offic. ordin. c. quoniam.
there were some that had the titles of Archbishops, as Vpsalensis and
Armachanus, which yet had neither church nor Diocese, but were created to fill
up the number; Id page 251.
and when yet upon a time the Pope wanted voices to sway the matter, he sent a
fresh supply of forty Bishops newly made: as every base town in Italy has his
Bishop. And when the Protestant Divines required audience, they could not be
admitted upon any equal terms: but Illyr. protest. contra Council. Trid
Fabric. recus. Conc. Trid. Sicid. commen. Innocen. Gentil. page 132. 135 158.
etc.
the safe conduct that was given out for them, as it was long before it could be
obtained, so it had a clause that it should appertain to none but such as
would repent and return to the bosom of the Roman Church; which shows that
it was a very jest to mock the world withal: and the liberty granted by the
same, would have proved no better to the Protestants, then that which the
Council of Constance gave Hus and Hierome, Vide Paralip. ad hist. Abb.
Vrsperg. page 396. and Pogh Floren. ep. ad Aretin.
who never went home again, but contrary to all truth and right were
unmercifully murdered by the Council. Now Panorm. extra de iureiurando. Ego N.
the law says, that he which has security granted him to come, has also
security to return: for he comes not securely, that may not safely return
again.

6 Secondly, all the Bishops were sworn to uphold the Papacy, that it may
appear they came prepared to do that they did. The oath is set down in the
Ego N. de iureiurand. in decret. Greg. 9.
Decretals: I N. Bishop, from this day forward will be faithful to S. Peter, and
to the holy Church of Rome, and to my Lord the Pope, and his successors. The
Papacy of the Roman Church, and the rules of the holy fathers will I help,
defend, and hold against all men, so help me God and his holy Gospels. Now
Papat^^, id est principatum ta^ in spiritualibus quam in te^poralibus. Dic
regulas, id est canones summorum Pontificum, etc. Panorm. vbi supra.
this Papacy is a principality in things both temporal and spiritual: and
these rules are the Canons of the Pope, and other Doctors allowed by the Church
of Rome. So that this Council judged before it heard, nay they would not
hear, but came every man prepared to condemn: and therefore Such as were
Catharinus, Dom. a Soto. Cornelius Mus. Salapusius, Ciconia, Fontidonius,
Baptista, Fornerius, and others, whereof read Innocent. Gentill exame^.
at every Sessions they had certain sermons preached by Friars, tending to
nothing but railing against the Protestants, and inciting the Council against
them. Whereunto they added another policy, by spreading Innocen. Gentill. page
32. Boz. de sign. eccles. lib. 18. cap. 3.
reports of one Abdisu, that should be Patriarch of the Assyrians, and was come
to Rome to acknowledge the Popes supremacy and religion, with many admirable
particulars: all which news was spread for the nonce to fill men's minds with a
conceit and liking of that which they meant in the Council to decree. The
which partiality and cunning when the Princes of Europe saw, See Illyr.
Protest. cont. council. and Innocent. Gentill. page 28 31. 96. 98. 110.
they sent their protestations against the Council, as insufficient to reform
religion; namely the Emperor Charles, the French King, the Kings of England and
Denmark, the States of Heluetia, and others.

7 Thirdly, in trying the controversies, they examined not by the Scriptures
only, but by traditions Sess. 4.
also, which before that time no man was bound to believe: and that which was
worse, there did nothing pass till the Pope with his Consistory at home had
scene it; and whatsoever he fancied, that was decreed, for which purpose there
went continual posts between Trent and Rome, and while the Doctors, pro forma
tantum, were disputing at Trent, the Pope was engrossing the Canons at Rome,
which being returned in packets, were solemnly published in the Council. And
thus they measured, sometime with a wrong rule, and sometime with no rule at
all. And though they had measured with the right rule, yet they did it not
rightly, for that they applied not the doctrine to the rule, but bent the rule
to their own doctrine, turning the Scripture violently to serve their
opinions. For in the fourth Session they decreed, that no man should give any
other exposition of Scripture then such as might agree with the doctrine of the
Church of Rome. Now that doctrine was the thing that should be examined, and
the Scripture was the rule that it should be examined by, and therefore they
wrested the rule to their opinions.

8 So that if it were not lawful to examine the teaching of the Church, as the
Jesuit holds, yet this example of the Trent Council may teach him, that at
least it is lawful to try whether the Church proceed aright in teaching; as
many Papists, upon experience of these dealings, no doubt, have not bin afraid
to examine things pretended to be already concluded by Councels: else that
Church is in a miserable plight, that will yield us no reason of her faith, but
her own bare word, and much doubts her self, that will suffer none to try
her teaching by so even a rule as is the Scripture; and all Papists her
children are in worse case then (...). vita Aristoph. praefixa Scholiis.
he that was judged to be the son of Philip of Aegina, only because his mother
said so: for they must not only believe God is their father, because she
tells them so, but they must take her word too, that Christ is her husband;
contrary to a notorious suspicion that has long gone of her, and would be
better cleared then by her bare word, Nos iustitiam nostram, and ecclesiae
sponsae nostrae nolentes negligere. says Boniface 8. de immunit. eccle. c.
quoniam. in sexto. and ibid. de elect. c. vbi periculum. caeterumque. condemned
by Bernard epist. 237.
that she is the Popes concubine, and has had many children by him out of
lawful wedlock.

. 32. The marks be especially those four which are gathered out of Scripture,
and expressly set down as properties of the Church in the Constantinopolitane
Creed, which is received commonly of all, and inserted even in the Protestants
Communion book: Vna, Sancta, Catholica, Apostolica: One, Holy, Catholic,
Apostolic. By all which, if I had leisure, I might show at large, how that the
Roman Church, that is to say, that company which communicates and agrees in
profession of faith with the Church of Rome, is the only true Church; and that
the Protestants, that is to say, that company which from Luthers time
hitherward have opposed themselves against the Roman Church, neither all, nor
any particular sect of them can be the true Church: for the Roman Church
only is truly One, Holy, Catholic, and Apostolic; whereas the Protestants
either want all, or at the least, some of these properties.

The Answer.
1 The Constantinopolitane Creed and the sacred Scripture teach these four to
be qualities abiding in the Church, and certain adjuncts belonging thereunto,
but not that they are the marks whereby to find it. For we call that a Mark,
whereby the thing questioned is undoubtedly brought to our knowledge, which
these four in the question of the Church perform not. For first themselves
are declared and proved by another thing, as the Jesuit himself unawares
grants, in that he says, they are gathered out of the Scripture and articles
of our faith: which is all one as if he freely confessed, the word of God, when
all is done, is the thing whereby the Church must be found, and the true faith
contained therein, is known sooner and better then the Church, which is not
assured to us till those things be found therein which agree with the Scripture
and articles of faith. This must be noted, because having in the eight former
sections wearied himself with striving against us, and used much diligence to
persuade, that the true faith is no competent mark to discern the Church by,
yet now of his own accord he comes home to us, and in his first words
submits himself to that which before he gainsaid, and so freely reuoketh all
his former arguments.

2 Next, they are not so much as properties of the Church neither: and
therefore the unlikeliest of a thousand to be marks thereof. For (...).
Phauo^in. le^ic.
they are not always inseparably and incommunicably found therein, that is,
such as at all times remain in the Church alone, and in every part thereof.
For in the beginning it wanted antiquity and succession, and in the progress
it has sometime been without unity and universality: and at all times the
false Church has made so fair show of all four, that no man could
distinguish them but by retiring to the doctrine. For Chrysostom Hom. 49. in
Math. op. imperf.
writes thus, All those things which belong to the Church of Christ in truth,
the heresies may also have in schism: they have Churches and the The book not
the doctrine.
sacred Scriptures, yea Bishops and other degrees of Clergy; baptism, the
Eucharist, and all other things; yea A pretense of Christ: as Math. 24.5.23.
Christ himself. So that if any one will know which is Christ's true Church, he
shall not be able in such a confusion to do it but only by the Scriptures. And
of unity, S. Basil Aschet. prooem. de iudicio Dei.
says, He found much unity among all other professions; only in the Church
of God he observed great strife and vehem^nt dissension, and the Pastors
themselves distracted with all contrariety of minds and opinions. Of
succession Nazianzen De laud Athan.
says, This is properly succession, to succeed in godliness: for he that
professes the same faith, is also partaker of the same succession; and he that
holds a contrary faith, must be reputed contrary to the succession. And D.
40. Non est facile.
the Canon law, They are not the children of the Saints which occupy their
rooms, but which do their works. Of holiness Vbi supra.
Chrysostom says, In former times one might have known Christ's Church by her
manners, when the conversation of the Christians, either all or many, was holy;
but now Christians are either as bad or worse then heretics or Gentiles; and
there is more continency found among them, though it be in schism, then among
Christians. And again, Hom. 4. in Math.
Whatsoever kind of holiness the servants of God have in truth, the servants
of Satan may have in likeness: for the devil has his that be meek and humble,
that be chaste, and give alms, that fast, and do every good deed which God has
appointed for the salvation of mankind; and these forms of godliness has the
devil brought in to seduce us, that a confusion being made between good and
counterfeit, simple men which know not the difference between goodness in deed
and goodness in show, while they seek the goods servants of God, might light
upon the devils seducements.

3 And therefore allowing the Jesuit what leisure he will (though otherwise
any reader may perceive he took himself leisure enough that penned this
discourse, and though briefly in show, yet in sum and effect, has couched
whatsoever is extant in any Papist, written concerning the matters questioned)
but yet giving him a longer day, he cannot, by these marks, make it infallibly
sure that his Roman Catholic is the Church of God: and this himself knows
in his own conscience. For Bellarmine De not. Eccl. cap. 3.
speaking of these very marks confesses, They make it not evidently true that
it is the Church, but evidently probable: whereby it appears that the
Jesuit, for all his set countenance, yet knows well enough these his marks
bring probability but no certainty. And I am sure all Papists of learning
will grant they are no marks at all, but when they concur with true faith:
whereas they say expressly Greg. de Valent. comment. Theol. tom. 3. disp. 1. qu.
1. punct. 7.. 18.
that among whomsoever the truth of doctrine and Sacraments are holden, Ex ijs
constare veram Ecclesiam.
thereby it is known the Church is there. And therefore the Jesuit may show
his skill in fitting his four marks to his Roman Church, and removing them
from ours, but he shall never come directly to the point, until he try us by
the Scriptures, and thereby sufficiently prove, that which is easily said, we
are not the Church of God, but a company standing in oppositio^ since Luthers
time, and divided into particular sects.

. 33. First the Protestants Church is not perfectly one, or uniform in
dogmaticall points of faith, but varieth according to the variety of times and
persons, now holding one thing, then another: the learned men thereof are so
much at jar in matters of faith, that it is hard to find three, in all
points, of one opinion.

The Answer.
1 The Papists themselves acknowledge Luc. Pinel. These. Vademont. These. 83.
that the unity of the Church consists in this, that the members thereof
believe the same things, use the same worship of God, and retain the same
sacraments: but the Scriptures more fully teach us how it is one. First,
because Ephesians. 4.4.
it is from one beginning which is the holy Ghost, who as one soul, quickens
and moves all the members. Next, Ephesians. 4.15.
it has but one head which is Christ. And thirdly, Ephesians. 4.5. Romans 12.5.
it is but one body and one society, partaking the same doctrine, sacraments,
and worship of God. The which unity, if the Jesuit can show to be wanting
among us, good reason the game be his: but for the doing hereof, it is not
enough to say, we vary, unless he can make true demonstration that the
variance is in faith, and this faith is changed with times and persons; the
which according to the custom of his sect, he says confidently, but shows
not: whereas we for our purgation, name A book so called, to be bought in
every shop: and containing the confessions of all the several Protestant
Churches in Europe.
the Harmony of confessions, wherein the particular Churches set down and name
the articles of their faith: the which confessions, if the Jesuit can show to
jar, as he says, in dogmaticall points of faith, I am content you believe
him in all the rest. Or if he can show the Church of England, since Papistry
was first abolished, has altered one article of the present faith now
professed.

2 I will not deny but there are iarres among us, but this is that we say, (and
for trial thereof we challenge all the Seminaries this day in England, from
whom the worst of our fallings out is not hid) that these iarres are not in
points of faith, nor yet any contrariety between Church and Church, but only
they are quarrels and dissentions between some particular men: and me thinks
the Jesuit should not be so absurd as to hold the Church it self guilty of
every fault committed by any private man therein, no more then a civil state,
ordered by good laws and wholesome government, can be discredited by some
suites and quarrels that now and then fall out between the subjects. And yet it
is false he says, that scarce three learned men among us, are in all points,
of one opinion: for that breach which is, is not so great as these words imply,
but only touches some particular men in matters not concerning faith, the
body of the Church in the mean time continuing in the unity of faith, and
upholding her government. And for further proof hereof, our enemies have taken
infinite pains, to collect and blaze abroad these our supposed dissentions; but
how have they sped in the journey? what have they performed? the mountain
traveled, and was delivered of a mouse. For one part of these dissentions are
falsely laid to our charge, through the ignorance and fury of our adversaries;
as drunken men in the pangs of their giddiness speak of things not as they
are indeed, but as the impression is in their idle fancy. Another part are not
the iarres of the Church, but the defects of some few therein, whereof the
Church is not guilty. The rest are not dissentions in things of faith, but
strife about ceremonies, kindled and nourished specially by the cunning of
secret Papists lurking, as the remnant of the Canaanites, among us: wherein if
any among us have exceeded, yet Ezekiel. 16.51.
the Church of Rome justifies us again, where neither three learned men, nor
three Popes, can be given of one mind in all points, but as Platina In Steph.
vi.
writes, This has bin for the most part, the manner, that the later Popes have
either infringed, or wholly taken away the decrees of the former. And Papists
D. 40. Si Pap. edit. Gregoria^. in Annot.
desiring to fetch religion rather from the Popes mouth, then from holy writ,
cannot but change as they have changed.

3 Therefore the discord among us being of no higher degree, we say as
Prudentius, a Christian poet, said of the unity of his time, Concordia laesa
est, Sed defensa fide: quin and concordia sospes, Germanam comitata fidem, sua
vulnera ridet. Psychom.
It has received some hurt, but is defended by faith her sister, in whose
company being safe come home she laugheth at her wounds. And though we excuse
not the oppositions of any who as k the twins of Rebecca shook each others
in their mothers womb, whereby she is made afraid, and her burden becomes
heavier and painefuller to her; yet let not our enemies flatter themselves in
this, Genesis 25.22.
for Rebecca the Church among us shall be safe, and God shall give her Isaac
the son of the promise, and make her a fruitful mother after all her sorrow.
Whose children though in some things they vary, yea reproach one another, yet
so did Cyril and Theodoret, Chrysostom and Theophilus, Jerome and Ruffin: and
there is no impossibility why in the pursuit of their passion, they may not
be deceived both. For two brothers being in choler may one renounce the other,
yet still they remain brothers for all that, and their angry words proceeding
not of judgment but of choler, (...). Aeschyl. Sept. ad. Theb.
cannot make void the band of nature.

Digression. 21. Showing that Gods true Church in all ages has now and then
been troubled with contentions, as great as are now among us.
4 And because our enemies may hope, by urging these contentions such as they
are, to discredit our profession, they must be put in mind that the unity of
Gods Church was never so perfect or entire, but sometime it has been blemished
with dissension, yea miserably rent in sunder with the inconsiderate strife of
her own children. Saint Paul Romans 16.17.
testifies of the Church of Rome, that there were therein which caused
divisions and offenses contrary to the doctrine. And of the Corinths he 1.
Cor. 3.3.
says, there was among them envying, strife, and contention, some holding of
Paul, some of Apollo, some of Cephas: and he 1. Cor. 11.19.
writes to them, that there must be heresies among them, for the trial of such
as were faithful. So Act. 15.39.
Paul and Barnabas, yea Gal. 2.11.
Paul and Peter had their iarres; so Polycrates and Victor, Cyprian and
Cornelius, Cyril and Theodoret, Chrysostom, Theophilus and Epiphanius, Hierome
and Ruffin, Paulinus and Meletius, Leo and the Council of Calcedon, Nazianzen
and the Council of Constantinople, all bishops of the Catholic Church, were
at extreme contention one with another. Eusebius. hist. l. 5 c. 23. and inde.
Niceph. l. 4 c. 37. and inde.
The strife between the East and West Churches, about the keeping of Easter
was such, that they excommunicated each other. Eusebius. hist. l. 7 c. 3. and
inde. Cypr. ep. 74. ad Pomp. Sabrat. Council. Carth. apud Cypt. apud Cypr. ep.
75 Hieron. de script. in Dionysio.
The question of rebaptization bred the like broiles between the Bishop of
Rome and the Western Bishops on the one part, and Cyprian, Dionysius, and
Firmilianus, three metropolitans, with the most Bishops in Affricke, Egypt,
Cappadocia, Galatia, and Cilicia, on the other part: there was no Church, or
Catholic Bishop therein, which was not entangled in this opposition. But the
broiles stirred up by Theophilus against Chrysostom were more then tragical,
and rent in sunder all the Churches in the world, yet were they the Bishops of
the Catholic Church that thus contended. In this variance Theophilus the
Patriarch of Alexandria, and Epiphanius the Bishop of Cyprus were chief
against Chrysostom; and with them joined the other Bishops of the Provinces as
they fancied: the event, was this, Socr. l. 6. c. 21.
Chrysostom lost both his Bishopric and life in banishment. Ni^eph. l. 13.
c. 13
Epiphanius and he, most grievously cursed one another. Socr. l. 6. c. 17. and
Niceph. l. 13. cap. 17. and 21.
Many were slain in the taking of parts. Sozo. l. 8. c. 22 Zosim. l. 5. Socr
l. 6. c. 18. (...). p. 262.
The Cathedral Church at Constantinople, with the Senate house, were set on
fire, and burned to the ground in the pursuit of revenge. The people were
robbed of their Pastors, and the Pastors themselves persecuted each other, and
pursued their people most unmercifully. Caesar Baronius, beginning to entreat
of this contention, Annal tom. 5 An. 400. nu. 51.
has these words: A shameful contention in the Church, the lamentable
narration whereof I now take in hand: wherein shall be described the bickering
and cursed persecution, not of Gentile against Christians, or heretics
against Catholics, or wicked men against good and just men, but (which is
monstrous and prodigious) of Saints and holy men one against another. The which
words make it plain, that this contention was among Gods own children in the
true Church. The like is written of the Bishops in the Council of Nice, (...).
Sozo. l. 1 c. 17.
accusing one another to the Emperor, as soon as they were assembled; of
whose iarres that famous speech of Constantine, made unto them upon that
occasion, gives witness: wherein among many other things Soz. ibid. Niceph. l
8. c. 16. idem in Conc. ^y ^apud. Niceph. l 8. c. 50. Eusebius. vit. Constant l.
3. (...)
he tells them, that he thinks this worse then all the evils to be uttered,
that he sees the Church of God dissenting by contentions and contrary
opinions. Yea Sozomen (...) lib. 1. c. 16.
says, The contrariety of opinions among the learned at that time, was so
scandalous, that it turned many from embracing the Christian religion. So
likewise, in a Council holden at Constantinople, for the deposing of
Nazianzen, he thus admonishes the Bishops: Vita Nazian. praefixa operibus eius
Graece editis Basil.
It is a shame o my fellow Pastors of the sacred flock of Christ, and not
befitting you, if while you teach others peace, your selves fall to war: and
how shall you persuade others to unity, your selves being at variance? In the
second Council of Ephesus, Flauianus the Bishop of Constantinople was deposed,
Liberat. breu. c. 12. Niceph. l. 14. c. 47.
and pitifully murdered: Euagr. l. 1. c. 10 Niceph. l. 14. c. 47.
with him were also deposed Eusebius, Dorilaeus, Ibas, Theodoret, Domnus,
Daniel, Aquilinus, and Irenaeus, all Catholic Bishops: and this was not done
by the faction of Dioscorus alone, Baro. An. 449 nu. 97. 98. 105.
but by the Catholic Bishops themselves, all which, says Baronius, Consented
both to the restoring of Eutyches and deposing of Flauianus and the rest. There
was in this contentious Council above 132. Bishops, whereof the four
Patriarchs, beside the Popes Deputy, were part: yea it was an Oecumenicall
Council, lawfully assembled, of Catholic Bishops, and yet through the
conueiance of cunning adversaries, they were set one against another. For the
godly men of those times had secret enemies grievous wolves in sheeps clothing,
who took all occasions to abuse their simplicity, and set them at variance
among themselves: For so do men use, Sozo. l. 6. c. 4.
says an old history speaking of this matter, as long as strangers wrong
them, to hold together; but when they are delivered from outward troubles, then
they fall out among themselves. Thus the policy of the Arrians kindled those
contentions that among the Catholics brake out in the cause of Athanasius,
and by strange devices nourished them: whereby they drew godly Bishops into
their faction against the truth, as Haer 68.
Epiphanius notes of the Meletians, Primas fere^tes tum in pietate tu^ in
vita, Meletiani qui summam iustitiam veritatis demonstraba^t.
Godly men, that being mingled with the Arrians, though they abode in the true
faith, yet were they not free from some contagion which they gathered in that
societi^: and one part hereof was Atha. orat. 1. contr Arrian.
their standing with others against Athanasius. This was it that bred the
troubles among the Bishops in the Councels of Seleucia, Syrmium, Antioch,
Tirus, Lampsacum, Ariminum, and many other: wherein evermore something was
practiced even by Bishops of the true faith, against their fellow Bishops, and
the faith it self. The Council of Ariminum is famous for this: wherein there
were above 400. Bishops of the West, all Catholic Athan. de Synod.
but 50. or therabouts that were Arrians; and yet they relented from the faith
of the Nicen Council toward Arrianisme, and gave occasion of infinite broiles
in the Church afterward by their inconstancy.

5 And long before this, Saint Cyprian lamented Church-contentions, and L. 4.
Ep. 4.
thinks God sent the persecutions of his time for no other cause: These
evils, says he, had not come upon the brethren, if they had bin linked
together in brotherly concord. And a little after the persecution of Julian was
over, the stories Sozo. l. 6. c 4. Niceph. l. 10. c. 40.
tell how the Church-gouernours again moved questions and disputations about
the dogmaticall points of faith. And Eusebius beginning to entreat of the
bloody persecution which the Church suffered under Diocletian; says, the
contentions of the learned therein, was the cause: Lib. 8. hist. c. 1
these are his words, They also, says he, which seemed to be our Pastors,
casting off the rule of piety, inflamed themselves with mutual contentions
each against other, they increased nothing but strife, threats, envy, and
quarrels, every man with all tyranny pursuing his ambition. Neither did the
persecution ensuing stay this dissension, but as soon as ever peace came to
the Church, they fell to it again, Eusebius. vit. Constan. l. 3. Gela. Cyzece^.
Act conc. Nic. l. 2 c. 7. 8.
that the good Emperor which brought this peace, had much ado with all his
authority, to appease them: whereupon Basil the great, makes this sorrowful
complaint: In other arts and sciences, Aschet. proae. de iudic. Dei. p. ^89
Graec. The like complaint made by the Emperor Theodosius of the Catholic
Bishops in his time (...). Council. Ephesians. page 235.
says he, I have seen much concord among the professors thereof: only in the
Church of God I have observed so much division, and so exceeding great
dissension of many, both among themselves, and against the holy Scriptures: and
that which is most horrible, the Bishops themselves have stood in such
difference among themselves, both of mind and opinion, and contrary to the
commandments of Christ have used such contrariety; that thereby the Church of
God has been unmercifully drawn in sunder, and his flock troubled without all
care and pity. A heavy complaint, and such as charge the Church with a foul
blemish; even as foul every way as that wherewith the Jesuit and the rest of
our enemies this day vpbraid the Church of England. Yet did not Basil therefore
think it was not the true Church, as the Jesuit disputes against us, much
less did he separate himself from it, but acknowledges the envy of Satan,
who can set brethren at odds in their fathers own house; who are to be
advised to reconcile themselves, and at length to embrace unity when they see
Papists their enemies scorning them and clapping their hands at the bickering:
lest all to late, when Gods judgments fall upon them, as they did upon the
primitive Church for that same sin, they learn by their own calamity, to
profess the faith in unity. Philostrat. heroic. in Protesilao.
One says, the communion of good things often times begets envy, but when
men communicate in miseries, they begin to love one another, recompencing
compassion for compassion.

. 34. And which chiefly is to be pondered, as principally appertaining to this
mark of unity, they have no means to end their controversies, and so to
return to unity and to continue therein. For while as they admit no rule of
faith but only Scripture, which Scripture diverse men expound diversely,
according to the diverse humors and opinions or fancies of every one, not
admitting any head, or chief rule infallibly guided by the holy Ghost, to
whose censure in matters of faith all the rest should submit themselves, vt
capite constituto schismatis tollatur occasio, an head, or chiele ruler being
ordained, occasion of schism may be taken away: whiles they do thus, as they
all do always thus, all proclaiming to be ruled by only Scripture: and yet
almost every one expounding Scripture diversely, and one contrary to another,
according to the seeming of every ones sense, and never a one admitting one
superior infallibly guided by the holy Spirit of God, to whose judgment all
the rest should submit themselves; whiles I say, they do thus, it is impossible
they should have the unity of faith which is required as a mark whereby to
know Christ's true Church.

The Answer.
1 The Jesuit having objected, that there is no unity among us, now gives his
reason why there can be none: because we make the holy Scripture the rule of
our faith: and indeed it is true, that all Protestants profess the Scriptures
to be the rule of faith: which the Jesuit may repeat as often as be pleases,
coming over with it again and again: but no Papist can confute it: yea many
Papists seem in express terms themselves to grant it, as I have showed
Digression 3. where the point is handled at large, and whither the reader must
betake himself for the trial. Only I will add the words of Acosta Biblio.
select. l. 2 c. 15.
reported and allowed by Posseuinus the Jesuit, that the diligent, attentive,
and frequent reading, as also the meditation and conference of the Scriptures,
has always seemed to them the chiefest rule of all to understand by. And I
will repeat De verb. Dei. l. 1. c. 2.
the words of Bellarmine, The sacred Scripture is the rule of faith, most
certain and most secure: yea God has taught us by corporal letters, which we
might see and read, what his will is we should believe concerning him. Here
are three of our principal adversaries say as much as we do, and yet the
Jesuit allows it not. This his vanity, common with him in every issue
between us, must be chastised with those words of Austin, Epist. 6.
See how they grow worse and worse, whose runagate babbling restrained neither
with fear nor shame, wandereth up and down without any punishment.

2 And though we grant, that diverse men expound the Scripture diversely,
according to their fancies, yea contrary one to another, not submitting the
exposition to one chief head; yet cannot this disable it from being a
sufficient rule to keep us in unity, because the men that thus diversely
expound, are not as he speaks, All and every one that professes our
religion, but some private men erring through ignorance or affection: the open
ministry of our Church in the mean time cleaving uniformly to one and the
same exposition, which from the beginning it never altered; and the points
wherein some among us vary, are not the articles of salvation (wherein alone
the reason of unity does consist) but some difficult places, the ignorance
whereof remoueth not the unity of faith: all which I have 7. nu. 2. ^ nu. 7.
and inde. 12 nu. 2. and inde. Digress. 8. and 10.
already handled in that which goes before, and therefore refer my self to
the places if any more be to be said to this matter. And whereas he thinks we
should admit one head or chief rule, to whom we should submit all our faith,
that a head being ordained, the occasion of schism might be taken away: herein
he talks absurdly. For first we acknowledge one head and chief ruler, such
as he mentions, even the Spirit of God, whose office it is to expound the
Scripture, and this exposition he utters in the Scripture it self, Digr.
11.12.
as I have showed. Next, if we would also according to his fancy, betake our
selves to the external authority of some man or company of men, relying upon
them in matters of faith and exposition, yet this would not please him neither,
unless the Pope were he: that you may see the vain importunity of the
Jesuit. Thirdly, when such a head as himself means, admitting it also to be
the Pope, were agreed upon, and all power to expound the Scripture put into his
hands, yet still the same difficulties would remain that he obiecteth against
us. First, that his determination, though never so plainly published, would not
satisfy such as are contentious: See Dig^. 24.
for in the Church of Rome, notwithstanding the Popes supremacy, there are
contentions. Next, that whatsoever he determined, if it were the truth, he must
fetch it and show it out of the Scripture. And so still we have as competent a
judge for the maintenance of unity, as the Jesuit can name any; and when he
has trauerst ground, and fetched a compass how he can to avoid this
judgment, yet the violence of the truth, and his own experience shall tumble
him headlong into it again.

3 The phrase borrowed out of Ierom, vt capite constituto, etc. means not the
Pope, or any man else that should be judge of the Scripture, but the Pastors
and Bishops ordained in every Church for preaching and government, which we
have and use according to Ieroms meaning, in a course more godly and profitable
then that which the Church of Rome usurps.

. 35. Contrary, the Roman Church is always one, and uniform in faith, never
varying, or holding any dogmaticall points contrary to that which in former
times from the beginning it did hold: all the learned men thereof, though
sometimes differing in matters not defined by the Church, yet in matters of
faith all conspire in one.

The Answer.
1 That which the Jesuit now begins to avouch concerning the unity of his
Roman Church, is all untrue, as I will sufficiently show in the three next
Digressions, and shall have occasion further to manifest Digress.
when I come to handle the note of Universality. This is the truth, and all
that can be said for it, Isid. Pelus. ep. 408 lib. 3.
which Pelusiota notes in all heretics, that the name of peace is indeed
every where, but the thing it self no where: and as Aug. epist 162 contra
pertin. Donatist.
it was among the Donatists, They sacrifice in schism and dissension, and
greet the world with the name of peace, whom they drive from the peace of their
salvation. This their unity is of seven sorts, Illyric. de sect Whitak.
controu. 2. de eccle. q. 5. c. 8.
as some learned men among us have sent them word, and we think our iarres
(such as they be) are better then it.

2 The first is the unity of darkness, in that they are provident to
maintain outward peace, lest their kingdom should come to naught: Mat. 12.16.
such an unity there is in hell; and one Bear (they say) will lie with
another, Petr. Martyr. decad. l. 3. c. 5.
and the very Cannibals use not to eat them of their own country. The second
is a heathenish unity, when men for their credit will not seem contentious:
as it is very certain they see innumerable abuses in their Church and
doctrine, and yet may be content to agree in all, lest the world should despise
them. The third is brutish unity, when their people consent, because they are
beastly ignorant, and know not their own^ abominations: so Staphyl. apol. part.
1.
the Colliar said, he was of the same belief the Church is, and yet he knew
neither the Churches nor h^s own belief. The fourth is Judas his unity, who
kept company with the other Apostles because he gained by it; as many cleave
to the Roman Church and agree therei^, because it enricheth them, and now and
then as a sanctuary freeth them from the danger of their sensuality. The fifth
is tyrannical unity, when men by fear are constrained to agree: the Popes
Consistory and Spanish Inquisition prevail more with their people then the
conscience of religion, as would soon appear if they were taken away. The
sixth is Herod's unity; for as he and Pilate, which were secretly foes, yet
agreed together to crucify Christ: so these men consent in one against the
truth, and conspire together, more to suppress us, then to establish any
sincerity among themselves. The last is the unity of Judge. 15.4.
Sampsons foxes, which were tied together by the tails, but all their heads
were loose, and every one looked a sundry way: so these men stick together by
the tails in their religion, all embracing one conceit of Popery, but in the
maintenance and exposition of the same, looking and thinking as many ways as
there be heads among them; only the Pope and his government they all
profess, because it is their vantage, and in him all their tails meet
together. This is the unity of the Jesuits Church, and the true genealogy
thereof, which we are content to acknowledge unto them.

Digression. 22. Obiecting the behavior of the Papists toward the divine
Scriptures, thereby to prove their varying from that which in former times the
Primitive Church of Rome believed.
3 But whereas he says, the Roman Church has not swarued from any point
which formerly it held, this is untrue; because it is declined from the
doctrine of the Scriptures, which the old Roman Church (till Antichrist brake
into it) held inuiolably: and for proof hereof I will not now stand to compare
the present Roman faith with the Scriptures, but only touch certain
practices of the Papists about the Scriptures, which are evident signs and
clear demonstrations of that I say. And first their canonizing, now after
1500. years, of the vulgar Latin against the Hebrew and Greek originals: for
Sess. 4.
the Trent Council charge all men to use it as the authentical text in all
their readings, disputations, sermons, and expositions; and that they do not
reject it under any pretense whatsoever. Yea Galatin. de Arcun. l. 1. c. 8. Leo
Castrens. apologet. lib. 2. and others.
the learned men among them accuse the Hebrew and Greek of corruptions
manifold; and their general opinion thereof may be discovered by the Bishop of
^oledoes conceit, F. Simen. bibl. Complut. in prolog.
who putting forth the Bible in diverse languages, and therein printing his
Latin in the midst between the Hebrew and Greek, says, he has placed them
as the two thieves on either side, but the Roman or Latin Church he has put
in the midst between them as Jesus Christ. And yet this their Latin so
swarmeth with monstrous corruptions, that Lin la. de opt. genesis interp. l. 3.
ca. 4. Reg. bibl. tom 6. in var. lect. lat. bibl. edit. vulg.
themselves complain of it as well as we; and Molina in 1. Tho. page 399.
Andrad. defens. Trid. lib. 4. Alph. Mendoz. controu. theol. q. 7 page 514.
diverse of them justify with us against their fellows the Hebrew and Greek;
and some that mislike it, yet confess Posseuin. bibl. select. l. 2. c. 6.
Sixth. Sen. bibl. sanct. l 8. page 318. b.
the errors supposed to be therein, are not of such weight as that they touch
the perfection of the Scripture in things pertaining to faith and good manners.
Now it is unlikely they would strive thus about an edition against all
antiquity and probability, but that they see some evidence in the originals,
which by their Latin they hope they can avoid.

4 Next, See Digr. 1.9.
they complain against the Scriptures, that they contain not all things
needful to salvation, but the best part of true religion is made known to us
by unwritten tradition, which if you take away, many points of the faith will
reele and totter: which they might never say for shame, if they were not
declined from the Scripture, and had not devised this shift of tradition to
fly unto when the Scripture is pressed against them.

5 Thirdly See Digr. 2. and 3.
they forbid the people to read the Scripture, and will not have it translated
into the mother tongue: which is a sign they mistrust their faith, and doubt
lest the people by reading should find it departed from the Scripture.

6 Fourthly See Digr. 16.
they make the Pope judge over the sense of the Scripture, Council. Trid. sess.
4.
forbidding all other senses then such as agree with the Church of Rome: and
that which is prodigious, they blush not to say, Cusan. ep. 2.3.7.
The Scripture is fitted to the time, and variably understood, the sense
thereof being one while this, and again another while that, according as it
pleases the Church to change her judgment: See Digr. 16.
meaning also by the Church nothing but the Pope. They would never make
themselves ridiculous by such incredible assertions, had not their apostasy
from the word of God made them desperate.

7 Fifthly their mouths are full of bitter and blasphemous speeches against the
Scripture, which is a sign they find it contrary to their humor, and therefore
hate it. Pigh. Hier. l. 1. c. 2. and contro. 3. de eccl.
One of them says, The Gospels were written not to rule our faith, but to be
ruled by it. Censur. Colo^. page 112. Pigh. contro. 3.
Others call the Scripture a nose of wax, that may be writhed this way or that
way. Sometime they term it Peers. de tradit praefat.
Dead ink, and Pigh. contro. 3
a dumb judge. Sometime they say, Bell. de verbo Dei. l. 4. c. 4.
it is not necessary: and that Durae. resp. page 148.
God gave not it to his people, but Pastors and Doctors. Sometime Eck. enchir.
c. 1. Caes. Baron. ann. 53 nu. 11.
they say, it receives all the authority it has from the Church and from
tradition, without which it were of no credit. Sometime, Eck. vbi supra
We must live more according to the authority of the Church, then after the
Scripture. Sometime, Eck. vbi supra
Christ never commanded his Apostles to write any scripture. Sometime they
receive the Popes Decretals as the Scripture it self, reuerencing them so
far, that therefore they break out into blasphemy against the Scripture,
Princip. in cursum. Bibl. See d. 9. in canonicis.
says Cameracensis. Sometime they deny the text it self, pretending it is
not Scripture, as L. aduer. noua dogmat. Caiet. page 1 and inde.
Catharinus testifies of Cardinal Caietane, that he denied the last chapter of
Marks Gospel, some parcels of Saint Luke, the Epistle to the Hebrews, the
Epistle of James, the second Epistle of Peter, the second and third of John,
and the Epistle of Jude. This man was of great reckoning among the^, no man of
more: they say of him, Sixth. Sen. bibl. l. 4. in Tho. Vius.
he was an incomparable divine, and the learned of all his age, Andrad.
defe^s. Trid. l. 2.
who by his study did much enlarge divinity; which is to be noted, that men
may see a trick of the Papists, first to commend their learned men, and fill
their people with a good opinion of them, and then to send abroad their books
full of such stuff as this, that may slide into the minds of men; yet so, that
when it is objected against them, they may answer as they ordinarily do, it was
but the writers private opinion, and so think to escape from the shame of it,
though still at home and secretly they love it.

8 Now I demand and require the most resolved Papist that is, to answer
directly from what beginning this grudge against the Scriptures, and devotion
to their Churches soueraignetie proceeds? whether they be not inwardly
guilty of some revolt from the doctrine thereof, which causes them under hand
(as they may) to work their discredit and crush their authority?

Digression. 23. Wherein by five examples it is showed that the modern Church
of Rome is varied in points of faith from that which it believed formerly, and
since the time it began to be the seat of Antichrist.
9 I do not say it has altered every thing which in former times it held, it
being sufficient for the disproofe of the Jesuits assertion, if it have
altered some; and those also esteemed among themselves dogmaticall points of
faith, or belonging thereunto: and this alteration to have bin not from the
truth only which the Primitive Rome embraced, but even from those articles
which Rome declining into heresy, either in the beginning or process of this
declination, professed, that so she may appear to have varied from her own
self.

10 The first example shall be in the Popes supremacy: for the Councels of
Sess. 4. and 5.
Constance and Sess. 2. and 18.
Basil decreed, that a general Council was of greater authority then the
Pope, and that he ought to be subject thereunto; and Cusan. concord. l. 2. c.
20. and 34. Panorm. de elect. c. Significasti. Pet. de Alliaco. Gerson. Almain.
Abulensi^. quos refert Bellarm. de Council. l. 2. c. 14.
many learned Papists believed this to be true: yet since that time this point
is altered, and the Councels of Council. Later sub Leon. ses. 11.
Lateran and Trent have set down the contrary, and now the Church is bound to
follow that determination.

11 The second example shall be in the Sacrament: for Geo. Cassand def. lib. de
offic. pij viri.
at the first the people received the cup as well as the bread for the space of
a thousand years; and afterward, Lib. de eccle. obseruat. c. 19.
says Micrologus, The Roman order commands the wine also to be consecrated,
that the people may fully communicate: and this was approved for good by Tho.
in 1. Cor. 11. lect. 5. Claud. de Saints. repet. 10. c. 4. Alb. de offic.
missae. c. 5.
many learned Papists: yet in time the Council of Constance Sess. 13.
forbad it, and then the Papists began to change their minds, and afterward the
Council of Basil Bohemis concessit came facultatem (test Aen. Sylu. in hist.
Bohe^. c. 52) Bell. de Euchar. l. 4 c. 26.
released the decree of Constance, and Sess. 21. c. 2.
the Council of Trent again revoked the release made at Basil, and forbad the
cup, as they had done at Constance.

12 The third example shall be likewise in the Sacrament: for Sco. 4. d. 10, and
11. Biel. lect. 41. in canon.
Transubstantiation is acknowledged to be but lately brought in, and first made
a matter of faith by Innocent the third in the Lateran Council within these
400. years, Scot. vbi supr. Biel. ibid.
before which time no man was bound to believe it, but all men were left to
their own will, to do as they would: whereas now it is counted heresy to
deny it, though Pet. de Alliac. 4. q. 6. art. 2. Dur. 4. d. 11. q 1.
many learned Papists themselves misdoubt it: of all which matter I shall
entreat more fully in the 49. Digression.

13 The fourth example shall be in the worship of Images: for at the first the
Church admitted no image at all, neither painted nor graven, In Cateches.
says Erasmus, no not the Image of Christ himself, to be set up in Churches:
and this appears to be true by the testimony of Epiph. ep. ad Joan. Council.
Elib. c. 36. Cle^. Alexand. protrept page 14. Graec.
the ancient themselves: next, when they began to be used, yet the Church of
Rome forbad the worship of them, as appears by Ep. 109. lib. 7.
the epistle of Gregory to Serenus: and De invent. l. 6 c. 13.
Polydore a Papist confesses, All the Fathers condemned the worship of Images
for fear of idolatry. Afterward, the second Nicene council brought in the
worship also, Act. 7.
decreeing notwithstanding that no image should be adored with Latria, divine
honor: but at the last Part. 3. q. 25. art. 3 4.
Thomas of Aquin, Ses. 25.
and the Trent Council, Fr. Suar tvm. 1 disp. 54 sect. 4. Vazqu. de adorat. l.
2. c. 4.
expounded so by the Jesuits, taught that divine honor also should be given to
them. Here we see three alterations in one point, the bringing of Images in,
the reuerencing them with civil honor, the adoring them with divine worship.

14 The fifth example shall be in the article of justification. For Thomas Lect.
4. in Gal. 3.
writes, that no works, either ceremonial or moral, are the cause why any
man is just before God. For works are not the cause that man is just, but the
execution and manifestation of his justice: because no man is justified with
God by his work, but by the habit of faith infused. This doctrine of Thomas is
proved to have been the faith of the Roman Church in his time, by this, that
he was made a Saint therein, and was, as Studiosus impendio pontificum Fr.
Vict. rel. 1. de potest. Eccl. p. 41.
they say of him, exceedingly devoted to the Pope, yea Henriquez sum moral.
proaem.
the fifth Doctor of the Latin Church, and the light of all the world, who
brought all Theology into a brief sum, etc. Yet Ses. 6.
the Council of Trent is varied from this, decreeing that man's own inherent
justice is the formal cause of his justification, and that we are not
justified by faith: since which time the learned men of that Church have left
Thomas in the point.

15 Many other examples may be given of their inconstancy; and no doubt they
could be content to alter much more, if the fear of losing their credit with
men did not restrain them, as their own confessions now and then unawares
breaking out from them, give probability: We acknowledge freely ( Biblioth
sanct l. 8. page 365.
says Sixtus Senensis) that there are many faults in our Latin edition of the
Bible, which yet the Church has left therein, lest the faithful, whose ears
have always from their infancy been inured thereunto, should now be offended
with the novelty of an exact correction. And concerning the Communion under
one kind, Fr. Ouand. 4. d. 9. prop. 6.
one of them says, that All things duly considered, it were better to grant
the cup then to deny it. And touching the adoration of Images with divine
worship, Bell. de Imag. li. 2. c. 22. S^ar. to. 1. disp. 54. sect. 4.
the learned among them, that even themselves hold it, yet think it not fit
to be uttered in common talk or sermons before the people, but rather the
contrary, that they ought not so to be worshipped. And whereas, to take away
the odiousnes of this opinion that yields the honor of God to an Image,
Cathar lib. de Imagine. ador. concl. 6. and 7. Peers. de tradit. part. 3.
some would have them worshipped with a worship inferior to that which is
given to the first Samplar, and Holk in Sap. lect. 157. Durand. 3. d. 9. q. 2.
Picus Mirand. apol. q. 3.
some would have no worship at all given to them, but only men should use them
to stir themselves up to the worship of the Samplar by kneeling before them:
this is misliked by othersome, Vazq. de adorat. l. 2. nu. 415.
who think it could be propounded to the people with small fruit, yea it were
foolishness to speak it. So that we see the learned in the Church of Rome can
hold nothing so absolute, but some of their fellows vary from it; and what is
propounded therein as matter to believe and practice, is misliked among
themselves; the most being ready to receive alteration in some points or
other, whenever occasion should bring it in.

Digression. 24. Touching the contentions among the learned of the Church of
Rome: and how the Papists live not in that unity that is pretended.
16 They which know Rome and Papistry, are sufficiently satisfied in this
matter: only some ignorant persons, whom the cunning handling of such as this
Jesuit is, has got into their possession, will believe no discord to be among
them. But were we all so blind that we could see none of this contention, yet
their noise and outcries in schools, Councels, pulpits, and consistories, one
against another, would make us hear it: the clamors of the conte^ders
resou^ding in our ears no less then the noise of two armies when they join
battle: or as the old philosophers, of whom Lucian. in Timon.
one says merrily, that with the noise of their disputations, they so filled
the ears of Jupiter and made him deaf, that he could not hear their prayers.
In whose room, Schol. in Lud. Senec. de morte Claud.. Facilius inter Philoso.
says Rhenanus, himself a Papist, have succeeded, a Gods name, Scotus,
Aquinas, Egidius Romanus, and others, whose contentions are no less then that
which was among the Philosophers: that herein they may seem, above all things,
to resemble the old Academicks, Stoics, and Peripateticks. For first See
Auentin. anal. Boio. l. 6. page 407.
they have the families of the schoolmen, wherein every one professes his
particular sect-maister, Thomas, Scot, Occham, or Durand: where both masters
and scholars have spent their life and writings in nothing else but opposition
against each other, that it is truly spoken of them, THERE IS NOTHING DISPVTED
OR AFFIRMED BY ANY ONE OF THEM, WHICH IS NOT GAINSAID BY ANOTHER. Thus the
Dominican and Franciscan Friars spent, with their partakers, whole ages in
quarelling about the conception of the virgin Marie: and thus the modern
Doctors of this time contend about every thing depending in controversy
between them and us, having no certainty among themselves what they may say
against us: so far forth that I An offer made to the Papists for the trial of
the questions between us.
offer to make demo^stration (having done it partly already throughout this
treatise) against any that will deny it, That there is no one point denied or
affirmed against us, wherein they vary not among themselves; and if any Papist
will allege, or set down what he thinks is the truth in any question, or
exposition of Scripture, controuerted between us, I will name him again a
learned Papist, either old or new, that says the contrary: which is enough to
show they have no unity.

17 This may also be confirmed by their writing one against another: His
sermons printed with the book of his answer to the qq. of the Armenians.
Armachanus against the Friars, Marsilius and Occham against the Popes
supremacy, the Jesuits and Secular priests of late among us, one against
another. Catharinus against Caietan, of whom Loc. l. 2. c. 11.
Canus again gives this censure; He was a little too busy in carping at
others, and marked not that himself, while he reprehended Caietan did many
times, and fowlly err. This Caietan though he were Reuerendiss. Thomae de Vio
Caie. S. To. Eccl. Card. Theol. doctoris absolu tissimi. The title set before
his comments upon Tho.
reputed the most absolute and profound Doctor of his time, As appears by his
opusc. ad diuersorum quaesita.
and much sought unto for resolution of difficult questions: yet afterward
Andrad. defens. Trid. l. 2.
they suspected him to have been a Lutheran, Sua^ to. 3. d. 60 s. 1. And this
appears by co^paring the new print of his commentaries upon Tho. with the old
edition printed at Venice. An. 1523.
and Pius Quintus caused a number of things to be put out of his books in a
new impression, that a man may know they are not all of one opinion. So
Catharinus and Soto have written vehemently against each other: and there is
not one of the elder Papists, such as were Pighius, Gropper, Bayus, Peresius,
Cassander, Hosius, Almaine, and the rest, who in their time, some three or
four score years since, were the best pillars in the Church of Rome, and
taught the doctrine thereof as it was then held; but now the Jesuits scornfully
cast them off and confute them. Who knows not, De great. l. 1. c. 3.
says Bellarmine, that Pighius, in many points was miserably seduced by
reading Caluins books? And of Gropper and the other Divines of Collen he De
iustif. l. 3. cap. 3.
says, Their books have need of the Churches censure: in the same manner do
they that are yet living deal one by another. For nothing is more common in
the books of Stapleton, Bellarmine, Gregory of Valentia, Suarez, Vasquez,
Molina, Baronius, and other modern writers, then to confute one another
opinion, and to determine in the questions depending as variably as ever did
the schoolmen.

18 And if any think I wrong them by reporting these things untruly of them, I
demand why have they razed and purged so many of their books which were their
own Doctors? why have they put out that which they writ, and put in what they
writ not, and so printed their books new over, that now you cannot find, in
the new print, those things which themselves printed in the old? Thus they have
served Caietan, Gratian with his gloss, Ferus, Polydore, Ludouicus Vines, See
index lib. prohib and the indices expurg. of all sorts. Iun. Hispan. Louan. and
Posseuin. apparat. sacer. tomis 2.
and whom not, if he had written never so little against the stream of the
present time? The Divines of the holy inquisition, Biblio. l. 2. c. 8.
says Posseuinus, a busy meddler in all men's writings, have commanded
certain things to be razed out of Andreas Mazius his comments which sauoured
of heresy. And of Iansenius his Harmony upon the Gospels, he Lib. 2. c. 18.
says, Many things are in it not allowed by learned men, which with little ado
might be supplied or taken away. Therefore it is plain that among the learned
of that side, there is some opposition, or else they would never geld one
another books thus.

19 And it is no sufficient answer to say, The difference is not in dogmaticall
points of faith, but only in matters not defined by the Church: for it is in
all the points of their religion wherein they differ from us, and wherein
Papistry properly consists, the certain truth whereof is determined in the
Scriptures, and therefore it is against unity to disagree therein: whether the
Pope and his Councels determine of them or no. Besides, it is a point of
Atheism to say, Dico hactenus nihil esse in hac controuersia ab Ecclesia
definitu^, ideoque sententiam nostrum non esse de side ^ Fr. Suar. to. 2. d. 3.
l. 6.
they are not matters of faith unless the Church of Rome have defined the^;
Occham. tract. 2. part 2. c. 10 and inde. An^ot^ers.
for what God revealed in his word, and may be known thereby, binds us of it
own nature; and though the Church have power to propound matter of faith out
of the Scripture, and, for the ending of controversies, to give testimony with
the truth, yet has it no authority to change the nature of things, or to put
any more verity into them then was before. In which regard, the contentions of
our adversaries touch the faith, in that they strive about things determined by
the word of God, and agree in nothing wherein they dissent from us: for in the
same things wherein they differ from us, they also dissent one from another.
This I will show in some few examples, such and so many only, as the present
opportunity will permit, and is fit for this place.

20 First, they agree not about the Popes supremacy. For Ferus Sixth. Senens.
biblioth l. 6. annot. 72.
taught against his dominion and principality in temporal things, Comment. in
Mat. l. 3 in c. 16.
preaching that Christ gave him the keys, not of the kingdoms of the earth,
but of the kingdom of heaven: not any earthly power to give, take away, or
alienate kingdoms, but authority to bind and loose, etc. And Marsilius
Defens. pac. part. 2. c. 18.
says, That unjustly, yea besides and contrary to the demonstration of
Divinity and humanity, he ascribes to himself fullness of power over
Prince, community, or any singular person. And Durand De modo celeb council.
que^ refert Catolog test. idem Gerson. quem ita refert Fr. Victo relect. 4. de
pot Pap. and Council. page 138.
holds, the Supremacy of the Roman Church should be declared and
distinguished by the Ecclesiastical and secular laws, neither ought the Pope
to be called the Bishop of the universal Church, because Gregory has
forbidden it. And it is a common opinion, that a Council is above him. And
Almayn Qu. in Vesp. page 133.
says, It is not necessary we believe things determined by him. And Cusanus
Concord. l. 2. c. 12.
says, that through use and custom of his subjects obeying him, he has at
this day gotten a great deal beyond the ancient sacred Canons. Secondly,
touching prayer in an unknown tongue, Christ instruct. page 212.
Contarenus a Cardinal, says, The prayers that men understand not, want the
fruit which they should reap if they understood them; for they might both
specially intend their mind to God for the obtaining, even in special, of that
which with their mouth they beg; and also through the pious sense of their
prayer uttered, they should be more edified: they want therefore this fruit.
Thirdly, touching Latin Service, Thomas Aquine, and Cardinal Caietan, in 1.
Cor. 14
hold it is better for the edification of the Church to be in the vulgar
tongue. Fourthly, touching the power of Priesthood to remit sin, 4. d 18..
Non autem.
the Master of Sentences and Fr. Victor. relect. 1. de potes. Eccl. sect. 3.
others with him, hold that only God forgiueth sin, and the Priest binds
and loses, only by declaring them to be bound or loosed, himself working no
spiritual effect. Fifthly, touching shrift, De poenit d 5 in poenit. gloss.
Panot. ibid.
the Canon Lawyers say, it was not ordained by Christ, but taken up by an
institution of the Church: and Michael Bononiensis Expos. in Ps. 29.
says, It is not needful for our justification, or the pardon of our sin:
and Caietan 3. Tho. q. 80. art. 4.
holds, A man by contrition, without any confession, is made clean, and a
formal member of the Church. 6. Touching justification by our own
righteousness, Th Aquin In Gal. 3. lect. 4.
says, No works, either ceremonial, or moral, are the cause why any man is
just before God. For works are not the cause that man is just, but the
execution and manifestation of his righteousness: because no man is justified
with God by his works, but by the habit of faith infused. And again In Romans
3. lect. 4 and 1. Tim. 1 lect. 3.
he says, The Apostle shows justification to be wrought by faith only:
there is in the works of the Law no hope of justification, but by faith only.
Seventhly, touching the imputation of Christ's holiness for our justification,
and the apprehesion thereof by faith; Pighius Bell. de great. l. 1. c. 3. and de
iustific. l. 2 c. 1.
holds, that there is in us no inherent righteousness whereby we may be
justified: but Controu. Ratispon. contr. 2. page 47. edit. Paris. 1549.
that we are justified in Christ, not by our own, but by the righteousness of
God: and Christ interposing his justice between his Fathers judgment and our
injustice, so we present our selves boldly before Gods tribunal, not only
seeming, but also being just: and the reason why our righteousness is placed
in the obedience of Christ, is because we being incorporate into him, Nobis
illi incorporatis, acsi nostra esset, accepta ea fertu^, ita vt ea ipsa etiam
nos iusti habeantur.
it is imputed to us, and by the same we are accounted just. And the Divines of
Collen Antididagm. Colon. page 29. A book written by Gropper, of whom the def.
of the Cens. says, he was the rare man of our age. See his commondations in
Sur. comment. An. 1547. p. 424.
say, We are justified by faith as by the apprehending cause, such a faith as
without all doubting assures us of the pardon of our sins through Christ:
(whereof notwithstanding it behooves us to be assured by the testimony of the
holy Ghost through faith) and after the same manner we are justified of God by
a twofold justice, as it were by formal and essential causes: whereof the
first is the perfect justice of Christ, not as it is without us, abiding in
him, but as the same being apprehended by faith, is imputed to us. This
righteousness of Christ, thus imputed to us, is the principal cause of our
justification, whereon we must chiefly trust and stay our selves. Eighthly,
touching the certainty of a man's own salvation, Enchirid. Council. Colon. tit.
de iustif. c. no^ habes ergo.
the same Divines of Collen write thus: We confess the truth is, that to a
man's iustifi^ation it is required that he certainly believe, not only in
general, that they which truly repent have their sins forgiven by Christ,
but that his own self also has forgiveness, through Christ, by faith.
Innoc. Gentill exam Con. Trid.
The same was also preached openly by Marinarius a Friar, at the Trent
Council. Ninthly, touching merits, De iustif. l. 5. c. 7. idem Walden^. tom.
3. de Sacra c. 7.
Bellarmine says, In regard of the uncertainty of our own righteousness,
and because of the danger of vain glory, the safest way is to put our
confidence in the sole mercy and goodness of God. 10. Touching the sacrifice
of the Mass, Cornelius Mus, Sixth. Senen. b^blioth. sanct. lib 4.
a Bishop so famous for his learning, that he was a Preacher at twelve years
old, and all Italy ran after him, defended Fr. Sua. tom. 3. d. 74. s. 2.
that Christ, at his last supper offered no sacrifice at all. 11. Touching the
Apocrypha, it is clear Lyra Hugo. Ca^et. Sigonius and others.
that many deny them to be canonical Scripture. 12. Touching the communion
under one kind, Ouandus 4. d 9. Pro. 6.
says, It were better to allow the cup to the people then to deny it, and
less hurt would grow by yielding then by detaining it. 13. Touching marriage,
4. d. 26 q 3. quem refert. Ioh. Capreol. ibid.
Durand held it was no sacrament, and Canus Loc. l. 8. c. 5.
says it is none, unless the Priest by solemn words of the Church do it. And
Tolet. Sum. cas. l. 7 c. 21.
that which some Papists call heresy, that the innocent party may lawfully
marry again after divorce, is affirmed by Comment. in 19. Mat.
Caietan, and Annot in Caiet. l. 5.
Catharinus. 14. Touching freewill, Ariminensis In 2 d. 26 p. 103.
denies that a man can will any thing that is good by nature, without the
special help of Gods grace: and Alphonsus Lib. 9. verbo. Libert.
holds our will is free from constraint, but not from necessity. 15. Touching
the descention of Christ into hell, In 3. d 22. q 3
Durand, and Apol. qu. 1.
Picus Mirandula deny it, affirming that he descended not properly and in
substance, but only by effect, in that, without any local motion, the power
of his death reached thither. By these few examples you may conjecture how well
they agree, that thus are divided about the principal articles of their faith,
and nothing can be so generally or certainly received, but some or other among
them deny it.

21 And to manifest this contention yet a little more, you shall see what a
number of opinions they have among the^, concerning any question which
themselves move in Divinity. For example, whereas in the Sacrament they think
the substance of bread and wine pass away, the forms, or accidents, only
remaining; the question is, in what subject, or substance these accidents
abide? Some say they remain separated without any subject: this is the opinion
of Occham, Biel, Cameracensis, Mayor, and the Nominals. Some that they obtain a
way whereby to exist of themselves: this is the opinion of Marsilius. Some that
they have their inherence in the quantity: this is the opinion of Thomas,
Bonauenture, Soto, Egidius, Suarez, and others. Some, that they abide with that
existence which they had in the bread and wine before consecration: this is the
opinion of Dominicus Bannes. Some, that the body of Christ sustaineth them by
his presence: this is the opinion of Palacio. Another question is, how the
accidents remaining after consecration have power to nourish? and whereof it is
that worms, or such like corruption, is engendered in the host? Some say, the
matter hereof is made of the air that is round about the forms: this is the
opinion of some mentioned by Thomas Aquine. Some, that the substance of bread
and wine returns again, and from it proceeds this nutrition or generation:
this is the opinion of Innocent, Bonauenture, and Alexander. Some, that of the
quantity remaining, the matter of the thing bred or nourished, is engendered,
whereinto the bread would have turned if it had remained: this is the opinon of
Aquine. Some, that the accidents receive possibility to be changed into this
matter: this is the opinion of Richard. Some, that when the accidents begin to
corrupt, there returns a substance again, not the former substance of bread,
but a new that was never before, whereof this nourishment and corruption
arises: this is the opinion of Scot, Durand, Biel and others. Some that these
generations, nourishments, and passions in the Sacrament are not at all, being
either mere apparitio^s, or things miraculously created of God: this was the
opinion of Algerus, Guitmundus, and Friar Walden. Such like are their questions
and opinions throughout al Divinity, too odious to mention. But what unity
call you this, first to cut Divinity into such shreds and questions, and then
to agree no better in determining?

Fidem minutis dissecant ambagibus,
vt quisque, lingua est nequior,
Soluunt ligantque, quaestionum vincula,
per Syllogismos plectiles.
Vae captiosis Sycophantarum strophis,
vae versipelli astutiae.
Nodos tenaces recta rumpit regula
infesta discertantibus.
Iccirco mundi stulta delegit Deus,
vt concidant Sophistica.
Prudent. Apotheos. hymn. in Infidel. 22 Or if all this be not sufficient to
convince them, you shall hear what some of themselves confess, and have
freely complained, even in their sermons, concerning this matter, that we may
know them to be of Ovid. metam. l. 3.
Cadmus kind, or Lucian. Con. uiu.
the Lapithes, beginning with merriments, and ending with frayes, that the
smart of their wounds given each other, makes them complain. For Cornelius
Mus, at the Council of Trent Orat. ad Trid Council. 3. Dominic. Aduent.
preached, Immortal God, how proudly are the ancient monuments of our faith
vexed with our contentious striving, whereby now the world is ouerturnd? How
peruersly is Gods word either set at naught, or ma^gled, or wrested, or
inuerted? How rashly do our selves, that we may seem to know something, sometime
set at naught the uniform consent of all ages? Is not that fervent love to the
common wealth, and toward one another, perished, whereby in times past all
Christians, o sweet and dear name, were called brethren? Preaching is turned
into contention. And Diez a Jesuit, Ph. Diez co^c. quadrupl. Rom 3. Dominic.
4. post Epiph. conc. 2. p. 804.
complains, What shall we say touching the contradictions which abide in the
ship of the Church it self? For truly though the tempests without so sharply
assault it, yet they themselves which are within, very often fall at contention
one with another. O holy Church of God, I see thee not only assailed by
heretics without, but within thy self also I behold even among Christians so
many contentions, strifes, and quarrels, that it is miserable to speak it, much
more to see it. Thus Esa. 19.2.
God sets the Egyptians together by the ears, that they may fight every man
against his brother, and against his friend; and gives them over as Judge. 7.22.
the enemies of his Church, to sheath their sword in their fellows sides: and
it cannot be otherwise, because, as In Eusebius. l. 5. c. 13. (...).
one said of the Manichees, having chosen opinions not hanging together, they
cannot but disagree among themselves. And when the language of such as would
build Babel was confounded, they understood not each other, but when one called
for mortar, his fellow would reach him a brick, and when he cried for stone,
fall to removing of ladders.

. 36. And no marvel, because they acknowledge one chief Pastor appointed over
them, to wit, the successor of S. Peter, to whose definitive sentence, in all
matters, they wholly submit themselves, knowing that to S. Peter and his
successors, Christ promised the Keys of the kingdom of heaven, and that he
would upon him, and his successors, as upon a sure rock, build his Church,
Mat. 16. Knowing also that Christ our Savior did especially pray for S. Peter,
Luc. 22, and his successors, that their faith should not fail, at least so
far as to teach the Church a false faith, to the intent that they might
always be able to confirm their brethren, if at any time they should fail
in their doctrine of faith: knowing lastly, that to S. Peter and his
successors, Christ gave most ample authority over his universal church, saying,
Pasce oues meas, Ioh. 21. that is to say, Rule or govern as chief Pastor
under me all my flock, all those that will be called my sheep, giving him
charge to feed them with the food of true doctrine of faith, and consequently
binding them to receive obediently this food at his hands; and consequently
again, tying himself so to assist him with the guiding of the holy Ghost,
that he and his successors should always propose unto them the food of true
faith, and never should teach them ex cathedra, any thing contrary to true
faith; since if he should not thus assist, but should permit them to teach the
Church errors in faith, his Church, which he has bound to hear his chief
Pastor in all points, might contrary to his promise, Mat. 16. Mat. 23. Luc.
10. err: nay by him should be bound to err; which without blasphemy cannot
be said. All Catholic learned men therefore knowing this, do acknowledge that
the definitive sentence of this chief Pastor must needs be always an
infallible and undoubted truth, and that therefore they may safely, yea they
must necessarily submit all their judgments and opinions, either in
interpreting the Scriptures, or otherwise, to the censure of this Apostolic
seat: which while they do, as they must always do, if they will be accounted
Catholic men, and will not either cast out themselves, or be cast out, by the
sentence of this chief shepherd or Pastor, out of the company of the
Catholic Church; how is it possible that one should dissent from another in
matters of faith, or at least obstinately, as heretics do, err in any point
of faith?

The Answer.
1 The Jesuit having immediately before propounded the unity of his Roman
Church, affirming that therein only the unity of faith and concord of the
learned is to be found, now proceeds to prove it by showing the means which
they have for the preventing of discord, which he thinks so all-sufficient,
that it were impossible there should be any dissension among them. The sum of
that which he says, is briefly this: They which acknowledge one chief Pastor,
to wit, the Pope, to whose definitive sentence in all matters they submit
themselves, cannot possibly dissent.

But all Catholics acknowledge this chief Pastor, and submit themselves to
his definitive sentence.

Therefore how is it possible they should dissent?

The second proposition he assumeth as granted, though indeed it be untrue, as
I will show: the first he proves thus: They cannot dissent who submit
themselves to him that has authority and infallibility of judgment.

But the Pope has this authority and infallibility.

Therefore they which submit themselves to the Pope, cannot dissent.

The second proposition he confirms thus: We know, that to S. Peter and his
successors Christ promised the keys; and said, upon them as upon a rock, he
would build his Church: praying for them that their faith should not fail, and
bidding them strengthen their brethren, and feed his sheep; which imports
this authority in ruling, and infallibilit it in judging.

But the Pope is S. Peter's successor.

The Pope therefore has this authority and infallibility.

This being the sum of his discourse, I answer first to that which he
assumeth so confidently, that all Catholic men submit themselves to the Popes
definitions, acknowledging the same to be of infallible truth. For whatsoever
his authority and judgment be, yet the Catholics do not so uniformly as the
Jesuit pretends, submit their opinions to him, but contrariwise when
occasion is offered, they utterly refuse both him and his definitions: and this
is so true, that he which will deny it, must be reputed ignorant of all sense
and experience, the which manifestly show, that not only the Christian
Catholics of the Primitive Church, but the Popish Catholics of the Romish
Church this day themselves, have rejected his determinations, and held opinion
against him.

Digression. 25. Wherein it is showed, that in the Primitive Church the Popes
determination was not thought an infallible truth, neither did the Christians
for the maintenance of unity submit themselves thereunto.
2 For many Catholic Bishops in those days dissenting from the Bishop of
Rome, and refusing his decrees, were not thought therefore to break any unity
in the Church. For Aeneas Syluius, who was himself a Pope about seven score
years since, Epist. 301.
writes, that before the Council of Nice, every man lived to himself, and
small respect was had to the Church of Rome. Sozom. l. 3. c. 8.
The Bishops of the East withstood Julius in the cause of Athanasius, and
charged him that he had done against the laws of the Church. Theod l. 5. c.
23. Sozom l. 7. c. 11.
Flauianus the Patriark of Antioch, about his succeeding Meletius in that sea,
against Paulinus, resisted four Popes one after another, when they would have
had him give room to Paulinus. Epi. ad Vrsac. and Valent. and Germin. apud
Baron. annal. to. 3. ann. 357. nu. 44.
Liberius who was Pope in the year 360. confessed, that Athanasius was
separated from the communion of the Church of Rome. Yea Baron. ibid. nu. 43.
and 46.
the Papists themselves acknowledge this Liberius condemned Athanasius, and
entered communion with the Arrians: which shows against all exception, that in
those days the godly Christians did not think either that the Pope was the
head of unity, or that all were of the true Church that held communion with
him: for then the Arrians had been good Catholics, and Athanasius, with all
that took part with him, had been heretics; which no man dares say. About
the year 450. Act. 16.
the Council of Chalcedon, wherein were 630. Bishops, withstood Leo then Pope
of Rome, in the question of his supremacy. Concerning which matter Concor.
Cathol. l. 2. c. 20. page 748.
Cusanus a Cardinal bears witness, It is manifest (says he) that Pope Leo
would not in certain points receive the constitutions of the Chalcedon
Council (specially that the Church of Constantinople should go before the
Church of Alexandria) but always gainsaid them, as some other Popes did after
him, and yet the decree of the Council always prevailed. Which experience
proves, that in those times the Bishops over all the world would as occasion
served, refuse the Popes judgment, and yet they were counted good Catholics
for all that. So likewise in the year 418. Cap. 105.
the sixth Council of Carthage having in it 217. Bishops, resisted three Popes
one after another, decreeing things contrary to the authority of the Church of
Rome, as Contare. sum. Council. magis illustr. page 263.
the Papists themselves expound the Council, whereof Cusanus Vbi supra.
writes thus: The Council of Affricke withstood Celestin, in that he would do
against the Council of Nice, and Celestin replied not that he might do it, but
alleged for himself the Council, though corrupted. Which opposition made
against the Pope is so apparent, that many Papists indeed labor to excuse it,
but none deny it: and Sic vndique Carthagine^ses patres constringuntur, vt
elabi nullo modo possint: quis iam ferat crassissimae igno^antiae illam vocem
in tot and tantis patribus* vbi illa Augustini and reliquorum prudentia? Alan.
Cope. dial. page 76. 77.
the despitefull speeches of some Papists against S. Austine and the Bishops,
bewray that they discover the same resistance made by the Council against the
Pope, that I mention.

3 Again, in the year 167. Eusebius. hist. l. 5. c. 23. and inde. Niceph. l. 4.
c. 37. and inde.
there arose a contention in the Church about the keeping of Easter, whereby
the Bishops of the East and West were divided: in which contention the Popes
definitive sentence was not received, but refused, without any offense against
the unity of the Church. For first, Polycarpe, coming to Anicetus that was
Bishop of Rome in his time, would not yield to him; neither could Anicetus
persuade Polycarpe to lay by his manner of observation, Eusebius. li. 5. c. 26.
says the story, and yet both sides retained unity. About thirty years
after, the question was renewed, Cap. 25.
and Victor the Bishop of Rome being earnest against the Eastern Bishops,
excommunicated them. But this (says Eusebius) pleased them not, for they wrote
unto him, reproving him sharply and bitterly: as namely Polycrates the bishop
of Ephesus, and Irenaeus the bishop of Lions, here in the West. These had many
on their side that stood against the Bishop of Rome; and that which afterward
took up the controversy, was not his authority, but the Council of Nice.
Now it is very probable, that if these Bishops had thought the subjection
mentioned by the Jesuit, to the Bishop of Rome, were necessarily required to
the essence of unity, they would have yielded; whereas by their resistance it
is plain they thought themselves bound to his determination no more then he
might think himself bound to theirs.

4 About the year 258. there arose a question, whether they whom heretics
had baptized, if they returned to the Catholic Church, should be baptized
again? Here no doubt the Popes judgment was to be followed, if it were true
that the authority and certainty of judgment were his, and all true
Catholics should yield unto him. But mark what fell out: Eusebius l. 7. c. 5.
Cypr. ep. 74. ad Pomp. August. de vnic. bapt. c. 14.
Stephen the Bishop of Rome forbad rebaptization, and thought them worthy
excommunication that used it: but Cyprian the Bishop of Carthage and a Martyr
of the Church, withstood him, and would never accept his decree. With him took
part Firmilianus the Metropolitan of Caesarea, confuting the decree that
Stephen had made, whom Apud Cypr. ep. 75.
in a certain epistle he thus reproves: What can be more base or vain then
to hold contention with so many Bishops throughout the world? breaking peace
with every one through diverse kinds of discord, sometime with the Eastern
people, sometime with you of the South, not suffering the Bishops sent from
them so much as to come to his speech, but forbidding the brethren to give them
room and lodging. Is this to hold the unity of the spirit in the bond of
peace, to cut himself from the unity of love, and in all things to make
himself strange unto his brethren, yea and through the fury of contention to
rebel against faith and Sacrament? See how this man, Menolog. Graec. in
Octobr. 28.
whom the Church so honored that they put his name into the Calendar, takes up
the Pope, and sets at naught his definitive sentence. With these took part
also a Council. Carth. apud Cyprian.
Council of 87. Bishops, yea many great Synodes, Eusebius. l. 7. c. 5.
says Dionysius Alexandrinus, and whole countries, who yet were not therefore
reputed to live out of the unity of the Church. And Dionysius himself, the
Patriark of Alexandria, consented herein with Cyprian and the Synods of Affrik,
as Ierom De Script. eccle. in Dionysio
testifies. Here the^ we see the Pope at one time resisted by 3.
Metropolitans, many Councels, and by the most Bishops in Affricke, Cappadocia,
Egypt, Cilicia, Galatia, and other countries; and yet the Jesuit will needs
persuade that all Catholic men have acknowledged one chief Pastor the Pope,
and yielded themselves evermore to his censure: when these examples show the
contrary, and make it more then plain, that till now of late, subjection to
the Romish Church was never esteemed appertaining to the essence of unity, nor
put into the definition thereof.

Digression. 26. Showing that the Papists themselves do not so constantly and
uniformly submit themselves to the Popes judgment, nor believe his infallible
authority as is pretended.
5 Indeed the Jesuit reports it of the Church of Rome this day, that all the
learned men and people thereof submit their opinions and judgment in all
things to the Pope; and this is generally boasted among them, and objected as a
matter fully proving their unity: but they only say it, for we know the
contrary, A memorable example hereof is the modern conclusions published by
the Venetians against the present Pope Pa^lus Quintus and his supremacy.
and discover daily as much headiness among them against their Popes and
Councels, as ever was in any government. Mark else their own words: It were a
great matter indeed, says De certitud. gratiae, assert. 13.
Catharinus an Archbishop among them, and in very truth too hard a case, to
bind the understanding of the wise, with every answer of the Popes that may be
produced: for the holy Ghost does not always and in every word assist them. And
Q. in Vesper. page 133. printed at the end of his Morals. in 8^.
Almaine a great Doctor in their schools, It is not necessary that men
believe things determined by the Pope, although the contrary be not publicly
to be taught. And Bellarmine, though unadvisedly possible, yet says plainly,
touching Cyprians withstanding of Pope Stephen, that De To. Pont. l. 4 c. 7.
after the Popes definition, yet it was free to think otherwise: yea he
holds, that De To. Pont. l. 2. c. 29. arg. 7.
as it is lawful to resist the Pope assaulting our body, so may we resist him
when he inuadeth our soul, or troubles the commonweal, and much more if he
practice the destruction of the Church: in this case I say, it is lawful to
resist him by not doing what he commands, and hindering that his will be not
executed. Caietan De authorit. Pap. and Council. c. 26.
holds, that in case of heresy he may be deposed, Cap. 27. ad 2.
and when he rendeth the Church in sunder, he may be resisted to his face. And
Franciscus Victoria Relect. 4. de potest. Pap. and Council. page 133
says, If a Council declare a thing to be matter of faith or belonging to
divine right, the Pope herein cannot declare otherwise, or change any thing,
specially if such a matter pertain to faith or the manners of the universal
Church. See how these men, all resolved Papists, and the learned of that
sort, yet assume it as out of question, that the Popes judgment is not always
of undoubted truth, but he may err, yea be an heretic, and make havoc of
the Church, and therefore may be resisted. And in very deed the conceit of his
infallible judgment being the beginning and foundation of his authority, it
cannot be denied but they which call the former in question, must needs doubt
of the later.

6 And let the most resolute Papist that is, but think seriously of this
point, and answer how it is possible they should so willingly obey his decrees,
and yield their opinions to his judgment, when it is a ruled case among them
all, that the Pope may err, yea as De sign. eccl. to. 2. l. 18. c. 6.
Bozius affirms, be an heretic, writing, teaching, and preaching heresy?
For will they obey him in error and scandal? or do they think his decree can
alter the nature of that which is false, and make it true, that they might with
security of conscience entertain it? They dare not say so. Franciscus
Victoria Relect. 4. de potest. Pap. and Council.
disputes at large against his dispensations, affirming that a Council should
do well to bridle him, and that they which use such immoderate dispensations as
he gives, are not thereby secured in conscience, that they may use them
lawfully: No doubt they which are so jealous of him in things concerning
manners, believing also he may write and preach heresy, and Bellar. de ^o.
Pont. lib 4 c. 1. says, this is the opinion of G^rson, Almaine, Alphonsus, and
Pope Adrian.
define it too, unless he use a general Council, Can. loc. l 6. c. 8. page
206.
which Council also may err in the reasons and causes whereon he builds the
definition, Bellar. vbi supra.
and by proceeding rashly without mature deliberation, finally Stapl. princip.
doctr. l. 8. c. 14.
the Pope in every thing, but the conclusion it self, may miss it: they (I
say) which thus far forth misdoubt him, are not in their conscience free from
a further conceit, if they might freely utter it; and that is, that both Pope
and Councels may err, and in such cases their decrees bind no man. And out of
question this was the common opinion of all Papists, till of late: for Canus
Loc. lib. 6. c. 1. these are Gerson, Almain, Adria^, Waldensis, Gratian,
Turrecremaia, and Erasmus^ unto whom many more may be added.
reports of seven renowned Papists, that in their time they believed the
Apostolic seat might err even then when it judged of a question of faith:
the which is far from the new vpstart opinion of Greg. de Val. Anal. fidei.
some modern Jesuits, that the Pope may define things of faith either with a
Council or without, whether he take heed or not.

7 And I do verily think that they which most pretend the Popes sovereignty,
and are loudest in magnifying his authority, are not in good earnest: for
there are examples where they repine at his definitions, and she outright from
them. The Pope In the Councels of Trent and Florence.
decreed the Apocrypha to be canonical Scripture, yet since that decree, De
script. and dogm eccl. l 1. c. vlt.
Driedo, Comment, in Sever. Sulpit.
Sigonius, and Sixtus Senensis have called them in question and rejected them.
And mark the words of S xtus concerning the book of Hester: The Council
(says Biblioth l 1. page 4^.
he) meant the true and natural parts of the books, not ragged and patched
additions, such as these last chapters of Hester are, much like a theme made by
a school lad. See what a pleasant distinction he has at hand to save himself
from the Popes command, and yet be counted a Catholic of the union too. And
Loc. l. 2 c. 9.
Canus says, notwithstanding the same decree, that he dares not call it
heresy to reject the book of Baruch out of the Canon: though they will make a
poor Protestant believe it is heresy to refuse any thing decreed by a
general Council. Yea Bellar. de verbo Dei. l. 1. c. 7. and 10.
they boast that these Apocryphaes were decreed to be Scripture long ago by the
ancient Councels of Carthage and Laodicea: yet Lyra, Carthusianus, Hugo
Cardinalis, Post hanc Sacri Co^cilij definitionem tam expressam, non desunt qui
in Ecclesia, varijs pratex^ibus hanc editione^ vulgarem plurimis in locis
corrigere veimt. Dom. Bann. in 1. part. Tho. q 1 art. 8 p. 67. que^ vide vsque
ad p. 73. Loc. l. 11. c. 5.
Tur^ecremata, Caietan, and others, in their time would not acknowledge them.
So likewise the Pope in the Trent Council Sess. 4. decret. 2.
decreed, that the Latin vulgar translation of the Bible should be holden
Authenticke, and in all public readings, disputations, preachings, and
expositions, used as such; and that no man should dare or presume, under what
pretense soever, to reject it. Yet what is more common with all Papists, then
upon every occasion to start from it? extreme necessity indeed compelling the^
thereunto. Hereof take an example in Canus: Thus, page 311.
says he, our Latin edition has it, where those three words, ipse est
Artaxerxe^, are no part of the Scripture, but, by I know not what expositor,
they were peradventure foisted into the margent, and thence, by the errors of
writers, clapped into our text. Another example take in Galatinus: Here De Arcan.
l. 10. c. 7 See another example touching, Marc. 13.32. in B. Medin in. 3. part.
Tho. qu. 10. art. 2. ad 1.
says he, our edition has two great corruptions: the Hebrew verity has it
far otherwise, and more agreeable to the truth of our faith. This corruption
I cannot but ascribe to the author of our edition. Again, the Pope, Sess. 11.
in the last Council of Lateran, is decreed to be above a Council: yet since
that time Contra. haer. l. 1 c. 6.
Alphonsus a Castro has writ the contrary. The Council of Trent Sess. 6.
teaches justification by inherent righteousness, condemning those that
believe the imputation of Christ's righteousness: yet Controu. 2.
Pighius submits not himself to this decree, but holds against it the
very belief of the Protestants: Sess 21 can. 3. Bellar. de Eucha. l. 4. c.
23.. Sit vltima.
The Pope in the Council of Trent forbids the communion under both kinds,
and teaches, that as much grace is given to the receiver in one kind, as in
both: but Breuiloqu. in 4. d. 9 pro. 6. and 7
Ouandus and Gasp Cassal. lib. de coen. l. 2. c. 25.
some others, think for all that, It were better, all things considered, to
minister in both kinds, wherein more grace is given the receiver, the^ in one.
Again, Sess. 6.
the Pope decreed against the certainty of grace and salvation, defining that
no man should believe these things of himself: yet Catharinus, even against
the Trent Council, Asser. and tract. de certitud. great.
defended the contrary, and wrote, Quilibet de sua gratia formidare and timere
potest. Conc. Trid. Sess. 6. cap. 9.
that a man may have the certainty of faith touching these things. And when the
authority of Trent was objected against him, he eluded it by diverse shifts and
flight distinctions, and constrained Dom. a Soto. apolog. c. 2. and Andr. Vega.
defens. Trid. l. 9. c. 46.
them that dealt against him, in effect, to gainsay the Council as much as
himself, saying, A just man may be as certain that he stands in grace, as
any man can be that Rome is, yea certain without all doubting and fear: the
which is expressly against h the words of the Pope: but this is an ordinary
practice of the Papists, first, in good terms to make profession of all
obedience to any thing the Pope shall decree, and the^ when the decree runs
against their mind, with subtle expositions, and witty distinctions so to
hammer it, that it shall dance after their pipe whatsoever the tune be, as we
see in Senensis and Catharinus. The which may be done the easilier and with
more show of obedience, because these decrees, specially the Trent Council,
are penned so cunningly and For Apollo his oracles always equiuocated. Ambigua
semper, and incerta obliquaque era^t ipsius responsa. Iul. Lessign. de cognom.
Deorum. lib 1. c. 4. (...). Scol Aristoph. in Pluto.
oraclewise, that they will reasonably bear as many expositions as there shall
be opinions; and then, albeit the contention be never so great, yet who dares
say the contenders submit not themselves to their chief Pastor, when every
side shall expound his decree for his own opinion?

8 Moreover if it were true, that all Papists acknowledge the Pope to be their
judge, and of such infallible truth in all his teaching, that they may and must
boldly yield all their judgments and wits to his, let them satisfy the world
how it fell out that they have deprived so many Popes, yea for heresy: for it
should seem in this case that their Church took upon her authority to direct
him when he was out of the way: and when there have been diverse Popes at once,
Nullus enim fuit illo tempopore (Concilij Constantie^sis) certus Papa. Caiet.
tract. de author Pap. and Con c. 27. ad 6.
what time it was uncertain who was Pope; what submission could there be to
this chief Pastor? Or if it be true, that a Council is above the Pope, which
Cusan. concord. l. 2. c. 20. and 34. Panorm. de elect. c. significasti. Facta
capitulorum and vniuersitatum, quia superiore^ habent, non sunt aequanda gestis
conciliorum, vbi solum Deus est superior, and a quibus non appellatur Aen.
Sylu. ep. 25.
the most and the ancientest Papists believe, and Council. Constant. Sess. 4.
and 5. Council. Basil. Sess. 2.
two general Councels decreed, how can it be said that Papists holding this
opinion depend upon the Pope, as the Jesuit pretends?

9 Thus we see how the Papists esteem their Popes at home; hey think it a
perilous matter to be tied so straightly to him, they think it lawful to
resist him, they believe he may fall into heresy, yea preach it, and practice
the destruction of the Church, they believe a Council is above him, and may
restrain or depose him, they believe he and his Councels may err in every
part and circumstance of his definitions, but the conclusion it self; they
have notoriously maintained opinions against his decrees, they have deposed
him, and been in that straight, that they knew not who was Pope: whereupon I
say, it is a most intolerable thing to endure the hearing of these loud brags
that they make abroad concerning their obedience to him, and so willing
acceptance of his judgment for the ending of controversies: and I am firmly
persuaded, by the experience of their writings and behavior, that whatsoever
they pretend abroad among the ignorant, they have a most base opinion both of
his person and judgment. For Guicciardine, a man very near him, Hist l. 16.
writes, that the goodness Apostolic is then commended, when he exceeds
not al other men in wickedness: And Fr. Victoria, speaking of his practice in
dispensing, Relect. 4. de potest. Pap. and Council. Pro. 12.
says: Give me Clements, Lines, and Siluesters (that is Popes as good as were
Clemens, Linus, and Syluester) and I will permit every thing to their judgment:
but, that I say no worse against these later Popes, certainly they are inferior
to those ancient Popes by many degrees.

10 But supposing all Papists, as the Jesuit speaks, do acknowledge one
chief Pastor over them, to whose definitions, in all matters, they submit
themselves; yet hence it follows not, that therefore they have the true
unity, and cannot dissent; for Fere semper seruata haec consuetudo, vt acta
priorum pontificum sequentes aut infringerent aut omnino tollerent. Plat. in
Steph. VI.
the Pope may be at controversy with himself, or possible his mind cannot be
known, as of a long time it was not when the Friars contended about the
conception of the virgin Marie, nor is not to this day, Suar tom. 2. disp. 3.
sect. 6.
the Church having defined nothing in this matter, and possible, Suar. vbi
prius refert.
as Caietan and Cano have observed, cannot, by reason the opinion that holds
her conception without sin, is in show godly, but indeed untrue and vain.
But that which is principally to be objected, the spirit of God has neither
given him such uprightness of judgment, that he can always define the truth,
nor put him into such authority that men necessarily are bound to obey him:
the which being true, then it will follow, that all such as rely most upon
him, shall either not consent at all, or consent in error, and a people may be
united to the Pope, and yet be without the true union of Christ's Church. Nilus
l. de primat Neceph. Greg. l. 10. hist. Romans c. vlt.
And assuredly the Greeks complain that this usurpation of the Pope to be
head of al Churches, and judge of all matters, has been the very fountain of
all our divisions.

11 Against this the Jesuit replyeth, that the Pope has infallibility and
authority of judgment both, given him by Christ, so that it were impossible
his people should dissent: and for confirmation hereof he alleges 3. texts of
Scripture, wherein he says, our Savior Christ spoke of Peter and his
successors, meaning the Pope, and gave them this power that he speaks of: and
so concludes, that by virtue of Christ's own ordinance, the Pope is the means
to uphold the unity of the Church, whose determinations the Papists receiving,
cannot disagree. Whereunto I will answer distinctly three things. First, that in
all the words alleged, our Savior meant the rest of the Apostles as well as
Peter. Secondly, whomsoever he meant, yet the words spoken contain no such
thing in them as the Jesuit gathers. Thirdly, supposing they were meant of
Peter, and contained the primacie, yet the Pope is not Peter's successor, and so
consequently has no part in them: the which parts of my answer being
justified, there will no doubt remain, but the unity of the Romish Church is
proclaimed and set forth upon uncertain grounds.

12 First I say, that all these words of Christ, I will give unto thee the
keys: and upon this rock I will build my Church. Mat. 16.18. I have prayed for
thee that thy faith fail not. Luc. 22.32. and feed my sheep. Ioh. 21.15. were
not meant or intended to Peter alone, but to the rest of the disciples with
him. Of the first place in Mat. 16. it is clear. For Bell. de To. pont. l. 1.
c. 10.. Ac vt a primo. c. 11. Catholici autem. c. 13.. At no^ and Catholici.
the rock and the keys signify the same thing, so that to who^ Christ
promised the one, he promised the other: but the keys and all the power thereof
was promised and given to al alike, as is proved: for it is agreed between us,
Bell. vbi sup. c. 12.. Thomas Caietanus
that the whole power of the keys is contained in binding and loosing,
Alexand. 4. q. 79. p. 316. 317. Mag. 4. d. 18. Dura. 4. d. 18 q. 1. Ouand
breuilo qu. in 4. d. 18 pro 16. Sylu. verbo clauis. nu. 1. Rosell. verbo
clauis. nu. 1.
and defined thereby; so that to be the rock, or to have the keys, supposes
or includes no more then to have authority to bind and loose: which
authority is expressly given in the 18. of Math. verse 18. to all the Apostles,
and the self same words, touching binding and loosing, are there used that
Christ used before to Peter: yea Iansen. concord. c. 72. Rhe^. upon Mat. 18.18
the Papists themselves confess, that all the fathers of the Church think,
that as before to Peter, so in these words to the other Apostles and their
successors, our Lord gave the power of Binding and loosing. Again, in Ioh
20.21. our Savior after his resurrection, breathed upon his disciples, and
said to them all, As my Father sent me, so I send you, receive the holy Ghost;
whose sins ye remit, they are remitted; and whose sins ye retain, they are
retained: where the ceremony of breathing upon them seems to give them all a
like portion and power of the spirit; and his words, As my Father sent me, so I
send you, to imply, that he sent all with equal authority, no man's
jurisdiction flowing from Peter to him, but every man's coming immediately and
alike from Christ that sent them. But the last words, whose sins ye remit or
retain, they are remitted and retained, signify the same that he had said
before of binding and loosing, and so consequently give them all the power
included in the rock or keys: for Ema. Sa. and Iansen. upon Io. 20.21. Bella.
de To. Pont. l. 1. c. 12.. Dices si non.
in this place is given what Mat. 18, was promised. Thus all the power of the
rock and keys is included in binding, loosing, remitting and retaining: and
authority to do this, is given to all the Apostles as much as to Peter, and
yet the Jesuit, by means of the rock and keys, thinks Peter is made
chief above them all. Let him and his partakers untie this knot, and say
directly what they think at the argument. Peter had no more power given him,
Planus sensus illorum verborum, tibi dabo claues, and quodcunque solueris, etc.
iste est, vt primo promittatur authoritas seu potestas, de signata: per claues;
deinde and actiones sieve officiu^ explicetur per illa vocabula Soluere and
Ligare, ita vt omnino sit idem Soluere and aperire, ligare and claudere. Bell.
vbi supra.. verum haec.
then that which is contained in the keys, mentioned Mat. 16. But all the
Apostles had this power given them: for binding and loosing, remitting and
retaining, include the whole function of the keys, therefore Peter had no more
then the rest of the Apostles. And if they answer, that Peter's jurisdiction
over them was given, John 20. when Christ bad him feed his sheep; let the
zealousest Papist that is, lay aside wrangling, and say bona fide, why is the
text of Matthew 16. touching the keys and rock, used then to prove his
Primacy, if it give him nothing beyond his fellows? and why go they not
directly to work, urging the 20. of John, and letting the rock and keys
alone as making nothing for them?

13 This that I have answered is also the judgment of ancient Doctors, in that
with one consent they all expound the rock, whereupon Christ said he would
build his Church, August de verb. Dom. Ser. 13. and in Joan. tract. 120. Hilar
de trin. l. 2. and 6. Ambr comment. in Ephesians 2. v. 20. Chrysostom. hom. 55. in Mat.
Basil. homil. de poenit. Emissen. hom. in natal. Pet. Andot^ers
either of Christ himself, or of the faith and confession that Peter held:
whereupon it follows, that they could not think those words gave Peter any
more then the rest. De unit. Eccl.
Cyprian says, Verily the rest of the Apostles were the same that Peter was,
endued with equal fellowship both of honor and authority, but the beginning
proceeds from unity, that the Church might be showed to be one. Aduers. Iouin
l. 1.
Hierome says, All the Apostles received the keys of the kingdom of heaven,
and the strength of the Church was stablished equally upon them all. In Math.
16.
Theophylact says, Although it was said to Peter only, I will give the keys
to thee; yet were they also granted all the Apostles: When? Where he said whose
sins ye remit, they are remitted. In Math. 16.
Anselm says, It is to be noted, that this power was not given alone to Peter:
but as Peter answered one for all so in Peter be gave this power to all. My
purpose is not to heap much together out of the fathers, but by a few places
to show the reader how and in what manner they used to speak concerning this
matter. There are diverse great Papists also who confess the same, whose names
I have set down in Digress. 30. nu. 41.
another place.

14 The next place of Luc. 22. I have prayed for thee that thy faith fail not,
therefore when thou art converted, strengthen thy brethren, I confess was spoken
to Peter, in regard of the sin whereinto, more weak then all his brethren, he
fell shortly after: yet notwithstanding it contains nothing which our Savior
meant not to the rest. For as he prayed for him, so he prayed for all, John
17.11.15.17.20. and the contents of his prayer was, that their faith should not
fail: and the very office of Apostleship, whereto he called them, bound them
to strengthen their brethren, as Gal. 2.11.
Paul did Peter by reproving him, and made them Gal. 2.9.
pillars and Ephesians. 2.20. Apoc. 21.14.
foundations, whereupon the world being built should recover strength; in which
regard our Savior tells them they must be Mat. 5.13.14.
the salt and light of the earth, Mat. 28.19.
and bids them go teach all nations, which is as much as he says to Peter
in this place, touching the strengthening of his brethren. Besides, Plerique
patres recte intelligu^t hanc Christi oratione^ etiam pertinere ad totam
Ecclesiam. Iansen. concord. c. 133.
the Papists cannot deny, but this prayer of Christ belongs to all the
Church, which it could not, if it had been meant for the making of Peter Prince
and head of his brethren, whose prerogatives, I hope, they use not so liberally
to impart to the whole Church: and indeed the ancient writers use this text
indifferently, to prove the perseverance of the elect in faith; which were no
good kind of reasoning, if Christ therein had meant none but Peter.

15 The third text, Feed my sheep, John 21. belongs likewise to all the
Apostles. For though in that place those words be directed to Peter, yet
therein our Savior did but apply a general commandment to him, and put him in
mind of a duty that was common to all. For what? were the rest of the Apostles
Peter's sheep, and not rather the people of the world to who^ he was to preach,
according to the ordinary opposition that is between Pastors and their
flocks? Or does feeding suppose any more then preaching the Gospel to all
nations, which every Apostle was bidden do? And though it should, yet Christ
says to all, As my Father sent me, so I send you: and it is like, the Father
sent his Son to feed the sheep, without any subjection to another. Ier.
3.15. Act. 20.28. 1. Pet. 5.1.
And Pastors inferior to the Apostles are authorized to feed the flock whereof
the holy Ghost has made them overseers. They are all Pastors, De Unit. Eccl.
says Cyprian, but the flock is one, which with one consent is fed by all the
Apostles. Moreover the fathers out of this text prove that every Pastor in the
Church ought to be diligent in feeding the flock committed to him, which is an
argument that they thought these words were meant to more then Peter. Saint
Austin Tract. 121. in Ioh.
says, They which feed the sheep of Christ with this mind, to have them
their own and not Christ's, are convinced thereby that they love not Christ:
and against them this speech of Christ (if thou love me feed my sheep) is to
be urged. Chrysostom De Sacerd. lib. 2.
says, Our Savior at that time intended to teach both Peter and us, how dear
his Church is to him, that so, by this means, we also with all our heart might
take upon us the cure and charge of the same Church. And the practice of Saint
Paul reproving Peter at Antioch, shows evidently that every Apostle had
equal authority to feed, not only the flock, but one another; else Paul
might not have rebuked him, as he did. And though our adversaries stick
reasonable well to this text, and are loath to give the Apostles any share
therein with Peter; yet are they not all so resolute but that some of them
confess flatly as much as I answer; Cusanus Concord. l. 2. c. 13.
says, If Christ said to Peter, Feed my sheep, yet it is manifest that
feeding is by word and example: So also, according to Saint Austin, in his
exposition upon that place, the same commandment was given to all, there where
it is said, Go into all the world and preach, etc. there is found nothing said
to Peter that imports any power. Therefore we say truly, that all the
Apostles, in power, were equal with Peter: the like Defens. pacis. part. 2. c.
28.
says Marsilius, That Christ committing the office of feeding to Peter, spoke
to him in the person of all the Apostles: which manner of speaking he testifies
to have used, in that he says, what I say to one I say to all. And albeit the
rest will not grant thus much, yet it follows evidently and unanswerably of
that which they do grant. For Baro. an. 34. n. 201. Rhem. Mat. 16.19.
they yield that no more is given Peter here then was promised in Mat 16. where
the keys are mentioned; but I have showed, and no Papist can deny, that all
the Apostles were equal in the keys, and that those words concerned Peter no
more then the other disciples. So that it must needs be wilful obstinacy, to
say still that these words, feed my sheep, were meant to none but Peter. And
let this suffice for the first issue between us.

16 The next part of my answer is, that to whom soever any of the texts
alleged were directed, yet none of them intends that which the Jesuit
assumeth: for he says, that to S. Peter and his successors Christ promised the
keys of the kingdom of heaven, and that he would upon him and his successors,
as upon a sure rock, build his Church: meaning thereby the common conceit of
the Papists, that Christ in these words gave Saint Peter and the Pope the
fullness of power and government over the universal Church: wherein the
Jesuit wilfully misreporteth the text. For there is no mention there of Pope
or successor, but only of Peter and the Apostles: it was his fancy to Rome
that put in the Pope. And how he is deceived herein, you may perceive by this,
that Caiet. tract. de instit. Pontific. c. 13. Ad huius rei euidentiam.
the Papists acknowledge the succession of the Pope had not his beginning from
Christ and the Gospel, but from the death of Peter at Rome; which being true,
then whatsoever he said to Peter, yet he gave nothing to the Pope: for if he
had, his institution into the Papacy had bin by the Gospel and the fact of
Christ, which the Papists dare not say. Again, Christ said not to Peter, that
upon him he would build his Church, but thou art Peter, and upon this rocks I
will build it: meaning as Sermon 13. de verbis Domini.
Saint Augustine expounds, upon this rock which thou have confessed, upon
this rock which thou have known (saying, thou art Christ the son of the
living God) will I build my Church: I will build thee upon me, not me upon
thee. For the rock was Christ, whereupon Peter himself was built, since no man
can lay any other foundation then that which is laid already, which is Jesus
Christ. And De trinit. l. 4. page 106.
Cyril says, I think that by the rock Christ meant nothing else but the
immovable faith of his disciple, wherein the Church is founded and stayed from
falling. And Hilarie, De trinit. l. 2.
The building of the Church is upon this rock of confession: this faith is the
foundation of the Church, by reason of this faith hell gates prevail not
against her. Hom. in not. S. Petri. going under the name of Eus^bius Emisenu^*
but Baronius says, the author of those homilies is Eucherius Lugdunensis.
annal. tom. 6. ann. 441. nu. 5.
Eucherius says, Let us see what this is, I will build my Church upon this
rock: upon this rock which even now thou laydst to be the foundation of
faith, upon this rock which even now thou taughtest, saying, Thou art Christ
the son of the living God; upon this rock, and upon this faith will I build
my Church: whereunto the Apostle agreeing says, Other foundation can no man
lay, but that which is laid, Jesus Christ; as if he should say, there is no
other foundation but that rock which Peter laid for a foundation, when he
said, thou art Christ. Yea many learned Papists also refuse this new exposition
of the Jesuits, and well saw the words could not bear it, and therefore after
the example of the fathers, expound the rock of Christ and his faith. In Mat.
16.
Lyra, of whom L. 4. Biblioth. sanct.
they say, that for expounding the Scriptures he had not his match; and In Mat.
16.
the interlineary Gloss, and Ibid.
Burgensis do all thus. Concord. l. 2. c. 18. 13.
Cusanus follows Saint Austins exposition set down immediately before. In d.
19 ita Dom. ^t super hanc petram.
The Gloss upon Gratian says, He cannot think that by the rock our Lord
pointed at any other thing then the words which Peter answered him, when he
said, Thou art Christ the son of the living God; because upon that article of
faith the Church is built: therefore God founded the Church upon himself.
Marsilius Defens. pacis. part. 2. ca. 28.
says, Upon this rock, that is upon Christ, in whom thou beleeuest: for Peter
as long as he lived might err and sin by the liberty of his will; and such
a one could not be the foundation of the Church. Petrus de Alliaco, Chancellor
of Paris, and a Cardinal, Reco^mendat sacr^^ Scripturae page 269.
writes thus: We must enquire what is the rock whereupon the Church of Christ
was to be built: notwithstanding it seems not, that by the rock Peter should
be understood, but Christ: for who may establish the firmitie of the Church in
Peter's infirmity? whereof ask the maid that kept the door, and let her
answer, at whose speech (as Gregory says) while he feared death, he denied
the life. Therefore seeing Peter had wauered, and his Vicar is not firmly
grounded, Cumque iam discrepent de summo Petri sacerdotio Pontifices, and
litige^t de summo Pontificio sacerdotes.
seeing the Popes differ about Peter's high priesthood, and the Priests agree
not about the Popes high bishopric, who dares presume to say, that any man,
of what holiness or worthiness soever, whether Priest or high Bishop, whether
Peter, or Peter's Vicar, or any other but Christ himself, is the foundation of
the Christian Church. Christ therefore upon himself, as upon a most steadie
foundation, established his Church against the Church of the devil; and upon
this firm rock he steadily confirmed Peter himself, saying of him the
sentence premised, Upon this rock will I build.

17 Thus it appears, that our Savior saying, Upon this rock I will build my
Church, meant thereby no more but that he would ground it upon the true faith
of Christ, that whosoever would desire to be joined to this Church, should
believe the same things that Peter then professed, or else perish for ever. And
the words are thus to be expounded: Thou art Peter, thy name is Stone, and thou
have professed a profession like thy name, answering the nature of that whereby
thou art called, and therefore thy name is stone or rock, and the profession
thou have made is like it; for thereupon I will build my Church, and they which
hold it shall never be moved. This is far from giving Peter and the Pope any
primacie, and yet this is all the fathers observed, and as much we see as the
discreeter sort of Papists have collected. And it is no matter though in the
language that Christ spoke, the same word be used for Peter and the Rock,
thus: Thou art Cephah, and upon this Cephah I will build: or if in the Greek
used by the Evangelist, (...) and (...), signify one thing, to wit, a rock or
stone; as if Christ should say, thou art rock, and upon this rock I will
build: for in the first place the word is used properly to signify Peter's
name, in the second appellatiuely to lay down the nature of his profession:
which the Papists might have observed from (...). Phauor. Lexic.
Phauorinus Camers their own Bishop, out of whose Lexicon they borrowed their
speculation concerning the synonymie of (...) and (...).

18 To the other part of the text concerning the keys, I answer, that neither
do they prove Saint Peter or the Pope to be chief Pastor, to whose definitive
sentence all the Church must be subject: but that he had the ministry of the
Gospel committed to him with the other Apostles: which ministry is signified
by the keys in this respect, because mankind through the fall of our first
parents, lay plunged in the miserable bondage of sin and Satan, utterly shut
out of heaven, until it pleased our merciful God to reveal the Gospel, by
preaching whereof the mind of man being enlightened, the fetters of spiritual
darkness begin to fall from him, and he rises into the knowledge of Gods
will, so that by believing in Christ he is set at liberty from the prison of
sin and condemnation, and the door of grace and life is opened to him. This
is done by the ministry of the Gospel, Esa. 49.9.
whose nature is to say to the prisoners, go forth, and to them that sit in
darkness, show your selves; and as Esa. 61.1.
a key to open the prison door to them that are bound, and to bring liberty to
captives: or if men love darkness better then light, then has God put Ioh.
15.22; 2. Cor. 2.16. Apoc. 11.6.
an effectual power into it, to shut up against them the kingdom of heaven,
and to strain them harder Pro. 5.22.
with the cords of their sins, that they might perish. This ministry being
executed partly by preaching and sacraments, partly by Church censures, is
called the keys, by reason of the likeness thereunto, and described by
binding and loosing in regard of the effect.

19 This exposition must needs be granted: first because it sufficiently
expresses the use and effect of keys, which is only to let in and out; or at
the least, that is the proper use thereof. Next Showed before nu. 12.
this is all that is meant by binding and loosing, and binding and loosing
contains whatsoever is signified by the keys. Thirdly, the Papists that most
stiffly defend the primacie, yet confess, that all the Apostles received the
keys equally with Peter. The promise of Christ concerning the keys,
appertained not only to Peter, but was transmitted to all the Apostles,
Council. Colo^. sub Adulph. an. 1549. Sextum medium.
says Adolfus the Archbishop of Colen, and his Council: Surius comment. an.
1547.
a man so addicted to the popish religion, and careful to restore it, that he
was thought meet to succeed Hermannus whom the Pope thrust out. Cusanus
Concord. li. 2. c. 13.
says, Nothing was spoken to Peter but that which was said to the rest: for as
it was said to Peter, whatsouer thou shall bind; so was it said to the rest,
whatsoever ye shall bind: and though it were said to Peter, Thou art Peter, and
upon this rock I will build; yet by the rock we understand Christ whom he
confessed. Thus they are driven to yield the keys to all the Apostles as well
as to Peter, and yet they think he alone had the primacie, which shows
clearly that the keys contain it not. Fourthly, they which expound the power
of the keys, to show what they contain, mention therein no more but as I have
answered. The Council of Colen under Hermannus, Bell. de poen. l. 1 c. 1.
penned by Gropper, Defens. of the Cens.
whom the Papists call the rare man of our age, proceeds thus: Enchir. council.
Colon. de sacr. confess.
But what keys Christ, when he departed hence, left the Apostles and their
successors in the Church, that is to be explicated. And truly this is plain,
that he committed to them his own keys and no other, even the keys of the
kingdom of heaven, as himself said to Peter, Whatsoever thou shall bind on
earth, shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever thou shall loose on earth, shall
be loosed in heaven. These keys the Fathers divided into the key of order, and
the key of jurisdiction. And again, each key into the key of knowledge and of
power. The key of order is the power of priestly ministry, which contains
power to preach the Gospel, consecrate the body of Christ, remit and retain
sins, and to minister the sacraments. The key of jurisdiction is power to
restrain the faulty: this is that power of excommunicating such as offend
openly, and absoluing them again. In which explanation of the power mentioned
in the keys, we see nothing touched but only the ministry of the word and
Sacraments, and the execution of discipline. But Marsilius Defens. part. 2 c. 6.
speaks more fully, that the authority of the keys, according to Saint
Austin and Hierom, is that iudiciarie power that stands in dispensing the
word, sacraments, and discipline, although the opinion and title of the
fullness of power, which the Bishop of Rome ascribes to himself, took his
beginning from these words, Whose sins ye remit, they are remitted, and
whatsoever you shall bind upon earth shall be bound in heaven.

20 The second text alleged is Luke 22.32. where Christ says to Peter, I have
praid for thee that thy faith fail not, and thou being converted, strengthen
thy brethren: which the Jesuit expounds as if our Savior had specially
prayed for S. Peter and the Pope, that their faith should not fail, at least
so far as to teach the Church a false faith, to the intent they might always
be able to confirm their brethren, if at any time they should fail in the
doctrine of faith: which all Catholic men knowing, do confess the Popes
definitive sentence to be always an infallible truth, and thereupon submit
themselves thereunto, and so live in unity. But this exposition is soon
confuted: for first here is no mention of the Pope, but of Peter only; whereby
it is plain, that no certainty can be concluded out of the words for any but
for the Apostles only: or if they reach to any besides Peter, then according
to the opinion of the most judicious Papists, the Church is it, and not the
Pope. So says Qu. Vesper. d. 3. art. 3. prob. 1. lit. G.
Cameracensis: That which in Scripture is promised to the whole, must not be
attributed to any part: but always to hold the true faith, and never to err
against it, is promised by Christ to the whole company of believers alone. It
is plain therefore that Christ promised Peter, his faith should not fail;
understanding it not of his personal faith, but of the general faith of Gods
Church committed to his regiment. And Friar Walden Doctr. fid. l. ^ c. 19.
says, Peter bare the type of the Church, not of the particular Roman Church,
but of the universal Church; not gathered together in a general Council, but
dispersed through the world from Christ to our times. Of the same mind are
Concord. l. ^. c. 11.
Cusanus and Defen. part. 2. c. 28.
Marsilius. So that in the judgment of four of the learned among our
adversaries, the purpose of Christ was not by this text to indow Peter or the
Pope, but the whole Catholic Church; and so accordingly, the right of
government and freedom from erring, should remain, not in the Pope, but in
the universal Church, clean contrary to that which the Jesuit here supposes.

21 Secondly, the direct and immediate purpose of Christ in these words, is to
forewarne Peter of the sin whereinto he fell afterward by denying him; and
the meaning is, that though Satan desired thereby to destroy him, yet he had
prayed that his faith might not by the temptation be utterly extinguished;
admonishing him, that as by his fall he would weaken his brethren the members
of the Church, so by the example of his true conversion he should strengthen
them again: understanding this faith, for which he prayed, not of Peter's
teaching or directing the Church in doctrine, but of the habit of faith abiding
in his heart, whereby he believed in Christ, and confessed his name: and
Confirmandi vocabulo authoritatem in docendo significari. says Greg. de Valen.
to. 3. page 197. e.
by strengthening his brethren, not that he should be supreme head over his
fellow Apostles, but that Esto a his poenitentiae exemplar ne desperent.
Theophyl. Infirmiores fiatres exemplo tuae poenitentiae comforta, ne de venia
despere^t. Gloss.
by the example of his repentance, and experience of Gods mercy to him in his
infirmity, he should encourage all people against temptation. This exposition
is proved to be true, because first there is no word in the text importing
either all infalliblenesse of faith, or any authority over the other Apostles.
See ( Comment. in Luc. 22.
says Caietan) how Christ bids Peter account the Apostles, not his
subjects, but his brethren: see how he puts him in office, not to rule over
them, but to confirm them in faith, hope and charity. Secondly, the words
going immediately before, forbid all absolute power of one over another: The
Kings of the nations bear rule, and exercise authority over them, but it
shall not be so among you. Thirdly, Bellarmine acknowledges Ex quibus
priuilegiis primsi fortasse non manauit ad posteros. De Romans Pont. l. 4. c. 3.
Alterum priuilegium. Quoad prima, non agit Petri successore^. Boz. de sign.
eccl. tom. 2. l. 18. c. vlt. page 594.
that to persist always in the faith without falling from it, is a prerogative
that possible is not derived from Peter to the Pope: which being so, it
follows that the Jesuits exposition is false, and no Papist can be certain
that by virtue of this text the Pope can teach no error, any more then he is
assored he cannot err himself: but it is clear he may err himself, and all
Papists yield it; therefore it is also uncertain whether he be enabled to
teach the Church so, that in teaching he cannot err, because the words of the
text are no plainer for the one then for the other. For as it says, strengthen
thy brethren, so it says also, thy faith shall not fail; yet the Popes faith
may fail, therefore he may also fail in strengthening his brethren, if this
faith and strengthening be understood as the Jesuit conceiteth.

22 The last place is Ioh. 21.17. where Christ bids Peter, Feed my sheep.
Out of which words the Jesuit concludes, that Christ gave him and the Pope
most ample authority over the universal Church, to rule it as chief Pastor
under him, tying himself so to assist him, that he should never teach any
thing e cathedra, contrary to the truth, and binding all the world to obey his
judgment. The which conclusions how violently they are wrested from the text,
let any man judge, Note.
and sure it is worth the Readers labor, and will recompense any pains he can
take herein, to make a stand, and but view whether the words be able to support
so mighty conclusions as are built upon them. For this is the only foundation
that the Papists have for the supremacy. And albeit in their disputations by
word and writing they pretend many texts beside, as the Jesuit in this
discourse does, yet you shall find when they come to canuasing, they always
retire to this as to their hold, and finding no other able to maintain them,
hither they run for exposition of all the rest, and here they insult; like
soldiers, which beaten out of the field, come blustering one upon another
neck for haste into their castle. But what is there here to prove the
primacie, which is holden to be Pontifici in persona b^ati Petri, terreni simul
and coelestis imperij iura Deus ipse commisit. Extrau. Ioh. 22. tit. 5. c. Si
frattum.
the fullness of power over all the kingdoms of heaven and earth? or as Greg.
Valent. tom. 3. page 184.
a Jesuit describes it, such a command as all faithful men in both courts,
internal and external, are bound to obey in all things touching manners, or
faith, or the worship of God?

23 For first I have showed but a little before, that whatsoever is commanded
in these words, (...). Basil. page ^27.
belongs to all the Apostles; and confirmed the same with the confession of
some learned Papists: whereupon it necessarily follows, that Peter hereby had
not the supremacy in question given him. Next, supposing our Savior had a
meaning to give Peter such a matter, yet what word is there that says as the
Jesuit does, he gave it his successor likewise? For Peter might have that
which his successor has not, as the gift of miracles for example. Yea I can
demonstrate against all exception, that although it were granted, Peter had
authority over all the Apostles, yet the Pope had not, because he is less
then an Apostle: and the case being put, Peter died an. 69. S. John an. 101.
Baron. ann. 69. nu. 1. and ann. 101. nu. 2
that Peter died 32. years before Saint John, let the resolutest Papist aline
say, whether it were likely that Linus or Clemens the Bishops of Rome should be
above S. John to rule or direct him? If he say they were, men are in danger to
fall into the chincough with laughing: if he say they were not, then the
supremacy fancied died with Peter, and Christ gave his successor none of it
when he said to Peter, Feed my sheep. Thirdly, the words themselves, Feed my
sheep, import no more but that he should be diligent in ouerseeing the flock of
Christ committed to the general care of him and his fellow Apostles, as is
proved by this, that the people to be taught are ordinarily called Cant 1.7.
I^h 10 16.
the fold, Ezech 34.2. Act 20 28.
the flock. Psalm. 77 20. Ioh. 10.11.
the sheep of Christ; and Ier. 3.15.
preaching to them is called feeding, and Ephesians. 4.11.
the preachers Pastors. The which words if they be racked to signify ruling,
as the Pope claims, with fullness of power, then others were made Popes as
well as Peter. For Act. 10.18. 1. Pet. 5.1. Ezech. 3 4. Ier. 3 15.
all pastors are commanded to feed the stock whereof the holy Ghost has made
them overseers, and they reproved that feed not. Feeding therefore signifies
no more but to preach the Gospel, and to give good example, as Cusanus
Concord. l 2. c. 13.
expounds it, and before him Defens. part. 2 c 28.
Marsilius, two learned Papists, who utterly disallow this exposition of the
Jesuits, and think this text proves not the Supremacy.

24 The last part of my answer is, that although it were granted the texts
alleged pertain to Peter alone, and contain the Primacy in question, yet can
the Pope reap no benefit thereby, because we deny him to be Saint Peter's
successor: the which point seeing the Jesuit has only assumed and not
proved, therefore neither will I touch it any further here, but refer my
self over to the 29. Digression, where the reader shall plainly see upon what
silly grounds the Popes succession is believed; the which notwithstanding is a
point of such consequence, that if it be not thoroughly proved, all Popery will
be void and without foundation at the first sight: in that all arguments made
for it, of what sort soever, are at the last resolved into the Popes
authority, and this authority is confessed to depend upon his succeeding
Peter, as upon the beginning and foundation thereof.

25 Thus we see the unity of Papists is avouched upon grounds merely false,
the Pope neither succeeding Peter, nor Peter being above the other Apostles in
infalliblenesse of faith, or power of government. All the Jesuits conclusions
therefore, that the Church has always submitted her self to the Popes
definitive sentence, that the Pope cannot err, that it is his office to direct
all good Catholics, that the Church should err, yea be bound to err, if he
might fall into error: I say these and the like conclusions scattered all over
his discourse, are vanity, for the disproofe whereof the event of things, and
experience of all ages is sufficient without any more ado; which give
plentiful testimony that he is neither free from error, not received as
supreme judge, nor admitted as the head of unity: but contrariwise in all ages
he has been detected of error, yea resisted, judged, condemned, and deposed
for heresy. The discourse whereof I put over to the Digressions following,
that the reader may have some light concerning this matter.

Digression 27. Showing that the Church Primitive acknowledged not the Popes
Primacy.
26 This I will demonstrate only by four experiences of those times. First,
that whereas there were four or five Patriarks, among who^, for the better
government, all the Churches of the world were divided: the other three were
made equal, by the Church-gouernment and practice of that time, with the
Patriarch of Rome, in all things touching jurisdiction; and he restrained
within certain bounds, beyond the which he might not go. And so others had
allowed the^ as ample authotie in their circuits, as he had in his. This
appears by the express decrees of six Councels, the first is the first
general Council of Nice holden, ann. 325. wherein were 318. Bishops. Can. 6.
The words are these, Let the ancient customs continue in force, that are in
Egypt, Lybia, and Pentapolis; that the Bishop of Alexandria have the
government of all these, for so much as the Bishop of Rome also has the like
custom: and so likewise throughout Antioch; and in the other Provinces let the
Churches have their prerogatives vpholden them. Where we see the Council
intending to confirm the preeminence of Alexandria, against the Arrians that
began to vex it, makes the Popes government in his Province Ex cius forma
quod Alexandrinae Ecclesiae tribuerit, particulariter sumpsit exemplum. Epist.
Nicol. ad Michael.
the form of that government which should be in the Province of Alexandria,
Which shows that the Popes government reached but to his own Province. For
had it stretched it self all over the world, then would it have been no form
for Alexandria, which was to abide in one Province and no more. Besides, the
Council saying the Bishop of Rome has the like custom, shows plainly he of
Al^xandria was to be equal with him, else it could not be the like. For there
is no Parilis mos est.
paritie between an universal Bishop and a provincial The second and third,
are the first general Councels, of Can. 2. and 3.
Constantinople ann. 381. of 150. Bishops, and of Cap 8. sentent. super petit.
Cyprio.
Ephesus ann. 431. of 200. Bishops: in both which the provinces of the world
are distinguished, and Patriarks restrained to their own circuits, and he of
Constantinople by name is made equal with the Pope in all Ecclesiastical
matters whatsoever. All the difference was, that he of Rome had the chief
honor, Consistebat hic honor in hoc, videlicet quod ad locum in sedendo primo
post Romans pontificem, and in, responsionibus h^be^et secundam voce^, and in
subscriptionibus Turrecrem. d. 22. Constantinopolita.
which consisted not in jurisdiction, but sitting in the first place, and such
like titles. The fourth is the Council of Chalcedon, an. 451, wherein were 630.
Bishops, the words whereof are these: Act. 16.
Following the decrees and rules of the holy fathers, and of those 150.
Bishops, assembled under Theodosius the elder of blessed memory, in the royal
city of Constantinople, and acknowledging the same, we also decree and ordain
the same things concerning the priueledges of the said Church of
Constantinople, which is new Rome. For our fathers gave the privileges to the
seat of elder Rome, because that city had the Empire: and the 150. Bishops,
moved with the same intent gave the same priueledges to the most sacred throne
of new Rome: thinking it reason the city which is honored with the Empire and
Senate, should also have equal privileges with elder Rome, and in
ecclesiastical matters be advanced alike with her, being the next unto her.
The fifth is another Council of Constantinople, ann. 686. where were 280.
Bishops: Sext. Syn. in Trull. Can. 36.
who renewed and confirmed the former decree of Chalcedon, repeating it in a
manner verbatim, as that had renewed and explaned the former Councels of Nice
and Constantinople. Whereby it expressly appears, that Constantinople had as
much authority in Church matters as Rome, and that Rome first obtained the
primacy of honor by reason it was the Imperial City, and this was the
meaning of the first Nicen and Constantinopolitan Councels: this the fathers
would not have said and done, if they had thought Christ himself had given the
Pope the Supremacy questioned. Whereupon Concord l. l. c. 13.
Cusanus thinks, that what of right belongs to him, was given him by the
Church: and Marsilius Defens. part. 2. c. 18.
writes, That he has no power over other Bishops and Churches, either by God,
or man's law, but such as was given him, either absolutely or for a time, by the
Nicen Council. The Sixth is the Council of Carthage, ann. 418. of 217.
Bishops. c. 92. and 105.
In this Council, when Sozimus the Bishop of Rome had claimed a right to
receive appeals from all parts of the world, and pretended a certain canon of
the Nicen Council that should give it him: the Bishops thereof, by the space
of four years, debated the matter, against him and Boniface, and Celestin his
successors, and having searched the original copyes of the Nicen Council
whereby the untruth of his claim was discovered, they wrote sharply to him
that he should not meddle with the people of their provinces, nor admit into
his fellowship, such as they had excommunicated; telling him that he had
nothing to do in their causes, either to bring them to Rome, or to send Legates
to hear them at home: for this were against the Nicen Council. The evidence
of this Council is such against the Supremacy, that no art of our adversaries
can avoid it, and therefore they are driven to use such shifts for the
answering thereof as it is pity to see, and I dare say, grief to themselves
to be forced to them.

27 The second experience to be observed is touching appeals: for the Church
did always constantly forbid the Bishops of Rome meddling with me^, or their
appeals to him, that were not of the Roman Patriarchy. This is clear by the
practice of the sixth Council of Carthage before mentioned, the fathers
whereof, among many other things, C. 105. Ep. conc. ad Celest
write thus to Celestine: The fathers of Nice did wisely see that all business
should be determined in the places where they began, and that the holy Ghost
wonted not to be wanting to assist the Priests of Christ both in seeing and
holding the right: specially seeing it was free for every man, if he misliked
the judgment of the arbitratours, to appeal to a Counsel either provincial
or general. Where this is to be marked, that by the Church-gouernment of that
time, a Council was the last and highest judge of all controversies arising.
And before this, when certain persons, being judged in Affricke, had fled to
the Pope for relief, mark what Cyprian Lib. 1 Ep. 3.
writes to him: Seeing it is rightly and justly decreed unto us al, that every
man's cause should be heard where the fault was committed, and every Pastor has
a portion of the flock committed to him, which he must govern as he will give
account of his deed to the Lord, it behooves truly such as are under our
government, not to run up and down, and, by their cunning rashness, to
break the concord of Bishops: but there to follow the cause where the accusers
and witnesses be: unless peradventure a few desperate and graceless persons
think the authority of the Bishops in Affricke, that have judged the^, to be
less. This which Cyprian says was afterward decreed in Councels both general
and prouincial, which could not have been, if the Pope had been supreme judge
of all the Church, and head of the unity thereof: nay Cyprian says, Oportet
vtique eos quibus prae sumus non circu^cursare, nec Episcoporum concordia^
cohaerentem sua temeritate col lidere.
The unity of Bishops is broken when men run from their own to the Bishop
of Rome. The eight general Council, holden at Constantinople has this Can.
26.
decree: The order of appealing shall be this, that he which thinks himself
wronged by his own Bishop, may appeal to his Metropolitan, who shall call the
matter before him. But if Bishops think they are wronged by their
Metropolitan, be it lawful for them to appeal to the Patriarch, who shall end
the strife; that in no case a Metropolitan have any power over his neighbor
Metropolitan, or a Bishop over his neighbor Bishop. The like was decreed long
before by the Council of Chalcedon, Cap. 9.
which expressly makes the Patriarch of Constantinople the last and highest
judge, under the Council, for all matters falling out in Greece And C 22.
the Council of Mileu^ excommunicateth all that would appeal to places out of
Affricke. Where then was the Popes supreme authority in these days, when the
Councels and discipline thus hemmed men in, that they should not come at him?
This some Papists see well enough and confess. Cusanus Concord. l. 2. c. 13.
says, The Pope has it not from the Church-rule, that he may hurt the
jurisdiction of other Bishops, because this were to disturb order. Therefore we
do not read that the ancient Popes ever put themselves into such matters: and
peradventure it would not have been suffered. For the Council of Affricke,
whereto S. Austin subscribed, allowed no appeal from the Synod to the Pope,
because it was not found allowed in the Church canons, but contrariwise the
Nicen Council decreed that a Synod should end every cause where it was begun.

28 The third experience is, that he had no authority over general Councels,
either of his own power to call them, or being called to be sole president, or
having decreed any thing, to judge, or rule, or countermand them: all which he
now uses, but then did none of the^. For first the power of assembling
Councels was in temporal magistrates: so L. 5. hist. pr^oem.
says Socrates, When once the Emperors beg^n to be Chrstians, from that time
forward the Church affairs depended upon the^, and the greatest Councels were
assembled, and so still are, at their appointment. And this appears to be
true by going through the particulars. For let all the ancient Councels be
read, and there is not one of them, but the very Acts and Titles thereof will
show the Prince called it: which is so true that Pighius a learned Papist Hier.
l 6. c. 1.
writes, The assembling of general Councels was the invention of Constantine.
The first general Council was that of Nice, Gelas. Cyzic. page 67. Eusebius. vit.
Constable. l. 3. c. 6. Theod. l. 1. c. 7. Sozom. l. 1. c. 17. Nicet. thesau. l. 5.
c. 5.
assembled by the authority of Constantine the great. The second was at
Constantinople, Sozo. l. 7. c. 7. Theod. l. 5. c. 7. Zon. to. 3. p. 30.
called by Theodosius the elder. The third was at Ephesus, Council. Ephesians. graec.
Euagr. l. 1. c. 3.
called by Theodosius the younger. The fourth was at Chalcedon, Council. Cale.
act 1. Zon. tom. 3. page 39.
called by Valentinian and Martian. The fifth was at Constantinople, Niceph. l.
17. c. 27.
called by Justinian. The sixth was again at Constantinople, Conc. genesis 6. Act.
1.
called by Constantinus Pogonatus. The seventh, as the Papists reckon it, was
at Nice, Zon. tom 3. p. 95. Sigon. de regn. Ital. l. 4.
called by the Empress Irene. The eight was again at Constantinople, Zon.
tom. 3. page 134. Sigon. ibid. l. 5.
called by Basilius Macedo. The Council of Sardica was Theod. l. 4. c. 4
called by Constantius: the Council of Syrmium, against Photinus, Socr. l. 2
c. 29. Sozo. l. 4. c. 6.
by Constantine the great. The Councils of Socr l 2 c. 36.
Millan, Socr. l. 2. c. 37
Ariminum, and Carol. de imag. Sigon de Reg. Ital. an 794.
Frankford, all assembled by the Emperors. More particulars may be given, but
these are enough: and Ep. 9.23.24.26
the earnest suite that Leo makes to the Emperor and Empress both, in his
time, for a Council to be holden in Italy, which yet he could not obtain,
makes it out of question, that al power of assembling councels was in the
Emperor. Yea the point is so clear, that Aen. Sylu. de Gest. conc. Bas. l. 1.
Cusan. conc. l. 2 c 2. Marsil. def. part. 2 c. 21.
many Papists deny it not: and Fr. Victo. relect. 4. p. 162.
some hold, that at this day in certain cases a general Council may be
called against the Popes mind, whether he will or no.

29 Next, he was president in no Council of a long time, and when he was, yet
others were presidents as well as he, the said office importing no such command
over the Council as now the Pope usurps; the which Duarenus a learned Papist
confesses De sacris eccl. benef. and minist. p. 39.
saying, The office was no more but to call the rest together, and to speak
unto them concerning the matters to be handled, as the speaker in the
Parliament calls the assembly, etc. but has no power over them; yea the
power of determining is in the court it self, which may also command him. Thus
was it in times past, says he, but now I know not how it comes to pass, that
the chiefest government over all Christians is given to him alone, that he
becomes free, after the manner of Emperors, from all Laws and Council
decrees. The which speech of this our adversary is to be noted, because the
Jesuit would make you believe, all Catholic men have evermore received him,
from Christ's own hands, as the supreme judge of all, and the refusing of his
will were the violating of the Churches unity. But that which I have said is
easily confirmed: for in the Nicen Council Hosius the Bishop of Corduba,
Macarius the Patriarch of Jerusalem, and Eustathius the Patriark of Antioch,
Athan. Ep. ad Solit. Nicet. the saur. l. 5. c. 6.
were presidents; if not the Emperor himself also with the^: for Gelas Cyzic.
Act. conc. Nic. c. 8 Socrat. l. 1. p. 174 gr.
the story says, That out of his chair he used speeches of exhortations to
the Bishops, persuading them to concord, and when many things were propounded
on both sides, and much controversy in the beginning arose, the Emperor heard
them all with patience, and leisurely received that they said, by course he
entertained the words of both sides, quietly reconciling them in their iarres,
and mildly speaking to every one: and as for the Pope, he only sent two
priests, to (...). Theodor. l. 1. c. 7.
assent to the things concluded, not to be Presidents in the Council, it being
folly to think that simple priests should be Presidents over Patriarks and
Bishops. In the second general Council holden at Constantinople, the case is
clear: for Bell. de conc. c. 19.
the Iesuite^ confess the Pope was there neither in person, nor by his
Legates, but Nectarius the Patriarch was President. In the first Council of
Ephesus, Conc. Ephesians. ^^^c Co^melin. Scrip^ ad. Th^od. and Valentin.
Cyril and Memnon were Presidents. Council. Calc. act. 1. Euagr. l. 1. c 10.
In the second, Dioscorus, put in by the Emperor. Council. Sard. Theod. l. 3.
c. 12
In the Sardican Council, Hosius the Bishop of Corduba, and Protogenes the
Bishop of Sardice. I would reckon up more particulars but that it is needless,
because the Presidentship was not a matter of power to rule the Council, or to
conclude matters after his own mind, though the Council were against him:
but, as I touched even now, out of Duarenus, of honor and order only, to have
the first place, to propose things, to gather voices, to give direction, to
publish the Councels definitive sentence: and therefore it concludes no
primacy for him that had it.

30 Thirdly, he was not reputed to be above Councels to overrule and check
them, as now he claims, but contrariwise they judged and commanded him, as
appears in the practice of the Council of Chalcedon against Leo, of Sinuessa
against Marcellinus, of the sixth seventh, and eight, general councels against
Honorius: whereof I shall speak more particularly Digress.
hereafter. And I assure my self, the most Papists believe this to be true,
because they defend that a Council is above the Pope: which they would never
do, but that they cannot deny, that so it was in ancient times. Cusanus
Concord. l. 2. c. 34.
says, A general Council of the Catholic Church, in all matters is of
highest power, even above the Pope himself. C. 20.
And it is manifest that Pope Leo, in certain points, would not receive the
constitutions of the Chalcedon Council, but always disclaimed them; and some
other Popes after him, and yet the decreee of the Council wa^ of force.
Panormitan De Elect. and electi. pot. c. Significasti.
says, In things touching faith, a Council is above the Pope, so that he
cannot dispose of things against the determination of a Council; hence it is
that a Council may condemn the Pope for heresy. For in things concerning
faith, the saying even of one private man is to be preferred before the Popes
judgment, if he have better reasons and authorities of the old and new
Testament. Victoria Relect. 4. de potest. Papae. prop 8.
says, that Caietan holds the Pope may lawfully disanull the decrees neither
of general nor provincial Councels, nor yet dispense against them but upon
good reason; and that the decrees of a Council bind the Pope in conscience:
and in this point he is to be believed. Yea Bellarmine De Council. l. 2. c. 14.
confesses, that Alliaco and Cusanus Cardinals, Gerson, Almain, Antoninus,
Tostatus, and many others, hold that a Council is above the Pope: yea the
Councels of Constant. Sess. 4. 5.
Constance and Bas. Sess. 2.
Basil decreed, that he should obey the Council in all things pertaining to
faith, and reformation of the Church. And that which comes yet closer to the
cause, a general Council has revoked things decred by the Pope in a lawful
Synod: whereof Concord. l. 2. ^. 13.
Cusanus gives an example in the Council of Chalcedon, that examined Leo his
proceedings against Dioscorus. Upon all which evidence I dare be bold to say,
it is manifestly false that the Jesuit affirms: All Catholic men have
always acknowledged the Popes determination to be Gods ordinance for the
maintaining of unity: and if I, and all Protestants should hold our peace, yet
the Jesuits own fellows would blabbe it out: for Cap. 12
Cusanus says, The Bishop of Rome, by custom of men's obedience toward him,
has gotten far beyond the bounds of the ancient obseruatio^s: and Part. 2.
c. 18.
Marsilius says, That unlawfully and against the mind both of divine and
humane reasons, he assumeth to himself this fullness of power, both over
Prince and community, and any singular power.

31 The last observation is the proceeding of Gregory the first, a Pope, in the
later end of the 500. year, against the Patriarch of Constantinople: which was
this. Sabel. E^nea. 8. l. 5. Platin. in Greg. Sigon. de regn. Ital. l. 1. an.
595.
He, the Patriarch, assembled a Synod, wherein he was desirous to make himself
the universal Bishop over all, as the Pope now conceiteth himself; and to
this purpose he also labored the Emperor Maurice to help the matter forward,
who writing to Gregory, commanded him to obey the Patriark. But Gregory
withstood him, and by many letters both to the Emperor and him, shows that
no man might be a universal Bishop over the rest, detesting the name, and
calling it vain, proud, profane, blasphemous, mischievous, Antichristian,
against the commandments of God and decrees of the councels, and finally
says, he is a follower of Satan, and forerunne. of Antichrist that assumeth
it. See l. 4. ep. 32 34. 38. 39.
His writings are full of this discourse, whereby it appears plainly, he then
had no such jurisdiction as now the Pope usurps, but detested it, not only
in John of Constantinople, but even in himself, and calls the name
containing it, a proud title, and bids it be packing, D. 99. Ecce in.
when one in his letter styled him with it: as Ib. Primae sedis.
the Council of Affricke long before had decreed, that not the Roman Bishop
himself should be called universal. Notwithstanding about seven years after,
Boniface the third of that name, prevailed against the Patriarch by the
friendship of the next Emperor, which by a foul piece of service he
purchased, and obtained that himself which the Patriarch had striuen for: and
so this title, with some part of the jurisdiction, was first visibly brought
into the sea of Rome, as Duaren. de sacris eccl. minist. l. 1 c. 10. Otho
Frising. chro. l. 5. c. 8. Paul. Diacon. de gest. Longo. l. 4. c. 11. Sabell.
Ennead. 8. l. 6. Rhegi. chro. l. 1. Anast. Biblioth. Luitprand. Albo Floriac.
Platina in Bonif. 3. Marian. Scot. an. 608. Martin Polon. an. 607. Vrsperg. in
Phoca. Naucler gener. 21. in Bonif. 3.
all Historiographers with one consent have left written in these words:
Boniface with great ado obtained of the Emperor Phocas that he might be made
the universal Bishop of the world: the which authority his successors not
only held fast even with their teeth, but also wonderfully increased. The
Reader, by all this that I have touched, may soon discern the Popes modern
authority, exercised among his own, and claimed over all, to be swollen far
bigger then it was in ancient times. But after swelling comes bursting,
whereof I read his followers beware in time.

Digression. 28. Showing that the Pope is not of infallible judgment, but may
err and fall into heresy, as any other man may.
32 This point is certain enough to us, who have cast off both him and his
teaching, for no other cause but this, that we are assured he is Antichrist,
and his faith heresy. But it may be showed in another sort also, that the
Papists themselves may not deny it, by making demo^stration of his errors in
such cases as they allow to be the truth. Which they skilfully foreseeing, have
lately invented the distinction used here by the Jesuit, that he may fall into
heresy, but he cannot teach it e cathedra, that is, by way of definition to
offer it the universal Church: he may err in his own person, but not as Pope
to define and teach error. The which is a sensles and ridiculous shift, though
the desperateness of their cause have put them to it. For they think their
Pope to be a public person, and his whole office to teach the Church; whereupon
his private errors, as they call them, cannot but go with him into the chair
and Consistory. For he that erreth in judgment, must of necessity err also
in his determinations, because no man can determine otherwise then he thinks.
Neither is it likely that God will put him in trust with the faith of his
Church, that cannot guide his own. For the rule must not only make straight
that which is crooked, but be straight it self. Therefore if the Popes faith
cannot direct himself, much less shall it be able to preserve others.
Besides, Tom. 2. de sign. eccl. l. 18. c. vlt.
Bozius says, He may be an heretic, yea write, teach, and preach heresy.
Which is all one as if he had said, he may err iudicially e cathedra: because
these three, writing, teaching or preaching are judicial exercises of the
chair, directed and reaching themselves to the Church for this special end to
inform men. Again, they have erred in Church canons, dispensations,
Decretals, and matters defined by them in Councels: therefore they have erred e
cathedra. The consequence is proved, D. 19. in Canonicis. Et si Romanorum.
because all these tend to the teaching of the Church, and are the means
whereby he publishes his judgment. Of his dispensations Franciscus Victoria
Relect. 4. nu. 6
says, The Pope in dispensing against the decrees of Councels and former
Popes, may err and grievously sin. Would it were so that we might doubt of
this conclusion: but we see daily such large and dissolute dispensations
proceed from the court of Rome, to the ruin of small and great, that the world
is not able to bear them. Thus Pius Quartus Sess. 8. can. 3. sub Pio 4.
decreed at Trent, that it should be lawful for him to allow those degrees to
marry together, which God in Leuiticus had forbidden, and to forbid those which
God had allowed. This was an heretical decree e cathedra; and according to it
diverse Popes have taught their people to marry against the faith. Sum. Angel.
verbo Papa. nu. 1.
Martin the fifth allowed one to marry his own sister german. Another allowed
K. Henry the eight to marry his brothers wife. Osor. de gest. Eman. l. 2.
A third taught Emanuel the King of Portugal to marry two sisters. Touching
decrees, Alphon. adue. here is. l. 1. c. 4.
Celestin ordained, for example, the marriage to be void when either of the
parties fall into heresy. Sigeber. chro. an. 768. and 902. Sigon. de Reg.
Ital. l. 6. an. 896. Baron. tom. 10. an. 897. nu. 6.
Stephen the sixth decreed in a Council, that such as were ordained Bishops by
Formosus his predecessor, were not ordained lawfully, because Formosus was an
evil man. This is plain Donatisme. De consecr. d. 4. A quodam.
Pope Nicolas decreed, that to baptize only in the name of Christ is good
baptism, contrary to the decrees of Ibid. Hi vero.
Gregory and Ib. Multi sunt.
Pelagius. 32. q. 7. Quod proposuisti.
Pope Gregory decreed, that a man might take another wife, in case his wife
were so diseased that she could not yield him the debt of marriage: the which
Ib.. Sed illud. Ambr.
says Gratian is altogether contrary both to the sacred Canons, and to the
doctrine of the Apostles and Evangelists. But what need we be curious in
reckoning up instances, when it is a thing granted, D. 4. Si Papa.
that he may be found negligent of his own and his brethrens salvation,
drawing innumerable people by troops with himself to be damned in hell. For
does not he err perniciously enough, that may thereby damn himself and
others? or were it possible he should do thus, if Christ had privileged him,
as the Papists fancy?

33 Moreover, it is granted by the Papists themselves that he may err in
faith, not in manners or opinions only. For Occham Q. 1 de potes. sum. Pont.
c. 9.
says and shows, that many things are contained in the Decretals which
savor of heresy. And Almaine, Qu. in Vesper.
that the power of not erring in the faith, is not always in the Pope. And I
have showed out of Bozius, that he may write and preach heresy: and heresy is
in matter of faith: whereupon it follows, that his judgment cannot be
infallible when he comes to proceed in determining, because the true faith
wherein he erreth, is it that should rectify the determination. The which
consequence Relect. cont. 3 q. 4. concl. 4. arg. 4.
Doctor Stapleton grants, yielding that if he err in faith, the whole Church
also should with him be led into error, and so the unity of faith should be
uncertain. But granting this, he denies that he can err in faith, which is
contrary to that which all others confess, and daily experience demonstrateth.

34 The last reason to show he may err even when he teaches the Church, is
this, that there may be diverse instances given when the Church refused to hear
him, yea cast him out, and deposed him as an heretic; which was needless if
there had not bin a purpose in him to seduce the Church, and danger lest his
teaching should have done it. This argument fowly troubles our adversaries,
and therefore they would feign outface it, by saluing such Popes as are
touched, from heresy. But all in vain, for what says 4. d. 18. pro. 25
co^ol. 2.
Ouandus? The which Popes though some Catholics would feign clear, yet should
they not deny as they do, that they were heretics, seeing the Pope may err,
at least as a private man. Thus Conc. Sinues. apud Baron. an. 303. nu. 89.
Carranz in Marcellin.
Marcellinus committed idolatry, and offered sacrifice to Jupiter, Saturn,
Hercules, and the Pagan gods, and was thereupon examined, judged and condemned
by a Council of 300. Bishops. The which story Tom. 2. an 302 nu. 102.
Baronius confesses, was from the beginning believed with a general consent,
and kept in the ancient martyrologues and breuiaries of the Roman Church.
Athan. ep. ad Solita. Fascic. temp an. 353. Baron. tom 3. an. 357. n. 43.44
Liberius that was Pope about the year 350. fell into Arianisme, subscribing
to the unjust condemnation of Athanasius, whereupon Athanasius fell from his
community, and himself as an obstinate heretic was deposed and cast out of
the Church. Anast. Bibliot. in Leone 2. Nilus de pri^at. page 23.
Honorius the first, that was Pope in the year 626. was a Monothelite
heretic, holding that Christ had but one will, and so withal but one nature:
for the which the Church condemned him in Synod. 6. act. 4.12.13. Synod. 7.
act. vlt. Synod 8. act 7.
three general Councels. See D Reyn. apolog. these. nu. 39 and inde.
It is a world to see how the Papists strive to clear this matter, and cannot;
though they blush not in his defense to discredit all antiquity, yea to fly
one in the face of another. As Pighius Hier. l. 4. c. 8.
having taken great pains to discredit the story, Pigh. diatrib. in ep. ad
lect.
a certain learned man wished him to recant: Diatrib. de act. 6. Syn.
whereupon he sets afresh upon the matter; but Canus Loc. lib. 6. c. vlt.
asks, How can Pighius clear him whom Psellus, Tharasius, Theodorus with his
Council at Jerusalem, Epiphanius, and Pope Adrian affirm to have been an
heretic? But An. 681. nu. 31.
Baronius turns upon Canus again, and Quem voluissem sensibus potius Canum
quam nomine, totus praeceps in ferenda de re tanta sententia.
descanting upon his name, shakes him off as if he had been a Protestant: that
I might a little by the way note the unity of Papists, even there where it
were most convenient they should agree.

35 And of late days, when they began first to broach this conceit of the
Popes infallible judgment, it pleased God to check that fond opinion, and by
sensible examples of some present Popes, to teach them the vanity thereof;
that if reason could not persuade them, yet experience should convince them: or
if they would believe none that had written, he might be an heretic, yet they
should see it with their own eyes, and then let them hold him the rule of
faith at their peril. Theod. Nicmens. de schism l. 3 c. 44. page 91. Antonin.
sum. hist. part. 3. tit. 22. c 5. 3.
For in the year 1408. in the Council of Pisa, consisting of a thousand
Divines and Lawyers, they were feign to depose two Popes at once, Gregory the
12. and Bennet the 13: the tenor of which deprivation calls them notorious
schismatics, obstinate maintainers of schism, heretics departed from the
faith, scandalizing the whole Church, unworthy the Papacy, cut off from the
Church. And whereas Bennet continued Pope still for all this, Conci. Constable.
sess. 37. Anton. vbi supra. c. 6. 2.
a second Council holden at Constance deposed him again, and declared that he
had no right to the Papacy, commanding all men to esteem him as an heretic
and schismaticke. Sess. 11. and 12.
The same Council deposed also another Pope, John 23, where it was proved
against him, that he held and defended as his judgment, that there is no
eternal life, nor immortality of the soul, nor resurrection of the dead.
Sess. 34.
A while after, the Council of Basil deposed Eugenius the fourth, declaring
him to be a rebel against the sacred Canons, a notorious disturber and
scandalizer of the peace and unity of the Church, a simonist, a perjured
wretch, incorrigible, a schismaticke, an obstinate heretic. Thus we see their
own selves in express terms lay to the Popes charge schism, heresy,
scandal, breach of the Churches unity; and for that cause depose him, and
refuse to obey him: and yet another while they will defend he cannot err,
Christ has given him infalliblenesse of judgment, and supremacy over all men,
all that will be counted true Catholics must submit themselves to him, and the
Protestants can have no unity, because they acknowledge not his authority.

Digression. 29. Declaring that the Pope is not Saint Peter's successor.
36 This point is properly proved by showing the difference between the Pope
and Saint Peter's faith. For if the Pope be departed from that which Saint Peter
taught, then it will plainly appear he is not his successor, because true
succession stands in holding the same faith. But I will not go this way to
work now, because I have touched it particularly in Digr. 22.23.
other places, and handle it generally throughout this book: and all our
writings and doctrine, and disputations tend to nothing else but to show it.

37 Next, it is proved by this, that, as Jerome Ad Euagr.
says, and D. 21. in Nouo
the Popes own canons grant, All Bishops succeed the Apostles. For if all the
Apostles were equal, and all Bishops succeed them; then what singular matter
is there in the Bishop of Romes succession, more then in the succession of
others? Or why should he be called Saint Peter's successor more then others?
For, as Marsilius Defen part. 2. c. 16.
notes, They are all successors which in life and conversation resemble them,
as Mat. 12. vlt.
Christ said, They are my mother and my brethren which do the will of my
father. Besides, if he were Saint Peter's successor, all the privileges given
by Christ to Peter, must be derived to him; as to preach the Gospel, which
some Popes have not been able to do, and few of late will take the pains to
do: to work miracles, to be free from heresy, to hold perfect the love of
Christ, to indite Scripture: which I think the Jesuit himself will not
attribute to the Pope.

38 But omitting these and such like reasons, the principal thing I now desire
to show, is, that as loud as the Papists are with the Popes succession, and
although the trial of all papistrie depend upon it, yet is it but a humane
constitution; not only because there is no word in the Scripture that says,
the Bishop of Rome shall succeed Peter, but also for that we no where find that
ever Peter made choice of him, or any other. I say we find neither of these in
the Scripture; but the most resolute Papists, and such as eagerliest handle
this matter, Caiet. de divine instit. Pontific. c. 13 Ad huius. Bellar. de Pont.
l. 2. c. 12.
say, The Popes succeeding Peter, in as much as he is Bishop of Rome, had the
beginning from Peter's fact, and not from Christ's institution: which fact was,
that he made his seat at Rome, and th^re died, and so it comes about, that
the Roman Bishop succeeds him: and Caietan adds, that not his death simply
gave the succession to Rome, but because he died there by Christ's special
appointment: which last point he and Qu. Vesper. art. 3.
Cameracensis prove by a story that tells how P^ter by reason of persecution
being minded to forsake Rome, as he was goi^g Christ met him: to whom Peter
said, Lord whither go thou? and Christ answered. I go to Rome, there to be
crucified: thereby adm^nishing Peter to return back again, and die at Rome.
So the Popes succession depends upon the fact of Peter, and comes from it:
and this fact contains his being at Rome, his being Bishop of Rome, his dying
at Rome, his dying by Christ's appointment: but what certainty is there of all
this except a few humane stories, which are all subject to error? especially
for that which Ca^etane says gave the Pope his succession, his returning to
Rome by occasion of the vision? The first author whereof is Act. Petri and
Pauli.
Linus, a foolish book, censured by ^^^o. an. 69. n. 6. and an. 44. n. 45.
the Papists themselves for a counterfeit; or allowing all the story to be true,
yet how does it appear that it was Christ's and Peter's mind by this their fact
to warrant the succession, that the Church of God should be bound for ever
after to believe and accept it? For seeing they will have us all damned,
unless we obey their Pope as Saint Peter's successor, and by virtue of this
succession authorize him over all the world in matters touching soul and
conscience, this life and the life to come; it is but reason that they make it
plain to us, that he has such a succession, which this conceit cannot do,
being indeed a very jest, which I am persuaded themselves believe nor. For
Cameracensis Qu. Vesper. art. 3. page 380.
writes, that the Papacy and Bishopric of Rome are two distinct things, and
not so necessarily conjoined together, but they may be separated: as for
example, if the Pope and a Council think it convenient, he may leave the
Church of Rome, and couple himself to another Church: in which case the Church
of Rome should no longer be head, nor have any sovereignty over Christians.
And touching the choosing of the Pope, Fr. Victor. r^lect. 2. de potes. eccle.
nu. 24.
they hold the manner thereof to be a humane ordinance, which may be changed:
the which were absurd, if Christ by S. Peter's deed appropriated the succession
to Rome, to alter it again or change the form. It is a safe way therefore
that Alphonsus De haeres. l. 1. c. 9 page 19.
holds: Though our faith bind us to bele^ue the true successor of Peter is
the chief Pastor of the universal Church; yet are we not by the same faith
tied to believe that Leo or Clemens (this or that Pope for example) is the true
successor of Peter. For thus a man may shake off the Pope when he will, by
picking a quarrel to the succession. But the Popes best course were, seeing the
succession is so doubtful, to style himself no longer Peter's successor, but
Peter himself, and in his name to send out his Bulls and decrees, as Pope
Stephen did, when he sent to Pipin for aid against Astulphus, and the Lombards
besieging Rome: Caes. Baron. an. 755. nu. ^17.
thus he writes: Peter called an Apostle of Jesus Christ, to you most excellent
men, Pipin, Charles and Charlemaine, three Kings, and to all Bishops, Abbots,
Priests, Monks, Dukes, Earls and Generals, etc. I Peter the Apostle, called by
Christ, and ordained to be the enlightener of all the world, to whom he
committed his sheep, saying, Feed my sheep: I the Apostle Peter, whose
adopted sons you are, admonish you, that you presently come and defend this
city from the hands of adversaries, because the naughty Lombards afflict and
oppress it. And doubt ye not believed, but trust assuredly that I my self, as
if I stood quick before you do thus exhort you: yea and with me our Lady, the
mother of God, the virgin Marie commands you, and also the thrones,
dominions, and heavenly host, with Christ's martyrs and confessors, that ye
have compassion on the Roman city and Church committed to me, and deliver it,
lest my body and my house where it rests, be defiled by the Lombards; that I
Peter the Apostle of God, at the last day may yield you mutual defense again,
and prepare for you tabernacles in heaven. Thus writ the Pope 800. years
since, stiling himself Saint Peter, which custom An^ po^^ible he has not:
Paulus i^^eut, idemque Petrus, vicem Christi ageus i^ terris: says Baronius
speaking of Paul the present Pope his excomunicating the Venetians. Paraen. ad
rempub. Vene^.
if he had not given over, for I know not what foolish bashfulnesse, possible
by this time the world would have given over questioning about his succession,
and have taken him for Peter himself. And why not the world believe him to be
Saint Peter, as well as Papists think him Saint Peter's successor?

Digression 30. Wherein it is showed, that the Papists are not agreed among
themselves to this day, how Peter's supposed Primacy is proved, or what it
contains: but they are uncertain in expounding the maine texts of Scripture
whereupon they build it.
39 I was desirous a little to divert into this matter, because the common sort
of Papists, having greater fancy to the conceit, then other knowledge of it, or
skill to discern it, think their learned men prove it more then
authentically: the rumor and common impression, whereunto the vulgar was always
subject, having indeed prevailed with them, and carried them away into this
conceit: according to Hierom. ad Nepot.
the saying of Nazianzen, the rude vulgar wonder at that they understand not.
Whereas I dare be bold to say, there is nothing in all the Scripture more
uncertainly expounded then the ordinary texts alleged for Peter's supremacy:
all the learned Papists, both old and new, so staggering and varying one from
another, that it is strange to see, and worth the noting.

40 First, we bid them point out the place where Christ gave it him: whereto
Card. Cont. De Sacram. chr. leg. l. 3. p. 103.
answers, That in his judgment, it was chiefly given in the 16. of Mat. when
the keys were given. But De Pontif. l. 1. c. 12.
Bellar. and Rhem. annot. Ioh 21.17. Iansen. concord^c. 148. Eman. Sa. annot.
in Ioh. 21.17.
others with him deny this, and say, the keys were not then given, but only
promised, and with the keys the supremacy: the gift was in the 21. of Ioh,
where Christ says, feed my sheep. But Vbi supra. p. 104.
Contarenus answers again, Let not the subtlety of some move ye that say
thus, for they speak more subtlely then truly. If this man say true, that all the jurisdiction Peter had, was given him with the keys, Mat 16. then it is
false, that others commonly assume, that the 21, of Ioh. Feed my sheep, makes
him the chief Pastor: but if Bellarmine say true, it follows thereof, that
the keys and rock contain no less then the seeding of Christ's sheep and
lambs: it being folly to think the promise should contain any less then the
performance.

41 But because the place of Mat. 16. touching the rock and keys, is used to
prove Peter's supremacy, Locus valde illustris est, vbi Christus eam
authoritatem verbis amplissimis D. Pet^o promisit. Greg. de Valent tom. 3. p.
185.
and boasted to be exceedingly evident for that purpose, we object that therein
Peter has no more given him then his fellow Apostles, but they are all made
equal with him; and we conclude it thus. All that Peter had, was to be the
rock and to receive the keys: but this was common to the other Apostles: the
Apostles therefore received as much as Peter. The second proposition, whereof the
question is, is thus proved. Bellarm. de Pont. Ro^. l 1. c. 12.. Veru^ haec.
Communiter enim sequenti sente^tia, Quod cunque ligaueris etc Intelligitur
explicari quid per promiss^s cla^es sit accipiendum: ideoque per claues
intelligitur potestas remittendi vel retinendi peccata. Iansen. Harm. cap 66.
All the power of the rock and keys is included in binding and loosing,
retaining and remitting sins: but this was given all the Apostles in Mat.
18.18. and Ioh. 20.21. All the power of the rock and keys therefore was common
to the other Apostles. Here our adversaries again vary among themselves.
Ca^et. tract. de instit. Pont. c. 5 (...) Ad primu^ Greg Valent tom 3. p 190.
Itaque intelligedum. Bann. 22. page 218. F.
One sort of them denying the first proposition, hold that the keys contain
more then binding and loosing, and that Christ thereupon in the 18. of Mat. and
20. of John, gave not the Apostles the whole power of the keys. For Caietan
says, that speaking formally and properly, the keys promised to Peter, are
above the keys of order and jurisdiction, and contain more. But Bellarmine
confuteth this, Vbi supra.
and says, It is not true, for is was never heard, that there were more keys
in the Church then two, of order and jurisdiction: and so gra^teth that all the
Apostles had as much jurisdiction as Peter, which is our conclusion. With him
also consent Marsil def. part. 2. c. 16 Couat^u^ relect. tom 1. part. 2. 9 F.
Victo. re^e. 2. de potest. eccl. Cusan. conc. l. 2. c. 13. Conci. Colon. sub
Adulf. c. Sextum medium.
diverse others: whereupon it follows inuincibly, that albeit it were granted
a thousand times that Peter had the Supremacy, yet were it not proved by the
text of Mat. 16. because every tittle contained therein belongs to all the
Apostles indifferently: whereupon it follows secondly, that neither can it be
proved by any other text whatsoever: because Per claues in tellexerimus
me^aphorice significatam p^enatiam ac supremam potestatem gubernandi Ecclesia^
Christi. Iansen. concord. cap. 66. jdem. Eman. Sa. annot. Mat. 16.19. Baron.
an. 34. n. 205. Ouand. 4. d. 18. pro. 16. Rhem. on Mat. 16.19. Fr. Suar tom. 4.
page 257. nu. 1. and. 2.
the highest authority that can be assigned, is contained in the keys, and
the keys were given the other Apostles as well as Peter; whereupon it
follows thirdly, that the Papists by their own expositions, are debarred
this text in the question of the Supremacy. And when they use it, themselves
know they beguile the ignorant.

42 The common answer is, that albeit the Apostles had the same keys and power
that Peter had, yet was it with a difference, that Peter had it before them,
and as their ordinary, but they after him as his Legates and subjects. The which
if it be all the difference they can assign between them, let the^ deal
plainly, and tell us why they allege Matthew. 16. touching the rock and keys,
where, by their own confession, this difference is not found? for they all
grant it is proved by the 21. of Io. where Christ says to Peter, Feed my
sheep. But let us take the answer as it is, and examine it. The parts of it are
two. First, that all the Apostles had the same keys and power that Peter had:
the which is true, but some Papists, foreseeing it would disadvantage the
primacy, deny it, as I touched before out of Caietan; He neither gave, nor
promised, Tom. 3. disp. 1. qu 1. punc. 7 p. 190. ^^em Baron. tom. 1. an. 34.
nu. 2^5.
says Valentianus, the keys themselves, to the other Apostles, though he gave
them a certain power to use them, that they might shut or open heaven by
remitting or retaining, or, which is the same, by loosing and binding sins:
but the keys themselves, that is to say, the full and chiefest power to do
this, every way, were promised and given to Peter alone. The second part is,
that they had their power after and under Peter as his Legates. This is untrue,
for in V. 21. He breathed on them saying, Receive the holy Ghost. As my Father
sent me, so I send you
the 20. of John it is plain, they all had their commission from Christ's own
mouth: and Paul Gal. 1.1.
says, he is an Apostle, not of men, nor by man, but by Jesus Christ, 2. Cor.
11.5.
and that he is not inferior to the very chief Apostles. Fr. Victo. relect. 2.
concl. 3.
And all the Apostles might say the same, for Marc. 16.15.
he said to all, Go preach the Gospel to every creature. Therefore in as much as
they had their commission immediately from Gods own mouth, it implies a
contradiction to say they had it under and from Peter. Here it is worth the
marking to see what answers they make, and how sweetly they agree. Soto 4. d.
20. q. 1. ar 2. concl. 4. Caiet. de authorit Pap. and Council. c. 3. Dominic.
Bannes. in 22. Tho. q. 1. art. 10. p. 234.. Alia est sententia Caiet.
The first sort say they received all their authority from Christ immediately,
but this was because it pleased him by special privilege to exempt them. So
says Caietan, Of his grace he gave the^ that power, which by the ordinary way,
they should have received of Peter, so preventing him, etc. The^ the which they
could never have said any thing more madly, first to tell us, they had their
authority from Peter, and then at the next word to fall three farthings in a
penny, they should have had it, but by special grace they were exempted, which
dispensation they show not neither.

43 The second sort answer, that the Apostles had two offices. The first was
the Apostleship, the second their Bishoply or Pastoral dignity. The former
they had immediately of Christ, but the later by and through Peter. Victoria
Relect. 2. nu. 8
says, Many grave writers are of this mind, as Turrecrem. d. 21. in Nouo. n.
3 and d. 66. Porro. n. 1. and Sum. l. 2. c 54 Paludens. de potest. Eccl.
Richard 4. d. 17 art. 3. q. 1. ad 6. Dom. Iacobat. de council l. 10. art. 7.
Staplet. Princ. doctr. l. 6. c. 7.
they are indeed: but their fellows confute them by virtue of the Roman
unity, as Victoria himself does, Vbi supra. nu. 9.
affirming, They received, all the power they had immediately from Christ,
which, he says, is proved, in that he made them all Apostles, and to the
Apostleship belongs three things, authority to govern the believers, the
faculty of teaching, and the power of miracles: so that it seems to him
firmly to be said and holden, that all the Apostles had the authority of
orders and jurisdiction both, immediately from Christ. And Henriquez Sum. Mora.
p. 403. and Domin. Ban. vbi supra.
says, There is no likelihood in their opinion, that say the Apostles received
their jurisdiction of Peter. And so we see the device of the Apostles delegacy
under Peter is altogether uncertain.

44 Others propound and order the matter thus, The difference of Peter's power
from the rest was, that he alone might use the keys, but the rest might not
without him: De Sign. l. 18 c. 1.
says Bozius. Visib. Monar. l 6. c. 2.
Sanders thinks the other disciples had the same keys, but it was neither
before him, nor together at the same time with him, but afterward: to teach
them that Peter had them by ordinary right as Prince of all; Se autem velut ex
^peciali delegatione Christi, and extraordinatio iure.
but they as it were by Christ's special delegation and extraordinarily. Tom 3.
p. 195.
Gregory of Valence lays the primacy of Peter in two points. First, that he
received his Apostleship ordinarily to endure over the whole Church, even in
his successors, whereas the other had it by extraordinary privilege to be made
Apostles over all the world and immediately by Christ^ differing in the manner of
receiving the Apostleship, and in the largeness of it being received. For
Peter had it of Christ, and over all the world for ever, which the other had
not. Secondly, that he obtained power over the Apostles themselves, as their
Pastor, to rulec, onfirm, and direct them in their ministry, not as Apostles,
for so they were equal, but as the sheep of Christ subject to him. Victoria
Relect. 2. de potest. eccl. nu. 11. p. 87.
lays it in four things. First, that his power was ordinary, theirs
extraordinary. Secondly, that his was to continue in the Church, theirs not.
Thirdly, that his was over them, but theirs neither over him nor one another.
Fourthly, that theirs was subordinate to his, so that he might ouerrule it.
Caietan De Autho. Papae and Council c. 3.. Et vt Clarius.
lays it in five things. First, in the manner of giving it, because he
received it ordinarily, but they extraordinarily and of special grace.
Secondly, in the office it self, for he was Christ's Vicar general, Which he
proves merrily by 2. Cor. 5.20. Ephesians. 6.20. And by their title Apostles, that
is sent, because Peter sent them.
they but his delegates. Thirdly, in the object of the power, for he had power
over all, they never a one over another. Fourthly, in continuance of time: for
his was to last to the worlds end, theirs determined with their life. Fifthly,
in the essence of the power: for his was preceptiue, to command them, theirs
executiue to do what he commanded them Bibl. sanct. 1.6. annot. 169. and 171.
Senensis lays it thus: that Peter had a threefold power, one of order,
another of Apostleship, a third of kingdom or monarchy; wherein alone he
excelled all the rest. These men distinguish nicely to find out somewhat that
might taste of the primacy, but the spite is, they are not agreed which
distinction to stand to, and the parts distinguished either differ not, or have
no foundation in the texts alleged by the Jesuit.

45 But that it may appear what lost labor it is to stand arguing with them
about this matter, and all men may plainly see they uphold their religion, not
with reason and arguments, but impudency and prodigious impostures devised to
seduce the world: let the Scripture be named whereupon they build the
distinctions assigned, and viewed if it yield them either certainty or unity
therein. The 21 of John is said to be it, where Christ bids Peter, Feed his
sheep. And let it be one example among five hundred, of the woeful and
forlorn plight wherein their cause lies, assuring all men there is not an
article of their faith controuerted, but it lies desperately perplexed with the
same uncertainties and contradictions. For Sicut enim quae caeteris Apostolis
aeque ac Petro contulit, and communia omnibus esse voluit, euidenter expressit:
nimirum Luc. 22.19 Mat 28.19 and 18.18. Ioh. 20.22. Luc. 24.45 Ita etiam quae
peculiaria voluit esse Petri, aperte significauit. Mat. 16.18. and Ioh. 21.15
Baronius and others confess, the 16. of Mat. touching the keys, contains
as much as it: the which place I have already showed belongs indifferently to
all the Apostles. And Armachanus qq. Armen. l. 11. cap. 14.
holds, that all Ecclesiastical power whatsoever, is included in the
Apostleship, and was given the disciples, Peter and all, in the third of Mark,
what time they were made Apostles: that it were the greatest folly in the
world, if the prerogative of Peter cannot be proved by those places, to think
it may be helped by this: and yet this is the hope of most of our adversaries.
But let the place be viewed, and see if there be one word that gives it.
First, they reckon up diverse circumstances going with the text, to prove that
Christ spoke to Peter only: which no man denies. But the speaking to Peter
makes him not chief, unless the words spoken signify that which should be
contained in the sovereignty. Besides, though now he spoke to Peter only, yet
all the matter spoken, belonged to the rest as well as to him. Secondly, Christ
says, Simon, love thou me more then these? Why does he examine him of his
love more then the rest, but that he intended him more authority? I answer, to
make him see his fault, who having lately undertook more then all, even to die
with him though all should forsake him, yet when it came to trial, performed
less then any, denying him thrice, which none else did. And possible also to
let him know his sin was pardoned, Luc. 7.47.
because more is forgiven to him that loves more. Thirdly, he not only
examineth him of his love, but also thereby draws out of him a fervent
confession of it. I answer, this he did also in regard of his former sin,
Isid. Pelusiot. l. 1. Ep. 103.
by a threefold confession to heal his threefold denial, and to assure his
fellow disciples of his repentance, and to show, by his example, how dear the
love of Christ should be to them that meddle with feeding Christ's flock.
Fourthly, he bids him Feed, and feeding is Ruling with fullness of power. I
answer, he bids him feed his sheep and lambs, which are the people, and
not the Apostles properly, which proves that feeding has no such meaning.
Besides, feeding signifies ruling not every way, but in such manner as
appertains to the persons that do feed. And therefore in kings it is to rule
with fullness of power, but in Pastors with the word and discipline only, as
appears by this, that all Bishops and teachers are called Ephesians 4.11.
Pastors, and bidden Ier. 3.15 Ezec. 34 Act. 20.28. 1. Pet. 5.1.
feed the flock of Christ, and yet no man thinks they are made Popes
thereby. Lastly Peter is bidden Feed the sheep, and the Apostles are a part of
Christ's sheep, therefore he must feed them. I answer, this is granted, but then
feeding signifies no more but edifying by word and example: and so as Peter
must feed the Apostles, the Apostles must feed him again, by the same
commandment of Christ Marc. 16.
that bade them preach the Gospel to every creature: as Gal. 2.
Paul fed him at Antioch by reproof. And whereas some urge that the sheep
signify the universal Church, because Christ says not these are those sheep
in particular, but my sheeepe in general, and so Peter is set over the
universal Church: this is but a speculation: for if the Church be strained
into so wide a signification, he could not feed it, because he could feed no
more then that part which was in his time, or followed after him: wherein the
other Apostles fed in community with him, and feeding was not Poping. Thus we
see that unless the Papists may be allowed to rack the words of Scripture
beyond all compass of ordinary understanding, and bring to them the sense
which they should fetch from them, there is nothing in all the Bible sufficient
to uphold any part of that wherein they are so confident.

. 37. So that this difference may be assigned between any sort of heretics
and the Roman Church, that they are a company not united among themselves, by
any link which is able to contain and continue them in the unity of faith:
whereas the Roman Church is as S. Cyprian speaks, Plebs sacerdoti adunata,
and grex pastori suo adhaerens; A people conjoined to their priest, and a
flock cleaving to their chief Pastor. Whom whilst it hears, as it is bound
to do, it is impossible but it should retain unity of faith: Like contrary
according to the saying of the same S. Cyprian, lib. 1. epist. 5. ad Cornel.
contra Haeret. Non aliunde haereses obortae sunt aut nata schismata, quam inde
quod Sacerdoti non obtemperatur, nec vnus in Ecclesia ad tempus sacerdos and
vnus iudex vice Christi cogitatur. Nor from any other root have heresies and
schisms sprung up but from this, that men do not obey the priest of God,
neither do they consider, how that in the Church there is one Priest and one
judge for the time in stead of Christ.

The Answer.
1 How well the Roman Church is linked together, I have said in the former
section: and therefore if the Jesuit will assign a difference between it and
heretics (which will be the same that is between fish and herrings) he must
do it by something else then by their unity: whereunto Saint Cyprian gives no
testimony in the words alleged, but that it pleased the Jesuit thereby to
impose upon his ignorant reader. For first he speaks not, in any of both
places, concerning the Church of Rome, but of every part of the Church
whersoeuer, and says, It is a company adhering to their Pastor, etc. Next, by
this one Pastor and judge, whereto the Church adhereth, he means not the
Bishop of Rome over all the world, (for himself dissented from him in the
cause of appeals and rebaptization) but every Bishop in his own circuit.
Thirdly, supposing he had conceited the Pope, and by these words immediately
meant him, yet what is that to the Pope now, who is degenerate into another
creature then at that time he was? whereby it comes to pass that many good
things might be said of him then, that cannot now, and of his Church then,
which since that time are perished.

2 But the truth is, that saying the Church is a people cleaving to their
Priest, he means it not of al Gods Church cleaving to the Pope, but of every
particular Church obeying their Pastor, according to Saint Paul's admonition,
Heb. 13.17.
Obey and submit your selves to such as have the oversight of you. And the want
hereof he says is the root of schism, not the dissenting from the Pope. And
this is proved to be his meaning, because in Lib. 4. Ep. 9. ad Florent.
another Epistle he has the same words, applying them to himself, and
complaining thereby that some had underhand refused him, and communicated with
others. For the Nouatians at Carthage, in a schism had made them a Bishop of
their own, and written to the Church of Rome falsely, that he was lawfully
elected: the which being against the custom and peace of the Church, moved him
to urge, as you see, the unity of one Bishop, and to defend the
Church-gouernment of that time, Hiero. comment. in Tit c. 1. Chrysostom. hom 1 ad
Philipp.
which was to have but one Bishop in one city. Hence proceed his words
touching every Bishop in his own place, as the Jesuit has alleged them.
Whereby you see how well he proves the unity of his Church and authority of
his Pope; even as well as if a man should make that proper to the Bishop of
Rome and his Church, which appertains to every Bishop and every Church; and
expound that of the supremacy, which imports no more but ordinary government
used by Pastors in their own charge. This kind of disputing is called
enclosing of commons.

. 38. Secondly, the Protestants Church is not holy, because not only most of
their men be evidently more wicked then in old time before their coming, as
those can tell that have seen both, and is confessed by Luther himself, who,
in Postill. super Euangel. Dom. primae Aduentus, says thus: Sunt nunc homines
magis vindictae cupidi, magis auari, magis ab omni misericordia remoti, magis
immodesti and indisciplinati, multoque deteriores quam fuerunt in Papatu. Men
are now more reuengefull, more covetous, more unmerciful, more immodest and
unruly, and much worse then when they were Papists. The like testimony is
given by Smidelinus, another of their Doctors, Conc. 4. super cap. 21. Lucae,
which for brevity I omit.

The Answer.
1 For answer to this, the Protestants have two things to say. First, that it
is false, their men be more wicked then the Papists in old time were, the which
is proved by comparing them together, and let that comparison give the trial
in the next Digression. And whereas the Jesuit says, They can tell that have
seen both, I answer, this is true, and therefore let us refer our selves to
their reports, which by and by shall be set down. And in the mean time it is
probable, the Papists in old time were such as they be now; which if they were,
I am contented our lives be laid together and compared. For the present
experience that we have this day in England touching Papists and their
conuersations, will acquit us, though their outrage and confusion be such, and
have wrought us that sorrow, that we can take small pleasure in recounting it.
Their treasons against the State, more then mont^^us, practicing the very
desolation of the kingdom by strange conspiracies, unnatural invasions,
barbarous murders, unutterable mischiefs, we make account were wickedness
enough to deprive them of the name and reputation of holiness: but this is not
all, they that live in these parts among people popishly addicted, live in the
midst of Sodom. And let it be observed, if all disorders be not rifest in
those parts among us where the people is most Pope-holy: other parishes where
the Gospel has been taught, being reduced to civility, and the rest that
swarm with Priests and Recusants remaining savage and barbarous, that no
Christian man may endure their manners. And for mine own part, having spent
much of my time among them, this I have found, that in all excess of sin
Papists have been the ringleaders, in riotous companies, in drunken meetings,
in seditious assemblies and practices, in profaning the Sabbath, in quarrels and
braules, in stage plays, greenes, ales, and all heathenish customs: the
common people of that sort generally buried in sin, swearing more then can be
expressed, uncleanness, drunkenness, perfidiousnesse vile and odious: their
families untaught and dissolute, their behavior fierce, and full of all
contumely, injury, inhumanitie, full of slanderous reports, wild looks, and
all unchristian usage toward any not of their own religion; that I dare be
bold to say, we may all cast our caps at them for atheism and all that naught
is: the which I would not have touched, because some will mislike it, but that
the Jesuits words. They can tell that have seen both, urge me to it: and
having seen it with mine own eyes, and smarted a long time under it, I thought
it would be to the glory of God, and confusion of Papistrie, to let the truth
be known, and to admonish the Priests lurking in the country, if they will
needs make the world Roman Catholic yet that they teach it more civility
withal.

2 His next reason to prove our Church unholy, is the confession of Luther and
Smideline. And do not the Prophets and Apostles complain as much against the
Church in their times, which yet was the true Church of God? What age, or
people, or Church was ever yet so holy, but the preachers thereof found matter
of reproof in it? I, but Luther says, Men are now much worse then when they
were Papists: he says so indeed, but he adds withal, that the cause hereof
is, for that men receive not the doctrine of Christ, therefore God in his anger
gives them up to their own sins: wherein he charge not the true believers
of our faith, but only such hypocrites as made a show without sincerity. The
very like complaint is in Chrysostom of the Church in his time: But now (says
Op. impers. in Math. hom. 49.
he) Christians are become either such as heretics and Pagans be, or worse:
yea and their conversation of life, though it be in schism, is with more
continency from sin then among the Christians. Here Chrysostom says, the
Christians are worse then Pagans, as Luther says, they are worse then Papists;
and yet the Jesuit dares not conclude, that therefore the Pagans, and not the
Christians were the true Church. For hypocrites are always mingled with the
Saints, as chafe is with the wheat, and by their sin bring a show of evil
upon the whole Church, and is imputed unto it. But Saint Augustine answers
this objection better then I can, which if our adversaries would mark, this
complaint of our unholiness were soon at an end: And now ( Epist. 161.
says he) the faults of evil men are cast in our teeth, not ours neither, but
other men's, and they also in part unknown; the which if we did see to be true
and present before our eyes, and sparing the cockle for the wheat sake, did
tolerate in regard of unity: he would think us not only worthy of no
reproof, but of great praise. And Jerome is of mind, the sins of the Church
are no vantage to heretics: thus he says: Ep. 78.
Are you therefore no heretics, if some upon your report have thought us
sinners? The same thing we answer the Papists.

3 Secondly we say, that if all were true which is objected, and we as bad as
the Jesuit conceiteth, yet were not this sufficient to prove us the false
Church. For what De praescrip.
says Tertullian? Do men use to try the faith by the persons, or the persons
by the faith? And Saint Augustine has a whole Epist. 137.
Epistle written of purpose to confute them that labored to make the Church
odious by obiecting the faults of such as lived therein. In that Ep^stle he
has these words: Object nothing against heretics, but only that they are
not Catholic, lest ye be like unto them: who having nothing wherewithal to
defend their cause, fall to gathering up the faults of men, that when they
cannot charge the truth it self, they may yet bring into hatred those that
preach it. And what Catholic man ( Apol. contra Ru^fin. l. 3.
says Jerome) in the disputation of sects, did ever object the faults of life
against his adversary with whom he disputed? Yea the Papists themselves being
pinched with this kind of reasoning, and tasting the inconvenience thereof, by
reason their own lives are worse then any, begin to disclaim it, that you may
see the Jesuit holds you occupied with an argument that himself knows is
nothing worth. D. Harding Confut. apol. part. 6. page 291.
says, You know it is no good argument, a moribus ad doctrinam: who would not
hiss and trample you out of schools, if ye make this argument, The Papists
lives be faulty, ergo their teaching is false? The Jesuit therefore must be
hist at by Hardings censure. Staphylus Apolo. part. 1.
says, Our faith must not be pinned to the life of the Clergy or preachers,
etc. Bellarmine De great. and lib. arbit. l. 5. c. 10.. Hoc posito.
says, It is certain, the doctrine which men teach us cannot be known by
their works, because their inward works are not seen, and their outward
works are common to both sides. Annal. tom. 7. 2 n. 526. n. 58.
Baronius calls them an ignorant company that measure Catholic faith not
by the sacred Scriptures which they know not, but by the example of life. Thus
we see the Papists are unwilling we should judge of their faith by their lives,
and yet how peremptory they are with us about ours, and how busy in
smattering of our faults, that will admit no disadvantage by their own.
Besides, they have a position among them, Bellar. de Eccles mil. l. 3. c. 2.
that no inward virtue is required to make one a part of the true Church, but
only the external profession of faith. The which being so, then what necessity
is there of holiness, either inward or outward, to prove that a people are the
true Church? for they may be so without it, if they do but profess it, which a
wicked person can do.

Digression. 31. Containing many complaints made by the Papists themselves
against their own Church and people, whereby it appears, their lives are
worse then can be said of the Protestants.
4 But because they are (...). Callistrat. diuis. in stat. Narcissi.
Narcissus like, so besotted with their own beauty, and the Jesuit will
needs have it tried whether Papists or Protestants be of better life: I am
content it be a match, and the comparison be made, upon condition, that what I
produce, be always remembered to be their own confession, not my report; and
therefore remain with the Reader for a cooling card to still the Pharisee,
next time he comes into the temple with Luc. 18.11.
God I thank thee I am not like other men: and ruffleth among his poor
brethren Esa. 65.5.
with stand apart, come not nie me, for I am holier then thou. And out of
question, upon what part of their Church soever we look, there is no cause why
they should boast themselves against us. Of their Popes, and what Saints they
have been, I shall have fi^ter occasion to speak Digr. 54.
below. Touching their Monks and religious persons. I refer my self
likewise to Digr. 45.
another place. Concerning the people, Ferus In 1. Ioh. c. 2.
says, that in their Church abuses of all sorts have prevailed, with diverse
superstitions and evil manners even to the highest degree. And (says he) the
God of this world, Mammon and Ambition, has so blinded our eyes, that we
cannot so much as see so great evils in our Church. Not denying, as the Jesuit
does, the same unholiness to be among themselves that we are charged with, but
lamenting that such as he is have no eyes to see it. Niemensis, a man in his
time attending on the Pope, Per vim stulta parens quasi vipera deperis omnes.
Tu portentorum locus es conformis eorum. Cum Nilo pottenta pari, nutris
crocodilos. Iam cum portentis reor exterminia sentis. Si quid in his possem,
facere^ sterilescere matre^. Theod. a Niem. de schismat. l. 3. c. 41.
says, Rome was a place of monsters, yea like Nilus breeding monsters and
nourishing Crocodiles, that it were to be wished it were more barren in
yielding such fruit of Vipers. And because the Jesuit alleged somewhat
against us out of Luthers sermons, I will quit him again with another sermon:
for Cornelius Mus the Bishop of Bitonto, thus preached some threescore years
since, in Saint Laurence Church in Rome: Concio eua^g. de Domin. and fest. tom
1. fer. 4 cinerum part. 3. page 242.
O my best beloved Rome, if ever it stood any city in hand to hasten her
conversion to God, thou have need to give example to all other cities of this
conversion. Thou which art wholly turned away, overthrown and perverted.
Turned away by thine own negligence, overthrown by the deceit of Satan, and
perverted by thine old custom of sinning. See thou not wretched city, how
thou art become a stews of lechery, a furnace of covetousness, a hell of all
other mortal sins? See thou not how every state and degree of men, and every
order this feast time of Bacchus is departed from God, and made a prey to the
devil? They have striuen among themselves who of all men shall be the worst, in
superfluous expenses, in dishonest attire, in filthy words and mischievous
deeds. Alas also, religious men are become dissolute, children are set to
school to a thousand vices, young men are unbridled, virgins have cast
offshame, Priests their gowns, and Monks their cowles: wise men are become
fools, and old men children. To the same effect he also preached Orat in Conc.
Trid. in 3. Dom. Aduent. Conci. tom. 3.
at the Council of Trent: With what monsters of filthiness, with what sinks
of uncleanness, with what pestiferous contagion is not both Priest and people
defiled? I make your selves judges, and begin at the sanctuary of God, and see
if there be any shamefastness, any chastity, any hope or help for honest
life? if there be not unbridled lust, notorious boldness, incredible
wickedness? Edification is turned into destruction, examples into offenses,
custom to corruption, regard of laws to contempt thereof, severity to
slacknesse, mercy to impunitie, piety to hypocrisy, preaching to contention,
solemn days to filthy marts; and that which is most unhappy, the savor of
life to the savor of death. Would God they were not fallen with one consent
from religion to superstition, from faith to infidelity, from Christ to
Antichrist, from God to Epicurisme, saying with a wicked heart and shameless
face, There is no God. The sacred name of Jesus Christ is made a jest and fable
among the Jews and Pagans by reason of us, whose wickedness with a shameful
report is bruted over all the world. Thus we see how easy a matter it is to
charge our adversaries with sin, if we would walk that course, and that
every jot of that we say of their peoples brutishnes, is confirmed by their
own words.

5 And touching their Clergy, there is as much to be said, and to better
purpose, because being the best part of the Church, the holiness must be in
them or no where. Mat. 6.22.
The light of the body is the eye, and if this light be dark, how great shall
the darkness it self be? Yet mark what Bernard says of his time: Sermon. 33.
in Cant. and in council. Rhem.
Brethren, so does Jesus at this day, he chooses many devils to be Bishops: the
archpriest visits his charge to fill his purse, he betrayeth innocent blood,
sells murders, takes money for adulteries incest, fornication, sacrilege,
perjury, and fills his bag to the brim. A stinking contagion creeps this
day throughout the whole body of the Church. All friends and all enemies, all
familiar and none to make peace, yea all seek their own: they are the
ministers of Christ, but do service to Antichrist: they go honored with the
goods of their Master, but him their Master they honor not. Hence it is, that
we daily see them decked like whores, attired like players, served like
Princes. They wear gold in their bridles, and gold in their saddles and spurs,
their spurs shining brighter then the altars, their tables gorgeous with meats
and cups, and abounding with surfeiting and drunkenness: their music and
minstrelsie, their wine-presses running over, and storehouses crammed with all
varieties: their barrels of ointment, their budgets full. These are the men,
and yet needs they will be Church-gouernors, Deanes, Bishops and Archbishops.
And how do these men keep their chastity, who being given up into a reprobate
sense, do things not meet? For it is a shame to utter what they do in the dark,
yet why should I shame to speak that which they are not ashamed to do? To the
same effect Defens. part. 2 c. 11.
writes Marsilius: We draw Christ to witness (says he) and let his
judgments fall on us if we lie, that our Bishops, and almost all others this
day, do flat contrary in all things which they teach others, according to the
doctrine of the Gospel to observe. Anal. l. 6. in ini^io.
Auentine confesses, the Pope sets over the flock of Christ, goats,
wolves, lust full persons, adulterers, rauishers of virgins and Nuns, cooks,
muletors, thieves, bankers, usurers, drones, gain-hunters, lecherous,
perfidious, perjured, ignorant asses. He commits the sheep to wolves and
hypocrites, which only provide for their bellies: nay he sets boys and
wantons to rule the lambs. I am ashamed to say what manner of Bishops we have:
with the revenues of the poor they feed their hounds, horses, whores: they
quaffe, they love, they fly learning as infection: Such is the misery of our
times, that we may not utter what we think, nor think that we speak. As for
the sheep committed to their charge, they clip, and strip, and kill them every
man at his own pleasure. In. Marcellin.
Platina complains thus: What may we think will become of our age, wherein our
sins are grown to the height, that they have scarce left us any room with
God to obtain mercy? How great the covetousness of Priests is, and specially
of such as rule among them, how great their lust of all sorts, what ambition,
what pomp, what pride, what ignorance both of themselves and Christian
doctrine, what little religion, what corrupt manners to be detested even in lay
people, I need not say: when they sin so openly, as if they sought for
commendations thereby. In euang. Ioh c. 10.
Albertus magnus confesses, Those which rule in the Church, be for the most
part thieves and murderers, oppressors rather then Pastors, spoilers rather
then tutors, rather murderers then keepers, rather peruerters then teachers,
rather seducers then guides. These be the messengers of Antichrist, and such as
supplant the flock of Christ. This voluntary confession of our adversaries
must be noted, the rather because the Papists ordinarily not only calumniate
our lives, but also tell such wonders of their Clergies learning, hospitality,
continency, etc. yea the modern Papists let slip the same complaints. Apol.
part. 1.
Staphylus writes, how it is much to be lamented, that the life and behauior
of the reverend priesthood answers not their godly and high profession, but
is very scandalous to the world. For many of them can tell a trim tale in the
pulpit, and exhort the people very demurely to a sober life, but will not once
move the foot to live well themselves. Can this be denied? It is alas too
true. Iansenius the bishop of Gaunt tells likewise the same tale out of the
school or a worse: We find by experience ( Concor. c. 39.
says he) at this day, it is too true that our Lord foretells concerning
unsavory salt. For truly the greater part of Bishops and Pastors, and such as
are Ecclesiastical degrees, be so infatuated, that they bewray themselves to
have no corn of salt in their life or doctrine. Hence it comes about that the
Ecclesiastical state is so trodden under foot and despised. And by reason of
their vnsauorinesse, there is no hope neither that the unsavory life of
Christians should be reformed, and their corruptions taken away, when they
themselves are irrecouerably corrupted, by whose health others should be
helped. So Paralip. rerum memor. annexa histo. Abbat. Vrsperg. p. 482. an. 1523.
the Pope himself at an assembly of the Empire, sent his Legate, and gave him in
charge freely to confess before the States met together: We know that for
certain years there have bin many abominations in this holy seat of Rome,
many abuses in divine things, and superfluity of traditions, and that all
things have grown worse and worse, the corruption being derived from the head
into the members, from the Popes into the lower Prelates. All we therefore
Prelates and clergy men are declined out of the way, neither of long time has
there been any that has done any good.

6 These foul reports, blabbed abroad by our adversaries themselves, touching
their own Church, contain worse matter then Luther or Smidelin speak of: and
serve to admonish such as have heard many sweet tales of the Roman holiness,
that all is not gold that glisters: and to forewarne al Papists that in
disputing with us, it helps the^ nothing to be railing at our lives: for they
shall always find, that either the truth is not to be tried this way, or if it
be, they will lose it at the first sight. And let them remember Balt. Castil.
lib. de aulico.
their own jest of the Duke of Vrbins Painter. A Cardinal hired him to draw
the images of Peter and Paul upon a table: which having done, the Cardinal
thought they were made somewhat too ruddy and hie colored in the face: but the
Painter replied, that when they were alive they looked pale with preaching and
fasting, but now they were become red in the face with blushing at the
wickedness of their successors, whereat they were ashamed, and that shame had
altered their color.

7 And the reader must observe yet further, that they are not so careless and
dissolute in their lives, but they are as ridiculous and sottish in answering
the matter. For what say they to all this when it is objected against them?
Bellarmin Tom. 1. praefat. in gymnas. Romans
answers, If a Catholic man fall into sin, if he commit theft, adultery,
murder; yet notwithstanding the foundation of his building abides still: he
has many and great furtherances to his salvation, he walks not in the dark,
he knows his Physician, he may through the faith that is in him call upon
God, etc. Happy Church where no man's sins may preiudicate him: this I believe
is it that makes the world run so fast to it for sanctuary. But Staphylus
more groslly after his manner: As for the life of the Clergy, Apol. part. 1. in
fine.
says he, God is their judge. For as of maidenhead, so of Priesthood man
cannot judge. And the Canon law worst of all: 11. q. 3. Absi^. in glo.
If a Priest embrace a woman, it shall be construed that he does it to bless
her. And, a Priest embracing a woman is presumed to do well. Now if this be so,
there is no more to be said, but that in silence and astonishme^t we adore the
prerogatives of this Roman Church, and admire her liberties, when they that
will live therein may without any danger steal the horse, but professing the
Protestants religion, they must be hanged for looking over the hedge.

. 39. But chiefly their Church is not holy, because there was never yet any
Saint, or holy man of it, approved to be such by miracle, or any other evident
token, as by revelation from almighty God.

The Answer.
1 This is false that the Jesuit says, there was never any Saint or holy man
of our Church, approved so to be by miracle, revelation, or any other evident
token. For first, the Prophets and Apostles, and holy men of the Primitive
Church, were all of our religion in every point, and believed not one article
of the present Roman faith: as we show in every question, and I have purposely
declared in other places. Now the Jesuit will not deny but these were Saints,
and by miracles approved so to be. Next, we have true believers, justified and
sanctified by the blood of Christ, who by virtue of their calling are Saints,
or holy men, as Romans 1.7. 1. Cor. 1.2. and 14.33.
the Scripture calls them, though their name stand not written in red letters
in the Calendar. And we prove them to be such, first, by the miracles and
revelations wherewith their faith was confirmed when the Apostles began to
teach it. For the men and the miracles are theirs whose the doctrine is.
Secondly, by the fruits of sanctification and the doctrine it self which they
believe; the former yielding as perfect obedience to God in all things, as this
sinful life will admit; the later, Tametsi dicunt, remissionem non pendere a
condition operu^, neque poenitentiam, aut fidem, aut vllum actum nostrum, esse
causam, aut meritum iustificationis; tamen non negant requiti fidem, and
poenitentiam and fidem viuam and poenitentia^ setiam, and sine his neminem
iustificati. Bell. de iustif. l. 3. c. 6.
even by the confession of our adversaries, binding men to a living faith, and
true repentance, the which doctrine cannot be without effect, and that effect
can be no other then the making such holy as entertain it. Thirdly, we have
Col. 2.2 5. Rom 8.16.
the full assurance of understanding, and steadfast faith in Christ concerning
our redemption, obtained partly by the revelation of the promises in the
Gospel, and partly by the Spirit of God bearing witness with our spirit, that
we are the children of God, and sanctified by the holy Ghost. And this is a
sufficient token of our holiness, and herby we know our selves to be the
Saints of God: the which if the Jesuit will deny, then let him prove, either
that we teach not true justification and sanctification; or if we teach it, and
have it, yet it is no argument of true holiness; or if it be, yet that it is not
evident enough without miracles to demonstrate the Church: or if miracles be so
necessary, then let him show we have no part in those which the Apostles did,
and others after the^. The which he cannot do but by examining the doctrine,
that all men may see how idly and circularly they dispute against the
Protestants, that do it by making holiness or miracles the notes of the Church.

2 But the Jesuits mind runs upon his Calendar and golden Legend, wherein
he thinks to find Saints and miracles to serve his turn. But he is deceived.
For let the^ be examined, and upon trial it will fall out, that one part were
no Papists; another part were not at all in rerum natura, neither they, nor
their miracles, but are mere devices and fictio^s; a third part consists of
uncertainties, that no man for his life can be sure it is true. The last and
the least part are canonized indeed, and were Papists, but that was of late,
and by the Popes doing, whereupon no man that wise is will ground his faith.

3 And touching this canonization, because the Papists always mean it when they
talk of their Saints, I object two things sufficient to discredit it. First,
that it was the Popes own invention, Bell. de Sanct. beatit. l. 1. c. 8..
Dices.
800. years after Christ at the least, set abroach and continued in policy for
the confirmation of certain idolatrous superstitions which he labored thereby
to advance, and now are made Bell. vbi supra. c. 7.
the seven points wherein the canonization consists: setting them in a
Calendar with red letters praying to them in the Church service, erecting
Churches and altars to them, ministering the Eucharist, and saying Canonical
hours in their honor, dedicating holidaies, setting up images, and worshipping
their relickes. Secondly, Sum. Rosell verbo Canoniz^tio. Can. loc. l. 5. c. 5.
q. 5. concl 3. Platin. in Bonif. 8.
themselves cannot deny but it is subject to error, that is to say, the Saint
canonized may be no Saint, and the miracles whereupon his canonization is
grounded may be false: as Tract de concept. and de indulgent. and refert
Catharin. adu. nou. dogm. Caiet. p. 127.
Caietan, and others confess, disputing about the miracles pretended for the
virgin Mary's conception without original sin; whereupon it follows
necessarily, as Si vnus sanctus vocatur in dubium, etiam caeteri vocari
possunt. Quare veraces essent haeretici qui dogmatizant esse periculosum
inuocare sanctos. Catha. vbi supra.
some Papists also complain, that all the Popes Saints may be doubted of, and
no man can invoke or worship them without manifest peril of idolatry. So
that we see it is a weak kind of reasoning to prove their Church by such
Saints. And I am firmly persuaded themselves mistrust it, in that many times
they shake off, as trifles, such revelations as the Jesuit boasts of. For
when the contention was among them about the conception of the virgin Marie,
and some, to prove it was without original sin, alleged revelations made to
Saint Bernard, Brigit, and others; the contrary side replied, as the
Protestants do, that these were fantastic visions, not sent of God, but men's
dreams, and Saint Katherin of Sienna had a revelation to the contrary. Anton.
part. 1. tit. 8. c. 2.
Thus answered John of Naples, and Antoninus, himself a Saint: teaching the
Protestants how to answer henceforward, when these miracles and revelations are
so importunately objected.

4 And sure it is as ridiculous an absurdity as they could lightly have
committed, thus to multiply their Saints, turning heaven into a stage, as
Scenam. de Coelo fecistis. Iul. Firmic. de errore profan. relig.
a father speaks of the Gentiles, and filling it with toys and Legend
fables, and then to be so uncertain about their own device when they have
done: yea to smile at the jest, and laugh at their own theater, as Caietan,
Antoninus, John of Naples, and others do. But if the Jesuit and some of his
mind, carry a grauer countenance in this matter, and speak more respectively
of their Saints, they are wise herein, seeing the Pope has dubbed them, and
has learned possible his lesson in Verb. (...).
Suidas, that says: It is no wisdom to be out of conceit with any god, as
Hippolytus was with Venus. The best way is to say well of all, specially at
Athens (now at Rome) where unknown gods also have altars dedicated to them.
Let our adversaries bethink themselves at last of this No man is able to put
any difference between the miracles of Christ with his Apostles, and of these
holy men, Saint Thomas Aquinas Bernard. B^nauenture, Beckes, Francis Dominicke,
and infinite others. Bristo. mo^ 6.
their dotage, and making choice of such as are without controversy, true
Saints in deed, let them without idolatry preserve their memories, and imitate
their godliness, and return to the unity of their doctrine, to reform their
innumerable heresies thereby. Which if they will do, they may with comfort
rejoice in the fellowship of the Saints, whereas now, meddling with them as they
do, they expose themselves to the scorn of men and rebuke of children.

. 40. Neither is their doctrine such as may of it self lead one unto
holiness, but rather to all liberty and looseness of life: as for example,
to break Fasting days; to cast away Confession of sins to a priest, which
is known to be so sovereign a remedy against sin; to neglect good works,
because they hold them not Necessary to salvation, nor Meritorious in Gods
sight; not to labor or endeavor to keep Gods commandments, because they hold
them impossible, and as it is said, Impossibilium non est electio, no man
chooses or labors to atchieue that which he esteems altogether
impossible. Not to be careful to avoid any sin, because they hold that
whatsoever we do is sin, and that all sins are Mortal in themselves: and
that there needs no Penance or Satisfaction to be done of our part for any
sin, contrary to that of S. John Baptist, Facite fructus dignos
poenitentiae, do ye works worthy of penance; and that of our Savior,
Poenitentiam agite, Matthew. 4. do penance: but that there is an easy remedy
for all, to wit, that by Only faith they be not imputed to us Finally to be
careless or desperate in all actions or consultations, because they hold all
things so to proceed of God his eternal predestination, that man, at least in
matter of religion, has no Free Will, and that he cannot do otherwise then he
does, and that God himself is Author of sin. Lo whither this doctrine of it
self leads, consider whether this can be a good tree which of it own nature
brings forth so bad fruit; and see whether this can be a Holy Church, which
teaches such points of unholy doctrine as of themselves draw men, or at least
open the gap to such disorderly, and lewd, and wicked life?

The Answer.
1 There is no part of our faith so holy, but evil minds may pervert it, and
take occasion of liberty thereby, as they did that said, Romans 6.1.
Let us sin that grace may abound; 1. Cor. 15.32.
and would do nothing but eat and drink, because to morrow they must die:
from the which perverseness of the wicked, we confess we cannot free our
doctrine, neither could the Apostles before us: but setting this aside, the
matter it self we teach, is so far from giving liberty, that we desire the
holiness of our Church be tried thereby rather then by any thing else. And I
marvel the Jesuit shamed not to say the contrary, when the learned of his
side give this testimony with it, that Staplet. de iustif. l. 9. c. 7.
the Protestants, every one of them, hold justifying faith is lively, working
by charity, and other good works, yea Bell. de iustif. l. 3. c. 6.
no man can be justified without such a faith, and serious repentance: for
hence it follows voluntarily, that the whole course of our doctrine is
against sin, because true faith working by love, and serious repentance, of
their own nature expel liberty, as one contrary does another. But this is the
manner of our lying adversaries; first, to misreport our teaching to the people
next, to extort violently from it what their malice can devise to our
discredit, belying herein their own knowledge; and then, to cry amain one to
another, Lo whither this doctrine leads? thus hoping, with the dash of a
goose quill to outface the truth of Christ's Gospel. But let the matter be
examined, and the points themselves, here reckoned up, looked into, and the
reader shall find, that when they are conceived as we hold them, they endure
neither lewdness nor liberty; and many learned and right skillful Papists
hold them with us, that the Jesuit might blush at his ignorance.

Digression 32. Touching fasting, and how we differ from the Papists therein:
and whether the doctrine of our Church be against it, as the Papists charge us.
2 The first point objected against us, is merely false. For we have no
doctrine that teaches to break fasting days, but the contrary, that fasting
is a Christian exercise, needful to be used for the humbling and enabling of
our selves to the duties of prayer and repentance, as often as the time shall
require; and we hold him no good Christian that omitteth it. Yea our Church
has public fasts in the danger of any general affliction, and our people
are taught to fast privately as much as any Papist whatsoever, setting
hypocrisy and superstition aside. The difference is, that we reject their set
days, and their manner of fast upon those days, by distinction of meats for
conscience sake, wherein they place the worship of God by way of merit and
satisfaction; for the most part also neglecting such exercises of religion by
prayer, contemplation, and repentance, as of right ought to be joined with the
outward abstinence: yea they place and practice fasting, Dicimus quod de
essentia iciunij quoad mo dum sunt duo, scil. vna comestio in spacio 24 horarum
and abstinentia a carnibus, quis, and lacticinijs. Llamas Sum. Eccl. p. 390.
only in forbearing flesh, and things coming of flesh, on certain days;
allowing themselves in steed thereof not only fish which is as good as flesh,
but that which is daintier, wine, conserues, sweet meats, and such like, in as
great measure as can be, as the experience of this our country shows among
such as are Popishly affected.

3 And suppose we had omitted all fasting indeed, and allowed no time for it,
yet some Papists would have borne us company herein, that so themselves might
be guilty of breaking fasting days as well as we. For Catharin. adu. noua
dogm. Caietan p. 262.
Caietan holds, It is no where commanded, but only by custom was brought
in, and is necessary neither for the service of God, nor the love of our
neighbor. Wherein though we refuse his judgment, yet touching our putting away
the distinction of meats and days, we are not to be blamed. For what liberty
or loosenes can possibly be imagined to proceed from eating flesh more the^
from eating of fish, sweet meats, spices, and other things finer the^ flesh,
which the Tho. 22 qu. 147. art. 6. 7. 8. Llam. method. part. 3. c. 5.. 24. 26.
Church of Rome allows? And how may it be conceived to be such disorder on a
Friday, or in Lent, or on a Saints even, to eat butter, or eggs, or a bit of
vndainty flesh, when they that are busiest in controlling it, the same days
will drink strong wine, and other drinks, and eat confections of better
stuff and warmer operations? Or why should a man be censured for eating his
meat on an Ember day, that fasts carefully and zealously upon any day without
respect of difference? Especially Fran. Victo. relect. 9. de temperant. p. 132.
our adversaries confessing, There is no kind of nourishment, either of
plants, or living creatures, but by the law of God and nature, we may lawfully
use it. Nothing can be objected but the precept of the Church, for Rational. l.
6. c. 7 nu. 22. p. 268.
Durands reason is too gross, that fish is eaten and not flesh, because God
cursed the earth, but not the waters, in that his spirit moved on them. But
what such authority has a particular Church to make a general law against
that which God and nature left at large? and what such iurisd ction has Rome
of late obtained, that it should forbid that which the Church in old time
permitted?

4 For Theo^. epit. divine. decret. c. vlt. Niceph l. 12 c. 34.
all antiquity can witness, that in the Primitive Church fasting was held an
indifferent thing, and every man was left to his own mind therein, Laxus ac
liber modus abstinendi ponitur euctis, neque nos seuerus terror impellit, sua
que^que cogit velle potestas. Pr^d. Cathem. him 8.
no law binding him to this or that manner, as Comment. in Act. c. 13. quem
refert. Catha. adu. Caiet. p. 262.
Caietan confesses; Montanus a condemned heretic, being the first that ever
brought in the laws of fasting, from whom the Papists have borrowed them. For
Irenaeus, that lived 1400. years ago, Eusebius. hist. l. 5. c. 26. Niceph. l. 4.
c. 39.
testifies concerning the keeping of Lent in his time, that some fasted before
Easter one day only, some two days, some more: and the unity of faith was
well maintained, notwithstanding all this variety. (...) hom. 2. de ieiun. p.
135.
Basil mentions only five days. And Socrates Hist. l 5 c. 22.
writes, how it was observed one way in one place, and another way in another.
They in Rome fasted three weeks only, and excepted Saterdaies and Lords
days. The Illyrians and Greeks six weeks. Others began seven weeks before
Easter, yet so as they fasted but a few days of all that time. The like
variety they observed in meats. For in some places they eat no living thing
at all, some only fish, some fish and foul, some dry bread, some would eat
no berries, or eggs, and some not so much as bread. For in these matters the
Apostles left every man to his own will. (...). Sozom. l. 1. c. 11.
Spiridion the Bishop of Cyprus, though he kept Lent, yet was it but upon
certain days that he fasted, and when a stranger came to him upon one of
those same days, he set swines flesh before him, and eat thereof with him. Yea
C^rop^lat. de (...) sic. p 118. and i^i Pacius annot. p. 322. graec.
they kept a Lent before the feast of Christ's nativity also, which we do not.
And touching Saterdaies, Ignat. ep. ad Philip. Sext. Syn. in Trul. c. 55.
some utterly condemned fasting that day, yet Aug. ep. 86.
other observed it. And Haeres. 75.
Epiphanius thought it an Apostolical tradition to fast Wednesdaies and
Fridaies, excepting those between Easter and Whitsontide, which yet the Church
of Rome observes not. And as for Ember days and Saints euens, we find no use
of them for fasting, till of late times. And touching this whole question of
fasting days, let it be marked what Ep 86. ad Casulan. pa no ante finem.
Saint Augustine writes to a friend of his, If (says he) you ask my opinion
concerning this matter, I find in the writings of the Evangelists and Apostles,
and all the new Testament, that we are commanded to fast; but what days we
must fast, and what days we must not, I find it not determined by any
commandment of Christ or his Apostles. So that if we be faulty because we
fast not after the Romish manner, then themselves are likewise faulty because
they fast not after the Primitive order: there being no greater reason why they
should condemn us for neglecting their fasts, then why we should condemn them
for neglecting the fasts of the ancient Church; nor any cause why our
liberty, in the use of meats and days, should be taken in worse part now,
then the same liberty used of old in the Primitive Church, when these things
depended upon the will of him that fasted.

5 And possible our accusers break fasting days in the same manner that we do.
For first, they eat as often and as good as we do, when they fast. Next, they
have dispensations Dispensati, ieiuniu^ non frangunt. Llam. metho. page 395.
which exempt them from fasting, so commonly and of course, that any man may
see the Pope defined fasting by meats and days, for no other cause but to
utter his pardons. Thirdly they have collations, which they hold by
prescription, that are equal to set feasts. For in Spain, on the even of the
Nativity for example, they have a bountiful supper, exceeding the measure of
fasting, made of fruits, conserues, marchpanes, and such like, Llam. vbi sup.
page 393.
which they think is lawful, though it hold not the nature of fasting.
Fourthly, they have customs, allowing them on fasting days to do as much as
we do. Llam. vbi sup. page 369. Ouan. 4. d. 16. pro. 52.
For in diverse places of Spain and Castile they use eggs, cheese, butter, yea
the lard of swines flesh. And generally on saterdayes they eat the inwards of
any beast, with the head and feet; yea any part of a swine, the buttock
excepted. Might it please the Papists now, either to give us leave to do what
they do themselves, or else to inuit us to their table on fasting days, that
we may have part with them, seeing their hospitality is so good, when we are
bound out from feasting at home? This is that which Joan. Sarisb. Policrat. l.
7. c. ^^
a Bishop noted in them long ago, and is worth the marking: They undertake
strict professions, and show us difficult things, and being more familiarly
favorable to themselves, when it comes to performance, they do things gentle
and possible.

Digression. 33. Concerning Auricular confession or shrift to a Priest; showing
that it is not necessary for the remission of sin: and how it is an occasion
rather then a remedy of sin oftentimes.
6 Touching the casting away of necessary shrift, we are not to be condemned,
unless our accusers can name some place of Scripture where Christ or his
Apostles has bound us to it; which they cannot do. For their own Canon law De
Poenit. d. 5 in poenitentia. Gloss.
says, it was taken up only by a certain tradition of the Church, and not by
any authority of the old or new Testament. And though the new Jesuits and
other Papists begin of late with great passion to deny this, affirming that
Christ ordained it in the 20. of John, yet that is no matter: for necessity
and shame has driven them to say so, and their predecessors as learned as
they, have writ the contrary. For Panormitan Super 5. de poenit. and remis. c.
omnes vtriusque.
says, That opinion of the Canon law, greatly pleases him, because he finds
no manifest authority that ever God or Christ commanded us to confess our
sins to a Priest. And Peresius a Bishop of the Trent Council De tradit. par.
3. consid. 3.
says, The clear and plain manner of this ordinance, both in respect of the
substance and circumstance, appears only by a tradition. And about six score
years since Carranz. in Sixto 4. Ouand. 4. d. 16. pro. 2.
Petrus Oxoniensis, the Divinity reader at Salmanca, publicly taught, as I
say, that it had the beginning from a positive law of the Church, and not from
the law of God. Who though he was made to recant this, yet Ouand. ibid.
Bonauenture, whom the Church of Rome honoreth for a Saint, was of his mind
long before, and Refert Henri. sum. page 206. edit. Salamant.
Medina, with others, at this day hold it. Whereby Rhem annot. Ioh. 20.23. Hopk.
memor. of Christian. 225. 2.
their rashness appears, that say our Savior appointed it so evidently in the
Gospel; and their misery, that are persuaded by such sayings to believe it.
Yea Annot. ad Tertul de poenit.
Rhenanus and Annot. ad Hiero. de obitu Fabiol.
Erasmus, as learned Papists as ever were, affirm, that neither Christ
ordained it, nor the ancient Church used it: which is the truth. For when it
began in some sort to creep in, Socr. l 5. c. 19. S^zo l. 7. c. 16. Tripart.
histo. l. 9. c. 35. Niceph. lib. 12. c. 28
Nectarius the Bishop of Constantinople put it down in his Church, and all the
Bishops of the East did the like in theirs: which the Papists know well enough,
and Walde^. tom. 2. de Sacr c 141. Dom. a Soto. 4. d 18 q. 1. Henri. sum page
325.
acknowledge, Impudentissimu^ illud Nectarij factum. Andr^d. orth. expl page
663. Nectari^^ a No^a^anis se^uctu^ fuisse oportet al^imare. Nec endaemonem
illum (qui Nectario ^^asit) quin potius cacodaemonem credendum est. Baron. tom
1. an 56 nu. 28. and Henriq vbi supra.
railing upon Nectarius for so doing: which is a sign that the Protestants
rejecting shrift, break no commandment of God, but follow the example of the
Primitive Church that refused it. The which is further proved by the preaching
of Chrysostom, Hom. 22 ad pop. Antioch.
saying, This is wonderful in God, that he not only forgiueth us our sins,
but neither does he disclose them or make them known, neither does he enforce
us to come forth and tell them; he requires no more but that we speak to him
alone, and to him alone confess our faults. This the godly Bishops would not
have done and taught, if the confession had been received in the^r time as
necessary, or if Christ had commanded it, or if it had been so sovereign a
remedy against sin.

7 And touching the necessity of confession in Lent, before they receive the
Sacrament, Sum. Armill. verbo communio. vlt. Caiet super 1. Cor 11. Pa^orm. d^
^clebrac^missat si. (...) De homine.
the learned Papists that ever were acknowledge it is a custom but newly
brought up, though Ho^^ memor tract. of confess. page 255
we be called lewd preachers, most wickedly deceiving the people, because we
say so. But mark what Caietan In 3 ^ho. q. 80. art. 4.
writes, and then judge what such cause there is why we should thus be
censured: There appears no positive law enioyning shrift before the receipt
of the Communion: the law of God has no such prec^ pt, but the contrary is
insinuated, where the Apostle says, Let a man try himself. Wherefore out of
this document of the Apostle, it seems unto me that he which is contrite for
his sin, and receives the Communion without shrift, sins not mortally,
though he have a confessor at hand. The reason moving me thus to think, is,
because it is plain, that a man having contrition for his mortal sin not
confessed, and so receiving, does that which is not sin of it own kind. Yea
to receive the other Sacraments also with contrition only, seems no where to
be forbidden. And that which is not confirmed by the authority of the Fathers,
must not by a superstitious novelty be commanded. The Papists therefore
extolling shrift so fast, talk out of their ignorance, not thinking that we
know how basely they think of it themselves.

8 For they not only know it to be, as I have said, a later tradition and
custom without commandment, expulsed sometimes out of the Primitive Church,
but they think in their conscience, it is not necessary; yea Mich. Bonon.
expos. in Psa. 29 page 259. edit. Venet. an. 1603. De poenit. d. 1. vt^um fol.
1. gl. Sant.
some of them write it expressly, that seeing justification is the infusion of
grace, whereupon sin is remitted, it follows that confession is not
necessary, either for the obtaining pardon of our sin, or for our
justification. For according to the true order of things, confession in time
follows contrition: and therefore seeing contrition it self is not without
justification, the said justification may be and is without confession. And
this opinion follows ineuitably of that they hold. For Caietan 3 Tho. q. 80.
art. 4.
says, A man contrite or sorrowful for his sin, stands clean in the
judgment of God, and is a formed member of the militant Church. And this
contrition as it goes before confession, so may it be without it. And L. 4. d.
18.
the Master of Sentences, and Refert. Fr. Victor. relect. 1. sect. 3. p. 13.
diverse others with him, holding that the Priest has no power to forgive
sin, or to work any spiritual effect by virtue of the keys, were as good
say, confession is not necessary. For why should it so be, when being done,
the Priest can give the penitent no spiritual grace thereby, nor absolve him
otherwise then by ^^claring him to be absolved?

9 And let no man say this shrift is known to be so sovereign a medicine
against sin; for we make account that Jesus Christ and his Apostles were as
careful to preserve men from sin as the Pope is, and yet they never
prescribed this medicine. And when Nectarius thrust it out of Constantinople,
he found the contrary by The rape of a noble woman. (...). Sozo.
a shameful experience, and therefore put it away to prevent wickedness. And
they that fear not to commit sin in the presence of God that sees all men,
will as little blush to confess it after their manner to a Priest, whom they
may deceive; and he that regards not the law of God, will care as little for
the Priests absolution; the fear of God and awe of his truth being of more
force to bridle our nature, then the policy of man. And the Jesuits speech,
It is known to be so sovereign, is but folly; and therefore he may keep it
to him self, or utter it to those that know nothing but what he tells them.
For more is known by his shrift, then I may be allowed to speak, though his
own Doctors allow me to speak somewhat, who knew as much of shrift as he
does, and yet all men think our English shriuers know something too. In Can.
lect. 77.
Biel allows me to say, it is an usual thing for them to turn their
confession into curiosities and babbling, mingling profane talk concerning vile
things. Aluar. Pelag. de planct. eccl. l. 2. art. 78. page 255.
Another writes, that hypocrites will never confess truly, but either cloak,
or dissemble, or defend their sins: yea religious men themselves, in nothing
so much as in dissembling confessions. For seldom or scarce at all do they
confess otherwise then in general terms, naming no great sin. What they
say one day, that they say the next, as if every day they sinned alike. This is
the virtue of shrift by their own confession: and yet it is nothing to that
which is known. For the same author Art. 27. p. 131.
adds, that it was an ordinary practice for the priests to commit execrable
villainy with the women at shrift, 1. Sam. 2.22.
as if they were the sons of Eli, Art. 2. page 83.
rauishing wives, and deflouring maids in the Church, and committing Sodomie
with young men, with other stuff Art. 2. and 73. and 83.
worse then this, that the Church was made a stews: that I say nothing
touching Ouand. 4. d. 34 pro. 5. corol. 3. Jacob. de Graff. decis. tom. 1. l.
1. cap. 25. nu. 12. Llam. method. part. 3 c. 8. 10. and inde.
the questions and resolutions passing between the priest and his penitents,
concerning cases scarce beseeming the chair of penance, save that the Priest
taking state upon him when he hears confessions, and sitting in his majesty
like a judge of China (for Llam. part. 2. ca. 6.
so they claim it) in his chair, Nudis genibus terta defixis prostratos
audiui, cu^ iuxta sellam meam quae deaurata crat, esset pul^inar sericu^. ib.
which sometime also is guilt with gold, receiving such as come to confession
kneeling on their bare knees, must be presumed not to err in any thing be
does, because Staphyl and Staplet apolog. part. 1.
they hold, that as of maidenhead so of priesthood no man may judge: which rude
conceit prevailing with the ignorant seduced people, is it that continued the
reputation of shrift, and nothing else. But mark again what Cornelius
Agrippa, one of their own side, has De vanit. c. 64.
left written to justify that I have said, if the Jesuit or his favorers
kick at it: I could (says he) by many examples, fresh in memory, show how fit
this shrift is for bawdry: for Priests, Monks and Nuns have this special
prerogative, that under pretense of religion they may go up and down when and
whither they will; and under color of confession, talk with any woman, whom
they oftentimes entertain but homely. Closely they go to the stews, ravish
virgins and widows; yea many times, which my self have seen and known,
run away with men's wives, and carry them to their fellows; and hereby, whose
souls they should gain to God, their bodies they sacrifice to the devil. If
the Protestants had been the authors of these reports, the shrift-maintainers
might with some color have replied, themselves had devised them in hatred of
shrift; but seeing they that deliver them are zealous Papists, and would say
nothing to the disgrace of their own Church, but what was too apparent and
could not be covered, we may with reason believe them, and rejoice in the
wisdom of God, whose judgment is just to give over idolaters and their
inventions to be taken in their own works, that every child might see their
madness, and Mal. 2.3.
cast their own filth in their faces. And I think most men that are
acquainted with the haunts of our Seminary shriuers this day in our country,
believe their shrift to be a medicine of the same box, whereof I hope I may
speak in Chaucers words, to end this point of Popish shrift, who living in a
shriuing time, thus Prolog. in the descript. of the Friar.
wrote how the Friar applied his medicine.

Full sweetly heard he confession,
And pleasant was his absolution:
He was an easy man to give penance,
There as he wist to have a good pittance
For unto a poor order for to give,
Is sign that a man is well yshriue.
For many a man is so hard of heart,
That he may not weep though him smart.
Therefore in steed of weeping and of prayers,
Men more give silver to the poor Friars.
Now this answer being made to popish shrift, for the removing of the general,
absolute, and perpetual necessity thereof, which the Papists urge: we are to
add concerning this point the doctrine of our Church, which does not deny or
take away the free and godly use of confession, but teaches that it is very
profitable when it is discreetly done upon just occasion, and a godly, learned
and trusty minister may be had for the searching of the wounds of sinful
souls, and applying of fit counsel and comfort to distressed consciences, and
therefore our Church exhorts, when any cannot so well by himself apply the
means prescribed in the word to himself for the quieting of his conscience,
but requires further counsel or comfort therein, then to resort to some
discreet and learned Minister of Gods word, and to open his grief, that he may
receive such ghostly counsel advice and comfort, as his conscience may be
relieved, and that by the ministry of Gods word he may receive comfort and the
benefit of absolution, to the quieting of his conscience and avoiding of all
scruple and doubtfulnesse, as it is in the second exhortation before the
Communion. For which purpose also a form of absolution is prescribed in the
visitation of the sick, to be used after special confession, in sickness as
well of mind as of body: Our Lord Jesus Christ who has left power to his
Church to absolve all sinners which truly repent and believe in him, etc.

Digression. 34. Concerning the necessity or requisite condition of good
works for our salvation: showing that the Protestants hold it.
11 The third point of our doctrine charged as tending to liberty, is the
article of good works, wherein the Jesuit accuses us two ways: first that we
hold they are not necessary to salvation: next, that we deny their merit.
This latter accusation we confess, but deny the former, and say, themselves
know it to be a lie, not only by our preaching and writings, wherein the
learned of our Church urge men to a godly life, Melancth. corp. doctrine. Chr.
in repetit. co^fess. Kemnit. loc. c. de operibus renat. q. 6. Calvin. Inst. l.
3. c 16.. 1. Pola^d. these. de bonis operibus. nu. 14.
defending the verity of this proposition, that good works are necessary to
salvation: but also by the clear confession of their own side, Bellar. de
iustificat. l. 4. c. 1.
who going about to fasten it upon us, that we should hold against the
necessity of good works, yet acknowledge it is rather a consequence of our
doctrine, and our secret meaning, then our manner of speech or teaching. Wherein
they show their desire of contention, and unconscionable misleading the people,
when they will not suffer us to expound our own doctrine, nor give us leave to
declare our own faith, but, Math. 5.17. Romans 3 31.
as the Jews did Christ and his Gospel, slander our doctrine with that which
themselves know is far from it. For how can they say, we hold good works not
necessary, when they see well enough and acknowledge our doctrine is, that Bell
de Iustif. l. 1. c. 12. Itaque.
man is justified by the grace of God not imputing our sins unto us, which
grace, faith apprehends by believing: Idem. l. 3. c. 6. Stapl. de Iustif. l.
9. c. 7.
and this faith is living, and works by charity, without which faith and
true repentance no man can be saved; so excluding not the necessity, but only
the merit of our works? Yea Bellarmine Bellar. de Iustif. l. 4. c. 1. Ac
primum. and Stapl. de Iustif. page 334. Protestants ipsi, quamuis a formali
nostra iustitia, sanctificatione^ and noua^ obedientiam distinguant, vt non sit
pars eius essentialis; adesse tamen came certo and infallibiliter volunt omnibus
Dei filijs, tanquam indiuidnam fidei iustificantis comitem and propriam sinorum
Dei notam.
says expressly, that Melancthon, Brentius, Kemnitius, Calvin and Luther teach,
that good works must be done, and show them to be necessary in some sort, in
that they affirm it is no true faith unless it bring forth good works, and
be accompanied with charity. Wherein he has truly reported that we teach, and
by reporting it, showed the wilfulness of his own side in giving it out,
against their own knowledge, that we deny the necessity of a good life. The
point we deny is this, that our own righteousness is the thing that must
answer the law of God, or by way of merit, procure acceptance with God to
eternal life, or make us righteous in his presence. For God of his justice
requires that every man, before he be saved or admitted into the state of his
children to enjoy his favor and friendship, bring a full satisfaction and
righteousness or justice of works answerable to the law: the which justice,
say we, is not the righteousness that we do, but the perfect obedience of
Christ imputed to us, and made ours by faith; our own works being only the
fruit of this faith, and a requisite condition of our salvation, as the way to
walk in, and no otherwise; which way whosoever finds not, or having found
it, walks not, shall never be saved, because God saves none but by
justification and sanctification both: the former is to acquit them from the
condemnation of the law, and it is by the blood and obedience of Christ; the
latter is to conform them to the Gospel, and to go the way that leads to
God; and it is by our own inherent holiness. Both these must therefore of
necessity be done: the obedience of Christ to justify us, and our own works
to go the way whither our justification calls us; whereupon it follows,
they neither justify, nor satisfy, nor merit before God, nor answer the
righteousness of his law; and yet are absolutely necessary as the fruits of
faith and marks of the way that leads to heaven. And even as the king freely
bestowing a place in the Court upon his subject, this his free gift binds him
over to come to the Court and receive it, and having so done, to discharge the
place with all diligence and attendance: and yet the subject cannot say, that
either his going the way or attendance procured him the place, but only the
kings free gift put him into it: and if this man's friend sometime tell him, you
must go to the Court and do your attendance, though, when you have done all you
can, your so doing is not worthy the kings favor he has showed you; he does
not thereby persuade him to neglect his journey and service, but rather the
contrary, that the kings gift calling him to the place implies both. So is it
in our sanctification, which is the way that leads to the kingdom that God
has freely given us, and the duty which that gift calls us to; and
therefore necessary in it own kind and order and no otherwise. Which the
Protestants holding do not teach thereby that men should neglect good works,
but the contrary: they only think them not necessary or requisite to our
justification for the satisfaction of the law, because herein nothing
concurreth with the merit of Christ, or can do: as many learned Papists
themselves confess, and the ordinary sort of people, that now misconceiueth
our doctrine in this point, when they understand it, as I have laid it down,
will not deny.

Digression. 35. Touching the merit of our works: and what is to be holden
thereof.
12 Next, the Jesuit accuses our doctrine of good works, because it denies
the merit thereof. For answer whereunto, we believe assuredly our good works
shall be rewarded both in this life, and in the life to come, yea far beyond
that which they are worth: only we deny their merit; that is to say, we think
this reward is not given for the merit or desert of the work, but of the mere
grace and mercy of God for the merits of Christ. Wherein we have not only the
Scripture, and ancient Doctors, but the most skillful and learned Papists that
ever lived, on our side. Exodus 20.6.
The law saying the reward is of mercy, and Romans 8.18.
the Gospel telling us, The sufferings of this life are not worthy of the
glory in the life to come.

13 That which the Papists mean by merit is this, which I set down in their
own words, and let the reader judge whether the Protestants have not reason to
refuse it. Andradius Orth. expl. l. 6
says, The heavenly blessedness, which the Scripture calls the reward of
the just, is not given them of God gratis and freely, but is due to their
works: yea God has set forth heaven to sale for our works. The Deane of
Louan Expl. Artic. Louan. tom. 2. art. 9.
says, Far be it from us that the righteous should look for eternal life,
as a poor man does for his alms, for it is much more honor for them as
victors and triumphers to possess it, as the garland which by their labor
they have deserved. Bayus De merit. operum. l 1. c. 9.
says, That although the restoration of mankind be ascribed to the merits of
Christ, yet it is not for Christ's merits that our works are rewarded with
eternal life: neither does God, when he gives the reward, look toward
Christ's death, but only to the first institution of mankind, wherein by the
law of nature it was appointed, that in the just judgment of God, obedience
should be rewarded with life, as disobedience is with death. Suarez Tom. 1. in.
Tho. 3. d. 41. sect. 3.. Secundo. and oportet.
says, A supernatural work proceeding from grace, within it self, and of it
own nature, has a proportion and condignitie with the reward, and a
sufficient value to be worth the same. The reward therefore is not given for
Christ's merit. The merit of Christ cannot be made our merit, therefore neither
can our merits have the power of meriting from Christ's merits, or any more
worthiness then they be ordained to have of themselves. It must not be denied
but our merits are true merits, so that the works of the godly proceeding from
grace, have of themselves an inward worthiness, and are proportionable to the
reward, in the same manner as if we conceived a man to be just, and work well,
without the merits of Christ, as many think of the Angels, and of man in the
state of innocence. Thus the merits which the Protestants deny, are not the
reward of good works, but that inward condignitie which our adversaries place
in them, whereby they think God is bound to reward them, yea without any
respect to the death or merits of Christ. This we hold a detestable opinion,
because it abrogateth the Gospel, and sets on foot the covenant of works.

14 Beggars asking for alms show their wounds, but Papists will have us show
our merits, and not ask heaven as an alms for Christ's sake, but challenge it
as due for our works sake: but what says one, Marc. herem. de his qui putant
se ex oper. iustif.
He that does good, seeking reward thereby, serves not God, but his own will.
Origin Ad Romans l. 4. c. 4.
says, I can hardly believe there is any work that may require the reward of
debt. Austin De gr. and lib. arb. c. 9.
writes, We must understand that God brings us to eternal life, not for our
merits, but for his own mercy. And Bernard; De Annunc. sermon. 1.
That the merits of men are not such, that eternal life should be due to them
of right, or that God should offer men injury if he did not therefore bestow
it. In Cant. ser. 61.
The mercy of God is my merit. De great. and lib arbit.
The things which we call our merits are the nurses of our hope, the
prouocations of love, the signs of our election, the forerunners of our future
happiness, the way to the kingdom, not the cause why we reign. And Gregory
himself, who was a B. of Rome, Super. Ps. 7. poenit.
says, It is one thing for God to reward men according to their works, and
another thing to give the reward for the works themselves. When the Scripture
says, according to our works, the quality of our works is understood, that
the reward shall be his whose the works are: for unto that blessed life,
wherein we live with God, can no labor be compared, no work likened, seeing
the Apostle says, The suffering of this life is not worthy of the glory of
the life to come. This that these fathers have said, is it we also say for our
selves and answer our accusers. Now I know well enough a witty Romanist,
devoted to contention, can invent some fine distinction to make these men
speak good Roman Catholic whatsoever they meant: let him do us the like
favor, making the same distinction for us that he will do for Austin, Bernard,
or Gregory, and we shall be as good Catholics as they.

15 Moreover it is diligently to be observed, that howsoever our adversaries
contend for their merits, yet the learned and most judicious among them
disauow them, teaching people at their way-gate to renounce them: and holding
that which I have said, to be the sounder doctrine: so did Anselme the Bishop
of Canterbury, 500. years since, teach the people to die in this faith,
Refert. Hos. confess. Petrico^. 1. c. 73.
confessing, Lord, I set the death of Christ between me and my bad merits, and
I offer his merits for my own merits which I should have, but have not: and
between me and thine anger, I interpose the death of my Lord Jesus. So also In
Luc. c. 7.
says Stella: God my Protector look not upon me, but first look upon thy
only Son, and place between me and thee, him thy Son, his cross, his
blood, his passion his merits: that so thy justice passing through his blood
and merits, when it comes at the last to me, it may be gentle and full of
mercy. Waldensis Sacramental. tit. 1. c. 7. p. 30. idem Erasm. ^eclarat. ad
Cens. Pa^is p. 197.
says, He is to be reputed the sounder Divine, and the better Catholic, and
more agreeable to the Scripture, that simply denies such merit, confessing
that simply no man meriteth the kingdom of heaven, but obtains it by the
grace and free will of God that gives it. Bellarmine De iustificat. l. 5. c.
7.. Sit tertia.
says, that by reason of the uncertainty of a man's own righteousness, and
for fear of vain glory, it is the safest way to repose our whole confidence
in the sole mercy and goodness of God. And he gives the reason, because no
man, without revelation, can be sure he has true merits, or that he shall
persevere therein; and nothing is easier then to be tempted with the pride of
his own good works. Pighius Controu. 2. Rati^bo.
says, We are made righteous not by our own righteousness, but by the
righteousness of God in Christ: who puts his own justice between his
Fathers judgment and our injustice, under the which as under a shield, he
protecteth us from the divine wrath which we have deserved. Ferus L. 3. commen.
in Mat. c. 20.
says, The parable of him that hired laborers into his vineyard, teaches
that whatsoever God gives us, is of grace not of debt; for all our
righteousness is as a cloth polluted: yea the very sufferings of this life are
unworthy of future glory. If therefore thou desire to hold the grace and
favor of God, make no mention of thy merits. And let all such as contend with
us about this point, assure themselves their own schools were of our mind
herein till of late. Gregorius Ariminensis 1. d. 17. q 1. ^^t. 2. p. 89.
defends at large, that no work done by man, though coming from the greatest
charity, meriteth of condignitie either eternal life or any other reward
either eternal or temporal; because every such work is the gift of God. And
against that conceit which says there is an inward worthiness in the nature of
our works, deserving the reward, which worthiness is commonly called the merit
of condignity, he disputes, that the reward is simply due to no works, nor of
their nature, but only through the free appointment of God, who out of the
abundance of his mercy has ordained to reward such works with eternal life.
But Durand is so plain, that the merit-mongers are feign to disclaim him. He 2.
d. 27. q. 2. p. 200.
says, There is no merit of condignitie between man and God, but only
between man and man; the said merit being strictly taken (as the Papists now
do) to import a voluntary action whereto the reward is due of justice, so that
if it be not given, there is wrong offered. And whatsoever we receive of God,
whether it be grace or glory, whether temporal or spiritual good, whatsoever
good work we have before done for it, yet we receive the same rather of Gods
liberality then of the debt of the work. And forasmuch as no man's free gift
can bind him to give more, but he that receives more, is the more bound to him
that gives it; therefore hence it follows that by the good habits and deeds
which God has enabled us to do, he is not bound by the debt of his justice to
give us more, that he should (as the Papists now say) be unjust if he gave it
not, but we rather are bound to him: and it is rashness, yea blasphemy, to
think or say the contrary, as Upon Heb. 6.10.
the Rhemists do. Then he concludes, that if God give any reward to our well
doings, this is (as the Protestants speak) not that he is a debtor to the
works, but of his own liberality. Mark the argument he uses against
merits, and then judge freely whether it can possibly be answered. No man
having freely bestowed a gift upon another, is bound by the good use of the
said gift to bestow more; but he that receives it is rather bound to him that
gives it. But all the works of grace whatsoever, though never so well used,
are freely bestowed upon us by God: therefore God is not bound by the good use
thereof to bestow more. And so consequently man is bound rather to God, and all
his reward is of mercy not of condignitie.

16 Besides, all Papists are not of one mind concerning these merits, that men
may see they talk against the Protestants abroad, that which they are not
agreed of among themselves at home, which is more then ridiculous. For Scot. 4.
d. 14 q 2. Ipse Scotus assignat quoddam meritum congruu^ quod ipse vocat
attritio^em ex putis naturalibus, quae est ratio aliqua remissionis peccatorum
and iustificationis. Dom. Bannes. part. 1 q. 23. art. 5 p. 496. Tho 1 2. q.
114. art. 3. and 6. and in 2. sent d. 27. q 3. Et ibi caete^i scholastici.
some hold that a man doing what he is able by the power of his freewill,
before his conversion, omitting nothing that tends to the obtaining Gods
favor, merits hereby of congruitie that God of his goodness, which binds
himself to accept every one that turns himself to him, should prepare him
to further grace: but Hos. conf c 73
othersome reject this kind of merit and accuse it of heresy: that we might
know what stuff the Popes schools now and then harbor in them. And touching
the merit of condignitie, you hear what is commonly said, Rhem. annot. upon 1.
Cor. 3.8. and Heb. 6 10. Andrad. O^th. explic. l. 6.
that our works of their very nature deserve eternal life; the reward whereof
is a thing equally and justly answering to the time and weight of the work,
rather then a free gift, so that God should be unjust if he gave it not: yet
Anselm Stella Waldens. Bell. Pightus. Ferus. Ariminens. Durand.
others, whom I alleged immediately before deny this, and Bellarmine himself
whether he were asleep, or what extremity he was driven to I know not, but
Indic. de lib. concord. mendac. 8.
he writes expressly, To works done by faith, and the help of God, we ascribe
no such merit as has the reward of justice to answer them: but only the merit
of impetration, which the schoolmen called the merit of congruitie, not of
condignitie: and yet I showed before that Hosius says, the merit of congruitie
is Pelagianisme. Again Tho 2. d. 27. art. 3 Hos confess. c 73. Alex. Halens.
part. 3. q. 69. m 5. art. 2.. 1. Greg Valent. Apol. missae. c. 5.
some say, The merits of a man's works proceed from the grace of God, and his
union with Christ. But Bavus de merit. oper. l. 2. c. 1. and 4. and 7.
others say, this is heresy and conclude, that the dignity of the person
adds nothing to the reason of meriting, and they may merit heaven that are
not yet adopted to be the sons of God. Armachan. qq. Armen. l. 12 c. 21.
Scot. 1. d. 17. q. 2. Vega de iustificat. q. 5. Occham. 1. d. 17. q. 2.
Some say, the merit is, not because the works have any worthiness in
themselves, but by reason God has made a promise, and thereby bound himself
to reward them: but Andrad. Orth. expl. l. 6. Caietan. 1.2. q. 114. art. 3.
Soto de Not and Great. l. 3. c. 7.
others deny this, and think they deserve the reward though God had made no
promise at all. Which the learned Papists think Halens. part. 2. q. 96. m 3
art. 2.
the works of Adam in his innocence, and Scot Almayn. Biel. Durand. Medina.
quos refert Suar. tom. 1. p. 35.
Christ when he redeemed us did not, ascribing their merit to the covenant
which God made to accept them. Bell. de iustif. l. 5. c. 17. Coster. Enchir. c.
7.
A third sort say, they merit by virtue of the work and promise both. Hos.
confess. Polon. c. 73. vbi etiam refert Albert. Bonauent. Gabr.
Some are of mind, that both the grace of working and the merit of the work
being doing, flow both alik^ from the merit of Christ. But Bayus de merit.
operum. l. 1. c. 9.
others say the contrary, how it is for Ch^ists sake indeed that God has
enabled us to do the good work, but when it is done, then the reward is given
not for Christ, but for the works sake, without any respect of Christ's death.
Suar. tom. 1. d. 41. sect. 3.
The Jesuits say many of them, that the promise of God made to accept our
works, binds God to reward them: yea they have an inherent and in trinsecall
worthiness of their own, deserving reward, as Adams works had in the state
of innocence. And Upon Hebr 6 10.
the Rhemists say, They be meritorious, and the very cause of salvation so
far, that God should be unjust if he rendered not heaven for the same. But 2.
d. 27. q. 2. lit. d.
Durand says, it is rashness and blasphemy so to speak, the promise of God
in the Scriptures no way binding him to give the reward, but only teaching
that he purposes to give eternal life to such as live godly. The like say
Part. 2. q 96. m 3. art. 2. part. 3 q 69. m. 5. art 2. 1.
Alexander and 1. ^. 17. q. 1. art. 2.
Ariminensis, two famous schoolmen.

17 By these uncertainties and oppositions of our accusers among themselves, it
is easy to discern, they have more stomach to strive against us, then wit to
conceal their own disagreements, or power to reconcile their faith with the
truth. The conclusion therefore shall be this, that the point of difference
between us and the Papists concerning merits, is, that we believe there is no
merit in our works at all, and the Papists cannot tell what to believe.

Digression. 36. Answering those that accuse the Protestants for holding that
no man can keep Gods commandments, and showing what is to be holden
concerning that matter.
18 First, that the malicious reports of our accusers seduce no man, I will set
down what we, and what they say touching this matter, and the difference
between us: and then make trial whether it follow of that we say, that men
should neglect good works. That which we hold is, that no man is able to do
all that the law requires, but in many things we sin all: the reason is,
because the commandment tieth us not only to the outward work, but Mat.
22.37.
also to the perfection of inward love, yea that we do both these, not by the
help of the grace of the Gospel, but of our selves, by the strength of our
own will, for so much as the law was given before the Gospel was revealed,
when man stood in pure nature: in either of which points whosoever fails,
though never so little, he is a transgressour of the law. And though Jesus
Christ have brought grace to the law, that is to say by the revelation of his
Gospel has in some sort altered it, yet that grace stands not in
diminishing the commandments, or enabling us here to keep it without defect,
but in absoluing us from the rigor of it, and working the obedience of the
Gospel in our hearts. The rigor of the law admits no righteousness but
that which is absolute and perfect, it offers us justification and eternal
life upon no other condition, it adiudgeth every man to hell for the least
sin, and condemns all such as fail in perfect obedience: and this rigor
stands in force toward all that are out of Christ: and though the grace of
Christ have delivered his children from it, yet this deliverance we see
implies not their exemption from sinning, but only supposes three other
things. First, that the curse of the law shall not be extended against the^,
because Christ has suffered it. Next, that the power of it shall be abated in
them, by reason the death of Christ has mortified the lust of the flesh.
Thirdly, that they are freed from the law thus armed with rigor, and admitted
to the obedience of the Gospel which is a yoke lighter and easier. And we hold
that all the perfection of man's righteousness in this life stands only in
bearing this yoke, the commandments whereof are three, and we think it not
impossible to keep them. The first is repentance, whereby we seek that our
sins may be pardoned, and we renewed by daily mislike and hatred of our
selves for the sins we have done, confessing them to God, and craving more
strength against them. The 2. is faith, believing in Christ for the remission
of our sins. The third is new obedience, consisting in the mortification of
the flesh, and quickening of the spirit, that we may endeavor and press our
selves forward to do our uttermost in walking the way of all the moral law.
And thus we say, the commandments may be kept and no otherwise.

19 Our adversaries that mislike us herein, themselves hold the whole law to be
both possible and easy to be kept by a justified man. Council. Trid. sess. 6.
c. 11. Bellar. de Iustif. l. 4 c. 10 Greg. Val. tom. 2. page 993.
They say, man's nature is so healed by grace, that thereby he has proper
faculty given him to eschew all mortal sin all his life long, and perfectly
to fulfill the law. Yea Rhem. 1. Cor. 9.16. and 2. Cor. 8 14.
that he may of his abundant charity do more then the commandments require,
and so both merit for himself and supererogate for others that want merits of
their own. And though they seem to except venial sins, yet that is no
matter: for Henriq. sum. moral. l 4. c. 20. nu. 5. Bellar. de amiss. gr. l. 1.
c. 3. Biel. lect. 7. in Can.
they think such are no sins, but a light matter, as it were a little dust
that rises upon ones garment, without hurting or changing it, repugnant
neither to grace nor charity, not turning a man from God, nor deserving
eternal punishment, nor breaking friendship with God, and therefore require
neither penance, nor confession, nor repentance, but he that dies therein may
be saved. The which being so, they had as good have not excepted them at all:
for what kind of sin is that which neither offends God, nor is against
charity, nor offers him injury, nor deserves his anger, nor requires any
sorrow for it? Nay Bonauent. Compend. theol. l. 3. c. 12. Valent. tom. 2. page
838.
some of them say expressly, a man by the special grace of God may live without
it too all the days of his life. This is the thing that we mislike, and
hearken to it; they which brag of themselves that they sin not, yet call
others Puritans, the which name was therefore given the Nouatians, Augus. de
haeres. c. 38. Isid. Orig. l. 8. c. de haeres. Lindan. Panopl. l. 4 c. 64.
because they thought they were pure from all sin, as the Papists do: it is
reareason they partake the name that communicate in the opinions, and none else.

20 This being the difference between us, I am contented the Scriptures judge,
and Fathers say, who are in the wrong, and let the Reader give ear how one of
them greeteth this Jesuit, Pelusiot. l. 1. ep. 100.
Why do thou foolishly glory as if thou were pure? why do thou
counterfeit thy self to be void of sin? what do thou renouncing the
fellowship of nature? Job. 9.30.
Job said, If I wash my self in snow water, and purge my hands most clean,
yet shall thou plunge me in the pit, and mine own clothes will make me filthy.
Saint James Iac. 3.2.
says, In many things we sin all. The Prophet Esa. 64.6.
confesses, We are all unclean, and all our righteousness is as a menstruous
cloth. And Pro. 20 9.
Solomon, Who can say, I have made my heart clean, I am pure from my sin? And
of such as our adversaries are, he Pro. 30.12.
says, There is a generation pure in their own conceit, and yet are not
washed from their filthiness. Saint Ambrose Comment. in Gal. 3.
says, The commandments are such that it is impossible to keep them. And
Saint Austin, Confess. l. 9. c. 13.
Woe be to the commendablest life that we lead, if thou Lord, setting thy
mercy aside, should examine it. Beside, the Papists cannot reconcile that
they say with the rest of their opinion, to make the^ agree. For the Rhemists
grant, In Mat. 6.12.
Every man, be he never so just, yet because he lives not without venial
sins, may truly and ought to say this prayer, Forgive us our trespasses.
Wherein granting that the iustest man is bound to say Forgive us, they admit
also that he keeps not the law: else it were superfluous to ask pardon where
there is no sin, or where the sin is so small, that it deserves no
punishment. And suppose the fancy were true, that God must be entreated
because of venial sins, yet that proves them to be directly against his
law, as Almain. moral. tract 3 c. 20. Vega des. Trid. l. 11. c 20.
some learned Papists acknowledge they are, because Gods justice binds no man
to humble himself that has not offended his law: venial sins therefore
being against the moral law, as Almaine and Vega confess, and binding us to
ask pardon for them, and no man living without them, it follows that no man
can keep the law.

21 And whereas it is objected, that God would not bid man do that which is
impossible, forasmuch as no man chooses that which cannot be done: Nam fatentur
doctores, quod aliquis been potest obligari ad impossible propter eius culpam:
and hoc quando obligatio praecedit ill^d impossible. Almain. moral. c. 1. Non
omnis impote^tia been agendi excusat homine^ a peccato si non been agat; quia
non illa quae est poena peccati. Greg. Arimin. 2 d. 26. page 103.
I answer first, that men are justly bidden do that which they cannot, because
through the fall of Adam they have deprived themselves of that strength whereby
they might have been able. Secondly, they are revoked to the law, not to be
justified by keeping it, but that it might be their schoolmasters to Christ,
to show them their misery, to drive them to faith, to direct their lives. And
it is an impotent foolishness to think that the proposition of the law could
be for no other end but to bind men to keep it: or if it were propounded for
that end, yet that the children of God are not delivered from it. Thus Saint
Austin De great. and lib arbit. ad Valen. c. 16.
answered the Pelagians, obiecting as the Papist does: The Pelagians think
they have spoken doughtily, when they say, God would never command what he knew
impossible for man to do: as who should say, any body knew not so much? But
therefore he commands things impossible, that we might know what to crave of
him. For it is our faith, which by prayer obtains that which the law
requires. And Bernard more fully In Cant. sermon 50.
says, Therein thou must yield unto me, that the commandment neither has
been fulfilled in this life by any man, nor can be. For who dares arrogate to
himself that which Saint Paul confesses he could not comprehend? Neither was
our Master ignorant, how the weight of the law exceeded man's strength: yet he
thought it profitable thereby to give them warning of their own
insufficiency, that they might know to what righteousness they should bend as
far as they might. By commanding therefore things impossible, he made not men
sinners, but humbled them, that every mouth might be stopped, and the whole world
made subject to God, when no flesh shall be justified in his sight by the works
of the law: for when we receive the commandment, and feel our weakness, we
cry to heaven. So that Saint Austine and Bernard, we see, say as we do, the
commandments are impossible to be kept, and yet for all that, they teach how
men may labor therein with profit, and bring them selves to humility and the
faith of Jesus Christ: which is the true use of the law, that men seeing their
infirmity, might seek for the pardon of their sins at his hand, who is the
end of the law for righteousness to all that believe. And the Papists teaching
the contrary, have filled themselves full of detestable presumption and
hypocrisy, and pestilent contempt of that righteousness which is through the
faith of Christ. Seek not ( Marc. Herem. de lege spirit.
says an old Heremite) the perfection of the law in man's virtues, for no man
is found perfect in it. (...).
The perfection thereof is hid in the cross of Christ. I end the point with
Saint Austins speech, Retract. l. 1. c. 19.
All the commandments are holden to be kept, when that which is not kept is
forgiven.

Digression. 37. Whether the Protestants think, whatsoever we do is sin.
22 Answer to the book of Engl. justice. page 183.
Our adversaries confess, there is no hatred so capital and deadly as that
which arises from the contrariety of religion. This they speak out of their
own practice, whose hatred against us has devised and laid to our charge more
lies then themselves believe truths: which trade of lying and coining
whenever they lay away, that very hour they shall be silent, having no
occasion to speak against us if they will speak the truth. For we do not
hold, that whatsoever we do is sin, as the Jesuit charge us; but that we
hold is this, Math. 7.17. and 12 33. 1. Cor. 13 2. Heb. 11.6.
first that every work, not directed to the right end, which is the glory of
God, nor arising from the right cause, which is faith, is sin and displeasant
to God, what show soever it make before men; as the works of Gentiles, and
other unregenerate men. And herein not only the Fathers hold with us, by Sic
que cleemosynae, reiunia operaque pia infidelium, peccata esse affirmant, quia
non sunt ex fide. Idque Augustine. multis in locis videtur docere, and ante cum
Origenes. Tolet. in Romans 14. annot. 15.
the Papists own confession, but the Papists themselves. Gregorius Ariminensis
2. d. 38. art 1. and d. 36.
says, It is truly spoken, that a work is then virtuous or morally good, when
according to all the circumstances required, it is conformed to true reason:
and every moral action not so conformed, is evil and vicious: as if it want
the due circumstances of the end, etc. The like say 1. d. 1 q. 1. lit. h and 3.
q. 12 lit. yy. solut. 3.
Occham, and Moral. c. 11. tract. 1.
Almaine, that nothing is a good deed unless it proceed from the love of God,
whereupon no work of infidels is a virtue, etc. So that hitherto they condemn
us for that which themselves confess to be the truth.

23 Next concerning the works of the godly done in the state of grace, we do
not say, whatsoever they do is sin; but only that sin cleaves to it, and
in part blemisheth it whatsoever it be, as water running through a miry
channel is mudded, and wine put into a fustie vessel is changed thereby. The
which pollution yet we do not think either makes the work lose the name of a
good work, or put the doer into the state of damnation, as a work that is
formally sinful, wittingly committed does, by reason God for Christ's sake
forgiueth the imperfection, and reputeth it good for that parts sake which
himself works. And as water mingled with wine, in part delayeth it, and yet
receiving the color and taste by the mixture, the whole is called wine: so our
natural corruption mingling it self with the good that Gods spirit works in
us, blemisheth it in part; and yet being overcome thereof, the whole is called,
and reputed a good work.

24 The Scripture teaches this plainly: for Exodus 28.35.
God gave the high Priest a plate of gold to wear on his forehead, with the
holiness of Jehouah graven in it, that he might bear the iniquity of the
offerings, the holy offerings of the people, to make them acceptable. Apoc. 8.4.
And Jesus Christ is feign to mingle the smoke of sweet odours with the prayers
of the Saints, when they go up to God. What better works then the sacrifices
of the synagogue and prayers of the Church? Yet we see they had need to be
purified before they come into the judgment of God. Yea Chrysostom Hom. 19. ad
pop. Antioch. (...).
faith of our prayers, that such negligence and carele^^^^es^ grows unto
them, that we could not live one day if God should straightly examine them. To
will is present with me, Romans 7 18.
says Saint Paul, but I find (...).
no power thoroughly to perform that which is good. And he that believed in
Christ yet cried Lord help my unbelief. For as a Scriuener teaching a child
to write, though he lead his hand, yet the writing bears witness of the
child's imperfection: so God by his spirit writing his law in our heart, yet
has not given us so great perfection, but that the best works he teaches us
bear witness of our natural infirmity so far, that Saint Austine Confess.
l. 9. c. 13.
is of mind, that woe be to our commendable life, if God removing his mercy,
should rip into it: and De ciuit. Dei. l. 19. c. 27.
says, All our righteousness stands rather in the remission of our sins,
then in any perfection of justice.

25 And it is the spirit of contention that charge this doctrine with making
people careless to eschew sin. For what can more encourage us to weldoing,
then when we consider the mercy of God that will not impute the imperfection
of our obedience to us, but supply what is defective out of the treasury of
Christ's perfection? and as long as out of a good heart and an unfeigned purpose
we strive without fainting to serve him, he is ready not only to pardon us,
but by exercise in sanctification, to lead us to more perfection. And if our
adversaries think the merit of their works and integrity of their holiness
be such a spur to prick them forward, As this Jesuit himself disputes.
wherein yet by their own confession they may be deceived; we are contented to
rely on the promises of the Gospel, Romans 8.1.
which assure us there is no condemnation to them that are in Jesus Christ,
which walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit, by reason the law of the
spirit of life in Jesus Christ has freed us from the law of sin and of death.
Which hope including Gods acceptance of that we can do, his pardoning that we
cannot do, Christ's mediation for that I can and that I cannot do, the holy
Ghost uniting my work and his together, I hope is more to be trusted to, then
such a Pharisaicall perfection as may deceive us, and by their confession that
labor in it, is subject to error so far, that when a man is at the
perfectest, yet can he not be sure he stands in grace, or shall persevere
therein.

Digression. 38. Against the distinction of sin into mortal and venial.
26 The seventh point of our doctrine condemned as an occasion of liberty, is,
that we hold all sin to be mortal of it self, and none venial. And we
readily confess indeed that this distinction in that sense is false, and being
devised to maintain the fancy of a man's perfect righteousness and power to
fulfill the law, we refuse it as idle and impious. And because they say o^r so
doing teaches men to be careless in avoiding sin, let the Reader judge
whether it restrain more, to say as we do, All your sins, though never so
small, are mortal, in their own nature deserving condemnation; or as they do,
Not all are such, but some are Henriq. sun^. moral. l. 4. c. 20. n. 5.
venial, neither offering injury to God, nor deserving hell, nor binding us to
be so sorry for the^: but they Tho. part. 3. q. 83. and 87. ar. 3. Ouand. 4. d.
16. pr. 77. Linwood l. 3. de celebrat. miss. c. Linte amina. vlt.
may be forgiven by knocking the breast, going into a Church, receiving holy
water, or the Bishops blessing, or crossing ones self, or by any work of
charity, though we never think actually of them. Let this conceit be well
beaten into men's heads, and withal define many As for example Quamius formalis
maledictio ex suo gene^e sit peccatum mortale, vt do^et D. Tho. Pote^t ^amen.
et idem tra ^it, esse tantum vei^le, ra^io^e ^^li^et pa^^ita^^ ma^ct^, it (...)
b^ ^^ous, qui (...) in (...) g^^ peccat^^. Atq^e hinc possunt saepe excus^i a
mortal: p^^e^te^. maledicentes filijs alio qui grau^bus verbis, vt commendando
illos daemoni. Greg. de Valen. tom. 3 page 1090. B.
gross and unseemly things, very incident to the life of man, to be such
venials, and then see who they be that untie sin most.

27 And though we thus reject this distinction, yet is not our meaning hereby
that all sins are equal and of like deformity, or have the same effects, or
stand in one degree of contrariety to grace, or that none are venial through
the mercy of God: for our trust is, that through the blood of Christ and true
repentance Matthew 12.31. 1. John 2 1. O ^ee Christ, Spe^ cap^o sore quicquid
ago veniab le apud te Quamlibet indignum venia faciamque loquarque. Prud.
H^mart. in sine
the mortallest sins that are shall be forgiven us. But we think it a false
and presumptuous opi^ion to hold any sin venial of it own kind, that is,
including nothing that offend^th God, or deserves his judgment. Wherein we
have many great Papists on our side, that our accusers may behold their
conscience in smattering against that in us, which is printed for good
divinity in their own books. Almaine Moral. tract. 3 c. 20.
says. It is a question among the schoole-doctors, whether there be any such
sin or no: and himself concludes out of Gerson, that no sin is venial of it
self, but only through the mercy of God, it being a contradiction that God
should forbid an act under a penalty, and when he has done, the said act
should not be mortal of it own nature; because being thus forbidden, it is
against his law, and that which is against his law is of infinite evil, and so
mortal. Of the same judgment is Contra artic. Lutheri. art. 32.
Fisher the Bishop of Rochester, and De vit. spir. lect 1.
Gerson the Chancellor of Paris, Vocab. Theol verbo Peccatu^ veniale.
who comparing the rules that are ordinarily given to distinguish between
mortal and venial, concludes he can find no difference. Besides, Opinio est
Altisiodorensis, celebrata in scholis, quod peccata venialia minuunt
charitate^. Haec opinio non tam improbabilis est sicut solet videri. Altisiod.
sum. l. 3. tract 6. ca. 5. q. 1. Fr. Victor. re l. 8. par. 2. n. 21
some schoolmen confess, that which they call venial sin, diminishes
charity, and Duran. 2. d. 42. q. 6. Nauar. manual. praelud. 7. n. 16. Vega
def. Trid. l. 11 c. 20. Greg. de Vale^t. tom. 2. page 634. Et Caietan. 1. 2. q.
72. ar. 5. Azor. instit. mor. par. 1 l. 4. c. 19.
others deny not but it is properly against the law of God; whence it
follows that it deserves the curse, and so is mortal, because Deuteronomy. 27.26.
the law says, Cursed be he that performs not all the words of this law to
do them. Yea the very name of sin attributed to it, shows it is mortal,
and partaketh the very nature of sin: the division of sin into mortal and
venial, being, as Durand and Nauar hold, Est diuisio vniuoci: quia ratio
peccati simpliciter and vniuoce saluatur in vtioque. Dur.
the division of that which signifies the same thing, and vpholdeth the self
same form of sin in the parts divided: that we may see how they are crossed at
home in their own schools, Bell. de amiss. gr. l. 1. c. 11. Quintu^ arguin.
who say, venials are sin by analogy, and imperfectly, and not univocally.
Thus the Papists themselves have misliked this distinction as well as we, whose
discretion should be more commended if they would spare our doctrine and
ouersee it, at least until they have made sure it find no secret friends in
their own Church. For as long as they that wrangle against it, are driven by
the truth thereof to yield unto it, the Protestants will take courage thereby,
and embrace the faith yet more joyfully, which has advocates to plead for it
at the Popes own gates. This is not said to condemn the use of this
distinction of sin by the Melancthon. Remisit. P. Marty^. Vrsinus, etc.
Protestants in another sense, not of the different nature of sin, but of the
diverse state and condition of the persons that sin, as they sin either
against their knowledge and conscience, or of ignorance, surreption and such
infirmity: in which respect they call the former mortal or reigning sins
excluding the rule of grace, and drawing upon the sinner the guilt of death;
the other venial, as consisting with grace and a living faith, by means
whereof they are pardoned and not imputed.

Digression. 39. Touching the satisfaction that men are bound unto for their
sins.
28 Next he accuses us for teaching against penance and satisfaction, taught
by John Baptist and our blessed Savior: wherein he speaks untruly of us. For
touching penance I will answer. 58.
below in a fitter place. And concerning satisfaction, we believe that although
Christ has satisfied for the fault and punishment, both eternal and temporal
of our sins; yet our selves are bound to satisfy the commandments of the
Gospel, tying us to repentance, and amendment, and patient bearing of the
cross: though we do not think the doing hereof is it that answers and
explateth the judgment of God due to our sin, but only serves as a
condition subordinately required that we may be partakers of Christ's
satisfaction. Thus the Papists themselves Sum. Rosell. v. satisfactio.
sometime describe satisfaction De dogni c. cl. c. 54.
out of Austin, to be the cutting off the causes of sin, and the stopping of
the ways that suggest them: and Bavus de indulg. c. vlt.
stick not to grant, there is but one satisfaction only to God, even that of
Christ: and we do not properly satisfy, but only do some thing in respect
whereof Christ's satisfaction is applied to us. Satisfaction to God thus
described, we confess: and think our selves blameless though we admit no
more, because we have some Papists on our side herein. And touching offenses
against our brethren, we think it necessary that we satisfy such as we have
offended, by confession, restitution, suffering punishment, as the case shall
require: yea we believe Job. 36 8. Act 1^.22. li^. 2^. Heb. 12.6.
that God in this life, by temporal afflictions, punishes not only the
reprobate, but even his own children whose sins he has remitted, thereby to
humble and mortify them, and exercise their faith and whole sanctification by
opening their eyes. This is it we hold touching satisfaction, wherein we
acknowledge an absolute condition of working and suffering, but deny the merit
of the work so done, and believe no virtue therein ordained to expiate our
sin.

29 Now compare this with that which themselves say, and so you shall see the
point they quarrel at. Sess. 4. sub lui. c. 8 C^t^ch. R^m tra^^^^e
^^^isfac^ione.
The Council of Trent defines, that when God forgiueth a sinner, yet he
forgiueth not all the punishment, but leaves the party by his own works, to
satisfy till it be washed away. Greg de Valent. tom 4. disp 7 q. 14 punct. 3.
Bell. de poenit. l. 4. c 6. Herinq. Sum. l. 5 c. 19. n. 8.
The works, whereby this satisfaction is to be made, are said to be all good
actions proceeding from virtue, either inward or outward: all penance enjoined
by the Priest at confession, as prayer, alms, and fasting; and all the
sufferings that befall men either in this life or in Purgatory. The things
which by these works we are supposed to satisfy God for, are holden to be
Bellar. and co^mu^^ter o^^es
the temporal punishment, C^nci^. T^^d. and Catech. To. vbi s^pr.
the relickes of sin, T^^pe^ expl. art. Lo^^a^^ 6 Vega (...) c. 36.
the fault it self, yea T^^^h. ^e poenit. 4. c. 1. Ca^^t. 1. qu. 4. de cont^^t.
the same punishment that should be suffered in hell, excepting the eternity.
Caietan 21. qq. Quoli. qu^^^^
says The canonical punishment enjoined by the Priest, for satisfaction,
includes the punishment which is due to sin before the presence of Gods
justice. And Gregory of Valence Vbi 1. ^^a. pun^. 1. Quod si vero.
writes, The recompense made by satisfaction, respects not only the
temporal punishment that is to be paid, but some part of the offense also,
and the wrath of God which by the said recompense must be turn^d away. The
thing that gives the works their condition to be satisfactory Rhem. Col. 1.24.
they say is Christ's grace, but they add, that the passion of Christ and they
together, make but one mass of passions, our sufrings applying the medicine of
his merits to us. Bell. de purg. l. 1. c. 1^. Tertius tamen.
Not that his satisfaction it self takes away the punishment due to us, but
in that it remoueth it, so far forth as we have grace from thence to make our
own satisfaction of power. The plain meaning whereof may be known by two
other speeches of theirs. The first is 3 d. 19. art. 2. concl. 5.
Biels: Though the passion of Christ be the principal merit for which the
grace of God, and the opening of heaven, and the glory thereof be given, yet
it is never the sole nor total meritorious cause, but always there concurreth
some work of him that receives the grace. The second is De purgat. l. 1 c. 14.
Bellarmines, That a righteous man has right to the same glory by a twofold
title: one of the merits of Christ by grace communicated to him, and another of
his own merits. Which he could not have said, but that he thought our own
works to be satisfactory and effectual as Christ's are, and able to do the
same that his death can.

30 So then the Papists condemn us in this point, because we believe not the
merit of our works, and their union with Christ's sufferings, for the
satisfying of Gods justice due to our sins; but think Christ satisfied for
all, both sin and punishment, and our own works are no more but
dispositions, or conditions, whereunto God has tied us upon other terms. And
what they think, more then this that I have touched, the Lord knows: but
they speak desperately, Soto. Palud. Caiet. Ruard. and nonnulli ex
recentioribus: quos refert Suar tom. 1. d. 4. l 9.
That a sinner, by the grace of God, may satisfy for his sin condignly and
equally, and by that satisfaction obtain pardon. Caietan In 3. Tho. q. 1 art.
2. ad 4. dub.
says: For so much as Christ the head, and we the members make one mystical
person, therefore my satisfaction being conjoined with Christ's satisfaction, is
made simply equal as it is the satisfaction of a mystical person: yea
sometime it is greater then the fault. Tom. 1. disp. 41 sect 3.. Vltimo tandem.
Suarez says, When the souls in purgatory obtain remission of punishment,
not by pardons, or suffrages, Quae potius est solutio qua^ remissio poenae;
quia fit per co^dignam satispassionem.
for so much as then it is by a condign suffering of the whole punishment,
there is no reason why it should be an effect of Christ's merits, because there
the man has paid God as much suffering as he owes him. There be finally Scot.
Duran. Biel. quos refert Suar. tom. 1 disp. 4. sect. 11.
some that hold a man by the power of nature, without grace, may be able to
satisfy for venial sins, and expel them. These me^, in their ordinary books
made for the people to read, Hopk. memor tract. of satisfact. ^. 1.
sometime (no doubt to conceal their impiety) speak bitterly of us for
saying, they teach a man may satisfy by his own natural power, and in the
state of sin, and for the fault of sin, and the eternal punishment as well
as for the temporal pain, which satisfaction is equal to Gods justice, and
united with Christ's merits: yet by this that I have showed, it appears they
mean no less; and are our enemies in this question for no other cause but for
that we believe it not, knowing well enough we teach true repentance, and
satisfaction, as I have described it, though we think our works have no power
to expiate, nor the Priest authority to enjoin them, nor a pardon any virtue
to absolve us by applying any satisfaction to us.

31 Wherein we do justly both reprehend and refuse them as vile and
sacrilegious blasphemers of the cross of Christ, climing (under Procul dubio
enim magnopere a peccato reuocant, and quasi fraeno quodam coercent hae
satisfactoriae poenae. Conc. Trident. ses. 4. c. 8. sub. Iul.
pretense of bridling men from sin) after him Esa. 14 14.
that said, I will ascend above the height of the clouds, and I will be like
the most high. For first Esa. 53.5. Psa. 32.2. Heb. 1 3. Romans 8.1. 1. Pet 2.24.
the Scripture attributes our whole redemption and reconciliation to Christ,
wherein is included our deliverance both from sin and punishment. Inasmuch as
there is no sin or punishment so small but the breach and curse of the law
contains it, Romans 10.4. 2. Cor. 5.21. Gal. 3.13.
which Christ took upon him to satisfy. And to join our own penance with this
satisfaction, makes two satisfactions, the one that Christ did, the other that
our selves do, whereby God shall be made unjust in punishing one sin twice
over. Or if, as some say, the satisfaction be but one, it is Christ's, and so we
satisfy not: or ours, and so Christ satisfies not: or Christ's and ours both,
and so we divide the honor with him, which is blasphemy.

32 Next, a work before it can satisfy must have three qualities, which are
so necessary, Suar. tom. 1. disp. 4. sect 6.
that Christ's own obedience could not have satisfied his Father without them.
First, that it be our own goods, and not the gift of God For his free gift
cannot tie him to reward it every time it is used: and all our good deeds 1.
Cor. 4.7. and 2. Cor. 3.5. Phil. 2 13.
are the free gift of God, we being unable to do them by our own will or
power. Next, that it be due no other way: which our works are not, for Ephesians
2.10. Luc. 17.10.
we are created to walk in them, and if we had never sinned, yet we owe them
all to the law of God: and it is madness to think, that may satisfy an
offense which was due to the law if the offense had never been done. Thirdly,
that it be of equal proportion with the trespass. Which no work is, because
no work is of infinite goodness, as Peccatum ve^^^l^e e^t insi ^^tae m^^.
iae. Alm (...). Moral. tract. 3. c. 2^.
every sin is of infinite wickedness, and every punishment due to sin of
infinite effect, if it be not staid. The Protestants therefore have reason to
disclaim all confidence in such works, as the ancient fathers in all ages have
done. For Chrysostom Homil. de Philogo.
says, If thou depart from thy former sins with all thy heart, and truly
promise God that thou will turn no more to them, he will require nothing else
for any further satisfaction. And In Luc. 22. ser. 46.
Ambrose, I have read of Peter's tears, but his satisfaction I read not, And De
domo inter. c. 1.
Bernard, This is a condign satisfaction to amend our lives, and when they are
mended to sin no more.

33 And I do not believe the Papists in good earnest hold their satisfaction of
such necessity, though sometime they speak zealously for it when the pardoner
wants money. For then their Church would never have Aperta est in ecclesia
^anua poenitentiae redemptionis. Baro. tom. 11. an. 1055. n. 9.
opened her doors so wide to let satisfaction out and pardons in: which is a
sign she loves the price of a pardon better then her doctrine of
satisfaction. And the opening of this door lets in more liberty then the
Protestants refusal of satisfaction; specially as the Popes use to open it.
For Theod. a Niem. de ^cism. l. 1. c. 68. page 29.
it is written of Boniface the ninth, That he sent into diverse kingdoms, his
treasurers with pardons and Bulls, who extorted thereby very great sums of
money from the simple people: that in some one Province they would get together
an hundred thousand Florenes, releasing all offenses whatsoever without any
penance, and dispensing with all irregularities. For it is a ruled case, Suar.
tom. 4. disp. 50. sect. 3. and inde. Henriq. summor. l. 7. tract. de indulgent.
That all satisfactory punishments may be released by a pardon, and Tax.
Cancel. apostolic.
the Court of Rome has an order containing the price to be paid for all kind
of sins, murder, incest, parricide, sodomy, sacrilege, etc. Aquinas
Supplem. in 3. part. q. 25. art 1.
says, Christ might release the fault without any satisfaction, and so might
Paul, therefore so may the Pope. Yea Magist. l. 4. d. 17. Quid ergo. Boz. de
sign eccl. l. 16 c. 7.
they hold a man may be released without a pardon, also by contrition and
humility of heart. Panormitan De poe^itent. and remiss c. Nouit qui.
says, A man may be inwardly so penitent and contrite, that he shall need no
satisfaction at all, but may be absolved presently without any penance doing.
And another Glossator. Panorm. c. licet de poenit. and remiss,
says, He has heard of many Divines, that a sinner may be so sorrowful for
his sin, that without any other satisfaction in this world, and without any
liberality of his Prelate, or punishment in Purgatory, he shall obtain
eternal life through the great mercy of God. Thus they that so zealouslly
reprehend us for teaching repentance and faith in the sole merits of Christ
against humane satisfaction, are driven to the same point themselves, and yet
will not confess it.

34 The which truth in all ages has so prevailed against them, that laboring,
by their conceit of satisfaction, to obscure it, yet could they never agree in
teaching it, nor for their lives offer us any certainty: but dazzled therewith,
like birds in the snow, or as the Sodomites smitten with blindness at Lots
door, they know not which way to go. Only they agree in this, to rail at the
Protestants, but what they would have us believe, themselves know not. For by
what works must we satisfy? Paludens. 4. d. 15.
One answers, by none that are otherwise due. Yes says Nauarr: man. c. 3 nu
4.
another, If a man do them, not only to pay his debt thereby, but also to
satisfy: as if our intent could give the work any other condition then the
law requires? And who has the appointing of the satisfactory works? Catech.
Romans p. 342.
One says, the Priest at shrift by virtue of his keys: nay Scot. 4. d. 15. q.
1. and d. 18. Biel d. 16. q. 2. art. 3. dub 5. Ouand. 4. d. 16. pro. 40.
says another, the penitent is not bound to do that which he inioyneth him,
but may reserve himself to Purgatory, or have satisfied before he came to
confession. But who are the persons in state to satisfy? Scot. 4. d. 21. q. 1.
Biel. 4. d. 16. q 5. art. 1.
One says, A man without grace by the power of nature can satisfy for venial
sin. Suar. tom. 1. disp. 4. sect 11. Hopk. memor. tract of satisfact.. 1.
Another denies this, and calls it heresy, holding it necessary he be
endued with grace and charity. But what are the things that our works make
satisfaction for? Satisfactio est compensatio poenae temporalis debitae. Greg.
Valent. tom. 4. d. 7. q. 14 punct. 1 Hopkins vbi supra. page 385.
One says, only the temporal punishment due in this life. Vega l. 13. c. 36.
Another says, the sin also. Tapper. expl. artic. Louanien. art. 6.
A third says, The sin and the eternal punishment also. And how do these
works satisfy, whether of condignitie meriting, or only of congruitie
begging the release obtained by them? Bayus de indulg. c. vlt.
One answers, They do not properly satisfy, but only do some thing in
respect whereof Christ's satisfaction is applied to us. Indic de lib. concorn.
Luthe ran. mendac, 8.
And Bellarmine writes, that he ascribes no merit of condignitie to any
works done by faith and the help of God, that in justice the reward should
answer them, but only the merit of congruitie. But Suar. tom. 1. disp. 4.
^ect. 12.
another says, that even in the rigor of Gods justice, they satisfy, and
merit remission. But what if I make no satisfaction, or have no pardon to
release me? Surius comment. rerum in orb. gest p. 450.
One in a fury answers, I am damned: The Lutherans, says he, need no
pardons, because relying upon their barren faith, they go right down to the
pit of hell. But Mag. 4. d. 17 Host. de poenit. and rem^ss. cap. Deus qu.
Archidiacon. apud Gloss. Panorm. vbi supra.
others say, that by contrition only, without confession, or payment of
outward punishment, or liberality of the Prelate, or pains in purgatory, I
may go straight to heaven. And touching the pardons, whereby satisfaction is
released, Caieta. tract. de indulgent c. 1. Durand 4 d. 20. q. 3.
they confess, that neither the Scripture nor the ancient Doctors mention
them; which shows them to be monsters, that talking so much of the necessity
of satisfaction, yet omit it upon a device of such uncertainty. Again, Tho. 4
d. 2. q. 1 art. 3. Allen tract. of pardons p. 281. Bellarm. de indulg. l. 1. c.
2. Sum. Syluest. v. indulg. n. 4.
some think these pardons to be grounded on the merits of the Saints joined
with Christ's merits, that by virtue of both these together the party may be
released. But Sum. Angel. verbo, indulg. n. 9. Duran. 4. d. 20. q. 3. quem
referunt. Ouan. Grego. de Valent. Caietan. and Suarez.
others deny this, and say, the merits of the Saints have been already
rewarded, yea beyond their desert, and so are exhaust and spent, and the
pardons are given out of the treasury of Christ's passion alone. But Fr. Mayro
4. d. 19. q. 2. Que^ sic exponunt Valent. tom. 4. p. 1457. Caiet. de indulg.
quaesit. 3. Henriqn. Sum. page 490.
some think there is no such treasury at all, neither of the merits of the
Saints nor of Christ. Whereby we may see what account they make of
satisfaction, that dare release it by a device whereof they have so small
assurance, that they know not whence it receives his effect.

35 And to show yet more fully how basely they think of it, we must call to
mind how they have taught the people, to whom satisfaction belongs, to
redeem the same by saying over certain prayers, (very jests to make a man
laugh) that they have printed in their ordinary Primers. Would they have sold
it at so vile a rate, if it had been in their own conceits, of any worth? or
is it possible for us to exchange it for any thing baser then these shreds? I
will lay them down as I find them in Nicol. Salicet. Antidot. animae And the
Salisbury Primer, called Horae B. Mariae.
their own books. There is a short prayer which whosoever says devoutly,
shall have three thousand days pardon of mortal sins, and twenty thousand
days of venials, given by Pope John the two and twentieth. And if that prayer
be too long, and the pardon too short, let him say five Pater nosters before
the vernacle, and he shall have ten thousand days pardon, granted by the same
Pope. Or if so many Paters nosters be too tedious, there is a shorter cut,
about the scantling of an Aue, which if a man say at the Leuation, he shall
obtain pardon for twenty thousand days, of the grant of Pope Innocent the
sixth. Or if he had rather have it for years then days, though he take the
more pains for it, there is a prayer made by Pope Gregory, about the length of
a Creed, which whosoever says devoutly, shall receive five hundred years
pardon: provided always that at the end of every verse, he say a Pater noster,
and an Aue. Or if he would have some odd days cast into his hundreds and
thousands, he must kneel before the crucifixe and say a prayer as long as
three Aues, and he shall have pardon for six thousand, six hundred,
threescore and six days, of the grant of Gregory the third; just so many
days as Christ had wounds in his body: save that our Lord on a day appeared to
S. Briget at Rome, and told her his wounds were but five thousand, four
hundred, and fourscore (or as Ludolf. vit. Christi part. 2. c. 58. Eck ser. de
Passione.
other authors tell it, five thousand, four hundred, fourscore and ten, not
reckoning possible the pricks of his crown, Suar. tom. 2. page 347.
which were threescore and twelve) in honor whereof if she would say every day
of the year fifteen Pater nosters, and fifteen Aues, so she should worship
every wound, if she mist it not in Arithmeticke, once a year. But if she would
take pains to use fifteen other prayers, which he taught her and are set
down in the book, adding them in order to the foresaid fifteen Pater
nosters, then she should deliver out of Purgatory fifteen of her kindred, and
fifteen more should be confirmed in grace, and fifteen sinners converted to
God: with many other prerogatives which it were too long to rehearse, as my
author speaks. But what say you to forty thousand years of pardon? Pope
Sixtus the fourth granted it to whosoever will say a prayer of his making not
five above forty words long: that his Catholics might not complain, the
Protestants satisfaction was easier then theirs. And there is another prayer
somewhat longer, which Saint Bernard upon a time saying before the Rood, so
pleased the said Rood, that bowing it self, it embraced him in his arms:
being belike of the same good nature that the Rood of Naples was, Anton. Chro.
part. 3. tit. 23. c. 7. 11. p. 206.
which spoke so kindly to Thomas Aquin, or of the same metal that the
crucifixe was of, Sibi or anti crucifixi imaginem inclinare caput aspexit.
Baron. annal. to. 11. an. 1051. nu. 1.
which nodded his head to the monk Gualbertus. Now such a prayer as this, that
like Dictus and Amphion, Thebanae conditor vrbis, Saxa mouere sono testudinio,
and prece blanda Ducere quo vellet. Horat. art. Poet.
Amphions harp could make stones move, by all likelihood would pierce further
then the straightest satisfaction that could be taught. Or if the Protestants
have an easier way, yet at last they must give place to one peculiar kind of
devotion, thoroughly plied in our country, which is, to have the arms of
Christ's passion, the cross, nails, whip, lance, heart and hands of Christ for
example painted, and them devoutly to worship. For this kind of satisfaction
has wonderful privileges granted it by one and thirty Popes, and an hundred
twenty eight Bishops. The first Pope granting three years pardon to them that
use it, the other thirty adding every one a hundred days more, and each Bishop
forty.

36 And so I conclude, that the premises considered, our adversaries have no
cause to disgrace the Protestants with their penance, or any longer to rail
upon them for putting it away; for as much as their own doctors have spoken so
coldly and uncertainly thereof, and contrary one to another, and allowed such
qualifications by contrition and pardons, as make it a thousand times easier
then an hypocrites repentance. Which they would never have done, being wary
and wise, but that they thought in their conscience, the repentance taught in
our Church to be the truth, and their penance a discipline of their own
invention. And so from henceforward we will take their angry words about this
matter, as spoken in zeal of their cause, and jealousy of their pardons, but
never think they mean in good earnest to condemn us thereby, though they
speak somewhat rigorously for fear of the worst, lest their people should
suspect them, and buy no more pardons

Digression. 40. Wherein the doctrine of justification by faith only, is
expounded and defended.
37 The ninth point whereof he accuses us, is for teaching that by only faith
our sins be not imputed to us: the which we teach indeed, or rather have
learned of him that teaches all truth, the Spirit of God, who Psalm. 32.1. Romans
4.6.
says, Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sin is
covered: blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputes no sin. Now I never
knew but Sixth. Senens. biblioth l. 6. annot. 216.
it was always lawful for Catholic men to use the Catholic phrase of the
Scripture, and speak as it does. For to say, they are not imputed, and by
faith only they are not imputed, is all one: because the not imputing of sin
is a mercy of God, Nazian. orat. in sanct. bapt.
whereby he ascribes it not to us, nor deputeth it to condemnation, but as if
we had never done it, he forgiueth it, and esteems us no sinners. The which
mercy being in God alone, supposes somewhat on our behalf that may receive
it, which can be nothing but faith alone, the Scripture saying, Gal 3.14.
We receive the promise of the spirit by faith: and Romans 4.11.
righteousness is imputed to all them that believe: as V. 3. Genesis 15.6.
Abraham believed, and it was imputed to him for righteousness. The which our
exposition, making faith alone the instrument, and not penance or works, if
our adversaries mislike, then let them hearken what some of the learned among
themselves have written. For So Much ( 4. d. 15. q. 1.
says Bonauenture) as man was not able to satisfy for so great offense,
therefore God gave him a mediator who should satisfy for it: whence it comes
to pass, that by only faith in his p^ssion, all the fault is remitted, and
without his faith no man is justified. And In Ioh. 19.^.30.
Ferus: Our salvation is consummate, not fully, but in hope: by reason man
begins to be justified and healed so, that whilst he is justified, the rest
of his sin remaining in his flesh, through Christ is not imputed to him. And
Antididagm. Colonienf. tit. de Iustif. hom. page 29.
Gropper: By faith we are justified as by the apprehensiue cause: that faith
whereby without doubting we firmly believe, that having true repentance, our
sins are forgiven us for Christ: whereof notwithstanding it behooves us by
faith to have the inward testimony of the holy Ghost. Whereby we see that
justification, or not imputation of sin, by faith only, is good divinity
among our adversaries themselves.

38 But because, either through ignorance or malice, it is misreported to the
people, who are made believe that thereby we exclude the necessity of a godly
life: therefore I will briefly expound the meaning of this proposition, By
faith only we are justified. Wherein there are three terms: the first is
justification; and thereby we mean Gods acceptance of a sinner to grace and
glory. For man being guilty of the breach of Gods law, and so subject to the
penalty thereof, which is condemnation, cannot be restored again unless he
bring a righteousness to satisfy this law again; that is to say, which may
answer both the obedience that it requires, and the punishment that it
inflicteth. The reason hereof is, because the law being part of Gods will, and
being given to man out of the justice of God, must take his effect: else God
should leave his justice unsatisfied, and depart from his nature, Mat. 5 18.
which is impossible. This righteousness we affirm to be not our own
inherent justice, but the obedience of Christ alone, whereby he fulfilled the
whole law most perfectly for us. We deny not but every servant of God has in
him true sanctification and holiness, enabling him to repentance,
satisfaction, faith, hope and charity; but we deny these or any of them to be
the justice whereby the bond of Gods law is answered, and we appear righteous
before Gods judgment seat, partly because they are imperfect, and partly for
that we do them not by our own strength. But the very thing that makes us
accepted as just, is the obedience of Christ, whereby he fulfilled the law, and
satisfied the punishment in his life and death for us: which obedience both
merited the remission of our sins, and effectually wrought the righteousness of
the law. For the deriuing whereof unto us, two things must be done: one on Gods
behalf, another on our own. That which God does, is called imputation of
Christ's obedience to us for the pardon of our sins, and the making of our
persons acceptable, as if our selves had never sinned. That which we do, is
believing in Christ, and so receiving that which God offers: both which
actions when they meet, Gods offering Christ, and our receiving him, the
justification of a sinner is then formally accomplished.

39 The next term is faith: whereby we do not mean either a fleeting opinion
of Gods favor standing only in imagination, nor yet, as our adversaries
define it only an assent unto all those things which God has revealed,
believing them to be true: but we hold it to be over and besides this, Nec
fides excludit omnem dubitationem; sed dubitatione^ vincentem and trahentem in
oppositum credibilis. Scot. 3. d. 23.
an infallible knowledge and apprehension of Gods good will toward us in
particular, whereby we apply the special promises of the Gospel to our own
selves: the which knowledge we hold is obtained two ways: one is by the inward
testimony of Gods spirit witnessing with our spirit, that God does now accept
us for his sons in Christ: the other leading hereunto, is by the revelation of
the Gospel, promising justification to all that do the things required
therein, whereto, when we by the grace of God and a living faith perform them,
our conscience enlightened with the truth, answers, We have done them. By
this means we say a man may be able to believe Christ to be his Savior, and
so believing he apprehends the promise, and is justified by his faith as by
an instrument; that is to say, this his consent and obedient yielding himself
to believe Christ Jesus his Savior and his special promises, is as it were
the hand whereby a sinner must receive Christ's obedience for his justification.
And if it be obicted, that no man can thus believe, because he knows not the
will of God, or if he do believe thus, he may deceive himself: I answer, that
it is in no man's power to attain to this knowledge of himself, but as God
reuealeth it and works it in us by his word and Spirit, infusing it secretly
into our consciences by the preaching of the Gospel, and our faith and
obedience thereunto, as a man hears his friend telling him a secret in his
ear: wherein if one be diligent and faithful, it will work three effects in
him. First it will humble him and show him his misery, and so drive him to
Christ for help. Secondly it will convert his life, and of a profane person
make him a godly man. Thirdly it will infuse and drop into him by degrees the
feeling of Gods good will toward him, and so inspire him with comfort: from all
which he may as infallibly by faith conclude his redemption, as if his name
were written in the Bible. Which I declare by a similitude of a King, who
sending a pardon to forty thousand rebels, sets not down their names in
particular, but puts in a condition, that all they shall be pardoned that
will lay by their weapons and come to him: the which he sends a herald to
proclaim, and the people hearing it do accordingly, and thereby know
infallibly they are pardoned: and if any man would molest them because their
name is not expressly written in the pardon, they might contemn him, and
securely conclude their deliverance from the condition that is expressed. In
the same manner do we apprehend our justification by faith. For all men being
sinners against God, he has sent out the pardon of his Gospel, not writing
any man's name therein particularly, but putting in a condition, that so many as
will be saved by Christ, repent, believe and obey him: the which being
published by preaching, as soon as the elect hear, they receive, and so know
infallibly they are pardoned. And if any man would molest them, as the Papists
for example do, because their name is not expressly written in the Creed, they
might despise them, and both against theirs and the devils accusations securely
conclude their salvation from the condition expressed, thus: He that repents
and forsakes his sins, and believes and obeys the Gospel unfeignedly,
shall be saved: But I repent and forsake my sins, I believe and obey
unfeignedly: Therefore I shall be saved. The first proposition is expressly
contained in the Scripture: the second is the perpetual and constant
testimony of the conscience in such as are called. The Schoolmen confess,
they are conclusions of faith, which arise from two premises, the one whereof is
immediately revealed in the Scripture, the other dedu^ed by good consequence, or
naturally known and added to that which is revealed. Greg. de Val. tom. 3. pa
34. A. B. Medin. in 1. 2. q 112. art. 5. page 627.
The conclusion therefore must needs be true and cannot deceive, because it is
extracted out of the word of God, and perfected by the work of his own spirit
in the conscience, where all the general propositions of the law and Gospel
are applied. If the second proposition be false, as it is in all that abide in
their wicked life, and impenitencie and infidelity; there is no way but to
amend and use the means of reformation, until the conscience may without
error assume it. This conclusion thus grounded, is that faith that we mean,
when we say, we are justified by faith: and it is so far from giving liberty
to sin, and excluding a good life, that you see a good life and the promise
made thereunto, are the premises that beget it, yea of absolute necessity they
must reform themselves before they have it, and persevere in all good works if
they will maintain it.

40 The third term is Only: whereby the meaning is not to debar repentance
and good works, but to exclude them from being either the righteousness that
makes us accepted to eternal life, or the means whereby that righteousness
is applied to us: though they have their use and absolute necessity otherwise;
repentance in preparing and making us fit to be justified by faith, and
afterward the same with good works, in the life of man. For the elect are
brought to glory not by justification alone, but by vocation and
sanctification also. In the former we say, our works have no room at all, in
as much as it stands in the clearing of a sinner from the law, and the making
of him perfectly just in the sight of Gods judgment, which no man's works can
do, but only the obedience of Christ communicated to us by faith. In the two
other they are required, because it is the ordinance of God, that if any man
come and be in Christ, he should repent and be a new creature, walking not
according to the flesh, but according to the spirit. Neither when we say, faith
only, do we think that the faith whereby we are justified is alone, and
without love and works, any more then he that says, the heat only of the
fire burns, means thereby that the heat is without light: but we hold that
justifying faith is always accompanied with works, as the Sun is with his
light, and trees with their fruit, and causes with their effects; though the
works themselves justify not, but being the effects of justification, have
their proper use to sanctify us, which is a condition in his due time and
order necessarily required to save us as well as justification, because as I
said, God brings no man to glory by justifying him alone, but by sanctifying
him also: for whom he electeth, them he calls, and justifies and sanctifies
both.

41 And this is it we mean by saying our sins are not imputed, or we are
justified by faith only: whereat as often as our adversaries wonder, they
should be put in mind of that which Erasmus told them long since, This word
Only, which now adays they shout at so in Luther, is reverently heard and read
in the writings of the Fathers. For Saint Ambrose Comment. 1. Cor. 1.
says, This is the work of God, that he which believes in Christ should be
saved WITHOUT WORKS, FREELY BY GRACE ONLY receiving the pardon of his sins.
Chrysostom Hom. 7. Romans 3.
says, But what is the law of faith? Even to be saved by grace: here the
Apostle shows the goodness of God, who not only saves us, but also
justifies and glorifieth us, using no works hereunto, but requiring FAITH
ONLY. Basil Hom. de humil.
says, This is true and perfect rejoicing in God, when a man is not lifted up
with his own righteousness, but knows himself to be void of true
righteousness, and to be justified by FAITH ONLY in Christ. Comment. 2. Ephesians.
Theodoret y says, We have not believed of our own accord, but being called,
we came, and being come, he exacteth not purity and innocence of life at our
hands, but by FAITH ONLY he forgave our sins. Bernard Cant. ser. 22.
says, Whosoever is touched with his sins, and hungreth after
righteousness, let him believe in God that justifies sinners, and being
justified by FAITH ONLY, he shall have peace with God. Thus the Fathers, in
their time, spoke according to Romans 3.28. and 4 5. Gal. 2.16.
the Scriptures, whereupon we ground our selves, whose words can no way be so
wrested, but they will yield our very opinion, and plainly show, that in this
point they held the same thing that we do.

42 And out of all question our adversaries themselves in times past have
thought it the truth. For Aquinas has left Romans 3. lect. 4. and Gal. 3. lect.
4.
written, that works be not the cause why a man is just before God, but rather
they are the execution and manifestation of his justice: for no man is
justified by works, but by the HABIT OF FAITH infused: yea JUSTIFICATION IS
DONE BY FAITH ONLY. And Iac. 2.
the ordinary Gloss, Abraham was not justified by the works he did, but by
FAITH ONLY, his oblation being a work of his faith, and a testimony of his
righteousness. But Gropper with the Divines of Colen Antididagm. page 29.
speak more fully, that By the faith of Gods word, working in us contrition
and repentance, and other works of preventing grace, we are justified as by a
certain preparatiue and disposing cause: but by faith, whereby without doubt
we firmly believe our sins to be forgiven for Christ, we are IVSTIFIED AS BY
THE APPREHENDING CAUSE. So God justifies us by a double righteousness, as by
formal and essential causes; whereof one and the chief is the perfect
righteousness of Christ; not as it is out of us in him, but as and when the same
being apprehended by faith, is imputed to us for righteousness. And this
imputed justice of Christ is the chief and special cause of our
justification, whereunto we are principally to rely and trust.

43 And thus we see the Protestants doctrine of only faith and the not
imputing our sins unto us, was thought sound divinity among our adversaries
themselves, till within these threescore years, that the Trent Council began
to look asquint at it, which was no marvel: for it is an ordinary thing that a
man marrying a latter wife, looks strangely on his own children had by a
former, yea gives his land from them to their younger brethren, though once the
time were when he was of another mind. And so no wonder if the Church of Rome
now begin to turn away her loving countenance from her former faith, when she
has about her so many brats of latter opinions begotten by the Friars and
Jesuits, her new lovers, that would have no nay. Otherwise, faith only is a
doctrine that might have inherited her mothers lands, even this day in Rome,
had she not in her widowhood played the wanton. And yet seeing in ancient
times it was holden, in the days of the Church of Romes first husband, our
adversaries, for reverence of their schools, and credit of the Doctors, should
handle the matter as gently as might be, and not so intemperatly revile their
mothers elder son, calling it, as this Jesuit does, a doctrine drawing men to
lewdness, or as Romans 3.22.
the Rhemists do, a new no-iustice, a fantastical apprehension; nor as
Whright. art. 9.
another does, a Solifidian portion; nor as Apolog. ep. sect. 8.
another does, a desolation of order, a doctrine against a common wealth:
because such foul words as these will touch the Scripture it self, and all
the ancient Fathers, and many Roman Catholics as well as us: and they that
are so lavish of their tongue in using them, if they take not good heed may
chance to have his hap that threw a stone at a dog, and unawares hit his
stepmother.

Digression. 41. Entreating of Predestination and Free Will, as the Protestants
hold them: and showing that their doctrine, concerning these points, does
neither make God the author of sin, nor lead men to be careless of their
lives, nor infer any absolute necessity constraining us that we cannot do
otherwise then we do.
43 In the last place he mentions our doctrine touching Predestination and
Freewill, as if thereby we led men to be careless in their actions: because
(as this Jesuit urges it) God having predestinate all things, man's free will
is lost thereby, that he cannot do otherwise then he does, but God himself is
the author of sin. Wherein he shows his insatiable desire of contention;
and that besides P^^. 30.15.
the grave, the barren womb, the earth, and the fire, which never say, I have
enough, there is a fifth thing as insatiable as they, the contentious spirit of
an adversary, never satisfied with lying and contradiction. For let them say
directly, what is the point they mislike? Is it our doctrine of predestination?
Why you shall see presently the learned of their own side teach it as we do.
Is it because we deny free will? why they belie their own knowledge; they know
we deny it but only in part. Is it because we teach God is the author of
sin? why Suar. Opusc. l. 2. c. 2.
their own Jesuits confess, The Protestants know well that God intends not
that which is formal in sin himself, nor inclines the will of man that he
should intend it. Or is it finally because we hold some fatal necessity
constraining the will of man, that he cannot do otherwise then he does, that so
all care and consultation should be to no purpose? Why, we teach the contrary.
These and such like, being malicious and base imputations devised by men in
their fury and desperate adventures against us, to seduce the ignorant, and to
make our cause odious, which even their own people would embrace if they knew
it.

44 For first touching Predestination, we hold according to Romans 9. Ephesians. 1 4.5.
1. These. 5.9. 2. Tim 2.20. 1. Pet. 2 8.
the Scripture, that God from all eternity, before the world was made, has
not only foreseen all things that could be or should be upon his appointment
or permission, but also by an unchangeable decree has foreordained all things
and persons to certain determinate ends, for his own glory: and that neither
the Saints were elected in Christ to infallible and perseuering grace and
eternal glory for their foreseen righteousness, nor the reprobate refused or
not elected to the same for their foreseen wickedness; but both the one and
the other were predestined to those their several estates, according to the
counsel of Gods own will, which was not moved thereunto by any thing that he
foresaw in the parties, but most freely decreed it, according to his own
pleasure, and absolute dominion that he has over the creature. And this decree
of Gods will is the first and highest mouer of all other wills and things in the
creature, whereupon Pr^ma radix contingentiae rerum, est voluntas diuina,
efficacissima ad faciendum res, non solum quantum ad substantia^, sed etiam
quantum ad omnem modum ipsarum, quantu^ ad fieri and quantum ad esse See Tho.
1. part. q. 19. and ibi Caiet. Capreol. 1. d. 38 con. 2.
the smallest, and most contingent or casual things also that fall out,
depend, as upon their universal cause, whose influence into the second causes
directs, produces, inclines, and ordinateth them to their effects: not by
enforcing the^ (as the will of man for example) by any natural necessity or
constraint, but by inclining them to work according to their condition, Deus
ita voluit, vt effectus egrederentur a causis secundis secundum modum ipsarum.
D Bann. part. 1. p. 333. f.
so as the said effects shall proceed out of them according to their own
manner, as a contingent effect shall go forth of a contingent cause, and a free
effect issue out of a voluntary and free cause. This is the sum of that we
hold touching predestination, and the influence thereof into the actions of men.

45 Whereby it is plain, that whatsoever we hold against freewill, yet do we
not lay the bondage thereof on Gods predestination, but upon Adams fall, which
is the proper root and foundation whence that impotencie that is in our will
arises. For the decree and providence of God began not after Adams fall, but
before, and yet we think Adams will was perfectly free: which shows our
opinion to be, that freewill (though we want it) may well stand with Gods
predestination, because Adam in his innocence had it, and yet was ruled by Gods
predestination. And therefore our adversaries belly us, when they say, our
opinion touching predestination makes us deny freewill: for we think indeed
our will is moved effectually by Gods will in all our actions; which being the
most effectual and universal cause of all things, qualifieth our will, and
inclines it to the action; yet does it not follow hereupon, that therefore we
think our own will has no freedom, but only that the freedom thereof
depends upon a former freedom, which is the freedom of Gods will. And if we
hold further, as some Divines do, that Gods will determines ours, and his
decree flows into all the effects of our will, so that we do nothing but as
he directs our will and purpose: yet this excludes not our own freedom,
neither makes God the author of sin, nor implies any inevitable necessity
in our doing. The reason is, because God moves not our will violently, nor
inforceth it, but leaves our inward motive within our selves that stirs it
up, which is the act of our understanding, whereby we judge the thing good or
evil, that we will or nill. For in the proceeding of our will, first the mind
apprehends some object and offers it to the will, then upon the full and
perfect judgment of the understanding the liberty of the will concurring or
going therewithal, the will follows or refuses it, as the understanding
judges it good or bad. And so this act or judgment of our understanding, is
the root from whence the free choice of our will arises, in such manner as
whatsoever it be that goes before the act of our will, or sets in with it,
to incline it, (as Gods will does) as long as it destroys not, or inforceth
this practical judgment of reason, the liberty of our will is not taken away.
And herein stands the true Concordia liberi arb. cum diuina praedest.
concord between Gods predestination and man's will: that the free and
immutable counsel of Gods will, goes indeed in order before the operation of
our will, or at least together with it, and determines and circumscribeth it:
but for so much as it neither inforceth our will, nor takes away our judgment,
but permits it freely to lead and persuade the will, it expels not our
liberty, but rather cherishes and vpholdeth it: For wheresoever these two
concur, freedom from violence and necessity, and the full consent of
reason, there is the whole and true reason of liberty.

46 Neither could I ever perceive that our adversaries durst directly gainsay
this. For it is a conclusion in their schools, that Gabr. 2 d. 28. notab. 2.
Anton. Sum. Moral. part. 1. tit. 5. c. 1.. 8.
no second cause can work without the agency of the first: and the first cause
flows into the effect of the second cause, more then the second cause it self
does: and thereupon God being the first cause of all things, the effects of
second causes, whether they be natural, or whether they proceed from freewill,
are more subjected to God then to their second causes. Yea Almain Moral. tract.
1. c. 1.
they write, that the first cause is not only the cause of the effect produced
by the second cause, but also the cause why the second cause produces such an
effect. Shall we from these speeches conclude against them, as the Jesuit does
against us, that man therefore has no freewill, and that he cannot do
otherwise then he does, and that God is the author of sin? And yet no Papist
alive can show any doctrine or writing of ours that more vehemently insinuates
such conclusions then these speeches do; for they ascribe unto Gods will an
absolute sovereignty over ours, to move, determine, and restrain it, and the
actions thereof; which is all that we say, and the very point the Jesuit
cauilleth at.

47 But it is objected, that if our will be no freer then thus, how can it be
possible we should do otherwise then we do? for God moves and inclines it,
yea determines and limiteth it. I answer, that if the saying, our will is
limited by God, give any occasion of danger, our enemies that accuse us, are as
guilty thereof as we. For these are their words, besides that I have set down
immediately before: Occham. 1. d. 38. quem sic refert. Alm. c. 1.
that when our will produces any act, it is not in the power thereof, at that
instant, not to produce it. Almain. Moral. c. 1. tract 2.
That the will can do nothing but God will have it so to do. Vall. de lib. arb.
que^ refert, Chemnit. loc. tom. 1. p. 440.
That there is no power at all in our will, but Gods will works and effects
all things. Dom Ban. 1. part. q. 19. art. 10.
That God determines our will by his immutable counsel, etc. A^im. 2 d. 26.
q. 1.
That all men need the special help of Gods grace to do any thing that good
is. This determination of our will by the government of Gods will, goes as far
against freewill as any thing that we say; and therefore if our doctrine lead
men to be careless and desperate, how will they excuse their own? The meaning
therefore is not, that God by his providence infuseth any constraint into the
mind of man to enforce it, or any error to seduce it, or imposes any
necessity to bind it; but only that he inclines and orders it to work
freely that which he has foreseen and determined for his own glory, and
besides his preserving the faculty thereof, moves and applies it to the
object and work that it wills or nilleth. Which manner of inclining I think
no Papist will deny. For Thomas Contra. Gent l. 3. c. 89.
says, Man cannot use the power of his will but so far forth as he works
in the power of God. Ib. c. 91.
And all our choice and will is immediately disposed of God. And Bell de lib.
arb. l. 3. c. 18.
the Jesuits confess, that whether men will or no, yet can they not pervert
the order of Gods providence set down from all eternity, to do at any time
that which God absolutely will not, or not to do what he absolutely wills.
Which words you see restrain all our liberty to Gods pleasure, and exclude
not the precedencie of his will to determine ours. Yet are not our actions made
necessary thereby, so that we cannot do otherwise then we do: because Gods will
is the first moving cause, willing no effect in the creature of absolute
necessity, but according to the condition of the second causes; and no effect
is called necessary of the first and remote causes, but only of the second
and nearer; as Tho. cont. Gent. l. 1. c. 86. and l. 3 c. 72. Capreol. 1. d. 40.
art. 3. concl. 3.
the Schoolmen teach in this question.

48 By this that I have said you may perceive, that though our adversaries take
upon them to be great patrones of freewill, yet when the matter comes to
scanning, they are forced to subject it again to Gods providence, as much as
any Protestant does; and their so doing is liable to the same difficulties that
the Jesuit obiecteth against us. For De gr. and lib. arb. l. 4 c. 11.
the Jesuits say, Man is not holden to have freewill in choosing and
consulting, because he can do it of his own strength, but because the
cooperation of God being allowed, he can do it. And Greg Arimin 2. d 26. q. 1.
and 2.
the best learned Schoolmen they have, think, Our will unable to any good,
till God send his special grace thereunto. Shall I now conclude, they debar
all care in consultations, and make men desperate, because the will is unable
when grace is wanting? and we can do nothing of our selves till God enable us?
If I should, my conclusion were the very same against them, that theirs is
against us, that is to say, wrongly inferred. Vide Dom. Bannes. 22. qu. 10. art
1. page ^90 lit. c.
For though I cannot by mine own strength, rise up from sin, nor do any good
till Gods grace prevent my will, yet an earnest care whereby I deliberate, is
that means which the spirit uses to prevent me; and therefore if I will be
saved, or reclaimed from sin, or confirmed in grace, I must admit
deliberation, as the first motion that God casts into my mind for the
effecting hereof: and not stay till I find some violent and sensible
compunctions enforcing me, but accept even that small motion of care and
consultation, the which to cast away, is to reject Gods offer inuiting us to
our vprising. Next, though we have no power to convert our selves, yet all men
have power to use the outward means, and liberty to hear the voice of Gods
word and spirit, inuiting them to consider of their estate: which is sufficient
to make them inexcusable if they resist it. God works some things in us
without us, some things in us and with us, some things in us and by us. In us,
without us, good motions which by his spirit he casts into us, as we lie
plunged in sin, whereby he awaketh us and bids us think of our vprising. In
us and with us, a good will to receive those motions, and not to resist the
spirit. In us and by us, all such good works as the motion of his spirit
teaches us to do. And thus in the greatest bondage of our will we make room
for care and consultation even in spiritual things, otherwise then the most of
our adversaries do, in Whereof read in the next Digress^^. 62.
their doctrine of the merit of congruitie: whereof Bav. de vi^^. imp. l. 2. c.
vlt.
one of themselves says truly, They go not the right way to work, who
aspiring to walk after the spirit, place the hope of a better reformed life,
in the commadement of the law, and freedom of their own will.

49 Or if the Jesuit, according to the common error among the vulgar of his
side, imagine we make men desperate and careless in their actions, because we
teach no man is elected or reprobated because of his works good or evil, that
God foresaw he should do: he is deceived likewise; and the former difficulties
return upon him. For the most judicious and learned in the Church of Rome are
of the same mind. Touching election there are Magist. 1. d. 41 and ibi Occham.
A^im. Camerac. Capreol. Dur. Mayro. and alij. Bell. de gr. and lib. arb l. 2.
c. 10. Valent. tom. 1. p. 364. Tolet. in Romans 9.
few but grant, it is of the free mercy of God without any respect to our
merits. Tract. de Praedest l. 1 p. 38.
And Catharinus says, the contrary is Pelagianisme and deserves to be hissed
at. Touching reprobation the opinion is more current, that it should pass upon
the foresight of sin which God beheld in the wicked. But this, in reprobation
negative especially, is also crossed by the Altisio. l. 1. c. 9 qu. 1. and 2.
Arim. Dur. Camerac. Capreol. vbi supra. Tho. contra Gentil. l. 3. c. 161. and
163. and lect. 2. in Romans 9
chiefest Schoolmen that ever writ, and Bell. vbi supra c 16. Valent. tom. 1.
p. 404. Tolet. vbi supra
the Jesuits themselves shrink from it. Ariminensis says, No man is
reprobated because of the evil use of his freewill, or final resistance of
grace, which God foresaw in him. Part. 1. q 23. art. 5.
Dominus Bannes confuteth them that hold otherwise, and says, that considering
the reprobate absolutely, there can no cause or reason of their reprobation be
given on their own behalf. But all the effects of reprobation are ordinated to
this one end, to show the justice of God, and his mercy toward the elect. Our
adversaries therefore communicating with us in our doctrine touching the cause
of reprobation, are as guilty of making men careless thereby as we.

50 But I wonder most what should drive this Jesuit to say, we make God the
author of sin. I know he might hear and read the imputation laid upon us
by Posseuin. bib. select. l. 8. c. 11. Bellar. de amiss. great. l. 2. c. 3.
the Jesuits, but it is very strange any man of understanding should not
discern the foolery. For I challenge any man that lists to try it, let him
show if he can that the Church of England holds any more touching this matter
then the Papists themselves have expressly written. Occham says, 2. q. 5. lit.
k.
God is immediately the first cause of all things produced by the second causes.
But of things evil, he is the mediate cause, in that he produces and
preserves the creature that is the mediate cause of evil. And 3. q. 12. lit.
yy.
again, if we speak of the sins of commission, not only the will of the
creature is the efficient cause of every such act, but even God himself who
immediately causes every act. And if you reply, that then God should sin by
causing an act of such deformity, as the will of the creature sins when it
causes such an act: I answer, that God is debtor to no man, and therefore he
is bound neither to cause that act, nor the contrary; nor yet not to cause it;
but the will of the creature, by Gods law is bound not to cause the act, and so
consequently sins by doing it. To the very same effect writes 2. d. 34. q.
1. art. 3.
Gregorius Ariminensis, and Page 126. ad 7.
adds further, that some Doctors of his time affirmed, that albeit the
sinful act were of God, yet the sin was not: which saying, says he, may
have a good sense, not by conceiving the deformity to be any thing distinct
from the act, which is not caused of God; but understanding, that although the
sinful act be of God, yet as it is sinful it is not of God, who does nothing
against that which right reason judges should be done. Cardinal Cameracensis
1. q. 13. art. 1. page 193.
says, Many solemn Doctors confess, that God is the cause of sin, and that
he can cause and will sin. Medina Bartol. Med. in 1 2 q 93. art. 6. page 496.
says, A sinner when he sins, does against the will and law of God in one
sense, and in another, not. He does indeed against his signified will, and
against his precepts and prohibitions, which by a figurative speech, are called
his will; but against the will of his good pleasure he does not, nor against
the eff^ctuall ordination of God. In the same manner Mayr 2 d. 43. q 1. Duran.
2. d. 37. q. 1 and 1. d. 46. q 2. Altisio^ l. 2. p. 79. Feli^. in decal. page
69 T^o. in 9. Romans
write others: and such as are busiest in accusing Luther and Calvin touching
this point, yet by strength of argument, and evidence of the Scriptures, are
driven to say, Bann. 1. part. q. 49. art. 2.
That no sin falls out beside the will and intention of God: Bell. de
amiss. great. l 2. c. 13.
but that by a figure he commands it, and exciteth men unto it, as a huntsman
sets the dog upon a hare, by letting go the slip that held the dog. God
therefore not only permits the wicked to do many evils, neither does he
only forsake the godly, that they may be constrained to suffer the things done
against them by the wicked: but he also ouerseeth their evil wills, and rules,
and governs them, and boweth, and bends them by working inuisibly in them.
And not only inclines evil wills to one evil rather then another, by
permitting them to be carried into one evil, and not permitting them to be
carried into another: but also positiuely he bends them, by inclining them to
one evil and turning them from another, occasionally and morally, etc. Let our
adversaries look well into these speeches, and they shall find we say, in
effect, no more: and if they will expound ours as gently as they do their own,
there will appear no difference.

51 For we hold first in general, that Ps. 5.4. Habb. 1.13. ^^h. 3 5. Zach
8.17. eccl. 7, 31. lac. 1.13.
God is not the author of sin, but the devil and man's own corrupt will; the
contrary whereof we defy as blasphemy. Next, more particularly, we believe that
God wills nothing that is formally sin, as he wills that which is good, but
hates it rather: whence it follows, that he inspireth it into no man,
neither does he create any corruption in our will which was not there before:
but forbids it absolutely, Esa. 30.21. Romans 2.15.
within us by the light of his Spirit, Deuteronomy. 27.26.
without us by the commandment: and the first entrance of sin into the
world, and the continuance of it in the world, was by the voluntary action of
man's will corrupting it self, God infusing no evil into it. That which he
does about and concerning sin, are three actions. First, as the universal
cause of all things, Act. 17.28.
he sustaineth mankind and vpholdeth his being, yea the being and moving of all
his actions good and bad: so that no man could either move to an action, or
have being himself, if God sustained not. Whence it follows, that The
Schoolmen call it, Substratum peccati and pars materialis quae subest ipsi
malitiae
the very positive act, called the material part of sin, whereunto sin
cleaves, is of God in the same sort that all other actions of the creature
are. Secondly, Esa. 6.9. Ioh. 12.39. Romans 9.18. and 2.5. 1. Sam. 2.25.
he withholdeth his grace, being bound to no man, and leaves the wicked to
themselves, whereupon it follows that their hearts harden, and they cannot but
sin: the manner how he hardens, is not by creating the sin, as he does
grace in the elect, but by denying them the power of his grace which should
mollify them, and by offering them sundry objects, which they convert into
occasions of sin, and ruin; whereby they stand exposed to the temptations of
Satan, and have neither power nor will to stay themselves. Thirdly, he
ordinateth the sin, which is nothing else but the directing of it in such
manner as he pleases, that it proceed no further, or otherwise then his good
pleasure wills. Sometime he restrains it, that it shall reach no further
then he wills; sometime he turns it to another end then the person doing it
thought of: sometime he makes way for it to pass to punish one sin with
another. And this is all we hold touching this point; and I dare undertake to
show every parcel thereof in the Papists own books, as I have said already.
And therefore their writing, that the Protestants make God the author of sin,
are but clamors, and verbal quarrels arising from malice. For they may
understand if they will, that when we say God wills, or works sin, and
positiuely ordains it, or any such like; we mean not this of Gods formal
will, but of the three inferior actions that I have here briefly touched,
whereby he governs it.

Digression. 42. Again touching Freewill, wherein the doctrine of our Church
is methodically propounded, and in every point compared with that which the
Papists hold: that the several questions between them and us, and the manner
how, and where they rise, may be seen distinctly set down.
52 When we speak of freewill, the question may be laid either touching that
freedom which man had before his fall, in the state of innocence; or touching
that which remains with us now in the state of corruption. Concerning that
which man had before his fall, there is no question but he had a perfect freewil
both to good and evil, the which was natural to him, and given him with his
creation: by the strength whereof he had power in himself to persevere in
grace, because the grace whereby he might persevere, was in the power of his
will. Only he was created mutable, that is, such as albeit he were every way
perfect, yet he might fall from that perfection if he would: and he needed the
general help of God to preserve his nature, and to move him to his actions,
the which he had from the instant of his creation to his fall: neither of which
impaired the liberty of his will, but rather perfected it. In this matter
there lies no question: for it is Tho. 1.2. q. 109 ar. 2. ad 1. Arim. 2. d.
29. art. 1.
a School point, that man before his fall needed the influence of Gods grace
to move his will, which he had.

53 The question is touching our will now in this corrupted nature. And we are
all agreed, that the faculty or power of man's mind called the will, is not
lost by his fall, no more then the parts of his body are: but the controversy
is about the NATVRE first, and then the STRENGTH of it. And touching the nature
of our will, we hold two things: first, that although Adams will, by nature,
was free, as well in things spiritual concerning God, as in things natural
concerning this life; yet ours is not so: but in things spiritual it is stark
dead till God create spiritual life and liberty in it; and so that freedom
it has, is in it by grace and not by nature. By nature we have power to will
natural things but till grace come there is no faculty to will heavenly
things, concerning the saving of our soul, or once to mind them. This is the
first point, and the Papists dedenie it, saying, that will by Adams fall was
not extinguished or lost outright, but only maimed or weakened, and left
destitute of that which guided it: and the grace of God approaching does only
heal it again, or as it were waken it out of sleep; and they liken it to
Andr. orth. l. 4 Salm. and Rhem. in Luc. 10.30.
a man wounded, that still has life in him, though physic and cure bring
perfect health. And Bell. de gra. and lib. arb. l. 6. c. 15. Dices quom.
the Jesuits hold, that before any grace come, it is free to do good, but this
freedom is as it were bound and stopped till God give it power. As a man
having the sight of his eyes, yet sees not till some sensible form come,
which form is not the cause he sees, but that which perfecteth the sight. And
Bell. de great. p^^m hom. c. 5. and 7. and de great. and lib. arb l. 5. c. 13.
Decimus.
they write, that all our naturals are as whole in us as ever they were in
Adam, and we only want a supernatural gift to guide them, which he had. To
this purpose Occha^ 1. d. 17. q. 2. lit. c.
they write, that it exceeds not the faculty of man's nature to do the acts
of charity, which may even merit at Gods hands, and Andrad. orth. l. 3.
that all the works of the very Gentiles are not sin, and Gabr. 2. d. 28.
that by doing what is in our own power, even by nature, without any grace, we
may merit Gods grace of congruitie; as I shall show hereafter. The which
assertions of theirs, show what they hold touching the nature of our will,
namely that even by nature, before any grace come, it has some freedom to
good; but if God do but prevent it, then it is able to do much more. Wherein we
refuse them, because the Scripture says, Col. 2.13.
a natural man is dead in sin, and 1. Cor. 2.14.
perceives not the things of Gods spirit, neither can know them, for they are
spiritually discerned.

54 The second point touching the nature of freewill, is, that as some Divines
think, it stands not in freedom from all necessity, but from all external
constraint. For I have showed before, that Gods will orders and determines
all wills, from which determination no creature is free: but they all depend on
God, and can do nothing but what he pleases: yet for so much as this will of
God takes not away the judgment of our own reason, nor constrains us, but
so directs us, that we always in choosing or refusing follow the direction also
of our understanding; our will hereby is left free; as if a man inuit me to a
banquet, he is indeed the first mouer of my will thereunto, and he leads me by
the hand toward the place, and in a sort determines my will to that house
rather then to any other; yet for so much as I allow of his motion, and find
reason in my self to go, I go freely, and with full liberty, though this
freedom is not from all necessity, but from coaction only. And so we
describe freewill to be the operation of the will in choosing or refusing
whatsoever the full and perfect judgment of our understanding offers: which
judgment going before, is sufficient to make the will free, because where it
is, there is no constraint. Others contrariwise dispute, our will to be free,
not in this respect, but because it is subordinate to no necessity. For man,
say they, has such a sovereign dominion over his actions that what he does,
he not only does vnco^strained, but he absolutely may and can do otherwise,
Voluntas a Deo determinata, non libere sed necessario agit. Bellar. de great.
and lib. arb. l. 4. c. 14. Deinde.
being no ways constrained by Gods will. But such an absolute freedom there
seems not to be; for I have showed before, that Gods will is above ours, and
sloweth into it, and moves it, and determines it; whereupon it follows that
our will of infallible necessity must needs be moved and determined, for Gods
will cannot be in vain. And this is allowed by many of our adversaries, though
some others condemn it. For Alphonsus defining free will, says, Aduer.
haeres. l. 7. verbo Gratia.
there is a liberty which is opposed against necessity; or more truly against
coaction, because some things are necessary which yet are done freely though
necessarily, but not of constraint or violence and of this liberty we call
man's will free. And Altisiod. l. 2. tract. 11. page 70 Anton. part. 1. tit. 4.
c. 2. 7.
others showing how free will stands in liberty from necessity, yet define
that necessity to be nothing else but compulsiue and external constraint:
whereby it is like they think, the will is no otherwise free but from
compulsion. Again, Almain. Mor. page 2.
they say, God by his concourse determines the action of man's will: whereupon
the will cannot but work, and yet is free, Dom. Bann. part. 1. q. 19. art. 10.
because it follows the judgment of reason, which is the root of freewil.
And as often as the act of willing arises from this root of judgment, it is
always free. And Tom. 1. lib. 1. art. 1. c. 25. p. 41.
Waldensis writes, that great clearks in his time did place this precedent
necessity, which is the cause that the thing is, in humane works, and that it
flowed from Gods will. Which shows, that they thought our will is not freed
from necessity, but coaction only. And finally those speeches of theirs,
Anton. part. 1. tit. 4. c. 2.
Our will is inclined, changed, determined by God: he makes that one
inclination shall succeed another. Tho. contra Gentil. l. 3. c. 89.
Man cannot use the virtue of his own will, but so far forth as he works
in the power of Gods will. Bellar. de great. and lib arb. l 3. c. 18.
And as a man by device should let birds fly, and yet causes them all to go
to such places as himself would. so does God rule the will, Ib. l. 4. c. 16.
yea move and apply it to that it wills. I say these and such like speeches
cannot be cleared so, but they subject the will to necessity as much as we do.

55 This being the nature of our will, the next point to be enquired, is
touching the strength thereof, which is not alike in all actions. For the
things whereabout the will is occupied are of three sorts, natural, civil and
spiritual: natural and civil things concern this life only, but spiritual
things touch the life to come; and therefore man's will has not a like power in
them all. By natural things we mean such as appertain to all living
creatures for their exercise and preservation, and of their natures, as to
eat, drink, sleep, move themselves, and such like. By civil things we mean
all humane actions tending to society, and the outward government of man's
life, which the light of nature and use of reason leads us to, as speaking,
buying, selling, going this or that way, the learning and practicing of a trade
or profession; whereunto we also refer moral things, that is, the governing
of our external actions and members, according to the rules of outward
discipline, without the inclination or consent of the conscience renewed; as
the exercise of all civil virtues, and many external works in their kind
appertaining to Gods worship, to be temperate, bountiful, faithful in word,
chaste, courteous, to speak and hear things good and honest, to go to Church:
Romans 2.14. Act 23.1. Phil. 3.4. Psalm. 50.16. 2. Tim. 3.5.
in things of which kind, man has natural freewill, that he can voluntarily
follow what his understanding shows him, and apply himself thereunto by
choosing or refusing. And in this point we all agree, Habere quidem hominem
liberum arb ad actiones ciuiles and externas, quae spectant ad co^mune^
conuictu^ and societatem hominum, docuit Luther. Melanct. Chemnit. and alij
passi^n. Valen. to. 1. page 1058. b.
as our adversaries confess. But we set down three limitations: first, Mat.
10.29. Iac. 4.15. Exodus 35.31. Esa. 54.16
that our will in all these things needs Gods general help to move and
apply it to the work; without which help, the bare faculty of our mind can
do nothing: for unless he sustain the power of my will, and apply and direct
it, I cannot so much as put a morsel of bread to my mouth. Secondly, this
general concourse of Gods, help being granted, Esa. 26.12. Ier. 10.23.
yet we can will none of these things perfectly, but in much weakness, and are
often hindered, by reason our nature through sin is depraved, whereupon the
mind is obscured with error, the judgment corrupted with blindness, the
affections disturbed, the will distracted, and the reason hindered by Satan and
uncertain objects. Thirdly in the smallest things that are, and wherein our
liberty is greatest, Mat. 10.29. Nu. 22.18.
yet the will of God going before, determines ours, that we can will no more
then God pleases. These limitations are also consented to by Biel. 2. d. 28.
lit. n. Bellar. de great. and lib. arb. l. 4. c. 4. and 11. Ban. part. 1. c. 19.
art. 10.
our adversaries: and so in things natural, civil, and pertaining to moral
discipline, we have freewill.

56 But in spiritual things concerning the salvation of our souls, the case
is otherwise: for the manifesting whereof, we must consider that there are two
states or degrees of our life. The first is called the state of sin, containing
that part of our life which is before regeneration and justification: in which
state they are which are not justified till God call them; and then they enter
into the second degree, called the state of grace, because then the grace of
God freeth them from the bondage of their former corruption. Now the question
is, what power man's will has in spiritual things, so long as he abides in
the state of sin? and whether by the strength of his own will only, without
faith and the special help of God, he be able to yield obedience to Gods law,
or to do any thing available to the pleasing of God and the saving of his
soul? We answer negatiuely, that he is not: because 1. Cor. 2.14. Ephesians. 4.17.
his understanding and judgment in such things is stark blind, and Genesis 6.5.
Romans 8.7.
the will by nature is turned from God, that it can follow nothing but that
which is evil and repugnant to Gods will, Romans 7.14. and 8.8.
whose law being spiritual, cannot be obeyed by such as are carnal, living in
the flesh; but Romans 14.23. Ephesians. 2.5. Col. 2 13. Gal. 3.10. Deuteronomy. 6.5.
all that they do is sin, til the grace of justification come and renew them.
And although God call none thereunto but by means and secondary causes, yet
these causes are the inward light of the spirit, and the outward preaching of
the Gospel; the will of man being merely passive in the first act of conversion.

57 But the Papists hold otherwise, whose several assertions against this
doctrine I will briefly collect, and set down in order, that you may see what
they ascribe to man's will in spiritual things in the state of unregeneration,
and view the differences between us. But first I must put you in mind, that
the warier sort of them, in words seem to join Gods grace with our will to
help it, in all such actions as they hold it can do in this state; and require
the aid thereof, as if without it they would grant it could do nothing. So De
great. and lib. arb. l. 6. c. 4. in titulo.
Bellarmine says, Man's will in things appertaining to piety and salvation,
can will nothing without the assistance of Gods grace, yea Ib. Nos tres
the special assistance. And sometime they revile us for charging them with the
contrary: but this is but a fetch to deceive the ignorant, and a dram of their
wit to make their Pelagianisme go down the easilier. For Gabr. 2. d. 28. lit.
l. and n. Ocka^ 1. d. 17. q. 3. ad 2. Altisiod. l. 2. page 70.
many require no such assisting grace, as shall appear; and some say we need
it not, as if freewill were absolutely unable without it, but of Gods
liberality it is infused into the will, being disposed before, to make it will
the more easily: which was the very heresy of Pelagius. They define this grace
to be no more but the general help which we need in natural things, and such
as the very Pagans have. They maintain the merit of congruitie, wherein of all
hands it is confessed, there is the influence of no special grace, it only
consisting in doing that which is in our own power, and Actus ille tanquam
dispositio praecedit gratiae infusione^. Gabr vbi supra.
going before the infusion of all grace, at least in nature. Yea the Jesuit
himself, that seems so religiously to ascribe the power of our will to Gods
grace, Bella. de great. and lib. arb. l. 5. c. 4 Intra. hos.
censureth certain Schoolmen because they had writ, that the general
influence of Gods grace being admitted, yet no man by his natural freewill
could do any good without his special help: and contrary to that he said
before, writes expressly, Lib. 6. cap. vlt.
Man, before all grace, has freewill, not only to things moral and natural,
but even to the works of piety, and to things supernatural. The which kind
of proceeding, how it can be reconciled with that they pretend touching the
uniting of Gods special grace with our will, it passes my understanding to
conceive; for they are contrary. And this was necessary to be observed in the
dealing of our adversaries, because this show of words, that Gods grace must go
with our will, is the veil whereby they hide their deceit, and the vizard that
covers their Pelagian faces, that the ignorant should not know them; and
carries so good semblance of reason, that, as Saint Austin said of the like
words used by the Pelagians, we would receive them without scruple, but that
they speak them, whose meaning is well enough known unto us. Now I will set
down what they ascribe to freewil in the state of sin.

58 First, that thereby a man may avoid sin when he is tempted to it; which
the word of God 1. Ioh. 5 4. 1 Pet. 5.9. Ephesians. 6.11.
ascribes to grace only. Biel 2. d. 28. lit. k.
says, Freewill by it own nature, without the gift of grace, can eschew every
new mortal sin: and the habits of grace, infused or attained, cooperate with
the will, to help it to will delightfully, readily and easily: and no
otherwise. And that this is a common opinion among the School men, it
appears by Ariminensis, 2. d. 26. page 95
who confuteth it. And Bell. de great. and lib. arb. l. 5. c. 7
the Jesuits say, that for the ouercoming of tentations (so that no sin be
committed) they do not always require Gods special help, properly so called;
that is to say, internal illumination, and his supernatural motion; but any
help whatsoever.

59 Secondly, they hold that a man by his own natural strength can know and
do that which is morally good, according to the moral law and precept of true
reason, and wherein there is no sin. Greg. de Val. to 2. page 815. b. idem
Bellar. l. 5. c. 4. and 9.
One says, Some moral works of the easier sort may thus be done, when no
great temptation rises against us. But this is nothing. Bella. l. 5. c. 14.
Another says, Man in the state of corrupted nature, has freewill touching
things moral: and Lib. 6. c. 15.
before any grace come to him he has a remote and imperfect power to do the
works of godliness: otherwise it cannot be conceived how man's will should
actiuely concur to the works of godliness. And yet further, they say, Scot.
2 d 28. Dur. ib. q. 4 Abulent. Mat. 19. q. 178.
All the commandments that are natural, may be observed throughout the whole
life of man, without the help of Gods grace, only by the strength of nature,
and all mortal sins against them may be avoided. Occha^ 1. d. 17 q. 2. lit.
c etc.
The works of merit and charity exceed not the whole faculty of man's nature,
though it stand in Gods liberality to accept such works at meritorious: God
of his grace may accept the good motion of our will, proceeding from our pure
naturals, and so consequently such an act may be meritorious. And that which
goes beyond all this, Andrad. orth. explic. l. 3. page 277. and inde.
they hold the very Gentiles, some of them, knew God, and did many things
wherein was no sin, and this was sufficient to justify and save them: an
opinion so vile and prodigious, that Greg. Arim. 2. d. 26. q. 1. Bayns de virt.
imp. c. 2
some of their own side confute it.

60 Thirdly Refert Greg. Arim. 2. d. 29. art. 2. in sin. Scot 2. d. 28. Dur. 2.
d. 28. q. 4
they write, that in the state of sin, without the special aid of Gods
grace, by freewil alone, we may love God above all, and easily keep his
commandments. Andradius Orth. expl. l 3. page 280.
says, Even such as are aliens from the true knowledge of Christ, may do
works that shall be polluted with no fault, but deserve exceeding commendation.
And it should seem this opinion had many patrons in the Church of Rome: for
Gregorius Ariminensis, who misliketh it, disputing against it, says, 2. d. 26.
page 99
It is yet more to be wondered, that any man should absolutely pronounce, that a
man by his pure naturals alone, without the special help of God, can will,
and do well; when they that say thus, exclude thereby the necessity of Gods
help, which is by teaching and knowledge, and so give less to grace then
Pelagius himself. Where reporting the opinion so vehemently, and charging some
of his own fellows with it, he makes it plain, how current it was. And the
Bell. l. 5. c. 4. de great. and lib. arb.
Jesuits censuring him for his labor, show they also have a months mind to
the conceit.

61 Now if we reject these opinions, and deny freewill in these cases, we are
to be excused. For the very Church of Rome it self never wanted some therein
that denied it as well as we, and with great passion confuted it. Ariminensis 2.
d. 29. art. 2.
answered a Doctor that held it against him, that saving his reverence it was
Pelagianisme. And Dom. Bannes 2. 2. q. 24.
says, he thinks it false and worse then false, that any man without the
special and supernatural help of God, can be able to do a supernatural act.
And Bayus de virt. imp. c. 8.
a late professor at Louan: Freewil without Gods help is of power to nothing
but sin, and it draws toward iniquity so much the faster, by how much the
sharplier it is bent to action. And L. 2. d. 25. g.
the Master of Sentences: Freewil, before grace repair it, is pressed and
overcome with concupiscence: and has weakness in evil, but no grace in good,
and therefore may sin, and cannot but sin, even damnably. So that our
mislike of freewil in this case, is true doctrine even by the judgment of our
adversaries.

62 But there are yet two other points which advance the will of man, even in
the state of sin more then all this. The first is the merit of congruitie,
whereby they teach that a man doing what is in himself by the only power of
his nature, so can dispose and prepare himself to his justification. Antoninus
Part. 1. tit 4. c. 2.. 2.
says, Albeit no man by his freewill can merit grace whereby he may do works
meritorious, yet he may dispose himself to the obtaining of such grace; which
God will not deny him if he do that which is in himself. And therefore it is
not altogether without the compass of our will to do works meritorious. And
Alexander Hales, 3. part. q. 69. n^ 5. art. 3 p. 249.
It must be confessed that if man do what is in himself, God gives his grace
necessarily, that is, immutably, as the Sun gives his light to all that will
receive it, and as we say, it is of necessity that God be immortal. And
Altisiodorensis, Sum. l. 2. p. 71.
The proportion between a corporal and spiritual blind man, holds not:
because the spiritual blind has a power preparatiue and operative to his
seeing, because he can do something which being done he shall see: and when
grace is powered into him bringing forth the act of seeing from the faculty of
seeing, there is no new faculty bestowed upon him. And 2. d 28. q. 5. and 1 d.
17. q. 2 lit. n.
Durand, All men grant, and good reason, that a man without any new habitual
grace infused from God, can prepare himself to grace. He says all men grant
it, and so I think they do, because I find the merit of congruitie taught and
maintained by Tho. 1.2. q. 114. art. 3. and 6. Bonauen. compend. Theol. l. 5 c.
12. Biel 2. d. 27. and 28 Scot. 2. d. 28. and 4. d. 14. q. 2. art. 2. Mayr 2.
d. 28. Occh. 1. d. 17. q. 2. Turrecrem. 23. q. 4. Nabuchodon.
the greatest clearkes in the Church of Rome: which yet is the very heresy of
Pelagius. And it is no matter though the Jesuits now begin to say, this kind of
merit is now rejected. For themselves and their peers, teach the very same
disposing of our selves to our own justification, that the Schoolmen meant by
it. Hosius Confess. Petricou. c. 73.
says, The Council of Trent chose rather to call good works going before
justification, dispositions or preparations to grace, then merits of any sort.
They are content to lay by the name, he says, but the thing they hold as fast
as ever any did. For Suar. Homil. 2. in Apoc.
says, Our works before we have attained grace, dispose and prepare us to
grace. And Wind. de effic. mort. Christi p. 173.
another very lately, According to Scotus opinion, which I neither defend, NOR
DISALLOW, the Gentiles, by their works morally good, and by the common
influence of nature, might merit of congruitie, the effectual grace of God,
seeing his goodness suffers no man to perish who does that which is in
himself. The like is holden by Euerard. Bill. defens. iudic. Colon. p. 267.
and 269. Conra. Cling. loc. l. 1. c. 8.
others long after the Schoolmen: and yet it is the heresy of Pelagius, by
the confession of their own fellows. This Relect. 1. de potest. Eccl. sect. 3.
p. 16.
says Victoria, is a good part of Pelagius his error, if I have any skill, and
the like say Bann. 22. p. 390. Bellar. de great. l. 6. c. 6.
others; though the Church of Rome still embrace it. And so it is clear, that
our adversaries hold the first grace, whereby man is led forward to his
justification, may be, and necessarily is, attained by the power of his own
freewill, which is the most presumptuous conceit that ever entered the mind of
men: seeing our Savior Ioh. 15.5.
says, Without me ye can do nothing, and 1. Cor. 4.7.
the Apostle demands, Who has separated thee? what have thou which thou have
not received? Whereunto, this opinion of freewill being true, I may answer, I
have separated my self by doing that which was in my self to do, and so
meriting, of congruitie, my justification: which power I received from no grace
of God, but had it by nature, in my own will. And finally our very prayers and
thanksgiving to God, show, we can do nothing of our selves. For what is more
foolish then to pray for that which I have in my own power? De not. and gr. c.
18.
says Saint Austin.

63 Thus having showed what is to be thought of freewill in the state of sin,
let us now come to the state of grace, and see what is to be attributed to it
there. Wherein we must again distinguish between the instant, or beginning of
regeneration called our vprising, and the time after, when our regeneration is
accomplished and we stand justified, and see what the freedom of the will is in
these two. And touching the beginning of our regeneration, what time we rise up
from sin, and enter into our first conversion, we say, that as our will could
no way dispose it self, nor remove the impediments, whereby it might be made
capable of grace, Romans 10.20. Heb. 10.16. 2. Cor. 4.6. 1. Cor. 4.7. Ph. 2.13.
Ioh. 1.13. Mat. 11.36. Rom 9.16.
so when grace first enters, it is merely passive, till grace have renewed
it, and no more but the subject wherein God works. The meaning whereof is,
that what time the Spirit of God, by means of the word preached, or otherwise,
first lays hold, and sets upon our will to convert it, it finds nothing
therein to help his grace in the conversion; but in order of working, first
grace gives life and quality to the dead will, and then being renewed it
wills the conversion, and becomes a voluntary instrument of God, both to
apprehend his grace offered, and to work forward with it. But as I said, this
it does not by it own natural strength, but by virtue of the seed of grace, and
new life that God has put into it. And as my paper whereon I am writing,
receives the ink passiuely, and brings nothing of it own to the writing
(for I could have writ upon another) but being written it becomes an
instrument with me of the writing, and as I write more and more, so it still
cooperateth with me, though in it self there be no natural beginning of the
writing: so is it in the will of man at his first conversion. Whence it
follows, that in those whom God effectually will renew, their will can make
no resistance, as my paper cannot reject my writing. Mat. 23.37.
The will of man may refuse the outward calling of God, by reason such calling
is not always joined with the effectual calling of his grace, and so the
reprobate may have it, but the efficacy of grace cannot be resisted: not
because man's will of it self has no property to refuse, but because
effectual grace takes away this property, and makes it unable to resist:
whence it follows again, that no man is converted against his will, because
grace in the instant of conversion takes away unwillingness and makes us
willing.

64 Against this our adversaries hold, Wind. de effic mortis chr. p. 174.
that humane will has some power, which being breathed upon by Gods Spirit,
does not a little work, with working grace in his conversion. The manner how
it works, they say is by concurring with Gods grace in our vprising. The
efficacy of which grace depends on the free consent of our will. For first
they compare our will to things defective, which yet have in themselves an
inward condition of their own, whereby they can receive perfection, whenever
any help comes. Thus they liken it Altisi^d. Sum l. 2. tract 11. q. 4 art. 2.
Alex. part 3. m. 1. art. 2. ad 1.
to the eye, which though it see not in the dark, yet can see as soon as
light comes, because in it self it has the faculty of seeing. Andrad. Orth
explic. l. 4. Rhe^, in Luc. 10.30.
And to a man half mad, who yet has life in him, and thereby can recover when
help comes to cure him. And to a man in prison, that can come out, if the
door be opened, and his fetters taken off. Next they say, the efficacy of the
grace whereby we vprise, lies in the cooperation of our will with it, as if
our will and Gods grace were two several agents in the vprising, as for
example, when two men carry a burden between them, which neither of them alone
carries. Thus Andradius Vbi supra. p. 350.
says, Gods grace and our freewill make one cause of our application to
justice. Contr. Gent. l. 3. c. 159.
And Thomas, It is in the power of our freewill to hinder, or not to hinder,
the receiving of divine grace: as if it had the office of a Porter in the soul
of man, to let in, and shut out. De great. l 6. c. 15 and l. 4. c. 16.
And Bellarmine: Gods motion leaves man altogether free, to be converted or
not be. His will is truly free, and determines it self, though God move and
apply it to the work, in that Gods motion is in the power thereof. Tom. 2.
disp. 8. q. 3. punct. 4.. 2
And Gregory of Valentia, That man is converted and answers Gods calling,
this is to be ascribed to his own freewill and Gods grace. And yet more fully
Ruard. art. 7. pro 10. expl. art: Louan. que^ ^efert. D. Bann.
the Deane of Louan, with whom, though not in so full words, the two former
Jesuits agree. The help of God being given alike to both, yet one man is
converted, and the other not. And if it be demanded what the reason is, why
this man is converted and that man is not? it is not because he that is
converted received greater help of God whereby he might effectually be
converted: but the reason is to be assigned on the behalf of his freewill:
namely that being assisted with equal help, the one would be converted, and
the other would not be converted. This is nigh to the heresy of Pelagius. And
thus we see the most noble gift whereby we vprise from sin, is not thought to be
the superabounding grace of God flowing from our election, which in a singular
manner, more deeply and secretly, inlighteneth, inspireth, persuades,
impelleth us: but I know not what servile motion that stands waiting at the
door of our heart for answer, whether freewill will let it in or no. An
assertion so unreasonable, that some of their own Doctors have forsaken it,
and embraced the doctrine of our Church. Our own strength, Corn. Mus. concion.
tom. 1. page 252.
says a Bishop of theirs, is not sufficient to bring us back from death. We
cannot be converted and saved by our own power. The exciting grace, which
disposes thee to thy conversion, God works in thee without thee, God sows
it in us, without us, but he reapeth it with us: not that our cooperation is
needful, but that our consent is required, when that, first stirring us up, is
gone before our consent: not the works of our will therefore dispose us to
justification, but the grace of God, which is against the merit of congruity:
and the efficacy of that grace depends not on our consent, but goes before
it, and works consent.

65 Touching the state of regeneration, when a man is justified and adopted, we
think the will is set at liberty, and has received a new condition, that it
can will and cooperate with Gods Spirit all the days of our life: as an
instrument of music being set in tune, can afterward yield good music which
before it could not: and all the good that a man, elevated into this state,
does, are the works of his renewed will, as things outwardly wrought by an
artificer, are the works of his own hands. Yet this must be expounded with
three limitations, every one whereof the Church of Rome denies. Psalm. 127.1.
First, that it still needs the grace of God to protect it, as before
adoption came it needed his power to create it. This protection stands in
showing the mind what is good and evil, in directing and applying it to the
actions, in governing and strengthening it that it faint not, and putting away
temptations which else would hinder it being mutable. Against this Refert Bann.
22. q. 24. art. 6. concl. 5.
our adversaries hold; that a men endued with the habit of charity, needs no
more but Gods general help to the acts and exercises of his charity. And
that which is worse, he may increase in charity without any further help, yea
that God by his providence preuenteth not the will to the doing of such an act,
but it is the man himself that first deliberateth of it. The second limitation
is, that perseverance in good begins not in the will, but in Gods protecting
grace that vpholdeth the will from desisting: whence it follweth, Mat. 6.10.
Psalm. 94.16.
that to every new work the will needs a new grace; as Organs give sound no
longer then while the bellows are blowing. Against this Bell. de great. and
lib. arb. l. 6. c. vlt.
our adversaries teach, that a just man, when himself will, can practice any
righteousness internal or external, by doing good works, and keeping Gods
law. Neither needs he, ordinarily any new grace to excite him, but only to
help him. Anton. part. 1. tit. 4. c. 2. 6.
And in case of falling into sin, When it is said the will cannot cooperate
to rise again, the meaning is, that it cannot do it so easily: There are, among
the Papists, Bann. vbi supra.
that think this impious blasphemy, and savoring of Pelagianisme. Alphonsus
Aduer. haeres. l. 7. verbo Gratia.
says, When our will by Gods help, has begun to do any good, it cannot without
the same special help, prosecute the good begun, nor persevere in it. And
Gregorius Ariminensis 2. d. 26. p. 95.
writes, that every man, in this present state, is so weak and infirm to
each good work, falling under Gods law; that not only to do it better and
more easily, but even simply to do it he needs, by reason of his infirmity,
the special aid of Gods grace: so far forth that without this aid he can
do no good.

66 The third limitation is, that the will being freed, and vpholden by the
grace of God, in manner aforesaid, Romans 7.14. and 23. and 8.18.
yet can it perform no perfect obedience to Gods commandments, nor do any
thing that shall have no sin in it: much less can it do works meritorious; but
all that regenerate will can do, is imperfect, and needs forgiveness, as I
have showed Digress. 35. and 36.
before. And although Deuteronomy. 32.4
Gods works be perfect and undefiled, which himself alone works out of us,
yet the things he works in us by his Spirit, in this life, are imperfect,
because of our flesh, til the time of the next life come, when that which is
imperfect shall be done away. And some Papists seem to be of this mind.
Altisiodorensis Sum. l. 2. tract. 11. p. 70.
says, Liberty from sin, is only in good men, whom Gods grace has set
free, not that they cannot sin, but that sin shall bear no dominion over
them. But the Church of Rome holds the contrary, Greg. a Valent. tom 2. p.
993.
That Gods grace so heals our nature, that we do not only receive thereby a
condition to be able to avoid all mortal sins all our life long, but also by
our works merit the increase of grace and eternal life. Ib. 1061. and 1077.
Occham. 1 d. 17. q. 2. Biel. 2. d 27. dub. 2.
The substance of which works proceeds from our own freewill, the grace of
God doing no more but adding to them a certain condition or respect that
makes them meritorious: because, as they imagine, although it exceed not the
faculty of our nature to do a good work, yet it is not in us to make the same
meritorious, unless God of his bounty will accept it.

67 And hitherto I have laid down what is to be holden of freewill, and how
the Papists differ from us, wherein it is singularly to be observed, that we
have in every point, the voice of one or other, among themselves, on our side:
and that we have not, as, Bell. praefat. de lib. ^^b. Apolog. epist.
they maliciously report us, turned me^ into beasts or stones, by taking away
freewill, but acknowledge it so far as to make all flesh inexcusable before
Gods judgment seat. And truly had we ascribed somewhat too little to it, and
taken from it to give the more to Gods grace, yet were our error on the better
hand, and deserved not to be set upon the stage with such outcries, as if all
our Church were proved unholy thereby: for a Saint of their own, by Consult. ad
Maximil. art. de lib. arb.
the testimony of Cassander (who was also of his mind) says, This is the part
of godly minded men, to attribute nothing to themselves but all to Gods grace.
Whence it follows, that how much soever a man give to grace, yet in so doing
he departs not from piety; though to do it he should detract something from
the power of nature and freewill. But when any thing is taken from Gods grace,
and given to nature, which belongs to grace, that cannot be without eminent
danger. But whatsoever we have done in the point, this I am sure of, that our
adversaries are gone too far, even by their own confession. There have not
been wanting Divines in our times, 22. p. 390.
says Dom. Bannes, who have given too much to freewill, and the power of
nature: and while they thought to eschew the error of Lutherans, they fell into
the proud heresy of Pelagians. And Et 393.
to make men free they have made them proud, and filled them with sacrilege.
This is the truth. For freewill has of it self either some strength, though
small, or none at all. If any, then Christ said not true, without me ye can do
nothing. If none, then where is freewill, and the cooperation thereof with Gods
grace? I will end the point with Saints Austins complaint: De verb. Apost. Ser.
2.
Unthankful men to ascribe so much to weak and wounded nature: true it is,
that man, when he was made, had great strength of freewill, but by sin he
lost it. But Sixth. Senens. praefat. l. 5. Staplet. de Iustif. l. 2. c. vlt.
our adversaries think Saint Austin went too far in this question,
attributing too little to man's will.

. 41. In the Roman Church I confess there be some bad and sinful folk. For
the Church is called nigra and formosa, black and fair. Cant. 1. because in
it are mixed good and bad; as out of diverse parables of our Savior I proved
before: but there are two differences betwixt the sinful which are in the
Roman Church, and among the sectaries. And first of those that are among the
sectaries, there are none truly Holy, of which, as of the better or more
worthy part, their Church may be denominated and termed Holy, as the Roman
Church may be. It may perhaps be that diverse of them abstain from grosser
sins, as swearing, backbiting, stealing, etc. and that they do sometimes many
works morally good, as give alms, erect hospitals, live, at least in outward
show, in modest and moderate sort: but alas these be not sufficient, or
certain signs of sanctity: all this and perhaps much more we may find in the
heathen Philosophers. These outward actions may proceed from natural, and
sometimes from vicious and sinful motives, and consequently may be very far
from true holiness, which must proceed of true charity; without which
charity, to distribute all that one has to feed the poor, or to give ones
body to burn, does nothing profit. 1. Cor. 13. The which charity must
proceed de cord puro, and conscientia bona, and fide non ficta, 1. Tim. 1. The
which things being most inward, and consequently hidden and secret, cannot
sufficiently be showed to be present by those outward actions. Nay they cannot
be infallibly known of the party himself (for, Nemo scit vtrum amore an odio
dignus sit: and quis potest dicere, mundum est cor meum. Pro. 20.) but are
reserved to him only qui scrutatur corda, to wit, almighty God; and it cannot
be perfectly known of us who have them truly; and consequently who be truly
Saints, unless it please him to reveal it by miracle, or some other certain
way unto us.

The Answer.
1 To prove we are not the holy Church of God, the Jesuit objected our sinful
lives, as if we had been of worse conversation then the professors of the true
faith could be. But for so much as he wisely foresaw, that if we fell to
comparing the lives of one another, his own Church would receive as much
disgrace thereby as ours, and his argument bent against us, in the discharge
would recoile upon himself, and roll in the fall upon the heads of his own
people, because they are as bad and sinful as their fellows: therefore now he
answers that difficulty, by assigning a difference between the people of
his Church and the people of ours in this point: and the difference, he says,
is this, that although in his Roman Church there be some bad and sinful, yet
all are not so; whereas with us there are none good, but all are wicked. A
proud and ridiculous brag; but yet I answer it. True holiness consists in
the concourse of the righteousness of justification and sanctification. The
former of justification is wheresouer Christ with all his merits, is imputed,
and apprehended by faith, for the pardon of our sins, and accepting of us
again to eternal life. Romans 4.11. and 3.24.
This is called the righteousness of faith, and they which have it are truly
holy thereby, and our Church teaches it against the Church of Rome that has
renounced it, and so deprived her children of all true holiness. The second of
sanctification, is when we bring forth fruits worthy of amendment of life, not
walking after the flesh, but after the spirit. And we affirm, that in our
Church this also is joined with the former, though we all confess it be in
great weakness, and far from that perfection which we desire: and such as
walk in it 1. Ioh. 3.7. Mat. 7.16. and 12.33. Romans 8.9. Gal. 5.22. Ephesians. 5.9.
2. Pet. 1.5.
are proved thereby to be truly holy.

2 Against this external righteousness of our sanctification, the Jesuit
obiecteth, that though we abstain from grosser sins, and do many good moral
works, etc. yet this is no certain sign we are holy: for this and much more
may proceed from sinful motions, and be found among the very Gentiles. Whereto
I answer, that this were a good argument against us, if we had no
righteousness among us but such as he has herein described. For this moral
holiness is no holiness indeed, neither do we thereby declare the holiness
of our Church; but say, the good works done among us proceed from faith and
love, and are directed to the glory of God, according to the rules of
sanctification, and so are sufficient to testify for us. And we grant, as the
Jesuit requires, that many great and plausible works of morality may proceed
from natural, yea sinful motives, and that therefore there is no true
holiness unless it proceed from charity, grounded on a pure heart and a good
conscience, and faith unfeigned: but we add withal, that the works of our
Church proceed from this charity, and thence receive their condition of
holiness.

3 And how does the Jesuit know the contrary, because he says so confidently,
the holiness found among us arises not from charity? What is the ground
whereupon he says so? He answers, true charity, a good conscience, and
faith, be things inward and secret; and therefore cannot by our outward actions
be showed to be present: nay he says, the party himself, without revelation
or miracle, cannot be sure he has them. The which if it be true, I desire him
to answer plainly, how he knows his own good works proceed from faith and
charity? and by what means he will demonstrate it to me that doubt it? for
revelation and miracle, I am sure he can show none: because the miracles of his
Legend, which is all he can plead, concern not him that never had them; and
yet he thinks his holiness and the holiness of his people, is a good mark
of the Catholic Church. It is false therefore that he says, No man by his
outward works without miracle, can be certain he has faith or charity. For
1. Ioh. 3.7.
Saint John says, He that does righteousness, is righteous as God is
righteous. And Saint James, Iac. 2.18.
Show me thy faith by thy works, and I will show thee my faith by my works. And
our blessed Savior, Mat. 7.16.
By their fruits ye shall know them. Luc. 6 43.
It is not a good tree that brings forth evil fruit, nor an evil tree that
brings forth good fruit. For men gather not figs of thorns, nor grapes of
thistles. A good man, out of the good treasury of his heart, brings forth
good things: and an evil man, out of the evil treasure of his heart, brings
forth evil. And if charity cannot be proved to be present by our works,
because it is a thing hidden secretly within us, then no cause can be proved or
known by the effects, and no physician can know the inward state of the body
by the outward signs: which were absurd. And the word of God calling upon us
Mat. 5.16.
to let our light so shine before me^, that they may see our good works: and 2.
Pet. 1.10.
bidding us thereby to make our election sure, and promising an abundant
entrance into Christ's kingdom to all that follow virtue, temperance, patience,
etc. should deceive us, if when we had taken pains in so doing, we could not
be assured that our works arise from faith: without which faith no work were
good, nor could minister any argument of our salvation to us.

4 Our works therefore being not founded on men's traditions, as popish works
are; nor directed to a false end, but done according to the direction of the
word, and for the glory of God, in the faith of Jesus Christ, without any
opinion of perfection, either to justify us, or to merit, or satisfy thereby,
are good works, and infallibly secure the doers that they have true charity,
and are the true Saints of God, though they have no miracles, nor other
revelation then this of Gods spirit renewing them. For of such works our
adversaries themselves say, Tho. lect. 4. in Gal. 3.
They are the execution and manifestation of our righteousness. Yea the Divines
of Colen affirm expressly against that which the Jesuit here says, Antididag.
Colon. page 30.
that we rely not principally upon our inherent righteousness, because it is
imperfect: but thereby, as by a certain inward experiment, we are certified of
the remission of our sins (who feel and prove in our selves such a renouation
of our spirit) and that the perfect justice of Christ is imputed to us, and
that so Christ by faith dwells in us. In which words affirming the experiment
and certificat that Gods children have within them, and the feeling of their
renouatio^, and Christ dwelling in them by faith, all which, they say, arises
from their works; they make it plain, how false and frivolous it is that the
Jesuit assumeth, that no man without revelation or miracles, can infallibly
know whether he have true faith and love or not. And I will make it yet plainer
in the Digression following.

Digression. 43. Proving that Gods children without miracles or extraordinary
revelation, may be and are infallibly assured that they have grace, and are in
the state of salvation.
5 For to the place of Eccles. 9.1. I answer, first the Jesuit has
misalledged it. For the Hebrew is thus, No man knows love or hatred, all
things are before him. And I care not though his Trent-vulgar-latine be as he
alleges it, for the Hebrew is the only authentical text, and not the Latin,
whereof themselves have a base conceit, though the Council of Trent have
canonized it. For Dominicus Bannez In 1. par. The. q. 1. art. 8. dub. 4
reports, that since this decree, there are not wanting many great men in the
Church of Rome, that take upon them to correct and censure it, and say, the
interpreter missed it foully in many things. And himself is of the same mind,
and acknowledges, that being at last convinced by his own experience, he
judges the Hebrew text vncorrupt. What vanity therefore is it in our
adversaries, to allege a translation which themselves despise as corrupt and
vicious? Secondly, to the words I answer, that Solomon does not say, that No
man can simply know the love or hatred of God to him; but in a compound sense,
that No man can know it by the outward events of this life: the which hinders
not but it may be known by the testimony of Gods spirit renewing us; as
Catharinus himself a Papist, expounds it: and this is it that we say, Romans
5.5. Gal. 4.6.
Gods love is shed in our hearts, and made known to us by the holy Ghost.

6 To the place of Prou. 20.9. I say briefly, that it proves evidently against
the Jesuit, that no man can keep Gods commandments, because he cannot make
his heart clean from sin: but it touches not the assurance of grace,
because grace is, and infallibly known to be, where the heart begins to be
cleansed, though yet (as it never shall be in this life) it be not perfectly
clean. For we are not assured that charity and faith dwell in us by this,
that our hearts are perfectly clean: for then the text had been against us:
but by this, that they are free from hypocrisy, and begin to be cleansed, and
daily increase therein.

7 The manner how we know we have grace and shall be saved, is by the means of
the holy Ghost, whose work it is to assure us; the which he does, first by
producing in us the effects of saving grace and predestination, which is the
constant reforming of our life within and without. Whereupon it follows, that
he which gives himself effectually and steadfastly to a godly life, may
infallibly be secured thereby of his salvation, because God, whose promises are
infallible, Romans 8.13. Heb. 5.9.
has vowed salvation to all such. Next by infusing or inspiring into us the
motion of assurance, and by inclining our heart to give consent to the promises
of the Gospel. The which inspiration is a supernatural work of God, created
in us by the outward means of the word, and the inward operation of his
Spirit, consisting in a certain knowledge and feeling that we have of Gods
good pleasure toward us, when once we truly believe. And as the eye in seeing
has a certain property annexed, that it knows it sees: so faith and
grace, in whom soever it is, has this condition, that it knows it self to
be such; and it not only works outwardly the things that are good, but by a
reciprocal aspect it sees it self, and yields assurance to the subject. In
which sense Saint Austin De trinit. l. 13 c. 1.
says, Every man, if he have faith sees it in his heart, or sees it not if
he have none. And again, Lib. 8. c. 8.
He that loves his brother, knows the charity wherewith he loves him,
better then he knows his brother whom he loves.

8 This is proved by the saying of Saint Paul, Romans 8.15.
We have received, not the spirit of bondage to fear any more, but the spirit
of adoption, whereby we cry Abba, Father: and the same spirit bears witness
with our spirit, that we are the sons of God. Whereunto it is ridiculous to
answer, that this testimony which God gives unto us by his spirit, is but
coniecturall, that is to say, such as stirs up our understanding, only upon
probable conjectures, to believe, which yet are subject to error. For so Gods
spirit should manifestly deceive us, and the spirit of bondage to fear should
remain still, and his spirit should teach us to cry Father, when we are not
his children; and finally, in giving testimony, be subject to the same
fallibilitie that ours is. The same Apostle 2. Cor. 13.5.
says, Prove your selves whether you are in the faith: examine your selves:
know ye not that Christ is in you, except ye be reprobates? To what purpose
should men examine themselves if they can find no infallible certainty? for
they might reply again, we have tried our selves, and find Christ to be in us
by faith and charity: but we are never the near: we may be reprobates for all
this, and thy preaching has done us no good; for the Papists tell us, our
knowledge is but coniecturall, and our examination cannot secure us from fear
or error: which were absurd. Again he says, Ephesians. 1.13.
After ye believed the Gospel, ye were sealed with the holy spirit of promise:
and Saint John, 1. Ioh. 3.19.
We know that we are of the truth, and before him we shall make our hearts
confident. 4.13.
Hereby we know that we dwell in him, and he in us, because he has given us of
his spirit. 5.13.
I have written unto you that believe, that ye may know ye have eternal life.
This sealing shows, that the elect have the very mark of God upon them,
whereby they are infallibly distinguished from the world: and the knowledge
thereof, which is attributed to them, declares that they see the seal, and so
consequently cannot be deceived; as he that sees his seal upon his goods,
thereby infallibly, and not by conjecture only, knows them to be his own.
But saying, we know we have the truth, we dwell in him, we have eternal life,
we make our hearts confident; he shows plainly how false it is, that faith
and love cannot be known to be present without revelation. For all this, he
says, we know by that which is written: and if we knew it but morally and
probably without full assurance, then we should be confident, even by Gods own
appointment, in that which might deceive us. Again, Stapleton De Iustificat.
l. 9. c. 13. in marg.
confesses, that Saint Paul pronounces the same certainty of other men's
salvation, that he does of his own: and therefore we may have assurance of
grace and perseverance as well as he had; for 1. Cor. 7.40. Romans 8.38. 2. Tim.
4.8.
in diverse places he shows, that he was assured of Gods spirit, and grace,
and eternal life.

9 You shall hear what the ancient Fathers say touching this matter. Hom. 17.
page 248.
Macarius says, Although they are not as yet entered into the whole inheritance
prepared for them in the world to come, yet through the earnest which they now
receive, they are as certain of it, as if they were already crowned and
reigning. Neither do they think it strange, that they shall thus reign
together with Christ, by reason of the abundance and confidence of the spirit.
And why so? Even because, being yet in the flesh, they have the taste of the
sweetness and the efficacy of the power thereof. The devil covered the soul
of man with a dark veil, but afterward comes grace and puts off that
veil wholly, whereby hereafter the soul is purified, and made able with
pureness to behold the glory of true light, and the true Sun of
righteousness, as it were lightening in his heart. Saint Austine In Psalm. 149.
post med.
says, There is a kind of glorying in the conscience, when thou know thy
faith is sincere, thy hope certain, thy love without dissembling. Saint
Austine therefore took it for granted, that these things might be known.
Hierome, not the ordinary doctor of that name, but a Greek writer, De baptism.
page 3.
says, that as a woman with child feels the springing thereof in her womb
within her, so the baptized by the joy, and comfort, and rejoicing which is
wrought in the heart, know that the spirit of God dwells in them, the which
they received in their baptism. Gregory the Bishop of Rome Dial l. 1. c. 1.
says, The mind filled with Gods spirit, has her most evident signs, even
virtue and humility, the which if they perfectly meet in the mind, then it is
plain they give testimony that the holy Ghost is present. Bernard Epist. 107.
says, Who is just, but he that returns love to God who has loved him? The
which is done, when the spirit by faith, reuealeth to a man the eternal
purpose of God concerning his future salvation. Which revelation is nothing
else but the infusion of spiritual grace, whereby the deeds of the flesh are
mortified, and the man prepared to the kingdom of heaven. Let these speeches
of the ancient be well looked into, and it will appear they contain all that I
have affirmed touching the certainty of grace and salvation.

10 And to what purpose do our adversaries take such pains, and devise such
shifts to answer them? They say, these and such like places prove there is a
certainty on Gods behalf, but not on ours: as if God, revealing his
certainty to us, did not thereby create in us the like; as when a man looks
his face in a glass, he imprinteth in the glass the same form that is in his
face. They say, we have an experimental or moral knowledge, but not an
infallible certainty, not assurance of faith, and such like. This they answer,
and their friends sit down contented with it: whereas notwithstanding when they
have wrangled what they can, they say the very same that I have laid down; and
if their words show it not, I am content you believe me no more. For first
touching the discerning of our selves, whether we be in grace, Altisiod. sum.
l. 3. page 165. Alexan. 3. part. page 254.
the eldest and best learned Schoolmen that I have seen affirm, we may know it
by our good desire, comfort of mind, and good works. Scotus 3 d. 23. page 46
says, As I believe God is three in person and one in essence, so do I also
believe my self to have faith infused, whereby I believe this. Dominicus
Bannes In Tho. 22. p. 359. c.
says, Every one that believes, sees that he does believe. And 1. 2. q. 112.
art. 5.
Medina, with who^ he and Caiet. ib. Ban. vbi supra.
others consent, says, A Christian man, by the infallible certainty of faith
which cannot be deceived, certainly knows himself to have supernatural
faith. Vega Refert. Greg. de Valent to 2. page 957.
says, Some spiritual men may be so certain that they are in grace, that
this their assurance shall be free from all fear and staggering. Dom. Soto.
apol. c. 2.
Others hold that a man may attain to that certainty of his own grace, that
he may without all doubting be as sure thereof, as he is that there is a city
called Rome. And some hold Catharin. assert. and apolog.
the very certainty of faith as we teach and define it. Next touching the
remission of sins and eternal life, they say, Medin. vbi supra. page 630.
I would have every believer certainly to hope he shall obtain eternal life.
Doctor Stapleton De justify. page 341.
says, We leave not a sinner hanging in the midst of wavering doubtfulnesse,
but we place him in good and firm hope, when once his conscience witnesses
with him that he has truly repented. I grant indeed that some of these
disallow the certainty of faith in this case, and admit a man only to hope;
but this is but contention about words, and they had as good have said, Faith,
confidence or trust, as hope, but for the prejudice of their stomachs. For
Stapl. l. 9. c. 11 de iustif. Dom. Ban. 22. q 18. art. 4.
they confess, the certainty of hope is not any doubtfulnesse, wavering one
while to this side, another while to that, as a man thinks himself sometime
accepted of God, and sometime not: but it is a certainty in the will of him
that hops, both firm and assured, excluding all doubtfulnesse touching
remission of sins. The which in effect is as much as we say, and full
opposite to the Jesuits assertion. Again, seeing Medin. p. 627.
themselves grant that all conclusions are the conclusions of faith, which
arise from one proposition contained in the Scripture, and another by good
consequence added unto it: why should they deny this to be a conclusion of
faith, My sins are forgiven me? For the first proposition is express
Scripture, He that repents is pardoned. The next, assumed to it, is evidently
known in the conscience, But I repent. The conclusion therefore is of faith,
Therefore I am forgiven, or such like. For no man knows he has faith or any
grace, but by such and the same discourse that this is. The evidence of which
reasons have driven some Papists to allow us the name also as well as the thing.
For I showed even now, that Catharinus at the Council of Trent defended our
very assertion, that the child of God, by the certainty of faith, knows
himself to be in the state of grace. The like is written by the Enchirid.
Christian. instit in Council. Colon. page 139.
Divines of Colen, It is true, and required for a man's justification, that he
certainly believe, not only in general, that such as are truly penitent shall
obtain forgiveness by Christ, but also that the man himself which believes
shall be forgiven through faith in Christ. And again, This is true, that no
man's sins are forgiven him unless he believe that he has obtained forgiveness
through Christ. And a Friar in the time of the Council of Trent, Refert
Innocent. Gentill. exam. Council. Trident.
preached thus before the Council, Let man (says he) abhorring the vain
confidence of his own worthiness, depend wholly on Gods mercy. Let him make
account that God, as a most loving father, is present with him, from whom let
him always expect things joyful and happy: and let him never suffer that
persuasion to be stricken out of his mind: though the difficulties be infinite
which the world, the flesh, and the devil procure: thereby to lead us from
the confidence of God, and his most religious service. Wherefore they do not
wander in the maze of doubtfulnesse, which through Christ have obtained
righteousness, but in the security of their mind, and peace of their
conscience, and joy of their heart, being taught by the Spirit which testifies
with them that they are the sons of God, they cry Abba, Father.

11 Why strive they then so bitterly against us in this title? and why do they
rack and torment the consciences of men, by telling them, that without miracle
it cannot be known who stands in grace, when vanquished by the truth, they are
forced, in the end, to ear their own words, and confess it may be known by
the testimony of Gods Spirit within us? You shall see the peevishness that is
among them: I will, Bart. Medina: vbi supra. page 630.
says one of them, allow every faithful man to hope certainly that he shall
obtain eternal life, but to be confident therein with the Lutheran
confidence, I utterly forbid him. Mark the vanity and stomach of our
adversaries: they will allow us to be certain and confident, and we require no
more, but not with the Lutheran confidence: they will communicate with the
doctrine upon a little parley, but they will first give it a new name to make it
Roman-Catholike. Luther belike did them some shrewd turn, that they would
endure his terms no longer in their church. They seem to be in the same
taking with him, (...).
that the man in y Suidas was toward his Cat for eating up his Partridge: he
loved his bird well, as the Pope did his crown, and therefore the Cat that
devoured it, must look to dwell no longer in his house, but be packing.

. 42. But hitherto it was never heard that almighty God did by miracle, or any
such certain way, give testimony that either Luther, or Calvin, or any of
their fellows had this true holiness, or that they were Saints. Whereas it
has pleased him to give testimony, by miracles, of the holiness of diverse
that professed the Roman faith, as of S. Benedict, S. Anthony, S. Greg.
Thaumaturgus, S. Bernard, S. Francis, and diverse others: who all professed the
Roman faith; and diverse of them were religious men, and founders of religious
orders, which Protestants reject and seek by all means to disgrace.

The Answer.
1 The first part of this is answered before, sect. 39. number. 1. where I have
showed how, and in what manner God gives testimony that we are his Saints and
our works holy: whither I refer the Reader. The next point contains never
a true word. For not one of the persons named, professed the Roman faith as it
is now holde^. Trithem.
For Thaumaturgus lived in the year 240. Anthony in the year 330. and Benet
in the year 500. All which time the present religion of the Roman Church was
unborn, except a very few points of small moment brought in by the
superstition of a few, and controlled by the general doctrine of the Church,
as I shall clearly prove in the sections following. Bernard lived later by
500. years, but he knew not the present Roman faith. He was indeed a Monk,
and in many things superstitious, (and what marvel, living above a thousand
years after Christ?) but he was a Papist in none of the principal points of
the religion. For he held the sufficiency of the Scripture without traditions,
justification by faith alone, that our works merit not, that no man can keep
the Law, that a man, by the testimony of Gods Spirit within him, may be
certain of grace; that there is no such freewill as the Popish Schoolmen
teach; he stood against the pride of the Pope, and the opinion touching the
conception of the blessed Virgin without original sin: as I will make good
against the Jesuit or any that will take his part. Who if he would deal
faithfully and to the point, should not say Bernard professed the Roman faith,
and was a Monk; but he should have showed, that he professed the present
Roman faith, as the Council of Trent and the Jesuits have set it down, at
least in the fundamental points thereof, which he can never do. As for Francis
of Assise, who lived about the same time, neither was he of the present Roman
faith, because it was not holden then as now it is: though I confess the
matter be not great what that Ecquis credat D. Franciscum pediculos semel
excussos in seipsum solitum esse immittere? Can. loc. l. 11. c. 7.
Lousy Saint were.

2 And as concerning the miracles, whereby this Jesuit says it pleased God to
give testimony of these men's holiness, I answer, that what is reported of
Bernard, and Francis, and Dominicke, and others of that rank, are lies and
devices. Which I demo^strate by this, that they are found no where but in the
Legends and lives of Saints, written by the Friars, whose authority our
adversaries themselves despise, as I will show in the next Digression. The
things written of Gregory, and Benet, and Anthony, and some others of that
time, have more antiquity, but no more certentie, as I will likewise
demonstrate in the same Digression: though allowing much thereof to be true,
yet the Roman faith is not justified thereby, because, as I said before, they
were done when yet it was vnhatched, and Rome professed another religion.

3 And whereas he says, diverse of these were religious men, and founded
religious orders, which Protestants reject; this is easily answered by telling
him again, first that if they were religious men and founded orders, yet their
so doing conuinceth not that they were of the same faith: for there might be
orders and professions erected in a contrary religion, as the Essens for
example, had their peculiar order of religion, and yet were, I think, no
Papists; who would be loath to be tied to the rigor which they professed: A
solitary nation, Plin. l. 5. c. 17. Solin. Polyhist. c. 38.
says the story of them, and admirable beyond all others in the world. No
woman among them, nor venerie: without money, dwelling among the trees: it is
incredible to speak it; the nation is eternal, through thousands of ages;
wherein no man is borne; so fruitful unto them is other men's repentance of
their lives. Next, it follows not, because they founded orders of Monks,
that therefore they were the same which the Church of Rome now retains: for
they may be altered, as indeed they are, by the confession of our adversaries
themselves. Thirdly, such as Anthony, and Benet, and Eustathius were, erecting
professions and orders of life without warrant from the word, or at least not
by commandment thereof, it was lawful for us to use our liberty in putting
them away again, without incurring the censure laid upon us by the Jesuit.
And yet he might have remembered, that a Cardinal of his own Church was the
first that put down Abbeyes in England.

Digression 44. Answering that which the Papists object touching the miracles
of their Church, and the Saints therein.
4 We deny not but the gift of miracles was in the Church at the first
revealing of the Gospel and long after, very commonly; whose proper end was
to revoke the minds of men to the marking of the doctrine that accompanied
them, that by marking it, (which they would not so easily have done, had not
the same of the preachers miraculous works allured the^) the efficacy thereof
might lay hold upon them, and convert them, which it did. Whereby it appears,
that all their strength arose from the doctrine confirmed by them; in as much
as it distinguished them from delusions, and such like wonders as may be done
by natural causes, and the conveiance of Satan, and assured the beholders
that their concurrence with so pure and holy teaching showed them to be of God.
For Bell. de not. eccl. c. 14. and de great. and lib. arb. l. 6. c. 1.
our adversaries confess, that No miracle can certainly be known to be so
before the Church approve it, and unless the will, by some mean be inclined to
believe it. Whereby it appears concerning the purest miracles that ever were,
that although as a sign they invited men to come and see, yet the men being
come, were assured by the efficacy of the doctrine, that what they saw was a
true miracle; and when God withheld this efficacy, that it inclined not the
mind, then As appears in the unbelieving Jews.
the men believed not, but said they were delusions.

5 This I say to show our adversaries, that that they must not be offended if
we examine the miracles offered, by the doctrine of the Scriptures. For if they
confirm any other doctrine, we may safely reject them as lying wonders: But we
have an other issue with them, easier to be tried then this, touching the
credit and certainty of their miracles: such I mean as they have to stand
upon. For all that they can allege for themselves are either the miracles of
Christ and his Apostles, or of the Saints in the Primitive Church, or of their
Legends. Touching the two first, we answer in a word, that they do but trifle
away the time in talking of them, till they have proved their religion the same
that those men taught: for the miracles must be adjudged to that side that
retains the same doctrine. Whence it follows that the Jesuit has no portion
in the miracles of the Primitive Church, because he is not of that faith: the
which if he will deny, then the trial must be made by the Scriptures, and he
must no longer say, we have the true faith, because it was confirmed by
miracles in the Primitive Church; but he must prove the faith of the Primitive,
and his present Roman Church all one, that afterward he may boast of the
miracles. This I say touching all those miracles that are true, and were done
indeed in the Primitive Church.

6 The things therefore whereupon, with most probability, they can stand, and
wherein indeed they put most confidence, are the miracles of their Legend
Saints, Anthony, Benet, Francis, Dominicke, and such like; which thick and
threefold they use to allege against us. But we except two things against
them. First, that supposing much thereof were true, yet the Roman faith is not
necessarily proved thereby to be the truth, for heretics, yea pagans, may do
wonderful things to confirm their error. D. Stapleton Promptuat. moral. part.
aestin. page 627.
says, that for the more trial of the godly, not only Antichrist himself,
and his forerunners, but all heretics also, may do true miracles, by the
permission of God, as the sorcerers of Pharaoh did. The which is proved to be
true by all stories divine and humane. That which Pharaohs sorcerers, and Simon
Magus did, is well known. Baro. An. 68. n. 22.
The stories add touching Simon, that he made images to walk, and would lie
in the fire without hurt, and fly in the air, and make bread of stones. He
could open doors fast shut, and unloose bands of iron, and had many shadows
following him, as it had been men, etc. Tacit. l. 4.
The Emperor Vespasian, at Alexandria, restored a blind man to his sight. Holy
^h. in vit. Philo^oph.
Empedocles the Philosopher, raised up a dead woman to life. (...). ost^. l. 4.
The like did Apollonius Tyaneus, of whom Lib 4 and 5.
Philostratus and Compend. page 202.
Cedrenus report great things: that he could deliver cities from scorpions and
serpents, and earthquakes: and that being dead many miracles were wrought at
his grave. And Cedrenus adds, that the same time there was one Manetho, which
in these works went beyond him, and by his very words could do what he
listed. These things I grant, as the same author affirms, were done by the
efficacy of Satan, God permitting him, for the trial of men's faith, and
punishing of their sins; yet do they well prove that the false Church may
have as strange miracles in it, as the Church of Rome has; and therefore such
things are but a weak argument to prove the truth by, unless the evidence of
the Scripture go before.

7 Secondly, we think the Legends that report these miracles, to be lies, and
the mere devises of men's idle wits; the which is proved by this, that I cannot
remember one writer of that sort, whom the Papists themselves do not challenge
for a lier. And though at the first my speech may seem hard, yet let the
reasons be looked into, whereupon I say it, and it will prove it self again
to be the truth. Claudius Espencaeus 2. Tim. 4. digr. 21.
says, No stable is so full of dung, as the legends are full of fables; yea
very fictions are contained in their portesses. Loc. l. 11 c 6.
Canus has a whole discourse of this matter, and among other things he writes
as follows: The Pagan Historiographers write more truly then Christians have
done the lives of Saints: and Suetonius, with far less corruption set forth
the lives of the Emperors, then Catholics have done the facts of Martyrs,
Virgins and Confessors: they either follow their affections so, or of set
purpose devise so many fictions, that it not only shameth me, but irketh me to
see them. It is certain also that all their narration is devised either for
gain or error: and it is a just complaint of Ludouicus Viues, touching certain
histories devised in the Church: who wisely and gravely reproves such who
thought it a great part of piety to coin lies for religion, and following
overmuch their affection, to write things, not as the truth, but as their
fancy told them; they present us now and then with such Saints, as the Saints
themselves, if they might, would not be. The Church of God therefore is greatly
hurt by these men, who think they cannot sufficiently set forth the lives of
Saints, unless they deck them up with fained miracles and revelations.
Wherein their impudency has spared neither the blessed Virgin, nor our Lord
himself. To this day I could never yet see one story that I could allow,
neither do I sift the author of that story which is called the Golden legend,
for in him you may read monsters of miracles rather then true miracles: he that
writ this was a man of a brazen face, and a leaden heart. Let it be noted well
what this man says of all the Saint-stories, without exception, and then see
upon what goodly grounds the revelations of Francis and the rest are builded,
that they should be such an infallible testimony for the Church of Rome. And
let any Papist show, if he be able, that their miracles are written in any
better authority then this that Canus charge with lying and falsehood. Would
our adversaries have us such fools as to believe what themselves believe not?
For I make this offer to the Jesuit freely, that if he can prove his
Saint-miracle by such an author as the learned of his own side gives credit
to in all things, and refuses in nothing, the said miracle shall be admitted,
and all the consequences thereof: but if himself think his author faulty in
some things, I may by the same liberty refuse him in others.

8 And I add further, that there is nothing more common with our adversaries,
then at home among themselves, to reject these very miracles, which abroad in
the Fair of fools, they set out to sale so buisily. Opusc. de concept. virg.
c. 1.
Caietan says, It cannot be known infallibly, that the miracles whereupon the
Church groundeth the canonization of Saints, be true, by reason the credit
thereof depends on the report of men, who may deceive others, and be deceived
themselves. And I have showed before, that a vision of Bernard, and another of
Briget, being objected in the question of the virgin Mary's conception, Part.
1. tit. 8. c. 2.
Antoninus, the Archbishop of Florence answers, they are fantastike visions,
and men's dreams. And mark what Canus Loc. l. 11. c. 6.
says of Gregory's Dialogues, and Bedes History, reputed to be of the best
sorts of stories that they have: The same (says he) may I say of Gregory and
Bid, truly and rightly, they miss it now and then, etc. who writ miracles,
talked of and believed among the vulgar: which the censours of this age will
think to be untrue. For my own part I could better allow those stories, if
the authors, with severity of judgment, had joined more care in choice. This
censure touching Gregory and Bid may well be enlarged to many things written
of Anthony, As that which Gregory Nyssen writes touching Thaumaturgus, how
the virgin Maerie, and Saint John came down from heaven to him, and taught him
his Creed. Nyssen orat. de vit. Greg. Thau.
and others of elder time, though the men that writ them (if the books be
theirs whose titles they bear) were godly men. For is it likely to be true,
that Vit. Pauli.
Jerome writes, how Anthony traveling in the wilderness to seek out Paul
the hermit, met with a Centaure (half a man, and half a horse) who spoke to
him, and showed him the way. And by and by when the Centaure was gone, meets
him another monster (like a Satyr) with a hook nose, and horns on his head,
the lower part of his body like a Goat, offering him a branch of palm: whom
Anthony asking who he was, he answered, I am a mortal creature, an inhabitant
of the wilderness, such a one as the Gentiles deluded with error, call
Satyrs: and I come as an Ambassador from my flock to beseech you to pray to
God for us, whom we know to be come for the salvation of the world, whose sound
is gone through out the earth. If the Jesuit think it reason we believe this
(for it is a part of Saint Anthonies miracles) and that such monsters of beasts
should be, and believe in Christ, let us play the good fellows, and believe
all the rest too: Baron. an. 1028. n. 5.
that the virgin Marie came from heaven to visit Saint Fulbert, when he was
sick, and gave him her breasts to suck, Vit. Bern. l. 1. c. 13.
and that she visited Bernard likewise in his sickness, being attended with
Saint Laurence and Benedict. And that Saint Francis Lib. confor. Anton. 3.
part. tit. 24. c. 2.. 8. Boz. de sign. l. 15. c. 3.
had the five wounds of Christ, made in his flesh by an Angel, with the nails
sticking therein, and continually bleeding till his dying day. That he used to
ride in the air, in a fiery chariot, talking with Christ, and Marie, and
John, and accompanied with innumerable Angels. That the image of the crucifix
used to speak to him, Francis go repair my house Boz. de sign. l. 14. c 3.
. That he had a cade Lamb which used to go to mass, and would duly kneel
down and adore at the elevation. Gold. Leg.
That he used to preach to birds, and instruct them, which heard him with great
devotion. Anton. part. ^^^t. 23. c. 1.. 1.
And that a little before Friar Dominicke was borne, there were found two Images
in a Church at Venice, the one of Dominick, the other of S. Paul: on Paul's
image was written, By this man you may come to Christ: on Dominicks, But by
this man you may do it easilier: because Paul's doctrine led but to faith and
the observation of the commandments, but Dominicke taught the observing of
Councels, which is the easier way. Boz. vbi supr. Bellarm.
That Antony of Padua converted an heretic, by making his horse adore the
host. Boz. ib. pa. 129
And that a certain devout woman, to cure her Bees of the murren, and to make
them fruitful, put a consecrated host into the hiue, and when after a time
she took it up, she not only found a miraculous increase, but saw also that the
bees had built a chapel in the hiue, with an altar, and windows and doors,
and a steeple with bells, and that the Bees had laid the host upon the altar,
and with a heavenly noise flew about it, and sung their Canonical hours, and
kept watch by night, as Monks use to do in their cloisters. These, and others
of the same strain are part of the miracles whereby the holiness of the
Roman Saints is testified: and it will not serve the turn to reply, these are
the basest part, which is now put out of the stories, or that the Church
allows them not, or that there is better stuff then this: for this, as vile
as it is, has the same authors that the other has, and in the days of Popery
was read and preached publicly to the people, and at this day is alleged by
our adversaries in their books against us, and remain in the stories as
before. And no doubt they possess the minds of the vulgar as much as ever
they did, who, among them, is of the same mind that Canus Loc. page 336.
says he knew a Priest of, who was fully persuaded that nothing could be false
that was once put in print. Yea Brist. mot. 6.
they shame not to write (and our countrymen believe it, because it is
printed) that these very miracles of Thomas Aquinas, Thomas Becket, Bernard,
Francis, Dominick and the rest, cannot be checked (though Canus checked them
before Bristo was hatched) No man being able to put any difference between the
miracles of Christ with his Apostles, and of these men. Polybius a heathen
author, Hist. l. 16.
mentioning in his story some such like wonders as these Legend miracles are,
which the Gentiles believed; says, they seemed to him altogether childish,
absurd, and impossible: yet notwithstanding (says he) as long as they nourish,
in the vulgar, piety toward the gods, the writers must be pardoned though they
speak monsters. This belike is the policy of the Church of Rome, to coin
lies for religion, as I noted out of Canus, and to bear with monsters of
miracles for pieties sake.

9 But leaving them to do with their own what they will, let the discreet
reader now remember where the cause sticks: namely at the certainty and
credit of the Legend miracles. For other they have none, which they can
properly challenge: and these are grounded on such authority, as not only
shameth it self, but also is discredited by the learned among themselves.
And so still, for any thing our adversaries can allege, the Protestants faith
is better proved by the consent thereof with the Scriptures, then their
adversaries is by the miracles of Antonie and Francis.

Digress. 45. Touching Monks and religious orders holden among the Papists,
and which, they say, we have rejected and forsaken.
10 First our adversaries are bound to prove that the law of God and course of
true religion binds us to follow these professions: for if some private men
in the Primitive Church began such a thing without commandment, only upon
their own voluntary liberty; it is lawful for us by the same liberty to
leave it again. Next, let them show if they can, that poverty, chastity and
obedience, as they define them, are counsels of such perfection, that they
cannot be fulfilled, as much as God requires, but by going to a Cloister, and
turning Friar: or that a man under the pretense of following such counsels, may
lawfully forsake his parents, and calling wherein God has placed him, to live
in an Abbey, professing a rule devised by men. The which things we say, God
has tied no man to, neither by word nor example in all the Scripture. Thirdly,
the disgracing of religious orders, as this Jesuit speaks, began not in the
Protestants, but themselves, as I will show presently, and the first that moved
and effected the plucking down of Abbeys in England, was not the Protestants,
but Cardinal Wolsey, Onuphr. vit. Pont. Sand. de schism. Angl.
the scum and scandal of mankind: and what the Protestants afterward did, the
uncleanness of the Monks deserved.

11 And though we grant, that Antonie and Benet, and others of that time,
practiced a certain kind of Monachisme, and lived solitary; yet were they
Monks of another kind, as far from these of the Church of Rome, as the time is
distant wherein they lived. Their religion was not the same, their manners were
better, their conversation every way was of another sort. And the religious
orders among the Papists have nothing of theirs but the names only, whereby,
as the Ass with the Lions skin on his back, they gull the ignorant, that
think every thing is the same that has the same name. For those ancient
Monks betook themselves to solitude at the first, not with any opinion of
perfection, but (...). etc. Soz. l. 1. c. 12. Niceph. l. 8. c. 39
to escape persecution, and to hide themselves. And when they found by
experience that the life fitted their austeritie, and rid them of many worldly
cares, they increased it the more, and followed certain rules for study, and
behavior, and religious exercises, much like as is used this day in Colleges.
In which course of life Antidida. Colon page 131. Dion. eccl. hier. c. 6.
some were lay men, not meddling with Ecclesiastical matters: Athan. ep. ad
Dracont.
some were married, and lived in that state: Eras vit. Iero^.
they bound themselves with no vows, Aug. de mor. eccl. l. 1. c. 33. Niceph.
l. 9 c. 14
nor made any distinction of meats: Vitas patrum. part. 2. 51. Niceph vbi
supra.
they labored with their hands, Sozo. l. 1. c. 12 Ieron. ep. 13. ad Paulin.
and lived not in cities, but alone and remote from men: with many other
customs which the Monks of this time observe not, whereby they prove
themselves to be as far from Antony and Benet as we are. Yea diverse among
themselves complain, Polyd. hist. Angl. l. 6.
that it is incredible to speak how much they are degenerated. And Alua.
Pelag. planct. page 130.
though they have the likeness of the Apostles, yet they are removed far from
their life. Let the Church lament her Monks, and say, Where be my ancient
Monks which founded the Church, and held the holy life of the primitive
Church? This shows Liber pater praeponitur libro patrum. Calicibus epotandis,
non codicibus emendandis indulget hodie studium monachorum: quibus lasciuam
musicam Timothei pudicis moribus aemulam non verentur adiungere: sicque cantus
ludentis non planctus lugentis officiu^ efficitur monachale. Greges and
vellera, fruges and horrea, porri and olera, potus and patera, lectiones sunt
hodie, and studia monachorum. Rich. Dunelm. Philobibl. c. 5.
the religious men of the Roman Church are of another cut then in the time of
Antony and Benet they were; and therefore disgracing them, we touch not the old
Monks of that time, but birds of another fether.

12 And if we have thought and spoken hardly of them touching their
conversation, and so disgraced them; what marvel? when the very savor of
their cloisters bewrayed them, and the stink of their hypocrisy was such,
that all the world was annoyed with it, and their own writers chronicled it?
Must the holiness of Monks and Nuns be a sign of the true Church, and laid
in as an argument against us; and must we be condemned for suppressing them,
and yet may we not be allowed to look a little into it, and see if it were so
indeed, or otherwise? I see no reason but we may lawfully, and without any
suspicion of malice, examine that holiness, that upon so great terms is put
upon us, and see whether it be so or no, and let the shame be theirs that are
guilty, and the fault be laid upon them that first cold the tales out of the
school. For we for our parts are confident, that in all their Church they
could have found no holiness which they might worse have stood upon then this
of their cloisters: of whom their own Invent. l. 7. c. 5.
Polydore says, It were behouefull that these dregs of men were cut off and
burnt, that with their filth they should no longer defile Gods service. And
Aluarus Pelagius De planct. l. 2. ar. 2 and 73. and 83.
writes of such things done in them, as are not meet to be named, and I think
shall never be met with again but in hell or in another cloister.

13 I would have stirred this dunghill no further, but that as I was writing
these things, there came to my hands Rule of good life
a little book, made by a Papist, such as our country is full of, to seduce
the vulgar, under pretense of exercising them in devotion: wherein teaching his
Catholics how to bring up their children, I must ( Cap. 9. page 74
says he) tell them often of the Abbeys, and the virtue of the old Monks, and
Friars, and Priests, and the religious men and women: and of the truth and
honesty of that time, and the iniquity of ours. And therefore accordingly let
us tell our children a little more of this matter, and let none tell it but
Papists themselves, that the children may believe them. Clemangis a Doctor of
Paris that lived 200. years ago, when the old time was, De stat. eccles page
47. and inde.
says, Concerning Monks and Abbeys, what can I say that is commendable? being
so slippery, indisciplinated, dissolute, unquiet, running up and down into
common and dishonest places, hating nothing so much as their cells and
cloisters, their reading and praying, their rule and religion. Monks they are
in external habit, but in life and works far from their professed perfection.
This of Monks. And touching Friars he says, page 53.
They are worse then the Pharisees, ravening wolves in sheep clothing, who in
words pretend the forsaking of the world, and in deeds, with all possible
fraud, deceit and lying hunt after it: making semblance in outward show of
austeritie, chastity, humility, holy simplicity; but secretly in exquisite
delicates and variety of pleasures, going beyond the luxuriousness of all
worldly men, and like Bells priests devouring the oblations of the people, and
though not with their wives, yet with their brats, filling themselves greedily
with wine and good cheer, and polluting every thing with lust, whose beat
burns them. And of Nuns he says, page 56:
Shame forbids me to speak of them, lest I should mention, not a company
of virgins dedicated to God, but showed, deceitful, impudent whores, with
their fornications and incestuous works. For what I pray you, are Nunneries now
adays, but the execrable brothel houses of Venus? the harbors of wanton young
men, where they satisfy their lust: that now the veiling of a Nun is all
one, as if you prostituted her openly to be a whore. This is some part of the
virtue of Abbeys, and honesty of the old time, from which the iniquity of our
new time is declined. But this is not all. For we must tell the children what
Cornelius Agrippa says also: There be ( De^anit. c. ^^
says he) in the Church, Monks, Friars and Anchorites of diverse sorts, which
the Church had not then when it was best. They which at this day take upon them
the name of religious men, profess indeed hard rules, and holy duties of life,
bearing the names of Basil, Benet, Bernard, Austine and Francis: but few among
them are good, the company of those which are naught being exceeding great. For
hither, into this profession, as it were into a sanctuary of all mischief,
come flocking all such as being terrified with the conscience of their
villainies, can no where else escape the vengeance of law, which have committed
crimes needful to be purged by punishment: whose filthy life have brought them
to infamy: which having spent their substance upon whores and dice, and
surfeiting, through debt and needinesse are constrained to beg. This crew has
dissembled holiness, and a hooded habit, and strong beggary joined together.
From hence start out so many Stoical apes, Insolentissima poscinummia, palliata
mendicabula, cucullata monstra, barbigeri, funigeri, restigeti, saccoge^uli,
loripedes, lignipedes, nudipedes, atrati, nigritae, grisones, versicolores,
linostolij, multipelles, tetiarij, palliati, clamydati, paludati, pullati,
praecincti, bracchati, etc.
such insole^t money beggars, patched rogues, cowled monsters, bush beards, rope
bearers, halter cariers, it will wearers, wry legs, woodde^-legs, bare legs:
dusky, sooty, collied, peckled, changeable, linsie, net wearing, cloked,
mantled, iacketing, swart, girt, breeched stage players: who having no credit
left in things humane, yet for their monstrous habit sake, are put in trust
with the things of God. Whose life being most lewd, and filled with all
villainy, is yet left unpunished through pretense of religion. These peoples
vanities and error, if I should set down with my pen, all the skins in Madian
would not contain them. Their cowle outwardly professes holiness, but
inwardly they carry detestable manners: and yet their cowle, as it were a
buckler, keeps off all the darts of Fortune and danger. In idleness and
beggary they live upon other men's labors, and going outwardly in course
apparel like clownes, tied with cords like thieves, their head notted like
fools, their cowle hanging like a naturals cockscombe about their ears, with
other marks of ignominy, which they pretend to bear for Christ, yet ambition
ouercometh them, and all things are referred to most arrogant titles. etc. This
you see is the virtue that was in Monks and Friars, and religious men and
women, and the truth and honesty of the old time, as it is reported by our
adversaries own mouths who best knew it. So that, in my judgment, the
Catholics of our country were as good tell their children somewhat else as it,
if they will tell the truth; unless they will teach them virtue, as the Plat.
Lycurg.
Lacedaemonia^s taught their children sobriety, that is, by showing them the
vilest drunkenness that can be, and making their religious houses the samplar.
But you shall hear a witness or two more, speak what they observed in the midst
of Italy, touching this matter: whose verses, because they are Poets, I have
followed to help the childrens memory, whom the book mentioned would have so
often put in mind of this matter. Thus writes Palingenius.

^eo.
But chiefly see no Monk or Friar approach within thy door,
Avoid them well, no greater plague, I warn thee this before:
The scum of mankind, follies spring, the sink of every sin,
Wolves clad in sheep skin, serving God, their gain thereby to win.
The vulgar sort, with show of good, they cousin and delude,
And under show of piety, their villainies obtrude.
Thus do they shroud a thousand sins, and thousand things forbidden,
Thus lust is cloked, and thus their rapes and Sodomies are hidden.
Chase far away then from thy house these cosining foxes well,
The very slaves of glut and lust, for which the heavens they sell.
Virg:
In steed of vowed chastity, with harlots they indent,
In virgins, boys and matrons lust; thus night and day is spent.
Sagitt.
O shame! how can the Church endure such two legd swine as these?
Whom naught but sleep and bellycheare, and Venus tricks can please.
And Ariosto expressing how an Angel upon occasion visited a religious house,
tells, according to the manner of Italy belike, what virtues he found there,
that the Catholics might tell their children, and encourage them to the like.
Thus he Orland. Fur. cant. 14. stan. 69.
writes.

Wherefore into an Abbey he does go,
Making no question Silence there to find,
And Peace, and Charity, and Love also,
And Lowly thoughts, and Well contented minds;
But soon he was aware it was not so:
All contrary their humors were inclind.
Silence in that same Abbey did not host,
Only his name was written on a post.
Nor Quietness, nor Humbleness, nor Peace,
Nor Charity, nor Godly love was there;
They were sometimes, but now those times did cease.
Now Couetize, and Ease, and Belly cheer,
Pride, Envy, Sloth, and Anger so increase:
Silence is banished, and comes not near:
And wondering much the Angel them does view,
And finds Discord in this cursed crew.
The which things being thus reported by themselves, one of another, let any
man judge who has most disgraced religious orders; and if we had not just
cause to reject and reform such abuses? And our adversaries are too childish
to think their confident words and devout persuasions to the simple, can
abolish the memory of them. The blood of so many thousand infants as have bin
murdered in Cloisters, and their bones buried in priuies and fish pooles, will
cry vengeance against them, and disclose their hypocrisy while the world
endures, let the Priests and their favorers smooth up the matter how they
can. And here in England, See Bal^, in his epistle before his book de vitis
Pont. where he sets down some part of the confessions for an example.
the commission sitten about the dissolution of Abbeys, for the examination of
the lives of the votaries, because the rumor was loud concerning them; tainted
so many in every Cloister, and discovered such iniquity, that it cannot be
forgotten: save that the things proved and confessed, were so soul and
abominable, that they had bin fit to have lain still in darkness, and to have
bin covered with an eternal night. Yet nothing will stay our adversaries from
boasting of their Monks for all this, but their holiness at every turn must
be cast in the Protestants teeth. So Trithem. in Bened. Apolog. epist. page 83.
they have a solemn brag that the only order of Bennet has yielded them
twenty kings and Emperors, above a hundred great Princes, eighteen Popes, 200.
Cardinals, 1600. Archbishops, 4000. Bishops, 15700. Abbots, 15600. canonized
Saints: such arrogant brags as this, have given us occasion to enquire after
the manners of votaries more then else we would have done. And our good hap is,
that what we say that way, is verbatim the report of their own writers, and
the experience of all among us that lived when Abbeys stood.

. 43. The second difference is, that the doctrine it self, which the
Protestants teach, induces men to liberty, and consequently to lewd life.
Whereas the doctrine of the Roman Church, both expressly forbids all vice,
and prescribes laws and rules, contrary to liberty and looseness of life;
and lastly contains most sovereign means to incite a man to all perfect
virtue and holiness of life. As for example, it teaches, that notwithstanding
the prescience or predestination of God, man has free will, wherewith, being
aided by Gods grace, which is ready for all that with humble, devout, and
perseuerant prayer will ask for it, he may avoid sin, and embrace virtue.
And it teaches that Gods commandments be neither impossible nor hard, but the
yoke of Christ is sweet, and his burden (with the help of his grace) light.
It teaches, that as a man may, by grace, avoid sin if he will, and easily
keep Gods commandments, and by doing good works live well: so these good
works are pleasant and acceptable unto God, and such for which God will give,
to all that do perseuerantly do them, exceeding grace and everlasting reward in
heaven. And contrary, that for neglecting good deeds, or which is worse, doing
sinful deeds, God has prepared intolerable and endless pains in hell. It
prescribes men to fast and to pray, and to use other means to keep the flesh
subject to the spirit, and the spirit to God. It maintains confession of
sins to a Priest, as commanded by our Savior in the Gospel: which both is a
great bridle to withdraw men from vice, as experience teaches, and a special
means whereby the Pastor of the Church, knowing the inward conscience of their
flocks, may better apply fit remedies to their spiritual diseases, and
prescribe to every one fit exercises for their practice and progress in
virtue. Finally the profession of this Church is such, that even simple
Protestants, when they see a Catholic do any thing amiss, will ordinarily
say, You should not do thus. So that these that sin in this Church cannot
any way ascribe their sins to any defect or peruersitie of the doctrine of
the Church; but must needs acknowledge them to proceed from their own
frailty or malice, contrary to the teaching of the Church; and sometime even
against their own conscience and actual knowledge. Wherefore notwithstanding
that there be some sinful persons in the Roman Church, yet it may be called
Holy, both because the doctrine and profession thereof leads of it self to
Holiness, and consequently is Holy; and also because there be many holy
persons, or Saints, in it, of which, as of the better, and worthy and
principal part, it may well, and is termed Holy: as a tree which having some
branches that have life, though others be dead, yet of those, as of the better
and more respected part, is absolutely said to be alive, which if we could not
outwardly perceive to have any branches alive, we would absolutely affirm to
be dead, and not alive.

The Answer.
1 Here you see this Jesuit prefers the holiness of his Church before ours,
because it flows from their doctrine, which ours, he says, does not. Wherein
I blame his memory, that. 24.
having before denied the doctrine to be a mark of the Church, and made
holiness the mark in stead thereof, yet now he cannot prove his holiness but
by the doctrine. For, says he, it is according to the doctrine. Wherein he
forgets himself much: for if he cannot prove his holiness, nor distinguish
it from the holiness of a false Church, as he conceiteth ours to be, but by
the doctrine; then the doctrine is better known and more apparent, and
consequently, a better mark, by. 26.
his own rules. The like error he commits in his three others marks,
unity, antiquity, and succession, or else let us see how he will shift
himself.

2 Next, he forgets himself again where he says, the Protestants doctrine
induces men to liberty and lewdness. For I have showed before that our
adversaries confess, we absolutely bind men to a godly life. Stapletons De
justify. page 334.
words are these: Even the Protestant themselves, albeit they distinguish
sanctification and new obedience from our formal righteousness whereby we are
justified, that it should be no essential part thereof, yet they teach that it
must certainly and infallibly be present to all Gods children, as an
inseparable companion of justifying faith, and as the proper note of Gods
children. Let the Jesuit look upon this, and bridle the liberty of his
tongue. For can the teaching of sanctification and obedience induce men to
liberty and lewdness? yea when it is required to be present certainly and
infallibly to all that will be counted the children of God? And whereas
notwithstanding they reply, that the consequence of our doctrine leads men to
liberty: I demand, how can the consequence of this point do it, which
Stapleton acknowledges we teach, concerning sanctification? for it binds
the^ in all their life to avoid sin upon pain of comdemnation. Whence it
follows, that neither can the consequence of any other point we teach, do it,
or intend it of it own nature, because the force and reason of this flows
into them all. But if any man will pervert that we teach, as Mat. 5.17.
our blessed Savior and his Romans 6.1. and 15.
Apostles teaching was perverted in the like case, and receive with the left
hand what we offer with the right, Apoc. 22.11.
Let him that is filthy be more filthy, and let such libertines and our
perverse adversaries go together: for Gods truth must not be shaped, as the
Church of Rome has shaped it, to qualify such humors. It is sufficient that
our doctrine in it self, and the preaching thereof, contain obedience and
debar the contrary, which it does; as I have demonstrated in all the points
that this Jesuit excepted against, in the fortieth section: and yet further
will do.

3 For it is untrue that this Jesuit says, The doctrine of his Roman Church
is against all vice, and that no man's sins can be ascribed to it: for even
the points which he reckons, freewill, ableness to keep the law, the merit
of men's works, fasting, praying, and shriuing, as the Church of Rome teaches
them, are so many heresies, and directly lead men to sin, inspiring them
with pride of their own works, and filling them with hypocrisy, idolatry,
and sensuality: as I have showed particularly in them all, in the digressions
under the 40. section: whereas being rightly understood and practiced, they are
the doctrine of our Church also, as I have showed before. And for confession,
we think it lawful for any man (excluding the opinion of necessity) to
reveal his secret sin to his Pastor, that so he may receive particular
instruction, when his conscience is troubled therewith; so the same be done
wisely and discreetly. And that which he adds touching the saying of
Protestants, when they see a Papist do amiss, You should not do thus: is a
weak proof that we think Popery directs them to no evil. For we speak to
them, either as to hypocrites going against their proud profession, or as to
ignorant persons transgressing Gods law. And our words with this relation, are
so far from showing that we think they do against their religion, that they
prove, we think the contrary. For saying, You should not do thus, we show them
their hypocrisy in taking upon them a profession that has no power in it to
reform their lives, and therefore advise them to embrace the truth that may
direct them better. I would not have mentioned this objection, it is so
contemptible, but that I perceive they are inamoured of it. For Campian, in
Concertat. Eccl. cathol. in Angl. page 24.
an epistle to the General of the Jesuits, sends it, with other news out of
England, to give hope of good success to the Catholic religion.

4 The conclusion therefore, that the Roman Church is the holy Church, because
the doctrine thereof is holy, and leads to holiness, and the holy Saints are
in it, etc. is denied, because the reasons whereupon it is grounded are false,
and have failed in the trial. Yet it sounds, you see, sweet in his ear,
like his sacring bell, for he repeateth it often.

Digress. 46. Naming certain points of the Popish religion, which directly tend
to the maintenance of open sin, and liberty of life.
5 But yet in this I commend this Jesuits wit, that declaring the holiness of
his doctrine, he mentions only certain of the plausiblest points thereof,
freewill, keeping the law, merit, fasting, praying, shriuing; and concealeth
the rest. For they which commend Moyles, never mention the Ass that begat
them, who yet is the one half of their pedigree, but talk all of the Mares
that bear the^. So play our adversaries in this point, for some parts of their
doctrine are so foul and profane, even at the first sight without any
discourse, that they may not, I think for shame, offer them as patterns of
their holy doctrine. I name these for example that follow. The Azor. Instit.
mor. tom. 1. p. 663. Aquipontan. de Antich. page 72.
depriving of kings, and Turrecr. Sum. de eccles. l. 2. c. 114. prop. 5.
absoluing subjects from their obedience, yea Baron. ann. 1089 11.
the murdering of them whenever it shall be the Popes pleasure. Which
doctrine has filled all parts of the world with treason, and allowed any man
to be a traitor against his sovereign, in case he be a Protestant Prince. The
worship of images whereby the people may easily be drawn to idolatry, as
Durand. ratio. p. 13. Polyd. Invent l 6. c. 13.
some of themselves deny not, and Council. Mogu^t. tom. 3. con. page 938.
their own experience has showed the^. The doctrine of pardons, Tho. supplem.
q. 25. art. 1.
whereby they hold any sin may be forgiven without satisfaction. This
imboldened certain Chemnit. exam. de poenit.
Germans to rob the Popes pardoner, because he had given them a pardon to remit
the next sin they should commit, though it were a great sin. And it is not
likely, but in the abundance of pardons, some will take courage to sin, if it
be but to taste their bounty. Staphyl. p. 53.
The Colliars faith, to believe as the Church believes, induces the world to
brutish ignorance. Their doctrine touching the sacrament, Suar. tom. 3. page
783.
that a dog or a swine, eating a consecrated host, eats the very flesh of
our Savior, of it self is blaspemy and atheism. Altisiod. l. 1. p. 27.
Worril. 1. d. 43. and 4. d. 21. and 26. Durand. 4. p. 462. c.
Some teach that souls damned long since in hell, may be delivered and return
into the body again, and do penance, and be saved, as diverse have been. This
gives hope to the worst livers that be, and in part confirms the error of
Origin. Hard. confut. apol d. 161. Graff. part. 1. l. 2. c. 75. nu. 3. Tho.
Bergom. rab. v. meretrix.
They say the stews are for a commonwealth. This maintains open whoredom.
Yea the Pope allows the Curtesans in Rome, and other places, upon a rent, to
profess bawdry. They forbid the marriage of Priests: that directly leads many
of them to hell. For Panormitan part. 3. cum olim. de clericis coniugat.
says, It were for the good and salvation of their souls who cannot contain,
if they were suffered to marry. For experience shows, that the law of
continency has produced contrary effects, in that men live not therein
chastely, but grievously sin by whoredom, whereas it were chastity if they
had to do with their own wives. Fr. Ouand. 4. d. 13 p. 347.
They hold that all heretics stand deprived of the right of dominion, both
natural, oeconomical, and civil. This teaches all inhumanitie, and
overthrows all society. For first Ouand. ib.
no father has any longer command over his child, nor master over his servant,
if once the Church of Rome repute him for an heretic. Secondly, Princes lose
their kingdoms, as I said before. Thirdly, all Catholics, as Papists call
themselves, are discharged of all bond toward them: Council. Constant. page 528.
edit. Crab.
so that no promise or oath, binds them any longer: neither are they bound to
pay them any debts. Ouand. ibid. Sum. Angel. p. 101. n. 15.
For he that is bound by oath, or otherwise to make payment at a certain day,
if he fail, yet he sins not, because the other man's heresy has discharged
him. Debtors may excuse themselves by excepting against their creditors, that
they are heretics. This is cosenage. Fourthly, Tolet. Sum. page 700.
it is lawful to equivocate, by reserving another meaning to himself of his
words then he that hears him shall conceive. Rhem. art. 23. 12.
Yea to speak contrary to his oath, if it be to detect a Papist. This is lying
and perjury.

6 Again their doctrine not only infers, but expressly allows most
palpable wickedness, directly tending to the desolation of public
government, and private honesty. Caiet 22. page 144. Tolet. Sum p. 700. Graff.
part. 1. p. 349.
As that prisoners may break the iayle, and use what means they can to
escape, though they be lawfully committed. A point well practiced by Priests in
England. That Tolet. Sum. page 548.
children may marry without consent of parents. Greg. a Val. tom. 3. p. 1090.
That parents cursing or banning their own children, sin but venially, as
long as they do it without deliberation. Tolet. p. 583.
That women, or servants, scolding, or railing one at another, sin not.
Tolet. p. 540.
That it is lawful on the Sabbath day to follow fuites, travel, hunt, dance,
keep faires, and such like. This is it that has made Papists the most
notorious Sabbath breakers that live. Infinite other doctrines of this sort
might be added: but I will end with that which a Co^nel. Agripp. de van. c. 64.
Papist himself says of Shrift, because the Jesuit stands so confidently
for the holiness of it, and offers it for so sovereign a medicine: I could,
says he, by many examples fresh in memory show how fit this shriuing is for
baudry; for Priests, Monks, and Nuns, have this special prerogative, that
under pretense of religion, they may go up and down, when, and whither they
will, and under color of confession, talk with any woman, whom they
oftentimes entertain but homely. And thus closely they go to the Stews,
ravish virgins and widows; yea many times, which my self have seen and
known, run away with men's wives, and carry them to their fellows. And thus
whose souls they should win to God, their bodies they sacrifice to the devil.

7 By this you may see what doctrine lies in the Church of Rome, veiled with
the title of the Catholic faith, whereby their hypocrisy is noted that so
blasphemously have charged the truth of Christ, which we profess, with
liberty. And whosoever shall attentively consider the whole course of
Papistry, I mean the doctrine and government both, in the Church of Rome, with
the rising and progress thereof, and the manner of advancing it forward; shall
find it to be nothing else but a very jest wittily devised to delude the
world, and in every point providing for the satisfying of the ambition,
covetousness, and sensuality of such as should have the greatest stroke in
that Church. And let any man make the trial, and compare one part of the
religion with another, marking the coherence, and how one point issues out of
another, and the policies whereby the world is inhibited to listen to it, and
they shall easily perceive it drives all at this, to make the Pope and his
clergy absolute Lords of the world, and of all the greatness and pleasures
therein. For the effecting whereof it was an easy matter for them to set
learned men aworke, and with fair rewards to make them show their wit in
persuading men; which they have done in all ages accordingly, but never better
then now of late by the Jesuits. Hence it is, that in the course of Popery
you see the Pope himself Lord of all, his clergy above the temporalty, his
Bishops the peers of Princes, See Palmer. Floren. Chron. ann. 1334. touching
the wealth of John. 22.
his treasury richer then any in the world beside; the consciences of men at
his devotion, their substance, obedience, and very looks at his command; and
to effect this, first he slideth into the consciences of men under the fair
pretense of being Saint Peter's successor, then he blinds their eyes by taking
away the Scriptures, and preaching; and stops their ears by dissuading them
from hearing any but himself. Then he plotteth them a religion fitting men's
carnal affection every way, the greatest part whereof stands in easing them
from taking any pains in spiritual things, which of all other are most
burdensome to flesh and blood. They must indeed serve God (if they should say
otherwise, no man would believe them) but there be ways to dispense, and to
turn the spiritual service into corporal, which is easier. And sinners must
have Gods pardon, or they cannot be saved; but the dispensation thereof is
committed, with the keys, to Christ's vicar, who has power to release them, by
applying the sacraments of the Altar and Penance to their sins. Nothing in
all the religion but it stands them in good stead. Their Latin service, and
prayers to blindfold men for seeing the fraud. The massing pomp, and Church
music to delight the senses, the images and relickes, and Pilgrimages to bring
in their offerings, the shrift to discover the secret inclinations of people,
which would serve the^ for a thousand purposes, whereof this was one, that
thereby the Pope knew the counsels of kings, and secrets of every state, and
wrought upon them. Their fasting days and prohibition of marriage to some
persons, to draw money for dispensations. Their merits, to make men frank
toward religious houses; their purgatory to supply the Popes kitchen. Their
holidaies to please youth, and renew their offerings; their pardons to deliver
men from the fear of sin, and to draw money when they would. And the stir
they keep with writing and pleading, in their schools and abroad, about
religion is, lest the world should think they have no religion.

. 44. Thirdly the Protestants Church is not Catholic, that is to say,
universal: neither in Time, nor in Place: for it came up but of late, and is
but in few places of Christendom, Neither in points of doctrine: for it
consists chiefly of Negatiues, that is to say, in denying of diverse points
of doctrine which have been held for truth in all former ages, by the ancient
Fathers; as appears by the Chronicles made by the Magdeburgenses, the
Protestants own Doctors, who confess in their Centuries, that the Fathers
held this and that, which they deny.

The Answer.
1 That our Church came up of late, the Jesuit says, but shows not: as the
Jews Ioh 8.57.
said to Christ, Thou art not yet fifty years old, and have thou seen
Abraham? And Nunc dogma nobis Christianum nascitur, post euolutos mill demum
consules. Prud. Peristep. him. 10.
the Gentiles to the Christians, that Now after I know not how many thousand
years, their religion was sprung up. But against his speech I reply two
things. First, that our faith is in all points the same that is contained in
the Scripture, and so consequently of the same antiquity; and therefore all
they that say, it came up but of late, should first prove it contrary to the
word of God, or else hold their peace. Secondly, as it agrees with the
Scriptures, so has it had in all ages those which have professed it, as I have
showed Sect. 17. digr. 17.
already, and more distinctly will show in the fiftieth section. In the mean
time let it suffice for this place which our adversaries themselves unawares
have written. The first is Bristo, who Mot. pref. and mot. 45.
says, The truth is, that some there have been in many ages, in some points,
of the Protestants opinion: in so much that scarce any piece, or article, there
is of our whole faith, but by one or other, first or last, it has been called
in question: and that with such liking for the time, that they have all in a
manner, drawn after them great herds of followers. I know Bristo means they
were heretics that in all ages did this, but that can he never prove: yet in
the mean time belike he saw some that were of the Protestants faith before of
late. The second is Reynerius that lived three hundred years ago, who
discoursing of the Waldenses, a people for substance, of the Protestants
religion, Refert Illyric. catal. tom. 2. p. 543.
says, They are in all the cities of Lombardy and Province, and other
countries and kingdoms. They have many followers, and dispute publickely; we
have numbered forty Churches of theirs, and ten schools in Parish. No sect
has continued so long: some say it has been since the time of Syluester, some
since the Apostles; and there is almost no country wherein it spreads not.
They have great show of piety, living uprightly before men, and believing all
things aright concerning God, and all the articles in the Creed: only they
hate and blaspheme the Church of Rome. etc. In this testimony of Reynerius,
you may see our Church was Catholic both in place, and persons, and time, and
doctrine: and that the Church of Rome was resisted, and the religion thereof
refused before Luther. The true cause why it was not so frequent and public as
now it is, either in place or persons, was the persecution of the Pope, and the
general corruption of the Papacy, which as a leprosy infected, and as a mist
obscured welnigh all places and persons, that sometimes not the true believers
themselves (such I mean as are come to our knowledge) were void of error in
every point, though they firmly held the foundation, as these Waldenses did.
And if it pleased God in process of time to give more liberty to the persons,
and more purity to the doctrine, what just occasion is this to say, we are not
all one Church, when the true faith of Christ is not always alike visibly and
purely professed? Minutius Felix Octau. pa. 401.
says, Why are we unthankful? and why envy we if the truth of God has grown
ripe in our age? let us enjoy our good, and let superstition be bridled, and
wickedness expiated, and true religion maintained.

2 The next point, that our Church is but in few places of Christendom, is
both false and impertinent. First impertinent: for if it were so, yet were it
no hindrance to the note of universality. For Gods Church under the law, was
shut up within the narrow bounds of Iudaea, and Digr. 17. nu. 31
the Papists say, theirs (in the days of their supposed Antichrist) shall be
openly seen but in few places, and Dried. dogm. eccl. l. 4. c. 2 par. 2.
Bellar. not. eccl. c. 7.
confess, it is not required to the universality of the Church, that of
necessity there be at all times in every country some believers: it suffices
if there be successively. Whence it follows, that if only one province did
retain the true faith, yet should it truly and properly be called the
Catholic Church, as long as it might be showed that it were the same which it
was at other times in other places of the world: the which we can show of our
Church, how small soever the compass thereof may fall out to be at some time.
Next it is false: for there is no place in Christendom, but there are some of
our religion therein, as not only experience, but our adversaries own reports
bear witness, wherein they Boz. sign. eccl. l. 19. c. 1. Bell. de Romans Pont.
praefat. and li. 3. c. 21. item de verb. Dei. praefat. habit. in Gymn. Romans
complain how our heresy (so heretics style it) possesses many and large
provinces, England, Scotland, Denmark, Norwey, Sweden, Germany, Pole, Boheme,
Hungary, Prussia, Lituania, Liuonia; whereto they may add France and the Low
countries, yea Italy and Spain it self, where the barbarous Inquisition daily
finds the profession of our religion even at their doors.

3 The third point, that our Church is not Catholic in doctrine neither, is as
ill proved as the former. For negative doctrine, so far as it is evil,
stands not in denying some points which the fathers held, but in denying that
which they held according to the Scriptures, and which they taught and
maintained to be certain and necessary matter of faith delivered in the
Scriptures: wherein neither we nor the Centuries ever refused them. Neither
have we denied any one point which they held in all ages for the truth, as our
adversaries have. For though the Centuries reject this and that, which the
Fathers held, yet they deny neither this nor that, which was holden for the
truth in all ages, as appears by their history, wherein they show the
succession of our faith in all ages, and note how it was many times corrupted
and mistaken, even by some of the ancient Fathers; which is all for substance,
that the Magdeburgenses can be charged with: wherein they have neither denied
the doctrine of the Catholic Church, nor offered the Fathers any wrong, to
say, they had some errors, as all men have, and themselves confess, which gave
occasion to others to err likewise: which errors the Centuries sometimes more
then was cause noting, they did not thereby notwithstanding accuse the whole
Church of error, because every thing was not the Churches doctrine that some
particular men therein held: and what they noted of some particular Fathers,
must not be stretched to be meant against them all; as their censuring sometimes
overmuch of many together, for some things written against the truth, must not
be expounded to be the denial of all they held beside: for if it be, and the
Centuries be thus censured, let this Jesuit say directly without shrinking,
why does Cathar. tract. de concep. virg. Suar. to. 2. disp. 3 sect. 6.
the Church of Rome hold the virgin Marie was conceived without sin, Capreol.
3. d. 3. Ban. par. 1. p. 75. Paul. Cortes. in sent.
which all the Fathers with one consent deny? Let them look my demand in the
face, that think it heresy to deny the Fathers, yea all the fathers
consenting in one.

Digression. 47. Of the authority of the ancient Fathers in matters of our
faith and religion. Wherein it is showed what we ascribe to them, and how far
forth we depend upon them. And the practice of our adversaries in contemning,
eluding and refusing both them and their own writers, is plainly discovered.
4 But this is a point that must be further looked into, and not suffered to
pass away thus. Our adversaries never make an end of boasting of the Fathers,
and by that their impudency more then by any other device, they have seduced
the world. Greg. a Val. to. 3. page 291. d.
One of them says, The Protestants in the questions of faith, should enquire
on what side the Fathers stand, that it being known, immediately without any
other examination, they might embrace that doctrine which the Fathers of old
judged to be true. Let us therefore see who they be that most stick to the
Fathers.

5 But first it is to be noted, that of all hands it is agreed, the Fathers
were not of infallible judgment, but had their errors: so they say themselves.
Austin D. 9. Negaro.
says, I cannot deny but there are many things in my works, as there are in
the writings of my ancestors, which justly and with good discretion may be
blamed. And thus they all confess: yea Anselme Comment. in 2. Cor.
writes, that in their books which the Church reads, many times are found
things corrupt and heretical: yet neither the books nor the authors are
condemned for this. Let the wise Reader peruse their books, and he shall find
this true that I say. Thus Refert Bellar. de Chr. l. 4 c. 8.
Hilary denied that Christ in his sufferings had any sorrow. Strom. l. 6. and
l. 3.
Clemens Alexandrinus says, that Christ did not eat and drink of any
necessity, but only to show he had a true body: and that he and his Apostles
after their death, preached to the damned in hell, and converted many. Epiph de
Not.
Origin taught many things against the faith, and wrong expounded the most
things in Scripture. Ep. ad Iubaia^.
Cyprian held rebaptization, and Aduers. Prax.
Tertullian Montanisme. Legate.
Athenagoras condemns second marriage. And none is free.

6 Yea many Fathers have erred together with one consent: as appears in
general Councels, Turrecr. sum. l. 3. c. 58. concl. 2. Panor. de elect. and
elect pot. Signif.
which have erred and may err, by our adversaries own confession. Eusebius. l.
7. c. 5.
With Cyprian in his error of rebaptization took part many great Councels.
Refert Bellar.
Iustine, Irenaeus, Papias, Tertullian, Victorinus, Lactantius, Seuerus,
Apollinaris, Nepos, and many more held the error of the Millenarians. And Bann.
part. 1. page 75.
our adversaries grant, that the more part of Doctors, if some few be against
them, make no infallible argument in matters of faith, but in things not
concerning faith, the consent of all together makes but probability, and no
certainty. Which assumeth it for true, that many fathers may err together
with one consent. Hence it follows evidently, that every thing is not
undoubtedly true, which a father or many fathers have written, but may with
good discretion be examined by the Scripture, and if it agree not therewith, it
may be rejected. Yea this ought to be so without any prejudice to their faith
that do it. For though Ephesians. 4.11.
God send them for the teaching of his Church, yet that sending was no
otherwise, nor with any greater authority then he sends the present Pastors
now living, who have the same authority to teach, and freedom from error that
they had, and differ nothing from them but in antiquity, which time may bring
to them as well as it did to the fathers: and yet who doubts but they may
err in their teaching, and without injury to the faith, be examined in that
they say?

7 Upon this ground it is, that the Protestants think, they are not absolutely
tied to every thing that the fathers have written. They reverence the fathers,
and study their writings, and thereby attain to great knowledge in things
concerning our faith, and account their books as most excellent monuments of
antiquity; but they allow the Scripture only to be judge, whereby they try
both the fathers and themselves. And they think it most absurd which the
Papists, to gul the world with, have written, that Noli meis. d. 9 glos.. In
istis.
the writings of the fathers must be observed at a nails breadth. The writings
of Austine and of the other Doctors, must be holden to the uttermost tittle.
Onuph. prim. Pap. part. 1. c. 6.
It is rash and foolish, and terrible rashness to go against a sense given by
the Fathers for the understanding of the Scriptures: I say, we think such
speeches as these gross and absurd, and we contemn them. For Plut. in Agesil
when one told Agesilaus he would bring him where he should hear a man
whistle for all the world like the singing of a Nightingale, he answered, It
should not need, for he had heard the Nightingale her self. So we have heard
the Scripture it self, more lively, and less subject to error then the purest
writings of the Doctors. Wherein we are content our adversaries themselves be
judges. For Andradius Def. Trid. l. 2.
says, there can nothing be devised more superstitious, then to count those
things for divine oracles, which the Fathers delivered only as probable. And
he adds, that God has revealed many things to us, that they never saw, etc.
And whereas it is sometime busily objected against us, that the Doctors living
so near the Apostles times, were likely to see more then we that live so far
off: Dominicus Bannes a Doctor of their own, denies this, It is not( 22. page
58. and 59.
says he) necessary, that by how much the more the Church is remote from the
Apostles times, by so much there should be the less perfect knowledge of the
mysteries of faith therein: because after the Apostles time there were not the
most learned men in the Church which had dexterity in understanding and
expounding the matters of faith. We are not therefore inuolued in the more
darkness, by how much the more, in respect of the time, we are distant from
Christ, but rather the Doctors of these later times being godly, and insisting
in the steps of the ancient Fathers, have attained more express understanding
in some things then they had. For they are like children standing on the
shoulders of giants, who being lifted up by the tallness of the giants, no
marvel if they see further then they themselves. Thus you see that our
adversaries, notwithstanding their cauilling at us, yet take the same liberty
in reading the Fathers that we do, and think it reason sometimes to prefer
their own judgment before theirs.

8 Neither were it so heinous a matter for us to deny things written by the
fathers, if prejudice and malice, one at another, were set aside. For Augus.
contra Cresco. l. 2. c. 32. and contra Maximian. l. 3. c. 14.
the fathers themselves denied what some had holden before them; and I know few
Papists of any wit but allow it, because the fathers have their errors, and
take it for granted, that they held many things against the Scriptures.
Marsilius Defens. p. 413.
says, he will receive whatsoever they bring consonant to the Scripture: but
what they bring dissonant from it, he will reject with reverence, upon the
authority of the Scripture, whereto he will lean. Turrecremata says, In c.
Sancta Romana d. 15 n. 12.
The writings of the Doctors are to be received with reverence, yet they bind
us not to believe them in all their opinions, but we may lawfully contradict
them, where by good reason it appears they speak against the Scripture or
the truth. D. 9. Noli mei^. nu 4.
And even at this day there may some things be found in the Doctors worthy of
reproof, and deserving no credit, etc. And Loc. l. 7. c. 3.
Canus, Every one of the Saints, except the writers of the Scripture, spoke
with a humane spirit, and erred sometime in things which afterward have
appeared to appertain to the faith. And Bibliot. select. l. 12. c. 23.
Posseuine, Some things in the Fathers, wherein unwittingly they dissented from
the Church, are judged and rejected. Whereby we see, not only that the fathers
have their errors, but also that we by the Scripture may be able to discern
and judge of them, and many times though unwittingly they dissented from the
doctrine of the Church; that it is no such perilous matter if the Centuries
denied sometime what they held. The fathers themselves allowed us this
liberty. Dionysius Alexandrinus Apud Eusebius. hist. l. 7. c. 24.
says, Let it be commended, and without envy assented to, which is rightly
spoken; but if any thing be unsoundly written, let that be looked into and
corrected. And Hom. 13. 2. Cor.
Chrysostom, I pray and beseech you all, that leaving this and that man's
opinion, you will search all these things out of the Scripture. And Saint
Austine, Ep. 112.
I will not have you follow my authority, to think it necessary you believe
any thing therefore, because I say it. And put the state of this question as the
Jesuits themselves do, and this will answer it. Gregory of Valenza Tom. 3. p.
291.
says, The question is, whether at this day in the controversies of faith, the
Christian people should assent to Saint Cyprian for example, or to Saint
Austine, judging their opinion to be agreeable with the Scripture; or to Luther
and Calvin, and the sectaries, thinking the same of their opinion?
notwithstanding that as well Luther and Calvin, as Cyprian and Austine, might
err, and sometime in other things did err? In this case we pronounce that we
must rather assent to Cyprian and Austine. Wherein he speaks absurdly, and
against that which not only Austine and Cyprian, but his own Doctors also
permit. For you see it is agreed, first that the fathers may err, then that
many of them may err together, thirdly that the learned of this present time
in many things have more understanding then they had; and lastly that therefore
with reverence they may in some things be refused. Which shows manifestly
that we hold the truth, and the same which the Papists themselves practice,
when we say, Luther, or Calvin, or the Centuries are sometime to be believed
rather then Cyprian and Austine. The reason is, because sometime they have
better means to see the truth then they had: the which if it be denied, then
all liberty and possibility of discerning humane judgments by the Scripture,
is taken away, even from our adversaries and all. For if the Papists in
expounding the text or determining a question, require sometime to be believed
before a father, yea many fathers, yea all the fathers (which they very
ordinarily do, as I will plainly demonstrate by and by) why may not we take the
same liberty?

9 This being our judgment touching the fathers, now let us proceed to see
what our adversaries ascribe unto them: and indeed it cannot be denied, but
they profess much subjection to them. Brist. mot. 14.
They cry, What they believed, I believe; what they held, I hold; what they
taught, I teach; what they preached, I preach. But let us enquire how they
perform this. Wherein the first point you have to observe is, who they mean
by the fathers? And Greg. a. Val. tom. 3. page 29^.
the Jesuits answer, not only the ancient Doctors that lived in the Primitive
Church, but such also as every age has yielded for the time present, who are
presumed never to have swarued from the common consent of the ancient fathers.
And thus the Schoolmen are also to be put in the number. And so to begin
with, you have the Friars and Schoolmen, Thomas, Scot, Biel, Durand, and such
like, that lived but yesterday, and were parties which our adversaries,
canonized for Saints, and made them of the same company with the ancient
fathers; that following their late conceits, they shall yet be said to follow
the fathers. And indeed Henriq. sum. mor. prooem.
they say, Thomas of Aquine is the first Doctor of the Latin Church, and the
light of all the world, who yet lived not four hundred years since: and shame
not to say, Ban. part. 1. page 79.
the School Doctors are the masters of the Church in things of faith: and it
is error, in matter concerning faith or manners, to contradict their sayings:
yea the matters wherein all of them agree, may be defined as points of faith.
This is more then ridiculous, first to talk so gravely of the ancient
fathers, and then to clap such Nouices into the definition.

10 Next you shall observe what they mean when they say, All the Doctors or
the fathers consenting in one. For Greg. a Val. vbi supra. p. 293
the meaning is not that they know the judgment at any time, unless it be
very rare, of all: but this is it, They are to be counted All the Doctors,
whose authority is such, that the circumstances of their learning, piety, and
multitude considered, they alone may justly be regarded, and the rest neglected
as no body, if they be compared with these. And thus one or more Doctors
erring, may be pressed with the authority of the rest. Thus you see another
device, that although they brag of all the fathers, and say they will refuse
nothing wherein they all consent, yet when it comes to scanning, they have no
hope so much as to find this consent of all, but refer it to their own
discretion, wisely to judge by circumstances who are all, and what the consent
is: that so when the stream of Doctors runs against them, they may turn it
aside by this device.

11 Thirdly, you shall observe, that having defined their Doctors who they be,
then in the next place they give sovereign authority to the Pope over them,
to explane their meaning, to allow them, dissallow them, purge them, and fit
them to their purpose; and by his good permission, every Catholic man may
frame a fit exposition to that they say. Alua. Pelag. planct. l 1. art 6.
One says, We are to stand to the Popes judgment alone, rather then to the
judgment of all the world besides. Greg. a Val. to. 3. page 293.
Another, that when the question cannot be fitly decided by the opinion of the
Doctors, then it is free for the Pope to interpose his authority. Another,
Turrecrem. Sum. l 3. c 44. Bell. de conc. l. 2 c. 17.
that the Pope is above all Councels, and the universal Church, and
acknowledges no judge upon earth over him. Quanto. de translat. Episc. in
Gloss.
Another, that he has a heavenly judgment, and makes that to be the meaning
that is not. Caiet. 27. q. 1. art 9.
Another, that the authority of the universal Church, and of a Council, and
of the Pope, is reputed to be all one. Whereby you may see, that whatsoever the
fathers say, or howsoever they consent, yet it is in the Popes power to assign
the meaning. And as if all this were too little, Index expu^gat. Belg. p. 12.
they openly profess, that in the ancient Catholic writers they tolerate
many errors, they extenuate and excuse them, and oftentimes deny them, by
devising a shift, and faining some handsome sense to give them, when in
disputations they are opposed against them, and in conflicts with their
adversaries. What needed all this, if they followed the fathers as they
pretend? and why use they this excusing, shifting, denying, eluding them? and
why are they feign to call in the Pope to charm them, if they think they have
their universal consent, as they pretend? Nay let them say bona fide, why have
they purged, and razed, and changed the writings of their own Schoolmen, and
later Divines, and in later impressions changed them in infinite places from
that which the authors writ; but that their conscience tells them, they are
shrunk from that which the Church of Rome held even in their days.

12 But all this will not serve their turn neither, though men not acquainted
with the practice of heretics, would have little looked for it at their hands
that so insolently brag of the fathers. You shall now see, in that which
follows, that they openly reject them also, and deny their doctrine as
ordinarily as ever any did. And judge thereby, if it were possible the
Centuries should be more negative then themselves. In the question touching the
cause of Predestination, Sixth. Sen. bib. l. 6. annot. 251.
one of them having reckoned up eleven fathers, charge them that they held
the prescience of merits: The which opinion, says he, was condemned in
Palagius. Mich. Medin. Orig. sacr. hom. l. 1. c. 5.
Another says, that Hierome, Austin, Ambrose, Sedulius, Primasius,
Chrysostom, Theodoret, Oecumenius, and Theophylact, which are the chiefest of
the fathers, in the question concerning the difference between a Priest and a
Bishop, held the same opinion that Aerius, the Waldenses, and Wickliffe did,
whom he counts for heretics, and charge those fathers with the same
heresy. In the matter touching the baptism of Constantine the great, Baron
an. 324 n. 43. and 50. and inde.
they reject Eusebius, Ambrose, Hierom, Theodoret, Socrates, Sozomen, and the
whole Council of Ariminum, and say, They deserve no credit, because they have
written the truth, that he was baptized by Eusebius the Bishop of Nicomedia. In
the question about the conception of the virgin Mary, Almain. potest Eccl. c.
16. Clictou. super Damascen. l. 3. c. 2. Fra. Titl. Ioh. 2.
they hold she had no original sin, and that it is a point of our faith so
to believe, and that it is impiety to think otherwise: and yet Bann. part. 1.
page 75.
they acknowledge, all the fathers with one consent held the contrary. An. 395.
n. 42.
Baronius censureth all the Historiographers of the fourth age, both humane and
divine. He says, Though there were abundance of them, yet some were too
obscure, some too short, some wanted order, some diligence, some piety and
truth, and some for private affection writ lies. Thus they encounter whole
troops of fathers together.

13 Now you shall see how they entertain them at single hand, one by one, or a
few together, as they meet them. Stapl. iustif. lib. 2. c. vlt.
Austin went beyond all good measure in this dispute, with the Pelagians: Sixth.
Sen. bibl. lib. 5. pref.
he attributes sometime too little to man's will. Alphons. adu haer. verb.
Episcopus.
I will believe Anacletus (a notable counterfeit) better then either Jerome or
Austin. No marvel if Jerome were deceived, when good Homer sometime is taken
napping. Turrian. scol. Graec. in constable. p. 172.
Though Chrysostom, and Austin, and some other fathers say, Judas received the
sacrament, yet the constitution of Clement ( Balsam. resp. apud ius Graecorum.
tom. 1. p. 363.
another egregious counterfeit) is rather to be believed. Ban. 22. p. 630
Certain modern Divines have forsaken Saint Austin and Thomas in a matter of
great weight, and have followed their own false imaginations. Tolet. Romans 9 p.
421.
I do not in this point allow the doctrine of Austin, Ambrose, Chrysostom,
Theodoret, and Photius. Maldonat. Ioh. 6.
Let the reader beware, that when he reads Chrysostom upon this place, he
fall not into Pelagianisme. Baro. an. 216. n. 16.
An evil spirit so carried Tertullian, that of evil being made worse, and most
filthy, he spued out most horrible blasphemies. Bellar. Romans Pont. l. 4. c. 8.
Little credit is to be given Tertullian in this matter, for he was a
Montanist. And yet Baron. ann. 201. n. 7.
I would not deny Saint Ieromes authority, but that Tertullian says
otherwise. Errores articulat. a Parrhisiens. p 139.
Cyprian and Jerome writ erroneous and heretical opinions, which we do not
read they ever retracted. Ibid.
It is plain that Ieromes doctrine was erroneous in some part, and that in
things pertaining to the faith, and teaching of the Apostles. Can. loc. l. 11.
c 6.
Pope Gregory, and Bid, the one in his dialogues, the other in his English
history, miss it now and then. Baron. ann. 433. n. 30.
They are deceived which think Cassian was, in every part, a Catholic. And
Gennadius was a Pelagian as well as he. Bellar. purg. l. 2. c 8.
Origin was seen in hell, burning with Arrius and Nestorius. Baron. ann. 256.
n. 40.
I wonder certain new writers dare still put forth apologies for him.
Posseuin. bibl. sell. l. 1. c 25.
Eusebius was an Arria^ in all his works, and a man of a double mind. Baron
annal. tom 1. prefat.
He lied in many things, he was full of Arianisme. Baron. ann. 324. n. 48.
No remedy but we must needs say, Eusebius lied falsely. Baron. ann. 395. n.
41. and an. 400. n. 42.
Ruffin runs over all things idly, and in many things he says not truly. He
puts on the guise of heretics, he persisteth joining sottishnes with his
fury which is peculiar to all heretics. Bell. cleric. c. 20
Socrates, to omit the rest, in the 21. chapter of his 5. book, makes three
notable lies. Both he and Sozomen were heretics. Bell. ib. and de poenit. l.
3. c. 14.
Sozomens story is full of lies, therefore S. Gregory rejects it. Baron. an.
56 n. 26.
There is as much credit to be given Socrates, reporting the fact of Nectarius
putting down penance, as all other heretics deserve when they handle their
own opinions. And because it is certain that Sozomen also maintained the same
matter, with the Nouatians, it is easy to show how manifestly both of them
doted. Baron. ann. 325. n. 6.
Nicephorus heapeth greater lies then these together. Baron. ann. 774. n. 10.
12. 13
Sigebert is to be called to account as touching a point of great weight: and,
reader, when thou hear it, it will constrain thee tragically to cry out, o
villainy, o fraud, o cousenage: he lies too shamefully. The things he writes
are forgeries, deserving to be blown away and execrated with their author.
Bell. de Pont. Rom l. 2. c. 5.
We contemn Fasciculus temporum, and the Passionall (two of their own
stories) specially seeing Fasciculus follows Marianus, who manifestly
contradicts both himself and the truth. Baron. ann. 996. nu. 54.
Auentine, a beast infected with the scab of heresy, whom Onuphrius a
Catholic, most unworthily claweth with an iuory comb, when he calls him an
eloquent man. Index expurgator. Toletan. page 121.
Let this commendation of Auentine (John Auentine a man famous in the knowledge
of things, and a diligent writer, etc.) be wiped out of Cuspinian. Posseuin.
bibl. l. 12. c. 16.
Photius, and Balsamon, and the imperial Constitutions must be read warily.
Baro. an. 853. n. 61.
Turpin is a shop of fables. Bellar. Pont. Romans l. 4. c. 7.
Benno the Cardinals book is full of most impudent lies, there is no credit to
be given to him. Baron. ann. 1048. n. 1.
His lies are more then his words. He is not a Historiographer but a Satyrist,
weauing falsehoods, and patching fables together. He takes liberty to
himself to lie, carpe, detract, and feign monstrous things of godly men.
Baron. ann. 774. n. 13.
Gratian, by his leave, was too credulous, and improuidently writ out in so
many words, Sigeberts imposture; and as if it had been some firm decree or
canon, writ it into his book of Decrees, when it deserved rather with the
author have to been execrated. Erro. artic. Parrhis. p. 140.
Gratians work in some part thereof is erroneous, and so is the Master of the
Sentences, and Anselme, and Hugo. Aquipontan. de antich. p. 72.
Would ye well knew, we make no more account of the Gloss upon the canon Law,
then the Caluinists of Heidelberg do of Brentius Catechism. Victo. relect. 4.
p. 138.
Gerson was an enemy to the Popes authority, and infected many with his
poison. His opinion differs but little from schism. I will easily grant, that
sometime these authors, who^ you see they cast off so co^tumeliously, give cause
indeed to be refused; but why do not our adversaries deal plainly then, and
bear with us if we do the like? and why do Camp. rat. 5. and 7.
they muster up the catologues of all the authors they can find, and yet when
they have done, fall out with them about some thing or other that they have
written, and give them this entertainment? For they should boast of no more
then they have to stand upon, neither should they use that as an argument
against us, that they are guilty of themselves.

14 And as they use the fathers, and the ancient histories, and their own
elder authors, so you shall see they use one another to this day. I said before,
how greatly, in words, they magnify their Thomas; and Posseuine the Jesuit
Biblio. select. l. 1. c. 10.
says, His doctrine is embraced in all their universities: yet when he fitteth
not their turn, they cast him off as lightly as any other. Erro. articul. vbi
prius. c. 3.
The university of Paris says, It cannot be proved that Thomas his doctrine
is allowed in all things: the Church has not allowed it so that we are bound
to believe there is no erroneous or heretical matter in it. For there is some
doctrine more approved then his, which yet is erroneous and heretical in
points of faith. It must not be thought strange, or any rashness if younger
doctors reprehend him, when they show he erreth in matter of faith. Peter
Lombard, Gratian, Anselm, Hugo, and others are more authentical then he. And
therefore (thus the Doctors of Paris conclude) it is presumption to extol his
doctrine so as if we might not auerre, that he erred in faith as well as others
did. And his canonization, which some pretend for a great color, hinders not
this, etc. Have ye seen a Saint of their own making thus entertained? but it
is ordinary with all the learned men they have. Turrecremata De consecrat. d.
4. Firmissime nu. 11. p. 101.
says, that almost all the Schoolmen hold, the virgin Mary had original
sin, yea that it is the common opinion among the famousest of them, and he
has collected a 100. of that mind, and yet now the Jesuits hold the
contrary: who censure all that lived before them, and Confutatur opinio Bellar.
Says Carer. pot. Pon. l. 2. c. 5
are daily censured themselves by others. Scot. Durand, and Gabriel, De great.
and lib. arb. l. 5. c 4.
says Bellarmine, three of the chiefest Schoolmen, dispute more freely for
man's will then were fit; and Ariminensis, Capreolus and Marsilius, three more,
ascribe too little to it. Posseuin. bibl. l. 2. c 8.
the Divines of the inquisition commanded somethings to be wiped out of Andreas
Masius his commentaries upon Joshua, that sauored of heresy. Posse. ib. c. 18.
Some things in Iansenius upon the Gospels, are not approved of by learned men.
Bell. ^c imag. l. 2 c. 8.
It is to be noted that Carranza erred. Baron. ann. 432. n. 36.
Valla was but a Gra^marian altogether unskillful in matters of the Church; a
dead fly that must be blown away. Thus contemptibly they speak one of
another, to quit that which they object against us, touching the dissension
between the Lutherans and Caluinists, and some hasty words that have passed
between them. Alas Relect. 1. p. 39
says Victoria, the Glosers of the Canon Law flattered the Pope, because they
were poor, both in learning and substance. And the hair of our head is scarce
grown since Baronius and Bellarmine themselves were confuted by Defens. Joan.
Marsil. Respon. docto. theolo. Apolo. P. Pauli.
the Divines of Venice in the maine point of the Popes supremacy; and Apol. P.
Pauli. p. 479.
one of the confuters tells Bellarmine, that he brings against him no other
doctrine, but the same which the Apostles and holy Doctors taught in all ages
successively. Which if it be true, then the doctrine of the Cardinals was false
and erroneous.

15 But if you would see them in their kind, yet a little better, look into the
story of Honorius, concerning his falling into the heresy of the Monothelites,
and you shall see the^ without all shame and respect, cast off most violently
whatsoever is brought to prove it, only because they will not be said to have
yielded. Councels, fathers, histories, their own writers are no body with
them, but like a hunted Bore they break through with one answer, they are all
forged or deceived. First, we object the sixth general Council. Turrecremata
Sum. de eccl. l. 2. c. 93.. Tertia via.
answers, They condemned him through false information that deceived the^.
But Pigh. diatrib. de act 6. Synod. Bell. Pon. Romans l. 4 c 11. Baron. an. 681
nu. 13.
others say, that part of the Council, which contains his condemnation, is
forged by the Greeks. Then we object the second Council of Nice. And Pigh.
and Bell. vbi supra.
they answer as before, either that the Council is forged, or that it
condemned him erroniously. Thirdly we allege the eight general Council. But
they reply, that it was deceived by the false copies of the sixth Synod.
Fourthly, we allege two epistles of Honorius, which contain the heresy
wherewith he is charged. Bellarmine says, Possible those epistle were devised
by heretics against him. Fifthly, we allege an epistle of Leo, wherein he
writes to the Emperor Constantinus Pogonatus, the same that we say, and
Baron. ann. 683. n 5. Bell. vbi supra.
they answer, that epistle is forged. Sixthly, we allege diverse authenticke
stories that say it. Bell. ib.
To all which they answer in a word by denying their authority, and saying that
Honorius name was so foysted in among others whom the stories had registered.
Lastly, we allege some of their own writers that acknowledge it, as Canus for
example; but Baronius rejects him, and Quem voluissem sensibus potius canum
quam nomine: an. 681. nu. 31.
descanting upon his name, wishes he had had more wit, then to be so headlong
in giving his verdit upon so great a matter. By this one example, if there were
no more, you may see what reckoning they make of antiquity, if it run
against them never so little. And that notwithstanding their big pretenses of
the ancient fathers, they are feign to reject them at every turn, and fall
into the same inconvenience wherewith the Jesuit charge the Centuries. And
therefore sometime they stick not plainly to give it out, that the
controversies are to be determined by the present Church at Rome. Allen Apol.
pro Jesuit. p. 99. and Bell. de effect. Sacr. c. 25. Testimonium Co^cilij Trid.
etia^ si nullum haberemus aliud, deberet sufficere. Nam si tollamus
authoritatem praesentis Ecclesiae, and praesentis Concilij, in dubium reuocati
poterunt omnium aliorum Conciliorum decreta and tota sides Christiana.
says, the Apostolic sea, with the Rulers and Councels of our time, must be
reputed for our judges, to whose power and jurisdiction all Christian people
this day are subject. Which shows that the fathers are not the maine thing
whereupon they rely, but the Popes will, whereby they can qualify the fathers
when they will: the which liberty, so to do, being allowed them, they may
boldly cry out, Greg. a Valent. tom. 3 p. 290.
The Catholics, in the questions this day controuerted, have on their side
the judgment of the fathers, yea the common judgment of all the fathers
consenting in one. I say they may be the more confident in bragging thus, if
the liberty, thus to correct and usher them, be allowed them, as in every
question they are driven to use it.

. 45. And all the learned of them will confess, that they cannot assign a
visible company of men, professing the same faith that they do, ever since
Christ's time without interruption till now: and consequently, will they, nill
they, they must confess that theirs is not universal, and therefore not the
Catholic Church. For the true Catholic Church of Christ must, as I have
proved before out of Scripture, be continually from Christ's time, all the
days, until the end of the world; and being, must needs always visibly
profess that faith which it does hold. Now theirs not being thus universally
and visibly in all times, it cannot be that Church which Christ our Savior in
Scripture described and assigned for his. The Protestants Church therefore is
not Catholic.

The Answer.
1 In the affirmative, that is, in matters of faith and godly life, necessary
to salvation, we hold the very same that always was held: but in the negative,
which denies many points as false and superstitious, or not certain of divine
faith, and necessary to salvation, we confess we cannot show a perpetual
continuance. And the reason is, because the things that we deny came in by
degrees in later times one after another; and were not held anciently as
matters of faith needful to salvation, but were either wholly unknown, or at
the most, the fathers delivered them only as probable opinions and humane
conjectures. The which distinction being laid, my mind is, that it be
understood in all my answers to this objection throughout this book. And thus
the learned among us confess and prove against all that contradict it, that
ever since Christ's time without interruption, there have bin a company of men,
visibly professing the same faith that we do; though the Church of Rome,
degenerating into the seat of Antichrist, persecuted them, and so, many times,
drove them out of the sight of the world, that to it they were not visible, but
only as the persecutors of every age light upon them, and suppressed them; by
reason whereof, when they were seen, the world, which cannot discern the
children of light, knew them not to be the Church of God. And this we prove by
the consent of our doctrine in every point with the Scriptures (for such
doctrine must needs be granted to have always been without interruption) and
in every substantial point with the doctrine of some that are known to have
lived in every age. Other visibilitie then this the Church is not always bound
unto, as I have showed Sect. 17. and inde.
in place, where all that the Jesuit here says is answered.

Digression. 48. containing a brief and direct answer to our adversaries, when
they say, we cannot assign a visible company, professing the same faith, in
every point, that we do; ever since Christ, till now, without interruption.
2 Gregory of Valenza, teaching that it is one property of the Church, to be
always visible, Tom. 3. page 142.
says, this troubles us exceedingly; in as much as we are not able to show
any company of people, which in times past was known in the world to hold that
form of doctrine and religion, that now we have brought in. And I have observed
in all my acquaintance with persons affected to Popery, in this country where I
dwell, that they object nothing against us more willingly then this. And
therefore I will answer it fully and directly. And touching the time immediately
after Christ, and so forward til 800. years were ended; I name the Primitive
Church and the other Churches throughout the world professing the faith of
Christ; and affirm that they were of our religion, though some corruptions,
especially laterward, came in withal. And if our adversaries deny this, we
offer to make the trial by the new Testament, and writings of all the said
ages successively; out of which we will show, that our faith is the same which
the Apostles preached, and the fathers, for all that time, believed: and
whatsoever came in beside, was resisted and disallowed; all the difficulty is
touching the ages following til Luthers time. And we say, that all that time
also, in every age successively, there was a Church of our religion. Our
adversaries bid us show it, and name the place and persons; whereto I answer
two things: That touching the place, the Church of Rome it self was it. For in
every part thereof, there were some that held our faith, and that which was
called the Church of Rome, was but a contagion outwardly cleaving to it, and by
reason of the multitude prevailing against it, in a sort, and obscuring it.
Concerning the persons and particular companies, we lay down two things:
first, it must needs be granted, that such there were, because the names of
some are extant; as for example, the Waldenses, Wickliffe, and the Bohemians,
which agreed with us in the substance of our religion. Next, we are not bound
to show an exact catalogue from time to time precisely, of every such person
and company, so that unless we do it, we lose our cause: for first, it was
the time of Antichrist, wherein the Church must be persecuted, and by that
persecution be diminished and obscured; which is the cause why the professors
could not ordinarily possess whole cities, and countries wherein they might
profess their faith openly, but in all places they lived oppressed with the
tyranny, and obscured with the greatness of Rome, that their names and
places, with other circumstances, whereby their memory should have been
preserved, could not so easily come unto us. Next it is certain that the
Church may be in places where none can see it, as 2. Reg. 19, 18.
in Elias his time there were seven thousand in Israel, and yet he saw never a
one of them. Whence it follows that they argue but weakly against us, that
say our religion was not, because we can show no professors; for Elias could
show none, and yet there were seven thousand. Thirdly, the want of histories is
a hinderance. For things past can be showed by no other means; and the most of
those times were exceeding barren of good writers. Baronius An. 90^. n. 1.
notes such want of writers in the nine hundredth year, that therefore it is
called the obscure age. So that many things might appear at those present
times, which for want of stories could never come to our knowledge. And the
consideration of this one point may justly stay the discreet from being too
confident against us, when they shall see many things to be done that are not
written to the posterity, but he forgotten. And more then this we assure our
selves, that the Church of Rome would in all those ages do her best to deface
the memory of any thing that might witness for us; whereby it came to pass
that so little was written of the men of our religion. For what they writ
themselves, it was easy for their enemies to suppress; and what their enemies
wrote of them, is of as much credit as that which the Jesuits write this day
of us. This that I say is more then probable. For if at this day our
adversaries Azor. instit. tom. 1. l. 8. c. 16. Posseu. biblioth select. pa.
130. a.
wipe our very names out of books, and command that no man shall name us but
in contempt, and charge us with horrible opinions that we hold not, as that we
make God the author of sin, deny fasting, praying and good works, etc. we
may with good discretion assure our selves, their ancestors have done the like
in former ages to the men of our religion. Hence it comes to pass, that their
memory is very scant in Popish stories, as the matters of the Jews are rarely
mentioned in the writings of the Gentiles, though they were famous: and where
they are remembered, it is with contempt and slander; and hence it is that
Wickliffe and the Waldenses are charged with such vile opinions. For if the
Jesuits thus charge and belie us at this day, why might not their forefathers
belie them in like manner, and deface their memory? The man that reads but
Wickliffes own books, and compares them with that which Friar Walden most
impudently charge him with, shall find this to be true that I say. And every
body knows what monsters are written touching Ierom of Prage by his
adversaries: and yet Poggius, the Popes own Secretary, that was an
eyewitness of his death and trial at the Council of Constance, says,
Epist. ad Leonard. Aretin. inter epist. Pij 2 ^p. 425.
he was a man worthy eternal memory, there was no just cause of death in him,
he spoke nothing in all his trial unworthy a good man: and he makes question,
whether the things objected against him were true or no. So then the practice
of the Papists this day with us, defacing our names, belying our opinions,
burying our memory, corrupting our books, suppressing the truth of things,
purging and razing all manner of evidence, makes us assure our selves, that in
the same manner our ancestors were used, and that it is a principal reason why
we yield not so perfect a catalogue, as else we might do.

3 That which is more to be said touching this point, shall be handled below,
sect. 50.

. 46. But the Roman Church is: for it has been continually without
interruptio^ since Christ and his Apostles time; still visible, professing the
same faith without change, which now it has: and therefore is Catholic or
universal in Time. It has had, and has at this day, at least some of every
country where there are any Christians, which is almost, if not absolutely,
every where, that communicates and agrees in profession of faith with it;
therefore it is Catholic and universal in Place. It teaches a most ample
and universal doctrine of God, of Angels, of all other creatures, and
specially of man: of his first framing, of his final end, and of all things
pertaining to his nature; of his fall by sin, of his reparation by grace; of
laws prescribed unto him, of virtues which he ought to embrace, of vices which
he ought to eschew, of Christ our redeemer, his incarnation, life and passion,
and his coming to judgment, of the Sacraments; and all other points that any
way pertain to Christian religion.

The Answer.
1 That the Jesuits Roman Church has continually held the present faith it
now professes, is false, and confuted Sect. 35. Digr. 22. and 23.
already. And I wonder he might for shame say it. For is any so mad as to
believe his Popes supremacy, his Latin service, his real presence, has
always been visible from the beginning, when there is not so much as any mention
of them in antiquity? All that religion therefore which the Roman Church
maintains against us, came in by peece-meale, through the faction and
conueyance of certain persons which in all ages corrupted the truth, and
increased the corruptions by degrees, till at length they obtained the name of
the Roman faith.

2 Next, whereas he says, it is proved Catholic in place by this, that it
has, and always had, some in every coast that communicate in profession with
it: we must distinguish the times. For in the Primitive Church, and long after,
the Christian world indeed communicated with the faith professed in the Roman
Church, but then it was not the same it is now, and so the present Church of
Rome is not justified by this communion, but condemned rather. Afterward the
nations of the world joined in profession with it likewise, as it degenerated
and grew up in corruption: but mark how. One part being the smaller and
obscurer, lived in the midst thereof, and communicated with no more then was
the truth, excepting some small errors, like 1 Cor. 3.12.
hay or stubble builded on the foundation: and this is not properly any
communion with the Papacy, but with the true Church, whereto the Papacy in
the Church of Rome grew as a scab or as a disease. Another part communicated
with it in the errors also as they grew, and embraced the Papacy; Apo.
17.2.4.15 and 13.14. and 18.9. 2 Thessalonians. 2.11.
but this was the seduced world, which the whore of Babylon made drunk with
the wine of her fornication, and deceived with strong delusions. And yet this
communion was not so great, but that many famous Churches in the world refused
it, and departed from it as soon as the alteration into the faith it now
holds, began visibly to appear; as the Churches of Greece and Armenia for
example, which to this day would never communicate with it. Maginus Geogr.
descr. page 166.
says, The Greeks long since departed from the Church of Rome, and appointed
themselves Patriarchs, whom they acknowledge to be their heads: and not only
the Greeks obey them, but all the Provinces also that follow the Greeks
religion, Circassia, Walachia, Bulgaria, Moscouia, Russia, the more part of
Pole, Mingrelia, Brosina, Albania, Illyricum, part of Tartarie, Seruia,
Croatia, and all the Provinces lying upon the Euxin sea. Whereby it is plain,
that many famous countries, and infinite people never allowed of the Roman
faith, but have kept possession against it to this day: though many re^eiued
it, as in times past, many communicated with Arius and Mahomet, and yet they
are not proved Catholic thereby.

3 To the last point, concerning the universal doctrine taught in the Roman
Church, I answer, that it is not the holding of certain heads and articles of
religion which makes a Church Catholic, but the holding them truly according
to the Scripture. Which truth being removed, the more is holden, the worse and
less Catholic is the Church that holds them. For as much therefore as the
Roman Church, by adding and detracting, has corrupted the universal doctrine
of Christian religion, and especially the points mentioned by the Jesuit, and
patched thereunto innumerable abuses, errors and superstitions, to the certain
damnation of all that believe them; it is not proved Catholic by teaching all
the doctrine of religion, but manifestly Antichristian, because it teaches
every point untruly.

. 47. Neither does it at this day deny any one point of doctrine which in
former times was universally received for verity or the Catholic Church. The
which if any will take upon him to deny, let him show and prove first what
point of doctrine the Catholic Roman Church does deny or hold contrary to
that which by the Church has been universally held, as we can show the
Protestants do.

The Answer.
1 The Jesuit needed not to have bidden us show the points holden in his Church
against that which the Church of Christ universally held in former ages: for we
name and show every point of his faith, wherein he dissenteth from us, and
prove that it came in contrary to the doctrine of the Church, through the
conueyance of some therein, being never universally received of all, but
maintained and advanced by the power and contention of some against the rest,
which either resisted it, or received it doubtfully. And I UNDERTAKE TO SHOW
THIS IN ANY QVESTION OF HIS RELIGION THAT HE WILL NAME UNTO ME, BY PROVING THE
SAME TO BE AGAINST THE SCRIPTVRE FIRST, AND THEN CONTRARY TO THE PRIMITIVE
CHVRCH, AND FINALLY TAVGHT BY THE SHOOL-MEN AND OTHERS IN THE ROMAN CHVRCH IT
SELF, OTHERWISE THEN NOW THE IESVITES AND TRENT COUNCIL DELIVER IT. This is
enough to answer the present challenge, and I have performed it in every
question handled in this book, and namely Digress. 32. to 42.

Digression. 49. Obiecting eight points for example, wherein the Church of Rome
holds contrary to that which formerly was holden: The conception of the
virgin Marie, Latin service, Reading the Scriptures, Priests marriage, Images,
Supremacy, Communion in one kind, Transubstantiation.
1 First, touching the conception of the virgin Marie: which all the ancient
fathers believed to be in original sin, and the elder Schoolmen universally, as
I showed upon another occasion out of Dominicus Part. 1. in Tho. q. 1. art 8.
dub. 5.
Bannes, and De consecr. d. 4 Firmissime. nu. 11.
Turrecremata: contrary to Sixth. 4. c. Cum prae excelsa. and Grave nimis. in
Extrau. commun. Council. Trid. sess. 5. Declarat tame^ haec. Galatin. Arcan. l.
3 page 490.
the present belief of the Church of Rome.

2 Next, touching Latin service, which is used in the Church of Rome against
all antiquity, and the judgment of many. 1. Cor. 14.
The Apostle says, If an instrument of music make no distinction in the
sound, how shall it be known what is piped? So likewise you, except by the
language you utter words that have signification, how shall it be understood
what is spoken? For you shall speak in the air. I will pray and sing with the
spirit, and I will pray and sing with the understanding also. And Origin Cont.
Cells. l. 8
says, Let every man make his prayer to God in his native mother tongue. And
many learned Papists confess, Lyra. and Tho. and Caiet. upon 1. Cor. 14. Eras.
declar. ad Cens. page 153.
that in the Primitive Church, and long after, the prayers and service were
done in the mother tongue: and that it were better for the churches edification
to have it so still. Cassander a great Papist, Liturgic. c. 28. and penult.
shows this at large, and adds, that diverse nations to this day retain the
ancient custom still, and never used any strange language in their prayers.
See Justinian Nouel. 123.

3 Thirdly, touching the forbidding of lay people to read the Scriptures, and
to have them in their mother tongue. For Ioh. 5.39.
Christ bad the people search the Scriptures, and Act. 17.11.
the Christians of Thessalonica searched them daily, and Deuteronomy. 6.7.
Moses commanded all householders to rehearse them continually to their family,
and 2. Tim. 3.15.
Timothy of a child was trained up in them. And Corn. Agrip. vanit. c. 100.
the Council of Nice decreed, that no Christian should be without a Bible. And
Chrysostom Homil. 3 in Laz.
bids the lay people take the Bible into their hand and read it: and Homil.
2. in Mat.
says, the reading thereof is more needful to them then to the Monks. And
Jerome Epitaph. Paul.
commends it in women of his time, that it was not lawful for them to be
ignorant in the Psalms, or to pass over any day without learning something
out of the holy Scriptures. The which things the Church of Rome at this day
will not follow.

4 Fourthly, touching the marriage of Ministers. For in Leuit. 21.7. 2. Reg.
4.1. Ezekiel 24.18. Luc. 1.13
the old law, Priests and Prophets had wives, and Heb. 13.4.
the doctrine of Saint Paul is, that marriage is honorable among all Paphnut.
apud Sozom. l. 1. c. 22. Theophyl. in Heb. 13.4.
men; 1. Tim. 3.2. Tit. 1.6. Chrysostom. hom 1. in Tit.
who also gives order concerning the wives and children of Bishops, which were
needless if they might have none. And that they were ordinarily married in the
Primitive Church, appears by many examples. Mantuan Fast. l. 1.
says, Hilarie a French Bishop was married, and that in his time it was
lawful. Nazianzene Monod.
reports of Basils father, who was a Bishop, that in the state of marriage he
held the life and order of a Bishop. And Synesius the Bishop of Ptolemais
Epist. ad Euopt. and Niceph. l. 14. c. 55.
writes thus of himself: The sacred hand of Theophylus has given me a wife;
and hereupon I testify to al men that I will neither forsake her, nor yet
privily as an adulterer keep her company, but I will pray God to send me by
her many and good children. Athanasius Epist. ad Dracont.
reports that Bishops and Monks lived married, and had children. And the
Ecclesiastical histories Eusebius. l 4. c. 23 Socrat. l. 5. c. 22. Niceph. l. 12.
c. 34.
say expres^y, that in the Eastern Churches it was counted a yoke too heavy
to be laid on the Churchmen, to bind them from marriage: and therefore they
might, if it pleased themselves, avoid the company of their wives, but no law
constrained them. And therefore many executing the place of Bishops, even in
the houses where Bishops used to dwell, begat many children of the wives which
before time they had lawfully married: and at this present day no Bishop
sleeping with his wife, is counted unchaste. Finally, our adversaries themselves
confess, that Scot. 4. d. 37. Polyd. invent. l. 5. c. 4. Antidid. Colon. page
128. Coster. Enchir. page 517. Greg. a Valen tom 4. disp. 9. q. 5. pu^ct. 5. 1.
in the most ancient times of the Church, and after the Apostles death, they
had their wives: 26. q. 2. Sors.
that they are forbidden marriage by no divine law, but only by a humane
constitution: Ouan. 4. d 25. pro 9 Bellar. cleric. c. 18.
that this constitution may be dispensed with, by releasing the vow. Caiet.
quod. lib. 1. q. 12. page 236. in fine comment. in 3. part. Thom.
That excluding the Church laws (made by the Pope) and standing only to that
which we have from Christ and his Apostles, it cannot be proved by any reason
or authority, that speaking absolutely, a Priest sins in marying; but
reason rather leads to the contrary, in that holy orders, neither as they
are orders, nor as they are holy, can hinder marriage. Pius 2. epist. 321.
That it is better for a Priest to marry then to burn, though he have vowed
not to marry. Pius 2. apud Platin. in eius vita. Erasm. declarat. ad Censur.
Paris. page 200.
That there be many reasons to forbid Priests marriage, but more to allow it.

5 Fifthly, touching Images. For the Church of Rome Conc. Nicen. 2. act. 7.
Council. Trid. sess. 25.
not only worshippeth them, but commands also to do it Conc. Trid. ib.
Suar. to. 1. d. 54. s. 4. Tho 3. q. 25. art. 3. and 4.
with divine honor, the very same that is due to God himself: contrary to
the commandment which says, Exodus 20.4.
Thou shall make to thy self no image, nor the likeness of any thing; thou
shall not bow down to it, nor worship it. And Saint Paul Romans 1.23.
reproves such as changed the glory of God into the similitude of men, and
beasts, and fowls. And Apoc. 19.10. and 22.8.
the Apostle was rebuked for offering to have worshipped the Angel. The
Council of Eliberis Can. 38.
decreed, that no picture should be made in the Church, lest that were adored
which is painted on walls. Ep. ad Joan.
And Epiphanius, finding an Image painted on a cloth, hanging in a Church, rent
it down, and said, it was against the authority of the Scripture that any
image should be in the Church. And Origin Contra Cells. l. 7.
says of his time, We worship no Images: Clem. Alexand. hort. ad Gent page 14.
graec. Minut. Felix octou. Athenag. Lega^.
and the ancient Christians of the Primitive Church had none. Yea eight
hundred years after Christ, when Zon. Cedren. and alij.
the second Nicene Council had set up Images, Ouand. 4. d. 2. pro. 8. Baron.
ann. 794. n. 1.
a general Council holden at Frankford, Abb. Vrsperg. ann. 793. Rhegin. ann.
794.
where the Popes Legates also were, abrogated the decree thereof, and by Opus
illust. Caroli Mag. contra Synod.
a book purposely written, confuted it. In that book it is said, page 486.
lib. 4. cap. 2.
the Catholic Church professes, that mortal men are to worship God, not by
images and Angels, but by Christ the Lord. Epiphanius L. 3. aduer^us haeret.
says, the virgin Mary was a virgin and honorable, but not given for us to
worship, but her self worshipped him that took flesh of her. Finally, many
learned Papists are of our side in this point. For Peers. de trad. part. 3.
some condemn all divine adoration given unto them. Gers. compend. Theol.
praecep. 1. Holk. in Sap. lect. 157. b.
Some condemn all worship whatsoever, even the bowing before them. Polyd.
invent l 6. c. 13.
Some acknowledge that all the ancient fathers condemned the^. Duran. ration l.
1. c. 3. n. 4. Cathar. tract. de cult. imag. Polyd. ibid.
Some think their use to be dangerous. And they which have gone furthest in
defending them, yet confess, Can. 6. Nilus primat.
that they which teach they may be worshipped with divine honor, are
constrained to use such nice distinctions, as neither themselves nor the people
understand, and if they conceive them, yet they cannot but err in doing it.
Peers. vbi supra. Bell de imag. c. 22.


6 Sixthly, touching the supremacy. For Can. 6. Nilus primat.
the Council of Nice appointed bounds and limits, as well for the Popes
jurisdiction, as for other Bishops, and the Councels Act. 16.
of Chalcedon and Sext. Synod. i^. T^ull. can. 36.
Constantinople make the B. of Constantinople equal in all things, that
concern authority and jurisdiction, with the Bishop of Rome. And Cusan.
conce. l. 2 c 12. Ma^sil. defen. pac. part. 2. c. 18. Duaren. de benefic. l. 3.
c. 2.
some Papists do not deny, but the Popes Primacy is much larger then it was in
the Primitive Church; wherein they say the truth. For the Councels of Cap. 9.
Chalcedon, Cap. 105.
Affricke, Can. 22
Mileui, and Synod. 8. can. 26.
Constantinople, forbid all appeals to him from foreign places: yea that of
Affricke rejected his claim, and writ unto him, that he should forbear the
taking upon him any such pre-eminence, Lest, say they, the smokie pomp of the
world be brought into Christ's Church: and Gregory, who himself was Pope of
Rome, Regist. l. 6. ep. 194.
writes, that he dares confidently say, he is the forerunner of Antichrist, in
his pride, whosoever he be that calls himself the universal Bishop, or
desires so to be called; because he puts himself before others. For at that
time Harmenop. epit. sacr. cano. tit. 7. de Synod.
the name of universal was forbidden all the Patriarchs, as it signified the
chief above the rest. And 1000. years after Christ, it was thought, Glab.
Rodolf. quem refert. and taxat Baro. an. 996. n. 24.
that although the Bishop of the Roman Church, for the dignity of the
Apostolic sea, were more reverenced then the rest, yet it was not lawful for
him in any thing to go beyond the tenor of the Canons. For as every Bishop in
his own sea uniformly bears the image of our Savior; so generally it
befitteth none busily to do any thing in another diocese. And when the Pope,
but 500. years since practiced against the Emperor, as now he does against
kings, Sigeb. chron. page 129. ann. 1088.
the stories noted it as nouelty and heresy, that Priests should teach the
people to yield no subjection to evil Princes; and should absolve them from
sin and perjury that practiced against them: whereas now Decretal. Greg. 9.
de Mayor. and obed. c. Solitae. Extrauag. Commun. c. Vnam sancta^ de mayor. and
obed.
the authority to depose and molest Princes, and absolve subjects from their
obedience, is made one of the principal parts of the supremacy. And touching
his temporalties which he now possesses, the stories have observed, how by
fraud and treason he cousened secular Princes of them, from time to time, as
occasion served. And so his whole Primacy gat in by steps into the Church, and
yet Turrecrem. tract. 73. qu. e Tho. q. 5.
they would make us believe the denial thereof were heresy.

7 In the seventh place I name the communion in one kind. For the Church of
Rome uses and defends it, contrary to Cyrill. catech. mystag. 5. Liturg.
Marc page 62. Constitur. Clement. page 145. graec. ordo Romans page 23.
all antiquity, and the very form of their own Lyturgies. For the most
ancient Liturgies that they have, show how the people received the wine as well
as bread. And Caietan 3. part. Thom. qu 80. art. 12. q. 3.
faith, This custom endured long in the Church, and that they had ministering
cups for the nonce to serve the people with wine. And I think no Papist will
deny this. And some Ouand 4 p. 221.
say, It were better if this custom were renewed again.

8 Lastly, I name transubstantiation. For Censur. Colo. page 267.
our adversaries say, The true Church has always taught, that as soon as the
Priest has pronounced the words of consecration, the former substance of bread
and wine is changed into the body and blood of Christ, so that no other
substance remains but only Christ's body and blood, the accidents, by a
supernatural power, abiding without a subject. The which how false it is,
appears by the word of God, Luc. 22.18. 1. Cor. 10.16. and 11.26.
calling it bread, and the fruit of the vine, after the blessing; and Luc.
^2.20.
saying of the cup, in the same form of words that is used of the bread, This
cup is the new Testament in my blood: and teaching that without bread there can
be no sacrament: and that Christ had a body of the same nature that ours is,
which cannot be without his dimensions, in many places at once. And it is
plain that herein they have altered the faith of the ancient fathers. For
Saint Austin De Doctr. Christ. l. 3. c. 16.
says, These words, unless ye eat the flesh of the son of man, and drink
his blood: are a figure, commanding us to partake the passion of Christ, and
profitably to remember that his flesh was crucified for us. Chrysostom Ad
Caesar. Monach.
says, The bread, before it be sanctified, we call bread; but when the divine
grace sanctifies it, it is delivered from the name of bread, and is thought
worthy the name of the Lords body, though the nature of bread remain still,
Gelasius a Bishop of Rome De duabus not. Christi.
says, The bread and wine pass into the substance of the body and blood of
Christ, yet so as the nature of bread and wine ceasseth not, and they are
turned into the divine substance, yet the bread and wine remain still in the
property of their nature. Theodoret says, Dial. immuta.
Our Savior, in delivering the sacrament, called his body bread, and that which
is in the cup, he called his blood. He changed the names, and gave his body
that name which belo^ged to the sign, and to the sign, that name which
belonged to his body. The reason why he thus changed the names, was, because he
would have such as partake the divine sacraments, not to heed the nature of
those things which are seen, but, for the change sake of the names, to believe
the change that is made by grace. For he called it wheat and bread, which by
nature is his body, and again on the other side he called himself a vine:
thus honoring the Symbols and signs which are seen, with the name of his body
and blood; not by changing their nature, but by adding grace to nature. Dial.
inconfusus.
For the mystical signs, after consecration, do not depart from their nature,
but they abide still in their former substance, and figure, and form, and may
be seen and touched as before. These testimonies are so plain that they
cannot be shifted. For they contain the very speeches used by the Protestants;
he changed but the name, he honored the signs with the name of his body, not
changing their nature: they depart not from their nature, but abide still in
their former substance, their former kind, their former form: the substance
or nature of bread and wine ceasseth not. They are a figure, etc. And the
fathers hereby confuted Eutyches the heretic holding that Christ had but one
nature, and that by reason of the union, the humanity was turned into the
deity: against which error they opposed the doctrine of the Eucharist, showing
that as therein bread and wine after consecration were honored with the name
of his body and blood, and received grace unto their nature, to be a holy
sacrament: though still they remained in their former substance and property:
so the humanity of Christ received grace by the hypostaticall uniting it to
the Godhead, and yet still retained the former property, to be humane flesh.
And had they believed as our adversaries do touching the sacrament, they not
only could not thereby have thus confuted Eutyches, but Eutyches might by that
very doctrine most probably have confuted them. For thus he might have
reasoned: You Theodoret, and Gelasius and the rest of your Church, think the
sacrament is a resemblance of the incarnation of Christ, and the union of his
two natures. But in the sacrament the bread and wine after consecration remain
no more, but are turned into the flesh and blood of Christ, and so there is but
one substance. Therefore likewise in the incarnation, after the union, the
humanity remains no more, but is turned into the divinity, and the nature
is but one: as I say. What could they have answered to this reason, if they had
held transubstantiation? Yea Eutyches made this argument, in part, against
them. For from the sacramental change of the signs, whereby, of common bread
and wine, they were changed to be holy signs and instruments of Gods grace
unto us, (which change is it that the fathers mention, and no other) he could
prove a change in Christ's humane nature: but Theodoret answers him thus; Now
are you caught in your own net: for the mystical signs depart not from their
nature, but abide still in their former substance, etc. Which shows
apparently that he believed not the transubstantiation

9 Neither had it been possible the elder sort of Papists should have spoken so
waueringly and uncertainly touching the point, if it had been always so
universally received in the church. Concerning things always believed indeed,
they speak resolutely, they are certain, and stick not: as when they speak of
the Trinity, of the mysteries of the incarnation: but when they come to
entreat of this transubstantiation, it is strange to see how they interfere in
their words, that they are able to make the resolutest Papist alive doubt,
whether ever they believed it in good earnest or no. I will set down the words
of some of them, because they deserve noting, and I had their books ready at
my hand to allege them First there is no certainty among them, whether the
bread remain or no. For Petrus de Alliaco, the Cardinal, 4. q. 6. art. 2. f.
says, That manner, which supposes the substance of bread to remain still, is
possible. Neither is it contrary to reason, or to the authority of the
Scripture: nay it is easier to conceive, and more reasonable then that which
says, the substance does leave the accidents. And of this opinion no
inconvenience does seem to ensue, if it could be accorded with the Churches
determination. And he addeh, that the opinion, which holds the substance of
bread not to remain, does not evidently follow of the Scripture, nor, in his
seeming, of the Churches determination. And Occh. centil. q. 39 c. Cum Marthae.
de celeb miss gl.. Sanguinis. Panor. ibid.
it appears evidently that it was a common opinion in the Church of Rome,
even of late, that the bread in the sacrament remains still, and that
transubstantiation is no article of faith. Next, among such as held the real
presence there was no certainty. For Tom. 3. d. 47. sect. 3 and. d. 49. sect.
2.
Suarez relates the opinion of some which held the change in the sacrament to
consist in this, that the bread and wine were assumed and united to the person
of Christ. And Occh. 4. q. 6. k. Gabr. 4. d. 11 q. 1 Sum. Angel. verbo
Eucharistia 1. n. 31.
diverse of the chiefest Schoolmen hold the bread is not converted, substance
into substance, but annihilated, by ceassing to be. And this matter was so
uncertain in Peter Lombards time, that it seems he knew not what to hold:
If, L. 4. d. 11. ^.
says he, it be demanded what manner of conversion it is, whether formal, or
substantial, or of another kind, I am not able to define. Which is a sign
that transubstantiation was not universally believed in his days. And
generally it is confessed, that before the Council of Lateran, not yet four
hundred years since, no man was bound to believe it, Tonstal De verit. corp
and fang p. 46.
says, It was free for all men, till that time, to follow their own
conjecture as concerning the manner of the presence. They were not therefore
bound to believe transubsta^tiation. And Scotus and Biel are reported by Soto.
4. d. 9. q. 2. art. 2. and 4. Suar. tom. 3. d. ^. s. 1.
the later Schoolmen, to have been of mind, that the opinion is very new, and
lately brought into the Church, and believed only upon the authority of the
Lateran Council: and indeed their words sound no less. From the beginning,
Script. Oxon. 4. d. 10. q. 1.. Quantum ergo ad istum.
says Scotus, since the matter of this sacrament was believed, it has ever
been believed, that Christ's body is not moved out of his place into heaven,
that it might be here in the sacrament: and yet it was not in the beginning so
manifestly believed as concerning this conversion. D. 11. q. 3.. Quantum ergo
ad istum.
But principally this seems to move us to hold transubstantiation, because
concerning the sacraments we are to hold as the Church of Rome does: where in
the margin it is noted, that our faith as concerning this sacrament, is only
by reason of the Churches determination. And he. Ad argumenta pro prima and.
adds, We must say the Church, in the Creed of the Lateran Council, under
Innocent the third, which begins with these words, FIRMITER CREDIMVS,
declared this sense concerning transubstantiation, to belong to the verity of
our faith. And if you demand, why would the Church make choice of so difficult
a sense of this article, when the words of the Scripture, This is my body,
might be vpholden after an easy sense, and in appearance more true? I say, the
Scriptures were expounded by the same spirit that made them: and so it is to be
supposed that the Catholic Church expounded them by the same spirit whereby
the faith was delivered us, namely being taught by the spirit of truth, and
therefore it chose this sense because it was true. Canon. lect. 41.
Biels words are to the same effect. Which shows the point was neither
holden, nor known universally in the Church before the Lateran Council, and
that then it began to be received as a matter of our faith. And yet since that
time, these men enquiring so boldly into the congrue^cie of the opinion, and
casting so many dangers about it, they show plainly that they mistrust the
proceeding of the Council, though they may not disclaim it. Durand 4. d. 11.
q. 1.
says, It is great rashness to think the body of Christ, by his divine
power, cannot be in the sacrament, unless the bread be converted into it. But
if this way which supposes the bread to remain still, were true de facto,
many doubts which meet us about the sacrament, holding that the substance of
bread remains not, were dissolved. But for so much as this way must not, de
facto, be holden, since the Church has determined the contrary, which is
presumed not to err in such matters, therefore I answer the arguments made to
the contrary, holding the other part which says the bread is changed. Would
our adversaries thus backwardly come into the opinion, if they had seen it to
have been holden in all ages before in the Church? or is it not rather an
infallible sign, that it was brought into the Church by the strength of some
men's conceits, without all warrant either of Scripture or fathers? the want
whereof so dazzled those that embraced it, that they could see no reason for it,
but are all glad to lay it upon the neck of a silly Pope in his Lateran
Counsel. Besides, Scot. 4. d 11. q. 3. Bell Euchar. l. 3. c. 23.
they confess, There is no Scriptare to enforce it, unless ye bring the
Church of Romes exposition. that is to say, the Popes authority, in whom,
Turrect. tract. 73. quest q. 49.
they think, the power of the universal Church, in determining matters of
faith: principally resides, if not alone. 3. part. q. 75. art. 1. p. 153.
Caietan lays down diverse opinions holden among the Schoolmen touching the
conversion, never a one whereof reaches the transubstantiation: and
disallowing such as expounded Christ's words, This is my body, metaphorically,
he says, his reason is, because the Church has understood them properly: I
say the Church, says he, because in the Gospel there is nothing that
compels us to understand them properly: and headdeth, that the conversion of
the bread into Christ's body, we have received of the Church. Now put all this
together, that we believe transubstantiation upon the authority of the Church,
and this Church was Pope Innocent in the Council of Lateran, before which time
there was no certainty, nor necessity of believing it, and the Council might
have chosen another sense of Christ's words more easy and in all appearance
more true; for there is no Scripture sufficient to convince it; and the
contrary were liable to fewer difficulties: let this, I say, be put together,
and it will plainly show, that this point came in contrary to that which was
universally holden in the ancient Church: because things universally holden,
were certainly known and expressly believed without all this ado.

. 48. Let him show also what country there is, or has been, where Christian
faith either was first planted or continued, where some at least have not
holden the Roman faith, as we can show them diverse places, especially in the
Indies, Iaponia, and China, countries where theirs is scarce heard of.

The Answer.
1 This is answered before, sect. 46. nu. 2. where I showed that when countries
were first converted from Paganism, which was for the most part in the
Primitive Church, the present Roman faith was not known: but the Church of
Rome in those days professed the same that we do, and consequently the nations
converted by it, and professing the faith thereof, were converted to our
religion, and professed it. For the Jesuit deceives himself with the name of
Roman faith, wherewith in the beginning all nations indeed under heaven
communicated, but then it was not the same that now it is: as I have plainly
demonstrated in the former sect. digress. 49. And although since the change
many nations have still retained the same faith with it, yet that justifies
not the faith, because the said faith growing on by steps and peecemeale, was a
general apostasy, and the mystery of iniquity working throughout the whole
Church, so that of necessity there must be some in all places to follow it. As
when a general rebellion grows throughout a kingdom, the rebels have
partakers in every town, and yet the possession is not proved theirs by that;
but only the greatness and strength of the rebelling faction is showed. The
Papacy, that is to say, the Roman faith, in as much as it differs from us, is
not imagined by us to be in another Church, distinct in place and countries
from the true Church of Christ; but we affirm it to be a contagion reigning in
the midst of the Church of Christ it self, and spreading throughout the parts
thereof wheresoever, and annoying the whole body like a leprosy; in which
disease though all the parts be affected, yet the inward and vital parts
retain their operation, and still work to expel the leprosy, which at the
length they do. In this case the man is possessed indeed with a vile contagion,
but yet the man remains there still, though the contagion be not the man. And
the contagion possesses every part of him, some more, some less; being
universally spread over the body: and yet hereby it is not proved to be the
true nature and sound constitution of the body, but a prevailing humor: and
when the body after a long time has shaken it off, and looked through it, by
reason the vital parts kept out the poison; we do not call it a new body; for
that were absurd, as our adversaries call the Protestants a new Church, but a
body recovered and delivered from a leprosy. In the same manner we compare
the Church and the Papacy.

2 To the second part, wherein the Jesuit says, he can show diverse places
where our religion is scarce heard of: specially the Indies, Iaponia and China:
I answer, he does wisely to carry his Reader into his new world, because he
knew the old world has Protestants in every part of it, as I have said: and
Engl. voyage^
the Spanish Inquisition has found some there too, and may daily find more for
any thing they know yet; the time being under 120. years since their first
discovery. And if the Jesuit were well put to it, it would be exceeding hard
for him to show so many of his Roman faith in those countries as is pretended.
The Spaniards I grant, that dwell and traffic there, profess it, but the
question is of the inahbitants. For I hold him a weak man and easy of belief,
that gives any credit to the Jesuits reports and their Indian news concerning
this matter: the which I say upon evident grounds. For Franciscus Victoria in
his public lectures at Salmantica, Relect. 5. page 201.
affirmed, that the Barbarians by war could not be moved to believe, but to
feign they believed and received the faith, which is horrible and sacrilegious:
Page 200.
and he adds, that the Christian religion was never yet sufficiently offered
them. And Bartolomaeus Casas that was a Bishop in the Indies, and saw all that
was done, Span. Colon^
informed the king of Spain, that the cruelty of the Spaniards toward the
people, and the lewdness of the Priests was such, that the Indians believed
nothing, but mocked at all that was showed them of God, being rooted in this
conceit, that our God is the worst, and the most wicked and unjust of all gods,
because he has such servants. But I will handle this point at large in the 50.
Digression, where I doubt not but to give the Jesuit enough of his Indies
conversion.

3 And whereas the Jesuit says, our faith was scarce ever heard of among the
Indians, this is rashly spoken, and more then he knows. For Bishop Jewel has
Def. Apolog. page 37.
showed out of Vesputius, that in the East Indies there were many godly
Bishops, and sundry whole countries converted and baptized before the
Portugals came there, or the Popes name was heard of. And if it be true that
Osor. gest. Eman. l. 3. page 83. and 107. Fred. Lumnius de extrem. Indic. l. 2.
c. 8. Sur. common. an. 1565. Baron an. 57. n 113.
the Jesuits own histories report, that the Apostle Thomas lies buried in a
city there, and that he converted them to the faith of Christ, and that the
people of the country by his doctrine have Bishops and Patriarchs to this day,
and married Priests, and the Scriptures, and the Eucharist in both kinds: then
belike there were at least some steps of the Protestants religion there, before
the Popes authority was heard of. And unless he can prove out of the
scriptures that Saint Thomas was a Papist (which is hard to do) he must grant
also that their first conversion was to our faith; for Saint Thomas converted
them, and we believe the same that he preached.

. 49. Nay even our own Chronicles can bear witness, that our dear country
England was converted by Austin a Monk, sent from S. Gregory, the Pope: and
continued in that faith, without any knowledge of the Protestants religion,
which then was vnhatched, for diverse hundred years. The like record in other
countries converted by means of those only, who did communicate and were
members of the Roman Church, we may find in other histories. See Socrat. l.
1. c. 29. and cap. 28. and 30. Sozom. l. 2 c. 23. Niceph. l. 14. c. 40. Platina
in vitis Pontificum Steph. 7. Adrian. 4. Aeneas Syluius de origin Bohemorum,
cap. 16. Baronius his Annals, the Indian and Iaponian histories and letters,
and other particular histories of peculiar Christian countries.

The Answer.
1 Touching the conversion of England by Austin the Monk (wherewith our
adversaries make so much ado) I answer two things. First, that supposing he did
convert it, yet was it not to the present Roman faith, but to that which was
the faith at that time. For neither was Gregory that sent him, such a Pope as
now the Pope is, invested with his supremacy, nor his doctrine, in the chief
things, suitable to that which is now holden, as may be showed by that which he
has left written against L. 4. ep 76. 80. 83. and l. 6. ep. 88 194.
Images, L. 7. ep. 109.
the supremacy, Super 7 psalm. poenitent.
the merit of works, and diverse other points: though I will not deny but the
contagion of some errors were got in in his time; and Austine arriving in
England, might do his best to scatter them. Which being granted, our
adversaries are never the nearer that they shoot at, because we can show the
said things, so brought in, to be errors, and different from that which the
Church believed long before Austins coming. And for trial hereof, let any man
set down what Austine taught in this his imaginated conversion of the
country, and contrary to our faith, and I will demonstrate it to have been
against the teaching of the Primitive Church before him.

2 Secondly, I say he converted not our country at all, excepting the planting
of some trifling ceremonies. For Gildas An. 580. Polyd praefat. ad Tonstal.
praefixa Gildae. Austin came an. 597. Baro an. 597. n. 20.
who lived before Austins coming, writes, that the Brittans received the
Christian faith from the first beginning. And this appears to be true, in
that the Apostles themselves, or some of that time, preached in the country.
Baronius An. 58. n. 51.
thinks, Saint Peter was here. Theodoret De Curand. Graec. affect. l. 9.
says, Saint Paul. Nicephorus L. 2. c. 40.
says, Simon Zelotes. Baron. an. 35. n. 5.
Some, Joseph of Arimathea: but whosoever they were, certain it is, that very
timely in the Primitive Church the Gospel was planted: for so Tertul. aduers.
Iudae. Origin. hom. 4. in Ezekiel. Theod. hist. l. 4. c. 3.
the ancient writers agree; whereby it appears, that Austine is not the
Apostle of our land, as Three conuers. par. 1. c. 8.
some vainly give it out. It is Alan. Cope. l. 5. c. 18. and 19.
objected, that the faith thus planted at the first, was extinguished again by
heresy and paganism, in that part of the land which was inhabited by the
English Saxons, whom Austine converted. Whereto I answer three things: first,
that if religion were among the Brittans, and extinguished no where but in
Kent, where Austine arrived, then he converted not the land, but one poor
country in it; and must be called no longer the Apostle of England, but the
Apostle of Kent, which compass I think our ambitious adversaries will not be
content with, because it is too narrow for their turns. Next Three conuers.
part. 1. c. 11 n. 4
the busiest adversaries that we have in this matter, say, all the land was
converted about that time. For Austine converted the kingdoms of Kent and the
East Saxons, and all the rest were converted within less then threescore
years after, being seven States in all. The which narration ascribes the same
want of the true faith to all the land, that in the objection is laid to Kent
alone. Whence it follows, that the faith was not extinct in Kent, because it
was remaining still in the other six kingdoms. The which to be true, appears
by Bid, who L. 1. c. 8.17.21.
writes, that before Austins coming, the Brittans were troubled with Arrianisme
and Pelagianisme, but Germanus, Lupus and Seuerus, three French Bishops
delivered them. Whereby it is plainly proved, that the whole land was not
converted by Austine, but had the faith long before he came. Thirdly, touching
Kent it self, where Austine arrived, over and besides that it cannot be proved
to have wanted the faith any more then the rest of the land did: Bid L. 1. c.
25.26.
says, that the Queen thereof was a French woman, called Bertha, a good
Christian, and had a Christian Bishop, even at that time when Austine came. L.
2. c. 2.
And he adds further, that when he arrived, he found diverse Brittan Bishops,
and learned men, with a Monastery at Bangor, all which were Christians, and
refused Austine for his pride, which they found in him contrary to Christ's
humility. And touching the Brittans, our adversaries Three conuers. par. 1. c.
9. n. 1.
write, that from king Lucius time until the coming of Austine, which was
four hundred years and more, they did not alter their faith, but it remained
among them when he entered: for Lib. 1. c. 17.
Bid says, that when a certain Bishops son broached the heresy of
Pelagius in the land, yet the people would not receive it. Which constrains
us to think that Austine brought not the faith into the land with him, but
found it there when he came. His errand (as it may probably be thought) was
about the planting of certain ceremonies, and the dealing with our countrymen
about the observation of Easter: and Cassand. ordo Romans praefat.
Gregory that sent him, about that time was busy in changing the Liturgies
used in these Western parts, and did change them, and thrust his new ones upon
all the places he could. It may be this was a part of the Monks business into
Kent.

3 And as the Jesuit untruly ascribes the conversion of England to the Monk,
so has he as absurdly written, that the Protestants religion was vnhatched for
I know not how many hundred years after. Which he would not have said, but
that Papists are famous for their adventures. For before the conquest, Homil.
Saxonic. A Elfrici.
Aelfricus an Archbishop of Canterbury caused the people of the land to be
taught the same doctrine, touching the sacrament, that we hold; and H.
Huntingd. l. 7. Fab. chron.
the Priests were married, as now they be, and Bed. l. 1. c. 1.
the Scriptures were used in the mother tongue. And after the conquest lived
John Wickliffe, and the Lollards, who held the same faith that we do, and
suffered persecution for it.

4 That which he says of other countries converted by means of such as were
members of the Roman Church, proves not Papistrie to be either ancient or
universal. For the three first authors, in the places alleged, speak of the
time within the first five hundred years, when the Church of Rome was of our
religion: and that which they report is not of any whom the Bishop of Rome sent
or procured to convert the countries, but this, Socr. l. 1. c. 19.20. Soz. l. 2
c. 24
that Frumentius being sent by Athanasius the Bishop of Alexandria, converted
the Indians, Niceph. l. 14. c. 40.
and a captive woman converted the Iberians, and a sort of Jews in Creet were
converted by the inhabitants, and the Burgundians instructed by a French
Bishop. In all which there is neither mention of the Church of Rome, nor of the
present faith now professed therein: but our adversaries think, that
whatsoever is found in antiquity concerning the ancient Church of Rome,
should belong to them; wherein they find themselves deceived as often as the
matter is put to trial, and this one example may show it; for allowing all
these countries to have bin converted by such as were members of the Church of
Rome, yet this was a thousand years ago, when that Church was the same that
ours is, and so the conuersions were wrought by persons adhering to the
Protestants faith. The three last authors, Platina, Eneas, and Baronius, are
Papists, living, one of them, at this day, the other within the memory of our
fathers; and therefore I regard not what they writ touching this question,
because we have more ancient records against them. And yet whatsoever they
have written, the present Roman faith is not justified thereby. For heretics
may convert nations to heresy, as Oros. hist. l. 7. c. 19.
the Arrians and Cedren compend. page 347.
Mahomet have done. Therefore it is necessary that first they prove their faith
to be agreeable with the word of God, by comparing them together, before they
boast of their conuersions.

Digression. 50. Of the conversion of the Indies to the Roman faith by the
Jesuits.
5 But that which he urges concerning the Indies, must be a little further
looked into. For Epist. Indic. Bellar. not. eccl. c. 12. Hard. confut. apol. p.
18.
our adversaries make much ado, and tell wonders of their miracles and
conuersions there. But mark the words of Franciscus Victoria their own
writer: It does not ( Relect. 5. page 200.
says he) sufficiently appear to me, that the Christian faith has hitherto
been so offered and preached to the Indies, that they should under the pain of
sin be bound to believe it. This I say, because they are not bound to
believe, unless the faith be propounded to them with probable persuasion. But
miracles or signs I hear of none, nor examples of life so religious; nay the
contrary, I hear of many scandals and villainies, and many impieties. Whence it
appears, that the Christian religion has not been preached to them
conveniently nor godlily. The which how true it is, you may perceive by that
which follows concerning the prodigious cruelty of the Spaniards, and
impious behavior of the Priests in those countries, ever since their first
discovery. And although the Jesuits send packets of news abroad touching the
miracles and huge conuersions daily wrought by their Priests, and touching
their holiness, and the multitudes which they baptize, and the planting of
their faith; yet that is but a fetch of their wit, to make fools enamoured of
them, and to increase their reputation. For such as have lived there, and seen
all that has been done, have written the contrary, and to this day report
things far otherwise: that any man may see the Papists invaded those
countries, and took all that pains to possess them, only to satisfy their
covetousness, and exercise their cruelty and lust upon them, and made
religion and the converting of them the pretense to cover it. Let any man judge
if I say untruly by this that their own writers report, concerning the
incredible havoc which they have made of the inhabitants, such as was never
heard of since the world was created. Metellus Sequanus Prefat. ad Anton.
August. praefixa ante Osor. de gest. Eman. page 15.
writes, that of two thousand thousand persons inhabiting one country,
Hispaniola, in the year 1580. there were not left at the most above five
hundred, or an hundred and fifty, but the Spanish cruelty had destroyed them
all. And Page 17.
he adds, that in one particular country, the inhabitants whereof received
the Spaniards as men fallen from heaven, with great worship and rich rewards;
they massacred them up so, that you might go seven hundred miles, and find
almost no living wight, who before the Spaniards arrival, were very populous:
and Page 16.
says he, the Spanish soldiers made a prey of the people as if they had come
but to hunt or hawke.

6 And indeed the report is, that the Spaniard at his first coming, found so
many people inhabiting as is incredible. Bartolomaeus Casas, a Bishop that
lived in the country, Span. Colo. page 1.
says it swarmed with multitudes as an Emmet hill does with Emmets, Page 27.
and was more replenished with people then Civil, or Toledo, or Valladolyd, in
Spain. And he says, Page 12.
that during all the time they were murdered and made away so cruelly, they
never committed any one offense against the Spaniards, that deserved punishment
by the law of man: yet did I never read of such cruelty as they used toward
them; in relating whereof, I will say no more then the said Casas has written
verbatim, in detestation thereof, to the king of Spain. He Page 2.
says, the Spaniards as soon as the nation was discovered, like wolves, and
lions, and tigers long famished, entered, and did nothing but tear them in
pieces, and murder, and torment them by cruelties never read or heard of
before. Page 13.
They whipped them, and struck them with fists and bastinadoes, cursing and
tormenting them, that it would affright any man to hear it. Page 55.
The acts which they committed (he says) are the deeds neither of Christians,
nor of men, but of devils. Page 92.
And it had been better the Indies had been given to the devils of hell, then
to the Spaniards. Page 17.
And he protests there is no tongue, skill, knowledge, or industry of man
able to recount the dreadful doings of these enemies of mankind, in Hispaniola
alone. Page 56.
The miserable people dying upon the high ways for feebleness as they carried
the Spaniards stuff, like horse, when they were laid on with staves, and had
their teeth broken with the pomels of their swords, to make them rise from the
ground where they lay for faintness, would say, I can do no more, kill me here
outright, I desire to die. And he tells admirable things of particular
cruelties used: Page 6.
They spared neither children nor old folk nor women with child, nor such as
lay in childbed, but would rip up their bellies, and chop them in pieces, as if
they had been butchering lambs. They would lay wagers who should most readily
and nimbly thus butcher men. They would pluck infants sucking from their
mothers paps, and taking them by the heels, dash out their brains against the
rocks, or hurl them into the rivers. Page 92. and 47.
They trained up mastiue dogs of purpose to rend in pieces and devour the
people, and for that purpose fed them with man's flesh, having a great number of
Indians fettered in chains, whom they murdered like swine, as their dogs
needed, to feed them. Page 48.
And he tells of one that wanting dogs meat, took a child from the mother,
and chopping the same in pieces fed his dogs therewith. Page 47.
And of a woman who being sick, to escape from the dogs, hanged her self,
having tied her child, about a year old, at her foot, which the dogs
dispatched. And one peculiar punishment they used, Page 6.
to set up low gibbets, and (as they used to speak it) in the honor of Christ
and his twelve Apostles, to hang thirteen persons upon every gibbet, and so
burn them with fire. Page 46.
They used to buy and sell the people, as they did all other merchandise,
giving young men and damsels for wine, or cheese, or such like; and sometime an
hundred persons for a horse. Page 89.
They have thrown down from the top of a steep mountain seven hundred men
together, who as a cloud have fallen to the ground and been battered in pieces.
Page 115.
In three months they famished seven thousand children. Page 8. 83.
They ravished and murdered great Queens. And Page 31.
at one time they massacred two thousand gentlemen that were Lords sons, and
the flower of all the nobility in that country.

7 This cruelty wrought lamentable effects. For when the miserable people saw
there was no hope it would end, Page 16.
they would hang themselves, husbands with their wives and children, only to
be rid of their misery. Page 99.
A certain woman having her husband taken from her, in grief and despair
dashed out her own child's brains against the stones. And it was ordinary, that
Page 115.
women would murder their own children, and destroy their conception, only
to rid them from the bondage of the Spaniards. Thus the goodliest nation of the
world was depopulated under pretense of religion. Page 3.
More then ten realms greater then all Spain, with Aragon, and Portugal, and
containing twice as much ground as lies between Civil and Jerusalem, are
turned into a wilderness. Page 4.
Twenty seven millions of souls perished within the space of one forty years.
Page 3.
In Hispaniola three millions. In five other small Isles near unto it, five
hundred thousand. Page 40.
In another country five millions in fifteen years. Page 68.
In another, five millions, where they laid wast above four hundred leagues of
fertile soil. Page 83.
In Peru above four millions. And this proportion belike holds throughout
all the West Indies. For they seek not to win the people to God, as our
foolish Priests give it out, but to get gold, and root out the natural
inhabitants, whom most unmercifully they wear out in the mines. Sequanus
Praefat. ib. page 16.
tells their manner: that when the Indies, which have been laboring al day
in the gold mines, come home in the evening, in stead of their supper, they are
stripped naked and bound hand and foot to a form, and whipped with whipcord
or a Bulls pizle. The^ scalding pitch or oil is powered upon them, and lastly,
their body thus rent with stripes, and scalded, is washed all over with salt
water, and so they lie save that sometime to heal them again, as their
masters in derision will tell them, they are put into the ground in a hole up
to the neck, and so stand all night. This is the manner of the conversion of
the West Indies, by the Papists own report that saw it, and detested it. In
the relating whereof I want words of mine own to lament it; I will use the
words of Niceph. Greg page 254.
a good Historiographer: O heavens, open your doors, and send thunder that may
worthily sound out this horrible calamity: astonish the nature of things
awhile, that the nature of things senseless may feel, and all Gods creatures
may help this unhappy nation to bewail their misery. For no mortal tongue is
sufficient, and the Jesuits increase it, by giving it out, that all this while
they are in converting, and the Priests are baptizing them into the Roman
faith, when the Spaniards are butchering them, as Paul. Fag. annot. in Chald.
paraph. Leuit. 18.21.
the Priests of Moloch, when they burned men's children to the Idol, danced and
plaide upon drums to make a noise, that no body should hear the pitiful cry
of the child frying in the fire.

8 And the Priests themselves that are sent over to convert them, are worst of
all. For Acosta the Jesuit De Ind. salut. procur. l. 4. c 3.
says, They teach the Indies to no purpose, but twice or thrice a week
repeat unto them the Creed and a few prayers, in the Spanish tongue, whereof
they understand not a syllable. And this, he says, is the exquisitest manner
that is used, to teach them a form of Catechism in the Indian tongue, without
either explaning it, or examining the party what he learns. Their teaching is
but a jest and a shadow, like as when one sings a song to get money, and
cares not greatly what he sings, nor how soon he gets it done, so he may
have his money: So the Priests greatly care not whether the Indian hearken his
catechizing or no, when he has gotten his money. And he says further of them,
that they follow covetousness, dicing, hunting, whordom, concubinage, and such
like, whereby baptism is made a scorn among the Indians, insomuch that many
times they are feign to be baptized against their wills. Hereupon it was, Page
11.
says Sequanus, that the king of Spain was counseled, that he should suffer
no more Priests to go into America, because of their unbridled and dissolute
life: whereof the Bishop, whom I mentioned before, writes more at large. Page
12.
He says, they which take upon them the cure of souls, are commonly all
idiots, and utterly ignorant, and barbarous, and extremely covetous and
vicious. Page 107.
And he tells of one whom himself examined, so fantastical and ignorant,
that he could not tell how to bless himself; and being demanded how he taught
the Indians committed to his charge, he said, he gave them to the devil, and
that it was enough for him to say, Per signum sancti crucis: and yet this man
had a town in commendam to ouersee their souls. He tells Page 4.
that millions of the people die without faith or sacraments; and Page 93.
that from the beginning they have had no more care to procure the people to be
taught in the faith of Christ, then if they had been dogs, but have forbidden
it rather: so that there is no more knowledge of God throughout the Indies,
except it be in Hispaniola, then there was an 100. years since. Yea Page 111.
he says, the Spaniards have purposely and effectually hindered the teaching
of religion, and driven away such as should have done it: Page 19.
and he shows how they taught it; for when they went a forraging to rob and
spoil the country people, when they came near any town, they used to make
proclamation, O yes, you Indians, be it known unto you, that there is one God,
one Pope, one king of Castile who is Lord of all these lands, come in and do
your homage, etc. The which being done, they would run upon the town, and
most cruelly burn it and all therein, men, women, and children, before ever
they knew of their approach. This is it that made Victoria in his public
readings in Spain, to say, the faith was never as yet sufficiently offered the
Indians to convert them.

9 And that we might yet more certainly know what kind of persons they be who
are boasted to have converted the new world, where the Protestants religion is
scarce heard of, he says, they are such gluttons, Page 5.
that one uses to eat and spoil in a day as much as would suffice 3.
households a month, accou^ting ten persons to a household: and Page 40.
writes, that armies of Spaniards did live sometime like Cannibals, eating
nothing but the flesh of the Indians, for the provision whereof an ordinary
shambles was kept in the camp, of the flesh of men and young children which
they roasted and fed upon, and many times men must be cruelly butchered, only
to have their hands and feet which the Spaniards counted a dainty dish. And
touching their fleshlinesse Page 5.
he says, any Captain durst adventure to ravish the greatest Queen or Lady
in the country: Page 48.
and some among them made a practice to get as many of the country women with
child as they could, to the end that being with child, they might sell them the
dearer for bondslaues: yea Page 108.
some had 14. wives apeece, or more. And so greedy were they of gold, Page 78.
that he thinks, if the devil had any for them, they would set upon him to
rob him: Page 51.
for the obtaining whereof an infinite sort have turned Pagan, and renounced
Jesus Christ. By which execrable behauior, says the Bishop, Page 111.
in stead of religion, they taught the people many odious vices, which before
they knew not, blasphemy, usury, lying: so that the committing them to the
Spaniards, is the giving them over to such as destroy both their bodies and
their souls. And briefly, Page 108.
says he, they believe nothing, but mock at all that is showed them of God,
being rooted in this opinion touching our God, that he is the worst, and most
unjust, and wicked of all gods, because he has such servants. And Page 15.
he tells of a Prince in the Isle of Cuba, who calling his people together,
showed them a casket full of gold and jewels, and told them, it was the
Spaniards god; and after they had danced a while about it, he threw it into a
river, because, says he, if they once get him from us, they will kill us: this
man was afterward taken by them, and burned quick: who being fastened to the
stake, a Friar comes to him, and tells him of God, and the matters of our
faith; the which if he would beleeeue, he might go to heaven; if not, he must
go to hell, there to be tormented for ever. The Prince after a little pause,
asked the Friar, if the Spaniards went to heaven, who answering, yea they did:
the Prince answered again, without any further deliberation, that then he would
not go to heaven, but to hell where he might once be free from that cruel
nation.

10 All this, and much more writes Bartolomaeus Casas, protesting oftentimes
over, that he sets not down the thousandth part of the cruelties used: and
we are enforced to believe it, because we read the like in diverse others that
have written of the discovery and conquest of those nations; and the best
friends the Pope has had, have complained of it. Victoria reading in the
schools Relect. 5.
said, We hear of many harmless people murdered and spoiled, and many Lords
thrust out of their possessions, and deprived of their territories: the like is
noted by others: and the Priests and Friars are charged to be both accessory
and principal in it: and the matters contained in the Priests Indian letters,
touching their miracles and holiness, are but fictions spread abroad to ward
off this infamy: the which if it be unjustly laid upon them, let them not blame
me, but their own writers who protest they saw it, and whose narrations I have
only related: being ready to show ten times as much out of other authors
likewise, as occasion shall serve. In the mean time I make this use of it,
that when I read our adversaries importunate bragges of their Posseuin. bibl.
select. l. 9. c 9.
catechizing the Indies, and baptizing them, such as this is, Sur. commen. ann.
1565.
Many of the Isles, and countries of the Indies, greedily embrace the faith,
and oftentimes whole cities are baptized; 15000. converted to Christin one
week: to think they have learned the lesson which Thales Milesius taught an
adulterer, to forswear the adultery when he had committed it: Diog. Laert.
lib. 1. in Thalet. (...).
for, says he, the perjury is no worse then the adultery. So think our
adversaries, that they may boldly forswear their cruelties and bloodshed
committed among the Indies, because the perjury and forgery whereby they deny
it, is no worse then the murder. But this is a desperate shift.

. 50. Lastly, let them show some space of time in which the Roman Church was
not since Christ and his Apostles: or in which is was not visible and known,
as we can show them many hundred years in which theirs was not, or else at
least, by their own confession, was not visible; as I proved Christ's true
Church must always be. Let them show when the profession of the ancient faith,
in any substantial point, did fail in the Roman Church, and when, and by
whom, the profession of a new faith began in it, as we can show when and by
whom this new faith of others began. Certain it is, that once the Roman
Church had the true faith, and was the true Church, to wit, when S. Paul said
to them, Vestra fides annuntiatur in vniuerso orb. Romans 1. Your faith is
renowned in the whole world: But when (as the learned and glorious martyr
Campian in Rationibus redditis academicis, ratione septima, urges) when, I
say, did Rome change the belief and profession of faith, so renowned, which
once it had? Quo tempore, quo Pontifice, qua via, qua vi, quibus incrementis
vrbem and orbem religio peruasit aliena? quas voces, quas turbas, quae lamenta
progenuit? Omnes orb reliquo fopiti sunt dum Roma, Roma inquam, noua
sacramentae, nouum sacrificium, nouum religionis dogma procuderet? Nullus
extitit historicus neque Latinus, neque Graecus, neque remotus, neque citimus,
qui rem tantam vel obscure iaceret in commentarios? At what time? vnderwhat
Pope? what way? with what force? with what augmentation or increase did a
strange religion ouerflow the City and the whole world? What speeches? what
rumors? what tumults? what troubles? what lamentations, at least, did it
breed? Was all the world asleep when Rome, Rome I say, the imperial and
mother City, did coin new sacraments, a new sacrifice, a new doctrine of faith
and religion? Was there no historiographer, neither Latin nor Greek, neither
far off nor near, who would at least obscurely cast into his commentaries
such a matter as this is? Certainly it is not possible that if such a thing had
happened, but it should have been resisted, or at the least recorded by some.
For suppose it were true which the Protestants imagine, that some points of
that religion which Rome holds at this day were as contrary to that which was
in it when S. Paul commended the Roman faith, as white is to black, light to
darkness; or so absurd as were now adays Iudaisme or paganism, or as
Holinshead says, it were the bringing them out of Gods blessing into the warm
Sun: Holinsh. descript. Britan. fol. 11. then I demand if it were now
possible that any Prince, in any Christian City, much more the Pope in Rome,
the mother City, could at this day, bring in any notable absurd rite, or
form, of Jewish or paganish religion; for example, to offer up an Ox in
sacrifice, or to worship a Cow as God; and not to practice it privately in his
own chapel, but to get it publicly preached and practiced in all Churches;
not only of Rome but of the rest of the Christian world, and that none should,
in Christian zeal, oppose themselves, no Bishop preach, no Doctor write
against this horrible innovation of faith, nor the author thereof? That none
should have that Christian constancy, which has been always seen when any
persecution was, to suffer martyrdom, in defense of their ancient faith? That
there should be never a true hearty Christian that would lament it? None that
would speak of it? No historiographer that would at least make some obscure
mention of it? Could all be so asleep that they could not note it? or so cold
and negligent of their souls good, as generally, without any care, to yield to
it? No certainly, though there were no promise to the Church of Christ's
continual presence, no assurance of his holy Spirits infallible assistance,
yet it is not possible that such a gross heresy could arise and ouerwhelme
the whole world without some resistance. The Bishops and Pastors could not be
so simple or so unmindful of their duty, but they would first note such an
evident contrariety to the ancient and universally received faith; and noting
it would, with common consent, resist, contradict, and finally according to S.
Paul's rule, Gal. 1. accurse it. If therefore this could not happen, nor never
did, at any time in like case, that any such gross error, or heresy, did or
could arise without noting and resisting: what reason can any one have to say,
that this has happened at Rome? and yet can bring no writer that did note the
thing, the time, and person, and what opposition was made against it, as in all
heresies that have truly sprung up of new, we can do. If there could not a
little ceremony be added to the Mass, but that it was set down in history
when, and by whom; how could the whole substance of the Mass, which consists
in consecration, oblation, consumption of the sacred host be newly invented,
and no mention made when, where, or by whom; or that there was such an
invention at all? If also historiographers were not afraid to note personal
and private vices of Popes, which they might well think those Popes would not
willingly have had published, why should they have feared to have recorded any
alteration in religion? which (if it had bin) had been a thing done by
themselves publicly in the view of the whole world. So that we may well
conclude, that if Christian religion had, since the Apostles time, altered in
Rome, it would have been recorded in histories, as other such alterations are,
and, if they should now happen, would be. But no mention being made in any
story that such an alteration was, it is sure no such was at all; no such
change of religion being at all, it is evident that the same faith and religion
which was in S Paul's time, has always continued and is there; now that which
was there then was the true faith, as appears by that high commendation which
S. Paul has left written of it: therefore that which is there now must needs
be the true Catholic faith, and that company which professes it, must needs
be the true Catholic Church.

The Answer.
1 It must be remembered, that the point which the Jesuit, in this place,
drives at, is to prove his Romish Church Catholic, that is, denying no point
of doctrine which in former times was universally received of the Catholic
Church, but holding the very same without any change. To prove this, he has
here furnished a popular speech, well conceited, it seems, by himself, and
much reported, I perceive, by the vulgar of his side: and because it fully
expresses the conceit of our country Papists, touching the antiquity of
their religion, and contains many speeches used by them in maintenance of
their heresy; and omitteth nothing of that which can be said against us in
this point: therefore I will answer it from point to point, plainly and
directly: desiring the reader to mark me diligently, and entreating my
adversary, whosoever he be in the cause, not to shut his eyes against reason,
when it is ready to convince him, nor to mistake any thing that I shall say,
but to apply it and compare it to that which is objected, as all Christian and
moderate minded men, in pursuit of the truth and peace ought to do.

2 The whole is thus contracted: There never was in times past, nor never shall
be in times present or to come, any alteration from the true faith to gross
heresy, such as the Roman religion is supposed to be, but four things fall
out withal. 1. Some space of time may be showed in which the said heresy was
not visibly known. 2. The time may be assigned when it began to rise, and the
truth to fail. 3. The persons are recorded that brought it in. 4. The Bishops
and people are known that note it, resist, lament, and curse it.

But there is no record extant that any of these things happened to the faith
of the present Church of Rome.



Ergo, It is the ancient Catholic faith without any change.

I answer, that both the Propositions are false. The first, because many times
the truth has been changed into error, where the circumstances mentioned
cannot be given. The second, because in many things holden by the Church of
Rome at this day, we can, out of good records, assign the time of the
alteration, with the circumstances. This my answer I will apply particularly to
all that the Jesuit says, as it lies in order, and so confirm it, reducing
every thing to one of the Propositions, whereto it belongs.

3 First, he requires us to show some space of time wherein the Roman Church
was not visibly known, ever since Christ, as he can show many hundred years
wherein our Church was not. This demand is satisfied already in the 47. sect.
and shall be further answered in that which follows, where that which he
says to prove it, is disproued. And though the Protestants confess their
Church to have been invisible (as I have expounded Digression 17.) yet that
will do the Jesuit no good; because we object more against his Church then so:
which objection he may easily assail with bragges and confidence, but can
never answer with truth and good divinity, as shall appear.

4 Next, he bids us show when the Roman Church failed in the profession of
the ancient faith which once it had, Romans 1.8. and who began the new: whereto I
answer, that these two circumstances, when, and by whom, may be showed in
diverse points; which is sufficient to disprove all the rest. See below, nu. 8.
and inde, where I name both the time and persons that changed some points:
which being so, there is no reason why the remainder of that religion, the
authors whereof are unknown, should be justified under pretense that we show
not the precise circumstances of the alteration; for we give sound and
sufficient reason why we need not do it: and to prepare the Jesuit and his
partakers to the hearing thereof, I propound Plutarch.
that famous problem which in times past the Greeks debated so curiously. The
ship Argos, wherein Jason sailed for the golden fleece, at his return, the
voyage being ended, was laid up in the road for a monument: where decaying by
little and little, they always peeced it anew where it wore away; till in the
end the whole substance of the old vessel was gone, and nothing remained
thereof, but only the reparations successively made in the room of the old.
Now the question was this, whether this ship (say it were Saint Peter's, to
gratify the Jesuit) were the same that he sailed in, when he lived, or
another new one, diverse from it? And whether my wise Athenian could precisely
tell, when and by what workman every piece was supplied, til the old was wholly
gone? for if that could not be showed, then by the Jesuits reason, it must be
reputed for the very Argosme wherein Jason made his voyage, without any
alteration.

5 But he says, it is not possible that so gross heresy, as we account
Papistrie to be, could arise and ouerwhelme the world, without some resistance:
the Bishops and Pastors of the Church could not be so careless, but they would
note and resist it, as the bringing in of any heathen or Jewish rite this day
into the Church, would be. Whereto I answer, that the Jesuit mistaketh
himself grossly, if he think his faith came in without resistance, or imagine
that we grant so much. For it was gainsaid in the rising, with Campians own
circumstances; the Pastors of Gods Church opposed themselves, the people
lamented, the writers mentioned it, as I plainly show in that which follows.
And although the particular circumstances of Time, Place and Persons
appertaining to this resistance, do not so evidently appear to us that now
live so far off from the change, yet that is by reason the said change was not
made in an instant, all at once, but came slily and slowly in: and we that now
live, have not records of all that fell out so long ago. We have sufficient
records of many things, but not of all particulars; the want whereof, arising
either from the scarsitie of writers in some ages, or the changers tyranny
suppressing all that was written, is the cause why the Jesuit may the boldlier
insult: Was there no historiographer that would mention such a matter? It is
one thing therefore to think there was no resistance at all, and another to
say, the particular circumstances of the resistances made against every several
point are not now extant. The former we utterly deny, the latter may be
granted; and of necessity must for these considerations, namely that a change
may have been in many points of the Romish faith, though we be not able to
yield the history or record of every particular circumstance that accompanied
it; for first we have no means to know what has been done formerly but by
histories and writings, which we want, or have in that scarsitie, that we may
safely resolve our selves, many things are wanting that were done. Secondly, we
have pregnant testimony of the change of some things, and as sufficient as we
desire; which is an undoubted reason that all the rest was changed also,
forasmuch as it stands all upon one ground, and one part thereof draws
another with it by necessary consequence. Thirdly it is agreed, that all error
whatsoever consists in changing from the truth, yet some there be, the
particular circumstances whereof are unknown. As for example, The Scribes and
Pharisees caught many things against the law, and Christ reproved them; yet the
time when those corruptions first came in, and the persons that devised them,
are unknown to us. Alphons. haer. l. 4. verb. Christ. haeres. 4.
In the Primitive Church there were a kind of heretics called Acephali,
because no man was found to be their head and master. Our adversaries suppose
the rejecting of Images to be a great heresy: yet can they not tell when it
began, nor who first brought it in. Alphons. haer. l. 8. verb. imag.
Some think Felix Orgelitanus, about the year 794. Sand. de imag l. 1. c.
vlt. Vazq. adorat. l. 2. disp. 2. c. 1.
Some say, the Marcionites and Manichees long before. Niceph. l. 16. c. 27.
Some, Xenaias a Persian. Bell. de Imag. c. 6.
Some think the Jews in their Talmud were the first. And our adversaries
cannot deny but themselves practice some things in their Church which were not
used in ancient times, and yet they cannot tell when they began, nor who
brought them in. Touching pardons, the case is clear. For Caietan Tract. de
Indulg. c. 1.
says, There is no certainty when they began. And concerning the use of
Organs in Churches, Baron an. 60. nu. 37. Bella de Missa. l. 2. c. 15.
it is unknown when and by whom it came in; save that Caiet. 22. q 91. Greg.
Val to. 3. pa. 1427. Nauar. de hotis canon. c. 16.
the most judicious Papists think that in the days of Thomas Aquinas, which
was 1300. years after Christ, the Church had them not. The which instances
make plain demonstration of that which I have answered, that there maybe a
change when the circumstances of time, place and persons are unknown to us
that live after.

6 The reason of this is yet further to be expounded. For the Romish faith came
into the Church as sickness does into the body, and ruin to a house; which
appears not by and by, at the first, but then when it is ripened: for the
children of God abiding still in the communion of the Roman Church (which they
did, not by allowing the material corruptions in faith whereinto she fell, but
by embracing that truth and good which she yet retained, and wanting means to
reform what was amiss) the cha^ges which successively she made in the faith,
were not so easily discovered, by reason there was yet no notable separation,
which is the only and most visible resistance that can be made. I say, Gods
children in all ages preserved themselves from consenting to the changes that
fell out in the substance of faith, but they did not always abandon the
communion of the Roman Church, which made the change: first, because she
changed not in an instant, but by degrees; and so consequently still held many
good things wherewith they communicated. Next, because the tyranny of Rome
suppressed them, so that they could not manifest abroad to the world their
mislike, whereby it might come to us; but by force and violence were
constrained to devour their own sorrow in the society of their adversaries.
The want of which departure from the Church of Rome, gives great color to her
innouations. When Arius and Nestorius, and such like heretics arose, they
violently and suddenly brake out of the Church, and forsook all communion: and
when Mahomet came from without, he visibly assaulted the whole Church: this
their sudden violence and separation, made them easily known to all the world:
but the Papacy breeding as a gangrene in the Church within, and corrupting the
pure doctrine but by little and little, was not so easily marked and discerned,
that it could so solemnly be resisted and registered, till it were ripened, and
Gods true Church mingled therewith, had means to discover it. So we read in
Mat. 13.25.
the parable of our Savior, how the tares were sown among the wheat: but who
the man was that sew them, and when, did not appear. The party, whosoever he
were, did it when the laborers were asleep, and so went his way: the tares he
left behind him, but himself was not seen: and when the husbandman was told of
it, he stood not disputing the matter as the Jesuit does here, with quo
tempore? quo Pontifice? qua via? qua vi? quibus incrementis? Were the workmen
all asleep? were they all so cold and negligent? For by this argument the
tares might have bin proved to be good corn: but it was sufficient for him to
epsy them when he came into the field, and to discern them from the wheat,
and to give charge to his servants, that they should not bind them up therewith.
And thus came the change of religion into the church of Rome as these tares
were sown in the husbandmans field.

7 Thus I have sufficiently showed, that for so much as we find the Romish faith
to be against the Scriptures, we have justly condemned it as heresy against
the Catholic faith; though we were not able to note any time when it began,
or person that first delivered it, or people that resisted it. But we have
another issue with our adversaries about the second proposition: wherein the
Jesuit, you see, with much confidence assumeth it, that there can be no proof
made of any time or persons wherein his Church altered the ancient faith. He
bids us show who brought in the profession of a new faith, and when the old
failed? He asks, at what time? under what Pope? what rumors, what
lamentations did it breed? what resistance was made against it? what
historiographer writ it? did none oppose themselves? and so concludes, that no
mention being made in any story, that such an alteration was, it is sure there
was no such at all. In which words, containing the sum of all that remains
in this section, he requires us to show two points: first, when the Church of
Rome changed her religion, and who they were therein that brought in a new
faith. Next, what resistance was made against her when she did so. Wherein I am
resolved the Jesuit speaks against his own knowledge, only to set a good
face on the matter. For is it possible he should be so ignorant as to imagine
these demands cannot be satisfied? Such as he is may speak boldly and
peremptorily, but they that trust them will be deceived; as I will plainly show
in the two next digressions, wherein I will out of sufficient records make
direct proof; first, that the beginning of many principal points of the
Romish faith may be showed, both concerning the time and the persons that began
them. Secondly, that in all ages the corruptions of that Church have been
resisted as they came in. The showing of which two points will fully answer all
that is contained in this section.

Digression. 51. Naming seven points of the Popish religion, with the time
when, and manner how they gate into the Church: thereby to show, that there is
sufficient record to detect the novelty of the present Roman faith.
8 This point in the matter of PARDONS is so clear, that it cannot be denied:
for the most learned Papists that are, acknowledge the use of them to be come
very lately into the Church. Which being so, it must necessarily be granted,
there is some thing altered and begun among them since the Apostles time.
Durand 4. d. 20. q. 3.
says, There are few things to be affirmed for certainty concerning Pardons:
because the Scripture speaks not expressly of them, and the Saints, Ambrose,
Hilary, Austin, Jerome, speak not of them at all. Caietan Tract. de Indulg. c.
1.
says, there can no certainty be found touching the beginning of Pardons:
there is no authority of the Scripture, or ancient fathers, Greek or Latin,
that brings it to our knowledge. Alphonsus Haeres. verbo Indulgen.
says, Their use seems to have come but lately into the Church. And
Henriquez the Jesuit Sum. moral. l. 7. c. 3. Scol.
says, There be certain late Divines which affirm, it is no rashness if a
man say, the use and practice of Indulgences is not from the Apostles times. If
there be no mention of them in the Scriptures, nor Fathers, nor in the ancient
Church, how can it be shifted off, but they had a late beginning, and so are
not Catholic?

9 The beginning of THE POPES SVPREMACIE usurped over other Bishops, was in
Boniface the third. For Fr. Duarenus a Papist De sacris eccl benefic. l. 1. c.
10.
writes, that with great ado he obtained of Phocas that he might be made the
universal and ecumenical Bishop: which authority (says he) his successors
have wonderfully enlarged: whereas in the beginning, as Respons. de priuileg.
patriar charum. in iure Graecoroman. tom. 1.
Balsamon a Greek writer witnesses, the five Patriarks were of equal honor,
and stood all in steed of one head over the whole body of the universal
Church. The beginning of his supremacy over Councels, was of late, since the
Councels of Sess. 4. and 5.
Constance and Sess. 2 and 18.
Basil; decreed within these hundred years, in the Council of Sess. 11.
Lateran by a few Italian Bishops: whereas in the ancient Church it was
otherwise. For Cedrenus a Greek historiographer Annal. p. 361. (...).
writes, that the oecumenicall or general Councels were so called, for that
by the command of the Emperor, the chief Bishops throughout the Roman
Empire were assembled. And Concord. l. 2. c. 25.
Cusanus a late Cardinal of the Church of Rome, says, how all the eight
general Councels were gathered by the Emperor. The beginning of his
supremacy claimed over Princes, was but of late. For Sigebert mentioning the
Popes proceeding against Henry the Emperor, about 300. years since, Chron.
ann. 1088. page 129. Idem Auentin. annal. Boio. l. 5. page 470.
says, Be it spoken with the leave of all good men, this novelty, that I say
not heresy, had not as yet sprung up in the world, that Gods Priests should
teach the people, that they owe no subjection to evil Princes: and though they
have sworn allegiance to him, yet they owe him no fidelity, neither shall be
counted perjured which think against the King: yea he that obeys him shall
be counted for excommunicate; and he that does against the King, shall be
absolved from the guilt of injustice and perjury. In which words we see how a
Friar of their own, 300. years since, calls that novelty and heresy that
now is cherished among our adversaries, and maintained for a piece of the
Catholic faith; and the Jesuit possible calls Campian a glorious Martyr,
because he was tied up for the practice thereof. For it is well enough known,
that neither he nor any other Priest were ever executed in the Queens time,
but only for publishing and practicing that which here you see Sigebert
calls Novelty. Besides, the Popes clawbacks (is it because they are beggarly
both in wealth and learning? as Fr. Victoria Relect. 1. de potest. eccles. page
39.
notes of them) now adays publish in print, Carer. potest. Romans Pont. l 2. c.
9. page 131.
that the power Imperial depends upon the Popes authority, and is
subordinate to it: and that the Pope has power to remove, revoke, correct, and
punish Kings: whose secular government is not merely necessary or expedient,
but when the Church cannot: and this (they say) is to be holden with the right
faith, as the natural, moral and divine law of God. This is a piece of the
present faith of the Church of Rome, the execution and practice whereof
affoordeth her such store of Martyrs in every kingdom. But that you may see
how vainly they brag of their uncontrolled antiquity, mark what Waldensis
has left written, almost three hundred years ago: he Tom. 1. p. 196. lib. 2.
art. 3. c. 78.
says, The regal power of Princes, is not by our mother the Church, used to
be set behind the priestly power, as if it were nothing of it self, but sprang
from it, and were the second after it. They err (he says) that affirm, the
root of earthly power hangs so much on the Pope, that by his commission the
execution of the same is derived to the Prince. Thus he writes in that book
which he calls the DOCTRINE OF THE ANCIENT FAITH, that we might see the
Church of Rome holds some things, which in the records of her own Court are
noted for Novelties, and late incrochments against the ancient faith.

10 The first restraint that ever was made of Priests marriage, was by Siritius
the Bishop of Rome, 380. years after Christ. For before that time it was
believed and practiced, that Priests might have wives as all other men, and
Siritius was the first that ever forbad it. The first part of this which I say,
that before his time married men exercised the ministry, is proved before
Digress. 49. number. 4. and is further proved by the confession of our adversaries
themselves. For Alphonsus Aduers. haeres. verb. Sacerdot. haeres. 4.
writes, that in the Primitive Church it was observed, that he which was
married might be promoted to priesthood, though it were not required of him that
he should first be married. And he adds, that this custom prevailed till the
times of the Nicene Council. The second part, that Siritius was the first that
forbad married Priests, appears, first by the decree it self, extant in D.
82. plurim.
the Canon law, next by the confession of our adversaries. For Inuen. l. 5. c.
4.
Polydore affirms it, and the Gloss upon the D. 84. Cum in praeterito.
Glos.. Qui sacrame^.
Canon law says, Siritius brought in the continency of Priests and Deacons,
yea some affirm, that of old, before the time of Siritius, Priests might
contract marriage. Index Expur. page 308. nu. 26.
This Gloss, Pius Quintus, the late Pope, has commanded to be wiped out,
because it is clear against the Papacy: but Nauclerus Tom. 2. generat. 13.
page 537.
says in effect as much, that Siritius commanded Deacons to be continent. And
Clictoueus De continen. sacerdot. c. 4. Quem refert^ Bellar. and Greg. Valent.
writes, that it is a commandment of the Church, first brought in by
Siritius, that married men should not be ordained Priests, unless from that
time forward they would contain. Here he confesses, that Siritius brought in
that Greg. Valent. to. 4. d. 9. q. 5. p. 5. 1. p. 1571. a.
which the Jesuits think to be the chiefest thing, whereunto the law of
single life binds. Thus Siritius began the matter, but yet ( Inuen. l. 5. c.
4.
says Polydore) it could never be effected, that their marriage should be taken
away till Gregory the seventh came to be Pope, in the year 1074. The which
thing when he attempted in Germany, as Sigeb. anno 1074. Lambert page 201 and
207. Auentin. annal. l. 5 Naucler. vol. 2. generat. 36. Baron. an. 1074. n. 37.
Sigon. reg Ital. l. 9. anno 1074.
the stories with one consent record, he was resisted, as one that brought in a
new custom, never received before. Auentine writes, Page 448.
that in those days Priests had wives openly as other men had, and begat
children, their wives being called by a seemly name, Presbyterissae. Page 460.
And when the Pope forbad them marriage, this, to many Bishops and other learned
and good men, seemed a new doctrine and a pestilent heresy as ever troubled
any Christian kingdom. And he says, the Bishops of Italy, Germany and France
met together, and for this cause decreed, that he had done against Christian
piety, and deposed him, for that, among diverse other things, he divorced men
and their wives, denying such as had their lawful wives, to be Priests, when
yet in the mean time he admitted to the altars whoremongers, adulterers, and
incestuous persons. Let any man judge if it had been possible the Bishops and
Clergy of Italy, France and Germany should thus bitterly have censured and
withstood this doctrine of Hildebrand, if the Church had received it always
before?

11 The Images of the Trinity, Posse^in. biblioth. l. 8. c. 16. Vasq. adorat.
l. 2 disp. 3. c. 3. Bellar. c. 8.
which the Church of Rome now uses and adoreth, came not in of seven hundred
years after Christ. For Can. 82. Carranz ibi.
the sixth general Council, holden anno 687. forbids the making of the holy
Ghost in the likeness of a Dove: and Apud Baron. an. 726. page 87.
Gregory the second, living anno 726. in an Epistle to Leo Isauricus, writes,
that in his time they used not to paint or represent God the Father. Upon which
words Baronius has noted in the margent, that AFTERWARD the custom grew to
paint God the Father, and the holy Ghost, in the Church. If it grew afterward,
then it was not used at the first.

12 So likewise the beginning of all image worship was in the second Nicen
Council: for Act. 7. Zonar. tom. 3. page 95. Geo. Cedren. Compen. p. 387
that decreed it. Whereas but a little before, when Serenus a Bishop in France,
in detestation thereof, had cast out of a Church, and broken certain images,
Gregory the Bishop of Rome Lib 7. Ep. 109
wrote unto him: The zeal which you had that nothing made with hands should be
worshipped, we commend, but we are of mind that you should not have broken
those images: for painting is therefore used in Churches, that they which are
unlearned might by sight read upon the walls that which in books they cannot.
Your brotherhood should therefore have spared the breaking of them, and yet
withal have kept the people from worshipping them; that such as are simple
might have had means whereby to come to the knowledge of the story, and yet
the people not sin in worshipping the picture. Which words show, that
howsoever he favored the historical use of images (which we deny not to have
been brought into the Church before his time) yet he condemned all worship of
them, as sin; which he could not have done, if the Church had believed the
contrary. And the proceeding of the Council of Frankford against the Nicen,
immediately after it was done, with the mislike that most men, then living, had
thereof, and the general grudge of all the Christian world against it, shows
this to be true that I say. Opus illustriss Caroli magni, etc. An. 1549.
The book of Charles the great, Bell. de imag. c. 14. Baron. an. 794. nu. 31.
containing the acts of the Council of Frankford, and confuting that of Nice,
is extant. And as soon as the decree of the Nicen Council came abroad and
was known, the faithful refused it, and spoke against it, as against a new
conceit never heard of before: Houeden. co^tinuat. Bedae ann. 792.
a good Historiographer writes, that Charles the king of France sent over into
England a book, containing the acts of a Synod (he means the second Nicen
Council) directed to him from Constantinople; wherein, out alas for grief,
many things are found inconvenient, and contrary to the true faith. Specially
because, by the uniform consent almost of all the Eastern Bishops, no less
then three hunndred, or more, it is confirmed, that images should be adored.
Which thing Gods Church altogether detesteth. Against which book Albinus wrote
an Epistle, maruellously confirmed by the authority of the Scriptures; and,
together with the book offered it to the king of France, in the name of our
Bishops and Nobles. The Bishop of Rhemes living at the same time, Refert Alan.
Cope. dial. 4. c. 18. p. 564.
writes thus: In the time of the Emperor Charles, by the commandment of the
Apostolic sea there was a general Council celebrated, the said Emperor
calling it, wherein, according to the path way of the Scriptures and tradition
of our ancestors, that false Synod of the Greeks was destroid and wholly
abrogated. And the Bishop of Orleance, at the same time likewise, Jonas de cult
imag. lib. 1.
writes, that the images of Saints, and stories of divine things may be
painted in the Church, not to be worshipped, but to be an ornament, and to
bring into the minds of simple people, things done and past. But, says he, to
adore the creature, or to give it any portion of divine honor, we count a vile
wickedness, and detest the doer of such a wickedness, and with open mouth we
proclaim him worthy to be accursed. Would so great Peers of the Church, and
that so universally, have thus bitterly taxed the Nicen Council, if it had not
brought in and begun a new doctrine? Did the Christian world thus exclaim
when nothing was altered? Wey their words well, and you will not think it.

13 The doctrine touching the merit of works, was begun lately by the
Schoolmen, for Waldensis Sacramental. tit. 1. cap. 7. p. 30
says, it is Pelagianisme, and charge them to have invented the terms of
condignitie, and congruitie, thereby to utter it. And it may easily be known
to be to by this, that the said Schoolmen agree no better in it. For it were
not possible they should be so contrary one to another therein, if it had been
a Catholic truth received from the beginning without alteration.

14 The Mass began not all at once, but by degrees. For the Latin language
came not in where the people understood it not, till the time of Gregory, six
hundred years after Christ, as Declarat. ad censur. theol. Paris. p. 153.
Erasmus affirms: the Church, in former times, using the Service in the
vulgar tongue. The transubstantiation, now believed to be therein, is acknowledged
by Scotus and Biel, to be no elder then the Council of Lateran. For so Tom. 3.
d 50 s^ct. 1. p. 628. c.
Suarez the Jesuit reports of the^: which report our adversaries are bound
to credit, coming from the mouth of so great a man of their own side. The
sacrifice conceited to be made therein, in the judgment of diverse learned
Papists, was not done by Christ. For Instit. moral. l. 1^. c. 8.
Azorius the Jesuit writes, that some Catholics deny that Christ offered up
himself under the form of bread and wine, in his last Supper. The which is
true indeed, and thence it follows that the opinion of such a sacrifice is
not founded on Christ's deed, but upon some later invention since him. And it is
very plain, that Thomas of Aquin three hundred years since knew it not. For
Qu. 83. art. 1.
disputing how Christ is sacrificed in the Eucharist, he answers, that he is
said so to be in two respects. First, because the ministration of the sacrament
is an image representing the passion of Christ, which is his true immolation:
and images use to be called by the names of those things whereof they are
images. Secondly, in respect of the effect of his passion, because by the
sacrament we are made partakers of the fruit of his passion: and, says he, as
concerning this second manner, it is proper to this sacrament, that Christ is
immolated, or sacrificed therein. These reasons of his, show that he knew no
such kind of sacrifice as the Church of Rome now defends, because the
celebration of the Eucharist being, in his opinion, but an image of the true
sacrifice of Christ, he could think it to be no true sacrifice univocally so
called, but only by external relation. And saying again, that Christ is
sacrificed therein, by reason we are made partakers of the fruit of his passion,
he shows clearly he knew no real sacrifice, because we are made partakers of
that even in Baptism also, where no man imagins Christ to be sacrificed. They
that are acquainted with Thomas manner of writing, will soon perceive, that had
he know nor believed such a sacrifice in the Mass as is now conceited, he
would have uttered it in other more effectual terms, and expressed it as
fully as the Jesuits have done since him. And touching the outward form of
the Mass, I need say no more then Cusanus the Cardinal has confessed. Ep 7.
p. 857.
He says, The Apostles made the sacrament of the Eucharist by saying the Pater
noster, as Saint Gregory affirms: and that diverse forms were used before one
Scolasticus came, who composed that which at this day our Church uses. The
which also is diverse according to the diversity of places. But we which live
under the Church of Rome have received the order of the Mass from the Bishops
of Rome themselves, who successively have added thereunto, one after another,
and so it comes to be a perfect Service or liturgy. This confession is
enough to show when many substantial points were brought, against former
antiquity, into the Mass. For at this day the Liturgy and rites thereof
contain many substantial errors, invocation of the dead, commemoration, and
intercession for souls in Purgatory, adoration, crossing, etc. all which by
this confession must necessarily be granted, to have been added successively
since the Apostles time.

15 I am weary of collecting these particulars, albeit the like may be done in
many more. And therefore I will show one way whereby any point of Papistry
whatsoever may be manifestly showed to be an alteration from that which was
first holden by the true Church, though the particular circumstances of the
change cannot be named: and that is the uncertainty and contradictions among
our adversaries touching the same, and the holding of it at one time in a far
other manner then they do at another: the which is a strong evidence to show
that it is but the invention of man's wit; for were it the old Catholic truth
without alteration, they could neither remove, nor contradict it among
themselves no more then they do the doctrine of the Trinity, or incarnation.
Hereof I will set down only two examples, that our adversaries may see their
turpitude, and young students in the controversies may be admonished what to
observe in reading the books of Papists, both old and new.

16 Touching the worship of images, the Church of Rome at this day, uses it,
teaching that all images must be adored; but the images of God and of Christ,
in a special manner, with the same worship wherewith we honor God himself,
which is divine honor. And this, Azo. instit. l. 9 c 6
the Jesuits say, is the constant opinion of all their Divines: yea Sess 25.
Azo (...) supra. Suat. co^. ^^^^p. 54. sect. 4.
the Council of Trent has so decreed it. But mark how long it was before
this opinion was ripe, and what uncertainty there is among themselves touching
it. For first, there was a time when the Church had no images at all, as I have
showed, Digress. 49. nu. 5. then, in process of time, through the faction of
private men, they gat in, against the minds and good liking of the godly, as
appears manifestly by the 36. Canon of the Elibertin Council, and the fact
of Epiphanius. And when they began thus to be let in, yet was it only for an
historical use, and to adorn their Churches, no worship at all being at the
first allowed them, more then we allow the pictures that are in the glass
windows of our Churches this day in England. This is proved by the records of
those times conuincing our very adversaries. For Cassander, persuaded by a
discourse of Saint Austins, Consult.
concludes thereupon, that there were no images in all the Churches of his
diocese. And Polydore Invent. l. 6. c. ^3.
writes, that by the testimony of Hierome it appears how in a manner all the
ancient holy fathers condemned the worship of images, for fear of idolatry.
Index. expur Belg. in Polyd. Vergil.
The which words the Papists, in the later editions of his book, have blotted
out. And Erasmus Cateches.
says, that by the testimony of sound and approved stories, it is clear, that
till Hieromes time, such as were of sound religion would endure no image,
either painted, or graven, to be set up in Churches, no not the Image of Christ
himself. And to put this that I say out of controversy, our adversaries are
not able to bring one testimony out of all antiquity, whereby it may be
convinced that the images of God, or Christ, or any Saint, were carved in
statues, and set up in the Churches to be adored and offered unto, as now they
are. They may show certain pictures and paintings in walls and windows for
other purposes; and they may muster up the fables of Christ's and his mothers
picture made by Saint Luke, the image that Christ sent to Abgarus, the image
erected by the woman of Syrophaenissa, the image made by Nicodemus, and such
like which are either untrue or impertinent: but one solid authority cannot be
given against that which I have said: our adversaries have long searched to
find it, and have wearied themselves with contending about it, but whatsoever
they bring proves nothing when it comes to the scanning. Afterward, in the
second Nicen Council, by a faction of unlearned and simple persons conspiring
together, at the suggestion of a graceless Empress, and upon silly grounds, a
decree passed to worship them: the which notwithstanding was refused as
impious, by the Bishops of England, France, and Germany, in the Council of
Frankford, which was a general and full Council, Abb. Vrsperg. an. 793. p.
1^7.
consisting of many Bishops out of all the Provinces of the Empire, Rhegnio.
an. 794 p. 30.
and the Popes own Legates, if any would deny it to be a lawful general
Council. Yea this worship thus decreed was not allowed long after, nor is not
to this day, by many great and skillful Papists, for among the Schoolmen and
later divines of the Church of Rome, there be Ho^k Sect. 137. ^. in Sap. Dura.
3. d. 9. q. 2. Alex. 3. q. 30. art. 3. Mirand. apoloog qu. 3. Alphons. Haeres.
verb. Adoratio. haer. 2. Council. Mog^nt. an. 1549. sub Sebast. c. 41 and 42.
diverse that say, No worship at all is due to an image, neither is it lawful
to worship it. But for so much as by the Image of Christ we are stirred up to
ado^e Christ, and before it make our adoration to him, therefore we are said to
adore the image. And yet Act. 4. and 7.
the worship, allowed by that Council, was far short of that which the Church
of Rome now gives. For it was not that which is called Latria, divine honor,
but the lesser worship consisting in the external reverence, and being
inferior to that which is given to the samplar. And Gabr. 3. d. 9 q. vnica.
concl. 7. and lect. in Can. 49. R. Aquil. 3. d 9. Petes. tract. de imag. p.
228. Catharin. opusc. de cult. imag. de Consecr. d. 3. Venerabiles. gl.. Cultu.
Sand. imag. c. 17.
many of the Schoolmen and others go no further. Till at the last, in the
days of Thomas Aquinas Tho part. 3. q. 25. art. 3. and ibi Caiet. Suar. Grego.
valent.
the conceit waxed bigger, and grew to that which it now is, that the crucifix,
and image of Christ, must be adored with the same honor that himself is, yea
that honor staieth in the very image. And by this one example the reader may
perceive how the several articles of Papistrie have increased by degrees, and
how they have been held at one time otherwise then at another, the learned of
that Church always removing them, that it is impossible they should be certain
what to hold.

17 Another example shall be touching original sin. For our first parents Ada^
and Eve, having sinned against God, left the effect of that their sin in all
mankind, their posterity; whereby they are born the children of wrath, as the
Apostle testifies, Ephesians. 2.3. This effect we call original sin, and our
adversaries, at this day, define it to be no more but Bell. de amiss. gra. l.
5. c. 17. Andrad. Ortho. expl. l. 3. p. 217.
the want of original justice, and a certain crookedness of the will wherein
he is borne, which makes him odious to God by nature: exempting the
concupiscence and corruption of nature that remains in the regenerate, and
all that are baptized, as if it were no part of this, or any sin. Which is but
a late device set abroach to maintain the perfection and merit of our works.
For the Master of Sentences, in his time, L. 2. d. 30.. Nunc superest. and
inde.
held it to be our natural concupiscence; expounding this concupiscence to be
a quality in the soul, arising from our flesh, propagated to us from our
parents, and stirring us up to sin. Thus according to the truth (wherein the
Jesuits now refuse him) teaching original sin to be a habit distinguished
from the natural faculties of the soul, and coming into them through the fall
of Adam, and there dwelling positiuely as a corrupt quality. This opinion had
Al^i^^ou. l. 2. tract. 2^ c 2. Greg. Arim 2. q. 30 art. 2. Hen. Gandau. quodl.
2. q. 11.
diverse partakers: and Ariminensis, that himself held it, says, many both of
his time and of old, favored it. Whereby it appears that the modern opinion
of our adversaries was not the Catholic received doctrine of that time. And
because then they were not so confident in their opinions as now they are,
there were othersome that held original sin to be nothing else but the sin
of Adam derived to us by the effects, whereby we are made culpable, by bearing
the imputation of that which he did. The which opinion is defective only in
this, that it restrains the sin to that which is but one part thereof. For
it consists in this and more. Yet it was holden in Lombards time, as himself
reports, and since, by Pigh contr. 1. p. 32 Catharin. de casu hom. and
peccat. orig. p. 182
no small men in the Church of Rome: and Occham so liked it, that he 2. qu.
vlt. v.
professes he would hold it, but for the reverence of some holy men, which
seem to say, that original sin is the want of that justice which should be
in us. And Catharinus says, that having conferred it with many men exactly
learned, and good Catholics, they liked it exceedingly. Whereby we may see
the present opinion, offered us at this day by the Jesuits, is not so
universal as they say it is, when the former ages so little favored it; and if
Catharinus say true, the very age now running may also be jealous of it for any
thing we know, and remove it again, when the masters of their Schools
please, as they formerly have done.

Digression. 52. Showing that the present religion of the Roman Church was
observed and resisted in all ages, as it came in and increased: naming withal,
the Persons that made the resistance; and the Points wherein; and the Time
when; from fifty years to fifty, throughout all ages since Christ:
compendiously observed out of history, for the satisfying of their error that
so much conceit the antiquity of Papistry, and think it was never controlled
till Luthers time.
18 Again the Jesuit, with much rhetoric and confidence, asks, What
voices, what stirs, what lamentations were heard when Rome brought in a new
faith? Were all asleep? did none resist? no Bishop preach? no Doctor write
against the alteration? none to suffer martyrdom? never a true hearted
Christian to lament it? no Historiographer, neither Greek nor Latin, far nor
near, to make at least some obscure mention of such a matter in his
commentaries? You see what a face he sets on the matter, and yet all
Histories confute him; for I never saw ancient history Greek or Latin (and yet
I have seen and read those Camp. rat. 7. Possen. bibliot. select. l 7. c. 23.
which our adversaries reckon up for the best and most ancient) but it
contains some notable memory of alterations made in the Roman Church,
observed and lamented by some or other then living. For which cause our
adversaries, at this day have taken exception against every one of them, and
charged each particular author either with falsifying the truth themselves, or
with being falsified by others; which needed not if they contained nothing in
disproofe of that which here the Jesuit has boasted. Yea the Jesuit himself
would lay this very imputation upon them, if he should be driven to answer that
which is produced out of them. And then the case would be altered, for he might
say no more, was there no Historiographer t Greek or Latin? but you should see
he would answer in another tune, There are Historiographers, Greek and Latin,
far and near, that have mentioned such a matter, but they are all liers. For
Eusebius, Socrates, and Sozomen were all 3. of the^ heretics and liers.
Nicephorus a lier. Benno full of impudent lies. Auentine a beastly lier.
Marianus Scotus a manifest lier. Sigebert a lier for the whetstone, O the
fraud, imposture, villainy of that he has written! And thus they will
intertaine whatsoever is produced against them, as I have noted Digression 47.
nu. 12. and for the further manifestation of that I say, there is not one of
seventeen histories, reckoned up by Posseuin for the chief, but Caesar
Baronius, in his late Annals, has attainted him.

19 Again, what need they make the matter so fair, and so insolently call
upon us to show who resisted them, when themselves have destroyed and corrupted
many authors whereby it should be shown? Auentine Annal. Be^^. l. 5. page 455.
writes of Pope Hildebrand, that for the cloaking of his ambition, he devised
fables, corrupted chronicles, razed out the things that were done, and
adulterated the sacred oracles. Thus they make away the evidence, and then bid
us show who resisted them. Let them restore us the writings of Wickliffe,
Dantes, Ockam, Marsilius and others, out of their ashes, and Italian libraries,
where they lie buried, and we will answer them. For in the Popes own Library
are books both Latin and Greek, written against his primacie, as is testified
by Dial. 4. c. 19.
Alan Cope; which is sign sufficient that the Papacy was resisted before
Luther was borne: yea Bristo in the preface of his Motives, writes, that
scarce any piece or article of the Roman faith, but by one or other first or
last, it has been called in question.

20 This I will show particularly in every age, so far as the title of this
Digression binds me, and the Jesuits demand requires: WAS THERE NONE THAT
WOULD SPEAK AGAINST IT? NONE THAT NOTED IT? For in the first 600 years there
was no substantial or fundamental innovation received into the Church; the
present Roman faith, touching such points, being yet either vnhatched, or
received by known heretics: only the mystery of iniquity, 2 Thessalonians. 2.7.
that began to work in the Apostles time, increased by the heresy and
ignorance, and superstition of some that daily corrupted Eusebius. hist l. 3. c.
32. and l. 4. c. 22. Niceph. l. 4. c. 7.
the truth. For the stories remember us of a saying of Hegesippus, that the
Church continued a virgin undefiled, as long as the Apostles lived: but when
that generation was passed, the conspiracy of wicked heresy, through the
seducement of those which taught other doctrine, took beginning. But hereof
Act. 20.28. Phil. 3.18.
the Apostles gave warning, even with tears, and (...). Basil. ep. 70.
the ancient Fathers complained, that we may see the Papacy to have been
resisted when it was yet in the Cockatrice egg.

21 After 600. years were expired, that the several points I name Alphons. v.
imago.
Serenus the bishop of Marsils in France, who brake the Images that began to be
set up in his Diocese. And Gregory the Bishop of Rome, L. 4. ep. 32.34.38.39.
resisting the supremacy: and Plat. Bonif. 3.
the whole Greek Church complaining when Phocas had first conferred it on
Boniface.

Sext. Syn. Can. 13.
decreeing the marriage of Priests, against the Church of Rome laboring to
restrain it, Carranz. in Can. 82.
and forbidding to make the holy Ghost in the likeness of a Dove. Council.
Bracar. 3. c. 1.
The Council holden in Portugal, where the cup is appointed to be ministered
to the people in the Sacrament, against the practice of some that used to dip
the bread, and so give it; which was one beginning of the half Communion.

Synod. c. 138. Zon. tom. 3. page 84.
the general Council of Constantinople, under Leo Isaurus, against Images:
Illyric. catal. test. tom. 1. page 633.
and Clemens, Scotus, and Adelbartus, who preached against the supremacy,
traditions, images, and in the defense of Priests marriage, also against
Purgatory and Masses for the dead; and were therefore persecuted by Zachary the
Pope: which is the reason why in some histories they are so hardly censured.

Zon. tom. 3. page 88. Synod. c. 141.
the Council of Constantinople under Constantinus Copronymus, and Rhegino.
chro. l. 2.
of Franckford under Charles the great, against images: and the book yet
extant that he caused to be made against the second Nicene Council; with
another set forth by Ludouicus his son, to the same effect: both which are to
be seen at this day.

Danae. resp. de Euchar. l. 1. c. 1.
who resisting the real presence, which in that time some private men began to
set on foot, was therefore murdered. The same time Bertram also writ against
it, whose book is extant. Tr^heinius Catal. script.
says of him, that he was a man very skillful in the Scriptures, exceedingly
learned, and of a holy life. Jonas Aurel. de cult. imag.
Claudius the Bishop of Towers in France, resisted Images, worship of Saints,
and pilgrimage. Anast. vit. Pont. in Serg. 2.
Lotharius the Emperor reduced the Pope to the obedience of the Empire, for
which cause he sent three Archbishops, twenty Bishops, and diverse noble men to
Rome, who disputed against him and confuted him.

Ep. Nicol ad Michael.
Michael the Emperor, and Phorius the Patriarch of Constantinople, resisting
the Popes supremacy: Anast. in Nicol 1.
as also did the Bishop of Rauenna.

Fascic. temp. page 68.
an ancient history mentioning the same, complains, Alas, alas, Lord God,
how is gold obscured, and the color changed! What offenses do we read to have
happened about these times, even in the holy Apostolic seat, which hitherto
with such zeal thou preseruedst! What contentions, emulations, sects, enuies,
ambitions, intrusions, persecutions! O the worst time that ever was, wherein
the holy failed, and truths are diminished from the sons of men. To the same
effect An. 912. nu. 8.
writes Baronius: What was then the face of the holy Roman Church? how filthy
was it when potent and withal base whores bare all the sway at Rome? at whose
lust seas were changed, Bishops were bestowed, and that which is horrible to
hear, and not to be uttered, their lovers were thrust into Saint Peter's
chair. In such times as these were, the Reader may easily think there was
matter enough in the Roman Church that deserved resistance. As Osbern. vit. S.
Odonis. quem refert Fox. in Martyrol. page 1039.
certain of the English Clergy maintained the Sacrament to be only a figure
of the body and blood of Christ, against the real presence then increasing.

Sigon. Reg. Ital. l. 7. an 963.
Otho the great, that deposed John the Pope, and assumed into his hands the
nominating and making of Popes hereafter; which was a manifest resistance made
against the growth of the Primacie. Homil. Saxon Aelfr.
Aelfricus the Archbishop of Canterbury, that preached and published his
homilies against the real presence coming in. And I name Refert Baron. an.
992. nu. 22.
Arnulphus, who in a Synod holden at Rhemes, noted the Pope to be Antichrist:
O Rome (says he) to be lamented, which to our ancestors yeeldedst shining
lights of Fathers, in our time sendest monstrous darkness, which in the age to
come shall be infamous. What, o ye reverend fathers, what (I say) think ye him
to be, which sits thus in a lofty throne, in purple robes and glittering
gold? Certainly if he be void of charity, lifted and puffed up only with
knowledge, he is Antichrist, sitting in the temple of God, and showing himself
as if he were God: but if he want both charity and knowledge, then is he an
idol, and to seek to him for answer, is to enquire of the marble stones.

Homil. Dominic. in Sept. and 18. Dominic. post Trin. ho. 1.
merits, and 18. Dom Trin. hom. 2.
ability to keep the law. His. l. 2. c. 4. que^ refert Baron.
Glaber Rodulphus, that wrote how the Bishop of Rome should have nothing to do
in another man's Diocese; the which he also says was the opinion of all the
Prelates in France. Baron. an. 100 4. nu. 5.
Leuthericus an Archbishop in France, denying the real presence.

D. 31. omnino. Gl.
Nicetas an Abbot, and Auent. annal. Bo^o. l. 5.
the Bishops of Italy, France and Germany resisting Hildebrand, and deposing
him, when he would restrain the Clergy from marriage. Sigeb chron. an. 1077.
Henry the third, the Emperor, with his Council of Nobles and Bishops, holden
at Worms, withstood the Popes supremacy now usurped, and judged him to be
deposed. And Sigebert a writer living at that time, Chron. an. 1088.
noted the Popes excommunicating of Princes, and absoluing their subjects from
obedience, and calls it novelty and heresy. The same time Naucler. vol. 2.
gener. 36. Sigeb. an. 1051.
Berengarius, in France, resisted the real presence: and though the tyranny
of the Pope oppressed him, Refert Baron. an. 1079 nu. 2.
yet many were still of his mind, De Sacram. c. 19 page 17.
but they could not so easily be noted, says Waldensis. Hildeb. Ceno^.
epitaph. Beren. apud Malmesb. l. 3.
This Berengarius was reputed a good man and holy, though his enemies the Popes
creatures, have railed upon him.

Naucle. vol. 2. genesis 37. pa. ^07. Sigon reg. Ital. an. 11 11. l. 10.
Henry the fifth, the Emperor, who against Paschalis then being Pope,
maintained his right of making Bishops, and other privileges that belonged to
his ancestors, which now the Pope usurps. I name Bernard, who though he were
superstitious in some points, yet freely noted diverse corruptions then coming
in, whereby we know they arose not without resistance. He is clear against Ep.
174. ad Can Lugd.
the feast of the Conception; whereby the conceit of the virgin Mary's freedom
from sin should be maintained: against Se^. 1. de Annunt.
merits, Cant. ser. 22. and ep. 19^.
justification by works, De gr^t and lib arb.
freewill, Cant. s^r. 5^.
keeping the law, Se^. 1. de ^oena Dom.
seven sacraments, and Ep. 107.
uncertainty of our salvation, and L. 2. consid ad Eugen.
the Popes greatness in temporalties. The same time, says In Honorio 2.
Platina, Arnulful a famous preacher was murdered at Rome by the Clergy
there, because he bitterly inueyed against their lust and wantonness, and
reproved their pomp, and raking together of riches: hence it was that their
hatred and anger was stirred up, to the destruction of him that meant well.
Chr. Massae. chro. l. 16. ann. 1124.
The same time one preached in Antwerpe against the real presence. And
Honorius noted the bringing in of wafers into the Sacrament, the which thing (
Cassand. Liturgic. c. 27. page 66. 68.
says Cassander) the author of the exposition of the Roman order took most
grievously, that the loaves of bread offered in certain Churches for the use
of the sacrifice, after the custom of the ancient Church, should thus be
brought from the form of true bread to so slight and slender a form, after the
likeness of plates or pieces of money: and (says he) in contempt he calls
them Minutias number mulariarum oblatarum.
scraps of offered plate, and ascribes to them a lightness like an image or
shadow, and thinks them for their slenderness unworthy the name of bread:
thus prosecuting them with more bitter words then these.

Naucler. vol. 2 page 83^. genesis 39
the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa, forbidding appeals to Rome, and the coming
of Legates from Rome into Germany, and other tricks of the Popes pride. I name
Lincolniensis, that noted the novelty and heresy of Friars. Refert Wickl. in
Trialog. l. 4. c. 26. 143.
He said, the definition of a Friar was, a dead carcass risen out of his
grave, wrapped in a winding sheet, and carried among men by the devil. I name
the Waldenses, dispersed over all this part of the world, who in the most
substantial points resisted the Papacy to the shedding of their blood. Naucler.
vol. 2 genesis 47. p. 1033. Hosiand. Cent. 12. c. 5.
Their opinions were these, among some errors Io. Marian. Hisp. de reb. Hisp.
l. 12. c. 1.
that are falsely imposed upon them: that the Pope is no greater then another
Bishop: that there is no Purgatory: that it is in vain to pray for the dead:
that Masses for the dead were the invention of covetous Priests: that Images
should be abolished, and the hallowing of water and other creatures: that the
word of God should be freely preached to al men: that Friars shrift, and the
use of oil in Baptism, were the inventions of men. They contemned the Mass,
and all that belongs to it, and prayer to Saints, and Canonical hours, and
thought a man might work any day except the Lords. They misliked fasting days
and distinction of meats, and the single life of votaries. They defended the
reading of the Scripture by the Laity, and received it as the judge of
controversies, and thought there were but two sacraments, as we do: and that
the Communion should be ministered in both kinds to the people: and that Rome
was Babylon, and the Pope had no right to the supremacy.

Cario. chron. an. 1202.
that was burned for withstanding altars, images, invocation of Saints, and
Transubstantiation. Math. Paris.
Robert the Bishop of Lincoln, that withstood the Popes proceedings in
England. Ioachim Abbas Rog. Houed. an. 1190.
said, Antichrist was borne in Rome, and should sit in the Apostolic sea.
Auent. annal. Boi. l. 7. pa. 535.
Frederick the second, as his ancestors had done before him, resisted the Popes
usurped supremacy. Magd. Cent. 13. c. 5. Hosiand Cent. 13. c. 10. lib. 1.
Arnoldus Villanouanus spoke against the Friars, and the sacrifice of the
Mass, and Papal decrees. Euerardus an Archbishop in Germany, in an assembly
of Bishops at Regenspurge, Auent. l. 7. page 546.
spoke thus of the Pope: Hildebrand, under color of religion, laid the
foundations of the kingdom of Antichrist. He was the first that began this
mischievous war, which his successors have continued to this day. These
Priests of Babylon will reign alone, they can bear no equal, they will never
rest till they have trampled all things under their feet, and sit in the
temple of God, and be exalted above every thing that is worshipped. He which is
the servant of servants, coueteth to be the Lord of Lords, as if he were God:
his brethrens counsel, yea the counsel of his master he despises. He
speaks great things as if he were God. In his breast he casts new devices,
whereby to raise a kingdom to himself. He changes laws, and confirms his
own: he defiles, plucketh down, spoileth, deceives, murdereth: thus does
that child of perdition (whom they use to call Antichrist) in whose forehead is
written the name of blasphemy, I am God, I cannot err; he sits in the
temple of God, and bears rule far and near.

Magd. Cent. 13. c. 5.
Gulielmus de S. Amore. withstanding the Friars and their abuses. Crantz.
Metrop. l. 8. c. 16. Refert Illyr. Catal.
The Preachers in Sweden that publicly taught, the Pope and his Bishops to be
heretics. Panor. de Iudicijs. c. Nouit ille. Naucler. vol. 2. genesis 45.
Dantes the Florentine wrote in a book, that the Empire descended not from the
Pope; for the which cause, after his death they condemned him of heresy. About
the same time also lived Gulielmus Altisiodorensis an ancient schoolman, in
whose Sums are found many things confuted, that then were coming in, and
maintained by others; the which because I have partly observed throughout this
my answer, by alleging him against the Jesuit, I will not now stand to
produce.

Defensor pacis.
in which book is to be seen the confutation of all such reasons as were made
to prove him the head of the Church. I name Occham the school-man, Beside his
own works see Sleid. comment. l. 2. Auent annal. l. 7. p. 628 Naucl. vol. 2.
genesis 45. p. 1003.
who exceeding vehemently writ against the Popes authority over Kings (a great
article of the Roman faith this day in England) and Councels: Trithem. de
Scriptor.
he told the Emperor, that if he would defend him with the sword, he again
would defend him with the word. And as he resisted the Primacie, so did he
confute many errors now holden by the Church of Rome, and confirms that which
is our faith in not a few points, as may be seen in his book upon the
Sentences. I name Gregorius Ariminensis, who in his book upon the Sentences
has diligently confuted that which is now holden by the church of Rome
touching Predestination, Original sin, Freewill, the merit of works, and
other matters. Illyr. catal. tom. 2. page 797.
The same time the University of Paris condemned the Popes pardons.

De Planctu ecclesiae.
of the lamentation of the Church, wherein he reproves diverse abuses of his
time. Fox acts and mon. page 38^.
And Mountziger, who in the University of Vlms, openly disputed against
Transubstantiation, and adoration of the Sacrament. I name Michael Cesenas,
Illyr. catal. tom. 2.
who said, the Pope was Antichrist, and Rome Babylon, and held there were two
Churches; one of the wicked, wherein the Pope reigned, which was a flourishing
Church; the other of the godly, an afflicted Church: and he complained that the
truth was almost extinguished. The same time also lived John Wickliffe, and
infinite more with him in England, whom in that time they called Lolards,
resisting Papistry to the shedding of their blood.

Plowmans tale.
writ, the Pope and his Clergy to be Antichrist. The same time Nilus wrote his
book against Purgatory and the Popes supremacy: and John Hus, Jerome of
Prage, and the Churches in Bohemia notoriously resisted the Papacy. Naucler.
vol. 2 genesis 47. p. 1033.
Their doctrine was the same with that of the Waldenses.

Bucholch. chronol. Naucler vol. 2. genesis 51. Illyr. catal. tom. 2. p. 890.
who preached that the time was come wherein God would renew his Church, that
the Church needed reformation; he affirmed that the Pope taught not the
doctrine of Christ, he maintained the communion under both kinds, and held
against traditions, justification by works, and the Popes supremacy. The same
time Wesselus Groningensis, and Ioannes de Vesalia were famous for holding
against merits, freewill, traditions, pardons, shrift, fasting days,
pilgrimages, extreme unction, confirmation, and the primacie. In England also
and Bohemia lived those which followed the doctrine of Wickliffe and Hus,
continuing the same till Luther.



40 And touching the catalogue that I have set down, I warn the Reader of two
things: Note.
first, that I have not set down all, either that lived or are recorded in the
several ages nominated; but only some few for example, to answer the Jesuits
demand: by which few you may easily gather there were many more, when so
learned men never use to want partakers, howsoever the tyranny and oppression
of their adverse part may keep them under. Next, my meaning is not to justify
every one that I have named to have been free from error, and a full Protestant
in every point, (though many were so in every point fundamental) but only to
show that the Papacy in all ages was resisted as it came forward, which the
Jesuit denies. If it be replied, that these persons were heretics condemned
by the Church; I answer, first the Jesuit bids us name, who resisted Rome,
were all asleep, none to observe the change? etc. and I name these; whereunto
it is no sufficient answer to say, they were heretics, because it vpholdeth
not the question; and one heretic may be able to detect another; and the
Jesuit should not make his challenge so broad as to say, No mention is made in
any story of such an alteration. Next, it cannot be proved that these were
heretics. For one part of them is the Greek Church, another part is some
ancient Divines of their own Church, a third part is such as the Roman Church
persecuted. The second are sound and lawful witnesses, being the true Church
of God to this day, though polluted with some errors. The second, though
Papists in many points, yet show against al exception, those points wherein
they were no Papists, to have been no part of the Catholic faith, so called,
in their time; for then they would not have resisted them, but embrace them as
they do all the rest. The third part I grant the Church of Rome then
persecuted, and now calls heretics, but that is the question, whether they
or their persecutors were the essential parts of the Church: and this must be
decided by the Scriptures only. For our adversaries say, they are the true
Church, and prove it by their antiquity without resistance: both which we
deny, showing the contrary in the precedent catologue, which catologue when
they will disprove again, by replying, the men contained therein were
condemned for heretics by the Roman Church; who sees not this to be a
retiring back again to the question, when that is brought to maintain the
question which is the question it self?

. 51. Neither do I see what answer can with probability be forged against this
reason. For to say, that the errors of the Church of Rome crept in by little
and little, and so were not espied for the littleness of the thing, or for the
negligence of the Pastors that lived in those days, is refuted already. For
first those matters, which the Protestants call errors in the Roman Church, be
not so little matters, but that less in the like kind are ordinarily recorded
in stories. Nay some of them, in their conceits, (and consequently if men of
old time had been Protestants, they would have been so also in their conceits)
as gross superstition as was in paganism it self: namely to adore Christ as
present in the Eucharist, which Protestants hold Really to be but a bare piece
of bread: also their use of Images, which they account to be idolatry, and
say, very ignorantly and maliciously, that we adore stocks and stones as the
painims did; the which things could not have crept in so by little and little,
but they must needs be espied. Neither could the Pastors of any time be so
simple or ignorant, so sleepie or negligent, but they must needs have seen,
and seeing must needs, in some sort, have resisted, as before I said. For, to
imagine all the Pastors of any one age at once to have been in such a deep
Lethargicall sleep, that they could not only not perceive when the enemy did
ouersow the cockle secretly in the hearts of some, but also when it grew to
outward action and public practice, and so could not be but most apparent, (as
the cockle secretly sown, when it grew and brought forth fruit, did appear
and was well known and perceived, Matthew. 13.) I say, to imagine all the
Pastors to be so simple and sleepie not to mark it then, or not to resist it,
is rather a dream of a proud man in his sleep, who is apt to think all
fools besides himself, then a judicial conceit of a waking man of any
understanding, who ought to think of things passed either according to the
verity recorded in stories; or when this fails, by consideration of the
likelihood of that which he thinks was done by men of that time, with that
which most men would now do in the like case. Finally, if this were so that the
Church did universally err, Neglexerit officium Spiritus sanctus (as
Tertullian speaks lib. de praescript. refuting the same cavil of heretics)
the holy Ghost should have neglected his office, which is, as we have out of
Scripture, not to permit the universal Church to fall into any error, but to
suggest all things that Christ said unto it, and to teach it all truth.

The Answer.
1 The Jesuit has said, that if religion had altered in Rome since the
Apostles time, it would have been recorded in some story, that such an
alteration was: But there is no mention in any story of any such alteration.
Therefore it is sure no such was at all. In which argument I have showed both
Propositions to be false, in my answer to it in the whole former section. But
the Jesuit supposes only two things can be objected against it: either that
the errors as they grew were small, coming in by little and little, and so were
not espied for their smalnesse; or else that the Pastors, which should have
espied them, were all asleep, which he says could not be. Whereunto I answer.

2 And first to his last exception. For I grant the Pastors, nor people
neither, were not all asleep, but waking, and saw the corruptions, at least
when they came to public practice, as I have showed by induction of al ages,
in the former section. Only we say, the number both of Pastors and people
decayed daily through the Popes tyranny, that, after eight hundred years were
expired, increased exceedingly, and oppressed the true servants of Christ.
Which oppression used against the Saints, joined with his strong delusions, and
the multitude seduced thereby, caused that the warning they gave could not be
heard, and what was heard could not be credited, and what was heard and
credited, could not, the one half, come to our ears that live now so long
after them. It is one thing therefore to say: the Pastors were asleep and saw
it not, when the enemy first meditated and devised the point of Papistry that
was sown; and another to think they were all asleep when it grew up and
showed it self. The former we grant: the later we utterly deny. Again, it is
one thing to say, the world was asleep when the Pastors gave warning, and
another thing to hold the Pastors were all asleep that should give warning. This
later is but the Jesuits conceit, for we never said it: the former is the
truth, and he cannot disprove it. Whence it follows, that still the holy
Ghost performed his office, and evermore led the Catholic Church into all
truth, and gave it warning of error, and suggested the words of Christ unto it:
but the Papacy was not that Church, whose children had no ears to hear and
receive the warning.

3 Next, to the first exception: I answer, the Jesuit has falsified our
saying; for we do not say, the corruptions were not espied for the littleness
of the things, as if they had been so small that they could not be seen; for
by that reason, as himself well observes, the worship of the sacrament and
images should be no small matter: but we affirm that these great corruptions,
and all the rest whatsoever, came in first one after another, not all at once.
And secondly were broached not in their full perfection at the first, but by
degrees, as come at the first sight bears no ear, and plants in the first
spring show neither fruit nor blossom, in which sense we may say the corn
and fruit came in by little and little. For who dreamt images should have been
worshipped, when they were first brought in for memory? or who suspected the
sacrament should have been adored, when they first used kneeling at the
communion? Therefore when we say, the errors of the Roman Church came in by
little and little, this is our meaning, and thus our words must be expounded.
Which is a sufficient reason why some things, thus coming in, were, at the
first, the less excepted against, when no great danger was misdoubted by their
entrance.

4 But if it were granted that some lesser alteration, consisting in ceremonies
and Church-canons, came in uncontrolled, or some points of doctrine having at
the first no show of evil, yet were it not proved thereby, that the godly then
living and allowing them were of another mind then we. For if our selves had
then lived and seen no more danger ensuing upon them then they did, we would
possible have said as little against them as they did. Prayer for the dead, the
sign of the cross, and the opinion of freewill, at the first coming in, were
so far from being applied to those vile purposes whereto the Church of Rome
now bends them, that they might endure them, and we refuse them, and yet be
both of one religion.

5 But why does the Jesuit assume adoration, and images, for examples of that
which came in without controllement? was he disposed thus to prostitute his
own cause? was there no example he could make choice of but these, when the
world never knew any innovation more famously and visibly noted then these? Did
not Can. 36.
the Elibertine Council, and Epist. ad Joan.
Epiphanius sufficiently point at the coming in of Images? And when the Nicen
Council had allowed them to be worshipped, did not Charles the great, in a
general Council of three hundred Bishops holden at Frankford, abrogate the
decrees of Nice again, and writ a book against them? And did not, An. 794.
nu. 39
by Baronius his own confession, the most learned men and famous of that age
speak against the Nicen Council, Walafridus Strabo, Jonas the Archbishop of
Orleance, Hincmarus the Archbishop of Rhemes, yea another whole Synod under
Lewis the first? I know he excuses it, and Geneb. chronol. an 744. Bellar.
^mag c. 14.
others with him, by this that the Councels of Frankford and Paris, and these
learned men did mistake the definition of the Nicen Council: but this is a
bankrupt shift confuted by Suar. tom. 1. d. 54. sect. 3. Vasqu. adorat. l. 2.
nu. 228.
as learned of their own side as themselves. And therefore the Protestants
condemning the worship of images, follow the ancient Church that resisted it.

6 And when we say, the use of images in the Church of Rome is idolatry, and
that the Papists worship stocks and stones as the Painims did; this is neither
ignorantly nor maliciously spoken. Not maliciously, though merrily; for Ad^.
valen c. 6
Tertullian says, touching such like absurdities of the Valentinian heretics,
the matter it self sometime requires that we laugh at it. Many things deserve
to be convinced, that with our grave doing thereof we seem not to reverence
them: Vanity and mirth are near sib. Let the truth laugh, because she is
joyful, and jest with her adversaries, because she is secure: that when we say
merrily, the Papists worship stocks and stones, our words be not taken as
uttered in malice. And we speak not ignorantly, but know what we say, and can
give a reason for it. For Exodus 20.4. Deuteronomy. 4 15. Romans 1.23.
to erect and worship images of the invisible God, is idolatry: or if that be
denied, yet unlawful by Duran. 3. d. 9. q. 2. ad. 4. Peers. de tradit. part. 3
page 222.
the confession of learned Papists themselves, though Bell. imag. c. 8.
the Church of Rome now use it.

7 Again, I think no Papist will deny, but his cross and crucifixe, for
example, is a stock, or a stone, or such a like metal; and yet the Jesuits
say, Coster. Ench.
that all the honor that is due to the samplar, is given to the image; Bell.
imag. c. 22
and it is so given that the image staieth and limiteth it in it self, as it
is an image, and not only as it represents the samplar: Greg. Val. tom. 4.
345.
themselves, after their manner, being properly Terminus.
the compass of the worship, though not of themselves, but in respect of the
samplar: and thus the images of Christ must be adored with divine honor per
aliud. The which is now the current doctrine of the Church of Rome, save that
Bell. imag. c. 22. Suar. tom. 1. d. 54. sect. 4.
some wiser then other some, and possible their conscience checking them,
think it no wholesome form of words for the pulpit. Again in the Masse-book
is a prayer to the cross: All hail o cross, our only hope, etc. Wherein
some things being spoken which can be meant of nothing but the very wood it
self: as this, Thou only were worthy to bear the ransom of the world, o
faithful cross, only thou art the noble tree among all: it is plain that
even a block and a stock is adored with Gods honor, as was used among the
Painims. For even they, in much of their idolatry, did no more, in that many
of their idols were the image of the true God, and so reputed and worshipped by
them, respectively, Act. 17.23.
and with relation to God. For Ba^o. an. 52. nu 9. Peers. tradit. part. 3. page
225.
the altar at Athens, was dedicated to Ba^o. an. 52. nu 9. Peers. tradit. part.
3. page 225.
the same God whom Paul preached: and it is the profession of Dion Chrysostom. ser.
12. Olymp. Sozo. l. 7. c. 15. Athenag. Leg. page 20
the learned Gentiles, that their images were dedicated to the true God the
author of life, and giver of all good things, the common Father and Savior of
mankind: whom in those images they worshipped, reputing the images themselves
but stocks and stones. Seneca Qu. natural. l. 2. c. 45.
says, By Jupiter standing in the Capitol with lightning in his hand, they
understand the Preserver and Governor of all things; the Soul and Spirit, the
Master and Maker of all the world, to whom every name agrees: Few or none
among them, Vbi supra.
says Peresius, thought the matter of their idols so graven, to be Gods. They
had many idols whereby they represented the true God. Yea Ortho. expl. l. 3.
page 289.
says Andradius, many among them vehemently abhorred the multitude of gods,
and in their mind and thought religiously worshipped that one God, whom, with
daily meditation, and all the power of their mind they sought, in him they put
all their hope, him they always studied to please. With this conceit the
Painims worshipped their images, Romans 1.23.
and yet are condemned of idolatry. Now I assume. But the Papists do the very
same in the worship of their images; acknowledging them indeed to be but images
of God and his Saints, but yet worshipping the^ as much as the Gentiles did
theirs. The Papists therefore in the use of their images commit idolatry, and
worship stocks and stones, as the Gentiles did.

8 But the Jesuit needs not take this unkindly. For his Vasqu. adora. l. 3.
disp. 1. c. 2. and 3.
Jesuits write, that not an image only, or a holy thing, may be worshipped
with the same adoration that is given to God; but even any other thing in the
world, whether living or without life. As for example, an Angel, a man, the
Sun, Moon, and Stars, the earth, yea Ipso ligno, Lapides, de modulo
straminis.
a stock, a stone, or a little straw: that the Jesuit no longer scorn the
imputation of worshipping stocks and stones. Yea Cornelius Agrippa has left
De occult. Philosoph l. 3. c. 15.
written, that certain (I dare scarce report it, my adversaries are so
impatient in hearing such things, but yet I will say it again) Cornelius
Agrippa, a great learned Papist has left it written, that certain of the
Schoolmen, naming Thomas of Aquin, and Aureolus, defended, that the very
stars in the firmament might be worshipped and called upon to help us, but
only for doubt of giving occasion to idolatry: not that it were idolatry (in
their conceit) so to do, but it might give occasion of idolatry, possible as
cutting of throats gives occasion of murder.

9 Touching adoration of the sacrament, (which is the Jesuits other example of
things reputed by the Protestants for no small errors in the Church of Rome) we
count is gross superstition indeed, and show the time when it came in. For it
is a late invention following upon the conceit of the real presence, and
prescribed 1220. years after Christ, by C Sa^e. de celebrat. missarum.
Honorius the third, and so was resisted by all those that withstood the real
presence. And if we call it heathenish superstition, thus to adore bread and
wine, we are to be borne with. For if the oblation of bread and wine, Iul.
Firmic. de erro^e profa. relig. Justin. Mart. apol. 2.
used by the Gentiles, in their sacrifices to Mithra, were idolatry: what is
the worshipping, even with divine honor, of that which is no other, for
substance, then that which the Gentiles offered? Besides, the lawfulness of
adoration depends upon the truth of real presence, which being overthrown,
the adoration cannot be excused. And that which is more, supposing there were
such a presence in the sacrament, yet, according to the doctrine of the Church
of Rome, no man can be certain when it is, that he might adore without error.
For Sum. Rosell. verbo Euchar. 3. nu. 47.
they teach, that the Priests intention is it that works. For if he should
say the words of consecration, without intention to consecrate the bread and
wine, he should effect nothing: Fr. Ouand. 4.
or if he intend to consecrate but one host, and there chance to be two, or
more, the^ nothing is consecrated at al. In which cases, and the like, there
must needs be idolatry, at least sometimes in the adoration, because though
there be no doubt but Christ is really present under the form rightly
consecrated, yet it may be doubted whether they be consecrated effectually or
no; for if they be not, the^ nothing is worshipped but the bare bread. For
remedy whereof H^lens. 8. q. 30 memb 3. art. 1.. 3. Bonaue. 3. d. 24. art. 1. q.
1
they teach this poor shift, to adore upon condition, if the due form in
consecrating be observed. Panorm. c. Sane de celebr missarum.
And they give the Priest an Item, that if he be called in the night season to
houzell the sick, and there spend all his hoasts, then, as he comes homeward,
he must put out the candle and go darklong, lest the people adore the empty
tabernacle. Again, it is Omnes enim eodem modo de speciebus sacramenti, sicut
de imaginibus philosophari debent. Vasq. adorat. l. 2. nu. 357.
confessed that the supposed forms of bread and wine, are adored with the same
honor that is given to Christ; yea Vasqu. ib. nu. 359. Resert.
some think, without referring that honor to Christ contained under them, but
staying it in the forms. The which being so, then the adoration of the
sacrament is culpable of the same idolatry every way, that the worship of
images is, which I have proved to be heathenish.

10 That which the Jesuit touches by the way, how the Protestants hold the
Eucharist really to be but a bare piece of bread, is a lie, because they hold
the Eucharist to consist of two parts: the outward elements, and the inward
matter thereby conferred to us. This last we call neither bare bread, nor bread
at all, but the flesh of Christ that was given for us, and it is infallibly
conjoined with the bread, by a sacramental relation; being as truly present
therewith, to the worthy receiver, as the bread it self, though not in the
same manner. For when land is conveyed by writing and seal, though it be not
really contained in the wax and parchment, but lies peradventure an hundred
miles off: yet is it truly present, and thereby infallibly given to him with
whom the covenant is made. And he that should account such a conueyance
executed, but bare parchment, would be refuted by every tenant in the country,
who esteem their leases to have the ground so united to them, by virtue of the
bargain passed between their Lord and them, that thereby they can occupy it
safely, and maintain their right against all intruders that would molest them.
So is it in the sacrament: whose outward element, if we call bread, so did our
Savior, and his Apostles, and the ancient Church before us. For Saint Paul
says, 2. Cor. 1^.16.
the bread that we break, is the communion of the body of Christ: and, 1. Cor.
11.
so often as ye eat this bread. And Justin Martyr Apol. 2. pa^. 76.
says, the Ministers deliver to all that are present, of the sanctified bread.
But bare bread we call it not, save only in respect of the natural substance,
which it retains even after consecration; and when it is ministered to persons
unworthy. For if a conueyance made to Peter, lying upon the table, be given to
Richard; or if Richard fraudulently take it away, he receives nothing but bare
wax and parchment, by reason the covenant was not made with him, but Peter. He
is not the party that has the right; though to Peter it be a further matter
then bare parchment.

11 But if the Jesuit would needs have been censuring such as speak
indecently of the Eucharist, he might have looked nearer home, in his own
Church, Verum esse huiusmodi apparitiones posse saepe fieri virtute daemonis.
Suar. tom. 3. l. 55. sect. 1.
where it is holden, that those very apparitions of flesh and blood in the
Sacrament (which they say are sometime seen, and are used as an argument to
prove the real presence) may be done by the power of the devil. And Ca^telae
Missae.
where they teach, that a man having received his maker, may vomit him up
again: and Tho. 3. q. 80. art. 3. ad. 3. Suar. tom. 3. d. 62. s. 2.
where it goes for current, that a brute beast, as a dog, may eat the body
of Christ. These speeches are foul, and deserve more reproof then that which
says, the external element in the Eucharist, for natural substance, is but
bare bread, as the water in baptism, for natural substance, is but bare
water, though by divine institution they be elevated to be the sacred mysteries
of the flesh of Christ

. 52. Fourthly the Protestants Church is not Apostolic, because they cannot
derive their pedigree lineally without interruption from the Apostles, as the
Roman Church can from S. Peter, but are enforced to acknowledge some other, as
Luther or Calvin, or some such, from whom mediatly or immediately they have
received, by succession, the Preachers of their faith: Luther and Calvin
themselves being not sent of any to teach this new faith, nor succeeding
lawfully to any Apostolic Bishop, or Pastor; but being, as Optatus
Mileuitanus said, lib. 2. contra Parmen. Victor the Donatist, an heretic,
was, Filij sine patre, and discipuli sine magistro. Children without a father,
scholars without a master. Or as S. Cyprian lib. 1. Epist. writes of Nouatus:
Nemini succ^dentes a seipsis Episcopi ordinati sunt. Succeeding to none, were
ordained Bishops of themselves.

The Answer.
1 Our answer is, that the succession required to make a Church Apostolic,
must be defined by the doctrine, and not by the place or persons: that is to
say, they must be reputed the Apostles successors which believe the Apostles
doctrine, although they have not this outward succession of Pastors, visibly
following one another in one place, throughout all ages, as the Jesuit says,
it is in the Roman Church. For Saint Paul Ephesians. 2.20.
tells the Ephesians, they are built upon the foundation of the Apostles and
Prophets, in respect of their calling to the knowledge of the Gospel; and yet
they had not lineally (as the Jesuit means it) descended from the Prophets.
And Nazianzene says, Laud. Athan.
Succession in godliness, is properly to be accounted succession. For he that
holds the same doctrine, is also partaker of the same succession; as he that
is against the doctrine, must be reputed to be also out of the succession.
Which being granted, the Jesuits discourse about succession is soon answered.
To the same effect speaks his own D. 4. Non est facile.
Canon, They are not the children of the Saints that sit in their places, but
which do their works. Yea the Jesuits confess this. For Posseuine Not. verbi
Dei. page 328. ad interrog. 11.
writes, that the true Church is called Apostolic, not only for the
succession of Bishops from the Apostles, but also for the consanguinitie of
doctrine. And Gregory of Valenza, Tom. 3. page 141. proprietas 4.
telling why the Church is called Apostolic in the Nicene Creed, gives only
three reasons: First, because it began in the Apostles: next, because by them
it was spread all over the world: thirdly, because it still follows their
faith and authority. Waldensis Tom. 1. doctrinal. l. 2. art. 2. cap. 18.
says, The Apostles filled the whole Church with wholesome doctrine: and in
that respect the whole Catholic Church is also called Apostolic. By all
which it is plain, that for the being of an Apostolic Church, it is
sufficient if it hold the Apostles faith, though it want the Jesuits
succession mentioned.

2 Whence it follows, that although it were granted, the Roman Church could
show a perpetual succession of Prelates, without interruption from S. Peter
(which the Jesuit says may be showed, but See digress.
I deny) yet were it not thereby proved Apostolic, unless these Prelates had
also retained S. Peter's doctrine: that the reader may see, all other marks of
the Church must be tried by the doctrine; and that the Jesuits succession, and
unity, and universality, prove nothing unless the true faith concur
therewith.

3 Whence it follows again, that it is no disadvantage to the Protestant
Churches, if holding the Apostles doctrine, they want external succession of
place and persons, such as the Jesuit boasts of: because the Apostolicknesse
of the Church is not to be defined by it, but wheresoever the true faith
contained in the Scriptures is professed and embraced, there is the whole and
full nature of an Apostolic Church.

4 And so I answer the Jesuits discourse in particular, that we can derive our
faith from the Apostles, and that without interruption, in that to this day it
was never interrupted, though such as succeeded visibly in bishops thrones did
not always profess it; it is sufficient that their malice could never
extinguish it, and the professors and teachers thereof lived in the Roman
Church it self; which, beside all other testimonies, we know by this, that it
is the faith of the Scriptures, which cannot be extinguished, but grows in
the midst of all her enemies.

5 And touching Luther and Calvin, I answer, Touching the calling of Luther.
that whatsoever is said against them, depends upon another point, which is,
the faith that they taught. For if that were the truth, the^ no doubt they were
sent of God to teach it, and we hearing them, received it of them no otherwise
then Gods faithful people are bound to receive the Gospel of their Pastors.
And whereas he says, they succeeded no Apostolic Bishop, neither had any
calling to preach that new faith; I answer, that for the external succession,
whereof I have spoken, we care not; it is sufficient that in doctrine they
succeeded the Apostles and Primitive Churches, and those faithful witnesses
which in all ages since embraced the same in persecution, though they succeeded
not in that open manner that was used before heresy and persecution grew. And
albeit the Roman Church would not hear them, yet had they a lawful calling.
First inwardly from God, who stirred them up, gave them gifts, directed them by
his spirit, and blessed their labor: then outwardly in the Church of Rome it
self, where they were created Doctors of Divinity, and Pastors to teach the
people, as they were baptized: by virtue whereof they might lawfully preach
afterward that which by the Scriptures they found to be the truth, and did
lineally succeed the true Pastors of the Church that lived before them. If it
be objected, that having their calling in the Church of Rome, it will follow
thereupon, that only the Church of Rome is the true Church; this is easily
answered, by denying the consequence. For the Church of God and the Papacy
were mingled together, and were both called by one name, the church of Rome, by
reason that in diverse things that were good and indifferent, they communicated.
So that even in the Papacy many of the things of Gods Church remained, as the
Scripture, Baptism, and these callings; which the Pope and his Clergy
occupying, did as pirates that occupy another man's ship, and his goods
therein: and therefore conferring baptism and callings to diverse persons that
afterward forsook the Pope, the said persons notwithstanding rightly
inherited them as the true Churches goods which the Papacy usurped. And
whereas the Jesuit says, they were not sent to preach this new faith; I
answer him, that this new faith, as he styleth it, is the true faith: and
therefore even that sending which they had, bound them to preach it, though at
the first it revealed it not to them, but God did it by means of the
Scriptures, and faithful professors, that lay secretly hidden in the midst
of the Papacy; and when they saw the truth, they needed no other outward
allowance to preach, then that which they had to preach the Gospel: as the
Jesuit will think, that himself being baptized in the Church of England,
after the order thereof, with intent that he should also profess that faith,
yet afterward falling to Papistry, needs no other baptism, but by virtue of
it may use the liberty of other Christians. The very same we say of Luther and
Caluins callings; whereby they are freed from the imputations that Cyprian and
Optatus lay upon the Donatists. For such as have no lawful admission, are
children indeed without a father, and scholars without a master, and Bishops
without succession, or what the Jesuit will: but these men had a calling, else
let us see what will be said to that I have answered.

. 53. This succession of Priests and Bishops continually from the Apostles,
which we have and the Protestants want, the ancient Fathers did much esteem,
and use as an argument, partly to confound the heretics of those days,
partly to confirm themselves to continue in the Catholic Church, proving by
the succession of Pastors, succession of Apostolical doctrine still to have
continued in the Church. Hereupon S. Irenaeus lib. 3. ca. 3. says, Traditionem
ab Apostolis and annuntiatam hominibus fidem, per successionem Episcoporum
peruenientem vsque ad nos, indicantes; confundimus omnes eos qui quoquo modo,
vel per sui placentiam malam, vel vanam gloriam, vel per coecitatem colligunt
praeterquam oportet. Showing the tradition from the Apostles and the faith
preached unto men, coming unto us by succession of Bishops, we confound all
them, who any way either through evil complacence of themselves, or through
vaineglorie, or through blindness, and evil opinion, do collect and conclude
otherwise then they ought. Hereupon also says Tertullian, writing against
heretics: Edant origines suarum Ecclesiarum, euoluant ordinem Episcoporu^,
ista per successionem ab initio decurrentes, vt primus ille Episcopus aliquem
ex Apostolis, vel Apostolicis viris, qui tamen cum Apostolis perseuerauerit,
authorem habuerit vel antecessorem. Lib. de praescript. Let them set forth the
beginning of their Church, let them unfold or declare the order of Bishops, so
running from the beginning by succession, that the first Bishop of their sect
had some of the Apostles or Apostolic men, who perseuered with the Apostles,
for his author or predecessor. Also S. Austine contra Epist. Fundam. c. 4.
says, Tenet me in Ecclesia Catholica ab ipsa sede Petri Apostoli, cui
pascendas oues suas Dominus commendauit, vsque ad praesentem Episcopum
successio Sacerdotum. The succession of Priests from the seat of S. Peter the
Apostle, to whom our Lord commended his sheep to be fed, until this present
Bishop, does hold me in the Catholic Church. The same S. Austin Epist. 105.
does dispute in the same manner. In which Epistle he reckons up all the
Bishops of Rome until Anastasius, who was in his time Bishop in S. Peter's
seat. Cypr. lib. 1. Epist. 6. Optat. lib. 2. cont. Parmen. The which argument
those Fathers would never so much have urged if they had not thought that this
succession was a sure mark of the true Church, and that with this outward
succession of Doctors and Pastors was always infallibly conjoined the true
doctrine of the Catholic faith.

The Answer.
1 How much soever the within named Fathers, or any other, stood upon the
outward succession of Bishops in their days, yet that will do the Roman Church
no good at this day. The reason is, because then none had succeeded but such as
kept the Apostles faith: which now is otherwise. For many Popes since that time
have succeeded which have been heretics, as I have showed, Digress. 28. This
difference between their times and ours, must be diligently observed, that the
fathers speeches, concerning succession, may be rightly understood, and the
Papists arguments grounded on them, may directly be answered. For Irenaeus in
the place quoted, says, the Apostolic tradition or doctrine, and faith,
which they preached to men, was come to them by succession of Bishops. Whereby
it appears, they had not yet discovered that apostasy in Bishops thrones
which afterward ensued; but the true faith remained still, which now in the
Church of Rome it does not. Let our adversaries therefore bring those times back
again, and restore us the Bishops that then succeeded, and we will allow them
the same argument of succession that the fathers made, or else not. For
Hegesippus speaking of that time, Eusebius. hist. l. 4. c. 22.
says, that as the law and the Prophets, and the Lord himself had taught, so
was it in every succession, and every city. Now it is contrary: as the Friars
and Jesuits, and the Pope himself have devised, so is it in every succession,
and every city of the Church of Rome. Which is a manifest reason why the
Fathers argument, drawn fom succession, cannot benefit the external
succession of Popes in that Church at this day.

2 Again, they used succession as an argument to prove their Church, but not
in that manner that our adversaries use it to prove theirs. For first the
Jesuit would make us believe, that by the succession of Pastors, the succession
of Apostolical doctrine is proved to continue; yea, he says, that with
outward succession of doctors and Pastors was always infallibly conjoined the
true doctrine. This the Fathers never said, as shall appear in my special
answer to their words. Neither would the Jesuit have said it him self, if he
had remembered the Greek Churches, which have as lineall succession from Saint
Mark and Saint Andrew, as Rome has from Saint Peter, and yet Can. loc. l. 4.
c. vlt. page 143.
they are counted heretical. Yea Bellarmine Not. eccl. c. 8.
says, It is not necessarily gathered that the Church is always there where
there is succession; which shows the Jesuits rashness in his assertion. For if
the true faith were infallibly conjoined with the outward succession, then it
would necessarily follow, that the true Church is always there where succession
is, which Bellarmine denies.

3 But with succession of persons, the Fathers always joined succession of
doctrine, and by them both together confuted schismatics. Thus does Irenaeus
in the very words alleged, and L. 4. c. 43.
in another place more fully: We must (says he) obey those elders which have
succession from the Apostles, which with the succession of their Bishoprics,
have received the certain gift of truth: as for the rest which want this
principal succession, we must suspect them. Mark how he directs you to
embrace that succession which holds the doctrine also, and refuse that which
has it not: which had bin idle, if the doctrine had bin so united to
succession, that it could not have bin without it. Now our adversaries say
otherwise.

4 Secondly, the Fathers insisted on the succession of other Churches as well
as the Church of Rome; which proves manifestly that the succession which they
assumed, proves not the Church of Rome to be the Church of God, because it
proves not other Churches so to be. Our adversaries have Posseuin. noc. verbi
Dei. page 329.
written, that the ancient Fathers reckoned not up the successors of other
Bishops alike, as they did the successors of the Roman chair: but this is an
untruth, proceeding of desperation: for Irenaeus in the chapter alleged,
mentions the Churches of Smyrna, Ephesus, Asia: and in L. 1. c. 3.
another place, the Churches of Germany, Spain, France, Egypt, Lybia and
others. And Tertullian Praescript.
refers us to Corinth, Philippi, Thessalonica, Ephesus and Rome. Whereby it
is plain, that if Rome be now the true Church, because the Fathers mention the
succession thereof, then the Churches of Greece must be granted to be the true
Church also, because the Fathers mention their succession also, which in
Constantinople and Alexandria is preserved to this day. But in that they reckon
up the succession of other Churches as well as of Rome, it appears that they
thought it was tied no more to Rome then to others.

5 Out of all this that I have said, I answer to the places alleged. And first
to Irenaeus, that he says not simply he convinced heretics by showing
succession, but by showing the faith which successively had continued to his
time: and we are contented the Jesuit convince us so too, if he can.
Tertullian bids heretics, if they can, deduce the succession of their
Churches and sectmasters: which he might well do, although it would not follow
thereupon, that wheresoever outward succession were, there should be also true
doctrine. And he had reason to make them this challenge, for though every
company be not the true Church that has outward succession, yet they pretend
themselves so to be; therefore he provoke them to put the succession in
trial, and show if they can that the first author of their sect was an
Apostles successor. This was a good trial then, but now it is not, when not
only new seas are erected, but the successors in ancient thrones are
corrupted. Austine says, the succession of Bishops retained him in the Church
of Rome. And good reason, when they succeeded in faith as well as in sea. If he
were now alive, he would say otherwise, when the succession, such as it is,
remains without the faith: it was not the succession alone that retained him,
but other motives joined with it, and mentioned in the same place, which now
are wanting. So likewise Ep. 165.
in his epistle to Generosus, he reckons up the Bishops of Rome that had bin
till his time; not using their succession as an argument to prove it the true
Church, but naming those that had succeeded therein, and perseuered in the
truth: which he then well might do, but the Jesuit now cannot, in as much as
the Popes following declined from the faith of their ancestors. Optatus
mentions the Roman succession as Austin does, reckoning up a catalogue of
the Bishops that had bin in that sea till Siritius time, to show the Donatists
that the Church was in other places as well as in Afric; and to admonish them
that their Churches wanted succession also, and not the true faith only. This
is no advantage to the Jesuits cause. For as some heretics want succession,
so all that have it are not proved thereby to be true Catholics, for any thing
that Austin or Optatus say. That which Cyprian says, receives the same answer
that I have given to the rest.

. 54. The which to be conjoined may evidently be proved out of S. Paul
himself, Ephesians. 4. who says that our Savior Dedit pastores and doctores ad
consummationem sanctorum, in opus ministerij, in edificationem corporis
Christi, donec occurramus omnes in vnitatem fidei and agnitionis filij Dei, in
virum perfectum, in mensuram aetatis plenitudinis Christi, etc. Signifying that
Christ appointed these outward functions of Pastors in the Church to continue
for the edification and perfection thereof until the worlds end; especially
for this purpose, as is said in the same place, vt non simus paruidi
fluctuantes, and non circumferamur omni vento doctrinae: that we may not be
little ones, wavering and carried away with every wind of doctrine. Therefore
that this ordinance and intention of our Savior might have the purposed
effect, he must provide so to assist and direct these Pastors in teaching the
true faith, that the people, their flock may always, by hearing them, be
preserved from wavering in the ancient faith, and from error of new doctrine:
the which cannot be, unless with succession of the Pastors lawfully succeeding
be conjoined true doctrine, in such sort that all true Pastors shall never
universally err, or fail to teach the ancient and Apostolic doctrine. For
if they should thus universally err, then all the people, who do, and ought
like sheep, follow the voice of their Pastors, should also generally waver and
err from true faith, and be carried about with the wind of new doctrine,
contrary to this purpose of almighty God, expressed in this place by S.
Paul. Yea the whole Church, which according to S. Gregory Nazianzene, orat de
moderat in disput. habend consists of sheep and Pastors, should universally
err, contrary to diverse express promises of our Savior Christ, of which I
have spoken somewhat before. Since therefore these promises cannot be false,
nor the purpose of almighty God fail, it follows that the people hearing
their Pastors, may also infallibly always learn and continue in the true
Apostolic faith: consequently that these ordinary Pastors, appointed by
almighty God of purpose to instruct and confirm the people in true faith,
shall never, at least universally, fail to teach the true faith. And therefore
the succession of this external function of ordinary Pastors must needs be
conjoined with the succession of one, and the same, true, holy, Catholic, and
Apostolic faith.

The Answer.
1 The Jesuit having said, immediately before, that with the outward succession
was always infallibly conjoined the true faith, now proceeds to prove it;
wherein you may easily conceive he takes a hard task in hand, because his own
Bellarmine confesses the contrary, Not. eccl. c. ^.
It is not necessarily gathered that there is always the Church where there is
succession: and the Greek Church at this day proves it inuincibly against our
adversaries. For they have the succession as entire as Rome it self, and yet
Bell. ib.. Dico secundo, argum. Can. loc. l. 4. c. vlt.
the Papists think them not the Church of God: because, among diverse errors,
they will not submit themselves to the Popes authority. The Jesuit therefore
has undertaken to prove that which the learned of his own side know and
confess to be false. But that is ordinary.

2 And as his assertion is insolent, so he proves it as weakly: though I must
confess he has verbatim borrowed his discourse from Greg. Valent. tom. 3 d.
1. q. 1. punct. 7.. 25.
as learned a Jesuit as ever Iesuited. But I answer two things. First, that no
man denies but the succession of true doctrine and communication which the
true Church of God is unseparably annexed with the succession of Pastors
lawfully succeeding. I say not the outward succession of Pastors, but the true
succession of Pastors lawfully succeeding, the which are the Jesuits own
words: whereto if our adversaries will hold them, and require no more, they
shall be yielded unto; and I will grant the same to be sufficiently proved by
the text of Ephesians. 4. But this neither confuteth us, nor justifies the Church of
Rome. It confuteth not us, because. 52. per totam.
I have showed the teachers of our faith do lawfully succeed, and so always have
done, though not outwardly, and visibly to the world. And it justifies not the
Church of Rome, forasmuch as the ordinary Pastors therein succeed not
lawfully. They succeed, in a sort, externally, sitting in the seats where
sometime the Apostles and their successors did: but they succeed not lawfully,
as I will show in the next section, or any other way then the Greecians now do,
or then the Pharisees and high Priests did in our Sauiors time, when they
refused him, denying him to be the Son of God, and requiring a murderer to
be given unto the^: the which they could not have done if the Jesuits
assertion were true, that the faith of Gods Church is infallibly conjoined with
the outward succession. For they had the outward succession from Aaron,
lineally without interruption; and yet if the people had obeyed them in all
things, they had led them into an universal error, no less then the rejecting
of the Son of God. Now if only lawful succession have the truth abiding
with it, and that is lawful which succeeds principally in doctrine,
retaining the ancient faith as well as the place and external show, which our
adversaries dare not deny, and Tertullian affirms, Praescrip. c 32
where he says, the Churches that conspire with the Apostles in the same
faith, are reputed no less Apostolical, for the consanguinitie of the
doctrine: if, I say, this lawful succession only have the true faith going
with it, let them say freely, and without collusion, to what purpose should
they plead their external succession to justify their faith, before they
have pleaded their faith to justify their succession? which when they have
done (and they can do it no way but by the Scripture) the Protestants will
never except against their succession, but embrace it. And what vanity is it
to object against us that we want outward succession, when that succession
which is to be stood upon, consists not in the circumstances of place, and
show, but in the retaining of the true faith? which may be done without
interruption, when the outward show of places and persons is interrupted.

3 Secondly, I answer further to the text alleged, and to all his discourse
thereupon, granting, first, that the ministry of Pastors is the ordinance of
God. Secondly, to continue in his Church for ever. Thirdly, for the teaching of
his people. Fourthly, in such sort that they shall never universally err or
fail to teach the ancient and Apostolic doctrine. Fifthly, whereupon the
people are bound to hear them. And hence it follows, that sixthly, where such
Pastors succeed, the true faith is always conjoined. This is granted. But then
our aduerries should consider, that such Pastors, furnished with these
promises, do not always succeed openly, or in one place, without interruption of
the external succession; but they may arise and successively continue when the
world sees them not, or seeing them, drives them from the Episcopal seas,
that they shall be constrained to teach the Church in secret. S. Paul says,
Pastors and Doctors shall succeed, and succeeding teach the true faith, but he
says not, all that have outward succession hold the true faith: neither is
there any thing in his words that proves this succession to be of that nature
which our adversaries require. Now the question between us is, not whether
there be a perpetual succession of Pastors in the Church of Christ, that
infallibly teach his truth; for we deny not that: but whether these Pastors be
only they that continue in one place, one after another outwardly and visibly,
at all times, to all the world? and whether Pastors succeeding in this manner be
so privileged that they cannot err? which we deny, and in all Saint Paul's
discourse there is not a word against us: because whatsoever he says may be
vpholden in that kind of succession that I have described. Again, our English
Bishops this day succeed lineally, in their places, from the first Apostles of
our land: will the Jesuit therefore grant we are the true Church? he will not
(though indeed we be) because they have changed that which the precedent
Bishops held for the true faith: the which being thus objected overthrows
himself; for now you see that with Pastors succeeding, the true faith is not
always joined; for one may succeed that will change the ancient doctrine, which
the Jesuit thinks our English Bishops have done (though they have not that
which is most ancient) but we prove against all exception their Italian Popes
have, as I have showed, Digress. 49. 51. 52.

. 55. But as I have said before, and by many Catholic writers has been
proved at large, in the Roman Church only is this lawful uninterrupted
succession of ordinary Pastors found: therefore the Roman Church, and those
that communicate and agree with it, is the true Apostolic Church, and has in
it always taught the true Apostolic faith.

The Answer.
1 Lawful succession is when the persons succeed in doctrine as well as in
place: which, in the Roman Church, at this day, they do not; inasmuch as they
are departed from the ancient faith to their own heresies. And this is the
principal cause why we deny that which the Jesuit says here touching the
Roman succession.

2 We do not deny but they have a rank of Bishops (whether interrupted or no I
will show in the Digression following) externally sitting in Rome one after
another, but we deny lawful succession to stand in this. And we deny again
that this is found only there and no where else; for it is found in the Greek
Church also at this day: as appears by Legate. eccl. Alexand. apud Baron.
annal. tom. 6. in fine.
the letters which the Patriarch of Alexandria sent to the Pope, about 15.
years since, wherein he styles himself thus: Gabriel, by the grace of God, the
servant of the seat of Saint Mark, in the city of Alexandria in Egypt, and
all other places joining to him, and bordering on the South, or the sea, and
Aethiopia, the ninety seventh of the Patriarchs, the successor of Saint Mark
the Evangelist. Wherein we see the outward succession to remain in that Church
as entire as it does in Rome, and yet the Jesuit will not grant the same, and
such as communicate with it, to be the true Apostolic Church that has the
true faith.

3 And touching this outward succession, because it is so much stood upon, I
say, it is not so entire as is pretended, but certain things may be objected
against it, which are sufficient to take it way, and plainly prove it to have
been interrupted. The which for the satisfaction of such as are desirous to
look into this matter, I will briefly set down in the digression ensuing.

Digression. 53. Obiecting seven things against the succession of Popes in the
Sea of Rome, whereby the same is clearly demonstrated to have been
interrupted, and not to be any certain or infallible succession.
4 First, I have showed, Digression 29. nu. 38. that our adversaries themselves
have no divine authority, but only such as rests upon uncertain proofs, to
convince that the Bishop of Rome, rather then of Antioch, for example, is Saint
Peter's successor. For allow them that Peter himself was Bishop of Rome, and
appointed his successor to be the head of his Church after his death, which he
never did; yet is there no infallible certainty, that this successor is the
Pope. Canus, Loc. l. 6. c. 8.
says it is proved but either by history or tradition: and Alphons. haeres. l.
1. c. 9.
another learned Papist concludes, that no man is bound to believe this or
that Pope to be Saint Peter's successor. The which uncertainty shows the
succession of the Present Pope, or any other before him, to be indemonstrable.

5 Secondly, supposing Peter were Bishop of Rome, yet there is no certainty
who succeeded him, and one another a good while after. Eusebius. ch^on. an. 70.
Opt. l. 2.
Some say, Linus succeeded Peter. Hier. script. eccl. in Clem. etc. 52. in Esa.
Marian. Scot an. 71
Some Clemens. Refert. Baro. an. 69.
Some that neither, but Cletus. 8. q. 1. Si Petr. Maria Scot. an. 71. Luit
prand. vit. Pont. in Clem.
Others say, Linus and Cletus were Bishops under Peter in his life time, but
had no power of binding and loosing. Disputat hoc mundus quartus fucritne
secundus. Gab. lect. 32.
Touching Clemens, all things are uncertain. Fra. Agricol. de primat.
Some lay the succession thus: Linus, Clemens, Cletus, Anacletus. Baro. ann.
69. n. 42.
Some thus: Linus, Cletus, Clemens, Anacletus. Tertull. carm. l. 3.
Some thus, Linus, Cletus, Anacletus, Clemens. Onuph. annot ad Clem.
Some thus, Clemens, Cletus, Anacletus, leaving out Linus. Optat. l. 2. Aug.
ep. 165.
Some thus, Linus, Clemens, Anacletus, Euaristus, leaving out Cletus. Some
thus, Linus, Cletus, Clemens, Euaristus, leaving out Anacletus. Here we see all
things are intricate, and no certainty can be had. The like may be observed in
the lower parts of the succession following.

6 Thirdly, the Sea has been void a good space together without any Pope at
all. Baro. an. 53. n. 28.
Ann. 253. upon the death of Fabian it was void one year, and some months.
Anastas. in Honor.
Anno 638. when Honorius died, it was void one year, seven months, and
seventeen days. Ann. 682. Anastas. in Agatho.
upon the death of Agatho, it was void one year, seven months, and five
days. Ann. 767. Anastas. in Paul.
upon the death of Paul, it was void one year and a month. Baronius An. 853.
n. 63.
says, It has fallen out that it has been void above two years and five
months, the election having been delaied through contention. Suppur. ann. 296.
And in Martinus Polonus it is noted in the margent, that the Papacy ceased
seven years, six months, and fifteen days. These vacations cannot be
denied, and therefore the succession has been interrupted, because at that
time the supposed Head that should succeed was wanting.

7 Fourthly, about the year, 850, a woman succeeded, that in the habit of a
man continued Pope two years, and five months, until, being gotten with
child she died in travel, in the open streets as she went on procession. This
is recorded by so many Marian Scot. an. 854. Martin. Polo. an. 855. Palmer.
Floren. an. 854. Sigeb. an. 854. Lao^ic. Chalcocondyl. reb. Tu^c. l 6 p. 411.
Anton. hist part. 2. ti^. 16 c. 1.. 7. Coel. Rho digni. lect. antiqu. l. 8. c.
1.
Historiographers, and all Papists them selves, some few excepted that received
it from them, that now it is too late for the Jesuits to control it. And I
care not though Anastasius, that lived in Rome the same time when this was, and
writ the Popes lives, mentions it not in his book; Onuph annot Joan. 8.
Bell. To. Pont. l. 3 c. vlt. Baron ann. 85^. n. 64.
which is the best argument our adversaries have against it. For Anastasius his
book is of small credit with themselves. Praefat. ad lecto.
He that put it forth says himself, that it is a question among the learned,
whether this Anastasius be the true author of all the lives contained in the
book. For Platina, Trithemius, and Onuphrius, and others, think Damasus writ
their lives that were from S. Peter to himself. Which being true, then it is
not certain that Anastasius, living in Rome when Joan should be Pope, wrote
every thing in that book. He says, that by reason of the often contradictions
contained in the book, Baronius suspecteth it was co^piled by more writers
then one, and by two at least. He says, many things are affirmed contrary to
the truth, which can be proved by the testimony of no grave or ancient author;
many slips in Chronagraphy are therein, and many things repugnant, and not
agreeing together: in many places other men have added or detracted. He says,
it may not be denied that in the copy there are places so intricate, that there
is no hope to get out. And he confesses, that after the life of Hadrian the
second, the lives of three Popes are omitted that went between him and Stephen
the sixth: as the life of Joan is omitted, that should have gone between the
lives of Leo the fourth, and Bennet the third. Yea an. 739. n. 6.
Baronius, in his own favor, can espy that many things are found in others
which Anastasius has omitted; but we are whooped at for saying so: though we
bring the testimony of Martin. Polo. Sigeb. Palmer. Florent. Fascic. temp.
Anton. Volateran.
diverse authors that say, she was put not in the catologue of Popes for the
turpitude of the thing: which might be the reason why Anastasius, or others,
mention not the story. For what should the Popes Library keeper do writing her
life that must be razed out of the catologue? yea Volateran says, the story
is, by many omitted for the foulness thereof. And if it be objected that
Anastasius says, Leo continued Pope eight years, three months, and five
days, and Bennet two years, six months and ten days; that there could be
no room for Joan to sit between them her 2. years and odd: this is easily
answered by that which I have observed already, touching the corruption of the
book. An instance whereof I give in Stephen the fifth, of whom he says, that
he sat seven years, and seven months, when it was Carranz. in Steph. 5.
but seven months and three days. These things the Papists themselves have
objected against Anastasius, if any man think his silence in the matter of
Pope Joan so great an evidence, that thereupon he would condemn all others
that have written it: though it may also be inquired whether they have given
him a purgation or no. For Sur. comment rerum. in orb. gest. p. 424.
they write of their Cardinal Gropper, in praise of his continency, that he
threw his bed out of his chamber window, because on a time, he found a woman
making it. So when Joan a woman had, contrary to the succession, made the Popes
bed, and Anastasius written it; why might not he that set out out the book, be
moved with Groppers zeal, and throw the story out of the window? They that
remember how much has bin cast of late, since printing came in, out of all
authors, by such purgation, may with good discretion enquire into this point.
For the Church of Rome is so curious in avoiding suspicions, that if any
servant of hers, be it Caietan, or Ferus, or Thomas, or Anastasius himself,
make a bed in a wrong chamber, by writing any thing that may justify the
Protestants faith, out it shall go at the window, and the book be purged.

8 Fifthly, diverse Popes have been heretics against the faith, and, as Lyra
Exposit. in Mat. 16.. Non praeualebunt.
notes, revolted from it. This I have showed at large, Digression 28. Yea it
is a judgment reported by the skilfullest Divines in the Popes Church: not
only that he has been an heretic, but also, Greg. Valent. tom. 3. p. 240. 2.
that he may do his best to obtrude his private heresy upon others. Yea
Turrecr. ium. eccl. l. 4. part. 2. c. 16. Decimus septimus modus.
he may define it solemnly, and avouch that Christians ought to hold it as
Catholic: which you may be sure they would not say, but that they have seen
the experience of it in former times. Now Tho. 22. q. 39. art. 3. Turrecr. sum.
eccl. l 2. c. 112. ad. 7. and l. 4. part. 2. c. 20. Caiet. de authorit. Pap.
and Conc. c. 18.
an heretic ceasseth to be Pope, and falling from the faith, he falls ipso
facto from the chair of Peter: whence it follows, that the succession of the
Roman Church has been so often interrupted as there have bin heretics that
have succeeded; by our adversaries own doctrine. Yea Bellarmine Not. eccl. c. ^
uses this very reason to disprove the succession of the Greek Churches:
Finally, says he, all those patriarchall Churches have had manifest heretics
to their Bishops for a long time, and therefore the succession of the ancient
Pastors is interrupted. Will our adversaries now stand to that law which they
have given to others?

9 Sixthly, D. 79. Si quis.
it is the Popes own law, that if any man be installed Pope, through money or
favor of men, or by popular or military tumult, without the consent and
canonical election of the Cardinals and Clergy, let him not be accounted Pope
or Apostolical, but apostatical. By virtue whereof the succession of the Roman
Church is wholly overthrown. For it must be granted, that so often as this law
has bin broken, so often the succession was interrupted. But nothing has bin
more common then by Simony and violence to obtain the Papacy. Vit. Damasi 2.
Platina notes it in Damasus the second: The custom grew (says he) that any
ambitious fellow might invade Saint Peter's seat. And Vit. Bonif. 8.
in Boniface the eight, Ingreditur vulpes, regnat Leo, sed canis exit: Re
tande^ vera, si sic fuit, ecce Chimaera: Mat. Westminster. page 443.
of whom the saying went, that he entered like a fox, reigned like a lion, died
like a dog. Guicciard. hist. l. 1. and 6.
Thus of late years succeeded Julius and Alexander. And Platina Vit. Syluest. 3
speaking of the coming of Syluester the third to the Papacy, says, At that
time it came to pass, that he which most prevailed, not in learning and holy
life, but in bribery and ambition, even he alone obtained the Papacy, good men
being oppressed and rejected: and he wishes that this custom were not
retained in our times. Caesar Baronius entreating of the Popes that succeeded
in the ninth An. 908. n. 6.
age, tells how about the year 908, Theodora a noble woman, but a notable
strumpet, of great beauty and excellent wit, by keeping company with Adelbert
the Marquess of Tuscia, by whom also she had certain daughters, gat the
monarchy of the city into her hands, and prostituting her daughters to the
Popes, inuaders of the Apostolic sea, and to the Marquesses of Tuscia,
thereby the command of those strumpets so increased, that at their pleasure
they removed the Popes that were lawfully created, and thrust violent and
mischievous men into their rooms. An 912. n. ^.
And he adds a complaint touching the miserable face of the Church at that
time: How filthy (says he) was the face of the Roman Church then, when most
powerful, and withal most sordide whores bare all the sway at Rome? at whose
lust Seas were changed, Bishops were given, and that which is horrible and not
to be uttered, whose lovers the false Popes were thrust into the seat of
Peter, which were not to be written in the catalogue of the Roman Bishops but
for the noting of such times. For who may say they were lawful Popes, which
were thus without right thrust in by such strumpets? No where do we find any
mention of Clergy choosing or giving consent afterward: all Canons were put to
silence, the Pontifical decrees were choked, ancient traditions proscribed,
and the old customs, sacred rite, and former use in choosing the high Bishop,
utterly extinguished. Thus had lust gotten every thing into it own hand, etc.
Thus themselves write of their own succession, which shows what we are to
think thereof, the rather, if we remember Sigon. Reg. Ital. an. 1046. lib. 8.
that this abuse continued almost 200. years together; that it might appear
that if discontinuance of time, or unlawfulness of entrance could interrupt a
succession, this of the Papacy, so insolently bragged of, was grossly
interrupted. Now take some special examples. Puer ferme dece^nis. Baron. an.
1033. nu. 6. Glab. Rodulf.
Bennet the ninth was a child about ten years old. Baro. an. 955 nu a. and 3.
John the twelft, a mad lad, eighteen years old at the most. Plat. and Baro.
an. 908. 1.
Sergius the third entered violently, casting out his predecessor Christopher,
imprisoning him with bands, until he drove him to turn Friar, and so end his
days. Baro. an. 912. nu. 7.
John the eleventh was created Pope by Theodora, and violently intruded for his
filthy love. Baro. an. 928 nu. 2.
Afterward her daughter Marozia by force of arms expelled him, and caused him
to be imprisoned, where he was smothered to death. Leo the sixth succeeded him,
Baro. an. 929 1.
and he also was imprisoned and died. The next but one was John the twelft:
Baro. an. 931 nu. 1.
he was bastard to Sergius by Madam Marozia, and being yet but a stripling, was
violently put into the Popedom by his mother and her husband Wido, the
Marquess. Baro. an. 940 nu 1.
The next Pope but one was Stephen, chosen by the Romans, without the
Cardinals consent. Baro. an. 955. nu. 4.
John the twelfth was made Pope by the faction of Albericus his father, when
for his age he was not yet capable of the order of a Deacon. Luitpr. l. 6. ^.
11.
In the end his Bishops forsook him, and one night as he was in bed with a
man's wife, he devil struck him, and he died. About ten years after, Baro. an.
974. nu. 1.
Bennet the sixth was imprisoned and murdered by Boniface that succeeded him,
who got the Popedom by violence; An. 975. nu. 1
and was again himself as violently deposed, and John the 15. put in his
room: An. 985. nu. 1
but he returned again, and apprehending John, imprisoned and murdered him.
This companion is one of the succession, and yet Baronius says of him, he was
a villain and a thief, the murderer of two Popes, the inuader of Peter's
chair, who had not so much as one hair of a Roman Bishop, whether ye
consider his entrance or going forward: but deserves to be reckoned among
famous thieves and ransackers of their country, such as were Sylla and
Catiline, all who might cast their cap at this thief. These are a few examples
among many of such as have succeeded in the Church of Rome, taken out of our
adversaries own writings. May it please them to look back and make a stand a
while, and when they have viewed the manner of their coming in, and well beheld
their order, to say what they think of the Roman succession in their days,
and where it was? And to remember that it is not the badnesse of their lives
that I now urge against them, but the manner of their entrance, which by all
laws of God and men, makes them apostaticall; and as Baronius confesses, not
fit to be put into the catalogue: and yet they were above fifty Popes together
that thus entered, and this order continued 200. years at that time, beside all
other times, wherein the succession may be showed to have bin no better.

10 Lastly, Onupht. cro. To. pont. Bozi. sign. eccl. l. 19 c. 1.
there have bin thirty schisms, wherein there were two or three Popes at
once. As for example, about the year 1044. Baro. an. 1044 nu. 1.2.5. Naucler.
vol. 2. genesis 35. Onuph. in Grego. 6. ad Plat.
Bennet the ninth, Syluester the third, and John, were all Popes at once, and
made their abode in three several places of the city, dividing among them the
revenues of the Patriarchies, until Gregory the sixth, hiring them with money to
give over, himself was created the fourth Pope, and was presently expelled
again, and Clement ordained. Again, Theod Niem. l. 1. c. 7.
about the year 1379. began the schism between Vrbane and Clement, which
ended not till 70. years after. At the first there were two Popes together,
the one in Italy, the other in France; Naucler. vol. 2. gener. 46. Joan.
Marian. de reb. Hisp. l. 18. c. 1.
what time the most learned men alive could not tell which was the true Pope,
but it was doubted throughout the Christian world. Naucler. genesis 47.
Hereupon some thirty years after the schism began, the Cardinals meeting at
the Council of Pisa, elected a third Pope, and so there were three Popes:
whereof Bellarmine Romans pont. l. 4. c. 14.
says, it could not easily be judged which of them was the true and lawful
Pope, every one of them having most learned patrons. Naucler. genesis 48.
Shortly after, the Council of Constance deposed them all three, and created
Martin: which yet did not so extinguish the schism, but that in the Council of
Basil it brake out again, where the Duke of Sauoy was made Pope against
Eugenius, and was called Felix, Clement elected, an. 1379. Felix resigned, an.
1449.
between whose resignation, and the election of Clement against Urban, was 70.
years. Here let any man bethink himself what succession this was, wherein so
many Popes succeeded all at once, and no man can tell which was the true Pope.
For if the Jesuit will have me to believe the Roman faith because of the
succession of Popes in that Church, then it is needful that he show me who
they were that thus succeeded, and prove their entrance lawful: which he
cannot do, forasmuch as every one of them will maintain his own right, and as
I have noted, had the most learned and conscionable men in the world on their
side: that no man could tell who succeeded.

. 56. And this conclusion I may also confirm with the authority of the
ancient Fathers, who in express words do affirm, the Roman Church, which was
then governed by Popes as now it is, to be the lawful and Apostolic Church;
Iren. l 3. c. 3.5. August. contra Ep. fundam. c 4. and in diverse other places
S. Ambros. sermon. 47. de fide Petri. S. Hierome Epist. ad Damas. de verbo
hypost. S. Cyprian l. 1. Ep. 1. ad Cornel. l. 4. Ep ad Papianum, and others.
The which since they did affirm for no other reason but because that company
of men which were Christians in Rome, and which in their days communicated
with the Roman Church, had a lineall succession of people and priests,
derived, without interruption from the Primitive Church, which was planted by
the Apostles themselves; with which succession of Priests must needs be
inseparably joined succession of doctrine: since, I say, for this reason, and
no other, they did call the Roman, the Apostolic Church: this reason always
holding, as well since the days of these Fathers as before, we may say that in
effect, they affirmed the Roman Church, at this day, to be the true Apostolic
Church. See especially Irenaeus and S. Austin in the place already cited. And
Tertullian lib. de praescript. And Optatus lib. 2. contra Parmen.

The Answer.
1 The ancient Fathers affirm not one word of all this. First they affirm not
that the Roman Church was then governed by Popes, as now it is. For they saw
not how it is governed now, and therefore could not affirm it. And that it was
not, in their time, thus governed, I have showed, Digression. 27. and 49. number.
6. and 51. number. 9. The Bishops of Rome in their time, I grant, were called
Popes and Occumenicall, as Ep. Arsen. apud Athan. apol. 2. Basil. ep. 52.
Justin. Novel 3. and 5. in tit. Balsam. respons. in iure Graecorsi. Joan.
Aquipont. de Antichr. p. 107.
other Bishops also were, but they had no such authority as now they usurp.
Their own Concord. l. 2. c. 12.
Cusanus may teach them, that he is gotten beyond the ancient observations, not
having that power belonging to him which certain flatterers give him. And
Duarenus, a Papist likewise, yet De sacris eccles. benef. l. 1. c. 16.
confesses as much as I say, that Phocas made him the universal Bishop, which
authority his successors have maruellously increased.

2 Next, albeit they affirm the Church of Rome to be the lawful and
Apostolic Church, yet they affirmed not the present Roman Church, which they
never saw, so to be. He that affirmed Lais to be a virgin when she was ten
years old, did not say, she was so at twenty. Rome since their death has
played the whore, and lost that name and reputation which the fathers had of
her. Which answers all the places cited out of Irenaeus, Austine, Ambrose,
Hierome, and Cyprian. For, calling Rome the Apostolic Church, they spoke of
their own time, and not of ours.

3 Thirdly, they do not affirm the Roman Church in their days to be lawful
and Apostolic, for no other reason, but because it had a lineall succession
from the primitive Church: but, as I have answered Sect. 53. n. 2. and inde.
before, because it had withal the succession of doctrine, which the present
Papacy has not. Neither did they think that therefore it had succession of
doctrine because it had succession of Priests, as if the former must needs be
inseparably joined with the later. For their words express no such thing as I
have showed. They revoke schismatickes to the succession indeed of the Roman
Church, as they did likewise of others, and object it against them: but not it
alone, nor so as they would assume all succession, for ever, to be joined with
the true faith, though then, in the Churches named, it was. Neither did they
believe the Priests whom they so called, to be sacrificers, or Massing Priests.
They used the name, but they gave it not the definition which the Church of
Rome now uses. Upon all which it follows, that the ancient fathers affirmed
not the Roman Church at this day to be the true Apostolic Church, though you
see into the places cited an hundred times; the which are answered Sect. 53.
principally for this cause, that the reasons whereupon they so commended it
then, hold not now in our days as they did in theirs. If our adversaries will
take benefit by that which the fathers say in commendation of the Roman
Church in their days, they must prove their succession as inuiolated, and
their doctrine as sound as then it was: which they can never do.

. 57. Now to make an end, considering all this which I have said and proved, to
wit, that there is but one infallible and entire faith, the which is necessary
to salvation to all sorts of men, the which faith every one must learn by
some known, infallible, and vniue^sall rule, accommodate to the capacity of
every one: the which rule can be no other but the doctrine and teaching of the
true Church, which Church is always to continue visible to the worlds end, and
is to be known by these four marks aforesaid, agreeing only to the Roman
Church; whereupon it follows that it only is the true Church, of which every
one must learn that faith which is necessary to salvation: considering, I
say, all this. I would demand of the Protestants who will not admit the
authority or doctrine of the Church, how they can persuade themselves to have
that faith whereby they may be saved? or by what right they can challenge unto
themselves the title of the true Church? since, as I now have proved, they have
never a one of these four marks, which by the common consent of all, are the
true marks of Christ's true Church. How can theirs be the true Church which
neither is one, because it has no means to keep it in unity: nor holy,
because neither was there ever man of it which by miracle, or by some other
undoubted testimony, can be proved to be truly holy? Neither is their doctrine
such as those that most purely observe it, do without fail, become holy; nor
catholic, because it teaches not all true things which have bin held in
former times, but denies many of them. Neither is it spread over all the
Christian world, but every particular sect is contained in some few corners
thereof: neither has it been ever since Christ, but sprung up of late; the
first founder being Martin Luther an apostata Friar, a man after his apostasy
known both by his writings, words, and deeds, and manner of his death, to have
been a notable evil liver; nor Apostolic, because the preachers thereof
cannot derive their pedigree lineally without interruption from any Apostle,
but are forced to begin their line, if they will have any, from Luther or
Calvin, or some later. How can they then brag that they only have the true,
holy, Catholic and Apostolic faith? Since this is not found but only in the
true, holy, Catholic, and Apostolic Church; and remaining always, as S
Augustine said, in ventre Ecclesiae, in the belly of the Church. It is
impossible that they which are not of this Church, should have the true faith,
according to the saying of the same Augustine before cited Quisquis ab hoc ventre
separatus est, necesse est vt falsa loquatur: whosoever is separated from this
belly of the Church, he must needs speak false For who can once have true
faith, unless he first hear it? because fides est ex auditu. Romans 10. Faith
comes of hearing. But how can one hear it sine praedicante, without one to
preach it truly unto him?

The Answer.
1 That which the Jesuit has said and proved, is granted him, to wit, that
there is indeed but one true faith, which is necessary to salvation to all
sorts of men; the which as it must, so it may be learned by that rule which God
has left, infallible, universal and accommodate to the capacity of every
one: the which rule is the Scriptures, contained in the books of the old and
new Testament, and not that which the Jesuit means by the doctrine and
teaching of the Church: though no man deny but that is needful for the showing
and teaching of the rule to all that shall be saved, expounding the said
teaching of the ministry whereby the faithful are directed in the Church. But
he has not proved the Church to be always visible to the world, nor those four
to be the Notes of the Church. He has said it, but not proved it, as appears
by my answer.

2 All which being considered, his demands are soon and shortly answered, that
the Protestants admit the authority and doctrine of the Church, though they
think not the Papacy to be it, nor the authority thereof to be above the
Scripture. And the grounds whereupon they persuade themselves to have the saving
faith, are so infallible, that all the Papists in the world cannot confute
them. And our title to the true Church is sound, when our adversaries have
smattered and wrangled against it what they can: for the doctrine of the
Scripture which in all points we profess and believe, prove it. And albeit
those four, One, Holy, Catholic, and Apostolic, be not the marks of the
Church, but certain qualities therein, yet we have them, at least for any
thing the Jesuit has said to the contrary: all whose discourse against us,
pretending the want of these things among us, I have fully answered in their
proper places, and retorted upon himself, whereby the judicious reader may be
satisfied. And therefore when we say, ours is the true faith, we brag not, but
maintain and avouch our lawful title, since, as S. Austin says, the same is
not to be found but in the belly of the true Church, which we are. Whereupon
we advise all Papists whatsoever to renounce the Papacy if they will hold the
truth and be saved. For, according to the saying of the same Austin aforecited,
whosoever is separated from this belly of the Church, must needs speak false,
because out of the true Church there is neither true preaching, nor lawful
sending such as should preach: and I have manifestly showed that the Papacy is
not the true Church, but a disease, that by the faction of some, grew unto it.

3 Thus the whole discourse of this Section is briefly answered. But where he
says, our religion sprang up of late, the first founder being Martin Luther,
an apostata Friar, a man known by his writings, words, deeds, and death, to
have been a notable evil liver: this must be a little more stood upon, because
it is the burden of every song among the Papists. And first, it is to no
purpose to say, our religion sprang up of late, in Luther, unless our evidence
whereby we show it to agree with the Scripture, and to have been taught, in the
Church of Rome it self, many hundred years before Luther was borne, can be
disproued. Next, we grant Luther was a Friar, and obtaining the knowledge of
the truth, renounced the profession, which was no other apostasy, or fault in
him, then it was in S. Paul when he renounced the profession of a Pharisee,
and became an Apostle; both the professions being hypocrisy, save that of the
Friar was of a deeper tincture, as I have showed, Digress. 45. Then concerning
his writings the Jesuit is no competent judge. For woe to him and all his
Church, if Luthers writings be good. And therefore let them be examined by the
Scripture, the touchstone of all men's writings, and not by the witles prejudice
of idle companions that never read them. And if they contain some particular
things that deserve reproof, yet what disgrace is that to the substance of his
writings? What fathers writing is so pure but it contains some error? Yea I
challenge the Jesuit, let him name, if he can, one writer of his own side, old
or new, Schooleman, or Jesuit, but some or other in the Church of Rome will
except against something he writ? Thomas, Caietan, Bellarmine, and Baronius are
controlled; yea in the later editions, the Council of Trent has purged, in a
manner, all writers; which makes it clear, that some errors in Luthers books
disadvantage us no more then the errors purged and espied in their own books,
disadvantage the Papists. And yet the things that are most excepted against,
are no errors, but the ancient truth maintained against Popish innovation. And
let the words of Erasmus, a man able to judge, by Antididag. p. 58. Sur.
comment p. 288. Staplet. discourse. p. 159.
the Papists own confession, determine this matter. Epist. ad Cardin. Mogent.
He says, It is observed of a truth that these men (the Papists) condemn many
things in Luthers books, as heretical, which in Austin and Bernard are read
for godly and good Divinity: and he adds, That he sees this, the best men
are least offended at his writings. The which is most true, it being their
ordinary practice, for the hatred of our persons, to rail upon that, which by
their own confession the ancient fathers held before us. So Hosiand hist.
eccl. cent. 16. p.837.
Andreas Masius, in the company of diverse, acknowledged there was more
Divinity in one page of Luther then sometimes in a whole book of some father.
Let his writing therefore rest, and come to his life and death.

Digression. 54. Containing a brief narration touching the life and death of
Martin Luther, with the incredible reports thereof made by his adversaries. And
showing how sundry Popes, in the Church of Rome, have lived and died worse then
he, supposing all reports were true.
4 In speaking of this matter, that stands altogether upon witnesses, I must
put the reader in mind of a speech of Bellarmines: Not. eecl. c. 14.. Sed
respondeamus
That it is the part of a fool rather to believe Calvin and Illyricus touching
ancient histories, whereat they were not present, then Bernard, Bonauenture,
and Antonine, that were present. Let this law be kept then, that Surius,
Lindan, Pontacus, and other railing Papists, that were not present at Luthers
life and death, be not credited against them that lived with him, and saw him
die: and if any will believe them, let him be the Jesuits fool. Now touching
his life, Melancthon that was his companion, and lived with him, has written
it, and commended it, to say no more. And Erasmus, that was familiar with him,
L. 11. Ep. 1. ad. Card. Eborac.
in a certain Epistle to Cardinal Wolsey, gives testimony, that his life was
approved with great consent of all men. And this, says he, is no small
prejudice, that the integrity of his manners is so great, that his very
enemies can find nothing which they may calumniate. As indeed to this day
nothing can be produced against him that is substantial. They clamor of his
doctrine, because it was against them, and produce some vehement speeches,
which his adversaries by their injuries provoked him unto, as Saint Hierome
often times uses the like vehemence; but what is that to his conversation? Let
them show his life to have been led otherwise then became a Preacher of the
Gospel: what murders, riots, whoredoms, periuries, scandalous courses did he
live in, as many Popes have done, and the topgallant of the Romish clergy?

5 They say, he married a Nun, after he and she had vowed to the contrary. But
this is a silly accusation, for the Pope has dispensed with many to do the
like; and it is a ruled case in the Schools, that the solemn vow of
continency may be dispensed with. And therefore in this point they offended no
further but in marrying without the Popes license, supposing the liberty of
marriage depended on his permission: which license if he had purchased, then
the fault should have been none, although he had married his own sister, by
the dispensation of Martin the fifth. And so all the rest of his faults, if they
be inquired into, will prove to be nothing else but certain trespasses against
the Popes corrupt canons.

6 Touching his death you see the Jesuit speaks suspitiously, read
prodigious tales in the books of our adversaries, which I will set down by
and by: but they which saw him die, and accompanied him to his gra^e, thus
report it, from whose mouths we have it Sleida. comment. l. 16. Lonicer. theat.
h^st page 244.
written: Being ill at case, yet nowtwithstanding the last day of his life, he
came out to dinner, and also to supper, what time he had much comfortable
speech concerning the life to come; and this among other; that as ^ldam in
Paradise, when the woman was brought unto him, did not ask who she was, or
whence she came, but presently knew her to be flesh of his flesh, and bone of
his bone, by reason he was filled with the holy Ghost, and endued with the true
knowledge of God: So we in the next life, being renewed by Christ, shall know
our parents, wives, and children, much more perfectly then Adam at that time
knew wife. After supper he prayed, as his custom was, privately by himself;
in which time the pain of his breast that had long troubled him, began to
increase: but ^^ting laid on his bed, and having taken some of an Unicorns
horn in wine, he slept soundly by the space of two hours: and being awaked,
he was had into his own chamber, saying, as he went, into thy hands, o God, do
I commend my spirit: for thou o God of truth have redeemed me. Soon after, he
gave himself to rest, but first saluted his friends that were present, saying
also to them: Pray God that he will preserve unto us the doctrine of his
Gospel, for the Pope and Trent Council are in hand with grievous things. And
when he had said this he began to sleep; but the force of his disease
awakening him, something after midnight, he began to complain of the stopping
in his breast, and to feel death coming upon him, Whereupon he fell to prayer,
using these words: Heavenly Father, who art God and the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and the God of all comfort, I give thee thanks for that thou have
revealed thy Son Christ unto me: in whom I have believed, whom I have
professed, loved, and preached, and whom the Bishop of Rome, and the rest of
the wicked, persecute and reproach: I beseech thee my Lord Jesus Christ receive
my poor soul. And heavenly Father, though I be taken out of this life, and
shall lay down this my body, yet I believe assuredly that I shall remain for
ever with thee, and that none shall be able to pluck me out of thy hands.
Having ended this prayer, he repeated the 16. verse of the 3. chapter of Saint
John: So God loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life. And
then the 20. verse of the 68. Psalm, Our God is the God that saves us, even
the Lord God that delivers from death. And not long after this, he commended
his soul into the hands of God, two or three times over, with show of much
comfort: until, as a man falling asleep, by little and little, he departed
this life, the standers by perceiving no pain to vex him. This was the end of
that good man, whose memory shall be precious in the Church for ever, and there
kept green and flourishing as the rod of Aaron laid up in the tabernacle: the
same time being present by him the Earl of Mansfield, and other noble men,
Iustus Jonas, Michael Coelius, Ioannes Aurifaber, and many more, who have
testified these things to be true, and accompanied his body to Wittenberge;
where by the appointment of the Prince Elector, he was honorably buried in the
Tower Church, and with great lamentation of many; Bugenhagius making the
funeral Sermon, and Melancthon the Oration.

7 This the Jesuit is bound to believe, because it is testified by such as
were present, and not the malicious reports of his deadly enemies that made
them on their fingers ends, wherein there is not so much as common likelihood
to maintain them. For let it be tried whether the talesensuing be probable:
Cocl. vit. Lutheri. Pontac. Burde. an. 1544. Lindan. fuga idol. p. 80. c. 8.
Caluinotur cism. page 957. Defense of the Cens. p. 66. Bell. etc.
That going to bed merry and drunk, he was found the next morning dead in his
bed, his body being black, and his tongue hanging forth as if he had been
strangled: which some think was done by the devil, some by his wife. And
that, as they bare him to the Church to bury him, his body so smelt, that they
were feign to throw it in a ditch, and go their ways. For these things savor
of the mint. Thyrraeus the Jesuit De Daemo. niac. part. 1. These. 99.
tells, how the same day Luther died, many that were possessed of devils, in
a town of Brabant, were on a sudden delivered, and not long after possessed
again. And when it was demanded of the devils, where they had been? they
answered, that by the appointment of their Prince, they were called forth to
the funeral of Luther. And this was proved to be true, because a servant of
Luthers, that was in the chamber when he died, opening a casement to take in
the air, saw near unto him a great number of black spirits hopping and
dancing. The which is a merry tale, save that it was made between the devil
and the exorcist, and crosses the former: for if Luthers servant was in the
chamber by him when he died, then he was not strangled suddenly by his wife in
the night: and if the spirits departed out of the possessed to go to his
burial, then belike he was buried and not left in a ditch.

8 But the fury of his enemies was so great against him, that not able to
conceal these tales made against him till he was dead, they published them in
print in his life time, which notably conuinceth them of slander and malice.
The copy of which news I hear set down, that such as have read the reports
of railing Papists touching him, may be advertised of the credit thereof, when
this was set abroad long before his death. Lonicer. theatrum p. 246.
A horrible miracle, and such as was never heard of before, that God who for
ever is to be praised, in the foul death of Martin Luther, damned in body and
soul, showed for the glory of Christ, and the amendment and comfort of the
godly. When Martin Luther fell into his disease, he desired the body of our
Lord Jesus to be communicated to him; which having received, he died soon
after. And when he saw his end approach, he desired that his body might be laid
on the altar, and worshipped with divine honors. But God willing at the length
to make an end of horrible errors, by a huge miracle warned the people to
desist from the impiety that Luther had brought in. For his body being laid
in the grave, on the sudden such a tumult and terror arose, as if the
foundation of the earth had been shaken. Whereupon they that were present at
the funeral grew amazed with fear, and lifting up their eyes saw the holy
host hanging in the air. Wherefore with great devotion they took it, and
laid it in a holy place: which being done, this hellish noise was heard no
more. The next night after was heard a noise and cracking about Luthers tomb,
much louder then before, which waked all that were in the city out of their
sleep, trembling and almost dead for fear. Wherefore in the morning opening
the sepulcher where Luthers detestable body was laid, they found neither body,
nor bones, nor clothes, but a stink of brimstone coming out of the grave, had
welnigh killed all the standers by. By the which miracle many being terrified,
reformed their lives to the honor of the Christian faith and the glory of
Jesus Christ. This merry conceit being spread over Italy, at length a copy
came to Luthers hands, which having perused, he writ these words under: I
Martin Luther, by this my hand writing confess and testify, that upon the 21.
of March I received this fiction, concerning my death, as it was full of malice
and madness: and I read it with a glad mind, and a cheerful countenance, but yet
detested this blasphemy, whereby a stinking lie is fathered on the divine
majesty of God. As concerning the rest, I cannot but rejoice and laugh at the
devils malice, wherewith he and his rout, the Pope and his accomplices, pursue
me. And God convert them from this devilish malice. But if this my prayer be
for the sin that is unto death, that it cannot be heard, then God grant they
may fill up the measure of their sin, and with such lying libels as this let
them delight themselves one with another, to the full. Hitherto the libell,
with Luthers answer; whereby it appears of how shall credit the Papists
reports are touching Luther, and what the practice of the Roman Church is
against the persons of all that embrace not her errors: and the Jesuit is
admonished hereby, that Luthers life and death, reported by his enemies, is no
indifferent motive why any man should mislike the Protestants religion the more
for it. For this report is made the more incredible, because it walked abroad
before he was dead: and the Reader may the easilier believe that I say, because
within our own memory, the like was done by Calvin and Beza, in their life
time.

9 But what needed the Jesuit labor thus to discredit us by Luthers manner of
death and evil life? For supposing he were culpable in some things, yet he
might be a Saint in comparison of diverse Popes, who are of greater regard in
the Romish Church then he could be in ours. For the world never bare such
monsters as the Popes have bin: that were a man desirous to represent the most
co^plete villainy that could be imagined, his next way were to make the picture
of a Pope: whose transcendent wickedness is not our report, as Luthers life is
theirs, but the constant narration of his own subjects, the Papists
themselves. They write of Syluester the second, that Martin. Polo an. 1007.
Platin. in Silu 2. Fasci. temp. ann. 1004.
being a Monk, he forsook his monastery, and giving himself to the devil,
followed him, and did homage to him, that all things might prosper according to
his mind, which thing the devil promised him. And so by bribery he obtained
the Archbishopricks of Rhemes and Rauenna, and at last the Popedom also, by the
help of the devil: upon this condition, that after his death he should be his,
body and soul. In the end, as he was saying Mass, by the noise of devils
about him, he understood he should die; whereupon confessing his sin before
the people, he desired all the members of his body, wherewith he had served the
devil, to be cut off, and the trunk of his body to be laid in a wagon, and
buried where the horse would draw it. And Caesar Baronius, that labors to
excuse him, An 991. nu. 7.
yet confesses, that he forsook his monastery and became a courtier, and in
talking, babbling, slandering, detracting, flattery, and doubleness of mind,
being made to deceive, he outwent all men. Touching Boniface the seventh,
Baron. anu. 985. n. 1.
they write that he was a very villain, and a church robber, a savage thief,
the cruel murderer of two Popes, the inuader of Peter's chair, that had not so
much as a hair of a Pope, but were to be reckoned among the ransackers and
spoilers of their country, such as were Sylla and Catiline, which were not
comparable to this thief that murdered two Popes. Have you heard a man thus
set forth, as the Pope is here by his own Cardinal? yet he is no body to John
the twelfth, whom Platin. in Ioa^. 13. Naucler. an. 956.
the stories call a monster of a man: Platin. in Joan. 13.
one from his youth up, defiled with all vice and turpitude; more given to
hunting then prayer, when he could tend it for lechery: Sigon. reg. Ital. l. 7.
an. 963.
accused and detected before the Emperor, in a Synod of Bishops, of murders,
adulteries, incests, periuries, and other vices of all sorts. Onuph. annot.
Plat. an Joan 8. Luitpran d. l 6. c. 6. and 7. quem refert Baron. an. 963.
His whores that he kept are named, Reynera a widow, Stephana his fathers
concubine, and her sister; Joan, Anne, and diverse others. He turned the Palace
of Lateran into a stews. He would forcibly ravish wives, widows, maids, that
came from other places to Rome on pilgrimage, the fame whereof made them afraid
to come. He would give them Saint Peter's golden challices and crosses for a
reward. He used hunting openly, and dicing and drinking. At dice he would call
upon the devil to help him, drink healths to the devil, set men's houses on
fire, revel it up and down the city in armor. He ordained a Deacon in his
stable among his horses; a Bishop of ten years old, and made Bishops for money.
He put out his godfathers eyes, cut off his Cardinals members, one man's tongue
he cut out, and maimed two Cardinals more, cutting off ones nose, and another
hand: Anton. chro. part. 2. tit. 16. c. 1. 16. Fascic. temp. an 944. Baron.
ann. 964. n. 17.
in the end, as he was committing adultery with a man's wife, he was suddenly
slain by the devil, and died without repentance.

10 I could give the like examples of many more, but Alexander the sixth, that
was Pope about one hundred years ago, shall serve the turn. Machiauel De
Principe. c. 18.
writes of him, that he did nothing but play the deceiuer of mankind: he gave
his mind to nothing but villainy and fraud, whereby to deceive men. Onuph. vit.
Alex. vi Guicci. hist. l. 1.
He got the Papacy by Simony, buying the consent of the Cardinals, that after
smarted for it. The king of Naples signified to the queen his wife with
tears, when he heard of his election, that there was a Pope created who would
be the bane of Italy, and of the whole commonweal of Italy: Stultissime
Pontifice^ creatum, exitio tandem cunctis futurum, non falsi vates
denuntiarunt. Onuph
the which was also the general conceit of all men. Guicciardin Lib. 6.
says, He was a Serpent, that with his poisoned infidelity, and horrible
examples of cruelty, luxury, and monstrous covetousness, selling, without
distinction, things holy and profane, had infected all the world. Lib. 1.
His manners and customs were dishonest, little sincerity in his
administrations, no shame in his face, small truth in his words, little faith
in his heart, and less religion in his opinions. All his actions were defiled
with insatiable covetousness, immoderate ambition, barbarous cruelty. He was
not ashamed contrary to the custom of former Popes (who to cast some color
over their infamy, were wont to call the^ their nephews) to call his sons, his
children, and for such to express them to the world. Lib. 3.
The brute went, that in the love of his own daughter Lucretia, were
concurrent not only his two sons, the Duke of Candy, and the Cardinal of
Valence, but himself also, that was her father: who as soon as he was chosen
Pope took her from her husband, and married her to the Lord of Pesere: but not
able to suffer her husband to be his corriuall, he dissolved that marriage also,
and took her to himself by virtue of S. Peter's keys. Lib. 6. Onup.
It was, among other graces, his natural custom, to use poysenings, not only
to be revenged of his enemies, but also to despoile the wealthy Cardinals of
their riches. And this he spared not to do against his dearest friends: till at
the last, having a purpose, at a banquet, to poison diverse Cardinals, and for
that end appointed his cup bearer to give attendance with the wine made ready
for the nonce; who mistaking his bottle, gave the poisoned cup to him; was thus
himself dispatched, by the just judgment of God, that had purposed to murder
his friends, that he might be their heir.

11 I am afraid I have been to bold in meddling with these matters. For the
Church of Rome has a law within her self, D. 40. Non ncs. glos.. qui^ enim.
that it is sacrilege to reason about the Popes doings, whose murders are
excused like Sampsons, and thefts like the Hebrews, and adulteries like
Jacobs. Qualis qualis autem fuerit Sleidanus sacra mentarius haereticus dignus
non fuit qui illum reprehenderet. Sur. comment. an. 1547. says thus of
Sleidan, because be reported such like matter of Paul the third, as Guicciardin
does of Alexander.
And our adversaries think whatsoever their Popes be, yet such sacramentarie
heretics, as we are, be not worthy to reprove them: and therefore the good
and courteous reader shall be at liberty whether he will expound my narration
as a reproof of the Pope, which were dangerous: or as a bare report of the
conceit which all men, even his best friends, have of his Popes, which I make
for no other intent but to show that Luther lived and died an honester man then
any Pope of Rome in his days. For Guicciardine Lib. 16.
says, the goodness of the Pope is then commended, when it exceeds not the
wickedness of other men, that we may know how rare a thing it is for the
Bishop of Rome to be good. The which when our adversaries see, they should
desist from their vein of railing against us, and by holding them close to the
argument, they should maintain their cause, or else, for ever, hold their
peace.

. 58. But how shall one preach truly, at least in all points, nisi mittatur,
unless he be sent of God? But how should we know that Luther, or Calvin, or
any other, that would needs leap out of the Church, and leave that company,
wherein was undoubted lawful succession, and by succession lawful mission, or
sending from God? How should we, I say know that these men, teaching new and
contrary doctrine, were sent of God? Nay certainly, we may be most sure they
were not sent of God. For since almighty God has, by his Son, planted a
Chur^^ ^n earth, which ever shall be until the worlds end, and has put in his
Church a visible succession of ordinary Pastors, which he will always, with
the assistance of himself, and of his holy Spirit, as has been proved, so
guide that they shall never universally fail to teach the true faith, and to
preserve the people from error; we are not now to expect any sent from God, to
instruct the people, but such only as came, in this ordinary manner, by
lawful succession, order, and calling, as S Paul says, Heb. 5. Nec sibi sumat
honorem sed qui vocatur a Deo tanquam Aaron: to wit, visibly, and with peculiar
consecration as his was, Leuit. 8. to which accords that which we read 2.
Paralip. 26. verse. 18. whereas Azanas said to Ozias the king, Non est tui
officij, Ozia, vt adoleas incensum, sed sacerdotum, hoc est, filiorum Aaron qui
consecrati sunt ad huiusmodi ministerium: Egredere de sanctuario, etc. Which
bidding when Ozias contemned, and would not obey, he was presently smitten with
a leprosy: and then being terrified; feeling the punishment inflicted by our
Lord, he hastened away: as in the same place is said. By which place does
plainly appear, that it does not belong to any other to do priestly
functions, as to offer incense, or sacrifice to God, or to take upon them
authority to preach, instruct, and teach the people, but only to Priests,
called visibly, and consecrated for this peculiar purpose, as Aaron, and his
children were. For though the priesthood of the Pastors of the new law, be not
Aaronicall, yet it agrees with the priesthood of Aaron, according to S. Paul,
in the foresaid place, that those that come to it, must not take the honor to
themselves, but must be called unto it as Aaron was, to wit, visibly and by
peculiar consecration, and must come to it in this ordinary manner, which our
Savior termed to enter in by the door, Ioh. 10. to wit, by Christ, who
visibly sent his Apostles, saying, Euntes docete omnes gentes, baptizantes eos,
etc. Matthew. vlt. and Ioh. 20. using a peculiar ceremony, Qui sufflauit in eos,
he breathed upon them saying, Accipite Spiritum sanctum, quorum remiseritis
peccata, remittuntur eis, and quorum retinueritis, retenta sunt, and are not
forgiven them. By which words visibly was given to the Apostles, both power to
absolve from sins, and a vertuall commandment to the people to make
confession to them of all their mortal sin: since without this confession,
they could not tell what to remit, and when to retain sins. The which
Apostles, being thus visibly by our Savior called, consecrated, and sent, did
visibly, by imposition of hands, ordeine others their successors, and these
others, from time to time, without interruption, until this present, men, who
now are Priests and Pastors in the Catholic Roman Church. These therefore, I
say, enter in by Christ the door, and therefore are true Pastors, and
whosoever enters in any other way, our Savior, in the same place, has told
us how to account of them, where he says, Qui non intrat per ostium in ouile
ouium, sed ascendit aliunde, fur est and latro, who comes not to feed the
sheep, but to steal, kill, and destroy them. So that we have not to expect any
to be sent of God, to teach and instruct us in faith, but such as come in this
ordinary manner, as it is certain Luther and Calvin did not come.

The Answer.
1 In this place the Jesuit, to show we have not the Church, excepteth against
our Pastors, and particularly against Luther and Calvin, as if they had no
lawful calling to preach as they did. And indeed it is a certain truth, that
all true Pastors in the Church of God, taking upon them to instruct his people,
must have a calling thereunto, and be sent of God, as the texts alleged do
well prove. Heb. 5.4. 2. Chron. 26.18. Mat. 28.19. Ioh. 10.1. and 20.22. And if
any man leap out of the Church, forsaking that company wherein lawful
succession undoubtedly is, and with the succession lawful sending from God, he
must be reputed a hireling that comes to destroy. For this is the touchstone
whereby true teachers are discerned, and the contrary discovered. And by this
we know the Pastors of our Church, against whom the Jesuit excepteth, to be
legitimate. For the God of heaven sent them, and when they came, they leaped
not out of the Church, otherwise then the wheat does out of the chafe when it
is winnowed, neither did they teach any thing that was new, or contrary to
the Church, but continued and reformed the ancient doctrine which the Papacy,
in the Church, had corrupted. And let the reader remember, which I have often
answered in this book, that the Popish religion, and abuses of all sorts; in
process of time, grew, as a leprosy, upon the Church, and, as I may say,
incorporated themselves therewith; by reason whereof things good and evil were
mingled together, Gods word with man's traditions, the true Sacraments with man's
errors, and the external calling of Ministers with foul corruptions: in which
case Luther, and our teachers, renouncing the said errors, traditions, and
corruptions, and retaining the rest, cannot be said to have gone out of the
Church, but to remain perfectly in it still; because that which they left, was
not univocally of the church, but only in conceit was reputed so. In the Church
of Rome, known by that name, and in no other, in these Western parts, were
the true Scriptures, Sacraments, Callings and Successions, and every part of
true faith and necessary doctrine: but these things were not the Papacy
against which we go; the Papacy was, and is, that which over and besides was,
by degrees, added to them. And therefore our Pastors leapt not out of the
Church, which always goes with the truth, but out of the Papacy; and
preaching by virtue of that external mission which they received in the
Papacy, they had the undoubted commission of Christ whereto they had right.
And even as when a fair poole of water becomes in time corrupted, weeds
grow, the mudde increases; and frogs creep into it, the owner thereof cutteth
a channel, and leaving the corruption draws the water to another place, and
so occupies it without danger; and the frogs remaining must not complain the
water is theirs, because the pit, wherein they remain, is it that first
engendered it: no more may the Papacy accuse us for going out of the church of
Rome, as long as we left nothing behind us but the frogs and weeds; and that
which was the ancient water, before they came, we are; whose growing upon us
was the cause that we separated, although they succeeded in the Church as the
weeds and frogs did in the poole.

2 The Jesuit obiecteth, that God has planted a Church, to endure in all
ages, wherein he will have a visible succession of teachers, preserved from
failing in the true faith; and therefore none are sent of God but such as come
in this ordinary manner, called, and succeeding, visibly, and with peculiar
consecration, which Christ terms entering in by the door. The Antecedent
whereof is false. For though Gods ordinance be that he have a Church, and
teachers therein, in all ages, succeeding one another, and standing in the
truth; yet he has made no law that this succession shall be visible, or with
peculiar consecration, as the Jesuit means them. For by visible he
understands conspicuous, at al times to all the world, which is a foolish
assertion, 17. And so forward to the 24.
confuted in it own place where he disputed it. It is sufficient that the
succession of the Pastors in the Church, be visible to the children of the
Church. And by peculiar consecration, Dom. Bann.
he means the Popish ceremony of Orders, which is a private invention of the
later times, and the proper corruption that grew to the outward ordination and
calling of Ministers which God appointed. Let these false definitio^s be
removed, and the succession, and calling, and consecration, be expounded as God
meant them, when he said they should always be in the Church, and our Pastors
have them, as I have answered. 52. n. 5. and. 53. and so forward.
before. Yea our very adversaries deny not, but a man may be a lawful
Minister though a Bishop never consecrated him; and whereas the common opinion
in the Church of Rome is, that a Bishop differs not from a Priest in order,
but in jurisdiction only, hence it follows, unavoidably, that iure diuino a
simple priest, in some cases, may ordain, because the power of ordaining
belongs not to jurisdiction but to order, as they call it. The which point
will serve to avoid all that the Jesuit has said in this section, though we
should say no more.

3 The Texts of Scripture objected are easily answered. To that of Heb. 5. I
say it requires no more but that the party be called of God, which Luther
was, as we know by his labor and the fruit of it, though Luther had also a
lawful outward calling, as I have showed, Sect. 52. number. 5. For the Apostle
speaks of Christ, who yet had none of the peculiar consecration mentioned by
the Jesuit, but only a calling from God otherwise testified. All the other
places receive the same answer. For they mention nothing but a lawful entrance
into the ministry, containing no one syllable that binds to such an
external kind of succession as our adversaries call for. Whereupon I conclude
that Luther and Calvin, and all our ordinary Pastors came in by the door,
and satisfied the whole ordinance of God touching a lawful calling. For
inwardly God enabled them, and opened their eyes to see the Roman corruptions;
and outwardly they were created Pastors, and teachers of Divinity in the
Churches where they lived, and where they preached, the magistrate authorized,
and the people allowed them; which is sufficient, unless the doctrine they
taught could be disproued. And if any other outward ceremony, or custom,
were wanting, which is used in the Church of Rome, or has been used in the
purer Church, in former ages; we care not for that, but are ready to
maintain, that, all circumstances considered, no such custom, or ceremony,
is simply, and by the law of God, or absolutely, necessary.

Digression. 55. Showing how uncertain, and contrary, the Papists are among
themselves, touching the power of Priesthood in remitting sins; and
concerning the first institution of Shrift, where it began.
4 The Jesuit alleging the words of Christ, mentioned Ioh. 20.22. to show the
necessity of coming in by a lawful calling: by the way glozeth two things
upon them, that deserve to be noted. First, that thereby the power to absolve
from sins, was given the Apostles, and so consequently to all Priests. Which I
will show to be but a new opinion, and of no certainty, that the reader may
see the Church of Rome is not at one with her self touching the principallest
points of her faith, and no man can be certain of any thing that the Jesuit
says: for these be his words, To the Apostles was given power to absolve from
sins. But Fra. Victoria Relect 1. de potest. eccles. sect. 3.
says, There be many Catholic authors, which to the power of Orders, do not
simply attribute the remission of sins, or collation of grace, or any effect,
truly spiritual, at all. For they say, mortal sins can never be forgiven
but by contrition, and that by the power of the keys sins are never
forgiven, or the first grace conferred. Wherein he has truly reported of many
great and ancient Schoolmen. For so thought Lib. 4. d. 18.
the Master of Sentences. And Mayor 4 d. 14. q. 2. concl. 3.
says, The sacrament of Penance does no way blot out sin, adding, that the
Doctors hold this commonly. Mich. Aygna^. Bonon. in Ps. 31
Bononiensis demanding whether a Priest can remit sin by the power of the
keys, answers, that the keys are taken three ways. First for the
principal authority simply; and so they belong to God only. Next for
authority, not simply principal, but precellent, and so they belong to Jesus
Christ only. Thirdly for authority, neither principal, nor precellent, but
ministerial only: and thus the Pope, and his successors have the keys, as
Christ said to Peter, I will give thee the keys. By this ministerial power he
means the same that Peter Lombard, who^ he alleges and follows, does, Mag.
lib. 4. d. 18. Ouand. 4. d. 18. pro. 26.
who is now rejected for holding that the key works not any absolution from
the sin, but only declares the party to be absolved. But Altisiod. part.
4. tract 6. cap. 8. q. 2. Alexand. part. 4. q. 80. m. 1 ad 3. Occh. 4. q 8.
lit. q. Gabr. 4. d. 14. q. 2. lit. d. and n.
most ancient Schoolmen follow him. Occham says, I answer according to the
Master, that Priests bind and loose, because they declare men to be bound and
loosed.

5 The which exposition, being the truth, as it overthrows the present
conceit holden touching the Priests absolution, that it is a judicial act,
effecting grace, and justifying a sinner, (whether contrite, or not contrite,
that is not material to the Priests authority:) so it ineuitably destroys
the Sacrament of Penance. For this supposed power to remit and retain sin,
is the foundation of that Sacrament. For therefore it is believed to be a
Sacrament, because the Scripture mentions the remitting of sins by the
power of the keys; which power being no more but only to declare them to be
remitted by true contrition, without conferring any grace to the party, the
Sacrament is destroyed for want of conferring grace properly: and so there is
no argument in the Scripture that Penance is a Sacrament.

6 Again, the Jesuit says, that the Apostles had power to absolve from sin,
and the people a commandment to confess their sins, given in those words of
John: thereby affirming his supposed Sacrament to be instituted by Christ, and
in those very words: wherein he falls again into the former difficulties,
and worse. For in the 40. Section he said, the Protestants denying Penance and
Satisfaction to be needful, go against that of John Baptist, Do works worthy
of penance; and that of our Savior, Mat. 4. Do penance. Which cannot be so if
Penance were not ordained before Christ's resurrection: for howsoever he will
think the denial of Penance is against the Scripture, yet if it were not
ordained till Christ was risen, he is debarred from saying we do against the
words of John Baptist, and Christ, Mat. 4. because those words command no
Penance; or if they do, then it was not instituted in John. 20. after Christ's
resurrection. Let the Jesuit choose which he will.

7 The truth is, our adversaries and the Church whereof they are, though they
make much ado with this sacrament, because it is the net that takes all their
provision, yet can they not tell either when or where it was instituted, or who
commanded it. You hear what the Jesuit says, that Christ did it in the 20.
Chapter of S. John: which is, I grant, the current opinion among the Jesuits,
since the Council of Trent, but in former times it was not so, before these
men, the Paracelsians of the text, took it in hand. Now ( Ouand. 4. d. 16 pro.
15.
faith a late Friar) out of the Tridentine Council, proving the necessity of
confession by disco^rse out of the authority of John 20, we have this to be
the germane sense of that text. He says, Now since the Tridentine Council
this is the sense, but before no such matter was believed. Nay contrary: for,
Verb. Confessio. 2. n. 1.
says Angelus Clauasinus, a truer way (then by John 20.) whereby it is proved
that confession is de iure diuino, is this, that it must not be thought the
Church and the Apostles would have laid so dangerous a burden upon men, if
Christ had not given this precept to them, as he did concerning the other
sacraments, baptism excepted, whereof it appears not when or how they were
expressly ordained. Mark how he says the 20. of John, is not the best way to
prove penance by, because the ordination thereof is no where expressed in the
Scripture: that the Jesuits have good reason Bellar. de effect. sacram. c. 25.
to be contented with the testimony of the Tridentine Council, albeit they
have no other; and to fear lest, if the authority thereof be taken away,
their whole Christian faith he called in question. For I assure the Reader,
that before this Council, which was but fifty years since, the sacrament of
penance was never known where it was ordained, though as learned Papists had
the matter in hammering as any were at Trent, as I will precisely make
demonstration.

8 For one sort of them, Glo. de poenit. d. 5. in poenitentia. Panor. omnes
vtriusque. de poenit. and remiss.
the Canonists especially, think it was taken up by a custom or tradition of
the Church, and not by any authority of the Scripture. And those Schoolmen
also incline to this opinion, Alexan. 4. q. 8. m 2 art. 1. and q. 17. m. 3.
art. 2. Bonauent. que^ refert Fr. Oua^d. 4. d. 16. pro. 2.
that have written how Christ ordained it not. The second opinion is, that it
was ordained by God, and so is de iure diuino. But by what authority was it
made known and propounded to us? Rosell. verb. confessio 2. n 1. Orbell. 4. d.
17. q 1.
Some say by tradition, without any Scripture. Scotus 4. d. 17. qu. 1. Idem
Iansen. concord. c. 147.
writes, that either we must hold it to have been published by the Gospel: or
if that be not sufficient, it must be said that it is a positive law published
by Christ to his Apostles, and by the^ to the Church, without any Scripture, as
the Church holds many other things revealed unto her by word of mouth without
all Scripture. And Peresius De tradit. part. 3. consid. 3
says, the naked and clear manner of this sacramental institution, touching
the substance and circumstances thereof, stands only upon divine tradition,
which the holy martyr Clemens revealed, from the mind of Saint Peter, whom he
daily heard. But others say, it is contained in the Scripture, written: but
they are not agreed where; and therefore let it be enquired where it is
written? Some say in the old and new Testament both. For Galatinus De Arcan. l.
10 c. 3
says, the Jews had confession. And Waldensis Tom. 2. c. 140.
writes, that Christ commanded it not, but confirmed and supplied the ancient
custom thereof used in the old law. Nevertheless others deny this, and say,
Christ appointed it in the new Testament. But in what place I marvel? The
Jesuit following Sess 6. c. 14. and 14. c 1.
the Tridentine Council, and Bell. Suarez. Greg. Valent. Baron. in places
where they handle this question.
the Jesuits, says, In the 20. of John. Antididagm. Colon. p. 108.
Others say the 16. and 18. of Matthew, when Christ gave the keys. Dom. Soto.
quem refert Ouand. 4. d. 16. pro. 15.
Others say at his last supper when he ordained the Eucharist. Armachan. q.
Armen. l 11. c. 14
Others, Luke 6. and Mark. 3. when he created his Apostles. Tho. 3. part. q.
84. part. 7. and Sent. 4. d. 22. q. 2 art. 3. ad. 3.. Ad 3. quaestion.
Others think it was not ordained all at once, but by parts, and at several
times; the which opinion Victoria Relect. 1. sect. 5. n. 10.
thinks the most probable: for he says, the Doctors agree not touching the
time when Christ gave the keys: there is no certainty, but only that they had
them. All this excludes the 20. of John.

9 By all which the Reader may see what an uncertain device the sacrament of
Popish Penance is, whose institution cannot be found: and he may judge to what
small purpose the Jesuit alleges Scripture, when his own side is so
variable and uncertain touching the same, and can agree upon no Scripture in
the present controversy that should infallibly decide it among themselves.

. 59. Or if it should please God to send any one in an extraordinary manner, it
appertains to his providence to furnish him with the gift of miracles, as he
did our Savior Christ, or some such evident token, that it may be plainly
known he is assuredly sent of God: otherwise the people should not be bound to
believe him, but might without sin reject his doctrine and teaching,
according as our Savior said of himself, Ioh. 10. Si non facio opera Patris
mei, nolite credere mihi. And Ioh. 15. Si non fecissem opera in eis, quae nemo
alius fecit, peccatum non haberent. If I had not done works among them, that
no other has done, they should not have sinned: to wit, in not believing. Nay,
unless there were some evident token of this extraordinary mission, (as there
is none such in these new men) the people should now, an ordinary course being
set down by our Savior, as I have proved, sin in believing any that shall
come and tell them that he is extraordinarily sent of God, if he teach
contrary to the doctrine that by ordinary Doctors and Pastors is universally
taught: though it should happen the lives of those Pastors should at any time
not be so commendable, or be evidently bad: still remembering that saying of our
Savior, Super Cathedram Mosis sederunt Scribae and Pharisaei; omnia ergo
quaecunque dixerint vobis, seruate and facite, secundum vero opera eorum nolite
facere. Mat. 23.1. Considering that also of Saint Paul, Gal. 1. Si quis vobis
euangelizauerit praeter id quod accepistis, anathema sit: Let him be accursed.
So that since the people has received from their ordinary Pastors that
doctrine which has descended by tradition, from hand to hand, from Christ and
his Apostles themselves (according to that of Saint Austin, lib. 2. contra
Julian: Quod inuenerunt in Ecclesia tenuerunt, quod didicerunt docuerunt, quod
a patribus acceperunt, hoc filijs tradiderunt: That which they found in the
Church, they held, etc.) whosoever he is that shall Euangelize any thing
opposite to this, whether he seem to be an Apostle or an Angel, and much more
if he be another, to wit, one of these new men, who fail (to say no more) very
much from Apostolic perfection, and Angelical purity of life; according to
Saint Paul, anathema sit: yea such a one as not only brings not this
Catholic or general received doctrine, but brings in a new and contrary
doctrine, we should not according to Saint John, Epist. 2. salute, or say once
Aue to him: and much less should we give credit to his words, or use him as a
rule of our faith, or prefer his teaching before the teaching of the
Catholic Church.

The Answer.
1 And is it true, that if God send any one in an extraordinary manner, it
appertains to his providence to furnish him with miracles, or the people
should not be bound to believe him? How is it then said of John Baptist, Ioh.
10 41.
that was thus sent, that he did no miracle, yet all things that he spoke of
Christ were true? And what will the Jesuit say to his Boz. sign. eccl l. 18.
c. 1. Baro an. 34. n. 274.
masters, that so ridiculously have put it in print, that albeit in the Acts of
the Apostles it be said that signs and wonders were done by the Apostles, yet
there is no sign reported that was done by any but by Peter: the rest of the
Apostles therefore either did none at all, or almost none, and very slender in
comparison of those which Peter did. And as the fathers say, John Baptist did
no miracles, lest any thing should be diminished from Christ's authority, so
may it be said of Christ's vicar Peter. A gross and a greasy conceit, and
swimming with blasphemy, yet the Jesuit must sup it off, because so skillful
clearks have given it him: but when he has done, good reason he recant his
present assertion, and bind not the Protestants to that which the Apostles
themselves wanted, in a manner, all but Peter. It is incredible how
scurrilously the Papists behave themselves in this point of miracles: Staph.
apol. part. 1. Hosius. confess. Polon. c. 92.
Not one of these new Gospellers was ever able so much as to cure a lame colt,
or a halting bitch: and yet when they will flatter the Pope, they shame not to
write, that all the Apostles did as little.

2 But I will answer the Jesuit directly to the point: that ordinarily it
appertains to Gods providence to furnish with miracles such as rise up in an
extraordinary manner, whether it be to abrogate, or alter, the ancient doctrine
of his Church, as our Savior, and his Apostles were furnished. And I grant
that if Luthers calling were answered by us to be merely extraordinary; or if
he had preached against the Catholic Church, or ancient doctrine continued in
all ages; the Jesuit had made a good passage against us: but he did none of
these things. His calling was not extraordinary in that kind which reuealeth
new doctrine not known before, as Christ's and the Apostles was; only the
external government of the Church being corrupted and oppressed by the
Papacy, declining from the ancient integrity that was in the beginning, he
used that calling which he had, and extraordinarily bent it to the preaching of
reformation. I say extraordinarily, first because it was not so visibly done in
those ages. Next, the corruptions against which he dealt were ordinarily
embraced in the outward practice of the world. Thirdly, he used his calling
given him in the Papacy to another end then they meant that gave it him.
Lastly, considering those times, his eyes, in an extraordinary measure and
manner, were opened to discern the truth, and God enabled him with
extraordinary gifts. In all other things, which are properly extraordinary,
he differed from the Apostles. For neither did he reveal new doctrine, nor
want all vocation of men, nor was taught immediately by revelation. In which
case he needed no miracles, but it was sufficient for him to prove his doctrine
by the Scriptures.

3 Whereupon the people were bound to credit him, as far as he taught
according to the Scriptures, for they are a token sufficient. And though our
Savior required no man to believe him but upon the evidence of his works, yet
that was because his place was merely extraordinary, which Luthers was not,
whom our Pastors succeeding, they have the same liberty to prove their calling
by the doctrine they teach, and not by miracle. The ordinary course set down
by Christ was not that which the Papacy practiced, but the same, for substance
wherein Luther came; the practice of the Papacy being a corruption that
incroched upon that course, against which if Luther preached, he taught nothing
contrary to the ordinary doctrine of the true Church, but contrary to the
Papacy that oppressed the Church. Which Papacy, if it could be proved to be
the true Church, then according to S. Paul, Gal. 1, Let him be accursed that
speaks against it, and as S. John speaks, Epist. 2, Let no man salute such
a preacher, or give credit to him.

4 Let our adversaries therefore take notice of their errors, in this point,
and diligently mark where they lie. First, they assume their Papacy to be the
ancient Church, and the doctrine thereof to be the faith holden, taught, and
always delivered in the same, which is false and confuted. Then they assume
again, that all me^ preaching against this their Papacy, preach against the
Church, and so consequently are not to be credited, unless they have the gift
of miracles. Thirdly, they infer upon this, that therefore all our Pastors
are unlawful. The which conclusion standing upon so weak grounds, can be of
no more credit then the grounds are whereupon it stands: all which I have
showed to be false in their own places where they were to be handled. Let them
prove theirs to be the Church, and show that what Luther taught against them he
taught against the Church, and then it will be true that no man should prefer
his teaching before them, and not before. Beside we make not our Pastors the
rule of our faith, but ground our selves and them on the Scripture, which is
the rule.

. 60. And surely me thinks though there were none of these evident proofs
which I have brought out of Scripture; yet even reason it self would teach
that we ought to give more credit to the universal company of Catholics,
which have been in all times, and are spread over the Christian world in all
places, then to any one private man, or some few his fellows. It is a proverb
common among all men, Vex populi est vox Dei, that which all men say must
needs be true. And contrariwise, to a particular man, or his private company
that will oppose themselves against this general voice of all men, like
Ismael, of whom it is said, Manus eius contra omnes and manus omnium contra
eum. Genesis 16. it may well be objected, which Luther confesses was objected to
himself by his own conscience, or rather principally by the mercy and grace
of God almighty, seeking to reclaim him (while there was any hope) from his
errors: Number tu solus sapu? Art thou only wise?

The Answer.
1 The Protestants will readily yield that we ought to give more credit to the
universal company of Catholics that have bin in all times, spread over the
world in all places, then to one private man, or some few his fellows, as the
Jesuit requires: but when they have done, they will tell him again that he
and his faction is not that company, nor Luther and themselves those private
men. I grant the Papacy was spread over the world, as the frogs were spread
over all Egypt, and the multitudes great that followed it: but the Catholic
company is not defined by that; as Luther and we are not proved to be private
men, either because we were but a few, or because we stood opposed to the
Church of Rome.

2 But the next point is false, Vox populi est vox Dei, It should be Vox populi
Dei est vox Dei; but then the Jesuit will be troubled to assure us that he and
his people are this populus Dei. They are Apoc. 17.15.
populus, and turbae, gentes, and linguae. But that will do them no good,
marvel if it condemn them not. But yet he has englished his vox populi
false. For all men say it not, that Papistry is the truth, but as I have
showed, in all ages many have misliked it, and at this day do, and most heavily
complained under the burden of it, and long wished for the reformation that
God wrought in Luthers time. Who opposed himself I grant against many, but not
against all, in his time; and much less against the general voice of ancient
times, which saw not the Papacy. And the objection mentioned by Luther to have
been made unto him in his mind, when he began against the Pope, was not any
work of Gods spirit to reclaim him from his error, which was none; but it was
the temptation of the flesh, that set before his eyes what judgment the world
would give of his doings, which always pleads for the multitude, and
stumbleth at the little flock of Christ. The which thought his heart
apprehending, but not following his case was all one with Exodus 4.1.10.
Moses Ier. 1.6.
and Jeremy, that were not a little troubled when God would send them, so few
against so great multitudes. Luther wanted neither the devil nor men to hinder
him.

. 61. Luthers words be these: Praefat. de abroganda Missa priuata ad fratres
August. ord. in Coenob. Wittenberg. Quoties mihi palpitauit tremulu^ cor, and
reprehendens obiecit fortissimum illud argumentum: Tu solus sapis? Totne errant
vniuersi? Tot secula ignorauerunt? Quid si tu erres, and tot tecum in errorem
trahis damnandos aeternaliter? How often, said he, did my trembling heart pant,
and, reprehe^ding me, did object that most strong and forcible argument; Art
thou alone wise? Have there so many universally erred? Have so many ages been
blind, and lived in ignorance? What rather if thou thy self err, and drawest
so many after thee into errors, who for this cause shall be damned eternally?
This did almighty God object to Luther; and this may well be objected to any
private man, or any few that, leaving the Kings street, or beaten way of the
Catholic Church, will seek out a by-path, as being, in their conceit, a
better, and easier, and more direct way to heaven: to them I say may be said;
Are you only wise? Are all the rest in all former ages fools? Have you only
after so many hundred years after Christ found out the true faith and the
right way to heaven? Have all the rest lived in blindness, darkness, and
errors? And consequently are you only them that please God, and shall be
saved? ( Sine fide impossible est placere Deo: Without the right faith it is
impossible to please God. Heb. 11.) And were all the rest, so many millions of
our forefathers and ancestors, many of which were most innocent and virtuous
livers, and some of which shed their blood for Christ his sake; were, I say,
all those hated of God? And did all those perish? Were all those damned? Shall
all these endure unspeakable torments in hell for ever? O impious, cruel, and
incredible assertion!

The Answer.
1 Luthers words, alleged, were nothing else but a suggestion whereby Satan
labored to hold him still in ignorance, by putting fear into his heart, when
he should consider the generality and antiquity of the errors against which he
was to deal; and the poor conceit that the world, ouergrowen with the said
errors, would have of him. Ier. 20 7.
So said Jeremy, O God thou have deceived me, and I am deceived. Thou art
stronger then I, and have prevailed against me. I am in derision all day long,
and the whole people mocketh me. The which to be the sense of his words,
appears by looking into the place. And if Luther had not apprehended the
motion in this sense, it had been small discretion for him to reveal it.
Besides there is nothing in the words sufficient to induce any man, of
reasonable understanding, to Papistry; which is a certain token that Gods
spirit did not suggest the^ to draw him thereunto. For if the Papacy were the
truth, God would move men thereunto by such reasons as were effectual. Here is
the argument Symmach. relat. apud Prud. and Ambr.
that the Pagans used in defense of their Idolatry, word for word: If long
continuance may bring authority to religions, our faith, made to so many ages,
must be observed; and let us follow our forefathers who so happily have
followed theirs: but who sees not the weakness of such kind of reasoning?

2 Moreover supposing that which the Jesuit says might be objected to private
men, leaving the beaten way of the Catholic Church, to seek out a by-path of
their own: yet we deny the Papacy to have bin that beaten way, or the religion
of the Protestants any by-path. It was I grant much trodden, and bare worn with
travel: but let all Papists take heed of that, and be well advised who were
the travelers. Mat. 7.13.
For wide is the gate, and spacious is the way that leads to destruction, and
many there be that go it. Other high way then this we have forsaken none. But
when the Church of Rome led men out of that way wherein Christ and his Apostles
walked, and the whole Primitive Church after them, into a new way of her own,
so craftily misleading them, that few, in comparison, saw the error; the rest,
whom God directed, had good reason to call them back again into the true way
of the Church; which though it were much grown up and made difficult, for want
of use, yet was it the old way still, for all that, wherinto God himself
calls men: Ier. 6.16.
Stand by the ways, behold and see, and ask for the old paths, which is the
good way, and walk therein, and you shall find rest to your souls.

3 The which thing when Martin Luther and our fathers did, they found out no
new way of their own, but opened the old, which the Papacy had forsaken.
Neither do we think they only were wise, and they only found the true faith:
but acknowledge the same wisdom and the same faith to have been in all ages
before them, as I have showed. Only as that company, how great or how small
soever, which embraced our religion, is distinguished against the other which
lived and died in the practice of Papistry: so we say confidently, it only was
wise and in the right way, and it only had the true faith and pleased God:
leaving the other side to his judgment that best knew what they were.

4 And whereas the Jesuit urges the matter touching our forefathers so
importunately; Were so many millions of our ancestors, many whereof were
innocent and virtuous livers, and some whereof shed their blood for Christ's
sake, were all these hated of God? did all these perish? were all these damned?
I answer, not one of them perished that was thus qualified, but they were
undoubtedly saved every mothers son of them that lived thus virtuously, and
innocently, shedding their blood for Christ's sake. But is the Jesuit, or any
man so fantastical as to think these millions were Papists? what Tridentine
and Iesuited Papists? when the modern Papacy, complete as it is, is not yet an
hundred years old, but younger then Martin Luther himself? But whosoever they
were that so followed the corruptions of the Church of Rome, that they lived
and died in the practice of all the points thereof, and hated and persecuted
the faith contrary thereunto; we say as Saint Paul does, 2. Th. 2.10.
They perished, because they received not the love of the truth that they might
be saved; and therefore God sent them strong delusions, to believe lies; that
they might all be damned which believed not the truth, but had pleasure in
unrighteousness: and for so much as the State of the Papacy, the Pope and his
religion is Antichrist: we say, all that obeyed the same are eternally damned.
For the Scripture teaches, Apoc. 14 9.
That if any man worship the Beast and his image, and receive his mark in his
forehead or in his hand: the same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God,
and shall be tormented in fire and brimstone. And this assertion is neither
impious, cruel, nor incredible, because God has spoken it: whose just
judgment regards not multitudes, if they live in heresy and idolatry,
refusing and persecuting the truth offered them, be they never so great and
frequent: as it spared not the old world, or Sodom, or the Jews in the
wilderness, or the Gentiles that knew not God, whose number far exceeded those
of the Roman Church.

5 Again, for a further answer to this question, Were all our forefathers,
living under the Papacy, damned? we must distinguish. For the errors of the
Church of Rome are of two sorts: Some capital and substantial, not only
contrary to the fundamental articles of our faith needful to salvation, but
also hindering the means and way which God has appointed, partly without,
partly within our selves, for the bringing us thereunto. Of which sort are the
giving Gods honor to images, justification by works, merits, the abolishing of
the Scriptures and preaching, and such like. Some are not so principal, but
consist only in the denial of smaller truths, like the hay and stubble, which
Saint Paul 1. Cor. 3.12.
mentions, that is built upon the foundation; and of their own nature, other
circumstances removed, destroy no article of faith: as prayer for the dead,
pilgrimages, fasting days, vows, and all those customs that stood only in
rites and ceremonies. Again, it is one thing to hold an error wilfully and
obstinately, joining the profession thereof with the hatred and persecution of
the truth: and another thing to err ignorantly, being seduced by such as teach
him, with a mind notwithstanding always ready to embrace the truth, whenever
he shall be further enlightened. These distinctions being premised, I answer,
that in all the time of the Papacy the most people erred in the later kind, the
greater errors being either not generally received, or not distinctly known by
the people. As for example, in the days of king Henry the fifth, Sacramental.
tit. 1. c. 7.
Waldensis notes, that the merit of works, was little known. And although,
by reason they wanted teaching, they erred in many things, and followed the
custom of the times, yet again they saw and misliked many things, and when they
died, because they mistrusted the present courses, they would renounce all
confidence in Saints, crosses, images, merits, and such like, and confess they
looked to be saved by Christ alone; which is a sign that they held the
foundation. Besides, they saw into many things that were then done, and in
their judgment, condemned them, carrying a mind always ready to be taught,
though the stream of time carried them away. Illyric. catal. tom. 2. p. 867.
Thus Domitius Calderinus, a learned man, when he went to Mass, had an usual
saying, Let us go to the common error: and all stories are full of things
showing this to be true. They saw the Popes tyranny, noted the covetousness,
pride, and ambition of the Clergy, they espied the packing of their Priests and
Friars, they groned under innumerable grieuances which they could not redress,
and very few among them all held Papistry in form. Whereupon neither has the
Jesuit any reason to say all were Papists, such as himself, neither are we
bound to condemn them all: but as Saint Cyprian Epist. 3.
says in a certain Epistle, If any that went b fore us, either of ignorance,
or simplicity, has not observed that which the Lord commanded: his
simplicity, through the Lords indulgence, may be pardoned. But we, whom the
Lord has taught and instructed, cannot be pardoned. Out of which words we see
what to judge of such multitudes as erred of ignorance, and went after the the
Pope, 2. Sam. 15.11.
as David's subjects did after Absolo^ in his rebellion, in their simplicity
knowing nothing. As for the rest that both erred in the foundation, and hated
the truth, as our adversaries in our country this day do; blaspheming the way
of God, hating instruction, stopping their ears against the word that we offer
them, and carrying themselves obstinately and maliciously against us, and so
dying in the arms of the whore of Babylon: we say, without impiety, they are
gone to eternal fire, according to that which God in his word has revealed.

62. Nay surely I am rather to think that you are unwise, who, pretending to
travel toward the happy kingdom of heaven, and to go to that glorious City,
the heavenly Jerusalem, will leave the beaten street, in which all those have
walked that ever heretofore went thither: who by miracles, as it were by
letters sent from thence, have given testimony to us, who remain behind, that
they are safely arrived there: you I say are unwise that will leave this way,
to adventure the lives, not of your bodies, but of your souls, in a path found
out by your selves, never tracked before. In which whosoever have gone, yet God
knows what is become of them, since we never had letter, or miracle, or
evident token, or any word from them to assure us that they passed safely that
way: I may account you most unwise men that will adventure such a precious
jewel as your soul is, to be transported by such an uncertain, and most
dangerous way I must needs think that since there is but one way, and that the
way of the Catholic Church is a sure and approved way, you are very unwise
that leave it.

The Answer.
1 They are unwise that leave the way of the Catholic Church, and they are no
wiser, but the very same, that follow the way of the Roman Church; the reason
is, because the Roman is not the Catholic Church. And therefore we that have
left it and the ways thereof, that we might travel toward the heavenly
Jerusalem, rejoice in the goodness of God that has called us to this mercy,
and daily crave of his heavenly majesty that he will continue us therein, to
our lives end, though Papists call us to follow them. Whose miracles, as
Digress. 44.
I have showed, give no testimony that any man, in the Popish religion, ever
came to heaven. The miracles of Christ, and of his Apostles, and of the
Primitive Church belong not to them but us, in that our faith is the same that
theirs was that did them. The rest contained in the Legends, and Indian News,
which are all that Papists can properly challenge, are the delusions of Satan,
and forgeries of men. And so the devil and the Friar playing the Carriers,
loded their packe-horse with such stuff: and because the Pope paid them well
for the device, they made silly Papists, such as the Jesuit is, believe they
came from their friends in heaven. This therefore is no sure way to find the
truth, unless it be certain that these miracles were sent indeed, and then as
certain that they which sent them died in the present Popish religion.

2 As for our selves we are not so destitute of letters and tokens, as the
Jesuit pretends; sent us not from men that are departed; but from God that
gave them entertainment, whose certificate, to us, is 2. Pet. 1.1^.
more worth then all the miracles of the world, because he sent it us by his
own Son, that best could tell who arrived in his fathers house. And these
letters are the Scriptures. God our King, Hom. 39.
says Macarius, has sent the divine Scriptures, as it were letters, unto us.
And Saint Austin says, Enarr. Psalm. 90. conc. 2.
These are the letters, which are come to us from that City, whither, like
Pilgrims, we are traveling. So that as long as by these Scriptures we can
justify our faith, we have letters from heaven sufficient to assure us, that
all which embrace and obey the faith we profess, are safely arrived in the
kingdom of heaven. This is the reason why the Pope forbids his people the
reading of them, lest thereby they should know so much: and knowing it should
forsake him and his lying miracles.

. 63. I must think that since the Catholic Church is, as I have proved, the
light of the world, and rule of faith, the pillar and ground of the truth; that
you leaving it, leave the light, and therefore walk in darkness; forsaking
the true faith, and therefore are misled in the mist of incredulity into the
wilderness of misbeliefe. Finally, having lost the sure ground of truth, fall
into ye ditch of many absurdities, and must needs be drowned in the pit of
innumerable errors. And erring thus from the way, the verity, and the life,
which is Christ residing, according to his promise, in the Catholic Church,
must needs, unless you will return to the secure way of the same Catholic
Church, incur your own perdition, death, and endless damnation of body and
soul: from the which, sweet Jesus, deliver us all, to the honor and
perpetual praise of his name. Amen.

Laus Deo, and beatae virgini Mariae.
The Answer.
1 The Church of Rome is not the Catholic Church, but the seat of Antichrist:
and therefore what danger soever there be in forsaking the Catholic, yet there
is none in refusing the Roman Church. Nay 2. Cor. 6.17. Apoc. 18.4.
all such as will be saved must forsake it. And they that will abide therein
shall find by experience at the last, that all the inconveniences which the
Jesuit says belong to such as leave the Catholic Church, will fall upon
them. And therefore blessed be God the Father of lights who has restored among
us the public ministry of the Gospel, for the calling of his people out of
the damned errors of the Roman Sea, into his own Church. And let the earth
rejoice and every child of God therein, and give him thanks, who has made the
light of his Church to break out, when the tyranny of the Church of Rome had
thought to have smothered it in eternal darkness, and with the innumerable
errors that it bred, to have seduced, misled, and drowned it for ever; whereby
mankind should have incurred perdition, death, and endless damnation of body
and soul. And let my dear countrymen know, among whom and unto whom I write
these things, and for whose sake I will expose my self to the indiscreet fury
of seducers, and many seduced; refusing no pains or duty that may tend to the
enlightening of their conscience and confirming of the undoubted faith of Jesus
Christ, whereof I am called to be the meanest preacher that lives among them:
LET THEM I SAY, AND ALL THE PEOPLE OF OUR LAND, WHOM THESE HAPPY DAYS HAVE
RECLAIMED FROM THE CHVRCH OF ROME, COUNT THIS THEIR CHIEFEST HAPPINESS, AND WE
ARE IT AS THEIR CROWN, that God has thus made them partakers of his Gospel:
when the other side, even under their eyes, lie plunged in ignorance of mind,
error of faith, and vileness of conversation, so horrible and prodigious, that
it needs tears to bewail it rather then a pen to report it. In recompense
whereof let them be CONSTANT AND FAITHFVLL to the end, and continue in the
things that they have learned; making no question but our faith which could
bring so visible a reformation of manners into our country, so certain
knowledge, so unspeakable comfort into our mind; which could bring the light
of Gods own word, the majesty of elder times, the reverent countenance of the
first antiquity, and the perpetual testimony of our adversaries themselves,
for her justification, will save their souls, if they will obey it. For want of
which obedience they may, and shall perish eternally, when the faith it self
is in no fault. And let them LABOUR WITH LOVE AND LENITY TO REDVCE AGAIN THEIR
SEDVCED NEIGHBOVRS, bearing with their frowardness, and praying instantly for
their conversion, if at any time it may please God to release them of their
errors, and to give them the knowledge of his truth, by delivering them from
the Roman Emissaries which have made them their wards, that they might
possess them, and prey upon them. And let them finally, with faithfulness and
instance, pray God for the state wherein we live, so pitifully vexed with the
discontent and fury of those that call themselves Catholics, who if they had
any dram of religion or conscience in them, would not thus practice to make
their own dear country, a theater of such tragedies as the world never saw
before. But our sins are the cause of these things, and therefore let every
man eschuing his own evil, seek that way to confirm himself, and the
Church wherein he lives, in the favor of God, that he may show mercy and
peace in our days. Amen.

FINIS.
An Alphabeticall Table of the several matters and questions handled and
disputed in this Book.
The first number signifies the section: the second the number of the section.
Where the number is but one, there the whole Section is meant.
A.
ABbeyes See Monks and Monasteries. Accidents in the Sacrament: where they
inhere. 35 21. how they have power to nourish, breed, corrupt, etc. ibid.
Adoration of the blessed Sacrament, when it was brought in. 51.9. absurdities
about it. ibid Alteration. The Church of Rome is altered from that which it
held in ancient times. Digress 23. See Roman Church. Anastasius his book de
Vitis Romans Pontificum, censured 55.7. Antiquity of the Protestants doctrine
demonstrated. 44.1. Apocrypha, not canonical Scripture, by the Papists own
confession 35 20. Appeals to Rome, forbidden 36.27. Apostolic, How the
Church is Apostolic 52.1. Arnulfus his speech of the Pope. 50.28. Auricular
confession justly rejected by the Protestants. 40.6. The primitive Church used
it not, ibid. It was the occasion and means of contriuing the horriblest sins
that were. 40.9. The saying of Chaucer touching it. ibid Not agreed upon by the
Papists touching the time when it was instituted. 35.20. and 40.6. and 58.7.
whether it be simply needful. 40.7.8. Austine the monk converted not
England. 49. Author of sin. God is not the Author of sin. 40.50. How God
wills sin. ibid. Touching this point the Papists have belyed us, and say
themselves as much as we do. ibid.
B.
BErengatius. 50.30. Bishops. Lay men sometime made Bishops. 5.11. The Bishops
oath made to the Pope. 31.6. Titular Bishops at the Council of Trent. 31.5.
Books. The practice of Papists in purging of books. 35.18. Boy Pope of Rome
55.7.
C.
CAlling of the Protestant Ministers how demonstrated. 52.5. It is necessary
that Pastors have a calling. 58.1. What calling the Protestants Pastors had.
ib. They need no miracles to confirm it, and why. 59. Canonizing. See Saints.
Catholic. The Romish Church not Catholic in place. 46.2. nor in doctrine
and time. 46.3. Centuries: how they have taken exception against the Fathers.
44.3. Certainty of salvation. See Salvation. Church. Our faith is not lastly
resolved into the authority of the Church. 6.9. How the teaching of the Church
is called the rule. 13.1. By the Church the Papists mean the Pope. Digress.
16. Why the Papists deuolue all power so to the Church. Digress. 16. How the
Church is said to err. 14.2. and 15.6. and 25.2. The Church militant may err.
14.2. and inde and 15.6. The Church is the subordinate means to teach men, and
how. 18.5. and 27.1. Church visible. The true state of the question between
the Papists and us, touching the visiblenesse of the Church. 17.1. and Digress.
17. and 22. The Papists confess in effect as much, touching the Churches being
sometime invisible, as we do. Digress. 17. The Church is not always visible. 18.
The Arguments against this answered from. 18. to 24. The Papists say the
Church, when Christ suffered, was in the virgin Marie alone. 17.3. The
Protestants Church has always been. Digress. 48. Marks of the Church: the
Sacraments and doctrine of the Scripture are the right marks of the Church.
24.1. and Digress. 18. The Arguments against this are answered, from 26. to 32.
How the teaching, and doctrine of the Church may be examined. 30. The marks of
the Church assigned by the Papists are not sufficient. 32. How the Church
moved Saint Austin to believe the Gospel. Digress. 19. Change of the ancient
Roman faith. See Alteration, and Roman Church. Clergy. The vileness of the
Popish Clergy noted. 38.5. How the Papists excuse it. 38.7. Communion. See
Sacrament. Commandments of God. See Law. Congruitie. See Merit of congruity.
Conception of the virgin Mary without sin, a new doctrine. 47.2. Consultation
not debarred, though man have no freewill. 40.48. Conversion of countries, by
the Roman Church, how it was. 49.4. Contention. What the contentions are,
wherewith our Churches can truly be charged. 33.2. The Church was never free
from al contention. Digress. 21. Grievous contentions in the Primitive Church.
ibid. Discourse touching the contentions in the Roman Church. Digress. 24.
They say they contend not in dogmaticall points, answered. 35.19. Councels
above the Pope. 36.28.30. the Pope not president in the ancient Councels.
36.29. They may err. 15.6. and 44 6. They were called, in ancient times, by
the Emperor, or civil Magistrate. 36.28.
D.
DEcree of God inclines and orders man's will. 40.47. Descention of Christ's
soul into hell denied by Papists. 35.^0. Doctrine of the Roman Church. See
Papistrie.
E.
EAster. Contention in the primitive Church about the keeping of it. 33.4. and
36.3. Election is not for works foreseen. 40.49. how a man may know if he be
elected. 41.7. England not first converted by Austin the monk. 49 nor by the
Church of Rome. ibid. Err. The Church may err, and how. 14.2. and 15.6. and
25.2. the Pope may err, even judicially, and be an heretic. 55.8. and
Digress. 28. Councels may err. 15.6. and 44.6. and so have the Fathers. 44.5.
Eucharist. How Christ is present therein, explicated. 51.10. Vile speeches of
the Papists touching it. 51.11. Euerard, the Bishop of Salisborow, his speech
of the Pope 50.33. Examine. The teaching of the Church and all men to be
examined. ^0.
F
FAith must be builded on the scripture. 1.1. Papists build their faith on
Tradition. 1.3. It must be explicit. 2.1. What infolded faith is. 2.2. in
marg. x. and page 6. number. 6. Disputing in matters of faith forbidden by the
Papists 2.4. The Colliars faith what. 2.6. The last resolution of our faith is
into the authority of the Scriptures. 5.5. And not of the Church. Digress. 6.
and 11. Faith how a mark of the Church 25 1. See Church. Faith only
justifies; expounded and defended. Digress. 40. Justifying faith described.
40.39. A man may know if he have faith. 41.3. Faith of the ancient Roman
Church, how it began to fail. 50 4. How the modern Roman faith grew in the
Church. 58.1. Fasting. Digress. 32. The Protestants maintain fasting ibid. The
Papists as deep in breaking fasting days as the Protestants. ibid Fasting was
an indifferent ceremony in the Primitive Church. ibid. Lent fast was holden
diversely. ibid. Fathers and Doctors are not the rule of faith. 23.1. They may
err ibid. The Papists boast that the Fathers are on their side. 44.4. They had
their errors. 44.5. We are not bound to every thing that they have said, but
may sometime lawfully dissent from them. 44.7. The Papists themselves do it.
ibid. The state of the question touching the authority of the Fathers. 44.8.
Who the Papists mean by the Fathers. nu 9. What they mean by all the Fathers
consenting in one. nu. 10. The Pope vshers the Fathers. nu. 11. The practice of
the Papists in rejecting the Fathers. nu. 11. and 12. Forefathers how far
forth to be followed. 61.2. What is to be thought touching our forefathers that
lived and died in the times of Papistrie. 6^.4. Freewill denied by Papists.
35.20. All the questions touching freewil laid down in order as they rise,
with their true states. Digress. 42. The want of freewill debarreth not
consultation. 40.48. How it is reconciled with Gods praedestination. nu. 45.
What freewill is, and wherein it stands. nu. 54. Freewill in natural and
civil things expounded. nu. 55. No freewill in spiritual things till grace
come. nu. 56. The Papists doctrine to the contrary. nu. 57. Some learned men
in the Church of Rome think freewil to be Pelagianisme. nu. 61. The will of
man concurreth not with Gods grace, in vprising from sin. nu. 64. The Papists
doctrine to the contrary. nu. 64. The efficacy of grace depends not on our
will. ibid. What freewill man has when he is regenerate. nu. 65. Friar how
defined by Lincolniensis 50.32.
G.
GOd not the author of sin. 40.50. See Author of sin. Good works necessary
to salvation. Digress. 34. They are to be excluded out of our justification,
but not out of our sanctification. ibid. They merit not. Digress 35. The
Protestants do not say, Good works are sin Digress. 37. Grace: The Papists
meaning expounded when they say, Man's will, without grace, can do nothing.
40.57. The Papists teach that a man of himself, can do good, before any grace
come. ibid. Man cannot dispose himself, it is grace that does it. 40.63. What
that is that makes grace effectual 40.64. A man may infallibly know if he be
in grace. Digress. 43. Greeks. They have as good outward succession, as the
Romish Church has. 55.2. Gropper the Cardinal: A story of him. 55.7.
H.
HIerome of Prague a good man. Holiness no note of the Church. 43.1. The
holiness of the Roman Church disproued. 38.1. The places of Luther and
Smidelin answered that are objected against the holiness of the Protestant
Churches. 38.2. The holiness of the Protestants doctrine is justified. 40. ad
49. What holiness the Protestants lay they have. 41.1. Complaints made by
Papists against the unholiness of their own Church. Digress. 31. A man may
infallibly know if he be truly holy 41.3. and Digress. 43. Honorius a Pope that
was an heretic 36.34. In that cause of Honorius, you have an example how the
Papists deny all authorities. 44.15.
I
IGnorance in matters of faith is commended by the Papists. 2.5. Images not
allowed of in ancient times, and their worship forbidden. 47.5. They are a new
device 35.13. The Papists are not at one among themselves touching the first
that rejected Images 50.5. Images of the Trinity, when brought in. 50.11.
Image worship when it was first brought in. 50.1^. and 51.5. The Papists are
divided among themselves touching the adoration of Images. 50. 16. They worship
stocks and stones as the Pagans did. 51.6. Imputation of Christ's righteousness
for our justification is acknowledged by Papists. 35.20. What this imputation
imports. 40.41. Indies not converted by the Jesuits. 48.2. but utterly
rooted out by cruelties unspeakable, which are touched at large, Digress. 50.
The Protestants religion was in India before the Papists knew them. 48.3. Judge
of controversies is the Scripture. Digress. 3. Papists will be judges in their
own cause. 5.7. The Pope is made judge who is a party. 5.8. The judge of
controversies assigned by the Papists, falls into the ^ame difficulties that
are laid against the scripture. 34.2. The Papists will not stand to their own
judges. 30.4. and 35.15. Justification is by faith, and not by works. 35.14.
and 20. and Digress. 40. What justification is, and how it is distinguished
from sanctification. 40.38.
K.
KEeping the commandments. See Law of God. Keys given to the rest of the
Apostles as well as to Peter. 36.12. They import not the supremacy, euinced by
disputation. 36.16. and inde. and Digress. 30. What the keys of the Church
mean. 36.18. Knowledge very commendable in the people. 2.7. Great among them
of the Primitive Church. ibid By what means the elect know, and are assured of
their own salvation. 40.39.
L.
LAtin prayers and service misliked by some Papists. 35.20. against antiquity.
47.2. Law of God No man's righteousness can satisfy it. Digr. 34. No man can
keep it. Digress. 36. Why given when no man can keep it. 40.21. The Papists
say absurdly, that the commandments are easy to keep: and a man may live
without sin. 40.19. Lay people ought to read the Scriptures: and to have them
translated. See Scriptures and Translations. Lay men have bin made Bishops.
5.11. Lege^d. The miracles recorded therein are of no credit. 42.2. Nor the
Legends themselves. 42.7. Lent fast not holden in the Primitive Church as now
it is. 40.4. Liberty. Our faith is falsely charged to be a doctrine of
liberty. 43.2. Luther. His calling is justified. 52.5. and 59.2. And his
writings. 57.3. And his life and death, against the malicious reports of the
Papists. Digr. 57. Those reports are touched. ib.
M.
Marriage no sacrament. 35.20. The marriage of Priests not restrained in ancient
times. 47.4. When the restraint began. 50.10. Marks of the Church. See Church.
Virgin Mary. The Papists say, the Church was in her alone when Christ died.
17.3. Mass not offered by Christ at his last supper. 35.20. When it began.
50.14. Merits renounced by Papists. 35.20. and 40.15. Merit of works none.
40.12. and 14. When that opinion began. 50.13. The Papists hold it, and what
they mean by it. 40.13. The diverse opinions that are among the Papists
touching merits. 40.16. Merits of Christ how far they go, by the Papists
doctrine 40.13.29. Merit of congruitie, what, and how holden in the Church of
Rome. 40 62. Miracles not now needful. 12.6. Their proper use. 42.4. The time
when the Church had them, and the end why. 41.4. The miracles that the Papists
stand upon are of no certain credit. 42.5. and inde. The Gentiles had as good
miracles as the Church of Rome has. 42.6. The Legendaries tainted for
whetstone liers. 42.7. Incredible reports in the Legends: and some also in the
ancient fathers. 42.8. Moral works what 40.59. Touching natural freewill in
things moral. ibid. Monks of ancient time not like ours of this time. 41.3.
and 42.11. Mortal sin. Digress. 38. See Sin. Monasteries were first thrown
down by Papists. 42.10. Of vile report in their time. 42.12. The testimonies of
diverse old writers touching the lives of cloisterers. Digress. 45. A brag
that the Papists make touching the order of Bennet 42.13.
N
Necessity of good works expounded and handled. Digress. 34. Notes of the
Church. See Church.
O
Obscurity of the Scripture not so great as the Papists object. Digress. 8.
Why they make folk believe they are so obscure. Digress. 9. See Scripture.
Occham the Schoolman. 50.35. Only faith. See Faith only. Opinions. Variable
exceedingly among the Papists. 35.21. The saying, that they vary not in
dogmaticall points, answered. 35.19. Original sin. No agreement among the
Papists touching the nature of it. 50.17. Original text of the Bible is the
Hebrew, and Greek, which is free from all corruption. 6.11. and 35.3.
P
PAinter. The Painters jest. 38.6. Painting Christ's arms for what use 40.35.
Papists famous for controlling, rejecting, censuring, and purging one another.
44.14. An example of their impudent denial of all antiquity. 44.15. and
50.18. They wipe our names out of books. 45.2. Papistry is a complete doctrine
of liberty, and a mere witty device for the maintenance of their ambition and
pleasure. 43.3. and Digress. 46. A new religion. 48.1. Pardons when and how
they came in. 50.8. They release all satisfaction. 40.33. The treasury whence
they rise. nu. 34. A view of long pardons granted for short service. nu. 35.
Penance. The Papists cannot tell when it was ordained, nor by what Scripture it
is proved. Digress. 55. Peter received no more power over the Church then the
other Disciples did; disputed. 36.12. and inde. The Papists are not agreed how
his supremacy is proved, or what it contains. 36.39. and inde. Pope made
judge of our faith. 5.8. and over the Fathers. 44.11. His judgment was not
received, as the rule, in the primitive Church. Digress. 25. but be was
resisted. ibid The Papists themselves will not yield to his judgment. 36.8.
Many Popes deposed. nu. 8. What kind of men they commonly are. nu 9. He was
tied to his own province in the primitive Church. 36.26. He may err. See
Err. He calls him self S. Peter. 36.38. Popes what kind of men, and how
they have been chosen. 55.9. Many at once. nu. 10. The lives of some of them
described. 57.9. How the Popes sin is excused. 57.11. Popes succession. He is
not S. Peter's successor. Digress. 29. If the Pope be not effectually proved to
succeed S. Peter in the conceited primacie, all Papistrie will fall. 36.24.
Prayer in Latin, misliked by some Papists. 35.20. Long pardons promised to
short Prayers. 40.35. Predestination. Our doctrine touching this point is belyed
by the Papists. 40.43. The doctrine thereof laid down. n. 44. It imposes no
natural necessity upon the second causes. ibid. The reconciliation of it and
Free will. nu. 45, 46. The Papists make the will of man as subject to Gods
decree as we do. number. 46, 47. It is not for works foreseen number. 49.
Presidencie over Councels belonged not to the Pope of old. 36.29. Priests power
to remit sin, denied by learned Papists. 35.20. This power handled. Digress.
55. Their marriage allowed in ancient times. 47.4. The foulness of their lives
noted in the Papacy. 38.5. A silly Priest that believed all was true that was
printed. 42.8. Purging of books, the Papists practice. 35.18. Puritanes That
name does properly belong to Papists. 40.19.
Q.
QVestions of faith must be decided by the Scriptures. Digres. 3. No end of
Questions among the Schoolmen. 35.21.
R.
REading the Scriptures forbidden by the Papists. 2.3. The lay people did read
them in ancient time 47.3. Rebaptization a point wherein there was much
contention. 36.4. Reprobation not for works foreseen 40.49. Religious men and
Orders. See Monks. Resolution of our faith. See Faith. Roman Church. How the
world, in former times, communicated with it. 46.2. The Greeks refuse it. ibid.
How it increased 47.1. When the faith of the ancient Roman church began to be
altered into that which now is therein. 50.4. and inde. Resistance made against
the change. nu 5. One means whereby it may evidently be demo^strated that the
Roman Church has changed the old faith. nu. 15. A full demonstration of the
resistance made, in all ages, against the Roman Churches alteration. Digress.
52. The objections that are made against the catalogue, are answered. nu. 40.
The Roman Church altered the faith by little and little, how it is meant.
51.3. How the Fathers praised the Roman Church. 56.1. How ye faith of the
Roman Church grew. 58.1. The Papists absurdly call the Catholic Church the
Roman Church. 13.3. Rule of faith is certain. 3.1. Such a rule is simply
necessary. ibid. but not revealed to all. ibid. It has five properties. 4.1.
The Scripture is it. ibid. and the Papists cannot deny it. 4.6. How we call
the translated Scriptures the rule. 6.1. The rule is easy, though some means
be needful to learn it. 7.2. and 8.10. How the doctrine or teaching of the
Church may be called the rule. 13.1. See Church.
S.
SAcrament. Seven Sacraments merrily proved, in a Sermon at the Council of
Trent. 8.15. How the Sacraments are a mark of the Church. See Church.
Sacrament in one kind against antiquity. 35.11. and 47 7. In both kinds best.
35.20 Our doctrine touching the Eucharist laid down, and how Christ is
present therein. 51.10. The Papists have no certainty of the presence of
Christ in the Sacrament. 47.9. Saints. What kind of Saints the Protestants
have. 39.1. and what kind the Papists. 39.2. and 41.1. Obiectio^s against the
Popes canonizing of Saints. 39.3. The Papists claim kindred of many Saints,
that never knew the Popish religion. 42.1. Salvation. A man may be assured
thereof. 35.20. and by what means 40.39. The Papists not able to deny this.
41.10. Sanctification of life absolutely necessary to salvation. Digress. 34.
Satisfaction. What kind of Satisfaction we require and teach. Digres. 39. and
what kind the Papists. ibid. The true state of the question touching
Satisfaction. 40.28. Note what the Papists teach concerning the Satisfaction of
our works nu. 30. Our works satisfy not. nu. 31. The Papists play with their
Satisfaction. nu. 33. Pardons release all Satisfaction. number. 30. A view of the
Papists uncertainties and contradictions in this question of Satisfaction. number.
34. Scripture. The people allowed to read it in ancient times. 47.3. The
Scripture is a letter sent from God to man. 62.2. The Papists forbid the
reading of them. 2.3. and disputing of them. number. 4. The knowledge thereof
needful. number. 7. They are easy to such as have the means. 4.2. It only is
the rule of faith. 4.1. and 10.1. and 34.1. The true cause why the Papists
disable the Scripture from being the rule. Digress. 4 It must be Translated.
See Translations. It is not obscure. 7.2. Digress. 8. but only in two cases.
8.1. How the sense thereof is attained. 8.2. It contains all things needful
nu. 3. Why learned men vary in the sense of the Scripture. nu. 4, 7. Digress.
10. How a man may be certain which is the right sense. n. 7, 8, 12. Why many
understand not the Scripture. Digress. 10. and 14. and. 10.1. How the easiness
of the Scripture is proved. 8.16. They have the outward authority whereupon our
faith is built. Digress. 11. how we know them to be Gods word. Digress. 11. and
12. They co^taine all things needful. 9.1. The Papists say the sense of the
Scripture alters with the time. 9.11. Horrible behavior of the Papists
against the Scriptures. Digress. 22. Shrift. See Auricular confession. Sin.
How God wills it. 40.50. Our vprising from sin is by grace, our own will not
disposing thereunto. 40.63. The Papists have no certainty what power ye Priest
has in remitting sin. Digress. 55. We do not say all that we do is sin.
Digress. 37. Our doctrine touching the sinfulnes cleaving to our good works,
makes not men careless. 40.25. Sin mortal and venial an untrue
distinction. Digress. 38. How the Papists hold it. ib. They agree not in it.
ibid. Succession. Wherein true succession stands. 52.1, 3. How the
Protestants doctrine has succeeded. 52.4. How the fathers insisted upon
succession. 53. and 56. It is no note of the Church. 54.1. True faith, how
joined with succession and how not. 54.2. The Succession of the Roman Church
proves it not the true Church. 55 2. The Greeks have as good succession as
the Romans. ibid. The Romish Church has no true outward succession. Digress.
53. Such succession as the Papists mean is not needful. 58 2. Supremacy of
the Pope, against the first antiquity. 35.10. and 47.6. The Papists agree not
in it. 35.20. The Popes Supremacy depends on a point that can never be
proved. 36.24. The Primitive Church acknowledged it not. Digress. 27. Phocas
gave it to Boniface. 36.31. When it began over Bishops and kings. 50.9.
T
TEmptation may be overcome without Gods grace, as the Papists untruly say.
40.58. Traditions made equal to Scripture. 1.3. Yea preferred before it. 1.2.
In marg. k. and 5.8. Translation of the Scripture forbidden by the Church of
Rome. 1.3. How translations are Gods word it self, and the rule of faith. 5.2.
and how our faith relieth on them. ibid The Scripture ought to be translated,
and read of all. Digress. 5. The Papists disdain this. 5.11. How our English
translations may be called erroneous, and how not 6.2. How we know our English
translation to be the infallible word of God. 6.3, 8. The amending or changing
of our translation, is no discredit to it. 6.6. The Hebrew and Greek originals
are free from error. 6.11. Transubstantiation a new doctrine. 35.12. and 47.8.
The Papists have no certainty of it. 47.9. Treasury of the Church, whence
pardon, arise, not agreed upon what it should be. 40 34. Trent Council what
kind of Council, and the proceeding thereof. Digress 20.
V
VAcancies of the Roman Sea 55.6 Venial sin what. 40 ^6. Some Papists deny
any sin to be venial. number. 27. How done away. ibid. Visiblenes of the Church
See Church. Unity of the Church wherein it properly consists. 33.1. The true
Church may be without outward unity. n. 2. It is so^time grievously violated
in the Church. Digress. 21. No unity in the Roman Church. 35.1 Digress. 24.
What kind of unity the Papists have in their Church. 35.2. Universality of
the Church how to be expounded. 44.2. Universality of the Romish Church
disproued 46.2. Our faith is vniuer^^^l in Time, Place, and Doctrine. 44.
Vprising from sin is by Grace, without the disposing of the will thereto.
40.63. Vulgar translation of the Bible, which the Papists use, canonized by the
Trent Council. 6.11. Exceedingly corrupt. Digress. 7.
W
WAfers when brought into the Sacrament. 50.31. Waldenses, and their opinions.
50.32. Woman Pope 55.7. Word of God. See Scriptures. The Papists by Gods word
mean Traditions, as well as ye written word. 1.3 Works. See Good works; and
Merit; and Satisfaction. The Church of Rome joins our works with Christ's
merits, jointly to satisfy therewith. 40.29.
GOod Reader it may fall out, that in the margent of this book specially, some
faults are escaped in the printing, by mistaking or misplacing the figures and
other parts of the quotation. Which is no marvel in quotations of this nature,
where many figures go together: And I my self, being above 100. miles from the
press, that I could not help it. Nevertheless I will maintain the
quotation, for substance to be true, though the Printer may have mistaken it:
and learned men that will take so much pains, may find that which I intend, I
doubt not, by their own knowledge of the place, if the numbers of the
quotation deceive them. I know not whether there be any such defects yet or no^
but this I admonish, because the Papists, if they find an error in the printing
of one of our books, use to exclame as if an article of our faith were razed
out: never remembering the like casualties of their own. It is one thing if I
have wilfully forged or falsified a place, and another thing if the Printer
only have mistaken the quotation. The latter may be, but the former is not: as
I will be ready to satisfy any that will charge me with it.

FINIS.

