THE PLANTERS PLEA.

OR THE GROUNDS OF PLANTATIONS EXAMINED, And usual Objections answered.

Together with a manifestation of the causes mooving such as have lately
undertaken a Plantation in NEW ENGLAND:

For the satisfaction of those that question the lawfulness of the Action.

2 THESE. 5. 21. Prove all things, and hold fast that which is good.

LONDON, Printed by WILLIAM JONES. 1630.

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader:
IT will appear to any man of common sense at first sight, that this rude
draught, that sets forth certain considerable grounds in planting Colonies,
being wrested out of the Authors hand, hardly overlooked, much less field and
smoothed for the Press, was never intended to be presented to public view,
especially in this attire: wherefore the Reader is entreated to observe, that
the particulars of this small Pamphlet, being all ranged under these two heads,
matters of Fact or of Opinion: In the former the Author sets down his
knowledge, and consequently what he resolves to justify; In the latter what he
conceives to be most probable, not what he dares warrant as certain and
infallible. Wherefore if in the declaring of his own opinion, either
concerning Colonies in general, or this in particular, he propose anything that
to men of better and more solid judgment upon mature advise shall seem either
not sound, or not evident, or not well fortified by strength of reason; he
desires rather advertisement thereof by some private intimation, than by
public opposition, as not conceiving an argument of this nature, wherein
neither Gods glory nor man's salvation have any necessary interest, (though the
work be directed to, and does in a good measure further both,) worth the
contending for in a time when so many weighty controversies in the
fundamentalls of religion are in agitation: and withal professing himself
willing to receive back any light gold that has passed from him unweighed,
and to exchange it for that which will be weight, as being conscious to
himself, that he desires not willingly to beguile any man. Besides, the Reader
may be pleased further to observe, that seeing the arguments produced in this
Treatise are rather proposed than handled, they cannot carry with them that
appearant and clear evidence of truth at the first view, as they might and
would do, if they were more largely deduced, and more fully fortified.
Wherefore he is entreated not to reject them too easily, as carrying more
weight than they seem to do at the first appearance. Howsoever the Authors
intention and opinion be construed and approved; if it may be believed that the
Gentlemen that are lately issued out from us, to lay the foundation of a Colony
in New England, have not been thrust forward by unadvised precipitation, but
led on by such probable grounds of reason and religion, as might be likely to
prevail with men that desire to keep a good conscience in all things: I trust
these will hold themselves reasonably satisfied; howsoever both they, and such
as wish the furtherance of your design, have (I assure my self) a testimony
from God and your own consciences, that they have endeavored to take there
footing upon warrantable grounds, and to direct themselves to a right scope, as
will be further manifested in this ensuing Treatise.

A BRIEF SVRVIEW OF COLONIES: And first, Of their Ground and Warrant.
CHAP. I. By a Colony we mean a society of men drawn out of one state or
people, and transplanted into another Country.
COLONIES (as other conditions 1. That Colonies have their warrant from God.
and states in humane society) have their warrant from Gods direction and
command; who 1. Argument from Gods Commandment.
as soon as men were, set them their task, to replenish the earth, and to
subdue it, Genesis 1. 28. Those words, I grant, express a promise, as the title
of a benediction prefixed unto them here, and in the repetition of them to
Noah, implies. Genesis 9. 1. But that withal they include a direction or command
was never, as I conceive, doubted by any. Iunius upon them: Prout vim intus
indiderat, sic palam mandatum dedit eurandae propagationis and dominationis
exercendae. And Paraeus, Iubet igitur replere terram, non solum generatione and
habitatione, sed cum primis potestate eultu and usu: Etsi vero nonnullae orbis
parts manent inhabitabiles; habemus nihilominus totius dominium iure Divino,
lic et non habeamus totius orbis usum culpa and defectu nostro. And before
them, Calvin; Iubet eos crescere and simul benedictionem suam destinat, etc.
and diverse other's.

It will be granted then that the words include and have the force of a
Precept, which perhaps some may conceive was to continue during the worlds
Infancy, and no longer; but such a limitation wants ground. It is true that
some commandments founded upon, and having respect unto some present state and
condition of men, received end or alteration when the condition was ended, or
changed. But Precepts given to the body of mankind, as these to Adam and Noah,
receive neither alteration in the substantials, nor determination while men,
and any void places of the earth continue, so that allowing this Commandment
to bind Adam, it must bind his posterity, and consequently our selves in this
age, and our issue after us, as long as the earth yields empty places to be
replenished.

Besides, the gift of the earth to the sons of 2. Argument from Gods gift of
the earth to men.
men, Psalm. 115. 16. necessarily inforceth their duty to people it: It were a
great wrong to God to conceive that he does ought in vain, or tenders a gift
that he never meant should be enjoyed: now how men should make benefit of the
earth, but by habitation and culture cannot be imagined.

Neither is this sufficient to conceive that Gods intention is satisfied if
some part of the earth be replenished, and used, though the rest be wast;
because the same difficulty urges us still, that the rest of which we receive
no fruit, was never intended to us, because it was never Gods mind we should
possess it. If it were then the mind of God, that man should possess all
parts of the earth, it must be enforced that we neglect our duty, and cross
his will, if we do it not, when we have occasion and opportunity: and
withal do little less then despise his blessing.

Withal, that order that God annexed to marriage 3. Argument from the Law of
marriage.
in his first institution, viz. that married persons should leave father and
mother, and cleave each to other, is a good warrant of this practice. For
sometime there will be a necessity, that young married persons should remove
out of their fathers house, and live apart by themselves, and so erect new
families. Now what are new families, but petty Colonies: and so at last
removing further and further they overflow the whole earth. Therefore, so long
as there shall be use of marriage, the warrant of deducing Colonies will
continue. 4. Argument from the benefit that comes to men's outward estates.


It is true, that all Gods directions have a double scope, man's good, and Gods
honor. Now that this commandment of God is directed unto man's good temporal
and spiritual, is as clear as the light. It cannot be denied but the life of
man is every way made more comfortable, and afforded a more plentiful supply in
a large scope of ground, which moves men to be so insatiable in their desires
to join house to house, and land to land, till there be no more place;
exceeding, I grant, therein the measure and bounds of Justice; and yet building
upon a principle that nature suggests, that a large place best assures
sufficiency: as we see; by nature, trees flourish fair, and prosper well, and
wax fruitful in a large Orchard, which would otherwise wither and decay, if
they were penned up in a little nursery: either all, or at best, a few that are
stronger plants and better rooted, would increase and overtop, and at last,
starve the weaker: which falls out in our civil State; where a few men
flourish that are best grounded in their estates, or best furnished with
abilities, or best fitted with opportunities, and the rest wax weak and
languish, as wanting room and means to nourish them.

Now, that the spirits and hearts of men are kept in better temper by spreading
wide, and by 5. Argument is from the furthering of godliness and honesty.
pouring, as it were, from vessel to vessel (the want whereof is alleged by
the Prophet Jeremy as the cause that Moab settled upon his lees, and got so
harsh a relish Ier. 48. 11.) will be evident to any man, that shall consider,
that the husbanding of unmanured grounds, and shifting into empty Lands,
enforces men to frugalitie, and quickneth invention: and the settling of new
States requires justice and affection to the common good: and the taking in of
large Countries presents a natural remedy against covetousness, fraud, and
violence; when every man may enjoy enough without wrong or injury to his
neighbor. Whence it was, that the first ages, by these helps, were renowned
for golden times, wherein men, being newly entered into their possessions, and
entertained into a naked soil, and enforced thereby to labor, frugality,
simplicity, and justice, had neither leisure, nor occasion, to decline to
idleness, riot, wantonness, fraud, and violence, the fruits of well-peopled
Countries, and of the abundance and superfluities of long settled States.

But that which should most sway our hearts, 6. Argument from the advancement
of Gods glory.
is the respect unto Gods honor, which is much advanced by this work of
replenishing the earth. First, when the largeness of his bounty is tasted by
settling of men in all parts of the world, whereby the extent of his munificence
to the sons of men is discovered; The Psalmist tells us that God is much
magnified by this, that the whole earth is full of his riches, yea and the wide
sea too, Psalm. 104. 24. 25. And God, when he would have Abraham know what he
had bestowed on him when he gave him Canaan, wills him to walk through it in
the length of it, and in the breadth of it, Genesis 13. 17.

Secondly, Gods honor must needs be much advanced, when, together with men's
persons, religion is conveyed into the several parts of the world, and all
quarters of the earth sound with his praise; and Christ Jesus takes in the
Nations for his inhenitance, and the ends of the earth for his possession,
according to Gods decree and promise. Psalm. 2. 8.

Besides all that has been said, seeing Gods command, and abilities to
perform it, usually 7. Argument from the abilities wherewith God furnishes
men for this work.
go together, we may guess at his intention and will, to have the earth
replenished, by the extraordinary fruitfulness that he gave to mankind in
those first times, when men manifested their greatest forwardness for the
undertaking of this task; which seems to be denied to the latter ages, and
peradventure for this reason among others, because the love of ease and
pleasure fixing men to the places and Countries which they find ready
furnished to their hand, by their predecessors labors and industry, takes from
them a desire and will of undertaking such a laborious and unpleasant task as
is the subduing of unmanured Countries.

Objection.
But, it may be objected, if God intended now the issuing out of Colonies, as
in former ages, he would withal quicken men with the same heroical spirits
which were found in those times: Which we find to be far otherwise.
Although the strong impression upon men's spirits that have been and are
stirred up in this age to this and other Plantations, might be a sufficient
answer to this objection, yet we answer further.

Answer.
Its one thing to guess what God will bring to pass, and another thing to
conclude what he requires us to undertake. Shall we say that because God gives
not men the zeal of Moses and Phineas, therefore he has discharged men of
the duty of executing judgment. It is true indeed, that God has hitherto
suffered the neglect of many parts of the world, and hidden them from the eyes
of former ages; for ends best known to himself: but that disproves not that
the duty of peopling void places lies upon us still, especially since they are
discovered and made known to us. And, although I dare not enter so far into
Gods secrets, as to affirm, that he avengeth the neglect of this duty by
Wars, Pestilences and Famines, which unless they had wasted the people of
these parts of the world, we should ere this, have devoured one another; Yet
it cannot be denied, but the near thronging of people together in these full
Countries, have often occasioned amongst us civil Wars, Famines, and
Plagues. And it is as true that God has made advantage of some of these
Wars, especially which have laid many fruitful Countries wast, to exercise
men in these very labors which employ new Planters; by which he has reduced
them to some degrees of that frugality, industry, and justice,

full states of unnecessary multitudes, or of replenishing wast and void
Countries; they have a clear and sufficient warrant from the mouth of God, as
immediately concurring with one special end that God aimed at in the first
institution thereof.

But, seeing Gods honor, and glory; and next men's Salvation, is his own
principal scope in this and all his ways; it must withal be necessarily
acknowledged that the desire and respect unto the publishing of his name where
it is not known, and reducing men, that live without God in this present
world, unto a form of Piety and godliness, by how much the more immediately
it suites with the mind of God, and is furthest carried from private respects,
by so much the more it advances this work of planting Colonies above all
civil and humane ends, and deserves honor, and approbation, above the most
glorious Conquests, or successful enterprises that ever were undertaken by
the most renowned men that the Sun has seen, and that by how much the
subduing of Satan is a more glorious act, then a victory over men: and the
enlargement of Christ's Kingdom, then the adding unto men's dominions: and the
saving of men's souls, then the provision for their lives and bodies.

It seems, this end, in plantation, has been specially reserved for this
later end of the world: seeing; before Christ, the Decree of God, that suffered
all Nations to walk in their own ways, Acts 14. 16. shut up the Church within
the narrow bounds of the Promised Land, and so excluded men from the
propagation of Religion to other Countries. And in the Apostles time, God
afforded an easier and more speedy course of converting men to the truth by the
gift of tongues, seconded by the power of Miracles, to win the greater credit
to their doctrine, which most especially, and first prevailed upon Countries
civilized, as the History of the Apostles Acts makes manifest. As for the rest,
I make no question, but God used the same way to other barbarous Nations, which
he held with us, whom he first Civilized by the Roman Conquests, and mixture
of their Colonies with us, that he might bring in Religion afterward: seeing
no man can imagine how Religion should prevail upon those, who are not subdued
to the rule of Nature and Reason.

Nay, I conceive, God especially directs this work of erecting Colonies unto
the planting and propagating of Religion in the West Indies, (although I will
not confine it to those alone) and that for diverse Reasons, which ought to be
taken into serious consideration, as affording the strongest Motives that can
be proposed to draw on the hearts and affections of men to this work now in
hand, for this purpose; which gives occasion unto the publishing of this
Treatise.

men in the times appointed by the Law of Moses, counting them and all they
touch unclean during that time appointed by the Law: whether upon any other
ground, or by a tradition received from the Jews, it is uncertain. Some
conceive, their Predecessors might have had some commerce with the Jews in
times past, by what means I know not: Howsoever it be, it falls out that the
name of the place, which our late Colony has chosen for their seat, prooves to
be perfect Hebrew, being called Nahum Keike, by interpretation, The bosom of
consolation: which it were pity that those which observed it not, should
change into the name of Salem, though upon a fair ground, in remembrance of a
peace settled upon a conference at a general meeting between them and their
neighbors, after expectance of some dangerous jarre. Now then, if all nations
must have Christ tendered unto them, and the Indies have never yet heard of his
name, it must follow, that that work of conveighing that knowledge to them,
remains to be undertaken and performed by this last age.

Again, what shall we conceive of that almost 3. Reason from the miraculous
opening of the passage to these parts of the world.
miraculous opening the passage unto, and discovery of these formerly unknown
nations, which must needs have proved impossible unto former ages for want of
the knowledge of the use of the Loadstone, as wounderfully found out as these
unknown Countries by it. It were little less then impiety to conceive that
GOD, (whose Will concurres with the lighting of a Sparrow upon the ground) had
no hand in directing one of the most difficult and observeable works of this
age; and as great folly to imagine, that he who made all things, and
consequently orders and directs them to his own glory, had no other scope but
the satisfying of men's greedy appetites, that thirsted after the riches of that
new found world, and to tender unto them the objects of such barbarous
cruelties as the world never heard of. We cannot then probably conceive that
GOD, in that strange discovery, aimed at any other thing but this, that, after
he had punished the Atheism, and Idolatry of those heathen and brutish
Nations, by the Conquerors cruelty, and acquainted them, by mixture of some
other people, with civility, to cause at length the glorious Gospel of Jesus
Christ to shine out unto them, as it did to our forefathers, after those sharp
times of the bitter desolations of our Nation, between the Romans and the
Picts.

A fourth reason, to prove that God has left 4. Reason from the nearness of
the Jews conversion.
this great, and glorious work to this age of the world, is the nearness of
the Jews conversion; before which, it is conceived by the most, that the
fullness of the Gentiles must come in, according to the Apostles prophecy,
Romans 11. 25. That this day cannot be far off appears by the fulfilling of
the prophesies, precedent to that great and glorious work, and the general
expectation thereof by all men, such as was found among the Jews both in Judea
and in some other parts of the world before the coming of Christ in the flesh,
now then let it be granted that the Jews conversion is near, and that the
Gentiles, and consequently the Indians must needs be gathered in before that
day; and any man may make the conclusion, that this is the hour for the work,
and consequently of our duty to endeavor the effecting that which God has
determined; the opening of the eyes of those poor ignorant souls, and
discovering unto them the glorious mystery of Jesus Christ.

CHAP. III. The English Nation is fit to undertake this task.
THat this Nation is able and fit to send out Colonies into Foreign parts
will evidently appear by the consideration of of our overflowing multitudes:
this being admitted for a received principle, that Countries superabound in
people when they have more then they can well nourish, or well employ, seeing
we know, men are not ordained to live only, but, withal and especially, to
serve one another through love, in some profitable and useful calling.
Granting therefore that this Land by Gods ordinary blessing, yields sufficiency
of corn and eattell for more then the present Inhabitants, yet, that we have
more people, then we do, or can profitably employ, will, I conceive, appear
to any man of understanding, willing to acknowledge the truth, and to consider
these four particulars.

1. Many among us live without employment, either wholly, or in the greatest
part (especially if there happen any interruption of trade, as of late was
manifested not only in Essex, but in most

Now what a disease this must needs be in a State, where men's necessities
enforce them to inventions of all ways and means of expense upon the
instruments of pride, and wantonness; and of as many subtilties and frauds in
deceitful handling all works that pass through their fingers, that by the
speedy wasting of what is made, they may be the sooner called upon for new; I
leave it to any wise man to judge. It is a fearful condition, whereby men are
in a sort enforced to perish, or to become means and instruments of evil. So
that the conclusion must stand firm, we have more men then we can employ to
any profitable or useful labor.

Objection.
But the idleness or unprofitable labors of our people arise not from our
numbers, but from our ill government, inferior Magistrates being too remiss
in their offices; and therefore may more easily be reformed by establishing
better order, or executing those good laws already made at home, then by
transporting some of them into foreign Countries.

Answer.
Good government though it do reform many, yet it cannot reform all the
evils of this kind; because it will be a great difficulty to find out
profitable employments for all that will want; which way we should help our
selves by tillage I know not: we can hardly depasture sewer Rother beasts then
we do, seeing we spend already their flesh and hides: and as for sheep, the
ground depastured with them, does or might set on work as many hands as
tillage can do. If we adventure the making of linen cloth, other soiles are
so much fitter to produce the materials for that work, their labor is so
much cheaper, the hindering of Commerce in trade likely to be so great, that
the undertakers of this work would in all probability be soon discouraged.
Nay the multiplying of new Draperies, which perhaps might effect more then all
the rest, yet were in no proportion sufficient to employ the supernumeraries
which this Land would yield if we could be confined within the bounds of
sobriety and modesty, seeing it may be demonstrated, that near a third part
of these that inhabit our Towns and Cities (besides such spare men as the
Country yields) would by good order established, be left to take up new
employments.

We have as much opportunity as any Nation 2. Argument from the opportunity of
the Sea.
to transport our men and provisions by Sea into those Countries, without which
advantage they cannot possibly be peopled from any part of the world; not from
this Christian part at least, as all men know: And how useful a neighbor the
sea is to the furthering of such a work; the examples of the Graecians and the
Phaenicians, who filled all the bordering coasts with their Colonies do
sufficiently prove unto all the world: Neither can it be doubted, but the first
Planters wanting this help (as Abraham in his removing to Charran first, and
to Canaan afterward) must needs spend much time and endure much labor in
passing their famlies and provisions by Land, over rivers and through Woods and
Thickets by unbeaten paths.

But what need Arguments to us that have already determined this truth? How
many several 3. Argument from our own practice already.
Colonies have we drawn out and passed over into several parts of the West
Indies? And this we have done with the allowance, encouragement, and high
commendation of State, perhaps not always with the best success, who knows
whether by erring from the right scope? Questionless for want of fit men for
that employment, and experience to direct a work, which being carried in an
untrodden path, must needs be subject to miscariage into many errors.

Now whereas it has been manifested that 4. Argument from our fitnes to the
maine end of Colonies, the planting of true Religion.
the most eminent and desirable end of planting Colonies, is the propagation of
Religion; It may be conceived this Nation is in a sort singled out unto that
work; being of all the States that enjoy the liberty of the Religion
Reformed; and are able to spare people for such an employment, the most
Orthodoxe in our profession, and behind none in sincerity in embracing it; as
will appear to any indifferent man, that shall duly weigh and recount the
number and condition of those few States of Europe, that continue in the
profession of that truth which we embrace.

CHAP. IIII. That New England is a fit Country for the seating of an English
Colonie, for the propagation of Religion.
NOT only our acquaintance with 1. Argument or occasion, trade into the
country.
the soil and Natives there, but more especially our opportunity of trading
thither for Furs and fish, persuade this truth, if other things be
answerable. It is well known, before our breach with Spain, we usually sent
out to New England, yearly forty or fifty sail of ships of reasonable good
burden for fishing only. And howsoever it falls out that our New Foundland
voyages prove more beneficial to the Merchants; yet it is as true, these to
New England are found far more profitable to poor Fishermen; so that by that
time all reckonings are cast up, these voyages come not far behind the other
in advantage to the State. 2. The fitness of the country for our health and
maintenance.


No Country yields a more propitious air for our tempor, then New England, as
experience has made manifest, by all relations: many of our people that have
sound themselves always weak and sickly at home, have become strong, and
healthy there: perhaps by the dryness of the air and constant temper of it,
which seldom varies suddenly from cold to heat, as it does with us: So that
Rheumes are very rare among our English there; Neither are the Natives at any
time troubled with pain of teeth, soreness of eyes, or ache in their limbs.
It may be the nature of the water conduces somewhat this way; which all
affirm to keep the body always temperately soluble, and consequently helps
much to the preventing, and curing of the Gout, and Stone, as some have found
by experience. As for provisions for life: The Come of the Country (which it
produces in good proportion with reasonable labor) is apt for nourishment,
and agrees, although not so well with our taste at first; yet very well with
our health; nay, is held by some Physicians, to be restorative. If we like not
that, we may make use of our own Grains, which agree well with that soil,
and so do our Cattle: nay, they grow unto a greater bulk of body there, then
with us in England. Unto which if we add the fish, foul, and Venison, which
that Country yields in great abundance, it cannot be questioned but that soil
may assure sufficient provision for food. And being naturally apt for Hemp and
Flax especially, may promise us Linen sufficient with our labor, and woollen
too if it may be thought fit to store it with sheep.

The Land affords void ground enough to receive more people then this State can
spare, and 3. Argument from the emptinesle of the Land.
that not only wood-grounds, and others, which are unfit for present use: but,
in many places, much cleared ground for tillage, and large marshes for hay and
feeding of cattle, which comes to pass by the desolatio^ happening through a
three years Plague, about twleve or sixteen years past, which swept away
most of the Inhabitants all along the Seacoast, and in some places utterly
consumed man, woman and child, so that there is no person left to lay claim
to the soil which they possessed; In most of the rest, the Contagion has
scarce left alive one person of an hundred. And which is remarkable, such a
Plague has not been known, or remembered in any age past; nor then raged above
twenty or thirty miles up into the Land, nor seized upon any other but the
Natives, the English in the heat of the Sickness commercing with them without
hurt or danger. Besides, the Natives invite us to sit down by them, and offer
us what ground we will: so that either want of possession by others, or the
possessors gift, and sale, may assure our right: we need not fear a clear
title to the soil.

In all Colonies it is to be desired that the daughter may answer something
back by way of 4. Argument from the usefulness of that Colony to this State.
retribution to the mother that gave her being. Nature has as much force, and
founds as strong a relation between people and people, as between person and
person: So that a Colonie denying due respect to the State from whose bowels it
issued, is as great a monster, as an unnatural child. Now, a Colonie planted
in New England may be many ways useful to this State.

As first, in furthering our Fishing-voyages (one 1. In our fishing voyages.
of the most honest, and every way profitable employment that the Nation
undertakes) It must needs be a great advantage unto our men after so long a
voyage to be furnished with fresh victual there; and that supplied out of that
Land, without spending the provisions of our own country. But there is hope
besides, that the Colonie shall not only furnish our Fishermen with Victual,
but with Salt too, unless men's expectation and conjectures much deceive them:
and so quit unto them a great part of the charge of their voyage, beside the
hazard of adventure.

Next, how serviceable this Country must needs be for provisions for shipping,
is sufficiently known already: At present it may yield Planks, Masts, Oars,
Pitch, Tar, and Iron; and hereafter (by the aptness of the Soil for Hemp)
if the Colonie increase, Sails and Cordage. What other commodities it may
afford besides for trade, time will discover. Of Wines among the rest, there
can be no doubt; the ground yeel ding natural Vines in great abundance and
variety; and of these, some as good as any are foundin France by humane
culture. But in the possibility of the serviceablenesse of the Colonie to this
State, the judgment of the Dutch may somewhat confirm us, who have planted in
the same soil, and make great account of their Colonie there.

But the greatest advantage must needs come 5. Argument the benefit of such a
Colony to the Natives.
unto the Natives themselves, whom we shall teach providence and industry, for
want whereof they perish oftentimes, while they make short provisions for the
present, by reason of their idleness, and that they have, they spend and wast
unnecessarily, without having respect to times to come. Withal, commerce and
example of our course of living, cannot but in time breed civility among them,
and that by Gods blessing may make way for religion consequently, and for the
saving of their souls. Unto all which may be added, the safety and protection
of the persons of the Natives, which are secured by our Colonies. In times past
the Tarentines (who dwell from those of Mattachusets bay, near which our men
are seated; about fifty or sixty leagues to the North-East) inhabiting a soil
unfit to produce that Country grain, being the more hardy people, were
accustomed yearly at harvest to come down in their Canoes, and reap their
fields, and carry away their Corn, and destroy their people, which wonderfully
weakened, and kept them low in times past: from this evil our neighborhood
has wholly freed them, and consequently secured their persons and estates;
which makes the Natives there so glad of our company.

Objection 1.
But if we have any spare people, Ireland is a fitter place to receive them
then New England. Being 1, Nearer. 2, Our own. 3, Void in some parts. 4,
Fruitful. 5, Of importance for the securing of our own Land. 6, Needing our
help for their recovery out of blindness and superstition.

Answer.
Ireland is well-nigh sufficiently peopled already, or will be in the next age.
Besides, this work needs not hinder that, no more then the plantation in
Virginia, Bermudas, S. Christophers, Barbados, etc. which are all of them
approved, and encouraged as this is. As for religion, it has reasonable
footing in Ireland already, and may easily be propagated further, if we be
not wanting to our selves. This Country of New England is destitute of all
helps, and means, by which the people might come out of the snare of Satan. Now
although it be true, that I should regard my son more then my servant; yet I
must rather provide a Coat for my servant that goes naked, then give my son
another, who has reasonable clothing already.

Objection 2.
But New England has diverse discommodities, the Snow, and coldness of the
winter, which our English bodies can hardly brook: and the annoyance of men by
Muskitoes, and Serpents: and of Cattle, and Corn, by wild beasts.

Answer.
The cold of Winter is tolerable, as experience has, and does manifest, and is
remedied by the abundance of fuel. The Snow lies indeed about a foot thick
for ten weeks or there about; but where it lies thicker, and a month longer,
as in many parts of Germany, men find a very comfortable dwelling. As for the
Serpents, it is true, there are some, and these larger then our Adders; but in
ten years experience no man was ever endangered by them; and as the country
is better stored with people, they will be found fewer, and as rare as among us
here. As for the wild beasts, they are no more, nor so much dangerous or
hurtful here, as in germany and other parts of the world. The Muskitoes indeed
infest the planters, about four months in the heat of Summer; but after one
years acquaintance, men make light account of them; some fleight defense for
the hands and face, smoke, and a close house may keep them off. Neither are
they much more noisome then in Spain, Germany, and other parts; nay, then the
fennish parts of Essex, and Lincolne-shire. Besides it is credibly reported,
that twenty miles inward into the Country they are not found: but this is
certain, and tried by experience, after four or five years habitation they
wax very thin: It may be the hollownesse of the ground

pected in New England but competency to live on at the best, and that must be
purchased with hard labor, whereas diverse other parts of the West Indies offer
a richer soil, which easily allures Inhabitants, by the tender of a better
condition then they live in at present.

Answer.
An unanswerable argument, to such as make the advancement of their estates,
the scope of their undertaking; but no way a discouragement to such as aim at
the propagation of the Gospel, which can never be advanced but by the
preservation of Piety in those that carry it to strangers; Now we know nothing
sorts better with Piety them Compete^cy; a truth which Agur has determined
long ago, Prove. 30. 8. Nay, Heathen men by the light of Nature were directed
so far as to discover the overflowing of riches to be enemy to labor,
sobriety, justice, love and magnanimity: and the nurse of pride, wantonness,
and contention; and therefore labored by all means to keep out the love and
desire of them from their well-ordered States, and observed and professed the
coming in and admiration of them to have been the foundation of their ruin.
If men desire to have a people degenerate speedily, and to corrupt their minds
and bodies too, and besides to tole-in thieves and spoilers from abroad; let
them seek a rich soil, that brings in much with little labor; but if they
desire that Piety and godliness should prosper; accompanied with sobriety,
justice and love, let them choose a Country such as this is; even like France,
or England, which may yield sufficiency with hard labor and industry: the
truth is, there is more cause to fear wealth then poverty in that soil.

CHAP. 5. What persons may be fit to be employed in this work of planting a
Colony.
IT seems to be a common and gross error that Colonies ought to be
Emunctories or sinckes of States; to drayne away their filth: whence arise
often murmurings at the removal of any men of State or worth, with some wonder
and admiration, that men of sufficiency and discretion should prefer any
thing before a quiet life at home. An opinion that favors strongly of
self-love, always opposite and enemy to any public good. This fundamental
error has been the occasion of the miscariage of most of our Colonies, and
the chargeable destruction of many of our Countrymen, whom when we have once
issued out from us we cast off as we say to the wide world, leaving them to
themselves either to sink or swim.

Contrary to this common custom, a State that intends to draw out a Colony for
the inhabiting of another Country, must look at the mother and the daughter
with an equal and indifferent eye; remembering that a Colony is a part and
member of her own body; and such in whose good her self has a peculiar
interest, which therefore she should labor to further and cherish by all fit
and convenient means; and consequently must allow to her such a proportion of
able men as may be sufficient to make the frame of that new formed body: As
good Governors, able Ministers, Physicians, Soldiers, Schoolemasters,
Mariners, and Mechanics of all sorts; who had therefore need to be of the
more sufficiency, because the first fashioning of a politic body is a harder
task then the ordering of that which is already framed; as the first erecting
of a house is ever more difficult then the future keeping of it in repair; or
as the breaking of a Colt requires more skill then the riding of a managed
horse. When the frame of the body is thus formed and furnished with vital
parts, and knit together with firm bands and sinews, the bulk may be filled
up with flesh, that is with persons of less use and activity, so they be
pliable and apt to be kept in life.

The disposition of these persons must be respected as much or more then their
abilities; men nourished up in idleness, unconstant, and affecting novelties,
unwilling, stubborn, inclined to faction, covetous, luxurious, prodigal, and
generally men habituated to any gross evil, are no fit members of a Colony.
Ill humors soon overthrow a weak body; and false stones in a foundation
ruin the whole building: the persons therefore chosen out for this employment,
ought to be willing, constant, industrious, obedient, frugall, lovers of the
common good, or at least such as may be easily wroght to this temper;
considering that works of this nature try the undertakers with many
difficulties, and easily discourage minds of base and weak temper. It cannot,
I confess, be hoped that all should be such; care must be had that the
principalls be so inclined, and as many of the Vulgar as may be, at least that
they be willing to submit to authority; mutinies, which many times are kindled
by one person, are well nigh as dangerous in a Colony, as in an Army.

These are rules concerning electing of fit persons for Colonies in general,
unto which must be adjoined the consideration of the principal scope whereat
the Colonie aims; which must be Religion, whether it be directed to the good
of others for their conversion; or of the Planters themselves for their
preservation and continuance in a good condition, in which they cannot long
subsist without Religion. To this purpose must be allotted to every Colony, for
Governors and Ministers especially, men of piety and blameless life,
especially in such a Plantation as this in New England, where their lives must
be the patterns to the Heathen, and the especial, effectual means of
winning them to the love of the truth. Nay it would be endeavored, that all
Governors offamilies, either may be men truly Godly or at least such as
consent and agree to a form of moral honesty and sobriety. As for other
ends less principal, which are especially Merchandise and defense, common
sense teaches every man that the Colonie must be furnished with the greatest
store of such persons as are most serviceable to the maine end at which it
aims.

Objection.
But able and godly persons being in some degree supporters of the State that
sends them out, by sparing them she seems to pluck away her own props, and
so to weaken her own standing, which is against the rule of charity, that
allows and persuades every man to have the first care of his own good and
preservation.

Answer.
The first, indeed but not the only care: so I must provide for mine own
family, but not for that alone; But to answer this objection more fully, which
troubles many, and distracts their thoughts, and strikes indeed at the
foundation of this work (for either we must allow some able men for Civil
and Ecclesiastical affairs for peace and war, or no Colonie at all:) First
I deny that such as are gone out from the State, are cut off from the State;
the roots that issue out from the Truncke of the Tree, though they be
dispersed, yet they are not severed, but do good offices, by drawing
nourishment to the maine body, and the tree is not weakened but strengthened the
more they spread, of which we have a clear instance in the Roman State: that
City by the second Punicke war had erected thirty Colonies in several
parts of Italy; and by their strength especially supported her self against
her most potent enemies. I confess that in places so far distances
New England from this Land, the case is somewhat different; the intercourse is
not so speedy, but it must needs be granted yet, that even those so far remote
may be of use and service to this State still, as has been showed.

vels, improved not so much by sight as experience, after the affairs of the
Colony were settled; what loss were it in lieu of so great a gain?

Lastly, if we spare men for the advancing of Gods honor, men that do us
service that they may attend Gods service, we have as much reason to expect the
supply of our loss, as the repayring of our estates, out of which we spare a
portion for our brethrens necessities, or the advancing of Gods worship; by the
blessing of God according to his promise.

CHAP. VI. What warrant particular men-may have to engage their persons, and
estates in this employment of planting Colonies.
TO give a clear Resolution to this Proposition, is a matter of no small
difficulty: I shall declare mine own opinion, and leave it to the censure of
the godly wise. It is the conceit of some men, that no man may undertake this
task without an extraordinary warrant, such as Abraham had from God, to call
him out of Mesopotamia to Canaan; their opinion seems to rest upon a ground
that will hardly be made good, sc. That the planting of Colonies is an
extraordinary work. Which if it be granted, then the argument has a strong,
and for ought I know, a necessary inference: That therefore those that
undertake it, must have an extraordinary Call. But that Proposition, That
planting of Colonies is an extraordinary work, will not easily be granted.
This Argument lies strongly against it.

That Duty that is commanded by a perpetual Law, cannot be accounted
extraordinary. But the sending out of Colonies is commanded by a perpetual
Law.

Therefore it is no extraordinary duty.

Now that the commandment is perpetual, has been proved. First, because it
was given to mankind; and secondly, because it has a ground which is
perpetual, sc. the emptiness of the earth, which either is so, or may be so
while the world endures; for even those places which are full, may be emptied
by wars, or sickness; and then an argument presses as strongly the contrary
way. The undertaking of an ordinary duty needs no other then an ordinary
warrant; but such is planting of a Colony, as being undertaken by virtue of a
perpetual law; therefore the undertaking to plant a Colony, needs no
extraordinary warrant. Indeed Abraham's undertaking was extraordinary in many
things, and therefore needed an immediate direction from God.

1, He was to go alone with his family and brethren.

2, To such a certain place far distant.

3, Possessed already by the Canaanites.

4, To receive it wholly appropriated to himself, and his Issue.

5, Not to plant it at present, but only sojourne in it, and walk through it
for a time.

Now none of these circumstances fit our ordinary Colonies; and consequently
Abraham's example is nothing to this purpose, because the case is different,
though in some other things alike.

Others conceive, that though men may adventure upon the work upon an ordinary
warrant, yet none can give that but the State; therefore they require a command
from the highest authority unto such as engage themselves in this affair.
Indeed that the State has power over all her members, to command and dispose
of them within the bounds of justice, is more evident, then can be denied: but
this power she executes diversely; sometime by command, sometimes by permission:
as in preparations to war, sometimes men are compelled to serve, sometimes
they are permitted to go voluntaries that will.

Again, sometimes the Supreme power takes care of the whole business;
sometimes (as in Musters) commits it to delegates. If the power of State then
proclaim liberty to such as will, to gather and unite into the body of a
Colony, and commit the care to some persons that offer themselves, to associate
to them whom they think fit, and to order them according to discretion; no man
can deny but that the State has given a sufficient warrant. Neither does it
appear, that ever any State did more; The Romans use was to proclaim that
they intended to plant a Colony of such a number in such a place, and as many
as would give in their names should receive so many acres of Ground, and enjoy
such other privileges as they thought fit to grant them, which they then
expressed: Those which gave in their names were enrolled till the number was
full, and then had they certain Commissioners appointed by the State of see
all things ordered and directed accordingly, and to put every man into
possession of his inheritance; neither did the State interpose their authority
in assigning, and choosing out the men, but left it free and voluntary to every
man to take or leave.

Seeing nothing can bear out the hazzards, and inconveniences of such
toylesome and difficult undertakings, as is the planting of Colonies, but a
willing mind: Men can digest any thing that themselves choose or desire; but a
commandment makes pleasant things harsh, how much more harsh things
intolerable?

But to come somewhat nearer unto the grounds of this resolution. In
undertaking an new inployment two things must be taken into consideration, upon
which a man's warrant must be grounded.

1, His engagement unto his present condition in which he is settled.

2, The tender and offer of the new service unto which he is called.

In both it must be first granted, that Callings are employments in which we
serve one another through love, Gal. 5. 13. in something that is good, Ephesians.
4. 28. not seeking our own, but other men's profit, 1 Cor. 10. 24.

In furthering other men's good our engagements are,

1, To the Church in general.

2, To that particular State of which we are members, either wholly, or any
branch of it.

3, To our friends.

And these as they have interest in our labors of love in that order that is
set down, so they have power to require them in the same order, and that two
ways, either by their express; command, or by the manifestation of their
necessity, or special good proposed. The Church in general rarely lays any
command but mostly chalengeth our service by the discovery of her need, and use
of our labors for her good. The particular State, besides the pleading of her
necessity; interposeth her authority; and that either immediately, as in
deputing men to public offices; or mediately by our parents, or other
governors whom she authorizeth to direct and setle us in such particular
callings and employments as may be for her use and service. The State then by
any public intimation, proclaming free liberty to men to remove and plant
themselves elsewhere, discharges these persons of the obligation wherein by
her power and authority they stand bound to their particular calling wherein
they are placed, and ought otherwise to continue. So that now particular
persons stand no longer bound by the States authority, but by the
manifestation of her necessities, which crave their aid and service for their
public good and safety.

The next thing then to be taken into consideration, is the advantages or
benefits, which may be gained by our service either to the Church, State, or
friends to whom we have relation by private interest. In all these the first
respect must be had to necessity, and the next to convenience. How much is to
be yielded to necessity, it has pleased God to manifest; by dispensing with
his own worship and service, in cases of necessity, not only upon our own
persons: but upon our goods or cattle. It must therefore be duly waighed
whether we may be more serviceable to the Church in the State where we live,
or in that we desire to erect: and again, whether service is of more
necessity: and whether appears to be greater, that must carry us, unless some
pressing wants of private friends challenge our service from them both, which
in matters of moment and importance, to them must be conceived to be cast in by
God, as a discharge from any other employment. As for example, The furthering
of the Gospel in New England, seems to be of more pressing necessity, and
consequently by a stronger band to call me on to that work, then the State at
home to my continuance here; for here though I may do something for the
advancing of Religion, yet my labors that way are not so needful in the land,
because many others may put too their hands to the same work. In New England
there are none to undergo the task: but in this case if the preservation of my
fathers life or estate required my stay, that is a discharge unto me from this
call to New England; not because his life or estate is of greater weight then
the Churches good, but because his necessity is greater; for no body can
procure my fathers safety but my self, other men besides my self may do the
Church this service. Thus men that are free from engagement may see what
weights are allowed to be cast into the balance to determine their stay or
removal.

All the difficulty that remains, is, who shall cast the scales (that is) who
shall determine which benefit or necessity is the greater? No question that
which conscience well informed, assures me to be so: but who shall inform my
conscience, or by what rule shall my conscience judge? It is out of
peradventure that God must inform the conscience. But how shall I discover
what God advises? It is as certain that if the word, by scanning the grounds
which it proposes, can give a Seer resolution, it must be followed. The things
that are revealed belong unto us and our children that we may do them, Deuteronomy.
29. 29. But many rules of Scripture though clear in themselves, yet are
doubtful and ambiguous in the application, because they cannot determine
particulars. In this case then we must have recourse to Christian wisdom;
assisted: First, By the advice and counsel of godly wise friends. Secondly, By
the observation of the concurrence of opportunities, Occasiones sunt Dei nutus.
Thirdly, By and consideration of the inclination of the heart proposing a right
end scope after frequent and earnest prayer. A resolution taken after all these
means used, as in Gods presence, without prejudice, with a sincere desire to
know and be informed of Gods will, and obey it, may be taken for the voice of
God at present, and ought to direct the practice, though it bind not the
conscience to embrace the things resolved for an infallible and only the most
probable direction. And the truth is, that unless this advise and resolution
by Christian wisdom, applying the general rules of Gods word to our own
particular case after we have sought counsel of God, and our Christian
friends may be admitted for a rule to direct our practice, I know not what rule
to prescribe to be followed. Suppose I would marry a wife, nothing but
Christian wisdom so assisted, as is expressed before, can show me which is
the woman.

CAP. 7. Answering Objections against the maine body of the work.
OBJECTION 1.
ALl experience is against the hope and good 1. Objection, from experience of
the ill success of Colonies.
success of Colonies; much money, and many men's lives have been spent upon
Virginia, St. Christophers, New Foundland, etc. with no proportionable
success, and what reason have we to expect other event of this?

ANSWER.
To speak nothing of particulars, which perhaps might occasion some distaste,
I deny not but the ends which they proposed may be good and warrantable; men
may set before themselves civil respects, as advancement of the Nation, and
hope and expectation of gain, which perhaps has either wholly set on, or
strongly swayed these lately undertaken Colonies: But I conceive where the
service of the Church, and respect unto the advancement of the Gospel is
predominant, we may with greater assurance depend upon Gods engagement in the
work, and consequently expect a prosperous success from his hand. Besides,
why may not English Plantations thrive as well as Dutch? Where and when have
their Colonies failed? To speak nothing of the East Indies, even this which
they have settled in New England upon Hudsons River with no

would be no question of a flourishing State there in convenient time by the
concurrence of Gods ordinary blessing. In this duty if we be wanting unto
them, there will be great cause to suspect, that the exception against the
work, for the insupportable butthen of the charge, is but a fair pretext to
color our fear of our own purses, which many are more faithful unto, than
unto the service of God and of his Church.

OBJECTION 2.
But the pretended end of winning the Heathen to the knowledge of God and
embracing of the faith of Christ, is a mere fantasy, and a work not only of
uncertain but unlikely success, as appears by our fruitless endeavors that
way, both in Virginia and New England, where New-Plimmouth men inhabiting now
these ten years, are not able to give account of any one man converted to
Christianity.

ANSWER.
And no marvel, unless God should work by miracle; neither can it be
expected that work should take effect until we may be more perfectly
acquainted with their language, and they with ours. Indeed it is true, both
the Natives and English understand so much of one another language, as may
enable them to trade one with another, and fit them for conference about things
that are subject to outward sense; and so they understand our use in keeping
the Sabbath day, observe our reverence in the worship of God, are somewhat
acquainted with the moral precepts; know that adultery, theft, murder and
lying are forbidden, which nature teaches, because these things are outward,
and may be understood almost by sense: But how shall a man express unto them
things merely spiritual, which have no affinity with sense, unless we were
thoroughly acquainted with their language, and they with ours? neither can we in
theirs, or they in our tongue utter any continued speech, because neither we
nor they understand the moods, tenses, cases, numbers, praepositions, adverbes,
etc. which make coherence in words, and express a perfect sense. Besides, it
has been intimated that we hardly have found a brutish people won before
they had been taught civility. So we must endeavor and expect to work that
in them first, and Religion afterward. Amongst such as have been brought over
into England from Virginia there was one Nanawack, a youth sent over by the Lo.
De Laware, when he was Governor there, who coming over and living here a
year or two in houses where he heard not much of Religion, but saw and heard
many times examples of drinking, swearing, and like evils, remained as he was
a mere Pagan; but after removed into a godly family, he was strangely
altered, grew to understand the principles of Religion, learned to read,
delighted in the Scriptures, Sermons, Prayers, and other Christian duties,
wonderfully bewailed the state of his Countrymen, especially his brethren, and
gave such testimonies of his love to the truth, that he was thought fit to be
baptized: but being prevented by death, left behind such testimonies of his
desire of Gods favor, that it moved such godly Christians as knew him, to
conceive well of his condition; neither is there any cause to doubt but time
may bring on in others, as well as it did in him, that which we expect upon a
sudden in vain.

REPLY.
But some conceive the Inhabitants of New England to be Chams posterity, and
consequently shut out from grace by Noah's curse, till the conversion of the
Jews be past at least.

ANSWER.
How do they appear to be Chams posterity? whose sons by the agreement of
Writers, took up their dwellings together in Canaan, Palestina, and the parts
adjoining in Arabia, Egypt, Mauritania, Lybia, and other bordering parts of
Afric, and consequently for any footsteps of their descents appearing unto
us, might be as far from peopling the West Indies, as any other part of the
posterity of Noah's sons. Neither do men's conjectures agree, (for we have
no certainties to build on) whence these Countries of the parts of America
toward New England might most probably be peopled. But admit the Inhabitants
to be Chams posterity does not the Prophet Esaias foretell the conversion of
Chams posterity in Egypt, performed in the Primitive times, all histories
witnessing that the Egyptians had amongst them a Church of eminent note,
governed by diverse Bishops under the Patharen of Alexandria? And who knows not
the numerous Churches of Afric, wherein were above 160 Bishops in St. Austins
time, governing sundry Nations, all of them of Chams posterity? But what
testimony of Scripture, or ground of reason from Scripture, lays such a
fearful curse upon all Chams posterity? Noah's curse reaches but to one
branch, to Canaan, and as Interpreters conceive, with especial relation to the
extirpation of that part of his issue which inhabited Judea, by the children of
Israel. It is too much boldness then to curse where God has not cursed, and
shut out those from the means of grace, whom God has not excluded.

OBJECTION 3.
But admit the English might be thought fit to plant a Colony in New England,
yet this time is unfit, in this troubled condition of the Church; it were more
convenient for men to keep close together, than to scatter abroad, that so
they might be the more able to resist the common enemy. This withdrawing of
our selves in time of so great hazard betrays weakness of heart, and
proclaims our despair of the cause of Religion, which the godly entertain
with sad hearts, and the Jesuits with smiling countenances.

ANSWER
It is reported that when Annshal lay before Rome, it discouraged him much in
his hopes of taking the City, that at the same instant there marched out of
the City at contrary gates under their colors an Army of soldiers toward
the sea, to be shipped and sent over for a supply into Spain; for it argued
the Romans feared him not, that durst spare a supply of men to a Country so
far distant when the enemy lay at the gates: And it seems to argue courage
rather than fear, when in the weakest condition of the Church men testify
their hope and expectation of the enlargement of that Kingdom of Christ which
wicked men and his enemies glory that they have as good as conquered and
subdued. I conceive those that engage themselves in this adventure are not so
void of Religion as to conceive the scourge of God cannot reach them in
New England; or of reason, as to think New England safer than old. But they
scatter and withdraw themselves in a time of need? Suppose the were present
with us. And if any other way their service be required, as they hold
themselves bound, so will they at all times do their uttermost for the
discharge of their duty to this their native Country. And lastly, by that time
all the particulars of this Treatise are well weighed,

OBJECTION 4.
It may be, passing over of two thousand or three thousand persons will be of
no great moment, and so many might be spared; but some men's examples drawing on
others, and there being no stint or limits set unto men's itching humors after
this new work, we know not where to expect any end; and what consequents may
follow the issuing out of great multitudes, especially on a sudden, it is
easy to conjecture.

ANSWER.
If that should be a true and real fear, and not a pretense, I should much
wonder that any man should have so little insight into the disposition of his
own Countrymen. Howsoever some men are content to remove from their
dwellings, and to leave their beloved Country and friends, let no man conceive
we shall find over-many of that humor: We are known too well to the world to
love the smoke of our own chimneyes so well, that hopes of great advantages
are not likely to draw many of us from home: And that evidently appears by the
different habits and affections of the minds of men unto this voyage. Some
pity the exposing of their friends, or such unto whom for the report of their
honesty and religion they wish well, unto so many dangers and inconveniences;
others and the most part scoff at their folly; a third sort murmr and grudge
that they are abandoned and forsaken by them: and good men dispute the warrant
of their undertaking this work, and will not be convinced. It may be, private
interests may prevail with some; One brother may draw over another, a son
the father, and perhaps some man his inward acquaintance; but let no man fear
the overhasty removal of multitudes of any of estate or ability. As for the
poorer sort it is true, many of them that want means to maintain them at
home, would be glad to pass over into New England to find a better condition
there; but by what means will they be transported, or provided of necessaries
for so chargeable a journey? and without such provisions they will be found
very unwelcome to such as are already planted there. Besides, it cannot be
doubted but the State will be so watchful as not to suffer any prejudice unto
it self, if the numbers of those that leave her should increase too fast. If
the State should be slack, even those that now allow the passing over of some
good and useful men, when the number is grown to an indifferent proportion
will of themselves be careful to restrain the rest as far as their counsel
and advice can prevail. The truth is when some 800 or 1000 families are seated
there, the Colonie will be best filled up with youths and girls, which must
be continually drawn over to supply the rooms of menservants and
maidservants, which will marry away daily, and leave their Masters destitute.
But it may be justly admired, what the cause should be that men of contrary
minds should so strangely concur in the jealousies and dislikes of this
work, neither opposing any of the former Colonies, whereof the least (I mean
Virginia, Barmudas, and St. Christophers) drew away two for one of those which
are yet passed over to New England; unless it be that the best works find
commonly worst entertainment amongst men.

OBJECTION 5.
It is objected by some, that religion indeed and the color thereof is the
cloak of this work, but under it is secretly harbored faction and separation
from the Church. Men of ill affected minds (they conceive) unwilling to join
any longer with our assemblies, mean to draw themselves apart, and to unite
into a body of their own, and to make that place a nursery of faction and
rebellion, disclaiming and renouncing our Church as a limb of Antichrist.

ANSWER.
A man might justly hope that the letter sub-

I conceive we do and ought to put a great difference between Separation, and
Nonconformity; the first we judge as evil in it self, so that whosoever
shall deny us to be a Church, either of our own men, or strangers of another
Nation, we cannot be are it: but other Churches that conform not to our orders
and ceremonies we dislike not, only we suffer it not in our own; not that we
adjudge the disusing of ceremonies simply evil, but only evil in our own
men, because we conceive it is joined with some contempt of our authority, and
may tend to a rent in the Church: But yet neither can this imputation be
charged justly on our New England Colonie; If the men were well scanned, I
conceive it may be with good assurance maintained, that at least three parts of
four of the men there planted, are able to justify themselves to have lived
in a constant course of conformity unto our Church government and orders. Yea
but they are weary of them now, and go over with an intention to cast them
off? Intentions are secret, who can discover them; but what have they done to
manifest such an intention? What intelligence have they held one with another
to such purpose? There passed away about 140 persons out of the western parts
from Plimmouth, of which I conceive there were not six known either by face
or fame to any of the rest. What subscription or solemn agreement have they
made before hand to bind themselves unto such a resolution? If that were
forborne for fear of discovery, yet it concerned those who had such an
intention to be well assured of a Governor that might effectually further
their purposes: Mr. 10. Winthrop, whom they have all chosen, (and that not the
multitude, but all the men of best account amongst them) is sufficiently known
in the place where he long lived, a public person, and consequently of the
more observation to have been every way regular and conformable in the whole
course of his practice. Yea but they have taken Ministers with them that are
known to be unconformable, and they are the men that will sway in the orders
of the Church? Neither all nor the greatest part of the Ministers are
unconformable. But how shall they prevent it? What Minister among us well
seated in a good living, or in fair expectance of one, will be content to
leave a certain maintenance, to expose himself to the manifold hazards of so
long a journey, to rest upon the providence of God, when all is done, for
provision for himself and his family? Pardon them if they take such Ministers
as they may have, rather than none at all. Has any conformable Minister of
worth, and fit for that employment, tendered his service, whom they have
rejected? No man can affirm they have taken such out of choice rather than
necessity, unless it be manifested where they have refused others whom they
might have had. But there are some unconformable men amongst them, yea and men
of worse condition too? And if there were no drunkards nor covetous persons nor
vicious any way, it would and might justly move all the world to admiration.
But there is great odds between peaceable men, who out of tenderness of
heart forbear the use of some ceremonies of the Church, (whom this State in
some things thinks fit to wink at, and it may be would doc more if it were
assured of their temper) and men of fiery and turbulent spirits, that walk in
a cross way out of distemper of mind. Now suppose some of those men that
(knowing the disposition of their own minds, how unable they are to bring
their hearts to answer the course of our Churches practice in all things)
consider that their contrary practice gives distaste to government, and
occasions some disturbance unto the Churches peace, upon that ground withdraw
themselves for quietness sake: Would not such dispositions be cherished with
great tenderness? And surely, as far as guess by circumstances may lead
us, we have more cause to think that they are so minded than otherwise;
because this will certainly be the consequent of their going out from amongst
us, which they cannot but foresee: and if they had meant otherwise, their way
had been to remain in the midst of us as thorns in our eyes, and pricks in
our sides, and not to depart from us: seeing we know it is the remaining of
the thorn in the midst of the flesh which torments; the plucking it out, and
casting it away breeds ease and quietness.

I should be very unwilling to hide any thing I think might be fit to discover
the uttermost of the intentions of our Planters in their voyage to New England,
and therefore shall make bold to manifest not only what I know, but what I
guess concerning their purpose. As it were absurd to conceive they have all
one mind, so were it more ridiculous to imagine they have all one scope.
Necessity may press some; Noveltie draw on others; hopes of gain in time to
come may prevail with a third sort: but that the most and most sincere and
godly part have the advancement of the Gospil for their maine scope I am
confident. That of them, some may entertain hope and expectation of enjoying
greater liberty there than here in the use of some orders and Ceremonies of
our Church it seems very probable. Nay more then that, it is not improbable,
that partly for their sakes, and partly for respect to some Germans that are
gone over with them, and more that intend to follow after, even those which
otherwise would not much desire innovation of themselves, yet for the
maintaining of peace and unity, (the only (...) of a weak unsettled body
will) be won to consent to some variation from the forms and customs of our
Church. Nay I see not how we can expect from them a correspondence in all
things to our State civil or Ecclesiastical: Wants and necessities cannot but
cause many changes. The Churches in the Apostles and in the settled times of
peace afterward were much different in many outward forms. In the maine of
their carriage two things may move them to vary much from us: Respect to the
Heathen, before whom it concerns them to show much piety, sobriety, and
austeritie; and the consideration of their own necessities will certainly
enforce them to take away many things that we admit, and to introduce many
things that we reject, which perhaps will minister much matter of sport and
scorn unto such as have Relations of these things, and that represented unto
them with such additions as same usually weaves into all reports at the second
and third hands. The like by this their varying in civil Conversation, we may
expect of the alteration of some things in Church affairs. It were bootlesse
to expect that all things will or can be at the first forming of a rude and
incohaerent body, as they may be found in time to come; and it were strange and
a thing that never yet happened, if we should hear a true report of all
things as they are. But that men are far enough from projecting the erecting
of this Colony for a Nursery of Schismatickes, will appear by the ensuing
faithful and unpartiall Narration of the first occasions, beginning, and
progress of the whole work, laid before the eyes of all that desire to
receive satisfaction, by such as have been privy to the very first conceiving
and contriving of this project of planting this Colony, and to the several
passages that have happened since, who also in that they relate, consider they
have the searcher of all hearts and observer of all men's ways witness of the
truth and falsehood that they deliver.

About ten years since a company of English, part out of the Low-Countryes,
and some out of London, and other parts, associating themselves into one body,
with an intention to plant in Virginia: in their passage thither being taken
short by the wind, in the depth of Winter the whole ground being under Snow,
were forced with their provisions to land themselves in New England upon a
small Bay beyond Mattachusets, in the place which they now inhabit and call by
the name of New-Plinmouth. The ground being covered a foot thick with snow,
and they being without shelter, and having amongst them diverse Women and
Children, no marvel if, they lost some of their company, it may be wondered
how they saved the rest. But notwithstanding this sharp encounter at the
first, and some miscarriages afterward, yet, (conceiving GODS providence had
directed them unto that place, and finding great charge and difficulty in
removing) they resolved to fix themselves there; and being assisted by some of
their friends in LONDON, having passed over most of the greatest difficulties
that usually encounter new Planters, they began to subsist at length in a
reasonable comfortable manner: being notwithstanding men but of mean and weak
estates of themselves. And after a years experience or two of the Soil and
Inhabitants, sent home tidings of both, and of their well-being there, which
occasioned other men to take knowledge of the place, and to take it into
consideration.

About the year 1623. some Western Merchants (who had continued a trade of
fishing for Cod and bartering for Furs in those parts for diverse years
before) conceiving that a Colony planted on the Coast might further them in
those employments, bethought themselves how they might bring that project to
effect, and communicated their purpose to others, alleging the convenience of
compassing their project with a small charge, by the opportunity of their
fishing trade, in which they accustomed to double-man their Ships, that (by the
help of many hands) they might dispatch their Voyage, and lade their Ship with
Fish while the fishing season lasted, which could not be done with a bare
sailing company. Now it was conceived, that the fishing being ended the spare
men that were above their necessary sailors, might be left behind with
provisions for a year; and when that Ship returned the next year, they might
assist them in fishing, as they had done the former year; and, in the mean
time, might employ themselves in building, and planting Corn, which with the
provisions of Fish, Foul, and Venison, that the Land yielded, would afford
them the chief of their food. This Proposition of theirs took so well, that
it drew on diverse persons, to join with them in this project, the rather
because it was conceived that not only their own Fishermen, but the rest of
our Nation that went thither on the same errand, might be much advantaged, not
only by fresh victual, which that Colony might spare them in time, but
withal, and more, by the benefit of their Ministers labors, which they might
enjoy during the fishing season; whereas otherwise being usually upon those
Voyages nine or ten months in the year, they were left all the while without
any means of instruction at all. Compassion toward the Fishermen, and partly
some expectation of gain, prevailed so far that for the planting of a Colony
in New England there was raised a Stock of more then three thousand pounds,
intended to be paid in in five years, but afterward disbursed in a shorter
time.

How this Stock was employed, and by what errors and over-sights it was
wasted, is I confess not much pertinent to this subject in hand:
Notwithstanding, because the knowledge thereof may be of use for other men's
direction, let me crave leave in a short Digression to present unto the Readers
view, the whole order of the managing of such moneys as were collected, with
the success and issue of the business undertaken.

CHAP. VIII. A digression manifesting the success of the Plantation intended
by the Western men.
THE first employment then of this new raised Stock, was in buying a small
Ship of fifty tons, which was with as much speed as might be dispatched
toward New England upon a Fishing Voyag:

The third year 1625. both Ships with a small Vessel of forty tuns which
carried Kine with other provisions, were again set to Sea upon the same Voyage
with the charge of two thousand pounds, of which sum the Company borrowed,
and became indebted for one thousand pounds and upwards. The great Ship being
commanded by a uery able Master, having passed on about two hundred leagues in
her Voyage, found her self so leake by the Carpenters fault, (that looked not
well to her Calking) that she bare up the Helm and returned for Waymouth, and
having unladen her provisions and mended her leake, set her self to Sea
again; resolving to take advice of the Winds whether to pass on her former.
Voyage or to turn into New Foundland, which she did, by reason that the time
was so far spent, that the Master and Company dispaired of doing any good in
New England: where the Fish falls in two or three mounths sooner then at New
found land. There she took Fish good store and much more then she could lade
home: the overplus should have been sold and delivered to some sack or other
sent to take it in there, if the Voyage had been well managed.

But that could-not be done by reason that the Ship before she went was not
certain where to make her Fish; by this accident it fell out that a good
quantity of the Fish she took was cast away, and some other part was brought
home in another Ship. At the return of the Ships that year, Fish by reason of
our wars with Spain falling to a very low rate; the Company endeavored to
send the greater Ship for France: but she being taken short with a contrary
Wind in the West-Country, and intelligence given in the mean time that those
Markets were over-laid, they were en-Forced to bring her back again, and to
sell her Fish at home as they might. Which they did, and with it the Fish of
the smaller Ship, the New England Fish about ten shillings the hundred by tale
or there about; the New Foundland Fish at six shillings four pence the
hundred, of which was well nigh eight pence the hundred charge raised upon it
after the Ships return: by this reason the Fish which at a Market in all
likelihood might have yielded well nigh two thousand pounds, amounted not with
all the Provenue of the Voyage to above eleaven hundred pounds.

Unto these losses by Fishing were added two other no small disaduantages, the
one in the Country by our Land-Men, who being ill chosen and ill commanded,
fell into many disorders and did the Company little service: The other by the
fall of the price of Shipping, which was now abated to more then the one half,
by which means it came to pass, that our Ships which stood us in little less
then twelve hundred pounds, were sold for four hundred and eighty pounds.

The occasions and means then of wasting this stock are apparently these.
First, the ill choice of the place for fishing; the next, the ill carriage of
our men at Land, who having stood us in two years and a half in well nigh one
thousand pound charge, never yielded one hundred pound profit. The last the ill
sales of Fish and Shipping. By all which the Adventurers were so far
discouraged, that they abandoned the further prosecution of this Design, and
took order for the dissoluing of the Company on Land, and sold away their
Shipping and other Provisions.

Two things withal may be intimated by the way, the first, that the very
project it self of planting by the help of a fishing Voyage, can never answer
the success that it seems to promise (which experienced Fishermen easily
have foreseen before hand, and by that means have prevented diverse ensuing
errors) whereof amongst diverse other reasons these may serve for two. First
that no sure fishing place in the Land is fit for planting, nor any good place
for planting found fit for fishing, at least near the Shore. And secondly,
rarely any Fishermen will work at Land, neither are Husbandmen fit for
Fishermen but with long use and experience. The second thing to be observed
is, that nothing new fell out in the managing of this stock seeing experience
has taught us that as in building houses the first stones of the foundation
are buried under ground, and are not seen, so in planting Colonies, the first
stocks employed that way are consumed, although they serve for a foundation to
the work.

CHAP. IX. The undertaking and prosecution of the Colony by the Londoners.
BUT to return to our former subject from which we digressed. Upon the
manifestation of the Western Adventurers resolution to give off their work,
most part of the Land-men being sent for, returned; but a few of the most
honest and industrious resolved to stay behind and to take charge of the
Cattle sent over the year before; which they performed accordingly: and not
likeing their seat at Cape Anne chosen especially for the supposed commodity
of fishing, they transported themselves to Nahum, keike, about four or five
leagues distant to the South-West from Cape Anne.

Some then of the Adventurers that still continued their desire to set forwards
the Plantation of a Colony there; conceiving that if some more Cattle were
sent over to those few Men left behind; they might not only be a means of
the comfortable subsisting of such as were already in the Country; but of
inviting some other of their Friends and Acquaintance to come over to them:
adventured to send over twelve Kine and Bulls more. And conferring casually with
some Gentlemen of London, moved them to add unto them as many more. By which
occasion the business came to agitation a-fresh in London, and being at

ration) are nothing else but the fruits of jealousy of some distempered
mind, or which is worse, perhaps, savor of a desperate malicious plot of men
ill affected to Religion, endeavoring by casting the undertakers into the
jealousy of State, to shut them out of those advantages which otherwise they
do and might expect from the Countenance of Authority. Such men would be
entreated to forbear that base and unchristian course of traducing innocent
persons, under these odious names of Separatists and enemies to the Church and
State, for fear least their own tongues fall upon themselves by the justice
of his hand who will not fail to clear the innocence of the just, and to cast
back into the bosom of every slaunderer the filth that he rakes up to throw
in other men's faces. As for men of more indifferent and better tempered minds,
they would be seriously advised to beware of entertaining and admitting, much
more countenancing and crediting such uncharitable persons as discover
themselves by their carriage, and that in this particular, to be men ill
affected toward the work it self, if not to Religion (at which it aims) and
consequently unlikely to report any truth of such as undertake it.

CHAP. X. The Conclusion of the whole Treatise.
NOw for the better preventing of such suspicions and jealousies, and the ill
affections to this Work, that may arise thereupon; two things are earnestly
requested of such as pass their Censures upon it, or the persons that
undertake it. The first is, that although in this barien and corrupt age
wherein we live, all our actions are generally swayed and carried on by private
interests; in so much as sincere intentions of furthering the common good;
(grounded upon that love through which we are commanded to serve one another)
be the wonders of men; notwithstanding men would not think it impossible, that
the love which waxes cold and dies in the most part, yet may revive and
kindle in some men's hearts: and that there may be found some that may neglect
their case and profit to do the Church good and God service, out of a sincere
love and affection to Gods honor and the Churches good. Why may not we
conceive that God may prevail upon the hearts of his servants, to set them on
as effectually to seek the enlargement of his kingdom; as a blind zeal
fomented by the art and subtlety of Satan may thrust on Priests and Jesuits,
and their partisans, to engage their persons and estates for the advancing of
the Devils Kingdom? Or if in the Worlds infancy, men out of an ambitious
humor, or at present for private advantages and expectation of gain, thrust
themselves out from their own dwellings into parts far remote from their
native soil; why should not we conceive, that if they do this for a
corruptible crown; that the desire and expectation of an incorruptible (the
reward of such as deny themselves for the service of God and his Church) may as
strongly allure such as by patient continuance in well-doing, seek
immortality and life? And yet the favorable conceits that men entertain of
such as follow in all their actions the ways of their private gain, and the
jealousies that they are apt to entertain of such as pretend only the
advancement of the Gospel, manifestly argue that the general opinion of the
world is that some may be true to themselves and the advancement of their own
private estates, but hardly any to God and his Church. I should be very
unwilling to think, they cherish this suspicion upon that ground that moved
that sensual Emperor to believe that no man was clean or chaste in any part
of his body, because himself was defiled and unclean in all. This is then the
first favor that is desired, of such as consider this action, to believe that
it is neither impossible nor unlikely that these men's intentions are truly and
really such as they pretend, and not colors and cloakes for secret dangerous
purposes, which they closely harbor in their breasts, especially when all
apparent circumstances concur to justify the contrary.

The next request that is presented to all indifrerent minded men is; that they
would be pleased to set before their eyes that which has been already
mentioned, that as there followed the children of Israel a mixed multitude out
of Egypt, so it is probable there may do these men out of England, and that of
diverse tempers: some perhaps men of hot and fiery spirits, making change and
innovation their scope, may conceive that (when they see that for the desire
and care of preserving unity and love, and taking away occasions of offense to
tender consciences, some changes and alterations are yielded unto) they have
gained what they expect, and may as fondly triumph in their supposed Victory,
as if they had overthrown all order and discipline; as they do absurdly
mistake the grounds and ends which the course of Government proposes and
aymeth at: and thereupon in their Relations to their friends, represent things
not as they are really done and intended, but as they apprehend them in their
fantasies. Others there will be that prooving refractary to Government,
expecting all liberty in an unsettled body; and finding the restraint of
Authority, contrary to expectation, in their discontented humors, meeting with
no other way of revenge, may be ready to blemish the Government with such
scandalous reports as their malicious spirits can devise and utter.

Now although some say, that malice is a good informer, notwithstanding no wise
or good man admits it for a fit Judge; if therefore men will be pleased to
forbear the over-hastie belief of such reports, as shall be sent over or
given out, either by men of foolish and weak minds or distempered humors,
until they receive more assured satisfaction from such as understand and are
acquainted with the grounds and secret passages of the affairs of Government,
they shall keep their own hearts upon the even-ballance of a right judgment,
and provide for the innocence of those upon whom they pass their censure.

If by these means jealousies and suspicions may be prevented, I make no
question but the relations which this Work has both to the State and Church,
will upon mature advise so far prevail with all well-minded men, as to move
them not only to afford their prayers for the prosperous success of this new
planted Colony, that from small and contemptible beginnings, it may grow to a
settled and well formed Church; but with all their best furtherance, Consilio,
auxilio, re, by advise, friends, and purses. Which howsoever the principalls of
this work, out of their modesty, crave not, yet the necessary burdens which
so weighty an undertaking charge them withal, will certainly enforce them
to need, whatsoever men judge to the contrary. Neither is or will the burden be
intolerable to this State; A common stock of ten thousand pound may be
sufficient to support the weight of general charges of transporting and
maintaining Ministers, Schoolmasters, Commanders for Wars; and erecting of
such buildings as will be needful for public use for the present; and for
time to come it cannot be questioned but the Colony it self having once taken
root, when men's labors begin to yield them any fruit, will be found
sufficient to bear her own burden. Alas, what were it for a Merchant or a
Gentleman of reasonable estate, to disburse twentie-fiue pound or fifty pound,
for the propagating of the Gospel, who casts away in one year much more upon
superfluities in apparel, diet, buildings, etc: and let men seriously weigh
and consider with themselves, whether a work of so great importance, so
nearly concerning Gods honor, and the service of the Church calling upon them
(as Lazarus upon Dives) for some of the wast of their superfluous expenses; if
they lend a deaf ear to the motion, will not assuredly plead strongly against
them at the bar of Christ's judgementfeate at the last day? Nay, what a scorn
would it be to the Religion we profess, that we should refuse to purchase the
propagation of it at so easy a rate, when the Popish party charge themselves
with such excessive expenses; for the advancement of idolatry and superstition?
Its true, it will be valued at a low rate, that the Colony is able to return
you again by way of recompense; perhaps the enjoying of such immunities and
privileges, as his Majesty has been pleased to grant unto them, and an
hundred or two hundred acres of Land to every man that shall disburse
twentie-fiue pound, and so for more proportionablie, for the raising of the
common Stock; yet their posterity (if not themselves) may have cause in time
to come, to acknowledge it a good purchase that was made at so low a rate: but
if they lend, looking for nothing again, we know the promise Luke 6. 35. he
is no looser, that has made Your reward shall be great, and you shall be the
children of the Highest Luke 6. 35.
God his debtor.

FINIS.

